

H.M.A.TRANSPORT
PORT MACQUARIE.
OUR HOMEWARD STUNT
AT LAST !!!


HOMEWARD BOUND.
The moon’s soft light is shimmering o’er the sea,
The transport’s smoke drifts leeward on the breeze,
My thoughts steal gently homeward, where the leaves
Of eucalyptus scent the balmy air;
And greetings warm ere long shall welcome me.
Dreaming, I see out there, where wave-crests fall,
My dear old home beneath the Southern Cross,
The golden wattle, fern, and verdant moss,
The face I kissed good-bye so long ago—•
I hear the mopoke and the curlew’s call.
Then sterner mem’ries pass, scene after scene—
The Anzacs wrestling with the odds of chance —■
Gallipoli! Withdrawal! Then La France !
The ‘‘cobbers” sleeping ’neath a wooden cross ;
The marvel I escaped “what might have been.”
Speed-throbbing ship, swift bear me to the arms
Of those for whom my heart so long hath yearned,
Who faith have kept and troth, and love have earned:
For them the hardest lot of all—to wait—
Through dread suspense that’s worse than war’s alarms.
And musing thus I turn to slumber’s bliss—
Last Post! Lights Out! The stilly night, the ship—
All sinks to fancy, save the steady dip
Of prow, that ceaseless parts the ocean swell.
I dream —home —angel—on my lips a kiss.
Padre.
7-4-19.


Our Homeward Stunt
on
SHIMA'I Piit
%mai


Contents
PAGE.
Foreword .. .. .. .. .. , . 3
Editorial .. .. .. .. .. ■. 4
The Voyage .. .. .. ~ .. .. 5
On the Eve of the Great World War .. .. .. 14
Anzac Day .. .. .. .. .. .. 17
Entertainments .. .. .. .. .. 18
Lectures and Debates .. ~ .. .. .. 22
Boxing .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
" Doc." Scores .. .. ~ .. .. 31
Robbed by Discipline .. .. .. .. .. 32
The Land of the Pharaohs .. .. .. ~ 35
“Digger” .. .. .. .. ' 39
Ye Diary of one Pepys .. .. .. 40
The Australian Y.M.C.A. Aboard .. .. .. .. 42
Australian Red Cross and Comforts Fund .. .. .. 43
Good-bye-ee .. .. .. .. .. ~ 44
Educational Activities .. .. .. .. .. 45
Fremantle .. .. .. .. .. .. 46
S.S. “ Port Macquarie” .. .. .. .. .. 48
Our Band .. .. .. .. .. .. 49
Editorial Notes .. .. .. .. .. 52
Ship’s Staffs .. .. .. .. .. ~ 54
Notes on Returned Officers .. .. .. .. 55
Ship’s Roll .. .. .. .. .. .. 62


FOREWORD.
By Lieutenant-Colonel J. A. ROBINSON, D.S.O., B.A.
This little production stands as a memento of our homeward
voyage.
It seems rather paradoxical that we should attempt by
means of a souvenir to keep prominently before us that portion of
our military career which we one and all were apt to consider as
most monotonous and boresome. The prospect of spending sixty
days within the narrow confines of a troopship did not altogether
enthuse one and certainly presented no allurements, but I think
that now,, as we are approaching our journey’s end and Australia
is hovering near, we might justly claim that the time spent on this
transport can be written down among the most pleasant periods
of our “Adventure,” and warrants the production of some small
literary effort which may serve to bring to our memory nothing
but happy recollections.
The energy and enthusiasm of the Editor of our weekly
paper have had a large share in making our voyage so agreeable,
and the output of this magazine represents the culmination of his
efforts. We feel sure that these efforts, as well as those of his staff,
will receive the whole-hearted appreciation of the nine hundred odd
soldiers who returned to Australia on H.M.A.T. “Port Macquarie.”


EDITORIAL.
Souvenir hunting and collecting has been an occupation zealously followed by the
Australian soldier, in common, no doubt, with the fighting men of all other nations.
The objects that he has collected on the battlefield will serve to remind him of the
strenuous times of active warfare in its manifold phases, if indeed such stimulus to
his memory be needed, which is, to say the least, extremely doubtful. The period of
active service from the day of embarkation to that of final disembarkation, with
its crowded times of variegated experiences, has been, in the picturesque modern
vernacular of the “ digger,” chiefly made up of a series of “stunts.” We have had
stunts offensive and defensive, stunts involving all the resources and refinements of
modern warfare, stunts calling for the pluck and grit never looked for in vain in the
boys of the Anzac breed, and stunts involving, alas, the lives of our brave “cobbers.”
On the brighter side and during the brief intervals of relaxation allowed to the fighting
man we have had " leave” stunts in France and Blighty, but among them all, one
ventures to assert there has been no stunt more welcome, none appealing with a more
direct personal interest, than our homeward stunt —the final phase bringing us back
to .home and kindred, to our dear land of the wattle and the gum.
It is appropriate that this final phase should be commemorated by means of a
souvenir, and the outcome of this feeling is the modest literary effort now submitted
to you.
The Editor hopes that this publication—made possible by the co-operation
of his numerous contributors, literary and artistic—will serve as a memento
of our voyage home, and the indulgence of our readers is asked towards its many
imperfections.
In conclusion, the hope is expressed that every officer, N.C.0., and man who
returned to Australia by the good ship “ Port Macquarie” will be blessed with health
and prosperity in his future undertakings.


THE VOYAGE
The morning of the 29th of March, 1919, was cold and grey ; it was blowing a
strong northerly wind and snow lay three inches thick on the decks of the troopship
“ Port Macquarie” when, at 3 o'clock, she began unmooring from the wharf at Queen's
Dock, Cardiff, and, assisted by tugboats, passed into the well-known “ Tortuous
Channels.” For a ship carrying veterans back to their places of enlistment, their
stern duty done, it was a quiet departure, for the dinkum Aussie is apt to take the
really great events of life quietly and without fuss. But though void of demonstration
it was a contented leave-taking, for were we not setting out for that land dearest of
all to our hearts —
*' Where homesteads peep
From sunny plain and woodland steep ;
Where love and joy bright vigils keep ;
Where the glad voice of childish glee
Is mingling with the melody
Of nature’s hidden minstrelsy—
Australia.”
We passed the Breaksea Lightship at 6.15 a.m., well into the Bristol Channel,
and before the living freight of the good ship roused to the call of reveille we were
going full speed ahead.
At noon the engines slowed down while the task of “ streaming the otters”
was being performed. “ The otters” are better known as paravanes, a naval device
for cutting adrift moored mines. The ” otters” swam along on either bow, jealously
guarding the ship, until we were clear of the mined areas, about 10 a.m. next day.
We had the English coast in sight right up to evening of our first day out;
but of Land’s End we saw very little, only the lighthouse and the, water breaking over
the jagged rocks. We passed St. Mary's Light, about four miles away, soon after
sundown —our last glimpse of the British Isles,


Everybody now began to settle down to the routine of life aboard a homeward-
bound transport, to its duties and pastimes. Though still soldiers under authority,
conditions were almost civilian —tempered with military discipline and as soon
as the excellent qualities of the captain of the ship and the C.O. troops were known
we became a happy ship’s company.
Much depends upon the senior officers, both military and naval, aboard a
transport, as to whether the voyage is to be a pleasure or not to the troops. In this
respect the “ Port Macquarie” was particularly fortunate. Captain McQueen proved
himself a gentleman and a real white man, respected by all, and simply loved by the
boys. In matters of etiquette and discipline exact, but in comradeship a true sport,
he spared no .pains to make life pass pleasantly for all on board.
The chief engineer, Mr. T. A. Leinster, was a good .second to the captain, and
whether in the saloon, on the decks, or in the engine-room, he left nothing to be
desired ; and he was always courteous and kind, to the point of good fellowship.
The C. 0., Lt.-Col. Robinson, D. 5.0., was a man’s man. Having risen from the
ranks himself, he knew the soldier’s heart and he laid himself out to help the men
in every possible way, and so held the esteem of all—officers and men —to the day
of disembarking, and we shall always think of him in terms of appreciation.
Situated like this, is it any wonder that we were a happy ship ? The men were
the finest crowd you could wish to associate with, and they “ played the game from
the jump.
Getting our sea-legs was hardly a matter of a day, for the “ Port Macquarie”
is a splendid sea-boat and the weather was continuously fine. Even the Bay of Biscay
gave us a pleasant surprise ; beyond a gentle ocean swell it was soft as a summer’s
night.
Our route lay via The Cape, and so the temperature rose rapidly as we made
south, and the men soon began to sport themselves in those “ shorts” dear to Anzacs.
We sighted the Grand Canary Island on our starboard bow towards evening
on Thursday, April the 3rd; and with the fall of night came the long, red, two-minute
flash of the Isleta Light, standing on the most northerly point of the island, 817 feet
above The sea, and visible thirty miles away in clear weather. Las Palmas lay before
us stretched out on the slopes running right down to the sea-front, plainly outlined
by its brilliantly lighted streets, as we steamed past over the calm, moonlit waters —
Las Palmas with its population of 59,000 Spaniards, capital of the mountainous Grand
Canary 6,000 feet high at its highest point, the great coaling centre for ships bound


for the Argentine, for South American ports, and for vessels bound from New Zealand
to_ England via The Horn, famous for its salubrious climate and semi-tropical fruits.
Alas ! it was not in our programme to call there. Leaving it behind, we headed for
the Equator, and soon picked up the constellation familiar to the eyes of men from
the Southern Hemisphere, the Southern Cross, and a few nights later the Great Bear
ceased to rise above the horizon.
For a few days, as we voyaged in the vicinity of the Equator, the weather was
very hot, and everybody sought siesta in some shady corner. The sea was without
a ripple, and life was sluggish and uneventful save for an occasional shoal of porpoises
or of flying fishes.
We “ crossed the line” about 4 p.m. on April the 4th. Although huge, canvas,
saltwater baths had been erected on the deck some days previously for the sport and
convenience of the men during the hot weather, there were no duckings. There is
an unwritten law of Father Neptune which, however, has not been generally observed
by the A.I.F. —that only they are ducked who are crossing the line for the first time.
On this occasion our boys were loyal to the traditions of the sea.
The engines stopped at the Equator for a few minutes. Why ? Ask the chief
engineer. Rumour hath it that “ the line got foul of the propeller.”
Life aboard ship is very busy : there are committees, games, lessons, lectures,
debates, rehearsals, concerts, mock trials, libraries, canteens, Red Cross issues, and
goodness knows what not. And we have a real live newspaper, original, printed and
published and circulated and read by ourselves, We have a newspaper committee
and an editorial committee, reporters and journalists, poets and artists. The head
of the concern is the genial senior medical officer, Captain King Patrick, M.D., etc.,
to whom we owe much in every way as being the soul of not only this concern but of
many other things besides for the good of the ship’s company.
The journal rejoices in the name of “ Our Homeward Stunt ” ; its circulation
is only limited by the iron walls that enclose us. At the end of the trip this editorial
committee will publish a souvenir du voyage which will perpetuate the name of the
paper published on board.
From the Equator to the Cape the days and nights were one continuous, dreamy,
succession of “ calm and fine,” and one could almost imagine himself afloat on “ The
Blue Lagoon” instead of on the Great Atlantic.
On the morning of Easter Sunday, April 20th, at 3.30, we sighted Dassend
Island Light, the first greeting from South Africa, and at 5,30 a.m. we entered-Table


Bay. The weather during the night had changed to a steady northerly wind with
rain and mist. At 6 a.m. we were at anchor awaiting the port officials. Nine ojclock
and the pilot is on the bridge, and soon we are alongside the wharf listening to Cape
Town’s church-bells. Then the joyful news: all troops free to go ashore, and the
welcome that the town, decked with bunting for their own returning troops, presented
to us as we streamed up to Adderly street.
Close by us in the docks was the “ Cluny Castle” carrying 545 A.I.F. troops
homewards, The “ Shropshire,” with 1,000 convalescents, arrived on Easter Monday.
The “ Llanstephan Castle” ran us neck and neck for the port, but she is a “ liner”
carrying H.M. mails, and “ the liner she’s a lady,” and so she berthed first.
The principal clubs of the city, the Y.M.C.A., and the Visiting Troops Enter-
tainment Committee vied with one another to make us welcome in Cape Town.
Froude says, “ Perhaps in all the world there is no city so beautifully situated
as Cape Town.” From the sea it presents a lovely panorama stretching from the
water’s edge right round the bay and almost to the foot of the famous Table Mountain,
3,582 feet high, which forms its solid background. On the mountain’s flat top is the
huge Hely Hutchinson reservoir, which stores an adequate supply of rainwater for
the city’s 160,600 inhabitants, over 80,000 of which are coloured people.
We were eager to see the famous ” lifting of the tablecloth,” but the gods did not
favour us. The ” spreading and lifting” of the ‘‘ tablecloth” is a strange natural
phenomenon. The S.E. wind, which blows intermittently from November to March,
causes a snowlike cloud to lie on the flat mountain-top and to hang down evenly
all round its sides, like the folds of a cloth. It remains'thus while the S.E. wind lasts,
but as soon as the wind drops the snowlike cloud-cloth lifts and floats away. This
is called ” the lifting of the cloth.”
Climbing Table Mountain is a feat of considerable difficulty and risk, if
unaccompanied by guides ; and there have been many instances of too venturesome
spirits being surprised in the quick-falling mists and lost, or losing limb or even life
in attempting the dangerous descents.
At Cape Town we took 1,746 tons of coal into the ship’s bunkers. The. coaling
is done by means of electric cranes served by Kaffir labour, the huge baskets being filled
from the coal-trucks which are brought alongside the ship. Cape coal, however, will
always be associated in our minds with abundance of ashes and reduced speed.
, The behaviour of our troops ashore was so excellent that the C.O. was moved
to mention it in orders.


Arrangements had been made to sail at 7 a.m. on Wednesday 23rd, but owing
to dense fog at that hour the port authorities declined to move the vessel. At 9 a.m.
the fog lifted slightly and we proceeded to sea. But our last memories of Cape Town
are of the fogbell ringing on the pier, invisible to us, as we slowly ploughed our way
through the thick mist, the ship’s whistle sounding intermittent warnings.
Again succeeded fine weather even to the point of delicious monotony. The
captain said it was unprecedented in all his eighteen years’ experience of trading to
Australia.
We were in wireless communication with Perth, 1,800 miles from South Africa,
and began to realise that we were indeed nearing home.
On the night of 8-9 May a very sad thing happened to dull the brightness of
our voyage, when Bombardier Nusser of the 14th Howitzer Battery disappeared. It
was a lovely night with a calm sea. Until 11 p.m. he was on deck with his mates in
cheerful mood. As they went below, he said he would be down in a few minutes, but
he was never seen again. Careful search and a board of inquiry resulted in “ lost
overboard in unknown circumstances.” There was not the least suspicion of any
such thing as foul play or suicide. It is said he used to sit on the side-rail of the ship
smoking, in spite of warnings. It was sad to go through the War and then to perish
coming home.
About 4 p.m. on May 13th we raised Rottnest Island, and soon all the boys
were crowding the decks -to gaze on this first little bit of Australia steadily growing
on our view. By 7.30 p.m. we lay calmly at anchor, the band playing familiar airs,
and the lights of Fremantle flickering merrily before us. The ” Trez os Montes" arrived
soon after us and the “ Benalla” a few hours later, both carrying A.I.F. troops. As
we turned-in that night all hearts were full of anticipation, but, 0 ! what a difference
in the morning ! Early we rose to parade to the port doctor. The influenza epidemic
had tightened up vigilance with regard to visiting ships ; but, confident of a clean
record, every soul lined up to have his temperature taken. Result: Out of 980 souls,
including ship’s complement, three soldiers with slight temperatures. Consultation,
regulations, consternation : quarantine for the W.A. quota and the three suspects.
All the rest confined to the ship under the yellow flag and forbidden to land. In spite
of endeavours to keep smiling, the disappointment was keen, and half jestingly our
sentiment expressed itself in the following vein :
" We don’t want to lose you, but we think you should go,
For your King and your country both need you so.”


So sang they of yore in a rousing refrain ; same tune, other words, when we come
back again:— ■
“ We can’t let you land, you really must go ;
Your pulse and thermometer frighten us so ;
Can’t greet you, nor kiss you,” say they with disdain,
‘‘ You might spread the ’flu now you’ve come back again.”
That evening a hastily organised but enthusiastic concert on the men’s deck
initiated us all as fully accredited members of the Cheer-up Society, and resignedly
we settled down to circumstances. The moving spirit of this concert of unprecedented
enthusiasm was our M.O. Captain G. R. Halloran, M.D., R.A.M.C., a great favourite
with everybody and a “dinkum Aussie.” Throughout the voyage his tact and energy
smoothed many little troubles and filled many otherwise blank spaces. The boys
all regarded him as a sport.
We had over 900 tons of cargo for Fremantle, but, though offered full rates to
assist in unloading it, the men refused, fearing complications with the unions ashore.
So at 9 p.m. the 15th of May we hauled up the anchor and steamed away for the Leeuwin.
Once on the move again, the tension was over. It was a typical, soft, moonlight night,
such as one revels in, in these Southern seas, and in spite of regrets we had a subconscious
feeling of contentment, for we were skirting the shores of Australia. A few fleeting
hours, with the land well in view, and we rounded the Cape and turned eastwards across
the Great Bight, whose waters behaved in a manner that seemed bent on not spoiling
the wonderful sea-calm that had favoured us all the way from England.
By midnight on May the 20th we had the Neptune Light abeam ; by breakfast
time next morning we had rounded Troubridge Point, and at noon we dropped anchor
in the outer harbour off Port Adelaide.
The medical inspection was again rigid, but it was soon over, and a cheer went
up from the “diggers” as the yellow flag came fluttering down as a sign that we were a
clean ship. Then in tow of the tugboats we moved slowly up the river through the
mangroves, and 5 p.m. found us made fast to Ocean Wharf, the gangways down, and
the Adelaide quota disembarking.
And what a welcome! The wharf was crowded with relatives and friends come
to meet the boys. The cheering, the sea of colour formed by the great mass of moving
flags, the greetings and embraces with loved ones long separated. It was worth much
to see it and to feel that you were in it, and that this people is our people and this
land my land.
While the ship lay at the wharf discharging cargo all troops for Eastern States


had shore leave, and they passed the
time seeing the sights of fair Adelaide
and enjoying the amusements and
entertainments provided for returning
soldiers by a grateful public. I have
heard the saying, “As quiet as an
Adelaide Sunday,” but it was not
Sunday, and Adelaide, celebrated for
its beauty, was also gay and vivacious.
There was not much sleep for any-
body on board that last night in port,
and it was a drowsy ship that quietly
moved from the wharf, in the early
hours of Empire Day, and resumed her
way in the mellow May sunlight, over
PORT MACQUARIE AT ADELAIDE WHARF.
seas still calm as a millpond, past Cape Jervis, Cape Willoughby, Melbournewards.
Next morning being Sunday, we had our last church service on board at 10 o’clock,
and the men turned up in force. The Padrespoke on the topic of “Looking Forward,’’
and the last song sung on board was “ God Save the King.”
Next morning before daylight we were off Queenscliff at the anchorage, and
the pilot was aboard by 4.30 a.m. Half an hour later we were inside the Heads and at
anchor in full view of Portsea. Two port doctors and a hospital nurse came aboard
and put us through medical inspection, and by 8.30 we were granted pratique.
We had a lovely run up the South Channel to West Pier, Port Melbourne, where
all the troops for Victoria, Tasmania, New South Wales, and Queensland disembarked,
the former to go to their military headquarters for immediate leave and to meet their
friends, the rest to continue their journey north by rail or to await a passage to
Tasmania.
The reception in Victoria eclipsed anything we had seen in the way of greeting
and public demonstration. As the great procession of motor-cars rolled citywards
through the streets that simply rocked with cheers, one could only restrain the tears
of joy and gratitude by sitting tight and resolving not to let one’s self go.
Thus ended a voyage that marks the close of a long and trying absence from
home on active service for King and Country, a voyage that will ever live in our
memories as a real pleasure trip, mounting from one joy to another until we reached
the grand climax of Home, Sweet Home.




CAPTAIN W. McQUEEN.
It is with the most profound regret that we have to announce the death
of Captain McQueen, which took place in Sydney on Friday, 11th July, He
contracted influenza and was removed to the St. Vincent Hospital where his illness
terminated fatally. Captain McQueen was appointed to the command of the
" Port Macquarie” eighteen months ago, being formerly Chief Officer of the " Port
Pirie.” The deceased was forty-one years of age and leaves a widow and one
child in England. We feel sure that the sympathy of every officer, N.C.O., and
man who came to Australia on the “ Port Macquarie” will be extended to Mrs.
McQueen in her sad bereavement. The late Captain McQueen endeared himself
to everyone on board by his unaffected geniality and his unremitting efforts to make
the voyage home pleasant and confortable for everyone. In these efforts he was
eminently successful and he made a large number of friends among all ranks who
will experience a sense of personal loss in his death. As a mariner we had the greatest
confidence in the deceased " skipper,” and as a man he earned the respect and
affection of all ranks.
THE PADRE,
To say that we were fortunate in having Chaplain Major Carter on board
is merely to express an opinion universally held by all military ranks, and by
the ship’s company. As President of the Amusements Committee, as a teacher
under the Education Scheme, as sub-Editor and a valued contributor to our
weekly sheet and to this Souvenir, as a padre and as a man, Major Carter
won the respect and affection of all on board, as we know he did when engaged
in his duties at the Front.


“ON THE EVE OF THE GREAT WORLD WAR."
The beginning of July 1914 saw Vienna one of the gayest cities on the Continent,
the Mecca of tourists, students, and musicians alike. Her cafes were thronged with
visitors from all parts of the world. Her operas were played to crowded houses and
(her great park) the “ Prater” was one ceaseless whirl of gaiety. Klosterneuberg on
the river vied with the Semmering Mountain in attracting the Sunday crowds, but
an outing on “ The Blue Danube” was the ideal.
A world war was never spoken of, and the suggestion that Hungary might seek
her independence was scorned. The aged Kaiser Franz Joseph was beloved by his
people, and his military caste was in evidence, even as it was in Germany. Everyone
was interested in the recent development of the aeroplane, and one saw all phases of
flying, from “stunting” on the flying field to the dropping of wreaths on the graves of
comrades who had “ crashed.”
It was on one memorable Sunday early in July 1914 that; Vienna was shocked
to hear of the assassination of its Archduke and his wife. Special leaflets bearing the
news were distributed to the crowds, and Vienna became a city of gloom. Black flags
of mourning were hung from windows to the pavement, and as the days rolled on the
nation, brooding over its loss, called for revenge. Knowing as we do now that the
assassination was only “ a move in the game,” one understands the more easily why
this spirit was fostered by her diplomats. For a fortnight feeling ran high, and who
can forget the air of sadness with which a crowd of some 2,000,000 Viennese attended
the Royal Funeral in the Ringstrasse late one night! The bodies were laid in state
in the Royal Chapel, Within two weeks war was declared on Servia, and an hour
later the writer was bound south for Italy by express,
Venice on the Adriatic was outwardly calm, its crowds intent on visiting the
wondrous Piazza St. Marco and the Palace of the Doges, but within a few days Italy’s
rapid mobilisation reminded the writer that she was still bound to the Triple Alliance,
and that her soil was perhaps not quite so healthy as the Alps of Switzerland. One
was soon, lost in admiration at the beauty of the Swiss Lakes, St. Gothard, and the
Grundelwald, and one’s supreme confidence in the heroic efforts of Sir Edward Grey
to bring about peace made one forget the risk of internment. The next few days saw
an exit of all Germans from Interlaken, the banks were closed, and Switzerland too was
mobilised.


The countries all around were now at war, and the problem of how to reach
Paris assumed no mean proportions, as the trains would not cross the Franco-Swiss
frontier. From the border, however, our trainload of refugees finally set out for Paris
amid much singing of the Marseillaise, and now France and Germany were at war.
Arriving in Paris one found the city in a state of semi-paralysis. Crowds surrounded
the Gare, people of all nationalities fleeing to their own countries, but the trains were
busy pushing troops up to the frontier.
The tubes had ceased running, the men having been called to the colours. Taxis
and horses had been commandeered. Everywhere the “ Poilu” was in evidence. Paris
was completely disorganised, but only for the moment.
"One question was uppermost in the French mind “Would England come in
and thereby seal the true friendship of the Entente, in action as well as in thought,
or would France he left alone to her fate? ”
By nightfall all aliens had to leave the city or be interned. The train service to
Dieppe being the only one running, the writer was soon on board a crowded channel-
boat and anon landed in Newhaven, England.
Events now marched rapidly in Britain : the recall of Kitchener to the War
Office, the delivery of the Ultimatum to Germany, and finally, as the time limit expired
at midnight without reply, the nation realised that it was at War. One can seldom
recall such crowds as those which surged excitedly from Downing street to Buckingham
Palace on that night, and one thinks with pride of the handful of splendid men who
marched in the grey dawn to Victoria Station for the embarkation. They were the
heroes of the Mons Retreat.
The anxious days which followed, the wonderful organisation which resulted
in the raising of an army and navy of 8,000,000 men, and their final victory, is fresh in
the memories of us all.
To an Australian the great exploits of her soldiers in the many theatres of war,
and the high standard of clean fighting which they have upheld, mark the entry of
the Commonwealth into the arena of world politics.
Australia has earned with her blood an honourable place among nations.
Long may she flourish ! ! !
GARNET HALLORAN, Capt. R.A.M.C.
At Sea, Anzac Day, 1919.


\%
? I
m
-ify
sis!)
I*
•yir^
f
*MT»
flJl
».4.
#s
J«»«
,£' |rg ;-
EC—i
p-
jQz
*«U 1
_;£• K ‘
COMRADES GONE WEST.
&
■Sing-wea-song-of our- comrades ■.gogc-WcsF,
WcsF-down.-Htg-long, lorjg, loge-Frail.
Fell -+h<iy- defending, or- charging ■ iFjc.' eresF;
GreaHthough,-Fheodds-Fbey-sFood up Fo H\e FesF,
paced •i h, faces •were • Funded •Fo • I'he Wes F,
Westward , ■ red • clicks • pale.
ToasF • we- • memory- of comrades jJope-WesF,
~TbasF-We -sileijce-deep ;
Round --sonic- crushed • liearb a,- Jsarrow-ForQ; breast;
Weeping <aF • horrje. • eornrade-gone-VcsF,
Missing'-p’rhaps- only• CTod • knpwfe• FFje-rcsF,
• like • Fcijdrils - creep.
Peace-Fo -flje souls • of: our- corrjrades-goge-WcsF,
.Peace, •a - sleep • deep-and-switch;
AfFer- Fhe-fuQAof • baFFle , calrti- resF;
AfFcr ■ g reaF- daring • aF- dutyls • beFjcsF
Stocp • • wliere-foc-nieii -I°-longer • co^FcsF,
flop- wardrunjs-of- - beah
Padre.
Z 5-4--1913.
UMn
/
f


ANZAC DAY.
Anzac Day (25th April) was celebrated on board the " Port Macquarie,” in
common, no doubt, with practically every part of our farflung Empire. The proceedings
commenced appropriately with a short but impressive service to commemorate the
fallen, held on the for’ard deck. Immediately before the service the National Anthem
was played by the band, and at its conclusion an impressive rendering of Handel’s
“ Dead March in Saul” was given, and the buglers played the " Last Post.” During
the service the Australian ensign at the fore and the' “jack” aft were flown at
half-mast.
The Padre took “ Anzac” as the subject of his address, speaking of the day (1)
as a memorial of the landing, the first great red-letter day in the history of the
Australians’ achievement in the war, (2) as a memorial to those who rendered the
supreme sacrifice, and (3) an appeal to all Australia’s sons to live up to the created
tradition. It was noble to die for the Empire, it is harder to live for it. This latter
is the duty demanded of us all now returning home.


"GETTING BACK."
I've heard men talk, when in the camp,
Or on the sea, or on the tramp,
Of tales they’ll tell to folks at home,
If they win through and cross the foam
And get safe back !
Some carry with them day and night
A souvenir of some big fight,
To show their friends how they have fought
On fields where victory's dearly bought—
If they get back !
While thunderous cannon rend the skies,
They face the foe with steady eyes ;
Though some get through, there's some must go,
Who try conclusions with the foe —
All can't get back.
Our boys who fell have left a name
Upon the glorious roll of fame ;
The memory of those brave, hearts dear
Is all I ask as souvenir
In going back. X.Y.Z,
ENTERTAINMENTS ON H.M.A.T. “PORT MACQUARIE.”
On the last day in port of departure the C.O. requested the Padre with the
Y.M.C.A. representative to undertake the amusements arrangements for the men on the
voyage.
These two gentlemen organised an amusements committee consisting of Chaplain
the Rev. G. W. Carter as president, Captain Halloran, vice-president; Mr. J. j.
Donnelly, secretary ; Lt. Minchin, sports officer ; Sgt. Phillips, band ; Sgt. Williamson,
No. 1 Coy.; Pte. Brick, No. 2 Coy. ; Cpl. Brigginshaw, No. 3 Coy. ; Pte. Barnard,
No.'4 Coy.: and Pte. Reid.


The committee held six meetings, and throughout the voyage kept the men
provided with entertainment. Unfortunately the ship possessed very limited deck-
space, which rendered sports almost out of the question. At the beginning of the
voyage, the secretary placed the entire Y.M.C.A. equipment at the committee’s
disposal, and the same was used by them in their work throughout the voyage. A
Pierrot troupe was formed and gave several concerts, which were most enthusiastically
received, the first taking place on Saturday April sth. The Pierrots were Captain
Halloran, Mr. Donnelly, Mr. Bailey (ship’s company), Mr. Pitman (ship’s company),
Sgt. Williamson, R.Q.M.S. Logan, Pte. Barnard, and Pte. Reid.
Several other concerts were organised. Perhaps the most notable was Dr.
Halloran's “ Cheer-up Society Concert,” given on the night we spent under the yellow
flag off Fremantle. There were also musical competitions, prizes for which were
given by the Y.M.C.A., and singsongs with lantern and song slides.
By co-operation with the education officer and the sports officer, the committee
was able to ensure that few evenings of the voyage should be without amusement of
some kind or other. The committee received sympathetic help from the troops and
from the ship’s officers, and so its work was crowned with success.


CONCERTS.
Monday evening the 31st March saw the commencement of organised entertain-
ments. The Padre, Doc. Halloran, and “ Bro” invaded the nether regions, and with
the aid of a piano and sundry jokes endeavoured to coax the extraordinarily shy
“ diggers” grouped round to warble sentimentally or otherwise. Certainly a few
“ toed the line,” but the demand greatly exceeded the supply, and ” Bros” pleading
voice had grown unnaturally hoarse towards the close of proceedings. Of those who
faced the crowd the singer of “ Roses of Picardy” was accorded the warmest applause,
and secured a large majority when a show of hands was taken to decide the most
popular item. This performer received a pocket wallet, which was handed over by
“ Bro,” the genial Y.M. rep. The other items were good too, and the little dancing
man, together with a couple of the elocutionary items, won merited acclamation.
The opening concert of the Pierrots was held on Saturday 5th April. A
portion of the forward hatch on the troop-
deck was converted into a stage with the
aid of allied bunting. Proceedings were
opened by the band and considerably
added to the enjoyment of the evening.
The party consisted of Mr. J. J. Donnelly,
Mr. Bailey (4th Engineer), Bluey Reid, Pte,
L. L. Barnard, Mr. Pitman (2nd Steward),
R.Q.M.S. Logan, and Pte. S. S. Verey.
Capt. Halloran officiated at the piano.
The company’s efforts to wile away an
evening were deserving of the greatest
praise and were well received by a full
“house.”


The second concert of the Pierrots was held on Saturday 12th April. The
troop-deck for’ard was decorated with bunting, by the Fourth Officer Mr. Dow, for
the occasion, which made a very pretty setting. The artists were Bluey Reid, Sgt.
Williamson, Pte. L. L. Barnard, “ Bro.” Donnelly, and Mr. Pitman. Captain Halloran
tickled the dominoes.
An impromptu concert, organised by Captain Halloran and “ Bro.” Donnelly,
was held on Monday 28th April, on the fore hatch of the troop-deck. There was no lack
of artists and everything went with a swing. Prizes were distributed at the end of
the performance, and were won by Mr. Kent (ship’s crew), best straight song : Pte.
Newman, comic ; and Pte. “ Splinter” Warren for the “ best worst.”
A concert, organised by the “dinkum digger” Captain Halloran and Sergt. Dug.
Phillips, was held on the fore troop-deck on Saturday 3rd May. Proceedings were
opened by the band. The following contributed items : —W.O. Paddy Doyle, Pte.
J. A. Palmer, R.Q.M.S. Logan, Sgt. Hocking, Pte. W. F. Cahill, W. 0. Mulgrave,
Sgt. Fitzpatrick, Cpl. Gee, Cpl. Newman, Pte. S. Verey, Cpl. May, and a quintette
by the band. During the interval the Jazz Band gave selections. All the items met
- with considerable applause, and we can safely say that it was the most successful
concert of the trip. Captain Halloran presided at the piano, and the stage arrange-
ments were in the hands of Cpl. Briganshaw.
The Cheer-up Concert Party, organised by Captain Halloran, entertained the
troops on No. 2 hatch of the troop-deck on Wednesday the 14th May. The artists
were Paddy Doyle. Bluey Reid, Cpl. May, Pte. Barnard, Cpl. Newman, Dvr. Ford,
Pte. Verey, Captain Halloran, Mr. Partner (ship’s company), and Pte. Cahill. 11 Bro.”
Donnelly presided at the piano and Bluey Reid looked after the limelight. The Padre
took the chair.


LECTURES AND DEBATES.
THE PANAMA CANAL.
An instructive and interesting lecture was given by Captain G. R. Halloran,
entitled “ The Panama Canal and its possible influence on the World’s Trade Routes.”
The lecturer went into the history of the developments of the canal, saying that three
French companies had failed before the U.S.A, Government took it up. De Lesseps,
of Suez Canal fame, was connected with the first venture. The U.S.A. finally made
a success of the work under General Goethals, military engineer, and Surgeon-General
Golgos. Firstly the stock from the French companies was bought for £8,000,000 and
a strip of land ten miles wide was leased from the Government of Panama, the ultimate
cost of the canal to the U.S.A. Government being £75,000,000. The labour was mostly
drawn from the British West Indies. Disease had to be fought yellow fever, malaria,
typhoid, and other tropical diseases. Mosquitoes were eliminated by draining the
swamps, pouring petroleum on water, netting in all houses, and cutting down scrub.
The result is that the Canal Zone is now a health resort, and this is probably the greatest
medical triumph in the world’s history.


Description .- Huge dams were built at both ends of the canal, which, by-
impounding the waters fiom the River Chagres, formed a huge lake 164 square miles
in area called Lake Gatun. The cut was then driven through the Culebra Range 9
miles long towards the Pacific. A series of six locks was constructed, a flight of three
at Gatun, one at Pedro Miguel, and two at Miraflores at the Pacific end. The spillway
over which excess water escapes was constructed close to the Gatun locks. The canal
when completed was 50 miles from deep sea to deep sea, and 40 miles from shallow
to shallow, 42 feet in depth, and its narrowest part is 150 feet at Culebra Cut. The
time of journey through the canal is from eight to twelve hours. The lecturer
gave a description of the workings of the locks of the lake and Culebra Cut, where
the landslides had occurred, and described the canal from a scenic point of view. The
canal was built principally in order that the American Fleet could be quickly transferred
through the canal from the Atlantic to the Pacific, thus gaining a distance of 8,000
miles, but last year the commercial tonnage passing through the canal had increased
to 7,000,000 tons. Captain Halloran then dealt with the world's trade mileage routes
through the canal, giving distances; and drew comparisons between New York and
London, showing that New York was likely to gain commercially. The lecturer
illustrated everything by drawings, perspectives, charts, and photographs. Two of
the drawings were kindly copied by Pte. Bishop.
'history OF EXCHANGE AND MONEY.
A lecture was given on the fore troop-deck by Lieut. A. N. Brierley, B.A., B.Ec.,
on the “ History of Exchange and Money.”
The lecturer traced the evolution of the growth of the present system through
the stages of barter, weighed money, stamped money, and coined money, with the
comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of one-standard and two-standard
countries. He briefly sketched the various types of paper money and the fluctuations
to which they are liable. He also spoke on book credits and cheques. Mr. Brierley
finished his lecture by dealing with the question of international exchange, and gave
his opinion of the reason of the variations of the relations between French, English.
American, and German money.
Lieut.-Colonel Robinson supplemented Mr. Brierley's remarks qn the points
of international exchange.


"FREEDOM OF THE SEAS.”
A lecture was given by Major Chaplain Carter on Monday the sth May; the
lecturer taking as his subject “ The Freedom of the Seas.”
The outline of the lecture set forth the matters as follows : That the League
of Nations idea of recent times is the result of the fusion of two schools of thought an
older one, which dates back some 300 years, which aimed at the abolition of war and
resulted eventually in the Holy Alliance, which broke down in 1830, and the newer
one, which sprang up after the failure of the Holy Alliance and which has as its ideal the
more modest aim of reducing war to the lowest possible minimum and denuding it
of what are regarded as its worst features. This latter school produced the Declaration
of Paris and the Geneva and Hague Conventions. It is from this school that emanates
the proposal for the Freedom of the Seas, which has never before been a clause in any
proposal for a League of Nations.
The Freedom of the Seas aims at abolishing belligerent rights against enemy
property afloat, abolishing the law of contraband and protecting in time of war the
trade, not only of neutrals, but even of the belligerent parties.
The lecturer then went on to show that this is incompatible with an inter-
national league of peace that it would tend to shift the balance of power from naval
powers and give the preference to military powers. This would be a serious blow to
Great Britain, as the Navy is the strongest British arm.
"LEAGUE OF NATIONS.”
A lecture was given on “The League of Nations” by Gunner Lance, on Bth May.
The lecturer dealt with the development of'the system of government, going
back to the days of the tribes, showing how they formed states or kingdoms and
eventually formed the nations such as the British Commonwealth of Nations, which
is often cited as the British League of Nations. At the outbreak of war we had the
Entente Cordiale and the Triple Alliance, which were only agreements in the event


of war. The preliminary League of Nations covenant consists of twenty-six clauses.
The lecturer dealt With the most important of these, and showed that the leading
nations will hold the balance of power. Admission of new members requires the assent
of two-thirds of the States represented by delegates at the Conference, and the consent
of the Executive Council, so that no mere majority will admit any new member. There
is nothing definite on the question of armaments, but the opinions of leading statesmen
both of Britain and America were quoted, in which the abolition of conscription seemed
very popular, also the limitation of armaments. All the nations seem to agree that
private enterprise in the manufacture of armaments must be abolished in favour
of State control.
International Court of Justice. —This Court is considered by some to be the most
important as a place where the nations must submit their grievances. It is hoped by
this means that wars to a certain extent will be abolished. An important part of
the proceedings is that this Court must take six months to consider disputes and give
an answer. The nations in question must wait another three months before declaring
war. The League binds itself to the decisions of the Court.
The lecturer touched on the question of the German Colonies. Germany is
not to receive any of the captured colonies, but whether they will all be disposed of
in the same manner as the islands handed to Australia under the mandatory system
the lecturer was unable to say, as the matter is not yet settled.
All treaties must be published, as secret treaties in the past have been a source
of great annoyance, particularly to America.
The lecturer then went on to show what the world would be without a League
of Nations, and showed that all the Powers must necessarily keep large standing armies.
These would breed the spirit of militarism, and take the money which should be spent
on development work and for the benefit of the people.
At the close of the lecture questions were invited and satisfactorily answered.
DEBATE.
A debate, under the auspices of the Educational Committee, was held on
Thursday 17th April, the subject being State Control versus Private Enterprise. The
case for Private Enterprise was conducted by Lieut. Brierley, ably seconded by Lance-
Corporal McLennan, and for State Control by Lieut. H. Barnes, supported by Gunner
Lance. Several members of the audience expressed their views. At the close of
proceedings a show of hands was taken, State Control receiving a unanimous verdict.


BOXING
COMPANY TOURNEYS.
On Monday evening No. 1 Company presented a programme of five events to
a large and appreciative audience. Each bout was characterised by skill, sportsman-
ship, and merit, and all the contests went to the three-round limit.
Lieut. W. T. Barnes officiated most efficiently as referee, whilst Lieut. Lyon and
Driver Todd acted as judges, and Cpl. j. Forster kept a watchful eye on the timepiece.
In the novice contest Pte. Hewitt, 26th Battalion (9 st. 8 lb.), secured the verdict
from Gnr. Bartley, Bth Bty. (10 st. 2 lb.), after a fairly interesting set-to. The light-
weight was undoubtedly the most pleasing event of the evening. Pte. Shelton, 26th
Batt. (9 st. 8 lb.), and Pte. Stanfield, 26th Batt. (9 st. 6 lb.), were so evenly matched
that the judges asked the referee to exercise his vote, and the bout was declared a
draw.
Pte. Palmer, 26th Batt. (11 st. 6 lb.), had the better of the contest with Pte.
Scott (11 st. 4 lb.), of the same unit, in the middle-weight, and secured the decision.
In the welter the contestants were fairly evenly matched, although dissimiliar types
of men ; and this bout, Cpl. Bell-Booth, 26th Batt. (11 st.), versus Pte. Howell, 26th
Batt. (11 st.), was also declared a draw.
For the commencing round hard hitting characterised the heavy-weight contest,
in which Pte. Anderson, 26th Batt. (12 st. 7 lb.), secured a decision over Pte. Sampson,
sth Batt. (12 st. 5 lb.).
Later in the week members of No. 3 Company also contested a similar number
of events, but this evening’s entertainment failed to reach the standard set by the
previous exhibitions. The generally expressed opinion was that a special three-round
contest between two of the ship’s apprentices, which resulted in a draw, was by far the


best event from the onlookers’ point of view. The novice event provided plenty of
amusement, and was taken generally as a farce. In this event Sgt. Keynes. 16th Batt.
(11 st. 6 lb.), who secured the verdict, was opposed by Pte. Jackson, 27th 'Batt.
(11 st. 6 lb.).
The towel was thrown in on two occasions during the evening, and in one
instance —the middle-weight -popular opinion was decidedly against Drewitt, 27th
Batt. (11 st. 6 lb.), who treated his opponent White, of the same battalion and weight,
With unnecessary severity. In this bout the towel was thrown in before the first round
was concluded and the verdict given against Wnite.
The light-weight contest lasted one and a-half rounds, and Walsh, 27th Batt.
(9 st. 4 lb.), proved himself more than an equal for Pte. Fitzgerald, 27th Batt. (9 st. 4 lb.),
who retired somewhat disfigured.
The honour of a verdict in the welter-weight was sought by Pte. Howe and Pte.
Diggings, both of the 27th Batt. The former had things pretty much his own way for
the first two rounds at least, and was awarded the verdict.
A termination was brought by the meeting of Pte. Morris, 28th Batt., and Pte.
Gillins, 15th Batt. (both 12 st.), in the heavy division. The former had the advantage
of greater reach but the rounds were fairly even and interesting ; the judges’ decision
was a draw’and this seemed to meet with general approval.
Lieut. Barnes again officiated as referee, with Lieut. Lyon and Sgt. Grandison
in the capacity of judges, with Cpl. Burnett as timekeeper.
Shortly after leaving Cape Town a number of contests were decided, and provided
a good evening’s entertainment both for spectators and competitors.
Lieut.-Col. j. A. Robinson, D. 5.0., acted as referee, Lieut. Lyon and Dvr. Todd
again judged, and Cpl. J. F, Forster officiated on the gong.
Of the six contests brought to a decision, that between Pte. Shelton, 26th Batt.,
and Sergt. Arthur, 26th Batt., both approximately 9 st. 7 lb., was the hardest fought
and of most interest. It was a dingdong go from first to last, in which Shelton had
slightly the better of the deal, and he was awarded the verdict.
Another light-weight contest was that between Ptes. Walsh and Warren. This
too provided much of interest, and from the spectators’ point of view Warren should
have won. The judges’ verdict, however, favoured Walsh.
The welter-weight was contested by Gnr. Bartley, Bth Bty., and Pte. Howell,
26th Batt. These two were of about even weight (10 st. 7 lb,), and their three rounds
were evenly fought as well. In this event the award was a draw.


The heavy-weight brought two contestants into the ring, Pte. Sampson, 15th
Batt., and Cpl. Bell-Booth, 26th Batt. Here again the performance was so very even
that a draw was the result.
In the middle-weight, Pte. Farrell was opposed by Goldberg and an interesting
bout resulted. The three rounds were closely contested and resulted in a draw.
The novice event brought two able exponents of the noble art into the ring
and the bout proved of consid nable interest. Ingles eventually secured a decision
over his opponent, Collins, by a narrow margin.
As usual the band (Sergt. D. Phillips conducting) enlivened the waiting crowd
With selections and marches prior to the boxing. The band is certainly a very much
appreciated asset, and wins merited applause on each appearance.
SHIP’S CHAMPIONSHIPS.
Following upon the several company tourneys came the championship contests
in four divisions. These were decided on Tuesday evening, 6th instant, and although /
there were but two aspirants for honours in each class the exhibitions in all cases j
were excellent. The contests were fought under Army and Navy Rules, and consisted |
of three two-minute rounds. |
More than an hour before the time of commencing, the ring-side was packed by *
enthusiasts and every available vantage point elsewhere was fully occupied. The j
band ably assisted to break the monotony of waiting and rendered several numbers J
in its usual efficient manner, to the evident appreciation of everybody. |


Lieut. J.B. Minchin, D. 5.0., M.C.,
was responsible for the organisation of the
championship, and is to be congratulated
on the successful issue achieved. He was
ably assisted by Cpl. C. N. Hall, who gave
valuable assistance in various ways., Lieut.
W. T. Barnes officiated as referee in a most
efficient manner, Lieut. Lyon and Dvr. Todd
gave the decisions, whilst Cpl. Burnett was
responsible for the time.
In addition to the money-order
and cash prizes, there were several valuable
trophies generously donated by our genial
skipper Capt. W. McQueen. The O.C.
troops (Lieut.-Col. J. A. Robinson, D. 5.0.)
donated the cash prizes awarded, whilst
the money orders were upon the A.I.F.
Canteens Fund.
RESULTS.
BANTAM WEIGHT.
Under 8 st. 10 lb. First Prize—Trophy, £1 Money Order, 10/- Cash; Second— 15/- Money Order.
Pte. Collins (8 st.), No. 3 Company ; Pte. Kelly (8 st.), No. 1 Company. This bout was characterised by
a brisk exchange of " broadsiders,” and was dean throughout. Collins secured the majority of points, and was
leading at the conclusion of the final round. He was awarded the verdict.


LIGHT WEIGHT.
Under 9 st. 7 lb. First Prize — Trophy, £1 Money Order, 10/- Cash; Second —15/- Money Order.
Pte. Stanfield (9 st. 6 lb.), No. 1 Company ; Fte. Warren (9 st. 7 lb.), No.'3 Company. This was perhaps
the most pleasing from a spectator’s point of view. Both men were taking the offensive at favourable moments,
and blows were exchanged with equal briskness and '‘sang-froid." The contest hardly inclined in either man’s
favour at any stage of the contest, and the judges’ award of a draw was received with unanimous satisfaction.
WELTER WEIGHT.
Under 10 st. 7 lb. First Prize — Trophy, £1 Money Order, 10/- Cash ; Second— ls/- Money Order.
Cpl. McFarlane (10 st. 6 lb.), No. 2 Company ; Cpl. Bell-Booth (10 st. 6 lb.), No. 1 Company. In this section
the is.sue was hardly in doubt from the commencement, for McFarlane soon showed himself somewhat superior
to his opponent. The bout was not, however, devoid of interest and was warmly applauded. Here again sportsman-
ship and good feeling were noticeable throughout the round.
MIDDLE WEIGHT.
Under 11 st. 7 lb. First Prize — Trophy, Cl Money Order, 10/- Cash ; Second —15/- Money Order.
Cpl. Drewitt (11 st. 6 lb,), No. 4 Company ; Pte. Farrell (10 st. 11 lb.), No, 3 Company. Interest was main-
tained throughout this contest, which, as the award indicates, was very even. Both men fought well, and Farrell
warily avoided his opponent's notorious right. Both men received and delivered heavy blows and each came up
smiling. I t was a difficult bout to judge ; some spectators inclined one way and others another. The final decision
was a draw, and, with one or two exceptions, was approved by the onlookers.
HEAVY WEIGHTS.
Over 11 st. 7 lb. First Prize — Trophy, 30/- Money Order, 10/- Cash ; Second —15/- Money Order.
Pte. Anderson (12 st. 2 lb.), No. 1 Company ; Pte. Sampson (12 st. 7 lb.), No. 1 Company. This event had
created the most interest beforehand, for " Nugget ” Anderson was recognised as an exceedingly hard nut to crack.
Sampson is to be congratulated on his pluck in meeting an opponent so well versed in, ringcraft and the “ noble
art.” Anderson had a lead throughout, but the other man is by no means a " dud." The first two rounds were
decidedly of interest but Anderson had things much his own way in the third, and Sampson’s towel was thrown
in a few seconds later before the gong sounded. Anderson was warmly applauded on receiving the decision, and
a no less hearty cheer was given Sampson as the two men left the ring together. Hare again good feeling and
sportsmanship characterised the bout.
Certainly not the least interesting event of the evening was an exhibition spar between our Y.M.C.A. rep.
(Mr. Donnelly) and Sgt. Arthur of No. 1 Company. This was for three two-minute rounds, and was not lacking
in hard knocks. Both men were heartily applauded for their exhibition.
RESULTS — continued.


Immediately after the final bout, Lieut.-Col. J. A. Robinson, D. 5.0., introduced
the chief engineer (Mr. T. A. Leinster), who had been invited to present the prizes
won by competitors during the evening. In a few apt and well-chosen remarks, Mr.
Leinster congratulated the successful aspirants for championship honours on their
respective performances. He thanked each and every one, or behalf of all present,
for a splendid evening’s sport and entertainment, and congratulated them also on
the good feeling and “ bon camaraderie” which characterised the bouts.
"DOC." SCORES
Scene. Inoculation aboard H.M.A.T. M. 0., shirt-sleeves rolled up, sweating in the
humid tropical heat at 10 a.m., busy puncturing diggers’ arms and injecting
therein the magic mystic juice of X.Y.Z. Excited “digger,” suffering from acute
“ cussednitis,” arms a-kimbo.
Say, bok ’ere Doc,, is this ’ere b ’noculation 'pulsory ? Caws, if it is, then I’m not ’avin’ any.’’
Doc. . Well, no, old man, just please yourself. I’m too busy to yap. Next man, please.”
Digger . Well, seein as ’ow it's that way, I'll be done." Bares his arm for the jab.


ROBBED BY DISCIPLINE.
My old mate Mick Ryan and I had just finished a long trip with cattle, and,
with plenty of money in our pockets, found ourselves on the way to Brisbane. At
Townsville a barmaid got hold of Mick, and I could not shift him. After waiting a
week, he told me straight that he wouldn’t leave the place, but that, as the lady had
got most of his money in presents, perhaps I could lend him ten quid. I gave him the
tenner, boarded the “ Cintra,” and continued my trip alone.
Some months later, I was standing outside the pub. in a bush township admiring
a big chestnut horse coming up the track. As he drew near, the rider lifted his torn
panama and smiled. It was my old mate Mick. “ Yes,” he said, “ it’s me, old chap.
But come an’ have a drink, and I will tell you the strangest story you ever heard.”
We were soon comfortably settled in the pub. parlour, and Mick started his
tale—
“ After you left on the ‘ Cintra,’ my tenner cut out mighty quick. By the way,
here’s the cash ; and some more with it if you are short. Well, I soon found out that
I was an ass, so I jumped the train to Cloncurry ; then, penniless and miserable, I
started to carry my swag out west in search of work. One night as I sat gazing into
my campfire and wondering how many scores of miles I was from the nearest white
man, a voice startled me with ‘ Good evening, sir’; I turned round and saw a pretty
woman in a white dress, standing in the faint glow of the firelight. At first I thought
that the stuff I had been drinking was too strong. But she was there alright. She
told me her selection was close by, and that her husband had died that day, and asked
me if I would mind coming over and staying in the house while she rode to the next
selection for assistance. I picked up my swag and followed her.
“ Arrived at the place, she gave me a box of cigars and a bottle of whisky to
keep me company during her absence. As she rode away I sat down to a stiff drink.
Suddenly the dead husband stood before me, a revolver in his hand ! ‘ It’s alright,
lad,’ said he; ' swallow your drink before you faint. Now,’ said he, ‘ listen to me !
That woman thinks I drank the tea that she put arsenic in she has gone for her
damned fancy man ; but you have only to sit tight and mind your own business and
leave the rest to me.’


“ He then returned to the bedroom.
“ An hour later I heard horses coming ; and in a few minutes she returned with
a big, handsome chap, whose arm I noticed as they passed me was round her waist. ■
“As they entered the room, three shots rang out. Then the ‘ dead’ husband
came out and told me to take one of his best horses and get away. He wrote out a
receipt for the nag and handed it to me with twenty quid, saying, 1 Look here ;
remember, you were never at Brown’s selection in your life.’
“ A few months later I was coming along behind a mob of cattle when I saw
a mounted trooper and a tracker riding straight towards me. The trooper stared at
me for a moment with his snake-like, black eyes, then covered me with his revolver
and said, ‘ I’ve had a hundred and sixty miles of a ride over the plains after you, so it
won't take much to make me shoot you. So be quick ! and tell me all you know about
the tragedy at Brown’s selection.’
“ 1 I know nothing,’ I said, ‘ so shoot and be damned ! ’
“ ‘ Be quick ! ’ said he, 1 only the tracker is witness, and my finger is itching
to pull.’
“ Again I replied, 1 1 know nothing and can tell nothing.’
“He looked hard at me and then jerked the false beard from his chin. It was
Brown himself! 1 Look, lad’, he said, ‘ I am leaving Australia; but 1 wanted to
make sure of you before I went. Here, take this,’ and he drew out a bundle of fivers
and handed them to me. I reached to take them. But at that moment a voice rang
out: ‘ Come on now ! Tumble out of that hammock, if you want any breakfast ;
this ’ere “ Port Macquarie” ain’t no b - ----- - convalescent camp !’ ”
E. A. FORD.
221 KNOTS! YE GODS!
The Chief Engineer he curses Cape coal;
" Port Macquarie's ” fast records reduce ;
Long-feller Chief Mate he says, " 'pon my soul,
The running has gone to the deuce ” ;
The senior M.O. keeps fouling the screw
With M.S. and dressings and lint;
The Officers moan, “ There's no mountain dew ” ;
Minchin growls, " There’s no room for a sprint! ”
The J.M.O. says, " Life’s joyless and lean ” ;
The C.O. lies low and says nuffin ;
But Captain McQueen
Keeps smiling serene,
And out of our grouse knocks the stuffin.’ 25/4/1919.




THE LAND OF THE PHARAOHS.
A glimpse of ancient Egypt above Cairo takes us upstream to Abu Simbel, some
700 miles, and leaving behind us the Pyramids, Sphinx, and the ruins of Memphis
city, one follows the Nile to Abydos (324 miles above Cairo), sacred as the traditional
burial place of Osiris, the Lord of the Dead. Here are seen the remains of temples
dating back 5,000 years, among them the temple of Seti I.
Among the ruins of Dendera (380 miles) is the temple of Hathor, one of the
best preserved of the Ptolemaic Temples. Around the great sweeping bend of the
river at Luxor (420 miles) one finds oneself on the site of ancient Thebes and amid an
extraordinary wealth of crumbling ruins. The Temple of Karnak is a most stupendous
and magnificent sight. Situated some 2 miles on the main road from Luxor, the
approaches are lined by avenues of sphinxes, many of which are still intact. Built
by Usertsen (b.c. 2433) and embellished by almost every monarch up to the time
of the Ptolemies, its main feature is the Hypostyle Hall, which is large enough to
conceal the Cathedral of Notre Dame of Paris. For splendour and magnitude, the
temple of Karnak forms the most magnificent ruin in the world. The roof, single
stones of which weigh 100 tons, is supported by 134 massive columns from 40 to 60
feet high. The outer walls surrounding the temple are 50 feet high, and along the top
one may walk for half an hour. Within are several obelisks and the sacred pool.
A short distance below Karnak on the same bank stands the Temple of Luxor,
built by Amen-Hotep 111, 1400 b.c. The columns are mostly lotus-bud in type, and
in the birth chamber the stone carvings depict the miraculous birth of Amen-Hotep 111.
A noteworthy feature is a fine obelisk of red granite erected by Rameses II
and a huge statue of that-monarch. The carving of his “ little wife” on the same
pedestal reaches only to his knee. At the present day the surrounding country is under
cultivation, and the methods adopted are as primitive as those of Lower Egypt. Across


the river is the hill of Thebes, the great necropolis of the Pharaohs and their people.
Within the twenty-miles’ donkey ride over the surrounding desert, there are some
very fine specimens of architecture, some of which are well preserved. On the road
to the tombs of the kings from the river one first passes the Colossi of Memnon, the
guardians of the mortuary temple of Amen-Hotep 111. To the right is the Ramasseum
built by Rameses.ll. The figure of Rameses now lies broken on the ground,
having been destroyed by the Persians, and its ruins show it to have been the most
gigantic figure in Egypt ever carved from a single block of granite.
■ Further on the desert track gradually ascends and enters the “ Valley of the
Dead,” between two small spurs of the hill of Thebes. The many tombs of thb kings
(Pharaohs) are disposed around a natural amphitheatre some few miles up the valley,
and. the road leading thereto has seen for centuries the pageantry: attending the royal
burials. Around the foot of the yellow cliffs are doorways once carefully sealed and
hidden, leading through the solid rock downwards hundreds of yards. Passing through
many corridors hewn in the rock one finally reaches the actual burial chamber. In
the tomb of Amen-Hotep II (18th dynasty) the mummy of the king still lies intact, and
in a small side-chamber lie the mummies of his three faithful servants, it being
customary to kill the most trusted of them, that their spirits might attend the master
after death. Some centuries later only a mock ceremony was gone through, and the
blue dolls so commonly found in tombs to-day represent the bodies of the victims of
the former peculiar rite. The sculptured sarcophagus of the monarch was most
elaborate. Often hewn out of the granite and at times covered with gold, it was
altogether a fitting resting-place for the mummy. Great care was taken in embalming
the body, that the spirit which revisited it might recognise the features, for should the
face be disfigured by enemies the spirit was baffled. The sarcophagus was therefore
made heavy and inaccessible, to prevent such a catastrophe. Within the chamber was
placed food for the soul, usually in bowls and dishes of alabaster or serpentine stone.
Gold, jewellery, and furniture were commonly found —the personal effects of the
king. The brilliant colour of the wall-paintings depicting the life of the emperor persists
to the present day.
Leaving the tombs one bears to the right and passes the Temple of Queen Hat-
shepset. The temple (Der-el-Bahari), built 1600 b.c., stands at the far end of a deep
bay in the cliffs of the hill of Thebes. Approached by a pair of obelisks, a pylon gateway,
and a long avenue of sphinxes, the temple consisted of a succession of terraces and flights
of steps, rising one above the other and ending in a maze of colonnades and courtyards
uplifted high against the mountain-side.


The Tombs of the Queens lie in a valley at the opposite end of the Hill of Thebes.
One of the most interesting is the Tomb of Queen Nephetari, wife of Rameses.ll,
19th'dynasty. The return journey to Luxor brings one to the Temple of Medinet
Habu.
Further up the Nile the village of Edfu (485 miles) marks the site of the old capital
of Upper Egypt in pre-dynastic times, and here is found one of the largest and best
preserved temples in Egypt, built during the two centuries before the Christian era
by the Ptolemies.
The present-day journey is usually done by train leaving Luxor at daylight,
and the run is to be remembered because of the great heat, the dust, and the glare
of the desert. The Egyptian fly here wages the same vigorous offensive as in Lower
Egypt. Arriving at Edfu the river has to be crossed in a treacherous-looking boat which
runs aground in the shallows. One is at once seized by several natives, carried ashore
piecemeal over the mud, and thrown on a donkey. The crowd of waders then clamour
loudly for “ bucksheesh,” and one sets off at a gallop, the mob at one’s heels.
The temple lately excavated from the present-day village is dedicated to the
god Horus, and the two pylons, 112 ft. high, are covered with battle scenes. The
Temple at Komombo (522 miles) on the way to Assouan is also Ptolemaic, and was the
Temple of Sobek. Assouan (522 miles) is a charming spot, the river dividing to
enclose Elephantine Island ; both banks and the island being thickly wooded. On
the outskirts of the town may often be seen a Bichareen village pitched on the desert,
the tribe selling their camel-herd. Nearby are the ancient granite quarries from which
granite was cut and floated down to Lower Egypt, A partially cut obelisk is still lying
in the quarry.
Sailing up the river to Shellal, one finds a complete change in the country-side.
The sandy banks are replaced by solid granite rock. The first cataract is soon reached,
and built above it is the immense Assouan Dam, passing through which the Island
of Phylas looms up. The Temple of Phylse is Ptolemaic and is very picturesque. It is
approached through a colonnade of thirty-two columns and the massive towers of the
pylons are each 120 ft. wide and 60 ft. high. Beside it is the smaller temple of Osiris
known as Pharaoh’s bed.
The effect of the dam at Assouan is felt as far up as Abu Simbel, another 174
miles, and here there are found great statues of Rameses 11, 60 ft. high. The temple
is excavated in the granite rock to a depth of 185 ft. At Assouan the wonders of ancient
and present-day civilization stand out in sharp contrast, and one turns from a study
of'the magnificent Temple of Phylas, built many centuries ago, to the colossal'dam


recently constructed a mile below it at Assouan. The dam is U miles long and is raised
to a height of 143 ft. above the valley floor, both ends and the base being built into the
granitic rock of the river-bed. The dam is pierced by 180 huge sluices which regulate
the flow and prevent silting, and a system of five locks at the western end allows the
Nile boats to pass up and down. The level of the river is held up nearly to the Sudan
frontier, and some 2,300,000,000 tons of water over and above the normal content of
the river are thereby stored instead of running out to sea. A continual water supply
throughout the year is thus provided enabling two crops to be grown on the same
land annually. That the Temple of Phylae, which is consequently submerged for
several months each year by the flood, may not suffer is the hope of Egyptologists,
who, while solicitous for the welfare of modern Egypt, justly regard the architectural
remains of an extinct Empire as sacred and inviolable.
GARNET HALLORAN, Capt. R.A.M.C.


He drafts from everywhere,
Mine, farm, and city fair,
The suburbs and the stations way out hack ;
And some you've seen before,
With cans and dogs galore,
A humping bluey on the sundown track.
His oaths are not sublime,
But mincing words and fine
Can't tell you all that's in a digger’s heart;
Though adjectives be ruddy,
His meaning's never muddy,—■
Hates one to think he’s trying to be smart.
He don’t indulge in bluster,
His simple " Come a gutser ”
Is eloquent; he knows that you'll "compree” :
Narked if one spreads "a furph” ;
His national game-—The Turf;
His strong words, " Dinkum Oil ” and ” E'll do me.”
Steel wires all up his back,
He’s humped a heavy pack ;
He’s “got the guts” and loves a ding-dong fight;
And you can "spit yer death.”
The digger's A.I.F.
Don't deal in feathers that the world calls white.
Long-limbed and tough and brown,
His face grows hair, not down ;
He plays the game,—and also plays Two-up :
But Gawdstruth 1 Strike me pink !
Whatever you may think,
He won't forget when he's been sold a pup.
He does his little dash
While he has got the cash, —
A cherished souvenir to him his paybook ;
But says,"Ain’t got the dough "
When funds are running low ;
He then does sums in some secluded nook.
Just mention politics,
At once his ears he pricks
And asks you what you think of Billy Hughes ;
Against the " League of Nations"
Has arguments in oceans, —
About the Yank he has "got private views.”
He flops about the deck,
Tin label round his neck,
Engrossed intensely in a game called House ;
Not many togs he sports,
He likes it best in shorts ;
Straight wire, he's happy when you hear him grouse.
En route to seat of war,
In port not let ashore ;
For which he thought they made excuses lame ;
They posted sentries out,
M.P.’s were all about;
But diggers somehow got there just the same.
For Pipeclay and for Blanco,
For Brilliantshine and Brasso,
Indignant like he says, “ I’ve got no time " !
" This blasted war well over,
I'll be no more a soldier,
No bally fear,” he mutters, "not for mine” 1
"DIGGER," BY THE PADRE.


YE DIARY OF ONE PEPYS.
March 28 th. —Ye war beinge no more, I do this daye begin my journee to ye land where do,dwell people
that have ye black or ye harde visage—Ye land that is known bye ye name " Australia," which beinge interpreted
do meane—Ye lande of ye harde doer. I board ye shippe " Porte Macquarie ’’ which lies atte anchor in ye dock
atte Cardiff.
March 29th. —Tis a goodlye shippe and this daye we do sail. Ye shippe begineth to roll and ye feeling
within my stomach is strange.
March 30 th. —1 break my fast and alas ! Ye fishes breake their fast also. I seeke my bedde and do feel
nigh unto death.
March 31s/.—l recover; 1 eate to my heart's content. Verily it is goode to live. 1 would my wiffe were
here.
April Is/. —Ye daye when all do make fools, ye one with ye other. Ido meet ye Mate one Sawbridge, j,
a sailor of gallant bearing. 'Tis well my wiffe be not here. I notte like ye looke of his eye.
April 2nd. —I look me about, butte move notte there being not room. I espice ye " diggers,” thatt being
ye name of ye “ harde visaged ones," gathered together in grate numbers, and I did hear one mysterious words,
ye like of" leggs to ye number of eleven, clickety click,” “Ye mudd kooke,” and others ; truly a strange proceedings.
Ye colonel he beinge ye great one over all ye troops did wear ye frown upon his hedde. Ye reason I knowe notte.
April 3rd.— This nighte did I witness strange duells to ye number of five. Notte swords or pistol. But
upon ye hands of ye men were strange padds and with strange movements didde they smite ye other, and though
there was muche of blood and bruises yette didde they smile one to ye other, truly strange. Ye Colonel, who didde
accte ye parte of ye umpire, didde from time to time saye with much gentleness " Breake! Breake ! " Yette
didde I hear nothings thatte didde breake saving ye umpire's voice. Igoto my bedde feeling now a sickness,
havinge hadde fish for my repast. Ye menu saith 'twas of the " flounder,” yette do I doubte ye truth.
April 4th. —This daye didde I visit ye court, where a wench comely indeed didde sue a vagabond who didde
deceive her.' He havinge provided her with a future of much size, didde yette protest that he should pay notte.
Trulye a meane wretch. Methinks I will be as a father to ye poor wench.
April Sih. —To-day didde I liste unto the band whiche didde play much music, I beinge much struck with ’
the man, he havinge hair thatt was redd, and his instrument itt was large. This youth brought much contentment
unto me. For 1 didde see ye likeness to my baby boy when suckinge of his bottle.


April 6lh. —Whatte strange sights I do beholde ! For to-daye didde ye apothecaries, to ye number of two.
draw them aside with much mystery, and I didde notice thatt they hadde hand coverings of rubber and bowls
thatte didde contain ye kondies. And their faces didde show ye looks of ye hunter. Then didde gather together
all thatt were diggers and fear was on ye visage of manye. Then didde they with much meekness and innocence
of mein approach one bye one unto ye learned ones. And if ye learned ones didde seeme disappointed then didde
ye digger sighe with much reliefe and go his way with manye smiles. But didde ye learned ones smile with glee
then didde ye digger's countenance turn to one colour of chalke and he woulde saye " come a gutzer" and he didde
go then into exile. Butte those thatte were called officers did notte go before ye learned ones for itt is written—
" Officers sin notte ! "
April 20//;.—This daye we do arrive atte ye Gape Town whiche is a goodlye town, and 1 beinge a leftenent
of foot am sent with a boddy of men to keep ye King’s rules and regulations. I did put my men in ye " drill hall "
and saye unto them " Tarry here, for gadzooks ! 1 must even depart for water to quench my thirst, and if anyone
thatt is amonge ye do other than obey my law, upon him will I visit my wrath.” And 1 went, and didde drink and
after meditation didde I return. And the picquet thatte was, was notte ! ! Then didde I take me back to ye
shippe in silence.
April 2ls-/.---1 do looke me around and see many things thatte are done. Ye people here havinge ye heart
thatte is good, do muche for ye diggers. Giving unto them muche too eatte and also carriage without horses in
which to journee. And there are some people thatte are white and others thatte are black and notte meet for
ye diggers to take unto themselves thatte were black and they thatte didde so didde lower ye prestige of ye uniform
thatte theye didde wear. I saw notte any of these butte I didde hear of bargains in velvet thatte was black, Yette
I took no heed for velvet is merchandise and lawful trade.
April 23rd. —We do sail, after a pleasant dallying, and we do praye for speed. Butte ye coal thatte is gotten
from ye Cape be notte ye best, and upon ye visage of lie thatte is chief of all ye engines is no smile. And 1 didde
say unto him wherefore art thou sadd and he didde make answer, thatte ye propeller, which is ye piece of iron
thatte do go rounde and rounde and movetli ye shippe, didde go rounde in one minute even sixty times and
thatte ye percentage of slippe was ninety and nine. Butte I went my way without enlightenment for I didde
notte know ye meaning of slippe and percentage. Yette have I a greate likinge for ye chief of engines, even
though my heart is as lend, for we do go forwarde ye one league and do slippe ye two.
May 12//;.—Many days have passed ere I writ in this booke, for my eyes haveinge been as ye blind man,
from ye dust from ye coal. Manye moons have gone and perchance ere the morrow is ye shippe will be atte anchor
atte ye Port of ye Mantle thatte is Free. And ye diggers are filled with contentment, for verily they will go on
ye shore and unto ye houses where ye " ear of ye pig " is in abundance. Verily there is joy, great joy, on ye shippe.
May 13//;.—We do arrive and every man has donned his best broadcloth, and ye officers havinge belts
thatte do shine and noses also. And withe much jubilation we do await ye man, who is by profession an apothecary,
who wilt say to us, " Hail, 'tis well; go ye ashore for a space. We would fain welcome ye.” Yet, alas, he said
not the words. But didde visit each and every one and didde place in ye mouths of all, tubes thatte were of glass.
And he didde tarry a long time doing this, and found notte thatte which he sought, butte nearing ye end didde
he see one man, and ye glass from his mouth didde read ninety eight and ye half. Now indeed was he full of
joy for should it notte read ninety eight ? Therefore cried he in muche jubilation, " Verily I say unto ye, Ye
shall not visit this palace of sand, cinders, and slush ;ye shall stay even on ye shippe. Now indeed are our women-
kind saved from ye sight of suche men and ye tin coverings need now be worn notte. For are ye not ye men
that didde go and fight our friends ye Huns ? Are ye notte ye tourists thatte sow notte and reap even six shillings
by ye day ? I shake ye coaldust off my feet. Verily I say fly from these our shores, lest peradventure thou makest
us as thou art. By the blood of our Fathers, the Gropers, I have spoken ! ”


THE AUSTRALIAN Y.M.C.A. ABOARD.
The Australian Y.M.C.A. did not fail in its last opportunity for wartime service
to the men returning home on our ship.
There are few troops who have before them such a long and weary homecoming
as the Australian “ Diggers,” and every activity that aims at entertainment and
social life aboard the troopship is an essential and practical service.
The Association had its representative aboard who was armed with the standard
troopship equipment as for each thousand troops. The list of equipment, consisting
of no less than sixty-six separate items, is too long for detailed mention, but contained
such items as a fiction and educational library of no less than one thousand standard
Works, costumes and gear for a twelve-person pierrot troupe, a case of fifty-six prizes
(cigarette cases, safety razors, hairbrushes, &c.) for the competitions which were
held at various times throughout the voyage, and various items of sporting gear, all of
Which,was used continuously.
We do not doubt that every man on this homeward trip has appreciated this
particular Y.M.C.A. service, and feels that but for the presence of the red triangle
our voyage could not have been cheerful as it was.
[The above particulars were supplied by Mr. J. j. Donnelly, the Y.M.C.A. Representative, who,
with characteristic modesty, has failed to mention the one factor which more than any other contributed
to the success of the Y.M.C.A. efforts on our ship, namely : the personality of the Representative himself.
In Mr. Donnelly we were fortunate in having a man of varied gifts ; a musician of more than average
ability ; a good sport and a gentleman imbued with the lofty ideals of his work.— Ed.]


AUSTRALIAN RED CROSS AND AUSTRALIAN COMFORTS FUND.
The joint representative of these two funds on board the “ Port Macquarie”
was the popular Sgt. Hunkin, late of the 39th Battalion. Anybody who has had
experience at the front knows the well-deserved, excellent reputation these funds have
won in the field, and their character was ably sustained on the troopship in catering
for the comforts of the men on the troop-deck and for the hospital patients.
The 112 cases of ‘‘Comforts” aboard included tinned fruits, socks, shirts,
condensed milk, cocoa and milk, cigarettes, tobacco, writing paper, and envelopes.
There were 75 cases of Red Cross goods—-fruit, jam, chocolates, biscuits, sweets, jellies,
malted milk, condensed milk, cafe au lait, beef extract, cornina, shirts, dressing gowns,
etc., etc. The goods were distributed to the men through the Company Q.M. Sergeants
for troops, and through the A.M.C. for hospital patients, aiming at every man getting
his share and nobody being overlooked. The method worked admirably, and everybody
Was pleased, and felt the deep gratitude we owe to the promoters and supporters and
workers of these two funds


GOOD-BYE-EE!
Good-bye to trenches, rats and mice,
To rotten billets, chats and lice,
To bully-stew and boiled rice.
Good-bye-ee !
To bully-beef and pork and beans,
Plum-apple jrm, and never greens—
I’ve indigestion still in dreams —
Good-bye-ee !
To Anzac wafers and rum issue,
The little lot that often missed you,
When other blokes got double issue.
Good-bye-ee !
Good-bye to going in the line,
To minnies, to the weird shell-whine,
To whiz-bangs and the damned five-nine.
Good-bye-ee !
To gas-guards and to Boche air-raids,
Reveille, piquets and parades,
Estaminets and chic French maids.
Good-bye-ee !
Good-bye to mumps and boils and scabies,
To war-time leave and war-time ladies,
To issue sox and war-time babies,
Good-bye-ee !
To sick parade and iodine,
Sulphur ointment, chloride of lime,
S.A. parade and Number 9.
Good-bye-ee !
To night patrol and Boche white flare,
To wiring stunts and " Who goes there ? ”
To strombos-horns, P.H., gas scare.
Good-bye-ee !
To mounting guard, fatigues, and drill;
Of dull routine I’ve had my fill,
Na-poo ! I’ve lost the lust to kill.
Good-bye-ee !
To dug-out, shell-hole, and shell-crater,
That brought me near the heart of nature ;
0 ! what a yarn I’ll tell the mater!
Good-bye-ee !
And then good-bye to my tin hat
That saved my life when splinters spat;
Thanks to the bloke who thought of that!
Good-bye-ee !
To red tabs, red tape—Ack—Ack—Ack !
To tons we carried in our pack,
Adieu 1 I’m never coming back.
Good-bye-ee !
To cold-footers and red-caps too,
Bonjour ! I touch my nose to you ;
Henceforth you’ve got to earn your screw,
Good-bye-ee !
My fond adieux to friends known well, —
To Abdul, Willie, Kaiser Bill;
1 hope they'll feel at home in hell.
Good-bye-ee 1
Digger.
30-4-19.


EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES.
When we set off from Cardiff most of us began to realise that the time had
come when all thinking men should train their eyes towards their future and their
reintroduction to civil life. The A.I.F. Education Service did well to provide books
for those anxious to reacquaint themselves with the serious things of life and afford
them the opportunity of brushing up subjects which had bearing on our men’s civil
occupations.
The Education Officer was provided with 341 text-books for sale and 20 reference
books for loan. Of the former 195 were sold, comprising works ranging from black-
smithing to political economy. Although men’s minds were restless and rusty, several
officers and men were only too pleased to act as teachers, and naturally the Education
Officer appreciated their voluntary services. Classes were held continuously during
the voyage home in the following, viz. : —Bookkeeping (three classes), French, English
Composition, Arithmetic, and Shorthand, Considering the lack of sufficient accommoda-
tion the classes were well attended, and the students greatly appreciated the efforts
and work of their instructors.
In addition to the above, Gunner Lance (of whose services to me and to the
whole ship I cannot write too highly) delivered nine (9) short talks on “ Sheep and
Wool ”to a few eager hailers from the country. Lieut. Brierley’s lecture on “ Money
and Exchange” was most instructive; and the lectures by the Padre on “ The Freedom
of the Seas,” and Gunner Lance on “The League of Nations,” were both well attended
and most interesting and instructive. Our esteemed M.O. Capt. Halloran, whom we all
admired, delivered a most instructive lecture on “The Panama Canal.” To Private
Barnard must great credit be given for
the undoubted success of the two
mock trials of a breach of promise case
and a slander case respectively. J udged
by the continuous laughter that eman-
ated from the onlookers, those who
took part in these were amply re-
warded for their efforts.
I must take this opportunity of
expressing my thanks to all who
helped to make the educational work
on the “ Port Macquarie” a medium
of assistance to the Diggers.
Bruce Laing, Lt., Education Officer.


FREMANTLE.
After so long abroad how we longed for the day of our arrival ! Fate decreed
that we should first sight our shores in the West, and as the great dreary waste behind
us increased our hopes were in the ascendant. Many comrades must leave us, but
the mingled sorrow and joy so fervently expressed in that touching song “ Will ye ne’er
come back again?” will be evergreen in the “digger’s” memory. Rottnest past,
we lay at anchor eagerly awaiting the dawn and with it the bustle and life preparatory
to our first shore leave. Who but “ the ’eads” could have foreseen the probability
of black disappointment hovering over us, and who can forget the gloom and depression
which settled upon us one and all as the verdict of “ In Quarantine” was announced.
It was some months later that two influenza germs were seen to move stealthily down
the gangway and steal furtively away in' their launch to the accompaniment of
adjectives which, it is said, are not to be found in any reputable dictionary.
The hours dragged by and, hoping against hope, the day was passed in agonising
suspense. Launches flitting to and fro, frantic flag-waving, “ morsing,” and wireless
Were the order of the day, but the yellow rag was obdurate and still floated mockingly
on the breeze. Snatches of “ All dressed up and nowhere to go” caught the ear. Mean-
while, thwarted at every turn, we grew desperate, the violent epithets hurled shorewards
were exceeded only by the biting sarcasm endured by the gloved gentleman who, be
it remembered, to his everlasting discomfort, “ forgot to procure certain cigarettes on
shore.”
But, meanwhile, “ The Cheer-up Society” was at work dispelling dull care,
and it is reported that even the pessimists joined in three of the heartiest cheers ever
heard between decks at the close of the proceedings. The Waterside Workers’ Con-
ference followed, at which many excellent speakers came to light and momentous
decisions were arrived at.
Another day of despair followed ; faces were sullen, and silence reigned supreme,
broken only by a volley of oaths as a figure in grey moved up the side of S.S. “ Benalla”
lying in the offing. A few hours later and, hey presto ! we were at sea again bound
for more hospitable shores. " Latrine wireless” has it that boilers were fired, winches
ceased their clatter, and hatches were battened down as if by magic; and now the
digger found his tongue, dull frowns changed to smiles, and happiness reigned once
more aboard the lugger.
Our thanks go out to “ the ’eads” for their energetic action, but a great
tribute must be paid to the men who under provocation played a clean game
and exhibited a high degree of self-restraint and discipline. We leave the West
disgusted. May the Fates never lead us back to those inhospitable shores.
“FED-UP.”


Hay Hows
with the
Poets.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
<Tune : “Happy Day.”;
We reached it in the month of May,
And dropped our anchor in the bay,
Alas ! It was on May thirteen
They dumped us into quarantine.
Quarantine ! Quarantine !
They dumped us into quarantine.
And there we lay in durance vile,
Each face lit with perpetual smile,
Our brief sojourn passed like a dream,
Because we were in quarantine.
Quarantine ! Quarantine !
Passed like a dream in quarantine.
Beneath'the yellow-peril flag
We watched the shore a'nd chewed the rag.
And thought of where we might have been
But for the bally quarantine.
Quarantine ! Quarantine !
We chewed the rag in quarantine.
When we were going to the war
They welcomed us like toffs ashore,
When we came back, the winning team,
Our welcome home was quarantine.
Quarantine ! Quarantine !
They welcomed us with quarantine.
I’d like to give " san fairy an ”
To that Fremantle doctor-man
Who made me suck the glass machine
That shoved me into quarantine.
Quarantine ! Quarantine !
Damn this infernal quarantine.
" DOPEY.”
Dull “dopiness,” thy soft seductive song is all too strong for me,
Mine eyelids heavy grow, my languid, limpid limbs all long for thee.
The very sea accepts thy rule, ’tis but a sick insipid thing,
The flying fishes float, not fly,
Flaked cloudlets 101 l against the sky,
The breeze is but a listless sigh,
And thou art king of everything,
“ Dull Dopiness.”
Dear mystery, the hour is thine when veiled in golden haziness.
The sun sinks sizzling in the sea a strengthless globe of laziness.
Tis then the purple shades are drawn and night berobed in
silvern beams
Comes tripping through the starry maze
And whispers down the silent ways,
The lilt of old-world lovers’ lays,
Creation seems a realm of dreams,
Dear Mystery.
J. J. DONNELLY
THE DIGGER’S RETURN.
Scdnt of wattle haunts me still,
Ah ! you can guess the place
Where girls wear starlight in their eyes
And sunshine on each face.
We’ve seen old Pharaoh’s mystery land
And Oriental charms,
The flash from eyes of beauteous hue
Acknowledged with salaam.
We’ve carried memories to France
We oft recalled ; and then
Their place was superseded
By the “ chic ” Parisienne.
We’ve been to England once or twice.
And up to Scotland too ;
We’ve sniffed the fragrance of the hills
And heather bathed in dew.
Yes, we’ve seen many wondrous sights,
But here I must explain
I’d just forget them all to see
A dog-fight in Balmain.
Driver Quinn, No. 2 Company.


S.S. “PORT MACQUARIE.”
Built 1912 by Messrs, Hawthorn, Leslie, at Hebburn-on-Tyne ; is registered at Lloyds 100 Al. Length,
426 ft. B.P ; breadth, 54 ft. 1 in.; loaded draught, 27 ft. 7| in.; displacement, 15,000 tons ; dead weight 9,240
tons gross 7,236 tons; net register, 4,638 tons.


Previous to commencement of the war the "Port Macquarie” was employed carrying emigrants to
Australia. December 1914, carrying Australian forces with the 2nd Contingent. May 1915, carrying a naval
bridging train from Sydney and Melbourne, also 500 troops, 500 horses to Bombay. February 1916, 'carrying
Imperial Artillery from Southampton to Alexandria. March 1916, carrying Egyptians and Sikhs from Suez to
Port Soudan. April 1916, carrying troops from Sydney and horses from Fremantle to Suez. October 1916, carrying
troops from Fremantle to Plymouth. February 1917, to end of the war, engaged by the Government as a food
and general cargo transport trading between the U.S.A. and U.K.; also made three voyages from U.K. to
Calcutta and back to Dundee via the Mediterranean. 14th August 1918, whilst in convoy off Dungeness, a torpedo
was fired at the " Port Macquarie,” passing 20 to 30 feet astern. Ist October in convoy in the Bay of Biscay the
S.S. " Montfort" was torpedoed. 2nd October, witnessed a fight between the S.S, " Chindwara” and a submarine
to the advantage of the " Chindwara,” the submarine remaining only about ten minutes on the surface.
OUR BAND.
The Band, under the able conductorship of Sgt. Dug. Phillips, maintained an excellent standard,
and was a much appreciated institution on board. Much credit is due to Sgt. Phillips for the high standard
of excellence of the rendering of the various items In the repertoire of the Band, and for maintaining among
its members the interest and enthusiasm which was a marked feature of their work. Regular performances
were given on deck, and were much appreciated. It can safely be said that the Band contributed in no
small way to dispel the tedium of the voyage, and to keep us all merry and bright. Below we give a list of
the members of the Band, with the instruments played by each bandsman
Sergeant I). Phillips {Bandmaster), Queensland,
Sergeant W. H. Thacker, Clarlnotte, South Australia.
Private J. Mo.Guckln, Clarlnetto, Queensland.
Private J. A. Palmer, B Cornet (Soloist), Tasmania.
Private B. Keen, B Cornet (Solo), South Australia,
Private V. Warren, B Cornet (llcplano), Tasmania.
Private W. Yoo, B Cornet (Repiano), N.S. Wales.
Private P. Bvans, B Cornet (2nd), South Australia.
Private S. Harris, Tenor Horn, Victoria.
Private W. Small, Tenor Horn, Victoria.
Corporal E. C. D. Richards, Tenor Horn, Queensland.
Private V. Wilson, Baritone, Queensland.
Private L. J. Pulbrnok, Baritone, Vietorla.
Corporal J. Gee, Euphonium, Queensland,
Private 0. Baker, Euphonium, Smith Australia,
Private C. Blow, Tenor Trombone, Queensland.
Lance-Corporal H. Brown, Tenor Trombone, Victoria.
Private W. 11. Scott, 10 Bass, Tasmania.
Private A. Cameron, B Bass, New South Wales.
Private Adler, Base Drum, Queensland.
Private S. Veroy, Side Drum, Queensland,
Private C. Fierce, Soprano. Soutli Australia.


DON’T MISS SEEING ! ! ! !
THE CONTINUOUS PROGRAMME ABOARD H.M.A.T. “PORT MACQUARIE”
WHEN THE FOLLOWING FACE THE FOOTLIGHTS,
Recitation - - " 221 Knots ! Ye Gods !! ” ----- Chief Engineer
Song - - “ Only Tired ” ------- Mr. Minchin
Song - - “ Oh, D'v those Tears ” (Kondie) - - - - S.M.O.
Song - - "My Motner bids me Bind my Hair ” - - - - Mr, Donnelly
Song - - “ Another little Sweep wouldn't do us any harm ” - Col. Robinson
Duet - - “ You and I together, Love ” - Chief Officer and Bill E, Yews
Song - ~ “ Pay, Pay, Pay ” ( Kipling ) - - Mr. Carlisle
INTERVAL.
Jazz Band : " Oh, it's a Lovely War " (with variations).
Recitation - - " Lovely Woman ” ( Crossland ) - Major Aitchison
Song - - “ Ragtime Pickin’ Man ”------ Bluey Reid
Song - - “ Smile, Boys, Smile ” - - - - - Cohen (Marquis of Seltona)
Exhibition Bout - Three two-minute rounds - - - Tiny (3 st. 2 lb.) v. Anderson (15 st. 8 lb.)
Recitation - - “ Half a League, Half a League onward ” (Tennyson) - Gunner Lance
Song - - “ Dimes and Dollars, Dollars and Dimes " (Hood) - Mr. Brierley
Recitation - - " Friends, countrymen, Romans, lend me your ears ” - Capt. Halloran
Song - - “ Trumpeter, what are you sounding now ? ” - - Bugler Williams
Song - - “ Beer, Beer, glorious Beer ” _____ Padre
Song - - "He shall feed his flock " (Messiah) - - - - Mr. Frost
Trio - ~ " Three Jolly Sailormen ” ______ Chips, Bo’sun, and Bo’sun’s Boy
Recitation - - “ Men are deceivers ever ” _ - - - - - Sgt. Williamson
Mr. Curtin will conclude the programme with one of the famous Mother Caudle Curtain Lectures.


A.M.G. De ralls
Company Of ficers
Orderly Room Staff


The following are the results of the competitions conducted under the auspices
of the Magazine Committee. These competitions were open both to the Military
personnel on board and to members of the ship’s company. The prizes were donated
by the Y.M.C.A. through the genial representative, Mr. j, J, Donnelly. The Chief
Officer (Mr. I. R. Sawbridge) also kindly donated £l, which was applied as indicated
below. In the case of the photographic competition, owing to the difficulty
experienced in getting prints finished on board, it was decided to leave it open so
that competitors should have the opportunity of finishing their prints after arrival
in Australia, The Editor has to acknowledge with gratitude the able assistance
of Miss Veda Coghlan, of Brisbane, an amateur photographer herself of considerable
eminence, in making the selection in this class.
(1.) Best Name tor Weekly Paper and Souvenir-. “ Our Homeward Stunt,” suggested by the late
Captain W. McQueen.
(2.) Best Original Black and White Sketch : Private G. B. Stanford.
(3.) Most Original Joke: Lieutenant V. Edwards, M.M.
(4.) Most Original Short Story. (1) Driver E. A. Ford, "Robbed by Discipline”; (2) (equal)
B. Boyd, "Camouflage” ; J. J. Donnelly, “The Liars.”
(5.) Photographic Competition : (1) Sergeant C. P. Cohen (Chief Officer's prize, 10s.); (2) Lieutenant
T. R. Lyon (Editor’s prize, 55.).
(6.) Best Original Verse : Lieutenant W. T. Barnes, " Blank Fire.”
(7.) Best Design for Souvenir Cover: (1) Private H. 'J. Bishop (Chief Officer’s prize, 10s.);
(2) Corporal N. Bell-Booth (Editor’s prize, 55.).
(8.) Guessing Competition (in connection with sales of Souvenir): Private F. B. White, Glen
Osmond, South Australia, 245.
Editorial Motes


It will no doubt be of interest to our readers to know that on going
to press 1,176 copies of the Souvenir have been ordered. A few extra copies
are available and can be had on application to Dr, J. King Patrick, 127 George
Street, Brisbane. Price Is.; posted Is. 4d.
We have pleasure in announcing that Lt.-Colonel J. A. Robinson,
D. 5.0., has been appointed A.D.C. to His Excellency The Governor of
Queensland, Sir Hamilton Goold-Adams, G.C.B.
The Editor wishes to record his great appreciation of the unfailing
courtesy and the valuable help given to him by the Staff of the Queensland
Government Printing Office in the production of this .Souvenir.
MAGAZINE COMMITTEE.
Editor —Captain J. Kmc Patrick, M.D., B.Sc.
Sub-Editors— Chaplain Major G. W. Carter and Gunner Lance,
Committee: Captain G. R. Halloran, R.A.M.C., Lieutenant Bruce Laing, Lieutenant Brierley,
8.A., 8.E0., Lieutenant T. R. Lyon, Mr. J. J. Donnelly, Sergeant McKinnon Sergeant
McPherson, Sergeant Walsh, Lance-Corporal McLaren, Driver Yule, and Gunner
Bartley (Secretary).


SHIP’S MILITARY STAFF.
O.C. Troops, Lt.-Col, J. A. Robinson, D. 5.0., 26th
Battalion.
2nd in Command, Major R. M. C. Aitchison, 57th
Battalion.
Adjutant, Lieut. W. T. Barr■ 26th Battalion,
Q.M., Lieut. A. B, C. Wood, 42nd Battalion.
Pay Officers —
Lieut. A. H. Carlisle, 28th Battalion.
Lieut. A. N. Brierley, General List Educational
Services.
Education Officer —Lieut. Bruce Laing, General List
Educational Services.
Sports Officer, Lieut. J. B. Minchin, D. 5.0., M.C., 16th
Battalion.
Company Officers —
No. 1 Coy.—
Lieut. T. R. Lyon, 29th A.A.S.C.
Lieut. V.G. Ibbott. M.C.,26th Battalion.
Lieut. E. C. Curtin, 59th Battalion.
No. 2 Coy.—
Lieut. A. G. Bates, M.C., D.C.M., 56th Battn.
Lieut. H. Barnes, 20th Battalion.
Lieut. F. Courtney, 17th Battalion.
No. 3 Coy.—
Lieut. R. P. Morrison, 23rd Battalion.
Lieut. K. S. Anderson, 22nd Battalion.
Lieut. J. F. Eason, 38th Battalion.
No. 4 Coy.—
Lieut. G. R. Field, sth M.G. Battalion.
Lieut. Vivian Edwards, M.M., 11th F.A.B.
Lieut. Arthur Emery, 28th Battalion.
Medical Officers —
5.M.0., Capt. J. King Patrick, A.A.M.C.
M. 0., Captain Garnet R. Halloran, R.A.M.C.
Chaplain —
Rev. G. W. Carter.
Y.M.C.A. Representative, James Joseph Donnelly.
Ship’s S.M., R.S.M. H. B, Gordon, 59th Battalion.
Q.M.S., R.Q.M.S. A. R. Logan, A.1.8.D.
0.R.5., Sergeant David Cox, 54th Battalion.
SHIP’S STAFF
Deck —
W. McQueen Master.
I. R. Sawbridge First Officer.
R. Scott Second Officer.
E. T. Lowrey Third Officer.
F. E. Dow Fourth Officer (Acting).
C. F. Goute Apprentice.
H. H. Nevarel Apprentice.
E. A. Beamish Apprentice.
W. C. Eustoe Apprentice.
I. G. Griffiths Apprentice.
R. Forrest Apprentice.
E. P. Haslam Senior Wireless Operator.
J. Harvey J unior Wireless Operator.
Engine Room —
T. A. Leinster Chief Engineer.
S. W. Brown Second Engineer.
A. E. Dowsett Third Engineer.
A. J. Bailey Fourth Engineer.
A. Maclnnes Fifth Engineer.
A. Cutter Sixth Engineer.
J. Robertson Assistant Engineer.
Victualling Department —
C. Frost Steward in Charge.
G. H. Pitman Second Steward.


NOTES ON RETURNED OFFICERS.
ROBINSON, James Alexander, 26th Battalion, A.I.F.
6 May, 1915 —Enlisted.
17 May, 1915 —Commissioned.
24 May, 1915 —Left Australia.
6 June, 1915—0. C, Raid—first raid undertaken
by Australians.
12 Sep., 1915 —Landed Gallipoli.
26 Dec., 1915—Adjutant.
24 Feb., 1916 —Captain.
Nov., 1916—Mentioned in despatches.
20 Jan., 1917—Mentioned in despatches.
23 Feb., 1917—Promoted Major.
Apr., 1917—D.5.0, (Attack on Lagnicourt).
Apr., 1917 —Mentioned in despatches.
7 July, 1917—Senior Officers' School, Aider-
shot.
30 Sep., 1917 —Returned from Senior Officers'
School, Aldershot, to
France.
Jan., 1918—Mentioned in despatches.
8 July, 1918—T. Lt.-Col. appointed to com-
mand 26th Battalion.
3 Oct., 1918 —Wounded in action ; reverted to
Major.
25 Jan., 1919—T. Lt.-Col., to command 28th
■ Battalion.
AITCHISON, Roderick McLean Campbell, Lieut, 57th
Battalion. (Originally 29th Battalion) —
20 Feb., 1916—Captain.
10 Mar., 1916 —Transferred to 57th Battalion.
17 June, 1916—Embarked Alexandria to France.
12 Feb., 1917—T0 be Major.
7 Apr., 1918—Specially mentioned in Sir
Douglas Haig’s despatch.
25 Apr., 1918—Congratulated for bravery and
initiative in organising his
line after first objective was
gained at Villers Brettoneux
on 25th April, 1918.
30 July, 1918 —To Camouflage School.
7 Aug., 1918—Rejoined Unit from School,
7 Sep., 1918 —To Senior Officers' School (Ailly-
sur-Somme.)
23 Sep,, 1918 —Rejoined Unit from School.
PATRICK, James King, M.D., B.Sc. (Glasg.), D.P.H.
(Dublin), Captain, A.A.M.C.
15 July, 1918 —Left Australia.
10 Sep., 1918—Disembarked from Australia
after acting as M.O. at
Sierra Leone for one month
on special influenza duty
with R.A.M.C.


Patrick, James King— continued.
19 Oct., 1918—Attached to Ist A.A.H., Hare-
field.
1 Nov., 1918—Attached to No. 2 Group Clear-
ing Hospital, Hurdcott.
2 Jan,, 1919—Attached to Ist Australian
Dermatological Hospital,
Bulford.
HALLORAN, Garnet R„ Captain R.A.M.C., B.Sc.,
M.D., Ch.M. (Syd.), F.R.C.S. (Ed.)-
Being on the Continent at the outbreak of war,
first served in July, 1915, as senior surgeon to a Red
Cross Hospital Unit attached to Third French Army
Corps, and stationed at Caen (France).
In August, 1916, was attached as aural and general
surgeon to the Brook War' Hospital, London, for 18
months.
In July, 1918, proceeded to Kantara, Egypt, and
was attached to Citadel Hospital, Cairo, and later as
operating surgeon to No, 2 Prisoners of War Hospital,
Abbassia. Returning to London in January, 1919, was
attached as surgeon to Ear, Nose, and Throat Depart-
ment 2nd London General Hospital, Chelsea.
CARTER, George Walter, Captain, Chaplain Depart-
ment—
-5 Jan., 1916—Embarked Australia for Eng-
land.
9 Feb., 1916 —Disembarked at England.
21 May, 1917—Proceeded to France.
27 May, 1917 —Attached to 2nd Infantry Bri-
gade Headquarters.
1 Dec., 1917 —Chaplain, 3rd Class.
ANDERSON, Keith Stirling, 22nd Battalion—
-30 June, 1915—Corporal—From Alexandria to
Gallipoli.
■l9 Mar., 1916 —Proceeded France.
15 June, 1916—L./Sergeant.
30 July, 1916—Sergeant.
13 Sep., 1916-~Mentioned for good services at
Pozieres.
7 Nov., 1916—Promoted 2nd Lieutenant.
24 Feb., 1917 —Posted for duty with 6th T.B.
24 April, 1917 —Attended School of Musketry,
Tidworth, and passed Ist
class (distinguished).
28 May, 1917—Lieutenant.
11 July, 1917—Proceeded to France.
19 July, 1917—Rejoined Unit.
9 Oct., 1917—Wounded and evacuated to Eng-
land.
30 Dec., 1917 —Proceeded to France.
9 Jan., 1918—Rejoined Unit.
4 June, 1918 —Specially mentioned in Sir
Douglas Haig’s despatch,
of 7th April, 1918.
17 July, 1918 —Wounded (2nd occasion).
17 Aug., 1918—Congratulated for his conspicu-
ous bravery and devotion
to duty on nights of 16th
and 17th July, 1918.
1918—To be Adjutant.
BARNES, Harry, 20th Battalion. (Originally !9th
Battalion) —
25 June, 1915—Private—Embarked from Aus-
tralia.
16 Aug., 1915—Joined Gallipoli.
14 Feb., 1916—L./Corporal.
18 Mar., 1916—Proceeded Alexandria to France.
30 July, 1916 —Wounded and evacuated Eng-
land.
17 Sep., 1917—Proceeded France.
27 Sep., 1917 —Rejoined Battalion from Eng-
land.
26 Jan., 1918—To Cadet Battalion.
24 Aug., 1918—Appointed E.D.P. Sergeant.
29 Aug., 1918 —Appointed 2nd Lieutenant.


Barnes, Harry— continued.
23 Sep., 1918—Rejoined Unit from Cadet Bat-
talion.
3 Oct., 1918 Wounded (2nd occasion).
14 Nov., 1918- Joined 20th Battalion from Hos-
pital.
4 Dec., 1918—Lieutenant.
BARNES, William Thomas, 26th Battalion
4 Sep., 1915 —Embarked Alexandria for Galli-
poli.
4 Oct., 1915 —Wounded.
14 Nov., 1915—Lieutenant.
26 Dec., 1915 —Embarked for England.
17 Mar., 1916 Invalided to Australia for six
months' change.
9 June, 1916—Discharged,
16 Jan., 1917 Re-enlisted as private.
14 June, 1917—Embarked from Australia.
31 Aug., 1917—Disembarked England,
24 Dec,, 1917 Proceeded to France.
4 Jan., 1918 —Joined 25th Battalion.
21 Aug., 1918—Seconded for duty with Ist
Australian Con, Depot.
12 Oct., 1918—Transferred to 26th Battalion
and remained seconded.
BATES, Alexander George, 56th Battalion—
-26 May, 1915—Private—Joined 2nd Battalion,
Gallipoli,
8 Aug., 1915 —Wounded.
17 Nov., 1915 —L./Corporal.
23 Jan., 1916—-Corporal.
14 Feb., 1916 Transferred to 54th Battalion.
1 Mar., 1916 —Sergeant.
19 June, 1916—-Embarked Alexandria for France.
23 Aug., 1916 —2nd Lieutenant.
29 Aug., 1916-Awarded D.C.M,
26 Dec., 1916—Lieutenant.
11 Mar., 1918—Awarded M.C.
11 Oct., 1918—T.0. strength 56th from 54th
Battalion.
BRIERLEY, Alan Hunan, 13th Battalion—
-16 June, 1915 —Joined 13th Battalion, Gallipoli.
28 Aug., 1915 —Wounded and evacuated to Eng-
land.
15 Aug., 1915—Lieutenant.
8 May, 1916-To Australia for four months’
change.
7 Feb., 1917—Embarked Australia for Eng-
land.
11 Apr., 1917 -Disembarked England.
25 June, 1917 -Proceeded to France.
14 July, 1917—-Joined Battalion from France.
18 Mar., 1918 -Congratulated by Divisional
Commander for having
obtained very satisfactory
report at Australian Corps
Gas School, 15th course.
1 Nov., 1918-To A.I.F. Educational Scheme,
Cam b ri d ge Trai n i n g School.
17 Jan., 1919--Attached to Finance Section for
duty.
CARLISLE, Algernon Hope—
-22 Sep., 1916—-Appointed V.O. Sgt.
8 Mar., 1917 Qualified Ist class, Tidmouth
School of Musketry,
7 Apr., 1917- Joined Cadet Training Battalion,
Oxford.
1 Aug,, 1-917 2nd Lieutenant.
15 Aug., 1917 -Went to France,
25 Aug., 1917 Taken on Strength, 7th Bat-
talion.
1 Sep., 1917 -Transferred to 28th Battalion.
27 Oct., 1917- Attached Canteen, 2nd Division.
5 Feb., 1918 Lieutenant.
28 Feb., 1918- Rejoined Unit.
1 Feb., 1919--England on duty.


COURTNEY, Frank, 26th Battalion-
-12 May, 1915—Private —Embarked from Aus-
tralia.
16 Aug., 1915—Proceeded Alexandria to Galli-
poli.
14 Nov., 1915—L./Corporal.
17 Mar., 1916 —Embarked Alexandria for France
1 Sep., 1916—Corpc •'h and T./Sergeant.
23 Dec,, 1916 —Sergeant.
3 May, 19’7 —Wounded and evacuated to Eng-
land.
22 Oct., 1917 —Proceeded to France.
27 Oct., 1917 —Rejoined Battalion. France.
19 Nov., 1917—2nd Lieutenant.
19 Feb., 1918—Lieutenant.
CURTIN, Edgar Catly, 59th Battalion—
-8 July, 1915 —Private—Joined 10th Battalion,
Gallipoli.
9 Feb., 1916—Transferred to School of Instruc-
tion, Zeitoun.
2 Sep., 1916—Embarked overseas to France.
30 Sep., 1916—Taken on strength, 59th Bat-
talion.
23 Oct., 1916 -Appointed L./Corporal.
30 Oct., 1916 —On Command at Lewis Gun
School.
9 Nov., 1916 —Rejoined Unit from School.
4 Jan., 1917 —Promoted T./Corporal.
22 Feb., 1917—Promoted Sergeant.
30 Sep., 1918 —Wounded in action.
25 Sep., 1918—2nd Lieutenant.
30 Sep., 1918—To Reg. Seconded List.
20 Oct., 1918—Rejoined Battalion.
24 Oct., 1918—On Command at sth Div. Sig.
School.
20 Nov., 1918—Rejoined from Command.,
23 Nov., 1918—Detached for duty with SBth
Battalion.
26 Dec., 1918—Lieutenant.
14 Jan., 1919 —Rejoined Unit from detach, to
58th Battalion.
EASON, John Faulkner, 38th Battalion.—
23 Nov., 1915 —Private—Embarked from Aus-
tralia.
20 Apr., 1916 —Proceeded from Alexandria tc
France.
31 July, 1917—Selected to attend Officers’
Cadet Battalion.
1 Dec., 1917 —2nd Lieutenant.
18 Dec., 1917 —Proceeded to France.
24 Dec., 1917—Rejoined Battalion.
15 Feb., 1918 —Highly commended for good
work in raid, 10th February,
1918.
1 Mar., 1918 —Lieutenant.
26 Apr., 1918—Wounded and evacuated to
England.
8 Aug., 1918—Proceeded to France.
12 Aug., 1918 —Rejoined Unit.
28 Oct., 1918 —Awarded M.C.
EDWARDS, Vivian, 10th L.H.—
16 May, 1915—Embarked at Alexandria for
Gallipoli.
29 May, 1915—Wounded.
21 Aug., 1915 —Embarked for Gallipoli from
Alexandria.
19 Apr., 1916—Transferred to 4th D. Artillery.
2 July, 1916—Transferred to T.M.B.
1 Dec,, 1916 —Corporal.
16 May, 1917 —Awarded M.M.
29 Dec., 1917—Cadet Training Battalion.
26 June, 1918 —2nd Lieutenant.
26 July, 1918 —Taken on strength, Bth Battery.
18 Sep., 1918 —Detached to 11th F.A. Brigade.
17 Dec., 1918—Lieutenant..


EMERY, Arthur, 28th Battalion—
-4 Sep., 1915 —Private—Left Alexandria for
Gallipoli.
19 Feb., 1916—Temporary Corporal.
16 Mar., 1916 —Left Alexandria for France.
6 Sep., 1916—Sergeant.
28 Oct., 1916—Transferred to 7th Tunnelling
Battalion.
1 Nov., 1916 —Appointed Training Cadre.
13 Sep., 1917—Proceeded to France.
17 Sep., 1917 —Joined Battalion.
21 Dec,, 1917—C.5.M.
4 Jan., 1918—Joined Cadet Battalion.
22 June, 1918—Qualified for Commission.
1 Aug,, 1918—2nd Lieutenant.
19 Sep., 1918 —To Corps School,
8 Oct., 1918 —Joined Battalion.
15 Dec., 1918 —Lieutenant.
FIELD, George Raymond, sth M.G. Battalion.—
8 May, 1915 —Private—Left Alexandria for
Gallipoli.
1 Sep., 1915—Corporal
22 Jan., 1916—Sergeant.
27 Dec., 1916—Joined Imp. M.G, Cadet School,
England.
25 Aug., 1917—2nd Lieutenant.
23 Sep., 1917—Rejoined Unit, France.
25 Dec., 1917 —Lieutenant.
14 June, 1918—To School of Instruction.
25 June, 1918—Rejoined Unit.
26 July, 1918—Detached to 123 American M.G,
Battalion.
29 July, 1918 —Rejoined Unit.
IBBOTT, Victor Gordon, 26th Battalion.—
29 June, 1915—Private—Embarked from Aus-
tralia.
4 Sep., 1915—Embarked Alexandria for Galli-
poli.
21 Mar., 1916—Disembarked France from Alex-
andria.
29 July, 1916—Wounded.
3 Feb., 1917 —Corporal.
3 Feb., 1917 -Sergeant.
2 Mar., 1917—Wounded (2nd occasion).
21 July, 1917—T0 Corps School.
25 Aug., 1917-—Rejoined from School.
1 Oct., 1917—C.5.M. and W.O. 11.
25 Oct., 1917 Selected to attend Infantry
Cadet Battalion, England.
1 May, 1918—2nd Lieutenant.
14 May, 1918—Rejoined Unit from Cadet Bat-
talion,
7 July, 1918 —Detached to Brigade P.T. and
B.F. School.
17 July, 1918 Rejoined Unit.
11 Sep., 1918—Lieutenant.
17 Dec., 1918 —Detached to 2nd Division Head-
quarters.
28 Dec,, 1918—Rejoined from 2nd Division
Headquarters.
1 Feb., 1919—Awarded M.C.
LAING, Alexander Bruce Cooper, 3rd Division
Artillery—
-15 Dec., 1915—Gunner —Disembarked at Suez.
14 Mar., 1916—Proceeded Alexandria to France.
13 May, 1916 —Transferred to 22nd Battery.
22 Aug., 1916—Bombardier.
14 Sep., 1916—Joined Artillery Cadet School.
2 Feb., 1917—2nd Lieutenant,
22 Feb., 1917—Proceeded to France.
5 Mar., 1917 —Rejoined Unit.
2 Apr., 1917 —Wounded and evacuated to
England,
I Aug., 1917 —Lieutenant.
29 Oct., 1917 —Proceeded ta France.
9 Nov., 1917—Joined 2nd Division Artillery.
21 Nov., 1917—Detached for instructions at 2nd
A.T.M. School.


Laing, Alexander Bruce Cooper— continued.
24 Nov., 1917 —Transferred to 2nd D.T.M.
Battery.
2 Mar., 1918—Transferred to 3rd A.M.T.M.
Battery.
21 May, 1918—Transferred to 3rd Australian
Division Artillery.
20 Aug., 1918—Tran; erred to sth M.T.M.
Battery.
2 Nov., 1918—Transferred to A.I.F. Education
Service.
LYON, Thomas Riddell, sth Division Train—
-7 Aug., 1915 —L./Corporal—Proceeded to Gal-
lipoli.
1 Feb., 1916 —Corporal.
1 Apr., 1916—Sergeant.
8 June, 1916—2nd Lieutenant.
13 June, 1916—Transferred to 29th A.A.S.C.
20 Sep., 1916—Lieutenant.
28 Feb., 1917—Transferred to 18th A.A.S.C.
MINCHIN, James Basil, 16th Battalion-
-12 Apr., 1915—Private—Left Alexandria for
Gallipoli.
30 Dec., 1915—Disembarked Alexandria from
Gallipoli.
1 May, 1916—Proceeded to France.
22 Mar., 1916 —Corporal.
16 July, 1916—L./Sergeant.
16 Aug., 1916—Sergeant.
13 Nov., 1916—Mentioned in Sir Douglas Haig's
despatch for distinguished
service and devotion to duty.
9 Mar., 1917—Joined Cadet Battalion.
22 Aug., 1917—Joined Battalion,
2 Aug., 1917—2nd Lieutenant.
31 Oct., 1917—Awarded M.C.
17 Aug., 1918—Awarded D.S.O.
31 Dec., 1918—Mentioned in despatches.
MORRISON, Robert Percy, 23rd Battalion—
-30 Aug., 1915 —Sergeant—Alexandria to Gal-
lipoli.
3 Sep., 1915 —2nd Lieutenant.
1 Mar., 1916 —Lieutenant.
19 May, 1916—Embarked Alexandria for France
8 June, 1916 -Joined 23rd Battalion, France.
2 Mar,, 1917—T0 6th Tunnelling Battalion.
16 Aug., 1917—Rejoined Unit from 6th T.B
WOOD, Anthony Barclay Chapman, 42nd Battalion —
5 June, 1916 —Sergeant—Embarked from Aus-
tralia.
23 July, 1916—Disembarked at Southampton.
14 Aug., 1916—0 n Command School, Hayling
Island.
25 Nov., 1916—Proceeded to France.
3 Jan., 1917—C.5.M. (W.O. II.).
26 June, 1917 —2nd Lieutenant.
5 Oct., 1917—Wounded.
25 Oct., 1917 —Lieutenant.
23 Dec., 1917—Wounded and evacuated to Eng-
land.




No. 1 MILITARY DISTRICT.
284 _ Private Alder, Angus Bruce 26th Batt.
2103 a L./Corp. Akes, Robert Natauiel 31st Batt.
127 Private Alcook, Arnold Edward 31st Batt.
5 Sergeant Arthur, Percy Aorill 26th Batt.
19 Private Avard, Ernest 26th Batt.
474 Private Barry, Ralph 26th Batt.
25 Private Barry, Henry Joseph 26th Batt.
3235 Private Barker, Cecil Ernest 15th Batt.
1514 Corporal Bell-Booth, Norman 26th Batt.
2108 Driver Beal, William 15th Batt.
2666 Private Berner, Henry 15th Batt.
32 Private Biddleoombe, William H. 6th Bde. H.Q.
327 Private Biviano, Guiseppe 26th Batt.
4482 Corporal Blackwell, Keith Ist. F.A.B.
20 Priv<|e Blow, Cecil Alfred 26th Batt.
1737 Private Blower, George Bth Batt.
1501 Driver Brown, Edwin Robert 26th Batt.
1513 Private Bryant, Christopher 26th Batt,
27 Private Cameron, Allan 26th Batt.
2713 Corporal Chapman, William M. 15th Batt.
2118 L./Corp. Chick, Francis Richard 15th Batt.
330 L./Corp. Clarke, Ernest 26th Batt.
332 Private Climpson, James 26th Batt.
2348 Private Clancy, Patrick Edward 15th Batt.
607 Sapper Cook, Phillip 2nd Div. Sigs.
68 Driver Coleman, Wilfred 26th Batt.
611 Private Collis, William Thomas 26th Batt.
1541 a Driver Colwell, Leonard 59th Batt.
389 Driver Daly, William Francis Ist F.A.B.
591 Gunner Davis, William Maurice Ist F.A.B.
2240 Gunner Davie, James sth D.A.C.
306 A./Q.M.S. Davis, William Henry 7th A.L.T.M.B,
647 Private Darlington, John 26th Batt.
85 Private Dykes, James Leonard 26th Batt.
66 Private Dynon, David 26th Batt.
2847 Private Emery, John 15th Batt.
360 Private Fisher, Walter Edwin 26th Batt.
190 Driver Ford, Ernest 15th Batt.
2708 Private Frampton, Harold J. (M.M.) 15th Batt.
4838 Corporal Freeman, Robert Alysus 2nd Div. Sigs.
100 Private Galbraith, Albert Daniel 26th Batt.
110 Corporal Gee, Joseph 26th Batt.
2364 Private Gilson, George H. (M.M.) 15th Batt.
2366 Private Ciggens, Thomas Charles 15th Batt.
2140 Private Grant, James Stevenson 15th Batt.
4893 Sapper Grace, John 2nd Div. Sigs.
209 Private Gibson, Robert 31st Batt.
1841 Sergeant Hair, James Ist A.M.T.C.
1953 Sergeant Hayes, Joseph Alphonsus 4th Pnr. Batt.
2151 Private Howard, Edward 15th Batt.
657 Private Jack, William 26th Batt.
481 Private Kelly, Michael David Ist M.G. Batt.
2217 Private Kyle, Charles Samuel 15th Batt.
2663 L./Corp. Lament, William Edmond 15th Batt.
362 Private Leahy, Thomas Patrick 26th Batt.
670 Private Little, John 7th. A.L.T.M.B.
650 Driver Masson, Victor Henry 26th Batt.
928 T./Corp. Martin, William Henry 26th Batt.
428 Private Marsden, John Edward 26th Batt.
1681 Private Maddick, Henry Lewis 26th Batt.
438 Private Mills. Edgar Ashwin 26th Batt.
386 Private Miller, Lawrence Victor 26th Batt.
681 Private Mitchell, William 26th Batt.
1982 Private Mitchell, Harley Leslie 15th Batt.
1608 Private Moran, Patrick Francis 26th Batt.
934 Private Moody, Thomas James 26th Batt.
430 Corporal Mason, Kenneth George 26th Batt.
SHIPS
ROLL


645 L./Corp. McDonald, Charles A. 26th Batt.
378 Sergeant McEvoy, Michael 7th A.L.T.M.B,
452 Private McGuokin, John Hilarion 26th Batt.
4271 A./Bdr. Mclntosh, William David 3rd Army Bde.
1251 Driver McKenzie, David sth A.C.
455 Private McKenzie, John William 26th Butt.
918 Private MoKnoulty, John 26th Batt.
8528 L./Corp. McNally, William George 12th F.A.B.
1652 Private MoWalters, Peter Hannah 15th Batt.
1621 Private Neale, Edward Carnet 26th Batt,
531 Private Newton, Gordon Samuel 26th Batt.
1190 Gunner Nicholls, Richard sth M.T.M.B.
3434 Private Noble, Sydney Henry 31st Batt.
1094 Private Norris, William John 26th Batt,
2869 b Private O’Rourke, John Page 31st Batt.
2625 Private Otterbridge, Herbert 3. 15th Batt.
474 Private Osborne, Robert 26th Batt.
538 Driver Overlack, Francis 26th Butt.
198 Driver Parsons, William Robert 26th Batt.
2223 Private Patterson, James Kerr 16th Batt.
955 a Private Pearson, Crisping William 29th Batt.
13637 Private Peebles, Joseph 4th F. Amb.
6548 Driver Peters, James Patrick sth Div. Train
572 Private Phillips, Douglas 26th Batt,
6727 Private Richards, John 56th Batt.
152 Corporal Richards, Edward C. D. 26th Batt.
1687 Private Reilly, Corneilous 26th Batt,
218 Private Robertson, John Gordon 26th Batt.
970 Corporal Ross, William Thomas 26th Batt.
726 Private Royan, Donald Robert 7th A.L.T.M.B.
4754 Driver Ryan, Francis John 2nd F.A.B.
498 Private Scott, Luke 26th Batt,
4539 Driver Shekelton, Burnett 3rd Army Bde.
1642 Private Sheppard, William 26th Batt.
1647 Private Shrubsole, Frederick W. J. 26th Batt.
4062 Gunner Sikes, Thomas 3rd Army Bde.
761 Private Skidmore, John Thomas 26th Batt.
235 a Private Smith, James Edward 26th Batt,
1578 Private Stone, John 26th Batt.
1558 T./Corp. Straiten, James 6th Army Bu?..
996 Private Sutton, William 26th Batt.
2418 Driver Talbot, Edward Vernon 15th Batt.
526 b Corporal Taylor, James 26th Battr
2420 L./Corp. Thomson, John Steel 15th Batt.
1004 a Private Tkachenko, Saveliy 26th Batt.
628 Driver Todd, Joseph James Colvan 26th Batt.
227 Private Trott, Sydney K. C. 7th Bde. H.Q.
1008 Driver Ulett, Albert Edward 26th Batt.
256 Private Verey, Sydney Soott 26th Batt.
775 Corporal Waters, Henry Richard 26th Batt.
4917 Sapper Walsh, Henry 6th Army Bde
728 a T./Sergt. Williams, Peroival J. C, 20th Batt.
944 Gunner Wilson, Joseph Ist F.A.B.
546 Private Wilson, Frank 26th Batt.
1091 Private Woodall, Leslie sth Pnr. Batt.
315 Sergeant Williams, Phillip 31st Batt.
No. 2 MILITARY DISTRICT.
2778 Gunner Alexander, Harry t 14th F.A.B.
473 Private Allen, Oswald 31st Batt.
4185 Driver Archer, Alfred David Ist F.A.B.
1292 Gunner Armstrong, James 14th F.A.B.
3003 a Private Armstrong, William Francis 30th Batt.
3146 Corporal Armstrong, Edward Francis 56th Batt.
2572 Private Eager, Martin 57th Batt.
2516 Private Bagley, William Edward 13th Batt.
2555 Private Baker, Eugene William 13th Batt.
3260 Private Bamford, Reginald Ralph 13th Batt.
988 R.Q.M.S. Bates, Sydney 6th B.H.Q.
1394 Gunner Bell, Scott 4th F.A.B,
2781 Private Bennett, James 69th Batt.
3261 Private Bertram, John (M.M.) 13th Batt.
1655 Private Brady, Patrick Francis sth A.L.T.M.B,
1056 Sapper Brick, Whittaker John 2nd Div, Slgs.
2153 Sapper Brookbank, Joseph Henry Bth F.C.E.
2330 Private Boyd, Jack Crawford sth Pnr. Batt.
1501 Driver Brown, Edwin Robert 26th Batt.
819 Private Bulmer, Stanley ' 56th Batt.
2713 L,/Corp. Burridge, Edward 56th Batt.
3244 Private Burton, Charles Hector sth M.G. Batt.
4352 Private Cahill, William Francis 7th F. Amb.
392 Sapper Cato, Esmond. 2nd Div. Sigs.
3287 Private Carpenter, George Walter 13th Batt.
11926 Corporal Challis, Herbert Francis 7th F. Amb.
187 F./Sergt. Clarke, George Henry Ist F.A.B.
1671 Sergeant Clarke, James Edward 3rd Batt.
29056 Sergeant Clarke, Frank Wensley Pay Corps
587 Sergeant Clarke, Ormand David Pay Corps
2494 Private dunes, Reginald 56th Batt.
3027 Sergeant Cohen, Clive Phillip Pay Corps
606 Private Collins, Alfred 26th Batt.
108 T./Corp. Conriok, Michael John 56th Batt.
387 Private Cooper, Walter Howard 30th Batt.
749 C.S.M. Cook >, Arthur 20th Batt.
982 C.S.M. Crawford, John 2nd Div. Sigs,
2801 Driver Croke, William 13th Batt.
839 Sergeant Clayton, Alfred Grant 20th Batt.


3588 Private Dalton, Cecil Ernest 13th Batt.
3033 Corporal Dengate, Richard Allen 13th Batt.
2620 Private Da Vere, Leo Clifton 13th Batt.
2024 Gunner Devitt, John Alban 13th F.A.B.
2743 Gunner Dingle, Wardley Stanley Ist F.A.B.
4601 Driver Dingle, John James Ist F.A.B.
1681 Private Dillon, Edward sth A.L.T.M.B.
926 T./R.S.M. Doyle, Patriot Joseph 14th F.A.B.
3300 Private Draper, Maurice 13th Batt.
1527 Private Durrington, John Thomas 26th Batt.
991 Sergeant Ec. inburgh, Joseph Ist M.G. Batt.
1293 Private Edmunds, Thomas Patrick 30th Batt.
1743 Private Edwards, Harold 13th Batt.
3040 Private English, James 13th Batt.
416 L./Corp. Eggins, Robert Clive 17th Batt.
417 Private Evans, Stephen 30th Batt.
884 Sergeant Ford, William Leslie 17th Batt.
3316 Private Foster, John (M.M.) 13th Batt,
1417 Private French, Russell Sullivan sth A.L.T.M.B.
2050 a Private Freebody, Ossie 59th Batt.
2598 L./Corp. Gallagher, William Ernest 56th Batt.
1671 Private Gaynor, Herbert Arthur 26th Batt.
4179 Driver Gilberthorpe, Arthur H. Ist F.A.B.
2597 Private Glenister, Sydney Norman 13th Batt.
3047 Private Glennie, Arthur 13th Batt.
3318 Private Coodchild, Frederick C. 13th Batt.
1084 Private Gove, David 18th Batt.
2371 a Private Graham, William Bremner 56th Batt.
800 Sergeant Gravenor, George L. 17th Batt.
314 Sapper Griffiths, Thomas Addle 2nd Div. Sigs.
550 Driver Grosse, Leonard Arthur 18th Batt.
2383 Private Groutsoh, Victor George 13th Batt.
559 Private Gurnett, Wilmore Richard sth Bde. H.Q.
2405 Corporal Gulley, Thomas Edwin sth A.L.T.M.B.
577 Private Hack, Ernest Madisson 27th Batt.
232 Driver Hagen, John Joseph 18th Batt.
4182 Corporal Hampson, Norman Cecil Ist F.A.B.
3342 Private Hart, George Gariboldi 13th Batt.
1023 2/Corp. Hast, Thomas Harold 2nd Div. Sigs.
2848 Driver Hargreaves, Alexander sth Div. Sigs.
2958 Corporal Hardie, John Henry 56th Batt.
8417 Driver Healy, Arthur Edward sth Div. Trn.
3573 Private Hickey, John Fitzpatrick sth Div. Sal.
2830 Private Hindmaroh, George 56th Batt.
2838 Private Hindwood, Alfred Henry 13th Batt.
2838 Driver Hobbs, Charles 56th Batt.
2604 Private Hodgess, George Edward 16th Batt.
2845 Driver Houley, Felix Owen sth M.G. Batt.
2937 Sergeant Howley, John James (M.M.) 58th Batt.
593 Private Jerrom, John Joseph 20th Batt.
2402 Corporal Johnson, Ernest E. (M.M.) sth A.L.T.M.B.
2096 C.S.M. Jones, Frederick S. (D.C.M.) 56th Batt.
208 Driver Jones, Reuben Thomas 56th Batt.
3073 a Private Jordan, James Brennan 13th Batt.
2863 Private Kelly, Arthur sth Pnr. Batt.
2855 Driver Kent, Thomas sth M.G. Batt.
1958 L./Corp. Kentwell, Isaac Milton 17th Batt.
2394 Private Knight, Reginald Charles sth Pnr. Batt.
2634 Gunner Lance, Arnold Fuller 13th F.A.B.
1613 Sapper Lee, Frank 2nd Div. Sigs.
1762 Driver Leeks, Frederick Charles 4th Div. Sigs.
2631 Sergeant Lovett, Arthur Harold 56th Batt.
7996 Driver Lyons, Norhert Hart sth Div. Trn.
2524 E.R./Corp. MaoPherson, William B. Ist D.A.C.
922 Corporal MacFarlane, Archibald sth A.L.T.M.B.
1255 Sapper MacFarlane, Alexander 2nd Div. Sigs.
3100 L./Corp. Magrath, Carleton 56th Batt.
2635 Private Markorow, Charles W. 13th Batt.
965 Private Marshall, James Charles 28th Batt.
4399 Driver Martin, Wallace Stanley 2nd F.A.B.
2853 L./Corp. Matthews, Charles Henry sth Pnr. Batt.
937 Corporal Miller, William James sth A.L.T.M.B.
2203 Private Miller, William E. C. 13th Batt.
2872 Private Michael, Frederick George 13th Batt.
1990 T./Corp. Mitchell, Lawrence Scott 13th Batt.
3081 L./Corp. Mostyn, Allred J. (M.M.) 56th Batt.
2415 Private Moore, Robert David 13th Batt.
2876 Private Monro, David Henry 13th Batt.
10 Driver Monorieff, Edward George 18th Batt.
2452 Private Morrison, William Henry Ist Pnr. Batt.
3584 Private Mullavey, John Patrick 13th Batt.
2419 Private Murphy, Daniel 56th Batt.
4620 Driver McDonald, Charles Ist F.A.B.
4335 Corporal MoDougall, John Ist F.A.B.
2658 Private McFadden, Ronald Arthur 15th Batt.
1261 Private MoGaughy, John W. sth Bde. H.Q.
8084 Private MoGivern, Thomas Joseph 13th F.A.B.
1006 Sapper McGavick, Arthur Ernest 2nd Div. Sigs.
3403 T./Corp. Mollveen, Harold George 13th Batt.
1068 2/Corp. McKay, Alaardin J. W. 2nd Div. Sigs.
1743 Driver McKenzie, William Haddon 2nd Div. Sigs.
227 L./Corp. McKenzie, John James 20th Batt.
5196 Sergeant McKinnon, Reginald 30th Batt.
3404 Private McLeenan, John 13th Batt.
2186 Sapper McLennan, Alexander Bth F.C.E.
2623 Gunner McPherson, Martin James 13th F.A.B.
1057 Private McVioar, Hugh Graham 13th Batt.
2211 Private Nixon, Reginald Rex 56th Batt.


2892 Private Oakley, Henry George 13th Batt.
253 Private O’Connor, Charles Herbert 30th Batt.
952 ’ Private Ogle, Thomas 30th Batt.
979 Sergeant O'Keefe, Edward Joseph 17th Batt.
960 Driver Palmer, Richard sth Bde. H.Q.
3197 Private Pattison, Arthur Leslie 13th Batt.
666 Sergeant Patterson, Hugh 13th Batt.
31 Driver Phillips, Garnett Ernest Ist. F.A.B,
1392 Sergeant Pomroy, Percy Harold 18th Batt.
2880 Corporal Porritt, Samuel Jones 56th Batt.
306 a Private Price, John Elias 20th Batt.
2429 Gunner Purcell, Daniel James 13th F.A.B.
4768 Driver Quinn, Henry Ist F.A.B.
3105 Bombdr. Rae, Archibald Francis 13th F.A.B.
1064 Sergeant Rees, John 17th Batt.
1759 Private Reid, Percy Clement 20th Batt.
3129 Private Rein, Walter Regis 56th Batt.
2432 Private Readford, Herbert M. 56th Batt.
964 Private Rich, John Reuben Bth A.L.T.M.B.
1533 Private Ridsdale, Thomas 20th Batt.
643 Private Rimmington, Herbert J. 10th Batt.
1104 Corporal Roberts, Herman Harold sth Div. Sigs.
2000 Gunner Robertson, Wallace Reid 13th F.A.B.
2659 Private Rollins, William Henry 4th Batt.
3113 Private Rook, George Frederick 13th Batt.
2532 Private Rosor, James William 13th Batt.
3532 Private Rowe, George Burdett 13th Batt.
2403 Corporal Ruskin, Edward Henry sth M.T.M.B.
2950 Private Sarratt, Frederick 50th Batt.
2281 Private Saunders, George Thomas Sth A.L.T.M.B,
4824 T./Bomb. Scott, Walter W. D. Ist F.A.B.
14 Sapper Soobie, Wallace Wilfrid 2nd Div. Sigs.
5028 Gunner Sharratt, Henry Edgar Ist F.A.B.
1356 Private Sharrook, Lucius Edwin 6th Bde. H.Q.
3411 L./Sergt. Shaw, James Law Sth M.G. Batt.
2938 Private Simpson, George Thomas 56th Batt.
3070 T./Sergt. Sinclair, George Robert Ist Mob. Vets.
2703 Private Smith, Jack 45th Batt.
540 Driver Smith, George William 30th Batt.
541 Private Smith, Henry Francis 30th Batt.
2902 Private Smithies, Joseph ,56th Batt.
667 Sapper Spedding, Lawrence B. 2nd Div. Sigs.
2232 T./Corp. Stoddart, George R. S. 13th Batt.
2937 Private Strong, John Patrick 56th Batt.
1855 Private Sullivan, Charles Joseph 3rd Batt.
3563 Private Smith, Ernest William 13lh Batt.
4372 Driver Smith, William Charles 2nd F.A.B,
1424 Private Tait, James 2nd Batt.
969 Gunner Tanner, Donald 6th A.F.A.
2495. Private Tanner, William 13th Batt.
2102 Private Tullook, Angus A. (M.M.) 13th Batt.
3933 Private Turner, Ernest Spencer 13th Batt.
2892 Private Vandenburgh, Charles S. 14th Batt.
709 Private Vine, Frederick James sth Bde. H.Q.
301 Corporal Wallace, Stanley Murray sth A.L.T.M.B,
1745 Private Wallace, Wilson 24th Batt
2867 Corporal Wassell, Harry James 56th Batt
3512 L /Corp Watson, Alfred W, (M.M ) 13th Batt
1399 Sergeant Welch, Alex. L. (D.C.M.) 20th Batt.
2475 Private Whitney, James Aldane 56th Batt.
2925 Corporal Williams, Algenon B. 13th Batt.
2931 Private Willoughby, Arthur E. 15th Batt.
2212 L./Corp. Wood, Dudley J. (M.M.) 56th Batt.
3507 Corporal Wooloock, Frank N. (M.M.) 13th Batt.
45 Private Yeo, William 18th Batt.
1021 Driver Young, Albert E. C. 20th Batt.
3rd MILITARY DISTRICT.
9507 Sergeant Abbott, Harold Athelstone Pay Corps
2248 Driver Aird, Albert John 4th B.H.Q.
1232 Driver Aitken, Herbert Arthur sth D,A.C.
1091 Sapper Alexander, Herbert 2nd Div. Sigs.
2983 Private Alexejew, Albert Alfred 57th Batt.
2457 Private Aldrad, Erie sth Pnr. Batt.
1273 Gunner Alker, Sydney 14th F. A.B.
572 Private Anning, Hallie W. H. 31st Batt.
2306 Sapper Anderson, Leonard Charles Bth F.C.E.
775 Private Anderson, Thomas Joseph 22nd Batt.
1034 Private Atkinson, Clement 30th Batt.
2552 Private Ashton, Thomas 58th Batt.
2931 Gunner Baldry, Frederick Charles 14th F.A.B.
690 Driver Ball, Victor Thomas 24th Batt.
772 Private Bailey, James Rufus 32nd Batt.
2210 Private Barfoot, Frederick 14th Batt.
3013 Driver Baxter, Percy sth D.A.C.
1085 Gunner Berwick, Thomas Scott sth M.T.M.B.
1184 Private Bean, Archie 22nd Batt.
5031 Gunner Bean, Neville Ist F.A.B.
2790 L./Corp. Beer, John Leslie 14th Batt.
2574 Private Beavis, Herbert Charles 14th Batt.
7271 a Private Bell, Francis John 16th Batt.
1517 Sapper Bennett, Henry James 2nd Div. Sigs.
472 Private Bergin, William Patrick 32nd Batt.
2124 Private Bishop, Hillas Tore 13th Batt.
1721 Driver Blay, William Henry Ist D.A.C.
764 Private Blanch, Andrew 24th Batt,
20117 Sergeant Blair, Douglas Granville Pay Corps
584 Private Bleaaby, George Reid sth Div. Sal.
2331 Private Bloxham, Henry 14th Batt.


5339 E.R.S./Sgt. Blight, Ivie Beaumont A.I.F. Kit Stores
7114 Driver Bowell, Joseph sth Div. Train
496 Private Boyd, Thomas Leslie 6th A.L.T.M.B.
827 Sergeant Boyle, Albert E. W. 24th Batt.
565 Corporal Boughton, Frank 6th A.L.T.M.B.
2SBO Sergeant Brandenburg, Theodore S9th Batt.
8057 Driver Briggs, James Ross sth Div. Train
6051 Driver Briggs, Charles I. W. sth Div. Train
768 a Corporal Briginshaw, Reginald Cecil 26th Batt.
1521 Private Briggs, Robert George 24th Batt.
3235 Private Brown, Gordon 14th Batt.
75 L./Corp. Brown, Jamas John 22nd Batt.
2805 Private Brown, William George 53th Batt.
2578 Corporal Brophy, Charles F, J. 57th Batt.
103 Gunner Buckler, Ernest Arthur 6th Army A.F.A.
4779 Driver Burbridge, Robert J. R. 2nd F.A.B,
1852 Gunner Burgan, Thomas 3rd Army A.F.A.
567 Private Butler, Patrick Thomas 22nd Batt.
2525 Private Byrne, Walter 58th Batt.
1275 T./Corp. Broughton, Frederick 6th A.L.T.M.B.
2741 Driver Cahill, Matthew Patrick 14th Batt.
2817 Private Galway, Leonard Samuel 14th Batt.
4157 Private Carey, David 14th Batt.
2575 Private Campbell, James 14th Batt.
381 Private Cameron, Joseph 32nd Batt.
813 Private Campbell, Percy Stewart 24th Batt.
842 Corporal Carine, Henry Daniel 24th Batt.
3064 Driver Cariss, Henry James 14th F.A.B.
4350 Driver Caldwell, Robert Ist F.A.B.
4644 Gunner Chambers, Victor George 2nd F.A.B.
2353 Private Clarke, James Henry 14th Batt.
2933 Private Clarke, Ernest Walter SBth Batt.
38S Private Cleeland, Francis David 24th Batt.
1123 Private Cole, Charles R. G. 31st Batt.
3015 a Sergeant Cole, Frank (M.M.) 59th Batt.
4447 Driver Collins, John Michael 2nd F.A.B.
3291 Private Collins, George Henry 14th Batt.
3286 Private Conroy, George Bowen 14th Batt.
2840 Private Cook, Wilfred Morgan 58th Batt.
2806 Private Cook, Thomas William sth M.G.B.
3278 Private Corrigan, Francis Frederick 46th Batt
2595 Driver Currie, Finlay 57th Batt.
346 Private Corrigan, Thomas Norman 24th Batt.
352 Sergeant Cornell, Osws. C. 22nd Batt.
518 Private Crouch, Oh.- 23rd Batt.
60S Private Crouch, Err. 24th Batt.
366 L./Corp. Dafter, James 24th Batt.
643 Private Dawson, William henry 31st Batt.
5208 Gunner Day, Marshall 13th F.A.B.
5097 Driver Day, Walter 13th F.A.B.
1522 Corporal Dean, Albert Edward 24th Batt.
2392 Corporal Ditteriok, Clarence Herbert 14th Batt.
1186 2/Corp. Donaldson, Ralph Charles 2nd Div. Sigs.
2370 Private Donovan, James Thomas 14th Batt.
3305 Private Downe, Reuben Milton 14th Batt.
2962 Driver Doyle, John Andrew sth M.G. Batt.
.'".45 Private Duckworth, Walter 14th Batt.
589 Private Dunne, James Francis 22nd Batt.
5093 Driver Dunnett, Driver Percy E. 2nd F.A.B.
1534 Corporal Earey, George 24th Batt.
2373 L./Corp. Earll, William John 14th Batt.
615 L./Sargt. Edwards, Victor James 24th Batt.
3313 Private Ewensen, James 14th Batt.
1671 Driver Fahey, Edward Joseph 24th Batt.
466 Private Falconer, James Ronald 26th Batt,
1741 Private Farrell, Walter Henry 14th Batt.
3318 L./Corp. Fielden, Geoffrey Bruce 14th Batt.
340 Private Field, Sydney 23rd Batt.
1581 Private Finnis, Henry Charles 24th Batt,
2380 Private Fitzpatrick, Henry E. 14th Batt.
2616 Private Fitzgerald, James sth Pnr. Batt.
28 L./Corp. Fitts, Fred. E. T. (M.M.) 32nd Batt.
1193 Corporal Flett, Hector Sutherland 6th A.L.T.M.B.
2475 Private Ford, William Thomas sth M.G. Batt.
1738 Corporal Foster, Mark 6th Army A.F.A,
2937 Private Fowler, Hugh 14th Batt.
2757 Corporal Franklin, Archie Vincent. 14th Batt.
2152 Driver Frankland, Samuel George 59th Batt.
818 L./Sorgt. Freeman, Athelstan W. 22nd Batt.
1053 Sergeant Frowd, Hugh McGee 22nd Batt.
2140 Private Fraser, Charles Henry 58th Batt.
1130 Private Geddes, David 22nd Batt.
2932 Private Gilbert, Charles A. E. 14th Batt.
5208 Driver Giles, William Arnold Qth Bty., 3rd
F.A.B.
3338 Private Goldberg, Albert Edward 14th Batt.
741 Corporal Graham, George Arthur 24th Batt.
5077 Corporal Gray, Charles Gordon 2nd F.A.B.
1154 Driver Greenway, Robert 24th Batt.
687 Private Grass, Edmond Joseph 31st Batt.
3329 Corporal Grieves, James (M.M.) 14th Batt.
1681 Private Hargreaves, Victor Richard 24th Batt.
137 Private Harris, Phillip Sydney 23rd Batt.
1674 a Private Harris, Leonard 24th Batt.
1238 a Driver Harrison, Skill Rupert 13th F.A.B.
174 Gunner Hazeldene, Charles Gilbert 6th Army A.F.A.
266 Private Hearn, Christopher Frank 32nd Batt.
4664 Driver Hendy, Percy Gordon Ist F.A.B.
399 Driver Hennessy, William 22nd Batt,
5099 Driver Herron, Alfred William Ist F.A.B.
1687 Private Hildebrand, William James 22nd Batt.


13302 T./Corp. Hobbs, Hubert R. 12th F.A.B.
1874 Corporal Hodkinson, Cyril 24th Batt.
1539 L./Corp, Hogan, Cecil Joseph 24th Batt.
27 Private Holgate, Stanley Charles 23rd Batt.
963 Gunner Holland, Herbert Thomas 13th F.A.B.
2935 Private Homewood, Charles 14th Batt.
1185 E.R./Sgt. Hunkin, Coinert Emanuel 39th Batt.
1190 L./Sargt. Hill, Harold David 6th A.L.T.M.B.
1321 Private Inglis, John 13th Batt.
401 Driver Irvine, Robert Angar 24th Batt.
186 C.S.M. Irwin, Joseph William 24th Batt.
40S Private James, Frederick Charles 24th Batt.
2856 S. Smith Jordan, Charles Leonard 13th F.A.B.
893 Private Joy, George Edward 24th Batt.
2744 Private Kearney, Thomas Daniel 24th Batt,
40 Driver Kell, James Campbell 24th Batt.
2404 Private Kelso, Edwin Milne sth M.G. Batt.
1666 T./Sergt. Kent, Albert William 60th Batt.
754 Private Kerr, Thomas Hunter 24th Batt.
160 Sergt. Kidd, John Rowling 23rd Batt.
1121 Private King, Sidney George 23rd Batt.
181 L./Corp. Kirby, Francis Victor 22nd Batt.
1224 Private Kirby, John 26th Batt.
4450 Driver Kirkpatrick, Hugh 2nd F.A.B.
906 Corporal Kitohen, Stanley (M.M.) 6th A.L.T.M.B,
4661 Driver Knowles, Albert Clive 2nd F.A.B.
896 Private Krause, Brune Gottfried 24th Batt.
2080 Private Laoey, James 23rd Batt.
67 Bombdr. Laldlaw, Walter Thomas 6th Army A.F.A.
2920 Private Laws, Albert G. G. sth M.G. Batt.
1546 Private Leonard, Alfred (D.C.M.) 24th Batt.
900 Private Leonard, Leo 24th Batt.
369 C.Q.M.S. Lewis, Alfred Frank 27th Batt.
1783 Private Lewis, Harry sth M.G. Batt.
5407 Private Little, Cleveland Eugene Aust. Employ
Coy.
2593 Driver Livermore, Clement Ross 31st Batt.
1536 L./Corp. Looke, Harold A. (M.M.) 24th Batt.
499 Private Lush, Charles William 24th Batt.
420 Private Lyons, Stephen Patrick 6th Bde. H.Q.
426 Private Marshall, Vernon 22nd Batt.
1204 Corporal May, James Whan 22nd Batt.
916 Private Manger, Joseph Richard 24th Batt.
787 Private Markland, George Brownlie 24th Batt.
45 L./Corp. Mason, William George 24th Batt.
3408 Private Martin, Frank William 14th Batt.
2056 Private Martin, William Francis 57th Batt.
1043 Sergeant Madsen, Alfred Francis Pay Corps
2646 Driver Martin, Jack David 14th F.A.B.
1205 Sapper Mallinson, William Bth F.C.E.
2917 Private Maher, William 7th Batt.
3421 L./Corp. Merrill, John Alexander 14th Batt.
428 Private Miles, Gordon Clifford 24th Batt.
1028 L./Corp. Mills, Reginald Smeaton 24th Batt.
871 Private Miller Herbert Charles b..'ud Batt.
370 Private Morath, Albert A. (D.C.M.) 12th F. Amb.
315 Driver Morrison, Henry Francis Ist F.A.B.
934 Private Moule, William Roi 24th Batt.
61a Private Murray, Roy James 4th F. Amb.
937 Private Myersoough, Edward A, 24th Batt. |
1951 Sapper McCallum, Edward James Bth F.C.E.
866 Corporal McDonnell, Patrick 22nd Batt.
1544 Corporal McEvoy, James Anthony 24th Batt.
3399 Private MoHardy, Alexander 14th Batt.
2645 Private Mclntosh, Archibald Hugh 59th Batt.
689 a Corporal Mclntosh, Arthur 20th Batt.
1116 Private McKenzie, Thomas William 30th Batt.
2205 Private McLaughlin, Hugh 58th Batt.
2408 Private MoLeish, Robert Wilson sth Pnr. Batt.
450 Sergeant McMahon, John Charles 24th Batt.
1992 Private McMillan, Percy 59th Batt.
911 L./Corp. McLaren, John J. C. 24th Batt.
1555 Private McNamara, Francis Thomas 24th Batt.
4020 Driver McNaughton, William C. 6th Army A.F.A.
2012 Sapper McNulty, Frederick George sth Div. Sigs.
205 Driver Mcßae, Keith 22nd Batt.
1168 Driver McLeod, Aubrey Wilfred 22nd Batt.
456 L./Corp. Meate, William 24th Batt.
2628 L,/Corp. Neil, William 14th Batt.
1198 Private Nelson, Alexander 32nd Batt.
1169 Private Nelson, Aubrey 22nd Batt.
4227 Gunner Newman, Lindsay K. J. 2nd F.A.B.
907 L./Corp. Newman, Frederick B. 23rd Batt.
2756 Private Normlngton, Arthur S. 57th Batt.
1989 Private Nuzum, Edward John 14th Batt,
4244 T./Bdr. Oates, Arthur William 2nd F.A.B.
623 Private Oakley, Herbert Gordon 23rd Batt.
312 Private Oakman, Thomas Henry 32nd Batt.
460 Corporal Olgaitie, Thomas 24th Batt,
421 Driver O’Brien, Thomas 23rd Batt,
14327 Private O’Callaghan, John Edward 4th F. Amb.
5515 Private O’Neill, George Joseph 4th F. Amb.
117 Private Parker, Kuybet sth A.L.T.M.B.
263 L./Corp. Parker, Frank Valentine 24th Batt.
1248 C.Q.M.S. Parsons, Maxwell Malcolm 23rd Batt.
810 Sergeant Pearson, John S. (M.S.M.) 6th A.L.T.M.B.
1025 Private Penglase, Albert Ernest 24th Batt.
428 Private Perry, Robert 6th B.H.Q.


2832 Private Phillips, Harold Reading 59th Batt.
885 Corporal Phipps, Harry Douglas 6th A.L.T.M.B.
1562 Private Pippin, Edward Bailey 24th Batt.
2656 Driver Pickard, Albert sth M.G, Batt.
950 Private Polinelli, Lawrence 24th Batt.
905 L./Corp. Poynton, George Walton 32nd Batt.
4656 Driver ■ Pretty, Charles Read 2nd F.A.B.
671 L./Corp. Price, Louis (M.M.) 32nd Batt.
760 Private Primrose, George Samuel 24th Batt.
3552 Private Pugh, Arthur 14th Batt.
272 Private Pulbrook, Lesli-i John 14th Batt.
84 Sergeant Pynor, Edward H. C. Ist A.G.H.
2472 Private Reed, Frederick 14th Batt.
19 Private Renehan, Thomas 22nd Batt.
1030 Sergeant Rennie, Albert Newton sth Div. Sigs,
275 Private Reynolds, Arthur 24th Batt.
4651 Gunner Rickards, Gordon 2nd F.A.B.
7434 Private Robartson, George 13th F. Amb.
451 Private Robin, Albert Arthur 22nd Batt.
724 Private Robins, William 24th Batt.
3488 L./Corp. Roberts, Edwin F. R. 14th Batt.
3470 Private Robertson, Percy Gilbert 14th Batt.
13348 L./Corp. Rooke, Gerald Martin 12th F. Amb.
(Driver)
13349 L./Corp. Rooney, James Edward 13th F. Amb.
2204 Private Ross, John 14th Batt.
1034 Gunner Rounds, Ernest Edgar 13th F.A.B.
2444 Driver Rowe, Walter sth D.A.C.
9096 L./Corp. Ryan, Martin 12th F. Amb.
1038 Private Ryan, Ernest 23rd Batt.
172 L./Corp. Rumpff, Alfred James A. 24th Batt.
286 Sergeant Semple, John (D.C.M.) 24th Batt.
965 Private Scott, Fritz 24th Batt.
430 S./Sergt. Shaw, Alfred Ferdinand 6th Army A.F.A
656 Private Sharpe, Henry Sant 23rd Batt.
457 L./Sergt. Sohammer, William 22nd Batt.
1283 Private Sheehan, William Sth Batt.
687 Private Simmonds, William 22nd Batt.
2854 Private Short, Thomas Frederick 14th Batt.
3498 Private Sloan, Silas Henry 14th Batt.
1064 Private Small, Walter 22nd Batt.
461 L./Sergt. Smart, Ernest Charles 22nd Ba,tt.
327 Private Smith, Sydney Boswell 24th Batt.
3507 T./Corp. Smith, Alexander 14th Batt.
13356 Corporal Smith, Frank H. E. 13th F. Amb.
2680 Private Smith, James 58th Batt.
4228 Driver Snowden, Henry Edward 3rd Army A.F.A.
1732 Driver Spears, Merlin George 59th Batt.
2438 Private Squires, John 59th Batt.
979 Private Steel, Edward Charles 24th Batt.
4665 Driver Stapleton, John Michael 2nd F.A.B.
564 Private Stanford, George 24th Batt. j/
7904 L./Corp. Stephens, Richard Alfred 13th F. Amb. |/
2021 Private Stewart, Charles 14th Batt. U
5236 Sergeant Stewart, Charles William 4th F. Bakery 1/
1734 Private Stewart, James H. (M.M.) 24th Batt. I'j
699 Private Stranger, Lionel Percy 27th Batt. !’|
3355 Corporal Swan, Archibald George 22nd Batt. 4
2922 Private Taylor, Webster Stanley 4th B.H.Q. ; j
14817 Driver Thomas, Albert Evan 18th F. Amb.
3484 Private Thompson, Clarence Hugh Bth Batt. ;J
3503 Corporal Thomson, David Arthur 14th Batt. f.
1113 Private Tilleard, Eric Jim 23rd Batt. J'i
527 C.Q.M.S. Tough, Stuart" 24th Batt. j'/i
2679 Driver Tregenza, George 57th Batt. y,
2907 Private Trotman, Harry 57th Batt. i ,
528 Private Tuchin, Charles John Mc.C, 24th Batt. j'J
1349 Driver Walker, John Stanley 14th F.A.B.
2911 Driver Walker, Charles Augustine Sth D.A.C. /
775 S./Smith Walls, Daniel Frederick 6th Army A.F.AjJ
1196 Private Watson, James Gardiner 26th Batt. j
717 a Private Warner, Horace Walter 22nd Batt. /
936 Private Warren, William 22nd Batt. |
2440 Private Ward, Ivan Walter 14th Batt, [.
2896 Private Watts, William Evan 14th Batt. j
1853 Sergeant Watson, Alfred George 6th Batt.
485 Private Walsh, James 27th Batt.
268 Corporal Webb, Robert 23rd Batt.
2825 Private Western, Alfred Lewis 57th Batt.
1134 Private Wharton, Edward James 24th Batt.
1001 Private White, John Williams 24th Batt. /
1004 Private Whyte, Alexander 24th Batt.
6206 Gunner Williamson, John Harook 13th F.A.B. '
912 Private Williams, Bert. 22nd Batt. /
471 Private Williams, Alfred Charles 23rd Batt.
2701 Private Williams, Ernest George 57th Batt. j
2907 Private Williams, Edwin George 58th Batt. i
2201 Driver Williams, Vincent John S9th Batt.
287 L./Corp. Willis, Thomas 22nd Batt. )
1650 Private . Wills, Henry 13th F. Amb.
767 Private Wilkins, Frederick William 6th A.L.T.M.B.
2923 Private Wilson, Lionel Victor 58th Batt.
2040 Private Withers, Harry David E. I4th Batt. j
914 Private Wood, Alfred Peroival 22nd Batt. |
917 Private Wood, Sydney Glen 22nd Batt. !■
i
8011 W./Corp. Young, Gavin Glenday Sth Div. Trn. ;
1114 L./Corp. Young, John Frank 2nd Div. Sigs. j
292 C.Q.M.S. Your ger, Stanley William 22nd Batt. j


No. 4 MILITARY DISTRICT.
5 , C.S.M. Adair, Cyril Morrison 27th Batt.
250 Sergeant Andrew, Edward George 27th Batt,
1256 T./Sergt. Atkins, Clifford August 14th F.A.B.
991 Ftr. Barber, William John 2nd F.A.B.
495 Private Barnard, Lancelot Lee 27th Batt.
1052 Private Baker, Charles Henry 27th Batt,
739 Private Beech, Alfred 27th Batt.
2793 Sergeant Bowditch, Howard Byron 10th Batt.
26 Private Bowering, Walter Edgar 27th Batt.
14 Driver Branford, Horace Percy 7th Bde. H.Q.
752 L./Corp. Bruce, Thorold Mervyn 27th Batt.
277 Private Burgess, Alfred 27th Batt.
1622 Corporal Burnett, Arthur Ernest 27th Batt.
1562 Sapper Carr, William Robert Ist Div. Sigs.
1802 Private Cakebread, Ernest 27th Batt.
3043 Private Chappie, Douglas Leonard 16th Batt.
1678 Private Chester, Henry William 27th Batt.
1682 Private Clarke, John Cornelius 27th Batt.
8839 Driver Claxton, Robert Ist Div. Trn.
1905 L./Corp, Coles, Henry Charles sth Div. Sigs.
MO Private Cooper, William James 27th Batt.
47 Private Conlon, Henry 27th Batt.
288 Corporal Corcoran, William Albert 27th Batt.
39 Private Craig, McAlister 27th Batt.
1093 C.S.M. Curtin, Michael Joseph 27th Batt.
8846 Driver Dabinett, William Burt 2nd Div. Trn.
1686 Private Dansie, Charles Gordon 27th Batt.
538 L./Corp. Davis, Joseph Alexander 27th Batt.
1689 Private Diggins, Charles Robert J. 27th Batt.
785 L./Corp. Doyle, Harry 27th Batt.
1690 Corporal Drewett, Leslie Roy 27th Batt.
787 Private Dwyer, Jack Luke 27th Batt,
69 Private Earl, Wilton Harrington 27th Batt.
303 L /Corp. Barney, Arthur Ernest 27th Batt.
1001 E R /Sgt Edwards, John Rowland A.A P.C.
558 Driver Egan, William 27th Batt.
556 Private Evans, Percy George 27th Batt.
679 Driver Falvey, Albert Edward 32nd Batt.
1703 Driver Fielder, John William T. 27th Batt.
798 Private Fitzgerald, Leonard James 27th Batt.
803 Private Gale, George 27th Batt.
1711 Private Gray, Herbert Edward 7th A.L.T.M.B.
1194 L./Corp, Gibaut, Edward James 2nd Div. Sigs.
807 Private Gibson, James Edward 27th Batt.
808 Private Gilbert, Basil Rodney 27th Batt.
1605 Driver Gilford, Frank 27th Batt.
82 Sergeant Grandison, Leslie 27th Batt.
568 Private Gray, James Sowden 27th Batt.
2612 Corporal Grant, Frederick Kenneth 16th Batt.
102 Private Haines, Cyril 32nd Batt.
88 Private Haley, Albert Francis 27th Batt.
242 R.Q.M.S. Harbey, Vernon 27th Batt,
94 Corporal Haines, Norman C. R. (M.M.) 7th A.L.T.M.B.
1074 Private Hope, Walter Vernon 27th Bait.
1719 Private Howe, Eric 27th Batt.
89 Corporal Howe, Herbert George 27th Batt.
2633 Private Hoare, Stanley Ivanhoe 16th Batt.
343 Corporal Hunt, William Horace 27th Batt.
1607 Sapper Hurley, Murnay Francis 2nd Div. Sigs.
536 Private Inglis, Wilfred Maurice 32nd Batt.
1534 Sergeant Irving, Henry Victor C, 27th Batt.
539 Corporal Jew, Edward Samuel 32nd Batt.
2613 Private Johnson, Alfred Michael 16th Batt.
850 Private Kanally, Clifford Clement 27th Batt.
611 Private Keane, Leonard John 27th Batt.
1053 Private Keen, Ernest Charles 27th Batt.
847 Private Keynes, Bertram Gordon 27th Batt.
363 Sergeant Keynes, Arthur Samuel 27th Batt.
851 Sergeant Lamb, George Stanley 27th Batt.
8910 Driver Lane, John 20th AAS C.
4872 Sapper Lee, John Henry 2nd Div. Sigs,
1768 L/Corp Leith, William James 4th Pnr. Batt.
1458 Sergeant Love-Band, Howard Gordon Ist M.G, Batt.
1936 Sergeant Morgan, George E. (M.M.) 41st Batt.
1800 Private Malthouse, Clifton D. R. 27th Batt.
132 Private Maly, John 27th Batt.
1011 Driver Maytum, George Edwin 6th Army A,F.A,
135 Corporal Mellish, Walter Wordly 27th Batt.
3015 Private Mercer, Stanley Archer 16th Batt.
143 Private Mildren, Frederick Julian 27th Batt.
866 Sergeant Mills, Edwin Charles 27th Batt,
2628 Private Moore, Thomas 4thAL,T.M.B.
2021 Sergeant Morris, Alfred Ernest 4th M G Batt.
62118 Private Morony, Clement Joseph 4th Gen, Rfts.
3409 Private Muller, Harold Adolph 4th F Amb.
877 Private McCann, Peter Felix 27th Batt.
1147 Sergeant McCarthy, Harcourt 2nd Div. Sigs.
1818 Corporal McDonald, Allan Kenneth 27th Batt.
1057 Private McGuire, Eugene Joseph 27th Batt.
880 Private McKenzie, William John 27th Batt.
2352 Private MoKim, William James 16th Batt.


406 Driver Neagle, George Lewis 27th Batt.
1751 Private Nelson, Clifford Augustine 27th Batt.
883 Corporal Nettle, James Cololough 27th Batt.
407 Private Norman, Harold 27th Batt.
2204 Private North, James Malyon 27th Batt.
1753 Driver Oldfield, Ross 27th Batt.
663 Sergeant Oldfield, Harold 27th Batt.
5006 Private Paddiok Albert Richard Ist F.A.B.
167 L/Corp Peters, Frederick James 27th Batt.
164 Private Peteiaon, Benjamin Taylor 27th Batt.
j 2319 Private Phillips, Arthur Bradshaw 16th Batt.
’ 415 Private Pierce, Charles Robert 27th Batt.
411 Private Pond, George 27th Batt.
412 Driver Pope, Benjamin 27th Batt.
{ 1560 Sergeant Provis, Roy Lincoln 27th Batt.
I
1614 Driver Quarrell, Frank 27th Batt.
1031 Driver Ranford, Cyril Jennings B. 6thArmyAF.A.
894 Private Rankin, Erie Charles 27th Batt.
i 897 Private Rebea, Anastasia 27th Batt
I 900 Corporal Reidy, Michael 27th Batt.
■ 905 Sergeant Robinson, Edgar Lewis 27th Batt.
435 Private Rhode, James Hermann 27th Batt.
' 1612 Sergeant Ryan, Thomas 2nd Div Sigs.
; 457 L./3srgt Sohammer, William 22nd Batt.
j 441 Driver Soholz, Otto 27th Batt.
I 7969 Private Siebert, Augustine F. (M.M). 13th F. Amb.
I 921 Driver Simons, Francis 27th Batt.
689 Private Skipper, Alfred John 27th Batt.
437 Private Smith, John Joseph 27th Batt.
460 Private Smithers, Frederick 27th Batt.
201 Private Solley, George 27th Batt.
700 Private Sutherland, Donald Grant 27th Batt.
1574 Driver Tame, Arthur 27th Batt.
471 Sergeant Thacker, Herbert Harry 27th Batt.
; 1577 Private Thomas, James Alfred 27th Batt.
704 Private Thornton, Percy Grey 27th Batt.
1578 Private Till, Alfred Simon 27th Batt.
1103 Corporal Townley, Alfred George 27th Batt.
217 Private Tremain, Roy William 27th Batt.
1608 Corporal Tudor, Joseph Basil Grove '27th Batt.
221 Corporal Vaughan, Francis B. A. Postal Corps
952 L./Corp Veitoh, Lance Stuart 27th Batt.
2822 Private Walters, Percy George E, 16th Batt
236 Sapper Walters, William 2nd Div. Sigs.
5912 Private Waterman, Leslie George 12th F. Amb.
2602 Private Warr, Joseph Thomas 16th Batt.
478 Sergeant White, Arthur 27th Batt.
1440 Sergeant Whittle, Albert Leslie H. 10th Batt.
234 Driver White, Frederick Bacon 27th Batt.
480 Driver Winch, Charles Henry 27th Batt.
224 Driver Winch, Harry 27th Batt.
1033 L./Corp. Winston, Easton Clarence 27th Batt.
966 Sergeant Wilson, Walter Broughton 27th Batt.
8997 Private Wooding, Peroival Charles sth Div. Trn.
No. 5 MILITARY DISTRICT.
1220 Sergeant Daley, Owen (M.M). 12th F. Amb.
1933 Sergeant Fitzpatrick, Frederick M. 2nd M.G. Batt.
1557 Private Healy, John 11th Batt
1183 Sergeant Hocking, William James 28th Batt.
1821 Private Hunter, Bernard Douglas 4th Div. H.Q
2663 Private lok, Henry Edwin 16th Batt.
8316 Private Leunig, Charles 12th F, Amb.
1642 T./WO.ll. Mulgrave, Andrew A.M.C. Details
3030 Private Ogden, Errol Charles 16th Batt.
2030 L /Corp. Oldfield, Sydney John 4th F. Amb.
(Driver)
2178 Private Ortis, Henry 4th Pnr. Batt.
5573 L,/Corp. Reardon, John Joseph 12th F. Amb.
No. 6 MILITARY DISTRICT.
430/ A./Bdr. Alexander, Albert 3rd Army A.F.A.
998 Private Anderson, Hazel Erskine 26th Batt.
1038 L./Corp. Allison, Henry 26th Batt.
4907 Driver Bartley, Thomas William 3rd Army A.F.A.
4309 T./Corp. Boyer. Charles 3rd Army A.F.A.
1055 L./Corp. Boys, James Henry 26th Batt.
1015 Driver Bryan, Leslie 26th Batt.
830 Driver Burge, David 26th Batt.
1249 Private Clark, Charles Henry 7th A.L.T.M.B.
1064 L./Corp. Cooper, William Milford 26th Batt
1061 Private Cutler, Francis William 26th Batt,
2024 Private Freeman, Arthur Frederick 26th Batt.
1255 Corporal Forster, John Cumine 26th Batt.


881 Private Gilbert, Frank Bryant 26th Batt.
885 Private Glann, Herbert William 26th Batt.
1089 Private Grundy, Francis Henry 26th Batt.
1217 Corporal Hall, Clare Henry Horace 26th Batt.
1804 Private Hack, Frederick Joseph 26th Batt.
2716 Driver Harvey, Edward Thomas 2nd F.A B.
896 Private Hewitt, Claude Benjamin 26th Batt.
897 Private Hosklng, Cecil Phillip 26th Batt.
1100 Private Howell, Osmond Ernest 26th Batt.
1107 Corporal Howell, John 26th Batt.
916 Private John, Alfred James 26th Batt.
906 Private Johnson, Arthur Albert 26th Batt.
2038 Private Jones, Harold Moore 15th Batt.
1130 Driver Knowles, Trevor George 26th Batt.
2292 Private Kearns, Ernest Owen 15th Batt.
2071 Corporal Laird, James 15th Batt.
4305 Private Lucas, James Dixon 3rd Army A F.A.
1133 T./Corp. Lipscombe, George 7th A L.T.M.B.
922 Private Mathers, Keith 26th Batt.
1561 Driver Morris, Rheuben 28th Batt.
929 Private McGuinness, Frederick H. 26th Batt.
1004 Private Mclntosh, Alexander Gorey 26th Batt.
1139 Private MoLagan, Leslie Stewart 26th Batt.
931 Private Nichols, Ronald Mervyn 26th Batt.
1165 Private Palmer, James Allen 20th Batt.
1395 a Private Petterwood. James Henry sth DAG.
945 Private Riley, Alfred James 26th Batt.
2505 Private Sampson, Cyril Claude 15th Batt.
1175 Private Salter, William Frederick 26th Batt
1174 Private Scott, William Henry 26th Batt.
971 Private Scott, John 26th Batt.
3570 Private Shea, Vernon Reginald 15th Batt.
1277 Private Shelton, Ellis 26th Batt.
955 Private Stansfleld Percy 26th Batt.
1283 Private Warren, William Victor 26th Batt.
990 Private Wilson, Norman 26th Batt.
1653 Private Williamson, Henry John 52nd Batt.


mpn The World’s
'I
sik
Costs One Penny per mile to run. Lasts for ever.
V idoria.
Tarrant Motors
Propty. Ltd.,
Russell Street,
MELBOURNE.
AGENTS :
New South Wales.
Davies & Fehon
Motors Ltd.,
Hunter Street,
SYDNEY.
Queensland.
Queensland Motor
Agency Ltd.,
Adelaide Street,
BRISBANE.


. - p*
. Cr ‘ i
1 (//‘j/yTc u
ffe
I
V ( <«» l»A. f, r )
T VT:'
‘, > M
i u\ n 1 i
myo,
G v '-'
hi it' ti 'j 1 1
7
fit
( >\ JjMW L j v }
t U
i
i **y •
h a.
'***•
8K
H. A J
A
AT
p
UKf^S<
*
A
£
s
teaft
xWmzk
ra
Imi
r »W % ,i -jV
EXCHANGE your
*—■' silent piano now,
and remember that
Easy Terms are at
your welcome disposal.
Catalogues Free.
Write To-day.
CDOMANCE Is ever a part of our lives which calls up
' '■ kindly feelings -those feelings which vivify tired
nerve centres and cause us to again take up life’s
battle with renewed energy and vigour.
The Nocturne, music's idealization of the romance of the
night, Is a wonderful nerve vitallzor If properly played
upon a sweet-toned piano.
And YOU can play Nocturne's, or, In fact, any compositions,
artistically and enloyabiy, provided you have one of
Paling’s Player-Pianos
Playable -instantly by everybody."
PA f [MG’S 86-88 QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE,
i I \ immmmt 111 V»-l w 7 Amj at Sydney, Newcastle, Usmore. and Toowoomba,


