

Our Duty During The
War and After.
OCTAVIUS C. BEALE
(Fellou) of The Royal Historical Society),
(Past President of The Associated Chambers of Manufactures
of Jfustralia).
Read before the Victorian Chamber of Manufacturers
at Melbourne, on 28th February, 1916.
MARCHANT AND CO., LTD., PRINTERS, SYDNEY.


I
jj
GAZETTE *
J


German Infamies.
It is a memory, graven upon one's soul, to have visited the scenes of
arson and pillage in France. One has walked for miles through devastated streets
ravaged by invaders who claim culture but are as cruel and carnal as the Mongol
hordes that blighted Europe under Attila. We know that the Kaiser openly
recommended his brother Heinrich to imitate that monster so that his name should,
be remembered in China a thousand years hence for savage attack and repression.
The Kaiser even named one of his sons after the same Asiatic conqueror who was
jknown in the fifth century as the "Scourge of God."
Long before the War, preparation had been made of murderous and incen-
diary material so that men must have been carefully practised in the use of it.
And there had been plenty of scholastic inculcation so that these immense sup-
plies were certain to be expended without lack of skill or access of remorse. We
have all read to nauseation of the infamous crimes committed by the Germanic
soldiery —generals, officers and men of all grades, as also civilians—upon the
people they had planned to invade in order to rob and rape and slay.
Neither your nerves, nor mine, nor anybody's should be spared the narra-
tion and reiteration of wrongs done by the Germans and the nations linked with
them in a league of premeditated crime. For we cannot and must not exclude
the national character and acts of our enemies from the consideration of our
subject. Not exceptionally but generally the German people have followed with
alacrity the teachings of their mad philosophers, professors and pedagogues so
that to-day their idol, the Kaiser, is forced to adopt the words of Macbeth:
I am in blood
Bo deep stepped in that should I wade no more
Returning were as tedious as go o'er.
When the time shall come probably a year or two hence, it will be found that
the real story of torture deliberately wreaked upon the bodies and souls of their
victims by the Germanic tribesmen will be without example in history for horror.
In Senlis, a charming old town where are still preserved relics of the
glorious Roman civilisation and freedom, the miscreants had sacked, burned and
wrecked as is their wont. They murdered for sheer blood-lust. In mockery
they buried the mayor, head downwards, in a field, leaving the feet protruding as
a Teutonic jest. M. Odent was a lovable and beloved man, in whose family the
mayoralty—very remarkably—had descended for generations. I inspected closely
hundreds of burned and sacked dwellings, illustrating in their utter devastation
that scientific organisation of which Germany lias been so proud and British
Liberals have so profusely extolled. They stole everything movable that had
value, so that when the War is over, the element of cheapness attractive, even
paramount, in the view of Freetraders, will characterise vast stores of loot
that are even now in course of distribution. From the million homes of the
thrifty Belgians, from the dwellings and sanctuaries of our beloved French allies
in the ten ravished Departments enormous quantities of articles of utility and
ornament, as also sacred vessels and pictures, have been despatched by rail to
Germany and thence to Scandinavia. I have the address of an important dealer
in Copenhagen who will supply these "goods" for anyone's money. The conven-
tional excuse, or reason, or argument of our Australian freetrade exponents, con-


stantly reasserted, is that price settles all such questions, and that if one trader
does not buy and sell cheap wares, irrespective of origin, his competitors will.
It is sophistry, like the rest of their lamentable gospel, and in God's name let
us join in refuting it or, still better, defeating it.
In the village of Barcy, near Meaux, on the very field chosen by Jolfre
for their fatal, though not final, defeat, every house had been sacked although
merely frugal dwellings of the farm-labourers. As usual, the church tower had
been shelled, and in the porch lay the ancient bell engraved with holy texts, the
bell that had called the harmless folk through the ages to baptism, to worship,
to marriage and to obsequies of their dead. The cross still hung on the sanctuary
wall but the figure of the Saviour was gone.
In the Authors' Club, London, I conversed with a fellow-member who had
arrived from Italy and was shortly proceeding, upon commission, to Serbia;
Dr. Spensley was a nephew of the late Howard Spensley, of Melbourne, and had
been chief medical officer to the city of Genoa. He informed me that there had
been place I in his care two little Belgian girls, of whom the elder was enceinte.
"Both," said he, "had been dragged by German officers, not private soldiers,
out of a train of fugitives and had been carried off by them. Finally each child
had had both hands cut off at the wrist." "But," said I, interrupting him,
"they would almost certainly bleed to death unless promptly attended to." "If
cut off with a sharp instrument that would follow," he replied; "but in their
pajse the hands had been hacked off with something blunt so that they, at all
events, survived. I had charge of them to contrive some form of artificial hand
which might enable them to feed themselves." And he called for the British
Medical Journal of that week so as to show me the method adopted. There you
see, are two contrasted forms of culture. That gentle, brave and faithful British
doctor went to his Calvary in Serbia, and his name counts upon the lengthening
list of our Club's roll of honour.
At the close of a recruiting meeting, this month, which I had addressed,
a sergeant-major came forward asking for names, and said: "When I was in
Brussels at the beginning of this War, I saw a woman bring in a cart, the
remains of her two children, a boy and a girl. The girl had three bayonet wounds
in her breast. One arm of the boy hpd been lopped off and a frightful gash by a
German officer's sword, reached from the lad's shoulder obliquely across his chest.
The mother had brought the little bodies in that they might be interred decently
and not burned by the Germans."
Here are a few photographs of Austrian acts of Kultur in poor Serbia. You
may see and judge for yourselves. In others there are tender babies, very
beautiful in the quiet majesty of death, and handsome mothers and maidens, all
massacred in cold blood. Impossible it is to understand this "furor Teutonicus,"
and God forbid we should ever comprehend their motive. Certain it is, however,
that the blood-lust described by Tacitus continues in the German tribes through
their direct descendants to this very day. Whenever and wherever Austro-
Germans have made conquests, temporary or permanent, there is a record of blood-
lust—cruelty for its own sake—Sadism, of which their model, Attila, was not
guilty. We are back to times of barbarism worse than the Dark Ages. The Mongol
Etzel is known to have shown mercy, and to have protected subjugated nations.
He was a savage of the worst type, yet neither he and his hordes nor any savage
tribes with whom our own nation has fought, all round the globe, have practised
ieeds of shame to set beside those of the Teutons of to-day.
I will conclude this demonstration by citing their conduct in Serbia last year,
as duly authenticated by certificates and photographs. The inquest was conr
ducted by M. Barlovatz, formerly Consul for Serbia in Paris, M. Lasitch, then


President of the Council, and Minister of Foriegn Affairs of Serbia, and the editor
of the "Gazette de Lausanne," a journal of much dignity and trustworthiness
generally. We have only time for curt extracts, which I carefully translate.
At the approach of the Austrians, nearly everybody had quitted Shabatz,
which was an open town. Everywhere they pillaged, everywhere they slew. The
widow, Marta Stoikovitch, stood by, helpless, at the sack of her home. When
there was nothing more to carry away, the visitors saluted her with two rifle shots,
which seriously wounded her in the groin and leg. Then before her eyes they
hung her twelve-year-old son to the gate of the yard.
At Bastave, two old women, the sisters Soldatovitch, infirm, aged 72 and 78
years, had remained alone in the village, refusing to believe that there were sol-
diers cruel and cowardly enough to attack them.
When, having defeated the Austrians the peasants returned, they found only
two corpses, covered with bayonet wounds, the nose, ears, and breasts cut off.
But at least these men who wear the Imperial uniform will exhibit elementary
respect due to the wounded and the hostage? Not even that.
At Preniavor, after an encounter between a platoon of Serbian cavalry and
the Austrian troops, an inhabitant had charitably received one of his wounded
compatriots.
When the Kaiser's Allies entered the village they discovered him stretched
upon a bed in the abandoned house. To cure him they could think of nothing
better than to bring some faggots and to burn him alive. The martyr's body
was found by the committee of inquiry.
THE HOSTAGES OF LOSCHNITZA.
"And now, to close this expose, we shall, in spite of our disgust, recount
the sad end of the hostages of Loschnitza. They were one hundred and nine, of
whom the oldest was 82 years, and the youngest scarcely counted eight summers.
"The whole hundred and nine were solidly fastened to one another, elbow
to elbow, with rope and strong wire, in front of a great ditch sixty-six feet long,
ten feet wide and six feet deep. Into this compact mass a platoon of infantry,
placed upon the slope of the railway, fired a salvo.
"The mass oscillated. Dragged down by those who were mortally wounded,
all the hostages fell in a shapeless heap into the common tomb where immediately
a squad of sappers shovelled in hastily the earth until all was quiet. Afterwards
the monstrous grave was opened.
"Poor hostages of Loschnitza buried alive, innocent victims of Austro-
G-erman barbarism, sleep in peace ! Your names belong to history, and the civilised
world will avenge you !''
Multiply these few instances by the hundred thousand, and we shall conclude
that these soulless assassins are not the people to invite shortly to our offices,
to our Cobden Clubs and National Liberal Clubs and marts and exchanges and
(homes. We shall not want them in our schools, colleges and universities to train
our chilHren in their form of culture. Not even to our parliament like Ignaz
Tribitsch of recent fame, nor yet to the Privy Councils of our Empire.
The Duke of Wellington wrote to his mother in 1807 (Maxwell's Life of
Wellington).
"I can assure you that from the General of the Germans down to the smallest
drummer-boy in their legion the earth never groaned under such a set of murder-
ing. infamous villains. They murdered, robbed and ill-treated the peasantry where-
ever they went.''


"The late General Grierson," says Moreton Frewen, "who commanded our
troops at the relief of the embassies at Peking, told me that the infamies per-
petrated by the Germans on the helpless Chinese, were such that he could never
again break bread with a German."
"GERMANY IS MUCH MISUNDERSTOOD."
(Lord Haldane Before the War.)
When the then very recent German acquisition Tribitsch protege of the
cocoa-press and the Cobden Club, was returned for Darlington in the House of
Commons in 1910, defeating a good Englishman, Sir Edward Grey telegraphed to
the now proved liar, forger, thief, spy and traitor: "Heartiest congratulations on
your splendid win !" And later on the Eight Honourable Walter Runciman
apologised, only too publicly, to Germany for what he denominated the "pernicious
and dangerous statements of Lord Roberts !"
You all know that it required not only a year's war, but a year's home agita-
tion to force the authorities to pull down the banners of the German and the
Austrian Kais'ers in St. George's Chapel, Windsor. They were not mere orna-
ments but symbols of dignity and distinction, demanding from free Britons
respect, homage and obeisance, the show of welcome and of hospitality. It was
only after a year of war and of home agitation that the King's warrant was with-
drawn from German manufacturers, who had been thus distinguished over English
competitors in England. The ostensible, obvious and only intent of these
"Warrants" is to recommend, endorse and encourage the sale of the foreign
manufacturers' goods to the King's lieges.
l T ears before the War, a royal carriage stopped at a New Bond Street store.
The princess sent in her lady in attendance, who delivered this message to the
proprietor: "Her Royal Highness has reason to approve of Herr Blank's pro-
ductions, and hopes you will add them to your list !"
ADMIRATION OF GERMANY.
Was it Love or Fear?
For the few phenomena last narrated it may be possible to suggest a not
unkindly explanation, but for political preferences to our assured and declared
enemies it is hard to find excuse. When Kaiser Wilhelm decorated General von
Bernhardi "for his admirable book" —"Germany and the Next War" —it was
nought else than a declaration of enmity to Britain. Every politician knew in
his soul what the German fleet was built for; Haldane, when he cruelly denounced
Lord Roberts and declared to Hermann Oncken that his spiritual home was
Germany, knew intimately the hostile intent of Germany. How then are we to
account for the preference, the deference, the sycophantic admiration of Prussia?
Or for the servile pretence of a non-existent blood relationship with Prussians,
who are a mixture of Allemannen, Slavs and Mongols? Is the admiration genuine?
Allow that Liberal politicians, in order to support their penchant for free trade
with the nation's most adroit antagonist, who protects his own ports, are weH
satisfied to let the German acquire English coal mines; obtain English china-
clay at less prices than could the English potters; to carry German goods in
English ships and on English railways at less rates than English goods; to let
him grasp whole lines of commerce and banking; to put his German friends in
Parliament and the Privy Council; to let them own and control newspapers; _to
prefer them in all ways —allow that it is their fiscal ideas only which prompted
the whole Liberal Party to all this folly, is the admiration genuine?
They may, and did, and do still, ignore German support to England's
bitter foes in Elizabeth's day, the protectress of her nation, and the greatest


monarch in our long history. But they cannot ignore the history of their own
times and the glaring characteristics of Prussian domination. The Germans have
often declared, before the War, too, that they are without a friend in the world.
They have exiled, expropriated and —fatal error —denied even the right of the
mother language to Banes in Schleswig and Holstein, to Poles in Posen, to French
in Alsace and Lorraine. Germans in Austria oppress and torture Czechs and
Italians, whilst Austrian Magyars torment Croats, Roumanians and Serbs. By
each of these nations, and many more they are hated with a loathing that is
deathless and changeless. Whilst Maoris and Zulus long to fight beside the
British, the Herreros would poison the Germans. None of these find room for
admiration !
Consider the cold-blooded Anti-Semitism in Germany futile and despicable.
Have we not been taught in our schools to admire Frederick the Great, a treacher-
ous assassin, a successful brigand, whose very Asiatic vices seem to have attracted
him because of their hideousness? He has always been the idol of the Prussians,
the glory and pattern of the Hohenzollerns. And Frederick said of the monarchs
of Prussia, Russia, and Austria at the great Partition that they were able to
"communicate together and partake of the eucharistic body of Poland. That
was Preussische Schrecklichkeit —Prussian Rightfulness. Still no claim to
admiration !
No ! It cannot be pretended that our English statesmen and the party
they represent really admired the conscienceless success of mighty and arrogant
Prussia even up to the Bay of Wrath. It was not admiration but ignoble fear,
and it is best to admit the fact.
THE DIES IRAE AND LAISSEZ-FAIRE.
Well, the nations are resolved to purchase no longer their right to exist.
The dies irae has come, and it has yet to be decided which shall reign, the gospel
or iron and blood, or justice and brotherhood. Now, in the very time of struggle,
it is our duty to strengthen our nation and our Allies so as to prepare for toe
common recovery when the War is over. That the preachers of laissez-faire
should press the policy, "wait and see," we well understand. "Leave it til
peace is declared," say they, and w r e know that when they urge resumption of
trade with Germany after the War, that it is a perfectly sincere policy. "Let
things slide, and all will come right." We say that 1 all will go wrong, and will
trust to nothing but preparation.
Until the thing called pacifism, cosmopolitanism, freetrade, or foreign pre-
ference, be jettisoned with a fire-bar tied to each foot we shall never have done
with illusions. We all have known, personally, that German merchants and
bankers in the Empire whom we have met, were invariably freetraders for the
British and protectionists for the Germans. For very many years I have been
a constant student of German newspapers as also of their literature, current and
historical. Whenever Australia, very rarely, or Canada, very often, or England,
with apologetic timidity, talked of fiscal retaliation, the Prussian growled and
"rattled his sabre."
ANTE-BELLUM WARNINGS.
I have gathered also, during lapse of years, a pile of pamphlets, "England
in deutscher Beleuchtung," "Seestern, 1906." "Arbeiter und Flotte." "England
und die Englander," and many others, all depicting the destruction of our Empire
by the modern Goths. Without an exception these lyrics showed how the
Bominions, at the outset of the imaginary struggle, threw off the detested yoke


of England, leaving the Motherland to her well-deserved fate under the sword of
the Hohenzollerns. Now this literary war-preparation did not come from the
Junker caste, it was the national cult, a part of Kultur, absolutely universal
wherever German is spoken.
Now, at last translations are abroad, and our people read Treitschke, Bern-
hardi, Leventlow, but hardly Clausewitz. The Gothic god is Frederick the Great,
and Clausewitz is his prophet. Treitschke and the rest are mere priests and
pieachers. lorce, physical force, is the means (for apart from the idea of the
State and the law there is no such thing as moral force). To impose our will
upon the enemy is the object. So wrote the Prophet on the first page of the
introduction in his magnum opus "On War."
Now, Bismarck himself declared that the war of 1864 upon Denmark, of
1866 upon Saxony and Austria, and of 1870 against France, were all "made in
Germany." German meant originally war-man, the word "guerre" still remain-
ing in Irench and Italian. Krieg is, however, the German word to-day for
war, and it means "to get." "Kriegen," to war, means strictly to get, to gain,
and this etymology is precisely the doctrine taught by all the national prophets
and priests. "Gain, commercially if you can, but get somehow, by war if you
must. Choose your own time to attack your enemy, and the world is your
enemy."
Most of us found it a hard and thankless task to issue warnings of national
danger before the War, but now, at least and at last, we know where we are.
What then is 1 our duty ? The Freetrade morning journals of Sydney are perfectly
candid in declaring that after defeating the foe in battle we ought to resume
perfectly amicable commercial relations, just exactly as before the fight. That
nearly agrees with the policy of the Freetrade press of London. The principal
party organ of London is owned by a pronounced pacifist, whilst the evening
journal, whose advocacy of external interests left little to be desired by its owners
and supporters, is directed by influences whose natality is not British. But we
may rely that these and all other like influences will be overwhelmed by the
millions of returned warriors when the joy-bells shall ring again.
NATIONAL POLICY OF CONTROL OF TRADE.
The whole commerce of a country is compelled to pass through one valve,
the Customs. Whether exports or imports, free or dutiable, everything is subject
to registration and control.
Whatever is worth having is worth protecting, be it strong or feeble. An
extremely popular Australian politician once said that he would treat young
industries as he would young puppies—throw them into the water, and whichever
survived was entitled to live. That is the Freetrade theory and practice in exactly
half-illustration. The other half, that which he omitted, is the treatment accorded
to the foreign puppies with whom the poor little native survivors must compete,
to live at all. The foreign are much multiplied, well fed and favoured, getting
the most and the choicest bits, besides all the petting and flattering.
You know that one dog remained dry. He wasn't a puppy, but had big
teeth and strong muscles, growled viciously when the genial statesman from the
Cobden Club proposed to pitch him into the water, and he still held on to his
bone. He is a very good and useful dog to this day, bigger and stronger than
ever, and always ready to fight. Our Prime Minister very properly patted him
on /the back the other day and called him a good dog. If he hadn't lived we
should have been short of sugar.


But we shall not argue Protection. It is accepted by every civilised nation
to-day. Even England has it, and God grant she may stick to it ! What we
want is an enormous extension of that principle which opposes in all things
laissez-faire. The first extension that we ask for is to exports.
Before the War, the New South Wales Chamber, co-operating with the New-
castle Trades and Labor Council, and others interested, asked for export duties
upon the metal contents of Broken Hill concentrates, so that zinc should be
produced in Australia. The same, of course, to apply all round. I personally
visited Broken Hill, studied the case with men of national instincts and finally
we waited upon Mr. Tudor, then Minister for Customs, and used publicly all our
arguments. Needless to say, the Minister was entirely sympathetic, but he gave
us no help. Also, needless to say, we got no support from the Sydney press, but
we did not reckon upon anything from that quarter save antagonism. Germany
held the whole trade, and Germany, forsooth, ought to hold it. Four hundred and
forty thousand tons of concentrates were carried in the year to Germany in
German ships, of which one half was worthless material. Australia paid freight
upon both metal and mud. That mattered nothing. And she received far too
low a price for the metal which also did not matter. And was forced to import
back again, in German ships at high freights, zinc for her own use, crude as well
as manufactured. This time the price was rectified, it was high, in accord
with the beautiful law of supply and demand., And, as usual, the press suppressed
all mention of these things. In our futile anger, we said, anyhow, I said: "Those
metals will come home to your own sons' hearts in the shape of bullets."
But the Government and Parliament, who hold the handle of the valve
through which all commerce passes, did nothing to save. They haven't settled
the question yet, though, happily, the will is now there.
Our Australian copper all went to Aron Hirseh and Sohn, of Frankfurt,
and after war broke out our banks would not even advance £4O per ton on electroly-
tic copper. No blame at all attached to the banks because Germany had put
our nation in such a hole, and when, of necessity, Aron Hirseh, and Moses, and
Guggenheim, with the other Wesleyans, dropped out, copper sold at highly re-
munerative prices to Australia.
Quicksilver is known to exist in the Commonwealth, and occasionally mines
have been opened, but that is a monopoly of the Bothschilds;. Mines are not
wanted.
Bismuth is another monopoly, the two producing countries being Austria
and Australia.
The control of nickel has passed to New York. New Caledonia is l , therefore, a
mere appanage of the United States.
Malaya is the greatest source of the world's tin supply. German-Americans
had nearly secured that metal also, had not the Straits Government intervened
by clapping on such export duties that all the ore must be smelted in the Straits
Settlements. The hyphenated persons sold back to the Straits Government, at
a smart loss, their land, and withdrew ungracefully. But that British colony,
having acted so infamously tow r ards the glorious principles of Freetrade, was in
a position further to protect the Motherland by adding the warship "Malaya,'"
and providing a nice little cheque of three millions sterling —not borrowed from
Mother —to pay for it. Further, the Colony treats tin ores from the Dutch pos-
sessions and other countries. All the work and profit is British, where the pam-
pered enemy or the greedy neutral, by all the laws of political economy, was
entitled to have and to hold it.


DANGER AND ABSURDITY OF LACK OF POLICY.
How all of us have cursed the absurdity of our national position! Our refined
copper of absolute purity was shipped —all of it—to Aron Hirsch, same as Merton
(real name Moses) of Frankfurt, who sold it to the German Government and
the Allgemeine Elektrizitaets Gesellschaft for munitions and electrical work. We
forced all this upon public attention long before the War. The copper went
in the form of wire-bars, which I have seen drawn in the A.E.G. works in Berlin
into wire, some of which, hundreds of tons of it, went back to Australia. Offers
were made in Australia to lay down plant—it is very simple machinery—to draw
down these bars if the Government would only support it, as Germany supported
every such movement. The wire would cost them no more, eventually much
less, and they use—the Australian Governments —very large quantities. Yast
reels of it, thousands of them, have been dragged through the streets. Year
after year we have denounced the folly that not a sheet of brass was rolled in
Australia; nor a sheet of copper, though we produce 40,000 tons of the metal
every year. And the chief officer in the War Office, Whitehall, informed me
that they preferred our Australian electrolytic copper to any other.
Professor Sarolea truly says "English Free-Trade has been one of the most
important contributory causes of German prosperity. England has been
Germany's best colony, and not only has England thrown open her own markets
to a rival whose competition was not always fair and legitimate, but she has
enabled Germany to trade on equal terms with practically every part of the
British Empire. This indebtedness of Germany to English Free-Trade is admitted
by all German economists who have made a study of the subject." No wonder,
then, that the Cobden Club, which will never publish a list of its members, has
so very many Germans claiming membership, and that both it and the National
Liberal Club have been so profusely supplied with German money. No wonder
that Tribitsch, alias Lincoln, and other enthusiastic Teutons have been sent into
the English parliament to advocate, as they did ardently advocate, English Free-
Trade with the Yaterland. Assuredly, they did not mean real free exchange, any
more than our Australian pro-German journals meant it. They meant only free
imports into our Empire of German protected goods.
PACIFIC PENETRATION BY GERMANY.
It was quite the same in Italy. The A.E.G., whose parvenu Chairman
Bathenau was an intimate of the Kaiser, supplied machinery through its associate
bank the Banco Commerciale, thus tying up each customer permanently. The
same in France, where numbers of large factories were bought with French money.
Some utterly refused to sell, such as the great St. Gobain Glass-Works Company,
of which there were 17 branches, that in Belgium falling into the thieving hands
of the Gothic invaders.
In Singapore, in India, in China, Germany has penetrated far with her
commercial underground engineering. Always with the help of English money
through German banks in London. And when the inevitable debacle came there
were fifty million pounds' worth of enemy accommodation bills, without security,
afloat in London. Either the State must assume that loss or the community face
bankruptcy. The State, as you know, assumed it. Another of the fruits of Free-
Trade when War demands a true balance-sheet.
Several years before the War, the Germans bought out the Holt line of
steamers trading from Singapore. They obtained in all 58. With consummate
effrontery they collected a large proportion of them in the harbour, hoisting
simultaneously the German black-white-red flag and hauling down the Union Jack,


in full view of the people, as a demonstration. Thus the inter-island commerce
fell into their hands.
One of the chief officers of the Indian Civil Service said, to me, "We have
been running India for years for the benefit of the Germans." Take one item,
what looks like a little one, such as our friends the Cobdenites reckon we can
amply afford. Only within the last few years the metal tungsten, its various
salts and alloys, have been brought into general use. " Its chief value lies in
the fact that when added to steel the latter acquired the property of self-
hardening. This renders it extremely valuable for high-speed cutting-tools, and,
in fact, four-fifths of the total output of tungsten is now absorbed in the manu-
facture of ferro-tungsten" for the purpose named. Burma heads the list as the
world's greatest producer. Australian and other British possessions also yield this
rare metal, so> that British Governments, each with its hand on the valve already
described, can control it to our own and our glorious Allies' benefit —if we choose
to do so —instead of giving over the advantage to Germans and German-Americans.
Of course, this will not please the Cobden Club and the German members of the
British Parliament, nevertheless, the Indian Government are taking measures to
stimulate the production of tungsten and, under ordinances, will control its
destination. So, too, with 800,000 tons of manganese from India, essential to
America and all other steel producers. A powerful weapon to enforce fair treat-
ment of the Allies !
PREFERENCE FOR THE ALLIED NATIONS.
The value of the tin exports of the British possessions, apart from England,
was m lyib about ten millions sterling.
Ordinances which are military in their character and purpose during the
War open out a vista of improvement in national strength and service to the
Allies. As the blood and treasure of all these nations are poured out for the
common life and hope, surely we should claim and agitate ceaselessly for the
fulfilment of our duty to them. We want legislative control, protection, not
merely of manufactures, but of manufacturing materials. Canada with her grain,
timbers and metals; Australia in meat, wool, hides, butter, grain and metals;
India in rare metals, jute, rice, and other grain; Egypt! and Africa in cotton—
and these are mere illustrations—can each, under a common understanding,
exercise choice and control of the disposal of her produce to the end of preferring
those wno are joined in the common fight for honour and liberty. Such a league
of the Nations would possess a vital, binding and durable interest to preserve
peace which no Hague banquets nor tinkling rhetoric could replace. Whilst
President Wilson scribbles notes, and Lansing entertains Count Bernstorff, whilst
the Teutons rape and ravage, let us occupy ourselves in devising an unbreakable
bond of friendship, a column of mutual strength and support, so that nations
great and small who are of our mind may hereafter live in peace with none to
make them afraid.
When the War is over it will not suffice for outraged France—nor Belgium
either —to be offered money or credit in order to replace factories and plant.
Buildings are easy of erection, but how about machinery? To purchase it anew
at such a time will require years for restoration. No! It must be brought
back from Germany, whither it has been scattered, or else similar plant must
iuc taken thence to enable Lille, Boubaix, Tourcoing, Armentieres, Charlem,
Namur, and the rest to resume their activity. And we are dealing to-night with
the equally urgent question of supplies of so-called raw materials.
Amazing would be the blundering miscalculations of the Liberal politicians
of England were we not accustomed to obliquity of vision in persons schooled
in the false philosophy of Adam Smith, Thos. B. Malthus, Cobden, Bright,


Spencer, and the two awful Mills. Lords Eosebery and Haldane confidently
prophesy poverty and lack of employment when the War closes. On the contrary,
the demand for labour and skill will be enormous. Prices of manufactured goods
will soar upwards, whilst some lines will be unprocurable to three-fourths of the
buyers. Window-glass, a thing of urgent necessity, builders' ironmongery,
building materials and fittings will be in supreme demand. Eeplacements of all
conceivable kinds will and must be made. The Free-Trade theorists declare
that there will be no money or capital to pay for such goods, which is only further
economic fatuity. They are not produced by capital beyond what still exists,
for war does not really destroy any large proportion of the world's producing
facilities. It even increases them suddenly. Goods are produced by industry,
the industrials of all ranks readily interchanging their products, whilst banks
effect individual adjustments. Those who remember the sequences after the War
of 1870 will be able to forecast the immense commercial demands which will
follow the next Declaration of Peace. And it will be a sorry shame, making for
sore troubles later on, if we do not now form Conventions to protect ourselves
and our faithful Allies when our present foes shall claim that rehabilitation which
they do not deserve. Every outrage upon justice must be expiated sooner or
later. And it will be our infamy indeed if we do not make secure our innocent
and valorous friends who have suffered so much, when Time, Fate and their own
splendid efforts, shall give us the opportunity.
Your voice as a representative body of experts will have much effect if you
urge upon our friends in the Homeland the necessity of preferring the Confederated
Nations for years to come. If amongst these nations any should tire of the
position withdrawal will be open to them. Even John Bull is chilled with his
open door, and talks of a padlock on his back gate. The Germans cozened him
—in an unkindly sense —and his amazement at proving them to be enemies
would be funny were it not tragic. The method of working this preference to our
best friends will be settled by the high contracting parties and the one essential
means is the valve aforesaid, the Customs, controlled by each Government.
Again there is talk of a Zollverein —how political economists do love that
German word! But a Customs' Union would never be agreed to by the
Dominions of our Empire, and as certainly not by our Allies. Each nation will
continue the fiscal system that it has found to strengthen and further its interests
and industries. Mutual arrangements can and ought to be made to direct to the
Allies those products that are indispensable to their restoration and success. No
matter how vast may have been the sums expended upon the War, and the
consequent indebtedness, all experience shows that the labours of men can quickly
reinstate prosperity.
After the ruinous and all but universal wars that had afflicted the ancient
world during the last century of the Eoman Eepublic, when #he destinies of
mankind were finally placed under the mild sceptre of Augustus, wealth rapidly
returned. We know that ordinary business loans were at four per cent, per
annum, and that a stupendous commerce developed in the Mediterranean during
the prolonged Augustan peace. The Pax Eomana lasted for two and a half
centuries, and God grant that the present conflict may be so decisive for freedom
and justice that the world may again know a period of rest as long and as happy!
It was not known before and has not been known since. But Eome, that spread
roads and civilisation everywhere, as also parliamentary government where it
was possible to apply it, made the unpardonable mistake of not conquering
Germany and endowing the barbarians with civilised language and law. Eoman
civilisation, literature, family life, law and customs, have remained to the other
nations their greatest glory. Once again the world has been threatened with a
barbarian deluge and a savage despotism. Buti this time we shall not, cannot,
repeat the fatal error of leaving Germany unsubdued. Also when Eome destroyed


dominat ! on V she indeed allowed afterwards another Carthage
to be built, ahe new city became very handsome, wealthy and commercially
uccessful, but never again did the Romans permit to it military or naval power
IMPERIAL NAVIGATION LAWS.
Pho k ! ' as re P r esentative and President of tiie Associated
ki Tendon ° r j V f anu±actures ' a Congress of Chambers of Commerce of the Empire
f' i q !J 6S^ n °} Im P eriai preference was discussed at the instance of
e Montreal Board of Irade. Our Council had been always and unanimously in
favour of preferential treatment to the Motherland. The Australasian Chambers
not TOtT erC T then agree with the principle, and upon that occasion did
not vote. I was in the happy position of recording five votes on behalf of
yourselves and our other Chambers. Since then Preference, though quite victor-
ous, is not yet actually m operation as between the Dominions. And as her insen-
sate hreetrade policy did not in the smallest degree save England from German
77' ha d and mahce ' so it is to be hoped that this War, which English Free-
traders declared could never occur, may possibly convince some of them of their
Let us not forget that there are in England immense secret funds still in
hand as shown by the Marconi-shares scandal—largely subscribed by Germans
whether naturalised or not, for the purpose of upholding the free import of Ger-
man goods. Let us not forget that Baron Bruno von Schroder, head of J. H.
1 and Co., German-English bankers, was granted British naturalisation on
f° '7 f, u i'- two da ys after our declaration of war. Let us not forge*
that these English-Germans had advanced £40,000 upon £41,000 of "villainous
saltpetre then being carried in an English ship to Germany, and that they
actually sued m British Courts for the recovery of the money, thus neutralising
n every sense our own Prize Courts. Let us remember that Mertons, a German
77 headquarters at Frankfurt, for a year after the War had a monopoly
o British metals and supplied the British Government, with whom they were
m full confidence. Remember that Krupps all along have had their office in
London. When I left that city last August, His Majesty's ships of war were
being coated with, and still obtaining further supplies of, an anti-fouling
composition, made m Germany. _ These examples, and a thousand others, warn us
that a long and a strong pull is needed to oust German influence to the effect
of introducing Preference to ourselves and our Allies.
We cannot hope wholly to oust this influence. Australian Freetrade journals
alone suffice to prove that, for they persistently uphold it. They practically
maintain silence as to the blacker and more notorious infamies of the German
military. But a great cause can be won without their assistance, and in face
of their opposition. In England there will be constructive effort by the whole
press, save three or four journals that are under German control. We cannot
expect to tear out all the roots at once.
The main remedy is simple. Eestore the old navigation laws that made
our nation great Adapt and spread the principle of our Australian shipping
law m favor of the Empire and of the Allies that have helped to preserve it
o not allow German ships hereafter, but only those of our partners, to trade
between the ports of the Empire. Up to the War, the Germans cut out our
countrymen and cut out our true friends. Our people feared and kowtowed to
the Germans. If we want cheap goods we can get cheaper and better than the
German. If we want high-class goods we can get them from our own folk and
the French. As to metals, wool—any materials—our friends will buy them
as readily as our enemies, and give as much for them, without undermining Let
us give our friends a show, anyway. °


I suppose everyone in this room has suffered at some time or other because
be did business—buying or selling—with a man whom he distrusted. So with
nations, let us discard commerce with the treacherous and dangerous, but culti-
vate relations with proved and trusty comrades.
OUR DUTY AFTER THE WAR.
To Recapitulate in Fewest Words:
Increase, diversify and foster local production so as to make Australia self-
contained to the limit of possibility, and self reliant. _ It is the only way we can
pay off present indebtedness and cease external borrowing.
As we must import certain lines of goods from abroad, let us give preference
to our Empire, then to our fighting Allies, as against the rest of the world.
Prohibition of tonnage of present enemy nations into and between Australian
ports. Urge upon the rest of the Empire exclusion of their tonnage between
ports of the Empire. Make preparation now.
COMMERCIAL UNION OF THE ALLIES.
The proposal for such a union has been received in France with eager
welcome. In Paris and throughout the Provinces numbers of prominent men
in municipal and parliamentary circles have spoken of it with approbation.
Chambers of Commerce and Manufacture have given their adhesion, and one could
submit to you arguments and suggestions to fill a newspaper, from practical
people in France. Canada is moving. Sir George Eulas Foster and other
enthusiastic patriots have joined in the agitation so that if Australia will come
forward as early and as earnestly as the exigence demands, we can count upon
success in Great Britain. It is not a question of accepting lower prices for
our products, but only of preference to those who will henceforward co-operate
with us towards the common gain and stability. Political economy ignores the
simple fact that Germans, before its own unhappy advent on this bought
British goods in such wise as to pay wretched prices, and at the same time get
control so that the same goods were sold back to the British at enormous
enhancement. It is a false theory that to export merchandise to any country
you must buy from that country in exchange. Islands have been completely
denuded of their wealth, whilst nothing whatever was returned. That happens
by force, fraud and legitimate commerce, all three. By suitable arrangements
with honourable friends we may do much better than by practising exchange with
quondam enemies, who had tricked us badly before the quarrel.
The "Morning Post" of London is doing admirable work in promoting this
commercial union. A proof of the excellence of the proposal is found in the
alarm and animosity it has aroused amongst German and pro-German traders
and publicists. One enemy authority declares it the most disgraceful I ever
remember to have seen. It touches the point of infamy." Mere recommenda-
tions, however, or promises, or pledges never to buy enemy goods again, are
worse than worthless, for they are misleading and unintentionally untruthful.
There is only one effective method, that is to say, national decision carried out
through the Customs. All others are mere pretence.
You can feel the pulse of the purely trading community, or rather the
pro-German part of it which would enforce its will on the rest, by studying
the Sydney Free-Trade dailies. They refuse even advertisements, as I can show,
which might militate against a return to German imports. They do not write
in support of fiscal preference to our Allies in exports or imports. Nor in any
other way. On the contrary prominence is given to arguments in favour of


resuming connections with Germany after, precisely as before, the War. It is
declared to be inevitable.
On the show window of a Sydney garage is a large gold sign offering a
leading line of German motor-cars. And the principal declared to us "They
can say what they like, but I could sell six B cars a week if I could only
get them." And in other lines of commerce in this very city of Melbourne we
heard the declaration, "I don't want to sell German goods, but if the market
is to be left open I will not give up my former agencies, because if I did my
competitors would jump for them." Oh, you can have the names and the nature
of the goods, but the principle—properly speaking the total lack of principle-
is what the nation has to regard. Here are these people, only waiting impatiently
to build up German fortunes afresh. Their occupation was, and still is, to buv
German manufactures, carrying high profit to the Germans, for cash in Europe
paid through an Australian bank. They sold, and they are still selling, these
German goods, upon long time-payment terms, providing immense sums of
Australian money for the holding of the time-payment accounts. Our Allies
ought to have these benefits, and, for a still stronger reason, Australia should
have such support for her own manufactures.
It is fortunate for Australia, and still more for the whole Empire that two
clear-sighted, energetic statesmen who know their minds and the public spirit
of this country, have gone to Europe, Messrs. Fisher and Hughes. Meetings
are being held in London of patriotic business men to urge the Administration
TT y se ® ri^lß k sea-power effectively. Shipments of grain from Argentina to
Holland have multiplied tenfold since the War commenced, and so with Eastern
merchandise and cotton to both Holland and Scandinavia. The figures have been
requently published. How Nelson would have acted in such a case had he
power and opportunity, we know from his action in the Baltic. We may judge
how needful to us now at the core of the Empire are men of "strong" minds
great hearts true faith and ready hands," when I quote you a few statements
by a, leader of the dominant party in England, dominant, though only representing
a minority of the voters. s
POLITICAL PROPHETS.
On 9th December, 1911, Lord Haldane said:
~ ",T h ® ? in f i m ° desi ( r e"—you will like to know the dearest ambition of
the retired Lord Chancellor— is to see Germany expand herself overseas, and make
her beneficent influence, that of a great and civilised nation, felt in the distant
parts of the world. (Of course, India, Australia, and China.)
At Dalston, June, 1912:
"The German Emperor is something more than an Emperor—he is a man
and a great man. He is gifted by the gods with the highest gift that they can
give—i US e a German word to express it—Geist. He has got Geist in the
highest degree. ,
Highfield, 20th June, 1914:
I am not in the least afraid of the invasion of German armies."
Holborn, 15th January, 1914:
Europe is an armed camp, but an armed camp in which peace not only
prevails, but in which indications are that there is a far greater prospect of peace
than ever before. Lo one wants war!"
Grimsby, 28th November, 1910:


"Tn naval and military defence we are absolutely and completely equipped
to meet all emergencies and situations. The person who says we are not is in
a blue funk."
At the Eighty Club dinner 29th November, 1912, this man in his seventh
year as War Minister, who reduced Woolwich Arsenal to the lowest level for a
generation, and cut down military estimates and preparation, but who afterwards
said, when the storm burst, that "he knew the perils of the situation," and
"where the powder magazine was" —this most dangerous sycophant of our dead-
liest foes said of Lord Roberts:
"I have a worse objection to Lord Roberts. If you carry out his pro-
gramme you would find you were short of money for the Army and Navy. You
cannot keep up both. I consider any policy that is put forward on any basis
that is uncertain about that is a policy not of the strategist but of the amateur. "
That is the statesman who cut down our artillery, cut down the numbers of
our Regular Army, cut down the numbers of workmen at Woolwich Arsenal.
As Germany is Haldane's spiritual home, let us dip our bucket into their
well of wisdom and this is what I bring up. Dr. Riesser, President of the
Hansa League, concluded a speech to an important congress of mercantile men
from Germany and Austria at Vienna —a few weeks ago—thus: "Only those
nations will conquer who are best prepared for war in time of peace, and
for peace in time of war." He also said, and we can only pray that the Bosche
authority for once was telling the truth, that the "Entente Powers have not only
entered into political arrangements, but have also concluded a number of economic
agreements, one of these being that none of them should make a commercial
agreement with Germany or Austria without the consent of the others." If
credit for that is due to the Coalition Government of Britain, it will help to
embalm their memory—and something is sorely needed.
ENGLAND AND GERMANY IN TUDOR TIMES.
The destinies of Prussia —which were those of Germany—in the War of 1870,
were in the hands of three most capable men, each a genius in his sphere,
Wilhelm der Erste, Moltke and Bismarck. Precisely in those activities they
were comparable to, but without possessing the towering intellects of, Augustus,
Marcus Agrippa and Maecenas. On our side, neither in this War, nor during the
years which showed it to be imminent, has a giant mind shown itself in the
political sphere. Dulness of mediocrity is all that history can record of the
nation's guides. Our salvation has been the Eranco-Bussian Entente, for which
—with the Italian—even Germans declare with bitterness that our gratitude is
due to Edward the Seventh. They described him as the "English Sphinx" and
whilst fearing, hated him, for they never could foil his statesmanship. Had King
Edward been pro-German, like his Ministers, or like Bloody Mary Tudor, our
position had been much worse to-day. If you can tolerate this address for a few
minutes longer we shall turn back on our own history for an enlightening
parallel.
Your minds are familiar with the names of the warriors, sailors and states-
men in the "spacious days of Great Elizabeth." But one of them is almost
forgotten, that of my own direct ancestor, Robert Beale. He was for 30
years private secretary and Clerk of the Council to the Virgin Queen. Founder
of the Elizabethan Society of Antiquaries, he was an erudite man, possessed an
equable mind, was a ripe scholar and linguist, like his royal Mistress, and during
his long activity was engaged in difficult and dangerous diplomatic missions. He
left behind him an immense collection of manuscripts now in possession of one
of his descendants dealing with all conceivable concerns of that mighty and pro-


lific period. In the matter of Mary Stuart, whom Elizabeth had determined on
removing in the old-fashioned way, he insisted upon at least a quasi-legal indict-
ment and actual warrant. When signed by the monarch, Eobert Beale took the
precaution of having the warrant—still extant —countersigned by the Lords of the
Council, then himself rode night and day to Fotheringay Castle, where he read
it and saw it executed, firstly making elaborate pen-and-ink sketches of all persons
present. These sketches also are extant.
All that is a digression, for our interest to-night consists in, his transactions
with the German Kaisers of the Holy Eoman Empire, which, as you know, was
neither holy nor Roman. It was a crude and impudent Bosche mockery of the
rule of the real Caesars. Before me is a transcript in mediaeval German, taken
from Robert Beale's papers, of a Resolution of the (so-called) Roman Kaiser
Matthias, contra the Queen of England, issued to the five Kurfiirsten (Electors)
of Mainz, Trier, Colin, Sachsen and Brandenburg. The latter was an ancestor of
the present Kaiser Wilhelm. It is immensely long-winded, and I shall only
quote from it that the Hanse Towns complain of the "arrogant English queen,'"
who not only has taken from them long-established trading privileges gained in
England over the English, but actually permits her own English "adventurers"
to go to sea and to trade with North Sea ports. The Hanse leaguers beg the
Kaiser to arrest, intern, and then to expel all English from Germany. He ques-
tions the wisdom of that move, and suggests that the English may seize Heligo-
land and the Frisian Islands, close up Emden and other Germany ports, bring-
ing about general loss and damage. (Not a bad hint, by the way,"for our people
after this War.)
Well, the puzzled Kaiser proposes to offer money presents to Elizabeth,
which showed, at least, some, but not enough, perception of character. Finahy
his successor tried the more drastic remedy, with effects that we shall see.
Under Freetrade in those days, as practised in England in our days, the
Germans acquired per modum contractus and otherwise, privileges, concessions
and advantages over the English, in buying, selling, banking, traffic, mining,
anything that had profit in it. They had actually had the very crown itself
in pawn, more than once, for money advanced And as English judges have this
very year decided that Germans can trade and sue, under faked company names,
in England, so the Common Law of England was defeated in those days by an
English King appointing German judges to try causes of Germans against English.
It was lovely for the Germans, until the Tudors, a breed of really English
monarchs, "awoke to the national view of the case." You can read albout it in
Macpherson's "Annals of Commerce."
We cannot do better than quote a page from lan Colvin's "Elizabeth and
Her German Garden."
Queen Mary of England, you remember, was married to Philip the Second
of Spain. That made Marv daughter-in-law, and therefore secret ally, of the
Kaiser. She re-introduced Freetrade to the Germans, and, of course, conces-
sions, as in our own days.
"However, Bloody Mary died, and King Philip returned to his native
Spain. And then came Elizabeth, the greatest of all English monarchs. She
kept the Prussians dangling in expectation and hope, until her own subjects had
so increased in foreign trade and shipping as to make the Kingdom independent,
and then offered them such privileges as they had enjoyed under the Reforms
of Edward the Sixth. This did not at all content them ; they appealed to the
Emperor, and they prohibited English merchants at Hamburg.' The Queen, who
had been quietly protecting the Merchant Adventurers and Staplers of England,
now felt herself strong enough to reply by abolishing all Hanseatic privileges.
The Germans, in retaliation, placed a duty on all English goods imported into




'
*
■
'
-
*
*
j
.
-
.
' .
-
'
*
.
:
I ,
' \ 'V
'
. -
'
