

. OUR LOCAL
MEN OF THE TIM
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES
—OF THE—
PROMINENT CITIZENS
—OF-
OLLINGWOOD AND FITZROY.
MELBOURNE:
Printed by J. M. Tait, 155 Smith Street, Fitzroy.
FlS&lJ'cu.
MDCOOLX XXIX.


Grigg, James, J.P. (Councillor, Fitzroy)
Gahan, John (Councillor, Collingwood)
Holgate, William Douthwaite (Mayor of Collingwood)
Holden, James, J.P. (Councillor, Fitzroy) ... ...
Hood, Thomas (Councillor, Collingwood)
Hall, Robert (Councillor, Collingwood)
Kreitmayer, Maximilian Ludwig (Councillor, rood)
Kimberley, Joseph Edwin Cooke (Councillor, Collingwood)
Lang, Jchn, J. P.
McKenzie, John (Councillor, Fitzroy)
Nettleton, Peter, J.P.
Pilley, William (Councillor, Fitzroy)
Pitt, William (Councillor, Collingwood)
Rowe, Thomas, J.P.
Raven, William George, J.P.
Reid, Hon. Robert Dyce
Showers, Robert, J.P.
Schultz, John (Councillor, Collingwood)
Tait, James M.„ J.P....
Tucker, Hon. Albert Lee
Walker, Henry, J.P. ...
Mt •••


\rr\
ROBERT WALLACE BEST
(mayor op pitzroy).
Robert Wallace Best, the Chief
Citizen of Fitzroy, wa- born in Argylo
street, Fitzroy, on the 18th of June,
1857, his father (Robert Best) being
at that time a ‘ locker” in the Cus-
toms Department. He attended the
late Hugh Tempi, ton’s school, George
street (now State School No. 150) until
he reached the age of 13, when he was
launched into the battle of life, his fust
experience being in Thomas’s printing
office, Chancery lane, where he applied
hint elf diligently to acquire the “black
a. t but he never matured into a
full-blow n “ devil,” owing to an open-
ing being made for him in the office of
Mr W. T. Trollope, then a leading
Equity solicitor In his new vocation,
the energetic youth applied himself to
every branch of office work, studying
meanwhile for matriculation, passing
his examination with credit in 1875.
An offer was made to him at this time
of entering an insu: ance office ; but, as
he was about to accept the appoint-
ment, Mr Trollope made him a pro-
posal under such exceptionally favor-
able circumstances that Mr Best deter-
mined to accept it. And so, in Janu-
ary. IS7G, he became an articled clerk,
studying earnestly at the Melbourne
University for two years, most of the
time under the professorship of the late
Dr Hearn He passed the usual course
cf law examinations viz , Law of
Obligation, Law of Property, Statut;
Laws and Constitutional Law and
History- -receiving credit in all the
subjects. During all this time he had
the management of the equity and
convey an eng branches of ..r < rollope’s
business, which was very large. In
1881 Mr Best passed his final examin-
ation for solicitor in eight subjects,
again receiving commendation, and was
admitted a solicitor of the Supreme
Court of Victoria in March of the same
year. It will be borne in mind that
during one of the most severe and try-
ing periods of his interesting career,
when his energy was taxed to the ut
most, Mr Best was engaged in three
important affairs—studying for a very
stiff examination, managing an increas-
ing business, and (last, but not least)
courting Miss Jane Caroline Langridge,
only daughter of the lion. G. D. Lang-
ridge, then Commissioner of Customs,
In all these enter prises he was success-
ful, and on the 13th of April, 1881,
he was married to the abovenamed
ladg at St. Philip’s Anglican Church,
Collingwood, in the presence of a great
assemblage, and the subsequent festive
gathering at the Forester’s Hall, at
which Sir Graham Berry and many
celebrities were present, will be among
the pleasant recollections of not a few
of my readers, This was not, however,
Mr Best’s first public appearance.
While still “a white-haired boy,” befoie.
getting involved in the meshes of law
and love, he often performed a, the
Fitzroy Penny Readings in the old
court-house, where his recitations were ■
much appreciated. Since then he has
studied music, and his vocalism is now
quite as much appreciated in local
social life.
Pending negotiations for a partner-
ship with Mr Trollope, an untoward
event occurred, which prevented a


business union tlat might' have been
advantageous to bcth parties, especially
to Mr Best’s warm - hearted, good-
natured employer. On the 16 th of
May, 1881, Mr Best took a small office
in Market street, sind jumped into a
good business at once. His first big
“ hit” in legal life was his able and
successful conduct of cases on behalf
of the relatives of :he late Charles Cut-
ler v. the Westerr. Steam Navigation
Company and Steere v the same. The
circumstances, as yet in the recollection
of most readers, arose ou*- of a collision
between the company’s s’earn vessels,
Julia Percy and Nelson, when Cutler
was drowned and Steere seriously in-
jured. Mr Best vas asked to watch
the interests of his clients during the
inquiry, and a notable feature of the
proceedings was hs determination to
proceed with the actions for damage?
although advised by counsel to the
contrary. His success is well-known,
as he obtained a verdict for f 1765 on
behalf of the relatives of Cutler, and
the full amount claimed by Steere,
<£looo. Business >hen flowed in still
more freely, and for over three years
Mr Best had the conducting of ail the
Customs’ prosecutions without a failure
in any instance. Another case of con-
siderable local interest was that of
Jeremiah Ryan v J. M. Tait—an ac-
in 1883, when he was returned by 1865
votes. After watching the tide of
municipal affairs until he had mastered
the situation, he began to take a more
active part in public life. He defended
the council at a public meeting re the
Howie street procession question with
convincing force, and subsequent
events proved the correctness of the
views he enunciated at that meeting.
Mr Best was again returned to the
council in 1886 by the magnificent
vote of 2020. In the same year, whilst
on a temporary visit to the country, a
requisition, signed by some 700 pro-
minent ratepayers, requesting him to
stand for the Legislative Assembly, was
got up and presented to him ; but,
owing to extreme pressure of business
at the time, he was compelled to de-
cline, Owing to the division of the
city into wards, Mr Best once more
came before the ratepayers in 1888,
when he was again elected by a large
majority. On the assembling of the
new council, Mr Best was elected
Mayor, and subsequently took his seat
on the Bench as chief magistrate.
Politically, Mr Best is a staunch
Liberal and Protectionist, likewise a
thorough Federationist—these being
the main planks on which depends his
hope in ihe coming election for the
Lower House, as he has determined, in
tion in the County Court against “ The response to numerous requests, to offer
Observer”—in wider Mr Best appeared himself as a candidate for the Fitzroy
for the defence. Tie barristers briefed electorate. Durino- his stmvarrrtW
to plead for the deience could not ap-
pear at the last moment, and at the
request of his client Mr Best himself
pleaded so successfully that the jury
gave a favorable verdict—which, how-
ever, was upset on s technical point by
a judge in a highe* court. Business
continuing to increase rapidly, Mr Best
entered into partnership with Mr
Theodore Fink, and on the 39th of
April, 1888, Mr I. D Phillips also
joined in the partnership of what is
now, perhaps, the laigest legal business
in the southern hemisphere. Notwith-
standing his great legal business, Mr
Best has been a successful speculator
in city property.
Mr Best entered the Fitzroy council
electorate. During his stewardship
for the city, Or Best has represented,
in nearly every instance, the interests
of Fitzroy at all the leading deputa-
tions, particularly on the railway ques-
tion and the Metropolitan Board of
Works, in the first of which he strongly
advocated the direct line through Fitz-
roy, and which he intends to urge on
the Government should he be elected.
Or Best’s untiring energy during the
conference at which the Metropolitan
Brard of Works Bill (which is to be
presented this Parliament) was pre-
pared, is particularly deserving of
notice. Professionally, Or Best is
specially adapted for his calling, being
a keen student of human nature, of a
not too sensitive and fractious temper,


combined with a clear and comprehen-
sive eloquence, sharp at retort and
vigorous in expression. Socially, of
him may be said a more entertaining-
man can scarce be found, being an old
athlete himself and an ardent lover of
all out-door sports and amusements.
Since taking up a permanent residence
in Fitzroy, he has been elected with
unanimity to the presidency of Fitzroy
Football Club, vice-president of the
Cricket Club, vice-president of the
Curlews, and has a connection with all
the leading institutions in the city
His liberality and charitableness are
well known, although his name does
not appear on every list of subscribers
to charities ; his natural disinclination
to publicity causes him to.act quietly,
William Douthwaite Holgate was
bo i at Askham House, York, England,
ehe month of August, 1856. His
father, William Holgate, was what is
generally known as a gentle nanfarmer.
Up to the age of 16 years, the subject
of this sketch was educated at home,
and, having a strong inclination for
the army, though his parents were
opposed to it, he at an early age
obtained a commission in the‘’Princess
of Wales’Own Hussars, where he served
as an officer until the age of 21. His
father at that time had a big interest
in a large banking house in York.
Certain complications took place, which
resulted in his losing nearly all his
invested capital ; and, as the position
of an officer incurred certain domestic
and social expenditure above his salary,
the younger Holgate sold out, and
determined on starting in business for
himself He remained at home for a
few months, and, finding nothing to
suit his particular wish, he sailed For
WIL LIAM DOUTH W AITE 110 LG ATE
(mayor of collinowoou).
yet he has always an open hand for
any deserving cause. Doctrinally, he
is a member of the Church of England.
In concluding a history so full of in-
terest to the young men of Fitzroy, it
is not out of place to po;nt to the man-
liness which has characterised Mr Best
in all his public undertakings and to
his irreproachable career. Asa native
of Australia, his eventful and success-
ful life so far may prove an incentive
to those younger members of the com-
munity who have a desire to rise in
the social and political scale.
We might also add diat Mr Best
was one of the promoters and guaran-
tors of the late Juvenib Exhibition,
at which i will be remembered he gave
the children of Fitzroy a Ireat.
New Zealand, which he reached in
December, 1878. Landing at Auck-
land, and being offered a share in a
station, which he accepted, he went
into interior, where he applied himself
to the rough lesson of acquiring colonial
experience Being of a healthy and
robust constitution, he soon became
thoroughly acquainted with the hard
work of bush life. The thirst for
travel had now seized holi of him, and
being offered a position of trust with
Professor Reischak, the Austrian
naturalist and taxidermist, he accom-
panied that gentleman for twelve
months, during which tine he studied
and learnt the characteristics of most
of the Maori tribes, acquiring at the
same time a complete knowledge of the
beauties of the New Zeaand country.
In 1881 he sailed for Melbourne, where,
immediately after his arrival, he started
in business in Swanston street as an
auctioneer and estate igent. His
business soon became sufficiently large


for him to open a branch office in Olif-
ton Hill, where he purchased the land
on which Askham House (his present
residence, now stands. During the
next six years he applied himself dili-
gently to the improvement of Olifton
Hill, being secretary of the North
Suburban Railway League, occupying
also the same position on the Olifton
Hill Railway League, and accompanied
every deputation to the Minister of
Railways on local railway questions.
He was the first 'o move in the matter
of obtaining a local post office, as also
a police station, in both of which move-
ments he was successful. These two
successes may be looked upon as his
first introduction to popular favor, for
his business increased materially in the
district as soon as it became known
that he had been the chief advocate of
those long-felt wants. In 1886, Mr
Holgate was created a Justice of the
Peace, a position which he has filled
with credit. He has always b n cn a
strong and ardent advocate foi direct
railway communication through Col-
li ngwood, as such in his opinion will
benefit a large number of people and
conduce to the federation of the
'northern suburbs. In 188/, in answer
to a very strong requisition, he launched
into municipal life, and succeeded in
•heading the poll with a very large vote
Nothing of importance worth mention-
ing took place during his first year of
office as a councillor, the energy of the
council being concentrated in keeping
down the expenditure within the limits
of the estima+es. The mayoral chair
being vacant, he was elected to that
position at the annual meeting, and
subsequently took the chair of the
Bench.
Politically, the present Mayor of
Oollingwood is a Liberal Protectionist ;
he is much attached to the idea of
Federation, and although not an Aus-
tralian native, he has many ideas in
common ■with the popular inclinations
of our most prominent natives. The
present state of municipal finances in
Oollingwood has caused Cr Holgate to
project another loan of £20,000, which
he is of opinion will (with the increase
of population) be a perfectly just and
essential requirement. His municipal
creed is primarily the construction of
streets, and the keeping of same in
thorough repair aftei wards. He con-
siders there is no need for Oollingwood
and Fiizroy being governed by two
councils, holding that there should be
but one common council, at which both
cities could be well represented, thus
considerably reducing the general ex-
penditure.
Socially, Or Holgate is a man of
convivial and pleasant ways, having a
spirited nature and well-toned tempera-
ment. He has done much (o promote
and encourage social life in Olifton
Hill ; he erected the Albert Hall
for that purpose, and takes a prominent
part in amateur theatricals, having a
good stage presence and considerable
histrionic ability, lie has done much,
too, in promoting private and public
charities, and although his stay in
these districts has been brief, he has
pm form' d active and useful work for
local institutions, thus acquiring great
personal popularity, and is regarded as
a rising man Like many other local
men he has considerably profited by the
“land boom,” and there is little doubt
that his Mayoralty will be brilliant and
hospitable. His religious opinions are
those of the Anglican Church, and
since his arrival on the Hill he married
Miss Graham, the daughter of one of
the oldest civil servants in the colony
still in harness.


William Bawling Bennetts, the son
of William Bennetts, farmer, of Per-
rinzebloe, Cornwall, was born on his
father’s farm on the 2-'th of February,
1837, and whilst yet a child came to
Australia with his parents, landing at
Williamstown in December, 1840.
Four years later, after travelling the
country, Bennetts, senior, settled in
Fitzroy, and opened a .st ire at the then
bottom of Brunswick street, known at
the time as Newtown. He attended
Lowe’s school, at the corner of B uns-
wick and Moor streets, until the age
of 14 years, when he was apprenticed
to the printing trade, under Mr
M ‘Combie, then proprietor of the
“ Port Phillip Gazette” (now the
“ Argus”) when it had the small circu-
lation of 200 copies a day. He aced
the part of a “devil” for six months,
when, through illness, he was com-
pelled to leave He next applied him-
self to his father’s business, which, in
1b57, through the latter’s death, be-
came W. and A. Bennetts. He took
the management of the business, which
had increased rapidly; and, in March,
1860, he was married to Miss Hannah
Hamby, in the Brunswick street
Methodist Church, the occasion being
marked by a very pleasant and numer-
ously attended breakfast at the house
of his brother-in-law, Mr Guise Kins-
man. It is due to his untiring energy
that Fitzroy now possesses one of the
leading hardware and produce estab-
lishments in Victoria. Mr Bennetts
first took an active part in public
affairs in 1872, when he became a
member and correspondent of the
[School Board, with which he has been
connected ever since. In 1874, he in-
spired the expiring School of Design
with new life and, by his energy and
pi'"severance, made it one of the best
in the colonies He has been hon.
secretary for this school for 14 years.
In 1875, he was made a Justice of the
WILLIAM RAWLING BENNETTS, J.P.
(Councillor Fitzroy.)
Peace, and has always been character-
ised as a just and humane dispenser of
the law. Mr Bennetts, by this time,
had been city auditor for about 15
years, and held that position when the
Hayward defalcations were discovered.
The next event of municipal im-
portance in which he took part was in
; 82, when the tram question was first
mooted. It was intended to have a
similar system to that of Sydney —
namely, steam motor —and, in Fitzroy,
an Anti-Tram Association was formed,
Mr Bennetts being appointed chair-
man. The objec’ of this association
was to agitate for a better system, and
its persbtent opposition gave the Go-
vernment time to consider which would
be best, resul ing in the present tram
svstem being introduced. He had pre-
viously been asked to stand for the
council, but declined in favor of Cr
Phipps. Next year, h >wever, in re-
sponse to another request, he contested
the seat, when he was elected by a ma-
jority of 167 Next election, he was
elected to the position of Mayor, which
he tilled with great dignity and
liberality ; aid, at last election, he was
returned third on the poll with a vote
of 2122. This happens to fall in with
his intentions, as he purposed not
standing; but the allegations msde
with reference to the financial diffi-
culties of the city caused him, to com ■
out. Since his fir.-t election, he has
taken an active part in the business of
the Benevolent committee He wis
chairman of the VV hittlesea and Ivtz-
roy Railway League, also a mover in
obtaining St. George’s Bridge ; and, by
continuously agitating, led to the tram-
way being run along St George’s road,
the Surveyor General opposing it, as
the cable might interfere with he pipe
track. Or Bennets was also presi-
dent of the Fitzroy Philharmonic So-
cle y, which failed to the extent of
£SO, and which amount was paid by


himself. He is vice-president of the
Fitzroy Football Club, and is connected
with several other local clubs and so-
cieties. Doctrinally, Or Bennetts is a
Wesleyan Methodist, which church
has had his active service for upwards
of 30 years, and he has also filled the
position of Circuit Steward. His
charitable nature is well known in
Fitzroy and Oollingwood, as he is chair-
man of the Home of Hope, and has an
open purse always for the deserving
The son of Michael Cody, a farmer,
William was born in Frankfort,
in the Parish of Ballyhoy, King’s
County, Ireland, on the 9th of Feb-
ruary, 1846. He attended the local
National School until he reached the
a'_>e of 16 years, when, after a deal of
persuasion, he was prevailed upon
to set out on a journey to Australia,
whence his parents and family had
previously migrated. He landed at
Williamstown in 1862, and in the
same year took a situation in the store
of John Harney, then one of the lead-
ing wine and spirit merchants in Mel-
bourne. At this he remained about
six months, leaving to take a better
appointment under Surveyor-General
Ligar ; but, being, enticed by the hope
of a fortune easily acquired at the New
Zealand diggings, he left in 1863 for
Dunedin, where he took a job at pick
and shovel work, toiling nine hours a
day for Bs. He was one of the ring-
leaders in the historical George-street
strike, being at that time a laborer on
the Octagon. His next venture
was to “ hump his bluey” to
Toka Marira, where he was appointed
foreman on a survey under Surveyor
Coe. When he had been working
three months, the hostilities broke out
between the natives in Wikata. On hear-
ing that several white children had been
slaughtered, William Cody volunteered
to go to the front, and on applying for
a position in the mount )d force he was
equipped in three day and sent to the
WILLIAM CODY
(Councillor, Oollingvvood).
poor, who may be seen flocking regu-
larly at his office in Brunswick street.
Cr Bennetts is president of the Excel-
sior and treasurer of the Planet Build-
ing Societies. In social circles, Cr
Bennetts’ pleasant smile is well known,
and his philanthropy will remain long
in the minds of all who have met him.
For all that is good and reliable his
name has, indeed, become a household
word in Fitzroy.
scene of action. Whilst the troops
were encamped at Pataranga, they
were suddenly and secretly ordered,
under the charge of Colonel Gamble,
to make a night march to Te Arannite,
a distance of about 25 miles, with a
view of surprising the natives there, it
being one of their greatest strongholds,
as well as their provision depot. Mr
Cody was, however, left behind with a
few others in order to attack the
natives there assembled at daylight the
next morning. Great was their sur-
prise, therefore, on making the attack
to find the place almost deserted, only
some women and children being left.
It was evident that the natives had
become aware of the march towards Te
Arranite, and had consequently gone
to the assistance of those who were
defending that place. When this fact
became known, Mr Cody was ordered
to proceed at once to Colonel Gamble
with despatches containing this inform-
ation, as it was of vital importance
that the commander should know,
prior to his making the attack, that he
had to contend with fully six thousand
more natives than he was aware of.
Mr Cody was on this occasion accom-
panied by another volunteer and a
friendly native whom they had picked
up with. This turned out to be a most
exciting ride, as they had not ridden
far when they came accr. s large uum-
b(n of the rebels, who fired on them
f com both sides; but, putting their
spurs to their horses, they managed


fortunately to reach their destination
safely, just as the attack was about to
begin. The Maoris were in this in-
stance completely routed; not, how-
ever, without great loss of life on the
part of the volunteers. Mr Cody, who
of course, took part in the fray, had
his horse shot from under him. After
staying here a short time, the troops
proceeded to Alexander, where they
established Stockades. Not Ions: after-
wards, word was received from Orockon
that the men there were unable to
repel the attacks of the natives owing
to their small numbers. A forced
night march was then decided upon,
Mr Cody being orderly in advance.
When he arrived at Orockon, he had to
crawl on hands and knees into the
camp in order to avoid being shot by
the sentries, who had fired at him,
owing to his not being able to give the
password. Next day an attack was
made on the rebels, and whilst taking
. . 7 o
part in this battle Councillor Cody was
shot in the left temple. He. was laid
up for two months, being unable to
speak for the first twenty-eight days.
When he recovered he was sent to the
Gate Pa (fortification), where he took
part in the fracas in which the 43rd
suffered great loss through what was
said to be bad generalship. The girths
under Mr Cody, in this engagement,
were cut with a bullet, and he was
pitched from his horse. The natives
were eventually driven back, and the
subject of this biography recalled to
Auck’an 1, where he received a pension
of one shilling a day in recognition
of his bravery. He, some time after-
wards, was presented with a silver
medal in the Town Hall, Melbourne.
Mr Cody was next engaged to take
charge of a horse bazaar at Auckland ;
but, becoming home sick, he a short
time afterwards left for Melbourne.
Arriving, however, at Wellington, he
heard of the discovery of gold at
Hokitika, thereupon abandoned his
intention of returning to Melbourne,
and engaged a berth in one of the
vessels about to set sail for thediggings.
30 O
A very heavy storm having arisen, the
ship was washed ashore, and he had,
with all others on board, a narrow
escape from a watery grave. After
having spent about six months on the
diggings, he returned to Melbourne in
the latter part of the year 1865. He
then got an appointment in the tempo-
rary lunatic asylum, Royal Park, as
warder; then he held a similar posi-
tion in the Melbourne Goal, from
whence he was transferred to the Col-
lingwood Stockade, -subsequently re-
moving to the Ararat Asylum, whei'e
he remained through that crucial time
for Government officials, the “ Dead
Lock.” When political peace was
restored, Mr Cody returned to the Ool-
lingwood Stockade, and on the aboli-
tion of that institution he went to
Kew asylum, where he remained until
January, 1878, when he resigned with
compensation, as he wished to take
over the Abbotsford Hotel, where he
still reigns. Mr Cody first became
popular in connection with local ath-
letic sports. He took great interest in
the Collingwood Hurling Club, of which
he was a prominent member, and he
was also a famous player in the Kew
Asylum cricket club. He opened a
Lodge of the 1.0.0. F. Friendly Society
in Abbotsford, and has always been a
leading member of St. Patrick’s Society,
from which he received a gold medal
for obtaining over fifty members. He
has also been District President, and
is now treasurer. On the 9th Febru-
ary, 1869, Mr Cody was married to
Miss Susannah M. Marris, at St. John’s
Church, Heidelberg. He was first
asked to contest the vacancy in the
local council caused by the death of the
then ex-Mayor, William Gray, but de-
clined to oppose ex-councillor Henry
Walker. However, on the redistribu-
of the wards of the city in 1887, ho
nominated for the Abbotsford Ward,
and was returned at the head of the
poll, having a clear vote of more than
half the number on the roll, although
there were five candidates in the field.
Or. Cody has been vice-president of the
Licensed Victuallers’ Association, and
a successful athlete. He is a Roman
Catholic, genial and good-natured, but
somewhat pugnacious in debate.


The ex-May or of Fitzroy, son of
William Grigg, was born in Adelaide,
South Australia, on the 25 th of August,
1845. In that city he attended Mar-
tin’s school until he reached his eighth
year, when his father came to Mel-
bourne and proceeded to the Castle-
maine district, subsequently opening a
store at Maldon when the Tarrangower
diggings started. During his stay here,
Master Grigg was sent to Mr Robert
Bell’s school, Westley Hill, Forest
Creek, until he reached his thirteenth
year, when he was sent to complete
his education at the Presbyterian Col-
lege, West Maitland, New South
Wales. He remained at this establish-
ment until he was fifteen years old,
when he returned to Castlemaine, and
was apprenticed to mechanical engin-
eering at Vivian’s well-known foundry.
He duly served his apprenticeship, but
circumstances and an opinion given by
Professor Hamilton, phrenologist, in-
duced him to give up his craft and
adopt commercial pursuits. He there-
fore undertook the management of his
father’s business, at which he remained
for a year ; but Maldon not being pro-
gressive enough for his aspirations, he
left for Melbourne and graduated as a
grocer behind the counter of Messrs
Scott and Kennedy, Gertrude street,
Fitzroy, with whom he remained for
about six years, the while saving all he
could with a view to starting in busi-
ness for himself. Whilst with this
formerly well-known firm, he was mar-
ried to Miss K. Abbott, daughter of
Mr John Abbott, of the colony of
Queensland, the ceremony being per-
formed by the Rev. John Egglestone.
In the following year he purchased the
business of Mr E. Puller, corner of
Gertrude and Gore streets. He carried
on this business in conjunction with a
land and estate agency until 1885; but
finding the latter business increasb g
h e was compelled to give up t! e
JAMES GRI G G, J. P.
(Councillor, Fitzroy.)
grocery branch, and opened a head
office in Collins street. Subsequently,
through still increasing business, he
felt compelled to resign the manage-
ment of the Fitzroy Permanent Build-
ing Society, of which be had been one
of the originators. In 1886, Council-
lor Grigg entered into partnership with
Mr Kimberley, and under their joint
names the firm has attained a promin-
ent position in the commercial world.
Having always taken an active part
in municipal and Parliamentary elec-
tions, Mr Grigg was in 1882 urged by
an influential deputation, headed by
Mr Ronald Robb, to contest a seat in
the council, which he did, and was
elected. During his first three years
of municipal life, Cr Grigg took an
active part in connection with the
tramway question and strongly advo-
cated the erection of St. George’s read
bridge. He was alo the first to sug-
gest the £60,000 loan, and strongly
supported the subsequent loan. Cr
Grigg was re-elected, the main object
of contention at that election being the
Dowie street processions, Cr Grigg’s
opinion of which seems to have been
greatly misconceived when he opposed
the prohibitory bye-law. In March,
1886, he was gazetted a Justice of the
Peace, which position he has since
filled satisfactorily. In 1887, he at-
tained the high position of Mayor
of the City, and at last election, not-
withstanding the heavy opposition, he
was returned to the Council. During
the year 18. v 6, he strongly opposed the
acceptance of design for the Town
Hall and municipal offices, the work
not having been left to public compe-
tition. In the year of his Mayoralty,
the opening of the railway to Heidel-
berg was ceh brated by Cr Grigg in
a generous manner. He gave a
banquet, which was attended by nu-
merous noted les, and entertained some
4000 schf ol childre i at a picnic to


Heidelberg Heights. Politically, Cr
Grigg is a Liberal Protectionist, and
has on several occasions been waited
on by deputations from Mcrnington,
Carlton and Fitzroy, with a view to
contest a seat in the Assembly, and he
has been for five years a member of
the Edinburgh Gardens management
Doctrinally, he is an adherent of the
Wesleyan Methodist denomination.
Since entering public life, Cr Grigg
has ,been very successful in business,
particularly in land speculation, and
This gentleman is the son of Joseph
Kimberley, and was born at his father’s
residence, Landale House, Egbarton,
Birmingham, on the 15th August,
1847. His father was connected with
a wholesale chemical establishment in
that place, where the subject of our
sketch attended the Rev George
Dawson’s school until he reached the
age of twelve years, when he was
sent to King Edward’s School until
the age of sixteen years. Having an
inclination for trade, he was ap-
prenticed to the jewellery business at
the house of James Wood, Great
Hampton street, Birmingham, where
lie served until he was 21. An uncle
having returned from Australia, of-
fered him the management of his
business in Sydney, and in 1868 Mr
Kimberly sailed from England in the
“ Paramatta,” landing in Sydney. He
immediately took up the management
of his uncle’s business, but unfortu-
nately the death of that gentleman
necessitated his sevei ing his connection
with the firm. His next venture was
to co-operate with a gentleman who
was to find the experience, whilst Mr
Kimberley was to find the money,
Shortly afterwards, he could not find
the money, but had gained the ex-
JOSEPH EDWIN COOKE KIMBERLEY.
(Councillor, Collingwood).
has received many flattering testi-
monials from property owners, for
whom he has conducted sales. The
firm of which he is a partner has
successfully founded Ocean Grove, one
of the most popular sea-side resorts in
the colony, being situated at Barwon
Heads, on the Southern Ocean, and
bounded by Lake Connewarre on the
west and Queenscliffe on the east.
Socially, Cr Grigg is free and jovial,
somewhat witty and clever at repartee.
perience, and he came to Melbourne.
On the opening of the North-Eastern
Railway he started a trade in general
country produce ; also undertaking to
supply posts and rails to railway con-
tractors. Overwork brought on illness,
and he was compelled to give up the
business, which had become very ex-
tensive. He next began a retail boot
and shoe shop in Smith street, opening
up six more in close succession in the
various suburbs around Melbourne,
and lie soon acquired an extensive
wholesale business. In 1886 he entered
into partnership with Mr Grigg, auc-
tioneer and estate agent, and is still
a member of that flourishing city firm.
Mr Kimberley was remarkably success-
ful in land speculations prior to going
entirely into that line, making a great
hit with the block at corner of Smith
and Johnston streets. Mr Kimberley’s
first appearance in municipal life
occurred in 1887, when he opposed
Cr Lang and was defeated, lie had
previously been asked to oppose the
late Andrew Wright, but refused to
do so, and when he again opposed Mr
Lang in 1888, he beat that gentleman.
Mr Kimberley has on all occasions
taken an active interest in local affairs
and is a staunch Protectionist. He is


in favor of Federation if it can be
effected on grounds compatible with
Protection. From the age of 16 he
has always been a great exponent of
the benefits of temperance, and since
arriving in Australia he has done much
to further that cause. He opened the
first temperance lodge here, and has
initiated nine members of parliament
at two sittings. IT e has also held the
high position of Right Worthy Grand
Chief of Australian Temperance
Lodges under the American Consti-
tution, and in 1873 undertook a
crusade all over the colonies, effecting
James Holden was born near Larne,
in the parish of Kilwaughter, in the
County of Antrim, Ireland, on the
15th of May, 1837. His father—
also named J ames—was considered
in the village to be one of the handiest
men with the saw, chisel, turning
lathe, or at the anvil, in the county.
The subject of our sketch went to the
national school, of which Mr John
Boyd was the old and much-respected
dominie. When he attained the age
of 14, the family came to Australia,
arriving on the Ist of April, 1852
Immediately on landing, J ames Holden,
junior, applied himself to water carting
—an occupation in those days con-
sidered very lucrative, as he could earn
from £3 to £5 per day. At this ho
continued for about three years, after
which he threw in his lot with a party
of diggers at Jim Crow (now Dayles-
ford), going from there to Maryborough,
thence to Adelaide lead, Alma and
Dunolly, finishing up at Back Creek
(now Talbot), and then returning to
Maryborough, where he remained till
1860, completing a five-years’ experi-
ence of the gold fields. On his return
to Melbourne, he went to work for a
JAMES HOLDEN, J.P.
(Councillor, Fitzroy.)
much good during his travels, and
opening no less than 40 lodges. On
the 9th of November, 1872, he was
united in matrimony to Miss Annie
Hall, of Wallan Wallan, the ceremony
being performed by the Rev James
Bickford. Doctrinally, he is a Protest-
ant, and socially a quiet, yet good-
humoured man, ever ready to assist a
worthy charity and encourage a good
object. Although of a retiring dispo-
sition, he is a man of energy and
perseverance, and has hitherto been
regarded as a good citizen.
contractor and builder named Macin-
tosh, applying himself to the carpenter-
ing trade at a salary of £2 2s per
week when journeymen’s wages were
£4 10s. After two years at this, he
went to New Zealand, proceeding at
once to the Tuepika diggings; but
having no extraordinary good fortune,
returned to Dunedin, after three weeks’
experience, and started work for Mr
John Reynolds, (now of Johnston
street, Fitzroy) who was then carrying
out some very large contracts. After
working for ten days, Mr Holden was
made foreman. When this job was
completed he had another try on the
diggings, and, after five months, re-
turned to his old employer at Dunston
and assisted at of the
Dunston Victoria Theatre. He came
back to Melbourne the Christmas eve
of 1863, and early in thVncxt year
worked for Messrs Oldfield'and Bind-
ley, timber merchants, leaving them
to enter a seven-years’ partnership
with one O Connell, to carry on box-
making and contracting. The partner-
ship, however, ] seven
months. Early in 1865, Mr Holden
started contracting on his own account,


his first “job ” being at Emerald Hill.
After this, his business increased
rapidly, most of his contracts being for
Mr James Munro, on building society
terms. The same year he was married
to Miss Mary Ann Meates, daughter
of Mr T. Lowe Meates, of London.
Unfortunately, through over-work and
anxiety, his health failed, and he has
never regained the robustness of his
early colonial days. Among Mr
Holden’s principal contracts in Fitzroy
may be mentioned the Bank of
Victoria, the present establishments
of Messrs W. and A, Bennetts and
Son, of Mr G. C. Olauscen, in
Brunswick and Gertrude streets, ■ Mr
Elolden was first requested to represent
fitzroy in the council in 1878, when
10 was waited on by a
vhich Messrs Neil Whyte, Mahoney,
lonly, and the late William Gray,
vere the principals, with a list of 714
lames appended to the requisition. He
ionsentcd, and although having only
:en days to prepare for the fight, he
vas elected with a vote of 1350.
During the first three years, Or Hol-
den seriously applied himself to the
business of the council, and at the next
election he was returned, then elected
Mayor by the unanimous vote of his
brother councillors. His liberality
during his mayoral year is well known,
one incident being the “Beating of
the Boundaries,” an event which created
no small sensation. He also called a
meeting of Justices of the Peace, to
consider the question of larrikinism,
when 102 gentlemen attended, and
thcresolutions then passed, urging the
introduction of the lash, were carried
by Mr Holden through all their pre-
liminary stages. They were favorably
entertained by Sir Bryan O’Loughlin,
Svho did not carry out his promises.
Afterwards, Mr James Service treated
|he matter with like inconsistency,
jmd the views of the metropolitan ma-
gistrates on this grave question have
been ever since systematically disre-
garded by Ministers. An event, show-
ing the generous nature of Mr Holden,
that occurred during his mayoralty,
was his energetic action for the relief
of a starving Italian family, frr which
he has received numerous letters of
gratitude from persons in high office in
Italy In 1883, Or Holden was ap-
pointed a permanent Justice of the
Peace, and has since discharged that
duty faithfully and conscientiously. He
has been for ten years connected with
the School Board acting on three
occasions as chairman. He was re-
elected to the council in 1884, 1887
and 1888. During his long steward-
ship, Or Holden has taken part in
nearly every important event which
has occurred in the city, particularly
the obtaining of £lOOO from the Com-
missioner of Public Works for the
making of Reilly-street drain; he
vigorously opposed the first introduc-
tion of tramways, and took a part in
the action of the Whittlesea Railway
League. On two occasions has Or
Holden put up for a seat in the As-
sembly. On the first occasion, he was
defeated through what has been alleged
to be malignant statements uttered
with reference to his religion ; and the
second defeat was attributed to some-
what similar causes. Politically, Cr
Holden is a Liberal Protectionist and
an advocate of Federation, also greatly
opposed to the present system of pay-
ment of members. Doctrinally, he is
a Presbyterian. He is on the direc-
torate of the Universal and Excelsior
Building Societies, and has held for
years the responsible position in con-
nection with the Australian Alliance
Insurance of adjuster and estimater of
damages in cases of fire. He has
always taken an active part in social
amusements and the development of
local clubs, being an officer of several
existing clubs. He has been twice
president of the North Fitzroy Bowl-
ing Club, from the members of which
he was the recipient of a very hand-
some and valuable gold watch He is
also superintendent of the Fire Brigade.
Socially, Cr Holden used to be one of
the leading spirits of the city ; but the
death of his only daughter, last year,
has restrained him from taking such a
prominent part in local social life as
previously. Still, he is as generous


and warm-hearted as ever, and few interests of Fitzroy than Jamet
public men have worked harder for the Holden.
WILLIAM PITT.
(Councillor, Collingwood.)
William Pitt, the son of William
Pitt, artist, of Sunderland, England,
was born in Lonsdale street, Mel-
bourne, on the 4th June, 1855, and
commenced his education at Howfyl
School, St, Kilda, where he remained
until he reached the age of fourteen,
when he was sent to Mr .Neighbour’s,
Carlton College, to finish his scholastic
studies. In 1875 he was apprenticed
to Mr George Brown, architect, when
he applied himself industriously to his
professional duties. He commenced
practice in 1879 with such success that
he won first prize for the competition
design for the Melbourne Coffee Palace,
Bourke street, beating the nineteen
competitors. This gave his business a
good start; and, making fast headway,
he soon gained a prominent name
amongst the architects of the colony.
In 1880, he secured first prize for his
design of the Palls Bridge, now in
course of erection. As a designer of
theatres, Mr Pitt had by this time
won a permanent prominence, leaving
as examples of his skill and inventive
genius the New Princess Theatre,
Melbourne, and Opera - house, Sydney.
His services were also retained to
assist in the erection of the Federal
Coffee Palace, Collins street. Amongst
other works designed by Mr Pitt is
Mr Coppin’s Improved Lodging-houses
and dwellings. In 1887, he was ap-
pointed as an expert by the Victorian
Legislative Council to give evidence as
to the best means of ventilating the
Council Chamber, also to report on
the condition of the Melbourne hos-
pital. In addition to the places
named, other structures which, when
completed, will be magnificent and
imposing edifices, bearing the name of
M r Pitt as designer and architect, may
mentioned, such as the new Town
Hall, St. Kilda, for which he won first
prize ; the Melbourne Stock Exchange
new buildings, corner of Collins and
Queen streets; and Pitt’s Buildings,
Collins street west, which latter pro-
perty is held on leasehold by himtelf.
At present he is engaged in plans for
a new banking chamber and offices,
Collins street west, which is to be
nine storeys in height, of Gothic de- j
sign, with the facade finished in free-
stone In 1887, Mr Pitt was elected
Vice-President of the Victorian Insti-
tute of Architects. He is extremely
fond of sport, being for some time
leading coursing judge of Victoria and
New South Wales, holding that posi-
tion and judging the Waterloo Cup,
together with the Bathurst and Aus-
tralian for three years. Coursing is
Mr Pitt’s favourite amusement; but, ■
owing to increase of business, he was
compelled to reluctantly give it up ;
and, in doing so, was presented with
numerous trophies and testimonials by
most of the different clubs. He has
also been very successful with the gun,
having won several very handsome
trophies in New South Wales and
Victoria at pigeon shooting. Having
taken a steady interest in local self-
government for many years, Mr Pitt
on settling in Collingwood, determined
to enter into local politics, and with-
out much exertion, but with good in-
tentions, he secured a seat at the last
election by a majority of 107 votes.
Since then he has been applying him-


self diligently to the routine of the
council business, and evolving the
municipal mysteries. Politically, Cr
Pitt is a staunch Protectionist, being
in favor of Federation as in accordance
with that policy. His religious views
are in accord with those of the Church
of England, and he is known to be of
a very charitable nature. It will be
remembered, when the Kimberley gold
diggings were discovered, Mr Pitt was
amongst the foremost to form an
Mr Thomas Hood, now one of the
earliest of the Collingwood councillors,
was bcrn at Lundin Mill, Fifeshire,
Scot 1 and, on the 12th of July, 1826,
his father at that time being a maltster
and brewer. At the ago of two years,
he was left with his grandparents until
the age of 14 years. In the meantime,
he _ attended the local school, after
which he was apprenticed to the
baking and gardening business with
a Mr Traill, of Kilconquhar, where he
served for six years, and two years
as foreman. Having learnt the
trade, he sailed for Australia, land-
ing on the Ist of March, 1849. He at
once commenced work at baking, but,
finding the hours not suited to his
habits, left to try his luck in the coun-
try, obtaining a job as gardener with
a Mr James Malcolm, at Kilnoque.
After working for six months, he re-
turned to Melbourne, and again applied
himself to his trade, working, amongst
others, for Messrs Main and Hunter
and the late Mr Archibald Aitken,
who was a baker father of Thos. Aitken,
brewer. He again sought the country,
this time trying his luck at gold-dig-
at the Forest Creek rash, and
making oftentimes an average of 3 oz. a
day. In 1852$ he returned to Mel-
bourne, and in November of the same
THOMAS HOOD
(Councillor, Collingwood.)
exploration party, which he fully
equipped at his own cost, to open up
the country south of Cambridge Gulf,
he at that time owing no less than two
millions acres of country in those
parts. Socially, his disposition is well
known by all with whom he has come
in contact, and his experience and suc-
cess in business will be a help to him
in the official career for which his
fellow-citizens have chosen him.
year opened about the first baker’s shop
in Collingwood, buildinga place for him ]
self at the corner of Wellington and
Stanley streets. His success here was
pretty marked, and on the 4th of
March, 1854, he was married to Miss
Mary Stewart, niece of the late Mr
Stewart, of Omoa, Lanarkshire, Scot-
land. The ceremony was performed at
the old Scotch Manse, Collins street,
by the Rev. R. Gunn. Mr Hood car-
ried on his business until 1860, and
during his stay in the shop was mainly
instrumental in the formation of St.
George’s Presbyterian Church, the
first meeting in connection with it
having been held in his house, and
the first minister, Rev. R. Boao-,
occasionally residing with him until
other accommodation could be found
for that gentleman. About this
time, as will be remembered, the
property of Captain Hutton, in
Stanley street, was looked upon as a re-
fuse heap, and the puddles of rain
water which had collected began to
stagnate and diffuse disease about the
neighbourhood. Two of Mr Hood’s
children were, amongst others, taken
off with diptheria. This caused him
to give up business and seek a new
home in the country; but failing to
find anything to suit him he returned


to Melbourne, and the rate collecting
y of Collingwood being in a very de-
moralised state at the time, he was
solicited by a majority of the council to
undertake to bring in the rates on com-
mission, and succeeded so well that he
was permanently appointed to the posi-
tion, which he held for some 27 years,
also holding the position of valuator
for most of the time. He only re-
signed these appointments in 1887. It
may be mentioned that, for some years
prior, he had been a “ sleeping partner”
in the malt-house managed by his
brother in North Melbourne, which he
left to join Mr Job Stanton, maltster,
Islington street, and the latter busi-
ness he has carried on upon his own
account since Mr Stanton’s decease.
Mr Hood was one of the most active
of j the citizens of Collingwood when
proclaimed a municipality, and, in
1856, was one of the assessors at the
first election, in conjunction with John
Pascoe Fawkner and Richard Samuel
Norton. In the following year he
stood for the council, and was elected
at the head of the poll, sitting with
Crs Samuel Ramsden, Thomas Turner
a’ Beckett, John Wood, Alexander
Carnie, Thomas Greenwood and John
Owen—nearly all of whom are now de-
ceased. During the first three years of
his civic life, Or Hood assisted in
carrying out works which greatly bene-
fitted Collingwood. He opposed the
opening of Wellington street when
first introduced, because hehadproperty
in that thoroughfare, and the council
could not show where the money was
to be obtained ; but he voted for cut-
ting down Smith st. so as to form aproper
gradient from Grace Darling Hotel to
Johnston street, and would have
given his hearty co-operation to Cr
Ramsden’s scheme for the cutting
down to the Yarra of Johnston
street and Victoria street had he not
feared involving the new municipality
in too heavy a debt. A peculiar
incident of those days, told by Or
Hood, will possess interest to land-
owners of the present day; he was
offered the land at the corner of Smith
and Stanley streets for £7 7s per foot,
but thinking, from appearances, that
Wellington street would become the
central business place of Collingwood,
he preferred to buy land at the corner
of Stanley and Wellington streets for
£5 5s per foot, As Mr Hood gave up
his baking business, and intended
again leaving the district, he did not
seek re-election after the expiry of his
first three years; but, as we have
said, he was induced to become 'he
collector of rates, -which position he
held until he finally retired to devote
himself to commercial affairs; but he
again 'entered the council as a repre-
sentative of the ratepayers of Barkly, the
most important ward in Collingwood in
1887. During the lifetime that Cr
Hood has been identified with Colling-
wood, he has taken a great interest in
building societies, being one of the ac-
tive starters of the first Collingwood
societies. He has been for 34 years a
Freemason and Oddfellow. He is an
old athlete, too, and even now indulges
in a merry game of bowls, for at the
age of 56 he was presented by the Fitz-
roy Bowling Club with the champion-
ship gold medal. Cr Hood is some-
what conservative in politics, being in
favor of Freetrade in the federated
colonies, and. Protection outside.
Doctrinally, he is a Presbyterian, and
was for some years an office-bearer in
St. George’s Church. He has all alon£
been, and still is, a moving spirit in all
local social movements, and no man ir
Collingwood has been so long and con
tinuously before the public. Pro
bably, in carrying out the du-ies oi
rate collector and valuator, he made
some enemies ; but his return to the
council each time he sought election
although opposed at the last by sucl
an able and powerful opponent
shows that he has the confidence of the
bulk of the public. At the poll foi
the election of the committee of the
first Collingwood Building Society, h<
had nearly double the number of votei
of any other candidate.


Robert Hal], the son of Horsfall
Hall, of Keighley, near Bradford,
Yorkshire, was born at that place on
the 15th of August, 1837, with a
geneological line of 300 years. Until
the age of 12 years he went to a school
of which a Mrs, Feildhouse was prin-
cipal, and, it being the old-time cus-
tom for boys to begin life early, he
went at once to his brother’s business,
i.e., wooltop making, combing, and
stapling ; but, not feeling himself spe-
cially adapted for that trade, he left
it and apprenticed himself to the
foinery and cabinet-making, He
finished his “time” in 1858, and being
particularly good at circular staircase
making, went to Lancashire, where he
followed the trade and kept in steady
employ until January, 1863, when-
being induced by report to visit Aus-
tralia, he sailed in the “ Great Bri-
tain,” and landed in Melbourne in
April of the same year,' with his
brother. On their arrival they im-
mediately set out for the Taradale
diggings, but, having no luck, pushed
on to Blue Mountains, thence to Se-
bastian ; but, bad luck following them,
they decided on returning to Mel-
bourne, where Mr. Hall took to his
trade, erecting in the course of his
connection with different contractors
staircases in some of the largest build-
ings in Melbourne. Whilst wprking
at this trade Mr. Hall occupied his
evenings in constructing the machine
which afterwards made his fortune,
and which he patented as the “ Hall
Wool-scouring Machine” in 1868. This
pretty well absorbed all his earnings,
and kept him in reduced circumstances
a long while. His friends and ac-
quaintances kept insisting on his giv-
ing up the idea, but, his nature being
persistent, he built a small place and
worked his machine, “ washing ” on
small commission for several squatters,
until Mr. William Taylor, of Keilor,
ROBERT HALL.
(Councillor, Collingwood).
took an interest in the invention, and
an arrangement was entered into be-
tween the parties, resulting in the first
“ Hall wool-scourer” being erected at
the Euston Station, on the Murray,
New South Wales, the result being
profitable. Mr. Taylor took an inte-
rest in the machines, which he strongly
recommended, and some twenty have
been sold, most of which Mr. Hall has
erected himself and superintended the
working, the results in all cases being
highly satisfactory. Whilst promoting
the interests of his invention, Mr.
Hall also conducted the woolwashing
establishment known as “ Hall’s,”
Reilly-street, which turned out a
larger yearly percentage than any
similar place in Victoria, and changed
hands last year at a big price, Mr.
Hall retiring from business. Mr. Hall
has spent much time and thought in
connection with artesian well-boring in
the dry parts of the back country of
New South Wales, and is associated
with a company of gentlemen who will
eventually reclaim much arid country
through this means. He has likewise
taken an active part in the agitation for
north-eastern suburban railway exten-
sion and a direct route to Melbourne.
In August, 1870, he was married to Miss
E. A. Heathcote, daughter of Roland
Heathcote, of Oastleton, Derbyshire.
Having an increased property interest
in Collingwood, and being hitherto for
business reasons precluded from taking
an active part in local politics, Mr.
Hall decided, on the solicitation of his
many friends, to strain a point and
enter the municipal arena in 1887,
when he was elected a member of the
Collingwood Council, and since that
time has paid, as all new .councillors
should do, earnest attention to the
duties of the office. Mr. Hall’s rea-
sons for not contesting a seat earlier
than he did were owing to his being
compelled in every case to erect and


superintend the working of each of
the machines he sold, besides having a
large interest in two squatting runs
in New South Wales, moreover holding
large tracts of land within a twenty-
eight miles radius of Melbourne.
At the last election he was re-elected
without having held a meeting, and
with very little exertion. Mr. Hall’s
political creed is “ fair trade” to out-
side governments and “ free trade” in
the colonies, being strongly opposed to
the increase of duties. He is a mem-
ber of the Church of England, and
Charles Tnomas Crispe, the son of
Dr. Thomas Crispe, of Watts House,
Leeds, Kent, was born at Tungkillo,
South Australia, on the 10th of Jan-
uary, 1852. With his parents, he
came to Victoria in 1855, settling in
Geelong, where the subject of our
sketch went to the Wesleyan Private
School, of which a Mr. Lennon was
headmaster. At the age of 16 he
was sent to Flinders Private School,
where he remained until he was nearly
18 years, when, by his own desire and
inclination, he was apprenticed to
Messrs. Hunter and Holy oak, builders
and contractors, which firm at that
time had a leading position in the
Western district trade. He served
his “ time,” four years, and remained
as a journeyman eighteen months
more; but, thinking that he would
have better luck in Melbourne, he
came here in 1874, and worked for
different contractors for some time,
when he joined Mr. Swinbourne in
purchasing the Melbourne Saw Mills,
Bourke-street. Success attended this
venture for some time, when a gentle-
man offered to insure the business for
.£7OOO. This offer vYaS declined, and
shortly afterwards a fire broke out on
CHARLES THOMAS CRISP E.
(Councillor, Fitzroy.)
has been identified with many deserv-
ing charities. His name is on the
official lists of several of the local
football and cricket clubs, and he has
been greatly instrumental in bringing
about the Collingwood Bowliug Club.
Socially, little need be said of Mr. 11.
Hall, as he is known in local circles as
a genial, good-tempered man; and,
though coming late in life to do ser-
vice for his fellow-citizens, his con-
scientious principles will be a good
guarantee of the conduct of munici-
pal affairs.
the premises and destroyed stock to
the value of about £7OOO, whilst the
insurance covered only £650, thus
leaving a. loss of some £6OOO odd.
This happened in 1879, and, after
struggling for a time, Mr. Crispe
opened a yard in the same business on
his own account" in 1882, on Heidel-
berg Road, which establishment his
energy and perseverance has brought
up to its present successful and pro-
minent position. Duxdng his endea-
vour to establish the business—which,
it may be mentioned, was uphill work
—Mr Crispe exhibited a persistency
which has characterised his business
and public life since. Mr. Crispe
first made his appearance in political
life during the Berry Administration,
being at that time President of the
Fitzroy branch of the Reform League,
of which Messrs. Fuller, Crowson, and
Johnston were prominent workers,
and which, through the combined and
determined efforts of the principal
members, effected an important re-
form in Victorian politics. Another
conspicuous agitation in which Mr
Crispe took an active part was when
the deplorably bad state of the streets
of North Fitzroy caused such indig-


nation amongst the ratepayers that
the city was placarded convening a
meeting in the Temperance Hall.
In 1882 Mr Crispe contested a seat in
the School Board of Advice, and de-
ft ated Mr Alexander Grant, solicitor,
and in 1885 he was re-elected ; but,
owing to increase of business and his
council election last year, he was re-
luctantly compelled to give up his con-
nßction with the School Board. Or
Crispe is also a member of the School
o ! Design committee, having been one
of the promoters of the North Fitzroy
school. In 1887, after numberless
solicitations, he contested a seat in the
council, and was elected, and the fol-
lowing year, on the formation of
wards, was returned for Clifton ward.
The Fitzroy and Whittlesea Railway
League also had Cr Orispe’s able sup-
This gentleman is the son of Ludwig
Kreitmayer, of Munich, Bavaria, and
was born in the city named on the 31st
of December, 1830. After finishing
his elementary education, his natural
bent induced him to study anatomy
under Professor Zeiller, anatomical
modeller to the School of Anatomy,
Munich, with whom he developed an
unusually keen appreciation of the
science; and, being greatly encouraged,
he pursued his studies with unremit-
ting zeal, until he perfected his know-
ledge not only of the human but of the
equine frame. Being now but twenty-
two years of age, yet thoroughly ac-
quainted with anatomical, physioiogical
and microscopical modelling, Mr Kreit-
mayer went to Glasgow as a medical
student, where he remained until ac-
knowledged to be a specialist of a high
class by Mr Allan Thompson of Glas-
gow, subsequently being appreciated by
such celebrated authorities as Professor
MAXIMILIAN LUDWIG KREITMAYER.
(Councillor, Collingwood).
port. On the 30th of August, 1873,
he was married, at Geelong, to Miss
Osborne. Politically, Cr Crispe is a
liberal Protectionist, and strongly in
favor of Federation, being a member
of the Australian Natives’ Association,
although not an active one at present.
He is a member of the Wesleyan
Church, and has always taken an un-
remitting interest in charitable mat-
ters. Socially, Or Crisp is a tho-
roughly domesticated man, and in
business very straightforward, always
to the point, and of undoubted in-
tegrity. Amongst local amusements
Cr Crispe’s name has been identified
for a number of years, being one of
the first movers in the establishment of
the North Fitzroy Bowling Club, of
which he is at the present an active
member.
Marshall and Mr Thorpy, of the Lon-
don University, and Mr Paget of St.
Bartholomew’s Hospital, where Mr
Kreitmayer was engaged, on the re-
commendation of Professor Marshall, to
furnish anatomical models in wax for
Marlborough House, for demonstration
at the School of |Design there These
models, which were admitted to be a
“ most beautiful collection,” were used
for the purpose of illustrating lectures
on anatomy to the art students, Mr
Kreitmayer’s next “ big” undertaking
was making, to the order of Mr Ed-
ward Dycer, of Dublin, a set of equine
models, which were afterwards pre-
sented to the Dublin College of Sur-
geons. At this time Mr Kreitmayer
was offered the position of modeller and
demonstrator to the art students at
Marlborough House, but being fascin-
ated by the stories of unbounded wealth
and certain fortunes obtainable in
Australia, m he sailed for our golden


land, arriving at Melbourne in 1856,
proceeding first to the Gympie and
then to the Palmer diggings. Meeting
with varied success for three years, he
returned to Melbourne and opened at
Hockins’ Room, Elizabeth street, a
museum of anatomical models, after-
wards touring the provinces with the
same collection, and, finishing a suc-
cessful trip, he sold the entire collection
to the Chilian Government, In 1863,
in conjunction with Dr L. L. Smith,
Mr Kreitmayer opened the Polytechnic
Hall, which subsequently became
devoted to dancing, the drama,
rinking and freethoughtism, but is now
to be replaced by a grand edifice for
the Christian Young Men’s Association.
This last venture of Mr Kreitmayer’s
was not a success, and he subsequently
entered into partnership with Mr
Sohier, proprietor of the Waxwork’s
Exhibitions in Melbourne, running the
two most successful exhibitions in Aus-
tralia together for some six years, when
Mr Sohier’s retirement from business,
in 1869, left Mr Kreitmayer sole pro-
prietor of the Waxworks, which he
has kept in a premier position by his
never-tiring energy and fertile origin-
ality Amongst well-known works
which bear Mr Kreitmayer’s stamp
may be mentioned the life-like figures
of an Australian aborigine group,
shown in the Victorian Court at the
recent Paris Exhibition (for which he
received a gold medal), and those ex-
hibited with the Australian hut and
scenery in the South Australian Court
at the Melbourne International Ex-
hibition of 1880-81. At the Indian
and Colonial Exhibition he exhibited
a group of aborigines hunting for food,
also a native camp, both of which were
greatly admired—the Royal Family
being amongst the frequent visitors to
this special exhibit. At. Amsterdam,
he received a gold medal fpr a similar
group, and at the present Exhibition
his skill in modelling has been called
largely into requisition, as will be seen
by visitors to the Armament Court, for
which he has been commissioned to
model a number of horses for the pu ■>
pose of showing a mounted and fully-
equipped battalion.
Mr Kreitmayer, though for many
years a resident in Collingwood, did
not interest himself conspicuously with
local politics, excepting at important
times, when his influence and word
would stay what he thought to be a
wrong. His first essay at council life
was made in 1887, when a requisition
was presented to him headed by Messrs
Cope, Snowden and Woolcock, At
that election he was seated, and since
then his business experience has been
of some use to the more hasty and
loquacious of his colleagues ; and, when
be becomes thoroughly initiated into
the mysteries of council life, his ex-
perience will be of good service to the
people whom he represents. Politically,
Cr Kreitmeyer is a Liberal Protection-
ist, and greatly in favor of Federation.
Doctrinally, he is a Roman Catholic.
On the 29th of March, 1884, he was
married to his present wife, whose
maiden name was Harriet Mary Watts,
daughter to Mr James Watts, of Ry-
lands, Somersetshire, England. Being
a man with a natural inclination to
study and research, Mr Kreitmayer,
although really of a convivial spirit,
is thought by many who know him not
to be somewhat reticent, although
amongst his intimate associates his
large-heartedness and pleasant ways
have made him a respected and con-
scientious friend.


This gentlemen (the son of Hans
Clauscen) was born on his father’s
farm at Schleswig-Holstein, Denmark,
on the 11th December, 1840. He
went to the National School, the sys-
tem of which is said to be much the
same as our own. When he arrived
at the age of 13 years, George set out
for Antwerp, where he shipped as a
midshipman in a brig named the
“Triton,” in which he first sailed to
Buenos Ayres, during the brutal civil
war then raging. Shipping a cargo
of hides the brig returned to Antwerp,
and continued trading between there
and along the Chilian coast for about
two years, when she was engaged to
carry wheat and provisions to the
British troops in the Crimea. Whilst
upon the first commissioned trip, she was
dismasted and nigh lost on her way to
Gibraltar, and during the succeeding
(few weeks a deal of tribulation was
experienced on board. Amongst other
voyages made during these turbulent
times by Mr Clauscen, he called at
rnd did trade in the following ports :—■
Constantinople), Seri, Falmouth, Malta;
md then went into the West Indies’
:rade, from Hamburg to St. Thomas,
round the Horn, thence to San Fran-
nsco, where he deserted his ship and
signed on with an American coaster, at
;hat time not knowing a word of the
English language. After doing a
voyage or two to the Sandwich Is-
lands and Vancouver’s Island, he left
die ship and went into a sawmill in
Victoria, the capital of Vancouvers.
He also worked at the saw in Port
Gamble, Port Hatlow, and _ several
ither places in those parts, doing alto-
gether about twelve months in that
;rade. Having had an eventful and
varied life in the American country,
he sailed for Melbourne in a timber
hip, and landed in 1859, just as the
Snowy River diggings were raging;
>ut, spending all his loose cash, he
GEORGE CHRISTIAN CLAUSCEN.
(Councillor, Fitzroy.)
was compelled to remain at ship life,
and took a berth in a coasting vessel
trading between Hobart and Launces-
ton. After doing two trips, he left sea
life for good, and went up to Sunbury,
where he took a job as barman in the
Sir John Franklin Hotel, when beer
was being sold at a shilling a pint.
After two years of this he came back
to Melbourne, and took to the wire-
working trade—having gained a gene-
ral knowledge of the business when
at sea. Working at this trade for
about two years, he was married to
Miss Louisa Thornton Gibson, of
Swan street, Richmond, on the 7th of
December, 1864. He next opened a
shop on his own account at Docker’s
Hill, Richmond, in wire-working and
fireworks—the latter being made such a
speciality by him that he was em-
ployed to manufacture many of the
illuminations for the Duke of Edin-
burgh celebration, and subsequently
employed to make the wire cages for
the Duke’s gorillas and other curious
“cattle” on board the “Galatea.”
About this time Mr. Clauscen bought
a 20-acre farm at Mulgrave, but it
turned out a failure, and he lost money
by it. He next opened a place in
Brunswick-street, between Gertrude
and Victoria-streets, where the car-
riage factory now stands, and another
at the corner of the Parade, where the
tram sheds are; but his health failed
him, and his business failed also, as he
was entirely unfit to take an interest
in it. He went up country to try and
recruit his health, and came back and
started his business in a small way in
a cottage in Princes-street, Colling-
wood, where he was assisted by his
son, George, until he took the back
part of Hodson’s ironmogery pre-
mises in Smith-street (now Macgib-
bon’s), where he worked and struggled
until he saw a chance of improving
his position by taking the vacated


premises of Milne Bros., at the corner
of Gertrude and Brunswick-streets, in
which place he continued the iron-
mongery, and introduced .the Wer-
theim sewing machines, he being the
first to supply these machines on
the time-payment system. This turned
out a success, the sewing machines
averaging sixty sales a month. He
was also the first to introduce the
system of canvassers. In 1880 he
amalgamated his business with that of
furniture, and shortly afterwards
pulled down the old premises and built
the present corner, in the meantime
carrying on his business in the Cham-
pion premises opposite. Two years
afterwards he took the shop of Stan-
way, Bourke street east, on lease, and,
by wonderful energy and strict
attention to his business, has brought
the present firm up to a premier posi-
tion in the furnishing throughout line.
In 1882 he took Mr Foley into part-
nership for two terms of three years
each, and, since the expiry of his term
this year, Mr. Clauscen has carried on
the business in his sole right, now
commanding larger trade in furniture
than any other house in the colony.
He has also been a fortunate specu-
lator in land, having been vendor of
that famous patch known as Preston
Heights, besides being a very exten-
sive owner of land in and around
Preston, Northcote, Ivanhoe, Heidel-
berg, and Clifton Hill. His first ap-
pearance in local politics dates from
1878, when, owing to the retirement
of Mr. Tucker from the council, he
was asked to stand, and was subse-
quently elected. He resigned at the
expiry of his first term, owing to in-
crease of business, but took the field
again in 1884, being again requested
by a large and influential requisition.
In 1886 he was elected to the mayoral
chair unanimously, and immediately
on his installation began the festivi-
ties which afterwards identified him-
self and Mrs. Clauscen with nearly
every social celebration that took
place during the Jubilee year in and
about Fitzroy. Amongst the many
social movements which kept the
mirthful fount in constant spray dur-
ing his term of office, may be men-
tioned, as most conspicuous, Mrs. Claus-
cen’s continental concerts and treat to
the school children, which will be still
fresh in their memory, as some 8000
Jubilee medals were struck oft and
distributed amongst them Another
well-remembered incident is the christ-
ening of the Jubilee Fountain, Edin-
burgh Gardens, and the laying of the
foundation-stones of the new Fitzroy
municipal buildings. He also repre-
sented Fitzroy in Sydney at Mayor
Young’s festivities to Yictorian civic
presidents. At the termination of his
year of mayoralty he received the
usual congratulations, but with un-
usual enthusiasm, as previous to
1885, during the Russian war scare,
when Australia was in a state of tre-
mulous excitement, he patriotically
convened a meeting of Germans with
the intention of forming a German
corps. The interest in this movement
was shown by the good feeling of his
countrymen resident in Melbourne,
and over five hundred attended the
first meeting, intended only for preli-
minary matters. The after result was
equally successful, and proved that,
“ when called upon, nearly every
foreigner ixx the colony would wil-
lingly naturalise himself and be iden-
tified with the colony’s trouble as they
had been with its success,” as Cr.
Clauscen nicely put it at the meeting.
For this laudable movement alone Or
Clauscen’s patriotic spirit became a
favorite theme amongst controversists
on the Federation question. Since his
connection with the council, Or Olaus-
cen’s name has been prominent in
many works, such as widening the
footpaths in Heidelberg road from
12 feet to 32 feet. He -was first to
moot the abolition of hollow cross-
ings in Smith-street, and took an
active part in floating the first
£60,000 loan, also in introducing the
wood block system and underground
drainage. He has expressed himself
strongly opposed to the Whittlesea
Railway being taken through Fitzroy,
on the ground that it would divide the


city and depreciate its commercial
value by having a railway line and
fence along Napier-street, as the city
is too narrow to be cut up for the pur-
pose of enhancing the value of pro-
perty at the extremes ; moreover,
a circuitous route would be of
equal and sufficient service to
both Collingwood and Fitzroy,
provided there was a central sta-
tion. Politically, Or Clauscen is a
Protectionist, though not a rabid one,
believing in local industries being en-
couraged by the Government to the
entire exclusion of imported articles
when the same may be made in the
colony. He is in favor of Federation.
His popularity in Horthcote is so great
that he has been asked several times
to stand for a seat in the local council,
as also to make a stand for Parliament,
being promised the entire support of
the district. For the forthcoming
election he has already been waited on,
but will not decide until the Electoral
Bill question has been thoroughly
settled. By religion, Or Clauscen is a
Lutheran, and socially his name and
that of Mrs Clauscen are too well-
known (as also their picturesque resi-
dence, “ Sunnyside”), to require eulo-
gium. They have been associated with
every club and assembly in the district,
including the Royal Yacht Club, the
Yarra Yarra Rowing Club, of which
Cr Clauscen is president, as he also is
of the Fitzroy Quadrille Assembly
and Clifton Hill Assembly; besides,
he has taken an active interest in the
Fitzroy Cricket and Football Clubs,
likewise being the first to introduce
bicycle sports in Fitzroy. Mrs Claus-
cen is a life-governor of the Convales-
cent Home for Women, the honor
being conferred upon her on account of
the active and meritorious service ren-
dered by that lady at the bazaar in aid
of that institution. Cr Clauscen has
been for 16 years a Grand Trustee of
the United Ancient Order of Druids,
having at all times taken a prominent
part in the society’s doings. It may
be mentioned, in conclusion, that the
grand building in course of erection at
the corner of Victoria and Rathdown
streets, which is to be called the
Queen’s Coffee Palace, is being fur-
nished throughout by Cr Clauscen, he
being at the same time one of the
directors of the company The build-
ing is to cost <£36,000, and when com-
pleted will be worked on an entirely
different system to that of any other in
the colony. He is also the originator
of the Northcote Tramway Company,
being now its most active director. The
many generous actions with which
his name is identified will long be
remembered, and, whilst he remains in
the service of the public, his actions, as
in the past will oe looked upon as
conscientious anduonorable.


This gentleman, the son of Edward
Brooks, of Chai’t Sutton, was born on
the 19th of September, 1826, at his
father’s residence in Kent. At an
early age he attended the local gram-
mar school, of which a Mr. Rugg was
head-master, where he remained until
the age of sixteen, "whenl seeing his
father’s success in the building trade, he
decided on learning it. This he did,
and worked at “ home” as a journey-
man until 1850, when, at the sug-
gestion of his people, he set sail for
Australia in the “ Duke of Portland,”
landing in Melbourne on the 23rd of
August of that year. Almost im-
mediately on landing, he set about his
trade, at first going into partnership
with Mr. Theobold (now living on
Clifton Hill), in the erection of the
Studley Arms Hotel, Wellington street,
for Major Hodgson; but before com-
pleting their contract, they were smit-
ten by the prevailing fever, caused by
the first gold discovery at Ballarat.
After spending six weeks in fruitless
search for the “yellow stuff,” Mr Brooks
returned to Melbourne with his partner
and resumed work on the hotel; but,
on finishing the job, they found a deal
of trouble in store for them in getting
the amount of money for which they
agreed to complete the building. A
compromise was effected, and Mr.
Brooks looked around for a place to
build a house for himself. Fitzroy
in those days being a splendid site
from whence to view the swamps of
Collingwood Flat, he decided on that
then most prominent position and
built his present residence in Core
street, the only land mark on the
property being an old stump of a tree,
by which he used to find his home.
His next business transaction was with
Mr. Brennan, subsequently Mayor of
Fitzroy, Avith whom he entered into
partnership and worked successfully
for years, during which time they took
EDWARD BROOKS, J.P.
(Councillor, Fitzroy.)
large contracts—amongst others being
Scott’s Hotel, the Royal Mail and the
old Melbourne Abattoirs. They also
contracted for and built a number of
the first residences in East Melbourne,
one in particular being for Mr. John
Clue. In 1858, on the 6th of May,
M r Brooks was married to Miss M. A.
Hague, daughter of the Rev. Joseph
Hague, of Rotterdam—an acquain-
tanceship originally contracted on the
voyage to the colonies. Another
daughter of this gentleman married the
Avell-knov n and talented artist, William
Strutt, some of Avhose finely-executed
portraits are still to be seen in the
Town Hall, Melbourne, also, St. Kilda
and Fitzroy town halls. He also
sketched the first Parliament of
Victoria, the original of which has
tecently been photographed for public
exhibition. Mr Brooks’ first marriage
Avas celebrated at KeAy by the Rev.
Robbie Fletcher, father of Dr, Fletcher,
of Adelaide ; but, shortly after giving
birth to a girl, Mrs Brooks died.
Business in the building trade still in-
creased through the energy and un-
tiring devotion of the partners to their
Avork, and Mr Brennan was elected to
the second council of Fitzroy. In 1865
Mr, Brooks made a trip to England,
having heard of his father’s ill-health,
and being desirous of seeing him again.
During this visit he married, on
November the Bth, his present Avife,
who was Miss H. Buss, fourth daugh-
ter of Samuel Buss, of Chart Sutton.
Mr. Brooks’ undoubted influence had
ahvays been devoted, in political
matters, to the Freetrade party, for
Avhom he fought ably at every oppor-
tunity ; but, as he sadly remarks,
“ generally on the losing side.” Al-
though frequently petitioned to stand
in the interests of his neighbours for a
seat in the council, he steadfastly
refused until 1880, when he a re-
quisition (headed by Messrs. Robb,


Blackett, Rusball, Falconer and Grigg)
induced him to personally enter the
arena. He was duly elected, and im-
mediately agitated for the completion of
the old Town Hall. This, notwith-
standing his continual harping on the
question, was put off from year to
year, until at last the final decision
was arrived at, when Mr. Brooks, at a
public meeting he was instrumental in
convening, denounced the extremely
large amount of money scheduled for
completing the designs adopted. His
resolution was lost, owing to the poor
attendance, it being a Fire Brigade
procession night for which the council
had convened the meeting. In 1883,
Mr Brooks was returned at the top of
the poll, and the following year elected
to the honorable position of Mayor,
which office he filled with becoming
dignity, although the year was not
one of great festivity. Amongst other
important questions in which Cr
Brooks took a successful and unceas-
ing interest, was the tramways. The
majority of the people were at first
under the impression that the streets of
Fitzroy were not vide enough for
trams, but Mr Brooks contended that
they were, and permission was given by
ihe council, whose decision was mainly
due to the persistent energy of Crs
Brooks, Evans, Showers and M‘Mahon.
Other works in which he interested
himself were the opening up of the
lower end of George and Gore streets
through Smith’s swamp—a work which
has greatly enhanced the value of
property at that end of those streets.
He also opposed the proposed tem-
porary construction of St. George’s
Bridge, contending that a permanent
bridge should be erected at once —com-
petitive designs were therefore called,
and those of Messrs White and Lucas
chosen. At the election of 1886, Or
Brooks lost his scat owing to his
neglecting to canvass, as he felt in-
clined for a little repose from active
public life. At the last election,
although he only started three weeks
before the time, he was returned at the
head of the poll for the East Ward.
In 1878 he was gazetted a Justice of
the Peace, and has well upheld the
honor and dignity of the Bench. Cr
Brooks’ political doctrine is Freetrade,
holding that the more Australia en-
courages outside trade the more outside
nations will trade with Australia. On
this account he is in favor of Feder
ation. In Church matters, Cr Brooks
has been identified ever since his
arrival in the colony with the Congre-
gational Church. He was closely con-
nected with the old Lonsdale street
Church until (with the Hon G. Har-
ker and a few others) he found the
money to purchase the site on which
the "Victoria Parade Congregational
Church now stands. This church was
erected in 1855, and Mr Brooks has
since been connected with it as an
active, earnest member of the manage-
ment. He was connected with the
first building society in Fitzroy, and
has been one of the prime movers and
most energetic directors of the Fitzroy
Permanent Building and Investment
Society. He has lately, with a small
company, gone into the development of
the Percydale Slate Company, of which
he is managing director. The quarries
(which are only 7 miles from Avoca)
are looked upon as the best in Aus-
tralia, the slate turned out being equal
in quality to any imported, so that,
when this quarry developes (it is only
10 months old) we may expect to do
without imported slate entirely. So-
cially, Or Brooks took an active per-
sonal part in sports, and was once a
locally famed cricketer, although he
does not indulge much in that line
now. His genial face and honest
character will, however, long be re-
membered after he (with our few
remaining pioneers) has been called to
join the Great Majority


JOHN
(Councillor,
Or. Gaiian is second son of John
Gahan. He was born June 18, 1851,
City of London, within sound of Bow
Bells, and left England with his
parents in 1853, landing in Victoria,
January 1, 1854, when they took up
their abode in Fitzroy. Here they
resided till 1856, and then migrated
eastward, settling in Abbotsford, where
the subject of our sketch has resided
almost continuously ever since. Im-
mediately upon taking up their abode
in Abbotsford, his parents placed him,
along with an elder brother, at Christ-
church School, then a denominational
institution, and, after four years spent
there, John, seeing that the family
resources were falling off, determined
to go out into the world and assist his
parents to bring up his brothers and
sisters in something like comfort.
Trouble had fallen on the family, his
elder brother being drowned in the
Yarra whilst bathing (this fact no
doubt influencing to a great extent Mr
Gahan’s consistent advocacy of Free
Baths); and business losses having
occurred, there followed years of de-
pression in trade, so that the father
and mother were glad of their son’s
assistance. In 1861 Mr Gahan was
employed at a tobacco factory in Mel-
bourne, owned by Gideon Heard, after-
wards, the well-known firm of Dudgeon
and Arnell. Here he remained 8
months, but developing a shrewd know-
ledge of the trade his employer wished
to bind him under an agreement. Not
being of robust constitution, he did
not consider the tobacco-making a
healthy enough occupation, and so he
joined Ids father in the building trade.
After working all day lie attended
night school in the evenings, and im-
proved his knowledge very consider-
ably. He assiduously devoted himself
to acquiring his trade, and in this he
was so far successful as to be able,
G A II A N.
Collingwood).
long before he was 21, to earn fron
£3 6s to <£3 12s a week, every pennj
of which went home to swell the
family exchequer. Always abstemious
he (with the aid of his much-lovec
mother), was enabled to somewhat re
trieve the fallen fortunes of the family
At the age of 22 he was married tc
Miss Anna Hannah, the only daughtei
of Captain A. Y. Marshall, who had
command of several fine vessels of tin
White Star line, and brought many ol
the pioneers of this colony to its shores
—a man who will long be remembered
for his sterling qualities and integrity
of character. The marriage being an
essentially happy one, John, still look
ing upward, ventured into business as
a contractor in September, 1875, his
first job being a small contract, under
Mr G. D. Langridge, who was the
carrying on practice as an architect.
From small jobs he got on to larger
ones, but, being a little too venture-
some, one large Government contract
almost swamped him. He, however,
recovered his position again, learning
from experience to persevere. About
this time he joined the Volunteers and
spent three years for the Queen. He
also took an active part in the
M. U. I. 0. 0. F., being for some years
a district auditor in the Collingwood
District. He went through all the
chairs of his lodge from secretary to
Grand Master. Still progressing on-
ward, he joined the Mystic Craft and
at the present time holds an important
office in a Masonic lodge. Doctrinally,
he is a member of the Church of Eng-
land and holds Bishop Moorhouse’s
licence as a lay reader. Politically, he
is a consistent Liberal, and has always
actively supported without fee or re-
ward the men of his choice, and only
on one occasion has his “ man ” been
defeated. He is a thorough teetotaller,
though not ajbigot, nor yet taking


part in temperance societies ; but he is
a strong Local Option supporter, and
takes a prominent part in Sunday
School work, having been secretary of
St “Phillip’s Sunday School for 16
years and treasurer for 10 years ;
also, church trustee and vestryman.
In 1885 he opened his present estab-
lishment in Simpson’s road, turning
out some splendid specimens of the
modeller’s art, likewise importing
shipments of American plaster and
cement. His latest movement has
been the inauguration of the Eastern
Permanent Building Society, which
promises to be very successful. Or
Gahan is of a thoroughly domestic
This gentleman (the son of one of the
Eight-hour Pioneers Kenneth McKen-
zie) was born at Adelaide, South Aus-
tralia, on the 15th of May, 1859. He
left his birthplace while yet a child,
and came to Melbourne, settling in
Eastern Hill. His father by trade is
a slater, but early abandoned that for
a more speculative line, mining, at
which he was pretty successful, until
the break of the old Bomballa, which
entirely ruined him. Young John first
attended St. Peter’s school, Eastern
Hill, of which Mr Strahan (now of
Oldham’s school, South Melbourne)
was head-master. At this school he
learnt as a pupil, and taught as a pupil
teacher until the age of 14, when he
found that teaching was impairing his
memory. He then left, and attended
the Scotch College, where he studied
for about 18 months, and matriculated
in 1875. He had acquired a great
fancy for law, but his father’s failure
in mining speculations necessitated his
leaving the collegiate and entering
into the more lucrative mercantile
JOHN M c K E N I E.
(Councillor, Fitzroy).
turn of mind, valuing the home cicrl©
far beyond the pleasures and ambitions
of public life. He was elected in
August, 1887, to fill the position of
councillor for Victoria Ward, being
returned at the head of the poll, after
a well-fought contest against the three
old members, all veterans in local
government; and since his election he
has shown himself capable of learning
and administering the local laws.
Although young in public life, Or
Gahan is enthusiastic in promoting the
fortunes of that part of the city which
has chosen him as its representative,
and in the future he is likely 1o fill
some more influential position.
business, which he did with the well-
known firm of Hayman and Co., where
he served from errand boy to shipping
clerk, and acquired a considerable
knowledge of commercial matters. The
death of Mr P. Hayman led to a
change in the affairs of the firm, and
he next obtained an appointment in
the Educational Department, where
in a period of eight yeai's he worked
from the position of supernumary to
one of the assistants in the classifica-
tion under the new Public Service Act,
the same time conducting a deal of
private and. confidential departmental
work. Whilst in the service he gained
the goodwill and friendship of all
whom he met, and when he left
secured the good wishes of superior and
subordinate fellow officer's, and was
presented with a testimonial of their
esteem. His reasoxx for leaving the
service was his dissatisfaction with the
classification under the new Pulbie
Service Act. His next venture was
going |into business with Mr Ballard,
his present partner, in the auctioneer-


ing and estate agency line. This was in
1884, and they first opened their office
at the corner of Swanston and Collins
streets, where success came with
energy, conscientious work and per-
severance. They shortly after opened
a branch on Heidelberg road, Clifton
Hill, through which they have secured
a deal of local business. Since being
in business, Mr McKenzie has been
very fortuate in speculations.
Although taking a passive part in
local politics, Mr McKenzie always
kept well acquainted with all leading
questions, so that, when asked to con-
test Clifton Ward at the last election,
he was tolerably conversant with the
burning topics; and this, with his
knowledge of platform speaking ac-
quired in debating societies, particu-
larly the North Carlton Presbyterian
Debating Society, took him in at the
head of the poll. To his power of
rhetoric and influence on the platform
Or McKenzie owes most of his success
in private and public life, as in the
former his oratory has made him a
favorite, and the latter secured him his
object in nearly every case. The prin-
cipal movement with which he was
identified in his early days was the
National Liberal League, of which he
was secretary His actions since his
election for the Clifton Ward have
shown that he purposes keeping the
good wishes of those who elected him.
Cr McKenzie has always been active in
the interests of the Australian Natives’
Association, a branch of which he
started in Clifton Hill, which now
numbers some 90 members. He is
secretary to the Albert Victor Masonic
Lodge, besides being an Orangeman.
He was one of the promoters of the
North cote and Preston Tramway
Company, also of the proposed line to
Heidelberg. He was for some time
secretary of the Australian Native
Association Building Society shortly
after it was opened, and which he con-
ducted successfully.
Doctrinally, Cr McKenzie is a Bap-
tist, having attended particularly the
Albert-street Chapel, but he lias
always been identified closely in a
charitable way with every denomin-
ation, being naturally an open-hearted
man. Socially, he is too well-known
to need comment on any particular
point beyond that he has a musical
bent, having in his time conducted
choirs. He is very fond of cricket,
being a member of the M.0.C., Fitzroy
Cricket and Football Clubs, and is con-
nected with several other local clubs in
various ways.
Politically, he is a staunch Liberal,
and greatly opposed to coalition, be-
lieving that a strong opposition makes
a Government work. He has been
asked to represent the district in Par-
liament, but has not decided whether
or not he will come out. The fact of
his having shown energy in furthering
his own interests is a sure sign that he
is capable of doing justice as a repre-
sentative man. His short career of
active municipal life has been so pro-
pitious that there is very little doubt
but that he will always be a good ser-
vant to the public.


The subject of this sketch is the son
of James Cowie, brewer and maltster,
of Falkirk, County Stirling, Scotland,
and was born on the 9th January,
1809, lie attended school under the
tuition of a Mr Shaw, and when he
reached the age of twenty, he set to work
to learn the mysteries of saddlery and
harness-making, which he accomplished
in the city of London, where he worked
at his trade, and ultimately as prin-
cipal saddler with Messrs Milroy and
Co., one of the largest firms in London.
He arrived at Port Phillip on the 13th
December, 1840, per ship “Midlothian,”
amongst his fellow-passengers being
that well-known energetic pioneer, Mr
W. Westgarth. After remaining a
few days in Melbourne, he sailed for
Tasmania on a visit, returning to Mel-
bourne in July, 1841, and at once pro-
ceeded to Corio (now Geelong), where
he took up his residence and com-
menced business as a saddler. He after-
wards amalgamated the business with
a general store, and eventually went
into the shipping line and mining—
having, as it may be rightly termed,
made a very “ good pile” in the early
days, by taking everything and any-
thing bytheforelock—and continued to
be successful in all his undertakings,
until in about 12 years he retired from
active business. In 1849 and ’5O, he
was one of the foremost in the forma-
tion and establishment of the Geelong
corporation, and was one of those
liberal colonists who went security for
£4OOO in forwarding the first muni-
cipal works. At the first election of
this council he was elected at the head
of the poll, with just double the votes
given to any other contestant. After
remaining in office for two years as an
alderman, Mr Cowie was elected Mayor
of Geelong on the 9th of November,
1852. His duties were no sinecure
during that time, as it was the work
of the first council to practically build
the city.
JAMES OOW I E, J.P.
On the increase of members in the
pre-constitutional Parliament of 1853,
Mr Cowie was elected to represent
Geelong in the old Nominee Council.
Nino days after his election, the “ Earl
of Charmont” was wrecked at the
Barwon Heads, and Mr Cowie, at his
own expense, sent eight bullock drays
to the survivors’ assistance, and
brought all the women and children,
together with the men, to Geelong.
Three days later, as a mark of the
esteem in which he was held, Mr Cowie
was entertained at Mac’s Hotel, the
largest number of gentlemen, tow n and
country members, yet seen at a dinner
in Geelong, being the result. On his
retirement from the mayoralty, he was
voted a piece of plate valued at £IOO,
“ as a trifling but sincere testimony of
the esteem in which his services were
held by the corporation,” which “trifling
testimony” he has not yet received,
owing to some unknow n reason. After
serving in the old Nominee Legislative
Council for about two years, he went
to England, and, on the return passage,
in the ship “ Schomburgh,” w’as, on
the 26th of December, 1855, wrecked
at Curdie’s Inlet, near Warrnambool.
Considerable hardship was experienced,
and several lives lost in trying to
rescue parts of the wreckage. After
about 48 hours’ severe privation they
were landed safely at Geelong. On
the introduction of responsible govern-
ment, Mr Cowie was elected to repre-
sent the South Western Province in
the second Legislative Council on the
7th October, 1856 ; and, in 1859, he
was elected, with 29 others (amongst
them being “ Money” Miller, W. J. F.
Clarke, J. P, Fawhner and James
Henty) to represent the Legislative
Assembly, the in first Victorian Parlia-
ment after the separation from N.S. W.
Amongst the many things of note in
Mr Cowie’s time-honored career may
be mentioned with conspicuous pro-
minence the fact that, during the Bal-


2apat gold rush, ho made money, and
with it set the first steam engine going
at his own expense ; he also took a
prominent part in establishing the first
fleet of steamers in the Geelong trade.
He was Mayor of Geelong when
Governor Latrobe laid the foundation
stone of the station, constituting the
Geelong terminus of the Melbourne-
Geelong line, at the same time being
one of the directors of the line. He
was, in 1850, a member of the Anti-
Conviot Commitee, a league which did
much for the early safety and purifica-
tion of Victoria. In 1852, he was
appointed a Justice of the Peace for
Geelong, and, in 1875, was gazetted a
J.P. for the Central Bailiwick.
Another commendable act, and one
for which he may claim originality, was
when lie had a store at Elephant
Bridge, now Darlington, in 1848-53.
There was a great scarcity of specie
before the “ gold fever” outbreak, and
Mr Cowie issued paper currency valued
at five shillings and ten shillings, all
of which were considered, when coming
from him, of equal value to any bank
note, and were greatly used in the
Western district. The only time such
currency was Hver issued before was
in 1761, in Edinburgh, Scotland, when
a firm of bankers, named Mansfield
and Co., determined “ to remedy the
existing scarcity of specie but this
firm did not have the success which Mr
Cowie enjoyed, as they were compelled
by the local city corporation to recall
their notes before many weeks. This
fact Mr Cowie was not aware when he
issued his currency. Since his arrival
in Fitzroy, his “ weel kent” and genial
face has been regularly seen at
the local court, where his matured
knowledge of “ petty law,” and his
extreme cautiousness, have secured him
the name of an upright and humane
man. Mr Cowie, on the decease of
“ Money” Miller, became the sole sur-
vivar af the 30 early fathers who con-
stituted the first Legislative Council,
and although within a few days of four-
score years, he still says “he intends to
live as long as he can,” which deter-
mination seems to have come through
being asked frequently how long he
expects to live by curious scribblers.
lix politics Mr Cowie is a mild protec-
tionist, and believes in colonial Feder-
ation. Although xxot of late years
interesting himself in public matters,
he has watched with no small anxiety
the growing national characteristics of
the people of the countxy. Doctxdnally,
he is a Presbyterian, and a very strict
one; and, socially, he finds more
warmth of good nature in the repose
of his own home, with the merry,
laughing faces of his grandchildren,
than in the levees and banquets of the
outside world. He has held every
publiepositionwhich has beeninthe gift
of the people, and boasts of never
having solicited any man’s vote. 'When
the time ball drops on this man’s life,
he will be rexxxembered as one wdiose
strict honesty and humane nature
should prove a beacon for the guidance
of those who wish to succeed in life
and leave a worthy name behind.


Tins old citizen of Fitzroy is the
son of John Showers, a*scion of a
family whose name was well known
in connection with the Indian military
service He was born at Bangalore,
East Indies, on the 6th of March,
1829, and, when about three years of
age, went to England with his parents,
who settled in Taunton, Somersetshire,
where he was educated in both private
and national schools, finishing in the
Wesleyan College at the age of six-
teen. He was next apprenticed to the
building trade, and at the age of 21
years went to London, where he worked
at his craft for two years. At this
time the colonies were much talked
about as a field for making fortunes,
so he left England and landed in Mel-
bourne in' 1852. His first job was
that of fitting up the old Bank of
Victoria in Swanston street, after
which lie started in business-with Mr
Robins, under the style of Robins and
Showers, in Condell street, Fitzroy ,• as
builders and contractors. The firm
was very successful, winding up at the
end of three years. Mr Showers’ next
venture was in the farming line. He
leased some 700 acres of land at
Korthcote, the present site of the new
Northcote Brick Company. He worked
this agricultural and dairying business
for about 7 years, and in 1862 built
the West of England Hotel at the
corner of Kerr and Fitzroy streets,
which house he conducted with untir-
ing zeal and respectability until 1877,
when his well-earned rest came, and
he retired from business. During his
occupancy, the “ West of England ”
was the best known hostelrie in Fitz-
roy, and the first public dinners of any
consequence in Fitzroy used to be held
there. There were but two local
cricket clubs then, and the Prince of
Wales made the West of England its
head-quarters, while the haunt of the
Commercials was Cooley’s Collingwood
Hotel, in Webb street. Mr Showers’
ROBERT SHOWERS, J.P.
was chairman of the Suburban Tramway
and Omnibus Company, which ran the
first ’buses through Fitzroy to the
United Kingdom Hotel, and afterwards
put cabs on the Ivanhoe line. Al-
ways having taken a lively interest in
local politics, he had a large body of
supporters when he contested a seat in
the council in 1875, at which election
he was returned with Mr John Hackett,
and at once took an active part in the
affairs of the council, soon making
himself conspicuous as a live councillor
In 1877, ho was elected to the honor-
able position of Mayor, which office he
filled with great credit, and, discarding
the then and now much sought for
banquets and junkettings, he spent his
time and money in endeavouring to
improve the minds of the youth and
develope the domestic harmony and
cleanliness of the elder people of city,
by introducing prize competitions in
which all of the specified age could
compete. Conspicuous amongst these
praiseworthy movements was an Essay
Competition for State School children,
which created no small amount of ex-
citement amongst the rising generation
at the time, and received the approval
of all the parents. Another well-re-
membered competition was that of the
best kept cottage garden, the intention
being to encourage more attention to
home comfort and to aid in beauti-
fying and improving the appearance of
the city. He also gave prizes for
competition among the children of the
principal Sunday Schools, the subject
being the “ Attributes of God.” In his
year of Mayoralty the Town of Fitzroy
was declared a city, so that he has the
honor of being the first Mayor of the
City of Fitzroy, the celebration of
which event was marked by a trip to
the Ballarat Juvenile Exhibition of
the school children of the newly-made
city. The duty of councillors in the
early days of the municipality was by
no means easy, and besides his devo-


tion to the routine work of the district,
Mr Showers was the first to moot the
question of a deputation to the Postal
Department relative to the erection of
the Post and Telegraph Office buildings
in Brunswick street. The present
system of pan cleansing was introduced
on his motion, and composition-pave-
ments, which have been such a boon to
the city,, owe their introduction in a
great measure to his energetic ad-
vocacy. He strove hard to secure a
uniform design and width of shop
verandahs, and on his motion the fal-
lacious system of paying rate collectors
by commission was done away with
and the present method adopted He
was a member of the Public Works
committee during the time he was
in the council. His motion calling
for the return of the expenditure
on the old town hall caused no
small sensation, and it may be
interesting to know that the origi-
nal cost was fixed at .£10,839. It
may be mentioned that Mr Showers
represented the City of Fitzroy on the
Tramway Trust from its inception
until he left the council. He is now a
trustee of the Licensed Victuallers’
Alms Houses in Michael street, and
was for many years connected
with the management of the
Licensed Victuallers’ Association. He
was mainly instrumental in bringing
about and effecting the improvements
to the North Pitzroy recreation
grounds, and we recollect him working
with pick, spade and wheelbarrow,
along with other enthusiasts, at early
dawn and dewy eve, improving the
ground. Mr Showers, on one occasion,
was presented with a very handsome
silver tea and coffee service, as a mark
of the esteem in which he was held by
his fellow citizens and friends. The
twelve years which he spent in the
council gave him so complete a know-
ledge of municipal affairs that his
opinion will always be regarded with
respect on such matters. For the
past eleven years he has held the
position of returning officer for the
Fitzroy School Board of Advice,
and is now a member of the Board of
Management of the Duke of Edin-
burgh Gardens. On the 19th of Sep-
tember, 1853, he was married to Miss
Ann Price, daughter of James Price,
Leominster, Herefordshire, at St.
Mark’s, by theßev. M r Clowes. This lady
(who was very much esteemed by
the old Fitzroy citizens) died in April,
71, and in the following year Mr
Showers was married to his present
wife, M' s Rowland, at the same
church, by the Rev. Mr Barlow.
In politics, Mr Showers is a strict
Protectionist, and is much in favor of
colmial federation. He was gazetted
a Justice of the Peace in 1879, and
has since then attended regularly to his
magisterial duties, always being a con-
scientious judge. He will ever be
remembered as one of the fathers of the
city, as a man whose ability and intel-
ligence were devoted to its best
interests whilst he remained in the
council’s service, and his retirement
from that body was greatly regretted.
He still, however, leads an active, use-
ful life, having plenty of time at his
disposal, and no public gathering is
complete without his presence. The
beautiful mansion erected by Mr
Showers, at St. George’s bridge, on the
bank of the Merri creek, is character-
istic of the man —who, although born
under an Indian sun, has all the in-
stincts of the “fine old English gentle
man.” It is named Bangalore, after
the place of his nativity, and is the
finest dwelling-house yet erected in
Fitzroy Its immediate surroundings
are excellent', the edifice itself can be
seen from a great distance, and the
internal arrangements reminds one of
a modern English baronial mansion on
a small scale, while the views from the
balconies are extended and pleasing.


'ms gentleman (the son of Thomas
falconer, a blacksmith) was born in
he west of Forfarshire, Scotland, on
he Bth of June, 1820, and attended
he parish school (of which a Mr Reade
ms dominie), at Glenisla, Perthshire,
ntil he- reached the age of 14 years,
laving an inclination towards agri-
ultural work, he went to labor on a
amn, where he remained for about
Tree years, when he was apprenticed
to a wheelwright, and in three years
[earned to make all kinds of farming
implements. His next adopted bu st-
ress was carpentery and joinery,
ind following the latter for about
line years in different parls of Glas-
gow and Edinburgh, etc., until 1849,
when he got married to Miss Agnew
xnd sailed for Australia, in the ship
Saxon,” captained by “ Hell-fire
Tack” M ‘L( an, landing the same year
u Melbourne. His first job was with
in old wheelwright named Huddle-
stone, who had a small forge at the
corner of Flinders lane and Elizabeth
street, and for whom Mr Falconer
made the first pair of hansom cab
wheels turned out in Victoria, anent
which he naively remarks :—“ And
I’ve not been paid for them yet.” He
workeci a month for this individual,
md then took small contracts in the
building business, which improved his
position considerably, until the gold
rush bioke out, when he joined the
fever-stricken army to Ballarat and
Mount Alexander. However, after
three months’ “ color’’-hunting, he re-
turned to Melbourne nothing better in
pocket, and continued his work in the
building and contracting line. He
first resic led at the corner of “ Heidel-
berg ioad’ and Charles street, erecting
las Napier-street home in 1850,
subsequently removing to his present
residence in George street, Fitzroy.
Amongst the numerous buildings which
Mr Falconer contracted for and
erected, the most important are. the
JOHN FALCONER, J
Smith street Post Office, the Fish
Market, Melbourne, the old police
barracks and Courthouse, Fitzroy, and
the Australian Wool Stores. He con-
tinued in this business until 1878,
when he retired to enjoy a well-earned
rest.
Mr Falconer always took an active
part in forwarding his peculiar views in
politics, and showed at times an un-
usual zeal in favor of Freetrade. His
popularity in the local political world
sent him in at the head of the poll at
his first election for the council, in
1860, when Fitzroy was only a
borough. He was elected chairman of
Public Works the first year, and
always displayed a progressive interest
in the state of the streets. It was on
his motion that the old box-crossings
were replaced by the level crossings,
which have since proved so successful.
The first level crossing in or about
Melbourne was laid at the corner of
Gertrude and Napier streets, to test
the practicability of Or Falconer’s idea.
Almost immediately after his election,
on account of his voting against the
reduction of the rate, an indignation
meeting was convened and a body of
the ratepayers asked him to resign.
He refused, and the result of the flood
in the lower portion of the then
borough, between Reilly and West-
garth streets, soon after necessitated
a change of opinion by the indig-
nant ratepayers. Mr. Falconer w r as
the first to suggest the construction
of Reilly street drain, to catch the
storm waters from the north. He
prevented, with his party of four, the
floating of a <£25,000 loan by some-
thing like stratagem when argu-
ment failed, because it had not been
advertised in the duly authorised legal
medium, “ The Collingwood Adver-
tiser,” and by so doing saved the city
some £15,000 interest, through the
delay necessitated in receiving legal
advice—the new Local Government


Bill being passed in the meantime He
was a strong advocate for the town
hall being built on the present site,
some of the councillors at the time of
floating the loan being desirous of
building it elsewhere, During his first
year of mayoralty, Cr Falconer, to-
gether with town clerk Gilchrist,
opened the Penny Savings Bank, and
he gave to each child depositing a
penny a shilling to add to his account.
This was in 1863, and the bank be-
came a great success, eventually trans-
ferring its accounts to the Government
Savings Bank when it was opened.
Mr Falconer was for two years Mayor,
and held fhe possession of a seat in the
council for 13 years, during which
time the council benefitted consider-
ably by his quick sightedness and busi-
ness tact. For the same number of
years he has been a Justice of the
Peace, which position he has always
held with a becoming dignity, showing
a keen knowledge of human nature.
In politics, John Falconer is an
invulnerable Freetrader, and believes
in the grand idea of Australian Feder-
ation. Doctrinally, he believes in the
“liberal thought” of the Australian
Church. Amongst the many societies
which owe their success in part to Mr
Falconer, was the Industrial Building
Society and the Langridge Terminat-
ing. Fie is a member of the Odd-
fellows’ Society, in which he has held
nearly every position, being for some
time corresponding secretary of the
Melbourne District. One interesting
episode in the council life of Mr
Falconer was the attempt to neutralize
his power in the chamber by the then
Cr James M‘Kean. At the close of
the 1863-4 session, Mr Falconer was
Mayor, and as the Act provides that
the Mayor shall be returning officer,
also that a candidate shall take no
part in the election, he was in a fix.
However, he was elected and declared
himself so at the poll. Shortly after
his re-election to Mayoralty, a pamph-
let from England showed that in one
of the English shires an election had
been held under similar circumstances,
and that a leading English judge (on
being appealed to) declared the election
null and void. Cr M'Kean refused to
be ruled by the Mayor, telling him
that he was no more than an non-
elected ratepayer, and he would take
steps to dethrone him. The Judge,
however, declared that there was no
case, Cr M‘Kean having been an ac-
cessory to the election, and therefore
not the proper person to lay the
charge. The resignation of Cr Harker
left an opening for Cr Falconer, who
resigned and was re-elected, by which
means he frustrated the macchinations
of the opposing party, and Fitzroy had
the benefit of a councillor who after-
wards did so much for the advance-
ment of the district and its inhabi-
tants. During his long municipal
career, Fitzroy never possessed a more
energetic and shrewd councillor, who
knew how to make the small revenue
of the time go a long way, Mr
Falconer is brusque in manner, but of
a very kindly disposition under the
crust He was one of the founders of
the Fitzroy Bowling Club, and has
long been its backbone, being the
permanent treasurer, and to his tact
may be attributed much of the success
of this favorite green.


This gentleman, the son of Thomas
Rowe, of Penzance, Cornwall, was
born at his father’s house on the 6th
of June, 1814. He attended the local
school presided over by Mr. Joseph
Sparslutt until ho reached the age of
12 years, at which early period he
went to work, and was apprenticed at
the old-established house known as
Messrs Panburthy’s, tinsmiths, plumb-
ers and braziers, where his father had
worked a number of years, and at
which place he learnt his trade and
worked as journeyman for no less a
period than 22 years. Hearing Aus-
tralia highly spoken of as a field for
enterprise, he sailed from England in
1848, in the ship “Duchess of Horth-
umberhnd,” and landed in Port Phillip
in January, 1849, with his wife and
children,—he having been married to
Miss Matilda Tonkin, August, 1836, at
Penzance. On landing, he immediately
started work for a Mr Bland, in Eliza-
beth street, where he continued until
the golc outbreak at Eaglehawk, Sand-
hurst, bo which he went, leaving his
wife anil family in charge of the small
shop at the corner of Palmer and Fitz-
roy streets. He was gone for only
three months, when a death in his
family necessitated his immediate re-
turn. He came to Melbourne and
settled lown to the management of his
shop as tinsmith and zinc-worker, after-
wards engaging in the house, land, and
estate agency, through residents leav
ing their property in his care whilst
they went to the goldfields. This busi
ness was more lucrative than that of
working as a journeyman tinsmith at a
salary cf £1 4s per week of 60 hours,
such bring the very liberal wages in
those days. He worked steadily, and
established a good connection in the
agency line until 1872, when he re-
tired, leaving the business to his son, in
whose lands it now is.
In tire very early days Mr Rowe v*as
identified with the Manchester Unity
THOMAS ROWE, J.P.
of Oddfellows, and was made president
in 1855 of the Widow and Ox’phans’
branch, for which he possesses one of
the earliest testimonials of the Order.
In 1863, he was a Past Grand Master;
and,'as a mark of the esteem and high
favor in which he was held by the
district lodges, he was presented in
1863 with a very handsome gold medal,
which has the peculiarity of being
Ballarat geld, dug by a member of the
lodge, the workmanship by a member
also. Mr Rowe had always been an
active supporter, at elections, of the
Freetrade party, and his name was
well known to the ratepayers when he
was induced to contest a seat on the
council of live being enlarged to seven
in 1866. The result of this contest
was that he was duly elected. After
serving in the council for some six
years, he was elected Mayor in 1871,
which office he filled with the customary
decorum. He subsequently retired,
and went to England. On returning,
he stood for the Council, and was again
elected in 1874. He served for another
six years, and once more retired.
Although never a man of blustering
habit, as some of the councillors of
those days were, Mr Rowe was always
a good and energetic representative,
carefully conserving the interests of the
various parts of the municipality. Mr
Rowe was an active advocate for the
present town-hall site, believing it to
be the most central; he was also much
interested in tire improvement of the
Reilly street drain, although that ditch
was not so disreputable in those days
as at present. He recalls with some
show of fervency the many heated de-
bates that took place in the council
whilst the irrepressible Mr James
M‘Kean was there. One interesting
item was the dethronement of that
gentleman by ex-Cr Rushall, when the
former, by a piece of sharp practice,
took the chair to elect his party’s
favorite to the mayoralty whilst the


other party were hobnobbing outside.
The election had taken place exactly
at 12 o’clock, the specified time, and
although ex-Or Rushall and party
threw ex-Or M‘Kean from the chair in
contempt of the election, a Supreme
Court mandamus declared it perfectly
legal. During the 12 years he served
the city; Mr Rowe was very attentive
to his duties. He is still an out-and-
out Freetrader, and was so from the
beginning. He is also much in favor
of federation. ' He has been a gazetted
a Justice of the Peace since 1882, and
has been an untiring attendant to his
magisterial duties. He was for six
years a member of the School Board of
Advice, and has always taken a lively
This gentleman, the son of William
Pilley, a scion of a family which traces
its lineage back 200 years in Chelten-
ham, Gloucestershire, England, was
born at Derby on the sth of August,
1845. He started his scholastic life
at the City of London school, of which
Dr Mortimer was principal. He was
very successful as a scholar, and at the
age of 15 years left school to be
apprenticed to the trade of which he is
now a master—that is, house decor-
ator. At the expiry of his term of
apprenticeship, he left England in the
ship “ Sussex,” and landed at Mel-
oourne in 1863. His object in coming
to the colony was to join his uncle,
George Pilley, who has since been
Mayor of St Kilda, and served for
many years in the council of that town.
However, instead of following his
trade, on his arrival he sought his
fortune amongst others at the Bendigo
diggings, but with no good result. He
next found himself at Wood’s Point,
Gippsland, following close on the first
WILLIAM P I L L E Y.
(Councillor, Fitzroy.)
interest in the promotion of education.
*Doctrinally he is a Unitarian, and is
unostentatiously charitable man. So-
cially, he finds but little pleasure in
conventional spheres, being more taken
up with home comforts. As one of
the earliest surviving settlers, his name
claims the respect of all who have been
interested in the welfare of the City of
Fitzroy, in which place he has resided
since 1849, and taken a big part in
developing what was once a swampy
bush into a prosperous and populous
city. The name of “ Tom ” Rowe is,
indeed, a household word, and few of
our/surviving pioneers have 'gone
through more public service.
survey party that blazed the Yarra
track. Portions of his time were
now spent in digging gold, felling
trees, and lumbering timber; subse-
quently, he again made his way to
Bendigo, where he worked for a Mr
Hawkins, of View Point, Sandhurst.
Whilst at that place he worked at his
trade on most of the big jobs in the
city, amongst which were the Arcade,
Pall Mall and the Hospital. He now
returned to Melbourne, and commenced
work for E. Brooks, of Little Collins
street, who was considered an extensive
tradesman. After working for about
twelve months for this firm, he went
to William Baldwin, of Russell street,
then acknowledged to be the most en-
terprising contractor in the house decor-
ating business in Victoria. Mr Pilley,
after working for a while with this
gentleman, took a contract for the
erection of some sheds at the back of
Spencer street railway station. This
contract was taken just before the
passing of the first protection tariff,


and, as a matter of course, his
prices being regulated by a Freetrade
Government, he lost money over his
first essay at contracting, through the
imposition of protective duties. This
could not be avoided, nor did he lose
his confidence in the good resulting
from the adoption of Protective prin-
ciples. On the completion of this job,
he went to work as foreman for Mr
Frederick Aplin, of Carlton, where he
remained for six years and saved
sufficient money to enable him to
commence business on his own account
at the corner of 'St. George’s road
amd Nicholson street, North- Fitzroy,
in 1875. He was about twmlve months
in this shop when he opened in Bruns-
wick street, where he remained for six
years until the failing health of Mrs
Pilley necessitated his going into
larger premises. These he found in his
present stand in Rae street, where he
has been ever since, and which busi-
ness, by his _ straightforwardness and
energy, has been brought by him to a
very successful issue. As a citizen,
Mr Pilley was very outspoken on
political matters—so much so, that he
made more enemies than friends by his
fervent advocacy of Protection. He
was one of the committee appointed
JAMES M.
From the second edition of “ Victorian
Men of the 'lime,” published in 1882,
we extract the subjoined brief outline
of Mr Tait’s life: “ Tait, James
M‘ Alpine, editor and proprietor of The
Observer, City and Suburban Advertiser,
came to the colony in 1852. He was
born in Glasgow. Scotland, in 1828.
His father (also a newspaper proprietor
ami editor), locally known at the time
as ‘John Tait, the Radical,’ took an
active part in the political agitations
antecedent to the passing of the Reform
Bill; he was chairman of the monster
(during a late general election), to
decide which candidates should he
given the protection vote. Five years
ago he was elected to the Board of
Advice, of which he was corres-
pondent for two years, and is now
the chairman. His election to the
council, at the last contest, will still
be fresh in the memory of the electors,
and the energetic upholding of his.inten-
tions since taking his ‘.seat, has been
noticed with interest. His plain
speaking has favorably commended him
to the notice of the ratepayers, and his
consistent endeavours to suppress ex-
penditure has secured for him the
confidence of the ratepayers of his
ward.
- In May, 1866, Mr Pilley was
married to Emma, the second daughter
of Mr Lamech Harlow, of Melbourne,
now consulting engineer to the Japan
Government. In political matters he
is a consistent supporter of liberal
Protectionism, and has a good word in
favor of federation. Ho is a member
of the Church of England and a man
fond of social pleasure. He is, too, of
decisive character—a man, who, as long
as he remains in the service of the
city, will do credit to his constituents
and the offices he may in time fill.
TAI T, J.P.
meeting in Glasgow green, and the
subsequent monster banquet, on the
occasion of Daniel O’Connell’s first
visit to Scotland ; and on his death,
in 1836, the mills and factories of
Glasgow stopped work in order lhat
the hands might attend <he public
funeral accorded his remains. The
late George Trcup, a well-known jour-
nalist (proprietor of the once popular
Tait’s Edinburgh Magazine), scon after
adopted the only son of John Tait, the
subject of this sketch, whom he took to
Belfast, Irelandj to train as a reporter


and compositor. Mr Troup subse-
quently established a daily newspaper
in Glasgow, at the stoppage of which,
in 1851, J. M. Tait sailed for Amei’ica,
where he found employment as a com-
positor on the New York Herald. In
1852, news of the gold discoveries in
Victoria caused passenger ships to be
laid on the berth for Australia, and
Mr Tait left in the Revenue, the second
vessel that”sailed from the American
seaboard for the new El Dorado Mr
Tait’s career in Victoria, for the first
two years, was somewhat adventurous,
full of moving incidents by flood and
field. For owr eighteen months, from
the moment he first put foot on Aus-
tralian soil, he never slept under any
roof s»> 2 of his own construction. He
placed his luggage in store, made up his
swag in the middle of Swanston street,
opposite the Hospital, and slept the
first night in the bush, soraewFere in
the vicinity of where is now located
the Hotham Town Hall, He tramped
to the Mount Alexander diggings,
where he worked with some success
until news of the Ovens rush came ;
and then, with a large party, set forth,
by a route none of them knew, in
search of the new goldfield, which was
reached, after many adventures, at the
close of 1852. Here Mr Tait was
tolerably successful for about a year,
occasionally visiting Melbourne for
stores, but camping outside the city in
a paddock. After many vicissitudes,
he came to Melbourne in 1854, got
employment as a compositor in the
Argus office, married,and settled down;
but he yearned for the life of the dig-
gings, and once more donned the
flannels and moleskins. A few months
of constant ill-luck, however, cured him
of this passion, and he returned to
Melbourne, where he at once obtained
employment as a compositor on the
Herald. He was the registered printer
of the first daily evening newspaper
published in Melbourne (the News),
and subsequently of a political weekly,
called the Dispatch ; but neither lived
many months. After 10 years’ con-
nection with the Herald, Mr Tait, in
conjunction with another, bought the
plant and copyright of the Collingwood
Observer from Mr Graham Berry, the
first number of which, under the new
proprietary, appeared on the Ist Janu-
ary, 1865. Owing however, to a par-
nership dispute, at the end of ten
months, Mr Tait sold out of the
Observer, and started the Collingwood
Advertiser; but, a few months after-
wards, he repurchased the copyright of
the Observer, and amalgamated both
papers, the Observer being now the
oldest of the suburban newspapers, and
the recognised organ of the Colling-
wood Democracy, enjoying a very large
circulation. Outside his sphere as a
journalist, Mr Tait has personally taken
part in most of the local movements
for the advancement of Fitzroy and
Collingwood during the past quarter of
a century. He originated and carried
on at his own cost an agitation which
eventuated in the municipal district of
Fitzroy being more than doubled in
size ; he induced the late John Pascoe
Fawkner to prepare his celebrated
lecture on the ‘ Early Days of Port
Philipand was the first to advocate
the holding of juvenile industrial ex-
hibitions in Australia.”
Since the publication of above, Mr
Tait was appointed a Justice of the
Peace for the Central Bailiwick, and
attends the Bench in Fitzroy and C<>l-
- with tolerable regularity. In
recognition of his services in securing
the annexation of the now important
district of North Fitzi’oy, a street in
the north was named after him by the
council. Politically, Mr Tait is a
Democrat of the Radical type, but has
no sympathy with demagogues or men
who make a trade of politics. In
religion he is a Presbyterian, and has
been almost continuously connected
with church management or thirty
years.


The subject of this sketch was born on
the 14th of February, 1812, near
Brighton, in Sussex, England, with a
lineage of over 200 years. He was
educated at the school of the Bev. Dr.
S. Lord, Tooting, Surrey, until he
arrived at the age of 14 years, when
he went to sea as a midshipman in the
■ “ Bridgewater,” and on his first voyage
was initiated into the rough life oiten
experienced upon the angry element,
as on their way to China the ship was
caught in a typhoon ofl Lin Zin and
nearly foundered. On the return pas-
sage, when in the Indian Ocean, they
were again dismantled, and had to put
back to Calcutta for repairs. Here
Mr Best changed ships and made the
passage home in the “ Moira.” On his
arrival in England, he went as a pupil
to his brother who was then Surgeon
to the Royal Family at Brighton. His
eldest brother died shortly this, and he
then, in conjunction with Dr John
Best, another brother, carried on the
business. Subsequently, Mr Best tra-
velled for several wholesale druggists in
London, and, after a varied experience,
sailed with Ins wife and six children
for Australia, in the “ Sibella,’ Captain
Coleman. On the passage he was
appointed acting medical officer, owing
to the eccenti’icities of the ship’s
doctor—Hungerford Sealy. He landed
at Adelaide in February, 1850, and
came on to Melbourne the following
month. He straightway commenced
business in a four-roomed cottage in
Moor street, Fitzroy, and carried on
for two years, when he went to I orest
creek diggings, and was there ap-
pointed to sign “ certificates for medi-
cal comforts,” without which the
thirsty digger was not legitimately
entitled to any liquor. After three
months of this life, he returned to
Melbourne, but it may be mentioned
that whilst at the diggings he declined
to pick up gold unless it appeared
before him in nuggets. He next opened
business in Brunswick street, near his
ALBAN THOMAS BEST, J.P.
present site, and has, with the assist-
ance of one of his sons, carried on a
very successful trade ever since.
Besides being a successful chemist
and druggist, Mr Best has made his
mark as a citizen. His earliest public
experience was gained as a member
of the Anti-Convict Committee in the
early days, tie always took a promi-
nent part in the elections, both parlia-
mentary and municipal, and iniBB7 was
himself elected to a seat in the Fitzroy
Council, where his- advocacy in peal
agitations made itself felt in more
than one instance, particularly when
opposing the location of the post-office
in Smith street, instead of Brunswick
street. Pie also took an active part in
conjunction with Mr Stewart, late
Mayor of Melbourne, in opposing the
opening up of the Gertrude street
passage of the Carlton Gardens through
to Queensberry street. In this agi-
tation he fought strenuously, and
ultimately frustrated the plans of
certain members of the Fitzroy Coun-
cil at the time, one of whom happened
to be in the Cabinet. In 1887, Mr.
Best was gazetted a Justice of the
Peace, and has since attended the local
court with unbroken regularity, dis
charging his duties in a humane and
just manner.
In political matters, Mr Best lias
always been a staunch supporter of
Protection principles, and strongly
opposed to stump oratory. Doctrinally,
he is a member of the Church of Eng-
land, and socially a man who in his
declining years prefers the comforts of
domesticity to the bustle of public
enjoyment ; yet, while he remains in
life his energies will be spent in doing-
some good to his fellow-men. Mr Best
is a strong supporter of the eight-
hours’ system, and regards with con-
siderable pleasure a trophy presented
to him by a late Mayor of Melbourne,
John Thomas Smith, for first prize in
a competitive examination for the best
essay on the eight-hours’subject in 1857.


Tins gentleman —the eldest son of Mr
William Raven, plumber and house
decorator, of Hampton, Middlesex,
England was born at his father’s
residence on the 24th January, 1833,
about three miles from the historic
Hampton Court. When still a child,
the family removed to Hally ford, on
the banks of the Thames, where Master
William attended the National School
until he reached the age of eight
years, at which time his parents
removed again—this time to Liver-
pool—where they remained for about
six months, and, on the recommen-
dation of the celebrated Dr Raffles,
Congregational minister—Mr Raven’s
father having been a teacher .in the
Sabbath School connected with the
Doctor’s church fourteen years before
—set out for Australia, in the ship
“Frankfield,” commanded by Captain
Mitchell, and landed at Liardet’s
Beach, now Port Melbourne, in June,
1841. Immediately on settling in the
then village of Melbourne, Master
Raven was sent to the Rev. Mr Water-
field’s Sunday school, which was then on
the present site of Dr Sevan’s Church,
and subsequently passed into the
management of the Rev. Alexander
Morrison. At this time his father was
in partnership with Mr NehemiahGuth-
ridge as house decorators and painters
and received the first shipment of
room decorating paper imported into
Victoria. After attending school till
he reached the age of ten years, William
George Raven went to work as a shop
boy at Bissell’s, ironmonger, of Collins
street west, and several other
leading places in the City of Mel-
bourne. He next went on trial to
Fulton’s foundry, and during the six
months spent there assisted at the
casting of the bell for the old Mel-
bourne Post Office. He was ultimately
apprenticed to Mr David Best, to
learn the trade of cabinetmaking and
joinery ; and on the completion of his
WILLIAM GEORGE RAVEN, J.P.
time was married on the 21st Oc-
tober, 1852, at the early age of 19
years, to his present wife, then Miss
Sarah Wedd, a native of Melbourn,
Cambridgeshire, England. After his
marriage he worked for and assisted
Mr Chuck in fitting up the canopy
and seats in the Legislative Council
chamber. After this he worked for
twelve months at the building trade,
for Mr Huxton, at St. Peter’s Church
and other edifices in the city. At
the outbreak of the Ballarat diggings,
Mr Raven went up to try his luck,
but returned after a spell, and subse-
quently tried the Mount Alexander
diggings, finally settling again in Mel-
in Melbourne, In 1856, he opened
an undertaker’s establishment in Stan-
ley street, Oollingwood, and in the
following year moved up to Smith
street, on a site adjacent to the
coffee palace, where he continued in
business for ten years, and then built
the premises he now occupies. Since
then he has opened branches in Bruns-
wick street and Heidelberg road, Clifton
Hill. Amongst the many large funerals
which Mr Raven furnished and con-
ducted, the most noticeable was that
of the late Hon. John Pascoe Fawkner,
the founder of Melbourne, when there
were upwards of ’228 carriages in the
procession, from the Governor’s car-
riage down to the street cab, making a
cortege of 2|- miles in length, being the
largest private funeral that had ever
taken place in Melbourne. The funerals
of other well-known and highly-re-
spected men were also conducted by Mr
Raven—for instance, the Rev. Joseph
Dare, D D.; Mr W. Beaver, M.LO.;
and Mr Frazer, M L.A. Another not-
able personage was also conveyed to his
last resting place by Mr Raven—the
much-respected Dr Corrigan, of Wes-
ley College,
In political matters Mr Raven is
a thorough Protectionist. He stood
twice for the Mfitzroy Council, but


owing to his support of the Post-
office being erected in Smith street he
was rejected. He has been a gazetted
Justice of the Peace for about 13
years, during which period he has
devoted a good deal of his time in
attending the Metropolitan, Fitzroy
and Collingwood courts. He has been
an active official of several friendly
societies—Past Provincial Grand Mas-
ter of Manchester Unity Order of Odd-
fellows, for which he holds an illumin-
ated testimonial, and Past Chief Ranger
of the Foresters. He is a Mason,
Life Governor of the Melbourne
Hospital, Benevolent Asylum, Blind,
and Deaf and Dumb Institutions, in
which Mrs Raven also holds honor-
ary positions. In charitable move-
ments Mr Raven’s name is well known,
particularly in connection with a series
of lectures given by the Rev. Dr Dare
and others, at one of which, in the
Melbourne Town Hall, 4000 persons
attended, and nearly £lOO was realised
Tins well-known citizen of Oolling-
wood is the son of Robert Walker,
farmer, of Dirtcar, near Wakefield, in
the West Riding of Yorkshire, Eng-
land. He was born there on the 24th
of December, 1821, and in that place
attended a private' school until he*was
10 years old ; after which, he went to
the famous Ackworth Quakers’ School
near Ponefract. One of the peculiar
rules of this school is not to allow
holidays of any kind but Saturday
afternoons. Before reaching the age
of 15 years, he went to his uncle at
Leeds, to learn the mysteries of tea,
coffee, and hop merchandise. He
subsequently opened in that business
himself, carrying on for three years,
and became an expert tea-taster, in
which line he travelled for a few years
representing a leading firm in London,
HENRY WALKER, VT.P.
towards the erection of the Young Men’s
Christian Association Hall in Russell
street. Mr Raven illustrated these
lectures by means of the most power-
ful lime light apparatus in the colony,
which he brought with him when he
returned from his visit to England in
1875, and it is still said to be the best
in the colonies. In religious matters
he is a Protestant, though not an
extremist in any way, such being (as
he maintains) against reason. So-
cially, he lives in a quiet, comfortable
way at his commodious residence,
“Ophelia” House, Rathdown street,
Carlton. Mr Raven has been very un-
fortunate in losing eight of his
children, having now only one daugh-
ter. He is a property owner in
Fitzroy, Collingwood and Carlton ;
and, as long as he remains amongst
us, his name will always be remem-
bered as being associated with straight-
forwardness and good feeling for all
whom he may come in contact with.
Liverpool and ' Belfast. In 1849 he
was married to Miss E. Lee ; and in
1852, in company with his wife, he
left England in the steamer “Cleo-
patra,” landing in Melbourne on Christ-
mas day of that year. As there were
no shops available in Melbourne at the
time, he went to Sydney, the voyage
taking 23 days, the weather being the
roughest ever experienced on the coast,
and there opened a confectioner’s
shop for his wife, with an oven for
which he wheeled the iron from
Sydney to Surrey Hills, and made it
entirely himself. This business was so
great a financial success that he could
afford a trip to England in October of
the same year, for the good of his
health. He returned in 1855, in the
ship “Australasian,” which vessel,
since leaving Melbourne on the return


voyage, lias never been heard of. On
his return, Mr Walker went into the
country to study the manner of con-
ducting a dairy station ; but, finding it
unpayable without freehold, returned
to Melbourne, and was engaged as
book-keeper and general salesman to
Messrs 11. and H. Kerr, a large firm of
grocers and Italian warehousemen in
Collins street. He remained here for
twelve months, then joining the firm of
Beckwith and Bancroft, wine and
spirit merchants, and bonded stoies-
men, who failed in about twelve
months, when he went to work for
Messrs MtComas, Wharton and Co,
wine and spirit and soap agents, with
whom he remained for a period of foui
years, at which time they wound up
the business. Mr Walker now under
took to manage the business he at
present owns on the banks of the
Yarra. He had been conducting the
business on commission for some time,
when the owner (a German) absconded,
and Mr Walker purchased the concern
on the Ist of September, 1863, carry-
ing on the business most successfully
since. In 1868, he purchased the
land, plant and trade of the Hobson’s
Bay soap and caudle company, and
conducted that until November, 1888.
Among other industries started by Mr
Walker, may be mentioned the poud-
rette factory, Merri creek, which failed;
stearine works, afterwards converted
into a wax vesta manufactory, to
which he subsequently built a shed,
where he carried on successfully for
some time the smelting of antimony ;
but the death of Mr Boardman, and
the collapse of his antimony mine at
Ringwood, caused Mr Walker to dis-
continue this trade. He next en-
arged the stearine works, and now
turns out some 600 boxes of candles
per week. Mr Walker was one of the
fourteen directors who introduced the
Victorian Tramway Company, which
they afterwards sold to the present
Trust. He also held a pastoral run at
Alexandra; but, through not being
able to attend to its affairs, lost £SOOO.
Mr Walker’s first essay in local re-
presentative life was in 18/2, when a
deputation, headed by Or Dwyer,
waited on him. He was returned,
though unable to take the field person-
ally, through severe indisposition, and
in the same year was elected Mayor.
He remained in the council until 1881,
when he went to England. During
the nine years he then sat in the
council, he was Mayor four times;
and, on his return from a second trip
to Europe, he served two years more,
during which he was again elected
Mayor, this being the fifth time of his
mayoralty. His years of mayoralty
were 1872-3; 1874-5, 18/8-9 and
1880-81 ; and, last time of all, 1887-8.
His years of office were remarkable for
the great spirit he threw into the
social life of the city. Prior to his
last trip to England, a grand ball was
given to Mr and Mi’s \v alker by
their fellow-citizens, and there being
then no hall in Collingwood large
enough to hold the company, Mr Peter
Nettleton gave the use of his fine new
wool shed for the pm’pose.
Amongst the many important move-
ments with which his name has been
identified during his municipal career,
Mr Walker was mainly instrumental
in introducing asphalt footpaths into
Collingwood, having succeeded in con-
vincing a very strong opposition of
the benefit of the scheme. He helped
to get the underground drainage from
Nicholson street across 3. M. Smith’s
ground to the Blind Gully, also ob-
taining £6OOO for pitching Reilly
street drain. He has acted on every
committee in the council, and may be
said to know more about Colling-
wood and its works than any other
local man. Had it not been for his
subscription of £IOO, the Victoria
street Bridge might never have been
erected ; he also bought the land close
to it on behalf of the construction com-
mittee, so that the work could be gone
on with. He was always earnest in
his endeavors to get Northcote road
connected with Hoddle street. Dur-
ng his first mayoralty, the Borough
of Collingwood was declared a Town,


and in 1876, he with his friend
William Kidney, assisted the Mayor,
(Mr Charles Morgan) in celebrating
the declaration ot the City of
Collingwood. This event will be re-
membered as the greatest gala day
Collingwood ever knew. The use of
Dight’s paddock was obtained, and the
invitation given to every child who
wished to attend free. There were
about 8000 children present, and
sixpence a head being charged adults
for admission, £126 was cleared from
this source, and is now the nucleus of
a fund for erecting baths. Mr Walker
was likewise the leading spirit in
opening the Victoria Park with a
grand Jete , and erected a pavilion
thereon for the Oapulet Club. He was
the projector of the Collingwood Cot-
tage Garden competition and Flower
Shows, now taken in hand by the local
Horticultural Society ; and there have
been few public movements in Colling-
wood for the last quarter of a century
in which Henry Walker has not taken
an active part.
In politics, Mr Walker advocates
strongly the benefit of Protection,
though at one time he inclined to
Freetrade. He is, however, very
passive in political matters, although
This gentleman (the son of Alexander
Lang, contractor and builder, of Air-
drie, Lanarkshire, Scotland, and Jean
Munro) was born on the Bth of
December, 1836, and attended the
local school until he was ten and a
half years old, at which immature age
he was apprenticed to the tailoring
trade ; but, so great was his desire for
education, he attended night school till
married. He served his time, so at the
age of sixteen years—when many of
our colonial boys are still sponging
upon their parents—John Lang was a
JOHN L AJN G, J.P
he once contested Collingwood for a
seat in the Assembly, and came nigh
being returned. Socially he finds a
deal of pleasure in out-door amuse-
ments, having being twice president of
the Fitzroy Bowling Club, also a mem-
ber of the Richmond Union Bowling
Club, and is now president of the
Collingwood Bowling Club, to the
members of which he presented a hand-
some pavilion, built at his own cost. He
is one of the oldest members of the
Victoria Racing Club, and president
or patron of ever so many cricket and
football clubs. Doctrinal ly he is a
Quaker, and in accordance with the
Society’s principles has always been a
man who spoke freely what he thought,
and, though at times appearing im-
petuous, is a straightforward, well-
meaning man. He is very charitable
in disposition, and as a Justice of the
Peace has always tried to temper
humanity with legal justice As one of
the oldest and best tried citizens of
Collingwood, his name will always be
remembered kindly by most people.
No other citizen of Collingwood has
devoted more time, money and energy
in advancing his city, and it would be
well for Collingwood if there were more
Henry Walkers in it.
journeyman tradesman; and it may
here be mentioned that Mr Lang’s
father died when the hero of our sketch
was only five years old, and he the
oldest survivor; consequently, the
rearing of the family of four infants
devolved on “mither.” After working
in Airdrie for a short time, he took a
trip to Glasgow, there obtaining em-
ployment, at which he worked for
some months, subsequently returning
to his native place, where ho was
married to Miss Janet Gray on
the 6th of June, 1856. The following


year he set out for the colonies in the
ship “ Merchant Prince,” and, after
losing by death his little daughter on
the passage, landed in Melbourne on
the 17th of March, 1858. He im-
mediately set to work at his trade ;
but, owing to the imported shoddy”—
those being Freetrade times—he, with
a number of his fellow-workers, were
compelled to seek whatever employ-
ment they could get, and Mr Lang
took a situation as porter to the then
proprietors of a large drapery estab-
lishment known as Barkly House,
Bourke street east. He had not been
more than six months in this position
when his ability as a general manager
asserted itself, and he was appointed
foreman cutter and general manager of
the workroom of that firm, which post
he held for a period of close on thirteen
years ; and, when leaving to go into
partnership with a friend, was pre-
sented by the hands (as a mark of
their esteem) with a pair of highly-
finished silver cups. The partnership
for which he left his place was never
consummated, and he shortly after-
wards started in business on his own
account in the premises now occupied
by Phillipson, Bourke street west. In
this place he conducted a very success-
ful trade for about eight years, and
finally (about six years ago) was com-
pelled through increasing business, to
seek new premises, finding a suitable
place at 215 Bourke street east, where
he has remained since, carrying on a
large trade as tailor, shirtraaker and
general outfitter. Of all these years of
steady work, only six months in p 859
was spent in the country, when he
went to Reedy creek to try his luck at
gold-finding, but met with very little
success.
In political masters, John Lang’s
name has been well-known for the past
twenty years, especially in Colling-
wood, where he has always been a
staunch advocate of Protection and
liberal principles. He has been in-
strumental in helping most of the
representatives into Parliament, having
acted as chairman for Messrs Langridge,
Beaver, W. Lang, Beaney and Roberts,
during their several election contests.
Mr Lang was first invited to contest a
seat in the local council in 1881, when
he was elected at the top of the poll
for Darling Ward ; almost immediately
after which he commenced actively to
oppose the proposed loan: and, al-
though he failed to stop it, his
opposition was the cause of delaying it
for nearly two years, which has since
been acknowledged to have lent more
local value to the work executed under
it. At the following election in 1884, he
was reseated and again elected on the
redistribution of wards election in
1887. Since he first entered the
council, Mr Lang always remained
true to his principles of econonic
government, and he keenly opposed
the present Town Hall site, contending
that the proper place should have been
at the corner of Johnston and Hoddle
streets, that being on a line of traffic
of more importance than the present.
He also took a big interest in the
underground drainage question, awd to
him we owe the idea, now becoming
general, of “ swing tongues,” which
allows a clearance of refuse in flood
times, instead of impeding the water-
course, as under the old system. To
his perseverance and business tact
Collingwood mainly owes the con-
struction of the town hall clock, which
will be a credit to the city. His
services to the ward he represented
have at all times shown themselves, as
on more than one occasion he pre-
vented too great extravagances in
other wards when to his ow r n the same
privileges were refused. Mr Lang, 1
moreover, worked on every one of the
committees in the council during his
seven years of office. A good deal of
his time has been spent amongst the
Oddfellows, which society he joined in
1861. In 1873, he was elected Grand
Master of the Collingwood District of
M.U.1.0.0.F.,and in 1875 was the first
District Grand Master of the Order
re-elected. In 1879, at Hamilton,
he w r as made Deputy Grand Master of
the Order in Victoria ; and in 1880-81,


he was made Grand Master of the
Order in Victoria, the body thexx
numbex’ing upwards of 14,000 mem-
bers. In honor of this, the members
of the Collingwood District made him
a present of a full set of Grand
Master’s Regalia, which was presexxted
through Mr G. D, Langridge, at the
Pitzroy Town Hall, where the occasion
was celebrated by a gx’and ball.
Socially,' his name has been idexxtified
Capulet Cricket Club and Collingwood
Lacrosse Club. The latter club pre-
sented the trophy they won in 1885, as
runners up, to Mr Lang, as a mark of
their respect for him. Mr Lang has
been for many yeax-s a Director of the
Langridge Building Society, and for
seven years has held the positioxx of
valuer to the same institution. In
JOEL E
Joel Eade (the soxx of James Richaxxls
Eade, farmer, of Cornwall, England),
was born on the 9th of February,
1823. His father (who died when
Joel was 11 years old), besides farming,
was the captain and confidential
manager of trustees of the Whealvor
tin mines. After attending the local
schools until he was fourteen yeais
years old, Joel Eade went to] work oxx
the farm, where he remained for about
three years, subsequently being ap-
prenticed to carpentering and joinery,
at which he served four years on the
very small wage of one shilling and
sixpence per week during the whole of
that period. He hurried away to
London as soon as his time expited,
and obtained work in the first shop at
which he applied, at a wage of 30s per
week, and in less than two years was
placed in charge at an advanced rate.
He remained ixx London for about
eight years. In 1851, he went to San
Fratxcisco, axxd worked there at his
trade, at the rate of 7Lf (30s) a day,
church matters, his name has been
closely connected with St. George’s
Presbyterian Church, of the committee
of which he has been a member for
16 years, and on one occasion gave a
very interesting lecture, illustrative
of the life of the late American,
General Garfield. In 1886 he was
appointed an honorary Justice of the
Peace, and has ever been x’egular and
attentive to the administration of
justice. Since his arrival in the colony
he has acquired considerable property
and has led a very active life ; and as
long as his exxeigy remains his interest
in the welfaxe of Collingwood will
be distinguishable by the same spirit
of earnestness as has hitherto charac-
terised him.
A D E, J.P.
and eventually was placed in charge of
the woi’ks at higher wages. After
experiencing some i - ough life in the
then tux’bulexxt golden city, he left in
1857 in the ship “ What Cheer,” and
immediately on landing at Melbouxxxe
set out in company with a shipmate to
the Ovens diggings, where they re-
mained for about twelve months, and
succeeded in panning out 4s worth of
gold as his share during the period.
Next he went on to Beechworth and
was employed in the erection of the
courthouse, at £6 a week, and eventually
obtained chax’ge of tixe works. In
1859, he returned to Melbourne,
thence to Daylesfox’d, where he pux*-
chased land, and carried on the busi-
ness of builder and contractor for
about a year and a half j ater which,
he again came to Melbourne and re-
mained idle for some time, eventually
starting business as architect and
builder, which profession he has carried
on since with success ; and now,
having educated his son practically and


theoretically, the business is conducted
in their joint names. To Mr Eade’s
practical experience in the building
trade is attributable his success, as he
is able not only to draw up the plans
and specification, but to superintend
every branch in house building, from
the foundation to its completion.
Previous to his election to the position
of assessor to the city of Collingwood
(which he held from 1867 to 1869)
Mr Eade always took a lively interest
in political and local matters. He
resigned the assessorship, in 1870
was elected to a seat in the council,
and in 1871 he was created Mayor.
During that year the payment of
parliamentary representatives was car-
ried, and Mr Eade was subsequently
chair man for nine different contestants
for Legislative Assembly honors in
Collingwood.
M» Eade is practically the father of
technical education in Australia, as in
1871 he originated and founded the
Collingwood School of Design, and
from that body an offshoot was called
the Artisans’ School of Works. This
organisation had only been in existence
about a year when the first Juvenile
Exhibition was opened by Mr Harker,
M.L.A., in a chapel in Wellington
street. This was in 1873, and re-
porting it a leading daily paper spoke
of it as “ a small exhibition of rather
interesting character.” Mr Eade’pre-
dicted in his speech that, though it
was apparently an insignificant matter
then, he would venture to say that the
idea would so spread that in a few
years the Melbourne Town Hall would
not be large enough. The two follow-
ing years, 1874 and 1875, similar but
more extensive shows were held in Col-
lingwood. At the opening of the third
exhibition, Sir William Forster Sta-
well, the acting Governor (who per-
formed the ceremony) spoke in eulogis-
tic terms of Mr Eade as the father of
such institutions ; and at the close of
1873 the latter was presented by Mr
Brennan, of torpedo fame, on behalf of
the members of the Collingwood
Artisans’ School of Works, with a
framed photograph. He was awarded
certificate of merit at the Intercolonial
Exhibition for excellence of workman-
ship exhibited by the pupils of the
Collingwood School of Works, 1875.
By this time the idea had become so
general and popular that Ballarat,
Sandhurst and the adjacent colonies
inaugurated, with great success, insti-
tutions and exhibitions of a like kind.
Later on, Mr Eade’s energy in trying
to advance industrial progress called
for laudatory comment from the Cham-
ber of Manufacturers, to which he was
invited to expound his views, which
were received heartily; he was subse-
quently appointed a member of the
committee of that institution, and
since then a trustee. The benefit of
local Schools of Design may be seen by
the fact that Mr Brennan, of torpedo
repute, and several other prominent
men, received their first techical
culture in the Collingwood school. Mr
Eade was the first appointed returning
officer for the Collingwood district,
after the electoral separation from
Fitzroy, for the School Board and the
Legislative Assembly, and has held
those positions ever since with great
credit to himself and the satisfaction
of the district. During his six succes-
sive years of council life, he was un-
tiring in the performance of work for
the council—so much so, that, during
a period when the council was without
a surveyor, he performed the woi’k of
that position gratuitously ; and, pre-
vious to that, managed to bring to
light the metal measuring impositions
perpetrated by a contractor and one of
the council’s officers, by which the
ratepayers were being systematically
robbed. Mr Eade was always great
on official reform, believing that the
the council’s officers should devote
their time wholly to their public duties,
He was a persistent advocate for the
opening up of Langride street, before it
was accomplished, and always took an
interest in the quality and quantity of
the work done, and the expenditure of
the ratepayers’ money. At one period
during his term of office as councillor.


being on the public works committee,
a,nd without a surveyor, he was the
means of saving more than 100 per
sent, on some of the works then being
Jone by day labor. He also inspected
the tunnel leading from Gold street to
the Blind creek outlet after its com-
detion, and found large obstructions of
nortar, scaffolding and other defects,
vhich he reported to the council, and
eventually it was attended to at some
;xpense, thereby preventing any
“urther damage arising from such
;ause. With others he advocated the
mtinuation of Oxford street to
Victoria parade. The land could have
been obtained on reasonable terms,
but ho was outvoted by the then
council. In 1873 he advocated the
ircction of new public buildings, the
jstablishment of public baths and con-
ributed to the same. He was an
executive member of the Intercolonial
Juvenile Industrial Exhibition in Mel-
bourne, 1879, and is a life member of
;he Collingwood Bowling Club. He
vas also one of the Commissioners
appointed to enquire into and report
m the best sewerage system for Mel-
>ourne and suburbs in 1871.
Mr Eade is the oldest officiating
Justice of the Peace in Collingwood,
holding a Gazette appointment for
upwards of 18 years, and his un-
Peter Nettleton, the son of Joseph
Nettleton, farmer and butcher of
Ossett, in the West Riding of York-
shire, England, was born on the 10th
May, 1824 ; and, being one of a large
family with but limited means, had to
commence work at an early age; conse-
quently, his schooling was of short
duration, that little being attained at
a local school. He was pretty well in
working harness at the age of 9, and
at 12 was placed under a master to
PETER NETTLETON, J.P.
swerving energy in the conduct of the
duties of that office entitle him to a
first rank in judiciary matters in the
district. He now almost daily clears
the local watchhouse. He has at all
times taken an active interest in any-
thing that would tend to the moral or
commercial improvement of the city,
and has been closely identified with
the Garden and Horticultural Society.
He is a member of the Church of Eng-
land, and life governor of the Mel-
bourne Hospital; likewise a Freemason,
dating from 1860. He was married on
the 21th September, 1861, to mrs
Heald. Socially, he is not fond of
junkettings, though his public position
compels him to attend most public
festivities. Mr Eade attributes his
rise in the world to his attendance at a
local School of Design while an
apprentice. The knowledge of archi-
tectural drawings there attained, en-
abled him to rise to the highest
positions in the workshops in which he
was employed, and his battle of life
would be an instructive narrative for
those more highly favored colonial
boys who do not possess the stern
application and persevering industry
shown by Mr Eade in his apprentice-
ship to master the mysteries of his
craft.
learn the business of woollen cloth
making. After serving as an appren-
tice for six years, he still continued as
journeyman with the same master
(with but a short interval of a few
months) up to the time of leaving
England for Australia, in February,
1849. For several years before leaving
England, Mr Nettleton had the
management of his master’s business
and became fully conversant with all
the workings of the trade, Notwitip


standing all this, Mr Nettleton could
never be persuaded to enter upon
cloth-making in this colony, although
great pressure has more than once
been brought to bear to induce him to
do so—asserting, as his reason, that at
the time it could not be made to pay
in face of the imports from other
countries. He landed at Geelong on
the 30th June, 1849, and in two days
came on to Melbourne, where he found
employment at fellmongery and wool
scouring, being the nearest approach to
his own line of business. He worked
for a Mr Wills more than two years,
during which time he became a mem-
ber of J. P. Fawkner’s land scheme,
and bought lots at Deep creek. About
this time the diggings broke out, and
by agreement with his employer, Mr
Nettleton and he were to take turn
about of a month each at the diggings,
Mr Wills returned with a dismal tale
from Ballarat at the end of his terra,
saying the place was not fit for one to
live in. The description of his first
Sunday morning there was unique. A
man preaching on a stump ■ behind
him, two men fighting for a money
prize; and, further on, a number of
diggers were “ sooling” on two dogs to
fight each other. Notwithstanding
this bad account, Mr Nettleton set oft
for Forest Creek, and after a spell
}f good luck he returned to town and
was married, on the 16 th of March,
1852, to Miss M. A. Hill, a sister to
Mr (afterwards Alderman) Richard
Evans Hill, a gentleman well-known in
Masonic circles. After his marriage,
Mr Nettleton again went to the gold-
fields, this time to Bendigo, thence to
Fryer’s creek, at both of which places
he made money, and returned to Mel-
bourne. Before this second trip to
the diggings he bought land in Wel-
lington street, Collingwood, and Vic-
toria street (or on the Yarra, as it was
then known). This was in 1852, On
his final return from the gold-fields,
he built a cottage on the latter holding,
where he has lived ever since. In
1853, he commenced, in a small way,
as a fellrnonger and w T ool Scourer,
which has since developed into a big
business ; but latterly by the heavy
duty imposts of America on clean
wool, the trade has fallen oh consider-
ably. The Americans ar» large buyers
and in consideration of the labor ques-
tion buy greasy wool only.
Mr Nettleton has been singularly
active in political matters since his
residence in Collingwood, but ever
in the interests of others; he has
always expressed himself as unwilling
to contest seats in either the local
council or Parliament, though often
urgently requested, with promises of
strong support. He is not a man
covetous of public honors, his dis-
position being naturally retiring, yet
he has at all times been particularly
active in promoting the elections of
others, amongst whom may be men-
tioned Messrs Harker and Reeves for
the Assembly, In 1873, Mr Nettleton
was gazetted a Justice of the Peace,
and his freedom of thought and man-
ner, unrestrained by conventionalism,
have had their influence on the Bench.
In political matters he is an out-and-
out Freetrader, being of opinion that
Protection should be able to extend its
benefits all round, which it does as
instanced in his own business, which
Protection could not benefit in any
way unless an export duty were im-
posed on greasy wools. As it is
impossible to expect this, the benefit of
Protection cannot be extended to his
business. Mr Nettleton took an active
part in the woi’king up of the Collmg-
wood and Langridge Building Societies.
In the first and second of the for-
mer institutions, he held (in con-
junction with late Messrs Bowring and
John Wood) the position of trustee. He
was one of the founders of the Im-
proved Dwellings Association, Gordon
place, Melbourne a philanthropic
organisation, the buildings of which
were opened in 1885 by Sir H. B.
Loch, and which have proved most
beneficial to thousands of men. He is
one of the Theatre Royal proprietors,
and was also a founder of the Eclectic
Association established in May, 1876,


and is still a member of this, the
oldest debating society in Victoria,
which retains on its roll many leading
debaters and thinkers. The meetings
wer* formerly held in the Royal Society
Hall, on a triangular piece of ground
facing the Carlton Gardens, Vic-
toria street west, but members now
assemble in the Manchester Unity
Oddfellows Hall in Swanston street.
Probably no local man in Collingwood
knows more about the city than Mr
Nettleton, particularly the very in-
teresting history of Simpson’s road
and the Victoria Bridge, In 1853 or
54 a small but representative meeting
of property owners on Simpson’s road,
was held at the Havelock Hotel, near
the toll bar, at Simpson’s street, East
Melbourne, to consider the best means
of improving the road. At this meet-
ing it was decided to apply to
the Board of Land Works for a sub-
sidy, and towards the balance of
expense the residents subscribed—
opening up and metalling the road as
far as Burnley street, that being con-
sidered the terminus in those days.
Besides subscribing towards the im-
provement, they submitted to the toll
—which, however, had to be abandoned
on account of the various subterfuges
adopted by carters to evade the im-
post. Some idea of the trouble of
cartage may be gathered when it is
known that in those days it cost
per load either way for anything be-
HON. ALBERT
Tins gentleman, now contesting for re-
election the representation of Eitzroy
in the Legislative Assembly, is the
eldest son of the late John Lee Tucker,
who emigrated from Devonshire, Eng-
land, with his wife, also a native
of Devonshire, in 1842, in the
ship “ Argyle,” and on the passage
out encountered more than the usual
tween Burnley street and Melbourne
proper. On behalf of the owner, as
trustee, Mr Nettleton sold to the
councils interested the land from
Burnley street to the Yarra, for the
widening of the road and the building
of the bridge, although he was of
opinion that to himself and property
no value would accrue from the con-
struction of the bridge and the making
of the road. Mr Nettleton was ap
pointed a director of the Bank of
Victoria in 1885, and after serving
two years resigned, prior to his
taking a trip to Europe, from which he
has recently returned, to visit his
birthplace and “do” the continent.
Although he found great changes in
most others places, his birthplace still
bore unmistakeable traces of 40 years
ago, owing to it for many years being
out of the track of the great railway
system of England. Mr Nettleton
was baptised in the Church of England,
but is untramnelled by any sectarian
dogma. He is a charitable man, and
although advancing in life is yet an
energetic and determined citizen, being
always of opinion that one man’s
honest thoughts are as good as another’s.
He has done considerable work in the
interests of Collingwood, and whilst ho
remains amongst us no man need fear
an injustice from him. He has been a
member of the Eitzroy Bowling Club
almost from its foundation, and still
takes a lively interest in bowls
LEE TUCKER.
viscissitudes of nautical travel in those
early days, being followed by pirates
off the coast of Morocco. It may be
mentioned that one of Mr Tucker’s
ancestors on the maternal side was an
officer identified with Admiral Drake’s
many expeditions in the British service
to the West Indies, also when preparing
to meet the famous Spanish Armada


The subject of this sketch was born on
the 16th of March, 1843, in Fitzroy, his
father’s residence, a brick and iron
building, then being on the site
which is now occupied by the Fitzroy
Town Hall—the platform in the new
hall being immediately over his father’s
garden The ground still amongst
old residents retains the appelation
“ Tucker’s Square.” He went to school
at St. Mark’s Denominational School,
the school-room of which was also used
as a church, under the head mastership
of the Rev. J. A. Clowes and Mr
Alfred Brunton, a most successful
teacher, now leader of a religious
sect in Dunedin. Amongst the
mostnotable of MrTucker’sschoolmates
were Professor Charles Cook, of
Christchurch; Fred Cooze, surveyor,
Mr Wood, of the Audit office; Mr
J. E. Rhodes, Mr Denby, Mr Evans,
Mr Downing, Mr Loughrey and
others. After teaching in the
school for some time, he went to acquire
a knowledge of the legal profession; but
having no great inclination for that
life, he threw himself into commercial
pursuits in various lines, with some
success, and during which time he
travelled all over Hew Zealand and
the Australian colonies, gaining a
deal of experience before he was 20
years of age. Before this time Mr
Tucker had been a frequent contributor
to the press on political subjects,
and has been for many years past
a contributor to the press. While
still a youth, his father trans-
ported his iron house from “ Tucker’s
Square” to the “ Quarries,” where the
original mansion fronted a great open
common now known as North Fitzroy.
Here the subject of our sketch be-
came acquainted with Mr J. M. Tait
(of The Observer), whom he assisted in
carrying on the agitation which
brought about the separation from
the City of Melbourne of Smith
Ward embracing all the dis-
trict from Reilly street to the Merri
creek, and from Nicholson street (then
a chain of quarry holes) to the North-
Cote load and its annexation to
Fitzroy, at that time, much against
the wish of the latter. " This
was practically Mr Tucker’s first
active move in the politics of
the day. He was soon after
requested to contest a seat in the local
council, and was elected in 1870 by a
large majority at the head of the poll,
Messrs Woodhead and Falconer being
second and third elected members.
In 1873, he was elected Mayor, and
was returned at every election for
nine years, always at the top of
the poll. In 1879 he was again
elected to the mayoralty, and on his
retirement from office was presented
with a handsomely illuminated address
by the councillors of the town. During
his term of office as councillor
he floated the first Fitzroy loan,
the bulk of which was spent in
the improvement of North Fitzrov,
the success of that now thriving
district being mainly attributable to
this loan. At the Parliamentary
election for Oollingwood (then includ-
ing Fitzroy, and returning three
membex’s), in 1871, he was defeated by
Messrs Bates, Barker and Vale—
although, taking the results of the
Fitzi’oy polls, he was at the head,
losing only in Oollingwood in one
division. At the next general election
for Oollingwood, he was returned at
the head of the poll with Mr Everard
and Mr Sullivan. When Fitzroy was
created a separate electorate, re-
turning two members, Mr Tucker
was returned with an overwhelming
majority in 1877 Dr Hearn, the
Conservative candidate, suffering a
bad defeat. Although taking an
active part in all matters of interest to
the colony, Mr Tucker did not come
into special prominence until 1876,
when he opposed the Government
in the over-taxation proposed, and
moved a resolution in Parliament
petitioning the Governor for a dis-
solution ; and, though supported in
this by Mr Justice Higinbotham and
the majority of the Opposition, the
resolution was lost by a small majority;
yet it had the effect of impeding the


exorbitant taxation proposed, resulting
in a dissolution of Parliament and the
return of a large Liberal majority. In
1878, Mr Tucker was appointed chair-
man of a Royal Commission to enquire
into the public roads question, the
result being that most of the closed
roads as far as practicable in Victoria
were opened. He was also appointed
a member of Royal Commission to
enquire into the state of the Crown
Lands of Victoria ; also of a Metro-
politan water supply Board, which is
still in existence. 'ln 1880, his steadily
increasing influence in Liberal interests
led to his being appointed by a ballot
of 64 votes in the Lower House to
represent the Liberal interests of the
Legislative Assembly during the Re-
form Conference, which resulted in the
extension of the franchise to rate-
payers. In 1879, he was offered
a portfolio on condition that he would
adopt a certain platform. This he
refused, as it would have necessitated
the surrender of political principles.
In 1884, he was asked by Mr Graham
Berry to join him in the formation of
a Coalition Government. Now came
the most important period in Mr
Tucker’s political career. He was
elected Minister of Lands and Presi
dent of the Board of Land and Works,
when his previous devotion to ail land
improvement questions became of
service to him. Having on inquiry
found that there were 12 million acres
of land in the Mallee country
which could be brought under
an improved lease policy which was
first enunciated by him. This policy
was adopted, and was and has been
the greatest success in Legislation
known in Victoria. At that time, no
less a sum than £20,000 a year had to
be spent in clearing the mallee country
of vermin; now, there is an annual
revenue of no less than £IO,OOO derived
from this' land, the tenants having
been previously sustained by the
country and virtually paying no
rent, There are under the Amended
Land Act four million acres of grazing
O O
area already taken up. The leading
principle of the Act is that the land, in
an improved state, will revert to the
Crown, from time to time, and enable
the young people of the colony to
engage in favorable and encourag-
ing agricultural pursuits. Another
beneficial effect of Mr Tucker’s know-
ledge of the land question was the
dealing with the Yarra Bank land, over
which the country had lost (through
the neglect of previous Governments)
no less a sum than £4,000,000. On
the retirement of Mr Lalor from the
Speakership, the position was offered
Mr Tucker by a majority of the
members • but, as this would deprive
him of his vote, and he wished to
have a free hand to fight the Fitzroy
railway question, Mr Tucker declined
the honor and supported Mr Davies’s
candidature. Last year, he was ap-
pointed by the Governor in Council
member of a Royal Commission, to
consider the advisableness of extending
the streets of the city westwards,
across railway reserve ia Spencer st.
After taking evidence of an extensive
character in company with Colonel
Sargood and Messrs Skene, Hodgkin-
son and others, he was appointed to
bring in a report, which he did, vetoing
such extension. He was awarded a
special vote of thanks “for ability
displayed” in drafting and personally
bringing* up this report, which was
adopted, there being only three dissen-
tients in 2 0 members. Itwas afterwards
considered in Parliament and endorsed
by the majority of the members in the
Assembly. Mr Tucker was first to
propose reduction in the probate duty
on smail estates, also to bring about
the increase in jurors’ fees from 5s
to 10s per day. He influenced the
Government considerably on the pro-
posed increased duty on cane sugar,
preventing the increase by his opposi-
tion. Another laudable movement in
which Mr Tucker was conspicuous was
ohe finding out and exposing “ bogus”
land companies, and bringing before
the blouse the fact of members lending
their names to agents for the purpose
of inducing the too confiding public to


invest. He has always been in favor
of the extension north of a railway
system, having introduced the Outer
Circle, Fitzroy to Whittlesey, Clifton
Hill to Royal Park and the Fitzroy
branch lines, the extension of which
will be provided for in the next Rail
way Bill, thus solving the problem of
connecting the northern suburbs with
the Princes’ Bridge station.
In religious matters, Mr Tucker is
attached to the Church of England.
He is a Freemason and a member of
the Ancient Order of Foresters. He
was married at St. James’ Cathedral,
in 1865, to Miss Elizabeth Isabel,
daughter of Mr John Payne, of Carlton,
This gentleman is the third son of
David Reid, a surgeon in the Royal
Navy, who saw service with Rear
Admiral Drake. He was born at
Inverarie Park, Argyle County, New
South Wales, on the 30th of August,
1829, and educated at the Australian
College,Sydney, under the principal-
ship of the late Rev. John Dunmore
Lang. He studied until he was seven-
teen years of age, when he came to
Victoria and engaged in pastoral pur-
suits for some years. Whilst thus
occupied, he was fortunate in being
the first to discover gold at the Ovens
diggings in 1852, in a creek now
known as Reid’s creek, named aftox
him. He was engaged for three years
in buying gold \ then he sold out and
went to England fifteen years ago. On
his return, after an absence of twelve
months, he was requested by a very
numerously-signed requisition to con-
test the Eastern Province of the Legis-
lative Council, when he was elected
unopposed the ticket then being
“ Reform of the Upper House.” After
three years’ steady fighting for the
reform, he successfully carried it
HON. ROBERT DY 0 E REID.
a family of Highland extraction, and
has a family of six sons and four
daughters. Mr Tucker’s name has been
identified with nearly every movement
of any importance in the district since
his advent to public life, and as a
politician his reputation is that of a
man of great resource and ability in
debate, and of undoubted practical
utility when in office. Thus, as long
as his name remains in the public
records, he will be remembered as a
man who has striven hard to carry out
all the movements he considered bene-
ficial to the constituency and the
country at large.
through the Upper House. In the
last Berry Administration he held a
fortfolio. After Mr Berry’s defeat by
Sir Bry anJJO’Loghlen, a large deputation
from West Bourke requested him to
stand in the Liberal interest for the
Legislative Assembly. He resigned
his seat in the Upper House and con-
tested West Bourke j but, although
only one week preparing for the
election, the poll disclosed—in a con-
stituency in which he was not known
—that he was only 91 votes behind
Sir Bryan O’Loghlen, although the
voting power was 5000. He fought
for the Liberal cause out of the House,
and on the retirement of one of the
Fitzroy representative (Mr Vale) he
was by requisition induced to stand
for the seat against Mr Blackett, by
whom he was defeated by a very small
majority. Twelve months afterwards,
at the general election, he was elected
with a substantial majority over Mr
Blackett, and at the next election
polled 500 votes more than his former
opponent, who represented the Con-
servative interest. As a staunch
Liberal, Mr Reid is well known,


being identified since his first election
for Fitzroy with his colleague Mr
Tucker in every movement which has
been of benefit to the Fitzroy elec-
torate. As a Liberal, his policy has
shown unflinching determination and
perseverance in carrying out his
pledges to his constituents. Mr Reid
was married in May, 1864, to Miss
Esther Caroline, daughter of Colonel
Shatworth, of the 57th Regiment, a
gentleman who was killed at the head
This gentleman (the son of Antona
Schultz, a builder and contractor and
native of Hamburg), was born in York
street, Richmond, Victoria, at his
father’s residence, on the 24th of May,
1854. He first went to school under
Mr Walker, then the popular master
©f the Church of England school, Len-
nox street, Richmond. Mr Schultz
started work at the age of ten years, in
a tobacco factory in Melbourne. He
remained at this for two years, after
which he went to work for his father,
with whom he learned carpentering,
and at the early age of 18 years was
appointed manager of works at Mr
Molesworth Green’s residence, Glen-
more. At the completion of this
contract, he became manager for a Mr
Kirby, contractor, at Bendigo, where
he remained for eighteen months, and
in the course of the next few years
conducted large works for several con-
tractors, including the residences of
Mr W. R, Thompson, Gisborne, and W.
R. Johnston, Brighton. His next
change was as manager—or, as it was
termed, “ speculating builder” for
Mr Thomas Bent, M.L.A., for two and
a half years, when hd decided on
starting in business for himself in
Collingwood, and by dint of persever
ance and practical knowledge of archi-
i*o*i i mi ig -in.ip
JOHN SOH U L T Zj,
(Councillor, Oollinqwood.)
of his corps at the Redan. Mr Reid
has four daughters living. It is un-
necessary to add anything regarding his
social disposition, he being well known
in Fitzroy and Colling wood as a man
of genial ways and pleasant humour
—a burly, out-spoken “ chief.” As a
a politician, he is deserving of the
goodwill and confidence of all whom
he has served, being at all times an
honest public servant and zealous
friend.
tecture, has made a great success. A
well known building, which bears the
stamp of his workmanship, is the Eye
and Ear Hospital. He was also clerk
of works for a time for Messrs Twenty-
man and Askew, architects. For the
past ten years Mr Schultz has taken a
prominent interest in political a&airs
in the district, and by his enthusiasm
and integrity has shown himself
thoroughly in earnest about local
government matters. In 1887, a
vacancy occurred in the council for
Victoria Ward through the retire-
ment, by effluxion of time, of the ex-
May or (Mr Henry Walker), and as it
was rumored that he did not again
intend contesting the seat, a depu-
tation waited on Mr Schultz urging
Viim to oppose a candidate already in
the field. Before acquiesing, Mr
Schultz saw and consulted Mr Walker,
and ascertaining definitely his inten-
tion of retiring, announced himself a
candidate and was elected by a sub-
stantial majority of 106 votes. Since
his election, he has, by watching
closely the working of the council,
become fairly well acquainted with the
doings of that body, and promises to
be a good steward of the ratepayers
interests. He is now a member of the
Town Hall and Finance committees.


Politically, he isa staunch Protection- genial manner and keen perception in
ist and greatly in favor of Australian business, and as he becomes more
Jfederation and intercolonial freetrade. acquainted with municipal <mvem-
Or Schultz was married on the 26th ment he will develop into a represen-
of March, 1879, to Miss Yeal, oi tative in whom the public may have
Gollmgwood. Socially, he is a man of all confidence.
JONAS OREWTHER.
This worthy old citizen of Eitzroy,
although holding no representative
position, is well entitled to a niche in
the gallery of our “ Local Men of the
Times’” Jonas Orewther was born, in
1813, at Tweedmouth, Berwick, on the
debateable land south of the Tweed—
a narrow strip of ground then attached
to the County of Durham, but now
absorbed into Northumberland. It
was far detached from the county
within whose jurisdiction it came, and
all legal business arising there, how-
ever trivial, had to be settled in the
old cathedral city of Durham, seventy
miles away, thus involving much ex
pense. Mr Orewther attended a local
school, havinglfor schoolmates John
Mackay Wilson, the printer, author of
the “ Tales of the Border,’ Dr Robert
Lee, of Greyfriars, Edinburgh, and
William Skene, another compositor,
who has been a reporter on the London
Times for forty years, always accom-
panying the Queen on her excursions.
Schooling completed, he was appren-
ticed to the smith and engineering
business, and on the expiry of his time
went to work with George Stephenson,
founder of the railway traction system
in 1833. He was engaged principally
in constructing the girders, etc., for the
Menai Strait bridge, then the greatest
engineering wonder of the age. After
that, in 1837, Mr Orewther was em-
ployed on the “ Quaker’s line,” twelve
and a half miles long, the first railway
opened in the world, assisting Timothy
Hackworth, who competed against
George Stephenson for the £5OO prize
offered for the best locomotive by the
Liverpool and Manchester Railway
Company, the prize being carried off
by Stephenson. Mr Orewther con-
tinued working at his trade until 1848,
when he accepted an engagement to
proceed to Constantinople to super-
intend the smith and boilermaking
works which the Sultan had established
oa the Sea of Marmoia to initiate his
own subjects into the mysteries of
practical engineering. Here he re-
mained till the end of his engagement,
about two years, building a steam
yacht for the Sultan and instructing
the Turkish mechanics. His experi-
ences of Turkish and Asiatic life are
interesting, and he carried home with
him many curios. He started an
engineering establishment in his native
Tweedmouth, where he continued until
the Victorian gold-diggings broke out,
when he started for Melbourne in July,
1852, He worked at the Ballarat
mines with moderate success, then
came to reside at the little hamlet
known as the Quarries, now as North
Fitzroy, starting a mechanical shop in
Brunswick, nigh the Melbourne bound-
ary. Here for twenty years he con-
structed reaping machines, quarry
cranes, crab winches and quarry tools.
He next erected a shop at Nicholson
street, North Fitzroy, but worked only
intermittently, as he often lent a hand
in assisting his sons in their extensive
agricultural implement establishment,
Kyneton. He finally retired from
active work seven years ago, and
recently took a trip to the home land.


Mr Crewther has all along been a
consistent Presbyterian, and was one
of the founders of St. George’s Church,
Collingwood, thirty years ago. In
politics he is a strong Democrat, and
has always been an energetic worker at
both municipal and political elections.
He has done his share in advancing
the progress of Fitzroy, having been
one of the few residents at the Quarries
who actively agitated for the separa-
tion of the land east of Nicholson and
north of Reilly street from Melbourne
and its annexation to Fitzroy. About
three years ago, he was requested to
accept the position of J P., but declined
the honor, as he was slightly deaf. Mr
Crewther, who has lately had a double
golden weddingcelebration, was married
twice, but both times to the same la' 7 y
—Miss Eleanor Purves. The first
event, in 1839, was a Gretna Green
affair. To do his “ sparking,” Jonas
had to travel about 70 miles by coach,
and as this was rather rough the sweet-
hearts agreed to get married quietly
and keep it dark A* that time, there
was one little spot of earth on which
runaways could be legally married. It
was three miles north of Berwick on
the Edinburgh, road, but on the
boundary line of England and Scot-
land, and there was only one room in
the lonely house on Lammerton Moor
in which the ceremony could b ■ per-
formed. The place had been so con-
secrated by some royal char ter centuries
before, when a tournament occurred on
the spot and the Queen thereof was
married to the winner of the joust
Anybody could marry, an ex-waiter
being the official when Jonas was
married, an old South Sea captain
named Stark being his principal rival.
They used to watch, in later years, the
train, and tout for customers. On one
occasion, the Duke and Duchess of
Northumberland landed at the station
near the marrying spot, and were
stuck up by one of these touters, who
had soon to make tracks. One wet,
bleak wintry night, a couple called at
the local hotel and sent for the ex-
waiter, when the landlord jocularly sug-
gested the expediency of having the
ceremony performed in his comfortable
parlor instead of tramping out to the
desolate moor on such a miserable
night. The parties agreed and the
event was brought off in comfort, but
in after years the husband repudiated
the contract and the surroundings of
the m irriage leaked o it, when it was
declared illegal. Other husbands then
tried to wriggle out of their Lammer-
moor marriages, but all were held to
be valid which were performed on the
spot specially dedicated to the purpose.
Afterwards, it was ordered that all
intentions to marry on Lammermoor
be advertised in the local paper, and it
is probable the practice has fallen into
disuse At all events, when Mr and
Mrs Crewther were prepared to take
up house, they got married in the
“ kirk,” and being thus doubly m irried,
their matrimonial life has been doubly
happy Mr Crewther is still a hale,
hearty man, though seventy-six years
old, and there is every hope of his
celebrating his diamond wedding. He
has a grand helpmate, who has been a
real mother to many more families
than her own—a good, large-heafted,
practical Christian woman.






r (3G? f 7
|\l 6<a/y
(o - DEC,W2 s)
