

Our Island
Trip..
S.S. "manapouri."




Our Island
Trip..
S.S. “manapouri."
iTithUr. Dyring* n Conpl icumts.
JULY, 1904.




OUR ISLAND TRIP.
S.S. “Manapouri."
r~rDVERTISED to start at 8 p.m. on Tuesday, June 28th, the s s'.
Manapouri was further announced to make her departure at
10 p.m., but it was not until 11.15 P- m - that we really got under
way on a perfectly clear moonlit night from the wharf at Sydney. The
usual farewellings on a steamer’s departure were rather long drawn out
owing to the delay. One young man was evidently leaving his
lady love for some time, with many tender and osculatory demonstrations
on deck, spent his time after the ringing of the first bell running up and
down the gangway to the said lady on the pier getting casual lover’s
refreshment, keeping one eye on the lady and a fearfully anxious other
optic on the two sailors at the head of the gangway for fear they should
haul it up and leave him stranded ashore. Not once or twice during
the thirty minutes did this occur, but at least a dozen. Any movement
of the sailors was sufficient to send him bounding up on deck ; when
things were quiet, down he bounded again to his lode-star.
Owing to the late hour of departure, Sydney Harbour did not come
up to expectations, most of the city lights being extinguished. Circular
Quay, with the dozens of brilliantly lighted harbour steamers all in
varied colours, and Woolloomooloo with its steep streets lit up with many
lamps certainly were fairy like, but Sydney Harbour by moonlight when
the town has been ablaze with thousands of many twinkling lights has
been seen, and it was hoped that a replica might have been obtained.
About midnight we passed through the Heads, and then to bunk.
One’s first impressions as recorded about the Manapouri are “ she is a
decent sort of a boat, with cabin accommodation for two and into that
space four of us are packed with some amount of discomfort as to the
disposal of clothing and luggage. The deck cabins are occupied by two
ladies on one side and a newly wedded couple on the other, who look
anything but happy this morning. I have a lower berth, and I verily


believe the mattress is stuffed with whole cocoanuts or something
equally as tender and comfortable.” It afterwards turned out that the
suspected newly-married couple had entered the state of matrimonial
bliss some seven or eight years ago and had a son of six summers.
However, in this case the error is pardonable, both on account of their
apparent juvenility and also neither seemed to be affected with the
“ boredom of matrimony.” After our arrival at Suva we are promised
more comfort, as many of our passengers land there.
We are a heterogeneous crowd. There is the above mentioned
“ newly married couple,” a sturdy yoeman and his charming wife from
New Zealand, who are taking a well-deserved holiday, an official of the
Company with all on board with him whom he holds most dear, he is
later on described as being disguised as a passenger, a Swedish gentle-
man with a moustache turned up not too ferociously, a Scot who gets
seasick, and when so his symptom is not “sickness” but “hunger”—
from observations made by an impartial critic it can be safely averred
that this particular form of seasickness has prevailed amongst the
majority of passengers throughout the whole trip. There are
several ladies, some good, some indifferent, and a few, bad sailors, a
French nun also who is going to Suva and expects never to see her
beloved France again, but who is always bright and happy, there are
three or four young Australians full of energy and life, ready for any
harmless fun and always anxious to follow the advice of their seniors.
Most of them were located in and around Cabin J, and this will account
for Cabin J being frequently mentioned in this veracious diary. Finally,
there were several careworn medical men seeking rest and health
generally after having had a struggle with the fiendish influenza. Here,
I may be permitted to remark that quiet observation has put pounds
into the writer’s pocket, for if it is good for the medico to take this trip
for recuperative purposes it is also good for the ordinary layman, and in
future I shall prescribe for myself and order myself away and pocket the
consultation fee.
The first day or two of the voyage was spent in deck billiards,
quoits, in becoming better acquainted with each other, and discovering
that dress clothes need not be taken out of trunks.
Thursday, July 30TH. —Becoming more settled, weather delight-
ful—bright sunshine with a few scattered fleecy clouds and just enough
warmth to be comfortable, not hot enough for flannels. To complete
our “ olla podrida ” we have a cynic on board ; occasionally his remarks
are caustic and cutting, but as they are evidently meant for mere idle
persiflage they are not taken too seriously. The captain and officers are
already doing everything to make the trip pleasant—deck billiards are in
great request. We are passing Lord Howe’s Islands at 10 a.m. There
are about sixty people living there, and they grow the best onions in the
world. There is a large quantity of fruit exported from there to Sydney.


From this distance, about thirty miles, they look like two abrupt rocks
rising from the ocean. The skipper says they are 2,000 feet high, and
on the S.E. are very abrupt and fall at once to the seaboard.
In the smoke-room at night much local information is obtained and
eagerly listened to. A Mr. W. from New Zealand, who has frequently
been round the Islands and who generally stays a month or two at this
season of the year, by which he avoids the cold and damp of New
Zealand, is a fund of valuable information as he generally stays inland
at a trader’s. He prefers Tongans to Samoans, and says if they are
decently treated they will do anything for you, but you must get inland
to see them at their best, they are spoilt at the ports. The best meals
he has ever had were in native houses cooked in native ovens.- Stones
are put in a hole, wood is piled on top and set fire to, the stones become
red hot, they are covered with green leaves, the meat is put in and
covered with leaves, then finally it is covered entirely with stones and
leaves. By these means the juices are preserved in the meat. He says
we are unlikely to see or taste bread fruit but that it comes out of the
native oven like a mass of white flour and has a very distinctive flavour.
The paw paw he does not like but says we will get them. He regrets
the decadence of Samoan customs in Apia since the German annexation
and says to see native life one must go inland. About Tonga he gave
the following information. The King, George, is 29 years old. 24 stone
weight, 48 inches chest measurement, 6 feet 4 inches high; latterly he
has become very gross and is seldom seen in public. The Tongan is
supremely confident of his superiority (more than equality) to the white
man. He says God first made the Tongan, then the Samoan, then the
pig and then he made the white man. King Cakabou is said to have
appealed for British protection against the Tongans who had come over'
in their war canoes and were about to conquer Fiji.
During the Franco-German war the Tongan Parliament is said to
have despatched a diplomatic note saying that the Tongan nation would
preserve a condition of strict neutrality towards the belligerents !!
On another occasion it was necessary to summon the United States
Consul as a witness in a court of law. Instead of sending a message, a
couple of policemen appeared and arrested the Consul. Later on a
warship from the United States arrived and collected a few thousand
dollars for the affront.
The Tongan Parliament assembles once every three years. (Since
being to Tonga I find it assembles in May of each year, and I cannot
vouch for the information as supplied by Mr. W.) One thousand pounds
is voted for expenses, and this is spent in feasting. When this is
exhausted Parliament promptly dissolves !!
They gorge themselves at these feasts. They have pigs, fowls,
fruits, kava and all kinds of European liquor. So bad was an engorge.


ment lately that the local medico had to go up with a stomach pump
and use it on four or five of the worst cases. (Fact confirmed
subsequently by the government medical officer at Nukualofa).
All land in Tonga is held in common. Each native is allotted a
quarter of an acre in the town and ten acres outside for plantation. For
this he is taxed about £i per annum. His source of income for pay-
ment of this tax is his plantation. He goes out, gets down some
cocoanuts, splits them, dries them in the sun and sells the result —copra.
There is no need for any hard work —nature provides everything.
No native may dispose of his land. On one occasion one did so
to a German trader, getting cash and a cow for his quarter acre
allotment. The news came to the ears of the King ; the native got five
years’ imprisonment, the German got back his cow but “ nary a red
cent ” of his £lOO.
The income of the King is said to be ,£5,000 per annum. With
this he maintains a “standing army” and has a very fine brass band.
When he opens Parliament he dons a uniform said to be a cross between
that of the Grenadier Guards and a Life Guardsman, with a helmet,
spike and horsetail fall, a scarlet tunic covered with gold and held up by
two pages in white silk, gold epaulettes and is said to look as gorgeous
as the best Drummer Major of the British Army !!
A childish and overwhelming conceit and desire for display seem to
be the especial characteristics of the Tongans They think themselves
quite equal to and a little better than Europeans. When the King
inaugurated his brass band he sent to Sydney for a bandmaster, but
after having him a fortnight the unfortunate man was dismissed, as they
reckoned they knew more about music than he did. However, the
band is said to be very good indeed.
Friday, July ist. —Discovered a solo four—played during the
afternoon and held an aboundance declared. In the evening had a quiet
little concert, Miss M. singing a coon song “ Sammy,” which at once
established itself as a favourite. For once and all let it be stated that
never has such kindness and good humour been experienced as was
received from the skipper and officers; all vie with each other to make
the trip agreeable, and not a little of the success is due to the chef on
board. The food is excellent and most varied, as many as 20 dishes
appearing for breakfast, while for dinner all kinds of little delicacies are
served.
Last evening there was such a sunset as a painter would hesitate to
put on canvas, as being an exaggeration of the effects of oranges, reds
and yellows. It was a glorious sight, only excelled by the more brilliant
moon-rise. This was most extraordinarily beautiful, and lasted for about


half an hour, until the more prosaic moonlit night prevailed, lovely, soft
and beautiful, but common-place after the earlier night effects. Just
after sunset a brilliantly lighted object appeared in the Eastern sky at
the sea level, resembling a steamer illuminated with gay electric lights
slowly this illusion was dispelled, and it was found to be the rising
moon. In a few minutes the distinct outline of an Island coast,
with palm and other larger arborescent trees outlined, appeared off
the side of the vessel at a distance of two or three hundred yards. A
distinct beach, covered with silvery sand, and indentations forming
small bays and inlets wooded to the water’s edge came into view. In
front a dark bluff headland, precipitous and ghostly, frowned darkly and
ominously. We seemed to be in a land-locked passage. In the back-
ground on the rising hills the outline of buildings of various sizes and
shapes, crowned with bastions, towers, and minarets, caught the eye.
Slowly and slowly the moon rose, touching the tops of these dark island
clouds with a bright silvery sheen as of burnished metal. The outline
of this lovely Island of the Blest was maintained for fully twenty
minutes, when the moon still slowly rising above the clouds dispersed
the pleasing phantom, and resulted in the annihilation of this uniquely
fascinating phantasmagoria.
Nature was in a happy mood on this particular evening, for shortly
afterwards another beautiful effect was given with the moon about 20
degrees above the horizon. A small bank of dark clouds was still
left. The moonbeams instead of coming in one bright brilliant
path across the water were broken up by the crested waves. Every few
seconds a brilliant light like a huge guiding star appeared as a wave rose
and was tipped by the moon’s rays. These seemed to be the lights
leading to a distant city. On the horizon was a band of warm pink color
among the dark clouds, the reflected glow from somewhere; this
simulated in a remarkable manner the reflection of the lights of a distant
city. They twinkled for all the world like thousands of points of electric
light, and the illusion was almost perfect requiring but little effort of the
imagination.
To-day passengers are all at home and indulge in the usual deck
games with verve. The sea is calm and smooth, the officers stating that
so far it is the best voyage they have ever had.
Saturday, July 2ND. — Yesterday afternoon a sports meeting was
held, consisting of a three-legged race, putting the eye and tail on the
pig, and a potato and spoon race, in all of which most of us joined. The
artist of J Cabin drew the pig—a very excellent piece of work, although
the sketcher complained of losing his afternoon nap, sports being timed
for 4.15 p.m. Many of us appreciated his feelings. After the violent
exercise of the sports, our artist announced that in future sport meetings
his physical efforts would be entirely confined to “ drawing the pig.”


last evening was taken up in inspecting the engine-room with the
Chief Engineer, who was afterwards good enough to lucidly explain the
working of the Turbine engine, and to show the great saving in space
that would be gained. The Company is having a new Turbine engine
steamer built for the inter-port trade in New Zealand.
Another lovely day to-day, but not hot; no white clothes are yet
donned. Everyone is happy and the children are on deck.
Sunday, July 3RD. —Yesterday was a record day for sports and
amusements. Deck billiards occupied the greater part of the morning.
During the afternoon there was an obstacle race round the ship and
across a boom, under which the Captain had caused a sail to be slung,
said sail being filled with enough sea water to give one a bath. The
race was run in two heats, one containing three competitors of maturer
years, the other the four younger members. All competitors were
dressed suitably for the dip. He of Glen Warlock fame unsuccessfully
negotiated the boom. The Woolwich Infant tried to run a bye by
getting round the dry edge of the sail and was duly disqualified, the
dark steed, Black Brunswicker, took no risks but boldly rolled into the
water. All three competitors were placed and were qualified to start
in the final. After the first heat was run, in order to prevent any
grumbling, all were started in the final. In this the only variation
that occurred was that on arriving near the sail each competitor
was deluged with seawater by the carpenter, who played a hose
with great accuracy and every one tumbled into the sail. Needless
to say, the whole affair was provocative of the greatest hilarity,
especially amongst the ladies. A fresh shower and “ summat to
keep the cold away ” wound up the proceedings temporarily. “J ”
Cabin then determined to get up a dance for the evening, and issued
invitations accordingly. The Woolwich Infant had been duly blood-
brotherhooded before this as one of our inmates was incapable of joining
in owing to a slight difference of opinion he was holding with his majesty
Neptune. The invitations and programmes were printed for us by the
Purser. All the officers entered heart and soul into the movement. The
Captain had the piano brought out on deck and had the large fan electric
light fitted up. Mrs. H., as usual, was delighted to furnish her part of
the amusement in playing the dances, and as a result everyone voted it
a great and glorious success.
There was to have been a singing competition that evening, but on
the attempt being made to substitute this for the dance, the suggestion
was drowned in an emphatic “no” on the voices. Previous to this, I
have omitted to state that after the obstacle races there was a series ot
Tug of-War competitions. In these, the blessed, i.e., married, easily
defeated the unblessed (single), chiefly by superior weight. Following
that “ J ” Cabin challenged any four on the ship and were easily victorious,
although their success was wrongfully attributed to adventitious aids.


To-day the weather is as usual, except that there is a cooler breeze
—the trades—and slightly more swell. Everybody is quiet being
Sunday, and further, all require rest for a recovery after the unusual
exertions of yesterday.
Monday, July 4TH. —Last evening “J ” Cabin determined to
produce a paper for Monday morning’s breakfast. This appeared in due
course; a reprint of it will be found in the appendix. The Purser
kindly struck off some thirty copies, which were eagerly scanned and
kept as mementos. This morning we played bridge, and afterwards
rested from the exertion of that game. In the afternoon “J ” Cabin
inaugurated a Mock Trial. This resulted from a libel action contained
in the Manapouri Messenger , in which paper the Fiend’s parentage was
described as (Cigarette-Contortion) from two well marked characteristics
of his. The carpenter manufactured a tow wig for the Judge (Mr. R., a
Victorian school-master). The Woolwich Infant was prosecuting
counsel, the Black Brunswicker defended. The form of oath, which
was administered on a bound book of song, was : “ You shall neither
tell the truth, nor anything like the truth, God speed the Manapouri.”
This occupied an hour and a half and was intensely comic—the witnesses
being especially good. The Fiend (Mr. B.), his mother (Mr. S. V.), a
poor lone widow with only two living husbands, and who was always
accompanied with a bottle labelled gin, Miss M. and others being
shriekingly funny. The various passages at arms between counsel and
the vagaries of the Sergeant (Mr. D.), who was decorated with two
medals and dressed in a cocked paper hat and a blue coat of one of the
engineers, and who indiscriminately used the rope’s end on jury, counsel,
judge, witnesses and spectators, being thoroughly appreciated. The two
medals of the Sergeant had been bestowed on him for valour, one for
saving his own life and the other for stopping a dead horse. The trial
was summarily ended by the announcement of afternoon tea.
In the evening a Euchre Tournament which was announced was
abandoned on account of the heat in the saloon.
Tuesday, July STH. —To-day we are in white clothes and in sight
of land—Viti Levu on the one side and Kandavu on the other. At
about 10 a.m. we pass Mbenga, the island where the natives are fire
walkers. Stones are put into an excavation ; piles of wood are placed
on top and set fire to ; after some hours the stones become white hot.
The members of one tribe of Fijians can walk across these stones bare-
footed without hurt. The Captain says that hours after the stones are
so hot that they cook their meals on the same stones, and the second
mate, who has also seen the performance, states that it is so hot that one
does not approach within about ten yards of the excavation. The island
itself is quite evidently merely the top of a submerged mountain. There
seems to be very little vegetation on it and very little flat ground on
which ordinary vegetation could grow.


The following is the legend of the fire-walkers. A great chief was
one day after crabs. He, as usual, put his hand down under a stone,
but drew out not a crab but a spirit. The spirit pleaded to be allowed
to go and offered to give him, if released, power always over his enemies.
The chief replied that he always had and always could conquer his
enemies, and threatened to kill the spirit, who then offered him control
over the waves. The chief replied he had never been wrecked and had
no fear of that. The spirit then offered him control over fire, which
offer being accepted, the spirit bade the chief follow, and leading him
over a similar excavation with white hot stones as is now used, the chief
and his descendants have ever since possessed control over that element.
The spirit was allowed to escape.
Arrived at Suva wharf at about 11.30 a.m. The entrance through
the bar is very fine, the deep water being an ultramarine blue. On the
left is the reef bearing on its bosom the old rusted remnants of a ship
cast up to it by the treacherous gales, on the right are the rolling breakers
incessantly moving and tipped with white feathery spume; in the front
sharp cones of mountains reaching up some hundreds of feet, the some-
what irregular outline being interrupted by the “ Devil’s Thumb,” called
also “ Joske’s Thumb,” a bold peak of rock somewhat resembling the
thumb of a Brobdignagian ; to the east the little town of Suva, with its
bungalows on every available knoll, some with vermilion others with red
roofs, other in slate or galvanized iron, one placed above the other like
seats in an amphitheatre. On the seashore at different parts cocoanut
palms, with their graceful drooping foliage, but not in sufficient abund-
ance. Nearer at hand a small sailing vessel or two, which could be seen
to contain a coloured crew with their peculiar mops of hair. One most
striking appearance in the landscape was the great varieties in the greens.
From afar they are as varied as in our own latitudes, but are more
brilliant as if they had been washed or varnished —nearer at hand this
colouring disappears. . Slowly forward we passed, and after being
duly inspected as we came from an “ infected ” port, we made fast to
the wharf. On landing we hurried, no not “ hurried,” for although not
hot it was very steamy, but rather we sauntered to Mrs. McDonald’s
Hotel, and failing to get accommodation there we secured such as there
was at the Club Hotel.
The foreshore at Suva is a sort of esplanade with palms and other
unknown tropical trees, but on the way the eye caught sight of crotons,
dracenas, cannas and the scarlet hibiscus. Back to the boat for lunch
and then a stroll round Suva. The Fiji natives strike one at once ; their
carriage is majestic. In fact, it seems an insult to offer a living block of
black marble a sixpence to carry your bag to the hotel, especially when
such black marble’s ancestors would have revelled in a steak nicely
grilled from one’s own forefathers; with their lower limbs beautifully
modelled, theif lithe shining bodies encased only in a cotton loin cloth


termed a sulu, which reaches to the knee, their pearly teeth, laughing
faces and mop of hair like a housemaid’s broom, sometimes jet black,
sometimes reddened with lime, one couldn’t help admire these men.
Never have their feet been insulted with casings of any kind, hence their
majestic carriage, and the climate gives them the slow gait associated
with the movements of royalty. Amongst them were Samoans, lighter
in colour, coolies’ wives, darker and thinner limbed, covered with silver
ornaments, hanging a ring, bracelet or bangle on any part of the body
capable of holding the same—bangles on their feet, rings on their fingers,
bracelets on wrists, forearms and upper arms, earrings, and through one
nostril an ornament piercing the septum. The male coolie wears no
ornament; the woman carries her wealth on her body. The male
coolie does all the harder work on the island, such as the making of
roads ; the woman is the drone of the hive. With the Fijian women I
am not impressed; they are decidedly far from beautiful, but they always
look happy, and put one in mind that they live only for the day’s
happiness j they laugh heartily as they meet each other, and shake
hands.
One sight struck me as being strange. A man sat in a waggon
without springs, holding a pair of reins and a whip, with which he lazily
flicked the flies from his team, which consisted of two miserable oxen
yoked together. For the purpose of guiding them there was a ring
through the nostril of each beast, the rings being united together by an
iron bar, and to each ring was attached one rein.
Thursday, July 7TH : Kadavu Levu, Roko tui Tailevu.—
The above signature was written by a gentleman whose grandfather
would have been pleased to have served us up hot from his oven and
eaten us had we dared yesterday’s expedition. It is that of the grandson
of Cakabou, one of the most ferocious of cannibal chiefs. Cakabou, or
Thakambou, died in 1886. He asked for British protection, and Britain
took possession of Fiji in 1873.
We made arrangements with Brown and Joske for the charter of a
steam launch for two days at a day. The provisioning of the vessel
cost 9s. 6d. We had on board tinned meats, bread, liquor, kava,
perfumes, cheese, preserved fruits, jams, etc.
If I was disappointed with Suva as not coming up to expectations as
regards tropical scenery, it was all dissipated in this journey up the Rewa
River to Bau. The journey up to the Rewa (pronounced Rua) is made
inside the coral reef, and is perfectly smooth. Even passing along the
Island the scenery improved, more palms and cocoanut palms appearing.
As the entrance to the Rewa was approached, the scenery constantly
improved. The river is more than a mile wide at its mouth. Steaming
up we passed several small villages with native huts, until we reached the
Roman Catholic Mission Station, having a large image'of the Virgin on


its northern aspect. These native huts are invariably of one kind—a
square front surmounted by poles leading to a ridge pole, and having
openings on all sides, such openings being closed by letting a mat fall.
In some of them there are European doors and windows, spoiling the
effect. No nail is used in the construction, the different parts being
spliced together by a tough kind of vine plant, and the whole being
thatched with pandanus leaves. The interior is covered with large
native mats lying on dried fern and other leaves, making a soft springy
mattress, on which the natives sleep, the women’s quarters being
partitioned off by curtains. Some of the cross beams inside are worked
in various-coloured patterns with parti-coloured string wound round
them. Cooking is done outside in a native oven; they never need a
fireplace within, on account of the climate.
On the way up 'the river, shortly after leaving the Mission Station
we left the main river and turned to the right up a narrow passage.
Then the beautiful tropical scenery began. The river ran a sinuous
course, some of the turns being so acute that the launch’s nose almost
touched the banks. Along these banks groves of banana plants, with
their dark-green graceful fronds, bread-fruit trees, cocoanut palms, and
sugar-cane, gently stirring to the breeze, were found around the settle-
ments or villages. Between the villages the mangrove, now out in
flower, lined the banks to the water’s edge. From the upper branches of
the mangrove a long single stem falls to the water and divides into
tentacles, which reach the mud; then a shoot appears, which gradually
becomes itself a parent tree. The mangrove flower is a saffron yellow,
cup-shaped form, something like an enlarged convolvulus. As every
village was passed, small bronze images appeared on the shore, each with
his or her little sulu or loin cloth, and in they splashed for oranges or
biscuits thrown from the launch. At every turn another village, all well
positioned, so that a good stretch of river could be seen up and down.
The undergrowth at various parts was interspersed with wild clematis
and other flowers of name unknown, but peculiar in character. Among
known varieties was the scarlet Hibiscus, and near some of the houses
the beautiful Poinsettia Occasionally we passed a native canoe of the
catamaran style, laden with yams, taro, or grass. In one case this was
propelled by women of fine physique. Our idea in ordering the launch
was to see original Fijian life, and for one day and night to live with
them. We expected a native feast, with a native dance, food cooked in
the native oven, and so on. This we were led to believe we would get
at the Island of Bau if we went, and we would have in addition the
advantage of visiting the ancient Fijian capital and seeing the most
powerful chief in the island, by name Kadavu Levu. We left at 10 a.m.
and arrived about 330 p.m. at Bau. To our surprise, on landing we
were met by a gentleman about 6 feet in height, dressed immaculately in
the finest flannel sulu, with a kind of extra first-class cricketing flannel


coat, a Scotch cap, no boots, and a black walking* stick. He spoke in
the most cultured English, and was evidently annoyed that we had not
sent word we were coming. This was next to impossible for us to do,
and, further, we did not know it was necessary, as we had been told in
Suva that a letter of introduction even was not required. Kadavu was
withal most dignified, and at once placed his own house at the disposal
of our company, but evidently he placed some restraint on his
hospitality. He detailed one of his men, whom we afterwards found
was his direct cousin, to take us round the village and show us the
sights. Our guide knew very little English. He showed us the old
priests’ house, which was built on the same plan as an ordinary one, but
was raised some 6 or 8 feet above the ground, on a mound, surrounded
or banked up by large stones, which were brought, I was afterwards
informed, from surrounding islands, some coming many miles distant.
This house was also of more pretentious build, the ends of the ridge pole
being ornamented with hundreds of white shells. It is the chiefs house,
and in every village there is one of these, but that at Bau was far the
finest we saw. The one at Bau is now occupied by the young men of
the village at night, as Kadavu has a more modern English villa roofed
with galvanized iron. In ancient times the priests occupied the house,
and outside it was a stone about 3 feet high, with a hollow in the top,
such a hollow as an ordinary skull would fit into. In prior times the
heads of their enemies, alive or dead, were placed in this, after being
offered to the priests as a sacrifice by the successful warriors and battered
to pieces prior to the bodies being cooked. The stone now finds a
resting-place in a large Wesleyan Mission Church about 100 yards
distant, and is used as a baptismal font.
From here we were taken to a knoll about 100 feet high, on which
is Cakabou’s (C = Th) tomb in a sadly neglected state. On the tomb is
a monument of white marble, which is a prominent landmark from sea-
ward. Two other graves with headstones are in the same place, the
headstones having fallen or been thrown down —perhaps by an earth-
quake. They were all very neglected. Some more recent native graves
alongside, without headstones, had been better looked after, being
covered with strings of some coloured native fruit, something like large
capsicums. Along the top of this knoll we passed to the missionaries’
house, and thence down a zigzag path to the grassed common lying
between the priests’ house and the Mission Church.
En route to the knoll of Cakabou’s grave we were taken to a native
hut, and saw the fishing boats return. They were manned by stalwart
women, who tumbled out of the boats into the water to haul them
ashore. Finely made they looked as they passed on to the shower bath
near their houses, the water being laid on all over the village in
galvanized iron pipes leading from a large underground tank, which is
supplied from the galvanized iron roof of the Church. Stand-pipes are


placed all over the village. Then we had races on the green for the
children, all decently clad in sulus. Some ran exceedingly well, a few
having quite a professional style in starting from the hands. I have
since been informed that Kadavu has organized Sheffield Handicaps in
Bau. About 6 p.m. we were summoned to dinner. Judge of our
surprise to see a table set with the finest linen, serviettes, cut tumblers,
flowers in vases—in fact, all the usual accompaniments of a gentleman’s
house, and we expected to have to divide our food with our hands. In
the room was an electric bell, which was quite unnecessary, for a couple
of native servants swooped down noiselessly as soon as the plate was
empty and attended to the guest. At the side was a desk with a diary,
clock, and all necessary articles for letter-writing. Pictures hung on the
walls, and various native weapons and curios. There was also an
illuminated address to Cakabou, signed by some Wesleyan dignitary in
Sydney, and to complete the whole illusion we were served in the style
of a first-class hotel, with a four-course dinner, consisting of soup, fish,
tinned meat, and tinned fruit, with tea or coffee.
Kadavu’s trouble was that he was unable to entertain us in a style
suitable to his position Up till dinner time he had done all the
entertaining, and until he accepted our hospitality we were not on good
terms. After nighfall three of us went out to see if it were possible to
arrange a dance. One of the party, who had been to the Islands before,
had made enquiries during the afternoon, and thought it possible. We
had been informed also that there would be church in the evening. On
the way we met the Roco, or chief, Kadavu going to see us. As there
were others to entertain him, we went on. We found on our return later
that he had had refreshment with our party, and from that on he was
most urbane, and could not do too much for us. He assigned the men
of our party a house to sleep in, but our guide (one of ourselves) forgot
the way, and landed us in a quandary later on.
We continued our walk, and came to the particular house we were
in search of. It was a somewhat eerie sensation to go parading around
this one-time heathenish village, led by a small lantern, and occasionally
coming up against a native, who passed with silent tread, generally on
the way to church. Having arrived, Mr. W. proceeded to try and get
the girls to make kava, but without avail. He then played a couple of
games of cards with them, but after vainly spending a quarter of an hour,
he announced that there would be neither kava nor singing, and we
passed out again into the darkness, and reaching the common, saw the
church fully lit up and in full swing so we approached. We found the
natives all squatted on a mat floor, and very fervid in their attention to
the service. The singing was excellent in quality and tone, the different
parts being well taken, and the whole service went with a good swing.
This village consists of a population of 500, lodged in native huts.
There is no attempt at anything like street formation, the huts being


planted down quite promiscuously. During the aftenjoon we were taken
to see two war canoes of Cakabou’s time. They were made to hold 250
warriors each, and are perishing from exposure.
Owing to being unable to locate our particular sleeping house, we
had to bunk as we could. The ladies of the party were excellently
provided with double beds, although the mattresses were stated to be
very hard. We men simply slept on the bare boards of the floor of the
room or verandah, with a rug underneath. We lay down fully clothed,
and had our bags as our pillows. Every night has its end, and we were
all glad to see daylight about 5 a.m., and another walk around was
indulged in, the war canoes,being visited ; then a climb up the hill past
the missionary house to Cakabou’s tomb. The view was very fine sea-
ward with the rising sun. Then to the village, and the usual distribution
of cigarettes, of which the Fijians—men, women, and children—are
inordinately fond. During the previous afternoon we had all bought
curios from the villagers, whose standard of value for all articles is “ one
silling.”
During my morning stroll an intelligent little boy took me in hand.
He could speak some English, and informed me that in former times
this village was really two villages, separated by an imaginary line, over
which it was death for one side or the other to pass. He also took me
to a stone about 50 yards distant, near the water’s edge, which he said
was an image one of the villages worshipped, the other one worshipping
at the priests’ house. Again I saw ihe baby of the village. I luring the
previous afternoon B.W. and I had squatted down native fashion on the
grass, and were soon surrounded by noisy children and their mothers.
The women were rather good-looking, for Fiji. One of them, better
than the others, had a beautiful little fat, dark-skinned baby, about nine
months old, as happy as Larry, langhing and crowing, and not at all shy,
He came to me to be nursed, and, like all of his age, put everything he
could get his hands on into his mouth. Except for his dark skin, he
was undistinguishable from any beautiful white baby. Incidentally, I
may say we all remarked on the good humour and jollity of the children
and the complete lack of quarrelling. Even the babies didn’t cry.
Returning, I had a further talk with Kadavu. He told me he had
jurisdiction over 11,000 natives, and rode on horseback from village to
village as required. He plays cricket, and is starting football His
language was good, but occasionally he lapsed into slang, as when he
said the natives were subject to a yearly tax of about 24 “ bob ” a head,
and speaking of Kamimura, the Japanese admiral, he gave it as his
opinion that “he is a very good man, with hard luck 1” He says
all land is held in common, and cannot be sold.
We then had breakfast of toast, tea and coffee, when Kadavu
proceeded to write various autographs. After shaking hands cordially
with the Roco, we got aboard, and left about 9 a.m.


Kadavu has a kind of butler, called Joe, an Indian, who has two
boys under him. Joe was a sort of major-domo of the house in which
we were located. I mention the fact of Joe’s existence on account of his
self-importance, and also that we took up six bottles of whisky, the
greater part of which disappeared in a mysterious fashion, and as Joe
was more than slightly intoxicated all the evening, we drew our own
conclusions. Being advised by Kadavu to camp at Nakelo, one of his
villages, for lunch, we left everything except enough for our own require-
ments at Bau. Amongst other things were kava, native tobacco, and
provisions.
About 12 noon we came to Nakelo, having on board my little black
friend of the morning, who was returning to Suva. Still the same beauti-
ful scenery, with the brilliant Hibiscus peeping out, oftentimes from a
tangled mass of ferns. Here and there a dark face would peer at us,
being set in a frame of dark-green foliage, the face alone being visible,
and as we passed along the banks all the village would turn out to see
our launch. In the youngsters would flop for oranges or biscuits.
Shortly before reaching Nakelo, we came to a Norfolk Island pine
on the river bank where the river bifurcated. The particular branch we
went down had in years past been formed from a canal constructed by
Cakabou for the purpose of shortening his journey when on warlike
expeditions against the tribes on the Lower Rewa. Gradually the water
has washed and widened the canal, until now it is the main river, although
the native name for that particular part of the river is still “ The Canal.”
Then we reached Nakelo, and were received by the chief, whose
name is unknown, and by Ade (pronounced Andy) Cakabou (Thakam-
bou). Here we were received with the greatest hospitality. Mats were
put down for us to sit on. Our own tablecloth was spread, and we
proceeded to get out our own provisions, now scanty in quantity, as we
found that several foods we intended bringing had been left at Bau
(probably through Joe’s agency). We were just about to make the best
of it when a native brought out a roast fowl from the chiefs house.
This was his own dinner, but etiquette compelled him to give it to us.
Ade also brought out her very own afternoon tea cups and saucers and
spoons. We joined forces, handing over to the chief, his ladies, and his
head men our tinned meat, bread, jam, and plum pudding, and we
dividing up their fowl. A very merry party we were, and all as hungry
as hunters.
We were then conducted around the place, and saw growing and
cultivated yams, taro, sugar-cane, and bananas. Some new fruit we had,
the pamelo or shaddock, not particularly nice, being slightly acid and
astringent. While we walked round they were preparing kava from the
fresh root. A description of the preparation of and formalities in
drinking kava can be found in any guide book. There is a decidedly


numbing effect produced in the mouth similar {o that produced by
cocaine. From the fresh root I preferred it to that obtained in Suva
from the dried root. The most objectionable feature in connection with
it is its appearance. The taste also has to be acquired.
At this village no payment was taken for anything, placing Dr. M.
in an awkward position. He had admired a mat, and thought he had
purchased it, but was informed by the chief that he could take no
payment for it. The Dr. squared matters by more than an equivalent
in the shape of a gold pencil-case. Various presents of fans and so on
were made to the ladies, and in no case was any payment accepted.
Ade Cakabou is a well-shaped, pretty woman—of course, spoilt, in
our eyes, by the broad nose and thick lips, but with her fascinating
smile and good-humoured face one could not help being much taken.
Round about the chiefs house are growing caladiums, balsams, crotons,
and ferns of all kinds and varieties.
This was the village, had we known of it, at which we would have
stayed overnight to see Fijian life. There we should not have found all
the accessories of a gentleman’s table, as at Bau, and we would have had
a meke at night. After about an hour and a half, and leaving with them
everything we had left, we started down the river from pretty little
Nakelo, and passing onwards reached the good ship Manapouri at 4.30
p.m., really very tired, but amply repaid for the exertion.
There were ten in party, and the cost of the trip for two days was
325. per head. After a bath and a good dinner, for which the
Manapouri is now proverbial, we had a meke on deck by the boys
employed on board. All movements are from the arms, body, and
hands as they sit squat-legged. Each movement has some significance
in the song. One man intones, and those associated with him in front
act in unison with him in all movements. Those in the background
merely clap their hands to time. One boy had two sticks with which he
struck a piece of wood, making music of a kind of Chinese character.
The most noticeable features in the meke are the good intonation, the
taking of different voice parts, the absolute precision of their time, and
the savage character of the music.
July Bth.—This morning we posted our various letters, leaving the
boat early, as she was going round to the mouth of the Rewa to take on
board 200 tons of sugar. Breakfasted at Mrs. McDonald’s Hotel, a
much cleaner and better hotel than the Club, at which we had
previously stayed. The Club Hotel was dirty, the meals bad. The
waiters were coolies, who were uncleanly, and whisked off fruit on to
your plate with their fingers when it did not drop off the fork - e.g.,
slices of pineapple. The beds were uncomfortable, the outhouses dirty,
and the place decidedly inferior. So bad was it that we paid our
accounts for dinner and bed (45.) and came aboard for breakfast.


McDonald’s is spotlessly clean; native waiters, swift, silent, and cleanly.
We had breakfast and lunch there, and were introduced to the pawpaw,
or mummy apple, something like a rock melon, and full of small black
rounded seeds, resembling when in their glutinous envelope enlarged
caviare. The skin, rind, and seeds are not eaten; the reddish
yellow portion between the seeds and rind is eaten with a spoon like
rock melon.
During the morning we drove round Suva, passing first round by
Government House, situated on a hill rising above the town. On this
rise are the residences of many of the principal people of Suva, and very
pretty the bungalows look with their tropical flowers and vegetation.
Then back through the town and up the hill on the other side, where
there are other lovely bungalows, all positioned to get the best view of
the bay and also to catch the sea breeze.
On we drove, passing several cringing coolies. These coolies are
indentured by the sugar people. They are of an inferior class, but are
very thrifty. A medical man on board from Viti Levu (he is the fourth
medico we have) tells me their wages in full working time come to about
ss. 6d. a week. The work is assigned out on the allotment principle,
and if fully performed the coolie earns is. per day, subject to
proportional reductions if the work is not completed. Even out of this
the coolie saves money, and after his indentures are completed he then
leases land (unimproved) from the Fijian and makes money, sometimes
becoming wealthy enough himself to indenture labour. On his leasehold
he grows sugar, taro, yams, fruit, and rears poultry. He works all day
and night, and is thrifty. No one denies his thrift and perseverance, but
every one detests him. He is cringing, fawning, obsequious, and mean
to a degree. He is quite untrustworthy. The Fijian and coolie have a
mutual contempt and dislike for each other. The Fijian is generous to
a fault, is well made, strong of limb, happy, and takes life easily. The
coolie is hard-working and penurious, ill made, cringing; his limbs are
spindles. The only thing he will spend money over is law. They are
inveterate law-fighters, and will quarrel legally over anything. A Roman
Catholic Marlst Brother on board states that one rarely ever sees a
Fijian at the assizes for crime of any kind, the criminal element being
almost entirely supplied by coolies. The coolie woman is better in
feature than the Fijian, but they do not emigrate in sufficient numbers.
It is confidently believed that the coolie will be a difficulty in the near
future, and that restrictions will necessarily be placed on his importation.
From the very lop of the hill above Suva a beautiful view of the
harbour is obtained. In front, in the distance, the dark-blue sea
expanse is broken by the waves falling in white cascades over the reef
which surrounds Viti Levu in a complete semi-circle, except for one
small space of unbroken water, the channel entering the harbour.


On the right, in the far distance, the Island of Mbenga (that of the
firewalkers) ; from there the high volcanic ranges divided into sharp
pointed peaks, the somewhat uniform appearance of the serrated tops
being interrupted by the Devil’s Thumb. Nearer at hand, the placid
ultramarine blue waters of the harbour, with scarcely a ripple. Below
us runs a creek, between the ridge we are on and one just across, both
ridges being covered with vegetation down to the water’s edge. The
course of this creek can be followed up between the hills, for a mile or
two, trailing its silvery serpentine way. Close at hand, below the
embouchure of the creek, stands the Hospital, and stretching away from
it along the shore a native village, with its peculiar huts, the village
being approached from Suva across a pretty white bridge, a prominent
object in the landscape. Away to the left, the semi-circular foreshore of
Suva, known as Victoria Esplanade, is seen, making altogether a coup
(Tail of great beauty.
During the afternoon we made an excursion by boat to Mr. Powell’s
spice plantation, across the harbour, on the Lami River. Mr. Powell
was himself in Suva, and our boatmen followed his lead up .the intricate
channel. Twice we grounded on the shallows, but having nothing to
spoil in the way of dress, our natives merely hopped out and pushed the
boat off. After about 40 minutes we reached the entrance of the river.
The short pull up was very beautiful, and suddenly turning a corner we
came in full view of the bungalow, prettily situated on a small knoll.
We were cordially treated and greeted, but lacked time to go round the
estate, which consists of about 200 acres. Mr. Powell informed us that
the banana plantation pays all expenses, and that he expects to make his
profits from spices. The plantation is three years old. In his front
garden he has specimens of different spice trees, of which he kindly gave
samples. These consist of cocoa. He produced several pods of the
cocoa and cut them open to allow us to taste the coooa custard. This
is a pearly white glutinous material surrounding the cocoa nibs, and is
most refreshing, with a slightly acid taste. It should make a most
delightful summer drink or a liquer, and is now entirely lost, no use
being made of it. We were also shown the clove and coffee plant, and
were given samples of anatto (a vegetable colouring material), palmetto
(whole spice), and croton seeds. Besides these, he grows capsicums,
nutmegs, pepper, and the cocoa erythoxylon (for the production of
cocaine). After partaking of his hospitality, we sauntered on to his wide
verandah, and casually asking the composition of a hedge about 4 feet
high in front, were informed in quite a matter-of-fact manner that it was
entirely made up of Gardenias , and that the odour was delightul when
in full bloom 1 ! The garden consisted of crotons, dracrenas, caladiums,
and various plants with the most beautifully coloured leaves.
Regretfully we left this ideal bungalow and returned to our ship.
After dinner things got much livelier aboard ship,-the boat pulling back


wards and forwards bringing our dusky passengers. These consisted of
Fijians, Samoans, and Tongans, the two latter races returning to their
homes. All brought their household effects with them, wrapped up in
mats. They further have a large consignment of kava bowls for Tonga,
where they say the trees from which they are made are rapidly dis-
appearing, and the wood is now scarce. Besides these bowls, they also
have three large drums, composed of hollowed out trees. On these the
natives now signal the time, being beaten, I believe, at 6 a.m., 9 a.m.,
and 12 noon. In old times these were their war drums. This evening
we had another meke by the Fijians and some songs by the Samoans.
In feature and expression the Samoan is more subdued and refined than
the Fijian, and so also is their singing. The Samoans’ is a softer, more
delicate, and more sympathetic note than the Fijians’. The latter you
would use to sing a blustering song or chorus, the former a sympathetic
ballad. Their songs were also most original and delicate in character, a
farewell song to their friends being especially tuneful.
Saturday, July 9TH.— We left Suva at midnight, arriving at
Levuka in the Island of Ovalau at daybreak. It is now decidedly warm
and steamy, and nowhere more so than at Levuka. All possible
clothing is god rid of.
The town is situated at the foot of a range of mountains which rise
abruptly from the seashore. Very pretty the place looked, the tops of
the mountains being wreathed in mists. The space available for
building between the seashore and mountains is not more than 200
yards across, consequently the town is extended right along the water’s
edge. This alone would prevent the place ever becoming any size, and,
further, it is exposed without shelter of any kind to the hurricanes which
visit it periodically and blow it to atoms. We were advised to go up to
the Bogie Hole for our bath. This is about 10 minutes’ walk up a
gorge, and consists of a cemented bath, a wall being thrown across the
stream just below a waterfall about 5 feet in height. The plug having
been previously lifted from the plunge bath, we contented ourselves with
a shower under the waterfall, a most delightful douche. We then
plugged the bath for the ladies later on, whose hours are from 10 a.m. to
5 p.m. On the way back we called at the “Fish Market.” The fresh
fish are spread out on a little landing pier, and a native calls buyers
together by blowing on a conch shell. Here one obtains shells and
coral, magnificent baskets of both being sold at 1/- per basket. There
is not much of interest in Levuka, and we were not altogether
disappointed to leave at 1 p.m. and get some cooler air.
Sunday, July ioth. — Last night we crossed the 180 deg. 01
longitude, so that to-day is not really Sunday, and to-morrow will be
Sunday, and is held as such in Samoa, who keep American time.
Tonga keeps the same as we do, and our ship keeps her own time, so
that really we could have two Sundays in this week. Bishop Willis, who


came on board with his wife at Suva, held service.- The rest of the day
was spent in the usual Sunday fashion, with food, sleep, and general
laziness.
Monday, July iith. —Still the same delightful weather as we have
had all along. To-night we should reach Apia. The boat is much
quieter now that we have left our young bloods at Suva. Time is
passed with the usual deck games and evening concerts. Arrived at
Apia at 9 p.m., and went ashore to make arrangements for the morrow.
The proprietors of the hotels are somewhat disorganized, as there is a
private yacht in harbour, and they have all been having a good time.
There had been a wedding on the Island of Savai, where a chiefs
daughter had been married. A huge feast, at which 450 pigs had been
slaughtered, had been part of the proceedings. The owner of the yacht
had stood as best man, and had made the bride a handsome present of
dress stuffs, perfumes, and such like things which appeal to feminine
vanity. Mr. R., the landlord of the Apia Hotel, had (been there also,
and was somewhat disinclined to discuss business details, with us that
evening, but called his major-domo, a young Samoan named Toso, to
attend to our wants. Toso was bright and intelligent, and announced
himself as ready to attend to the wants of our party, now somewhat
large, numbering in all about 20, quite sufficient to drain the equine
resources of all Samoa. In order to be quite safe, W.B. and I arranged
to leave the ship at 6 a.m. and breakfast at the hotel. The boatmen at
Apia are all licensed, and charge a fare of 1/- each way. This is an
absurd price, as the pull is certainly not more than a qaarter of a mile.
Why a pier or wharf is not built passes comprehension. That evening
the deck was crowded with Samoans eager to sell curios. The officers
of the boat were always consulted, and prevented us being too much
plucked.
In the morning our boatman, called Brown, did not appear to
time—in fact, no native has any idea of keeping time appointments.
Failing “ Brown,” we engaged “ Sam,” a splendid specimen of humanity,
and, landing, went to the hotel. It was now 6.30 a.m., and all Samoa
slept peacefully. . The sleep of some was understandable, but that we
should have to rouse up our faithful Toso, who was to have all
preparations ready by 7.30 a.m., was a little too much.
While Toso galloped aimlessly up and down the street making his
preparations, we went for a walk up the Tivoli Road, passing many
picturesque natives with fish and other eatables in baskets slung over
their shoulders.
Returning, we had breakfast, and shortly afterwards the party
arrived from the ship, and then the fun began. Mr. R., who was fully
dressed in a pyjama suit, topped with a bad head and a free flow of
language, started the game. The whole equine equipment of Samoa


was drawn up outside the hotel, and arrangements were made with a
number of traps—jinkers, capable of squeezing in two passengers and a
driver—at 3dol. (12/-) per day, and riding horses at zdol. (8/-). One
trap with two horses, to hold five passengers, was engaged at 30/-. The
jabbering and huckstering that went on were simply indescribable,
everybody talking at the same time, and all explaining at the highest
pitch of their voices. In the meantime, quite a flock of Samoan girls
was pestering one and all to buy fans, baskets, necklaces, and so on.
We seemed to be getting on swimmingly, and had the ladies portioned
out in various traps, when suddenly down came a thunderclap. Rates
had risen all round 2dol. per diem* R. fumed, threatening the owners
with all sorts of penalties for .breach of contract. The natives were
obdurate. “Toso,” “ Toso ” was being called by everyone. He alone
seemed to keep his head and hold his tongue,. After this had gone on
for about 20 minutes to half-ah-hour, it'looked'any price against our
outing. We were strongly advised not to compromise, as we were
inclined to do, or the rates would be< again raised, so out we got the
ladies. The invaluable Toso was sent off on the pony post haste, and
shortly afterwards returned with a note. We could have Easthope’s so-
called “ buggy,” to hold eight people, to go to Papasea for £2. R.
thinking it a fair price, we agreed—in fact, in that excited crowd we were
like so many corks on the surface of a seething ocean, Toso and R.
being our leading lights to a safe anchorage. Then began some more
chaffering with the owners of several native carriages (save the mark).
One was passed as too unsafe even for the four Samoan girls we were
taking with us. However, eventually all was fixed up, and we got away.
The large buggy was drawn by two weeds, who looked anxiously round
for a feed. The said trap weighed about half a ton.
Mary, a Samoan girl, and I got away in the last trap, drawn by the
very weediest of weeds, which was immediately christened “ Bones.”
His owner said we would not be able to drive him, and he knew the
beast. We got along the main street to the first turn, when “ Bones,”
suspecting some treachery, such as half-a-day’s work, positively refused
to go, and deliberately turned to the beach. The application of the
whip simply made him back and lift his heels. With the help of half-a-
dozen natives, he was pushed round in the proper direction, Mary being
in the meantime affected with hysterical laughter. Mary had a sweet
face, with beautiful teeth and magnificent eyes, so that laughter suited
her, and was quite contagious. Mary took the reins, and by her
persuasion and the forcible and continuous administration of the whip
by myself, “ Bones ” followed the others.
The road to Papasea is lovely beyond description. Tall, very tall,
cocoanut trees, 70 or 80 feet high, reared their graceful heads, laden
with fruit, all along the route. Palms of all varieties, bread-fruit trees,
bananas in rare profusion, and hosts of other unknown trees and shrubs,


formed a continuous avenue. At last, after a drive of about five miles,
the last half-mile of which “ Bones ” was towed by a friendly native in a
buggy, we stopped and took out the horses. We had provided ourselves
with clothing with which to do the slide at the rock.
The walk to Papasea is about a mile and a quarter ; certainly not
more than a mile and a half. We had been told that the distance was
variously from one to four miles. The way was hot and steamy, but the
distance was not too far for the ladies. On the road we passed a very
fine cocoa plantation, with the usual pawpaws, bananas, and dense
tropical undergrowth. Finally we reached Papasea, or the Sliding Rock,
and in the bush changed into bathing costumes. At first our Samoan
girls were shy, but after one or two had attempted the slide they entered
with spirit into the game, and many of Us slid for all we were worth, both
alone and accompanied by the girls.
It is very good fnrt and should never be missed when at Apia.
Having walked back, horses were harrieSsed, and a return was made to
the hotel, Mary and I had a terrible passage home with “ Bones,” but
with her persuasion and my somewhat' more forcible urging, we arrived
late, but in time for dinner.
In the afternoon there was some trouble with the natives, who
wanted payment before having completed their contracts, but eventually
we all got away for Papalaloa, or the Jumping Rock. We had the same
unwieldy engine called a drag, with the same two rats, and half-way up
one hill they came to a dead stop, and we got out and walked.
Papalaloa is about two miles out, and lies off the road to the left.
Stevenson’s house, Vielima, is half a mile further on, and to this I
climbed. It is a most delightful bungalow of two stories, and has been
added to by its present owner, Mr. Kuntze. There is now a large open-
air dining-room on the ground floor. The whole house is fitted up with
electric light. The garden is beautiful, Allamandas creeping every-
where, single and double Hibiscus being in profusion, and flowers of
every hue filling all vacant spots. Stevenson’s grave is on the summit of
a high ridge to the west of the house.
Returning from Vielima, a call was made at Papalaloa, but as we
had no natives, there was no jumping done into the pool. Coming
back to the hotel, we settled our accounts, and, strange to say, there
were no complaints. The whole day’s outing for carriage hire amounted
to 10/- per head—a very cheap trip. Back to the boat for a well-deserved
bath, after walking four miles in this climate.
In the evening we went to see a seva, or native dance. This took
place in a native house. These houses are better built than those of
the Fijians, being more regular in outline and finer in the thatch. The
dance was in itself and its surroundings the very essence of decency and
decorum. The movements of arms, body, and legs were rhythmical


and well executed. The steps were original, but had no suggestiveness.
The performers were dressed in their lava-lavas, or loin cloths, the upper
parts of the body being hidden with a copious necklace of banana
leaves, whose edges being divided, hung down over them like a green
shawl. The music and accompaniments were supplied by a number of
men in the background, who beat on the mat with sticks or clapped
their hands in unison. -iThe Taupo, or chief’s daughter, was more
extensively decorated than the others, the upper part of her body being
protected with a pink silk handkerchief. All were copiously smeared
with cocoanut oil. About an hour and a half of the seva was enough,
and we prepared to go. Before leaving, each of us was shaken by the
hand by the Taupo and bidden adieu with the word “ Tofa ”
(Good-bye). Some of her attendant maidens, went so far as to print a
kiss on the cheek of some of our party. By the way, during the course
of the dance, one dusky beauty, with swinging rhythmical movement,
approached the writer, and with lightning rapidity imprinted a smacking
kiss on his lips, to his complete surprise, and to the great merriment of
his shipmates and the natives assembled.
Later we came aboard, the anchor was weighed, and we sorrowfully
left the delightful island of Samoa and its sweet dusky olive beauties,
with their child-like, winning ways, soft, persuasive voices, tender tones
and movements.
Wednesday, July 131 H.— Left Apiaat*i2 midnight, and to-day it
is slightly rougher. Are having a quiet ‘.'day, and our good ship is
turned for home—a sweet sound, in spite of the pleasures of the trip.
Thursday, July 14. TH. —Up at ■ 6 a.m. to see Vavou Harbour.
The entrance somewhat resembles that of Sydney Harbour, with a
bluff headland on one side and a lower one opposite. We were
informed that the right-hand side of the harbour consisted entirely of
islands separated from each othet by narrow passages, the islands over-
lapping, so" that it is completely land-locked. It is a distance of seven
miles from the entrance to the anchorage, and as the water is as deep as
40 fathoms, the whole British Navy could easily be contained in it.
.The whole harbour is dotted with small islands covered down to
the water’s edge with verdant green. Here and there are silvery, sandy
beaches, and approaching Vavou are some of a golden yellow colour.
On the left, a tall range of mountains followed us along, in one place
the serrated peaks being replaced by a long continuation of the range,
with an absolutely flat top. Up and between the different parts of the
mountain range ran arms of the harbour, as in Sydney. In my humble
opinion, the beauty of this place excels that of Sydney. The water is
the deepest of blues, and far away, below, the bottom can be seen, so
clear is it. It is stated that, owing to the great depth, there is no fishing
to speak of at Vavou. Slowly up, past settlements on either side, we


steamed. These consisted both of native huts’ and trading stations.
Approaching our anchorage, we passed through “ The Narrows,” with
Mount Talau on the left and a little settlement with a golden shore on
the right. Ahead we saw Vavou, a small settlement with a Governor’s
(black) house, post-office, and several business houses of trading firms,
all being built of wood and galvanized iron. In addition to these were
the native huts, much inferior in construction to those of either the
Fijians or Samoans. The Samoans excel all others in the construction
of their huts and the quality of their mats, tappa, and baskets. The
Tongan makes no mats, fans, or baskets, but gets them from Nuie, a
savage island.
After breakfast, with a small boy as a guide, we climbed Mouga
Talau (Mouga pronounced Mounga = Mount), which is 400 to 450 feet
high. The way along leads through a delightful orange grove, orange
trees 20 or 30 feet high laden with fruit being on either side—fruit to be
had for the picking. Further along, cocoanut palms, laden with fruit,
tempted one to drink, and on the way back our little guide shinned up
and satisfied our wants. The climb up is steep and through dense
undergrowth, but is quite accessible for ladies, and is more than worth
the trouble. The view is beautiful. The deep blue of the harbour
waters becomes opalescent near the beaches of silver sand, and exhibits
all the colouring of m'other-of-pearl. In this there is absolutely no
poetic imagination, for thefTSatne effects .observed by all, not only in
one place, but also up aU;thg different branching inlets. At our feet
stretched out the harbour;'with its scored of small'islets, all verdant
green, set in a sea of ultramarine blue ; in the far distance the breakers
of the Pacific dashing themselves in a feathery spray against the
encircling coral reef. The colouring of the harbour can never be
forgotten. The variations as noted at the time passed from silver to
blue green, to light green, thence to light blue and the deepest of
Prussian blue.
Back to the village, and strolled around-,wdh- my little guide, Maru
(wild beast). Purchased a piece of tappa’ cloth’ from Maru’s mother for
2/-, a fan being added ks a ; make-weight. An intelligent native, who
could speak English, and desired me to take him back to Melbourne,-
informed me it would take 50 women one day to. make my tappa cloth,
and that its local value was about 6d. This is no, place for ladies with
a penchant for women’s rights.
There being a wharf at Vavou, there was no difficulty in getting
aboard for lunch. In the afternoon we were taken by boat to see a
cave four miles down the harbour. We sailed down, arriving about 3.30
p.m., with a bright sunshine—a very necessary adjunct when visiting this
cave. There is a sufficiently wide entrance to admit a life-boat, the
height and width being somewhere about 20 feet. At once one enters
a roughly circular chamber with a domed roof. The chamber is of


calcareous formation, and the roof contains large stalactites not
terminating in fine points as at Jenolan and other caves. Right across
the dome is a large heavy mass, hanging down as if it were a beam of
solid rock, roughly dividing the roof into two parts. The stalactites
are rather of the formation known as “shawls” in Jenolan, but are
more massive. Opposite the entrance, and slightly to the left, is an upright
stalagmite standing in jiiche. This is about 5 feet high and 2 feet
wide, and emits when struck a deeply sonorous note as of a bass gong.
This quality was accidentally discovered within the last year or two by a
native who entered the cave in rough weather, and, putting out his oar
to prevent his boat striking, accidentally hit the rock now known as the
Bell Rock. The name of thisrcave is Anapekapeka, or Cave of the
Pekapeka (ana = cave). The pekapeka is a small bird resembling a
swallow, whose black mud nests can be seen in the dome of the cavern.
Opposite the entrance is a cleft leading, it is said, to another cave, into
which light descends from above?" The bottom can be seen many feet
below, and the sunshine follows a path of gold through the entrance to
the interior of the cave. The chamber is about 50 feet high and
100 feet in diameter, and constantly there is the drip, drip of water from
above. The peculiarly beautiful colour effects in the cavern are difficult
of description. They would be more difficult to depict in colours, and
are still more difficult to explain.
Certain it is that in different positions? imjthe chamber the colouring
on any one part of the wall varies. Perhaps';part of the effects is due to
the reflected sunshine through the clear blue waters of the cave. Along
the lower part of the chamber, from sea level to a height of about 3 feet,
there is a band of dark-red colouring, probably produced by some iron
salt in the calcareous formation. From this band to the roof the
colouring consists of all variations of greens slashed with yellows, from
the darkest sage green to the lightest eau-de-nil. In a different part of
the cave the colour would be from deepest blue to the palest of greeny
blue. Nearer the entrance, the hanging stalactites were tinted with all
varieties of blues and greens quite beyond the masculine power of
differentiation.
Of course, the usual vandals, with their insolent self-conceit, had
desecrated the walls with their autographs. Very pleased were we to
observe no British name amongst them The remarkable characteristics
of the chamber are the intensity of the blue colour of the water, its great
translucency, and the indescribable admixture of the colour tints on the
walls.
On the way back, hundreds of small crabs were seen scampering
over the coral rocks. A passenger, who lives on the Islands, gave the
following fish yarn:—When out fishing in this harbour, he attempted,
unsuccessfully, to catch some of these crabs, which are very good eating.
Then the natives tried their hands. One man beat two sticks together,


emitting a particular kind of tattoo. The crabs stopped suddenly,
elevated their tentacles, and were easily secured. The natives aver that
by certain songs they are also able to attract sharks and capture them.
In the evening, by invitation of the Governor of Vavou and the
German representative there, we attended a lakalaka (lakalaka, Tongan
seva, Samoan = meke, Fijian), or native sing-song. The only difference
at this entertainment other than we had previously seen was the making
of the king’s kava. This was a most ceremonious performance, and it is
stated that this particular man is one of the very few who now know how
to make it. It occupied about 20 minutes, and as we didn’t understand
the significance of the various grotesque movements, it became a trifle
“ slow.”
Friday, Jury isth. —Left Vavou at midnight for Haapai, a six
hours’ run. Up early to see the entrance through the reef. This
passage is a difficult one, owing to the’’ narrowness and intricacy of the
channel. We cast anchor about a mile and a half from the shore, and
landed after breakfast. On the way round we saw Mount Kau, an
active volcanic cone, about 40 miles off. From the top a continual
cloud of smoke is emitted. Near Kau is another active volcano, called
Tofua, which is said to periodically disappear.
At Haapai the colouring of the water is quite different from Vavou.
Here it is a bright emerald' green even in deep water. There is but
little of interest here—a very neglected palace of the King of Tonga, the
only thing of beauty about itrbeing a fence formed of the most beautiful
varieties of crotons. A walk of ten minutes, through an avenue of
cocoanut palms, takes one right across the island, where on the beach
shells may be collected. There being no jetty, we were carried on the
backs of natives to the rowing boat, and arrived for lunch in time, as we
always did. At 4.30 p.m. we made a start for Toga, or Nukualofa.
These intricate passages must always be negotiated by daylight.
Saturday, July i6th.— Arrived at Nukualofa at 7 a.m.
Approaching Toga (Tonga), we pass many small islaads, two of which
have histories. A Mr. L., a passenger from Haapai, who combines the
offices of teaching English in the school at Toga and that of Government
auditor, gave me those of a couple of them. Before proceeding to these
histories, a word or two about Togan officials. This gentleman has the
duty of Government auditor thrust upon him; it is entirely honorary,
and carries no increase of salary. We heard, too, ashore that all salaries
of Government officials are six months in arrears.
In Toga “ one man in his time plays many parts.” At Vavou and
Haapai the one Government official combines in himself the onerous
offices of postmaster, harbour master, customs officer, health officer, and
head of any ’other branch that may exist. They complain of having to
keep five or six different sets of books. It is stated as true that stamps


were so limited in supply on our arrival at Vavou, because the Govern-
ment official as postmaster had requisitioned for a supply a month
before, but had used a form of the wrong colour, and had further used
a wrong kind of envelope in sending his requisition, and that this had
been referred back to him for explanation from head office at Nukualofa.
As the mails run once a month, it will be some time before he gets a
fresh supply of stamps.
Respecting the before-mentioned islands, on one of them the
Haapaians years ago swooped down, and the inhabitants, fearing them,
hid away in a large cave, thinking themseives secure. The enemy,
discovering them, smothered them by lighting fires in the entrance.
Skeletons can be found to this day in the cave. The remnant getting
away, made for the island of the Tongan group furthest away from
Haapai, named Pylsaart. Here they existed for some years, when a
ship approached and offered to convey them back to their native land,
for which they pined. Unsuspectingly, many of them got aboard, and
were treacherously conveyed to the mines in Chili. After this the
Togan king sent for the remainder and settled them on an island near
Nukualofa.
The other island is small, and contains the bodies of the seven
natives who were shot for attempting the lift of Shirley Baker. This
man is variously anathematized and blessed. are uttered at
him for his treatment of the king and natives; blessings for his planting
of fruit trees and his civilising movements.
On walking along the pier at Nukualofa, one was attracted by some
small fish swimming alongside, of the brightest blue colour. The town
itself consists of a collection of wooden houses with galvanized iron
roofs, and suffers much in beauty and comparison with any town visited.
The king’s palace is a two-story wooden building of light design,
with an iron roof, much resembling any ordinary house. The grounds
are surrounded by a stone wall about 3 feet high. They are not
extensive, and serve as a paddock for the king’s horses. They are
better grassed than anything we have seen in these islands, and here for
the first time since leaving Australia we have seen clover and grass
resembling our own.
Along the seashore are the stores of various trading firms. There
is some attempt at regularity in the streets. The native houses are built
of wood and galvanized iron, and where a native hut appears it is of
inferior type. The natives strike one as not being so cleanly as those
of the other islands. There are but few places of interest in Nukualofa :
the king’s palace, the monument to the king’s father and his own late
wife, now two years dead, and the Lagoon, about a mile from the shore.
The old king’s monument is said to have cost and that of the


late queen £l4OO. If so, one is inclined to believe with the local sage
that, as regards the monument, there jvas more “chiselling” done
between Italy and Toga than ever had been done in Italy, from whence
the statue came. In both cases the monuments are placed on a mound
10 or 15 feet above-the ground, the mound having been made by the
natives, and being surrounded with a casing of dressed coral stone. A
flight of steps leads to the monuments on top.
The Lagoon is a large expanse of water with a mouth communi-
cating with the ocean. It is a good mile from the beach. In most
islands, instead of occupying its present site, Nukualofa would be here,
situated, as it is really the Lagoon of the Atoll. About 20 yards from
the shore were two women fishing. One was quite naked, but merely
her head was showing above water. She was feeling with her feet for a
kind of jelly-fish, and having located its spot, down went her hand, and
the mass was speedily transferred to the basket. The other native had
on a dark robe stretching from her shoulders. She landed near us with
her fish, No. 1 passing along a little way and transferring into garments
in the bush. An old darhe who was also present, apparently acting as
chaperone, explained to us that these fish were “ very good kai-kai ”
(food).
At Nukualofa we disembarked our native passengers. From Fiji
we took a small number, and although a few were landed as we arrived
at various ports, still the additions were always many more than our
losses, so that by the time we left Haapai we must have had about 150
on board. They arrive with much jabbering, carrying the whole of their
worldly goods and chattels, consisting mainly of mats, a sulu or two, a
head rest, generally made of bamboo, and a piece of tappa cloth. This
is made of the inner bark of a tree, and is beaten out into bands, which
are joined together by some gummy material. A few of them, the
wealthier, had also a box made of camphor wood, and so much do they
trust others outside their own family circle that each box is provided on
the inside of the lid wi}h a bell, which gives an alarm whenever the lid
is unlocked and lifted.
All over the deck these dusky, untidy men and women lay in all
sorts of positions, higgle-de-piggledy, among their household goods, their
taro, yams, cocoanuts, and other foods. They sleep most of the time
covered up in tappa cloth. When they wake they eat and smoke.
Knives and forks are unknown luxuries. They simply tear off taro or
yam or yam in junks and bolt it down with tinned meat or fish. When
not eating or sleeping, they sing. One section or another was always
doing one of these three active exercises. It mattered not that a hymn
in full blast was going on above their heads, some slept soundly on.
After leaving us at Nukualofa, the deck was a sight, and required the
scrubbing and washing it received. All the same, with all the


disadvantage of a crowded deck, they were most entertaining, and one
listened for hours to their singing and watched their various
performances.
At 5.25 p.m. we drew off from the wharf with a sad feeling as we
uttered the Samoan “ Good-bye ” (“ Tofa,” the sweetest-sounding word
of them all), to these interesting islands, in which we had all been
restored to a normal state of health
Sunday, July 17TH. Still excellent weather, but gradually getting
cooler, so that we are discarding our white clothing.
Monday, July ißth. — To-day had a championship doubles, deck
billiards. The chief officer and the Baron won.
In the afternoon got up a Calcutta sweep, and in the evening at
9 p.m. tickets were put up for auction. Very spirited bidding was
indulged in, especially for the top ticket .(278). It was eventually
secured by the Baron for £3/16/-. The total amount of the sweep
amounted to ,£9/8/6. It was won by Mr. Radford, who held 275.
Some harmless amusement was indulged in by the fictitious sales of
tickets, some of the passengers being completely taken in, and expressing
horror-stricken surprise at the “ gambling." This “ gambling spirit ” was
further accentuated by fictitious “ cuts ” of cards at 20/- per cut.
Needless to say, the company did not consist-cf gamblers. During this
afternoon and evening we encountered squalls of rain.
Tuesday, July 19TH. —Beautiful morning ; cool breeze ; sea calm.
We have returned to our normal'weather.'
Wednesday, July 20TH. —Headwind; rougher sea; so much so
that we steamed at half speed (5 knots), as it is impossible to make
Auckland before midnight, and it is useless shipping seas. Even at
half speed they come over the bows right merrily. This evening at
dinner Dr. Maher, in a neat speech, thanked the captain and officers for
their kindness, and called upon the writer to propose their healths.
This was done apparently to the satisfaction of my shipmates and also
the officers. Captain McLean and the chief officer replied. Singing
filled in'Hhe evening, a lady on board who came from Haapai, Mrs.
Burgess, being a great acquisition, playing all accompaniments from
memory. We passed the Great Barrier, and saw where the ill-fated
Wairarapa struck. Shortly afterwards we passed the Little Barrier, and
were in Hauraki Gulf, and then to bed.
Thursday, July 21ST. —Anchored at 1 a.m. The Health Officer
boarded us at 8 a.m. Went ashore in the Customs launch with Dr.
Benham, as we wished to get to Rotorua. “ Richard ” came ashore also
to see the last of us.
Took train at 10 a.m. for Rotorua. It is unnecessary to describe
the journey. It takes 8 hours to do 170 miles, and during that time


one is almost choked with dust. Arrived at Nelson’s Hotel,
Whakarewarewa, at 6.10 a.m. and had a wash. By moonlight walked
to Rotorua and did Whaka. This place has been modernised out of all
semblance of what it was ten years ago. The original native life is
unseen. There is now a village with streets all laid out and seats on all
points of vantage. No guide is needed. All the old interest has
vanished.
Friday, July 22ND. — Started at 8 a.m. for the round trip to
Waimangu. On the way to Wairoa some very pretty bush called the
Tikitapu bush is passed. Then the Blue Lake is reached—a beautiful,
light, greeny blue—having no outlet. A short distance further on, and
separated only by a low divide, certainly not more than 200 yards away,
is another lake, the Green Lake, quite a dull green in colour.- From
the divide the two lakes c£n be seen. The Blue is t 6 feet higher in
level than the Green. The Green emptys itself eventually over a
waterfall, 150 feet high, into Lake Tarawera. Eventually we got to
Wairoa—ten miles—and saw the sights, views of the hotels, Sophia’s
whare, the school-house, s<j on. Here we took a boat and partly
sailed and partly pulled across ’Tarawera. We had three natives. It
was bitterly cold. We had a “ south-easter,” which produced a choppy
sea, and froze one to the bones: About 12 noon we finished the pull of
eight miles. Tarawera and the surrounding volcanic hills are simply the
abomination of desolation. In a few parts some stunted vegetation
appears as if ashamed of itself. The old volcanic mud is being
gradually denuded by the' rains, making ravines of all sizes up the
mountain sides. Everything seems quiescent now, but there is always
the feeling that something, might happen and that you yourself might
be there at the physchological moment. It was just as quiescent an
hour before the eruption eighteen years ago. A. walk of Imiles
brings one to Rotomahana. Here we had lunch,, and then we had
another boating excursion across the lake. Still the same bitterly head
wind, but the water is warm, and on the right are evidences of thermal
action as evidenced by the rising steam. We'saw the old spots where
the pink and white terraces existed, and which are not being .reformed
here, although it is said others are slowly- forming at Waiotapu Valley.
Towards the head of the lake we pulled over the “boiling water,” a part
where thermal action is so active that the water is almost boiling hot.
At the time of the eruption Lake Rotomahana was blown right out,
and its bed was dry, people being able to walk over it. It is said to be
eight times its original size now. After getting across this lake we got a
fresh guide to go to Waimangu. He was a half-caste maori; a fine
looking fellow, well educated and most intelligent. He had gone
to school to St. Stephen’s Maori College, Auckland. He first introduced
us to a small geyser constantly in action called the “ Red Geyser,” and
it deposits a salt of iron just as in the original pink terraces. Then we


proceeded gently upwards along the bed of a rivulet, of hot water which
comes from the Indicator near Waimangu. Further on this easy course
was impossible, and striking to the right we got into the thick of the
crater country. Most of these were active ten years ago, notably the
black crater, called so from its colour. At the time of the eruption they
were all active, and extended in a line nine or ten miles long to Mt.
Tarawera. Up the steep rises we toiled, although the path was good
and graded as well as possible under the circumstances. Here we
became just as hot as we had been chilled in the lake. Once on the
top, a height of about 500 feet,'and 1500 feet above sea level, the view
was grand. Away to the south, through a dip in the hills, could be seen
the far distant Ngarahoe, now snow-capped and brilliantly illuminated
by the afternoon sun. Range after range of blue tinted mountains
intervened. Nearer still Mounga KakayJjjea, which‘lies overlooking
Waiotapu Valley. This mountain is quite hot, so that there is little
vegetation on it, and it is marked in a most characteristicfashion on one
side by the many tints of its earths : reds, orange, yellows, browns, and
whites. The meaning of it is the nice smelling (Kakara) thing (mea).
The origin of the name is probably from some shrub which was on it in
former times.
At our feet, or apparently so, Lake Rotomahana, a dirty brown
green, with its many little arms and its’steam clouds rising on one side.
Away back, the frowning, desolate Tarawera, with its huge wounds
staring blackly. To the right, range after lange of hills furrowed by the
rains, the debris being carried down, and the harder irregular lines
looking like the bones of the skeleton of some huge antediluvian
animal.
No vegetation exists on these derelict monsters, and but little near
at hand. It is a veritable wdrn-out hell. Thus slowly vae still clambered
up, and at last reached the Rest House, below Which, muddy, dirty
Waimangu lay sulkily. Adjoining her, and nearer irs, that, is right- below,
250 feet, was her Indicator, a blue, boiling'lake. At one time when the
Indicator overflowed, it was a warning that the.'Premiere Uanseuse of
the earth was about to play her part, and-it was time to be on the alert,
but now there is always an overflow from the Indicator, so it is no index
.to the lady’s caprices. For us she was sullen as she had been for fifteen
days before, so after being robbed by the local photo, artist, we passed
on.
It is miles from Lake Rotomahana to Waimangu, it seems
more, but it is all uphill climbing. It is 1 miles from the Rest House
to the Government accommodation house at Waimangu. It seems only
% mile at the outside, but twice one descends and ascends, and these
little inconveniences are not observable from the Rest House. We saw,
of course, the place where the unfortunate girls were washed away
during one of Waimangu’s eruptions,


The other curious sight here is the Devil’s Pan. It is
a perfectly safe place to visit, but it is nerve trying, as it is so difficult to
believe it is safe. You have observed fat boiling in a frying pan. You
remember how it sizzles and how the little oil globules rise and are
driveh' about here and there, and how they glisten as they bubble up.
Well, imagine a pan about 50 yards in diameter with here and there
places that are not so sizzling, and along which you walk, and
imagine, instead of fat, water boiling and bubbling up in the same
fashion, and making the same sizzling noise, and imagine columns of
steam rising up from this area enveloping you, and being blown aside at
times by the wind 50 as to let you see your way, and you then have a
weak notion of what the DeyiFs Frying Pan really is. After leaving this
we reached the coacby *nd after a wearisome drive of seventeen miles
landed at the hotel at 5.15 p.m. The return journey to Auckland was
made on Saturday* 23rd.
On Monday, 25th, we left by the Mararoa for Sydney at 5.45 p.m.
There was but little of , interest on the trip to Sydney. The
Mararoa travelled much faster than our good old Manapouri, but she
rolled most dreadfully. However, she made a good trip, landing us at
Sydney on Friday morning about 7 a.m.


THE DIRGE OF CABIN J.
If you’re on the Manapouri
And you want to know the lay
Of anything and everything
Just call on Cabin J.
If you suffer from-sea sickness,
And cannot see a ray
Of hope, take our advice
And come to Cabin J.
Should a husband be your aim in life,
We’ll find one straightaway;
They’re browsing round irk Hundreds
Near Cabins K and J.
Should headache rack'your wtary brow,
The result of yesterday, '
A perfect antidote you’ll find -■
In the squash at Cabin J.
We give advice on things like sweeps
For small sums every day;
We turn it out by grama, one - '
Round there in Cabin J. ■
And now.my shipmates you’ll agree,
Whatever others say,
They’ve done their best to cheer things up,
The boys of Cabin J.
LIST OF OFFICERS S.S. “MANAPOURI.”
Captain McLean
Thos. Brown, ist Officer
John Leonard, 2nd Officer
James Thomson, 3rd Officer
S. McDowall, Chief Engineer
H. Swan, 2nd Engineer
J. Backland, 3rd Engineer
W. Teixeira, 4th Engineer
H. Neill, Purser
E. Maultan, Gunner
E. Reid, Chief Steward






LIST OF PASSENGERS AND ADDRESSES.
• Mr. and Mrs. and the Misses Mills, U.S.S. Co., Melbourne.
S Mr. and Mrs. Dick, Glen Warlock, Kimbolton, N.Z.
•' Mr. and Mrs. Eedy, Citizens’ JJfe Assurance Society, Sydney.
• Mr. and Mrs. Ethell, 3 Moore Street, Sydney.
' Dr. Maher and Son, Collins Street, Sydney.
' Dr. Benham, Port Adelaide.
Dr.'Farrington, Suva.
Mrs. Hawkes, c/o Mrs. Sadler, Manly, Sydney.
Mr. and Miss Fulton,-dEStiva.
1
- Mr. Power, c/o C.S.R. Co., Lautoka.
Mr. Bellamy, c/o C.S.R. Cp., Lautoka.
Mr. Stacpoole, Suva.
- Mr. and Mrs. Rule, Buva.-
Mr. and Mrs. Purdon, C.S.R. Co., Labassa, Fiji.
- Mr. Scott Young ?t ,G.S.R. Go., Nausori.
- Mr. J. Forsyth, Suva.
—-Mrs. L. E. Browrl,* Bro ,1 & Joske, Suva.
- Mrs. K. Solomon, Levuka.
V s ' Mr. H. H. Wright, c/o R. Easthope, Samoa.
>-Baron Wrangel, c/o Hellstrom, Dunn & Co., Macquarie Place,
Sydney.
Mr. A. Faill, P. 0., Sydney. '
Miss Harrison.
Mr. and Mrs. Egglestone, Solicitor, Melbourne.
k ' Mr. J. A. G. D’Alpuget, Patterson, Laing & Bruce, Sydney.
. Bishop and Mrs. Willis, Nukualofa
• Mr. A. Johnson, Sargood, Son, & Ewen, Auckland.
- • Mr. W. Lieber, Nukualofa or Apia.
k Mr. Radford, Samoa.
‘ Mrs. Burgess, Campbell Terrace, Parnell, Auckland.
- l< ; k '-,


ITINERARY.
Melbourne to Sydney
654
miles
Sydney to Suva ...
1750
))
Suva to Levuka
60
J>
Levuka to Apia ...
607
1»
Apia to Vavou
35°
Vavou to Haapai... ...
80
a
Haapai to Nukualofa ....
130
a
Nukualofa to Auckland ... ... '
IIOI
>>
Auckland to Sydney ... ...
1281
Sydney to Melbourne ... • 5,*.. ./..
654
»>
_ V
6667 miles
Left Melbourne ~ me 27th, 5.15 p.m.
Left Sydney une 28th, 11.15 p m.
Arr. Suva T uly sth, 11.30 a.m.
Dep. Suva ... ... ... July 9th, midnight
Arr. Levuka ... ... ... July 9th, daybreak
Dep. Levuka July 9th, midday
Arr. Samoa , ... July nth, 9 p.m.
Dep. Samoa . ... ... July 12th, midnight
Arr. Vavau ..; ... July 14th, 6 a.m.
Dep. Vavau ... ... ... July 14th, midnight
Arr. Haapai ... July 15th, 6 a.m.
Dep. Haapai July 15th, 4.30 p.m.
Arr. Nukualofa July i6th, 7 a.m.
Dep. Nukualofa July 16th, 5.20 p.m.
Arr. Auckland July 21st, 1 a.m.
Dep. Auckland July 25th, 5.45 p.m.
Arr. Sydney ... ... ... July 29th, 7 a.m.
Arr. Melbourne July 30th, 1.30 p.m.


APPENDIX:
July 4th, 1904.
THE MANAPOURI MESSENGER.
Issued with the consent of the Commander and by the Members of"J” Cabin.
Editorial.
This issue is the resultant of two great forces which impelled the promoters to their
perilous literary venture. The promises of financial support have been of such a
character that all fear of failure on that score were absolutely abolished. This was
one reason of its birth. The other was an overwhelming feeling that we were able to
alleviate the sufferings of our fellow mortals, and having this mission to fulfil we
raised our banner with its fateful motto, “if y'U can’t suck seed chew grass,” and
under this aegis here we are. . -
A Moonlight Sonata in “Sea.”
On the last day of June there was such a sunset as a painter would hesitate to put
on canvas as being an exaggeration of the effects of orange, reds and yellows. It was
a glorious sight, only excelled by the more brilliant moonrise. This was extra-
ordinarily beautiful, and lasted for about twenty minutes, until the more prosaic
moonlit night prevailed, lovely, soft and beautiful as it was, but quite commonplace
after the earlier night effects. Just after sunset a brilliantly lighted object appeared in
the eastern sky at the sea le*J*d resembling a steamer lit up with gay electric lights.
Slowly the illusion was dispell and it was found to be the rising moon. In a few
minutes the distinct outline ok ‘ ;land coast, with palm and other larger arborescent
trees outlined, appeared off the h ‘ >f the vessel about two or three hundred yards distant.
A distinct beach covered with -very sand and indentations forming small bays and
inlets wooded to the water’s edge appeared. In front a dark bluff headland,
precipitous and ghostly, frowned darkly and omniously. We seemed to be in a land-
locked passage. In the background on the rising hills the outline of buildings of
various sizes crowned with bastions, lowers and minarets caught the eye. Slowly and
slowly the moon rose, touching the tops of these dark island cloud with a bright
silvery sheen as if of burnished metal. The outline of this lovely Island of the Blest
was maintained for about twenty minutes, when the moon, still slowly rising above the
clouds, dispersed the pleasing phantom, and resulted in the annihilation of this
uniquely fascinating phantasmagoria.
The Black Brunswicker.
Sporting Notes.
Sports of various kinds have been held under the highly esteemed patronage of
various crowned and uncrowned heads.
We are unable, through want of space, to give any details of the training and ,
performances of the various competitors, but we would point out that in the case'of
the Maori Pet a few more gallops before the Obstacle Race would have improved his
condition and given him a better show. He has a very taking action, especially where
liquids are concerned, and later on expect to see him more successful in collaring the
leaders than he was when he tackled the Woolwich Infant, who, by the way, made an
excellent recovery after his fall at the last obstacle. He is, however, hardly fine
enough yet. [The “Fiend” (Cigaretta-Contorlion) is a taking colt, but is yet
rather light. We hear he is to be turned out to grass for a spell.'] The excellent colt
Stacpoole richly deserved his win, as he didn’t give the others a show once he got over


INVITATION to the dance.
,
“ J ” Cabin and the Honorary Member
request the pleasure of
COMPANY
at a DANCE,
S.S. “Manapouri,” Saturday, 2nd July, 1904,
at 8 p.m.
Please present this ticket Automobiles mav be ordered
to the Usher. jor If Midnight.
that very awkward water jump at the companion ladder. He won as he liked, with
the Woolwich Infant a bad second. No third prize was awarded. The Tug of War
resulted in an easy victory for the Blessed against the Unblessed. Very rational advice
was freely given to the latter, and wi ‘jv- it has been seriously considered by some
of the juniors from observations ma our Sporting Editor at the fashionable ball
held in the evening. - 1
Our heartiest thanks are due to Mr. Ethel! for his great assuidity in promoting
the happiness of the company in every way, and not the least of his successes are his
sweep promotion, “a la Tattersall,” open to the public. N.B.—There is no io%
reduction. Sweeps have been won by Messrs. Slacpoole and Wright, and Master
Maher.
Unfortunately, the Sub-Editor got lost last night after the ball looking for the
Polar Star. He was discovered early this morning, not crossing, but at the bar, so we
are obliged to hold over my description of the ladies’ dresses. It is sufficient to say
that the dance was a thorougli success in every way.
Brevities. ■
The Glorious Fourth. Many of the Company ■ », 'tars last night and got
the Stripes this morning. Stated that a high offi,. n ,e Company is on hoard
disguised as a passenger. Wanted an ownerJor a [ , note. Apply K Cabin.
Found a lost reputation. Apply Editor. (N.B. —1\ ant of “J ” Cabin need
apply ;it is too big a contract for the Editor to underr ; V store their characters.)
Our greatest thanks are due to the Commander and nis Officers for their extreme
kindness to all. ■ T ,
LOLOMA.
Printed and published by the Manapouri Pubishivg 00. 1 1_ ne Members of J Cabin, of whom
extra copies may be obtained for tb'Ahrbunt of £5.


V«T. * PBPPBRDAT AND CO.,
PRINTERS
» - : JT STREET, SYDNEY.
