

ourFUNNY
★ A Cij "








Our
Funny Mummy
Written and Illustrated by
TOBY CAMERON
THE CURRAWONG PUBLISHING COMPANY
32 JAMIESON STREET, SYDNEY


REGISTERED AT THE GENERAL POST
OFFICE, SYDNEY, FOR TRANSMISSION
THROUGH THE POST AS A BOOK
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
William Brooks & Co., Limited, 99 Pitt Street, Sydney.


Cl 7283
1 6 NOV
Dear Children,
I hope you like Tortoises, because this is a story about
the bestest goodest one that ever lived, and I'm going to
give you four guesses if it’s a Mummy Tortoise, a Daddy
Tortoise, a N’uncle Tortoise, or a N’aunty Tortoise. Hands
up who guessed! A Mummy Tortoise! Well, you’re right
and now I will get on with the story.
She came to us —did Prudence, right out of the blue —
I mean we didn’t expect her or anything, because we were
on our own. I’d better explain who “we” are: There s me,
Pm Jiggy, age eleven; and Selina, she’s nearly eleven; Sally
is eight-ish; and Bunny—well, Bunny, is four and a bit, but
everybody thinks she is “old fashioned,” whatever that may
mean. She —Bunny, I mean —has had Adventures before,
Lucky Thing, and she boasts about them; and her hair is


red and she is very trying and terribly keen on Magic
and things—but she is a darling, really, and Prudence did
make a good job of taming her. Xow everybody is intro-
duced. I must go back to where we first found Prudence.
It was the morning of a very Mondayish Monday, and
we were all lying about in the garden feeling hot and bored,
and Bunny was boasting
about when she was Magic;
and we were getting tired
of her, when suddenly the
Postie came by and dropped
something into the letter
box; and it sounded like a
parcel, and we all rushed to
get it in case it was from
Mummy. But it wasn't a
parcel or a letter —it was a
TORTOISE, of all things!
A dear little dumpy lumpy
wrinkly crinkly Tortoise
and she was asleep, and tied
round her neck was a label,
and it said, “This is Pru-
dence.” That was all! Well,
we were all terribly
excited, and Sally said, “I’m positive it’s from Mummy/’
and I said, “Girls, your Mummy is probably a Fairy and
she could send you anything in that case, but why a


Tortoise?” And we all agreed there wasn’t much sense in
that idea, and Selina said, “Let’s wake her up and give her
something to eat.” So we tried —but not a thing we did
would wake that Tortoise, she seemed to be asleep for ever,
so we gave up trying to wake her and put her in the garden
and went inside —inside the house I should say—and some-
body had the idea of me getting lunch. You see, I’m not
really a sister to the others, but I’m just on the verge of it.
I found them when I was very lonely and I stayed and
stayed until I felt like a sister, and it made up for lots of
things; and I felt sure I could scramble eggs—as everybody
wanted scrambled eggs —so I tried, but, what with Bunny
shrieking for her Mummy and Sally changing her mind and
wanting poached eggs, I got all muddled up and burnt the
things, and there was an awful smell of burnt saucepans,
and Sally began to cry and said it reminded her of her
Mummy —and Selina got mad and she stood up and gave
a lecture, and she said, “Sally and Bunny, you are both
very silly. You know perfectly well that our Mummy has
gone away before and that she may be a Fairy for all we
know, and we are really very lucky to have Jiggy (that’s
me) to scramble eggs for us. Now pull yourselves together
and let’s make the best of it.” And Selina sat down and
put on her most elderry face and set a good example by
taking a big mouthful of the scrambled eggs. So did I,
and, oh dear, they were awful! —just like india-rubber. We
all tried to eat some, but Sally started to look pale,
so I said. “Sally and Bunny, you can leave the table,” and


they did, and Selina and I threw the rest of the india-
rubber eggs out of the window for the birds and they
landed and almost bounced on to
The grass? No!
The next door dog? No!
The path? Not exactly!
They landed right in the middle of Prudence Tor-
toise? Yes!
On to the middle of her shining shell, and, wonder of
wonders, it woke her up. Bunny rushed out and shouted,
“Oh, look, look, she’s awake! —look at her arms and legs,
and her funny neck —she’s moving!” “Of course she’s
moving,” hissed Selina. “Be quiet, Bunny, let’s creep up
quietly and watch her wake up.” So we crept very very
slowly until we were close and watched Prudence wake up.
She took a long time, but Tortoises are like that, you know.
She just wriggled at first, and then slowly Y-E-R-Y
S L-O-W-L-Y her head came out of her shell and twisted
itself round, and she opened one eye and looked at us very
hard. We all nudged each other with excitement, wonder-
ing what would happen next. And to our very great sur-
prise the Tortoise
Went to sleep again? No!
Did a dance? No (they can’t) !
Asked for a drink of water? No!
She spoke! And in our own langwidge, too. She said,
“I suppose you are THE GIRLS?” “That’s us,” we said.
“How did you get here? And what? And who? And why?


And where, etc.?” That’s short for all the questions Tve
asked her, and Prudence just stayed where she was and
blinked slowly. “Well, girls,” she said, “I’ve come to look
after you instead of your Mother, who might be a Fairy for
all we know.” “There,” said Selina, “I told you so.” So I
said, “All right, don’t rub it in, even if you were right about
your Mother —perhaps this Tortoise is a Fairy, too.” And
Bunny pinched Sally because she was too excited and there
was a bellow, and Sally had to be comforted, and Bunny
kept on saying, “She’s Magic. She’s Magic.” It really was
exciting, you know. I felt all shaky inside to think I had
met a Tortoise who could speak. Prudence didn’t seem
excited, though. She just sat and looked and blinked at us
with a dreamy eye. “Maybe one of you would clean this
disgustin’ mess off my beautiful shell,” she said. So we all
ran and got things to clean the egg off with. But I was the
best —I used an old knife that was my Granny’s, and it was
very old and very sharp and it scraped the egg off wonder-
fully. Then we hosed it, and Sally polished it up with boot
polish until it was beautifully shiny. We all helped with
the polishing, and, while we were rubbing, our little letter-
box Tortoise seemed to grow, for when we had finished she
was about two sizes bigger than Bunny —right from a little
tiny Tortoise that could lie on your hand, she had grown
into a lady-size one! Some sort of Magic, I thought to
myself, and the others must have thought it, too, but we
didn’t like to say anything in case we hurt her feelings.
“Thanks for the polishing, girls!” said Prudence. “That


was the touch I needed to make me grow. Now I feel more
like a Mummy. Come and have a hug.” So we all went and
had a lovely soft cuddly Mummy hug, and —well —that hug
sealed things, if you know what I mean, and from that
moment we all loved our dear Prudence Tortoise, and she
said, “That was good. I hope I'm your Mummy for a long
time. What about something to eat?” And it turned out
that she would eat almost anything that humans did (being
only half a Fairy), but steak was her favourite, and I said,
“I’m terribly sorry, Prudence, we haven’t any steak, but
we’ve plenty of Camp Pie.” And she said, “Oh, never mind
about meat, I feel like a bit of grass to-day—fresh grass on
toast is very nice, you know!” And, turning to Bunny, she
said. “You ought to like grass on toast, Bunny, because it’s
green.” “Oh, I hate green now! I like purple and sea
green,” said Bun. Prudence answered, “Well, then, there’s
grapes—which are slightly sea green
and some are purple, and —er —er,”
and we could see she was racking
her dear little brain for something:
to eat sea green in colour. So
Selina made up a game of naming all
the sea green and purple things there
were to eat, such as Green Vegetables,
Jellies, Apples, Pears, Pea Soup,
Toheroa Soup (my Daddy likes that),
and, of course, Lollies. And for purple we got Black Cur-
rants and Cream, but that was all and we were all hungry,


so the game ended and we had buttered toast and Gingei
Pop, which was left over from Christmas. And time passed
ever so quickly that evening, and soon it was eight o clock.
“Time for bed, girls!” said Prudence. “But first let’s do the
washing up.” And we all helped to dry and put away, and
I noticed Sally was looking very worried, so I said to her,
“What’s wrong with you, Sally? Have you got a poem
coming?” And she snapped, “No! Don't be silly, I was
wondering where Prudence Tortoise would sleep, that’s
all.” Everybody heard, and so did Prudence. “I sleep in
my own Private Hammick —it is portable and can easily be
fixed up anywhere, and I assure you, little girls, it is most
restful,” she said. Selina whispered to me. “Lucky Thing,
I just love sleeping on floors, but it must be gorgeous to
sleep in a Hammick.” I agreed with her, and we were
making plans to borrow the Hammock when Bunny sud-
denly set up an awful wail, because nobody was taking any
notice of her. “Dear, Deary me,” said Prudence.” “What a
very strange child. Does she often perform like this?” “Oh,
yes!” we told her, “but if we don’t give in to her it all dies
away and she stops.” “So I should hope,” remarked Prue,
with a driff sniff. “Can’t abide squealing children. Now,
my children—Ernest, in particular—never cried.” And we
all asked her to tell us about her children, but she didn’t.
She just ignored us, and said, “Sleepy Time now. I’m for
my Hammick; you for your beds.” And, do you know, she
astonished us very much by unfolding a lovely Hammock
from nowhere it seemed (perhaps it was under her shell).


“I b-spect it’s Magic,” said Bunny. “Oh, do stop about
Magic, you awful kid!” I said, under my breath, and then
I heard Prudence calling out, “Where can I hang my Ham-
mick, girls?” So we made a tour of the house and Pru-
dence chose a lovely place in the little corner in the ceiling,
just over the foot of the stairs, so that she could hear us if
we had bad dreams; and, after much puffin’ and blowin’
and mountin’ step-ladders and nearly falling off them,
Prudence Tortoise got her Hammick fixed up at last. “Do
you think it’s strong enough?” hissed Selina in my ear.
And I hissed back, “No, I don’t.” And the idea of it all
made us giggle, and we did silent giggles until our jaws
and tummies ached, and Selina said, “If only she would
say Hamm-OCK, instead of -ICK,” and we laughed some
more. And Sally and Bunny didn’t think it was the least
little bit funny, and stood with long mask-like faces, which
was because they were jealous of us giggling. What stopped
us laughing was a sudden loud ting-a-ling on the Tele-
phone, which gave us all a fright and nearly made Prue
fall off the step-ladder. We all pushed each other to answer
it, and, after an argument, I did it —as usual—and a voice
said, “Hello, Girls, this is Mummy! I won’t be away too
long. Take care of little Prue Tortoise; she is a friend of
mine and just loves children. So, good night, my darlings—
Bunny, my little one; Sally and Selina, my big girls; and
Jiggy, my best friend. I’m speaking from F . . .” And,
do you know, that silly old Telephone got broken or some-
thing, because it just went all blank and no more Mummy’s


voice. “Any message for me, girls?” said Prudence, “les!
We are to take good care of you by Mummy’s order,” said
Selina. She looked very pleased and started to climb very
slowly up the step-ladder—l mean Prudence did. And at
last she reached the Hammick and settled into it with a
big plonk and a heave. And, Yes, it did hold! —which was
wonderful, as she was rather heavy. Maybe it was Magic,
and Bunny started saying, “I B’spect it’s M . . .” But we
didn’t let her finish saying it; we just bundled her upstairs
into her nightie and her bed before she could wail. And
she was so surprised she didn’t wail! We weren’t long,
either. Getting into bed usually takes a while, but we were
very tired and excited and Bunny would talk, and, last of
all, she said, “Why did Prudence Tortoise like grass on
toast?” And we all shouted, “BECAUSE!” And she fell
asleep, and so did Selina and Sally. But I lay awake and
thought about everything that had happened, and I asked
the little Invisible Girl if the Missing Mummy was a real
Fairy, and she said, “That remains to be seen.” Which
wasn’t much of an answer, was it? The little Invisible Girl
is my own sister, who went away years ago to live in
another land and she stayed there and grew up. She’s
lovely! We have lots of fun, but she’s invisible, that’s the
trouble. Anyway, I think she must have put me to sleep, for
I don’t remember anything more that night except feeling
very happy that Prudence Tortoise was so nice. It was
very quickly morning again, and we woke up to the sound
of loud bangs and thuds and creaks. And what do you


think it was? I said it was Prue Tortoise going down her
step-ladder. Selina guessed it might be
her scrubbing the kitchen floor, and, of
course, Bunny and Sally hoped it was
Prue cooking the breakfast. But there
was no smell of cooking, so we had to
get out of bed and go and look. And
it was dear old Prue Tortoise doing her morning exercises.
Standing on her head she was, and doing bicycle rides, you
know how—and touching her toes. She didn’t have very
much luck at touching her toes, because her shell wouldn’t
stretch. But she tried awfully hard, and, before long, we
were all doing exercises, too. Have you ever tried? It’s
very good fun if you don’t make a lot of noise and wake up
Mummys and Daddys and things; but we got tremendously
hungry, so it must have done us good, for we each ate about
ten slices of bread and butter and honey and jam and pea-
nut butter and pickled onions (not me!), grass (for Prue)
and crushed nuts, and Selina said, “Turtles eat seaweed.”
So we asked Prue if she liked it, and she said, “I’m no
Turtle!” But I think they must be relations because of
their shells. Nobody wanted scrambled eggs, thank good-
ness ! I was glad, I can tell you. So we 8 and 8 and 8 and 8
and 8, and Bunny got full first, and Selina, Sally and I
raced Prudence, who was crunching a pickled onion. We
did have a merry sort of breakfast —being allowed to have
races—and, when it was all cleared away, Prue Tortoise
said, “Now, what’s to do to-day, young ladies?” And we all


thought and thought, and Sally said, “It would be a very
good idea if we could do the washing before our Mummy
comes back —it would be a surprise for her, and washing
is nice sort of work.” So we decided to do it, and Prue Tor-
toise came plunkety plunk down the garden steps into the
laundry with us, and, in about five minutes, all one pairs
of hands, except Bunny’s (she was too young), were
squelching in and out of the lovely shining soap froth; and
we began making bubbles through our thumbs and fingers
(like you do in the bath) until Prudence saw us! and said,
“Is this a new sort of game, or are we —er doin’ the
washin’?” And we said, “DoinG the WashinG.” And after
that it was really serious, and soon we were out of the
steam into the sunny outside with the clothes all ready to
hang on the line, and a cry arose, “WHERE ARE THE
PEGS?” Those awful pegs, always lost, lurking in the
long grass or hiding in the Banksia
leaves. But Bunny knew where to
look. She went away, looking very
secret, and came back with a basket
just crammed with pegs ... SQUARE
PEGS, ROUND PEGS, LONG
PEGS, SHORT PEGS, BROKEN
PEGS, PEGS with one leg, PEGS
with no legs, even no-headed PEGS.
Bunny said she loved them and was
sorry for them, and, just as I was
hanging up a sheet on the line, a


voice said to me, “NO TN ONDER W E GET KNOCKED
ABOUT. STEADY OX. DON’T PUSH SO HARD OR
YOU WILL BREAK ME!” I couldn’t believe my own
ears, because well, just because until the voice said
again, “YOU MIGHT AS WELL KNOW WE ARE
ALIVE LIKE YOU, AND MEETING FAIRYISH
PEOPLE BRINGS OUR VOICES BACK!” The others
heard it, too, and came round me to listen, and young
Bunny jumped about and clapped her hands and shouted,
“It’s a Magic Peg! It can talk!” And the Peg said, very
majestically (I can't spell it), “UNFORTUNATELY,
YOUNG PERSON, ‘IT’ IS NOT MAGIC, and ‘IT’ IS NOT
A PEG AT ALL, SEE!” “Oh!” said Bunny, staring at the
Peg. “AND, WHAT IS MORE, I THINK YOU ARE
RUDE!” said the Peg. And I felt sorry for Bunny, because
she got very red and stood on one leg, and said she wasn t
meaning to be rude; she only thought the Peg was Magic.
“IT’S NOT ME THAT’S MAGIC, it’s your friend,”
answered the Peg, “and she’s only semi-fairy!” And the
others listened very hard, and just then Prudence Tortoise
ambled up and said, “Well, Millicent, who would have
thought of meeting you. How are you, dear? And the little
ones?” Thought I first talking Tortoises, now talking
Pegs. What next? And, as I thought, my thoughts joined
with Sally’s and Selina’s and Bunny’s and made a sort of
a coloured mist round us, and we seemed to get ever so
little, and we were lifted up into the air and perched right
on top of —Where do you think?




The House? Xo!
The Laundry? Xo!
Your, wrong. We were perched right up on top of the
clothes line beside the Pegs!! And we were the same size
as they were, and they were such funny little jolly things
when you got to know them. And they told us that they
would take us to the Land of the Clown Babies where
they learned to tumble and make jokes and where the
Columbines learned to ride on horses bare-backed. And
Bunny said, ‘Will there be any monkeys? I love monkeys!”
And the Pegs said the place was full of circus people, and
we said, “Why are you Pegs? Are you bewitched?” And
they told us how, in the usual way, some wicked old Wizard
had bewitched them. He had said that any clown baby who
fell off the tight rope more than three times should be
turned into a wooden person for the rest of their lives for
being so clumsy—and that they should live on a tight rope
all the time. And, “Here we are!” they said. And Bunny
looked angry, and said, “I hate that nasty old Wizard. You
poor fings. But you are un b-witched now, aren’t you?”
“Yes, yes!” they cried, “we are. 801 l up, roll up for Clown
Land.” Which meant we had to walk the rope into Clown
Land. And do you know, dears, that, without any practice,
we all managed to walk that rope into . . . Oh! A wonder-
ful Place! The colour of it. I can see it now: Brilliant
shiny yellow, the colour of Laughter Pink for happiness
and beautiful blues and mauves which made you feel good.
Oh, I forgot to tell you how funny Prudence looked bal-


Tooy Crt»neKor«


anced on the rope! Swaying her dumpy body from side to
side, and then nearly bending double to keep from falling
off, backwards and forwards she tottered, but a kind Peg
lent her a sunshade like real tightrope-walkers have, which
helped Prue to get across. We four girls hurried on into
Clown Land, in case we got the giggles and fell out of the
Adventure, for it was an Adventure an A 1 Adventure,
too! As I was saying, Clown Land was lovely. Fairy Floss
met us, and her dress of spun sugar looked very tempting,
and her hair was made of it, too. “Oh, dear, I’m hungry!”
wailed Bunita Bunny Nose. ‘Well, don’t eat the Fairy,
pleeeeeese/’ whispered Sally, who was the best at keeping
her in order. “No, don’t!” we said. So she didn’t, which
was a good thing. Fairy Floss seemed to know Prudence
Tortoise, who introduced us, for I distinkly saw Prue wink
her dreamy eye as she did it, and Fairy Floss winked her’s
back. (I mean her eye.) “I suspect a secret code, Jiggy,”
whispered Selina in my ear. “It’s something about your
Mummy, who may be a Fairy,” I answered. But, I regret
to say we didn’t find out if it was, because, at that moment,
a large bundle of Peg people bustled and jostled and pushed
us right into the middle of the biggest tent you ever saw,
and it was full of Clowns! Overflowing with Clowns —Baby
Clowns, Toddlers, Girls, Boys, Men, Ladies, even Grand-
fathers —all Clowns! Clowns with beards, Clowns with-
out beards. Oh, goodness! there were hundreds of them.
I liked the baby ones best, tumbling and standing on their
heads, doing somersaults. One cheeky one reminded me of


the little Invisible Girl when she was tiny—always stand-
ing on her head. We stayed in the big tent quite a long
while, and they all said “Oh!” when we said we must go,
and some of them signed their names on Prue’s shell, be-
cause we hadn’t brought our autograph books. Such funny
names NIMBO, TUMBLO, ALFREDO, TINY AND
LENA. Getting herself signed like that made Prue feel
terribly important, and she bought us one of those striped
lollies each, but mine tasted of peppermint (it would!), so
I gave it to Bunny and she had two. It was a good idea to
keep her quiet, I thought, but I was wrong, for she suddenly
started to jump up and down like a ball, and it was joy
caused by seeing two Effelumps (I mean Ellefumps)
those grey things with trunks —who were sitting down at
a table knitting and mumbling 2 plain, 2 purl. And it
turned out that they were making knitted cases for each
other’s trunks, as they were to be sent to England in a
Circus and didn’t want to catch cold. Did you ever? No,
I never! Sally’s turn now to get excited. She didn’t jump.
She just gleamed right out of her eyes like she does when
a poem is coming, and her gleaming was caused by a pro-
cession of those scrumptious Dollies on Sticks. It was a
beauty competition, a Peg told me, for the best dressed.
I wouldn’t have liked to be the Judge, they were all so
lovely. I couldn’t have chosen. Selina fell in love with a
blue doll with silver spangles and moon-blue hair. There
was so much to see in that place that you felt sorry you
had only one pair of eyes. I loved it all so much and I




longed very hard to see some ponies, those baby Shetland
ones with long manes. And I longed so much that I wasn’t
a little bit surprised when two pure white ponies with
manes and tails like silk slipped up to me and inquired if
I would like a ride. Would I? I mounted one of them like a
real rider, and we cantered right round the town. I saw
lovely ballet ladies with satin shoes, Charley Quins (I
mean Harley Quins) in their gorgeous suits —all the glitter
of the show. I wished the others could see it, too, and, as I
wished they dropped out of the air on to the ponies. Lady
Bunita Bunny Nose with me (I’m Jiggy), and Princess
Sally and Queen Selina on the other pony. Bun and I were
dressed as Columbines, with sticky-out skirts and stars in
our hair, and the others were in lovely long Princessy sort
of clothes. We rode a bit more, and then somebody said,
“Wherever is Prudence Tortoise?” But she was nowhere
to be seen. We found her at last having a wonderful time
on the Slippery Dip, riding down on her tummy because
she was afraid of cracking her shell. The bundle of Peg
people were standing round clapping and laughing at her.
We stopped our ponies to watch, and, of course, Miss
Spoilty Bun had to get off and go on the Dip, too. As a
matter of fact, she ruined her Columbine’s dress. She was
very trying, and tried to climb up the Slippery Dip to
prevent Prue from sliding do™. So they both had to give
it up in the end. Prudence was very cross and told Bunny
off. So would you if your fun had been spoiled. Then
Fairy Floss came and said, in her sweet little voice, that


we had better make some plans, as it was getting near
Theatre time in the World and would we either sleep the
night, or go back to the earth. How we all begged and
begged to stay the night, but Prudence got all Mummyish
and firm-looking and said, in her Tortoisy voice, “No, girls,
enough is as good as a feast, you must go home to bed.”
We all groaned and wheedled, and Bunny screamed and
got a dig from a Peg. But Prue had made up her mind,
and when Prue made up her mind it meant —I’ve said it,
and I mean it, and no hanky panky. So we gave up coaxing
and someone said, “We will be good and come home quietly
if you will let us sleep in your Hammick just for once. Oh,
please, darling Prue!” And she gave in after awhile and
told us we could sleep in it just for once, but that she
couldn’t abide beds and would rock herself to sleep in her
own little shell. That was what she said. Wasn’t it sweet?
She had her sweet moments, and we had our sad ones, for
the time had come to say goodbye to glorious Clown Land.
Some kind Fairy (I suspect the Mummy) sent us each a
monster-size Fizzy drink in rainbow colours, and we drank
them through straws made of ice. Prudence tut-tutted at
us just like a Mummy, and said to drink them slowly,
because of the H i c c c c c ups. The sad-eyed Peg people
stood around in groups feeling awful because they had to
be wooden again. Bunny got sorrier and sorrier for them,
and promised one tiny little old square Peg with only one
leg that she would take extra special care of her when they
got back, and that she could live in her doll’s house, which


was very very nice of little Bun, wlio had a soft heart but
a trying manner. I thought very sadly, Why, oh why, do
the lovely things have to come to an end! But Sally and
Selina said they felt hungry, and that did the trick. It sort
of undid the spell or whatever it was, for —you must be-
lieve me, because it’s true —we found ourselves sitting
round the table in the girls’ house waiting for Prudence
Tortoise to finish cooking our bacon and eggs. I pinched
myself and it hurt. And then Selina said, “Do you see what
I see, Jig?” And I said, “Indeed I do, Selina!” “What
about you, Sally?” And Sally nodded her head and
answered, “Oh, it’s true enough. We’ve lost Clown Land
and the Peg people and Fairy Floss!” “And the ponies,
weren’t they gorgeous!” “It was lovely while it lasted, but
not long enough, was it Prudence?” I said. And she sniffed
and blinked and snapped in a cross voice, “Some people
are never satisfied. Now eat your tea.” So we did. And,
what is more, we washed up and swept the floor and went
down to bring the washing from the line. And the Pegs
were there in the basket, I’ll have you know —quite dumb
dears and wooden and uninteresting. “Poor old fings,”
sighed Bunny Nose. “I’ll always take care of you.” And
it’s a true fact that, ever since our A 1 Adventure, she
(Bunny) has taken great care of the basket of Pegs and
they’ve never got lost again. Especially she loves one little
old Peg with only one leg; she talks to it and gets fierce
if one of us touches it. She’s a funny child, is Bun. Oh!
And we did have a lend (loan I mean) of Prudence Tor-


toise’s Hammick after all. There was a mad rush to get
there first, and I won, and the others were jealous and lay
right on top of me like a human samwidge. There was me
(Jiggy), Selina, Sally and Bunny. It was a bit uncomfy,
but, after a lot of struggling, we managed to get our faces
free, and, being so tired, we didn’t mind being a bit
squashed; but Prudence fussed and fussed and actually
made us get up and wash our teeth —just like a Mummy:
drinks of milk and washing your teeth and having baths.
Still, they are very nice people on the whole. So it must
have been quite late when we got settled again in the
Hammick, and I think the Missing Mummy person came
somehow or other, for we all woke up next day in our own
little beds. Mummies are like that if they think their
children need them.
It was Friday when we woke up, and, oh dear! Miss
Bun was in A MOOD. “She was tired of being looked after
by a silly old Tortoise,” she said. And we all said sh — sh —,
Prudence will hear you. And she stamped her size ten foot
and said, “I don’t care. I want another Adventure. Now!
Now! Now!” in a terribly screamy voice. Well, we all knew
that you couldn’t just get Adventures like that, especially
if you were naughty, and Sally said, “She’s got a grink on
her shoulder, that’s what it is.” Bunny got worse and
worse, and Prudence heard the noise and came waddly
wonk plinkety plonk up the stairs and stood looking at
Bunny in her mood. “Well,” she said, “I promised your
Mummy that I would try and tame you. Come here and be


V jJl
l|(
I ,ii ,--\\v\Vv 4^ S ( .
X*Vl -v Ckf;
tamed.” Bunny snorted, and stopped jumping. “Bunny
Nose, my precious little pet,”
said Prue, “If you will come
out of your awful mood I
will give you a ride on my
back.” And Bun said, “And
will you ride the Scooter,
too?” And Prue said, “Yes,
my little lamb. I will ride
the Scooter if you will prom-
ise me to be tame for the
rest of your life.” So Bunny,
the lucky little thing, got a
beautiful ride on Prue’s back
up and down the bank, and
then we all stood and
watched while Prue did an
exibishon ride on the
Scooter. Bunny screamed
with joy and made Prue ride
ever so long, and, last of all, Prue said she felt puffed and
had to sit down and get her breath back. “I wonder where
Prue’s breath has gone to?” said Bunny. “Oh, you silly!”
said Selina. “Don’t you know that elderry people lose their
breath quite a lot, but it always comes back again when
they rest.” Bunny just gasped and said “Oh!” And then
she smiled and Prudence Tortoise hugged her and said,
“From now on, Miss Little Oirly Bunny, you are to be


i -^TT
a« ty/'X'-su 'Toey CaM€^o*
TAME.” And she was —fairly tame —for a long time, and
we all agreed how easy it was to tame people if you were
kind. It wore off (the tame
part) sometimes, though!
But the drink wasn’t tamed.
Oh, no! He flew from
Bunny’s shoulder on to
whose shoulder?
Mine? No!
Selina’s? No!
He flew on to Sally’s
shoulder, and must have
pulled her hair, for we saw
her face get all cross-look-
ing, and I said, “Now, what’s
wrong with you?” But she
wouldn’t answer. Not one
single word would she say.
We said,
“Sally! Are you ill?” No
answer.
“Sally! Does your head ache?” No answer.
“Sally! Do you want your Mummy?” No answer.
But she gleamed, and her eyes said Yes. And I said
to the little Invisible Girl, “Darling! Do find the Mummy
who might be a Fairy. You know everybody there and
could make inquiries.” And in that very instant the ’phone
rang, and a voice said, “Hallo, girls. I got your message.


jT j 1
I won’t be long away. Now
three, then look and see
what you will see!” And
we did it, and when we
opened our eyes we were
standing in a beautiful room
shut
your eyes, count up to
almost as beautiful as a
Palace and it was full of
wonderful books and paint-
ings and colour, and the
Mummy (the Fairy one) was
there dressed all in shades
of blue, and she said, “Imag-
ination lent me her wings,
and I am here gathering
beautiful ideas and thoughts
for all children who love
fantasy. So spare me a little
longer. Have a look round
and enjoy this glimpse
of beauty.” We were thrilled,
wandered round and looked at
I can tell you, and we
glorious paintings and
colours, and Sally said, “I feel so happy. When I get back
I must write a poem about this place before I forget it.”
And then there was a whizzy sort of a feeling and a sound
of bells, and we sort of rang off the dream —if it was a
dream. But I think it was real, and we came back to the
house and Selina and I felt terribly good inside, and we


found Prudence and told her about it, and she sniffed and
blinked as usual, and we said, “Prudy, dear, you must be
tired. It’s time you had a rest. You must put your feet
up.” And we fixed her up with a cushion and a cup of
Tortoise’s tea, and she sighed with happiness at being
looked after and sank back into her shell and closed her
eyes, and Selina and I thought she was asleep and started
to tip-toe away, when her voice said, “One good turn de-
serves another. I shall make pancakes for tea to-night.”
And we were ever so excited and went to tell the others,
but they were busy. Sally, quite deaf and dumb, because
she was writing a poem; and Bunny—Miss Famous Tame
Bunny was “making fings” of Plasticine! And Prue
hated Plasticine, like Mummies do, because of the carpets.
So we tried to take it away, but Bun yelled and yelled and
trod it right into the carpet. And we said, “You naughty
little girl,” and struggled and tumbled as we tried to take
the Plasticine away, but it made an awful mess in the end,
and, of course poor old Prudence got woken up by the noise.
But she wasn’t cross. No! She was still keen on making
pancakes, and before long they were ready—at least, the
batter stuff was, and, when the cooking started, everybody
took it in turns to toss a pancake, except Bunny, who had
been naughty. We had such fun, and, after awhile, Pru-
dence said, softly, “Would it be silly if I—er —tossed a
pancake?” And we said, “Of course not. It’s lovely fun.
Go on, Prue, have a try. See how high you can toss one.”
And she took hold of the frying pan, and, with great force,


y
she twisted her arm round and round, and all of a sudden
the pancake, the frying pan, and Prudence Tortoise all
flew into the air, and the pancake stuck . . . Now you
guess where?
On the picture of trees? No!
In the Hammick? No! It was folded up.
On the top stair? No!
The pancake stuck in the very middle of the ceiling.
Prudence and the frying pan came down again with a
bump. But Prue was so cross and disappointed that she
jumped and jumped in a rage, and,
do you know, her funny little head
went down inside her shell and
refused to come out again. It was
awfully scaring to see her jumping
about like that, with no head, and,
I can tell you, I felt like crying in
case it never came out again. But
it was there all right, because she
stood still for a minute and I
peeped down her shell, and I
could see her eyes glinting. We
promised Prudence all the pancakes in the world and
lettuce on toast if she would come out again. But she only
said, in a muffly voice, “I want the one I tossed and NO
OTHER,” and did another extra high jump. Really, you
know, she behaved rather like Bunny when she was in a
temper. And it was Bunny who fixed things up in the end.
You see, she climbed on to Prudence Tortoise’s back and


hung on ever so heavily, and made it so hard for her to
jump that her head got all inquisitive and popped up to see
why she felt so heavy. And we were all standing in a row
laughing —with joy, mostly. And Prudence saw us and
laughed, too, and said, “I was only practising for the picnic
on Saturday.” And we said, “Is there a picnic? We didn’t
know!” And she looked all secret and blinked —and, well,
she just changed the subject. And the picnic was an excuse,
but it would have been nice, because to-morrow was Satur-
day. So we ended up eating cold flabby pancakes, with
Prudence looking sort of cross and not talking very much.
So, at last, it was bedtime and another night went by. In
the morning Sally said she was sure Mummy would be
coming home that day. But she always said that and it
never came true, and Selina remarked, “Nothing new ever
happens round here —there’s NOTHING NEW UNDER
THE SUN.” I answered, “Oh, Selina —after all the Adven-
tures, too —what a thing to say!” Just then Prudence
Tortoise poked her head round the bedroom door, and,
looking straight at Selina, she said, “As a matter of fact,
Miss Selina, you are WRONG. I dare you to go to the Sun
and find out!” “You dare us!” we cried. “But we can’t get
to the Sun, it’s too far.” “Can’t —can’t —can’t all the time.
Of course you can,” said Prue, in a slightly cross voice.
“You never know what you can do if you say can’t all the
time —try saying Can. Listen to me, girls! Stand on your
toes, take a deep breath, fold your arms, and say, ‘I Can
get to the Sun.’ ” So we did all the things she told us, and


took a huge deep breath and puffed out our cheeks and tried
to say “I Can.” But, what with holding our breath and
puffing out our cheeks, it sounded like a sort of a grunt.
But it was Magic, all right. Oh, yes, definitely I For we all
four puffed up and up and up through the roof, over the
trees, past the beach and into the sky, and there we hung
just like four human kites. And Prudence! Oh, she did
look funny!—because her little legs and arms were work-
ing up and down all the time, and it didn’t suit her face
to be blown out like that. I felt quite calm, but poor
Bunny didn’t like it and her face was getting redder and
redder, and I thought how perfectly awful it would be if
she burst like a balloon —because she looked as if she was
going to. So I called the little
Invisible Girl once more, and she
came and held Bunny’s hand and
told Selina and Sally they were all
right. And then suddenly, like a
flash, I had the big brain wave. I
remembered that our dear old
Prudence Tortoise was slightly a
Fairy! Wasn’t I clever? So I
floated over to her and said, “Prue,
darling, we need some Magic ever
so badly just now. Do let me into
the secret of yours, because it
might help us all to get to the
Sun —and it was your dare, you know.” Prue blinked and
took ages to answer, and then she said, “Upon my word,


I'd forgotten indeed, I’d forgotten. lam very slightly
Magic. It's my shell, dear —it has to be touched in the
right spot to make things happen, but only one touch each,
and if you fail that’s that!” So I asked the girls if they
felt like trying Prue’s Magic, and they agreed to try. I had
to go first, as usual, but was no good. Bunny boasted that
she knew all about Magic and howled like anything when
her touch didn’t do the trick. Sally was no good. It was
Selina who was the lucky one. She touched the actual
Magic spot straight off, and there was a noise like crackers
and a whizz and a bang and off we sped like rockets. I
think we must have gone half across the world. But it was
too quick to see anything and it was getting terribly hot,
and the hotter it got the slower we flew, and I thought,
“More trouble. There must be some way out of this—other
than Magic —we can’t go on much longer, it’s altogether
too tiring.” And the little Invisible Girl whispered in my
ear, “I fly everywhere by thought and I don’t get tired.” “Do
you, really!” I answered. “Do tell me how.” And she said,
“Tell your friends to think of something they like very
much —and don't forget yourself.” So I told them, and, in
a think, I was sitting in a simply lovely garden playing
with heaps of babies and dolls. That was certainly my
think come true, and I wondered about the others. And it
was true, because Sally had long raven black hair, and
Selina had turned into a Tomboy! Little Bunny was
dressed in a pale mauve party dress with a purple sash,
and, as I looked at her, the dress turned into a blue satin


one all frills and again into a white
one, with silver stars on it. So the think-
ing was true, and the little Invisible Girl
murmured, “You are in the thought waves
now, and if you use them properly they will
get you to the Sun quicker than anything.”
I said, “Oh, thank you, darling! I think
we will be all right now!” And she said,
“You will. So we thought ourselves from
one lovely thing to another, and we all
sang, and Prudence Tortoise Oh! I
forgot to tell you about her. When we all had our thinks,
she had hers, too, and there she was going on in front, and
she had wheels instead of legs and arms!! And a new hat!
Well, she was quick at last, for her wheels just went like the
wind, and she was singing, too —-a
real Mother’s song about babies
and we were listening, when, all
- of a sudden, Sally tugged at my
w skirt, and cried, “Look, Jiggy!
Look!” And, stretching away into
the distance were hundreds and hun-
dreds of tall goldy-coloured towers. And Prue said, “Those
are the towers of the Sun. There are so many that they
have never been counted, and they are made of pure gold!”
“Do they have men and ladies living in them?” asked
Bunny. And Prue snapped, “How do I know! Don’t ask so
many questions!” And Bun started to cry and cry because
c


she hadn’t asked any questions, and Prudence got sorry for
her, and said, “Hop on my back and I will carry you. We
are nearly at the Sun, girls!” And we passed through
avenues of those beautiful towers, until I wondered if
they would ever come to an end. And, you know, we would
have got terribly hot, being so near the Sun, if I hadn’t
remembered the thought waves and said to myself, “How
lovely and cool it is up here.” And we heard a little flute
playing all the time —it was lovely! And do you know what
it was? It was Prudence Tortoise’s musical ear! It kept
us very cheerful, until we suddenly came to a full stop.
Yes, to a huge big round golden gate just like a full
stop—with a bell hanging over it and “PLEASE RING
QUIETLY” written on the door. “This is the gate,” said
Prudence. “Now who dares to ring the bell?” And we all
said we would, and Prudence chose Sally, because she was
the quietest. And so Sally crept up and only just tinkled
the bell, and the door swung round and round just like one
of those hotel doors and we went in and found ourselves in
a long golden tunnel. It was so long that it seemed to
stretch for ever and ever —and it was brilliant and shining.
“I B’spect this is the path to the Sun,” said Bunita. “I
wish it wasn’t so long.” And, suddenly, as she spoke, the
floor of the tunnel began to move and we had a lovely ride
right down to the end of that tunnel, until —BANG! —we
were shot through a trap door into a beautiful garden.
Everything was goldy colour—grass-trees, even the earth.
“You were lucky to come through the moving Ray,” said a


\ /
voice. “Very lucky.” And the voice came from a funny
jaggedy little golden boy, who appeared from nowhere.
“Goodness!” said Bunny.
“Who’se ever are you?” “I’m
Nugget,” said the boy. “As I
was saying, the Bays are very
tricky. For instance, there’s the
sticky one where you stick for-
ever if you aren’t careful, and
the backwards one where you
keep on going back to the ge-bin-
ning, or is it be ginning? —it all
depends on how you ring the bell,
and the Noisy Ray is awful, and . . .” But it was too much
for Bunny, who started to cry. “I don’t like it! I don’t like
that boy! I want to go home!” So we comforted her as
best we could, and pretended we weren’t scared. But I was.
I don’t know why. Then Prudence came to the rescue, and
she stood up straight on her legs (the wheels had gone)
and she pointed her finger at the boy, and said, “Nugget,
that will do, thank you! Where is Sol?” “Oh, Sol! You
can’t see him —he only sees people from Fairyland. He’s
very particular, is Sol,” said the boy. Prudence took a step
forward and began to shake. Selina and Sally and I knew
what that meant—it meant that Prue was getting very
cross. “I said, Where is Sol?” shouted Prue. “I am a sort
of Fairy I’ll have you know, and DON’T AGGUE, YOUNG
MAN.” Oh, dear, she was terribly angry, and Nugget took


one look at her and ran ever ever so fast round the Sun,
until he disappeared! Prue stopped shaking and took out
her hanky and wiped her forehead. “THESE people make
me tired,” she said, and plonked down on to the golden grass
and began to take her shoes off. I said, “Prudy, darling!
Couldn’t we go back? as it’s so difficult to see Sol. You are
tired, and I’m sure Bunny ought to be in bed. Selina and
Sally thinks so, too.” And Prudence sat up, and, looking
at me very Mummyishly, she said, “I’m disappointed in
you, Jiggy. You must do the dare now, and, after all, we
are here at the Sun. Oh, girls!” And she made us feel very
sorry, and Selina plucked up her courage and went up to
Prue and said, “Prudence, dear! We didn’t mean to disap-
point you. We will go on with the dare,
won’t we, girls? Besides, we are having
a lovely time.” And we three cried,
“Yes, it’s gorgeous!” And, do you know,
it’s as true as true that, as we spoke,
a great blinding shining yellow light
came and shone on us and made us
feel ever so brave and strong and
h a PPJ> an( i Prue got up and powdered
her nose, and said, “It’s Sol! He must
be going to see us —that light comes
U from his smile. Come along, children!”
we started off, and we all felt so
excited, and Prudence started fussing


about our hair being tidy and made Selina rub her
eyebrows, because they looked dirty or something, and
Sally whispered, ‘'lsn’t she an old fuss pot!” Which was
true. And, at last, we were ready to see Sol, and we looked
and looked, and there he was A Great Big Fat Jolly
Smiling Sol —and he was the Sun. Of course!! Weren’t
we silly! He was there all the time, but we Avere too
frightened to see him. Then he spoke, “You are the children
who dare to come and see me?” And we said, “Yes —we
are!” And he laughed and shone all over, and beckoned
Prue. And she trotted up to him and they whispered for
a long time, and then Sol called out, “BIG GIRL! COME
OYER HERE!” And I knew he meant me, and my knees
started to wobble. But I went over to him and he smiled
and said, “Am I so terrible that you wobble at the knees?”
And I answered as best I could, for my mouth was
wobbling, too. “N-—n—o. You aren’t terrible at all. I
think you are very nice, especially when you smile. But,
please, do tell us about the surprise—l mean the ‘something
new that Prudence dared us to look for.’ ” I felt as if I
had made a long speech, and Sol laughed and said, “Oh, ho!
So we have four brave girls, have we? Come along, then,
and look hard slightly to the left of me, and there is your
surprise!” So we looked, but we had to shade our eyes
because of the bright light. But there didn’t seem to be
anything very much out of the ornery—l mean, there were
some trees and a field and—Yes!—there was something!
Sally found it! And she grabbed my arm and whispered,


“Look, Jiggy. I see a field full of Huge Big Giant Sun-
flowers!” And she was right. It was an enormous field,
and we rushed over, and, when we got there, it was like
being in a forest, for the Sunflowers were Giant size. “This
can’t be the surprise, surely?” said Selina. And just then
we heard a sound from above our heads —a tiny little crying
sound it was. And I started to climb up a Sunflower stalk
and the others came after me, and, as we climbed, the
sound got louder, until, suddenly, I was at the sound. And
there, dears! lying tucked right in the middle of the Sun-
flower was a tiny weeny dimply pinky downy cuddly little
baby! And the others climbed round and peeped over the
flower and saw him, too. And I heard the little Invisible
Girl say quite clearly, “He’s for you, Jiggy! He’s the sur-
prise—the SOMETHING NEW UNDER THE SUN!” And
I almost cried with joy, and said to the baby, “Oh, you little
darling!” And another whisper said, “He’s not ready yet —
but I will send him down to you when he is.” And then
the loveliest thing happened, for the baby lifted up his little
tiny arms to me and smiled right into my eyes—truly, he
did! And I just couldn’t wait to pick him up any longer.
But I s’pose I wasn’t meant to, because it all faded away—
I mean disappeared —the baby, the Sunflowers, everything,
and we were back again talking to Sol. Prudence said,
“Any luck?” And we told them all about the baby, and
Sol smiled and said, “A little bit of the sun for you to keep
in your heart, my dear!” And I got a wonderful glowy sort
of a feeling, and Sally said, “You LUCKY THING!” And




I remembered, and said, “Well, girls, you’ve got Bunny,
you know —she’s your baby!” And just then Bunny gave a
squeak, and, what do you think? Her nose had been put
out of joint, because of the baby. Noses always do that,
but they go back into joint again. Oh, yes! Kind old Prue
found her Magic hankie and wiped Bunny’s nose back
again. So Bun had her bit of Magic, after all, because Prue
lent her the hankie. Bunny started, “I want the little baby
—he’s mine!” So I promised her she could hold him later
on. And that, dears! was exactly how we found “Newby,”
which is short for new baby. And I know I shall never be
able to wait until he’s ready. Selina spoke then, and said,
“Something tells me we ought to be going home —and Sally
and I are hungry.” So we asked Sol how we could get back
to the earth, and he scratched his head until he had a
bright idea, which was, “The Long-tailed Comet is due this
afternoon. It calls here once in ten years, so I suggest you
go home in it. The speed is terrific, but nothing to be
afraid of. OKAY?” And we all (except Prudence Tor-
toise) said, “OKAY DOKAY,” and Prue snorted and said
about slang being ugly in little girls. Bunny started say-
ing, “Please come quickly, Mr. Comet, as I want to go
home.” And that Comet kept to time. Yes, it did! It came
exactly on the tick it was expected. Fancy that —after ten
years, too! It swished up to the Sun in a lot of brilliant-
coloured lights and shiny stars —and it stopped just in a
good place for us to get on. “Good-bye, brave girls and
Mistress Tortoise,” called Sol,” and we hopped on the


Page 41 Our Funny Mummy
Comet, which seemed to be in a hurry about something,
and, POOF! we were away. Zip! —swish! —swirl! we were
away. We waved at dear old Sol, and he sent a beaming
smile, which made us all feel good. We sat in star chairs
and I hugged myself in secret joy at my good luck in find-
ing Newby. Selina and Sally had a game of counting the
stars, and Bunny played with the Comet’s Tail. Prudence
Tortoise! What did she do?
Did she read? No!
Did she sing? No!
She went to sleep —tucked herself cosily into her shell
and slept. The little Invisible Girl came to me and said,
“Newby will travel on a Comet, too, when he’s ready, so
watch the stars —the shooting stars —as they carry the new
babies from the Comets to the earth.” I said, “Oh, yes. I
know about that, for the little girl’s Mother, who might be
a Fairy, told me I came on a shooting star! And, darling!
Thank you!” I said, and the little Invisible Girl whis-
pered, “Don’t thank me, I’m only a little girl like you—
only I’m invisible.” And I said, “How I wish you weren’t
invisible!” And then she flew away, and the Comet blew its
noisy whistle and blew hundreds of baby stars off its tail—
it nearly blew Prudence off, too! Do you know she rolled
to the edge and I grabbed hold of her back legs and saved
her, and she was cross —actually cross —after I’d saved her
life, too! She was cross with herself really for being asleep
—grown-ups go to sleep too much, I think. Soon after that
she started fussing and did her hair in a thing she called


a Bun —but it wasn’t a bit like a Bun. Then Sally called
out that she could see lots of water underneath. Which was
the sea, and it was then that the queerest thing happened—
for somehow, somewhere out of nothing it seemed, five dear
little coloured balloons (like you have at parties) floated
down and stood in front of us, and then they sort of un-
folded and turned into real
parashoots (I can’t spell it),
and the red one spoke and
said, “My friend, the Shoot-
ing Star, is late this year, so
he sent us to help you home.
Just hold our hand and we
will do the rest.” So Sally
chose the yellow and Selina
the blue one, and off they
went, over the edge ever so
gently into the air. “See you
later,” I called to them, and
turned round to fix up about
Bunny and Prue. But Prue
was being difficult. She said,
“Whoever heard of such a
ridiculous thing. Parashoots
and at my age, too! I
won’t do it!” and she
stamped her foot. I tried and tried to make her, but
she was firm and just said, “No, I won’t!” all the time,


until I got rather tired and said, “Come along, Bunny
darling! You and I will have to go and leave Prudence
Tortoise if she is so silly.” And the Comet must have
agreed with me, because he whistled and flicked his tail and
bounced us up and down as if he was saying, “Hurry up!
“Hurry up! I’m late!” And I said, “Come on, Prudence
dear! You know you will go on lying about forever if you
don’t make up your mind.” And then she made it up—her
mind, I mean —and she stood up and said, “Here goes!”
And I caught hold of Bunny and we held our Parashoots,
and off we went, too. We soon caught up with Prue and she
seemed all right, and then we nearly banged into a cloud
and he was an angry one, so I was glad we didn’t. And
then we saw the others, floating down below us like two
coloured balloons. “They are nearly home,” I thought. But
they deserve to be, for they were the bravest —and brave
people always get the things they want. Bunny was sing-
ing a little song to herself and was as tame as anything.
So we drifted down —down —always down —until I saw the
trees, and then our beach and the dear old house —it looked
sort of friendly. “Look, Prue, there’s the house!” I said.
And she wriggled her legs and smiled and said, “I think I
shall take up Parashooting later, it’s most restful.” And
Bunny said, “Me, too, please!” And then, suddenly, we
dropped like Giant petals from a huge flower right on to
You guess what we dropped on to. Was it
The chimney? No!
The garage roof? No!


We landed on the grass, and Sally and Selina rushed
up to us shouting at the tops of their voices, “Guess who’s
here?” And, of course, we knew who it was. The Mummy!
And she came out to help untangle Prue from her Para-
shoot, and there was a wild rush at her and much hugging
and squeezing, and I found myself hugging my own leg. Gee,
it was fun! Poor Prue got terribly helpless, for we all
tumbled on to her, and there was a huge heap of me’s and
children and Mummies. “What a home coming!” gasped
the Mummy, in a very laughy sort of a voice. And she said,
“I’ve made a cake to welcome you home, girls!” And Pru-
dence smiled a very extra Tortoisy smile, and said, “I hope
you remembered to cook it.” And suddenly I smelt a smell,
a homely hot sort of a smell, and black smoke started puff-
ing out of the kitchen window, and I said, “Something’s
burning!” And, yes! Alas! Alack! —woe and sorrow —it
was the cake! —the beautiful Welcome Cake, burnt as black
as ink. Nobody said much, because it was so sad, and the
Mummy looked sort of red in the face, and then Bunny
broke the silence. She said, in her little tame voice,
“Mummy! Are you really a Fairy?” And the Mummy
looked and said, “I don’t really know, darling! I ought to
be, for I’m full of ideas.” And then we told her all about
our Adventures and the clowns and Sol and everything.
But we kept Newby till last, because he was the best, and
she listened and said, “Oh, Jiggy, you are a lucky girl!”
And I told her that I knew I was, but I felt sorry I had
found the new something and not the girls. And she put


her arm round me and said, “Good girl—to think of others.”
,That was all. And the little Invisible Girl came again and
whispered, “Look, Jiggy—at the wings!” And, yes, it’s the
absolute truth—l saw the wings, the most beautiful soft
silvery bluey mauvy wings, behind the Mummy’s back
(where wings grow), and I was thrilled, and I cried out
quickly, “You are a Fairy, I can see your wings!” And
the Mummy smiled at me and said, “Those are the wings
of imagination. She has lent them to me for as long as I
like to use them, and, as a special favour, I can lend them
to the girls, too!” And I said, “Now everything is lovely
and full of promise.” And just then a little tinkly laugh
giggled above our heads, and a merry voice said, . . . “And
they lived happily ever after. Good-bye, darlings! Have
lots of fun.” And you know who it was —the dear little
Invisible Girl flying back to her land. But it reminded
Prudence Tortoise, too, about going, because she started
fussing around and looking anxious, and muttered, “I’ve
got to go. It’s no use, I must go. Ernest will be missing
me something awful!” And then she started to sniff a
terrible lot and her eyes got very watery-looking, and I
nudged Bunny and she untied Prue’s magic hankie from
her belt and gave it to Prue. And she covered her face with
it, and it must have been Magic working, because our dear
Prudence Tortoise just shrunk or shrank—anyway, she got
tinier and tiner right in front of our eyes. She went down
to being a little Letter-box Tortoise again. But she could
still speak, and we knelt down so that we could hear what


she was saying, and it was, “’Bye bye, dear children. I will
love yon and remember yon always.
Always!” And we said, in choky
voices, “Don’t go, Prudence! Don’t
go!” Bnt she was firm jnst once
more and quite Mnmmyish, and she
powdered her nose and pnt her hat
straight and got on to her Scooter
and away she went. Bnnny had been very tame during
all this time, bnt seeing Prne ride off like that was
too much for her. She yelled. And the Mummy came out
and said, “Cheer up, chickens! Prudence will come back.”
And we said, <f When.” And she said, “In about a year.
She is due for a long sleep all Winter time, and so are you
it’s bedtime.” And we groaned and moaned, but bedtime
won, as usual. Now I long to be a grown-up, don’t you?


niiiiiiMiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
Young or Old
ou ’ll love these Kiddies Books
'CURR A WONG"
publishes nothing but
Australian Books
written, illustrated and
printed by Australian
Authors, Artists and
Printers
THE PIRATE FAIRIES. A Children's "thril-
ler." By J. W. Heming. Illustrated by
Des. Connor. Post Free, 3/-.
WHITESPOT. A charming story of a
dingo pup and his friends. By Robert
Record. Illustrated by John Andrews.
Post Free, 2/6.
BUSH PARTY. An entertaining and instruc-
tive story Also contains "Mother Goose
Island." By J. W. Heming. Illustrated by
Des. Connor. Post Free, 1/3.
OSCA AND OLGA. A fantastic story that
will fascinate youngsters up to 12 years.
By Paul Buddee. Illustrated by C. H.
Percival. Post Free, 3/6.
AUSTRALIAN NURSERY RHYMES. A real
Australian tiny tots' book. By J. W.
Heming. Illustrated by John Andrews.
Post Free, 3/6.
QUEER ANIMALS. A collection of interest-
ing facts and pictures. Post Free, 1 /6.
QUEER BIRDS. Companion book to the
above. Post Free, 1 /6.
RUPERT AND RITA. A fascinating story
for youngsters. By Paul Buddee. Illus-
trated by C. H. Percival. Post Free, 3/6.


PRESENT FOR * *
MUMMY OR DADDY
A VOYAGE TO VENUS. An inter-
stellar space story. By D. H.
Healy. Post Free, 4/6.
MURDER EXTRAVAGANZA. A
mystery novel of the sea and
stage. By J. W. Heming. Post
Free, 4/6.
PASSPORT TO PARADISE. Romance
with a dash of "Bitters.” By Leila
Piranf and Jean Campbell. Post
Free, 4/6.
THE DIGGER HAT AND OTHER
VERSES. By Tip Kelaher. Illus-
trated by C. H. Percival. (2nd
edition.) Post Free, 3/-.
SOME OF US. A collection of
delightful character studies. By
Stella Heys. Illustrated by John
Andrews. Post Free, 6/6.
PLAYWRITING. An Unconven-
tional Text Book, How to write
for the stage. By L. L. Woola-
cott. (2nd edition.) Post Free,
6/6.
EVERYBODY'S CRAZY. A mad
mystery novel. By G. C. Bleeck.
Post Free, 8/6.
SCORCHED EARTH. A realistic
novel by Philip I. Sounders. Post
Free, 4/6.
SOMETHING TO LIVE FOR. A new
way of life. By A. E. Mander.
Post Free, 5/6.
UNPOPULAR PAMPHLETS. No. 2.
"War Abolished," by J. Krish-
namurti. No. 3. "Alarming Aus-
tralia," by A. E. Mander. No. 4.
"Money Quiz," by Vincent Pan-
tin. No. 5. "Tell the People," by
J. K. Ewers. No. 6. "Dividends
of Deceit," by F. S. Greenop.
(Others in preparation.) Each,
Post Free, 1 /6.
NEWCASTLE PACKETS AND THE
HUNTER VALLEY. An authori-
tative history of coastal naviga-
tion. By J. H. M. Abbott, with
paintings by John Allcot. Post
Free, 15/-.
If you cannot buy them from your A ewsagent
or Bookseller, send to the Publishers
THE CURRAWONG PUBLISHING COMPANY
32 JAMIESON STREET, SYDNEY




'f


Hp u 3 cm
3 1508 02238524 4


I
■
.
f •
.
.
V •
Sk %
'
