

Our Book of
OPTIMISM
What Country Mayors
think of
Country Prospects
With the Compliments of
The Country Press Co-operative Co.
of Australia, Ltd.
5-7 Barrack Street, Sydney
Epworth Press, Sydney.


To the Pioneers
H It is meet and right that we should keep in per-
petual remembrance the men and women who,
in years long past, grappled with the primitive
in Australia, and bequeathed to us our goodly
heritage. They have labored, and we, in more
spacious years, have entered into the fruit of their
labors.
H The fertile field, the mart, the mine; the hosts
of cattle and the ripening corn; the bustling town;
the unending road; the civic privilege, the boons
of school and art and home —these things come to
us by no right of our own, but by the brow-sweat
and the courageous toil of the men who blazed
the trail.
IT Therefore, with Will Ogilvie we say—
“. . . the- valleys that, smile to our tillage,
The hills where our banners unfold,
IVere won by the men of the village
And bought with their axes of old.
And we only ride with the flouting tide
As we follow the blazed line back;
So we'll drink the toast of the vanguard host,
And "The Men Who Blazed the Track."
IT It is for us who follow to be worthy of those
from whom we sprang; to face our difficulties
manfully, and to recall, as they did, that Aus-
tralia’s strength is in her unexampled primary
resources.
EPWORTH PRESS, 218 CASTLEREAGH ST.. SYDNEY




Foreword
1 This is a book of good cheer. While admitting
the seriousness of prevailing conditions, it believes
that it is as wrong to overstate the problems of
the moment as it is to pretend they do not exist.
1 The point of view of “Our Book of Optimism”
is that it is the condition of the great rural por-
tions of our State that matters most in these diffi-
cult days. From them our salvation must come—
from new God-given wealth, contributed by farm
and field and forest.
1F What do the men of the outback —the wealth-
makers on whom we all depend—think of things?
How far has the current depression crippled their
industry and broken their spirit? How are they
reacting to the crisis?
1F That, after all, is the important thing for Aus-
tralia at this time.
1F In the following pages of this “Our Book of
Optimism” are given first-hand statements from
52 representative districts of New South Wales
—from Albury to Glen Innes, and Broken Hill
to Murwillumbah. These statements are actual
interviews with the civic heads of the respective
centres, responsible men who thus pledge the
honor and credit of their communities.
1F Official banking figures, published on page 32,
are extraordinarily illuminating on the question
of rural thrift.
HWhen you have finished reading this booklet,
you will agree on two things —that the heart of
the inland is sound; that city business men must
look more and more to the country for salvation.
Sydney, April, 1930.


Armidale
The depression in business, of which so much is heard in
the metropolitan area, has treated New England very lightly.
In Armidale, for instance, one seldom hears the word.
The building trade is brisk—it has never been brisker —
general merchants continue to report good business, and there
is an entire absence of apprehension as to the future. The
slump in wool prices has, of course, been reflected in quietness
in the stock trade, but the city and district are certainly not
“down in the dumps.”
Armidale, with its four big boarding schools, accommodat-
ing over 600 students (exclusive of day students) ; its £lOO,OOO
Teachers’ Training College; its four hostels, one costing
£20,000 (another at £16,000 to be erected by the Education
Department), and its large Demonstration School, will feel
any depression less than any other centre in the State, or even
in the Commonwealth. It is interesting to note, too, that
there are over 120 teachers in Armidale school.
The Armidale City Council will this year spend more money
and employ more men than ever before. The whole of this
money will come from revenue. I am most optimistic con-
cerning prosperity in the coming year.
(Sgd.) W. H. WATSON,
Mayor.
In the District
I understand that the present period of depression is, with one
or two possible exceptions, unprecedented in the history of the
State. This may be the case, but if it is so, then the stability
of New England is established for all time.
11 The only evidence of depression we see here is the “back-
wash” of the effect in the cities. We see their unemployed
tramping the road looking for what work there is to be found.
We have practically no unemployment of our own.
U Our district still produces abundant wealth, as the 1930
Annual Show, just over, bore witness, with exhibits which
have never been excelled in number or quality. We do not
know the meaning of the word “drought.” We have our dry
spells, but even they are rare. The bounteous rains, which
have fallen over this part of the State, mean abundant feed
for the live stock during the winter months.
(Sgd.) JOHN S. MOOREHEAD,
President Dumaresq Shire Council.


Albury
I am certainly an optimist as to the future, but I hope a
reasonably prudent and cautious one. Things, generally speak-
ing, may not be as prosperous at present as they were, say,
a year or two ago. However, I say emphatically that they
are by no means so bad as many timid souls allege. We have
had slumps and depressions in Australia before—and pulled
through them. It was not the pessimists who saved the
situation, but the people of optimistic outlook who put their
shoulders to the wheel and helped the chariot of progress out
of the slough of depression.
If We have overcome difficulties in the past by facing them
boldly, determinedly, and, may I say, cheerfully. A sensi-
tive man in excellent health may have his health impaired by
friends consistently and persistently telling him that he is
looking ill. He becomes dejected, and eventually is on the
sick list. It is much the same with a community as with an
individual. With hundreds, possibly thousands, thinking
depression and talking depression, the thing becomes an obses-
sion, the whole country is apt to stagnate, and eventually it
will take years to become normal again. This is the time
for cheerfulness and optimism.
f There is much in Albury to encourage the hopeful outlook.
This is the only provincial town in Australia, outside of
Geelong, to hold wool sales. It is expected that this year
approximately 70,000 bales will be sold, which is expected
to realise, roughly, £1,250,000. It must not be forgotten also
that the Riverina produces one-third of the State’s wheat
output.
tl Confidence in the town and district are convincingly shown
by the building figures for the municipality. The official total
for 1929 was £162,806, included in which were no less than
89 new dwellings and shops. These figures are equal to the
average of the last five years, during which time no less than
£843,555 was spent in building in the municipality. There
are many other evidences of town progress, indicating the
essential stability of this centre.
With favorable seasonable conditions there will be a very
big acreage put under wheat this year. The heart of the people
is sound, and optimism is the watchword.
(Sgd.) ALFRED WAUGH,
Mayor.


Bathurst
The history of Bathurst during the past decade is one of
solid business progress. Such business progress depends on
sources of income which are not subject to the violent fluc-
tuations of abnormal conditions.
H Bathurst has this stability. It is situated in one of the most
favoured positions of inland Australia, and it is this fact which
is all important to the primary producer around Bathurst and
to the general business of the City.
If Wool, wheat and orcharding form the basis of steady pro-
duction. Recently the canning industry has been tried out
with success, and the “Bathurst” brand of asparagus has taken
a place right at the top of the market. One other factor
making for steady income is the large Railway paysheet.
H Evidence of solid progress within the city is to be found in
the steady building of the modern, convenient and picturesque
dwelling, and indication in itself of a higher standard of liv-
ing and of a love of a bright and comfortable home.
ft The main shopping centres of the city are being greatly
improved by the building of up-to-date, attractive shop fronts
and commodious showrooms, where goods can be displayed.
H The initiative thus displayed by the Bathurst business men
is not only progressive on their part, but is an indication of
their faith in the stability of their city.
f With regard to the future, I think that this will be a golden
one for Bathurst. Whilst undoubtedly many parts of the
Commonwealth are feeling the stress, Bathurst has fluctuated
but little, which indicates the healthy position of its finances.
(Sgd.) P. J. MOODIE, Mayor.
Broken Hill
The number of men employed on the Broken Hill mines is
officially stated as being 5,106 (January 31st).
K There are approximately 1,000 other wage-earners employed
in the town. The total wages paid average just about
£40,000 weekly.
H The recent rains have given every promise of a full re-
covery in the pastoral industry, which covers so great an area
in this district—about 50,000 square miles at a rough esti-
mate. The re-stocking of the dry areas has been commenced.
(Sgd.) R. DENNIS, Mayor.


Bega
There is no depression in Bega. On the contrary, progress
in the last twelve months has been more marked than for
many years past, and our main industry, dairying, was never
on a more satisfactory footing, with the result that produc-
tion has substantially increased.
If Bega Butter Factory alone, for the six months ended
January 31st, 1930, paid to suppliers £96,435. Figures for
the adjacent factories at Cobargo, Bemboka, Wolumla, and
Pambula, and for the cheese factories on Kameruka Estate,
at Erinna, and Tilba, are not available; but they have been
proportionately greater than for a long time past. The
cattle market has been very brisk, due principally to the
operations of Victorian and Hunter River buyers. In addi-
tion to the regular weekly stock sales at Bega Municipal
Yards, many hundreds of dairy stock have been sold pri-
vately to outside buyers. The pig market has also been good
and the local bacon factory reports a very successful half-
year.
If Maize crops on the river flats promise excellent yields.
If Building operations in the town have been greater than
for 20 years past, and as an evidence of this, it is noticed
that tradesmen who removed to the city some years back are
returning and finding work here. The tourist trade is increas-
ing and adding considerably to the prosperity of the town.
If The local show, held recently, established records in all
sections, and there was quite an extraordinary increase in the
attendances of the people, proof of the fact that this district
has not yet felt the pinch which is affecting less favored
centres.
(Sgd.) J. T. ROGERS,
Mayor.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
II The originals of the interviews in this booklet are carefully filed
in the offices of the Country Press Co-operative Co. of Aust. Ltd.,
5-7 Barrack Street. We shall be happy to show them to anyone
desirous of making a personal inspection.


Bellingen
As a large butter, bacon, and timber-producing centre, with
the added present season activity in maize growing, the Bel-
linger River is definitely establishing itself as one of the
soundest and most fertile areas in the State.
In the past six months the butter output from the two
river factories has exceeded 484 tons, and the money paid
to suppliers of cream to the factories in the period has reached
a sum in excess of £81,155. In addition to this activity in
butter, there are two cheese factories (one at Kalang, on the
Upper South Arm of the Bellinger, and the other at Gleniffer),
which are in constant operation and distributing large sums
of money to dairymen in their immediate districts. Pigs
sold at the fortnightly sales have realised almost £5,000 in
the past six months. The turnover at the local co-operative
bacon factory in the same period has reached over £13,000,
while truckings to the abattoirs of pigs has added approxi-
mately another £1,500 to £2,000 to these returns for pigs.
Probably not for seven years past has a better season been
experienced, and production is reaching peak point on every
hand. The beautiful alluvial flats on the river are carrying
excellent crops of maize, and thousands of bushels in excess
of the average crop will ordinarily be harvested.
H Pastures, both on hill and flat lands, are excellent, and
there is every evidence which gives to the district outlook
generally a feeling of assured success. Public institutions
and organisations in the town are in a very healthy position,
and reflect further the sound position of the district.
IJWhen the present Shire Council began the year 1929 the
overdraft on General Fund Account at the bank was in
excess of £5,000. In the year more work was performed than
in any one year previously, yet the year finished with the
general fund overdraft reduced to a figure of £1,068.
H The Memorial Hall and Literary Institute, which recently
erected substantial buildings, to a cost in excess of £5,000,
held a fair last month, which returned a nett profit in excess
of £313. Building activity in Bellingen in the past year
(building areas only) showed the value of new buildings to
be £11,894, while at the last meeting of the Shire Council
seven applications were approved for building works, which
included three new cottages.
(Sgd.) H. V. WOOD,
President , Bellingen Shire Council.


Canowindra
I have much pleasure, as Secretary of the Canowindra Pro-
gress Association, and in the absence of a Mayor (as this
town of 2,000 inhabitants is incorporated within the Boree
Shire), in affirming that the Canowindra district for a 20-
mile radius is included among the best in the State. Al-
though the past season has not been a prolific one for New
South Wales —and this district was a common sufferer with
the rest —the wheat crop was very substantial, and in some
instances the yield was quite up to the average.
U The wool season also showed good returns, as compared with
other parts, although it is known the price has dropped.
If During the past year a very good amount of building has
been carried out in the town and district, and with a good
prospect ahead, the operations in this regard should be con-
tinued. At the present time I know of tenders being called
for several buildings, including some shops.
If During the past few months steps have been taken to have
the dairying industry increased very appreciably in this dis-
trict, for which the Belubula and Lachlan Flats are highly
suitable, giving most seasons eight cuts. There is already a
butter factory working in Canowindra. There are also two
flour mills. It is claimed that there are more motor cars
per population used in this district than in any other.
If The water supply has led to the making of nice gardens and
vegetable growing is carried on extensively by private citizens.
The whole of the streets of the town are just about to be
tar-painted. The whole town is practically kerbed and gut-
tered, and there is a general tree-planting scheme being
gradually carried out. The district is fairly closely settled,
and there are very few of what can be termed large hold-
ings. The fertility of the district is on a par with its finan-
cial soundness, as a reference to any of the publications con-
cerned will show that there are practically no liens on crops
in this district, while other districts have shown long lists.
If The formation a few months ago of the Canowindra Dis-
trict Development League will help this district forward, and
much good from it is expected. Some irrigation plants have
been installed along the adjacent river. Sixty tractors are at
work in this district, so I am informed. The up-to-date
town is a reflection of the country behind it.
(Sgd.) W. ERIC FROST,
Secretary, Canowindra Progress Association.


Casino
I have pleasure in stating that there are no grounds for
pessimism concerning the future of Casino and district.
U The primary industry is dairying, and the district has just
experienced a bountiful season.
U During the past six months the Casino Dairy Society has
manufactured 770 tons of butter, an increase of 53 tons com-
pared with the corresponding period of last year. The year’s
turnover at the factory was £442,890. There are 715 sup-
pliers on the pay sheet, as against 679 last year.
Casino is an important pig-raising district, and annually
30,000 pigs are placed on the market, valued in the vicinity
of £lOO,OOO.
H Dairy cows in the district number approximately 36,000.
Timber production is estimated at £25,000 per annum.
H For the year ended December last, 25 new buildings were
constructed in Casino, which has a population og 5,000, and
the district 10,000.
f The population will be increased still more in the near
future, with the removal of the railway workshops from Lis-
more to Casino, for then between 70 and 80 new families
will reside here, necessitating the construction of a number
of new homes. With this influx of population, together with
the added prestige the town will receive through being con-
stituted an important junction town on the main North
Coast Line to Brisbane (on completion of the railway within
the next few months), and the promise of an excellent
winter, one cannot but take an optimistic view of the
future of Casino.
(Sgd.) DUGALD A. RAYNER,
Mayor.
THE BEST BUYER
IT Dr. Dunmore Lang, one of Australia’s greatest statesmen, never
tired of affirming that the rural public was ever the most stable
public in this country.
1T Most stable because they are producers, and not dealers: because
their buying power is uniformly high; because the exigencies of their
craft make them resourceful and self-reliant; because contact with
Nature at first hand breeds character, poise and contentment,
f The rural public is also the best buyer of our goods, because dis-
tance and isolation compel wide provision for many and diverse
needs, and thus create a maximum market.


Coff’s Harbour
For the present I cannot see how the general financial depres-
sion is going to affect this district very much.
U The farmers are having one of the longest and best seasons
for many years, with heavy cream supplies resulting in good
cheques by the factories. This recovery, after many lean
years, must have its good effect upon the whole district, as
wealth from primary production is real wealth, upon which
the position depends. The slump in the timber industry
has been felt for some time, and I do not think it is likely
to become worse. The mills now working will continue
according to the demand for sawn timber, and the position
is being improved in this district by the extensive and progres-
sive operations at Timmsvale, where a large number of men
are constantly employed in the up-to-date saw mill.
If The observations of travellers that Coff’s Harbour is more
than holding its own for signs of progress among country
towns is borne out by this year’s building operations. About
£6,000 worth of new buildings are in course of construction
in the town, while another £6,000 to £7,000 worth are to be
commenced at an early date.
H A £7,000 road contract is proceeding on the State Highway
at Korora, and the permanent construction of the Jetty
Road, at a cost of £7,000, is to commence at any time now.
£l,OOO is to be spent on the aerodrome to further improve
Coff’s Harbour as an airport, and the installation of a large
petrol depot on the aerodrome to supply the Sydney-Brisbane
mail ’planes en route, means further advancement to local
industry.
Tf The Harbour Improvement Works, which have never
closed since commencement, are proceeding satisfactorily,
employing about 100 men.
H A new industry is the growing of tomatoes, bananas, pas-
sion fruit, and other small crops, resulting in additional
people and fresh capital coming into the district. The action
of the Crown in throwing open for selection some 1,200
acres of banana land from the State Forest, will add further
to the primary products of the district.
(Sgd.) H. M. HENDERSON,
President, Chamber of Commerce.


Cootamundra
The Cootamundra district suffered a temporary set-back as
a result of the low income from last season’s wool, but the
wheat yield was 15 per cent, beyond anticipations. Wool,
for many years, has been the chief asset. Big money was
made thereby. However, for the first time for many years
the men on the land were taught the lesson that wheat has
its claims again; and the area for wheat cultivation this
year will be increased by at least 30 per cent., whilst many
will also go in for dairying. The abolition of the rural award
is giving landholders a better chance to launch out, and al-
ready the number of men to be seen “humping the bluey”
on the roads has noticeably decreased. Life on the land is
also being made more attractive by the extension, from Coota-
mundra, of the Burrinjuck hydro-electricity scheme. The vil-
lage of Wallendbeen, 12 miles away, is about to switch on
its street lights, whilst at Stockinbingal, 14 miles distant, the
poles and wiring are being erected.
H In the town of Cootamundra, gas and steam engines have
been replaced by the modern electric motors in the principal
industries, such as the flour mill, freezing works, and timber
yards. One of the latter alone employs forty hands. Further,
by next summer Cootamundra, whose gravitation water ser-
vice proved inadequate during the dry spells, is to be amply
supplied with water from the Murrumbidgee River at Jugiong,
25 miles away. The cheap hydro-electricity generated at the
Burrinjuck Dam is to be utilised to pump the water, by a
22-inch rising main, to two gravitation dams on the Cowong
mountains, whence it will be gravitated to several towns on
the tablelands, Cootamundra, Murrumburrah, Harden, Wal-
lendbeen, Young, Stockinbingal, Temora, Barmedman, and
Wyalong. Other towns and villages will assuredly spring up
along the water mains. At Cootamundra, which is to be the
first town served by the big water scheme, several factories
and industries are to be started.
U A tannery is mooted. It will absorb a hundred men. Large
new saleyards for sheep and cattle are now being erected.
Cootamundra’s unique position as a railway centre —no other
provincial town in Australia has greater transport facilities
for stock, etc. —lends itself to the establishment of secondary
industries; and this, coupled with the fact that the surround-
ing district is unsurpassed for its safety and soundness in pri-
mary production, make the future bright with promise.
(Sgd.) F. R. DICKSON, Mayor.


Cowra
Nobody seems to be unduly worried about matters here, and
when one looks along the main streets on shopping day
(Saturday), he finds hundreds of cars, belonging for the
most part to farmers and graziers, that testify to the general
welfare.
If Droughts are unknown in this district. We can therefore
afford to laugh, and laugh heartily, at a few doleful city
Jeremiahs, who would have us believe that Australia is about
to sink under the seas that wash the shores of this great
country.
If The district on the eastern side of Cowra grew crops this
season that went up 38 bushels an acre, and from the rich
Lachlan flats on the western side fat bullocks find their way
to Homebush, and there fetch from £l5 to £25 a head almost
every week.
If There is really nothing to howl about. The district will
grow thousands of acres of wheat more this coming season
than ever before, and, on the law of averages, it should be a
bumper one.
If A few years ago many farmers here went from wheat to
wool; this year they are turning from wool to wheat again,
with mobs of fat lambs to supplement their earnings.
If About five years ago the population of Cowra stood at
about 3,500; to-day it is close on 5,000, whilst that of the
district is probably in the region of 16,000.
If The municipality is steadily marching forward in the
right direction. The returns for 1929 showed that 33 more
cottages were erected than in 1928, or an increase in monetary
value of £31,641.
If The whole world is in pretty well the same position as
Australia, which, however, has a far greater recuperative
capacity than any other country. While recognising that we
must live within our income by curtailing extravagance, let
us also remember that Australia is at the bottom as sound as a
bell. If we have to do with less in our homes or upon our
backs, and the lesson should be a salutary one, there is no
need for pessimism.
(Sgd.) N. A. NOSS,
Mayor.


Dorrigo
In the first place I would like to say that, despite the general
financial stringency, the Plateau was never more prosperous
than it is to-day. The prospects are bright, and there is
every indication that production will reach record figures this
year.
IF The manager of the Dorrigo Co-op. Dairy Co. has advised
me that the output of butter from the factory last year
totalled tons, the value of which was £135,934 10s.
The output of the company’s bacon factory was 5,573 pigs
(treated), valued at £23,841. In addition, a number of pigs
were sold privately to outside buyers. The butter factory has a
larger output than any individual factory between the Macleay
and Clarence Rivers (factories on those rivers excluded),
which speaks well for the Plateau, considering that it is the
youngest district on the North Coast, having been opened up
only a little more than 20 years.
IF From the Chairman of Directors of the Maida Vale
Cheese Factory I have learned that the manufacture last year
was approximately 50 tons, valued at about £5,000.
ft After careful inquiry, I estimate that £16,000 was received
by Plateau growers for their potato crop last year. The
above were supplemented by good returns for maize and
other primary products.
IF The crops this year are excellent, and returns promise to
be better than they were last year. At the Dorrigo Agricul-
tural Association’s show social, the Government expert, Mr.
Squire, said the corn crops on Dorrigo this year were the best
he had ever seen here.
IF Thousands of pounds are received annually from cattle sold
in the Sydney and Melbourne markets. One firm alone
(H. W. Kirkland & Co.) advised me this morning that
£7,448 worth passed through their hands last year.
IFFrom the local representative of the Forestry Department
I have learned that the output of timber from the Dorrigo
Plateau last year was approximately 16,000,000 sup. ft., the
approximate value being £247,500, or about £17,000 better
than the previous twelve months. A large amount of this
money is, of course, distributed in the district.
(Sgd.) H. T. SHORT,
President, Dorrigo Shire, 1928.


Dubbo
From a small beginning, the town of Dubbo has grown to a
Municipality boasting an improved capital value of £2,063,802,
with an assessed annual value of £170,359 and a revenue of
nearly £35,000. The town has one of the most modern
electrical installations, involving capital invested in assets
aggregating approximately £lOO,OOO.
H In spite of the drought and the hard times generally expe-
rienced throughout Australia, Dubbo is advancing buoyantly.
In the past four years, its new buildings have aggregated a
value of £419,329. House property has probably depreciated
slightly, but all country values are hardening and on the
up-grade. There are evidences of solid progress on every
hand —what could be more convincing than the fact that
three new banks have been erected in the last two years?
U The social life of Dubbo is known and appreciated far and
wide. The hard-court tennis championships of the State are
played at Dubbo, which possesses twelve gravel courts and
equipment unequalled by any country town in Australia. Over
1,250 players will be affiliated with the Association this
year. Other sporting institutions include Jockey Club, Picnic
Race Club, Trotting Club, Croquet, Bowls, Golf, Football,
three Swimming Clubs, and Cricket Club, with turf wicket.
There are also four flourishing bands, with over twenty-five
performers apiece.
H These and all the local institutions which go to make up
the well-furnished country town, have their roots well down
in the soil. The splendid district behind them has made
them possible. Dubbo itself, solid and progressive, is merely
the expression of the rich district that surrounds it. Conse-
quently, we take the most hopeful view of the future.
(Sgd.) JOHN BARDEN, Mayor.
In the District
IFTalbragar Shire is improving with every year; so is
Dubbo’s railway service, and there will be more country
under wheat and lucerne this year than at any previous period
in the history of the district. The total value of the ratable
land within the Shire is just under £1,000,000, and it is
financed on a 2d rate, with a revenue of £19,500.
(Sgd.) W. H. GODWIN,
President, Talbragar Shire Council.


Eden and Twofold Bay
Without being in any way unduly optimistic, I may say
that, in my opinion, the South East is not only holding its
own, but is making headway in regard to both primary pro-
duction and general development.
ft During this season the output of the district butter fac-
tories showed a marked increase above that of the previous
year, and prices for the product (the whole of which in
some cases was sold as first-class) have been very satisfactorily
remunerative. The outlook of the dairy companies is dis-
tinctly encouraging, as not only is there a prospect of dis-
trict supplies of cream being normally maintained, but a
big extension of dairying is expected to result from the open-
ing up of highly productive lands by developmental roads
now in course of construction.
ft During the last year large supplies of hewn sleepers have
left this port for Sydney, and shipments of hewn timber have
been made from Eden to Melbourne, thus bringing Victorian
money into this State and providing employment in this dis-
trict. This bids fair to continue.
ft Fishing is, as it always has been, a great stand-by for
locally resident fishermen, who find markets for their hauls
in both Sydney and Melbourne.
ft The town of Eden itself has made marked progress, as is
evidenced by the erection of new buildings, the establishment
of a busy bark-grinding industry in proximity to the wharf,
and a general improvement of the town and surroundings by
the local progressive bodies.
(Sgd.) A. I. NICHOLSON,
President , Imlay Shire Council.


Forbes
Forbes is upholding its reputation as a sound business centre,
despite the financial stringency that is said to exist in New
South Wales to-day. This is especially apparent from our
building figures, which can always be regarded as a sure sign
of a town’s prosperity. Last year these figures were set down
at <£66,600.
TT Our wool clip last season amounted to 11,000 bales, while
the Lachlan flats supplied thousands of tons of lucerne for
drought-stricken areas in other parts of the State.
U The new sale yards, although only in existence a short time,
have proved they are a paying concern, and fortnightly sales,
interspersed with special sales, have been well patronised.
IT A movement is now under way for the establishment of a
butter factory, and experts say our rich river flats spell suc-
cess for the project. The Lachlan River is an asset that
cannot be valued in money. While other centres faced, and
are facing, water shortages, Forbes has not been troubled in
this respect. In addition to domestic, stock and irrigation
supplies are always plentiful.
Reports from all parts of the district indicate that farmers
are sowing greater wheat areas than for many years past,
and one can look forward to the town and district main-
taining the prosperity that has marked its progress in past
years.
(Sgd.) WALTER J. THOMSON,
Mayor.


A Timely Reminder
IF It was President Jackson who, in his “Message
to the United States Congress,” remarked: “The
wealth and strength of a country are its popu-
lation, and the best part of that population are
the cultivators of the soil.”
IF This dictum applies with redoubled emphasis to conditions
in Australia, whose prosperity has been built up over the years
on the wonderful wealth of her primary production.
IF Even the great City of Sydney itself exists only because the
rich hinterland of the State has made it possible. We in the
metropolis merely turn over the wealth the back-country sends
us, and it is precisely because the prices the world is offering
us this year for our soil-products are lower than we have been
in the habit of receiving, that financial stringency is being
experienced.
IF Nevertheless, the shortage registers itself first and princi-
pally in the city, for the country is self-contained, and goes
on producing its natural wealth as of yore. Dairy herds are
still returning their monthly cream cheques; record wheat
acreages are being sown; our merino flocks are growing the
world’s best wool for the world’s markets; mine and
forest alike are contributing to the country’s revenue, and our
agriculture everywhere is adapting itself profitably to changing
circumstances.
IF Nature is no Pessimist.
IF It is well we should be reminded of these things, so easily
forgotten in a great industrialised city. This “Book of
Optimism” is our small contribution to the stiffening of the
morale of the community at a time when such a tonic is
peculiarly necessary.
THE PESSIMIST
fAn Optimist, we are told, is a man who, of two evils, chooses the
less.
f A Pessimist, on the other hand, is a man who, of two evils, chooses —
both!
1f Which is probably what the humorist had in mind when he des-
cribed the Pessimist as a man who wore both belt and braces.


Glen Innes
Apart from the lower returns for wool, the pastoral and
agricultural outlook in the Glen Innes district is very bright.
Both sheep and cattle are in splendid condition, and there is
an entire absence of disease, with excellent winter prospects,
ft Though the cream supply was somewhat lower than usual
in the early months of the season, a great time is now being
experienced in the cow country, and supplies to the three local
factories are daily increasing. There is every prospect of a
“drooping” autumn, in which case the dairying season will
continue for a couple of months longer than usual. The
dairyman is finding the pig a good side-line, and the local
factory is slaughtering at the rate of 200 a month. The Glen
Innes factory is now handling poultry and eggs, in addition
to butter and bacon, as a result of which the aggregate amount
distributed each month has been considerably increased.
ft Tens of thousands of tons of prime oaten hay is in the
stacks, and it is expected that when it reaches the market as
chaff it will rival the best southern chaff for price. This
chaff will probably find its way on to the market in the
winter months, at which time it is usual to find the best
demand. Quite a number of oat crops have been headed, and
the seed, of prime quality, is finding ready sale.
ft A splendid maize crop is in prospect. On many farms
there are large areas, which it is estimated will yield round
about 60 bushels, while the grain promises to be of first
quality. Glen Innes district has the great advantage that
when once a maize crop is placed in the shed it can be held,
without deteriorating, for any period, to catch the best
market, there being no weevil. The R.A.S. field maize
championship of the north has been won by Glen Innes twice
in the last three years.
ft Ploughing for early oat and wheat crops has already com-
menced, and it is probable that a record area will be turned
over this year.
ft The farmer-grazier is now seriously tackling the improve-
ment of his pastures, and in view of the very satisfactory
trials in various parts of the district in past years, it is safe
to estimate that on many properties double the number of
stock will be carried within the next year or two.
ft The building industry is brisk, and since the New Year
cottages have been erected at the rate of per week.
(Sgd.) W. A. CRAMSIE, Mayor.


Gloucester
Although there is talk of a general depression through the
State, the Gloucester district, happily, does not appear to be
affected. On the contrary, the past six months has created
records in primary production in both the dairying and cattle
industries—the district’s two stable avenues of revenue. Dur-
ing that period (September to February) the Gloucester Dairy
Company has manufactured 892,762 lbs. of butter and dis-
tributed among its suppliers over £56,000, this being its
largest turnover for those months in any year. The last
balance sheet of this company disclosed that the factory had
a turnover for the twelve months ending June, 1929, of
£117,000, and its chairman of directors, at a meeting of the
local Chamber of Commerce, stated that such was the rate
of increase, that it would not be long before the output of
this factory was a quarter of a million pounds sterling per
annum. The flush period of this factory is between March-
May.
U The Gloucester Shire is at present constructing important
developmental roads that will largely extend the factory’s col-
lecting area and bring more country under dairying. For
the past six months, ending February, 1930, 9,113 head of
cattle have been sold through the Gloucester Shire yards, of
an approximate value of £68,198, while in the same period
this district has supplied the Sydney and Maitland markets
with 5,600 fat cattle, valued at £53,311. In the same period
4,000 swine have passed through the Gloucester yards, and,
in addition, 900 have been trucked to other markets—a total
value of £9,775. Wool sent from Gloucester totalled in
value approximately £7,000. This is an infant industry for
the district, of two years’ standing. These figures give a
total of £194,284 for six months, from September 1 to Feb-
ruary 28, 1930 (inclusive).
Tf During the past two years Gloucester has made marked
progress, building being more brisk than for many years past.
At the present time tenders are being called for large brick
business premises in the main street, where a new garage is
also in course of erection. A dozen good residences are going
up within the town, and leading builders have orders in hand
for some months to come.
(Sgd.) A. J. WHITE,
Shire President.


Grafton
The Clarence River district is enjoying the best season it
has experienced for many years. Dairying, which is the prin-
cipal industry, is more prosperous than it has ever been, owing
to the prolific season resulting from the bounteous rains.
ft The Grafton Dairy Company reported a record turnover
for the last year £272,951, which was £32,482 better than
in the previous year, and the highest total recorded for any
one year. This Company’s butter output reveals an increase
of 250 tons per annum, and an increased annual value of
£50,000 compared with two years ago.
ft The Clarence River Pioneer Dairy Company at Ulmarra
had a turnover in its butter department during the six months
ended December 31, of £178,706, which was £77,650 better
than the corresponding period of the previous year. It
manufactured 905 tons of butter in the six months, which
was an increase of 403 compared with the corresponding
period of the previous year. For January the company manu-
factured tons of butter, which was tons more than
in January, 1928.
ft Sugar cane and maize crops are looking splendid, and give
every promise of good harvest, whilst potato prices last year
were best Clarence River growers had received for very manv
years.
ft Farms are changing hands at record prices, some going
well over £lOO per acre, showing that depression is in no
way being felt in this locality.
ft Building operations in Grafton last year were the best
since 1926, over £40,000 being spent in new premises and
additions.
ft Generally, the North Coast is regarded to-day as the most
solid portion of the State, and, as evidence of the general
prosperity, it may be mentioned that most business folk re-
ported their last Christmas as the best ever experienced.
There is no sign whatever of depression here.
(Sgd.) D. W. MACPHERSON,
Mayor.


Grenfell
Despite the dryness of the season being experienced here,
there is unusual activity among farmers, and the indications
are that a larger area will be sown for wheat this season in
the Grenfell district than ever before in its history.
No doubt the fact that wool prices are low at the moment
has had something to do with this. However, farming men
in this district are not sitting down and moaning about the
financial conditions generally. They are actively at work,
and to aid them, modern machinery, in the form of power
tractors, is being pressed into use. One of the largest land-
holders in this district, and a man who has not grown wheat
for years, has purchased two such tractors in an endeavour
to put a large area under wheat.
U In a normal season this district produces close on a quarter
of a million pounds’ worth of wool, and the wool men are all
carrying on.
H During 1929 there was more activity in the municipal life
of the town than for any previous period since the institution
of Local Government. A large sum of money was spent in
road construction, and a considerable amount of work car-
ried out in conjunction with the Main Roads Board.
Plans and specifications have been prepared for a local
water supply, to cost in the neighbourhood of £BO,OOO, and
it is anticipated that a start will be made before the close
of the present financial year.
If All the Council’s funds are in a healthy state, and the total
rate levied is in the £ on the unimproved capital value.
H Unusual mining activity is noticeable, and during February
no less than 16 permits to “enter and search for gold” were
issued at the local C.P.S. office.
H A number of Main Roads contracts are about to be let,
and tenders for one job, running into £20,000, are being con-
sidered by the Weddin Shire Council.
(Sgd.) JAS. BRADLEY,
Mayor, Municipality of Grenfell.
(Sgd.) GEORGE H. PEREIRA,
President, Weddin Shire.


Hay
I am very firmly of opinion that there is nothing to war-
rant the pessimism one encounters in Sydney in respect to
country conditions, in so far as this district is concerned.
U Hay is the central town of an immense pastoral district.
As a sheep district, it is unsurpassed in Australia. Some of
the most noted stud flocks of the Commonwealth are in the
Hay district. Last year, 1929, the bounteous rains of Octo-
ber, followed up as they were by good falls in November and
December, put the district into good grazing condition.
U I know of no empty houses in Hay. Three cottages are
now building, and the Union Bank, after occupying rented
premises for over fifty years, has just erected a new and sub-
stantial building of two stories, which includes the manager’s
residential quarters.
The excellence and level character of the roads of the dis-
trict has led to the general use of the motor car and lorry.
This development is most marked. There are seven garages
in Hay and fifteen Bowser pumps are in use. One local motor
carrier alone (The Hay Motor & Engineering Pty. Ltd.)
lifted 8,248 bales of wool from different stations in the dis-
trict and conveyed them to the railway.
The recently published balance sheet of the Hay Pastures
Protection Board showed that, in 1929, there were 1,171,685
sheep and 10,877 head of large stock within the Hay P.P.
district. In addition, for the owners of about a further quar-
ter of a million sheep in the adjoining P.P. districts of Bal-
ranald and Hillston, Hay is the market, banking, medical,
lands office, and district court town.
H The low price at present ruling for wool is sure to be felt
to a certain extent, but if there is a good season in 1930 that
drawback will be counteracted.
H The prosperity of the town may be gauged from the muni-
cipal finances. The General Account is £3O better than it
was a year ago, and the Water Account £3OO better. The
Sewer Account is not as flourishing to the extent of £lOO.
The Council’s estimate of the ability of the ratepayers to
pay their taxes may be gauged by the fact that the rate
notices have just been issued, showing the following assess-
ments on the unimproved capital values:—General, 10d;
Water, 9^d; Sewer, in the £; and Lighting, Id on the
improved capital values.
(Sgd.) E. W. WILKINSON, Deputy-Mayor.


Inverell
The people of Inverell have unbounded confidence in their
town and district, and that confidence has not been in any
way diminished by any recent happenings.
I Our district, which is one of many resources, comprising as
it does grazing, farming, dairying, fruitgrowing and mining,
has just experienced a bountiful wheat season, and though rain
would be welcome at the present time, the pastures are good
and stock are doing well. Furthermore, we enjoy an average
annual rainfall of thirty inches, and the climate is a favourable
one, situated as we are 1,900 feet above sea level, “twixt table-
land and plain.”
II As an indication of the productivity of the soil in this dis-
trict, I would only say that 31,400 bags of wheat were obtained
this season from 2,900 acres, the best crop being 8,400 bushels
from 200 acres, while from the whole of the district over
450,000 bags were gathered in, and the crop estimated to
return £300,000.
IF The Inverell Butter and Bacon Co-operative Co. held its
annual meeting on March Bth, when it was revealed that dur-
ing the year it distributed £30,000 among its suppliers. Of
the total output of butter, 99.97 per cent, was graded and
paid for as choicest.
1f The unfortunate drop in the wool market does not affect
Inverell so seriously, as the district is a safe one and wool-
growing has in the past proved profitable.
T Further, I might add that our annual Pastoral and Agri-
cultural Show on March 4th, sth, and 6th, 1930, constituted
a record, both from a financial point of view and the quality
of the exhibits, for the whole of the 61 years of the Society’s
existence. The judges of the various sections expressed their
delight at the quality of the stock they were asked to judge.
f The building trade is also a fair indication of the pros-
perity of the district, and during 1929, 40 new cottages were
built and extensions to other buildings carried out, at a total
cost of £23,670. This year, to date, new buildings costing
£1,970 have been erected, and tenders for a new Convent
High School were called recently. We therefore look to the
future with every confidence.
(Sgd.) S. J. S. BUTLER,
Mayor.


Kempsey
Kempsey and the Macleay Valley generally are in a very
fortunate position, and any handicap to local prosperity and
progress in the immediate future will be only a faint reflec-
tion of general disquietude. Speaking both as a business
man and landowner, I can affirm that the town of Kempsey
is enjoying a wonderful measure of prosperity, that primary
production is well above the average in volume and value,
and that the winter outlook could not well be brighter.
If Though Nestles’ big condensed milk and lactogen works at
Smithtown have been compelled, temporarily, to restrict their
output, owing to the weakness of overseas markets, the pro-
portion of the milk which usually goes into such manufacture
is being transformed into butter. The butter output of the
Macleay and Upper Macleay factories for the month of Feb-
ruary represented a payment to suppliers of £29,600, while
cheese production for the same period was valued at £2,055.
The regular pig sales at Kempsey and Greenhill attract buyers
from all quarters, while the inauguration of fortnightly calf
sales have created a definite and assured market for what
was, in the past, in a large measure, a waste product.
If The pig production of the district now exceeds £75,000 per
annum, and is steadily on the increase, while fat stock repre-
sents no inconsiderable source of revenue. The maize crops,
for which Macleay is noted, promise magnificent yields. Fish-
ing, oyster culture, and potato and vegetable growing, are all
thriving subsidiary industries that add their part to the dis-
trict’s prosperity. The timber industry enjoys a somewhat
uncertain existence, but numerous mills are working uninter-
ruptedly. West Kempsey Forestry District produces 18 mil-
lion super feet of timber per year.
If The men on the land in this great district face the future
with an equanimity that not even official pronouncement of
financial depression can seriously disturb.
If Kempsey itself reflects the prosperity of the district it serves
and to which it owes its existence. During 1929 new build-
ings to the value of £22,978 (in addition to a new High
School, costing £16,000), were constructed.
If Extensive street construction, now nearing completion, will
add further to the town’s appearance, as will also a scheme
shortly to be undertaken for the laying-out of street garden
plots and the improvement of park lands.
(Sgd.) A. H. KNAUER, Mayor.


Leeton
I gladly accept your invitation to provide an official state
ment regarding local conditions, which will serve to indicate
to the people of Australia how Leeton and the Irrigation
Area stand in regard to the note of pessimism that is being
broadcasted from the city. The people on the irrigation area
are singularly free from such set-backs as droughts, fires and
floods, their biggest handicap being the need of capital to
bring the whole of their land into a state of production.
H The following official figures by the Water Conservation
and Irrigation Commission will convey more than words the
records of the wealth produced on the land:—For the year
1929 the total gross production on the Murrumbidgee Irri-
gation Area—of which Leeton is the premier town —was
£900,000. In addition to this, the railway revenue for rail-
way stations on this settlement ran into £lOO,OO0 —totalling
one million pounds sterling for the M.I. Area for one year.
This year’s figures promise to be higher, with increases in
dairying, fat lamb raising, bigger wheat yields off the irri-
gated areas, increased rice crops, better dry-out of fruit crops
and a good vintage.
H Further evidence of the Area’s prosperity is shown in the
Willimbong Shire’s allocation of £14,000 to be spent on road
work during the current year, while the faith of the busi-
ness section of the community is seen in the extension of
business premises, and erection of up-to-date shops. Most
notable of these is an up-to-date “Talkie” theatre, equipped
with modern plant, at a cost of £lO,OOO. At the State
Cannery, situated at Leeton, we find the processors working
overtime canning the many loads being brought in; and, best
of all, a market is always open for the finished article.
l[With all this happening before my eyes, I can look with
confidence to the future, seeing that Leeton and its people
will keep on toiling to advance Australia. Our people here
are prepared to tackle the overseas market. Our sheep-men
look to the world for a market for their wool. The rice-
growers, who are now producing Australia’s requirements, are
prepared to increase their acreage and tackle the world’s
markets in the East. Viticulturists this year are sending 1,500
cases of grapes to Canada as a trial shipment, while oranges
are sent to New Zealand with favorable results.
(Sgd.) J. S. DOOLEY,
President, Willimbong Shire Council.


Lismore
At a time when Australia is passing through a period of
financial stringency, it is well to realise that the basic primary
industries are in a sound position. This is applicable to the
dairying industry above all others, and dairying is the foun-
dation of Lismore’s prosperity.
As Mayor of Lismore, it gives me pleasure to state that
this district is experiencing a period of prosperity, and will
weather the storm very satisfactorily. This is no mere idle
talk, but is a true picture of district conditions as they are
to-day—and I speak with years of experience of Lismore and
the Far North Coast. From a production standpoint the
season has been satisfactory; the price of butter has showm
farmers a fair return, and one company alone, Norco Co-
operative Ltd., paid out £84,000 more in January of this
year than in January of 1929. This is partly due to the
excellent season and partly to the company’s wider sphere of
operations. The figures for February will, I know, also show
a great increase on the figures for February, 1929, when they
are available. The turnover of Norco for the past year was
£2,403,139.
U Other factors confirming my optimistic outlook are the fact
that the price of cattle remains at a satisfactory figure, and
the cane farmers are receiving adequate returns for their
labours.
U Dealing more intimately with conditions in the town of
Lismore, I say that there is nothing in the outlook to occa-
sion alarm. The Lismore Council meets fortnightly, and
has not yet failed to pass plans for at least ten new houses.
The town is also seeing a number of larger works carried
to fruition. A new school, costing £20,000, is half-built.
A commencement has been made with extensions of the
sewerage system, which will cost £70,000, and will provide
employment for a large number of men. A new agricultural
college for the Roman Catholic Church will cost £60,000,
and a contract has been let for a new butter factory to replace
the existing Lismore branch of Norco, which will cost £45,000.
Of smaller works there are a large number.
U Lismore and the surrounding district is financially sound
and will continue sound.
(Sgd.) D. McA. ROSS,
Mayor.


Lithgow
In a time such as this, when a spirit of depression seems to
be abroad throughout Australia, it is very pleasing to know
that in Lithgow the confidence of the people is unbounded,
and that this confidence is fully justified by recent achieve-
ments and in the light of future developments.
H Lithgow’s industrial prosperity throughout the twelve months
just passed has been almost phenomenal, and in a recent sur-
vey of the position amongst the storekeepers, it has pleased
me very much to know that 1929 was a record year, notably
for the Co-operative Society (with a turnover of .£380,000)
and Bracey’s Limited (with a turnover of something like
£150,000).
If At the steelworks more men are employed than ever be-
fore; there is much activity at the small-arms factory on the
manufacture of goods not previously made in Australia; the
coal mines are working full time, many on extended contracts;
the tweed mills are making progress; and railway activities
here are increasing week by week.
If Generally, it is delightful for me to know that Lithgow’s
position, as the fourth largest town in New South Wales, is
being well maintained, and that progress continues to be
made.
If We sometimes forget that Lithgow, although mainly an
industrial centre, has in its immediate district 5,000 acres of
wheat, 5,000 head of cattle, and 25,000 acres of other crops.
Combined with our mineral wealth, how well equipped is
this town of ours!
(Sgd.) D. M. CREGAN,
Mayor.


Maclean
At Maclean, the capital of the Lower Clarence River, the
prospects this year amongst the farming community promise
to be the best for over twenty years. The dairying industry
is doing wonderfully well, and large cheques are being earned.
The growth of grass on the lower river is unprecedented. The
sugar mill at Harwood expects to harvest nearly 80,000 tons
of cane, and the season should last nearly six months instead
of the fourteen weeks occupied last year.
H Maize and other crops are in splendid condition, the showery
weather prevailing being of great help to them. Grazing and
fat cattle are also having a record year.
(Sgd.) OSWILL R. KELLY, Mayor.
U Regarding the outlook in this district, I wish to state that
the season has been propitious. Good rainfall has resulted
in the dairymen getting excellent cheques.
f The cane has also benefited, and the 1930 season will be
well over 60,000 tons, and a high density is expected. Large
planting took place in 1929, and the 1931 season should go
close to 100,000 tons.
K Whilst past seasons have not been up to average, this season
has certainly been favourable and well above average.
(Sgd.) W. F. TOLLIS,
Secretary, Chamber of Commerce.
Manilla
The financial condition of the country does not appear to be
effecting Manilla in any serious manner. What is worry-
ing us most is the dry spell. When rain comes, for which
we are long overdue, there will be little to fear financially.
Manilla had a fair wheat crop and a record wool crop.
The latter is practically sold at fair prices, considering the
present wool market. Only a small proportion of the wheat
has been sold, farmers holding off for a higher market. When
the wheat is sold and rain falls once more, Manilla will be
in a good position to carry on for another year.
(Sgd.) A. R. MACLEOD, Mayor.
[Good rain has since fallen at Manilla.]


Moruya
There is no noticeable depression in our town; in fact, more
buildings are going up than for some time. The crops all
look healthy, more especially after the long dry spell, and
if sufficient rain falls in the very near future good yields
should result. If the proposed water supply and lighting
scheme becomes an accomplished fact, and of this there is
every prospect, the town should go ahead rapidly. The
general outlook is very satisfactory.
(Sgd.) W. R. AMES, Shire Clerk.
Murrurundi
Notwithstanding the reported depression throughout the
State, the data available in this locality is evidence of the
fact that such depression is only noticeable in the very faintest
degree, and activities in the matter of production in the dis-
trict appear to be as brisk as ever.
IF A splendid wool clip was recorded, and although the price
per lb. in the Sydney wool market showed a decrease of
approximately 50 per cent., the clip recorded was such that
the actual return to the grower showed a decrease of only
33 per cent, on his previous year’s wool cheque.
IF Although there has been an absence of rain for some time
past, which has greatly retarded the growth of grass, prime
fat cattle are to be found in almost any quantity in this dis-
trict, and some of these yarded at the local sale yards recently
were passed in at about £lO per head. Large numbers of
sheep and cattle, mostly good quality stuff, were sold through
the local yards during the past year, buyers being attracted
from other parts.
IF As regards the financial stress, it might be pointed out that
only last month a big day’s sports was held at Timor, in aid
of the Murrurundi Hospital, as a result of which about £2OO
was netted.
1F Building activities have been fairly brisk during the past
year in the town and district. Good land sales have taken
place, with high values. Electric light has been installed in
the town during the last six months by a private company,
and this was officially switched on on Saturday, Bth March.
(Sgd.) G. W. KILMISTER, Mayor.


Mudgee
Mudgee has not felt the much-talked-of depression to any
noticeable extent. It is, in fact, one of the favored districts
of the State. Although Mudgee fine wools have a world
reputation, it is not wholly a wool-growing district. There
are many other sources of production—wheat, lucerne, wine,
fruit, butter, corn, honey, rabbits, fat lambs, pigs, cattle—
and for all these Mudgee secures top prices. For horses as
well, blood stock and Clydesdales, Mudgee district stands
second to none in the Commonwealth. The immediate dis-
trict carries some 27,000 large stock and 900,000 sheep
(approximately). Last year about 10,000 bags of wheat were
harvested, but this season it is estimated there will be over
40,000 bags. There has been a decided increase in the butter
output at the local factory.
In the town of Mudgee, progress during the past three years
has been remarkably rapid—so rapid indeed that a movement
is now under way to extend the boundaries of the munici-
pality to permit the further growth of the town. In adjoin-
ing districts —Rylstone and Kandos on the one side and
Dunedoo and Gulgong on the other—there is no depression
to be noticed beyond a quietness in trade, due possibly to a
lessened output through depression in other parts. Kandos is
more an industrial than a pastoral or agricultural centre,
and the collieries and cement works there and at Charbon,
together with the quarries at Mt. Knowles and Mt. Frome,
keep about a thousand men employed.
H In the Dunedoo and Gulgong districts landholders are busy
preparing for the next harvest, and, as a result of the recent
summer rains, a much increased area will be put under crop
this year. Stock sales are held regularly at Mudgee, Dunedoo
and Gulgong, and, as a result of the promising outlook, prices
show a distinct tendency to harden. Any depression in Mudgee
and the adjacent districts is largely imaginary. Perhaps our
greatest asset is the optimistic spirit of our people. They
have experienced and overcome these periods of depression,
and know what it is to win through. When the hearts of
the people are right, difficulties can readily be overcome and
our people are meeting the situation with the indomitable
spirit of the pioneer.
(Sgd.) R. DOBIE BAWDEN,
Mayor.


Murwillumbah
I have no right to speak of other parts of the State, but of
our own town and district I can say that conditions for the
primary producer were never better. This is the most
closely settled rural community in the State. For January,
1930, the big butter co-operative company, Norco Ltd., manu-
factured butter 70 per cent, in excess of the make for January,
1929, and the pay, approximately £250,000, for dairy pro-
ducts for the month, was a record for the company. The
March pay for the February make is expected to eclipse
this.
7J Banana growing has developed enormously during the past
12 months, and increasing trainage is being booked on the
two special fruit trains despatched each week. I was recently
informed that the area now under bananas on the Tweed is
rivalling what it was a few years ago at the peak period.
71 In the town during the past year we have seen the new
High School opened, at a cost of £20,000, and, at the open-
ing of this year, advanced in grade because of rapidly increas-
ing attendances. Contracts for new buildings for the year
include one new hotel, estimated to cost about £20,000.
During the last year five miles of concrete pavement have
been laid in the district, three miles in the Municipality, at
a cost of £59,000, giving evidence of the stability of the dis-
trict and the local confidence in its prospects.
7f With a production of 80,000 tons of cane, the district is
producing half the sugar cane of the State.
7[ These facts should convince even the most confirmed
pessimist that the Tweed will fully maintain its reputation
of being the most fertile and prosperous area of its kind in
the Commonwealth.
(Sgd.) A. R. BLACK,
Mayor.
In the District
It is one of the best seasons I’ve known, and I’ve been on
the Tweed these 59 years. Need I say any more?
7[ Everything considered, the Tweed is in the soundest of
conditions.
(Sgd.) E. C. J. MARKS,
President, Tweed Shire Council.


Muswellbrook
Although the economic depression is being given a great
amount of publicity at the present time, little direct evidence
of this is to be seen in Muswellbrook. This town is, of
course, favoured, in that its coal mines have for the past twelve
months produced record outputs. Coal despatched by the
Muswellbrook mines for the eight months ended February
last, against the corresponding period of last year—l 929,
103,101 tons; 1930, 191,011 tons, an increase of 87,910 tons.
For some months past about 6,000 tons of local coal has been
shipped at Newcastle each month.
Dairy production of the district for the past six months has
been £lOO,OOO. Unparalleled lucerne seed crops have been
the feature of the centres producing this commodity.
H Settlement throughout the district has increased largely.
% Building has been booming for the last two years within the
municipality, despite which it is impossible to find a vacant
house in the area. The building figures for the last annual
period, which closed on 31st December, show that new build-
ings and additions to the value of approximately £57,000,
have been erected.
U During the eight months of the financial year ended Feb-
ruary last, the increased earnings over the corresponding
period for last year amounted to £10,096.
(Sgd.) J. C. HUMPHRIES,
Mayor.


The Story of the Savings
What the Bank Deposits Show
We are indebted to the Commissioners of the Government Savings
Bank of N.S.W. for the following official figures in regard to the
towns included in the pages of “Our Book of Optimism.” Savings
Bank deposits represent the small accumulations of the people, and
are the truest index of the stability of a district.
IT In the subjoined table are shown the number of accounts and the
deposits for the towns themselves, as well as similar information
regarding, adjacent agencies attached to the respective town branches
The total of both gives the district’s aggregate deposits.
1i The details are:— Town Agency
Accounts Balances Accounts Balances Total
£ £ £
Albury 6,604 476,227 .. 2,282 85,230 561,457
Artnidale 6,690 349,435 .. 2,117 111,832 461,267
Bathurst 7,952 522,884 .. 1,539 141,702 664,586
Bega 2,700 137,031 .. 2,454 119,106 256,137
Bellingen 743 32,612 .. 847 30,986 63,598
Broken Hill .... 16,510 757,812 .. 1,638 41,218 799,030
Canowindra .... 1,429 68,723 .. —• 68,723
Casino 4,087 148,569 .. 504 13,393 161,962
Coff’s Harbour . . . Included in Agency figures of Grafton Branch.
Cootamundra . . . 5,014 192,269 .. 1,214 47,800 240,069
Cowra 4,098 190,613 .. 1,211 53,069 243,682
Dorrigo Included in Agency figures of Bellingen Branch.
Dubbo 7,577 197,496 .. 4,972 177,780 375,276
Eden Included in Agency figures of Bega Branch.
Forbes 4,538 154,666 . . 652 13,826 168,492
Glen Innes .... 4,342 218,424 .. 929 49,760 268,184
Gloucester Included in Agency figures of Taree Branch.
Goulburn 11,603 649,237 .. 2,967 216,189 865,426
Grafton 6,634 291,232 .. 3,862 215,125 506,357
Grenfell 2,614 121,723 .. 210 4,271 125,994
Hay 2,531 129,030 .. 592 37,063 166,093
Inverell 5,379 249,465 .. 2,086 112,065 361,530
Kempsey 5,225 201,725 . . 2,904 137,099 338,824
Leeton 2,361 111,376 .. 96 2,298 113,674
Lismore 9,455 366,319 . . 2,257 88,885 455,204
Lithgow 6,727 436,387 . . 1,509 19,507 455,894
Maclean Included in Agency figures of Grafton Branch.
Manilla 1,983 94,059 .. 1,041 50,524 144,583
Moruya 603 62,955 .. 425 31,784 94,739
Mudgee 5,380 278,546 . . 3,286 192,863 471,409
Murrurundi .... 1,384 87,920 . . 87,920
Murwillumbah . . . 4,099 161,512 .. 992 50,834 212,346
Muswellbrook . . . 2,618 152,838 .. 1,305 56,832 209,670
Narrabri 3,863 120,792 .. 2,333 111,097 231,889
Narrandera .... 4,826 132,097 .. 3,586 180,373 312,470
Narromine .... 1,310 66,057 .. 505 19,471 85,528
Nowra 2,708 148,920 .. 1,396 96,023 244,943
Orange 7,862 422,237 .. 862 50,725 472,962
Parkes 3,668 181,628 .. 181,628
Scone 2,059 117,557 .. 117,557
Singleton 4,614 342,068 .. 166 8,753 350,821
Tamworth 7,678 347,047 .. 2,221 126,293 473,340
Taree 4,448 185,764 .. 3,156 1 67,914 353,678
Temora 4,917 177,055 .. 1,041 35,825 212,880
Tumut 2,757 136,547 .. 1,077 63,538 200,085
Wagga 9,757 434,431 .. 1,924 80,801 515,232
Walcha Included in Agency figures of Tamworth Branch.
Wellington 3,937 209,875 .. 241 9,032 218,907
West Wyalong . . . 2,293 120,549 .. 819 27,963 148,512
Wingham Included in Agency figures of Taree Branch.
Wollongong .... 9,065 490,117 .. 4,172 234,802 724,919
Yass 3,018 215,577 .. ' 1,285 104,609 319,646
Young 3,748 209,090 .. 192 4,400 213,490
Grand Total for Forty-six Districts: £14,320,613


Narrandera
It would be absurd to say that Narrandera is not feeling the
effects of the general depression and the adverse seasons, but
in spite of all, the town and district are financially sound.
The harvest was about 75 per cent, of the average, and the
wool clip was very good. There are about 750,000 sheep
in the Pastures Protection Board district, and, on a conserva-
tive estimate, these returned about 10/- per head. The losses
in live stock have been negligible, and the wool clip this year
should be up to the average, given an early break in prevail-
ing seasonal conditions. In addition, the area under crop is
expected to be a record, so that the prospects on the whole are
encouraging.
If With regard to the town, business is good, and there is an
optimistic feeling. The Municipal Council is building new
civic chambers at a cost of £12,000, and three shops at a
cost of £4,000, thus bringing the Council’s investments up
to £16,000. The whole of the floor space of the buildings
is leased. The proposition is a sound business one for the
Council, and it is an evidence of the confidence of the aider-
men and ratepayers generally in the future of the municipality.
If The well-known firm of O. Gilpin Ltd., who have been
carrying on business in this town for over 20 years, and so
have an intimate knowledge of it, have recently purchased a
business allotment in the main street, with a frontage of 82
feet, at £l5O per foot. They are now calling tenders for busi-
ness premises to be erected at a, cost of £7,000 or £B,OOO.
tf Mr. L. D. Trim, who has also been carrying on business
in the town many years, has accepted a tender for new busi-
ness premises, at a cost well over £B,OOO. The committee
of the Public Hospital has recently completed additions to
the hospital at a cost of £lO,OOO.
If Thus is shown the confidence that local hard-headed busi-
ness men have in the future of the town and district. From
an experience of over 30 years, that confidence is shared by
us all.
(Sgd.) R. H. HANKINSON, Mayor.


Narromine
Despite the fact that Narromine and Trangie have passed
through three years of depression—l 929 easily being the worst
—conditions are not as bad as people living away from the
districts might imagine. Both towns are proceeding with their
1930 shows despite the depression, and the splendid rains
that fell in these parts during January have considerably
brightened the prospects of the man on the land. The wheat
last year was almost a failure in Narromine district, but this
season the largest area in the history of the town is being
put down and farmers are quite optimistic.
Tf At Trangie, which is the recognised fat stock centre of the
west, the drought has been severe, and many graziers had to
send their stock to other parts for agistment. Nevertheless,
the amount of stock business transacted during the year was
astounding, and indicates very plainly the solidity of the
district.
H Some idea of the growth and expansion of Narromine dur-
ing the last year can be gathered from the following figures:—
H New buildings during 1927 amounted to £4,150; during
1928, £17,471; and during 1929, £19,251. Municipal
incomes for the same period were: 1927, £2,633; 1928,
£5,890; 1929, £7,289; 1930 (est.), £10,672. In 1927 the
municipal staff comprised three men; in 1928 the staff
totalled 10 men. During 1928 the town installed electricity,
and during 1929 a permanent water supply.
(Sgd.) B. J. MOONEY,
Town Clerk.


Narrabri
This district, although experiencing in some measure the
prevailing depressed conditions, is undoubtedly in a very solid
position. Last season’s wheat harvest was very satisfactory,
being well over the average yield, whilst prospects for the
coming season are distinctly good, this district having been
favoured with fairly general falls of rain.
II Pastures are for the most part assured for the coming
winter, and pastoralists have been relieved of a great deal
of anxiety by the recent rains. The works programme of
this Council for the current year is considerably larger than
previously, but all labour requirements have been filled.
HI consider that any local depression that is being felt is
only a temporary phase, which will quickly pass.
(Sgd.) E. P. HOGAN,
Mayor.
Nowra
There is no noticeable depression in our town. There are
no empty houses. Nowra butter factory paid out about
£lOO,OOO during the past six months; the Bomaderry con-
densery has been doing full time; Berry butter factory turn-
over would be approximately £50,000 for the last six months;
and the timber trade—props for mining and sawn timber for
building—has been as brisk as ever. All that is wanted to
make the district O.K. is a good downpour of rain. The
dairy farmers have had a good time, notwithstanding the
depression prevalent in other centres.
(Sgd.) J. QUINN,
Mayor.


Orange
Orange certainly does not in anv way appear to suffer from
serious financial depression-
-11 For the five years preceding 1929 ne^ 7 buildings, to a
total value of £498,000, were erected, an average (approxi-
mately) of £lOO,OOO annually. In 1929 (last year) the
total value of new buildings was £152,000, an increase of
50 per cent., and these new buildings included 73 private resi-
dences. In January and February of this year new build-
ings approved were of a total value of £15,184, which com-
pares very favorably with the similar periods of preceding
years.
If The Orange Municipal Saleyards reported for 1929:
Stock sold: Cattle, 19,331; Sheep, 313,591; Pigs, 2,394;
Horses, 6. Fees paid, £1,821.
If Under practically no circumstances which can possibly arise
is Orange likely to be influenced by economic stringency, its
district products being of such stable nature as wheat, fruit,
etc., while its woolgrowing is inconsiderable.
If A comprehensive statement of the harvest of Orange dis-
trict, giving an indication of unchanged circumstances, is:—
If FARMING.—Grain harvest good, wheat particularly so,
averaging up to 12 bags to the acre, and, in isolated instances,
16. Oats also exceptionally good, averaging to 15 and 16 bags.
Hay from Orange sold to £4/10/- off the farm, and realised
£3/10/- steadily on the market.
H FRUITGROWING.—ExceIIent crop of cherries, prices
highly satisfactory, rising to £1 a case. Plums not quite
normal output, but prices fair. Heavy crop of pears. Cool
storage enabled growers to hold fruit until prices rose; shortage
of supplies and demand in Brisbane, where 12/- case secured.
Conditions with respect to apples were similar to pears, and
early crops realised good prices. Grapes give good promise.
Peas are at this date about 7/- to 8/- a bushel, and 4/-,
it is estimated, would recompense the growers. In one day
85 tons of peas left Orange.
If Under the Orange Rural Producers’ Co-op. Society’s bulk-
loading scheme, which returns thousands of pounds annually
to growers in the form of rebate alone, 2,275 tons 9 cwt.
of fruit and peas were dispatched for the months of January
and February, 1930.
(Sgd.) S. WHITMEE, Mayor.


Parkes
In spite of the fact that Parkes and district have been more
or less in the throes of a drought for the past two years,
this town and district is able to stand up to the period of
severe financial depression which has come upon us. It only
goes to show how financially sound and stable this central
western district is.
If Unlike people who live in the larger cities, the residents of
country areas are thrifty and far-seeing, and, when it comes
to a time like this, they are very much better able to meet
their obligations than people living in cities. When we rea-
lise that, although people on the land have had two bad seasons,
they are putting more land under cultivation this year than
probably ever previously, it is easy to understand two things.
The first is that there must be money about to enable them
to carry out this work; and the second is that, given a rea-
sonably good season, in seven or eight months’ time, the finan-
cial difficulties so far as this district is concerned will have
passed away.
If In Parkes itself the applications for building permits have
shown little diminution, and in some months recently the
building figures have been higher than in any previous cor-
responding month. The year 1929 constituted a record for
building figures.
If Parkes and district have proved themselves more able to
recover rapidly from periods of drought and depression than
most country towns and districts in the State.
(Sgd.) D. GEDDES,
Mayor.


Scone
By reason of the fact that “all eggs are not carried in the
same basket,” as it were, the Scone portion of the far-famed
Upper Hunter is not suffering to the extent of many other
parts of the State, because of the present State-wide depres-
sion. The wool and sheep market has certainly slumped, but
against this, cattle, which are bred and fattened on practically
all holdings, will compensate sheepmen to no small extent,
for the number of large stock being handled is already on
the increase. Scone is regarded as one of the leading store
stock markets of the State. This particular district has been,
and still is, a continuous and heavy supplier of cattle and sheep
to the southern markets. Dairying is likewise carried on ex-
tensively, and now the season has changed for the better, the
outputs of the Scone and Aberdeen butter factories have already
been appreciably increased.
H Lucerne is grown on a large scale, and great quantities have
been trucked into Queensland and the far north-west during
the past few years.
U Choice stone fruits are raised in the district, and with the
opening up of the country leading to the famous Barrington
Tops, growers of apples and citrus fruits are finding a ready
market for their products. The leading thoroughbred stud
of Australia, that conducted by Mr. Percy Miller, is located
in the district, as also are several minor establishments of a
similar character.
H The building trade continues to boom in town, premises
erected during the past 18 months being valued at approxi-
mately £90,000.
U That the Municipal Council have every confidence in the
town is evidenced by the consummation of negotiations for a
town water supply, at a cost of about £40,000. A tender
has actually been accepted for this project, which will be put
in hand in the very near future, thereby absorbing much
labour, which will be tided over the winter months.
( Sgd.) B. E. MILLARD,
Mayor.


Singleton
It is the opinion of this Council that there has not been any
noticeable depression in Singleton; in fact, the statistics which
I have been able to gather show that there is a greater
acreage under cultivation than ever previously, and with the
bountiful rains which have fallen recently, the indications for
a good season are most hopeful.
II The butter factory paid out £320,071 during the last twelve
months, and the number of stock sold last year through the
saleyards reaches the grand total of £98,894, which is a record.
Included in the stock figures are 62,852 cattle, 22,715 pigs,
and 9,069 sheep.
If The building activity is greater than it has been for years,
and the general outlook is indeed a bright one.
(Sgd.) CHAS. A. BUCHAN,
Town Clerk.
Temora
The building permits granted by the Temora Municipal
Council for the year 1929 numbered 87, representing a total
estimated cost of £35,760, including 28 new dwellings, esti-
mated to cost £27,727. The building operations for 1929
constituted a record for the area.
U The Council has just raised a special loan of £lO,OOO to
allow of the electricity system being converted, to permit of
alternating current being purchased in bulk from the Bur-
rinjuck hydro-electric system, and the long-promised South-
Western Tablelands water scheme has now been commenced.
If The wheat yield for the last harvest was 303,294 bags for
the Temora district.
(Sgd.) W. CALLAGHAN,
Mayor.


Tamworth
The only effect the widespread financial depression in Aus-
tralia is having upon the town of Tamworth and its imme-
diate district appears to be the moderate tightening of
expenditure generally, particularly upon luxuries, and from
the trend of everyday conversation and discussions, the recog-
nition by the residents of the necessity for increased production.
If The district generally is in a fair condition, although further
general rain will be necessary within the next month or six
weeks to ensure a good start to the wheat. Last year the
wheat crop in the district was much above the average—
better, in fact, than in most parts of New South Wales—
and the money thus brought into the district is proving of
great value.
If The prospect for tobacco, which is a big source of income
to Tamworth, is quite good, as most of the tobacco is grown
on the river flats, with irrigation, and there is no shortage
of water for this purpose. The wool industry in Tamworth
is, of course, passing through a critical phase, in common with
the rest of Australia; but on the other hand, the dairying and
other minor industries are having a fairly good time.
If Building operations in Tamworth during recent years have
been unusually large, and the growth of the town has been
more rapid than in any time of its history. The Council’s
records show that there is no falling off in this direction.
If The following are the figures for the past four years of
new dwellings:—l926, 58; 1927, 55; 1928, 93; 1929, 112.
If The total expenditure for dwellings and other buildings in
Tamworth for the four years was nearly half a million
pounds. Building applications for the months of January and
February, 1930, show that 25 new dwellings have been
erected, and the total expenditure on buildings for the two
months has been <£30,742.
If The growth of the Council’s electricity undertaking affords
an example of the prosperity and progress of the town, which
is, of course, a reflection of the wealth of the surrounding
district. The sales of electricity have increased in the past
five years from one million units annually to almost three
million units, and is still increasing at the same rate.
(Sgd.) EDWIN A. BRILEY,
Acting Mayor.
[Tamworth has since experienced beneficial rains.]


Taree
Although the rural districts must necessarily share to a
certain extent the effects of the stringency of the money
market, the country is the backbone of the State.
If The beneficial rains which have fallen during the last couple
of months (date of writing, March 26, 1930) have assured
a good winter, as well as the success of the late maize on the
Lower River. At present there is a riot of pasture through-
out the whole district and stock are in excellent condition.
The following figures give the value of butter for the six
months ended 31st January, 1930:—Manning River Dairy
Co., £106,667 19s 8d; Upper Manning Dairy Co., £67,863
6s 3d; Comboyne Dairy Co., £18,451 17s 3d; Lower Wal-
lamba Dairy Co., £15,295 9s 2d; Upper Wallamba Dairy
Co., £32,565 17s lOd; Camden Haven Dairy Co., £9,567
12s lid, making a total of £250,411 13s Id.
If Official figures concerning the timber industry give an
actual value of the district output for 1929 as £76,283. On
privately-owned property in the same area as much again is
sold —a grand total of about £150,000.
If The Manning River Co-operative Bacon Factory paid to
its members for the six months ended 31st December, 1929,
£20,190. In addition, many pigs are sent from these districts
to Sydney and Newcastle markets.
If The waters of Cape Hawke, Manning and Camden Haven
contribute almost one-fourth of the State’s total fish produc-
tion from inland waters. To this output of 3,071,887 lb.
must be added local sales of 531 boxes, valued at £996. As
the value State’s fish production is £547,023, it will readily
be seen that these districts shared very largely. Oysters des-
patched were 2,080 bags and lobsters 7,300 dozen.
If In Taree Municipality during the six months ended 31-12-
29, new buildings to the value of £8,892 were erected or in
course of erection. A church is being erected at an estimated
cost of £14,000.
If A summary of revenue received locally for six months, from
dairying, timber, bacon, fish, oysters, and lobsters, shows the
magnificent total of £404,011.
(Sgd.) H. E. MILLIGAN,
President, Manning Shire.


Tumut
What little depression existed towards the close of the year
1929, in the towns of Tumut, Adelong and Batlow, and the
Tumut Shire generally, has been dissipated by the altered
conditions, which very serviceable rains, at short intervals,
have brought about. The prospects for a bounteous harvest
in maize, millet, tobacco, and particularly dairying, are indeed
roseate.
ff Building operations, which last year reached the peak of
expenditure on investments in this class of properties—viz.,
£35,000 —are still proceeding apace, and besides several large
premises on the point of completion (including a new £lO,OOO
picture theatre and a big furniture warehouse in the town
of Tumut), a number of other applications to build residences
—which still show a shortage on demand—have been dealt
with by the Shire Council, and others are contemplated.
If The dairying industry is in a particularly flourishing con-
dition, land-owners, hitherto confining their energies to agri-
cultural pursuits, and sheep and cattle raising, now being con-
vinced that dairying is the most profitable of them all, and
therefore propose embarking in that line. Summer relief
pastures in the highlands are, this season, in big request, and
thousands upon thousands of head of live stock from less
favoured districts are “summering” in these regions, where the
pasturage is abundant.
If The turnover at the local butter factory last year was over
£BO,OOO. This year should materially exceed that high
figure.
(Sgd.) C. E. JEPSEN,
Shire Clerk.


Wagga
There is no noticeable depression in our town —in fact, the
building trade is more brisk than it has been for years. The
wheat harvest totalled 200,000 bags, while the butter fac-
tories have paid out £51,000 in the past six months. The
maize crop is good. The wool clip was a record, and the
figures for the local saleyards last year reached the following:—
Yarded. Sold.
Sheep 412,842 .. 294,738
Cattle 17,562 .. 13,955
Pigs 11,244 .. 10,297
Dairy Cattle .... 723 .. 534
H A greater area is being put down for crop this year than
for some years past, and although we have some unemployed,
the general outlook locally is one of buoyant hopefulness.
(Sgd.) E. E. COLLINS, Mayor.
Wellington
Although a depression exists in Sydney, that state of affairs
has not spread to the country to a very marked degree. The
rural areas are the wealth-producing sections of the State, and
as such, are not so liable to financial stringency as are those
places that are dependent upon us.
HAs far as Wellington is concerned, little effect is felt, and
the future outlook is full of hope and confidence. More land
than ever before is being put under crop, the rainfall to date
is well up to the average, and stock are looking well.
H As a sign that money is not too tight, I might mention that
building operations for the past twelve months constituted a
record for the town, over £50,000 being spent. This year,
apart from the usual expenditure, it is anticipated that at least
£30,000 will be expended on public works in the town, some-
thing like £lO,OOO going in wages. No annual fixtures have
been dropped and business is going on as usual.
These activities point to the conclusion that whilst we have
passed through a hard period, money is still available, the
spending power of the community has not been noticeably
affected, and the future outlook is one of buoyant hopefulness.
(Sgd.) E. W. WILLIAMS, Town Clerk.


Walcha
There is very little depression in this town or district, and
the prospects, looking ahead, are not in any way alarming.
If The building trade will be better than last year, which was
an exceptionally good one. Numerous residences and business
premises have been, or are about to be, erected.
ff The wool clip was up to the usual standard last season, the
clip from this district being noted for its brightness and
quality. The numbers of stock disposed of by local agents
for 1929 were: Cattle 5,000, sheep 150,000.
If The general outlook for 1930, taking all things into con-
sideration, is all that one could wish for.
(Sgd.) T. C. FENWICK,
Mayor.
Wingham
I have resided in Wingham now for 16 years. I have been
in business at Killabakh as a saw-miller, and am now in busi-
ness with my sons in a sawmill at Elands, on the Bulga
Plateau—one of the most up-to-date sawmills in the State.
If I recognise that the State and Australia are passing through
a bad time. Better times will come, however.
If The Manning River district I regard as being one of the
most solid and prosperous districts in the State. Its dairying
industry, coupled with fat stock sales, sawmills, timber
industry, maize growing, and bacon factory, all go to provide
the people with ready money.
If Money is not easy to get these times, but where there are
several butter factories and a bacon factory paying out
monthly cheques to the primary producers, the advantage is
something to reckon with—especially when we have one of
the best cattle markets on the North Coast between Maitland
and Grafton.
If I say that Wingham and the Manning district is solid.
(Sgd.) H. MACHIN,
Mayor.


West Wyalong
Whilst we are naturally feeling the effects of the world-
wide depression, business men, primary producers, and the
people generally, are giving evidences of optimism and enter-
prise. There has been considerable building activity of late,
the total value of buildings erected in West Wyalong for the
past four years being £118,198. Included amongst the build-
ings erected last year was the Roman Catholic Church, the
total cost of which (with furniture) was £21,000. Among
the more important buildings listed for 1930 are a new
theatre, to cost approximately £9,000, and a new Church of
England, to cost approximately £lO,OOO.
Tf The number of stock sold through the West Wyalong yards
during 1929 was as follows:—Sheep, 124,017; cattle, 1,613;
horses, 469; pigs, 130.
11 The total wheat received at stations within a reasonable dis-
tance from West Wyalong was 2,000,000 bushels. With
the development which has taken place, following the exten-
sion of the railway from Ungarie to Naradhun, and the more
recent extension from West Wyalong to Wamboyne, com-
bined with the general impression that under the law of
averages the coming season should be a very favourable one,
I am of the opinion that a greatly increased area will be put
under crop this year. Farmers on every side are speaking
of increasing their areas this year.
H The local branch of the Country Women’s Association con-
cluded the year with a credit balance of £l,lBO 6s 9d. With
this sum they hope to erect a Maternity Unit at the pro-
posed new District Hospital. This proposal was investi-
gated last month by Mr. R. J. Love (Chairman of the Hos-
pitals Commission), who has recommended the removal of
the present hospital, and the erection of a new and up-to-date
building, on community lines. The membership of the local
branch of the C.W.A. increased last year from 39 to 70.
If The West Wyalong and District Show Association is going
forward this year with a total prize list of £1,395. This
Association now has 12 Life Governors at £lOO each; 7 Life
Lieutenant-Governors at £5O each; and 404 Life Members
at £lO/10/- each.
If Speaking generally, I would say the people here are facing
the coming year with the usual degree of optimism and
confidence.
(Sgd.) SIDNEY M. SMITH, Shire Clerk.


Wollongong
Depression, which appears to be general, has not become
noticeable to any extent in the Wollongong district. When
local conditions are carefully considered, the causes for the
general prosperity existing here are readily accounted for.
Whilst the northern mines have been closed, the local pits
have been reaping the whole of the trade, and have produced
more coal during the last twelve months than in any previous
year in the history of coal mining in the district. The Aus-
tralian Iron and Steel Company is erecting at Port Kembla
one of the largest and most up-to-date steel works in the
British Empire, and the surrounding district is expanding
correspondingly.
ft The general wealth of the soil is a noted feature of the Illa-
warra district. The seasons do not vary greatly, and the
production during the last twelve months has been no exception
to the general rule.
ft As a tourist centre, Wollongong has always been attrac-
tive. At the present, however, probably due to the construc-
tion of a first-class road connecting it with Sydney, and the
erection of the George’s River Bridge, the district has be-
come very popular.
ft The progress and development of the district is reflected
in the official reports and statements of the Wollongong
Municipal Council, which show that the population and
land values have doubled within the last ten years, while the
improved value of land has increased from £841,621 to
£2,192,470. The Council’s revenue has, during the same
period, increased fourfold. In addition to its ordinary revenue,
a large sum of loan money is being expended on town improve-
ment. During the last twelve months the number of new
buildings erected within the Municipality constituted a re-
cord, the value being estimated at £272,500.
ft The Wollongong district is served by a very good water
supply, and an excellent electricity service, while sewerage is
now being installed.
ft It is anticipated that the progress and development which
has taken place during the past few years will continue, and
become even more marked during the next decade, and it
does not appear likely that any circumstance can arise which
will retard or check this prosperity.
(Sgd.) W. L. HOWARTH, Mayor.


Yass
The effect of the present depression is felt here, in common
with elsewhere; but not to any particularly marked degree,
and a spirit of optimism rather than pessimism prevails.
*f Building figures for last year in Yass were a record, and
during the past two months (January and February) the
Municipal Council has received applications for seven new
buildings, representing an expenditure of some £5,500, which
compares well with last year’s figures. Most of this building
is apart from assistance by the Savings Bank.
11 The decrease in the value of wool is undoubtedly a serious
thing for a district such as Yass, where sheep and wool are
the main industry, as it means the woolgrowers’ gross income
is reduced approximately about half. On the other hand,
the district has enjoyed a run of good years and high prices,
and is in a particularly strong position financially, and the
people on the land are able to meet existing conditions.
Deposits in the local branch of the Government Savings Bank,
on the last returns published, amount to £354,919, an amount
I understand unequalled by any town with the population of
Yass, and much greater than that of some towns with double
the population. It represents an average balance of £B4 per
depositor.
If There is only a small area sown to wheat locally, but it is
anticipated it will be increased owing to the fall in wool
values. This, however, I understand, will be more noticeable
on the western side, about Binalong, where more wheat is
grown, as it is reported that several landowners propose to go
back to wheat on a larger scale. While on the dry side,
seasonal conditions are good about Yass, and with rain in
the normal course this month or next, the seasonal outlook
will be good.
If The Annual Show has just taken place, and, despite the
conditions, was most successful. The exhibits showed an in-
crease, the attendance was larger, and the public spending
capacity seemed quite up to that of other years.
If At the smoke concert there was a very satisfactory response
to the appeal for special prizes next year. A most marked
feature of the gathering was the optimism of both business
men and wool-growers; it was, in fact, quite stimulating.
(Sgd.) J. A. DAVIS,
Mayor.


Young
Despite the fact that the district has been experiencing one
of the driest periods on record, it is in a most flourishing
condition. Fortunately, the rain came always just when it
was needed to benefit the crops, fruit orchards and pastures,
with the result that the wheat crop throughout the district
was much better than was anticipated. As regards the fruit
crop this season, we are experiencing a record in apple pro-
duction, and heavy consignments have been, and are being,
packed for export. The production of prunes is also above
average, and with increased tariff protection, it is confidently
anticipated the returns to the hundreds of growers in this
district will be the best to date.
ft There have been no losses in stock through the dry period,
and pastures have, on practically every holding, carried the
stock without difficulty. The fall in wool values is proving
a blessing in disguise to a rich district such as this, as there
is every sign that the area to be sown with wheat this com-
ing season will be doubled. While it is a time for readjust-
ment, there have been no panic sales of properties, and no
desire on the part of landholders to sacrifice their holdings.
The confidence of the people of Young and district in their
own centre, and its marvellous producing capacity, cannot
be shaken by the calamity howlers, whose activities are re-
sponsible for magnifying much of the present depression.
(Sgd.) C. G. PRESCOTT, Mayor.
Co-operation Among Producers
The town of Young is fortunate in that it draws upon three
important primary industries—wool, wheat, and fruit. The
two first-mentioned commodities have returned less than
usual: but the fruit industry, covering four Soldier Settle-
ments, apart from civilian growers, has grown into a most
important source of local income, and provides much labour
during the season, which lasts about six months. Prunes are
produced on a big scale—much the biggest in Australia. Cher-
ries have made Young famous, and apples, which are being
produced in large quantities, will materially add to the
revenue. This year wheat will be more extensively grown,
and there is a desire on the part of landowners to increase
general productiveness.
T. A. TESTER,
Secretary, Young District Producers' Co-op. Assn. Ltd.


ABOUT OURSELVES
If The Country Press business organisation is the city
office of the country newspapers, by whom it is co-
operatively owned.
If Its activities on behalf of the papers it intimately com-
prehends include—
1. —Specialised counsel to city and other adver-
tisers, particularly in regard to provincial
media in all States;
2. —Country research and information;
3. —Complete reference library of provincial
papers;
4. -News clipping services on all topics;
5. —Telegraphic and cable services to all New
South Wales rural journals.
If It is our aim so to represent the place, the prestige,
the power and the purpose of our members that, pre-
eminently, we shall be worthy of our motto: “Country
Press for Country Service.”
If This booklet is in pursuance of that ideal of service.
The Country Press Co-operative Co. of Aust. Ltd.
5-7 Barrack Street, Sydney.
E. C. SOMMERLAD,
General h
’Phones: BW 1318 and BW 1319. mamm


