

OUR INHERITANCE
IN THE HILLS.
BEING A SERIES OF ARTICLES BY A
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT.
Reprinted from the South Australian Register, Adelaide Observer, and
Evening Journal.
PRICE-ONE SHILLING.
ADELAIDE :
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street.




OUR INHERITANCE
IN THE HILLS.
BEING A SERIES OF ARTICLES BY A
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT/
Reprinted from the South Australian Register, Adelaide Observer, and
Evening Journal.
ADELAIDE :
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street.




INTRODUCTION.
To those who are accustomed to think of “ The Hills” as if they embraced
very little more than the range forming a back-ground to the city of Adelaide, an
excursion among the ranges, or a description of such an excursion undertaken by
another, affords abundant cause for surprise and delight. The wide expanse of hill,
and valley, and plateau lying between the Gulf and the River Murray can scarcely
be realized by those who have never explored those regions. The extensive
flats, which stretch in almost unbroken line from Mount Pleasant to Yankalllla,
constitute in themselves a rich possession, but between them and the Adelaide Plains
lie range upon range of rolling hills, divided by fertile gullies. Limits of
space have caused us to treat of “ Our inheritance in the hills” far more briefly
than we could wish. It would be scarcely possible to describe minutely its developed
and undeveloped wealth in ten times the space which we have devoted to the
subject. In every part of the ranges valley after valley may be seen stretching
out In almost Interminable succession, and to visit each of these in turn, and
dilate upon its capabilities, would be a labour of years. It has only been practi-
cable for us to give a hasty sketch of certain places as a specimen of the whole.
The country, in short, has merely been sampled. Its resources have been little more
than hinted at. Its vast mineral treasures, its adaptability for dairy-farming pur-
poses, its value for the rearing of forest trees have been barely mentioned ; and
It has been found out of the question to describe in detail the towns and villages
dotted here and there over its surface.
For all that, the articles present a mass of interesting facts and
suggestions. They are to a large extent destitute of shade and colour, but
the outline can easily be filled in. Indeed, the future development of the
South Australian hill country, blessed as It is with a fertile soil, a copious rainfall,
and a climate which renders it highly desirable as a place of residence, as well
as capable of producing the choicest fruits of cool latitudes, may readily be
pictured In imagination. Even old colonists, who flatter themselves that they
are thoroughly acquainted with the Mount Lofty Ranges, cannot regard the sketch
given of the present state of the industrial development of these ranges as a twice-
told tale. Pioneer settlers took up land amongst them, and in many cases were
not so successful as they hoped to be. New conditions have, however, arisen, and
altogether the experiences of earlier years furnish no adequate test of the
possibilities that are opening out before us. The growth of population has
supplied new markets and promoted new industries for which in former times there
was no scope. Large tracts of land which were condemned as almost worthless or
abandoned after being robbed of their first fertility have been demonstrated to be
valuable for the growth of vines, wattles, and fruit-trees, to say nothing of such
sources of profit as osiers and timber-trees. Moreover, it is a satisfaction to
know that the home market for vegetables and fruit must extend rapidly
with the growth of such industries as mining and manufactures. This has been
clearly seen in regard to the Broken Hill trade, and it will no doubt be even more
fully verified in the future. ‘ ‘ The best stroke of mining that ever I did, ” said an
old Ballarat worthy, “ was in raising vegetables for the miners during the fifties.”


But although the inheritance is a grand one, it is essential that more attention
should be bestowed upon it in the future than it has received in the past. More capi-
tal is required, and more confidence must be felt in the results that may be attained.
The wine-making industry, for instance, is seriously hampered by the insufficient
storage accommodation available in the colony. The heavy expenditure entailed
upon winemakers to provide storage necessarily contracts their wine-making
operations, and consequently tells against the expansion of the growth of the vine.
The colony should have some central depot for the reception of all classes
of wines above a year old. Then the wattle-bark industry has developed surpris-
ingly, but it is seriously menaced through the want of enterprise in the matter
of planting. The invention of new implements specially adapted to the industry,
such as a special plough or scarifier, a stripping knife and an improved mill
for cutting would also tend to give a great Impetus to the trade. Fruit-growing will
be indefinitely extended when the arts of tinning, preserving, and drying are pro-
perly understood and practiesd, and especially when exporters to the London
market have become assured that their shipments of fresh fruit on board the ocean
steamers can be kept cool without beiag frozen. Vegetables and dairy pro-
duce will be much more extensively used in the city as soon as the hills railway
affords as complete facilities for the conveyance of these articles as are offered
by Railway Companies in England. This is a point to which the Railway
Commissioners have already turned their attention, and no doubt Mr. Smith is keep-
ing the matter in mind. We do not despair of seeing vegetables sold in Adelaide
direct from the trucks as is now done in England. Then in regard to possible
applications of forestry, the Conservator of Forests has already shown conclu-
sively that Our Inheritance in the Hills may be indefinitely increased in value.
Large tracts of land in the ranges are at present held by private owners to little
or no purpose. It certainly is melancholy to note what a large extent of good land
has been practically abandoned and is now overrun by stink-wort and other noxious
weeds. The holders of such land should be encouraged in every possible
way either to sell outright or to offer long leases on reasonable terms. The
system of agricultural leasing has never been properly carried into effect in South
Australia. Almost invariably the tenure has been too short, and the tenant has
found it necessary to farm so as to take the heart out of the land and leave it
worthless at the end of his term. The new Land Boards will be charged with
the duty of developing, as far as possible, the plan of having long leases,
and no doubt the example thus set will soon be followed by many holders of large
estates. The working men’s blocks have undoubtedly become popular, but, as
we felt sure would be the case, the avowed policy of the founders of this
system has not been adhered to. It has been found impossible to provide blocks
within easy distance of centres of employment, and the consequence is that many
of the “Blockers” have nothing but the produce of their twenty acres to live
upon. In special situations this may be no hardship, but a good deal of the avail-
able land is of such a nature that a larger area is absolutely indispensable. We may
say, In conclusion, that we have every reason to believe that greatly increased
attention has been directed to the hills and their resources by the writings of our
special reporter, and we have gratifying assurance that the republication of the
articles in a collected form will give widespread satisfaction.


'elite (South Australian Register
(Established 1836),
An eight-page Daily Paper, with frequent Supplements containing the latest
news from all parts of the world by wire and post. Price 2d., or 355. per
annum in advance ; posted, £2 ss. *V*'
' * " %ht (Observer
Is the largest Weekly Newspaper published in the colony. It consists of 48
pages. The Observer is arranged in several distinct departments. The
“ Miscellany” contains reviews of the latest books, essays on popular subjects,
notes on science, incidents of travel, interesting sketches, articles on explora
tion, chess problems, riddles and puzzles, poetry and witticisms, a column for
ladies containing the latest fashions, a department for children filled with
tales and poetry for the young, and novels by the best authors. No expense
is spared by the Proprietors in obtaining the right to publish stories by the
best English writers. Tales by local writers of ability are also constantly
published. The Farm and Garden Department contains a vast amount of
well-edited information for the benefit of farmers, sheep and cattle owners,
gardeners, and others interested in the tillage of the soil and the growth of
stock. The Sporting columns (which are under the control of a Special
Editor) contain full details of all racing matters, cricket, football, aquatics*
rifle shooting, &c., in the Australian colonies and the old country.
The Observer also contains full British, Foreign, Intercolonial shipping,
commercial, and general news, original articles on political and social subjects,
dramatic and musical criticisms, &c. The columns devoted to “ Echoes
and Re-echoes” contain humorous comments on current events in poetry and
prose.
An early edition of the Observer is printed on Friday morning for the
country mails. Price Sixpence, Six Shillings per quarter in advance, or
i 2S, per annum in advance (including postage).
%\it (Shewing Journal,
Published every afternoon, contains the principal news of the day. Price*
One Penny. Q 5 I d ~VL I
m xi C)
qEhe (South A ws l ra^ari ohgiotet ,Snnnnarg
Is published fortnightly for despatch by the English mail. Price Twopence,
or (including English postage) 6s. 6d. per annum.


HARROLD BROTHERS,
M&teCUAmt&»
ADELAIDE, PORT ADELAIDE,
Port Pirie, Broken Hill, and London,
HAVE OMT SALE
SHERRY—In Bulk
PORT WINE—S. S. Hutcheson’s,
bulk
MILK, Preserved “Columbus”
Brand
COFFEE EXTRACT—Branson’s
BRANDIES—Yvon’s, bulk
WHISKY Bannockburn, Special
Cream
Lochnavar, bulk
And are Sole Agents in
Napier Johnstone’s Square Bottle
Whisky
Wm. Younger’s “Monk’, Ale and
Stout
Lemoine’s Champagne
Barriasson’s Brandies
Henkes’ Schnapps and Geneva
Maria Christina Manila Cigars
RUM—Jamaica, in qrs. and octaves
CANDLES-Paraffin, '‘Orient”
fluted
DRIED FRUITS Elemes and
Sultanas
TEAS—lndian and China, of all
descriptions
CIGARS—" Bahadur,” Indian
South Australia for—
Lincrusta Walton—Wall Decora-
tions
W. D. & H. 0. Will’s Tobaccos and
Cigarettes
Kaisar I Hind Cigarettes
Oriental Tea Co., Limited—Teas
Blue—Barringer & Brown’s “Azure”
Pig Iron—Shott’s Iron Co.
Gunpowder—Karnes’ Blasting
HTDENTS EXECUTED
On most favourable terms for every description of Goods.
CONSIGNMENTS received from all parts of the World.


R. W. PATFDLL,
rp -pg" "pyi Li
Universal Provider,
Shops 1,2, 3,
MACrlll ROAD.
NORWOOD.
One of the largest and best assorted
stock in the Colonies, at the lowest
prices.


Australasian Implement Co„
XffofiH Adelaide-
(R. H. WHITE, Manager.)
HAVE ON SALE
Sole Agents "ISsSdP Irrigating
° A,a , AND
fob Pumping
Tho 1 wffiW* Machinery,
' WBBsSSS Patent
I l|P| jj j ** Plane Cultivator, etc., etc.
FARM Freeport
-A S a Covers As a Cover^^l^ng
ft. S .1 sqofc
i jb r.r
-H i* Wire Netting
GARDEN
IMPLEMENTS ' Hopsb Gears,
J\/Cr ▼ Chaffcutters.
I | The Largest Stock
The Une is so a -^[TgJ!
miplete that no IfflplGlllGntS
re desiring such | AgOO^ I • MBkcsssvfi AND
oo* for Farm or |J|if | fUI.. HflV HarVßStjng
complete that no §
one desiring such | AgSSsd^i
goods for Farm or I S
a nay iiai vcolm
Garden can fail to ** JS|p|k Is
undone or more of Machinery
the list adapted to jr
/wMP'vssmai in Adelaide.
t INSPECTION
Wm I INVITED.
/> rrr
his wants. Write
for Catalogue and
Price List.
ftP ( OA
oi en
)oriq


OUR INHERITANCE IN THE HILLS.
No. I.—ADELAIDE
The familiar hills by which the plain of
Adelaide la bounded on the east and on
the south comprise some of the best
known and at the same time some of the
least known parts of South Australia.
Towards the south they are approached by
the road which runs continuously from
Adelaide right to Cape Jervis. Twice
every day the coach from Hill & Oo.’s
office at Victoria-square starts with its
freight of human beings. The route, as
most of my readers are aware, lies in the
first place along the Bay-road, running
from the south-western corner of the city;
but at a point about halfway to the sea it
branches off due southwards, and con-
tinues onwards till it reaches the southern-
most extremity of the shores of the Gulf
of St. Vincent. A flat road, skirted by
fields of stubble and pasture, leads to a
gentle rise, and as this comes close within
view the straggling village of Edwards-
town is passed—a strange mixture of
the country town and the outskirt suburb
of a large city. Further on, but on
the other side of the road, to the left,
stands the little hamlet of St. Mary’s,
with its quaint Chapel and neat Church-
yard. Bands of high gumtrees, which
present a picturesque appearance from
the hills further to the east, skirt the
road and divide the fields from one
another, bearing evidence of the length of
time during which settlement and culti-
vation have continued to exist in this part
of the colony. As the rising ground is
approached the traveller notes one farm
in particular, a well-kept place with fine
stock and well-cultivated crops, a garden,
and a windmill for purposes of irrigation ;
this is Mr. Bagless’s prize farm, and forms
indeed a worthy termination southwards
to the plain upon which the metropolis of
South Australia stands.
The ruin of the old Kangaroo Inn, a well-
known hostelry of bygone days, is passed,
and close by and a little to the south
where the gentle declivities of the hills
commence is a more modern structure, the
Lady Mac Donnell Hotel. The road now
begins to wind among the low hills,
which are here and there pleasantly
TO NOARLUNGA.
intersected with vineyards and fruit-trees.
Away to the right glimpses are presented
from time to time of the broad waters of
the Gulf, with here and there a tiny sail
or a long line of smoke left by some
incoming or outgoing steamer. To the
right is the prettily situated town-
ship of Sturt, Higher and higher
the road ascends with each succeed-
ing turn, but the curves have been
so carefully laid out by the surveyor that
the former terrors of Tapley’s Hill have
in the present day to a great extent
vanished. Yet the scenery at this place
is bare and forbidding. The hills are in
the winter season most plentifully watered
with showers of rain blown off the Gulf,
and the grass, although yellow and dry in
the summer season, is always abundant
and long. At a turn in the road is the
Flagstaff Hotel, and an old sundial
near by was for many years the team-
sters’ clock in this locality. The
River Sturt winds along in its rocky
bed between the spurs of the hills, and
evidence of abundance of water is shown
in the extent to which irrigation is used
for the cultivation of fruit-trees. In
almost every quarter in the hills districts
it is comparatively easy to obtain a good
supply of fresh water by sinking a well.
In order to recognise this one has only to
follow the road up still higher to the little
hamlet known as O’Halloran Hill, and to
note the unpromising places in which
wells giving an unlimited supply of water
have been sunk. O’Halloran Hill is the
summit of the elevation which the road to
Noarlnnga reaches after leaving Adelaide.
From this point the view is exceedingly
fine. To the west there is the long but com-
paratively low line of hills trending to the
southwards, with their trees sparse in
places, but closely crowded at the summits;
then, nearer at hand, are the yellow, cul-
tivated fields with stubble, the bright
green patches showing where new vine-
yards have been planted, and the long
slopes devoted to pasturage. In front the
road winds between fields of a similar
nature, while away out to the right-hand
side, beyond the undulating knolls with


their occasional sheaoak and dwarf gums,
the long line of the waters of the Gulf,
bounded to the south by the hazy form
of Rapid Head, and the still more in-
distinct outline of the coast towards
Yankalilla and Second Yalley. The
southern breeze blows cool and fresh upon
the face on these uplands even in the hot
days of summer, and it is doubtful whether
a cooler place than O’Halloran Hill can be
found within twenty miles of Adelaide.
The road to Happy Valley branches off
at this spot, going eastwards through un-
dulating country towards Clarendon.
The main road, however, takes a slight
descent, still going eastward. Several
promising vineyards have recently been put
in about this neighbourhood, and a large
area has been cropped for hay. The soil
is, however, well suited for the production
of wheat and oats in every part of the
extensive valley between O’Halloran Hill
and Noarlunga. It is Bay of Biscay land,
containing patches of rich black soil
adjoining others of loose lime and light
loam, while here and there may be seen
rocky stretches of barrenness. Looking
out over the prospect to the west and to
the east, one notices at once how large
an area of country is still to be brought
under cultivation. All along the distant
hillsides the encroachments of the agri-
culturist are plainly visible in the
formation of fields from the primitive
straggling wooded land. But a very large
amount of very fair land still remains in
the original condition in which it was
found by the early pioneers of fifty years
ago. It is indeed in many respects a
neglected portion of South Australia. As
evidence it is only necessary to glance at
the next roadside township, Reynella. It
is to a considerable extent a village
of the past, as several ruined
houses along the road remain to testify.
Yet the hotel does a good roadside
trade, and the surrounding country is
exceedingly rich in products. Few places
are so promising from a viticultural point
of view, the area under vines being now
quite extensive. The production of wheat
and hay in the vicinity gives employ-
ment to a larger population than might
be supposed from a casual look at the
place. Several houses embowered in trees
of luxuriant growth have evidently well
withstood the test of time. Yet there is a
standstill look about the place, and many
a tale 1s told of former residents who have
left the district to go northwards, and
who have in the majority of instances re-
gretted„the step which they have taken.
The hills on the left side gradually
close in upon the road as the journey is
proceeded with, and the low range trends
towards Noarlunga in the south. The
place at which the road turns downwards
parallel with the range is Morphett Yale,
an old and thoroughly established town*
ship of quiet, substantial appearance with
its three Churches in various old English
styles of architecture and small, neat
churchyards, wherein “ the rude forefathers
of the hamlet sleep.” Passing a very
matter-of-fact post-office we reach the
State school on the top of the rise—a
building of the well-known gabled pattern,
neat and businesslike. This is one of
healthiest spots in the whole of Australia,
and the sturdy children of the school
appear to suffer very little from the lassi-
tude usually produced by heat. Morphett
Yale is the centre of a district having a
population of not much under a thousand
souls, and certain to increase in the
future. It is soon left out of sight in the
onward journey, and as the hills on the
left are closely approached glimpses of the
blue waters show that only a space of
some three or four miles of low undula-
ting land, terminating in a line of sand-
hills, intervenes before the sea is reached.
The land is almost entirely bare of trees,
but fairly well cultivated, although it is
not difficult to discern that the quality of
the soil deteriorates as the sandhills are
approached.
Before turning off to the right at the
foot of the line of hills the road passes
the post-office at Hackham. There
is no township properly speaking,
but gardens are visible in various
directions, and on or two of the farmers
carry on operations after a sensibly scien-
tific method. Then some plantations of
wattles are passed. They are still young,
but are undergoing the process of thinning
out in places, some even of the very young
trees being barked and destroyed. One
has barely time to observe this, when the
road coils around in a somewhat bewilder-
ing fashion, and takes a sudden dive down-
wards at the brow of a hill, over which is
seen projecting the vane of an old-
fashioned Church, with weathercock and
battlemented tower. The driver explains
that we have now reached “The Shoe,”
as Noarlunga is familiarly called. He
puts his foot to the skid, but lets the
horses go at a rattling pace down the hill,
and brings them up neatly a few inches
from the verandah-post of the Horsehoe
Inn, which stands at the foot of the hill.
The town is a quiet place in a very quiet


situation, hidden down among the [ for this season. But with hay well above £4
hillocks which rise on every side. The
River Onkaparinga, on which it is
situated, takes a wide curve in the shape
of a horseshoe along the base of the hills
and passes away to the westward
at the other side of the township,
finding its way into the sea at Port
Noarlunga by a circuitous route, which
makes the river course seven miles long,
although the distance in a straight line is
only about three. At Noarlunga the river
is a tidal stream, broad, sluggish, and
deep. It is at various seasons full of fish,
and the skilful angler can frequently catch
in an hour perhaps a dozen fine large
bream, from 1 lb. to 4| lb. in weight. To
the westwards the Onkaparinga comes
down from the hills, which rise in gently
undulating knolls of greater and greater
height. There is a fairly good road follow-
ing its course upwards to Clarendon, the
only difficult parts being a couple of steep
hills quite close to the latter township.
The farmers in the vicinity have for the
most part done well this season. Scarcely
SCO acres have been cropped for wheat,
while perhaps four or five times that area
has been cut for hay. The season has
been a dry one here as everywhere else,
and whereas in ordinary seasons there are
many wheat crops which go more than 20
bushels to the acre, it is doubtful whether
any of the land will reach to that average
per ton, the farming land about Noarlunga,
which in almost all cases will give one ton
to the acre, proves quite as profitable as if
it should yield 15 bushels of wheat to the
acre. There are few paddocks which
would yield less than 8 bushels to the
acre if stripped for wheat. The district
has vastly greater resources than those
which are at present developed. It is
splendidly adapted for the cultivation of
the vine, and will grow either wheat or
hay—whichever should happen to be most
profitable for the season. The old flour-
mill, which was burnt out a few years
ago, is now out of work owing to the
preference given to hay over wheat. A
little chaffcutting is all the purpose which
it Is now made to subserve. But there
is plenty of room for expansion in the
Hundred of Noarlunga as a whole. I find
from a Government return that working
men’s blocks to the number of more than
100 have been surveyed and offered to
the public. At a rental of one shilling per
acre a block of twenty acres in such a dis-
trict should surely prove a profitable
holding for a working man, the rent
amounting to less than sixpence per
week. The grazing and cultivation leases
in country so grassy and so well
watered are in most cases well worth
the .small rental that is charged for
them.


lI.—NOARLUNGA TO MACLAREN VALE.
The drive from Noarlunga to Maclaren
Yale is an instructive one in many ways.
The road skirts round the great horseshoe
curve of the river and seems to make
its escape from the only accessible
point in the rim of the huge basin after
crossing over the Onkaparinga by a large
substantial bridge. Rising on the other
side the coach soon reaches the heights
where the southern breeze seems to
blow perpetually. Grassy paddocks and
hayfields stretch on every side,
while to the left of the road
at a little distance is a hillside
covered with an extensive wattle planta-
tion belonging to Mr. H. 0. Fletcher, a
well-known local resident. A large extent
of country on these uplands is also used
for grazing purposes, the elevations being
very gentle, and the ground in almost
every direction well covered with nutri-
tious grasses. Wattle-planting is now
one of the most popular of the new
developments of the southern district.
Every one seems to be either laying in a
patch or thinking of doing so. Some
little difficulty has been experienced by
people who are not accustomed to the
work of stripping during the driest season,
the bark being so brittle that it refuses to
strip easily, and is very apt to break off;
but the proper season for stripping in
each locality is only a matter to be tested
by a little experience. The market for
wattlebark is now recognised to be a
first-class one, and at £9 per ton for the
product it pays handsomely to grow. So
great is the present demand for wattle-
seed that as much as 6d. to Bd. per
pound is now being given In the
various localities from Clarendon
right down to Yankalilla. In one
part people are able to make as
much as £1 per day by gathering the
wattle-seeds off the trees, or dropping
them Into canvas bags by shaking the
branches. The season for picking is, of
course, a short one, as directly any heavy
rain comes it washes the seed all away.
It is wonderful how long a wattle-seed
will remain dormant before springing into
life. For example, it is a well-
authenticated fact that on one of the
first established farms near Noarlunga the
ground, after having been cropped almost
continuously for thirty years, not long
ago was turned over and left fallow
for a short time, when, strange to relate, a
healthy young crop of wattles made its
appearance. After a bush fire the trees
usually spring up in large numbers, ap-
parently owing to the heat having roasted
the seeds to a sufficient extent to allow of
their germinating. Many of the farmers
who have a bit of poor hilly land in
their sections find that wattle cultivation
is the best way of turning it to
account, and it is surprising what a large
number of small clamps of the trees may
now be seen in various directions. The
open park-like country in this part of
South Australia is very extensive, and
the trees are a very noticeable feature at
every point of the landscape. As the
rise beyond Noarlunga is fully reached a
scene of great beauty meets the view. A
long range of hills bounds the horizon,
and at the foot, in the far distance,
lie Willunga and Aldinga. Closer
at hand is one of the most beauti-
ful valleys in the whole of South
Australia—Maclaren Yale. It is
like the domains and gardens of some
magnificent estate in the best part of Eng-
land. Belts and clumps of trees are scat-
tered over the face of the land. Say field a
stretch as far as the eye can reach, with
wide expanses of grass paddocks between.
Haystacks, and cottages with their
neat gardens and porches covered with
creepers, are to be seen in every direction.
Tidy fruit-plots and plantations grow
luxuriantly here and there ; and last, but
not least, the extensive vineyards cover-
ing hundreds of acres extend along one
side of the flat and far up the gentle slope
on the western side.
These vineyards are the now celebrated
Maclaren Yale plantations of Mr. Thomas
Hardy, and are worked in connection
with Tintara, the smaller estate a couple
of miles away which was originally started
by the well-known enthusiast in viticul-
ture, the late Dr. Kelly. A wineshop,
known as the Belle Vue House,
stands on the main road, and
behind it are the extensive cellars
occupied by the successive vintages
of Mr. Hardy’s valuable properties. The
structure is an old flourmill which has
been converted by degrees into a fairly
convenient place for the storage of wine in


lI.—NOARLUNGA TO MACLAREN VALE.
The drive from Noarlunga to Maclaren
Vale is an instructive one in many ways.
The road skirts round the great horseshoe
curve of the river and seems to make
its escape from the only accessible
point in the rim of the huge basin after
crossing over the Onkaparinga by a large
substantial bridge. Rising on the other
side the coach soon reaches the heights
where the southern breeze seems to
blow perpetually. Grassy paddocks and
hayfields stretch on every side,
while to the left of the road
at a little distance is a hillside
covered with an extensive wattle planta-
tion belonging to Mr. H. 0. Fletcher, a
well-known local resident. A large extent
of country on these uplands is also used
for grazing purposes, the elevations being
very gentle, and the ground in almost
every direction well covered with nutri-
tious grasses. Wattle-planting is now
one of the most popular of the new
developments of the southern district.
Every one seems to be either laying in a
patch or thinking of doing so. Some
little difficulty has been experienced by
people who are not accustomed to the
work of stripping during the driest season,
the bark being so brittle that it refuses to
strip easily, and is very apt to break off ;
but the proper season for stripping in
each locality is only a matter to be tested
by a little experience. The market for
wattlebark is now recognised to be a
first-class one, and at £9 per ton for the
product it pays handsomely to grow. So
great is the present demand for wattle-
seed that as much as 6d. to Bd. per
pound is now being given in the
various localities from Clarendon
right down to Yankalilla. In one
part people are able to make as
much as £1 per day by gathering the
wattle-seeds off the trees, or dropping
them into canvas bags by shaking the
branches. The season for picking is. of
course, a short one, as directly any heavy
rain comes it washes the seed all away.
It is wonderful how long a wattle-seed
will remain dormant before springing into
life. For example, it is a well-
authenticated fact that on one of the
first established farms near Noarlunga the
ground, after having been cropped almost
continuously for thirty years, not long
ago was turned over and left fallow
for a short time, when, strange to relate, a
healthy young crop of wattles made its
appearance. After a bush fire the trees
usually spring up in large numbers, ap-
parently owing to the heat having roasted
the seeds to a sufficient extent to allow of
their germinating. Many of the farmers
who have a bit of poor hilly land in
their sections find that wattle cultivation
is the best way of turning it to
account, and it is surprising what a large
number of small clumps of the trees may
now be seen in various directions. The
open park-like country in this part of
South Australia is very extensive, and
the trees are a very noticeable feature at
every point of the landscape. As the
rise beyond Noarlunga is fully reached a
scene of great beauty meets the view. A
long range of hills bounds the horizon,
and at the foot, in the far distance,
lie Willunga and Aldinga. Closer
at hand is one of the most beauti-
ful valleys in the whole of South
Australia—Maclaren Yale. It is
like the domains and gardens of some
magnificent estate in the best part of Eng-
land. Belts and clumps of trees are scat-
tered over the face of the land. Hayfields
stretch as far as the eye can reach, with
wide expanses of grass paddocks between.
Haystacks, and cottages with their
neat gardens and porches covered with
creepers, are to be seen in every direction.
Tidy fruit-plots and plantations grow
luxuriantly here and there ; and last, but
not least, the extensive vineyards cover-
ing hundreds of acres extend along one
side of the flat and far up the gentle slope
on the western side.
These vineyards are the now celebrated
Maclaren Yale plantations of Mr. Thomas
Hardy, and are worked in connection
with Tintara, the smaller estate a couple
of miles away which was originally started
by the well-known enthusiast in viticul-
ture, the late Dr. Kelly. A wineshop,
known as the Belle Yue House,
stands on the main road, and
behind It are the extensive cellars
occupied by the successive vintages
of Mr. Hardy’s valuable properties. The
structure is an old flourmill which has
been converted by degrees into a fairly
convenient place for the storage of wine in


all Its stages, the fermenting vats being on view about a couple of miles east of the town-
the lowest flat, the casks on the second
story, and the vintage factory on the top
flat. Besides the old mill, however, Mr.
Hardy has secured a part of the Adelaide
Exhibition Annexes, and is now
completing commodious additions, In
which are placed vats of capacities
varying up to 3,000 gallons. Having
put in considerably over 300 acres of
vines, Mr. Hardy intends to confine his
operations for some time to come to the
development of this large area and the
works connected with it. Butthe vineyards
of Maclaren Yale will go on extending,
nevertheless. In all directions the
farmers have been encouraged to put in
patches of vines, owing to the ready
market which now exists for grapes. The
demand in England for a light, wholesome
wine from Australia at not much above 2a.
per gallon is growing so rapidly that all the
grapes that Maclaren Vale can produce will
be profitably utilized, if they are sound and
good, by being pressed at the cellars. In
the early days of winemaking all over
the South and in the Hills, a large
number of farmers made the great mistake
of trying to make their own wine from
all sorts of grapes. A very heady and
extremely unwholesome article was usually
the result, and the temptations due to the
presence of casks of wine always at band
were such that many farmers fell into bad
habits. The consequence has been that
as a precautionary measure a number of
small vineyards in good bearing order
have positively been uprooted and a
serious prejudice exists against the culture
of the vine. But the more clear-sighted
of the farmers now recognise that if they
confine themselves to growing grapes and
Belling the produce in the raw state they
give themselves far less trouble than by
attempting to make wine, while at the
same time they escape a danger
which has to some proved only
too real and serious. An acre of
vines in fair bearing order yields
240 gallons of wine, worth say from
£25 to £3O ; and as the grower of the
grapes always gets a good proportion of
the return, it pays him to give atten-
tion to the operation of cultivation.
At Maclaren Yale I left the beaten
track of travel in order to examine to
some extent the resources of this beautiful
valley further inland. The district road
runs almost due east through portions of
the valley, and then about halfway to
Kangarllla It crosses over a low range
and enters upon more hilly country. The
ship of Maclaren Yale embraces some of the
finest agricultural scenery in the colony.
At this point a spur of the low range, of
which the end portion is marked as Mount
Panorama, obtrudes itself upon the plain,
and the road mounts across the shoulder
of this higher ground. Looking to the
southwards one sees a long range of hills
very sparsely wooded, but grassy and
deeply furrowed with ravines. It passes
by the township of Willunga, and trends
away to the south-west towards Yauka-
lilla. This range forms a true division not
only geographically but also geologically,
for the rocks and soil on the other
side are of a different nature. Bight
along to Yankalilla and the Bald
Hills there are frequent patches of sand
and scrub —a kind of country which is
rare to the northwards of the hills. The
beauty of the vale as seen from the point
of vantage is singularly attractive, and in
this one view one can see at a glance almost
all the leading resources of the South.
Here and there the stripper is at work,
and wheat is being cleaned up and bagged.
Hay-wagons are passing along the roads,
piled up with their now valuable freight.
At intervals there are grass paddocks
upon which sheep are depastured, and
along the plains and undulating uplands
there are clumps of trees where wattles
yield their promising produce ; while, like
bright green squares inlaid upon the
summer brown and yellow of the plain,
the vineyards stand out more conspicuous
than anything else, unless, perhaps, they
are rivalled by the luxuriant green of the
fruit-trees, with their gradually ripening
harvest of fruit growing upon them.
Looking downward upon the soil of the
hill upon which we are standing, the
quality of it seems poor enough, for, as
has been said, it is a spur of a range which
obtrudes itself upon the plain, and
presents quite a different character of
country and vegetation. Yet there away
to the left in a secluded valley lies the
Tintara Yineyard, which is now so well
known in London that “Tintara” has
come to mean one of the best favoured of
all the Australian wines, and to
Include all the produce of the vineyards
in this neighbourhood. The history of
that vineyard will be an interesting
chapter in the story of Australian develop-
ment. How Dr. Kelly some 30 years ago
laboured late and early to acquire a
knowledge of viticulture and to bring his
vines to perfection ; how a Company was
formed with fine prospects of success, but


with poor results; how the concern was —say a distance of five miles —one scarcely
wound up and went into liquidation, and
the doctor died a disappointed man,
although at the present day all his expecta-
tions are actually being fulfilled. It
is his son who now manages the.extensive
vineyards of Maclaren Yale and Tintara,
and who dates his experience of viticul-
ture from early boyhood. The country
In the vicinity of Tintara is what is known
as ironstone soil, and although almost
universally condemned for agricultural
purposes it is admirably adapted for the
culture of the vine. There are dozens of
valleys apparently similar to that in
which the original vineyard Is situated,
and there is little reason to doubt that
this part of the hundred will in future
prove rich In produce such as grapes and
wattle bark, although not to any large
extent in wheat. A little further to the
northwards Mr. Hardy has planted ten
acres of currants, and the result is prov-
ing most satisfactory. The colonial grown
article is already recognised as superior
to the imported currant.
Very little use in proportion to its
capability is now made of the upper part
of the valley. It is only for a very short
distance round the township that the
land is moderately well taken up by
farming. Further up the valley there
are large grass paddocks of good soil,
well watered and well situated, upon
which the owner depastures perhaps
two or three horses or head of cattle for
a square mile of territory. From about
a mile out of Maclaren Yale right
up to the boundary of Clarendon district
sees half a dozen habitations. At Mac-
laren Flat, about midway along the road,
there are a couple of farms and one la
situated further up towards the hills. But
the land cannot said to be a quarter
occupied in any proper sense of the term.
Indeed, if one takes the country between
Port Noarlunga and Willunga and as far as
the ranges on the east and the gulf on the
west it is really surprising how small is the
population which it at present supports as
compared with Its possibilities. The
area is as large as one of the agri-
cultural counties in England, such
as Hertford, which sustains probably
twenty or thirty times the population.
The two or three paddocks under cultiva-
tion towards the head of the valley
were at the time of my visit being
stripped for wheat, and the crops, although
thin compared to what they sometimes
are, will give about 15 bushels to the
acre. Right under the foot of the
range called Wickham’s Hills, after the
sturdy Waterloo veteran, who wasoneof the
first pioneers of tne district, a very large area
of country some eight or ten miles In length
has passed into private hands as one con-
tinuous estate. Most of it is beautiful grassy
country, and in some places it is used for
grazing purposes. But the day is not far
distant when it will yield ten times the
wealth which it does at present, and at
any rate support ten times the popula-
tion. The road makes a turn as it meets
the hills, and branches northwards to-
wards Kangarilla, this turn forming the
boundary of the District of Noarlunga.


111, MACLAREN VALE TO WILLUNGA & SELLICK’S HILL.
The South road from Maclaren Vale to
Willunga passes through the pleasant,
open, grassy country comprised in the
hollow space between the hills which have
already been referred to. A moderate
rise on the south side of Mac-
laren Yale is crowned by a large
edifice with a high Gothic gable, this
being the Congregational Church. Passing
from the higher ground one descends into
the lower part of the valley, and south-
wards across a level plain towards the
line of hills which rise like a wall in
front. Hayfields and pasturage lands
are to be seen on all sides, and the
country in summer time looks like one
long waving sea of yellow grass. Small
vineyards are to be seen here and there
located close to the various home-
steads, and it is easily observed that
in depending upon these homestead
plantations for the future increase of the
yearly vintage Mr. Hardy is not making a
mistake. There is no denying the fact
that throughout the southern districts the
people have acquired a strong faith in the
value of the vine as a permanently
valuable and peculiarly suitable product
of their lands. The great number of
vines which have been planted are in a
very large proportion of cases too young
as yet to be productive, but the owners
are perfectly content to wait for three or
four years after planting, and confident
that at the termination of that period
they will be able to sell the produce at
fairly remunerative rates.
Along this flat road towards Willunga
the flood waters come down from the hills
in tremendous volumes, and very deep
channels have oeen cut by the roadside.
The traveller notices in these channels
that slabs of slate similar to the paving of
Bundle-street have been used for water-
tables. The slate quarries of Willunga
have long been well known, not only in
this colony, but also in Victoria. They
lie beyond Willunga, further up the hills.
Many of the water-tanks throughout the
southern districts are constructed by the
putting together of five square slabs of
slate about two inches in thickness, and
braced together by means of iron rods.
The tanks of this description, which Mr.
Hardy uses at Maclaren Yale, are very
useful for temporary storage, but cannot
of course be employed as an absolute
substitute for wooden barrels or vats.
Willunga is located in almost exactly
the same relative position to the adjoin-
ing country as is the suburb of Mitcham.
The hills at the foot of which it is
situated run down in a slanting direction
towards the sea. They are for the most
part either quite bald and bare, or very
sparsely covered with low stunted trees.
The buildings of Willunga also bear a
strong resemblance to those of Mitcham,
as may be noticed by any one
viewing the picturesque town from
one of the rises to the south-east. The
lower part of the township looks like one
large garden or orchard and vineyard
with houses intermingled amongst the
profuse mass of vegetation; while the
upper part consists of houses built upon
the small hills at the foot of the range.
Through the middle flows a rippling
stream, the slaty bed of which affords
rather an interesting study for the
geologist. A moderate amount of agri-
culture is carried on in the neighbourhood
of Willunga, and a large number of sheep
are depastured on the surrounding hills.
The area of the good farming land, how-
ever, is very largely in excess of that
which is actually under cultivation, and
the whole district, containing about a
thousand inhabitants, might easily support
a population five or six times as large.
Looking across the plain towards the
sea in a westerly direction the eye rests
upon a line of neat houses occupying the
same relative position as Glenelg or
rather, to speak more accurately, as
Brighton. This Is the pretty township
of Aldinga, through which the afternoon
coach passes every day on its way to
Yankalilla. The road from Noarlunga
passes southwards to Aldinga within
a couple of miles of the gulf. This trip
is in its way rather a picturesque one, as
the plain is Interrupted midway between
the two towns by a number
of hills, the hlllocky nature of
which can perhaps bast be ex-
plained by the jocular remark of one of
the coachdrivers “This part of the
country looks as if it had the mumps.
In among the limestone hills lies a pecu-
liar glen, looking like a miniature part of
; the Western Highlands. A couple of


farmhouses have been built low down in misunderstanding, it has received.
the valley, and a stream has worn a
very deep course on its winding way to
the sea. On towards Aldinga there are
some sharp hills, through which cuttings
have been made, and one of them, known
as Bennett’s Hill, makes as steep a pinch
as any driver would like to en-
counter with a large load of passen-
gers. From this point to Aldinga
the land is partly undulating and partly
flat, but all open and grassy limestone
country.
Aldinga Is a town which looks as If it
could scarcely make up Its mind whether
to extend along the eastern road or along
that which runs to the south. It certainly
is a very neat place, and is the centre of
nearly twice as much cultivation as
Willunga, although it has not so much
pasturage. Port Willunga, which is its
seaport, lies a mile and a half to the west,
and has a rather dilapidated jetty or pier.
The place as a whole, indeed, looks
decidedly as if it had seen better days, and
the only fact which is particularly memor-
able in its recent history is the
wreck of the Star of Greece, which
occurred last year quite close to the jetty.
Port Willunga, indeed, ranks amongst
the “has been” settlements of the colony.
In the earlier days of the Victorian
goldfields It was one of the most con-
siderable of the outports. Thence
large quantities of wheat and hay and
slate were shipped; a busy trade was
done in the large and substantial build-
ings which were the pride of their owners
a quarter of a century ago, and which
even In their skeleton form seem to have
a certain pretentiousness about them.
The bustle is only a recollection now, but
the time when it was otherwise is still a
vivid memory in the minds of the sturdy
old residents. They especially tell
you of the time when Mr. S. White
(who recently revisited the colony
after many years’ absence) had his
wheat vessels trading regularly to the
Port, and they point out to you a tall
cylindrical structure somewhat like a
chimney-stack, now standing lonely in the
middle of a paddock between Aldinga and
Willunga, which according to tradition
Mr. White had erected partly to enable
him to command a view of the Port so
that he might have early notice of the
approach of his vessels. Close to this
monumental erection, which the old
settlers irreverently call “ White’s Folly,”
is a little Chapel, which deserves better
treatment than, through some curious
This quaint building was In the
more prosperous days of Aldinga
well attended by worshippers; but it
is a long time since the voice of a
preacher was heard within its walls,
and the Chapel, untended and unat-
tended, is rapidly decaying. The seats
and the books and the other ad-
juncts of the Church were allowed to
remain whilst the weather broke holes in
the roof, through which the rain poured
upon the furniture until the place has
become a melancholy wreck.
From Aldinga the way lies still towards
the range of hills terminating close to the
sea in the steep and forbidding slopes of
Sellick’s Hill and Mount Terrible. As
we pass across the plain we notice a patch
of country covered with salt flakes, and on
reaching the little township of Sellick’s
Hill, almost upon the seacoast, we can see
a lagoon close to the seashore. This
lagoon is exceedingly Interesting and
suggestive of reflection. It is indeed the
last remaining portion of an arm of the
sea which at one geological period must
have covered the whole of the limestone
country including the plains of Adelaide
and Aldinga right down as far as Sellick’s
Hill. On mounting the hill itself this fact
Is presented In a singularly striking light.
The township Itself is a small one, the
only building which is noticeable being a
small inn rejoicing in the high-sounding
title of “The Norman Victory.” A
stranger would indeed wonder why in the
antipodes a hostelry should apparently
derive its designation from the Battle of
Hastings or some other Norman victory.
But there are those living who remember
the time when no hotel was there and
the reason why it received its name after
its erection. Mr. Norman, an old and
much respected settler in the neighbour-
hood, who died some years since, was at
one time a member of the Central Road
Board, and was mainly instrumental, after
a long and persistent struggle against
many opponents, In having the road con-
structed over Sellick’s Hill, and to com-
memorate his success the hotel, when
erected after the road was opened, received
the name of “The Norman Victory.”
The whole country, indeed, has a bare and
deserted look, especially when viewed
from a short distance up the hill But
the peculiarities of the hill itself soon
demand attention. Steep limestone
slopes surround one In all directions,
and in the middle there is a tremendous
scar or gully on the side of the range.


The road winds round the contour of this the upper cuttings of the Hills Railway.
gully from side to side, but always up-
wards, the steep slope and cutting being on
the right hand, while on the left there is
merely a fence to divide the road off from
a precipitous abyss which at times seems
almost unfathomable. Sellick’s Hill is,
perhaps, the worst piece of hill country
traversed by any of the main roads of
South Australia, and great skill and atten-
tion are necessary on the part of the
ooachdrivers who are selected for
the task of conveying passengers from
Noarlunga to Yankalilla. The coach far
Adelaide leaves the latter place at 3
o’clock in the morning, and in the winter
time, when the driver has to negotiate
this part of the road in pitch
darkness and in the face of the
concentrated gusts of wind which blow
along the gully, his duties are
of a very arduous nature. As the
summit of the range is reached a very
remarkable change takes place in the
character of the country. The limestone
disappears and gives place to schistose
rocks, similar to those which are seen on
The stunted sheaoaks vanish from the
landscape, and with them also the uni-
versal carpet of yellow grass. Larger
trees of various variety of eucalyptus
make their appearance, and the ground is
covered with scrub and heaths. It is as if
one were suddenly transported from a
place like Prospect to one like Crafers,
and the explanation of the wonderful
difference between the two parts of
Sellick’s Hill is no doubt to be found in
the fact that the top of the mountain was
during countless ages an island while
the rest of the country was submerged.
Mr. Alfred Russell Wallace has pointed out
in his book on “ The Malay Archipelago”
that South Australia remained under
water, with the exception of a few
of Its higher portions, during a very
extended period, while Australia con-
sisted mainly of two islands —an
eastern and a western. The limestone
deposits are in themselves an evidence ot
this fact, and nothing could be more In-
structive on the point than a trip to the
top of Sellick’s HilL


IV.—MYPONGA,
YANKALILLA
~ AND CAPE JERVIS.
The township which is situated midway
between Aldinga and Yankalilla is
known as Myponga, and can be ap-
proached by two roads, one of which
starts from Willunga and mounts a
range of hills by a zigzag course to the
east of Sellick’s Hill. By a branch of
this road the traveller can reach Port
Elliot at about twenty-two miles’ dis-
tance. The coach, however, pursues the
more direct route to Myponga, keeping
nearer to the coast. The country, as has
been said, is entirely different from that
upon which Aldinga and Willunga are
situated, the grassy limestone soil having
disappeared, and having been replaced
by alternate ridges of scrub and partially
wooded valleys of beautiful sylvan
country. Indeed, with the exception of
small patches of lower land close to the sea-
coast, which have been in former times
submerged, the whole of the country
between Sellick’s Hill and the Southern
Ocean is almost free from limestone.
It is country almost exactly similar to that
which is to be found between Mount
Lofty and Mount Barker. Leaving
Sellick’s Hill behind us, we pass some
moderately open and grassy country, and
then enter upon a line of scrubby sandy
soil, similar to a large number of patches
which run in ridges towards the south-
west in the southern part of the colony.
If a traveller through the country confined
his observations to one of these scrubby
ridges he would gather a very poor im-
pression of the country as a whole.
Myponga, however, is the centre of a
considerable amount of good dairy-farm-
ing land, upon which cattle fatten splen-
didly, and this kind of country, inter-
rupted by one or two scrubby patches,
continues all along the gradual downward
slope which leads to the well-watered fields
of Yankalilla. The quality of the
dairy produce made in this part
of South Australia cannot be beaten
In any part of the continent. At a
recent Agricultural Show there were seven
or eight exhibits of fresh butter which
came so close to perfection that it was
almost impossible for the judges to draw
any distinction between them.
The town of Yankalilla, although
containing sixty or seventy houses, makes
but little show upon the wooded land-
scape in the midst of which it is situated.
The five or six Churches, with the Institute
and Bank, wear a neat although somewhat
antiquated aspect. Three or four thousand
acres in the vicinity are under cultivation,
but the whole population of the district.
Including ninety square miles, is con-
siderably less than one thousand, and it is
a subject of constant comment that
all of the districts embracing
Myponga, Yankalilla, Second Valley,
Glenburn, and Bald Hills—indeed the
whole of the southern region of the
colony —contains probably not more than
half the population that it supported
twenty years ago.
“What is the reason of this exodus 1”
I asked of an old resident who has lived
in the locality for about forty years.
“ You may call it,” he replied, “ a
matter of going further and faring worse
with the most of them. Some have gone
away to the Far North, even beyond
Goyder’s line of rainfall. Some young
fellows have gone across tn© Victorian
Border, and have done fairly well by
getting good land at cheap rates between
Horsham and Serviceton. But that game
is stopped now because the prices of the
land taken up have risen so very much
recently, and a young man can do better
for himself at the present day by re-
maining at home. Then a third place
to which a lot of people have gone is the
Peninsula. In fact, I believe that more
of the Yankalilla and Second Valley
people have gone across the Gulf than to
any other place.”
“And how,” I asked, “have these
emigrants fared.”
“Well,” he answered, “it is not for
me to speak against any part of the
colony where I live. All I know is that
I have seen a lot of them visiting this
place from time to time, and they nearly
all say that what with dry seasons, poor
crops, poor feed, and carting water miles
and miles they don’t find things across
the Gulf quite so pleasant as they ex-
pected, and most of them wish they had
stayed at home and been contented with
a smaller area of land to work upon.”
Normanville is the port of Yankalilla,
two miles to the westwards. It can
boast of a fine jetty and a rocket apparatus,
and a large flourmill stands upon the


flat behind the beach. But the early
glories of Normanville are evidently under
a heavy cloud. The old Royal Hotel,
a commodious edifice, stands near the
pier deserted and dismantled, and the
Normanville Hotel further inland has
superseded it. The rails which lead to the
jetty are covered with sand to a consider-
able depth, and the whole place wears the
appearance of having declined greatly in
prosperity. The view from the pier, how-
ever, is a grand and inspiring one. Indeed,
Normanville and Second Valley are
probably the most picturesque places in
South Australia. Looking to southwards
the eye rests upon enormous bluffs or
headlands, rising to a hight of five hundred
or six hundred feet, and coming close to
the water’s edge. These are in the dis-
tance lower and less distinct, and the view
is bounded by the long line of Rapid Head,
which forms the southern end of Rapid
Bay. In the foreground is a picturesque
object in the shape of the wreck of a
Swedish barque, the captain of which
nearly two years ago, being a stranger to
the place, mistook Normanville for the
Semaphore and got upon the sand
before he knew where he was.
Strange romantic scenery is met with
on the road between Normanville and
Second Valley. After passing a small
alluvial flat the road skirts along the foot
of an abrupt range of hills and bluffs, on
the sides of which it is noticeable that
vast quantities of pebbly debris has been
accumulated by the action of the water
in times when the level of the Gulf
was much higher in relation to the hills.
The broken pebbles and stones are
quarried out by the local District Council
for roadmaking purposes, and capital
metal they make. By-and-by a sudden
turn in the road brings us opposite
to a precipitous valley known as the
Great Gorge, at which a good stream of
water is spanned by a neat bridge. A
little further along the coast a similar
valley is met with, and this receives the
name of the Little Gorge. Up this
valley the road passes, and the sea is
obscured from view by the hills on the
coast, Fine undulating country at once
meets the view, upon which it is evident
a considerable amount of authority has
been carried on, and this continues as far
as Second Valley and Glenburn. It is
very pleasant to view this rich and well-
watered country from an eminence. The
fields are in many cases divided off by
hedges in true English fashion. Home-
steads with fruit-trees surrounding them
are to be seen at rather long Intervals.
Fine timber, and in some cases a planta-
tion of wattle, crowns the top of each hill.
In almost every respect, indeed, the
landscape bears a striking resemblance to
what one sees in the south of England,
and an English traveller if suddenly
transported to the middle of the Sacond
Valley might readily imagine himself in
the centre of Devonshire.
Wattle cultivation is a very profitable
industry in this portion of South Aus-
tralia. At various points along the road
quantities of the bark may be seen in
stacks varying from two or three up to
twenty tons, and these stacks are now
selling on the roadside at the rate of £8
12s. 6d. per ton. Several of the local
residents have gone in for planting wattles
on a large scale, and quite systematically.
The land is ploughed up exactly as if for
wheat, and the seeds after having been
steeped in hot water to make them burst
are sown along the ground and harrowed
in. The first crop may be looked for in
five or six years, but in many instances it
is well to allow seven years so as to give
the trees time to attain full growth. In
the meantime the owner may direct his
attention to stripping bark from trees
which have grown naturally upon land
either bought or leased. The cost of strip-
ping generally amounts to about 255. per
ton. The market is a ready one, and it is
generally admitted that wattles pay better
than wheat. The bark is ground or
broken into small pieces at the local mills,
this industry being a sort of adjunct to
flour-milling. It is packed in bags and
sent to the jetties for transport to Port
Adelaide. A large quantity goes from
each of the little harbours at Second Valley
and Rapid Bay, the former being known
as Finnis Vale, Rapid Bay. The Second
Valley jetty is very substantial but ex-
ceedingly short, measuring from the rocks
to the pier head only about twenty yards,
the water being very deep in the vicinity.
To the southward a’ledge of rock runs out
from an enormous bluff and forma a
beautiful little boat harbour—quite a
natural miniature of Victor Harbour.
Travellers in search of the picturesque
cannot do better in this part of the world
than visit this romantic spot. The
hills along the coast are of a
peculiar formation, the strata being
broken and contorted by volcanic up-
heavals. Hill after hill rises straight
from the sea to an elevation of some five
hundred feet. The Rapid Bay jetty is
situated under the lee of Rapid Head,


which bounds the view to the south- lead. The country at the foot of
nraaf T f qlqa I a O TTAKvt nmnll i.l till 1 lIP 1 «•
west. It also is a very small structure,
and is scarcely in such good repair as that
at Second Valley, although the shelter
from the west wind is very complete.
The crops about Yankalilla and Second
Valley are estimated to give this season
an average of about fifteen bushels of
wheat per acre. I saw several fields
under crop, the owners of which
estimated the yield at between twenty
and thirty bushels per acre. The last
three months of 1888 were exceedingly
dry in this as in other parts of the colony.
But there is almost always plenty of
moisture throughout the year to give the
crop a fair chance, and occasionally indeed
there is too much, I saw land which had
yielded under ordinary conditions as much
as 50 (fifty) bushels to the acre. Of course
land capable of giving such results Is
valuable, and £l3 an acre is quoted. But
a considerable amount of good, or fairly
good, agricultural land can be secured at
from £4 to £7 per acre. I saw a large
area which had been cut for hay and gave
2£ tons per acre. This yield with hay at
£4 per ton or thereabouts was a very pro-
fitable one. Yet a large amount of land
in this locality has reverted from farming
to grazing. The lower part of Second
Valley is now one large grass paddock, in
various parts of which may be seen the
evidences of ploughing in bygone days.
Further on toward Oape Jervis the
road rises among beautiful sylvan
scenery. In the valleys may be seen
vineyards, fruit-trees, and heavy crops
of potatoes, together with patches
of such crops as sorghum, linseed &c. As
Glenburn is reached the land becomes
more rangy and scrubby. The township
Includes merely a small store, a Church,
and two or three houses. The scrub
increases in thickness, and we get npon
the ridge of a range terminating four or
five miles from Oape Jervis in Sheephill
and Hansford's Hill, named after the
owner of the station which includes most
of the Cape Jervis country. Overlooking
this land the eye can take in at one
glance a magnificent panorama. On
the horizon lies the long, hazy line
of Kangaroo Island. Straight in
front is the ledge of rocks upon
which the Sorata was wrecked. To the
right is the Cape Jervis Lighthouse, and
to the left appears the ruin of the
chimney-stack belonging to the Talisker
Silver-Lead Mine—a property which it
will yet be found profitable to work, for
it contains a large store of silver and
the hill is beautiful grassy limestone
soil, upon which at on© time a
number of famiilies lived by farming.
These, however, have nearly all been
turned away or have left the district, and
the whole locality now scarcely maintains
half a dozen families including those of
the lighthouse-keeper.
The reasons for the depopulation of the
well-watered district between Yanka-
lilla and Cape Jervis would form an
instructive study to the student of human
nature. The people who have stuck fast
to the district all through its years of
neglect, are in most cases prosperous,
having added piece after piece to their
properties. It is interesting to notice at
and around Yankalilla, the small home-
steads, or rather huts, in which some of
the most substantial men of the
locality began their career thirty years
ago or thereabouts. Of course, trades-
people and those who depend upon
the custom of a large population for the
prosperity of their businesses, have suffered
in some instances seriously, but amongst
the commercial men «f the district it
would not be difficult to name a number
who have retained their business con-
nections for between thirty and forty
years. Even when this has not been
the case, the population having
become altogether too small to main-
tain a skilled artizan in his par-
ticular line of business, the wonderful
resources of the ground have come in to
supply the deficiency. In some places it
is to be noticed that a man who originally
maintained himself and family by trade,
has added little by little to his fruit and
vegetable gardens until they have become
the means of almost entirely supporting
the family. One case of this sort I
noted particularly in which a man
obtains a fair living out of four
or five acres of land in a
gully. He has planted out beds of almost
all the principal varieties of vegetables.
He keeps a few hives of bees. He has
two or three cows, and his orchard, which
is a good one, is in full bearing. Such a
man, although his income in cash may not
be large, is able to live very comfortably,
and even to save a little if he is so dis-
posed. In other cases very good results
have been obtained by combining the
growing of a little wheat in the lower
land with wattle cultivation In the
higher country.
The fact is that a large proportion of
people in South Australia do not realize


the advantages of living in a place in
which a great number of family necessaries
may be produced easily and cheaply. The
ambition too often has been to grow only
those things which can be Instantly
turned Into ready cash. In agri-
culture, as in almost everything else
the fault of Australians lies in making
haste to be rich, neglecting the advantages
of slow and steady sailing. One instance
In point may be mentioned ; —A farmer
who had done moderately well in the
South, and having saved forty or fifty
pounds each year, and put together a neat
little sum, felt discontented and shifted
about ten years ago to a piece of land
of very large area, very good soil,
but terribly small rainfall. It
was in fact outside of Qoyder’s line. He
had an advance of over £BOO on this new
property upon which he executed a
number of substantial improvements.
During two years, in the earlier portion
of the ten years, he secured fair or good
harvests, and saved several hundreds of
pounds. For a time he believed that his for-
tune was made. If he went on for seven or
eight years at as good a rate he would be
able to sell out and retire with a com-
petency. But alas for the uncertainty of
human calculation when the mysteries of
the weather are involved therein ! After
that time he did not secure a single
good harvest. Two or three bushels
to the acre were his usual luck,
and twice, at least I believe
in the interval he did not obtain seed
wheat. Hard work and semi-starvation
have been the lot of the family for the
past three or four years, and when the
man himself recently visited the scene of
his former comfort In the slow-going
regions of the South he was heard to ex-
claim, “What a fool I was not to
leave well alone.” Other cases there are
in which farmers have really benefited
themselves by a change of locality, but
this has been usually in the cases ot young
men whose prospects at home were
limited by the nature of the particular
parts in which their fathers’ homes were
situated. Owing to the easy terms upon
which a very large area can be secured, the
laws of land selection have always given
an undue impetus to the occupation
of newly opened territory as compared
with that which has been already settled.
But so far as one can understand from
the present condition of the people there
is more room for the expansion of industry
within twenty or thirty miles of Cape
Jervis than in almost any other portion
of the Continent of Australia.


V.—THE SOUTHERN COAST.
The southern half of the large peninsula
forming the County of Hlndmarsh is es-
pecially interesting at the present juncture
of the history of South Australia. The
reason is that to a large extent the agri-
cultural and other resources of this part
of the colony have during recent years
been overlooked. The country from
Yankalilla down to Cape Jervis has
already been referred to, and the fact
that a moderate amount of agricultural
settlement exists along the route has been
noted. This settlement extends for about
five or six miles back from the coast,
patches of valley country having been
taken up here and there. But nearly all
the rest of the district right down to the
shares of the Southern Ocean is still
occupied on miscellaneous lease, being
in the hands of the Government
to be disposed of according to the
requirements of the people. To
the south of the road which
leads from Glenburn to Port Victor
it may be said that fully 100
square miles of territory are still Govern-
ment property, the only exceptions to the
general rule being that a few blocks In
the neighbourhood of Waitpinga were
sold many years ago. This village is at
present a very insignificant place, con-
sisting of three or four scattered farm-
houses near the upper waters of a creek
which flows into the sea about four miles
distant, a little to the west of Newland
Head. A small amount of agriculture at
one time existed round the village of
Talisker, near Cape Jervis, but most of
the people have moved away from the
locality.
In order to see this part of the colony
it is best to proceed by way of Port Victor,
because there is only a horse mail between
Yankalilla and the southern coast, and
the facilities for travel are better at
Port Victor than they are at the
other side of the route. Starting from
the last named locality so as to obtain in
the first place a ood view of the coast
between Cape Jervis and Port Victor, one
cannot do better than climb to the top of
the high conical headland named Rosetta
Head, but usually known by the people of
Encounter Bay as “The Bluff,” This
mountain headland is approached by a
long stretch of sandy beach, backed by
low-lying country at the mouth of the
River Inman. On reaching the top of the
hill a magnificent view Is obtained. To
the north there are the fine ranges of the
Hindmarsh Tiers rising one after the
other, with the Bald Hills out towards the
north-west. Then along the coast the eye
rests upon one headland after another,
stretching out apparently in almost inter-
minable succession, Rowland Head
standing out boldly in front, and
hiding portions of the other bluffs
which form the coastline for this part
of the Southern Ocean. Looking out
to sea one may still note at rare in-
tervals the spouting of a whale and one
is reminded that it was from Rosetta Head
that in earlier years the whalers of
Encounter Bay were accustomed to keep
a look out for the cetaceans of the
Southern , Ocean. Even to the present
day the visitor notices the remains of
huge bones and of the boiling-down vats
in which was conducted the unpleasant
operati m of extracting the oil.
Proceeding along the road inland
towards the west some country of a very
varied description is met with. At times
it is wild and scrubby, with sandy patches
and grass-trees, but there are plenty of
gullies between the ranges in which homes
might be found for a large number of
settlers. Streams which are fed by
springs in the mountains are plentiful
along the whole of the southern
coast ; but the road runs along by
a ridge from which the valleys have to be
inspected at a distance. It is evident,
however, that plenty of room for settle-
ment exists in this part of the colony. It
is noteworthy that the waters of the
ocean on the southern coast of the Cape
Jervis Peninsula are filled abundantly
with fish of good quality, while those of
the borders of the gulf on the western
side are not so well favoured in this
respect. It has been suggested in
consequence of the opportunities for
creating small holdings in the valleys
of the southern coast and the
facilities for fishing, ;,that a num-
ber of Scottish crofters from the
Western Highlands should be invited
to emigrate to this part of the colony.
But surely it is well that the attention
of people who are already in the


province should be drawn to this place
before seeking for new fields from which
to attract population.
It has been said that a few farms at one
time existed in the neighbourhood of
Cape Jervis, The land at this place is
comparatively low-lying, limestone coun-
try, and does not attract much of the
rainfall which passes over from the sea.
The average rainfall at Cape Jervls is only
about 16 inches, although on the elevated
country not far distant it is nearly 80
Inches. Perhaps the farms near Cape
Jervis were injudiciously cropped. At
any rate the population has nearly all de-
parted, and the small amount of farming
which still exists is carried on by the owner
of the sheeprun which embraces the
land. The country grows very good
wheat in places all along the southern
coast, and the rising ground is
usually well adapted for wattle-
growing. Bees thrive in the locality
owing to the abundance of scrub flowers,
and some very fine honey can be produced.
Not only have the agricultural resources of
this part of the colony been neglected,
but some very promising mines near the
southern coast have for years languished
for want of support. There is no doubt
that in the Talisker Mine, a very large
percentage of silver exists in conjunction
with a payable amount of lead. It is said
that hundreds of tons, giving over thirty
ounces of silver to the ton are ready for
extraction. Yet in former years some of the
shareholders in this minelostveryheavily,
owing to the extreme difficulty of work-
the ore in a locality having no proper
harbour, and the want of knowledge in
connection with the treatment of silver-
lead. The old smelting works are still to
be seen at the mouth of the creek,
which flows into the sea a couple of
miles from Talisker. It is now proposed
to form a new company to work the silver
lead in connection with one or other of
the smelting works existing at Dry Creek,
Port Adelaide, or Port Pirie, By
employing a small steamer to ship the ore
from the creek near Talisker the risk of
accident on an exposed coast would be
very slight compared to what it would be
if sailing ketches were used. A large
amount of suitable marble for smelting is
to be obtained at Second Valley and this
could be shipped in the same steamer.
The Wheal Coglin is another silver-lead
mine which undoubtedly contains good
ore. Tin exists in large quantity at Wait-
pinga, where a good lode has been
traced right down to the seacoast. Up
beyond the first of the Hindmarsh
Ranges, north of Port Victor, some won-
derfully rich iron ore has been tested, but
of course the want of local coal has been
a great drawback to the industry. Copper
exists in various localities, such as in the
Bullaparinga Mine near Rapid Bay.
Starting from Port Victor it is possible
to cross the Peninsula of County Hind-
marsh by four routes, one of which passes
through Mount Jagged and what is known
as the “ Square Waterhole Country,” the
second proceeding by way of the River
Hindmarsh and Myponga, the third being
the road up the Inman Valley, and the
fourth, which is merely a bush track for
the greater part of the way, going from
Port Victor to Glenburn and Cape Jervis.
The “ Square Waterhole Country,”
which is seen on the first of these routes,
is exceedingly interesting as having
attracted so little attention for over thirty
years, although capable of supporting,
according to competent opinion, quite
a large population. A network of
swampy ground stretches along the
country at the head waters of the
River Finniss and along towards the
road which leads to Willunga. This
peculiar conformation of country may be
understood to some extent by inspecting
the River Finniss at the place where It is
crossed by the railway to Goolwa. The
bed of the river is a large wide channel
of swampy ground, varying from 100
yards to perhaps half a mile in width and
spreading out in places into large broad
swampy areas full of rich rank soil with
peat and bog, examples of such areas being
the Sqaure Waterhole itself and the
Hungry and Black Swamps.
The origin of this remarkable conforma-
tion seems to be that the waters collected
from the large areas of sandy ground near
Mount Magnificent and Mount Jagged
pass underground by percolation
from the sand and have con-
verted large tracts of country into
spongy wet soil. The Black Swamp
joins with the Finniss River, while the
Hungry Swamp is connected with Cur-
rency Creek. It has been estimated by
Mr. J. E. Brown that in one place 3,000
acres of swamp exist, and around it there
are 15,000 acres of good tillable land,
nearly the whole of which is let by the
Government upon miscellaneous lease,
and which would be available for various
purposes of culture. More especially the
swampy land is admirably adapted for the
cultivation of the osier willow, so useful
to the basketmaker, and so profitable to


the grower that after tue first year It will
give a return of from £3O to £4O per acre.
By growing osiers on two or three acres
of swamp, vegetables on the margin, and
wattles on the poorer sandy soil a
settler could make a fair living. One
man has put in eight acres of fruit-
trees with very good results Indeed.
His potato crop is a splendid one,
giving samples up to as much as one
pound in weight. Peas, tomatoes, and
many other vegetables do very well, and
the tobacco plant flourishes vigorously.
I was told that the water in the creek is
so plentiful that in some places holes
which have been tested have been proved
to be over sixty feet in denth.
The agricultural country upon the
Rivers Hlndmarsh and Inman is of
quite a different description. For
the purpose of getting a good view
of it one cannot do better than
travel from Port Victor along the Inman
Valley by way of Bald Hills, and so
on to Yankalllla. In the first place
we pass along the side of a large
estate owned by the Hon. Alex.
Hay, who has not adopted the policy of
selling or letting his land in this locality.
There is one large paddock beside the
road covered with splendid wattles, but
so far as is known not owned by
any one, and at present merely
retained by the District Council for pay-
ment of rates. The River Inman runs
along the middle of a wide flat strip of
land hemmed in by hills on both sides,
and further on by two mountain ranges.
The flat land contains some magnificent
soil, and one section in particular, which
was intended for the aboriginals, but left
by them quite unused, would do very well
for cutting up into working men’s blocks.
Further on the level strip of land com-
prises a very extended area of ground,
which at one time maintained a family to
almost every section of eighty acres, but
which at the present day is mostly used for
grazing purposes. The exodus of people
In search of larger areas, unmindful of
rainfall, has quite depopulated the district,
and large grazing estates have taken the
place of farming properties and home-
steads. Deserted farmhouses are to be seen
in every direction over a large extent of
land. The late Sir Henry Young and
Mr. Justice Gwynne acquired extensive
estates in this part of the country, and it
is asserted that they found by experience
that the policy of letting their land on
short leases was a very unprofitable one,
because tenants were too apt to work out |
their farms owing to the neglect of fal-
lowing or manuring. But the cure for
this is surely to be found in a system of
long leases which might have the effect of
getting the farmer into the habit of
regarding the permanent interests of
the land as identical with his own.
When we come to seven or eight
miles from Port Victor we ascend the
shoulder of a mountain spur covered with
scrub, and from this point of vantage we
obtain a splendid view of the whole of the
Inman Valley and the Lower Bald Hills.
To the north a bold range of mountains
known as the Green Hill Range runs
upwards to the head of the Valley con-
fining it within closer and closer limits.
It is heavily wooded with small tim-
ber, but much of this is now being
removed to make room for sheep.
The Lower Bald Hills lie closer at our
feet. They are not particularly bald,
being sparsely wooded with fine gum-
trees in almost every place excepting
where clearances have been made for
purposes of cultivation. Passing through
some very dense scrub covered with
stunted ironbark trees we reach the
upper side of the spur and obtain a fine
view of the southern range, which is
known as the Back Valley Range, and
adjoins a very extensive gully which as
yet seems to be nearly in a state of nature.
All around the Bald Hills extend in un-
dulating masses, good wheatfields being
seen here and there. Away to the
north-west a glimpse of the gulf near
Normanville shows that the view
extends from the gulf to the
ocean, for the blue line of the
horizon on the south is still plainly
visible. Farming in this locality
has not much uncertainty about it. One
man has got during this season, which is
one of the driest ever known, 300 bushels
of wheat from ten acres. He keeps some
stock, and had a little manure obtained
from this source to scatter over the ground,
but in other respects he made no special
preparation of his land. It is wonderful
how many things are available as manure.
Some farmers near Encounter Bay cart
large quantities of common seaweedfon to
their land, allowing it to rot in heaps or
in pits for several months, and then
ploughing it down. The result is exceed-
ingly satisfactory, the crops being pretty
well a matter of certainty. On the Bald
Hills a certain amount of dairying is
carried on, but there is a great want of
some suitable means of conveying
fresh produce either to Port Victor or


to Yankalllla. At one place not far
from the latter township, known as
Dairy Flat, there exists some of the finest
feeding land in South Australia. Yet
it is strange to notice that all over the
Bald Hills country many of the farms
have been quite deserted by the enter-
prising young folks, and left to the care of
old people who have not the strength, nor,
indeed, the motive for working them
thoroughly.
To the south of the Bald Hills the
range beyond the Back Valley rises
abruptly. It is covered densely with
scrub, and apparently of little use as the
habitat of either man or beast. The
road which takes ns up the hill and along
the ridge to a sort of extensive tableland
is merely a kind of side track along which
at rare intervals a solitary bullock-
dray paises. As the southern side of the
ridge it reached the view to the south
opens out in a scene of wild and desolate
grandeur. All along the southern side
stretches the high blue line of the horizon.
Nearer at hand extend, as it were, oceans
of scrub on an undulating high tableland.
Grasstrees cover the land as far as the
eye can reach, growing side by side in
thousands. Stunted stringybark-trees rise
at intervals, and on the hungry-looking
soil the honey-suckle and other scrub
bushes grow in myriads. Down in the
valleys among this monotonous country lie
patches of rich soil, with here and there a
bit of marsh and plenty of good spring
water. The valleys, too, include a con-
siderable amount of land bearing good
timber and having fair soil. It is in one
of these valleys that the little township of
Waitpinga is situated. The track which
I took in order to examine the
country on the southern coast
towards Cape Jervis is one of the
worst that I have ever travelled.
The rain has formed the road into a suc-
cession of small gullies, along which it
is practically impossible to travel, and the
consequence is that in getting from Bald
Hills to the southwards a traveller is com-
pelled to make his way through the scrub,
taking care to keep the road in view so as to
avoid losing himself in this interminable
sea of vegetation. The easiest way to
reach Waitpinga is by the fairly good
road which extends from Rosetta Head to
the neighbourhood of the village.
The first half of the journey from The
Head is through an extensive flat, only
varied by occasional rises and covered
with dense scrub, and here and there a
few trees and patches of moderately good
soil The whole region to the west of
Rosetta Head is used for little else than
to support a few sheep. Occasionally
it is noticeable that extensive portions of
the scrub have been burned in order to
permit the grass to have a chance of
springing up and affording nutritious
feed. Burnt patches of this description
extend at intervals right along the track
to Glenburn. The best of the country is
included in a large valley which lies
behind the Tunkalilla Beach. It was
here that many years ago Mr. Robinson,
familiarly known as “Encounter Bay Bob,”
one of the pioneers of the South, held a
considerable quantity of agricultural and
grazing land. A moderate amount of
wheat was at that time shipped from
Tunkalilla Beach by means of surf boats
and ketches, and cattle-grazing was con-
ducted on a fairly large scale. Even at the
present day occasional small herds of wild
scrub cattle are to be met with, and the
few inhabitants of the locality usually
carry their rifles with them in order to be
ready for an encounter with the ferocious
scrub bulls which make it so difficult to
have anything to do with the wild cattle.
At the present time, however, the whole of
the Tunkalilla Valley is devoted, like the
rest of the country, to grazing a few
sheep.
At Waitpinga it is quite evident that
nearly all the farms have been wholly or
partially deserted. At one time the place
had a post-office to itself, but at present there
are not more than three or four families in
the locality. Several of the farms were
deserted from teh to twenty years ago,
and as very often happens the wheat crops
were succeeded by a plentiful growth
of wattles. Ten years ago, however,
these wattles were regarded as little else
than a nuisance. But now the aspect of
the matter has completely changed. I
stopped to inspect a section which for
some years was abandoned, and upon
which wattles have sprung up in pro-
fusion. It includes about eighty acres,
upon which is a little hut belonging to
the owner, who occupies it only two or
three months out of the year, when he is
engaged in wattle stripping. The
amount of wattle bark which he can
gather in a month is evidently something
considerable. I noticed on the door of
the house some figures showing the
amount gathered from the section by this
one man during a single month, and as
the account is open for public inspection on
the door I suppose it is a fair subject for
comment. During the month referred


to he had gathered 4 tons 11 cwt.
of wattle bark and 152 lb. of gum. Now
the price of wattle bark varies from £8 to
£8 12s. 6d. per ton, so it is evident that
this man must have collected material to
the value of over £4O in one month.
There Is some of the Crown land in the
vicinity upon which wattles grow in
clumps, and a lease for twenty-one years of
about eighty acres of this land may gene-
rally be secured at the Government sales
at from £1 to £1 10s. per annum. A few
working men's blocks in tbe neighbour-
hood of Port Victor worked in con-
junction with some of this scrub and
wattle country might give a fair living to
a number of families. These scrub
blocks are splendid places for the keeping
of bees, and 1 noticed that some of the
settlers take advantage of this fact. But it
is from the wattle that the district gets
nearly all its new support. Most of those
who are engaged In gathering the bark
have brought into Port Victor or to
Yankalilla supplies to the value of from
£2OO to £BOO during the past year, and
the barkmill at Port Victor is kept very
busy. The quality of the fibre exported
from this place is said to be first class, and
the bark industry has to a large extent
taken the place of that of dumping and
exporting wool. It would be difficult to
say how much of the resources of the land
from the Pinnies to Cape Jervis is neg-
lected, or how large a population it is
fitted to support. The vine, for instance,
flourishes splendidly in the
but the good vineyards which were
planted ; eight years'ago have
been neglected owing to the want of a
local market for the grapes. When such
a market is created, as it soon must be,
these vineyards can be brought into
bearing again in a year or two, and
winemaking will become an established
industry of the district.


VI.—CLARENDON AND
About midway between the townships
of Maclaren Yale and Kangarilla the head
of a large valley is reached, and the
country begins to assume a more moun-
tainous character. Looking down upon
the plains which have been passed, one
cannot help speculating upon the future
possibility of applying irrigation to a level
piece of country such as Maclaren Flat,
bounded by hills which terminate so
abruptly, and which Include such fine
gullies for the storage of water. Soil,
climate and physical features all seem to
qualify this place for one of the future
irrigated fruit gardens of South Australia.
Our road, however, lies to the eastward,
and the valley is soon lost to view. The
country becomes poorer in patches, and
the timber much heavier. A few cattle
are to be seen grazing here and there, but
almost the entire country is unutilized.
In scattered places there are clear-
ances, and a little cultivation may
be seen. Coming to a rise and
looking over the country to the north-west
one can observe at a glance that there is a
large area of light sandy soil and barren-
looking scrub 5 but as speculation is sug-
gested as to the possible use to which such
country can be applied, the answer pre-
sents itself in the appearance of a large
wattle plantation many hundreds of acres
in extent. There is scarcely any portion
of the whole colony in which the wattle
will grow so quickly as in this hilly tract.
A vast extent of land, in fact, is covered
with wattles, and the trees grow in a
dense thicket so close to one another that
they have to be thinned out from time to
time, even while very young, in order to
give the survivors a chance to attain to
moderate dimensions at maturity. The
road a little further on runs through a
long avenue of gum-trees and wattles,
reminding one of the approach to some
English baronial hall. The drive at this
place is quite flat, although the country is
so high, and the shade of the trees Is most
agreeable. Presently the township of
Kangarilla presents itself —a store, a wine
shop, and very few houses. It is evident
that the wattle plantations are the main-
stay of Kangarilla. But a short distance
from the township there is a promising
silver-lead mine, into which 1 ; some Eng-
lish capitalists are putting money.
COROMANDEL VALLEY,
About half a dozen men are kept at work,
and some good silver-lead has been
obtained, although not in any very large
quantity as yet.
The ad which comes through Claren-
don past Kangarilla after traversing
some heavily wooded hills descends
into a deep valley known as Dash-
wood’s Gully and called after one of the
earliest settlers in this part of the colony,
one of whose sons is now a member for
the district. The first part of this portion
of our route is along the headwaters of a
creek which finds its way into the River
Onkaparinga about midway between
Clarendon and Noarlunga. After passing
over the ridge, however, the road skirts
along the valley of a much longer creek,
which is entirely confined to the eastward
of the range which runs down to Willunga
and Sellick’s Hill. The valley of this
long stream is in shape not unlike that of
the Onkaparinga, being a kind of triangle,
at the head of which stands Dashwood’s
Gully. The gully itself is a most pictu-
resque spot, with wooded hills on all sides.
Fine large willows are growing by the
sandy bed of the creek down in the
hollow, and the post-office is a very
rustic-looking place. There is no town-
ship in the proper sense of the word, and
not much agriculture is carried on, the
chief support of the district being the
grazing industry. There are one or two
beautiful gardens with fine fruit-trees in
the neighbourhood, and the climate and
supply of 'moisture are everything that
could be desired. But of course, so far
as the supply of the Adelaide market is
concerned, the distance of Dashwood’s
Gully from the city is decidedly against
the present advancement of fruit and
vegetable growing.
Coming back to Kangarilla we notice
that it stands very high in the midst of
a densely wooded piece of country.
The creek which has been mentioned runs
through it to join the Onkaparinga, and
is crossed by a small bridge. The main
road, which passes northwards through
Clarendon and on to the railway station
at Blackwood, is here reached, and a coach
passes along to the Meadows once every
week-day. The road is in splendid con-
dition, being one of the finest main
roads in Australia. From an emi-


nence a mile beyond Kangarilla a year. The township of Clarendon con-
wide view out to westward is ob- tains in all some 400 people. It Is an
4-qltiaH a# 111 ■ J 1 , . 11. . f r . ..
talned of rolling hills, covered with inter-
minable scrub—very closely resembling the
Ninety-mile Desert, only of course more
undulating. In a short distance this gives
place to a series of forest-clad hills, inter-
spersed with valleys of evidently good
land, some of which have been taken up
for purposes of cultivation, the timber
having been cleared away and crops sown
upon the slopes and levels. Large
numbers of similar valleys are to be found
in various places a mile or two away from
the road, lying quite untenanted and
solitary. Indeed it may be said of almost the
whole of the hill region comprising the
south of the colony, that settlement has
in almost all cases been attracted to the
vicinity of the main roads, and that many
localities at a distance from these avenues
of traffic still remain practically unused.
As one mounts the brow of the hill and
surveys the coutry, suddenly a deep cutting
is reached and the road makes a long
descent into the fruitful valley in which
lies the township of Clarendon.
Clarendon is almost exactly eighteen
miles south of Adelaide. The valley in
which it liesa is very deep and picturesque
one the River Onkaparinga coming down
from the higher land to the eastward
forms beautiful reaches of water em-
bowered in trees. The view on approach-
ing the town is very fine indeed. To the
left there is a large hill completely
covered on the near side with that bright
green verdure in strips which may easily
be recognised as indicating a vineyard.
The property belongs to Mr. Joseph
Gillard, and embraces over eighty acres.
A winepress and a considerable amount of
storage are in use, and the produce
increases from year to year. Further
down in the deepest part of the valley
there are broad strips of alluvial soil,
which on closer inspection are found to be
covered with extensive crops of potatoes.
The area under cultivation is now very
considerable, and it is asserted that in a
season such as the present one when
potatoes have commanded first-class
prices the industry is absolutely
the most profitable one which can
be followed in the hills. Of course a man
who puts in a large crop of potatoes must
take his chance of the market being either
good or bad, but almost every resident of
the hills district has at least two strings to
his bow. Fruit-growing is the principal
industry, and many of the orchards are
evidently extending in area from year to
cld- established centre of population, and
its three or four Churches, with the
courthouse, State school, &c., have a
very substantial and old-world appearance,
reminding one of an English village, the
illusion being to some extent heightened
when one notices the swinging sign of the
Royal Oak, a substantial Inn established
in the early days of the colony.
Leaving Clarendon and its beautiful
valley behind the road mounts up to the
ridge of a range of hills dividing the hill
country from the plains and low undulat-
ing ground a few miles south of Adelaide.
The view is magnificent—first a ridge or
two of lower hills, then the hazy outline
of lines of trees across a distant plain, and
lastly the broad expanse of the deep blue
gulf stretching the high line of its horizon
away out from north to south as far as the
eye can reach. The prospect is a short
one, for here close at hand there is a
steep gradient by which one descends to
the comparatively low hills upon which
Blackwood Railway Station is situated.
The road descends the face of the range,
and winds sharply Into the recess of every
deeply furrowed valley which breaks its
contour. The slopes are covered with
long yellow grass, kept almost perpetu-
ally in motion by the breezes in this lofty
situation. Sloping down into a valley on
the left side of the road a large wheat-
field is noticed, but the crop is evidently
a very poor one, the farmer having cal-
culated, as is often done in these locali-
ties, upon a very late season, and the
heat of October, November, and Decem-
ber having upset his anticipations.
A post-office, or rather a wayside post-
shed which has been dexterously con-
structed out of two sheets of galvanized
iron and three posts, marks the spot where
the driver of the coach takes up the mails
from Cherry Gardens. If one mounts the
hill to the rear of this place in search of
the township of Cherry Gardens some
difficulty will be experienced in finding it.
The fact is that although the place con-
tains about 200 people, the houses are
so hidden away among valleys and trees
that they make but little show upon the
face of the landscape. A short distance
further on, however, a very substantial
store and post-office make known the
approach to Coromandel Valley, a place
which was settled in the very earliest days
of the colony, and named after the
good ship Coromandel, a sailing vessel,
which brought out some of the pilgrim


gathers of South Australia. Opposite the
post-office a large area of ground has been
marked out for working-men’s blocks,
and a number of men are now pre-
paring to make the best possible use of
their plots of eighteen or twenty acres
each. Weatherboard houses have been
put up and one or two enthusiasts are
living in tents while attending to the work
of fencing and planting their little
domains. Fruit-trees have been put in in
large numbers and various fruits such as
strawberries are being planted assiduously.
A good market for such fruits pre-
sents itself in the shape of Murray’s
large jam and biscuit factory, a pic-
turesque building built upon the slope of
a hill close to the township and sur-
rounded by stacks of wood which
have been collected or supplying the
furnace. A large area of land is
now available for settlement In Coro-
mandel Valley. The place contains about
400 people but has a capacity for at least
ten times that number. The Valley is
within the circle of convenient market
gardening for the supply of Adelaide,
being less than ten miles distant by road,
and small plots of vegetables may here
and there T>e seen. The distance to
Blackwood Railway Station is not great,
but as the ridge upon which the railway
runs is reached the country becomes
more scrubby. The road skirts along
a small creek, passes over the line, and
at this point the coach draws up at the
well-known and substantial station of
Blackwood.
A reference to the kind of country
around the Blackwood Railway Station
will be of some interest. The village of
Coromandel Valley is situated on the river
known as the Sturt, which passes down
from the neighbourhood of Crafers, skirt-
ing around the foot of the hills, and run-
ning rapidly down past the village of
Sturt, which has already been referred to
as lying In the route of the South-road
from Adelaide. This village of Sturt
must not be confounded with the place
known as Up per Sturt, which lies upon
the railway between Belair and Mount
Lofty Stations, at a height of 1,500 ft.
above the sea level. In the interval be-
tween Upper Sturt Station and Blackwood
Station lies a large reserve known as
Government Farm, which was intended in
the early days of the colony as a kind of
model farm, situated at a convenient
distance between the two centres of
agriculture of Adelaide and Mount
Barker. Practically, however, the place
has never been much else than a mere
Government reserve, having been for
many years left in charge of a pensioner
of the Government who had his arm
blown off during the firing of a royal
salute in Adelaide. The question will
now arise as to the purpose to which this
Government reserve should be put.
It is included within what is known as the
Hundred of Adelaide, extending from the
River Sturt on the south and to the
River Torrens on the north, a hundred
in which there are at present no working
men’s blocks available.
Blackwood Station lies at an elevation
of t 835 feet above the level of the sea, and
commands a splendid view of some of the
wooded valley country along towards
Coromandel Valley, as well as the gullies
which extend down towards the plains of
Adelaide. It is between this place
and (Jpper Sturt that an interesting
estate has been laid out by
a well-known city lawyer for the
cultivation of vines, fruit, and other
products. A fine substantial weir has
been thrown across a small gully in order
to confine the waters of the creek, and
the result is the creation of a dam in
which about a million gallons of water can
be stored. Further reference to this
place will be made later on. Pipes being
laid from this elevated dam a large part of
the garden has been laid under irrigation
by gravitation. There is no doubt that
other residents in this part of the hills
will soon avail themselves of the splendid
opportunities for utilizing the abundant
water supply. The lower basin of the
Sturt, where it passes by the village of
Lower Sturt, is especially suitable for the
formation of dams for Irrigation purposes,
and I have not the slightest doubt that
in future times all the land between the
South-road and the Gulf will be con-
verted into a large luxuriant garden, owing
to the application of water conserved in
the hills which are visible from Blackwood.
At the present day the locality of the
station is noted for its very extensive
strawberry gardens, several of which,
extending over many acres, give a good
idea of the way in which the best fruits
of the temperate zone can be made to
flourish in profusion. A neighbouring
jam factory consumes a large proportion
of the produce, strawberry jam being a
great favourite with the residents of the
North and in the west of Victoria, where
there is a good market for the South
Australian article.
One of the finest gullies, which will no


doubt in future be used for the conserve- and yet the length of the railway between
tion of water, is that over which the
longer of the two railway viaducts Is con-
ducted. The train on leaving Blackwood
Station for the city has to make a long
curve, first to the south-west and then to
the north, in order to get round the ridge
of hills which intervenes between Belair
and Mitcham. The distance between
the rails at two points is only one mile,
them is eight and a half miles. In effect-
ing this detour the railway has to pass
through no less than four tunnels and
over two viaducts, and the difficulty of
the country and the way in which it has
been surmounted render this portion of
the Hills Bail way one of the most remark-
able engineering works in this part of the
world.


VII. —ECHUNGA, MACCLESFIELD, AND THE BUGLE RANGES
Aldgate is the terminus of what is
known as the suburban line of Hills
Kailway. It has a much more frequent
train service than the next station imme-
diately further on, and will no doubt in
time become a flourishing township. At
present it is rather under a cloud, the
expectations of the owners of most of the
adjacent land in laying out a town a square
mile in area having been by no means
realized. The hills at this place are
heavily wooded, and the road takes many
windings and turnings in the avoidance
of steep gradients. Before starting
on our journey to the south or
to the east it is interesting to take a
glimpse at the meeting - point of the
roads which lead to Mount Barker and
Macclesfield respectively. This spot is
known as the Aldgate Pump, and is well
remembered by many a traveller or
teamster who has stopped to refresh his
horses or cattle with the cool refreshing
water which the historical pump brings
up from the adjoining well, in which the
water is only two or three feet below the
surface of the ground. The hotel
occupies the triangular space formed by
the junction of the two roads, and faces
towards town as if inviting the outward-
bound traveller to stop and partake of its
refreshment for man and beast. But
beyond the wayside traffic very little
business is now done at Aldgate, and the
various storekeepers who have tried the
locality have not had a particularly for-
tunate time of it, especially during the
recent depression. Several neat and
substantial stone residences, however,
attract attention on the rising ground to
the right of the road, marking, as they do,
the end of the hill suburbs of Adelaide.
Towards Macclesfield the country is
densely wooded, and the road rises along
a forest hill side, and on to the ridge from
which a fine view of wooded hill and dale
may be obtained. The breeze which
comes across the waving sea of green
eucalyptus is wonderfully invigorating.
Indeed, I kuow of no place in the hill
district at which a more refresh-
ing breath of Australian ozone
can be obtained than the rise beyond
Aldgate. But the southward turn 1s soon
reached, and then the eye rests upon a
number of small clearings to the left of
the road, where the ground slopes away
gradually into the valley. These are
“ working men’s blocks,” and are ex-
ceedingly Interesting owing to the way In
which they are being worked. Several of
the owners of fifteen or twenty acre
sections are city working men, who
keep members of their families on their
sections, and who industriously fill up
their Saturday half-holidays and any
spare time which they may happen to
have in the cultivation of their little
estates. The fruit-trees are being planted
and the strawberry and vegetable beds
laid out; hives are being set up and light
fences run round the sections. One
cannot note the work that 1s being done
without sympathizing with the efforts of
these pioneer “ blockers” and heartily
wishing them every success. At all
events living must be very cheap in this
locality. Fuel is to be had for nothing
and plenty of milk at a trifling coat.
House rent is almost unknown, and
doctors’ bills equally so.
A gentle decline now leads to a flat
stretch of road, in which there is little
evidence of habitation, and presently the
River Onkaparinga is seen with its fine
substantial bridge and beautiful reaches
of water. It Is, of course, a smaller
stream at this point than at Clarendon
or Noarlunga, but still quite large
enough to render boating possible. On
the right ride, close to the bridge, Is the
hills residence of Mr. D. Murray, who has
carried out an Important experiment by
planting a hop garden along the bank of
the river. His success has been un-
doubted, and the tall poles are covered
with hops, which are evidently as healthy
as any to be seen In Kent or in Tasmania.
Hop-growing will without doubt become
a most important industry in the hills
districts, as the local market is a large
one, and the risks are not very great In
this part of the world. Passing the
bridge we come upon a handsome one-
story residence, standing on the gentle
rise to. the right, and wonder why it
has been located so close to the road.
The explanation is that the original
building, which has been supplemented
by two substantial wings, was an hotel
known as the Wheatsheaf, and formerly
kept by Mr. Warland, now of Victor


Harbour. Its pleasant situation and be all the better in the end for not having
surroundings made it a favourite resort
for newly married couples, and many a
middle-aged colonist dates his married
life from the honeymoon spent on the
banks of the Onkaparinga—a river whose
name unfortunately gave but little scope
for rhyme to gratify the lovers’ poetical
propensities. The place now belongs to
Mr. G. W. Goyder, the Surveyor-
General, who has laid out terraces and
planted an extensive orchard, besides
lawns and other embellishments.
For the raising of water he has one of
those very effective handlifts on the
chain and bucket principle, by which it is
said that one man can lift 8,000 gallons
per hour from a depth of ten feet or a
proportionate quantity from a greater
depth. One cannot help picturing in the
future dozens of such beautiful hills resi-
dences fringing the banks of the river
between the road and the railway and also
further down the stream.
The long, level, wooded plain which
intervenes between the Onkaparinga and
the neighbourhood of Echunga rejoices
in the name of Biggs’s Flat. The place
had at one time considerable celebrity
as a goldfield, and it is recognised
that large quantities of the precious metal
still exist in the locality, although whether
in sufficiently rich patches to render allu-
vial digging very profitable or not has
never exactly been determined. The Flat,
so far as the roadside evidences are con-
cerned, is represented by a quaint thatched
building, which serves as a post-office.
Delightfully cool in summer these thatched
roofs are, and if they could only be secured
against danger from fire they would be a
great improvement upon galvanized iron
in the country districts. The land near
this place is evidently of good quality; for
here on the right side of the road is a
flourishing farmhouse, and a large
area on both sides has been under
crop for many years past. Biggs’s
Flat as an agricultural area has
scarcely received the attention which it
deserves. As Echunga is approached the
road rises and skirts along the side of an
extensive wattle plantation. The Echunga
Wattle Plantation Company have shown
considerable enterprise in taking up a
large extent of land and using it for
wattle cultivation. The situation is so
elevated, and the past two winters have
been so cold, that the growth of the trees
has not been so rapid as could have been
wished. But the value of the property is
undoubted, and probably the trees will
grown quickly.
Echunga is a very pretty village or
township with substantial Churches and
a kind of old-world settled look that
reminds one strongly of the old country.
Several of the cottages are closely covered
in with creepers and fruit-trees, and the
neighbouring agricultural lands are partly
divided off by “.blossomed furze unprofit-
ably gay.” Echunga has enjoyed a great
reputation as a gold-producing locality,
and stood unrivalled as an alluvial field in
South Australia until Teetulpa broke out.
Indeed, there are not a few old expe-
rienced diggers who aver that they would
rather try their luck again at Jupiter Creek,
about three miles from Echunga, than at
any other Australian alluvial field in
Australia. Rumour also asserts that
several of the local residents have been
able to derive a small Income for years
past by working the alluvial drift in a
quiet way. Be that as it may, it is
certain that neither the drifts nor the
reefs of Echunga are by any means
worked out, and the small population of
some 1,500 at present residing in the
whole district is certain to be largely
increased at some future time. Agricul-
ture and grazing, however, are the main
stays of the township, and there is good
undulating cropped land for a mile or
two in several directions. Further
on towards Macclesfield the country
becomes more rangy and several
densely wooded ridges are passed. Closed
in between these ridges there are three or
four valleys having cleared land, which
has been at one time or another well
cultivated. There are, however, one or
two deserted farmhouses along the road,
and the place is anything but a busy one.
Some of the land in this upland region
seems poor enough to look at; but it
usually improves very much in appearance
on being turned up for fallowing. A very
large quantity of the forest land is well
covered with wattles growing naturally,
and the stripping Industry has been very
successfully carried on in this part of the
colony.
A little lower down towards the south-
east the clearings become larger and extend
further along the side-valleys. Then we
reach a broad open cleared space in the
middle of which stands the pleasant town
of Macclesfield. The place, of course, is
not so prosperous by any means as it once
was. The overland mail-coach to Mel-
bourne, the South-East, and the En-
counter Bay District is no longer heard


drawing up in front of the hotel and post-
office. The traffic of the important town
of Strathalbyn, which lies about eight
miles further on, no longer brings trade
to Macclesfield, but passes through
by the railway from Mount Barker
Junction. Some of the farming
land has gone quite out of cultivation,
and the population has been con-
siderably reduced of recent years. Yet
several industries, such as wattle-cultiva-
tion, are “looking up,” and wattle seeds
are in good demand, as is evidenced by
the posters in which a firm offers to buy
them in any quantity. The brewery,
which has wells of beautiful cool water,
has attained a considerable reputation, and
is now being enlarged by the addition of a
three-story portion in approved brewery
style. The Institute is a large one and
the Churches, including one belonging to
the Roman Catholic body, have a very
substantial appearance. There are two
well-built hotels, one of which is known
as the “Davenport Arms,” owing
to the proximity of the Battunga Estate,
owned by Mr. Robert Davenport, a
brother of Sir Samuel. A large portion
of the business of Macclesfield is now
done by way of the railway, the station at
Bugle Ranges being about five miles dis-
tant in a north-easterly direction. There
is very little really mountainous country
to the east of the township, the whole area
being rather hillocky and undulating
right down to Strathalbyn on the south-
east and up to Wistow on the north-east.
Side roads lead both to Gemmell’s and to
Bugle Ranges railway stations, but the
latter is much more frequented than the
former, and will require some little extra
attention owing to the traffic which it is
likely to have. But the country passed
through en route to the railway is very
suggestive as to the extent to which this
part of South Australia has been depopu-
lated. Out of the fifteen or sixteen
habitations which are to be seen between
Macclesfield and Bugle Ranges there are
quite a dozen which are ruined or
abandoned. The country is like an open
undulating park, sparsely timbered and
covered with long and nutritious grasses.
The grass is indeed wonderfully fine, even
after the driest of seasons, and retains
some of its greenness right to
the end of the summer. In one
or two places running streams are
crossed, and in one valley in which an
inhabited homestead is to be found there
are evidences of very successful cultiva-
tion. The soil is black, not deep, but^
easily worked, and thousands of acres
have in former years been well cultivated.
It is melancholy to see the substantial
homesteads standing solitary and deserted,
evidently abandoned for many years and
all the improvements going to rack and
ruin. In several places orchards of well
matured trees, perhaps fifty or 100 in
number, are to be seen overgrown
with grass and weeds, but still bearing
profusely apricots, peaches, plums,
cherries, &c. One place in particular
is a moat substantially built house of
eight or ten rooms with a fine pleasure
garden, commodious outhouses, and a
plantation of willows and other English
trees fringing the watercourse which runs
at the foot of the garden. The front
windows are boarded up, the flower beds
are overgrown; yet almost everything is
apparently in the position which it
possessed during the tenancy of the
occupier. It is as if some Rip Van
Winkle had gone to sleep in the neigh-
bourhood and would wake up some day
and resume possession of his home and
his garden.
But this good grass country is now
put to other uses than agriculture. It
comprises some of the best summer
grazing land in the colony, and large
flocks are depastured upon it at the time
when feed has become scarce on the
plains and it is necessary to seek higher
ground with a better rainfall. Here and
there at intervals may be seen the
fenced-off sheepyards, and at one time
it is evident that a fair number of shep-
herds were employed. But these days have
apparently gone by and the whole place
has now an utterly deserted look. Yet the
near approach of railway communication
will surely tend to bring a larger popula-
tion to this part of the colony. It cannot
be to the interests of the colony as a
whole that large tracts of land through
which expensive railways have been con-
structed should remain depopulated. It
is abundantly evident that the land in
this part of South Australia is splendidly
adapted for the growth of fruit, vines,
and many other classes of products ; for
here just close to the Bugle Ranges
Station is an orchard containing
some of the finest apricots which
could possibly be grown. A little
wattle cultivation, too, is being carried
on in the vicinity. The station is
being extended by the addition of a siding,
and in other ways there are evidences of a
growing traffic.
Coming back to Echunga in order to


examine this part of the colony more corn-
pletely we find that the large flat or com-
paratively level table-land which forms the
valley of the Onkaparinga extends south-
wards towards Meadows for several miles.
The distance between Echnnga and
Meadows is over seven miles, the latter
place being twenty-eight and a half miles
from Adelaide. As we pass along the
road to the south we notice that the
elevated flats are bounded on the east by
a low range of hills upon which grows a
great quantity of timber. When I say
that the hills are low I mean, of course,
that the rise from the road is not a large
one. At the same time the range has
considerable elevation above the level of
the sea, and is, Indeed, a continuation of
the long range stretching from Mount
Pleasant to Mount Magnificent, and of
which Mount Barker is an offshoot.
The country in this part of the colony
is exceedingly pleasant to travel over.
The hills and the plains present a
beautiful succession of sylvan scenes.
The soil is evidently in places of good
quality, as it is over a very large area of
the valley of the Onkaparinga. Very
little of the land indeed would merit
the title of first-class soil. Bat what
it may lack in quality of humus it
makes up in the moisture which it nearly
always contains, and with a very little
manuring the wheatfields of this part of
the country can be made to produce heavy
yields. There is, however, not much
cultivation carried on, the ploughed land
comprising merely a patch here and there
at which a clearance of timber has been
made. To the west, between the road
andjjthe River Onkaparinga, a very large
proportion of the land was reserved
by Government £ln consequence of
the presence of alluvial gold, the
J npiter Creek diggings being in
the middle of this portion of country,
and the greater portion of the land Is, I
believe, still unsold. The gold-diggings
are by no means worked out. Indeed I
am assured by an old digger that In some
places a man can easily “ make tucker,”
as the phrase goes. There is, therefore,
a good chance for the establishment of a
number of new homesteads on this left
side of the River Onkaparinga. By
working a small area of land for fruit,
vegetables, honey, and wattles, while at
the same time washing out some]of the
watercourses for alluvial j. gold, a man
could make a good living for himself and
family, and as regards other considera-
tions the locality is as healthy and as
pleasant as any within the boundaries of
Mouth Australia. The land is comprised
in the Hundred of Kuitpo, which includes
Echunga, Meadows, and Dashwood’s
Gully, being bounded on the west by the
River Onkaparinga. I find that within
this area there are still twenty-six working
men’s blocks to be disposed of, and
although some of them contain little or
no first-class soil, there are very few
which are not at least fit for fruit and
wattles. In my travels about the country
1 have noticed that in almost every case
the best soil in each locality has been dis-
posed of many years ago, and whether the
owners chose to make any use of it such
land is of course not available for working
men’s blocks. Where, however, Govern-
ment reserves have existed for many years
there is some chance of a little good land
being still available for leasing from the
Government.
The township of Meadows is a very
pretty and rustic-looking place in the
middle of a plain, bounded by the hills
which meet together at the head of
Dashwood’s Gully. The soil Is of first-
class quality in places, and potatoes grow
luxuriantly owing to the fine rainfall,
which averages about thirty inches. Fat
cattle are to be seen grazing upon some
of the rich meadow-land, and there are a
few patches with wheatfields. The
wattlebark industry has been going ahead,
and all about the piece of country between
Echunga, Meadows, and Macclesfield there
is plenty of demand for labour in this
industry.
Leaving Meadows we pass over a low
part of the range and into the valley of
the River Finnlss. At Bull's Creek, which
is about five miles further on than
Meadows, all the streams which come
down from the hills flow into Lake
Alexandrina, either by way of the
River Angas, passing beside Strath -
albyn, or by the Finnlss, which crosses
the railway to Qoolwa at Queen’s
Own Town. The country is partially
wooded with good timber, and much
of it has been converted into first-class
grazing and agricultural land. The
hundred in which Bull’s Creek is situated
is called Kondoparlnga, and Includes the
land from Meadows across to Strathalbyn,
and southwards as far as Mount
Magnificent. There are no working
men’s blocks in this part of the colony,
although I understand that several
patches of land still belong to the
Government. In some cases of course
the new varieties of leases have shut up


portions of Government land for a period say that It gradually changes in character
of twenty-one years, so that there beyond Ashbourne and on to the Square
are other barriers to dealing with the land Waterhole, where, as has already been said,
besides those presented by the fee simple there is a large quantity of sandy soil
having passed into private hands. Of the among which there are extensive swampy
land beyond Bull’s Oreek it is sufficient to patches and watercourses.


VIII.—ROUND ABOUT MOUNT BARKER
In the early days of the colony of
South Australia the whole of the district
between Aldgate and Callington was
roughly spoken of as the Mount Barker
District. Since those times the division
of the colony into districts, electorates,
and so forth has greatly restricted the
meaning of the term. But at the same
time Mount Barker must still be regarded
as the centre and nucleus of the eastern
hills. Passing along from Aldgate Rail-
way Station towards the Mount one
takes a route which lies nearly due
east through heavily wooded country, in
the midst of which is situated
the exceedingly picturesque town-
ship of Bridgewater. The “water”
which is alluded to in this old English
name is to be seen in the shape of a
pretty streamlet known as Cox’s Creek.
Some of the old residents have not yet
got over the habit of alluding to the
village by the name of the stream upon
which it stands. The bridge is a little
stone structure, which would form an
excellent study for those who are fond
of sketching from nature. Prominent
features in the landscape are the large
poplar and willow trees growing down in
the valley beside Dunn’s old flour-mill,
where a large overshot waterwheel was at
one time used as the motive power. The
splash of the wheel is now no longer
heard, and, as has been the case in other
localities, steam has taken the place of the
forces of nature as a motive power.
Rambling about Bridgewater the visitor
comes across numerous patches of market
gardens in which almost all descriptions
of vegetables are successfully raised for
the Adelaide market.
On towards the River Onkaparinga
both the road and the railway run through
a short tract of country which is densely
wooded with tall straight saplings—
exactly the sort of country which excites
the imagination of one who is accustomed
to the scarcity of timber and the difficulty
of fencing in the Far North. But very
soon the river is reached—by no means a
large stream in this part of its course,
although very picturesque. It has attrac-
tion too for lovers of “ the gentle art,”
as it is well supplied with fish, both
English and indigenous. Perch and
trout ware introduced some years ago by
Mr. Johnston, of the Oakbank Brewery,
and the first-named fish has thriven
remarkably well, specimens of perch
being sometimes captured which turn
the scale at 3 or 4 lb.
Whether the English trout are nume-
rous or not is a question which will have
to be decided by some angler having more
skill with the fly than the majority of
those who have been accustomed to fish
in the locality. Wandering up the stream
for half a mile or so we notice a few
fruit gardens and vegetable plots, and
come upon several scattered houses form-
ing the settlement of Griinthal. The
place seems a prosperous one, having
neat houses and gardens lying in a couple
of small valleys which run downwards to-
ward the stream. If we follow the river
still further up its course, after crossing a
neat bridge we reach Balhannah at two or
three miles beyond. The route lies
through forests of bluegums and saplings
with a certain amount of wattle growing
between. Here is a patch of ground
to the west of the road beside the river
upon which the owner raises annually
many tons of melons, vegetable marrows,
cucumbers, &c. The watermelon grows to
perfection in the locality, and very heavy
specimens have sometimes been obtained.
Near Balhannah I noticed several exten-
sive gardens of young fruit-trees, giving
an idea of the amount of confidence which
the owners feel in the extension of the
fruit industry.
Lovers of fruit-gardening, however,
would do well to visit the large orchards
of Mr. Thomas Pugh, a short distance out
from Balhannah. These gardens lie at
the head of a valley running up to
some low hills on the west. The apple
orchard is the largest and finest of its
kind in the colony, and, strange to say,
the very finest fruit grows upon what
seems to be the most unpromising soil.
The orchards certainly include some rich
black gully soil, but the finest and largest
fruits which I saw, such as the Maiden’s
Blush Apple and Chamberlain’s Seedling,
grow upon the sloping ground high up
towards the head of the ridge.
“Really,” said Mr. Pugh, who is a
pioneer of the district since 1851 and
knows its capacities most thoroughly, “ I
don’t think there is any part of the hills


district which Is unsuited for growing ground stretching away backwards from
fruit. But If it were all used for that
purpose, or even a twentieth part of it,
where should we find our market
“ In England ?” I hazarded.
The pioneer shook his head doubtfully
u I haven’t much doubt,” said he, “ that
we may be able successfully to send some
kinds of fruit to the English market; but
then itmuscalwaysbe the very best, and the
first-class quality commands a market any-
where. The difficulty is to know what
to do with the second quality.”
It may be mentioned in passing that
the amount of fruit raised in this garden
would be more than sufficient to supply
every man, woman, and child in the colony
with a pound of fruit each year. The
estate owned by the Hon. Thomas Play-
ford beyond Norton's Summit yields a con-
siderably greater quantity, and there are
several other very large gardens which
place enormous amounts of fruit upon the
market annually. The extension of our
fruitgrowing area certainly demands the
finding of an outside market such as the
Californians have found for their produce.
But surely this can successfully be
accomplished. If it is profitable
to send fruit from San Francisco
3,000 miles by rail and 3,000 by
sea, and to sell it in the London market
at the very time when fruit is cheapest,
certainly it ought to be profitable to send
fruit from Adelaide and sell it in Eng-
land during the off season, when fruit
commands a high price.
But we must push onwards towards
Mount Barker. Passing down along the
Onkaparinga we strike the main road
again, cross the bridge, and proceed through
pleasing open country to Hahndorf, a
quaint and picturesque German town,
consisting of about half a mile of houses
and gardens on each side of the road,
with tree-guards conspicuous on both
sides. The German colonists have here
their own Lutheran Churches and a fine
Academy, and some of them so habitually
adhere to their own language that they
find a difficulty in making themselves
understood in the English tongue. Hahn-
dorf was founded by the Pilgrim Fathers
of German settlements in Australia, who
fled from religious persecution in Prussia
in the year 1838. It is the centre of the
German settlement on the eastern hills,
just as Tanunda is the centre of that in
the Angaston district. A large amount of
fruitgrowing is carried on actually within
the limits of the to srn itself, almost every
house having its acre or two of planted
the road.
The past season has been a poor one as
regards quantity, but quite satisfactory in
regard to the quality of the fruit pro-
duced . In former seasons some marvellous
results have been obtained. Mr. Sonne-
mann, a local jam manufacturer, has grown
single pears up to as much as 4 lb. 7 oz.
in weight.
The local flourmill has secured compara-
tively little wheat this year owing to the
high price of hay and the anticipation of
still higher rates before the season is
ended. The area cropped for hay has
been giving from to 2 tons to the acre.
Last year, when hay was abundant in the
North, and the price was very low, almost
all the farmers in this part of the colony
made a point of letting their crops grow
for wheat, and so large was the quantity
brought into Hahndorf that the mill is
still kept busy with the disposal of last
season’s supplies. The German colonists
are amongst the most frugal and indus-
trious in South Australia, and it is no-
ticeable that the mother of the family fre-
quently finds time to attend to a bit of
garden besides carrying out her household
duties.
Going on towards Mount Barker we
have to surmount a long ridge of stringy-
bark and ironstone country, which is
really the edge of the high plateau form-
ing the valley of the River Onkaparinga.
To the east of this ridge all the valleys
and gullies drain themselves into the
Mount Barker Creek, and so on into the
River Bremer, which falls into Lake
Alexandrine. In exploring this rangy
country there is little to be seen
excepting dense forest and hungry-
looking soil. At one time it was
believed that a range of this description
would be of little use for any pur-
pose, even for the growing of wattles.
Especially all the stringy bark patches were
almost universally condemned as useless
for wattles. But this idea seems to be
now.pretty nearly exploded. I saw a
piece of bark about six feet long which
weighed 14 lb., and which I learned was
taken from a tree grown upon the
despised strlngybark ranges. The fact is
that in exposed situations the young
wattle requires a good deal of shelter from
the severe cold of winter, and in too
many cases the holder of a piece of high
country has deprived the wattles of this
shelter by cutting down the higher trees
of the natural forest before the young


wattles have been strong enough to with-to pick their fruit the receipts will not
stand the cold.
From the top of this ridge on looking
towards Mount Barker a fine upland scene
presents itself. Fields and meadows ex-
tend on every hand, divided off by hedges
of furze and hawthorn. Noble gnmtrees
oast their shadows upon the undulating
grassy land like the oaks on some old
English estate. Furrowed land on all
sides gives evidence of the work of the
plough, and cattle are grazing upon the
meadows which slope downwards towards
the streams, where willow trees are bend-
ing in shady clumps. I have noticed in
every part of the Bills Districts that Eng-
lish trees under ordinary conditions attain
to grand proportions. Here as we drive
into the town of Mount Barker we pass
by the residence of Mr. Barr Smith,
with its handsome tower and bow-
windows. Beside it there grows a large
oak-tree under which on one occasion Mr.
Barr Smith entertained at luncheon no
less than seventy-five persona.
Mount Barker is one of the oldest
towns in the colony, having been in fact
founded very shortly after Adelaide itself.
Among the earliest residents was the Hon.
John Dunn, who at ten years of
age arrived with his father and helped him
to erect the old windmill two or three
miles away from the town. The enterprise
resulted in failure, and Mr. Dunn, sen.,
betook himself to Adelaide and
worked for a time at carpentering.
Yet in the end both he and his family
were eminently prosperous in the Mount
Barker district, and the handsome Wes-
leyan Church stands as a memorial of the
pioneer. Mount Barker has not pro-
gressed much during recent years, pro-
bably owing to the rise of so many other
centres at which the local business is con-
ducted. The railway has not produced
much difference in the state of business,
and the facilities of access are certainly
not better in the matter of speed than
they were before its construction. Start-
ing in a trap with a smart pair of horses
from almost any of the railway stations at
the same time as the train the traveller
can reach Adelaide from ten to twenty
minutes before the arrival of the train at
North-terrace.
In the Immediate vicinity of Mount
Barker there is not very much agricul-
tural land, and those crops which are sown
are usually cut for hay. Fruit is grown in
abundance, and is certainly sold at very
cheap rates. Some residents indeed
complain that if they have to pay a man
pay his wages. Here, as elsewhere in the
hills, it is becoming more and more
recognised that the expansion of the fruit
industry absolutely demands the opening
up of outside markets.
“ What do we live upon chiefly 1” I
heard one leading resident enquire of
another.
“ Well,” was the reply after some con-
sideration, “I cannot tell exactly. We
have a little agriculture. The machinery
yards employ some labour, and the
tanning industry has been looking up
lately. One thing I know, however, and
that is that if it had not been for the
wattles during the past year we would
probably have had a rather bad time of it.”
“Why,” I exclaimed, “ it seems to me
that the same must be the case from Cape
Jervis upwards all over the hills district.
I have heard almost exactly the same
expression in more than a dozen places
already.”
The bark industry being so valuable
it is rather disquieting to notice
round about Mount Barker that,
although thousands of trees are being
stripped and killed, yet very few indeed
are being planted. The price of the bark,
which has reached £9 this season, may
perhaps recede somewhat, but the diffe-
rence is not likely to be serious, seeing that
English speculators are offering a minimum
of £7 10s. per ton for ten years delivered
in Australia. Mr. J. E. Brown, the Con-
servator of Forests, is now experimenting
with the seed of the Indian plant pro-
ducing the nut known as the myrabolam,
the use of which along with wattle is
necessary to the production of first-class
leather. Not only is this trial likely to
prove successful, but the oaktree, pro-
ducing valonia, has been found to grow very
satisfactorily at Kaponda. The only thing
which is now wanted is that residents of
the whole country should be fully awake
to the value of fplanting. The Ninety-mile
Desert and the Murray Flats yield a
moderate amount of bark, but, unfor-
tunately, the Government stripping
licences are not obtainable until after
the proper season for stripping in warm
localities has passed by.
Littlehampton is a sort of suburb of
Mount Barker, lying in a narrow valley
through which the railway line passes on
its way to the Junction. The fruit-trees
in the gardens at this place are nearly all
fully grown, and are wonderfully loaded
with fruit when In season. A road passes
on from here to Nairne, and another to


Mount Barker Junction. The palmy days
of Naime when it was the terminus of
the Hills Railway are now passed away,
and the town has a desolate and sleepy
appearance. The depreciation in the value
of property has certainly been greater than
is warranted by the circumstances of the
case. Between a good deal of grazing
and a very little agriculture some of the
residents in the vicinity are able to make
more than a living. In some cases farm-
ing pays remarkably well. Jb’or instance,
there is one farmer who I believe holds a
couple of sections, and who is reputed to
be worth £6,000 or £7,000, which has all
been made in the district. He has with-
out doubt successfully studied the problem
of how to make farming pay in the hills, as
he obtains some of the best averages for
wheat and hay in the whole of the locality.
“ All by good luck, I suppose ?” I heard
one local resident say.
The reply of hia neighbour was some-
what to the purpose. “I will tell you
what it is,” said he. “That man’s land
is not any better than thousands of acres
that are all around us. But he was
prudent and put all hia savings into his
business instead of spending or speculating.
He has spent a lot of money in manure
and changes about continually. Oneyearit
will be stable manure, another year bone-
dust, another year guano ; but he always
looks to putting something into the land
and not merely taking all he can [out
of it.”
This I am assured is only a sample of
the course pursued by a number of agri-
culturists in this district, and it perhaps
explains why in a visit to Mount Barker
and its neighbourhood one sees so many
evidences, if not of rapid money-making,
at least of substantial comfort and
prosperity.


IX.—WOODSIDE, MOUNT TORRENS, AND BLUMBERG.
Some of the oldest settled agricul-
tural districts in South Australia
are included in the large tri-
angular tableland, the edges of which
start from Mount Pleasant and run down
on the one side to Mount Lofty and on
the other side to Mount Barker. This
triangle of country embraces the upper
portions of the valleys of the Onkaparinga
and Torrens Rivers, the two being divided
off by a sort of low watershed which
passes near Lobethal. It is surprising to
note how very nearly level some of the
country on this plateau is. From the
Balhannah Railway Station northwards
and eastwards up as far as Blumberg there
is very little variation in the level of
the road, so that the task of connecting
the Hills Railway with the upper portion
of the Torrens Valley by a line through
Woodside will be a very easy one. From
Adelaide the distance to Balhannah by the
road is only nineteen miles, although by
railway it is fully half as much again.
But if a line were made from Balhannah
to Blumberg the comparison of shortness
would be, if anything, in favour of the
railway as compared with the road.
Balhannah was awakened as it were
from a twenty years’ sleep by the arrival
of the railway, which converted it from a
kind of outlying agricultural suburb of
Mount Barker into a depot of the road
traffic from Woodside, Lobethal, and
Mount Torrens on its way to the city.
The township itself is about half a mile
north of the railway station, but the hotel
and stores are now very busy, and the
barkmill which was started two or three
years ago has been shifted in search of
larger accommodation, in consequence of
increase of business. The drive along to
Oakbank is strongly suggestive of English
scenery. In one place a long line of
poplars, about twenty-five years old, may
be seen on the left side of the
road, and it is Intended to continue this
line and to form an avenue by planting
also the other side of the road. The land
for a mile or two on both sides consists of
open grassy country dotted all over with
dead trees, which have been ringed some
twenty or thirty years. An immense
quantity of land of this description exists
all along the road to Blumberg, and one
would imagine that the district contains
enough dry timber to serve Adelaide for a
generation or two.
Unfortunately almost the whole of
the land in this district has gone out of
cultivation. The reasons for this strange
circumstance are various. Certainly there
is no lack of rainfall, and the earlier
settlers who made their homes upon the
plateau between 1845 and 1865 lived
prosperously and happily. The chief
hardship which they had to encounter
was the difficulty of transport between
Adelaide and Balhannah or Mount Barker
by the slow and tedious process of con-
veyance in bullock drays, the journey
usually occupying a whole day from
early morning until late at night.
Now that the railway has given greater
facilities of access one would think that
the district would revive rapidly in pro-
sperity, and indeed a slight improvement
in the area under cultivation has been
noticed of recent years. But the place
was at one time most injudiciously
cropped from year to year without fallow-
ing or rotation of crops, and of course
without manuring. The consequence was
that the soil became completely worked
out, and although much of it has re-
covered heart, the district having received
an evil reputation as being poor soil has
received very little attention for some
twenty years. The old saying “Give a
dog a bad name and hang him” is as true
in reference to agricultural land as in re-
gard to anything else. An attempt is now
being made to secure fresh settlement for
a large area of land which at present only
maintains a few cattle. Besides this in
the neighbourhood of Oakbank a piece of
ground which was set apart as an aboriginal
reserve has been cut up into working
men’s blocks, and these are now being
industriously worked by the holders.
Oakbank itself is a pretty township, famed
for its beer and its racecourse, and the
handsome residences of the owners of the
brewery form attractive features in the
landscape.
Further on, a large proportion of the
country is what is known as “ Company’s
land,” that is to say it belongs to the
original South Australian Company, which
at the foundation of the colony secured so
large an area at the rate of 12s. 6d. per
acre. The policy of letting out the land


at a high rental In comparatively small A couple of miles to the west of the
blocks and under conditions which gave road from Adelaide to Charleston lies the
the lessee no encouragement to cultivate
his land scientifically, or to make sub-
stantial improvements upon it, has had
a very injurious effect upon settlement
not only in this but also in other neighbour-
hoods. Latterly the Company has been
driven to depend more upon the large holder
who is able to keep stock than upon the
small farmer who trusts entirely to agricul-
ture. There is no doubt, however, as
to the great capacity of much of the land.
The past season has been a very dry one,
yet the few fields which are cultivated have
yielded from eight to fifteen bushels per
acre. The rainfall over all the country
between Woodside and Gumeracha is over
30 inches per annum on the average, and
this even on moderately poor soil nearly
always ensures the farmer against an
absolute failure of his crops.
Woodside bids fair to become a large
and thriving town, as It can depend not
only upon the surrounding farms but also
upon the goldmining which is conducted
among the hills a short distance to the
eastward. The names of the Bird-in-
Hand Mine, the New Era, the Ridge,
&c., are very familiar to the public of
South Australia, and there can be no
doubt that a large quantity of gold exists
in the reefs and drifts of the locality, the
general belief in the neighbourhood being
that if operations were confined to Wood-
side and not hampered by what is called
“ mining on ’Change ” the gold industry
would soon be more flourishing than it is.
Woodside, however, receives a con-
siderable amount of attention from
tourists and visitors from Adelaide, and
the locality is a very pleasant one in
which to spend a holiday. Beyond the
town a level road runs on between hedges
of furze and hawthorn, with here and
there a patch of cultivated land. This
description will apply to the country all
the way to Nairne, which used to support
a tolerably large population, and which is
bound to reassert itself as a favourable
field for settlement. Here, as indeed
throughout all parts of the hills, minerals,
especially gold, are being sought for care-
fully, and with good prospects of success.
In the neighbourhood of Charleston the
effects of unwise cultivation have been most
painfully apparent. Charleston is a very
slow place indeed, and looks as if it had
not much trade of any sort to depend
upon. The land round about is chiefly
devoted to grazing, and even in this re-
spect not much use is made of it.
pretty German village of Lobethal close
to a ridge of hills, and it is curious to
notice how the steady-going and conserva-
tive propensities of the Germans have
resulted in this township having suffered
less from loss of population than almost
any other place in the hills districts.
Good crops of wheat and oats are gathered
every year, and hops are quite success-
fully cultivated. The township has a
population of some 250, whose houses
are nearly all built along the main
road. Vineyards and fruit gardens
yield a considerable amount of produce,
and the tweed and woollen factory gives
employment to the healthy German girls
of the locality, besides engaging a certain
amount of specially skilled talent. The
quality of the material turned out from
the factory has attained a fairly high
reputation. It is strange to note these
manufacturing premises situated in so
romantic and rural a spot as Lobethal.
The effect upon the visitor is somewhat
the same as that upon the English tourist
who in following up some quiet stream
through seq uestered valleys suddenly comes
upon a paper-mill or some other factory
in which the busy hum of machinery
goes on continuously from morning until
night. On the hills which almost com-
pletely surround the township of Lobethal
there are many suitable sites for vineyards
and fruit-gardens, and the measure of
success which has attended the operations
of the hopgrowers gives promise of a large
trade in the future.
Returning to the road and passing
through Charleston the way lies through
a tract of level ground upon which there
is practically no cultivation. The water-
course which leads into the
Onkaparinga crosses the road at a
place where only a footbridge is
provided, and where occasionally the road
is covered with three or four feet of rush-
ing water. The country then becomes
more woody as a low ridge is reached,
upon which wattles grow in profusion. It
seems a pity that in view of the large
future value of the wattle-tree, all the
higher country midway between Charleston
and Mount Torrens should not be imme-
diately planted. The outlay would be
certainly slight in comparison with the
probable returns. From this very low
ridge of country we pass into the valley of
the Torrens, and a gentle slope brings us
across partially wooded country, flanked
to the east by a low range of hills until


we reach a sharp turn of the road which ful description, is kept fully at work.
marks the township of Mount Torrens.
The mountain itself is not at all a con-
spicuous object in the landscape, owing
to the elevation of the tableland from
which it Is seen. Looking northwards
one can observe that a perfectly straight
road leads to Blnmberg. On both sides
run long lines of furze and hawthorn
hedges. The country in every direction la
similar to that which has been already
described, and occasional patches of culti-
vation are to be met with in the midst of
a vast amount of land devoted to grazing
purposes. The land at this place is nearly
all of very good quality, and the rainfall
being everything that could be desired,
there is very little doubt that the district
will be one of the first to be fully occupied
by farming. All the country along by
Kenton Valley is very valuable, the
lower lands producing fine grasses and
crops, while the higher ridges give every
indication of productive goldfields. There
are places in which the side roads glitter
all over from the abundance of mica schist,
and where promising reefs are abundant.
On striking the course of the Torrens
at Blumberg the auriferous character of
the country becomes still more obvious.
The intersection of the road from Mount
Torrens with that from Mount Pleasant
is marked by an outlying portion of
Blumberg known as OliventhaJ, at which
there are several large apiaries, and the
manufacture of bar-framed hives is one
of the industries of the township.
Blumberg itself is a prettily situated
village lying on the left bank of the
Torrens, embowered among poplars,
willows, and fruit-trees. The large
three-story mill, upon which a consider-
able amount of money has recently been
spent in the introduction of very fine
roller machinery, affords a striking test!*
mony to the faith of the owner in the
future agricultural progress of the district.
Having built up his fortunes from very
small beginnings in the neighbourhood he
knows its capacities perhaps as well as
any one else. An immense stack of wattle-
bark 1s to be seen at the mill, and the
grinding machinery, which is of a power-
The banks of the Torrens at this point
give fine opportunities for holiday rambles.
The bed of the river is in places
filled with large accumulations of sand, in
which it Is well known that an immense
amount of gold is embedded. At other
places the quartz-reefs come running down
from the hills to the north, and form rocky
cataracts in the bed of the stream. It is
only in the rainy season that there is any
strong flow of water at this place, and
during some months of the year
the river is mainly represented by
a chain of pretty ponds interspersed
with a wilderness of branches and trunks
of trees and rocks. A mile or two above
Blumberg on the opposite side of the
river, a collection of buildings may be
seen upon the rising ground against which
the stream flows. These are the works
connected with the German Reef, a gold-
mining property which has yieldedja large
but unknown amount of the precious
metal. The proprietors being a private
firm have never had to undergo the
vicissitudes occasioned by “bulls” and
“ bears” upon the Stock Exchange, and
they have kept on their way steadily,
evidently doing well, but saying very
little about it. They own mining rights
over a considerable extent of land in the
Upper Torrens in which alluvial mining
has been and still is successfully pursued.
Here on the right side of the road, how-
ever, one notices a goldminer’s cradle
which looks as if it had been abandoned.
It is an unfortunate fact that many of the
owners of land and of mining rights be-
tween Gumeracha and Mount Pleasant
have demanded very excessive royalties
or rents as the price of a permission
to dig for gold. In some cases as high
as 7s. fid. per week is charged, and of
course as soon as a man gets, as the
phrase puts It, “ down on his luck” for a
few weeks, he becomes disgusted at
having to pay so heavily for next to
nothing and abandons the search for gold.
All up towards Mount Pleasant the same
character of country continues, the reefs
being numerous, but the majority of the
land being simply used for pasturage.


X.—THE MOUNT LOFTY RANGE.
The Mount Lofty Range, which forms
such a grand and imposing background to
the plains of Adelaide, includes a much
larger area of country available for
cultivation than might be supposed from
a hasty observation at a distance. To
the west of the range between Crafers
and Norton’s Summit the spurs of the
mountain chain run down in all directions
and divide the country into three main
valleys, in which flow the streams known
as the First, Second, and Third Creeks.
On the eastern side of the chain numerous
small streams take their rise in springs
upon the mountain sides, and find their
way ultimately into the Onkaparinga. In
order to get a fair view of this part of the
country a very good plan is to take the
train to Mount Lofty Station, and passing
through Crafers to follow the road
which runs northwards along the range.
The station in question is in reality
about three miles from the Mount
itself. It is 1,611 feet above the
level of the sea, while the eleva-
tion of Mount Lofty itself is 2,340
feet, so that the pedestrian has to make a
rise of over 700 feet in order to reach the
highest point, and this means some pretty
stifl climbing, although there is a good
road all the way. Between the station
and Crafers there are some beautiful
suburban villas which have cost sums of
money from a few hundreds up to
£lO,OOO each. Fine gardens with terraces
and appliances for irrigation have been
laid out, and in a few years this locality
will assume a most luxuriant appearance.
Passing up to Crafers one is able to inspect
the operations of market-gardening at
Fern Hill, where in a valley upon the
level of nearly 2,000 ft. some very suc-
cessful plots for vegetables have been laid
out. The rainfall is abundant in this
locality, no less than 42J inches per annum
falling at Mount Lofty, and probably
about 40 inches at Crafers. Plenty of
fruit is grown in the vicinity, and there is
a building for a jam factory at Crafers, or
Stirling East as the place is sometimes
called.
The road to Mount Lofty skirts
Crafers township until the crest of
the ridge Is reached and then runs to the
north-east, gradually rising to the
summit of the range. Several cosy
residences embowered amidst luxuriant
creepers, fruit-trees, and hedges are
passed, and as the road winds a little
to the eastern side of the mountain
range we obtain a fine view of the
densely wooded plateau to the east-
wards. Here the valley of the Onka-
paringa is laid out before us. Mount
Barker stands up conspicuous on the
east, and the Bugle Ranges trend a\;ay
southwards until the eye reaches a low
line of water In the south-east, indieating
Lake Alexandrina. The forests close at
hand, in the midst of which lie Bridge-
water, Ambleside, Balhannah, and Mount
Barker, embrace a very large area. Here
and there at intervals patches of bright
green or yellow indicate the localities of
market gardens, wheatfields or grass-
paddocks. But the greater portion of the
land still remains virtually untouched
by the hand of man. Residences are to
be made out In various places among the
trees, their white walls and roofs glisten-
ing in the sunshine. But the population
is evidently only a small fraction of that
which this plateau is destined to maintain.
No doubt much of the land is iinsuitable
for agriculture, but a great deal of the
soil is admirably adapted to the growth
of fruit and vegetables. The tendency
among agriculturists in these colonies
has been rather to depreciate the
value of timbered land, and to
overrate that of perfectly open country.
In Victoria the magnificent land on the
Gippsland plains was quite overlooked for
a whole generation, simply because it was
heavily wooded. Yet it now commands a
very high price, although the cost of
clearing alone is in some cases £l5 per
acre. In the hill country of South
Australia the trees are mere pigmies
compared with those of Gippsland, and
the valleys between Mount Lofty and
Mount Barker could be rendered fit for
agriculture at a comparatively small cost.
Towards the summit of the Mount the
road rises rapidly, while on both sides
there is a quick descent on a stony
hillside. Yet even here it is observable
that fruit-trees flourish on the slopes of
the Mount, being kept continuously
fresh and green by the abundant rainfall.
Several fine residences with battlemented
towers or old English gables are passed,


notably those of Sir William Milne and Sir almost precipitous slope which leads to
Thomas Elder, both having massive
white stone towers. Suddenly the view
opens out to the west and spreads
out like a huge map. Before the specta-
tor lie the plains of Adelaide and the
waters of St. Vincent Gulf, bounded in
the hazy distance by the dim line of
Yorke’s Peninsula. That bright line of
yellow In front of the water is the range
of sandhills along the seacoast. Near at
hand are the innumerable spurs of the
mountain range covered with waving green
trees, and scored and lined with roads
which twist about the hillsides in most
fantastic shapes. To northwards is seen
the bold forms of the Barossa Ranges,
and away to the south lies Tapley’s
Hill and the grassy limestone country
characteristic of the Noarlunga and Wil-
lunga districts. In front the eye is
attracted by the perfectly straight road
which runs down to Port Adelaide, and
the square form of Adelaide itself, dotted
abundantly with groups of houses, while
out to the north lie the most populous
suburbs beyond the Park Lands. Leaving
the peak, which 1s surmounted by the
conspicuous white round Observation
Tower, we pass along towards little Mount
Lofty by a winding road which gives a
splendid view of the deeply furrowed
valleys of First and Second Creeks, and so
on down the Green Hill-road which leads
to Burnside.
But in order to explore the place
thoroughly it is necessary to make a
descent into the gullies. The walk
down the valley of First Creek by way of
the Waterfalls is most romantic. Passing
by two beautiful smaller waterfalls in the
midst of a dense undergrowth of ferns,
creepers, and trees we reach the larger
cascade which is eighty feet in height, and
there have an opportunity of inspecting
the prolific market gardens with which
the lower part of the gully is
partially filled. Peach and apricot
trees, with apples, pears, and quinces
grow in abundance. Olives have been
planted in considerable numbers. Vine-
yards crown the rounded hills quite close
to the road, and last, but not least, there
are several beautiful orangeries, the
produce of which is magnificent in size
and quality. If we pass down into the
valley of Second Creek a very different
scene presents itself. From little Mount
Lofty we make our way down by a wind-
ing road above a tributary of Second
Creek. People with a taste for climbing
can fulfil their desire by descending the
the channel of the streamlet covered with
dense undergrowth of reeds, ferns, and
creepers. In following down the soli-
tary gully the enclosing hills become
more and more precipitous, and it
requires a good climber to make
his way along the steep inclines.
Climbing to the top of the hill in order to
strike the roadway, we reach the summit
of the ridge dividing off First Creek from
Second Creek, and have a good view of
the deeply furrowed valleys on all sides
trending down towards the Adelaide
plains. It is strange to remark that such
solitudes can exist within six or seven
miles of the great city. The grass-covered
hills are tenanted only by a few
sheep, and not a habitation meets
the view excepting the cottages
of two or three shepherds on the brow of
the hill away northwards near the Green-
hill-road. The valley of the Second Creek
in both its branches includes several
patches of beautiful alluvial soil suitable
for market gardens, but although the
distance from Adelaide is so short the
diffieulties of access are considerable, as
there are many places to which it would
be quite impossible for even the most
skilful driver or rider to penetrate either
in a trap or on horseback.
Uraidla and Summerton are reached by
way of the Greenhill-road, which has
already been referred to, and which passes
from Burnside along the sharp slope of
the Green Hill, over the Mount Lofty
Range, and so on along to the valley of a
stream, which finds its way into theOnka-
paringa. The two townships are sur-
rounded by patches of market gardens,
on which very large quantities of vege-
tables are raised for the Adelaide market.
It is remarkable to notice the difference
in the climates of the western and eastern
slopes of the range. Up at Uraidla all
the English fruits such as the strawberry,
raspberry, and blackberry flourish to per-
fection, while In the gullies on the
western slope the most successful fruits
are those of Southern Europe. The
market gardens near Uraidla are some of
them exceedingly interesting. The sources
of income of the residents are decidedly
varied and miscellaneous. To take a
single example, there is one man who
obtained about £l5O per annum for the
vegetables and fruit which he conveys to
market by the road three times a week.
He has a few acres of grazing land and
grows some fodder In the gully for
about half a dozen cows, more


or less. He always keeps a number of
sties of pigs, and from his live stock he
makes about as much as by his gardening.
Then he is able to do a little wattle-
stripping, partly from his own ground
and partly by arrangement or licence
from other localities. Probably he nets
about £7O each season from this source.
He has also several hives of bees, which
have not been long in operation, but
which will turn in a few pounds
each year. Altogether I should say
that this man’s income, clear of
all expenses, is over £3OO per annum,
although his operations are certainly
not on an extensive scale. A winding
road branches off near Uraidla, and
passes through some densely wooded
country In the midst of the beautiful
valleys southwards right down to Crafers.
There are several first-class nurseries in
this district, notably one belonging to one
of the resident Justices of the Peace, and
situated on the sloping land which leads
downwards from Crafers into the valley.
Large numbers of seedlings are raised in
this garden for planting in the localities
round about, and owing to the almost
universal desire for tree-planting, the
demand has now become very great. The
owner has remarkable facilities for obtain-
ing water, as in some places he has only
to dig a hole a few feet in depth on the
side of the hill, and by means of pipes to
run off the water by its own weight to any
locality that may be desired. The whole
of the valley to the east of the Mount
Lefty Range is admirably adapted as a field
for nursery work, It is well sheltered
from the blighting hot winds of summer,
which play such havoc down upon the
plains, and it receives a large share of
moisture, both in the form of rainfall and
in that of running streamlets.
Taking the main eastern road from
Adelaide there are some vary interesting
sights to be seen. My present purpose,
however, is to refer only to that which
may be observed on the higher levels of
the Hill District. The road passes through
Magill and Norton’s Summit, and so on to
Lobethal. From Adelaide to Norton’s
Summit is only a distance of nine miles,
or about one mile less than the distance
to Uraidla. From Magill to Norton’s
Summit there is a very picturesque and
romantic road. At some places the hills,
which rise precipitately at the sides of the
deep gully, terminate in precipices having
a height of 100 to 300 ft. After passing
through this deep glen, which in winter
time presents a very gloomy appearance.
we reach one of the steepest pinches to be
found anywhere in South Australia. On
the rising ground there is a large and
interesting nursery known by the name
of “Grove Hill.” The view on attain-
ing the top of the hill amply
repays the labour involved in the
steep climbing. The valley of Third
Creek lies at our feet, and it is easy to
see that very large opportunities for the
production of fruits and vegetables exslt
in this part of the Hills District. Down
to the left is seen the deep gully in which
Mr. John Horsnell established his market
gardens many years ago, and reared a
very fine herd of Alderney cows. The
walk up this gully is fully as interesting
as that to the waterfall on the First
Creek, and the place is not nearly so
much frequented by pleasure-seekers.
Several tanks or dams have been con-
structed in Horsnell’s Gully as a means of
supplying the suburban residents of
Magill with water. These have been very
simply made, and the supply of water
being continually replenished by the creek
they do not require to be at all of large
dimensions. It has been suggested that
the extension of the capacity of the tanks
in Horsnell’s Gully would afford a very
simple and inexpensive means of
testing the advantages of irriga-
tion on the plains in the
vicinity of the range, the system of
pipes, necessary for the convenience of
the residents, being already in existence.
Indeed, the same remark may be applied
not only to the neighbourhood of Magill
but also to those of Burnside, Glen
Osmond, and Mitcham. I merely mention
the opportunities for water storage in
these gullies with the object of showing
how easily the supply of fruit may be
increased to an almost unlimited extent.
Norton’s Summit is not by any means
a large township. St. John’s Church is
built right on the brow of the hill, and it
is from the porch of this edifice that the
finest view of all can be obtained, in-
cluding the whole of the Adelaide Plains
and a very large part of the Gulf of
St. Vincent. To the eastward and up
towards the north-east there are seen
many gullies in which run tributaries of
the Fourth Creek, which, like Third
Creek, finds its way to the River Torrens
between Walkerville and Campbelltown.
These market gardens are in most respects
similar to those which have already been
referred to at Uraidla. Perhaps the most
interesting feature in the view,
however, is afforded by the large


vineyards which extend up the fairly successful experiments have been
slope from Magill, and from which some
of the very finest wine of South Australia
is derived. The names of Mr. W. P.
Auld and Mrs. M. Penfold will always be
remembered in connection with the wine
industry in this part of the colony. There
is plenty of room for the extension of
these vineyards in almost every direc-
tion, and, indeed, all the efforts of
the proprietors will be necessary
in view of the rapid increase of the
English market for colonial wine. About
two miles beyond Norton’s Summit the
valley of Fourth Creek terminates
abruptly in Marble Hill, one of the most
striking eminences in the line of the
Mount Lofty Kange. It is on the face of
this hill that the Governor’s country resi-
dence has been built, and a garden has
been laid out.
I had an interesting conversation with
an experienced grower of oranges with
reference to the chances of exporting that
class of fruit to the English market. He
was well aware that a moderately success-
ful trade from Sydney has already been
opened up by the orangegrowers of Parra-
matta, who have sent regular shipments
by the Orient steamers to London, while
made by the growers of South Australia
and Tasmania. From one or two trials
which he himself had made he was con-
fident that there was no insuperable
obstacle in the way of placing South
Australian oranges on the English market
in a thoroughly saleable condition. The
most frequent mistake he believed was in
packing oranges too loosely, so that when
shrinkage by evaporation took place the
fruit was likely to be knocked about and
bruised. He referred to the mistakes
which had been made in ignoring the
element of neatness in fruit-packing, such
as wrapping the oranges in bits of wall-
paper or old newspaper, and putting them
into unsuitable receptacles.
“But after all,” said he, “if you ask
me why we do not make greater efforts to
export oranges to England, my answer is
simply that we don’t require to do so.”
My inference from this was to the effect
that no one need have any fear in planting
orange-trees in any suitable locality of
South Australia. There is an assured
market, and as soon as the local demand
is fully overtaken there is an unlimited
opening in much more populous countries
than Australia.


XI.—THE
TORRENS
VALLEY.
The country In the neighbourhood of
Mount Pleasant affords some very good
examples of the influence of rainfall in
altering the whole aspect of any region
of the earth’s surface. To the eastward
of Mount Pleasant, on the road to the
village of Springton, the traveller comes
upon a ridge of country which separates
the valley of the Torrens from that of
the Lower Murray. Standing upon this
ridge he can see at once that two entirely
different characters of country are spread
out before him To the eastward the
trees are stunted, and much of the land
Is of a sandy scrubby description, while
to the westward vegetation is much more
vigorous. The gumtrees are wide-
spreading, the grass is long and healthy,
and numerous watercourses are to be
seen. The annual rainfall at Mount
Pleasant, twenty-four inches per annum,
is somewhat more than that of Adelaide.
But going eastward the ra*nfall rapidly
diminishes until the Murray and
the Ninety-Mile Desert are reached.
Mount Pleasant itself is supported
chiefly by the grazing industry, a large
proportion of the land in the vicinity being
open and grassy. A good deal of wheat
is also cultivated, but the area has
not been progressing of recent years.
In fact the undulating country near the
head waters of the River Torrens presents
the same spectacle of wide areas of land
having gone out of cultivation as may be
seen along the whole route from Bal-
hannah. There is plenty of scope, how-
ever, for the maintenance of a fairly large
population in the district. Here are one
or two estates upon which dairy-farming,
especially cheese-making, is carried out on
a fairly large scale. Then the presence of
alluvial gold in the sand and drift of the
River Torrens gives an opportunity for
holders of gardens and farms to supple-
ment their incomes in a very comfortable
way. Oases are mentioned in which men
have been able to combine a little garden-
ing along with gold-digging to some ad-
vantage. It is greatly to be regretted
that the Crown does not possess any land
in the locality suitable for occupation.
Between Mount Pleasant and Blum-
berg there is a considerable amount of
ground covered with the feathery-leaved
tree known as the silver wattle. A
certain amount of industry has been
created by the stripping of some of these
trees, but unfortunately the price obtain-
able for the bark is considerably less than
that of broad-leaf wattle bark. Several
of the homesteads visible in this part of
the country afford evidences of very
substantial comfort. There are a number
of extensive vineyards, and fruit gardens
are frequently met with. Small patches
of sorghum have been planted as fodder
for the cattle, and it is stated that the
rainfall in this part of the country usually
proves sufficient to bring the plant on
fairly well. Here and there a few fields
of potatoes and a little maize may be
noticed. But it is evident that these
have suffered from the long spell of
dry weather. Mount Pleasant itself con-
tains some very substantial buildings,
including two of the most handsome
country Banks to be found anywhere in
the colony. The distance is thirty-five
miles from Adelaide, and it is near to
this township that the road branches off
which leads to Palmer and Mannnm. A
considerable amount of the wheat which
Is grown upon the Murray Flats finds its
way to Blumberg along this road, although
recently the River Murray has proved a
formidable competitor as an avenue for
the trade.
Between Blumberg and Gumeracha,
coming towards Adelaide, one passes
through some of the most beautiful rural
scenery in the colony. The road closely
follows the course of the River Torrens,
keeping on the left bank, and as the land
is hilly, although by no means moun-
tainous, the route winds about a good
deal. On the slopes of the hills, which
are splendidly watered by the rainfall, a
moderate amount of land is cultivated,
most of the crops being cut for hay for
the Adelaide market. The course of
the Torrens presents many beautiful
and picturesque landscapes, as the
rocky hills descend towards the bed
of the stream on every side. The
opportunities for the conservation of
water at very slight cost along the
course of the Upper Torrens are
very numerous, and it is suggested by
several of the local residents that the
construction of a few inexpensive weirs
in places where rocky reefs cross the


bed of the stream would result in the would inundate the land close to the out-
conservation of an immense amount of
water, which could be stored until required
for irrigation or other purposes on the
plains of Adelaide. With one central
reservoir such as that at Hope Valley
and a series of dams in various parts of
the river course the supply of water
might be kept up the whole year round
according to the plan which is frequently
practised in America.
Before reaching Gumeracha on the way
citywards an estate known as Kenton
Park, the residence of Captain Randall,
the pioneer of Murray River navigation,
is reached. The river at this place
is crossed by a weir constructed by the
former owner, and it forms a beautiful
reach of placid water. The garden is one
of the oldest in the colony, and contains
magnificent wide-spreading oaks and other
varieties of English trees, such as ches-
nuts, poplars, &c. The extraordinary
development of some of the acacias
planted many years ago shows how wonder-
fully an ample supply of rainfall may
result in converting arboreal dwarfs into
giants of the forest. The land surround-
ing the garden is divided into fields by
hedges of hawthorn and furze, giving a
peculiarly English look to the landscape,
and the illusion is still further heightened
by the presence of several varieties of
English song-birds. The present owner
of Kenton Park, like his father before
him, has devoted much attention to
the breeding of cattle, and some
magnificent beasts, chiefly Herefords, are
to be noticed upon the Park. In former
times the preference was given to the
Devon breed, and many beautiful animals
were reared on the estate. For the
production of fodder a certain area of
sloping land has been placed under Irriga-
tion. An eight-horsepower steam pump is
used for raising the water from the
river into a partially cemented tank
at the top of the slope. The whole
of the hillside down from this tank is
covered with sorghum, dhurra, mangolds,
and maize, and under the stimulating in-
fluence of irrigation the plants attain
enormous proportions. The sorghum, tor
instance, rises to a height of some six feet.
The reason for having a tank in which to
store the water Is not that there is any failure
of the supply from the river. It is found
that for successful irrigation a large and
sudden rush of water is required, more
especially on sloping ground. If a steam
pump without a tank were employed the
flow would be comparatively gradual, and
let before it had even reached to that
lying in the further corners of the field.
It is interesting to notice the devices by
which the water is made to flow from the
higher into the lower trenches which cross
the plantation from side to side. When a
strong flow of water has been brought
along one trench it is suddenly
diverted into another by means of a large
spade-like implement which is stuck into
the ground, a passage being at the same
time made so as to allow the water to flow
over into the lower level. In this way
the whole of the land receives a thorough
drenching. During the past dry season
some of the fodder plants would have
fared very badly had it not been for the
use of irrigation. But in its present state
the land is in some places covered with
mangels, which have grown so luxuriantly
that they are in danger of pushing one
another completely out of the ground.
The experiment in irrigation has been a
complete success. But the production of
stock for the market in a country where
cattle stations exist cannot be said to be
the most profitable method of utilizing
such first-class land as that at Gumeracha.
It is probable that the growth of fodder
will be persisted in and extended in the
neighbourhood, but the object will rather
be for dairying purposes than for the
supply of meat to the Adelaide market.
The town of Gumeracha is a different
kind of place from the straggling roadside
township which one is accustomed to meet
with in a journey almost anywhere about
Australia. It is laid out regularly in
streets almost in the form of a square, and
occupies the ground rising away from the
road and from the river towards the
south. Looking down upon the town
from some of the rising ground the
visitor from England is strongly re-
minded of some rural borough of his
native land. The houses are all em-
bowered in the midst of large and well-
grown English trees, such as oaks, poplars,
and elms, among which are scattered
the native gumtrees with peculiarly green
foliage. Fruit gardens and rose bushes
with hawthorn hedges are seen in every
direction. Down in the valley towards a
stream which runs into the Torrens
is to be seen the old Baptistry, an
artificial basin of water surrounded by
oaktrees, where in earlier times the
Baptist community were wont to practise
in primitive fashion the rite of baptism.
The old stone mill which adjoins the
paddock now lies silent and deserted,


but it hag often been suggested by local in large paddocks used for grazing.
residents that it will one day come
into use again perhaps as a factory for
butter, cheese, and other dairy products.
Certainly the land in this part of the
country, with its average rainfall of over
thirty-two inches per annum, is wonder-
fully well suited for the production of
milk in almost any quantity. The
grasses, even after a dry season, are
long and nutritious; while the running
streams afford ample supplies of water
for the irrigation of fodder plants. Nor
is the area of this kind of coun-
try very limited. All across by Kenton
Valley up to Blumberg and down
as far as the bridge over the Torrens
the fine fields are to be seen almost
continuously, and from the paddocks which
have been cut for hay during the past
season the product has in moat cases
amounted in value to between £5 and £6
per acre. It Is to be noticed from the district
map that there are several Government
reserves at Kenton Valley, and whether
these should be offered for working men’s
blocks is a matter for consideration. It is
needless to remark that the climate in
this part of South Australia is healthy
and invigorating. Indeed it is becoming
more and more recognised as one of the
holiday resorts for the people of Adelaide.
Leaving Gumeracha the way to Adelaide
is due west, along by the left bank of the
river, which is closely confined on the
other side by hilly land leading up to a
moderately high range. Crossing the
river by a picturesque bridge built close
up against the hills we climb the
rising ground, with many windings
and turnings between fields which are
partially cultivated and yield good crops
of hay, the rainfall on these rises being
about forty inches per annum. So wet is
it indeed in some seasons that in parts of
the upland country the rain sometimes
proves injurious to the crops. At the top
of the first rise in the road a beautiful
view presents itself. Out to westward
there is a long range covered with green
waving foliage and a deep valley in front
of it. In a short time the little village
known as Chain of Ponds is reached.
The country round about is rather thickly
timbered, but I saw in the locality a
number of beautiful alluvial flats, wonder-
fully well adapted for market gardening or
growing fodder or fruit-trees, or, in fact,
for almost any purpose to which rich land
with a fine rainfall can be applied. Yet
nothing is done with these valuable blocks
of ground, excepting that they are included
Further down in the valley is the old town-
ship of Millbrook. The mill, a large build-
ing, once one of the finest in the colony,
has long ago been silenced, and the brook,
whose presence is suggested by the latter
part of the name of the township, strongly
reminds one of Tennyson’s refrain :
For men may come and men may go.
But I go on for ever.
Close at hand there is a large vineyard,
which was planted many years ago by an
enthusiastic cultivator at a time when
the market for colonial wine was of a
very limited and uncertain nature. The
proprietor suffered the vicissitudes to
which the pioneers of almost all industries
are subjected, and ten or twelve years ago
the whole vineyard was abandoned. The
vines are now old and no new ones have
been put in. Straggling gumtrees have
begun to encroach upon the area, and a
property which would have been worth
thousands of pounds at the present day,
had it been kept in condition, is now of
very little value.
From Millbrook there is a steep rise
towards the wooded range which has
already been spoken of, and which the
road crosses at a place called Breakneck
Hill, in former years a perfect terror to
teamsters and travellers. The cutting
which has been made for the road to pass
over this hill is said to be the deepest in
Australia. It measures from the crown
of the hill to the level of the road 140 feet,
and no less than three contractors lost
heavily by undertaking to cut through
the heavy hard rock of which the hill is
composed. After traversing this cutting
still to the west in the direction of Ingle-
wood a large extent of wooded country
presents itself to view. It is quite an
ideal place for the growth of wattles, and
includes a large number of good gullies
which at some time or other will be
utilized for fruits and other products.
Passing through the pretty little hamlet
of Inglewood with its few scattered houses
the road descends the hill and leaves the
township of Houghton upon the left. This
village includes a population of about one
hundred, and is bisected by the road which
passes over Anstey’s Hill to Adelaide. To
the left is situated the beautiful estate of
Highercombe, for many years in the pos-
session of Sir B. D. Boss, and noted for
its production of wines—some of them
having a reputation extending far beyond
the limits of the colony—and fruits.
An immense amount of fruit is grown in
the locality, and extensive orchards of


young trees indicate that the production to the city we pass through long stretches
is increasing. Large quantities of straw- of sloping or gently undulating land upon
berries are raised from the same land, the which scientific cultivation has been de-
rows of plants being in some oases placed
between the fruit-trees. The end of the
valley, however, is soon reached. There
is another rise in the road, at the summit
of which is seen the entrance to the track
leading down to the valley in which the
estate of Glen Ewin is situated. Here
fruit-preserving operations are carried on
upon a large scale, the “Glen Ewin”
jams having a reputation coextensive with
the colony’s. Mr. George McEwin, the
founder of this establishment, after serv-
ing his generation faithfully and well in
the encouragement of agricultural and
horticultural industries, a few years ago
passed away, and the business of fruit
growing and preserving is now carried on
by his sons. Continuing in the way to
Adelaide there is another deep cutting,
and then we pass down a long valley
winding towards the level land beyond.
Parts of the gully are cultivated, the soil
being extremely rich, and a’windmill is
used for raising water for the use of the
inhabitants of Teatree Gully. As the
road emerges upon the open country this
township is gained. It is the centre of a large
farming and fruit-producing district, which
includes nearly all the sloping ground at
the foot of the range. The adjacent hills
yield large quantities of fine white clay,
admirably suited for pottery, and there is
no doubt that as South Australia develops
into a large producer of preserves and
fruits for exportation Teatree Gully will
become a commercial and manufacturing
centre. Freestone, iron ore, and even
promising indications of coal exist, the
quarries of the first-named material yield-
ing an unfailing supply. Coming nearer
veloped to a very large extent, and farm-
ing by means of steam machinery may be
seen in full operation. These stretches,
however, belong rather to the plains
than to the hills, and do not come
within the scope of this article.
On leaving the bridge over the River
Torrens near Millbrook, if the traveller
be adventurous enough to follow the
course of the Torrens itself, he will find
some very rough work before him. The
hills encompass the valley of the stream
on both sides, and in some places the
ravine Is most precipitous and romantic.
But for a distance of some seven or
eight miles there Is little to be seen but
wooded hills, which are only used for
grazing a few sheep, and which on
account of their inaccessible nature are
scarcely suitable for any other purpose,
unless, perhaps, for wattles, and, in
places, for vines. On reaching to
within a mile or two of the frown-
ing crest of Black Hill a stream
is reached, called Fifth Creek,
which Is in fact the longest tributary of
the River Torrens, and which drains the
country backward from Norton’s Summit
and Uraidla. It is in this locality that
the favourably known gardening and
fruitgrowing district of Montacute is
situated. The fruit garden owned by
Mr. Joseph Curnow, J.P., at Monta-
cute is indeed one of the finest in
the colony. But there is a vast extent
of good fruit-growing land near the
Black Hill at present applied to but
little purpose, and which will yet
prove a source of wealth to many
families.


XII.—FREELING TO ANGASTON.
“Ten years ago,” saida leading resi-
dent of Angaston to me the other day,
‘* I don’t suppose you could have found a
more poverty-stricken crowd in all Aus-
tralia than the majority of the farmers
round about Angaston and Tanunda.
Yet at the present time the people in that
part of South Australia are perhaps the
most comfortable In the colony.”
The statement was rather a striking
one, and I wished to see for myself the
condition of the population, and to in-
vestigate in some measure the causes
which have brought about so striking
an alteration. The best approach to
Angaston is by way of Freeling, the
first of the two railway stations
between Roseworthy and Kapunda.
Although this district is not properly within
the scope of my observations I cannot
refrain from turning aside to glance at
Mr. Marshall’s farm, which lies not far
from the Freelicg Railway Station. The
interest in this property centres in the
fact that it comprises land which several
years ago was never worked to any
advantage, several men having lost money
over it. When the present owner came
into possession about three years ago he
started a thorough system of deep
cultivation and careful manuring and
fallowing. Be carried out this policy to
the utmost extent which his means would
admit of. The result has been remark-
able. During the past season when
thousands of acres of sown land in the
colony have not yielded anything fit for
reaping, some parts of this farm at
Freeling, in spite of the dry
weather, gave 35 bushels of oats
to the acre. His crops throughout,
indeed, have been moat healthy and
vigorous, and have given a highly remune-
rative return. In addition to this,
poultry-rearing on a large scale has been
undertaken by the thrifty housewife,
and by means of an incubator chickens
are hatched out score after score with the
greatest economy and celerity. The result
is that fresh eggs for the Adelaide and
Melbourne markets are produced in such
quantities as to furnish quite an income
of themselves. It has often been said
that poultry-rearing as a separate industry
does not pay, but experience goes to show
that on an ordinary farm where there is so
much from the fields, yards, and house
which can be picked up by fowls or
thrown to them as food, the industry is a
very hopeful one. Besides this form of
enterprise the owner keeps a few dairy
cattle and pigs, from which also be
derives a fair amount of profit.
Of Freeling itself, which is upon
the plains, nothing need now be
said. The hill district in this part of
the country really commences at the smell
township of Daveyston, a place which
occupies the same relative position on the
road to Angaston that Teatree Gully does
on the way to Gumeracha. The hills at
this spot begin to appear in the form of
gently undulating mounds of grassy
country, with a limestone or clayey
subsoil. A moderate quantity of the
surrounding land was cropped for hay
last season, and I was told that
some paddocks have yielded 2 tons
to the acre. The farmers In this
part of the colony for the most part are
alive to the value of manuring, and it is
stated that In cases where a man has been
able to obtain a moderate amount of
manure from stock, the results, especially
during the past season, have been sur-
prising.
As the town of Greenock is approached
the hills, although still very low, become
more decided in form. The ti-tree,
which is sparsely spread over some of the
first hills, gives place to small bluegum
and sheaoak dotted freely over open park-
like country. The great majority
of the people at Greenock are Ger-
mans, as indeed is the case over
the whole of this part of South
Australia, with the exception of
one or two townships. Greenock itself is
a quiet place, devoted mainly to the
business of milling and chaff-cutting, and
of supplying the neighbouring farmers
with goods from the local stores. One
man in the locality drives a good business
in collecting eggs from the surrounding
farmhouses, chiefly for the supply of the
Melbourne market, and his carts loaded
with large casks in which the eggs are
packed may occasionally be seen making
their way to the railway station at Free-
ling. Some of the thrifty housewives
of this part of the colony are able
to make by their poultry a com*


fortable addition to the earnings of been constructed during the last three
their husbands. In the matter
of wheat-growing the district has been
fairly successful in times past. But some
of the landhasbeen seriously Impoverished
by injudicious cropping.
To the eastward of the road between
Daveyston and Greenock lies the interest-
ing and important village of Seppel tsfield.
The valley in which this place is situated
presents a most pleasing appearance from
an eminence on the road. Extensive vine-
yards cover the face of the hill, which
slopes toward a little creek. A large
orchard lies a little closer at hand. Cattle
and sheep are grazing on the grassy land
further up the hills, and the chimney-
stacks and distillery of the Seppeltsfield
vineyard property combine with the
houses of the village and one or two
windmills to lend a picturesque character
to the scene. Mr. Benno Seppelt, the
vigneron, is in many respects a remark-
able man, having been one of the pioneers
in the encouragement of grape-growing
throughout this district, and a visit to his
premises throws a flood of light upon one at
least of the causes which have enabled the
people to rise from their former condition
of comparative poverty. The vintage begins
In March, the beginning of the month
this year being selected owing to the
earliness of the season. Over 150 grape-
growers bring in the produce of their
vines in carts to Seppeltsfield, the grapes
being merely thrown in loosely. Mr.
Seppelt always insists upon conducting
the whole operation of winemaking in his
own establishment. He has only about
115 acres of vines at Seppeltsfield, but
owing to his extensive connection he is
enabled to secure the produce of nearly
1,000 acres, from Angaston, Tanunda,
and right down as far as Lyndoch.
Further than that he does not, as a rule,
care to have grapes brought for fear of
injury in transit.
The growth of the wine trade Is illus-
trated by the fact that so far as the
market is concerned Mr. Seppelt could
dispose of four or five times the quantity
of wine which he makes at present. Large
orders from England and elsewhere have
had to be declined in consequence of
want of room in which to store the pro-
duce of the grape. This year the presses,
vats, and tanks will be taxed to their
utmost capacity, and the produce pur-
chased will be about 100 tons more than
last year. On the average about 200,000
gallons of wine are now made each year,
and the new cement tanks which have
years bring up the total capacity
of the storage to about half a
million gallons. Last year the total
quantity of wine made in the colony
was about 710,000 gallons, the increase
upon the previous year being nearly
200,000 gallons. The total stock held
in South Australia last year was over
2,000,000 gallons, and this year it will
probably be nearly 3,000,000 gallons.
This rapid increase explains the reason
why Mr. Seppelt has laid the foundations
of his wine stores on a very extensive
scale. Only the first storey of the large
store has been completed and covered
with a temporary roof, and as two other
storeys will hereafter be added the
capacity of the place will be enor-
mously increased. The distilleries
just across the creek towards Davey-
ston are already three or four storeys
high, and strong and substantial buildings
in which the vinegar works are carried
on have a very large capacity. In addi-
tion to this the buildings include some
fine stables, a piggery, and outhouses
for the accommodation of sheep and cattle.
Passing through Greenock we again
meet with open park-like country, and the
road crosses two or three low ranges
upon which the sappling gum-trees
and sheaoaks grow in very large
numbers. There is still an immense
extent of uncleared land, and although
perhaps it would be advisable not to
interfere with the timber on the
summits of the ridges, yet there is
certainly ample room for clearances on
the lower land away towards the ranges.
Some of the long slopes in this beautiful
country are at present cultivated for wheat
and hay, and owing to these products,
and other sources of income, such as
vines, fruit-trees, pigs, eggs, honey, &c.,
many of the farmers are very comfortably
off. There is little change in the
appearance of the country for about four
miles on this route, until Nuriootpa is
reached at a distance of forty-seven
miles from Adelaide, and almost exactly
ten miles from Freeling. The town-
ship is usually referred to by the
local residents as Angas Park, or more
familiarly as “ The Park,” an estate of
the late Mr. George Fife Angas, having
extended right along cne side of the road.
The great majority of the land has been
sold and there are a fair number of small
proprietors. The town itself is a very
substantial one, with handsome stone
buildings and several stylish residences,


quite equal to those of good quarters in Salter, an old resident of the neighbour-
Adelaide. The large building at the
left side of the road on entering
the township is the jam factory,
which now belongs to Messrs. D. & J.
Fowler. It is a severely plain structure,
comprised chiefly of galvanized iron, but
having accommodation for a large amount
of business. Employment is afforded
during the proper season for dozens of
hands, the majority being girls Ihlng in
the neighbourhood, who are engaged for
the work of paring and coring the fruit,
placing it in tins, pouring in syrup,
putting on and soldering lids. Not far
distant there is a wide area of land
partly cleared and partly scrubby,
extending over about 900 acres, which
the firm have secured for further opera-
tions in the direction of fruit-growing.
Some of the local residents round about
Angaston find it a great advantage that
their children are enabled to earn some-
thing without having to live away from
home owing to the presence of the
jam factories and winemaking estab-
lishments. The girls in the preserv-
ing works seem to be a healthy,
merry lot, to judge from their appearance
and the lively way in which they go about
their work.
Onwards round the corner of Angas
Park and towards the town of Angaston
the road runs for the most part through a
beautiful open plain scattered over with
fine trees, and covered in places with
vineyards extending in area from twenty
or thirty up to about 100 acres.
These vineyards are on the level
plain quite close to the road, and as one
passes along the fences the plants present
straight lines at intervals, not only when
looked at from the broadside, but also
when viewed diagonally. So great is the
care with which the vines are planted that
cne scarcely ever sees a crooked line or
even a single plant placed irregularly. It
is a very healthy sign for the winemaking
Industry that the majority of the vine-
yards afford evidences of recent planting
to an extent greatly in excess of the areas
laid down in vines some years ago.
Passing along towards Angaston one can
notice in some places three or four grades
of vines, the oldest being perhaps in
one corner of the vineyard, while
the others of smaller size and diffe-
rent shade of green occupy the parts
of the land brought under cultivation by
the proprietor in successive years. Close
upon the town of Angaston one of the
finest vineyards belongs to Mr. Edward
hood, whose house is on the rising ground
to the left of the road near Angaston, and
who possesses very complete appliances
for the making of wine. It is interesting
to notice how rapidly the two operations
of growing vines and of making wine are
becoming separated from one another.
There are in this district four makers who
have studied the subject ®f winemaking
very carefully, and who from year to year
purchase a larger and larger portion
of their grapes from the neighbouring
vineyards. These winemakers are Mr.
Benno Seppelt, Mr. Edward Salter,
Messrs. S. & W. Sage, and Messrs. S.
Smith & Sons, of Yalumba, a mile or two
beyond Angaston, who also do a large
business in tinning fresh fruit. With
regard to Mr. Seppelt mention has
already been made of the fact that
he purchases the produce of over
150 vineyards. I learn from my en-
quiries that each of the others makes
up the produce of some forty or fifty
vineyards. There must therefore be in
the district from 300 to 350 growers
of vines, and when one considers that
many of the vineyards have not yet
reached the productive stage it seems
likely that the latter number has already
been reached. The usual practice in
laying-in a vineyard is to obtain
the young rooted plants from
some nursery or locality where
the ground is watered by springs
or is otherwise suited for stimu-
lating the young growth. The land
is well ploughed and the vines planted out
at distances of about a couple of yards
from one another or rather less. A two-
year-old vine gives a small return, but it
is well to sacrifice this in order to pre-
serve the strength of the plant. At three
years old a middling crop may be gathered,
but this again should not be allowed to
grow to maturity, unless in exceptional
cases. In and after the fourth year a good
return may be looked for—say 3 tons per
acre of grapes, at an average price of from
£4 to £5 per ton. The age of the grape
vine is indefinite, plants being in
existence over 100 years old. One
plantation may be expected to serve a
man for a lifetime.
Angaston is moat picturesquely situated
in a valley which runs up towards some
low undulating hills, and through which a
perennial stream of beautifully clear water
makes its way, crossing the road in the
middle of the town and filling a trough
built by the roadside. The main street is


adorned with a fine row of Moreton Bay of the place. The town and neighbourhood
figa, and some of the noble wide-spreading
gumtrees have been judiciously left
growing by the way. The road divides at
a point where the Institute on the left
side forms a conspicuous object, and
several streets are to be seen on the right-
hand side. The distance of Angaston from
Adelaide is fifty-one miles, of which thirty-
seven miles are by rail to Freeling
and fourteen by coach. The latest ten-
dering for the mail contract has resulted
in the appointment of a rival to Hill and
Co,, so that some competition in the
coaching is anticipated. As a place of
residence Angaston is one of the most
pleasant localities that I know in South
Australia The late Mr. George Fife
Angas had a peculiar faculty for attracting
men of ability to the locality In which he
had invested his fortune. The beautiful
park and residence at Lindsey Park, about
two miles beyond Angaston, is replete
with memories among old colonists. The
days of its glory are now apparently
passed away, and for many years
the town of Angaston itself has been
practically at a standstill. If, how-
ever, there is a great future
for winemaking and fruitgrowing, and
of this I am thoroughly convinced,
then most assuredly there is a great future
for Angaston. There are some who put
great faith in the mineral riches of the
neighbourhood, and speak enthusiastically
of the gold to be found there, to say
nothing of the other metals and of
marble, of which there is large store. It
is not too much to hope that some day
the underground treasures will be brought
to light and help to revive the prosperity
have suffered like the rest of the colony
from the depression that has prevailed, and
the handsome building on the right of the
road beyond the centre of the township
built for the local branch of the Com-
mercial Bank of South Australia, and
known locally as “ The White Elephant,”
remains as a local memorial of a most
anxious period. The district of course
is mainly an agricultural one, and
as such it will continue to be
characterized by a certain amount of
quietness. But there is evidently a
satisfactory amount of Improvement
taking place. The local flourmill, for
instance, has been fitted with fine roller
machinery, and nuts through a good quan-
tity of grain from the neighbourhood and
from the country across by Truro and the
North Rhine beyond the eastern range of
hills The area of fruitgrowing in the
neighbourhood has very largely increased
during recent years, and some wonderful
results have been obtained in the produc-
tion of grapes. One farmer—Mr. H. H.
B. Pepperell —quite close to Angaston has
thoroughly tested the value of irrigation
as applied to viticulture. In one part of
his vineyard he has three-quarters of an
acre well situated for irrigation from
springs on the ground. From that area he
obtained last year no less than 12 tons of
grapes. This is at the rate of 16 tons of
grapes, worth say £7O, for an acre of land.
I wonder whether there is any other equal
area of land in Sooth Australia which
produces as large a return as this. Cer-
tainly I should think that such an experi-
ence is conclusive as to the value of
irrigation for vines.


XIII.—ANGASTON TO GAWLER.
I had already, In the course of my trip
from Freeling to Angaston, obtained a
tolerably clear Idea of the causes which
have led to the present comparative
prosperity of the people living beyond the
Barossa Ranges. It was quite easy to see
that under the regime of wheatgrowing
alone a farmer with one or two sections
including eighty or 160 acres would still
be a poor man, even If he netted £1 to
80s. an acre oif his land each year clear of
all expenses. But when he came to have
forty or fifty acres laid down in vines and
fruit-trees and could secure £8 or £lO of
income from every acre so treated ; when
he found that he could feed pigs and
other live stock on the refuse of
his orchard and vineyard, and could
conduct half a dozen other industries
on a small scale, the whole aspect of the
matter was changed. Incomes of from
£5OO to £l,OOO per annum have become
not uncommon in the district. So I was
told before I inspected the country. I
can quite believe it after having done so.
Passing through Angaston and taking
the left-hand turning for a couple of miles
one comes upon a valley beyond a steed
decline in which is the property owned by
Messrs. S. & W. Sage. The proprietors
of this place supply fruit to the neighbour-
ing jam factories, and have some magni-
ficent specimens of apples, pears, &c., to
show. But their own business is chiefly
that of wine-making, and they buy
annually from about forty growers,
besides having a fair - sized vine-
yard of their own. The vines have
been planted along the sharp slope to-
wards Angaston, and yield some very fine
Frontignac and champagne grapes, besides
other more common kinds. The severe
frosts of last winter played havoc with all
the vines at the bottom of the hollow,
although those on a higher level are
perfectly healthy and in full bearing. It
would be impossible to obtain a more
striking illustration of the fact that cold
air being heavy tends to collect in the
hollows of the earth’s surface, and that
the dangers of frost-biting are greatest
in the most sheltered localities. As makers
of wine Messrs. Sage, like the majority
of others in the colony, now find that it is
an advantage to use for fortifying purposes
only their own pure distilled grape spirit
Instead of the spirit which Is extracted from
potatoes. The cost of this fortifying is
greater, but the grape spirit is sparingly
used, and the results are said to be ex-
tremely satisfactory. Indeed, this is one
of the causes of the recent great improve-
ment in the South Australian light wines.
Messrs Sage are now evidently laying
the foundations of a large business.
But jams and preserves are equally in-
teresting with wine. Coming back to Angas-
ton, and making the right-hand turning, we
arrived in about a mile at the establish-
ment of Messrs. S. Smith and Sons. The
presence of this firm and of Messrs. D.
and J. Fowler in the neighbourhood of
A ngaston has given a very considerable
Impetus to the Industry of fruitgrowing.
I had already seen in the neighbourhood
of Greenock a large fruit garden owned
by one of the Brothers Seppelt, and pro-
ducing all the leading classes of fruit,
such as peaches, apricots, apples, pears,
plums, &c., nearly all of which are
made into jams or preserves. Various
other orchards had been noticed, but I
was told on that side of the hills that the
crop had been rather light this year.
Round about Angaston, however, the
fruit-trees have been very productive.
One grower out beyond Angaston has
raised apricots to the value of £450 from
twenty acres of land. I saw a row of
twenty-three apple-trees at Yalumba, as
Messrs. Smith’s estate is called, which
yielded 300 bushels of stone-pippin
apples. One tree alone gave thirty
bushels, and another about thirty-five
bushels. These results of course
are phenomenal, but in regard to fruit-
growing in general as an industry it
may be said that the eagerness of the resi-
dents to put under fruit-trees the largest
possible area of ground is the best practi-
cal evidence that profitable returns are
being secured. Young apricot-trees for
planting have been in such demand that
on one road near Angaston last year no
less than 150 vehicles went through in a
single day with apricot-trees from the
nurseries. These latter establishments
indeed have proved quite insufficient to
supply the demand for trees, especially
as there 1s a heavy drain on them, due to
the establishment of the Murray Irriga-
tion Colonies.


,f Apricots are being overdone,” said fruit as well as the wine industry will in
one local resident to me, and I was anxious
to find out what sort of market Messrs.
Smith & Sons find for their apricot pre-
serves at present, and what reasonable
expectations there are of an outside
market being opened up.
“ Not enough to supply the demand”
was the answer to the first question. I
went into the spacious preserving factory,
a big square building with a cement floor,
quite smooth enough for that of a skating
rink. Some girls were busy paring and
cutting up pineapples, which were
packed into large tins and preserved in
syrup. These pineapples of course have
to be imported, and the local fruit-trade
is at present in a quiet period of the year.
But during the past season the firm have
put up and sold no less than 65 tons of
apricot jam and 20 tons of preserved
apricots, making in all 85,000 tins. These
figures with reference to one kind
of fruit alone, give to the visitor an
idea that the ample space provided at the
factory is fully required. If all the tins
of jams and preserves turned out in one
year at this place were piled up in the
factory to a height of 5 or 6 feet, they
would fill the room to overflowing. And
yet the firm are not able to overtake all
the orders which they receive.
But I wanted *to know specially some
particulars about that part of the preser-
ving Industry which seems to have most
chance of finding a future market in
England. I had tasted in London not
long ago some stewed apricots brought
from California, and now largely used in
England for table purposes. Some of them
are preserved in tins filled up with
sweet syrup, while others are merely
stoned, divided into halves, and
slightly dried by the ordinary
drying process. Before being used they
only required to be soaked in water in
order to become juicy and fresh, almost
like fruit just plucked from the tree.
They are then ready for stewing. At the
works at Angaston both these methods of
treating apricots have been successfully
worked, and the preserves in tins are
very popular in Australia. So long as
the makers find an abundant local market,
and are unable to secure sufficient fruit to
supply that market, there is no necessity
to go abroad for trade. But for the satis-
faction of those who are planting fruit-
trees in large numbers it is well that it
should be known that methods are being
worked by which European markets can be
opened up besides those of Australia. The
future furnish a large item of Australian
export. In the matter of wine It may
be mentioned that Yalumba contains
storage sufficient for a quarter of a million
gallons, and that wine making is pursued
as successfully as preserving.
Returning to Nuriootpa, or Angas Park,
we take the turn to the southward, and very
soon find ourselves on a peculiarly interest-
ing plain. The country is not perfectly
but very nearly level, and abounds in rich
soil with in places a subsoil of red clay,
varied with patches of limestone, rough
marble, &c. It la for the most part
either clear or only sparsely timbered,
and forms really a continuation of
the open park-like country around Angas
Park. The creek which runs in the
same direction as the road is the North
Para River, usually referred to by the re-
sidents as the Gawler River. Out to the
east there is an irregular mass of hills
forming parts of the Barossa Ranges, and
dividing off the valley of Tanunda from
that of Tarrawatta. From the latter
place, at a distance of a mile or two to the
eastwards, a side road brings us to the
North Rhine country, including Keyneton
and Eden Valley, where the hills rapidly
slope downwards to Sedan and the Mur-
ray Flats. The influence of the Barossa
Ranges is to a very large extent to cut
off the rainfall from the lower country out
toward the Murray. The consequence is
that while the rainfall averages
25 inches at Angaston, or rather at
Coll ingrove, and 22 inches at Tanunda,
It is only about half that amount for
the plains to the eastward. Not only is
this the case, but the number of wet days
on the higher level is considerably more
than double that which may be experi-
enced on the lower.
“What a large vineyard!” is the ex-
clamation which naturally escapes one in
passing through the five miles of distance
between Nuriootpa and Tanunda. In the
vicinity of the road the paddocks with
vines are placed so near to one another
that the general effect is that of an im-
mense estate devoted to viticulture. As
a matter of fact, however, the bulk of the
land is occupied by small holdings, and
this perhaps is the reason why so much
of it has been turned to such excellent
account. Here is a place where the
owner has forty acres in fall bearing and
a similar area just recently planted, while
he is preparing to lay in more vines dur-
ing the ensuing season, Next to him is
another man whose operations are exactly


similar, only that they are on a more
limited scale. Further on there is a
smaller holding upon which some twenty
acres of vines and fruit-trees are inge-
niously interspersed with large quantities
of pie-melons spread over the space be-
tween the trees and vines. The quantity
of pie-melons raised in the district is very
large indeed, and it is strange that one
does not more frequently see tins of jams
and preserves labelled with the name of
this kind of melon. I am informed
that the Angastou factory does not use any
pie-melon. The area of vineyards along
this part of the road is simply astonishing.
Close to the highway the rich soil com-
mands a high price, but I understand that
back towards the hills there is plenty of
good vineyard country which is obtain-
able at a rate of seven or eight pounds
per acre, and a man can do better
on forty acres of this than he could
ou 400 acres of wheat land with a
poor rainfall. With regard to fruit-
growing some good hints are to be
obtained in the neighbourhood of
Tanunda. Close to the river, about half
a mile from the road, there are several
large orchards which thrive well, notwith-
standing the attacks of that formidable
enemy the frost. This evil has been very
successfully combated by one firm of
fruitgrowers by means of tar-smoke.
Fagots of wood are smeared with tar and
placed in open kerosine tins all over the
hollow parts of the garden. When the
approach of a frost is suspected, the men
rise early in the morning and put a fire-
stick into each tin. The effect is to cover
the orchard with a dense cloud of smoke,
which protects the trees from the frost and
the sun’s rays.
Tanunda is in the middle of a large
plain, where the road touches the river.
It has a very clean and tidy appearance
with its white road and white buildings,
its broad main street, bordered by well-
grown Moreton Bay fig-trees, and its
general air of substantial comfort. Here,
as in other places in the hills districts, I
heard stories of enterprising men who sold
but their holdings for a mere song in
order to take up land in the dry areas,
and who have always regretted the step
then taken. Tanunda is in a very good
position for a local centre of industry
and it has been proposed to form a Com-
pany for the purpose of engaging in the
making of wine. The present winemakers
are not adveise'to such a proposal, as they
feel now that the unlimited outside
market has been opened up that the more
wine of good quality that is made the
better are the prospects of the trade as a
whole. The great thing that is needed
for the advancement of the wine industry
is a large increase in the cellarage or
storage. Any new investment of capital
having this object in view would be gladly
welcomed. The establishment of a wine-
store to hold, say 2,000,000 gallons, at
some convenient centre such as Gawler or
Port Adelaide, or at the metropolis
itself would give an immense impetus to
the growth of the vine, for it would set
free the whole of the cellarage of the
winemakers themselves for the reception
from year to year of simply one year’s
vintage, so that instead of having to store
his wine for three or four years, or a
longer period, the winemaker would
dispose of all but the year’s supply to the
proprietor of the storage cellar. It would
pay the vignerons to accept very reason-
able rates for their wine with the object
of setting free the bulk of their storage.
After leaving Tanunda we pass south-
wards across a plain which bears a striking
resemblance to that upon which Adelaide
is situated. To the eastwards are seen
the Barossa Ranges, with the Kaiserstuhl
rising in about the same relative position
as Mount Lofty. Further down the plain
runs into a long valley, ending up in the
high land round about Mount Crawford,
and in which Jacob’s Creek, a tributary of
the North Para, takes its rise. A large
area of the land in the vicinity of the road
is known as Jacob’s Flat, after the owner
of the extensive property. The place in
eludes one of the prize farms of the colony.
Dairying is conducted here on a large scale,
about 200 cows being kept in the grass-
paddocks. The introduction of the
cream-separator and other modern
Improvements has had a very beneficial
result, the amount of butter and cheese
produced being now very large. From
time to time Mr. Jacob has gone very
enthusiastically into the raising of various
classes of produce for the market, such as
bacon, cheese, &c., and the estate is with-
out, doubt capable of supporting an
immense amount of profitable agricultural
industry. By growing fodder-plants the
people between Tanunda and Rowland’s
Flat have very largely increased the
capacity of their land, which in
some caces is made to maintain from
two to four head of cattle to an acre.
Sorghum is one of the favourite fodder-
plants, and the high stalks and broad,
fresh, green leaves of this giant species of
grass may be seen in almost every direc-


tion. It grows wonderfully under the all his improvements or pay rent for them,
influence of Irrigation. One local resident the Company has found that nearly all its
tried an experiment which proved that
under Irrigation the sorghum plant grows
to a height of nine and a half feet although
without this artificial assistance, but under
exactly similar circumstances otherwise it
only rises to two and a half feet in height.
Mangels, rape, and Indian corn are also
used as fodder-plants.
The plain of Jacob’s Flat ends at the
corner of the North Para River, where
the stream makes a sudden turn to the
west. At this place the hills approach
close to the river, and some picturesque
nooks are to be noticed. Down amongst
the low hills lies the settlement known as
Rowland’s Flat, one of the richest patches
in South Australia in proportion to its
area. The soil is magnificent, and bad
seasons are practically unknown. The
value of irrigation is certainly understood
here. I counted within about a quarter
of a mile no less than eight windmills,
which are used for watering the land. It
is, therefore, no wonder that the vines
and fodder plants on this flat look large
and healthy. The people of the village
are chiefly Germans and have their own
Lutheran Church. A short distance to
the south-east, among the undulating bills
towards the ranges, there are several
swamps or lakes of fresh or slightly
brackish water. One of these was at one
time quite empty and was used by a
settler for farming purposes. It was
rather an unpleasant experience for this
man to find after some unusually heavy
rains that his farm was converted into a
lake.
Our way now lies to the south-west,
towards Lyndoch Valley, and we leave the
North Para River not to strike it again
until Gawler is nearly reached. The soil
continues to be of good character, and
much of it has evidently been at one time
placed under crop. The trees have been
killed many years ago by the process of
ringing, and the furrows may be noticed
over a large area of the land. But the
paddocks are covered with that useless
weed the stinkwort, and the land is only
used for grazing a few stray head of
stock.
“ It Is Company’s land” is the explana-
tion which is volunteered on my enquiring
the reason of this comparative desolation.
The South Australian Company in the
early days of the colony secured the great
bulk of the best land in the vicinity of
Lyndoch, Adopting a system of leases
under which the tenant had to abandon
land has gone out of cultivation. The
conditions of the terms imposed were in
some cases that the tenant should put up
a substantially built residence of six
rooms and leave it to the Company ; or
in others that he should plant twenty
acres of vines, worth say £25 an acre,
and twenty acres of lucerne, these im-
provements also becoming the property
of the Company. The feeling on this
subject seems to be very strong in the
district.
“Talk about Irish landlordism and
rack - renting” said one local resident.
“You won’t find It much worse in
Ireland than it is in some parts of South
Australia.” There is certainly a large
amount of good land near Lyndoch, the
deserted condition of which requires some
explanation. But to the south and west,
near Barossa, and right down through
Humbug Scrub and on to Mount Gawler,
there is an immense amount of scrubby,
comparatively valueless, country. I say
comparatively, because after leaving
Tanunda one is apt to be fastidious about
the quality of the soil. The Hum-
bug Scrub country is covered with
moderate-sized timber and various
shrubs. The soil is sandy in
patches, and covered in most places with
a greater or less amount of sandy drift.
But some of the ground contains good
rich chocolate loam, and there is a
red clay subsoil which suggests the pos-
sibility of successful vineyards being
established. From Lyndoch a side road
passes off 1 to the left and reaches Wil-
liamstown in the midab of the hilly
country which culminates In Mount
Crawford. The distance of this place
from Gawler is eleven and a half miles,
and the scene of the proposed Barossa
reservoir is within about three miles, at
a place where the South Para runs
through a narrow gorge in the hills.
This work if carried out will be the
grandest by far in the colonies, providing
for the storage of two cubic miles of
water. Williamstown is pleasantly situ-
ated, but not extensive, the bulk of the
adjoining land being hilly and merely used
for grazing purposes. The township
of Barossa in the midst of the gold-mining
locality is about four miles nearer to
Gawler. Between this place and Sim’s
Rush, which is still nearer to Gawler, the
whole of the land is spoken of generally
as the Barossa Goldfield. A number
of men have for years apparently made a


fair living by working away at the alluvial
drift. It la In this locality that the Lady
Alice and Enterprise Gold-mining Com-
panies some years ago opened up pro-
mising properties. There is another En-
terprise mine in the district, but this is a
copper-mining property further to the east.
Passing on to Sandy Creek it can easily
be noticed that to the southward there is
a large amount of scrubby and sandy
country, while out to the north and west
lie some beautiful open areas of farming
land, more or less undulating or hilly, in
the midst of which are the towns of Con-
cordia, Sheaoak Log, New Mecklenburg.
As this open agricultural country is
reached the eye also rests upon the great
plain beyond Gawler. The whole of this
country is well occupied for farming pur-
poses, but I believe that Gawler will some
day become a wine-making centre, and
viticulture will become a favourite occupa-
tion. There is a large area of unsold land
in the Hundred of Para Wirra, lying to the
south of the South Para River, and in this
hundred there are fifteen working-men’s
block now under offer, while in Barossa
there are seven. This part of the colony
is certainly capable of supporting a much
larger population than it does at present.


XIV.—A
FRUIT
GARDEN.
being to bring under cultivation a certain
amount of land each year. On the
alluvial soil at the bottom of the gully
the trees are wonderfully prolific. But
it is observable that some of those which
have been planted far up the slope yield
crops of fruit almost if not quite as heavy
as those at the bottom of the gully.
“In this part of the colony at any rate,”
says Mr. Playford in reference to the
trees on the higher levels, “ fruit-trees
get on almost as well without irrigation
as with it.” It is to be noted, however,
that on these elevated slopes the amount
of soakage through the subsoil is very
considerable, and in cutting a trench it is
not at all uncommon to come upon an
underground spring of beautifully clear
water.
As an example of a garden in which
fruit-growing is carried on as a business
concern It would be difficult to find in the
Hills districts a more instructive instance
than the place called Drysdale, including
the residence of the Hon. Thomas Play-
ford. This garden is situated near the
bead waters of the Fourth Creek, about
half a mile to the north-east of the town-
ship of Norton’s Summit. The house is
built upon the rising ground overlooking
the meeting place of two small gullies,
which rnn down towards the valley, in-
cluding the estate of Morialta, owned by
Mrs. John Baker. The upper part of the
valley was in the early days of the colony
a wilderness, such as one might expect to
find close to the summit of a mass of
hills 2,000 feet In height. On the sides
of the hills grew vast quantities of scraggy-
looking gum-trees. The ground glittered
with stony ddbris of sandstone, quartz, and
slate, being, in fact, to outward appear-
ance about as hungry-looking soil as one
would find in a day’s journey. Below the
stones, however, there was a layer of
blackish soil, and at a depth of from 1 to
3 ft. a bed of rich red loam, exactly the
sort of soil which fruit-trees are adapted
to.
On the lower levels of the garden irri-
gation is systematically carried out. A
2-inch iron pipe conducts the water from
a pond in the stream about a quarter of a
mile higher up. The level of the source
of supply is just high enough to make the
water reach as high as the house. On
both sides of the gully portions of the
pipe are furnished with nozzles, to which
pieces of canvas hose may be fixed, and
by this means the water is diverted at will
into any of the numerous horizontal
trenches which pass through the property
at various levels parallel with the main
stream. At the corners where the water
has to be turned from a higher into a lower
trench, the diversion is effected very
simply by means of pieces of galvanized
iron guttering and canvass hose. The
water, as it passes along the trenches,
soaks into the loose alluvial soil and keeps
it beautifully moist and cool.
Mr. Playford is the largest grower of
cherries in the colony, and raised no less
than 15 tons of this fruit during the past
season. The market price varies from 6s,
a case of 48 lb. in the glut of the season to
165., the highest price for which any were
sold this year. Some years as much as
20s. a case has been the wholesale market
price during the Christmas season. But it
is not safe to rely entirely upon one kind of
fruit. The orchard includes apples, pears,
plums, cherries, gooseberries, currants, &c.
There are a few orange-trees, but the
climate at this elevation is rather too cold
for them, and the same remark will apply
At the bottom of the gully the stream
rising in springs within a distance of half
a mile formed a sort of swamp, covered
by a dense growth of shrubs and stunted
trees. The pioneers of the district were
mostly woodsplitters, who worked on the
ranges then known as “ The Company’s
Tiers. ” Turning their attention to market-
gardening, they cleared patches of the
swampy gully, dug channels so as to
confine the stream and to drain the allu-
vial soil, and gradually forsook their old
business of woodcarting, as the require-
ments of the Adelaide market became
greater and greater. The valley still includes
several large and valuable market gardens
which are not divided off from one
another by any fences, so that the
whole place seems as if it were com-
prised in one property. But the part
owned by Mr. Playford is with trifling
exceptions entirely devoted to fruit-grow-
ing. He has about sixteen acres of old
trees in full bearing, and about twenty-
four acres of younger trees in various
stages of growth, the policy of the owner


to apricots and peaches. For years the
apple - trees were affected with the
American blight. Three varieties alone
resisted its withering effects, and these
are found to be the trees whose green sap
is most strongly impregnated with sul-
phate of iron. Since 1882 the pear and
apple trees in the Company’s Tiers have
suffered from a blight on the leaf and
from scabs of a brown colour on the
fruit. It got worse from year to year
until last year it destroyed nearly the
whole crop of both apples and pears.
Only two or three sorts of apples were
free from it, and some of the best kinds
of apples, such as Cleopatra, were nearly
denuded of leaves, and the fruit was
completely worthless. This blight on the
leaf and scab on the fruit is a well-known
disease both in Europe ard America, and
is caused by a parasite fungus named
Fusicladium Dentriticum, which by some
unknown cause has found its way here,
and like all fungoid growths will be
found to be affected by atmospheric
causes. The present year, however, has
witnessed a remarkable change, for almost
every kind of apple-tree has resisted the
scab most effectually. The real secret
of successful fruit-growing, as in almost
everything else, is thoroughness. The
ground should be turned up, right to the
stems of the trees, every year, either by
digging or by hoeing. Ploughing may be
resorted to if the ground is very suitable
as regards levelness and ease of working,
and if the lower branches be removed
from the trees. But it is never so satis-
factory as digging.
The method of rearing a tree is exceed-
ingly Interesting. Here, in a sheltered
spot on one side of the garden, is the
parent cherry-tree, from which all the
others are raised. Its seeds are picked up
from the ground and planted out in rows.
After the first year the seedling plants
are usually subjected to a process of
“budding,” the object of which is to
engraft the fine quality of a superior
variety upon the strength and hardyhood
of a more common one. A leaf-bud is
cut from a tree of a superior variety, and
a slit having been made in the bark of the
young seedling this bud is inserted and
tied firmly with a piece of linen. By-and-
by, when the proper season arrives
and when the bud has become
part £of the seedling, the whole of
the plant above the bud is removed, and
the result is that the tree which rapidly
shoots up next year partakes wholly of the
nature of the bud. In one year a height of
seven or eight feet may be attained. Tho
rearing and grafting of fruit-trees may now
be regarded as an art, requiring a consider-
able amount of skill to produce the very
best effects. Yet it is one which is so
interesting and attractive that there are
few gardeners who do not soon become
familiar with it.
It has already been said that the most
thorough method of cultivating the soil in
the hills for fruit-growing is to have it
dug or hoed once every year. A very
good practice is to dig the ground every
alternate year, and to turn it up with the
hoe in the intervening seasons. Employing
men upon this work an owner will find
that the cost of digging comes to 4d. per
rod or perch, and as each acre contains
160 rods the cost of digging is therefore
at the rate of £2 13s. 4d. per acre each
year. Upon the sloping hillsides the
plan adopted by the men when at work at
this task is to stand facing towards the
hill, and to dig horizontal trenches, turn-
ing over the material, and putting it about
a toot down hill. The consequence of this
plan is that at the foot of the hill there is
always a certain amount of stuff which
has to be thrown into the gully, while the
top trench has to be filled up with
material taken from the unreclaimed
ground up above. At the foot of the hill
all the steepest parts are carefully pro-
tected by dykes or walls of loose stones
piled one above the other, the object of
this being to prevent the ground from
slipping or being washed away, and thus
exposing the roots of the trees.
After a very heavy fall of rain,
such as that which occurred on the first
day of 1889, a certain amount of damage
is usually discovered. Especially is this
the case at Drysdale upon *he side of one
slope on which gooseberry bushes are
planted in between the rows of trees.
The loss of a few of these bushes,
however, does not make much
difference, the price of the homely
gooseberry having fallen to a ridicu-
lously low figure. Last season the jam-
makers could not be induced to offer
more than Is. 6d. per case for this descrip-
tion of fruit. At this price the berries
positively would not pay for picking,
and the whole crop was allowed to rot on
the bushes.
Yet it must not be supposed that this
is a fair specimen of the experience with
other portions of the garden. It may
fairly be estimated that of the ground
which Is covered with fruit-trees In
bearing the annual value of the pro-


duce of each acre is from £5O to inspect this one valley as a sample,
£lOO on an average. The expense of and yon will find that so far as
digging and hoeing may be set the supply of good land for fruit
down at about £2 per acre. Fortu-
nately there Is an abundant supply
of water to be had for nothing, and the
subsoil being not far from the bedrock
always contains a fair amount of moisture.
But it Is easy to see that upon level
ground where irrigation Is resorted to,
and the cost of water 1s £1 or £2 per
acre the expenses of fruit-growing must
be largely increased. Against this con-
sideration, however, there are two matters
which ought not to be lost sight of. In
the first place there are some fruits, such
as oranges, lemons, peaches, and apricots,
which cannot be grown upon the
elevated hills where surface-springs and
moisture in the subsoil are abundant. In
the second place also it is said that a
tree will bear a heavier crop under irriga-
tion than it could yield with no such
artificial stimulus. Certainly in the
garden at Drysdale there are not wanting
some proofs that this is the case. In one
part of the gully several of the fruit-trees
which are planted between two runlets of
water are covered with enormous crops of
fruit. But on the other hand It may be
questioned whether the quality under
such conditions is quite so good as it
would be without an artificial supply of
water. At any rate the owner’s opinion,
as I have said, is that, taking all things
into consideration, fruit can be grown in
the hills quite as well without irrigation
as with it.
Some of the trees upon the upper slopes
have an awkward tendency to break down
their branches by overloading them with
fruit. It is observable as a general rule
that fruit-trees always produce the heaviest
load of fruit upon the one or two branches
which hang downwards furthest towards
the ground. Sometimes these branches
may be propped up by means of trestles.
But even when this is done the chances
are that the branch breaks off at the
point where it rests upon the trestle.
Labour in Australia is too dear to allow
of much work of this sort leaving a margin
of profit, and as a general rule in the
Hills Districts the fruitgrowers allow the
branches to get support from the ground.
In very hot weather the reflected heat
scorches up some of the fruit, but this
loss cannot be avoided.
“Boom for population in the hills?”
remarked the owner of this garden, “ I
should think there is, You have only to
the supply of good land for fruit
and vegetables is concerned the room
for expansion is practically unlimited.”
Here, at Drysdale, on an area of sixteen
acres of old trees and twenty-four of
young ones there are always at least three
men employed in digging. It may be
said that these forty acres of ground
support directly or indirectly five or six
families. At this rate there is room on
the estate of Mrs. John Baker further
down the valley for 100 families, or say, a
population of 500. There seems to be
only one opinion in the hills as to the
immense amount of available land. But
the crucial question is that of how to find
an outside market. The colony of
South Australia exports wool, wheat,
minerals, wine, bark, etc., to the
older countries of the world, and
each one of these articles has given the
foundation of a valuable industry, quite
apart from the local market. Is it to be
the same way with fruit? So far as
regards dried and tinned fruits, the possi-
bility of exportation is proved beyond
doubt. For the exportation of table
fruit special care is required, and experi-
ments have not been altogether successful;
but Mr. Playford entertains no doubt of
ultimate success. Within the past three
years he, in conjunction with several
others, notably Mr. William Merchant,
took part in the exportation of table fruit
sent direct to Covent Garden, London,
and in one or two cases so successful was
the experiment that pears for the table were
sold at 455. per case. In other instances,
however, the fruit was completely spoiled,
and there is reason to believe that it was
frozen owing to the want of constant
supervision. It is a remarkable fact that
although animal food may be reduced to
the lowest temperature without injury yet
nearly all descriptions of fruit become
spoiled directly they are frozen. The
lesson to be derived from this is of course
that the fruit trade must be conducted
upon a different basis from that of frozen
meat. In the meantime fruitgrowers need
not have any fear in planting such trees
as apples, apricots, oranges, and lemons,
for not only is the local market for these
very large, but there is a practical
certainty of foreign exportation in one
form or another. If the products cannot
be sent in their fresh state for table use
they can at any rate be dried for export
or packed in tins with syrup.


XV.—TWO RESIDENCES.
The Hills residence of Mr. J. H.
Symon, Q C., affords a good example of
what may be done in the way of convert-
ing a most unpromising locality into an
estate or farm suitable for a gentleman’s
country seat. It is situated about half
a mile from the Upper Sturt Railway
Station, which lies just above the
boundary of the Government Farm. The
house has been built upon the brow of a
hill looking down a large gully towards
the River Sturt, and just at the spot
where two small gullies join one another.
It is to the further one of these two
smaller valleys that Mr. Symon has
devoted his attention. Fom* years ago
the whole place, excepting about an acre
of an old market garden, was a perfect
wilderness, covered with scrub and iron-
bark forest. The valley has been cleared,
and in its lower portions it is now covered
with mangolds, maize, and sunflowers, as
fodder for stock, and with potatoes and
various vegetables for domestic use.
Strawberries and fruit-trees have been
planted on the sloping ground. Up
towards the house there are several varie-
ties of English trees, such as oaks, plane-
trees, and walnuts, surrounding a lawn,
upon which stands an elegant and com-
fortable summer-house, overlooking the
large valley towards the west,
But it is in regard to the conservation
of water that Mr. Symon’s operations will
prove most interesting to the ordi-
nary visitor, and especially in con-
nection with the reservoir or dam
which he has formed in the upper
portion of the gully. Having occasion to
run a small roadway up the hill, it was
necessary that the track should be taken
across from one side to the other, and of
course an embankment was required.
But instead of constructing a culvert for
the water to escape by, the owner decided
to make the work serve two purposes, by
providing not only for the road, but also
for the storage of water. First of all
a trench was cut across the gully
about two or three feet wide, and
down to the rock, which is not far
from the surface. This waa filled with
puddled clay, and, as the embankment
proceeded, further layers of clay were
added, until the resulting structure con-
sisted of an embankment having in the
inside of it a wall or dyke of clay quite
proof against water. The material chosen
for the upper side of the embankment
was as far as possible of a clayey descrip-
tion, while stones and rubble were mostly
used for the lower side, and provision was
made for the escape of storm waters at
one corner. The result is highly satisfac-
tory. By means of this simple earth-weir
a dam has been formed which stores close
upon a million gallons of water, and the
soakage at ordinary times is very
slight. It may be mentioned that the
area from which the water is collected
consists merely of the highest part of this
small gully, including say twenty or thirty
acres. Prior to constructing the dam Mr.
Symon had built a tank of stone and
cement on the side of the hill, opposite to
the house, as a means of securing a
domestic supply of water. For filling
this tank he uses a simple hot-air engine,
which pumps the water up from a
cemented pool, at the bottom of which
there is a spring. For purposes of
domestic water supply the hot-air engine
has been largely adopted in England and
America, and I believe it is positively the
best form of small motor which can be
employed for any purpose. The pattern,
which is about 4-jj feet in height, will raise
500 gallons of water per hour 80 feet high,
or a smaller quantity to a greater
height. If the lift be only about 10 feet
high, the amount of water thrown will be
between 3,000 and 4,000 gallons per hour.
And what is the cost 1 In the first place
it must be remembered that a hot-air
engine having no boiler is perfectly harm-
less when not attended to, so that no
skilled labour is needed. The only thing
that can happen if it is neglected is that it
stops working owing to the loss of heat.
While the gardener at Mr. Symon’s is en-
gaged upon his ordinary duties, he attends
to the engine every half-hour or hour,
giving it a small quantity of coke. The
total amount of this fuel consumed per
hour is only 4 lb.
The machine consists of two upright
cylinders, between which, and raised
about four feet high, works a flywheel.
One cylinder is the heating-box, In which
the fire is placed, and in which a small
quantity of cool air, on being admitted, is
made to perform its work by expanding,


and by suddenly driving upwards a necessitate a city life of business and
P a^S er > thus effecting half a revolution bustle such a residence affords a pleasing
nr r.hfl flnnrViaoi „4.v. i- t i .1 1 . , c . 0
of the flywheel. The other cylinder is
the cooling-box, containing a kind of
water jacket and another compartment, in
which the air is caused suddenly to con-
tract on being admitted in a hot condi-
tion from the first cylinder. The effect of
this is to pull down the plunger from the
top of this cylinder, and thus to cause
another half revolution of the flywheel.
The rod of the pump is bolted in connec-
tion with this second plunger, and the
pump itself forms part of the engine.
From the tank, which is about thirty feet
above the level of the house, a two-inch
pipe provides an abundant supply of
water, not only for domestic purposes, but
also for numerous standpipes, to which
the hose may be attached.
The water in the dam, of course, is
chiefly intended for irrigation, and
although the system has not yet been
completed, the results which may be
anticipated can be inferred from the fact
that in one place where moisture is sup-
plied from a spring, the maize is growing
to a height of twelve feet. There is
always abundant feed for the cows, which
are kept in the stable on the slope of the
gully. One wall of this structure has
been formed by placing cemented stones
against the sharp declivity of the hill,
which has been cut perpendicular for the
purpose.
Close at hand are the sties, in which
there are always two or three litters of
young pigs of a very good breed. These
porkers are a source of profit, as their
food, being merely refuse, vegetables,
fruit, &c., costs next to nothing, while
the young pigs command a ready
sale. It is difficult, no doubt, to say bow
how far the results obtained upon a
gentleman’s farm can be used as a test of
practical experience by those who have to
earn their living by their operations. On
this point everyone has to judge for
himself, and the owner of the place
to which I have been referring
shows much public spirit in offer-
ing every Information which can
possibly be of any assistance to those
residing in the Hills. It is always an
advantage when experiments such as the
construction of the dam referred to, and
the use of a hot-air pump are carried out
by those who can bear the expense of a
possible failure, the result being valuable
as a guide for all classes of the Hills
population alike.
To professional men whose duties
relief, both mental and physical. But a
farm in the Hills, if large enough, may be
made subservient to another and even
more important purpose. To the pro-
fessional man, who looks forward
to retiring from business and spend-
ing the latter portion of his life
in liberty and comparative ease of mind,
an estate in the hUls, gradually Improved
with an ultimate view to profit, is one of
the best possible forms of investment.
Such an estate is Warrakilla, the residence
of Mr. G. W. Goyder, C.M.G., the
Surveyor General of South Australia. It
is situated on the bank of the river
Onkaparinga, about half a mile beyond
the bridge, by which the road from
Aldgate passes over the scream. The
distance from Aldgate station is about
five and a half miles. Warrakilla was
originally the well-known “ Wheatsheaf
Hotel,” kept by Mr. Warland, but it has
been much enlarged and improved. The
place has an acre or so of garden and
orchard, including some cherry-trees which
are about forty years old. When Mr. Goy-
der came into possession, about nine years
ago, he enlarged the house, planted hedges
and trees, and laid out lawns. A large
mound at the side of the house, near to
the river, was levelled out, so as to form
a circular terrace, bordered by laurel in
the inside, and hawthorn hedges on the
outside, the round space enclosed being
planted with couch grass, which continues
beautifully green and fresh nearly all the
year round.
Plane - trees and oaks are planted
alternately, and here may be seen the
evergreen oak that curious variety
which yields perfect acorns, but leaves as
unlike those of an oak-tree as anything
could be. Nearer to the road there are
some fine specimens of the Pinus Insignis;
the well-known cone-bearing tree, which is
itself of the shape of a huge cone. The
trees now rise to forty-five feet in height,
having grown at the rate of five
feet per annum. The other English
trees as a rule have averaged
three feet each year, and are
by no means fully grown yet. But some
American Oatalpas with graceful stems,
broad yellow-green leaves, and long
clusters of flowers, have grown more
rapidly than any of the others. Further
out upon the sloping ground there are
one or two acres planted with young
walnut-trees.
Thus far it will be noticed that the plan


of the place is merely that of a resi-
dence, with garden and nothing more.
But lower down at the foot of
the mound we find ourselves on
an extensive flat, including fifty
or sixty acres. Here it is that the fodder
is grown for a number of cattle, and in
ordinary seasons the loose alluvial soil
produces abundance of feed, with no
stimulus beyond the ordinary rainfall.
But the land is admirably suited for irri-
gation, and the necessary works for taking
advantage of this fact are now in progress.
A year or two ago the owner definitely
formed the idea of changing the flat from a
mere grazing paddock into an irrigated field,
growing fodder for the support of a large
number of cattle. Colonial cheese is
winning a capital reputation in the
colonies, and one of the most needful
industries is that of dairying. This is the
prime objected aimed at, but of course
the fattening of cattle for the market may
always be carried on side by side with
the breeding of dairy cows.
The broad waterhole of the river-
bed beside the flat is fifteen or
twenty feet in depth, and contains
numerous strong springs. Along the
upper edge of the flat a deep trench has
been dug, and this will form the main
channel for the reception of the water.
Cemented at the bottom and guarded at
the sides it will lose no water by percola-
tion. Two steam pumps near the river
can supply a full stream for this cemented
channel, and the water will be diverted
from different points into the branch
trenches running in various directions across
the field. Underneath the surface of
the ground pipes for drainage purposes are
to be laid, so close to one another that
only one-sixteenth of an inch will be left
for the water to find its way into them.
Pipes of this description may serve two
opposite purposes. When the ground is
too wet they drain it; when it la too dry
they irrigate it. Five distinct drains form
the first portion of the work, and others
will be added as they are required.
Peas grow in great profusion in this
locality, and they are found very useful
for the fattening of pigs. There are six
sties, in which litters of the unclean but
useful animals are being reared for the
delectation of Gentile palates. The
parentage is mixed. On the one side
there is the lean and active Berkshire,
and on the other the fat Essex, with the
burdensome body. Their progeny are,
naturally enough, not only active when
alive, but also weighty when cut up for
sale. Some of the pigs are allowed to
roam round among the peas and acorns,
and they seem to pick up plenty of food.
The system of drainage by means of
pipes has been very successfully adopted
at the orchard, which lies about a quarter
of a mile from the house. Here there are
seventeen acres planted with apples, pears,
cherries, &c. Apricots and peaches are,
of course, out of the question. The
climate is cooler at Warrakillathan it is at
Mount Lofty. At one time a large pro-
portion of the ground was planted with
cherry-trees, which were stunted by some
mysterious disease, and had to be rooted
out. It seemed to be some taint of
heredity, and quite incurable. The
cherries were sacrificed, and apples took
their place. The best of the apple-trees
are to be found down on a small flat
adjoining the Cattle Company’s Creek.
Here, several years ago, the ground was
so wet in winter as to literally drown
some of the trees. Others were in a state
of suspended animation, and had to be
subjected to the treatment for restoring
the apparently drowned. Small pipes were
laid underneath the surface, end to end,
at a depth of two or three feet or more.
Very small spaces were left for the recep-
tion of the water. No less than a mile
and a quarter of this sort of drainpipe
was provided, with outlets to the creek.
The effect was magical. The trees became
healthy and vigorous, and are now bear-
ing heavy crops of very fine apples of the
choicest varieties. The drainage system,
therefore, may be pronounced a success.
But fruit - trees in the hills have
various enemies to contend with. The
orchard, of course, has been carefully
surrounded with wire - netting. But
one portion of the netting hav-
ing been injured some time ago, the
hares got in and destroyed 100 young trees
by eating away their bark. As an extra
precaution the stems of the trees are now
painted with a mixture of lime and
sulphur in oil.
The water supply for the whole place
comes chiefly from an excavation on the
hill across the road from the house, and
further away from the river. The water
is conducted by a syphon-pipe, which can
be set going by means of an exhaust
pump. This tank receives every year
three times as much water as it can hold.
But in the summer it sometimes runs
dry, and then recourse is had to two
400-gallon iron tanks, which can be
filled from a well by means of a simple
chain and bucket pump driven by


by one or two men. This little pump, or stream. Some of these trees were
rather water-lift, Is wonderfuly effective
considering its small size. At various
points standpipes for the supply of
water are to be seen, one being
reserved for the bowling-green, and
another for the tennis-lawn. Down at
the river there are various small boats and
canoes, and several suitable localities for
fishing are pointed out. But what chiefly
interested me was the large plantation of
osier willows along the banks of the
destroyed four years ago by a great bush
fire which swept across the hills. But
the survivors are sufficient to supply in
time quite a moderate income from basket
willow. Indeed, the many sources of
future profit at this interesting place, and
the way in which all the plans have been
laid out, strongly illustrate the well-known
faith of the Surveyor-General in the great
possibilities of productive enterprise in
South Australia.


HUNDREDS.
XVI.—THE
HILLS
The country which has been described
In this series of articles may conveniently
be referred to as comprised within nine-
teen hundreds of the Counties of Ade-
laide, Hindmarsh, and Light. The former
county, in which the metropolis of the
colony is situated, includes all the country
between Gawler and Willunga, being
bounded on the east by the range which
passes Hahndorf, Woodside, and Mount
Pleasant. The County of Hindmarsh
may be called the Southern Peninsula of
the colony, as it comprises the whole of
the country between Mount Barker Junc-
tion and Port Victor on the south, and
Cape Jervis on the south-west. County
Hindmarsh is 1,034 square miles in
area, or almost exactly the same ex-
tent as the English County of Wiltshire,
which includes 1,040 square miles. But
according to the last census Hindmarsh
contained only 10,322 inhabitants, while
Wiltshire had a population of no less than
258,000, although it includes no large city.
The County of Adelaide now contains
probably 130,000 people, but almost all of
these reside in the city or suburbs.
All the counties of the colony are
divided into smaller subdivisions known
as hundreds, and these have as a rule
been marked out in accordance with the
geographical features of the country. Be-
ginning at the metropolis, we find that the
Hundred of Adelaide includes .the land
bet ween the Rivers Torrens and Sturt, and
extends from the Mount Lofty ridge to
the Gulf of St. Vincent. The total area
is 69,520 acres, almost the whole of which
extent has been alienated from the
Crown. There is only one block of 100
acres held under lease from the
Government for grazing and cultivation
purposes. I find, further, that eighteen
working-men’s blocks have been taken up
upon the usual conditions of a twenty-one
years’ term, with right of purchase or of
renewal. There are eleven of these
blocks which have been offered, but are
not yet leased In the Hundred of Noar-
lunga, which stretches down as far as the
River Onkaparinga, there are no less than
117 such vacant blocks, while 124 leases
have been taken up. Leases of other
kinds Include 2,874 acres. The area of
Noarlunga is 76,800 acres, of which 7,190
are still Crown lands. The Hundred of
Willunga, Including the valley of Mac-
laren Vale and WiSurga, right down to
Sellick’s Hill, has been practically all
alienated. Out of an area of 63,360 acres
there are 2,480 acres held under various
leases.
Crossing over the Hills into Dashwood’s
Gully we are in the Hundred of Kuitpo,
which includes a long valley running from
Hahndorf down to Mount Magnificent, a
total area of 79,360 acres, of which more
than half, or 42,727 acres, are held under
leases for grazing and cultivation, &c.
Twenty working-men’s blocks are occupied
and thirty-five unoccupied.
On the other side of the ranges
beyond Sellick’s Hill the same long
valley is continued in the Hundred
of Myponga, running down to Yanka-
lilla. Here a very large proportion of
the land is alienated. Out of 61,440
acres only 2,240 remain as Crown
lands, and 18,215 are under various leases.
Only two “blocks” have been surveyed, and
one is unoccupied. The figures for the
Hundred of Yankalilla, which extends to
Cape Jervis, are somewhat similar, the
Crown lands being 2,700 out of 78,080
acres, and 10,866 acres being on lease.
Seven blocks are now held, and one is
vacant. But when we go further south into
the long Hundred of Waitpinga, stretch-
ing along the coast from Cape Jervis to
Rosetta Head, near Port Victor, we find
that no less than 30,480 acres are still in
the hands of the Crown, out of a total of
65,280 acres, while 18,762 acres are under
different kinds of leases.
The Hundred of Encounter Bay, com-
prising the valley of the Inman, and as
far east as the River Hindmarsh, is about
half held upon lease, the area thus dealt
with being 27,975 acres out of a total of
60,160. No less that twenty-nine work-
ing men’s blocks in this hundred remain
unoccupied, out of thirty-one which were
offered. In the Hundred of Goolwa, run-
ning from the Hindmarsh River to Cur-
rency Creek and up to Mount Jagged,
there are no blocks, and the same may be
said of the next four hundreds to be men-
tioned. Goolwa includes 55,040 acres, of
which 16,590 are under lease. Some of the
land chiefly comprised is what is known as
the Square Waterhole country, amounting
to 3,340 acres, is still in the hands of the


Government. But the bulk of this unsold four vacant blocks out of fourteen.
country is included in the Hundred of
Nangkita, which is bounded by the River
Finniss on the east, and runs away up
towards Willunga. It embraces no less
than 23,080 acres of Crown lands, and
24,295 acres which are held on lease ; so
that in this hundred, out of 74,880
acres, the Crown is still the owner of
nearly two-thirds of the land. But after
leaving the Finniss and proceeding as far as
Strathalbyn and Bull’s Creek, we find that
the case is very different in the hundred
known as Kondoparinga. There are no
vacant Crown lands, and only 12,916 acres
are held upon lease. Further to the
north, in the Hundreds of Macclesfield,
including Mount Barker, of Kanmantoo,
to the east of the mountains, and of
Onkaparinga, there are no vacant Crown
lands, and very few leases. Onkaparinga,
stretching from Hahndorf to Mount
Torrens, and westward to Mount Lofty,
includes 73,280 acres, almost all held by
private persons, the largest owners being
the South Australian Company. The
sixteen blocks which have been offered
have all been taken up.
The valley of the Upper Torrens, in-
cluding Gumeracha and Mount Pleasant,
is known as the Hundred of Talunga,
including 56,950 acres, of which 2,065 are
held on lease. Further north, as far as
the South Para River, the Hundred of
Para Wirra embraces 65,600 acres, chiefly
of the country known as the Humbug
Scrub, 31,596 acres being held under
grazing and ether leases. Nine work-
ing men’s blocks have been taken
up, but eleven remain vacant. In
the Hundred of Barossa there are
Nurlootpa, to the north of the North
Para, and stretching from Rose worthy to
Nuriootpa, is all with the exception of
small reserves held in fee-simple, and
Moorooroo, including Angaston and
Tanunda, is in practically the same posi-
tion, having only 235 acres held upon
lease, and no Crown lands.
The Central Land Board has decided
in regard to all the land to the south
of the Hills Railway, that during the
months of April and May, 1889, every lot
or lease at the disposal of the Government
shall be offered to the public on the most
favourable terms. This offer includes all
the land extending from the railway to
Cape Jervis, and eastwards to Goolwa. It
is intended that the offer shall be of a
liberal description, but the wisdom of
thus parting even on lease with all the land
at once may be doubted. The details which
1 have noted above, and for the majority
of which I am indebted to the kind
courtesy of the officers of the Survey De-
partment, will therefore be of special in-
terest as indicating not only the extent of
the room for expansion in the Hills, but
also the Immediate opportunities which are
now open for those who intend to acquire
holdings from the Government. Maps
showing the localities of various places
now under offer are to be seen at the door
of the old Public Library Reading-room in
Adelaide, and every information is readily
supplied by the officers of the Lands
Office, opposite the Post-Office. The
sketch map given as a supplement to this
day’s issue will be found valuable in
illustrating the topography of the country
I have described.


REGULATIONS UNDER "THE CROWN LANDS ACT, 1888,”
Relating to Leases with Right of Purchase, Perpetual Leases, and Leases of Small Blocks for Working
Men ; also for Surrender of existing leases and agreements to come under the provisions of the Act,
LEASES WITH EIGHT OF PURCHASE AND PERPETUAL LEASES.
Land Boards.
1. Each board shall comprise five members, three of whom shall be residents in the
district for which they are appointed, but shall not be Civil servants. The board shall
hold office for twelve months from the date of appointment, but retiring members shall be
eligible for re-appointment,
2. Each board shall meet whenever summoned by the Commissioner, and each board
shall, at its first meeting, elect a chairman. Three members shall form a quorum.
3 The actual and reasonable expenses of the members of the board, when occupied
upon the duties of the board, shall be paid by the Government, and the non-official
members shall, in addition, be paid a fee of £1 Is. per diem for each day upon which the
board shall sit, including the time exclusively occupied in travelling to and from the place
of meeting.
4. The Commissioner shall from time to time indicate to the several land boards in
writing what land it is proposed to declare open to application within each district, and
shall submit to the boards rough plans showing the manner in which it is proposed to
sub-divide such lands and a general description of the soil, The boards shall forthwith
classify such lands, and decide upon the size of the blocks into which the lands shall be
sub-divided, and fix the price or rental at which it is proposed to declare the said lands
open to lease. Such classification, price, and rental snail be subject to the approval of the
Commissioner, who shall, after according his approval, direct the Surveyor-General to
make the requisite survey, and delineate the lands so sub-divided upon the public maps
of the province ; prepare lithographs of such surveys or sub-divisions for the use of the
boards and the public ; prepare notices for the Gazette, giving number of sections, area,
price and such other information as is desirable for the information of the boards and the
public ; and to do such other things as may be required, in order that the lands may be
leased in accordance with the provisions of “The Crown Lands Act, 1888,”
5. Applications for leases, in terms of the Gazette notice declaring lands to be open to
lease shall be made to the Commissioner in terms specified in such notice; and such
applications shall be referred by the Commissioner to the land board for the district in
which such land is situate, to be dealt with as provided by “The Crown Lands
Act, 1888.”
6. An officer from the'Land Office will attend each meeting of the board to act as
secretary, and to conduct the necessary correspondence connected therewith.
7. The meetings of each land board shall be open to the public, and may be held in any
local courthouse, public building, or other suitable room that may be available.
8. The lands classified by the land board shall, after approval by the Commissioner, be
gazetted as open to application; and the notice thereof shall give full particulars as to
area, price per acre, a general description of the land, and the date up to which
applications will be received by the Commissioner, which applications will, within one
month after their receipt, be referred by the Commissioner to the land board of the
district at its next sitting,
9 In considering applications the board shall have power to summon and examine
applicants, witnesses, and objectors. The board may reject any application, or sub-divide
any block, apportion the rental, and charge cost of re-survey or sub-division to the
applicant The board shall forthwith report to the Commissioner its decision furnishing
the names of the successful applicants, together with particulars of the land allotted to
them, and the rents payable, notice of which shall forthwith be published in the Govern-
ment Gazette.
10. The lessee will be required—
i. To pay the rent annually in advance :
11. To pay all rates, taxes, and other impositions which may be payable in respect of
the leased land during the lease;


ttt. To fence the leased land within the first five years of the term with a fence or wall,
ordinarily capable of resisting the trespass of cattle, and during the remainder
of the term to maintain and uphold such fence in good and substantial repair :
IV. To forthwith commence to destroy and keep the land free of vermin, to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner, during the currency of the lease:
v. To keep and maintain all improvements the property of the Crown, and which, in
the opinion of the Commissioner, may be deemed necessary on the leased land, in
good and tenantable repair and condition :
vi. To insure and keep insured in the full insurable value thereof all buildings the
property of the Crown upon the leased land in the joint names of the Com-
missioner and the lessee, in some insurance office to be approved by the Com-
missioner, and forthwith lodge the policy of such insurance in the office of the
Commissioner, and to forward to the Commissioner the receipts for the premiums
Sayable in respect of such policy within seven days after the same shall become
ue, with a power for the Commissioner to insure on default by the lessee, and
to recover the amount paid for such insurance in like manner as the rent is
recoverable:
vn. Subject to the regulations to permit every mineral lessee or licencee holding a lease
or licence under Part v. of “ The Crown Lands Act, 1888,” of or respecting any
of the demised land, and all persons authorized by him, to have free and
unrestricted access to and egress from the land comprised in such mineral lease
or licence.
11, The Governor may resume, for roads, railways, or tramways, or for sites for towns,
or for park lands, or for mining purposes, or for any public purpose, the whole, or from
time to time any portion of the land subject to the lease : Provided that at least three
months’ notice of the intended resumption shall be given to the lessee, who shall be
entitled to compensation for loss sustained thereby, as provided by clause 31 of Crown
Lands Act, 1888.
12. All Crown lands (excopt town lands) situate within hundreds and schedule D to
Crown Lands Act, 1888, may be leased with right of purchase or perpetual lease.
13. All lands vested in t the Commissioner of Educational Lauds shall be open to
perpetual leasing only.
14. Leases shall be prepared in triplicate and forwarded to the residence given in
lessee’s application.
15. The lessee will forfeit the lease and all moneys paid on account thereof, should he
fail to execute each part thereof within twenty-eight days of the lease being sent to him,
or within such further time as the Commissioners may allow. After executing each part
of the lease the three copies shall be returned to the land office, at Adelaide, for execution
by the Governor. The lessee shall also pay the balance of the first year’s rent on the
land comprised in such lease, and the fees connected therewith.
Leases with Right of Purchase.
16. Leases with right of purchase shall be granted for a term of twenty-one years, with
a right of purchase at any time after six years of the term, at a price to be fixed by the
land board, but such price shall not be less than five shillings per acre. The original lease
shall contain a condition for renewal for a further term of twenty-one years with right of
purchase at any time during the term ; the price to be fixed by the board, and to be not
less than five shillings per acre. The rent for the renewed term of lease shall be fixed by
the board not less than twelve months before the expiry of the original lease.
Perpetual Leases (Including Educational).
17. The rent for the first fourteen years of a perpetual lease shall be that notified in the
Government Gazette. The rent for subsequent terms of fourteen years shall be fixed by
the board by re-valuation at least twelve months before the expiry of every period of
fourteen years.
(As to both Classes.)
18. A lessee under a lease with right of purchase, or under a perpetual lease (including
educational), who shall not, within six months after notice to him of the amount of the
rent fixed by the board on re-valuation for the renewed lease, signify his acceptance of
such re-valuation, shall forfeit his right of renewal, and his lease shall cease and determine
at the expiration of the then current period of his lease, and the land included in such
lease shall be again open to application at the rental fixed by the board.


19. In cases where leases are determined as provided by the preceding section, and also
where a lessee under a lease with right of purchase fails to exercise his right of purchase
at the expiration of his renewed lease, the lands shall be again open to lease at a price to
be fixed by the board, and the improvements made by the former lessee shall be paid for
by the incoming tenant to the Commissioner at a price to be fixed by the board, and by
the Commissioner to the outgoing lessee.
20. Lands that have remained open for a period of three months, or in respect of which
applications have been rejected or refused by the board, may, from time to time, be
re-offered by the Commissioner at such reduced rent as he may, with the advice of the
board, deem proper.
SURRENDER OF AGREEMENTS AND LEASES TO COME UNDER CROWN
LANDS ACT, 1888.
21. Any person holding a credit agreement, a lease of lands formerly held upon credit
but surrendered for a lease, a lease of scrub lands, a ten years’ lease with right of
purchase, a working man’s block, or a lease of lands reserved for leasing, may apply to
the land board for the district through the Commissioner, and on the form prescribed in
schedule 1 hereto, to fix the price and annual rental at which he may obtain a lease of
such land with a right of purchase, and the annual rent at which he may obtain a
perpetual lease. The board shall then fix such annual rent, or price and annual rent, as
the case may require, and submit same for the approval of the Commissioner, who, after
signifying his approval, shall cause the applicant to be informed through the chairman o
the board what the annual rent, or price and annual rental, will be, and thereupon the
applicant may surrender such agreement or lease on the form prescribed in schedule 2
hereto, and obtain in lieu thereof, at his option, a lease with right of purchase, or a
perpetual lease : Provided that when such surrender refers to leased lands situate within
the limits of the reserved district defined in schedule B to Crown Lands Consolidation
Act, 393 of 1886, the right of purchase shall not extend to more than one thousand acres.
22. Any person mentioned in the last preceding section of these regulations, and who
shall have surrendered his agreement or lease for a lease with right of purchase or a
perpetual lease, as therein provided, shall be charged with the rent fixed by the board, as
from the date of the agreement or lease under which the lands were first held, and shall
be credited on account of such rent, and as against any future rent, with all moneys paid
by him since such date on account of the rent or, purchase of such lands, except the first
deposit of 10 per cent.
REDUCTION OP RENTS.
23. Lessees (inclusive of Educational Lessees, but exclusive of Annual Lessees) of lands
within hundreds and of lands within the limits of schedule D to Crown Lands Act of 1888,
who may be paying a rental in excess of what they deem to be the annual value of the
land may obtain relief by a clear statement of their case in writing to the Commissioner,
who shall refer such statement to the local land board for its consideration and recom-
mendation; and should the board recommend a reduction of rent or reduction and
remission of rent, and such recommendation be approved by the Commissioner, he shall
direct that the reduction or reduction and remission be made accordingly: Provided that
an annual return be laid before Parliament, giving the reasons therefor, within one month
of the opening of Parliament for the dispatch of business.
24. The local land board, or any member thereof, may at any time enter upon any
leased land within the district to view and inspect the land or any improvements
thereon.
LEASES OF SMALL BLOCKS FOR WORKING MEN.
122 The Commissioner shall cause such Crown Lands, suburban lands, Crown lands
reserved for the use of the aboriginal inhabitants of the province (except such lands as
are reserved for the use and occupation of the aborigines at Poomndie, Point McLeay,
and Point Pearce), as he may think fit, to be surveyed in blocks not exceeding twenty
acres in area, to be dealt with by the board under Part n. of Crown Lands Act, 1888.
123. The Surveyor-General shall cause such blocks to be properly marked upon the
ground, and delineated in the public maps in the Land Office.
124. Applications for lease shall be made to the Commissioner, and by him referred to
the land board for allotment; but no person shall be entitled to any lea . se ’ l exce Pf
one who 'gains his livelihood by his own labour, and whoffias attained the full age ot
eighteen years.


125. Each application must be accompanied by a declaration that the applicant is over
eighteen years of age. A false declaration as to age will involve forfeiture of the lease
and moneys paid on account thereof.
126. No person shall be entitled, either by transfer or otherwise, to hold a lease, or
have an interest, either directly or indirectly, in more than one block of land leased
under these conditions.
127. The lease shall be for a term of twenty-one years, counting from the first day of
January, April, July, or October next succeeding the day of allotment, with a right of
purchase or perpetual lease as provided in Part n. of Crown Lands Act, 1888,
128. The rent payable under every such lease shall be payable annually in advance,
and every such lease shall bind the lessee to personally reside on such land for nine
months at the least in every year of such term, and shall contain a covenant by the
lessee not to transfer, sublet, assign, or part with the possession of any of the demised
land without the consent, in writing, of the Commissioner, and such other terms and
conditions as the Commissioner shall see fit to require.
129. Personal residence by the wife or any member of the family of any such lessee
upon the demised land shall be considered residence by the lessee.
130. No lessee, under these regulations, shall be entitled to impound any cattle or
sheep trespassing on any land comprised in his lease, and forming portion of or adjoining
a travelling stock reserve, unless such land shall be [enclosed with a fence at least four
feet in height, and sufficiently substantial and close to ordinarily resist the trespass of the
cattle or sheep trespassing.
131. On the lessee making default in payment of rent for a period of three months as
specified in clause 129 of the Crown Lands Act, 1888, or in the observance or performanca
of the condition or covenants for personal residence, or acquiring an interest in more than
any one block of land leased under these regulations, or transferring, sub-letting, or
parting with or disposing of the interests of any portion comprised within the lease,
without the consent of the Commissioner in writing, the lease shall be absolutely void,
and the land, with all improvements thereon, revert to the Crown and became Crown
lands : Provided that the Commissioner may waive'such forfeiture and impose some other
penalty in lieu thereof.
132. The Commissioner retains the right of entry upon any Lands leased under these
regulations, for the purpose of removing surplus waters from springs, waterholes,
reservoirs, or swamps, and of conducting, distributing, or disposing of such surplus waters,
as he may think fit: Provided that no lessee is deprived of water by such entry required
by him for domestic purposes, or for the cultivation of portions of the land comprised
within his lease, or for the supply of stock ordinarily grazing thereon.
133. Lessee to destroy all rabbits and other vermin on the land, and fill up their
burrows; and to destroy all Bathurst burr, star thistle, and other noxious weeds growing
upon the land and upon the half width of Government roads adjacent thereto.
134. The erection of brush fences will not be permitted, and will render the lease liable
to forfeiture.
GENERAL REGULATIONS.
135. Personal or substituted residence is still required by the holders of credit
agreements, working men’s blocks, and scrub leases (in terms of such leases and agree-
ments) held prior to the coming into operation of the Crown Lands Act, 1888, and so
long as such agreements and leases continue to be held, the same limitations as to area
will obtain. Should such agreements or leases be surrendered for leases under Part n, of
the Crown Lands Act, 1888, residence conditions and all limitations as to area will be
dispensed with. Residence by the wife or any members of the lessee’s family will be
accepted as residence on a working man’s block.
136. Any lessee, with the consent of the Commissioner in writing, draining or em-
banking swamp land comprised within his lease, for the purpose of making such land
habitable or productive, shall be entitled, at the termination of his lease, to the value of
such works, in addition to any other improvements to which he may be entitled • Pro-
vided that the improvements so made be valued, and their value added to the upset price
of the land when offered again to lease—the value to be allowed to the lessee, should he
again become the purchaser, or paid to the Commissioner by the highest bidder, and by
him to the outgoing tenant, should he fail to obtain a renewed lease.
137. A fee of £1 will be charged for the correction of any error made in names or other
particulars supplied by the purchaser, selector, or their agent, or for famishing a copy of
lease or otner deed*


138. A fee of two shillings and sixpence will be charged for noting each transfer,
mortgage, probate, or letters of administration.
139 Clerks in the Land Office will be allowed to fill up forms of application and other
forms for the convenience of purchasers, but persons signing such forms will be held
responsible for all particulars contained therein.
140. All applications made under these regulations shall be registered in the Land
Office, iffithe manner most convenient for preserving a record of the particulars of every
application.
141. If any doubt shall arise as to the mode of receiving or dealing with any question
or application in any manner not specially provided for by these regulations, or as to the
true construction to be placed on any regulation relating thereto, the decision of the
Commissioner thereon shall be final.




MAP ILLUSTRATING ARTICLES ON “OUR INHERITANCE IN THE HILLS.”
- SCALE
MILES 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 Z I 0 16 20 MILES
ll+l - - - I 4
SURVEYOR GENERALS OFFICE.ADELAIDE FrvtwirS.Cha*tfcrrd ,lfatttDih/>fpvtpher






E. & W. HACKETT,
Wholesale and Retail
SEEDSMEN AND CORN MERCHANTS,
73, Bundle Street, Adelaide.
SEED wheat
FLOWER SEEDS FROM THE BEST HOUSES IN EUROPE.
Our strains of Pansy, Petunia, Phlox, Stocks, Primula, Calceolaria, Cineraria,
and other Florists’ Flowers are very fine.
AGRICULTURAL SEEDS,
Including Grasses of kinds suitable to the Colony.
THOUSAND-HEADED KALE.
SORGHUM SEED, MAIZE, &c.
VEGETABLE SEEDS
Our List contains all the best and most useful sorts. We pay special attention
to sorts suitable for Market Gardeners.
Boots and Seedling Plants according to Season.
POTTING SOIL, ALSO ENGLISH LOAM, PEAT, AND COCOA WASTE.
pruning and <§ndding (Knives, (Scissors, (Syringes,
SHEARS, SECATEURS, &c.,
AND MANY OTHER GARDEN REQUISITES.
CAROB SEEDS, SEEDS OF INDIGENOUS TREES, SHRUBS, &C.
Including a large number of the Eucalypti.
Fruit Trees, and Nursery Stock of all kinds.
PERUVIAN GUANO, BONE DUST, ROCK SALT, &o.
SUPERPHOSPHATE, NITRATE OF SODA, &C
SULPHATE OF AMMONIA.
The second edition of our “Illustrated Manual for the Garden and the
Farm,” revised and greatly enlarged, will be forwarded on application.
