

j I
\ ■ •
1 OUR VOYAGE. |
} )
EXTRACTS FROM THE
“Sobraon Gossit> ”.*
A W RJiIVR Y JNJiWS PALER
I \
A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER


Fl 3 [/t
"Nr
















PRINTED BY T. PETTITT & CO.,
23, FRITH STREET, AND 50, OLD COMPTON STREET,
SOHO, LONPON, W.


CONTENTS,
Introduction. Page.
The “ Sobraon ” 1
List of Officers, Passengers, &c - 3
The Cape of Good Hope :
Cape Colony ... ... ••• 5
Cape Town ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 6
Changes at the Cape .. ••• ... ••• ••• ®
To Constantia and Back... ... .. ... ... ... ••• 9
St. Helena :
Napoleon’s Island Home ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• n
Our Visit to St. Helena... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Poetry :
Voices of the Sea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
Woman’s Heart 23
At Sea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
Recollections of the Past ... ... ... .. ... 25
Birthday Address ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
“ Pace the Deck ” ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
Sunset in the Indian Ocean ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
Lines on Luna ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
Catterel Rhymes , 31
A Dream ... ... ... ... ‘.. ... ... ... ... 33
A Vision of the Night 35


Essays on Social Subjects :
Love and Marriage .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37
Literature ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40
The “ Sobraon ” Portrait Gallery 42
South-East Trades Perfect Cure Company 48
Mr. Armstrong 51
Crossing the Line 52
Breaking Up 54
Obituary 56
Farewell ' 60
Summary of the Events of the Voyage ... 62
Log and Meteorological Report 69


INTRODUCTION.
N presenting their subscribers with a compilation
f from the “ Sobraon Gossip ” under the title of
“ Our Voyage,” the Editorial Committee feel
that a few words of explanation are necessary by
way of introduction. The objects which the Com-
mittee had in view in publishing a weekly news-
paper on board the “ Sobraon ” were: to furnish a
record of the events and progress ,of the voyage; and,
by affording a medium for the interchange of thoughts
and ideas amongst the passengers, to help, in some
measure, to lighten the tedium of a long sojourn on board
ship. They determined from the first to exclude from their
pages any thing of the nature of scandal, and they believe that
in this respect they have been thoroughly successful. The
only personalities introduced from first to last were the
verses in the “ Sobraon Portrait Gallery,” and these were in
every case submitted to those to whom they referred
previously to publication, and again a second time before
appearing in print.
After some discussion it was determined to publish the
“ Sobraon Gossip ” in its present continuous form instead
of printing its numbers as they stood. There were several


reasons for this, the most important being that the funds at
the disposal of the committee were not sufficient for the latter
purpose, and that it was thought that the log and the summary
of the voyage would be more valuable in a continuous than in a
disjointed form ; also that a small volume containing these
with other extracts from the various numbers would make
a better souvenir of “ Our Voyage ” than the numbers
themselves as they stood.
The Committee wish to take this opportunity of record-
ing their great obligations to their special artists, Miss
Babington and Mr. Elliott, whose illustrations added so
much to the interest of the paper: also to Mrs. Price and
Mr. Powell, whose services as “printing presses” were
invaluable.
In conclusion, the Committee beg to acknowledge the
interest taken in the publication of this record of “ Our
Voyage,” an interest sufficiently evinced by the large
number of copies—nearly 250 —for which subscriptions have
been received.


Mainmast —
Mainsail .
. 720 yds.
Foremast —
Royal
180 yds.
Two maintopsails
7°° M
Topmast staysail
165 ,,
Topgallantsail .
280 ,,
Three jibs
600 ,,
Royal
Topmast staysail
193 »
330 „
Mizenmast —•
Crossjack
3°° »
Topgallant ,,
. 260 ,,
Two mizentopsails .
45° ..
Royal ,,
188 „
Topgallantsail .
190 ,,
Foremast —
Foresail ,
583 f»
Royal
Topmast staysail
120 ,,
327 ,,
Two foretopsails
700 ,,
Topgallant ,,
210 „
Topgallantsail .
280 ,,
Spanker
280 ,,
Giving a total of 7
056 yards, or
not far short of two acres
of canvas.
B
THE “ SOBRAON.”
HIS fine ship, one of the largest sailing vessels afloat, was
built by Messrs. Hall & Sons, of Aberdeen. She was two
years in course of construction, and was launched in
November, 1866. She made her first voyage to Sydney
in 1867, under Captain Pyle; and she has since made five other
voyages to the same port, and three to Melbourne, returning by the
Cape of Good Hope, under her present commander, Captain Elmslie.
The “ Sobraon ” is a “ composite ” ship—that is she is built of
solid teak, with iron beams and frame-work. She has wrought-iron
masts and steel yards and topmasts. She is classed A 1 16 years at
Lloyd’s, 2,130 tons register, 3,500 tons burden. Pier length is 300 feet,
her breadth 40 feet: extreme depth of hold 28 feet.
The height of the mainmast from the keel is 189 feet— 29 feet
being below the main deck. The length of the main and fore yards is
90 feet; lower topsailyards 76 feet; upper topsailyards 56 feet; royal
yards 44 feet.
The sails contain the following quantities of canvas :


Some idea may be formed of the expense of a suit of sails from
the fact that a new mainsail costs nearly ;£ioo.
The “ Sobraon ” is built with a special view to carrying a large
number of passengers. She has a flush deck, with only a very small
poop, containing merely the officers’ quarters. There is a deck-house,
containing a smoking-room, two bath-rooms, and a handsome staircase
leading to the saloons. The principal saloon is nearly 100 feet in
length, and is panelled in polished teak and maple. It will dine
seventy people. There is also a prettily decorated ladies’ saloon near
the stern of the ship. On either side of the saloons are the sleeping
cabins, and at one end of the principal saloon there is a piano. The
second and third-class cabins are particularly roomy and well ventilated.
As it may be interesting to our readers to form some idea of the
amount of provisions necessary for a large ship, we append a list of a
few of the principal supplies taken on board for the homeward voyage :
—173 sheep, 30 pigs, 18 sucking pigs, 720 fowls, 420 ducks, 144 geese,
1 cow; flour, 12 tons ; sugar, 2\ tons ; butter, 1 ton ; biscuits, 3 tons;
preserved meat, 6,000 lbs.; salt meat, 6,200 lbs; soup, 1,200 lbs.
[Ed./fl/.A:]


LIST OF
OFFICERS, CREW, AND PASSENGERS,
On board the “ Sobraon,”
On her Voyage from Melbourne to London , 1875.
COMMANDER.— Lieutenant J. A. Elmslie, R.N.R.
FIRST OFFICER.— J. Seaborne, Esq.
SECOND OFFICER. —G. Irvine, Esq.
THIRD OFFICER.— C. Hall, Esq.
FOURTH OFFICER.—F. Northey, Esq.
SURGEON.—Dr. F. M. Harricks,
MI DSHIPMEN.— Messrs. Goodman, Cooper, Richardson, Hoare, Lewis, Noad,
Worsley, Cox, Grindon.
Carpenter, Engineer, Sailmaker, two Boatswain s Mates, four Quartermasters,
nineteen Able Seamen, two Ordinary Seamen, two boys.
CHIEF STEWARD.— Mr. Weetch.
Second Steward, six Cuddy servants, Pantryman, Cook, Baker, Butcher, Butcher s
Mate, Sculleryman, Storekeeper.
SALOON PASSENGERS.— Mrs. Elmslie ; Mr. and Mrs. Cane, four
children, and maid ; Mr. and Mrs. Fisher and one child; Mr, and Mrs. Justice, two
children, and maid ; Mr. and Mrs. Martin and Miss Martin ; Rev. J. B. Smith, Mrs.
Smith, and two children ; Mr. and Mrs. Taylor and two children ; Mrs. McGee >
Miss McGee, and Master McGee; Mrs. Hay; Mrs. Kemble; Mrs. I rice ; Mis.
Poulton ; Miss Babmgton, Miss Chapman, Miss Collins, Miss Dickson, Miss Decock,
Miss Henley, Miss Miles, Miss McCartney, Miss Sheffield ; Messrs. Adams, sen.,
Adams, jun., Barker, Barwick, Colbeck, Cranmer, Day, Dick, Drummond, Elliott,
Fulton, Feltoe, Halkyard, Middleton, McKenna, Mawley, Nealcl, Nutt, Powell,
Raphael, Robertson, Shaw, Sullivan, Wilson, Young.
N.B. —Those passengers whose names are printed in italics left at the Cape.
<
JOINED AT THE CAPE. —Mr. and Mrs. Harrington, and Messrs, Leeds,
Marshall, and Style.


SECOND CLASS PASSENGERS. Mr. and Mrs. Dodgson, Miss
Dodgson, and two children ; Mr. and Mrs. Keith and one child ; Mr. and Mrs.
Saunders and one child ; Mr. and Mrs. Selby ; Mr. and Mrs. Sturgess and two
children; Mrs. Gilbert and three children; Mr. and Mrs. Cullen ; Mr. and Mrs.
McDermott; Mrs. Cole ; Mrs. Smithers ; Messrs, Clough, Heath, Roberts, Elliott,
Foxcroft, Hanson, Lloyd, Hutton, Murray, and Murdoch.
THIRD CLASS PASSENGERS. Mr. and Mrs. Millson and two
children ; Mr. and Mrs. Boanas and three children ; Mr. and Mrs. Henley and
three children; Mr. and Mrs. Dearden ; Mrs. Finch and one child ; Messrs.
Irving, Williams, Gobby, Bangert, Soltorft, Harris, and Power.
LEFT AT THE CAPE.—Mr. and Miss Armstrong; Messrs. Israel, Baker,
and Wood.


THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.
CAPE COLONY.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, March 20th, 1875 J
i?]APE COLONY comprises the southern extremity of the
African Continent, and is bounded by the sea and the Orange
and Great Kei Rivers. It has an area of 350,000 square
:2J miles. The Cape was discovered in i 486 by Diaz, a
Portuguese, and was finally ceded to the English at the beginning
of the present century. To most Englishmen this part of the world
is less known as a place of settlement than for its attractions to
the sportsman. The boundless plains of thejnterior swarm with count-
less herds of antelope, buffaloes, and spring-bok, while the elephant,
the stately giraffe, the rhinoceros, the zebra, and the hippopotamus,
are frequently to be found; thus investing the country with charms
which have lured the sportsman and the traveller from all parts of the
globe. To the invalid, moreover, it offers a delightful and salubrious
climate. Already it has proved a sanatorium for invalids from India
and for Europeans suffering from pulmonary complaints. The tempera-
ture throughout the colony is genial and pleasant, the general range of
the thermometer being from 40° to 90°. To the emigrant, not only
does the beautiful and genial climate offer an attraction, but the means
of livelihood are varied, and the remuneration for work of every kind
is good. The mineral products are copper, coal, stone, marble, and
slate; also diamonds, rubies, topaz, and crystals. Wool is extensively
produced ; the broad-tailed Cape sheep having been superseded by the
Merino. Horses and cattle are bred extensively; and wine is produced
to a considerable extent, that grown in the vineyards of Constantia
being most esteemed. The principal exports are wool, copper, ivory
and ostrich feathers. [Ed. J. M F.\


CAPE TOWN.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, March 27 th, 1875 J
APE TOWN, the capital of Cape Colony, is built on the
shores of Table Bay, as they slope upwards towards Table
Mountain, and presents from the sea a singularly pic-
turesque and imposing appearance. Table Mountain,
which rises in bold relief behind the town to the height of 3316 feet
above the level of the sea, is so-called from the fact that, unlike most
mountains, the summit is not conical but flat, and when the mist
descends upon it, presents the appearance of a table covered with a
white cloth. Cape Town has a population of some 30,000, of whom
about 15,000 are Europeans or their descendants; the rest are Malays,
Kaffirs, and natives of Bonny and Mozambique. The Hottentots are
becoming very few in number.
The streets of Cape Town are for the most part regular and of
good width. Many—perhaps we should say most —of the houses have
been built by the Dutch Settlers, and some are of venerable age and
picturesque appearance. There is an English and a Dutch Cathedral,
besides which there are many Churches and Chapels. The market-
place is a large open space surrounded by handsome buildings—banks,
warehouses, and shops—some of which would not discredit a much
larger city. The public botanical gardens are pretty, homelike, and
well timbered. In the centre of these is the Government House —a
homely old-fashioned brick building, beautifully covered with creepers
and surrounded by lofty trees. Near the Government House is a large
building containing the museum and public library and reading rooms,
The museum does not contain anything very remarkable, but the reading
rooms are particularly comfortable and well-arranged. The most impor-
tant suburb of Cape Town is perhaps Constantia, celebrated for its
vineyards and wine. There are two lines of railway from Cape Town —


one extends to Wynberg, the nearest station to Constantia—the other
to Wellington, a distance of some 60 miles into the interior. A visitor
to Cape Town is little likely to forget his first impressions of its general
aspect. The picturesque town, with its magnificent background formed by
Table Mountain, and the perhaps still more striking Lion Mountain—
the variety of the population, presenting every shade of colour, from
the ebony-black of the negro to the scarcely noticeable bronze of the
half-caste Malay —the gorgeous colours in which the women love to dress
themselves—the curious head-dresses of the men—the semi-tropical
fruits and flowers and vegetation, will all combine to form a picture
upon which the memory will dwell with pleasure for many a long year.
[Ed./. M. F]


CHANGES AT THE CAPE.
(From ihe Sobraon Gossip, April 24 ih, 1875 J
N starting again upon our journey towards England after our
pleasant sojourn at the Cape, we have to chronicle with
o) regret the fact that we have left behind us three of our saloon
passengers, viz,, Mr. F. Robertson, and Mr. and Mrs.
Fisher, who remain in South Africa to push their fortunes. We
wish them God speed in all their undertakings, and hope that
wealth, health, and happiness may attend their future lot in life!
Another passenger, Mr. Adams, has been obliged to leave us on account
of the delicate state of his health, in order that he may hasten his
journey homewards by taking advantage of the Mail Steamer. No
vacant chair will remind us of our absent friends, as we have five new
passengers in the saloon. We give our new fellow-voyagers a hearty
welcome, and extend to them the hand of friendship with right good-will.
We have also to notice that the Minstrel Troupe, which afforded us
music and laughable entertainments, also left us at the Cape. Their
sudden and unexpected departure prevented our acknowledging our
obligations to them as we would have liked. They received, however,
from the passengers a sum of money amounting to nearly four pounds.
[Ed. J. M. F]


TO CONSTANTIA AND BACK.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, April 24 th, 1875. )
CONVEYANCE with two wheels and four horses is what,
perhaps, one never sees in England, but in such a
vehicle we made our journey to Constantia, a distance
of about twelve or thirteen miles. We were soon clear
of the environs of Cape Town, and were driving merrily along
a good road, with the flat-topped Table Mountain and the Crested
Lion on our right. The road was fringed on either side with
trees, amongst which the familiar oak of our native shores was
conspicuous. This tree is not indigenous to the country, but was
introduced by the early Dutch settlers. More unfamiliar were the
hedge-rows of lofty aloes and of the cactus known as the prickly-pear;
while the coloured population of every shade, which clustered around the
way-side cottages, spoke unmistakably of a foreign land. Kaffirs,
Hottentots, Malays, natives of Mozambique, and every combination of
these and other races were there represented. Passing through the
villages of Mowbray, Claremont, and Rondebosch, and crossing several
streams in which dusky ladies in picturesque costumes and attitudes
were carrying on laundry operations, we emerged upon more open
country, and a glorious prospect was spread before our view. A range
of mountains, whose rugged and serrated peaks were partly lost in
cloud-wreaths, lay before us. At their base nestled the village of
Constantia, while to the left a vast plain stretched away to the shores of
False Bay. At Constantia we visited the vineyard of Van Cloete, to
whom we had a letter of introduction. The father and son, who now
represent the firm, are fine types of the Dutch Settler. They live in a
grand old farm-house (date 1681), which has been the family residence
for generations, and which is characterised by the spaciousness that is a
peculiarity of Dutch architecture. The drawing room is a vast apart-


merit and contains no fireplace—a guarantee of the mildness of the
climate. Having inspected the wine stores, with their great butts and
vats, we were shown an old Dutch map of the date of about 1630,
in which most of Livingstone’s discoveries seem to be accurately-
foreshadowed, including the Victoria Nyanza Lake, with the Nile taking
its rise from its northern shores! We returned to Cape Town by way
of Newlands, a route even more beautiful than that by which we had
come. For more than a mile our road wound through a magnificent
avenue of oak trees, whose boughs, which interlaced overhead, formed an
impenetrable screen from the rays of the mid-day sun, and testified to
the taste and industry of the Dutch colonists. As we emerged from the
twilight shade of the trees another magnificent view lay before us.
Now on our left the mountains rose in massive and rugged grandeur,
and the rays of the sun, which was setting beyond them, shone through
their clefts upon a light evening mist, throwing far up into the sky
sharply-defined shafts of golden light, and encircling the Lion’s Crest with
a halo of gold. As we neared Cape Town we met many carts laden
with coloured ladies and gentlemen, who were returning from the races
clad in the most gorgeous colours, and more or less “ disguised in
liquor.” One cart, after pursuing a wild and zig-zag course from side to
side of the road, finally capsized,shooting out its coloured occupants like
so many sacks of flour. We returned to our hotel with the recollection
of a most enjoyable drive and with fine appetites for dinner.
“ Hinido


ST. HELENA.
NAPOLEON’S ISLAND HOME.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, May ist, 1875 J
HE historic interest that wreathes itself around the home of
the exiled Napoleon, and the tomb which for years con-
tained the corpse of one of Europe’s greatest warriors and
most illustrious statesman, has not yet, even amid the
political changes of the nations, faded from Ihe heart of every English-
man as of a place whose associations are filled with the most thrilling
interest. Through the kindness of Captain Elmslie, on the morning
of the 27 th of April, we were permitted to gratify our curiosity by
landing on the famous island of St. Helena, perhaps one of the best
known of all the solitary islands in the South Atlantic, It is 800 miles
from the nearest land, io| miles long, and 6| broad, and encloses an
area of 47 square miles, with a population of between six and seven
thousand. It was discovered by the Portuguese navigator Juan de
Nova Castella, on the 21st of May, 1501 (St. Helena’s Day). It was
uninhabited until the Dutch became possessors of it. In 1673 it was
taken by the English and chartered to the East India Company, until it
was required by the English Government as a residence for Napoleon
Buonaparte (1815 —1821). We have lingered beneath the roof of
Long wood, the home of the exile. We have seen the spot where he
breathed his last, and we have walked in the rooms where he was wont
to linger and to pass many a night of sorrow. We have wondered that,
dwelling as he did in solitude and denied the fellowship of men, his
spirit did not take flight long ere it did, from so uncongenial a habita-


tion. We have visited the former sepulchre of the mighty despot as it
lies cradled amongst the mountains, far removed from the haunts of
men, and in which he who shook the world for a season, slept undis-
turbed, save by the gentle sighing of the wind and the sweet warbling
of the golden canaries which perch upon the trees overshadowing his
grave. [Ed. J. M. F.']
■'&


OUR VISIT TO ST. HELENA.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, May ist, 1875, & following Nos.)
V
RYING to imitate that most exemplary of birds, the early
one who picked up the worm, the party of which the
writer was one left the ship before breakfast, selfishly bent
on securing a carriage for the trip to Longwood, as we
heard that the rolling stock of the island was very limited. As we
rowed to shore we passed close to the ship “ Peterboro,” from Calcutta;
next to her was anchored the English man-of-war “ Encounter,” a very
neat-looking vessel. On our arrival at the quay, we were at once sur-
rounded by native women and boys, with very interesting faces. The
women offering baskets, necklaces, &c., made of various coloured seeds,
and the boys all sorts of information as to the nearest hotel, &c.,
accompanied with the most violent efforts in the way of touching caps
and other semi-reverential signs. The first object worthy of remark
was the wall of the town, a rather muddy-looking but massive structure,
running along the mouth of the valley from hill to hill, parallel with the
quay, and with an archway and double gates, protected by a drawbridge
and deep moat. The town itself seemed to consist of one long narrow
street, stretching in a more or less straggling manner up the centre of a
valley for more than a mile. Two of our party having gone in search
of a carriage (much assisted by the direction of Mr. Moss, the principal
merchant in the town, who, to us and to all the passengers, who subse-
quently sought his assistance in similar matters, really was most kind
and attentive), the rest of us besieged the “ Commercial Hotel,” with
a desire for breakfast clearly depicted on our every feature. The land-
lord who, though very moderate in his charges, was exceedingly growly
in manners, tried to prove his belief in the adage, “hunger is the
best sauce,” by not only making us wait three-quarters of an hour for


breakfast, but by keeping the table scrupulously free from all embellish-
ments of a saucy nature, with the exception of the coolly impudent
remarks of his lazy native waiter —however, though plain, our repast
was despatched with much apparent satisfaction to all parties : a plate-
ful of the most delicious bananas, and the news that our friends had
secured two carriages, considerably adding to our powers of enjoyment.
By this time we found that numbers of our fellow-passengers had made
their way on shore, having secured their breakfasts but not their
carriages. Those amongst us who were known to have been first in
the town, were now besieged with showers of questions as to where the
post-office, market, grocers’ shops, &c., were, and it really was most
amusing to see the Sobraonites, old and young, short and tall, rushing in
and out of the various shops, and from one side of the street to the other,
making all sorts of wild enquiries from all sorts of wild-looking natives.
The sum total of information when all items were duly taken into con-
sideration, seeming to be that a visit to the market was useless, as the
very meagre supply of bananas, tomatoes, and green figs had been
snapped up; that it was hopeless to look for any more carriages or horses,
and that the vast quantity of canaries at is. each, that we had heard of
whilst on board, in reality consisted of two that couldn’t or wouldn’t sing
at 2 s. 6d. each, and one that was warranted' to sing, but which, from
the bare fact of its being able to do so, the owner stoutly refused to
part with at any price. Plowever, we are glad to say, that at last five
carriages, four saddle horses, and one open spring cart w r ere secured,
thus enabling some twenty passengers to visit in comparative
style and comfort. The first to set out were a lady and gentleman on
horseback, their start being effected in a most dashing style from the
centre of an admiring crowd of fellow passengers, and with a small black
boy hanging on to the tail of the lady’s horse. Our party of seven had
to divide itself, four riding in a barouche —we think we should like to
call it—two in a pony carriage, and one on horseback. We were very
proud of this our gentleman outrider, for he had most successfully outbid
an officer of the “ Encounter ” for the hire of his fiery steed, a matter of
2s, 6d. being the debateable and slicking* point with Her Majesty’s
gallant officer. The vehicles and horses with the exception of this one
were like the houses, delapidated and the worse for w y ear, and as we
heard that it was an uphill journey the whole way, and noticed that


string and similar unsatisfactory material was extensively used for door
handles and bolts, we naturally had our fears, lest the conveyance we
occupied should show its disinclination to again visit the tomb of the
French monarch by collapsing altogether. Soon after starting we were
made aware that the ascent was to be one of no ordinary kind, by being
joined by a black fellow mounted on an additional horse, and quite a
small army of boy attendants, some provided with whips and sticks, and
others with huge stones to slip under the wheels whenever we stopped
to give the animals breath. We took the zig-zag mountain-road to the
left of the valley, and soon were high enough to get a capital view of
the town below us. Our attendants were most talkative, and more than
willing to give us all the information we desired. The Governor’s resi-
dence was the first of any importance that they pointed out. It seemed
a most unofficial looking place, reminding one rather of a single-storied
St. Kilda lodging-house, situated in what seemed the Whitechapel end
of the town. The garden certainly was green and fresh-looking, with
date-palms and banana-trees in abundance. Further up the valley were
one or two very nice villa residences, one particularly so, belonging to
Lady Ross, widow of a late Governor. At the end of the valley on the
slope of a green hill was Mr. Moss’s house, a very pretty one in a
delightful situation, with a beautiful garden full of tropical trees and
plants, and in which we could see the gardeners mowing the lawns, and
numerous white pigeons flitting about the out-houses. The whole place
had a most home-like appearance. Paddocks surrounded the house,
and a long drive led up to it. The view altogether at this point was
certainly most pleasing. The hill sides above and below our road were
covered with wild scarlet geraniums. Far below us was the main, road
belonging to the town, the people walking along it looking little bigger
than dolls. Immediately to our right across the valley was the abrupt
and rugged hill, topped by the fort which we had seen from the ship, and
up the side of which “Jacob’s Ladder”—a matter of some seven hundred
steps—is built; beyond this hill was a lovely waterfall, which appeared
suddenly over the edge of a precipice, and falling in a thin white column a
distance of perhaps two hundred feet down, or rather a little clear, of a
hollow of beautiful rocks, which were in some places bare and darkly
coloured, in others covered with what in the distance looked like bright
green moss, was finally lost to view in a huge natural basin of black
rocks below.


We now turned a very sharp corner and came upon a splendid view
of the sea, blue and calm as a lake, with the “ Sobraon ” cruising gently
about the anchorage ground. For the next two miles or so our road lay
through long low avenues of pine, fir, and native willow trees; the smell
of the firs and the scene altogether to our poor eyes and nostrils,
hitherto surfeited with shipboard sights and smells, was simply en-
chanting. Our young guides seemed to be enjoying themselves as
much as we were, although we imagine they take the same journey
nearly every day, but they seemed able to see a joke in almost every-
thing. On the occasion of our horses absolutely refusing to draw us
out of a mud hole, it was very amusing, or should we say lamentable,
to mark the utter want of unanimity and waste of power in the method
of attack, for their tremendous rushes at the poor animals can only be
described by this word. Leaving the wooded country, we came out
upon and skirted a splendid valley, backed by distant mountains, the
scene here comparing most favourably with some of the grandest parts
of Scotland; words of ours cannot describe it; we can only say we
longed to be able to take sketches of each fresh point of beauty for
our friends who were left behind in the town or on the ship. Just here
we saw a bright yellow canary, its colour showing up beautifully against
the dark ’green of the fir tree on which it waS perched, singing away
with all its might, and quite regardless of our presence ; being the first
time we had any of us seen one of these familiar little fellows in a
really wild state, it formed a very pleasing incident.
At the foot of the valley we had now entered lay Napoleon’s
tomb, but we determined to drive on to Longwood, taking this, the
bigger plum of the two, on our way back. Our road now led us round
the end of the valley and to the opposite side of it, so that we were
enabled to keep the same mountain scenery in view, only from different
aspects. At last we came to the entrance to the Longwood grounds;
passing into a small open plain through a high stone gateway, we soon
reached the garden gates. Just previous to this we were very pleased to
meet a large party of our friends from the fore part of the ship, who, by
starting early, were able to do the whole distance on foot, and who
expressed themselves as highly delighted with their excursion. Apart
from their associations, there was really nothing interesting in the house
or garden; in fact, the whole place looked very dismal, and we made the


remark that it was only a matter of surprise that poor Napoleon did not
die sooner than he actually did. The house was a long, single-storied,
plain-looking affair, and as it is now merely used as a show place, the rooms
are quite devoid of furniture. We passed through the drawing, dining,
and bed rooms; in each was a descriptive ticket in French and English,
and in one of the rooms was a white bust of the Emperor, suspended from
which was a double wreath of white immortelles; the whole surrounded
by a very primitive little black wooden paling, looking anything but
Imperial. This, we believe, marked the spot where the emperor
breathed his last, and it certainly was intensely interesting to think of
whose death-place this was, and that we really were visiting the far-
famed Longwood. Although Longwood is built at such a great
elevation, the view from some of the windows and verandah was very
contracted, and the garden was square, bare, and desolate. We now
turned our faces homewards to visit the tomb, which was about a mile
from the house. On our way there we met two very dashing turns-out,
each containing a mixed party of ladies and gentlemen—Sobraonites—
and next to them, to our great amusement, came two well-known
patresfamilias, trudging along by the side of* the most jolly-looking of
square delivery carts, in which were seated their respective matres-ditto,
each accompanied by one cherished offspring. We must allow that the
pluck of this party, on thus determining at all risks to visit Longwood,
cannot be too much admired. We also should not forget to mention
that two ladies walked all the way to the tomb and back, which con-
sidering the extreme heat and the roughness of the way was a most
creditable performance. Leaving our carriages to meet us on the other
side of the valley, we proceeded to the tomb on foot (although from the
slipperiness of the ground, owing to the recent heavy showers, our mode
of procedure frequently threatened to be on all fours) along a very
pretty path, winding down the side of the green hills, the slopes covered
with yellow-flowering gorse and other brilliant shrubs. Passing through
a small white gate, we entered the private grounds surrounding the
tomb. The natural beauty of the valley, the bright green of the hills,
and the numerous tropical plants, combined to make this a most lovely
spot. Amongst the plants were some very- beautiful ones, bearing a
large bell-shaped flower of a pale lilac colour, together with many
varieties of cactus, and enormous aloes, with leaves some ten feet in


length. These, we heard, were called “ English ” aloes. We are afraid
our St. Helena friends are either very ignorant, or very satirical, for wc
can assure them that nowhere in England, with the exception of Kew
Gardens, where we keep such things under a glass case, is it possible to
find anything at all approaching in beauty to these glorious plants.
The tomb itself was in a very sweet spot, and is familiar to all of
us now, from the numerous photographs we have lately seen. There
were the historical willow, well, and sergeant ; the latter was very kind
in letting us bring away sprigs of the willow, or any other relics of a
vegetable nature that we might wish for. We now drove back to town
at a far more rapid pace than we came, falling in with others of our
friends on the way, thus helping to form quite an imposing spectacle.
On our arrival at the hotel, we might have fancied ourselves on the
main deck of the “ Sobraon,” so great was the crowd of familiar faces.
Satisfaction was the prominent expression on the faces, both of those
who had so lately come back from Longwood, and of those who staying
behind had been able to snap up the luncheons prepared for other
mouths than their own. Having done a little more light skirmishing
amongst the shops to secure various delicacies of a grocery description,
we returned to the ship in time for dinner, thoroughly delighted with
our trip and feeling very thankful to Captain Elmslie for his kindness
in giving us this day’s enjoyment; and we are sure that most pleasant
recollections of our visit to St. Helena will remain with us all for many
years to come.
“ Convalescent.”


POETRY.
VOICES OF THE SEA.
A FRAGMENT.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, April 24 th, 1875. )
List to the rolling, oh ! the rolling
Of our ship, as on we glide;
What is your notion,
Of our motion
In the restless ocean,
In the shifting tide ?
It reminds us, it reminds us,
Of the changing tides of life—
Their ceaseless surges,
As on they urge us,
With many a storm,
In varied form,
And never resting, never resting,
Still they heave us, still they heave us;
One day sadness,
Next day gladness,
Care to grieve us, hope to leave us.


List to the creaking, ah ! the creaking
Of the timbers in our side;
And the moaning,
Frightful groaning,
Winds bemoaning,
O’er waters wide.
And the flapping, yes ! the flapping
Of the sails against the mast,
Something like sea-spirits rapping ;
Telling a quaint story
Of a former glory,
In the billows hoary—
And the wind, as it rustles and bustles,
Seems to tell us, seems to tell us
Of voices dear,
Bringing them near
This night to cheer
Us on our road.
Hark ! the shouting of the seamen,
With their sad refrain,
And yelling, loud yelling
Their lungs vast swelling,
Are telling of our dwelling
On the stormy main.
And the clouds as fast they fly,
Thro’ the moonlight rays,
Like darkened hours
When sorrow lowers
And sadness sours
Some summer days.
But then the morrow, oh ! the morrow,
When those shadows pass away,


Seems the brighter,
Makes hearts lighter,
Clasp we tighter
The glad mem’ries of the day.
Have you seen the sun a-setting,
Setting golden in the west ?
So earth’s pleasure,
Which we treasure,
Doth but measure
Short lived glory at the best.
You have watched his early prime,
His bright promise in the morn ;
So at many and oft a time
We have seen this brightness born.
But the bloom of a flower,
In infancy’s hour,
By the scythe of the mower,
By chill frosts hoar,
May be blasted for e’er,
May be reft of its brightness,
Like a heart of its lightness,
By sorrow or care.
Have you watched the silv’ry star
Sparkling from afar ?
And with others of its kind
Smile to your enraptured mind,
Emblems of peace, so blest,
Immovable by storm they rest,
In glittering splendour ever drest,
Through changing time.
Ah I time does change, and many
Here sailing on the main,


Will find an empty chair,
Will miss some faces fair
Which used of old be there,
Where England’s Queen doth reign.
And now of this, the rolling and the flapping,
The creaking and the rapping,
The groaning and the moaning,
The sunset and its rise,
The hoarse yelling and the cries,
The moonlight and the star
Shining from afar;
And the quaint story,
Of the former glory,
In the billows hoary,
On the waters wide,
You have my notion,
In the restless ocean,
On the shifting tide.
“ Profugus. ”


WOMAN’S HEART.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, May 15 th, 1875. J
That Woman’s heart is a priceless pearl
I have no need to tell;
But every pearl in an oyster grows,
And the oyster is cased in a shell.
And many a man with a cunning plan,
This priceless pearl to gain,
Has won him the girl, but lost the pearl
Which deep in her bosom had lain.
Some with the sharp and cruel steel,
Would seize on their delicate prey;
Others have thought that a wedge of gold
Would be sure to force its way.
But neither of these will gain the prize,
And is not the way to prevail;
For I have a plan, and beat it who can,
That never has known to fail.
Just place the shell with its priceless pearl
In the furnace of love, pure and bright,
And ’twill open its valves of its own accord,
And discloses its pearl to the sight.
Let him who wishes bring on his steel,
And the other his wedge of gold,
They will get but the shells, while I’ll get the pearl
Which those worthless shells did hold.
“ Profugus


LOVE’S ACROSTIC.
List, then oh! list to these sounds on the sea,
O’er the wild sweeping billows borne onward to thee,
Voices of dear ones, which whisper and glide
Elfin like, speaking so oft by thy side.
“ Zetar
AT SEA.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, March 6th, IS7SJ
No more do we suffer from vile mal de mer,
Our brow is unruffled, our mind free from care;
Our ship sails along o’er the waters so free,
Not with speed, it is true, but as safe as can be.
Oh ! what life upon earth could be fairer than this ?
The essence of pleasure, the summit of bliss ;
They may talk of the gipsy, so “ roving and free,”
But for ease and contentment, why give me the sea!
With the prince of all captains, with mates brave and bold,
And a ship, all whose virtues could never be told ;
Come, tell me, ye land-lubbers, lying on shore,
Do you think, in all conscience, we could wish for more?
When at last the sweet vision of “ home ” meets our eyes,
And we bask in the smiles of our dear native skies,
With what joy will we think of the life that is past,
With its pleasures and pains—too delightful to last.
“ May.”


RECOLLECTIONS OF THE PAST.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, April 24 th, 1875 J
When twilight faded into calm, still night,
And o’er the rippling waves the moonbeams play’d,
I gazed upon the ocean bright with light,
As myriad sparks beneath its foam-crests stray’d.
My mind was weary, and my heart was full
With burning love I strove in vain to hide,
Long had I struggled ’gainst this love for her,
My own adored one, who now stood beside.
In tones of fondest love, she bade me tell
The secret of my sorrow and my grief,
And when I whispered—“ oh ! I love thee well ”
The very words brought comfort'and relief.
So gently then to her fond heart she pressed
My trembling hand, and thanked me for my love;
And as her head lay pillowed on my breast,
Angels might e’en have envied us above.
Scarce faintest murmur stirred the evening air
All, all was hushed ; the sea, so calm and clear;
Never had God’s fair world looked half so fair,
L or Heaven (from me so distant) seemed more near.
’1 is true that happiness can radiance lend
To clothe with grace the earth, and sea, and sky ;
When hearts are aching, nature does not tend
1 0 soothe with smiles, or check the weary sigh ;
Her beauties then we heed not, for they seem
Apart from Life, that knows but grief and tears :
lis only when we live, and love, and dream,
I hat nature to our minds herself endears.
“ May”


BIRTHDAY ADDRESS TO A YOUNG LADY,
(From the Sobraon Gossip, May 22nd, 1875 J
My dearest maid, what shall I say
To thee on this thy natal day,
To wish thee well ? For words are weak,
And fail to say what heart would speak.
Thy past one joyous day has been,
Thy childhood happy as a dream,
Thy mother’s stay, thy father’s pride,
Thy bark, how sweetly does it glide.
Dear girl, be always what you seem,
A ray of light, a glad sunbeam.
If I could choose thy future life,
Twould be so calm, so free from strife,
So free from sorrow, grief, or care,
No thorns or roughness anywhere;
The flowers should spring thy steps to greet,
And joy and gladness always meet
Around thy path. But some have trod
Through waves of sorrow, nearer God—
Though weak in faith, I yet would dare
To offer up a humble prayer,
That God thy friend may ever be,
And portion out thy lot for thee.
"Ida?
May
17th, 1875 .


LINES WRITTEN ON OVERHEARING A GENTLEMAN
ASK A LADY “TO PACE THE DECK. 5 ’
(From the Sobraon Gossip, April 24 th, 1875 J
Will you pace the deck with me, love ?
The night is clear and soft,
The moon shines bright on the sea, love,
And the glistening sails aloft.
Will you pace the deck with me, love?
The stars above us shine,
Bright is our path on the deep, love,
’Mid ocean’s glittering brine.
Come pace the deck with me, love,
To-night some mystic spell
Unites my heart to thine, love,
Too deep for words to tell.
From the day when first we met, love
My thoughts on thee were bent;
E’en then my heart I lost, love,
Before I gave consent.
And since that fatal hour, love,
Thy willing slave I’ve been,
Nor would I break those bonds, love,
For with brightest hopes they gleam.
Will you pace life’s path with me, love ?
Life’s ocean, wild and wide,
Safe ’mid its storms and calms, love,
My fond and cherished bride.
“Ida:


SUNSET IN THE INDIAN OCEAN,
30th March, 1875.
CFrom the Sobraon Gossip, May Ist , 1875.;
A hundred faces were turned to the west,
And were gazing across the silent sea;
They were watching the sun as he sank to his rest,
Like a king in his pomp and majesty.
Most delicate crimson and pearly grey
Was the sky that stretched above our head,
While down in the West the great clouds lay
In mighty heaps of black and red.
There were ink-black clouds with crimson stains,
And cinnabar clouds with golden sheen,
And amber clouds with purple veins,
On a background of azure and palest green.
But my pen in vain essays to write
The glowing tints of that evening sky;
E’en a pencil dipped in the rainbow’s light,
Might fail to paint them worthily.
There were yellow plains with shrubs and trees,
And snowy mountains stained with blood,
And purple shores bounding sapphire seas,
With shadowy vessels that sailed their Hood.
And we watched until each shape and hue
Had faded away into twilight grey,
And each gazing face more solemn grew,
And was wistful with thoughts of the “far away.”


For some were thinking of those whom they love,
And some, of those they have loved and lost,
And were wondering if from that heaven above
Their spirits watched us—the tempest tossed.
And to some came a thought so sad yet sweet,
That it stilled the heart and hushed the breath,
A thought for that twilight hour most meet —
The solemn thought of the hour of death.
But the sky had a message of peace for each heart,
Ere the last faint glow of day had ceased,
For the sun that we saw that night depart,
In the morn would in glory arise in the East.
And the Power that painted that evening sky,
And enamels each flower that springs from the sod,
Is not Tyndall’s atom that some set on high,
But a loving, beneficent Father and God.
“ Him do I


LINES ON LUNA.
( From
I love to watch the moon
When bathed in silver light,
She sits upon her starry throne,
The glorious queen of night.
I love to watch the clouds,
That o’er her bright face sweep,
And fling their shadows on the breast
Of the calm and silent deep.
And as I gaze, I think
Of friends across the sea,
And wonder if they watch the moon,
And watching, think of me.
But sad perplexing thoughts
My tranquil musings mock,
For though with us ’tis seven hells ,
With them ’tis Jive o'clock.
They cannot watch the moon,
For there’s no moon to see,
And probably their minds are filled
With ante-prandial tea.
The moon behind a cloud
Has sunk as if to rest,
And black as ink the shadows fall
Upon the ocean’s breast.
All my romance has fled,
And, like all else that’s bright,
Has glittered only to deceive,
And left a darker night.
Fie Sobraon Gossip, March 29///, 1875 J
“ HirudoF


CATTEREL RHYMES.
ON A FLUFFY, FURRY, FANTASTICAL FAVORITE.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, May 29 ih, 1875. )
The pot it called the kettle black,
And both reviled the chimney-back,
But so did not
Our Topsy.
Some one’s coat reminds me so
Of the medium brush they use,
When they wish to polish shoes,
But whose it is I scarcely know;
Of course it’s not
Our Topsy's.
I’ve heard of a nigger so uncommonly dark,
That charcoal applied
To his ebony hide,
Made a clear white mark.
And I once saw a cat as black as my hat,
But it was not
Our Topsy.


As gig-lamps appear on a winter’s night—
Her tongue is as rough as a paper called emery,
And her nose, soft as silk, is impressed on my memory.
But admiration must pause
While I speak of her claws,
For it is really quite awful,
And I’m sure it’s not lawful
Thus to tear up clothes by the pawful.
How different
Some beings by their perfect clarity,
Quite invisible become;
But in the very name of charity,
May there not be also some—
Our Topsy.
Who though by no means bright and fair,
Yet puzzle one to know they’re there—
It ne’er was so
A FAREWELL TO TOPSY.
With Topsy.
Sweet child of the night, farewell! mayest thou never be painted
darker than thou art, for thy blackness after all is but superficial, and thy
shadow is no darker than that of the fairest of thy race. May thine
admirers be as numerous as thy black hairs—and thine enemies fewer
even than thy white ones. May poison never pass thy lips nor a heavy
stone depend solely on the buoyancy of thy body for its support.
Fare-thee-well, fond, fickle Friend,
And again I say, Farewell!
“Ibid Junr."


A DREAM.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, March 20th, 1875 J
The scent of spring-flowers fills the air
And peaceful beauty lingers there;
The trees with leaves of brightest green
Give freshness to the op’ning scene ;
There, treading o’er that sweetest spot,
Each gentle slope, each rugged knot,
Is seen a child, poor, thinly-clad,
With eyes so soft, so calm, yet sad—
It seemed as though that little life
Was passed in scenes of care and strife.
No gentle mother had she now,
To soothe that weary, throbbing brow,
She stood alone on earth’s bleak wild,
That saddest thing—nobody’s child.
But, little mourner, God is kind,
He’ll shield thee from the wintry wind,
And He who said “ come unto me ”
To little children such as thee—
Will take thee to the realms above,
Where all is peace and light and love.
The child was tired, worn and weak,
She laid her down and sunk to sleep,
And visions, fresh as summer wind,
Stole swiftly o’er her dreaming mind,
She seemed to see the heavens divide,
And something slowly downwards glide,
Until it came more near and near,
And then she looked in childish fear,


And saw a vision bright as day
And glorious as the sunbeam’s ray,
Who said, in tones of silvery chime,
From lips that knew no sin, no crime,
“ Fear not, poor child of mortal birth,
Thou dost not love this weary earth,
Its joys and pleasures thou knowest not,
For cares and sorrows have been thy lot.
There is a land above the skies,
No grief is there, no bitter sighs—
Where all is beautiful and bright,
Where angels sing in robes of light.
Wilt thou come to that better land,
And join that fair angelic band ?
And only think earth’s troubled shore,
Sad memory of days of yore ? ”
The child stretched out one little arm,
And cried, “ oh ! shield me from all harm,
And take me, take me home with thee,
Where cold and want I’ll never see.”
The night wore on and still she slept,
And when the earliest sunbeam crept,
With brightest smile and warmest ray,
Athwart the glittering orb of day,
She woke no more on earthly sod,
But in the heavenly home with God.
“ Beta.


A VISION OF THE NIGHT
(From the Sobraon Gossip, May 2gth. 1875. )
I dreamt a wondrous dream last night,
I dreamt of home and love ;
But all was not brightness in that dream,
For one had gone above.
I dreamt of house and inglenook,
Of many a well-known place,
That in my childhood’s memory
Had left a loving trace.
I saw them laughing round the fire,
But could not join their mirth ;
For one my heart loved more than all
Had passed away from earth.
Once more I walked the garden round,
Midst each familiar tree;
I knew them w T ell, yet still now strange,
How changed they seemed to me.
And now from earth my dreams flew up
To realms above the sky ;
And there midst white robed angels,
Whose song I heard on high,
I saw my earth lost darling,
I heard her heavenly song,
Foremost she stood midst those above,
Who on earth had done no wrong.


I sighed, and woke, my dream was o’er,
The vision passed away ;
And I’ll ne’er see my darling more,
’Till that last and awful day
When like a scroll the heavens depart,
And earth doth meet for aye;
Then I will meet my long lost one,
And bless earth’s dying day.
“ Sigma 0


ESSAYS ON SOCIAL
SUBJECTS.
I.—LOVE AND MARRIAGE.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, March and 20th, 1875. )
HERE are certain periods in every one’s life when the acts
performed at that particular time are likely to lend some
colour to their whole future. Such periods as when a boy
leaves his home for the first time to go to school, or when
he comes out into the world and finds he must rely in a great measure
on himself and his own exertions; or again, when a girl leaves the
schoolroom and takes her place in society. But perhaps there is no
period more important to any man or woman, than when the determina-
tion is arrived at to enter the married state. What should a man marry
for? If he views matrimony in the true light, he will marry for the
intense love which he bears to the woman of his choice; because he
feels that she above all others is, by reason of her disposition, most suited
to be the help-meet for him; the one who is most likely to be ready to
rejoice with him in his joys, and to sympathize with him in the many
trials and difficulties which a life of any usefulness must necessarily
engender. One hears a great deal of love at jirst sight. There is, in
point of fact, no such thing. A man may admire a woman for her
beauty or her talents, and this admiration may, in course of time grow,
into love, but to love at the first blush is simply impossible. Love,
true love, can only be induced by constant intercourse—by frequent
exchange of ideas. There can be no real love unless there is con-
geniality, and it is quite impossible for people to discover whether they
are congenial unless they meet frequently and converse freely.
Hurriedly got up engagements, and hastily contracted marriages are far
too common. A man is struck with a face—he thinks he is in love —he
proposes, and is accepted. The marriage takes place, and in too many
cases it is never till the irretrievable step is taken that the mistake is found
out. Marriage is a far more important step than many seem to imagine,


and matrimony in many instances is looked upon more as a commercial
speculation than a step which must entail great happiness or misery.
We cannot help noticing that the girls of the present age are, as a body,
quite unfit to make good wives. They are either taken up completely
with matters of learning, which can in no way tend to make them helpful
wives and good mothers—or else they are empty-headed, shallow-minded,
heartless flirts—who are always getting engaged merely as a pastime
without any ulterior purpose; who seem to forget that
“ Hearts may be broken by light words spoken,
Only for something to say.”
Of course there are exceptions, and happy is the man who secures one of
them—these are the prizes, and they are few in comparison with the
blanks. To give their children a good and useful education should be
the aim of every parent, for in these days men and women must be
highly educated if they would take a good place in society, but there is
a limit to this as to everything else ; what all sensible men are so
desirous of obtaining, and yet find so much difficuly in discovering, are
women who will make thoroughly good wives women who have hit
the happy medium —who are neither complete bookworms not senti-
mental dunces. If the girls of the present day would only think a little
less of Hydrostatics, Dynamics, the Binomial Theorem, and such like
abstruse matters —would keep out of their heads the idea of becoming
Doctors and Lawyers, would cease to wrangle on the franchise and
women’s rights, and try to become more and more the gentle, sympa-
thizing, high-minded, noble-hearted woman, with a view to becoming in
time, helpful loving wives and devoted mothers, then they would be
admired, nay more, loved far deeper than they are at present; then
would men fight less shy of matrimony. Again, the extravagance in
dress is a great stumbling-block to many men marrying, and women
should try to be less selfish on that point. We are quite ready to admit
that men have a large number of failings also. They are, in many
cases, intensely selfish; they often love the comfort of their clubs more
than that of their home; but the fault does not always rest with them.
They also often treat the opposite sex as if they had no hearts and a
great paucity of feeling, and they are often intensely conceited, imagining
as they frequently do, that because they love a girl the feeling must of


necessity be reciprocated. One word more and we have done. If
marriage is intended to produce real happiness there must be unqualified
love on both sides, and intense reciprocity of feeling. Men must be un-
selfish, noble-hearted, tender, loving; women must be trained to be
helpful wives and good mothers, not mere bookworms or insipid know-
nothings, and in both cases we should strongly advise a long and careful
look before a leap of such magnitude, and which must eventually be
productive of so much happiness or the reverse, is taken.
“ Viator


lI.—LITERATURE.
E approach this subject with a considerable amount of
diffidence, inasmuch as the term “literature” involves such
a large field for thought. We live in very go-a-head days ;
in times when an immense amount of matter is written,
and the point must suggest itself to anyone, since the many calls
of life preclude our reading but comparatively very little, what style
on the one hand, we shall do ourselves most good by studying, and
on the other, what publications it is best to avoid. The world
teems with books, papers, magazines, &c., of every sort and kind
—good, bad, and indifferent. Let us start with the assumption that
our reading is intended to have the effect of doing us good, of
improving our minds, of giving us knowledge on matters of real
interest. What then is the style of literature most likely to leave these
good effects? Travels, biographies of great men and noble women,
histories of our own and other nations—those which tell us of great
discoveries and manners and customs in foreign lands; this we hold is
the kind of literature which is likely to improve us most, to elevate our
minds and make us worthy, nay more, really acceptable members of
society. We trust that, so far, we have our readers completely on our
side. We now come to a style of literature, regarding which there is
a great variety of opinion. We refer to novel reading. There is much
to be said for and against the novels with which we are flooded nowa-
days. Such authors as Dickens, Thackeray, Lytton, Trollope, and
others may be read with considerable advantage—they contain many
lessons, they carry on their pages many ideas and suggestions which
may be exceedingly useful to us in our daily life. Would that the
majority of our novel writers were such as these ! But, unfortunately,
most of the light literature of the present day is unquestionably pernicious,
nay more, positively immoral. Many novels are simply constituted of
a string of ideas which can have no other tendency but to corrupt the


minds of those who read them; and these are the books which, we
blush to write it, get into the hands of and are read with avidity by the
rising generation of both sexes. The writers of these books know only
too well how to make their books intensely interesting. They work
the passions up by sensational scenes, and so engross the attention of
the readers. But, we ask, what good is derived from reading such books ?
Or rather let us say, is there not untold harm done by putting ideas into
the heads of our sisters and daughters, which otherwise would never
suggest themselves? In the same way as some promoters of entertain-
ments think that there can be no fun without vulgarity, so in the same
way, too many writers entertain the fallacious idea that a book cannot
be interesting without being immoral. What is lovelier than the maiden
coming out into the world fresh and pure—what more hateful than what
is known as “the girl of the period?” If we would insure those
who are near and dear to us ranking amongst the former, then let us
take care that the literature which gets into their hands shall be of the
right description—a happy mixture of the grave and gay ; deep and
light, much that is amusing as well as plenty which may be styled simply
interesting—but a total and complete absence of anything which has a
corrupting tendency, or from which not only no good but an infinity
of harm will be derived.
“ Viator.”


THE SOBRAON PORTRAIT GALLERY
(From the Sobraon Gossip.
* # * All the following verses have been submitted to those persons to
they refer, and none have been published without special permission.
Artists, we know, have been the rage
In every clime and in every age,
And ill could we spare,
Miss Babington fair,
Who so well adorns the “ Gossip’s ” page.
Those harmonies borne on the air,
The name of Miss Chap?na?i declare,
The music that lingers
In the tips of her fingers,
Would charm e’en a wolf or a bear.
Though Miss Collins by no means is tall,
She is greatly esteemed by us all,
For that saying, though trite,
Is most certainly right,
Which declares that the best things are small.
Tall and ruddy is Mr. Colbeck,
And with vigour he paces the deck,
For I never have seed
Such a brisk invalid,
Though he tells you he’s only a wreck.
There was a good pater named Cane ,
Whose brats gave him very much pain,
So he wheeled them in pairs
Round the deck, in low chairs,
And much pleasure in this he did feign.
whom


Of caution and cuteness,
Good sense and astuteness,
Robert Cranmer's a very fair sample ;
’Twould be a wise plan
To copy this man,
And on other’s fair fame not to trample.
Oh ! charming Miss Dickson
Don’t try any tricks on,
For fear you’ll be getting a cold;
For our doctor looks pale,
When with sickness you ail,
And is gloomy with sorrow untold.
If on French you are bent,
Kind fate now has lent
A good teacher in Miss Decock;
But beware how you pass
A small joke in her class,
For to larking and fun she’s a foe.
His power as an artist knows no limit;
He can hit off our faces and forms in a minute ;
In mechanics as well,
Mr. Elliott's a swell,
And also, no doubt, can play on the spinet.
Miss Henley , so comely and fair,
You certainly can't live on air,
For though chubby before,
You have gained one stone four
On the voyage —oh ! won't your friends stare !
From the land of the diamond diggers,
Of ostriches, lions and niggers,
Where butter’s five shillings a pound,
To England once more,
Their dear native shore,
The Harringtons homeward are bound.


Mr. Halkyard at Oldham did dwell,
And at last in our company fell,
He will carve you a basket
As soon as you ask it,
And cut crosses from florins as well.
There was a young doctor named Harricks ,
Who dosed all his patients in barricks ;
They swallowed his lotions,
And rubbed in his potions,
Which were labelled in hasty italics.
Upright and handsome and tall,
Kind and good-natured to all,
And contented in all kinds of weather;
Justice bids us declare,
That a better matched pair,
Cupid seldom has harnessed together.
An Australian lady I see,
And her name it is Mrs. M‘ Gee;
You will open your eyes,
When you gaze on the size
Of her children ; so youthful is she !
Mr. Marshall , who comes from Cape Town,
Has a most diabolical frown
(Mephistopheles-like is his face)
And say what you will,
He will never sit still,
Nor long will he rest in one place.
Mr. Martin his leisure employs
With chess—’tis a game he enjoys ;
Mrs. Martin likes crochet and knitting,
While o’er the pianner,
In a wonderful manner,
Miss Martin's fair fingers are flitting.


From the land of Shillalies,
Good whiskey, and praties,
Oft known as the Emerald Isle,
Comes the prince of all paddies,
The j oiliest of laddies—
McKenna / our hearts to beguile !
There was a kind lady named Miles,
Whose face was illumined with smiles ;
If you don’t take her part,
And admire her good heart,
You deserve to be pelted with tiles.
A young man who resided in Surrey,
With theories his head used to worry;
The last that he made,
Was to bottle the Trade-
Winds, and send them in hampers to Surrey,
I declare Mr. Neild ,
That I know not the field
Where your genius shines at its best;
But I think that in whist
Your chief powers you enlist;
Now, perhaps, you will deem this a jest.
If on journeys erratic,
You’d fain be dramatic,
Why send for our friend, Mr. Nutt,
And from comic to tragic,
He’ll travel like magic;
This statement you cannot rebut.
That lady who talks like a book,
And has such a self-satisfied look,
And who carries her nose in the air,
Would be really quite nice
(Her name’s Mrs. Price),
If less vanity fell to her share.


“ Like a bird ” Mr. Raphael sings;
He can speak, too (amongst other things)
French and German, with ease,
And on the trapeze,
He often a somersault flings.
From the Emerald Isle,
For many a mile,
Mr. Sullivan sailed o’er the main ;
Now to Erin returning,
With ardour he’s burning,
“ Home Rule ” for his country to gain.
Whenever Miss Sheffield I see,
I think of the best cutlery ;
Good and bright may she ever remain,
And in sorrow or weal,
May she prove “ true as steel,”
And the best of all “ tempers ” retain.
Our chaplain is good Mr. Smith
(And his goodness is more than a myth),
His spouse has a genius poetic,
And Lorna , their darling,
Might well cure the snarling
Of the sourest-minded ascetic.
There was a young Scotchman named Shaw,
Who found the French language a bore,
And he said, “ Oh ! by jingo,
It’s a horrible lingo ;
When I say ‘ Honi soit ’ they all roar.”
Mr. Taylor thinks London but “ small,”
While of Melbourne he talks very “ tall; ”
Its churches and banks ✓
j Y
I believe that he ranks
Far above the great dome of St. Paul.


Said a doctor named Wilson—“ Indeed,
“ In all things I can bear off the meed ; ”
But defeated in French,
He received such a wrench,
That he afterwards lowered his creed.
“May”
“ Hirudo


THE SOUTH-EAST TRADES PERFECT
CURE COMPANY
(UNLIMITED).
{From the Sobraon Gossip, May 22 nd, 1875.)
To the Editor.
Sir, —I have read with much pleasure and satisfaction an article
which appeared in your last number, headed “ Forty-eight hours in the
South-East Trades.’' But why does the writer say forty-eight hours in the
South-East trades ? Why not a week, a month, a year, a life-time, a
century ? But why end there ? Why ever leave them ? Ever is a long time
certainly, but why ? Patient reader, imagine a splendidly-appointed vessel,
specially constructed to sail leisurely backwards and forwards in these
sublime latitudes. Kindly oblige me by supposing yourself for the
moment to be an invalid in search of health—an article hitherto
unobtainable in any market. Suppose yourself to be making
humble application at the polished mahogany doors of an elegant
and spacious office in the City. Suppose your application accepted
by the said mahogany doors, and that you are stepping more lightly,
yet firmly, than you have done for months past from before their
highly polished presence; a poorer man, may be in pocket by some one
or two thousand pounds, but yet withal rich—rich in Hope.
The fastest and best equipped steamer of the day lies alongside a
specially constructed wharf. You show your ticket and step on board.
You look over the stern, and in large golden letters you see painted these
words, “The Hopeful.” You are hope-full, you retire to your berth, a berth
which sets at defiance every known law of gravitation. Beside of it, con-
veniently placed, is a tap labelled “Drink and Sleep.” You say to your
delightfully surprised self, “Fancy that! Sleep laid on to the bed-side”!
You dream of Health, of Hope, of Home, and of Happiness, regard-
less of Channel Chops, Biscay Bays or Atlantic Swells, as unconsciously


you are borne southwards through the warm, moist, and stifling Resort of
Dragons that keep ceaseless guard over the North shores of these too
happy—yea, “laughing waters.” The Gates of Hell clang unheeded
behind your rapid progress. The Breath of Heaven smites your slum-
bering cheek, and jaded nature immediately recognises its own sweet re-
storative. You are There and There you are ! But where? Why patient
reader, where else would you be than on board that specially constructed
vessel hitherto mentioned—on board the “ Perfect Cure ” —that floating
Paradise of the S. E. Trades. The only part of this weary world (and
that too the largest portion of its surface) which meets all the require-
ments of our nature. One question alone will provide me with as
much surprise as I can well manage in a life time, and that is, “ Why
does any human being live out of the limits of the S. E. Trades.
On the following morning you rise refreshed. You light your fine
trabuco. You stroll forth into a large and verdant orchard. You seat
yourself beneath the grateful shade of the Blenheim Orange. Uncon-
sciously you pluck the unconscious daisies at your side. The artistically
arranged Alderneys welcome you as friend. At the exact moment
when appetite is beginning to cast its longing eyes inwards, the silver
tinkle, as of marriage bells, summons you to breakfast. You enter,
without descending a single step, the most magnificent saloon one
could possibly picture. You cast a passing glance at the richly stained
windows, which throw in return their mellow glances across the snow-
white cloth which supports the choice viands forming its chiefest
ornaments. What a happy family are there assembled (with a retired
army officer in uniform behind each chair), to share with you the elegant
productions of the finest of the fine arts —gastronomy. You are at
home. Every face present you have seen before. Every face welcomes
you as a long-lost and tried friend. You at once become conscious
and feel that you are the one choice gem required to complete this
happy crown.
Why not end here? Why describe further in detail more than
heart could wish, ingenuity and wealth provide, or the most facile
pen describe? I will only mention in a jumbling order—the cabin clad
deck —the cabins themselves —which are no cabins at all, but elegant
and spacious rooms open to this every wind of Heaven—the airy
billiard room, the quiet and elegant work room, the lofty smoking room,


the pretty little writing room, the well-stocked library, the fine military
band, the scientific lectures, the theatre, the opera-house, the sharkless
yet open sea baths, the boating and fishing excursions, the shady walks,
the archery and croquet grounds, the pleasant drives, the table d’hote?
provided over by the chef de cuisine in person—the healthful amuse-
ments, especially designed for and provided by this Company for their
beloved family of water babies. But the one leading and attractive
principle of this Company I have designedly reserved until now, and
that is, No Cure , No Pay. Another is, that one payment covers every-
thing. One word for that swiftest and truest of pilot fish, the little
“ Hopeful.” By its means arrive frequently old and new friends—the
latest news—the choicest, freshest, and rarest of provisions—the morn-
ing papers, newest books, &c., returning home with the widow’s only
son restored to life, together with many of his happy, strong, and merry
fellows, with hopeful news of those loved ones far on the road towards
that most desirable of all residences, termed Health.
Having already trespassed so far upon your valuable space, I will
only conclude with the first verse of an old song invariably sung by
sailors in the doldrums. I could say more, mind you!
“ Oh ! give me back my S. E. Trades,
Those winds I love so Well;
Whose sunny circumambient glades,
No sorrows have to tell.”
And remain, Sir,
Your most humbly, obedient, and obliged Servant,
“ Ibid , fund
P.S.—For those who are unable to afford the expense of a voyage
in the “ Perfect Cure,” I am instructed to say that this Company will
consent to lay on, at a very moderate charge per cubic foot, these life-
giving S. E. Trades to their own home. Those again, in still poorer
circumstances can have them fresh as imported and in quantities, either
in cask or bottle, on application to the Secretary. •!. J.


Mr. ARMSTRONG—THE AUSTRALIAN
TOM THUMB.
to most of us Mr. Armstrong’s size and
J||i /I appearance are sufficiently familiar, yet, by special request,
we append a few particulars with regard to him. His
height in his stockings is 3 ft. 4 in., which is said to be
4 inches less than General Tom Thumb; his .weight on March 13th,
when he was weighed on board the “ Sobraon,” was 48 lbs., or
3 st. 6 lbs.; his age is 20 years. He is tolerably symmetrical with
the exception of his legs, which are decidedly too short for his body.
There is also some malformation about his nose and palate which
interferes with his speech. He possesses a fair amount of intelligence,
although the development of his mind would se'em more to resemble that
of a child of ten or twelve years than that of a man of twenty. That he
possesses a good deal of agility all who have seen him dance the
Highland Fling and Sailors’ Hornpipe will testify. Mr. Armstrong
left the ship at Cape Town, where we believe he intended to exhibit
publicly in connection with the troupe with which he was associated.
“ Hirudo"


CROSSING THE LINE, 1872.
Extracts from a Lady’s Diary.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, May i st, 1875 ).
N Saturday, the 9th November, we crossed the Line. It was
a day of great festivity among the sailors, and from morning
till night all kinds of amusements were carried on on
board.
They commenced on Friday night by Neptune’s secretary coming
on deck and delivering letters from “His Majesty the King of the
Seas ”to our Captain. One of the sailors was dressed up to represent
the character, and it was most amusing to see the grave manner in
which the skipper carried on a conversation- with this individual. His
enquiries for Neptune, his Queen, and family, were gone through with
the utmost decorum, and he ended by saying : “ You must present my
respects to his Majesty and say that I shall be prepared to receive him
on board to-morrow, and swear allegiance to him as Monarch of the
Seas.” Then the secretary took his leave and our letters were distri-
buted. He certainly seemed more hair than anything else, but that
no doubt was correct.
The Queen was too modern to be in character. She had a huge
chignon made of yellow tow, and was less careful about showing her
legs than might have been expected from a person in her dignified
position. Their son was decidedly the best of the three. He looked
really capital! He was painted a dark yellowish red, with all kinds of
mystic emblems in black on his face and body. His only clothing was
a brilliant striped cloth round his loins and a silver (?) crown on his
head. Round and about these principal personages were several droll
characters representing a doctor and barber with their attendants.


Neptune and his train came on the poop deck, where they were
received by the Captain with all due honours. After this ceremony
they went on the quarter deck, and the barber, who had an enormous
razor, shaved various passengers who had not before crossed the line.
They were then put into the bath and had a good ducking. All this
was carried on with perfect good humour —only willing victims being
sacrificed. Then Neptune took his departure amid great cheering.
The afternoon was devoted to sports of various kinds—a prize of
money being given to successful candidates. The most interesting was
a race to the mast head and back —a prize of iox. being given by the
first mate. It was won by a Dutch sailor, who performed the feat in
2 min. 5 sec. : this the Captain told us was remarkably quick work;
he also said that when he was a middy (and I imagine somewhat more
sylph-like than at present) he had won a prize by doing it in a little
over 4 minutes.
There was also a smoking race —a prize being awarded to the man
who could get through of tobacco in the shortest time.
In the evening a grand concert came off —the Captain having
offered a prize for the best song.
The quarter deck was lighted up for the occasion, and some men
blacked their faces and came out as Christy Minstrels. They were a
capital get up, and gave us some really good songs. I expect the
glorious night which we had, with the moon so bright that one could
read easily by it, had much to do with the affair going off so well. The
proceedings were varied by a sailor’s hornpipe, one of our passengers
dancing it in his racing costume. The colours were white, with a
crimson satin scarf and cap, and the effect was very good.
Various jokes were perpetrated in the correct Christy style, most
of them referring in some way to the ship, as, for instance, “ Why is
Captain B like a man who has been married twice ? ”
“ Because he has a second mate ! ”
So the day came to an end, and a very jolly day it was,
“May.”


BREAKING UP.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, May 29 th, 1875.)
HESE words are music to many a youthful heart at this
moment, and are redolent of Midsummer holidays and
“ Home, Sweet Home.” We too shall soon (D.V.) be
breaking up, and we would fain prepare a summary report
of our quarter’s schooling, seeing that the phrase “finishing one’s
education” is a misnomer; and a wise man will be always learning.
Breaking up implies a being bound together ; and to look at the compact
community, the mutual co-operative firm we now are, it is hard to recall
the medley of random units and promiscuous individualities we were
when we first met on board the “Sobraon;” compare the frank and
familiar way in which we now look at each other with the furtive and
curious way in which we tried to make each other out, and see what we
were like then , and we must see that valuable influences have been at
work, and that a sea voyage is not necessarily a nuisance and infliction,
with a redundance of salt water and spare time, and that’s all. Good as
the ship “Sobraon” has been, there has been another allegorical ship
in which most of us have sailed from day to day, and which has been
safe and steady in all weathers, the ship Friendship , while another crack
little craft the very “ Champion of the Seas,” Courtship , with her well-
picked crew (all mates and no captain), has been performing clever
exploits and evolutions, which have ever been admired and appreciated
by spectators for which they were not intended. In a physical and
corporeal aspect we are certainly improved by the voyage—disease and
death have touched us but lightly, while most have gained improved
health, some have grown buxom and bonny as our weighing days will
testify, and if our crop of mustard and cress has failed, yet an early spring
crop of hirsute ornaments has appeared on some cheeks once blank and
boyish, telling of congenial seasons and impending manhood. Our least
praise is that we have had little or no differences or disagreeables to
complain of —indeed, such would have been something like con-


nubial quarrels, which are absurd and amusing because of their proximity
—neither can advance or retreat or claim a victory, while both forces
“ sleep on the field,” so we have been so close together that it has been
impossible to cut each other or run very far away, even if we were so
disposed. A long sea voyage is a great test of temper, revealer of
character, and often both the best of us and the worst of us comes to
the front at such times. I think that the present occasion has brought
a good balance of profit to us all. We have had opportunities of enlarged
experience and increased information —we find that the world of men as
well as of matter is much larger than we were aware, and that the little
world of church or state in which it may be we have been long moving, is
but an insignificant section and fragment of a much larger one. What a
field we have had for the study of character, and for the exercise of the
nameless and numberless courtesies and charities and amenities of life !
That we were shipmates on board the “ Sobraon” will form a sort of
bond of cousinship and relationship when we hear of each other in future
years, for our beautiful artist has not more surely limned our features
on paper than memory has photographed them in the picture-book of
life—the fleshy tables of the heart—to turn them o’er and o’er in days to
come. Marbles are originally rough, angular bits of stone which are
then placed in a cylinder—steam is applied—the stones begin to rattle
and rotate until when the process is complete they are turned out as
round as marbles. Some such charming operation has been going on
among us ; many of the rough corners and angles of character which we
thought we could never get round have been rubbed off, and in spite of
differences of class and creed and nationality , we find that we are more
alike than we thought; that there is a common human heart beating in
every bosom, and we turn out as round as marbles.
May the longer voyage of life which we are all taking be equally
propitious, and may we reach at last “ the desired haven,” and meet
again in that better world where adieux and farewells are a sound
unknown !
“ Max”


OBITUARY.
IN MEMORIAM.
F. W. BARWICK, WHO DIED MAY IBXH, 1 875.
#N the old bridge at Lucern there is a remarkable
painting representing Death, noiselessly claiming his
various victims, from the infant in the cradle to the
old man tottering on the verge of the grave, and so it must
ever be; death defies all, and does his work silently and
surely. Young and old, rich and poor are called alike, and
well it is when he finds those, he calls ready to obey his
summons.
One of our number who all of us have seen from time
to time, and many of us have been with day by day, has
after a tremendous battle, been claimed by the last great
enemy. We must not deplore his loss; his suffering was such
that his death can only be looked upon as a happy release,
and we can but pray that what is a loss to those who loved
him here is a gain to him of far greater value than anything
that this earth can afford.
Poor Barwick is gone ! but the presence of death amongst
us should tend to make us think more of matters of religion than
we are wont to do. Let us not miss this opportunity of searching
ourselves and endeavouring to deepen our own spiritual life.
Let not this death be thought of to-day and forgotten to-
morrow, but let us try and think that there is much to be
learnt from it.


In thus writing a few lines in Barwick’s memory we wish
to place on record that everything that could be done for the
allieviation of his pain and to prolong his life was done. He
had, like all invalids, his favourites amongst us, and these,
together with the servants appointed to wait on him, were
unremitting in their efforts: untiring, gentle, patient, and
long-suffering.
We think we can add no more. Silently and quietly has
Barwick passed away. Those who loved him here on earth
must now look forward to renewing those ties of affection in
that land where partings are unknown.
“ Viator "
t


IN MEMORIAM.
MRS. STURGESS, WHO DIED JUNE IST, 1 8 75.
GAIN has death visited our number, and the spirit of
on e whose removal will pierce the hearts of many
n J friends with grief, has returned to God who gave it.
Mrs. Sturgess commenced the voyage in comparative health,
but soon unfavourable symptoms began to disclose themselves,
and for the most of the voyage she has been confined to the
cabin, and thus she was known and missed on deck less than
she otherwise would have been. She struggled with her afflic-
tion very bravely and patiently, and it was fondly hoped that
having borne so much she would be spared a little longer to
reach her native land, and see her dear parents once more.
On Sunday last it became evident that these hopes could not
be realized, and that her life was drawing rapidly to a close,
she sank into a heavy stupor for the most of the day, but on
Monday morning she recovered her consciousness and realized
her impending danger. She was grateful for this season of
recollection in which to survey her position and prepare for
the final conflict. Though the disappointment seemed strange
and sad to natural feeling, yet she resigned herself to God’s
will as good and right. She spoke with anxiety and affection
of her dear husband and family; of her faith in Christ as a
present and precious Saviour, and listened with eager attention
and sympathy to converse about the eternal world which was
opening before her. She soon after became unconscious, and
having borne the burden of nature’s last distress, she passed
away at half-past three in the morning of Tuesday, June Ist.


Every medical aid and comfort that could relieve and sustain
was freely rendered, and it is but just to record here the
unremitting attentions of the doctors, the kindness and devo-
tion of cabin friends, and the generous consideration of the
Captain in gratifying the wishes of the family in regard to the
disposal of the body. All will unite in sympathy with the
husband and family in prayer, that her friends in England
and Australia may be prepared for the unexpected event,
and sustained under it, and that it may be a lesson and a
blessing to all of us —saying, “ I have a message from God to
thee—prepare to meet thy God.”
“ Max."
t


FAREWELL.
(From the Sobraon Gossip, May 29 th, 1875,).
R. JOHNSON is accredited with the saying that a ship
is a floating prison with the chance of being drowned ;
but after a hundred days’ experience we beg to differ from
the worthy doctor, and to express our conviction that a
well-ordered ship, such as the one in which we sail, resembles less a
prison than a comfortable home, in which we are free from taxes,
house rents, tailor’s bills, and doctor’s fees. We can look from our
floating homestead over the blue waves, and some of us are ready to
confess, now we daily see recorded on the notice board a day’s run
nearer home, that it is with a feeling something akin to reluctance that
we shall say good-bye to the good ship which has been the scene of
so many days of pleasure, and on which we have formed so many
friendships. That we have had almost an entire freedom from mal de
mer may be due to the fact that the ‘‘Sobraon” either disdains to pitch
and toss, or has some private arrangement with old Father Neptune. To
Captain Elmslie we are under a debt of gratitude for the steady and
sure way in which he has piloted us, through sunshine and storm, over
the long distance of miles of ocean, as well as for his generous and
considerate kindness on several occasions, when he has in a disinterested
way studied our feelings and pleasure. Especially would we record his
attention to one of our number, Mr. Barwick, who has passed from
amongst us by the cold hand of death.
The thanks of all are also due to Mr. Seaborne, the chief officer,
who has throughout our long voyage, by his kindness and affability,
made for himself a place in the hearts of all the passengers. If good
wishes will do anything towards advancing him in his profession, he has


our best. With regard to the other officers, the midshipmen, and the
crew, we would bear our testimony that, in our opinion, it is seldom a
ship has left Australia with a finer body of officers and men.
Now that we may soon expect the white cliffs of England to loom
in the distance, and the sweet word “ home ” strikes an echo in every
heart, we would extend the hand of friendship to all our fellow voyagers,
and with our best wishes for their health, happiness, and prosperity,
bid them farewell. [Ed.


A SHORT SUMMARY OF THE EVENTS OF
THE VOYAGE.
1875, February 12, Friday. —The “Sobraon” being anchored in the
bay, some two miles from Sandridge, the passengers, with a few excep-
tions, came on board in the tug at about 4 p.m., amidst deluges of rain.
One unfortunate individual fell from the paddle-box into the sea, and
was, with some little difficulty, rescued. There was great confusion on
board during the evening.
February 13, Saturday. —Weighed anchor at 9.30 a.m., and were
towed to Queenscliff, where we remained for the night. A mirage was
visible during the greater part of the day, causing the shores, ships,
lighthouses, &c., on the horizon to appear as if suspended in the air.
February 14, Sunday. —Were towed through the Heads at about
8.30 a.m. After we were cast off by the tug," we made but little pro-
gress, as it was almost a calm during the day. No services.
February 15, Monday. —Last sight of land.
February 16, Tuesday. —A general meeting of the passengers was
convened to consider the subject of amusements. Three sub-com-
mittees were formed, viz., Musical, Dramatic, and Literary.
February 18, Thursday —Dancing on deck in the evening. An
albatross and a mollyhawk caught.
February 19, Friday. —Several albatross and mollyhawks caught.
February 21, Sunday. Rough weather. Several seas shipped.
No services.
February 22, Monday. —An outward-bound vessel spoken—the
“ Ocean Rover.”
February 23, Tuesday. —An outward-bound vessel sighted, but not
signalled. Dancing on deck in the evening.
February 24, Wednesday. —An evening concert given by the
Musical Committee in aid of the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum.


Admission is. 6d. Amount realised, between 4 and Per-
formers : Misses Collins, Sheffield, and Martin, Dr. Harricks and Mr.
Raphael. Readings by the Rev. J. B. Smith and Mr. Nutt.
February 26, Friday. —ln the longitude of Cape Lewin.
February 28, Sunday. — Prayers on deck in the morning. Evening
Service with Sermon in the Saloon (Rev. J. B. Smith).
March 1, Monday. —First performance of the Christy Minstrel
Troupe on the main hatch. Mr. F. Fountain, and Messrs. Baker,
Wood, Israel, and Armstrong,
March 6, Saturday.—Dancing on deck in the evening.
March 7, Sunday. —Prayers on deck in the morning. Evening
Service with Sermon in the saloon (Mr. Fulton).
March 10, IVcdnesday. Second Christy Minstrel Entertainment
on the main hatch.
March 12, Friday. — A gale, probably a cyclone or circular storm,
lasting about fourteen hours, with a heavy confused sea. There were
severe squalls of wind, which reached their climax at 3.30 p.m., when
the jib was blown into ribbons. Six hats went overboard.
March 13, Saturday— Wind and sea moderating. In the evening
a second concert was given under the auspices of the Musical Com-
mittee. Admission free. The performers were Misses Chapman,
Collins, Dickson, Sheffield, Martin, and Henley, Dr. Harricks, Messrs
Fountain, Harris, and Israel. Readings by Mr. Nutt and Mr.
Fulton.
March 14, Sunday. —Prayers on deck in the morning. Evening
Service with Sermon in the saloon (Rev. J. B. Smith),
March 15, Monday.— St. Valentine’s Day was kept to-day, the
editor’s box of the Sobraon Gossip being temporarily used as a post-
office. Nearly a hundred valentines were posted, and were distributed
at breakfast-time by a special postman. In the evening a trial was
held on the main hatch in a case of breach of promise of marriage.
March 16, Tuesday.— Second evening of the trial. Verdict for the
plaintiff.
March 18, Thursday.— Passed a barque which had lost her main
topgallant mast. Probably bound for Melbourne from the Mauritius.
Too far off to signal.
March 20, Saturday. — A waterspout was visible early in the
morning. It was about six miles from the ship.


March 21, Sunday. —Prayers on deck in the morning. Evening
Service with sermon in the saloon (Mr. Fulton).
March 22, Monday. —A barque passed astern of us, bound,
probably, for India. Too far off to signal. A shark seen but not
caught.
March 24, Wednesday. —First chess handicap tournament com-
menced. Each player to play forty-eight games.
March 26, Good Friday. —Prayers on deck in the morning. Flying
fish to be seen.
March 27, Saturday. —A second circular storm or small hurricane.
The gale commenced with torrents of rain, and afterwards the wind
shifted very rapidly, and the ship was taken aback. The foretopsail
carried away, also a large boom. For several hours the ship was under
main lower topsail only. There was a heavy confused sea, and a good
deal of water was shipped. The gale lasted about nine hours.
March 28, Easter Sunday. —Service in the saloon, morning and
evening (Rev. J. B. Smith).
March 30, Tuesday. —Shark seen but not caught. Dramatic enter-
tainment in the evening on the main hatch. The piece played was
“ Little Toddlekins.” The performers were Messrs. Nutt, Nemo,
Raphael, and Powel, and the Misses Sheffield and Martin.
April 1, Thursday. —Two whales close to the ship.
April 2, Friday. —Longest run—274 miles.
April 3, Saturday. —Severe squall in the night in which the ship
was taken aback. It blew hard all day with a heavy sea.
April 4, Sunday. —Service in the saloon morning and evening
(Sermon by Mr. Fulton).
April 5, Monday. —Nearing land. Colour of sea changed. Final
performance of Christy Minstrels.
April 6, Tuesday. —Severe thunderstorm in the night with squalls
of wind and rain and a heavy sea. In the morning there was an almost
total eclipse of the sun, lasting from about 5.30 to 7.30 a.m. In the
Agulhas current.
April 7, Wednesday. —Sighted the coast of Africa in the morning.
Passed Cape Padrone and the lighthouse on Bird Island before evening.
After dark the light on Cape Recife was visible.
April 8, Thursday. —Passed a steamer probably belonging to the


Union Company ; it was too for off to signal. We had a distant sight
of land all day. Still in the Agulhas current.
April 9, Friday. —Land only visible towards evening in the
distance. Fished for cod on the Agulhas Bank, but caught none.
Passed a brigantine. Sighted the light on Cape Agulhas about 10 p.m.
April 10, Saturday. —A calm. Land not visible.
April 11, Sunday. —Came in sight of land about 2 o'clock p.m.
Sighted the Cape of Good Hope late in the afternoon, and were
close to the lighthouse on its extreme point by nightfall. We had
nearly reached the light on Green Point (marking the entrance to
Table Bay) by 10.30 p.m., with a very strong breeze blowing off the
land, when the ship was suddenly taken aback in a sudden shift of
wind under the lee of a mountain, and we put out to sea again for the
night. Prayers in the saloon in the morning; none in the evening.
April 12, Monday. —Again attempted to enter Table Bay, early in
the morning, but the wind failed before reaching Green Point, and the
ship drifted about until the afternoon, and was once in some danger of
going upon a large rock —the “ Whale Rock.” About 3 o’clock a light
wind took us into the bay, where we anchoted at 4 p.m. Most of the
passengers went ashore.
April 15, Thursday. —Re-embarked in the “ Sobraon ” at noon,
and weighed anchor at 3 p.m. Left Table Bay with a favourable wind
by the North Passage, between Robben Island and the northern
extremity of the bay.
April 16, Friday. —Two small sharks caught, each about 3 feet
long. A brigantine in sight.
April 17, Saturday. —A barque in company—not spoken.
April 18, Sunday. —Service in the saloon morning and evening
(Sermon by Rev. J. B, Smith),
April 19, Monday. —Brigantine in company—not spoken.
April 25, Sunday. Prayers on deck in the morning; evening
service with sermon in the saloon (Mr. Fulton).
April 27, 7'uesday.— Off St. Helena by daybreak.—The majority
of the passengers went on shore at about 8.30 a.m. The ship did not
anchor, but stood on and off during the day. Having spent a pleasant
day on the island, we all re-embarked by 4 p.m., and set sail about an
hour later.


April 30, Friday. —A ship in sight ahead of us.—Shoals of flying-
fish about.
May 1, Saturday. Several whales to be seen in the distance.
Second chess tournament commenced.
May 2, Sunday. Island of Ascension in sight all day, about
25 miles off to the east of us. Prayers on deck in the morning;
evening service with sermon in the saloon (Rev. J. B. Smith).
May 4, Tuesday. —A large homeward-bound ship in the distance.
May 5, Wednesday. —Same ship still to be seen.
May 6, Thursday. —Two outward-bound barques passed both
signalled. One was French, the other English; names not made out.
May 7, Friday. —Passed the Equator about 9.30 a.m, ; almost a
dead calm all day. We saw a large school of porpoises in the evening
and soon afterwards a shark made his appearance, and was caught in
the usual way. His length was about six feet.
May 8, Saturday. —This morning we were boarded by a boat from
the barque “ Cameo ” (London to Adelaide). Her Captain wished to
send a letter by us.
May 9, Sunday. —Very heavy tropical rain. Three vessels in
sight; two of them were signalled. Service in the saloon morning and
evening (Sermon by Mr. Fulton). '
May 10, Monday. —Two vessels in sight; one of them was a large
ship.—Not signalled.
May n, Tuesday— Several vessels in sight. Dancing on deck in
the evening.
May 13, Thursday. —A shoal of black-fish (small whales) passed
close to the ship.
May 14, Friday. —Large numbers of flying-fish about.
May 16, Sunday. Prayers on deck in the morning; evening
service with sermon in the saloon (Rev. J. B. Smith).
May 18, Tuesday. —Mr. Barwick, a saloon passenger, died early
this morning, and was buried at sunset. The Rev. J. B. Smith read the
funeral service.
May 20, Thursday. —Three vessels in sight, but not signalled.
May 21, Friday. The Captain’s gig, with a crew of 18 pas-
sengers and midshipmen, under the charge of Mr. Seaborne, put out to
a brig for newspapers and potatoes. She was the “ Britannia ” from
Liverpool, for the Island of St. Thomas, 31 days out.


May 23, Sunday. —Morning prayers on deck. Evening service
with sermon in the saloon (Mr. Fulton).
May 25, Tuesday. —Third chess tournament commenced.
May 26, Wednesday. Two vessels in the distance. A large
sword-fish was seen near the stern of the ship; it was said to be about
14 feet long.
May 29, Saturday— Passed a large steamer, supposed to belong
to the Messageries Maritimes ; a large ship was also in sight.
May 30, Sunday. Three or four ships in sight two were
signalled ; they were the “ Flying Fish” and the “ Nereid ”; all outward
bound. Service in the saloon morning and evening (Rev. J. B. Smith).
May 31, Monday. About 200 miles from Madeira at noon;
passed several outward-bound vessels.
June 1, Tuesday. —Mrs. Sturgess, a second-class passenger, died at
3 o’clock this morning.
fine 4, Friday— In the evening two very large whales were close
alongside the ship for some little time.
June 5, Saturday. —ln the forenoon the Captain sent his gig with a
crew, under the command of the second officer, to investigate a large log
of timber which was seen floating at some little distance from the ship,
The boat returned after an absence of about an hour with two turtles and
five fish—the latter are called “ Old Wives,” and are usually found
under all old floating timber. They are good eating. The log was
supposed to be part of the deck cargo of a North American timber ship,
and was covered with barnacles.
June 6, Sunday. —ln the afternoon the gig with a crew of twenty
went off to a large barque. She proved to be a German vessel, the
“D. H. Watjen,” 1,200 tons register, bound from Newcastle to Singapore
with coals ; twenty-one days out. She was a fine vessel with a poop
eighty-three feet long. We obtained from her some newspapers and
potatoes. Service morning and evening in the saloon (Sermon by Mr.
Fulton).
June 7, Monday. —The gig with several passengers, including four
ladies, put out to a small brigantine—the “ Edith Grant ”; 200 tons ; from
Belfast for Charlestown ; eleven days out.
June 8, Tuesday. —Several passengers witnessed the curious spec-
tacle of a whale in difficulties. He was being attacked by his enemy


the Thresher-fish—a kind of shark. An outward-bound barque in sight.
June 9, Wednesday. —Crossing the Bay of Biscay. The sea is no
longer blue. Several vessels in sight during the day. A closing concert
was given in the evening in the Saloon, in aid of the Merchant Seamen’s
Orphan Asylum. The performers were Misses Chapman, Collins,
Sheffield and Henley, Dr. Harricks and Messrs. Cooper, Fountain,
and Harris. Readings by Mr. Nutt and Dr. Harricks.
June 10, Thursday. —Cold weather with a strong North-West
breeze. Passed a number of vessels, both outward and homeward-
bound.
June n, Friday. —Sighted Start Point at 6.30 p.m.
June 12, Saturday. —Abreast of St, Catherine’s Point. Isle of
Wight at 4.30 a.m., and stood in to Dungeness, fora Pilot towards noon.
After a splendid run up Channel, we anchored off Margate at about
5 p.m., being unable to enter the Mouth of the Thames on account of
the westerly gale that was blowing.
June 13, Sunday. —Weighed anchor at 3 a.m., and were towed up
the river. Were moored at Gravesend at about 10 a.m.
“ Him do.”


c/5
P 4
<|
S
w
P 4
CO
£
o
H
Si
P o
cn c
§ l
P
c *3
2 8
O a
O
M c 5
o b
p
'o'
M
<3
o
O
w
H
H
S
S' u
■43 .b T 3
a -s
a ° .s
Q
.'o
5?
4?
§
§
V.
O
o
o
p
w
H
P
•a
’Si W
c
o
p
■a
3
■O IXI
rt
P
oi *•> {j-
*C° N . 9 -•
C o 4) b/3 I E
£ § u - 2 2 .S m a
rf i, -Mb ..|flS Is||BB
lad '53 J u oil’d
« j-“a^'g ( § „ | i! s"g s s
<! CJ 0 0.0 -FTrS <u 2 . ~ -
S 4> 8 8 Bsg V 3 r «2'Srt2 a 4? I 8 g . 6 E
~ j- 5 2* 2 s"« ggB* >• § « •■ g .*r ? £ *r*r
T 3 r i342p,xi4>,C lJ -)G > c ' irl „o cJ Bva <U 43 - -42
C M M « M'S w3"S MS S M M
cj 'E - c H ••; o ’c ° ■'ass 3'E' a 3U tL2'C5g »< E
P pqpq «Sw< OPQQpq Q wSsQQWM
6
-—— 3
o
O PI
S II vo CO NN ms h N COVO vo o 'i-N «H O M “
fe „ 3
O
*>
- ■ <D
1 '" U
. A
.2 || Cii • • » ~
« £ C/3 £vi Cfl c
•- 11 02 k,- ~ iCd C/2 -C
« W £ W W P •§
CJ
2
u v> <u
•3 rt II II I ro I VO m PI VO rh m O uiNrh .£1
a 4: II II I N I N OvoO Ov VO VO vo vO VO "
‘o “ o
.S c
—IH ■—— *t3
•- • §
£ | | | rf- rfvO tJ- r>. up CO Ov CO VO NNrfw O N
°-£ I °0 O O V)°Cn °OnV^ o o\°Ov °Cv °HH °rO°up 0 (N % °co°ro g
u I I 1 up vo vo vo *o up up up upvo up vo vo vO 'O v O vo r;
2 c -■
5 «3 # a
T 3
« I CO OVD o COCO r*- rf upoO O CO MhO CO N
u (On OO 00000 vq Oh h hoo Ov c>o hhO O h
cf\ do* 6 6\Q\6\ On O* O* O* On On On OOOO* O* O* °
5 1 N CO CO COW N N MCOCOCON C< CJ CO CO CO CO CO CO Ph
& B
■ « ■ ■—- --■ ■■ • - - - o
£
!» U I►* CJ co upvo CO On Oh w co upvo <J\ O o
O rt
#r 3
O 1 O
C | *1 I VO VOOO vo vo WOO Oh rfco rfvO 5
W O rt-uo*-HvO NN rf h rf rf CO up CO CO en
£ »h d m m i-i • J
0 g
00 Vo Wo 'll VO 'll 'o 'ovoo CO vD 'o VooO 'rf-'vo'pi 'tJ-
vo tJ-iomio ■vj- roi- co tJ- pitJ-covo
1 || °N °Os vO °o°ro°OV 00 °fO°Ov °o °p| °0 °i-i
•• r}-ro rororOP) N«P) Pt h m >- n2 0 252
, , 'o vb Vo'ij-Vo'pi vo 'pi 'co'm Vo '« 'o Vi oo 'o oo %* 'o
. W H H PI M M M tl n (OPI H CO^lPl
CO oo 0000 00000 o 0000000
OvO CsOvOvO OvOv OvOO CO 'O'O'O'O N
CO CO va to CO •vt- to CO CO CO to CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO
Tf vo ■co N COOvOi-i PIcOTf VOVO OO WPI CO tJ- iovO
. MW MMdPI Cl P| Cl Cl PI PI P|
lO
’S *. - - :::: :s : :
■ .h . rt
£ rt | I I rt" rJ-NO Tf rf- u-> fO On fO NO NN rj- wOH ON <s>
I I o’ o’o’o’o’ o’o’o’o’o* o’ o’o’o’o’o’o’o* *^3
s“ -S on on on on on h rouNN n g
5 J; | I I u-> vo VO VO VO 1-niovo vovO no NO NO NO NO vO NO vO
H 2- ' o,
4) nj
£ £ I n OVO O fOCO rt- rf* 1000 O CO M»hNO 00 N
g o |On OO OOOGO NO Cn >-<>-<►-< CO On OvQ wh O O h •£
cf\ do dd\ds 6\ d\ ddd d> cf> on ddd d d d „°
rt s 1 N rO CO row W W N COMrON r* N MfOtOMMM
» 3 B


►V -S w -r 4} C
q § .2 •S'a , £ a
■S W r-H W g tyj • rt . *-'
goo CJ W J o S 2 £ q —•
SlSub « . "fj -"• r 3 b .
ri S S O MS a, W g O O S c 3 g in *J
t/j § rt £-q •£ ? . <« ?33 W <« ta S . ._- s
O*,S 5 ,S | sr°rC5 r ° rC c'tJ O+'E 2c ”
p 4 3 g b/3 SBrt§S§&' • SB 03
—-r • «-• p . • Ph r- £-. • . 0 cj rt C
2 3ha b.S 21i •§ cS « ...?S> £ co § > a «
S ?T'“§rti3 r s ) >,gN |!^S' J3 »77 S -
w •« ■S's’sc r 2 sSss
£ -2 2 g I 6-S Sw - *s *- I*r*r*p*j
O ,£ <U 1) jS q. -'O , wJ3 p O -a "3! O -C 33 ,£3 33
HH tjo-d 'V bD TTS g a § MMW)b/)bOb/)boa.b/0§33 tsfl bJO bJO W)
H *C oo ’C "* « ° o'C -C -C -C T # C ‘C 1/1 ‘C & 1/1 ’C - n -C -C
<J Q > ppc/3 PQ« pq pq
> w.
fv» c ——
P 5 o
Wo
03 a u
PP tJ “ fOrfH to CO t-» O n WONNCO w O ■^•■^•2 ir>
O£ £ *
vi *3
g - -o 7
tf M § . t £ . b>• § 3w • w
I 8| s S • pH
’■§ 8 b 5 £««»’ 5 *s**
' w *
O (j
H i§ - 3 13 HNOOOO M CO Tt N o 0"0 CO CO in N>O JO O O'JO
f'v H c/” vO N G\ On COO'OVO t> t>» vO vO
Nw W 3 O 1/1
B -5
cq
Q ..s .
.SJi'a ■^■ |-IV ° 0 . 10 'T 5 H N OMAN cowt 'O'O u ? T f M . N .
& a? J VO °« °N VO Zo VO VV.SO §0 °0 °0 CO °0 % °Ov °g.°o °M V
vOvOvOvO vO vO O'O OO N l>»vO Jb>. vD NNN
js h 2-s
-
*Js» tJ « OOMCO <t w 00 N O 0.0 com" 0 iovO vO 00 mog
go Oi-ii-ii-i i-i CO vOOwNMMOOO O O °. "^!°.
§ g dodo d d\ d\d ddd d d d d j dddd
Jj CO CO CO CO CO N NCOCOCOCOCO CO CO CO M CO CO CO CO
| W 3.
S.j mncotJ-iovO O'O " N cot vnvo r-00 O' 0^
Q rtS WNNO Ci N NN N COCOCOMCO CO CO COCOCO^
o °
,
~ O
. c o rf- W H VO inrf COCO TfM NO CO ro Cn ro O
N rt O N h mLO rj-O VO 'O fON O h
m. *-h
O 3
o o .
O T 3 O f'*. t+" to i-O CJvOvOvOrJ-iOi-OfOCOvO (S*-* fOvO
3 h ro w Tj - ro iO O u~) rf- u~) lo h iri vo
OO On Tt- m n^On
O On ON ON CO 00 OOCOOOGO
M CO V HH *OnvO *b Vl V hh s C\VnnO V>%-* V Tt- "o "in OCO
3 , IoM m h d ro ro rf tj- in hi rorf »-i r^-
*5 " vOvOvOvO vO vO «N fO fO fO fO Tf tJ-N h h >—< ►—i <M ►—•
CO fO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO co CO CO CO
. t>%oo On O Cl CO rb iovD On O *-• M co rf itnvO
Li 3 . ►H MCI MMMM
H tC C
< °2 « s s zppppppp pp pppp
fi S


co«1j T 3 rt to s 1 fc' g|g d,i3 3
n'i’S f | . y gg{ g*% in -§|
53 JB SdS. - s - o'* | g ° M £
• r~- *r C/3rQ <L) <Tj G 013 ri
.SP-s-d *.S - g-g
adH m fl . §* .'g’s to JJ JJ
. -£ r rt g S r O r H*' _ m *G > r-O
‘g ° :-%%* B . g „c >i g’S & £ d
J i’SB B^g , ’ia rt^l-? 8 l| L’S
e 5 M
" o-sf .-a|*s,S§9
>4 2 4-. W 44-jJ 44* 2*XCrt 'd 4-T h 4-T'2 4-1 6 4J* 4J- >-. £ "L g 4-T 4-P O Q 4-. 44
rt a '&i mmm£ '§o.2 mJp ErJ fo’S wf §~ a o £&*& g
>2 a « >rH .- . c tn - c 4-. rt *£3 -* •£ *c ~ c S tMc -C -C - C -2
W pq pqpqpqpdpq pq pq pq pq pq pq pq Q pq pq pq pq CJ
U-)
VO VO 0
2 Th CO MVO VOVO VO iflOO I [
Ct ir>
. £•
w £ £ W | I 111
co xn > .
co
Bco Ov tJ-OO d-vo Ov Nco C vo d" d- rh lo , ■ ■ •
to to tovO vo OO to vo vO vO VO to O. Ov CO [ i
VO rf-NOvOvd-NfO Ct VO Ov VO rf- N vo to VO
°M °ov °i-( 'co'io'roVt Vj 00 < to°to. °to °0 Vf °vo °co I II °0
I*- vo 1-4. t0v0 O tv to vD vO vO vo NO vO vo vO
vo N O vo O OO CO vo O toOO vO CO vo CO O
to CO h N vo OOvmmOOO 00 Cvi 111
cfv d\ cf\ cfv o' d cfv d\ odvo’ d d cf> cfv dv I
Ct N N N MtCN N rOOCOCOCON N N
►i N ro d- uivD OO « N fCt vo vo N OOOvO
d- VO vo vo vo lO vo vo vo VO VOVO
f< VO MNOO'-'d-M voOd-fOCON , >l, 111
rj- M OO ho N N 't “IN M
N i-iNNi-i I w l 111
vo oo oWn'o vo Vi novo vo nvo "ov
w vowiororo d- rod-vo«Mvo N
°vo °ro °ro°N °0 °o°o vo °vo ro Ov t"* d" O I 00 I
vo vo vo vo VO d" CO COCOCi CJ CJ CJ w
%-i 00 vO *uovO VO 'i-O O Cn Q\
fO to rj M ro^^o
°o °h-< °N °M °c) M co NN M ro Tt v-o m
r o ro fO co fO fO fO ro fO ro
I 111
OO ON o N CO O ►h m fOrflO
n CS M rnro KH M M H W H
ij *2
S <3


_r -o 253 rt u u
O C* O frt 5 .S .
Ort ’c C 1/5 rt v_ rt
c m J Hn° a ° b
£ i 1 I ~l 6 «
s**>"w r | d b ® " s £
CO 5 IT<5 hn'SJa w > S >
S'? -s § fi"?goS .Jr" .-
< .Sf’C .£/> ►», gj3 g >3 ■‘ J «3 o° w oo o "§22S
5< -° >* -q ,o co /s ,£ -£ -o ■** to
<< - >■. M rG *2 . . •-«
W o _h na ■ M 2 u ; r d Hl ; r d'd r d.’c3’j3’g2e
2 * S 3 d*s ■§ |^51151 •& i I •§
£ r «3 3
5 H PQS W Q m WPQP PQMW
3 S' — —
Pi o
W g . .2 rH „ Th
hS ti 1.53 « ,s 3 io u-i o 2 (r > 1 -2^l
oco
« ** * -
* 51 I j 5 i W
• | 3 c - -Sp: |S in Mid W N I
■3 | mm a s«» 5 » M H
£ O H 0 w co
§S w
jo o —:
rl ti V
'•a.S'o N in 00 no co ►h o Cn ■■d- 1 *0 ►* rp
H I* « <>o rl 00 vo jS/S. r- vo vo vo I i^r-vo
_ W 3 *0 ,y)
’■'■» teH h-l C
ts « w •"
‘O4 fi'S-S Nr- O rfvoH. N CT> O «’f e *?«0
i ii-s & m u °& vf£ 1
£ H 5 .a
“ ■ ”
n -c
fJ "2 o o OO 00 r * \r> CO 00 Tj-rOTf
S Sg 8 & S o«O '% os a. as OS , as as as
I 3 2 (S i*T\ 0\ 000 CT\ On On On On On On On
££ CO N N fO ro fO W NCJ MM MMM
• CD O
>1 *J hi m ro rt* t>* CO On O N
. 5 vOnO vO VOvOO VO vO VO
S 0 0
N. § n««ChOwro roO »o COCO O '■O vo
Q) |-H h* »-H M M « M HH ►-.
S
i> Vr% v ro V CO**Tt" O 5-0 O OOn Mvo ro
O "2 ?n ~ ro - N
'Si W “o °oW °- « ° °2
C >-l H-« f* HH
O
3 Wo V. "o 'onV V. 'o '« »-'o V«
'5 °rO < N *0 °CO « o On S[2 P
COCO CONNNN NCI >-<i-i
.(-> r/N o w N CO IONO C''* CO Os O
w - n n nnnnnco
H rC _
ft " I


May
i
IO° 14'
12 0 44'
H9
76
29.94
76°.8
79 !
S.E.
3 4
Hot, rather dull and showery ;
Ascension Island N. 63 W.,
170 miles.
M
2
8-31'
14 0 42'
157
77
29.90
80*. 7
67
E.S.E.
3 to 4
Bright and hot, with dry air;
Ascension Island in sight at
sunrise ; at noon, N. 26 E.,
38 miles.
yy
3
6° 29'
16° 8'
1 55
78
29.87
8i°.S
64
S.E. by E.
3
Bright and hot.
yy
4
4° 3i'
17° 18'
132
79
29. 88
83°- 5
72
S.E. by S.
3 to 4
Bright and very hot.
yy
5
2° 33'
18° 46'
148
80
29.86
82°. 6
76
E.S.E.
4
Bright and very hot; heavy
tropical rain between 3 and
4 A.M.
yy
6
1° o'
N.
20° 2'
120
81
00
On
C*
Si’,5
81
S.E. by E.
2
Moderately bright and hot;
heavy tropical shower about
3 a.m., and again at 11 p.m.
y*
7
0" 7'
20 0 59'
94
82
I 29.82
85°.o
72
N.E.
I tO 2
Bright and very hot indeed ;
heavy tropical shower) 1 op. m. ;
lightning ; crossed the Line
this morning.
yy
8
o° 56'
20° 54'
55
83
; 29.87
78°-5
89
S.
2
Moderately bright and hot; a
heavy thunderstorm at 4 A. M.
vivid lightning.
>y
9
2° 52'
21° 24'
116
84
29.86
8o°.7
88
N.E.
light
airs
Dull, very close and rainy;
about 1.30 p.m. a heavy storm
came up astern; lost the
S.E. trades.
IO
3° 14'
3° 47
22° II'
53
85
29.83
82°. 5
76
N.E.
1
Bright and very calm and hot.
>>
it
22° 15'
33
86
i 29.87
8i°-5
82
W.S.W.
light
airs
Dull, hot, and sultry.
>>
12
5° 2'
22° 15'
83
87
i 29.76
74°.6
95
W.
5
Dull, sultry, very heavy rain; from
11.30 p.m. yesterday rain fell
in torrents all last night and
throughout the day.
yy
13
6° 17'
23° 46'
94
88
29.84
79° -5
78
N.E. by N.
4
Bright and hot; caught the
N.E. trades.
yy
14
7’ 5i'
26° 6'
■
168
89
29.87
78’-3
78
1
N.E. by N.
5
Bright and warm.


b Ido S»w «| -• g
I J I b a- . § 11
. S j 2 "3 j* w °
'g'g'g&l &S -g MbJ 'S|v,l 1 II
• .5 .5 .5 - rz p o qq u .£ PP ~ 'S i° ■4- n o tj
S ? s g 2 ■" r ?»iwS2- c1 .3 w . -.S
£3 Eo o .~IH •-I g Oh'S -dc| °l? u g| E 2
w -a'S'ss g p -e’S -*= *r*p-’o "o £ "b H ~•£ "o S
S * !'!'!'! I -
2 -s -C ,c .c -33 u 5 ~ voJ£ Jc .S 33
tD to to MS bO O P 3 tOOi fl <*> to to to to
!S 5-S5/S!S ” ij *c 'c - n -c *c - c - a s ”-c-c -c *c
<1 . pqpqpqpqCpq Q pq pq pq pq pq pq pq pq pq pq pq pq
> o'
P 4 o
W § ,
w ” «j
. S rt b rj- rj- rj- OfO CO 'Sj.S f O Ow " h fOifl to fO Orf
0
<5 'S 1
s yg ,• . >v
pv , , . •
'«§ 2 ~H £ M w w 1/3 N N£££ fc £ . N
S fl w 52! %-jz WW to
£ gfc- 55 55 *5 S 5
J O “ fr —rr
W \s .b is
NJ H -a n “ ro rj- ro Ov On ON 0000 NOCO PI NNN M
M E I*. m N N N NOO N NNNOO NN t-rVO VO 00
- £0 3 O _
*N» 5! I_l c
Q * —=
•• u .
So 2 «.§ foninoiifl')' m nn rovo vo rj- -< vo n iomo
S.'S « o’o’o’o’o’o’ o’ o’o’ o’o’o’o’o’o’ o’o’o’o’
c ..-S Niororfroui rj- vr> 10 rj- oo Nj -1 i-c N. l-« 10 CO 00
cp S" »>. n> r>. r>. t--vo vo \o vo vo
H2.S
tj ”u O fOOO N' On O M w ,N> N O tOO W't 0000000
pS So OOOvOi-i VM WO OOOOOvOv p-OvOO
I o a d\ d\ as <j\ 6 6 6 do 6d 6 d 6\ds 6 dsd d
J; NNNNfOfO ro rOrO COCOfOfOCSP) MN toto
*S -
So
§. OH N Mi-Ifi VO INOO OnO « N MNf vnvo r^co
.N > « p Os Os as Os Os Os Os Os Os CvOOOOO 0000
« 0
K S
C OONNOtN O OO O o M lON O M iflO NtN
c< OsCO H o\o H VO lO ts Os IOVO 00
<0 S H. w w W 0) W H N ww
Q
X -a OO nNN Cl NO 000 MO H fl\ tOfOvopJ-
sj 3 , N N nioui Tj-I-I wntN <tw>H N N N h
< 000000 O OO 000000 0000
w CO O N fOrfin LT) rf- -rf- fO fO rO M O 1>» h m
CO COCO fO CO ro CO ro M MNNN
•o Vj'n 'o "o 'ov"vo Nf 'cv'rf *U Vt '-I CO 'ro'ovoo \j-
s • « rr fO rh pt fo n<fH m h vo ro «
,h 000000 o oo 000000 0000
« ON voOO w ro rj- ussO Os O N rj- rj- -oj- rj-vo
H H H M N N N NN NNNfOroro rorororo
, ; vovO N.CO Ov O >h N N) r|- vnvo N»00 Ov o -< m n
M VO MWW M « N N NN NNNNNN fOfO
< “ | SS!S! t r S .- s .-..-. --S -
Q S =, -


H , lilt? lIS °||
ti
■ss g »ffrsF»^lol?lss3|
**«g|g IS 8 I g'S
ts S £ & “^o^Ocfl
« pqpppqpqpqQQ £ Q Q
, •!« ,
HH 1-4 lO VO O
®f. £
I I
« i
Jr
C/2 •■ CO >- ■ CO
fc £
£
I I
CO M tui" SO N »o I !
oo x>.oo oo oo oo oo cn t-- 1 I
vo co no uo io on O'
°uo So §0 Vo °R vo
vO vO'O'O'O'O'Oio v-O
V R , ,
r ?;£?;?;?;££ r 1 1
g O«N co novo
lO m 10 rj- . ,
n jo 1
\t- Vi "m V> oo 'o V) 'o "to
H UIN tO'f-iON Tj- VO
0\ 00 00 UIN Ol vj-
►H M H H M M M
'co -2'2 v ‘8 | [
V? sfcVaVs? $
CO Tj- mo On O « 2


SUMMARY.
LOG.
Distance. Total distance travelled between Melbourne
and London, about ... 14,300 miles.
Longest day’s run (2nd April) - - - 274
Shortest day’s run (4th June) - . . 24 ~
Days out. From Australia to the Cape (Land to Land) 52 days.
From Cape Town to St. Helena - - . n ~
From St. Helena to London - 47 ~
From Australia to England (Land to Land) - - 117 „
(Including the 6 days spent off Cape Town and St. Helena.)
h rom Leaving Sandridge Pier (Melbourne) to arrival
in S. W. India Docks (London)
122 „
METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS.
Barometer (corrected for temperature) at 710071. —Mean. 29.989 inches.
Highest (25th March) .... 30.2: ~
Lowest (12th March) .... 29.38 ~
Range .83 „
Te77iperature of the air in the shade at 710071. —Mean. - 69°. 117
Highest (7th May. Lat. o’ 7' N. Long. 20° 59' W.) - B^.o
N.B-—This was the highest temperature experienced at any time during the voyage.
Lowest (1 ith June, in English Channel) ... S^-9
Range- ....... 2 8°.i
Relative a/ziou/it of Hii7)iidity in the air at noo7t. —
(100. representing complete saturation.) Mean. 77
On only one day (27th March) was the air completely
saturated.


Least amount of Humidity (3rd and 15th and 24th March,
and 6th of April) 60
At no time during the Voyage did the wet-bulb of the Hygrometer, read more than
8 degrees lower than the dry-bulb.
Wind. —The Direction of the Wind indicated in the foregoing
tables is its true bearing at noon. - - -
The Force of the Wind at noon—(Estimated according to the
Beaufort scale, in which 12. represents a hurricane, and O. a
calm) Mean - - ' * - - - 3 >2
Greatest—(at 3.30 p.m. 12th March, during a gale)
During the Voyage three gales were encountered; (1) A moderate gale on
21 st February; (2) A whole gale on 12th March; (3) A strong gale
on 27th March. The sea during this last gale was unusually turbulent,
rising in irregular heaps all round the Ship. Several heavy squalls were
met with after this date, but none worthy the name of a gale.
On twenty-eight days during the voyage, either calms or light airs prevailed
at noon.
Surface Temperature of the Sea.— During the Voyage the surface tem-
perature of the Sea was found but seldom to differ more than 1 or 2
degress from the temperature of the air in shade. On one day,
however (6th April), while in the Aghulas jCurrent the surface tem-
perature was observed to be 6°. 7 higher than the shade temperature
of the air. On the following days the surface temperature between
noon and 4 p.m. had fallen as much as 10 degrees (71°. 7 to 6i°.7).
Remarks. During the voyage, seventy-eight days were registered as
bright, thirty as dull or cloudy, and ten as moderately bright.
Rainfall. —It is much to be regretted that no correct rainfall observations
—owing to there being no rain-gauge on board—were taken during
the voyage. On reference to the daily register, it would appear that
during the day time unusually heavy rain fell on two days; either
heavy or steady rain on eight days ; that ten days were showery ; and
that on six other days there were light showers—leaving ninety-two
days which were quite fine.
Fog. — On the 27th February a rather dense sea fog prevailed during the
greater part of the day; but on no other day was it at all foggy.
From the experience of this, Our Voyage, it would appear that the
two principal advantages the sea has over land, as regards climate, are
(1) the absolute purity of its atmosphere ; (2) the greater equability of the
temperature and humidity of that atmosphere—varying as they do but
little from day to day, and having in addition a very limited diurnal range.
If we except some very dry countries, the sky would also appear to be much
clearer at sea than on land.


Another lesson this voyage teaches us, and that is, that these advan-
tages are much lessened during a passage either due N. or S. across the
Line, as the tropics more than 3,000 miles in extent, including, as they
may be said to do, the Calms of Cancer and Capricorn, and the hateful
“ Doldrums,” have to be passed through. For most delicate constitutions
these latitudes are particularly trying, as throughout the greater part of
them the air is of a more or less relaxing character, and highly charged with
electricity. On the whole it would seem that the greatest benefit would
be derived from a voyage along one of those parallels of latitude lying
between 30° and 40° S., say between Australia and the western coast of
South America, or vice versa, selecting, within the limits named, a higher
or lower parallel according to the season of the year. For those requiring
a still milder and more settled climate, it would be doubtless preferable to
sail backwards and forwards within the limits of the S. E. trades.
E.M.




Fl&VO
■ M ayy


1508
00539178


