

» I /
jOfK
/ f VI/i
/ \ "j l ,
lit ;Wv
jF?'*t- *&SBm »f«/ ‘-'.,'L’ \
X itfW» jjffiaK iSu S
■ Vj i \ I ' v «|Vi 7i//SM n)/\ • i /’^r
* \ V jJf ittf//// \ / •■/ iMJMML OKX. • #
m. s Sk & . \/ ITwfflsy l/athr IRv^«r k
rlmiir A & «k| / I 'VZ/ %» &mMMIiW^S3Sr
I'TSk, "(\ " Ij ■/ . jjKjjr HMI
M sSf
/ JHL W/', % T
/ : 'fa \%:
\ I v \/ V4 j
\«/m jR
™5W flHBl
@h i * yr M V 4
<0^
\ .,' ' V «-'5*™S. > *2^^ —
v \ . /w k. V I v a \ y
OUR FRIEND
RODNEY


v
*v v










'/IjJhess
fr\%f\s /*
i x k \\
11 V
<*




IP**** 4 *
> A "
®« mi® HIM
h
RUTH . C .WILLIAMS
o
ILLUSTRATED BY
RHYS WILLIAMS
TIE I.UOTEI MMJISiING
c ® M IPAK ¥
SYDNEY


■ * *■ •


< 3T: .
qV \j)
AUG 1945
WHEN Rodney heard he was going to the country
for a holiday, he was wi Id with delight.
A holiday in the country on a small farm was
was just the kind he liked best of all, for there he
coidd see the animals and help to feed them, and perhaps ride
a horse, and swim in the river.
Rodney was a nice little hoy and most people liked him
because he was friendly and had a cheerful smile. And most
animals li ked him because he never hurt them, and they
knew he had a kind heart. He also had a way of talking to
them as though they could understand every word he said,
and often he thought they really did understand. He was
quite certain animals understood lots more things than most
people bel ieved thev did.
So it was a happy dav for Rodney when he set out for
FI annel-flower Farm to spend weeks and weeks in the
country.


fi; '' ' ‘ f
1 JPl £j*
L h vi'iuii i
( '*f *7
“-••Vs \
_5k \ §a-
It was a long journey, and when
Rodney got there he found the people
busily occupied with their various jobs,
and he was told he must spend much
time playing by himself, hut he did not
mind that. He went out at once to make
friends with the farm animals, and found
a number of things to interest and amuse
him.
i \ /_j.y
There was a hound with a long, sad
face, whose name was “Wallace”. He
made friends with Rodney at once, and
took him to see the duck with the ten
little yellow ducklings. Then there


There was a young draught-horse
resi ded in a BoW nearby with his
mother. He was not much more than
three feet high and had funny clumsy-
v looking hooves and fetlocks, a fuzzy
\ beard and a curly tail.
Jr.
H j/P * Rodney thought this foal the nicest
\ J r horse he had ever seen, and he climbed
the sliprails and reached over to pat his
\ W y MTJ , i
■* J back.
jjf f <
■' P i Then he went on to make friends with
tp/ . a Billy-goat, who was tied to a tree by a
I f long rope. Billy-goat, whose name was
J i! 1 * Percival, did not seem very pleased to see
vu him, 80 RocJ ney went away and sat down
on the grass to watch the rabbits popping
-■**' — --<ssssS? X
were two white woolly lambs, who lived
in the garden and were bottle-fed.


\v V»“• 7 7<^
\ ' U 4M n fl 1
. l/s *
t
in and out of their burrows and playing on the grass in the
dusk.
During the evening meal Rodney chummed up with a
nice black cat, who came and rubbed affectionately against
his legs.
What a lucky hoy I am, he thought, ‘and what a
lovely day I shall have tomorrow!
In the morning the little hoy wakened early, and,
jumping out of bed, ran to his window to feast his eyes upon
the paddocks, orchards and hills, to assure himself that they
realK were still there and not merely a lovely dream from
which he would wake. But there they were, sure enough, in
delightful reality. The cheery farm noises which met his
little ears raised in him a feeling of adventure. He quickly
washed and dressed and ran downstairs and out into the
morning sunlight to start the happy day.
In the middle of the sunny courtyard sat Wallace, the
hound, meditatively finishing his breakfast. He greeted


jfW - 'f' 0
»
• _/ V
Rodney with a slow wag of the tail.
The black cat was engaged in washing bis back and,
apart from a momentary pause, took no notice of bim. A
lame magpie stood upon tbe fence practising a few double
notes and then whistled “Is there a man about tbe bouse.
“Hullo, Rodney,” said tbe farmer’s wife, come in and
have your breakfast, dear, and then you can go wherever you
like. Take Wallace with you. Wallace is a nice, sensible
dog and you won’t come to any barm while be is with you.
So Rodney bad bis breakfast and was soon off to tbe
milking, and then to see tbe pig sty, and stroll about tbe
fields. Presently be noticed that Wallace was limping
badly, and sitting down on a big stone be took tbe old dog s
paw in bis two little bands.
“Poor old Wallace,” be said, “Wbat’s tbe matter with
your feet, eb? Wby does it burt you? Have you cut it, or
sprained it? I won’t burt you, Wallace. But I can’t see
wbat is tbe matter witb it.
Tben a deep voice suddenly said
“My dear boy, if you would be so kind as to remove


I; • ,! 1 ; lit/ 1!
i \i /, a I \ if? !( , :
I M. 5! i i |i i
! u/lp = -i u
ji /^** i)£ { i i rl />
; fi;
||j|\ >■■•
the very painful thorn which has lodged itself between my
toes, I would he deeply grateful.
Rodney dropped the dog s feet and looked around him.
As he believed himself to he alone, the voice greatly surprised
him. He could see nobody standing near. There ivcls
nobody anywhere near. Rodney looked about him in
amazement, then he stood up and peered in every direction
and shook his head. He and Wallace were alone in the
middle of a grassy field and not another person was in sight.
In his bewilderment Rodney spoke aloud to himself.
Who in the world said that? he exclaimed.
I did, of course!” replied Wallace
There was no mistaking it this time. It was Wallace, the
hound, who had spoken. Rodney could scarcely believe his
ears, he just stood and stared.


Close your mouth, my dear hoy,” said Wallace kindly.
“Do n’t look so surprised! But above all, don t be afraid.
Of course I can talk when I want to, nearly all animals can.
We all know a lot more than humans usually give us credit
for. But we only speak to those who have kind and under-
standing hearts. Now those people up at the farm, very
worthy and excellent folk in many ways, never even noticed
that I was lame. Many’s the time they have left a thorn in
my foot to fester until I was nearly mad with pain. But you
noticed it at once. lam very much obliged. If you would
kindly look between the second and third toe of my right
front paw and extract this thorn an impossible feat for
me I shall be greatly indebted to you.
So Rodney, recovering from his amazement a little, did
as Wallace requested, and removed as gently as he could the
offending thorn.
That done, Wallace first licked his foot and then pressed
it tenderly to the ground; then he trod a pace or two and
returned, sighing with relief.
* I cannot thank you enough, my dear boy. The relief
is great. No pain at all. Ah!
Rodney felt very happy to
have helped his friend, and
said so.


Suddenly Wallace asked: “Do you like Rabbits?”
Rabbits? exclaimed Rodney, surprised.
Rabbits; plain, ordinary Rabbits,” replied Wal-
lace. My friend, Mrs. Bunny, is suffering a trifle of incon-
venience with ber front door. Some thoughtless human has
rolled a great stone against it and she has now to take her
children half a mile round in order to play on the meadow.
I have endeavoured to move it but it is too heavy for me. If
you would agree to come and give it a good heave, I expect
you could move it. The place is hut a step from here.”
Well, I'll try,” said Rodney, “hut . .
“Let me hasten to add,” said Wallace, “that in making
this request, I have no ulterior motive. My rabhitting days
are over alas!”


**2SS&ZZ&*^
So off they went, and in a few minutes the large stone
was dislodged and Rodney found himself being introduced
to Mrs. Bunny.
Very kind of you, I m sure! said she, I aying her long
ears hack and smiling up at Rodney.
Mrs. Bunny was so pretty, and looked so soft and fluffy,
that Rodney longed to stroke her silky fur. But fearing to
alarm her if he attempted anything of the kind, he merely
smiled and assured her that removing the stone had been no
trouble at all.
We are very pleased to have the nasty thing out of the
way, she said. Would you like to see the children? Here
they come, you see. Here is my Jimmy, Polly, Pat, Nancy,
Jane, Eric, Jill, Prudence, Bobby and Spotts. What do you
think of them?
I think,” said Rodney with perfect truth, “that they are
lovely dear little things, and you are a very lucky rabbit to


have such lovely babies. Would you let me touch one of
them if I promise to be very gentle?”
The baby rabbits were such sweet little furry animals
that Rodney felt it would be a great honour to be allowed
to stroke one of them for a minute.
"Run and let Rodney pat you, children.” said Mrs.
Bunny, he won t hurt you.”
How do \ou know' I won t? asked Rodney
(IT
1 can see it in your face, and hear it in your voice ”
said Mrs. Bunny. “Besides, my friend Wallace assures me
of it.”
“You are very kind.” breathed Rodney, overjoyed; and
he sat down on the grassy ground and Jimmy, Polly, Pat.
Nancy. Jane, Eric, Jill, Prudence, Bobby and Spotts all came
and hopped about on his lap and allowed him to cuddle
them, and Rodney was the happiest boy in the world.


i^ 1 v a* j« in * R . .
8L ll/ /
Br jfeflHr A * •vjjE-.
®
(/




Jf
\ Pm®.'
w/m
M
miM
WA#\‘!;t ar,
\ V f 1
Jl‘ J .4:
#/* •■'
Vi l V V
*■>1
Wallace, the hound, sat
nearby and watched the game
with sleepy eyes. Presently
he remarked to Mrs. Bunny:
“I heard Farmer say that
our friend Magpie will always
be lame.”
“Poor fellow,” sighed Mrs.
Bunny. But it was Ki s own
fault, you know.”
“Is that the magpie 1 saw
this morning? asked Rodney.
“The same, replied Wal-
lace. “He is a likeable bird
in many ways, but he has one
grave faultl
“What is that?”
“Well, if he sees a bare foot
he just has to peck it. A row
of naked toes he just cannot
resist.”
“1 am glad 1 wear shoes,
remarked Rodney. Do please
tell me more about Magpie.
“Well,” said WaII a c e,
“about a year ago Magpie
lived happily in the bush with
his friends. Near his home
stood the cottage of a farm-


labourer called Ostler. Mr. and Mrs. Ostler bad a lot of
children and tbey ran about without shoes all the summer
and nearly all the winter, too. These children knew that
Magp ie often watched them from the trees while they played
their games, and one day they set about luring him down to
their garden. They placed tempting bits of meat and scraps
on the top of a post, and presently Magpie came a little nearer,
and then a little nearer still to see what was placed there.
When he thought no one was looking, he came right up and
tasted a piece of meat. He liked it very much, and the next
day he came again in a cautious, roundabout way and ate
another small piece. At the end of a Few weeks he was a
great friend of the children’s. He nearly lived in their
garden, ate all the scrans they had, instead of hunting for his
own food, and he sat on their fence and tried to whistle the
tunes they taught him.
“He even let them stroke his feathers. At about that time


Mr. Ostler brought home to his family a tiny black dog. A
little fellow, a mere pup, and as black as soot. He was a
Scots terrier and his name was Jock .
“An odd fellowship sprang up between Magpie and Jock.
The children were afraid at first that these two would
hurt each other, but they soon found this was not so.
Magpie and Jock were both young and liked to play. Jock
would jump off all four feet at once and yap and rumble
inside when Magpie came near. And Magpie would dance
about with his head down and his wings outstretched and
make passes at Jock with his long beak. It all looked very
threatening. They would circle about each other, screaming
and yapping, shrieking and growling until Jock made a rush
and knocked Magpie over. Then they rolled about, fur and
feathers, feet and wings all mixed up in a spinning, writhing
little mass while the children laughed and jumped about and
encouraged the combatants with giggles of glee.
"Everyone was very happy and Magpie was a great
success up to this point. Then one day in the middle of all


the fun Magpie rushed over and started to peck the children s
bare toes. With squeals and laughter the children ran away,
leaving Magpie alone in possession of the field . . . the victor.
Magpie strutted about » chortling. He felt a very fine bird
indeed. Who called me a tame magpie?’ he shouted.
Tame indeed!
‘After that he rushed over and pecked the children’s
toes whenever he saw them, and he often hurt them very
much; sometimes he made them bleed, and gradually his
popularity faded away until the Ostler family began to
wonder how in the world they could rid themselves of this
troublesome bird which had come from the bush to annoy
them.
One day the eldest Ostler boy heard his youngest sister
screaming, and running out into the garden he saw Magpie
rushing at her again and again and pecking her poor toes
until they bled. Justifiably angry, young Ostler picked up
a large stone and flung it at the bird. It broke Magpie’s leg
and almost killed him. He was only just strong enough to


drag himself away, half-flying, half-dragging on the ground,
to a stretch of hush nearby, where he lay down to die. That
is where our Farmer came across him and brought him home.
He is a very kind man. our Farmer, and very clever as a vet.
He put Magpie’s leg in a splint and nursed him back to
health. Now Farmer has taught Magpie to whistle a new
tune, and as long as someone does not cross the yard with
bare feet I belfeve everything will be all right.
‘The moral of that story.” said Mrs. Bunny, turning to
her children, “is, never allow yourself to form a bad habit.
1 am sure I can hear someone coming down the path.
Wallace, who is it?”
“Oh, he’s a long way off yet. It is poor old Percival.
“It’s the goat,” said Rodney, shading his eyes with his
hand to see who was coming. “You must have very sharp
ears, Mrs. Bunny, to hear him so far away.


‘Yes, I have to have good hearing. Dear, dear. What
does he want to come down here for? I don’t like that fellow
Percival.”
‘Why not?’’ asked Rodney.
“Well, we all have our trials and troubles, and have to
bear them cheerfully. But Percival Goat seems to think he
is the only one with anything to put up with the way he
grumbles!”
Oh, said Wallace, tolerantly, he is a very nice animal
in many ways. We all have our faults, you know. I think
he just suffers from indigestion, and it sours his disposition.
“And no wonder he suffers from indigestion,” replied
Nlrs. Bunny, no wonder at all! The things I ve seen him
eat! It would surprise you! With my own eyes I have seen
that Percival eat a jam-tin, half an old rubber hotwater
bottle, and a suit of our Farmer s underwear! And then he


complains about
tummy-acbes. If most
animals ate anything
of tbe kind it would
not give them indiges-
tion! It would kill
them!’
“Well,” objected
Wallace, ratber hesi-
tatingly in Percival s
defence, You know,
my dear Mrs. Bunny,
Goats are Goats!”
“Goats are Idiots, if
you ask me! retorted
tbe irate Rabbit.
“Now a nice, clean,
vegetarian diet of
grass witb a little cab-
bage. Wbat’s wrong
witb that?”
“Well. I don’t like
it much myself,” re-
marked Wa 11 a c e-,
meditatively.
“A nice moderate
little luncb of young
grass never harmed
anybody,” announced
Mrs. Bunny witb
finality.


“Myself,” remarked Wallace, dreamily, “I enjoy a nice
plate of stew, some bones and half a fresh rabbit. . .
A scream from Mrs. Bunny interrupted Wallace at this
point.
“Come along, children!” she cried. “This is no place
for us. Jimmy. Polly, Pat. Nancy. Jane. Eric. Jill, Prudence.
Bobby and Spotts, come home!
There was a flashing of small white tails as all the
Rabbit family rushed into their burrow, and in a second not
a bunny was to be seen.
Wallace looked at Rodney
I fear I said something to upset her, he remarked.
‘You said something about eating rabbits.” explained
Rodney.
Oh, so 1 did! Some animals are so sensitive. I was
doubtless a trifle tactless, but she’ll get over it! Hello,
Percival, old man. How are you today? he shouted, as
Percival came up looking bearded and shaggy, wearing a
rather sour expression on his face.


"My dear Wallace.” he |
replied, I am not at all well. * j*. \ tf
My poor stomach, you 7/
know! Last night I made a --w
most delicious meal off half ,
a rotten pumpkin and it
seems to have disagreed W IIhjS'
witK meI ” %MV/
“I wouldn’t be surprised,"
replied Wallace. This is y
our friend, Rodney, a very li™
nice boy."
Percival turned a P a^e -
distrusting eye upon Rod- pj
ney and remarked: "I don t ( * , y
like boys, they laugh at me." \ 'uj
"I won’t laugh at you,’’ j ’^'S 2 ''
promised Rodney. "It’s a
lovely day, isn’t it?"


It may look nice now, replied Percival, "hut I think it is
going to rain soon. I suffer from lumbago and I can always
tell.”
Oh, do you have much pain?”
The pain is awful, asserted Percival. "Worse than
anyone else s. Nobody knows what I suffer.”
lam so sorry, said Rodney, sympathetically
"Thank you very much,” said Percival. "So am I. I
was on my way to the river to have a drink. Shall we all
go together?”
So Rodney, Wall ace and Percival went on down a
narrow track which led to the lovely river. Suddenly
Percival stood still.


“Someone is down there before us, Wallace. Who do
you think it is?
“Henry and Henrietta, I believe.“ Wallace replied. “I
have noticed their scent for some time.
“Those wretched lambs, complained Percival.
“Wherever I go that wretched little Henry Lamb, with his
everlasting poetry, seems to be there first!
“Henry Lamb certainly is just a thought tedious with his
rhymes,” Wallace admitted. “But he is a very nice fellow
really. lam rather fond of him.
“Is he the lamb I saw this morning in the garden?
asked Rodney.
“Yes, I suppose so,” replied Wallace. Henry and Hen-
rietta are twins. Henrietta never speaks at all, but Henry
talks all day long. Unfortunately, every time he opens his
mouth he utters a rhyme. lam convinced he can t help it.
The thing comes natural to him. He doesn t rea Hy mean it.
But most of his friends find it a very tedious fault. He is
young yet and will grow out of it, poor fellow!


Rodney didn’t know what to say to this, but he smiled at
Wallace as they walked along and patted his head.
'How kind and charitable Wallace is to all his friends,
thought Rodney. “I really do like Wallace very much
indeed.”
"There he is now, snapped Percival just then. Listen
to him!”
Rodney looked down towards the river, and laughed
aloud. There in the sunlight on the edge of the limpid water
frisked and frolicked two little white lambs, kicking up pretty
sprays of crystal water and golden river sand as they ran and
leaped, twisted and danced, d he tranquil bush scene and
the shallow, sandy water making a background to their merry
game.
"Just listen to him!” exclaimed Percival, as though
personally offended. And to Rodney’s surprise he heard
Henry singing gaily at the top of his voice:
“Oh what fun to be together
In this lovely golden weather,
Sunny days are made for dancing,
Happy hearts and feet a-prancing,
Life is always so entrancing
When you’re young like me.


site
>.
V
We watch the fleecy clouds go by,
We chase the darting dragonfly,
Frisking all the daylight hours,
In and out of leafy bowers,
Rolling in the flannel flowers,
When you’re young like me.
Days like these were made for laughter,
Who shall care what follows after.
Come you from your fields and fallows.
Come and paddle in the shallows.
Gambolling in careless glee,
While you’re young like me. ’
Absurd creaturel grumbled tbe Goat in bis beard.
1 think tbe Lamb is a nice little fellow, declared
Rodney. “He seems so happy and goodnatured and I adore
bis song.”
“I don’t,” snapped Percival. “He does that sort of
thing nearly all the time, ridiculous little animal. One gets
very tired of it.


'He is delightful,” Rodney insisted. I hope I may
hear him recite again.”
'You will!” promised Percival, grimly. You cant
keep him quiet. You can t stop him.” And Percival
mooched about very much annoyed, and waggling his heard
in such a funny way that he reminded Rodney of an old man
he had seen in a Hillbilly him. Rodney thought it was no
wonder some people laughed at him. He remembered in
time his promise not to laugh at Percival, and commenced
instead to reflect that if Percival endeavoured to be a little
more tolerant of his neighbours he would not only be a much
nicer goat, but a much happier one.
Just then Henry and Henrietta came frisking up, and
Wallace introduced the lambs to Rodney. Henry stared up
at him.
"Did you say,” he asked incredulously. "Did you
actually say that you liked my song?
"I loved it,” Rodney replied, emphatically. ‘lt seemed
so nice and happy.”
"It's because I am happy,” explained Henry, apolo-
getically. lam very sorry, but I can t help it. I seem to have
the soul of a poet, or something. Rhymes spring to my lips
( every few minutes. It seems to be a very sore trial to my
friends.”
“Anyway, 1 like your verses. Will you say some more?’
First Henry gasped with astonishment, and then he
started to recite, skipping and frisking the while.
‘Once 1 saw a Hollyhock
Growing by a wall.
Said 1 Pray tell me, Hollyhock,
What makes you grow so tall?


Jv!
Graciously he bent his head,
And nodding to me, gaily said,
'All Hollyhocks grow fust this way,
The reason why 1 cannot say I
What makes you grow so small?
Then I saw a busy bee
Hovering near a flower
Said 1, Pray tell me, Busy Bee,
Which is your idle hour?’
He fixed me with an angry eye,
And scowling at me made reply,
T m not an idle chap like you,
I have a lot of work to do!
Kindly leave this bower/
Suddenly he stopped. "I can’t think up any more of
he announced.
that,”
“Splendid!” applauded Percival
“Thank you very much,” said Henry. “I didn t know
you liked it!”
“I don’t!” grumbled Percival
“Come, come now, Percival,” said Wallace. “Don’t
be so grumpy. Henry never does anyone a bit of harm. His


verses are really very cheerful and pleasant.
Surprised to be thus encouraged, Henry took heart
again, and remarked, ' I once wrote a very nice Ode to a
Lettuce and a Carrot, especially to please Mrs. Bunny.
Would you like to hear it?”
"No!” said the Goat, unkindly. My head aches after
listening to the other two.
"All right, Grumpyl laughed Henry, Listen to this
then.” And he started careering around again, and singing:
Don t he so terribly grumpy, Grumpy,
Don't he so horridly cross and humpy.
If your head does ache, and your figure is lumpy,
Don't blame poor little mel
Don't he so dreadfully snappy, Snappy,
Don't go about like a cross Grand Pappy.
We re fearfully grieved if you're not very happy,
But don 't blame poor little me I


'That, asserted Percival, is not at all funny. Can t
you be sensible for a uni e while?
*1 am afraid it is almost impossible, said Henry,
apologetically, "I rarely feel sensible. I like being young and
carefree and dancing among tbe clover flowers.
Quite idiotic, of course,” sighed Percival, hopelessly.
No goat would behave in such a foolish manner.’
“No. I suppose not,” agreed Henry. ’More is the
pity I ” And suddenly he was off again, frisking about and
kicking up his feet in merry abandon. Oh,” he cried:
“I’m glad I m not a Billy Goat,
A Billy Goat,
A Billy Goat,


/ m glad I m not a Bdly Croat,
But just a lamb like me!
I’m glad I’m not a Billy Goat,
Funny beard,
And shaggy coat,
I’m glad 1 m not a Goat,
But fust a lambkin on the spree.
Simply ridiculous! commented Percival
* I can t help it! said Henry. It just ripples forth and
I can’t stop it. 1 m sorry you don t like my poor rhymes.
Such nonsense, snapped Percival.
’But I just have to rhyme, or I d bust! explained the
Lamb.
Disgusting! shouted the old Goat, really roused this
time.
But Henry, tl le Lamb, merrily repli ed:
I m sorry you think that my verse is disgusting,
It really is not so disgusting as busting,
I just have to rhyme
So 1 mustl”
With that Percival suddenly took to his heels and trotted
away in a very marked manner, his goatee flying in the breeze.
And the two Lambs, Wallace and Rodney all stood and


laughed and laughed at his retreating form. Henry, indeed,
laughed so much that he threw himself down on the sand
with all his little feet in the air, and squiggled and writhed
about.
All of a sudden Rodney stopped laughing, and choked.
"Oh,” he said to Wallace, I promised I would not laugh
at Percival. And here lam going into fits and fits. What
a dreadful thing to do!
Don t worry about that, Rodney, my dear boy, said
Wallace. * Everyone laughs at Percival, lam afraid. He
allows his ill-nature to get the better of him, and he makes
himself absurd.”
And the moral of that is, said a voice behind them,
always keep a sweet temper!
And looking round they beheld Mrs. Bunny and all her
children behind them, near a rabbit hole.


' Hello, said Wallace, "so here you are, Mrs. Bunny.
I trust you were not seriously alarmed at what I said a while
back. You know I would never harm you or yours. lam
your friend.
Upon reflection 1 realized that, Wallace. You were a
hit tactless, hut I really knew you would not harm your
Friends. You are a good Fellow, Wallace! ’
Here Henry sprang to his Feet, shook the sand from his
wool, and danced forward.
"Oh! Mrs. Bunny," he cried, "you are the very one I
wished to see. Would you care to hear again my ode to a
Lettuce and a Carrot?"
"Not just now, thanks, said Mrs. Bunny, and in a
twinkling she turned and dived into her burrow, followed by
all her family, one after the other.
"How convenient it must be," thought Rodney, "to have
a burrow always handy to dive into whenever someone says
something you don’t like!"
He noticed that Henry 7 looked a trifle disappointed for a
moment, but soon cheered up.
"Oh well, perhaps she is right!" said Henry. I know
a place where great juicy blackberries grow, Rodney. Would
you like me to take you there? I never eat them myself, but
I expect you do.”
"I do, whenever I get the chance!" Rodney assured him.
So they all set off for the blackberry bushes. As they
went, happy little Henry 7 , the lamb, gambolled along in
front of them singing this song:


JpA I J Bl %
“Blackberries black, Blackberries green,
The best of their kind that I ever have seen.
Undoubtedly fit to present to a queen.
Come alongl
Blackberries sweet. Blackberries sour.
Some people eat them a peck to the hour.
And when they are finished they nibble the flower.
Come along J
Blackberries cooked, Blackberries raw,
Eat them all up and start looking for more,
When you’ve finished the lot there are plenty next door.
Come along J”
Soon they arrived at the blackberry patch. A scattered
group of low bushes in a grassy crevice between the fields.
The fruit proved to be quite as large and luscious as Henry
had promised, and Rodney started to pick and eat them,
reflecting that they really were something to sing and dance
about. He offered a few to Wallace, who ate them
reluctantly, and strolled away to lie down at a little distance.
Rodney enjoyed the fruit so much that he did not notice
anyone approaching until he heard a voice speaking.
No doubt our friend Per-r-cival ha a verv sombre


deesposition, said the voice, with an unmistakably Scotch
accent. You would never-r r credit what a number-r-r o
things that animal can find to compleen aboot!
And turning round to see who it was, Rodney was
surprised to find the foal whom he had patted earlier in the
day and a Scots terrier as black as soot walking together
towards the blackberry bushes, and talking to one another in
an earnest manner. The Scotch voice appeared to be that
of Jock, the Scots terrier.
"I suppose,” said Jock just then, "it is just his wee, an
he canna help it.”
"Hello!” called Henry Lamb. Hi, Jock and Ernest
come and meet our friend Rodney.
“Ah!” remarked Jock, that wi II be the wee bit laddy
himself.”
Percival has been telling us all about you, said
Ernest the foal.
"1 hope he was not offended with me, replied Rodney
feeling guilty about having laughed at Percival.
"Of course he was, said Ernest, he is always offended


y, ‘ *
at someone, or grumbling about something. Nobody takes
any notice of Percival. My mother says that when our
Farmer s sons were little boys and Percival was young and
strong they bad a Billy-cart in which Percival pulled them
about all over the farm, the boys driving him like a horse.
Everyone made a great fuss of Percival then, and he resents
being left out of things now that the boys are grown up and
gone to college. His life is very dull these days, and the
duller he gets, the nastier he gets. Never mind him. This
is my friend Jock; his people come from Aberdeen, you know.
He came over here this morning to visit Magpie. They are
fast friends, used to play together as children.
“Oh,” said Rodney, turning with renewed interest to
Jock, who appeared to smile, and certainly wagged his tail.
Were you the pup who used to play with Magpie?
Och, aye, replied Jock. 1 was that! Hello,
Wallace, my mon. Hello, Henry and Henrietta. Have
you composed any more verse, Henry?
Oh, yes, cried Henry, delighted with this kind atten-


lion, and dancing forward merrily. Just now I made up a
very nice song about blackberries. It goes like this:—
“ Blackberries, luscious, juicy and sweet,
You’re sure to declare them a positive treat;
Delightful to look at, and scrumptious to eat.
Not just noo,” interrupted Jock.
“But there’s lots more of it,’ explained Henry, eagerly.
“That’s just what I was afraid of, replied Jock. Nay,
mon. I maun be getting back t tbe boose. Tbe leddy will
bave my dinner ready by noo, an I would na like that grey
streak o a tabby cat to get it.
“Are you still having trouble with that cat? asked
Wallace, sympathetica Hy.
lam that, Jock re plied. Ah, mon. It was a greeve
misteek ever to ba’ brought that sneaking tabby cat to oor
boose, but they knew noo better, I suppose. A’ week Good
day t’ you all.”
And Jock took himself off, his short, black legs tramping
manfully through the long grass.
“He is a nice fellow, is Jock, remarked Wallace.
Such a pity he lives so far down the road.”
As he spoke the hollow clatter of cow-bells rang out over
the fields and hills. The little boy forsook his blackberries
altogether and took a few hesitating steps in the direction of
the farm-house. He said:
Could that be the luncheon bell, Wallace? The
Farmer’s wife told me to listen for it, but I didn’t know it
would sound like that.’’


*
"Yes, that s it, Rodney. She steps outside the kitchen
door every day at this hour with a cow- bell in each hand and
makes that amazing din. Anyway, one can t fail to hear it,
and everyone goes home to dinner.
I had better run then, exclaimed Rodney, suiting the
action to the word.
"And we shall all come with you,” Henry the Lamb
cheerily announced. * Come on, Henrietta and Wallace and
Ernest. Let us see if we can overtake dear old Bagpipes!
"Bagpipes? said Rodney, wonderingly. "Who is Bag-
o»*
pipes (
Why, Jock, of course, replied Henry, laughing. And
then changing his voice to perfectly imitate Jock s accents, he
continued: * Eh, Rodney, ma mon, canna ye hear the skirl o
the bagpipes in the hills the very minute he oopens his
mooth?”
Rodney could not help laughing at this, and he stopped
in his running long enough to catch little Henry in his arms
and give him a tight hug.


Henry, you really are the dearest little lamb I have ever
met, and you do say the funniest things, he cried.
And laughing and happy they all ran up the hill to
dinner, the I ambs trotting and shipping, Wallace plodding
steadily along with the quiet deliberateness of an old dog,
and Ernest walking sedately forward like a horse of twice his
years.
Jock, who heard them overtaking him, turned and
waited.
Hoots, mon, he called out to Wallace. What s all
the hurry aboot? Dinna fash yoursel . No marauding grey
tabby cat lives at your boose ready to pounce on all the scraps
the minute they re put down. Take it easy, mon!
Said Wall ace: You make a mistake, my dear fell ow, we
are but accompanying Rodney home.


Accompanying the wee laddie, is it? Eh, but I
thought it was your ain food you were consarned ahoot.
Myself noo, I have to exercise the utmost care in this matter
of food. At oor ho ose, the Leddy, Mrs. Ostler, ye ken, she
ha a great and incomprehensible affection for yon grey tabby
wretch and feeds it with the best of everything. It takes me
a mort of tail-wagging and begging and fussing aboot to
wheedle from the foolish woman a few delicacies for mysel .
I even tried once to imitate the cat s ourr, hopin to get round
her a bit that way. But it was no great success. No great
success at alii They thought I was growling at the tabby
cat and rushed me ootside. A’ week We all ha our
troubles nae doot.
Too bad, my dear fellow,’ said Wallace, obviously
greatly moved by this shocking tale of favoritism and in-
justice. Very trying for you, I must say!
An hour later, when Rodney ran down the flagged path
of the garden and unlatched the gate to the fields, he found
his friends already there awaiting him.
The little boy had brought with him a bottle of milk for
the I ambs to share, a nice meaty bone for Wallace, and some
stale cake and apples for Ernest and Percivah Jock, of
course, had gone home. AH the animals were greatly
pleased and contented with these gifts except Percival, who
grumbled and complained and called the cake unappetising,
dry stuff, but ate it all up nevertheless, even licking up the
crumbs!
Henry, who was watching him, gurgled with laughter at
this , and standing on tiptoes whispered something in
Ernest s ear, at which Percival appeared to take offence, and.


fixing Henry with a cold, unfriendly stare, said in a com-
plaining voice:
I don t know why these cheeky youngsters like to
ridicule goats so much these days! Mannerless, that’s what
it is. Now, when / was a kid that sort of thing would not
have been tolerated! But I don’t suppose you want to hear
what I have to say!
“Not very much!’’ agreed Wallace, gnawing drowsily
at his bone.
All the same Percival continued:
I can remember a time when goats were very popular.
Very well thought of animals, they were, very well thought of
indeed. Humans frequently kept whole herds of them, even
preferring them to cows!”


“Incrediblel” murmured Wallace, settling himself down
sleepily with his nose on his paws. “You don’t say so!”
“Yes. Ido say sol” replied the Goat, firmly. “Whole
herds of them! Goat’s milk and cheese is an extremely good
food. In fact, in some countries a goat is a greatly valued
and prized possession!
You amaze me,’’ murmured Wallace, nearly dropping
off to sleep.
“Goats,” persisted Percival. his eyes shining with family
pride, “goats are frequently mentioned in Literature and in
History. Now, Rodney, you can read, perhaps. You can
think of a story where goats were mentioned, can you not?”
Well! replied Rodney, trying to think of a truthful
answer which would not give offence, “there was Robinson
Crusoe, who was wrecked on a lonely island in the middle of
the sea, and found a lot of goats there.”
Exclaimed Henry the Lamb, in surprise, “Found goats
on a lonely island in the middle of the sea?”
“Yes. a long way away from everywhere!
Quite right! applauded Wallace, waking up suddenly.
Best place for them!”


Percival appeared very annoyed at this, but let it pass,
and, turning to Rodney with an air of great dignity, said in
a commanding voice, “Tell them about Robinson Crusoe and
the goats!
“Well,’ said Rodney again. “Crusoe was wrecked on
a lonely island in the middle of tbe sea, and be only managed
to save from tbe wreck a few tools and some sail-cloth, a gun.
and a barrel of flour. A few things like tbat! He would
have starved to death on tbe island (for be was there for years)
bad it not been for a herd of goats be found there. He got
milk and cheese from them. And be killed them for meat.
And when bis clothes wore out be made clothes of their skins,
too. One often sees pictures of him.
“I don’t think I have, said Henry.
“He usually has a Parrot with him, and he wears goat-
skin clothes, roughly-made, and an umbrella and shoes.
People say that goat’s meat is very nice to eat.
“I wonder what it tastes like! exclaimed Wallace,
opening his eyes to gaze meditatively at Percival. I have
always wanted to know!
It tastes as it smells, perhaps! suggested Henry.
“Oh! sighed the Dog in a disappointed voice, and,
losing all interest in the whole thing, went off to sleep again.


Said Henry thoughtfully. “Umbrella and shoes of goat-
skin, meat and milk. And he commenced to sing a song in
his usual style. All loveable, light-hearted absurdity:
Said Robinson Crusoe
To the Old Billy-Goat,
1 ve mislaid all my trousseau,
And require a fur coat,
So which of your friends
Can you spare for the same?
Tis an honour a goat
Should be eager to claim.
I need an umbrella.
And trousers and shoes;
For his pelt which young feller
For these shall 1 choose ?
/ want milk and cheese
For my new larder shelf.
And you d make a fine joint
Of BAKED GOAT S MEAT YOURSELF! ”


What happened next amazed everybody. So enraged
was Percival at this new piece of insolence that, while all the
other animals and Rodney were laughing at Henry s cheery
song, Percival suddenly lowered his head and rushed
furiously at Henry, intending to butt him with his horns.
The Lamb just skipped aside in time and Percival crashed
into the fence instead, breaking through the wire-netting in
such a way that his great horns became entangled and caught
fast and he could neither get forward nor back. There he
stuck, roaring and bellowing and bucking about in a most
extraordinary way.
“Whyl” gasped Henry, faintly, “Whew! I didn’t know
he would feel as mad as all that. Let us go elsewhere before
the poor old buffalo disentangles himself. I always know
when I’m not wanted. Something seems to tell me!
Willing enough to leave matters as they stood, Rodney.
Ernest and the Lambs ran off down the hill.


M
m I .o Tj *. m' t jpL
iiV
xl«
14 ,, flBSBH^*''^
j&StT**'. ■•'
j-, j- ' W
V •• ‘,B[ *_J I
v Mb. -mBJIBmuk jH
iilili Bi \iMfiMBIIffnifcifc ■
1 “ ' __ % 3
/ ■* ' Jgr s
- A ♦ Jr4, >
i w 1
jJmj ■ • *pjj |


.
■


"Come on,” called Henry. “We ll visit Ringtail Pos-
sum if she is in I Let me sing a song as we go.
“A little jump here, and a little skip there,
Pirrouette with your two back feet high in the air,
Rush about like a dizzy young devil-may-care,
And end with a sudden full stopl
Run a half circle, and see how it feels
To chuck a half dozen quick Catherine Wheels.
Just shut your eyes tight and go head over heels,
And land with your tail at the top.
Career round the meadows and roll in the grass,
Be sure to shy madly should anyone pass.
Just hold in your breath and advance bold as brass,
With a jump and a skip and a hop.
Light-heartedly they ran down the hills, laughing at
young Henry’s loveable nonsense.
Presently the Lamb stopped them in their clattering,
noisy progress and told them to go more slowly. They
entered a shady wood near the river and advanced quietly
down a bracken-bordered track, where the warm air smelt
spicy and sweet with honey and with Eucalyptus leaves, and
the cool shade of the gum trees checkered the sun-kissed
ground.
Henry stopped them by a spindly group of bushes in
which hung a nest like that of a bird. “This is Ringtails
home,’ ’he said. “Looks like a bird’s nest, doesn’t it? Looks
as though it would come to bits if you gave it a good poke,
but it’ s really quite strong. Hi, Ringtail, come and meet our
friend Rodney. He won’t hurt you. He is the nicest boy I
ever met.’’


Gently, and so silently that Rodney did not liear a sound
nor see a leaf stir, the Ringtail Possum crept from her nest and
clung among tKe branches and twigs which supported Ker
borne. Rodney saw tbe little creature witb tbe sweet,
anxious face and wide, round, brown eyes gazing down upon
tbem. Her tail was coiled strongly round a branch behind
and slightly above her, and on her soft, furry back clung a
small, wide-eyed miniature of herself.
"She has a young one,” cried Rodney. “What a dear,
wee thing, and look, oh, look, there is another baby one
behind her going up the tree above the nest! See how they
hold on with their funny, small hands, and what a pretty
cream colour they are underneath!”
Quietly!” cautioned Henry the Lamb, ' she is a very
nervous animal. Very shy of strangers. If you have a small
piece of cake on you, just place it in the twigs somewhere
and let us come away before you frighten her to death with


your excited goings on. Not many humans are so lucky as
to see Ringtails in their very own homes just like that. Come
away down this path to the river. Why, here comes
Wallace.”
Sure enough, Wallace appeared just then round a curve
in the track, puffing and panting with his exercise, and wag-
ging his tail violently at sight of Rodney.
"Oh, there you are, my dear hoy,” he gasped, "there you
are I My, my! I stayed behind with poor old Percival to
see it I could help him. Nothing we could do could disen-
gage him from the barbed wire. Eventually Farmer heard
the commotion and came along and tied him up again near
the stables. He is better tied up and out of the way, really.
Such an ungovernable temper he has! Well, I mean, really!
He tried to butt poor Henry in the stomach! Not the thing
at all, I assure you. Nip in the ankle, perhaps, were the
provocation great enough. Quite permissible! Quite! But
butt him in the stomach No! There is a difference!”
"Yes,” agreed Rodney, staring at Wallace in a doubtful
sort of way, "I suppose there is.”
Oh, decidedly!” affirmed Wallace, with the decision of
one who has studied the usages of polite society for many
years and understands these little niceties.
Said Ernest the Foal, gently, "My mother says Percival
has always had an unfortunate manner.”
"And now,” said Henry the Lamb, "his manner is so
unfortunate it has become a calamity! Come on, let s forget
him!


Come you from your fields and fallows,
Come and paddle in the shallows,
Gambolling in careless glee,
While you’re young like mel”
So down by the river’s sandy banks tbey idled tbe lovely
afternoon away, until tbe sun began to dip towards tbe
Western bills and tbe shadows lengthened over tbe fields.
Tbe birds quieted their songs a little, and tbe golden bush of
evening descended over tbe drowsing land.
I must go home to tbe farm, sighed Rodney. "It has
been such a lovely day I bate to end it, but I really must go
back now or tbe Farmer s wife will be anxious about me."
So she will, said Wallace. Indeed, we bad better all
go home. I can do with my supper myself. How about you,
Henry and Henrietta?”
"Ob, yes! announced Henry, mildly, "Henrietta and I
are absolutely savage."
"And I am getting hungry and want my supper also,"
remarked Ernest, gently.


sL,.
“Then lead on, Ernest, my friend,” cried Henry
dramatically. “Lead on, right speedily, with much haste,
and also he quick about it. Lead on, my Ernest friend, and
we will follow like the sheep we are. Lead us forth to our
food!
“Food, Food, glorious Food,
We order our meals in accord to our mood
For me, grass and daisies,
And Jock prefers bluid’,
But we all go half crazy
To get to the food.
Food, Food, wonderful Food
Some like theirs dressed, and others quite nude;
Some creatures toy with a knife and a fork;
Some swallow a rabbit whole out for a walk:
But whether our taste is expensive and good
Or we just scratch up something from under some wood,
So strong the appeal,
So urgent, so real,
That we wend our way home
In good time for each meal.”
“Oh, be sensible, Henry, do!” Ernest begged him. “My


mother will wonder
where I have got to. Let
us hurry home to the
farm.”
"We are all coming
now,” said Rodney,
who was at that moment
stepping along beside
Wallace, his hand rest-
ing affectionately upon
the Dog s head and pat-
ting it now and then.
‘You know, Ernest,
one of these days I want
to learn to ride a horse.
I have always thought
how nice that would be.
Will you be a saddle
horse, Ernest?”
No, not me. When
I grow up I shall be a
draught horse and pull
a plough or a farm-cart
or a great big dray. My
mother says all our an-
cestors were farm horses,
and helped the farmers
prepare fields to grow
food for lots of people.
We worked in the
orchards, too, and on the


farm, and helped take the stuff to market. Real, honest work,
ours, and we are very proud of it. It is a splendid thing to
lead a useful life. My mother says that animals, like people,
have different destinies, each one useful and good in its own
way, and the secret of a happy life is to always do one s best
wherever one s duty liesl
‘And a very fine sentiment! The moral of that is .. .
began Mrs. Bunny, as she suddenly popped out of one of
her many front-door holes and appeared on the path before
them, “. . . the moral of that is . . .
"Oh, it s you, is it? 1 d forgotten you.
"Well, be quiet!" growled Wallace. Go back and put
your children to bed or something. How dare you come
annoying a hungry dog at this time of the day. I want my
supper, that I do, and although I am a reformed character,
and the soul of honour, you would be well advised to keep
out of my way."
Rodney smiled to himself at the rapidity with which
Mrs. Bunny rushed into her hole again, and vanished from
sight.
The old dog stood and glared after her for a minute or


*v c *& ‘f V . Iks*
4 y
<*• '■\ •> \ *«V. e - p f'4 v - ■■ y-* i^ v S
* ■■< VK -> *
1 Vtev viV . '-' \-^<f %i ** \
two. grumbling under his breath in a testy manner.
Tut, tut, tut! he exclaimed aloud at last. “I fear I was
rather short with the poor thing, hut I have felt for some time
that it would he a kindness to remind Mrs. Bunny that her
friends are not all vegetarians. Now no one would he more
grieved than I should anything happen to Mrs. Bunny
Except Mrs. Bunny!” remarked Henry.
You shouldn’t interrupt!” Wallace reproved him, turn-
ing a reproachful brown eye upon the lamb. “Don’t you
know that you should never bleat until you are hloten to? I
mean spoken to! What are you laughing at? And now I
have forgotten what I was about to say <—• well, never mind,
this hilly hit of path just here seems to get increasingly steep
as the years go on. Strange, isn’t it? I never used to pant
as much as this.”


"Have you lived here for long?” enquired Rodney.
“All my life I’ * replied the dog, proudly. Tve served
our farmer faithfully, dog and pup for twelve years come
Michaelmas!”
‘That is a long time! the hoy agreed. You must
know the neighbourhood very well by this time. You
would never get lost, would you?”
Lost? Me get lost? Far be it from me to boast, but
my friends say I have the best sense of direction in the district.
Some animals, however, manage to lose themselves con-
tinually. Very good at it, they are! The best I ever knew
was a little black lamb. Villain, they called him, because
he was a black sheep, but he was really no villain at all but
a very nicely behaved young fellow whose only fault was
the colour of his wool, which, of course, was no fault of his


own. Always in trouble, was poor Villain, even bis own
Mother would have as little to do with him as possible. It
bad been a terrible disappointment to her to have a black
lamb instead of a white one, and she avoided and neglected
him in a disgraceful and unfeeling manner. Shocking, it
was! Without bis Mother’s care and guidance, the poor
little scrap drifted into all manner of distressing situations.
Should there be a bit of barbed wire anywhere, Villain was
bound to get tangled up in it. Should there be a drinking
hole, Villain was sure to slip in and nearly drown himself.
The flock disliked him. One never saw him with them,
but always straggling along alone, bleating as though his
heart would break. lam no sheepdog, but as the flock
disowned him, and he was plainly so desperately in need of
a friend, I took care of the little thing myself.”
Henry, who had been listening to every word, suddenly
exclaimed, "I have never heard about this before. This
fellow was no relation of mine, was he?”
"To be sure, he wasl” replied the dog, "but a bit before
your time perhaps. Now let me see. Villain would have


been your Mother’s second cousin once removed. On her
Father’s side, of course. Well, he got lost so often that I took
to rounding him up myself and taking him home to the dairy
door at about milking time to persuade a farmhand to give
him a bottle of milk. They seemed to think it a nuisance at
first, and then they commenced to like him. It was funny to
see them watch for him. pet him and fuss over him. It saved
his life, I suppose. He soon grew to be a lovely creature,
and the best-ltked lamb on the farm. The people re-named
him Boot-black.”
“Where is he now?” Henry enquired.
He lives over at Farmer Jenkin’s place, ‘Three Creeks’.
Jenkin's daughter runs a special pasture for black sheep as
a kind of hobby. One of the most delightful places I have
ever seen. I visit Boot-black there whenever I can. His
friends think the world of him, and I don t know a more
contented animal than he is now.”
Boot-black I said Rodney. That s a nice name.
And Boot-black lived happily ever afterl”
Oh. Wallace,” he sighed, a little later, as they all
crossed the last grassy field and neared the house, “What a
lovely day we have spent together.”
Well, there is yet tomorrow, my dear boy!” replied the
Dog, wagging his tail. Tomorrow and, I hope, many other
happy days beside. Now I would suggest that tomorrow,
Henry, you and I take our friend Rodney through the
orchards to the creeks beyond and show him the shallow
places where it is fun to build a bridge. Why, yes, and visit
the tadpole pond! You and I, Henry, must see that Rodney
has a pleasant holiday.”


“Yes, indeed,” agreed Henry, “You and I and Henrietta
Will you join us, Ernest?
“If I am allowed to do so.” was Ernest’s prim reply
Said Little Henry, “We shall all spend some lovely days
together. Oh! I really must make a song about itl
“W e’ll roam over fields, in the orchards, and valleys,
Explore every crevice, the nooks and the crannies,
Squeeze through the fences, and jump all the ditches,
Meet with adventure, knights errant, and witches.
Find lovely maids in distress to set free,
Henrietta!
And Wallace!
And Rodney!
And me!


Well play hide and seek in the woods near the river,
And chase the grass parakeet hither and thither.
Discover the secrets (I m certain we could),
Of the queer little creatures who live in the wood;
We ll read the elf writing on each bluegurn tree,
HenriettaJ
And Wallacel
And R.odneyJ
And me!”
As Rodney warmed bis feet in front of a great roaring
fire tfiat night before going to bed, be smiled up at tbe
Farmer s wife and said:
I bave bad a lovely day! All tbe animals talked to
me and told me wonderfully interesting stories about them-
selves. ”
Dear, dear now!” laughed tbe Farmer’s wife in an
amused good-natured way, “you will tell me next that old
Wallace can talk! That you will I’*


“OK, yes, Ke can,” said Rodney, dreamily. “Ke told me
a number of very interesting stories.
And tbe little boy smothered a very large yawn.
“Well, welll’’ exclaimed tbe Farmer’s wife, staring at
Rodney in smiling and tolerant disbelief. Did you ever
bear tbe like? Dear, dear me. Whatever next? THE
THINGS THAT BOY DOES SAYI”


UJ. H';H 0 REV
PUBLISHING COi]!|
p^£^cnpy/






OUR FRIEND
RODNEY
