

OUR TRIP
TO
Gippsland Lakes
AND RIVERS.
BY “ TANJIL."
With NEW TOURIST’S MAP, in COLOURS.
&c., &c., &c.
PRINTERS: RAE BROS..
35 ELIZABETH STREET NORTH.
1882.
PRICE
SIXPENCE.
Melbourne:
Publisher: M. L. HUTCHINSON,
15 COLLINS STREET WEST.


CHRISTMAS AND
NEW YEAR CARDS,
SEASON 1882-3.
O *3 ft
co « g
Z -A
5 H
T a? W
- 1 - —i!
OSS
I- SR) «
i -c 3
J a
S
WjN returning thanks for the favours of past years,
*£■ has the pleasure to announce his first Shipments
of this Season’s
CHRISTMAS AND IS
NEW YEAR CARDS,
im
Which have been most carefully selected in the
BRITISH and FOREIGN MARKETS, specially
for the Australian Trade.
M. L. HUTCHINSON imports direct from
the best makers, and will have fresh Consignments by
EVERY STEAMER TILL THE MIDDLE OF DECEM-
BER, so as to ensure the latest Novelties available in
the Home Markets.
No old stock remains, and Customers may rely on
the NEWEST and CHOICEST DESIGNS at
the Lowest Prices,
GLASGOW BOOK WAREHOUSE,
15 COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.


OUR TRIP
TO
Gippsland Lakes
AND RIVERS,
By “ TANJIL;”
■With NEW TOURIST’S MAP, In Colours.
jjaily ®f Hin |)i£eoyery
or ftIPPSLAMJ,
By JOHN" KIKG) of Nambroh;
WITH
A CHAPTER OF SOUTH GIPPSLAND,
By D. MACDONALD, D.D,
Printers ; EAE BEOS., 35 Elizabeth-st. N., Melbotjene.
Publisher: M. L. EUTCEmON ] 15 Gollins-street West


CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Table of Distances ... ... ... ... ... 2
Introduction ... ... ... ... ... 3
Early Days ... ■ 5
Port Albert ... ... 13
Our Trip to the Lakes and Rivera ... ... ... 15
Sale ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
To the Lakes ... ... ... ... ... 22
Lake Wellington ... ... ... ... ... 23
MlLellan’s Straits and Lake Victoria ... ... ... 24
Paynesville ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
Lake King ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
River Mitchell ... ... ... ... ... 25
Bairnsdale ... ... ... ... 26
The Hop Industry ... ... ... ... ... 29
Rosherville or Metung ... ... ... ... 32
Lakes Entrance ... ... ... ... ... 33
North Arm ... ... ... ... ... 34
Aboriginal Station ... ... ... ... ... 36
Lake Tyres ... ... ... ... ... 39
Tambo River and Bruthen ... ... ... ... 41
The Back Lakes ... ... ... ... ... 44
Ninety Mile Beach ... ... . ... ... ... 46
Lower Gipps Land ... ... ... ... ... 47
Omeo ... ... ... ... ••• 51


MILES.
TIME.
Melbourne to Sale by Railway
127i ...
Ch.
5m.
Latrobe Bridge, Sale, to Lake Wel-
lington
10
lb.
Across Lake Wellington ...
11
lb.
5m.
M'Lellan’s Straits...
n ...
40m.
Lake Victoria
18
2h.
Paynesville to Balrnsdale ...
u
Xh.
43 m.
Payncsville to Roshervillo...
... 10
.. lb.
Rosherville to Entrance ...
... 8
45m.
1st class.
2nd
CLASS.
Return excursion tickets, always
available at the Princes’
Bridge Station, including
railway faro and steamer,
ordinary times
£2 12
Cd
£2
1 0
Special holiday excursion tickets
at Christmas and Easter,
return
2 6
0
1
16 0
Meals on hoard the steamers
usually ...
0 2
0
TABLE OF DISTANCES AND USUAL TIME OCCUPIED
BY THE STEAMERS.
Viz.—Lake King, 4 miles, River Mitchell, 10 miles.
The journey from Sale to Bairnsdale is frequently accom-
plished half an hour less than the above.
PROBABLE COST OF THE TRIP FROM MELBOURNE
AND BACK.
Hotel accommodation at Sale, Paynesville, Bairnsdale,
Eosherville and the Entrance, 2s. to 2s. 6d. for meal or bed,
80s. to 42s per week ; or for families by special agreement.
Boats can be obtained at all the places at very low rates., and
generally a small steamer can be chartered for about £3 per
day, which is very convenient for large parties. M. L.
Hutchinson agent in Melbourne, R. Stellwag, secretary, Sale.




INTRODUCTION.
■HE following pages have been written with a two-fold
object, viz., to give all interested in the colony some of the
events connected with the discovery of Gippsland, which
are not found in the usual histories hitherto compiled, and to
helc those who are desirous of spending a holiday in this
varied and beautiful province of Victoria, to enjoy the time at
their disposal to the best advantage. Although Gippsland
comprises nearly 14,000 square miles, or 9,000,000 acres,
equal to a sixth part of the colony, till within the past few
years most of it has been comparatively unknown. Around
Sale, Bairnsdale, and a few other townships, considerable set-
tlement has taken place, yet there are millions of acres to be
occupied, and a bright prospect awaits the settler in this new
territory. The first portion of this little work is his-
torical, written by one of the earliest colonists, whose
name has been associated with this portion of our country from
the first, and who has bcnn indebted to Mr Shillinglaw for
the quotations from M'Millan’s diary. It is only by placing
on record the actual experience of our pioneers that a true
history can he written. The second part gives some idea ot
what Gippsland is now, and will, it is hoped, serve as a guide
to the thousands who annually seek health and pleasure outside
the busy city or town, and also in some measure supply a want
which has long been felt by giving information respecting the


ADVERTISEMENT.
TRE LAKES NAVIGATION COMPANY’S STEAMERS,
“TANJIL” & “BAIRNSDALE”
Leave Sale and Bairnsdale Daily (Sundays excepted)
SPECIAL RETURN TICKETS, including Railway and Steamer,
can be obtained at Prince’s Bridge Station, and are available for the
Season.
Full particulars respecting Fares and Time Tables from M. L.
HUTCHINSON, Bookseller and Stationer, 15 Collins Street West ;
or from
E. STELLWAG, Secretary, Sale.
various lakes and rivers, and their surroundings. One thing is
certain, no one will be disappointed in taking the trip, for the
pleasure, whether in boating, shooting, fishing, ferning, or other
amusements is as varied as the scenery, and the easy access to
the various parts described, enables the invalid or the robust to
undertake the journey. No fatigue is necessary, beyond that
which is self-imposed, and the thanks of the travelling public
is due to the Lakes’ Navigation Company for opening up so
many pleasant places of resort at such a small cost. If the
pleasure of any person is enhanced by going over the same
ground the end of giving these notes to the world will have
been served by
THE PUBLISHER.
15 Collins-street West, November, 1882.


GIPPSLAND.
EARLY DAYS.
■HERE is a pleasure in the exploration of a new country,
which can be keenly felt, but not so easily described ;
therefore it is not intended in this brief account of the
occupation of Gippsland by Europeans, to do more than re-
count a few of the facts connected with the names of the ex-
plorers, and the first inhabitants.
In 1839, Captain Lachlan M'Alister, who commanded the
Goulburn detachment of the mounted-police of N.S. Wales, (a
terror to bushrangers of that time,) was the owner of a large
herd of cattle, running at Currawong, in the Manaroo country,
and finding them of little value so far from Sydney, instructed
his manager Angus M'Millan, to push out to the southward
with a view to find good country, of which there had been
rumours, and a harbour that would enable him to ship cattle
to Tasmania, where the British Government were expending
large sums of money on their penal establishments.
Angus M'Millan was one of the fourteen sons of Ewan
M‘Millan, of the Isle of Skye, and landed in Sydney on 26th
January, 1838, with letters of introduction to Captain
M'Alister. He was just the man for such an enterprise. Ho
possessed a kindly spirit, mixed with much determination,
and these qualities were necessary to induce the two Omeo
natives, Coboan Johnny and Friday to accompany him, for
it required great reliance on their leader to give them courage
to enter the country of the dreaded Warraguls, that being the
name given to the so-called wild natives of Gippsland, who
had so often carried death and destruction, among the more
peaceable natives of Omeo.
On the 28th May, 1839, Angus M £ Millan, on his good
horse Clifton, (a well-bred Arab, and whose hoof is now in the
Melbourne Museum as a memento of a faithful servant,) with
a Manaroo native named Jimmy Gibber, left Currawang in


search of country that was afterwards to be known as Gipps-
land. On June 3rd he sighted Lake King from the top of
Mount Haystack. His journal states that—After noting the
bearings of all the remarkable hills, he returned to report his
doings to M'Alister.
On the 20th December, M'Millan again formed a party
consisting of Matthew M'Alister, Cameron and Old Bath. He
succeeded in getting in sight of the Lakes, when he again re-
turned to a depot formed at Numlamunjie.
On the 11th January, 1810, he started again, and his jour-
nal is here quoted : Jan. 11th 1840—“ Party started, con-
sisting of Matthew M'Alister, Mr Cameron, two blacks and
self. Four weeks supply of flour, beef and damper, and three
weeks’ ration of tea and sugar. Camped 12 miles from
Station Course, S - E., (meaning Numlamunlie).
12th Jan., 1840—On old track, distance 8 miles.
18th Jan., 1843—Course 6 miles S.E., and 3 miles S.S.W.
14th Jan., 1844—Crossed Shady Creek with great diffi-
culty, and got on a range running S.E. Camped on Monkey
Creek, distance about 12 miles.
15th Jan., 1844—Clearing our way inch by inch. After
leaving the leading range, found we could not continue our
S.S.W. course, and made again for the river Tambo. Got
clear of the range, and came to a large fern covered flat,
which Johnny called Bruden. He wanted to cross the
Tambo, and said that the plains were east of us, but I was
convinced from my former observations and the appearance
of the broken country in that direction, that he was mis-
taken. Camped on a point near the river. Beautiful kan-
garoo grass. Distance about 12 miles.
16. Travelled down and crossed the river. Course E.S.E.,
beautiful open forest country. Beached the banks of a Lake,
and being the first European that had ever tasted its waters,
named it Lake Victoria. Myriads of swan, duck, &c.
17th. Made and named the Nicholson River. Followed it
up to the ranges, and crossed. Calculated I was now about
20 miles from the beach by Flinders’ chart. Came to and
named the Mitchell River and Clifton’s Morass. Delightful
country.
18. Left Prospect Plat. River too deep to cross. Mag-
nificent view of mountains to the N.W., and lake to S.E.,


with the Mitchell winding at our feet; it was truly the land
of the mountain and flood, so called it “ Caledonia Australia.”
The journal proceeds until the writer had passed the Avon,
M‘Alister, and Glengarry Rivers, when the provisions being
exhausted, he returned to the depot at Numlamunjie, and
subsequently to Currawong on to Manaroo, for cattle to stock
his recent discoveries. A third attempt was made by him on
the 9th February, 1841, from the station he had formed at
Nunton, on the Avon, to reach the sea coast, in which he
succeeded, and on the 14th of that month he supped the salt
water at Port Albert out of his Highland bonnet.
Space does not admit of a detailed account of all Mac-
Millan’s followers, but in addition to those already mentioned
the names of Thomas and Lachlan M‘Alister, jun,, Alex-
ander Arbuckle, John M'Donald, Colin M'Laren (still living
at Rotumah Island, Lake Victoria), Edward Thomson, and
Jemmy Lawrence must not be omitted. They were a devoted
band, for they toiled on, following M'Millan like a Highland
chief who had only a few inspiriting kind words in Gaelic to
give in lieu of wages, that came tardily in those days, for
there was much to be done before cattle could be shipped to
Tasmania, and net proceeds returned.
These few lines simply record the fact that Angus M'Millan,
between the dates of 28th May, 1839, and 14th February,
’4l, succeeded in establishing himself in Gippsland, with a
road to a shipping port at Corner Inlet ; but it is only known
to those who were present what an arduous undertaking it
proved to be. With the limited means at his disposal it may
be said that none but a Highlander could have secured the
co-operation of his followers. Two years and more elapsed
before wages could be paid ; but hard, and at that time,
dangerous service was required, and was given.
That M'Millan was the first to enter Gippsland there can
be no doubt, though from prudential reasons he and M'Alister
suppressed the news of the important discovery, and allowed
Count Strezlecki the honor of making public the existence of
one of Victoria’s fairest provinces.
It chanced that Edmund Paul de Strezlecki, a Polish
Count, was travelling in Australia for his own amusement,
and searching into the geological structure of the country. He
followed the course of the Australian Alps, which led him


about March, 1840, into Gippsland. He was accompanied
by Messrs James M‘Arthur and James Riley (the latter now
in Geelong), also an aboriginal native of the Goulburn in New
South Wales, named Charley Tarra. To this blackfellow the
party were indebted for their lives, for becoming entangled in
the Western Port Ranges, their provisions failed, and they
were dependent on monkey bear, which Charley supplied.
As the Count published his discoveries in Melbourne im-
mediately on his arrival, he asserted his right to be considered
the discoverer of Gippsland, and for which he received the
Founders’ Medal of the Royal Geographical Society, London,
in 1846, but it must be always recollected that although the
Count was the first to publish, he nevertheless travelled along
M'Millan’s marked track from Numlamunjie to Bruthen, which
so expedited his progress, that he succeeded in reaching Wes-
tern Port. But for that saving of time he must have been
driven back by want of provisions.
The names of Gippsland and Lake King were retained—
the first as a compliment to the existing Governor of N. S.
Wales, Sir George Gipps. The River Tarra, in South Gipps-
land, was named after the native, the said Charles, who was
no ordinary character. The tender care he bestowed on
M‘Arthur who was ill during the last part of the journey, and
who would have sunk altogether but for Charley’s help, proved
that under a dark skin he possessed a warm and affectionate
heart, for his assurances to Macarthur that he would never
leave him, and his help in reaching the camp at night, proved
that he recollected they had been boys together at Arthurs-
leigh,near Goulburn. N.S.W.
The Count passed through Gippsland, but to M'Millan
was left the arduous task of establishing his employer’s cattle,
conducting the shipping at Port Albert, and finding crossings
over numerous rivers and swamps. His people being principally
Highlanders were not used to deal with Australian natives, who
began to grow troublesome. They had firearms, but scrupled
to use them, and not until they were obliged did they do so in
self-defence. For some years a spear remained embedded in
the solid wood of the first slab hut built at Nunton, near
Stratford, proving the force and skill that the native could
employ. Cunning also was a characteristic of their nature,
for in an interview between M'Millan and the natives, the


former advanced without his rifle, but with a green branch in
his hand, as also did one of the blackfellows, but the Omeo
native, Ingebira, standing at some distance, detected by his
gait that the Warragul was dragging a spear through the
grass with his foot, which he threw immediately M'Millan re-
tired without doing any harm.
The year 1838 and part of 1839 will be remembered by old
colonists as years of famine, 18 or 20 month’s drought had
starved the stock, and reduced the supply of grain and flour
to such an extent, that the price of flour in New South Wales
rose to £IOO per ton, and was hard to find even at that price.
Consequently the news of a fertile district with lakes and rivers
invited many adventurous spirits to follow up M‘Millan’s
tracks. James M‘Farlane, of Omeo, despatched his manager,
Malcolm M‘Farlane, of Glenmaggie, to occupy Heyfield.
George Curlewis took possession of ‘ The Heart,’ so called be-
cause the natives had cut out of the turf a large cutting of
that shape. His manager, M‘Lennan, a Highlander, added
another to w T hat was almost a Scotch colony. M'Donnell,chief
of the Glengarry clan, established himself on the banks of
Tarra River, among whom must not be forgotten James
Neilson, his butler. A hospitable Highland table was
spread under his direction as far back as 181=2. Gaelic songs,
accompanied by the bag-pipes and the tartan dress, for many
had brought their colors with them, might have led a traveller
to suppose that coming to Gippsland, the way had been
missed, and the Highlands of Scotland attained instead.
Though not among the earliest arrivals in Gippsland, the
two M‘Leans and Simon Gillies may claim to be a portion of
the band of pioneers, as they arrived early in 1812. For
three or four years Mr. M‘Lean (father of our present member)
had charge of Mr. M'Alister’s sheep, but in 1846, in conjunc-
tion with his brother and Simon Gillies, he formed the station
known as Glenaldale, on the Mitchell River. Mrs. M‘Lean
was the first of her sex and color to cross the Glennarry River,
and her son Alister John was the first white child born in
North Gippsland. Although the bush in those times could
not be looked upon as a good training ground for future
members of Parliament, it must be admitted that Mr. M‘Lean’s
eldest son, Allan, found time and energy to study and deve-
lope the qualities necessary to his future career.


William Pearson, of Kilmany Park, assisted by James
Eintoul (both Scotchmen) came among the earliest pioneers.
The Finlay, of Twofold Bay, sent Jack Shea to occupy what
is now known as Fulaham, though in 1842 it passed into the
hands of John and Arthur King. Messrs. Louglinan and
Taylor from India, occupied the Mitchell Eiver country, hence
the name of Lindenow ; and Frederick Stirling Jones named
his station Lucknow, to gratify his friend Taylor’s Indian
proclivities, whilst to himself it recorded a hope that his luck
was now in the ascendant. In the same year, 1842, John
Eeeve, an Englishman, pitched his camp at Snake’s Ridge,
so called because M'Millan and Colin M'Laren found a
freshly killed snake, out of which the fat had just been taken
by the natives.
Wm. Odell Raymond, assisted by Richard Brinsley
Sheridan, left Wellington Valley in N.S. Wales, and arrived
at Stratford, on the Avon Eiver ; though the name given by
M‘Millan was intended to remind his followers of the Scotch
River Avon. Mr Sparks, a Manaroo squatter, occupied Swan
Reach about this time, thereby affording natives of that
locality an abundant supply of beef, for the numerous rivers
and morksses afforded safe shelter to the hunters of the Lake
'Tribes.
Messrs. Thompson and Cunningham from Manaroo settled
at Clyde Bank, and D. P. Okeden, of Manaroo, settled at
Old Rosedale. Messrs. Campbell and Fraser (the former
now of Glencoe), took up a position designated in those times
as “ The Hill Top,” now better known as Longford. Many
a traveller was indebted to Mr. Campbell for his assistance in
crossing the almost bottomless morass at the foot ofthe hill, and
it is difficult in these times to recognise the Punt Land and the
Longford Morass in their altered circumstances. The Latrobe
River was long without bridge or boat, and on one occasion
old Archie MTntosh was pulled through the river at the end
of a rope, of course nearly drowned ; and now having enume-
rated the earliest arrivals in North Gippsland, it may not
be uninteresting to record the origin of some of the names
given to lakes and rivers.
Strezlecki’s name of Lake King was retained as a mark of
esteem for his friend, Admiral P. P. King, first native born
in Norfolk Island, in the days when Governor King was firs^.


commandant in that penal establishment. Admiral King
was the first Australian to reach the rank of Admiral in the
British Royal Navy.
Lake Victoria was named by M'Millian, a proof that
Scotchmen were true and loyal before the Queen of that name
had hoisted her flag at Balmoral.
The name (so given by W. A. Brodribb) of Lake Welling-
ton, and that of Mount Wellington, are standing proofs of
the respect that all Britishers have for the good old Duke—
sometimes called the Iron Duke, because ho had the windows
in his London house closed with iron, after they had been
broken in the riots at the time of the passing of the Reform
Bill.
M‘Lennan’s Straits and M'Millan’s Straits were named by
John Reeves in his first exploration of the Lakes in 1841, on
which occasion the Lakes’ Entrance was found, and owing to
the sudden breaking of a thole pin, tire boat was swept out to
sea, and had to be beached and hauled across the western land
spit.
Jembuck Point, now called Jemmy’s Point, was named dur-
ing this cruise, as a live sheep was carried for provisions, and
on being turned out to graze, it got away.
The Tambo River boars a native name, coming as it does
from Omeo.
The Nicholson, after Sir Charles Nicholson, first Speaker
of the House of Assembly in Sydney.
The Mitchell River, after Sir Thomas Mitchell, Surveyor-
General of N.S. Wales, who travelled through Victoriain very
early days, and suggested the title of Australia Felix, which
name, however, was thought might be condensed in the happy
name of Victoria.
Providence Ponds, so called, because in the long stretch of
country between the Mitchell and Avon Rivers. It was pro-
vidential that such fine ponds were situated jnst half way.
M‘Alister River, as M'Millan’s tribute of respect to his em-
ployer.
Thomson River, after the popular Sir Edward Deas Thom-
son, Chief Secretary of N.S. Wales.
The Glengarry River after the Chief of that title.
The Latrobe River —This name was the source of much
amusement in early days. M‘Millan had called the river—


Glengarry ; Strezlecki called it—Latrobe. The squatter of
that time inclined to M'Millan’s name, but it was noticed that
on Mr Latrobe’s first visit to Gippsland his name was used
in speaking of the river, so at last a compromise was effected
by styling the stream Latrobe below the junction of the Thom-
son and Latrobe Bridge.
Eagle Point was selected by Mr Commissioner Tyers, as his
residence, and was so called after a large eagle’s nest found in
a tree on the cliff.
Jones’ Bay called after Jones of Lucknow.
Ben Cruachan, conveyed M'Millan’s desire to perpetuate the
Scottish names.
Clifton’s Morass, after the horse Clifton, who nearly lost
his life in a deep hole concealed by ferns.
In the foregoing is comprised most of the names given by
the discoverers and their immediate followers to Gippsland,
but after 1812 the arrivals were numerous, and all the grass
country that was considered available for sheep and cattle was
speedily occupied.
The numerous lakes and rivers of Gippsland were regarded
by the early inhabitants as something quite different to the
rest of Australia as known at that time, and the possibility
of the Entrance to the Lakes becoming navigable was much
discussed, but after the Entrance had been twice barred by a
high bank of sand about 1844, it was considered settled
beyond all doubt, and many years passed by before the question
was again revived. There seems little doubt now that a good
and permanent Entrance can be constructed.
The history of the early days of Gippsland would not be
complete without a short account of the search after a suppo-
sitious white woman who was thought by many to be among
the natives. In consequence of the numerous depredations
committed by the natives, a detachment of native police or
black trackers, was sent under the charge of a Mr Walsh.
This party in trying to arrest some natives who had been
detected in killing cattle, succeeded in catching a woman, and
in the evening the black tracker in discussing the events of
the day, remarked that the woman he had caught ‘ smelt like
a white woman.’ This story spread, and in Melbourne was
greedily caught at by the journals of that time, and as it
happened that a schooner called the Brittania had been wrecked


on the coast, it was considered highly probable that a lady
passenger had been saved from the wreck. The Government
instructed the black police to prosecute the search with dili-
gence, and the poor natives were hunted for about two years,
in the vain hope that the white woman would be found. Suffi-
cient time elapsed to enable a young boy named Thackewarren,
who had been caught in the bush, to learn a little English,
and using him as an interpreter, the natives were informed
that the white woman must be restored. To the great delight
of Mr Commissioner Tyers, the Warragals made a promise to
bring her, and a day was named. Greac excitement prevailed
—great' preparations were made—suitable clothes were pro-
vided—much sympathy was all ready, but to the astonish-
ment of all who had assembled, the natives appeared carrying
the figure head of the Brittania schooner, which was soon re-
cognised as belonging to the long-lost vessel. It was a roughly
carved female bust, and the nearest approach to what the
blacks understood that the whites wanted.
Of a country that can be reached by rail from Melbourne
in five or six hours, and of lakes that can be explored by com-
fortable steamers, it would be superfluous to attempt a des-
cription. Let the traveller judge for himself, not forgetting
that there is a large unoccupied country lying to the north-
eastward of the Lakes’ Entrance, which invites inspection.
The situation, which includes the valley of the Snowy River,
necessitates a charming climate, whilst the numerous streams
flowing from the coast range ensure rich valleys, suitable for
the growth of the hop and maize, the cultivation of which in
the neighbourhood of Bairnsdale and Bruthen has proved so
profitable.
PORT ALBERT.
An outline sketch of the early days in Gippsland would
not be compl.te without a short account of the discovery of
Port Albert. Whilst M'Millan was pushing through the
mountains, rivers, and scrubs, towards a port that was sup
posed to exist near Wilson’s Promontory, a new actor ap-
peared on the scene in the shape of the Clonmel steamer,
bound from Sydney to Melbourne. In the darkness of the
night, her captain thought he saw a short cut, by which he


could miss the Promontory ; as the story was told in those
days, and as luck would have it, he ran his ship almost into
Port Albert, thus discovering a most useful harbor, and which
for many years served as the only outlet for all Gippsland
The Clonmel’s captain despatched an officer and boat’s
crew to Melbourne, and they happening to arrive just as Count
Strezlecki was giving an account of the New Province, which
Sir Charles Duffy fancied be added to Melbourne thirty-five
years afterwards, the Melbourne public being informed of the
double event—the discovery of a fine country with a good
harbor.
A party left Melbourne in May, 1841, consisting of Messrs
Jessop, Kinghorne, Norman M'Leod, M. M‘Farlane, Arthur
Rankin, Dr. Stewart, John Orr, W. A. Brodribb and Charlie
Tarra, the black fellow. This party found the Clonmel lying
wrecked on the entrance to Port Albert, but as they were the
first to sail up the long eastern channel towards the River,
they considered themselves entitled to bestow on it the name
of Port Albert; they also investigated the western channel,
into which the Albert River flowed.
The party, as I have stated, returned overland to Mel-
bourne, having visited and named Lake Wellington.
M'Leod, of Ballarat, Jessop, Kinghorne, Malcolm, M‘Far-
lane, afterwards of Heyfield, W. A. Brodribb, M,L.C., of
Sydney, and John Campbell, of Glencoe, and a few others
started to inspect the new land in a barque called the Singa-
pore (hence Mount Singapore in Corner Inlet.) They reached
Port Albert a few days before M'Millan’s arrival from the
north, and landed their horses, stores, &c. The intention of
the leaders was to establish a settlement, and then return to
Melbourne overland.
Not knowing anything of M‘Millan’s movement, or even
that he was in any part of the district, as Count Strelecki
had not said much, if anything, about him in Melbourne. Mr.
Campbell was surprised to hear the blast of a bugle ;he
thought, at first, it must be some native’s noise, and stood to
arms, but keenly observing some horsemen, he ran forward and
had the pleasure of meeting Angus M'Millan (whom he had
left in Scotland) Glengarry and others.
It must have been a gratifying sight to M‘Millan, after all
his troubles, to find a shipping place for his stock in a safe


harbour, and enlivened by the presence of friends that he
imagined far away in the old country.
OUR TRIP TO THE LAKES AND RIVERS—1881-2.
It has been often remarked in the public press how little
the old folks at home know of these colonies, and the ignorance
of Australian geography, displayed by writers on Colonial
topics has been the occasion of many severe comments by
those here. We believe, however, that nineteen twentieths born
and brought up in Victoria are as ignorant of their own
country as those in far off lands. It is quite possible if a
child of full school age was asked where is Eotomah Island,
or M'Lellan’s Straits, he or she would be unable to answer.
It is our intention to give notes of a trip to Gippsland, and
we trust the tour made in that distant province of Victoria
will be repeated by many of our readers.
Taking our seats in a comfortable compartment of one of
the railway carriages specially reserved for our party,
through the courtesy of the general traffic manager (Mr.
John Anderson) everything seemed to indicate an agreeable
journey. By the way we may state that it is always best to make
up a party of six or eight when going for a holiday, and the
railway authorities will, at any time, meet their wishes by
reserving a carriage. The first part of the journey is unin-
teresting, after you get through the beautiful country around
Toorak, Hawksburn, Gardiner and Armadale, the Caulfield
Racecourse is passed on the right, but the situation is bleak
and barren in the extreme ; the main advantage the locality
seems to possess is its elevation, and thus affords a command-
ing view of Hobson’s Bay and its surroundings. After leaving
Caulfield, Oakleigh is soon reached, and a most unnecessary
delay here takes place, and we would urge it at once be done
away with. We suppose it is a remnant of the old times when
Oakleigh was the starting point of the Gippsland line. We
are now fairly on the way, and soon pass through the older
and more settled districts of Dandenong and Berwick. The
c


former township is on the line of railway, and has some good
buildings, the latter is situated some distance ofi, but is sur-
rounded by better country. Several minor townships are
passed before we reach the more pretentious one of Drouin,
but none of them have yet risen to call for special description.
Timber seems to be the chief product, and its density, close to
some of the places, makes one think of the danger in case of
a raging bush-fire. For general safety we should say let a
belt of land around each township be thoroughly cleared, or
some day we may hear of a terrible disaster during a dry
summer. Drouin is a township of some pretentions. It boasts
of a newspaper, Mechanics’ Institute, and two or three places
of worship, while every provision is made to satisfy the wants
of the body. There are several large hotels and general stores.
Within a few miles of the township is the celebrated Brandy
Creek country. The soil is very rich and as a consequence
the land is very heavily timbered. In a few years Drouin will
be able to supply Melbourne with English fruits. The town-
ship is situated about 500 feet above the level of the sea, and
we feel the necessity for changing coats. The next township
is Warragul, the station indicates extra accommodation, and
another delay of twenty minutes takes place. We are now
about half way, the train from Melbourne meets the one from
Sale, and there is a general scramble for a cup of coffee and a
chop. The township of Warragul is considerably in advance
of any others on the line, and in general appearance is a credit
to the industry of the people. Idleness is no virtue here, and
what has been accomplished in this densest portion of a Gipps-
land forest reflects great credit on the population settled
therein. Some of the glens and slopes are very beautiful in
this district, and the traveller is struck with the many fine
fern tree gullies on each side of the railway. Any one desirous
of becoming a selector should just go to Warragul and spend
a few days before making up his mind.
The other townships we pass of any note are Waterloo,
Trafalgar, Moe, Morwell, Traralgon, and Rosedale,all form a
picture of patient industry, and are proofs of what the hand of
man can accomplish. With the exception of Rosedale they have
all been called into existence since the railway opened, and
while we believe there is no class of our community deserving
of greater consideration than these pioneer settlors in the


primeval forests, we are sure strong hands and sturdy hearts
will have a reward in healthy vigorous frames and comfortable
homes. They deserve the land for nothing, and we trust if
ever any of them find it difficult to meet the state rent, there
will be a liberal minister at the head of the Lands Department
to deal leniently with these tenants of the Crown. Hosedale
is situated in country more park-like than the rest, and where
cultivated the land seems good. Here more substantial materials
are used largely in building, and the whole surroundings pro-
claim the place to be one of older settlement and greater com-
fort. Stores, churches and hotels abound, and the township
presents a very pretty 'appearance. We have now to give up
our tickets, indicating we are nearing the end of our journey
by rail, and so we find it, for a further ride of 16 miles brings
us to the thriving borough of
SALE.
We had read a good deal about Gippsland in general, and
Sale in particular, before our visit, and knowing that it was a
journey of some thirty-six hours, through almost inaccessible
country, before the iron way connected it with Melbourne, we
often pictured the many disadvantages the people ofi Sale must
have laboured under for many years, being almost isolated
from the rest of the world. On alighting at the railway station
we cast a glance around and were led to express our surprise
at seeing things so far advanced. We remember one old lady
who was evidently proud of “ her country,” turning round and
saying “ these gentlemen think there is no place in the colony
outside of Melbourne.”
The borough is well laid out with wide streets at right
angles, running north and south and east and west. You are
at once taken with the clean appearance of the place, and the
air of comfort by which its inhabitants are surrounded. There
is no place south of the Yarra, excepting of course the suburbs
of Melbourne, equal to it in size or neatness. The buildings
are generally made of brick and many of them substantial
structures. It would be impossible in these pages to
enumerate all of them, or to indicate the various works of
public interest which its people have carried out. The following
list will suffice to show that whoever may cast their lot in.


Sale will not be “ out of the world.” Perhaps the most notice-
able building is the Victoria Hall, a very convenient place for
public gatherings, and capable of seating 1000 persons. Its
cost exceeded £4OOO, and is the property of a company. The
Government buildings,including post and telegraph office,court-
house, gaol, &c., are also of brick, but rather old fashioned,
and might be altered to suit the convenience of the public
without, and the inmates within, with very little outlay. The
Mechanics’ Institute is a commodious building, and before the
erection of the Victoria Hall, was used for public meetings.
It has a library of 3000 volumes, fairly selected, and well kept.
There is also a good supply of Colonial and English newspapers,
some magazines, and plenty of chess and draught boards, which
appear to be well patronised. Perhaps nc town is better
provided with public halls. Besides those mentioned, the
various societies have their separate buildings, including the
Temperance, Masonic, Manchester Unity, and United Order
of Oddfellows. The churches include Anglican, Presbyterian,
Wesleyan, Primitive Methodist, Baptist and Roman Catholic.
These buildings are of a substantial character, and w r e believe
most of them are free from debt. As a proof of the attach-
ment which sometimes exists between pastor and people even
in this changing colony, we may mention that the Rev. W.
S. Login, the respected Presbyterian minister, has been located
in Sale for more than a quarter of a century. His people
have just completed a very neat building intended as a lecture
hall and Sabbath school, which like the church is free of
debt.
The Sale High School has lately been opened by Mr. F.
Forsyth Cheffins, principal, and the Sale College is presided
over by Dr. Spooner, F.R.A.S., F.A.S.L. The prospectus,
terms, and other matters of interest to parents and guardians
appear in the advertisements elsewhere.
The State school is a commodious building, situated in the
business part of the borough. We noticed that a new one is
now being erected, more conveniently situated for the bulk of
the population, and the present site will be sold, the proceeds
is expected to cover the outlay, of the new structure, which
is situated on a pretty knoll, and when finished will be one
of the finest buildings in the borough. We were pleased
with the general good behaviour and neat appearance


of the children in attendance. Mr. F. Stocks, assisted
by a staS of competent teachers, has the scholars in a perfect
state of discipline. There seemed to be less of the larrikin
element in Sale than in most large towns of the colony.
The Press is well represented by the Gippsland Mercury
and the Times. Both papers are well printed and ably con-
ducted. They are published three times a week, on alternate
days, and thereby give the people a daily paper. We under-
stand the Mercury is one of the oldest provincial papers and
has the largest circulation. We generally gauge a newspaper
by its advertisements, and certainly they indicate a healthy
condition in both papers.
The commercial wants of the place are catered for by four
banks including a branch of the Savings’ Bank. The hotels
are numerous, and generally well conducted. Tourists and
travellers will find every accommodation at the Criterion, the
Club, or the Exchange. The public gardens are pleasantly
situated at the eastern end of of the borough, and form a fine
resort for residents or visitors. Not far from them is situated
the Gippsland Hospital, which we found well worth visiting.
The several wards are nearly full and scrupulously clean, and
it was evident great care is exercised in its management.
Patients are sent here from many miles round, and there are
generally all ages and both sexes within its walls. With in-
creased population the buildings will be too limited, and will
have to be enlarged or rebuilt. Between the Botanical Gardens
and the business part of the borough there is a fine sheet of
fresh water called Lake Guthridge. It is said that when the
French Commissioners went to see the Lakes of Gippsland
they thought they had reached them when they got to Sale,
and in going over the gardens, exclaimed, “ Vat beautiful
lakes !” Certainly great improvements have been effected
within the last few years, and what were once dismal swamps
will soon be transformed into lovely serpentine and miniature
lakes, where fish and waterfowl abound.
The latest development of public energy in Sale is to give
more light, the borough council recently negotiated a loan of
£6OOO to build gas works, and now every street is lighted
with gas of good quality. The best directed energy
of a public character, is, perhaps to be found in supply-
ing the town with pure water. The famed Artesian well is


•conveniently situated between the post office and the railway
station. Its depth is about 230 feet, and the water will rise
some 40 feet above the surface, giving a daily supply of
40.000 gallons. As the experiment tried and found so highly
successful in Sale is worth repeating in other localities, we give
the following particulars relating to this enterprise :—After
considerable discussion and speculation as to the sinking of an
Artesian well being successful, it was resolved by the borough
council to call for tenders, and on the 15th April, 1880, Mr.
Niemann’s offer to sink a depth of 300 feet for £225 was ac-
cepted. Work was commenced without delay, and on the
17th of June an Artesian well was struck at a depth of 190
feet. The water rose to three feet above the ground. To this
depth the outlay had been a little over £IOO, and the contrac-
tor agreed to finish the work by day labour. On reaching a
further depth of forty-one feet a continuous stream of pure
water was obtained, rising to the height of forty-three feet
above the surface. The total cost of the undertaking, including
tanks, stand, troughs, pipes for channels, &c., amounted only
to £2BO 165., and for this small sum the inhabitants of Sale
have a never failing supply of clear water, which is testified by
Mr. Cosmo Newberry as of excellent quality. Within
the last few weeks increased interest has been shown
in the matter of Artesian well boring in this locality. Mr W.
Craig, of Craigilee, near Stratford, has successfully struck
water on his station. This well was sunk under the directions
of Mr Neimann, and Messrs M‘Lean Bros, and Eigg have
been eminently successful in their efforts near the railway
station, Sale. On the 25th August, 1882, water of excellent
quality, was obtained in large quantities, supposed to exceed
34.000 gallons per hour. The tube is six inches in diameter,
and is the largest Artesian well in Australia. The work was
executed for Messrs H. Luke and Co., Sale, who have con-
tracted with the Government to supply the Railway depart-
ment. The outflow is, however, so great that it is intended
to reticulate the town, and to provide motive power for driving
machinery. There are many places in the colony whose inhabi-
tants are similarly situated, now sorely suffering from want
of the blessing which is provided by an all-wise Creator under
their feet, and it only requires the application of the means
directed by an intelligent man, to supply abundantly all their


need. Messrs. M'Lean Bros, and Rigg elsewhere describe
in detail their improved water-boring machine.
The resources of the country around Sale are very great
It is from its extensive plains that the fat stock of Gippland
chiefly come. We passed several trains loaded with both sheep
and cattle, the appearance of which would have gladdened the
hearts of Melbourne butchers. Good land invariably encour-
ages settlers to make further improvements, and we believe
some of the extensive paddocks between Sale and Maffra
are capable of producing still greater supplies of stock and
cereals.
There are some very large cheese factories near Sale, but
time would not permit us to visit them. Marble of a very
fine quality is likely to become a valuable product. We were
shown a splendid slab, taken from Mr. Buntine’s land
(one of the earliest settlers), and the polish was equal to
any we have seen, while for grain and and color it could
not be excelled. We understand that already arrange-
ments have been made for supplying contractors at a
cheap rate, and some specimens have been sent to Ballarat,
which have given great satisfaction. We were informed that
the supply is unlimited, and in future years will be a source
of wealth to the district. Hops are grown in a few places
around Sale, but principally at Ramahyuk, the aboriginal
station on the Avon river. All who can spare an extra day
should go there. The Rev. Mr. Hagenauer gives a hearty
welcome, and the whole settlement is worthy of a visit. To
see our sable brothers and sisters at school is a sight not to be
forgotten, and to know that they undergo the same examina-
tion under our school code and attain the highest per centage,
is a proof that the aboriginals of Australia are not so low in
the scale of creation as some would have us believe. In a
subsequent chapter we shall have something to say on
this subject. Arrowroot is also grown very extensively at
Ramahyuk, and we understand commands a ready sale in the
Melbourne markets. It is neatly put up into 11b. packets, and
sells retail at Is. per pound.
In taking leave of Sale we have one suggestion to make
with reference to the name. We would advise that it should
be changed. On several occasions its unsuitableness as the
name of a town was apparent. On one notice board we


would read “ This road for Sale,” meaning the way to it, on
another would be “ This house for sale,” meaning, of course,
that the property was for sale. A party we met, who seemed
somewhat of a political turn, was quite indignant at being
asked, “ Are you for Sale?” Of course it was his “ destina-
tion,” and not his political vote that was enquired after. In
the train it seemed like a confession no one cares to make when
we told the guard “We are all for Sale .” New chums, we
observe, think we are joking when mentioning this borough
in some connection, and we consider it a very unfortunate
appellation. We have now to say good bye and take our seats
in one of the numerous conveyances provided for those bound
for the Lakes, and in another quarter of an hour find ourselves
on board the comfortable steamer Tanjil.
TO THE LAKES.
The drive to Latrobe Bridge is chiefly along the banks of the
Thomson, a fine deep river which has recently been snagged,
and will shortly be navigable to within less than a mile of
Sale. A swing bridge is now being built, which will al-
low of vessels proceeding up the river a considerable distance.
The rivers, Glengarry and Thomson, unite at the bridge, and
form the Latrobe. For the information of tourists, we may
mention that there is accommodation at the two hotels at
Latrobe Bridge, equal to any in the colony, while those fond
of boating, or fishing, will find plenty at hand, in the Latrobe,
Glengarry, or Thomson.
It is one of the pleasing features of a trip to Gippsland to
meet everywhere with hospitality and courtesy, and while much
kindness was shown to us in many quarters, we cannot take
leave without acknowledging that we received special attention
from the worthy Mayor, (Mr Herberte); Mr Luke who
was indefatigable in showing us “ everything worth seeing, ”
and to Mr E. Stellwag, the secretary of the Lakes’Navigation
Co., who was ever willing to plan for the comfort of all. We
found the steamer Tanjil a very superior boat, built in Mel-
bourne expressely for the Lakes’ Navigation Co., about four
years ago. The railway was opened from Oakleigh to Sale
in March 1878, and the Tanjil was ready to form the connect


ing link between Sale and Bairnsdale a month earlier. It is
to this company that the credit is due for opening up the
Lakes and Rivers of Gippsland to the Melbourne public, and
their energy in carrying out this enterprise deserves all praise.
There are now two steamers regularly in the trade, belong-
ng to this company —the Tanjil and Bairnsdale , doing the
regular trips from Sale to Bairnsdale, and the Labes Entrance ;
and occasional trips upthe Tamboßiver,and to the Back Lakes,
of these we shall have something to say by and bye. Captain
Larsen, well known to many through his connection with the
Golden Crown, is a man of few words, but always very
obliging and willing to point out places of interest or give
every information to strangers journeying with him. The
Latrobe is a fine river, free from snags, very deep and gener-
ally running bank high. In point of size it takes third place
amongst the rivers of Gippsland. The country on either side
is very flat, and during dry seasons affords good pasturage
for stock. The banks are fringed with beautiful acacia,
blackwood, and other trees, and to a city man, perhaps the
eleven or twelve miles run down this fine river, may be the
most delightful part of the journey. Some lovely pictures
present themselves at every turn, and we feel that he who
wrote, that Australia had “ no rivers worthy of the name, ”
had never been in Gippsland. About an hour’s steaming
brought us to
LAKE WELLINGTON,
This Lake is about ten miles wide and twelve miles long,
and certainly its extent surprised us. Many difficulties had
to be overcome before it could be entered from the river. There
is now, however, a good channel across the bar, and as it is
clearly indicated by buoys and piles, it can be navigated with
perfect safety by night or day. The scenery on this lake is
samewhat tame, and you imagine yourself in Hobson’s Bay,
rather than sailing on a body of fresh water. It is here we
first get a sight af immense quantities of waterfowl—black
swan, duck and teal appear in thousands. Another hour
brings us to the eastern side of the lake, and the question is
asked, how are we to get out of it ? To all appearance we
are going ashore, not the slightest opening so far as we can
see is to be found, till presently a nice green spot appears, for


which the steamer is making, and in a few minutes we find our-
selves in M‘Lellan’s Straits.
Here the scene is completely changed, and all who have an
eye for the beautiful exclaim, “How lovely !” The water is as
smooth as glass, on both sides we are hemmed in by some of
the finest ti-trees ever seen, while here and there glimpses of
the country are obtained, satisfying the eye wherever it looks.
There is an old cattle station on the south bank of the Straits
called Seacombe, and some of our party were anxious to see
what was left of it. As the Tanjil had here to replenish her
stock of fuel, an opportunity w r as afforded to explore the ruins.
These at once indicated that at one time a very extensive es-
tablishment existed, and the fruit trees, still growing, showed
the fertility of the soil. We imagine a few years will again
see this a busy scene.
M‘Lennan’s Straits are about five miles long, and connect
Lakes Victoria and Wellington, so that, about half an
hour’s steaming brings us to Lake Victoria. This is the
longest of all the Lakes in Gippsland, being about 22 miles
in length, and from three to four miles in breadth. Some fine
sights for villa residences are to found to the left, and there
are numerous bays and inlets offering every inducement to
sportsmen either with the gun or rod. On the right, the Back
Lakes are situated, and these are entered by rounding Sperm
Whale Head, so called from its resemblance to the sperm
whale, at the eastern end of this lake.
PAYNESVILLE.
At the eastern end of Lake Victoria is Raymond Island,
which is about throe miles long and from one to two miles
across. It has generally been occupied as a cattle station,
and some of it is well timbered. The steamer passes between
this island and the main land, the connecting channel being
called MAlillan’s Straits. On the left bank the thriving
township of Paynesville is situated, and the waters in this
locality form the principal fishing grounds. It is quite a
settlement of fishermen, and a few years ago there seemed to
be no other occupation for the people. Things have, however,
•changed, and now boat building is carried on at Paynesville
with considerable energy. There are several beautiful spots


in this neighbourhood, and the increasing trade of the place
has been met by enterprising colonists, so that tourists wishing
to break the journey can rest here for a few days and resume
it at pleasure. A very enjoyable trip is up Kewland’s Back-
water. From its appearance on the map no one would imagine
it to be of any great size, but when once round Butler’s Point,
a splendid sheet of water is opened up, extending for several
miles, with high land on both sides and offering good induce-
ment to the tourist or sportsman to spend a day in the vicinity.
M‘Millan’s Straits are very picturesque, and Paynesville is
well sheltered. There is a good wharf at which all the steamers
embark or discharge passengers with safety. The only light
erected along the route is at the entrance to Lake King, and
is placed on the left as we proceed north-eastward.
LAKE KING.
We now enter Lake King, the most beautiful of all the
larger lakes. When we first visited Gippsland we found this
lake as smooth as a mill-pond, and many thousands of wild
ducks and black swans were swimming on its surface. On a
recent visit a fellow passenger declared “ he had not been in
so rough a sea since passing through the Bay of Biscay.”
The first journey was in one of the fine steamer-, and the last
in a small one. It is from this lake we obtain an extensive
view of the most romantic scenery. Its immediate surround-
ings are very beautiful, and the general appearance of the
distant hills, including Mounts Taylor, Baw Baw and the
range of Australian Alps, is truly grand. On a clear day early
in the summer when these mountains are capped with snow, no
finer sight can be witnessed than is obtained from Lake King.
Immediately south of this is Eosherville, and the Tambo
River enters this lake from the east.
RIVER MITCHELL.
After a delightful sail across Lake King we enter the
Mitchell River. This is very peculiarly situated, and for the
the first six miles or so is in the centre of a narrow peninsula,
Jones’ Bay lying to the east and Eagle Point Bay on the
west, which the river divides. There is deep water on both


sides, with luxuriant banks covered with good timber and
vegetation. The river Mitchell is second only in size and
beauty to the Tambo. Like most of the rivers in Gippsland,,
the water is of excellent quality, and there is no danger in its
navigation. For several miles up, the belt of land on its banks
is unoccupied, and offers good grazing ground for stock.
Nearer Bairusdale we pass some magnificent maize flats and
hop plantations, which lend a beauty to the scene obtained
from this river. Eagle Point is the only high land between
Bairnsdale and Lake King. It is a favourite place for picnics,
and from its summit there is a fine view of the surrounding
district, which on a clear day is beautiful to behold, the
panoramic effect being quite unique, having such a variety of
land and water, mountain and valley before us. To those
who have never been in Kent, perhaps the hop gardens on
the Mitchell River are the most interesting features on the
route. We were not initiated in the science of hop growing,
and therefore did not understand all the requirements neces-
sary for their preparation for market. One of our party ex-
claimed, “ What an odd style of architecture the people adopt
here in building their houses,” not knowing that these erec-
tions were all “ kilns” for drying the hops. It is quite evident
Bairnsdale has a source of great wealth in this interest, and the
hop gardens and maize flats are as pretty pictures of Victorian
colonization as any one could wish to see. There is an air of
comfort surrounding every habitation, and the contrast be-
tween the settlers here, and those who are just breaking up
the soil along the line of railway is very great.
BAIRNSDALE.
We are now safely landed at Bairnsdale, and feel somewhat
favourably impressed with its appearance. Being the head
of the navigation, its wharves form a rendezvous for all the
steamers and sailing craft coming up from the Entrance. The
river is navigable for several miles further up, but the bridge
at Bairnsdale stops the way. It is a structure of some pre-
tensions, and has, we believe, landed the Shire into the meshes
of a very considerable debt. When erected it was to be a
drawbridge, so as to admit vessels of any size proceeding up


the river, but from all appearance it has never moved, and
the only draw it has made is on the Shire treasury.
Baimsdale is perhaps the best situated town in Gippsland.
The Mitchell takes a graceful turn here, and the township is
laid out along its northern and western banks. The portion
between the main road and the river was sold in allotments,
while that to the left was sold in large blocks. The main
street is of unusual width, and in some places the buildings
have been erected without proper regard to permanent levels,
and we fear, unless some comprehensive scheme of drainage be
adopted without further delay, serious consequences may arise
in after years, when Baimsdale becomes the centre city of the
eastern province. The first impression made on a visitor to
Baimsdale is that it is a business place. The numbers of
stores, shops and banks seems very large for a comparatively
modern township. The population is about 1500, but it is
the centre of a large district, embracing the three great indus-
tries of the colony—agricultural, pastoral and mining. It has
two principal streets, and a good many others which are yet
unformed. There are four banks and four churches, the former
comprise some good structures, and are in keeping with the
place. The latter are neither large nor imposing, the best in
point of size and appearance is the Wesleyan, a very neat
building. The next is the Church of England. Both are
built of brick, while the Presbyterian and Roman Catholic are
of wood, one a new building and comfortable, the other out of
repair, is now being replaced by a substantial brick
structure. The State School is a fair erection and well
attended. Mr Radford is the head master, whose reputation
is “high percentages.” There are two newspapers the
Advertiser and the Baimsdale and Bruthen News, by the
energy of the proprietors the people are supplied with news
five days a week. Both journals are good specimens of the
country press, and we trust soon to see a daily issue, as in
Sale. There is a Mechanics’ Institute and Library, but they
can scarcely be called a credit to the town. There is room
for much improvement both in arrangement and matter. The
hotel accommodation is of the first order, Petersen’s Club,
Duggan’s (late Batts), Paynes or Roberts will satisfy the most
fastidious, and the several landlords are moderate in their
charges.


Bairnsdale has many attractions for tourists, and several
of its surroundings will be visited with interest. One of the
most pleasant excursions we made was up the Backwater of
the Mitchell. It is entered from the river a little above the
bridge, and for about half a mile or so the water is narrow
and a visit should always be accomplished by daylight. This
portion has never been snagged ; if it were cleared there is
a depth of water to carry the steamers, and one of the most
enjoyable trips out of Bairnsdale would be added to the
locality. It is about five miles long, and a short distance up
there is a splendid sheet of water. On the left the laud is
covered with fine hop gardens, and on the right some good
farms, with occasional breaks of high cliffs and dense vegeta-
tion. The peninsula, which is formed between the Mitchell
and the Backwater, is peculiarly adapted for hops and maize,
for in seasons of drought there is nothing to fear, as irrigation
can be conveniently carried on at a very small expense.
A simple horse pump is the usual appliance, and the land is
so situated that every portion of it can be reached. Our party
had a good boat and we went along most pleasantly without
taking any notes as to the points of the compass, and we were
somewhat surprised to find after all our journeyings, we were,
as the crow flies, just opposite our starting point, with the
township appearing only two or three hundred yards off.
Those who are fond of botanizing or geologizing will find
plenty to interest them in this trip. The cliffs are one mass
of fossils, while the banks are covered with many beautiful
varieties of shrubs and flowers.
Another place of interest is Picnic Point, scarcely two miles
up the river. There is here also a large bed of fossil shells,
and many visitors enjoy picking them out of their long rest-
ing place as some remembrance of their visit. The great
attraction is, however, a magnificent fruit garden. Visitors
can enjoy themselves to the full, and there is such profusion
that all will find the place well worth visiting. It is also one
of the prettiest spots around Bairnsdale. In a former chap-
ter we noticed Eagle Point as a place of interest, those who
cannot go so far will be able to spend a few hours on the way
to it with pleasure. Some of the oldest hop and fruit gardens
are in this direction, and it is stated that many of the trees
have been planted thirty years. The willow seems to have


been a great favorite with the early settlers, and in some
instances has attained an enormous size. During a hot day
we were under the shadow of one which would have sheltered
a hundred persons. When we remember that all the willows
of the world came from one stock, first found in the valley of
the Levant, it is interesting to find that such splendid speci-
mens are even at the “ends of the earth.” An enterprising
resident of Bairnsdale went to the trouble of planting willow
trees on both sides of the Mitchell and in a few years they
will keep his “memory green,” and form a beautiful feature on
the banks. There are many other places worth visiting, and
of easy access to tourists, but time would not allow us to
visit them. Amongst others we may mention the Nicholson
river, a fine stream with plenty of fish, and only about eight
miles from Bairnsdale. Mount Taylor, a very prominent
peak about eleven miles north of the township, and Lindenow
Flat, a very fertile region, through which the Mitchell flows—
so that visitors have ample choice, and they will also find the
various hotelkeepers exceedingly obliging.
THE HOP INDUSTRY.
The fertility of the soil on the banks of the Mitchell has
been often proved beyond dispute, and during the Interna-
tional Exhibition in 1880-81 the growers around Bairnsdale
carried off many prizes in fruit and cereals. The staple in-
dustry is, however, hop-growing, and as before stated, no
lovelier sight could be desired than a flourishing hop garden.
The plants are, like vines, cut down every year, allowing so
many “ eyes ” to sprout from the “ crowns,” and generally
planted in small squares or triangles, with a pole in the
centre for the hop vines to creep up. They run from twelve to
fifteen feet high, and frequently festoon in such a way that
one could almost wish one was always near a hop plantation.
About three hundred acres are planted with hops on the
Mitchell River, and the annual value of them is about
£20,000, Each holder has from two to forty acres under
cultivation. At present Gippsland supplies about one-
fifth of the demand, so that four-fifths are still imported.
We would strongly advise the poor persecuted vignerons of
the Geelong district just to transplant themselves to the


Tambo and Mitchell Valleys and grow hops and maize. In
passing, we would remark that in our opinion, the Phylloxera
Act is one of the worst pieces of legislation ever enacted, and
a blot on our Statute Book. The hop plant is subject to
disease, and sometimes is destroyed by larger insects than the
phylloxera, but no one ever proposed that the healthy planta-
tions of the district, situated many miles from each other, should
beruthlessly rooted out, and the work of a lifetime destroyed.
The price of hop land on the Mitchell and Tambo, of
good quality and cleared, varies from £ls to £3O per acre.
We quote the following from the evidence taken before the
Tariff Commission, which lately sat at Bairnsdale, and it will
supply all necessary particulars of the industry from actual
experience—of course, all hop growers believe in a heavy
duty “ The average rate of hop land planted was about
£lO per acre. A little land had been selected as hop-growing
land. Had not known any seed a total failure. His opinion
was that the general average of the whole district was seven
hundred and seventy pounds per acre ; some ground
may yield fifteen hundred pounds per acre, but it might be
specially prepared land, or the party had no yearlings to
bring down his average. He did not think £SO an acre an
over estimated amount as the cost of production. If he got £2O
per acre profit he did not think he could dispense with the duty.
He had forgotten to mention before that besides the cost of
production, and there were other heavy expenses, such as the
erection of kiln, irrigation, &c., and the loss through inun-
dation, one season he had lost six thousand poles through
floods. He would not say that the duty had thoroughly
established the industry, but it was getting on that way. He
thought in five years they might dispense with a portion of
the duty, but not the whole. There was in the district some
some four thousand or five thousand acres fit for hop cultiva-
tion. Labor for picking would gradually grow with the in-
crease of cultivation ; there had been a little difficulty the
present season in getting pickers. He employed ten men all
the year round. During the picking season he employed
about one hundred persons, men, women, and children, The
latter went to the hop fields with their mothers. Some
families earned fifteen shillings per day picking. Had culti-
vated maize. There was a large quantity of land suitable for its


cultivation. About fifty bushels to the acre would be a general
average of the crop. Arrowroot was cultivated to a limited
extent; there were about forty acres under cultivation. The
crop would be extended. There were twenty-four hop growers
whose gardens went from an area of three to forty acres. Ten
years before the duty was imposed their hops were quoted at
2s. 6d. per pound. Since the duty was imposed the area
under cultivation had increased two hundred and thirty acres.
The picking season lasted about six weeks. Sometimes the
hops are not poled the first year, and it was not fair to take
the first year into account in giving a general average of the
crops. The cost of subsoiling would be about £3 10s. per
acre ; then there was the cost of sets, ploughing, &c., about
£lO. The cost of poles per acre would be about £5 ; then
there was the day work for putting them in. The first year
there was only one pole per plant, two the second, and three
the third year. Two good men could set up eight hundred
poles per day. After the plantation was fully established the
cost of cultivation per acre was £SO. Without year-
lings about twelve hundred pounds per acre would be a fair
average. He considered the soil and climate of Victoria more
suitable than the English soil and climate. He quite con-
curred with the Exhibition judges that the Colonial article
was of a better quality than the English. Labour was
cheaper in England, and that permitted the English hops to
be produced and sold cheaper than the Colonial. Some of
the land under hop cultivation had been sold at 50s. per acre
by the Crown ; that was the lowest. Some had been sold at
£ll per acre. Could not give the quantity sold at that
figure, but could mention some at £lO per acre. It would
depend upon the terms of the lease whether at its termination
the improvements would revert to the landlord. The improve-
ments put on his land would add £2 per acre to the rent of
his land. Good and cleared land realised £25 per acre.
Maize was grown on or about the same land as was suitable
for hops. Tobacco was grown in the same district.”
When we mention that English fruits of every description
grow to perfection in this district, added to the above evi-
dence, we think our readers will agree with us that Gipps-
land bids fair to become “ The Garden of Victoria.”
We have now to bid a good-bye, and leave with grateful
D


remembrance of the kindness received at the hands of the
residents of Bairnsdale bound for the Entrance.
We have again to make our acquaintance with the Tanjil.
and find Captain Larsen at his post, ready to take us to the
Entrance. After a most enjoyable trip down the Mitchell,
across Lake King, passing Tambo Bluff on the left, and
Raymond Island on the right, the lake narrows down to
Shaving Point, round which is Bancroft’s Bay, on whose
shores is that beautifully situated retreat,
ROSHERVILLE OR METUNG.
Visitors will have no difficulty in finding plenty of health-
ful enjoyment in this locality. The scenery all round is beau-
tiful, and there are many nooks and comers worth exploring.
A very pleasant walk is along the path close to Bancroft’s
Bay, and on to Gardener’s Gully. It may certainly be called
the “ Lovers’ Walk,” and while in the spring time the
native daisies and violets abound in all their lovely modesty,
ferns of exquisite beauty are found all the year round and
groves of gigantic pitosporums and other evergreen trees
add a charm to the scene. Butcher’s Creek, across the Bay,
and Perch Creek, on the opposite shore to the east, are also
places of interest; while inward and along the shores of
Lake King towards the Tambo, some pleasant spots are to
be found.
This place is really the gem of Lakeland, and for a quiet
resort either to spend the honeymoon, or for invalids seeking
health, it must appear as Paradise itself. There is one good
hotel with accommodation for a large number of visitors, and
during our visit we found great attention and com-
fort. An excellent boat is provided for the visitors
free of charge, and as Rosherville is the nearest
point from which to reach the Back Lakes, many
find it a most convenient place to spend their holidays.
From the high gronud at the back of the hotel some very fine
views are obtained, both northward, southward and westward,
while the surrounding water affords ample opportunity for
anglers to indulge in their favourite pastime. Baths are
provided, and as we are here only eight miles from the ocean
we had the advantages of the sea breezes. The official name


of this place is Metung. Opposite to Eosherville is a Sani-
tarium and Sportsman’s Home situated on Point Norman by.
Every accommodation is here provided for families. Mr.
Stow, the proprietor, has for many years maintained a light at
the point, and passengers arriving by steamer at night can reach
their destination without difficulty. The proprietor has superior
boats at his command. There is abundance of sport in the
locality by land and water. We have now reached the most
beautiful part of our journey round the Lakes, and the
scenery altogether is far superior to any that has gone before,
in fact, we find one great advantage of a trip to Gippsland
is that the farther we go the better the scenery appears, and
the more it is enjoyed. There are numerous little islands on
the right of our track, and on the left the land is bold and
striking, with here and there a picturesque change in the
scene, in the shape of beautiful gullies filled with ferns and
evergreen pitosporums, and other trees with handsome foliage.
After steaming about four miles we reach a bold headland
called Jimmy’s Point. It is an eminence of considerable
interest to excursionists, and from its summit one of the finest
views of the Lakes is to be obtained. It is opposite this point
that the proposed New Entrance from the sea presents itself.
The remains of some £20,000 spent in endeavoriong to make
the connection between the ocean and the Lakes is to be seen
in a number of piles and a jetty. Some think that if once
connected, the current down the Lakes would scour a channel
and keep it clear, while others contend that as it is a battle
of Ocean versus Lakes, the former will conquer and that with
prevailing easterly winds and mountains of sand at its com-
mand, it will be impossible to keep the channel clear.
Another effort is shortly to be made, and for the sake of the
trade and commerce of this Eastern province it is to be hoped
it will not be in vain. A strong current down Eeeves Eiver
added to steam power soon brings us to the Lakes Entrance,
and we are comfortably located in one of the two establish-
ments here situated, either Laughton’s Hotel, close to
the sea, or Eoadknight’s Murrangbaur House, where we
purpose staying a few days and making short excursions
up the North Arm and to Lake Tyres, giving a few
thoughts by the way on the aboriginals here gathered and
cared for.


LAKES ENTRANCE.
Perhaps there is no place in Victoria more deceptive to a
tourist than the Lakes Entrance. Many persons have
arrived there at night, and left in the morning under the
impression that it was not worth staying longer as “there was
nothing to see.” Our experience has been, that every visit
has revealed something new, and the late trip was no excep-
tion. The Entrance is uninteresting beyond the fact of view-
ing the mighty operations of nature, and occasionally witness-
ing the skill and courage of man in navigating so dangerous
a passage. There are now some excellent schooners running
between Melbourne and the Lakes via the ocean, including
the Maffra, the Enterprise, and Sir Wilfred Lawson, for
carrying cargo. The sailing crafts have been unusually
fortunate, and scarcely have ever met with a mishap in
crossing the bar. Generally the Lady of the Lake, a small
paddle steamer, is kept in readiness to tow vessels in, but
with a fair wind the regular traders enter without such
assistance.
To visitors the sight of crossing the bar is an interesting
one. At present the Entrance is almost in a direct line from
tho jetty, immediately in front of Laughton’s Hotel. A year
ago it was a good deal eastward. When Sir John Coode
took his bearings it was opposite Mr. W. Roadknight’s resi-
dence, and fifteen years ago it was near the Red Bluff, about
three miles eastward along the coast. We remember enjoy-
ing ourselves on the hard sandbank one day, and the next
found volumes of water five or six feet in depth rushing over
the spot at high tide. The Ninety Mile Beach extends
as far as the eye can reach, and beyond ordinary shell
gathering, and marine plant collecting, it has nothing very
interesting. It was stated that the bold Red Bluff, situated
between the Entrance and Lake Tyers, was really the first
land sighted in Australia by the illustrious discoverer, Captain
Cook, on his first voyage from New Zealand, Cape Everard
is a little to the eastward, named after the officer on board
who discovered it, but others maintain that this was only the
second point reached in making the voyage of discovery. It
is, however, the sights inland we have to enjoy more than
those along the cost.


One of the most picturesque excursions from this point is
up the
NORTH ARM.
Taking a boat from Laughton’s Hotel, you proceed up the
Reeyes River, as far as Jimmey’s Point, when proceeding
northward you enter a scene which has to he witnessed to be
realised. To all appearances you are beginning another chain of
lakes only more beautiful than any before passed through.
The North Arm is about seven miles long, and navigable by
boat the whole distance. There is fish in abundance at all
times, and no better outing can be fixed on than this
locality. The vegetation is varied and choice, tints of endless
shade meets the eye at every turn, while the sound of the
bellbird and other musical members of the feathered species
are constantly around you. Several fine fern gullies are
available for picnics. And no one should go to the
Entrance leaving the North Arm unexplored. Another plea-
sant spot is Frenchman’s Gully. This is easily reached on
foot, and as Mr. Laughton is an excellent guide, no difficulty
will be experienced in making out the best route. There are
also many smaller places worthy of a visit. Pleasure seekers
will be surprised with the immense height of the pitosporums,
honeysuckle, and other evergreens in this locality.
One of the finest views at the Entrance is to be obtained
from the top of the hill on which stands Mr. Roadknight’s
house. The eminence is about half-a-mile from the jetty,
but anyone wishing to stay at “ The Hill ” will be met at the
steamer without extra charge. The Roadknight’s are old
settlers, and have resided in the same place nearly a quarter
of a century. A visit to their splendid garden gave convinc-
ing proof of not only the fertility of the soil, but of the mild-
ness of the climate. English fruits grow to perfection, while
oranges and lemons mature without much care in cultivation.
A noteworty feature in the garden was the number of bee
boxes, and we were told that sometimes a ton of honey will be
gathered from them. Another pleasant height is the
“ Beacon,” a little less than a mile east of Roadknight’s, and
from this point a more extended view of the coast may be
had. Between Lake Tyers and the Entrance is Lake Bunga
from which in dry seasons the supply of fresh water is ob


tained. The surroundings are very dense, and require some
courage to explore. A close examination of this locality dis-
covers several fine specimens of ferns.
Sea bathing can be indulged in by all who love this
exercise at the Lakes’ Entrance, as the channel affords every
opportunity without danger from sharks, and has the advan-
tage of any depth from six inches to six feet. The bath-
ing ground is reached from Laughton’s Hotel round the
beach ; and from Roadknight’s, by a pleasant winding path
down the glen, which is so well trodden that visitors need not
fear going astray.
THE ABORIGINAL STATION
As Lake Tyres is situated about six miles from the Entrance,
and can be reached by road or by the coast, the former is a
pleasant walk or drive through the bush, and the latter is
bracing and perhaps more enjoyable when an early start is
made. The lake literally teems with fish, but is closed to the
fishermen for eight months in the year ; the aboriginals are,
however, permitted to fish at all seasons. Immense supplies
are forwarded to Melbourne, At the Lake there is a Church
of England Mission Station for the natives, in charge of the
Rev. Mr. Bulmer, with Mr. I). R. Morris as teacher of the
Aboriginal State School, The unanimous testimony is that
both gentlemen are well fitted for the positions they occupy,
and under their management a great change has taken place
with the aboriginals. During the months of January and
February the majority of them have a holiday, and take to
their natural mode of life, erecting mia-mias, and resorting to
hunting and fishing for food. During our stay at the
Entrance between fifty and sixty of them—men, women, and
children—were there located. It was with some degree of
interest we watched their movements, and after considerable
observation we came to the conclusion that the blacks are
apt learners of what is evil, and in many things imitate their
fairer brethren, which it would have been better had they
never known. The code of morals under which they live indi-
cates a finer state of feeling than they are usually credited
with ; for instances, cousins are not permitted to marry, and
in one case under our notice the intended bride had to leave




the camp and go to a distance to prevent such a breach of
tribal law. All the unmarried men of the camp reside to-
gether, and the single females also live quite separate, while the
married portion occupy an intermediate position. It was with
some feelings of satisfaction we saw the modest, retiring dis-
position of all the young people of the tribe. As regards good
manners, no class could have behaved better. The old women
are perhaps the exception, their love for “ bacca” and “ white
money” prompts them to be less discreet, and they are,
most persevering beggars. The general custom is to take up
one of the little piccanninies, sling it between the shoulders,
and solicit money for the little creature. If asked what rela-
tion she is to the child, the invariable answer is “ granny.”
The women do most of the fishing, and are well skilled in the
art. They will catch fish when all other persons fail, and it
is no uncommon thing to see half-a-dozen or more women
standing in the water up to their knees, pulling out the fish
with great rapidity. A great amount of fishing is done by
night. The women enter the lake armed with a torch and a
spear. The fish attracted by the glare fall an easy prey to
the unerring aim of the expert fisherwoman. The men are in-
dolent and fond of amusement. Their favorite game is card
playing, and they do not hesitate to tell you that the white
man taught them. There are more full-blooded aboriginals at
Lake Tyres than at any other station with which we are ac-
quainted. Some of them have taken family names after the
early settlers of Gippsland, and there some of M'Dougall’s
(who were the first married with Christian rights and obliga-
tions), that formed fine specimens of the genuine natives of
Victoria. r The women are also good basket makers, and out
of the wild reeds of the district make them very neat and
strong, of various sizes and shapes. The men make numbers
of boomerangs, and they are also useful to settlers in securing
bark for export ; but it requires considerable tact to keep them
at anything like constant work. During the hop picking sea-
son a good many go to Bairnsdale, and are employed by the
settlers. We hope our readers when they go to this distant
part of the colony will visit the station,and thus show their in-
terest in our sable brethren. Our illustration and explana-
tion from Mr Brough Smyth’s work on the aborigines will be
interesting to our readers.


The woman in mourning and the woman and child are
natives of the Western District ; the girl with the raised
scars on her breast and shoulders, the boy to the left of the
central figure, and the man and woman immediately below be-
long to the Yarra Yarra district. The man to the right of
the central figure is Nathaniel, generally regarded as highly
educated. He was educated at Lake Hindmarsh Station.
The man holding a spear is Whyate, a black from the coast.
The central figure shows a native in ordinary attire.
LAKE TYERS.
BY LYRE BIRD.
We left the Entrance at about midday, and after a couple
of hours pleasant drive through the bush, the famous Lake
Tyers suddenly burst in view. It is one of the last haunts of
the aboriginal, and the home of the lyre-bird. It was a fine
summer morning, and the lake as it stretched before us in
one varying mass of light, presented a scene of panoramic
loveliness.
To the south a narrow streak of sand barely divided its
waters from the ocean breakers that ceaselessly beat upon the
shore, while away to the north, and to the east its winding
arms loose themselves behind thickly-wooded hills.
On descending to the shore of the lake we found the famous
hunter of the district, ycleped Dick Hatton, in waiting to
put us on the right trail to be followed to take us up the Now
Nowa arm of the lake, where the lyre-bird and the wonga make
their home. He cheered our drooping spirits by pointing to
the black gins poleing their rafts about the lake for fish, and
assuring us with true bush humor “ that the lake was just
alive with fish just now. In fact he could no longer bathe in
its waters without hurting his feet; treading on the flounders,
and scraping against the flathead.”
Having culled much information of this useful character,
we embarked with our traps in a small boat, and proceeded to
row across the lake, and round the neck of land on which the
Mission Station is built, borrowing a loaf from the excellent
pastor in charge (the Rev. Mr. Buhner). It is impossible to
convey a true impression of the tranquil beauty of the


scene upon which we now entered. Instead of the flat shore
fringed with the everlasting ti-tree, met with all over the main
chain of the Gippsland Lakes, our boat glides along between
forest-clad hills that rise from the waters edge.
At a short distance ahead the shores appear to meet, but a
point is turned, and the traveller beholds another sheet of
water again stretching away, till apparently lost in the forest.
The Now Nowa arm is a winding chain of lakes, lead-
ing from one to the other, and breaking away into inlets and
reaches, and branching off into innumerable glassy little bays,
the haunt of the cautious waterfowl.
The shores are covered with luxuriant Australian vegeta-
tion, the ironbark and white gum growing to a great height,
while the clear water reflects their branches apparently a hun-
dred feet in the lake below.
The upper part of this lake is literally alive with fish, the
water breaking all around the boat, and fat mullet leaping into
the air. It is questionable whether these fish leap for flies,
or merely in sport ; but the effect is striking in beholding
large fish jumping through the air a few paces ahead of the
boat. Both wild duck, swan, wood pigeon, and other birds
were passed all the way up the lake, often coming within easy
range, and occasionally falling victims to our prowess.
About half-way up we stopped, and directed by our guide,
succeeded in chipping off some fossilised star and shell fish,
with which certain parts of the shore abound. This halt,
with occasional walks for purposes of stalking game spent
the sunlight, and night fell before we reached Mr Bulmer’s
selection, which that gentlemen had kindly lent us for our
camping ground during our trip. The country around the
selection is very picturesque ; the hills being covered with
timber, while the bends of the lake as seen from the bush
agreeably diversifying the view. It is in the gullies about the
locality that the lyre-bird is found. The sportsman who is
energetic enough to rise in the early dawn will not be disap-
pointed with the result.
The next day was spent in fishing and shooting, with very
good results, while we were entertained by some of the black
boys from the station running down a kangaroo within view
of our camp.
In the evening we paddled down the lake by moonlight, the


beauty and stillness of the waters lending an inexpressible
charm to the scene. Arriving at the station in the dark we
gladly availed ourselves of the hospitality of Mr. and Mrs.
Buhner, and enjoyed a hard-earned and welcome meal with
our kind hosts.
Conversation with Mr. Bulmer and Mr. Morris, the mission
schoolmaster, took us deep into midnight, and we retired to
rest, departing in the morning carrying with us the most agree-
able recollections of our trip to Lake Tyers, and of the kind-
ness of those who made our sojourn so pleasant.
TAMBO RIVER.
Having spent the time at our disposal, we now retrace our
steps to Bairnsdale, leaving behind those who can stay longer
to visit the many other places of interest surrounding the
Lakes Entrance and Lake Tyers. If time permitted, a very
enjoyable excursion could be made to the Snowy River, a dis-
tance of about thirty miles from the Entrance, and a locality
fast coming into prominence for settlement. For the present
we say “ good-bye,” and our way is towards the Tambo
River. Starting from Bairnsdale early in the morning by the
little steamer Sarah, we feel as if we were embarking on a
craft intended for some other purpose than carrying pas-
sengers, and the difference of the proportions is as great
as those between a well-fitted railway carriage and an
omnibus. However, Captain M'Carthy has evidently a
good opinion of his little steamer, and his quiet, obliging
manner soon made all quite comfortable on board. We
find our muster to be nineteen souls, including engi-
neer and cabin boy, and half an hour’s “ ship life”
under present circumstances dispels any fear we had at start-
ing, and, before we enter the river, all are perfectly satisfied
with the tight little steamer. The entrance to the Tambo is
on the eastern side of Lake King, and twenty minutes steam-
ing from the mouth of the Mitchell brings us to this noble
river. The bar between it and the Lake has hitherto pre-
vented its navigation, but a steam dredge is now at work, and
all obstacles impeding the opening up of the Tambo will
shortly be removed. At the time of our visit the channel
was eighty feet wide and seven feet deep. This will be in


creased to 200 feet wide, and nine feet deep so that in a short
time the largest of the lake steamers may cross the bar with-
out difficulty. The river itself has water enough for almost
any vessel. The depth for some miles up is from sixteen to
twenty feet, and it keeps this average right across. We have
no hesitation in placing the Tambo as the first river in Gipps-
land, and we do not know any finer in Victoria. The whole
of our party were surprised at its extent, and being quite un-
known to any of us, our trip increased with interest as we
proceeded. At present a visit to this river is not included
in the regular excursion tickets of the Lakes’ Navi-
gation Company, and a small additional fare to be
paid to make this trip, but twice the sum charged
would be sooner paid than so fine a river should be un-
visited. For several miles the land in the immediate vici-
nity of the river is flat, with undulating country at the
back. A few settlers homes here and there show the per-
severing disposition of man, and although isolated from the
rest of the world, there is an air of comfort and satisfaction
pervading them. On enquiring at one or two points we found
that hops, maize, potatoes, wheat and oats were the main
crops of the settlers. Before the steamers of the Lakes’
Navigation Company made regular trips, there were no means
of getting the produce to market except by road to Bairnsdale,
and many discouragements had to be encountered. Now
that bi-weekly trips are made, settlement is certain to proceed
more rapidly, and trade will increase. In our opinion the
whole valley of the Tambo will be occupied and cultivated
equal to the Mitchell in a few years. The river flats will be-
come a series of grand hop gardens and maize paddocks, and
the country beyond will be occupied with thousands of cattle.
We found the average crops last season to be from twenty-
five to thirty-five bushels of wheat to the acre, and from
forty-five to fifty bushels of oats, while the yield of maize per
acre averaged about eighty bushels. No finer field presents
itself to the hardworking, patient, steady settler, than this
district. To show that progress has been made, we may
mention that local self Government has just been given to it,
and the Tambo Shire, with Bruthen as the capital, now ranks
with others in the colony. The beauties of the river increase
as you proceed, a few miles up the stream, the scenery is not


only beautiful, but often grand. There are innumerable nooks
and corners, creeks and bends suitable for picnics, and as
there are no townships on the navigable portion of the Tambo,
provision for the day’s requirements has to be made at Bairns-
dale, and a lunch on the banks of the river is perhaps more
enjoyable than in the best dining room. Such was our ex-
perience, and all our fellow tourists seemed to be of the same
opinion. The first trip made up the Tambo partook of an
exploring character, and discoveries were made in the botani-
cal and geological world. Mr Guilloyle, the director of the
botanical gardens, was one of our party and was fortunate in
finding a new acacia. The locality north of Swan Beach, a
settlement some ten miles from the mouth of the river and
which possesses many features of interest has some high cliffs
remarkable for their boldness. They will be henceforth known
as “ Guilfoyle’s Bluff.” On further examination it was
found that the whole cliff was a mass of fossils, and comprised
some very fine specimens. Oyster shells were found nearly
two feet in circumference, and innumerable petrified star fish
and other inhabitants of the deep, showed how different the
scene once was. As there are no living oyster beds now in
Victoria it is strange to contemplate how the bivalve flourished
here in ages gone by. There are also many beautiful varie-
ties of ferns, flowers and shrubs, which are readily obtainable,
and can be transplanted to the city and suburbs without
difficulty.
The head of the navigation at present is Mossyface, a pretty
spot about three miles from the picturesque township of
Bruthen. By arrangement coaches met our party,
and conveyed us to within the lines of civilization. This
short but rough journey of some three miles was accomplished
without accident. A glance at the track we had to follow led
some of the party to prefer the walk to the ride. One of the
first duties of the New Shire Council has been the improve-
ment of the road between this point and Bruthen. It is also
mooted that efforts will in due time be made to cut a canal,
thus saving in the bend of the river about eight miles, which
will bring the steamers within a few hundred yards of the
township. Bruthen boasts of a post and telegraph office, a
bank (Victoria), two hotels, the Star and the Bruthen Inn, a
large and well built brick store, a State school, and a tannery


where kangaroo and finer qualities of leather are prepared
Bruthen is one of the beauty spots of Gippsland. Thereare.
some delightful places in the vicinity worthy a visit, thebridge,
Echo Valley, the cliffs, Lake Toulon, &c., are features of in-
terest to the visitor. From Little Dick, an eminence on a
spur, the offshoot of the Dividing Range, four miles north of
the township, a most extensive view can be obtained. North-
ward tower the peaks of the Australian Alps and the Divide,
the summits of which in winter are shrouded in snow ; east-
ward can be seen the Pacific apparently calm and immovable ;
southward the Southern Ocean stretches away to the horizon,
while between the coast line and our feet lie the Lakes,
Bruthen and a mighty expanse of country full of interest and
character. Westward the bold chain of mountains run on till
they form a decided angle in the Baw Baw chain.
Bruthen is surrounded with well covered hills, and its
neighbourhood has the advantages of mining, pastoral and
agricultual interests. There is a grand future before the people
of the Bruthen district, and their present condition is evidently
one of comfort and happiness. The famous Buchan Caves
are reached from this place, and the enteprising local
coach proprietor, will at any time arrange for visiting them
when a party of four or six can be made up.
THE BACK LAKES.
It is with feelings of regret we take leave of the Tambo
River, knowing that there are many lovely spots in its
neighbourhood which would charm the eyes of the tourist,
but we trust another season to revisit the Lakes district, and
hope to spend more time in this locality. The Sarah is again
available for our party, and we make a start in her for the
Back Lakes. The nearest route from Bairnsdale is via
Paynesville, round the western side of Raymond Island, and
the peninsula of mainland seen on the map. If the trip is
intended to be made from Rosherville by a sailing craft the
course would be more direct, keeping Raymond Island on the
right. There are boats in readiness for excursionists, and those
who have time at their disposal will have great enjoyment in
exploring this almost unknown area. As this was the first


time a steamer had gone up the Back Lakes we took the
precaution to carry a pilot. There are no great dangers in
any part of the Lakes, and to the fishermen at Paynesville
the various channels are well-known. Great credit was due
to both captain and pilot, for the steamer had neither to stop
nor turn back during the whole of the route. It it impossible
to describe the many beauties of these miniature lakes. The
numerous islands met with on every side would, Crusoe-like,
enable one to take possession and live “lord of all around.”
Eotumah Island is the largest, and we understand McLaren,
one of the pioneers,has resided there, hermit fashion, for the last
eighteen years. His occupation has been gathering skins of
various descriptions, and then taking them to Paynesville to
barter for the comforts of civilized life. The vegetation of the
islands is varied, and in some places they are thickly wooded.
The whole of the Back Lakes form splendid resorts for the
sportsman. Fishing and shooting can be carried on to the
heart’s content. Sometimes during our trip the air was black
with duck and teal, while occasionally the scene was varied
with pelicans and numerous other birds. On land we found
the kangaroo, wallaby, and the emu, and we were told that
sportsmen have often shot them from the door of their tents.
We know of one gentleman from Daylesford who had almost
a boat load of wild fowl from two days’ shooting with one
gun, and when he got to Bairnsdale he was able to let half
the townspeople enjoy “ roast duck.” Without any difficulty
he shot nearly one hundred and fifty brace of the birds in the
time named. Any party desirous of enjoying an out of door
holiday, in which fishing and shooting are essential elements,
we strongly advise them to take a tent, some flour, tea and
sugar and cast their lot in this locality. All the rest of their
requirements will be found on the spot.
As our trip was limited to one days’ excursion we had to
make the most of our time, and part of the programme was
to reach the ocean. After steadily steaming for about an
hour we came to the belt of sandhills which separate these
waters from the sea. With commendable care the captain
cast anchor with a view to land our party in the small boat.
We found a nice little indentation, which, as we were for the
once explorers, we named “ Green’s Bend,” after one of our
company, and got safely on shore. The sand ridges are covere^


with many varieties of shrubs and trees. Ten minutes climb-
ing brought us to their heights, and one of the finest sights
ever witnessed was before us. The day of our visit was clear
and beautiful, the air had all the freshness of early spring, and
perhaps few may have similar opportunities afforded them
when going over the same ground. At our feet, looking
southward, the eternal ocean rolled in its deep blue bosom,
with its white crested waves. East and west was the Ninety
Mile Beach, fringed with the same sort of vegetation which
grew around us, and looking northward was a perfect scene
of beauty. Immediately below lay the still waters of the Back
Lakes, dotted here and there with little islands of various sizes.
Further from us was the mainland, backed by the everlasting
hills covered with snow. The sun shone out in all his
majesty, and seemed to give us a picture, which is indelibly
impressed on our minds, and certainly the varied beauties of
nature presented to us under such circumstances can never be
forgotten, but leads one’s thoughts upwards to the Great
Designer and Upholder of all things.
NINETY MILE BEACH.
Our party now spent a considerable time on the Ninety
Mile Beach, gathering shells, sea weeds, and other little
mementos of our visit, and then partook of a substantial
lunch under the trees on the lake side of the sand hammocks.
Perhaps never a meal was sweeter to our company, and the
boiling of the “ billy” was never more anxiously watched than
on this occasion. Provisions were, however, ample and
varied, and the nineteen mouths were in due course fully
satisfied. Coming to the little steamer we found she had
been brought close to the water’s edge, and we were enabled to
step on board without any difficulty. Since this trip was
made a well-marked channel has been laid out,' and now ex-
cursionists can visit the Back Lakes with greater facility.
To those who have time we strongly recommend this additional
pleasure, even if only for a day’s outing. So far as our ex-
perience was concerned the visit to the Tambo and Back
Lakes added largely to the enjoyment. On our return trip
we landed at Sperm Whale Head, and saw ample evidence
that, from a sportsman’s point of view, there would be a fine


BURNING OF THE SCRUB.


field of operation—parrots, ducks, black swans, emus, and
wallaby are evidently plentiful. The route to our destination
was across the head of Lake Victoria, calling at Paynosville,
and on to Bairnsdale, where wo sojourned a day or two,
and then sot our faces homeward on board the good little
steamer Bairnsdale, under Captain Neilson. This was our
first acquaintance with the smart craft, and we cannot con-
clude without giving her a meed of praise. She is a screw,
built yacht fashion, and is a fast and comfortable boat. Her
captain is the most punctual man on the lakes, and all who
wish to sail in her must be up to time. Like the rest of the
skippers he is, however, very obliging, and has a fund of in-
formation about Lakeland. Six and a half hours steaming
brought us safely to Latrobe Bridge, and with a two hours
rest in Sale wo took a train for Melbourne, where we arrived
in safety, and all of one opinion as to our trip to the Lakes
and Rivers of Gippsland.
LOWER GIPPSLAND.
BY D. MACDONALD, D.D.
There is an Upper, a Middle and a Lower Gippsland.
The upper portion of the territory is the mountainous region
to the north, mingled with many a beautiful valley, and mak-
ing it the Switzerland of Australia. Middle Gippsland is
the country along the line of railway to Sale, and on to Bairns-
dale, while Lower Gippsland is the district between the rail-
way and the sea. This chapter takes notice of Lower Gipps-
land. The extent of this district may be inferred from the
fact that all Gippsland is supposed to be about one-sixth
of the colony of Victoria, and speaking roundly, each of the
throe divisions occupies about one-third of the whole territory.
Lower Gippsland has not yet been visited by tourists
so much as either of the other two sections. It is not a land
of mountains or of flood, and yet it has attractions of its own,
which will, by and bye, make it the scene of many industries
and a place of refuge to exhausted townspeople. One of its
great features, is that it borders on the sea. Wilson’s Pro-
montory, the most southern point of Australia, runs into Bass’
E


Straits from Gippsland, with many an island—the home of
the seal and the mutton bird—in the fair way between Mel-
bourne and Sydney, while just round the Promontory there
is one of the most remarkable indentations on the Australian
coast. This important branch of the sea is called Corner
Inlet, and it will one day occupy an important place in the
commerce of Australia. It has a harbour—Welshpool, which
can accommodate large vessels, and may, at any time, become
a port of call in the Straits. The more enthusiastic Gipps
Landers anticipate at an early date that their surplus produce in
the shape of timber, potatoes, onions and fruit will be shipped
from their inlet to tropical Australia, and there is really no
reason to doubt that when the country is opened by railways,
these hopes may not be realised. Besides, the inlet is swarm-
ing with fish, and it could, as it is confidently and seriously
affirmed, supply all the requirements of Victoria from the
deep.
Miners are already busy in Lower Gippsland digging for
coal, gold and tin, though the great rush at present is towards
the land. Selectors have hitherto avoided this region for two
reasons, though it contains an immense extent of the very
best of soil. It is yet covered with a dense vegetation, and then
there are no roads. The gum tree is a wonder to see, and
worse even than the great giants of the forest, is the under-
growth of scrub, through which even a dog can scarcely make
his way. Settlers, however, are beginning to discover that it
is possible to utilize even this forbidding country at a com-
paratively moderate cost. It is certainly not possible to raise
produce at a paying price in such a country without roads—
not to speak of the expense of grubbing the big trees, but
by cutting the undergrowth, and burning it in the hot season,
and then scattering English grass seed over the ashes, it is
found that a growth of grass soon appears, and that
several crossbred sheep to the acre can be fattened, and on
their own feet travelled to market. This discovery has greatly
heightened the prospects of Lower Gippsland, and on a re-
cent visit we found many old diggers, who had been weary of
their lives at the goldfields, now making homes for themselves
in the centre of the forest.
Lower Gipps Land is even better watered than any other
portion of the territory. The western breeze from the straits


comes laden with moisture. Happily there are no hot winds,
in consequence of the Northern ranges, and so late as the end
of February in the recent dry season wo found the crocks
running’. The rivers of South Gippsland arc not equal to
the Mitchell or the Tambo, as they have not Alpine ranges
to drain from, as a catchment area ; but the Bass and the
Tarwin are considerable rivers, and the Franklin, the Agnes,
and the Tarra would be precious streams anywhere else in
Australia.
A portion of this region has been settled for a compara-
tively long time before the era of railways. East Gipps
Land was unapproachable except by sea, and all the
traffic from Melbourne to Sale, Bairnsdale and Omeo had
to be made round Port Albert. This made the Port a consider-
able town, and in the hey day of the Omeo diggings the track
inland used to bo crowded with teams on their way to the
interior. The teamsters usually had their homes near the
sea, and many a nook near the coast was cultivated in those
days to provide food for the horses and bullocks. The railway,
however, and the entrance to the lakes from the sea, have
sadly changed the fortunes of poor Port Albert, and what
once promised to be a town, if not a city, is left almost high
and dry.
There is a long stretch of sandy coast between Port Albert
and the eastern boundary of the colony called the Ninety-mile
Beach, broken only by the Entrance to the Lakes and the
Snowy River, and most of the country between the beach anil
the lakes is useless, and even westward from the Port to
the Promontory the soil along the margin of the inlet
.is too light for cultivation, but it is otherwise a few
miles back from the sea. The undulating character of
very much of Gippsland, which the traveller sees at Drouin,
stretches across the Strezlecki and Hoddle Ranges for a
distance of about fifty miles to the straits, with a soil
equal, we may safely say, to anything in the world.
This is the land which settlers are now subduing with the
axe, and with every promise of success to those of them who
expend their time, labour and money with that prudence which
is necessary in every field of industry open to man.
There are three ways of reaching Lower Gippsland. One is
by the sea to Port Albert, and another along Western Por


by the Bass and the Tarwin. This is the route usually taken
by selectors going with their families and stock. The third
way is the tourist’s road by Sale, and thence by coach to the
Port, and by saddle or private trap, along the Inlet. This
last was our way, doing the Lakes and the Rivers first, as
already described by our friend “ Tanjil.”
After returning to Sale from the Lakes, a small portion
of our party, also, were anxious to see friends who had newly
selected on the Franklin, took coach to Port Albert, a
weary journey of over fifty miles. The Port was originally
started by a private firm, and the Government, in its wisdom,
laid out another township alongside of the original one, so
that there are two towns to contend for the vanished trade
of the deserted Port. A private conveyance took us thirty miles
from the Port to the Franklin, and, although the way is level
enough, W'o must testify that it was hard driving both for man
and boast. It -was, however, a new world for Melbourne peo-
ple, and everything was an object of groat interest. On ap-
proaching the neck of the promontory we turned inland by a
cutting in the forest, known as Turton’s track, and soon
found ourselves going over very rough ground indeed. By-and-
bye, however, we had the pleasure of reaching our friends, and
were glad to find that they had put up a good slab house,
and that they wore already surrounded by many bush com-
forts. As soon as they had fixed on their location, only a
few months ago, they had planted potatoes, vegetables, and
grasses, and they were already enjoying the fruits of their
foresight. Such milk, and such mealy potatoes as we lived
on during our stay on the Franklin, are altogether indescribable
not to speak of the porkers pointed out to us as in keeping
for our next visit.
Our trip to the Franklin was timed, so that we might see the
annual burning of the scrub, and seeing it was an imposing
sight. On the day following our arrival, hundreds of acres
were one blaze. From the hollow where we were situated it
looked as if the whole earth were on fire. The roar of the
devouring element was terrific, many trees over two hun-
dred feet toppled over in the creek, and before night an
immense clearance was made in the dense forest, over hill and
dale. As mere tourists we could not help lamenting for the
great trees, and those handsome fern-palms, though of course


our sympathies were only laughed at. The great event of the
season, the burning of the scrub, was wound up with a dance, in
which, however, we positively refused to join. We may also
add that the young bushmen varied their amusements that
night by singing songs, one of which sticks to our memory
yet. It was “ The Wild Colonial Boy,” in which there were a
number of sly hits at all who were not bushmen. In short our
friends were in a merry mood, and we left them in good spirits
just as they wore about to resume the hard but hopeful work
of clearing their lot. May God bless them and prosper their
labours.
OMEO.
This town, though not in Gippsland, is yet so closely con-
nected in interests with the great territory that it is looked
upon as part and parcel of North Gippsland. The name
“ Orneo ” is said to have originated from the expression
Oh—-my—oh, which was made use of by an individual who
behold the fertile laud and fine scenery in the vicinity for
the first time.
Oraeo is situated about 73 miles from Bairnsdalo, or 56
miles from Bruthen ; the road to Omeo from the latter
township is due north. The mountainous character of
the country, the dangerous gullies, the numerous creeks, one
of which called Navigation Creek had to be crossed, over
a dozen times, rendered travelling a matter of groat diffi-
culty and danger, consequently the cost of goods and mer-
chandise in transit was excessive. Bullock drays and pack
horses were the only reliable moans of conveyance, a team of
horses on the road being a thing of rare occurrence. The want
of a good highway was thus a barrier to the advancement of
Omeo. The Government, long after a survey had been
made by Mr Greenlaw, was prevailed upon to construct a
road along the Tambo Yalley, which, though a little longer,
will be a “ king’s thoroughfare ” compared to the old moun-
tain and dangerous track. The Tambo Valley road is now
formed for a considerable distance, and ere long communica-
tion will be complete between Omeo and the Lakes Entrance,
Bruthen, Bairnsdale, or Melbourne.
After leaving the Shire of Bruthen, there are throe stages


on the way, viz, : Mr P. M'Dougall’s, at the Tambo crossing,
20 miles from Bruthen ; Little River, 12 miles further on ;
and at M'Millan’s, Swift’s Creek, another distance of 10
miles—a drive or ride of 14 miles and Omeo is reached.
The scenery on the route is picturesque and charming in
the extreme, the river is kept in view most of the way, and
the pictures of beauty once seen arc never forgotten. Omeo
is a thriving town, depending on its pastoral, agricultural,
and mining interests. The prosperity of the latter promises
to make the town a second Sandhurst or Ballarat. Near
the town are splendid marble quarries. A company has
been formed to work them, the shares in which are
mostly held by Melbourne capitalists. The town is
pleasantly and romantically situated near the shores of
Lake Omeo, famous for all descriptions of wild fowl.
The land in the vicinity is of the best quality, pro-
ducing largo averages of cereals to the acre. The town has
several well-built buildings, a Mechanics’ Institute, a lino
State School, a Bank, Post and Telegraph Offices, two
churches belonging to the Wesleyans and Church of Eng-
land denomination, and once a quarter the Presbyterians are
addressed by the Rev. W. F. Main, of Bairnsdalo. In the
absence of the several clergymen the services are conducted
by laymen. There is a grand future for Omeo, and as soon
as the Tambo Valley road is completed the name of “ Omeo ”
will become quite a household word..
Kae Bros., Printers, Elizabeth-st. N., Melbourne.


THE PEOPLE’S CLOTHIERS.
%
S)
lANMCTIIRERS & IMPORTERS,
HATTERS,
€£iOTMIMMS»
GENERAL OUTFITTERS,
FALL AdiA-XjL,
SANDHURST.


Jtl vJ JD JS Xv. X £>
COMMERCIAL HOTEL,
IB .A. X IR, DST S ID .A. L IB ,
Is conveniently situated in the centre of the town, and has been
specially fitted up to accommodate
TOURISTS and COMMERCIAL TRAVELLERS.
PRIVATE ROOMS FOR FAMILIES.
Excursionists and Picnic Parties can obtain every
information at this Hotel.
PICNIC HAMPERS PROVIDED ON THE SHORTEST NOTICE.
nVLIELBOTJIRiIsriKI ALES.
WINES AND SPIRITS OF THE BEST BRANDS.
Rowland and Lewis’ Mineral Waters and Cordials.
BILLIARDS.
A Livery Stable adjoins the Hotel. Saddle Horses, Buggies, and
Covered Family Conveyances for Hire. Experienced Drivers.
The Charges throughout the whole Establishment are
on the Most Moderate Scale.
Traps meet the Steamers on arrival, and convey Passengers and
their Luggage to and from the Wharf.


COMMERCIAL HOTEL,
O IB o.
This Old-established and Superior Hotel having been lately
Enlarged , is now open for reception of
TOURISTS AND TRAVELLERS.
Is Beautifully Situated.
EVERY ACCOMMODATION.
Best Brands of Wines and Spirits.
Combired with
MODERATE CHARGES.
B. MIDDLETON,
Proprietor.


J. W. BOLAND.
MAIN ST., BRUTHEN,
STSjJn JEIS&JSXI iua«jsa'ua&x»iaa* a aao
SHOEING FORGE. GRAVE RAILINGS
Of WROUGHT IRON in Every Variety of Style and Description.
TAMBO HOUSE,
BRU THEN.
WILLIAM RITCHIE & GO.,
GENERAL
STOEEKEEPEES.
COUNTRY ORDERS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.
E. GRUBB,
Practical and Fashionable Tailor,
MAIN STREET, BAIRNSDALE.
The CHOICEST ASSORTMENT of TWEEDS and GOODS out
of Melbourne. FIT GUARANTEED.


A. MAGARTHUR & CO,
CATTLE SALESMEN,
AND ARBITRATORS,
Mining & Money Brokers, & General Commission Agents.
Auction Sales of Oattle, Horses, Pigs, Produce, Land, &c.,
Held EVERY SATURDAY at Our Yanis, in MAIILLAN ST.,
BAIRNSDALE. At BRUTHEN, the LAST THURSDAY in
Each Month; and at SALE, MAFFRA. and STRATFORD,
when commissioned to do so.
Account Sales and Cash I’rocee Is paid over immediately Sales
are concluded. Our Agent at ISnithen is Hr. John Archibald.
MONEY to LEND £lOO to £5OOO.
The Undersigned as Agents for the
Modern Permanent Building & Investment Society,
Are prepared to Assist Tralesmui, Farmers, and Others to
Buy their Places of Business, or Residences, or Farms, &c.; or to
Assist them in Building New Houses under the Society’s Rules.
REPAYABLE FORTNIGHTLY OR MONTHLY.
Charges Strictly Moderate. No Delay.
A. MAGARTHUR & CO.,
.M-.MII.LAN ST., BAIRNSDALE.


MICHAEL FEE LEY,
SHAMROCK HOTEL,
MAOALISTER ST., SALE.
Every Accommodation for Visitors. Good Stabling. WINES and
SPIRITS of the Best Brands.
HORACE RICH,
AGENT FOE
WM. M'CULLOCH & CO.,
RAILWAY CARRIERS,
SHIPPING AND FORWARDING AGENTS,
RAILWAY STATION, SALE.
ADVANCES MADE ON PRODUCE OF ALL KINDS,
All Commissions, by letter or otherwise, carefully and promptly
attended to, at Lowest Current Rates.
Agencies : -6IPPSLAND STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY;
COLONIAL MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANY ; NEW
ZEALAND FIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE COMPANY".
HORACE RICH,
Railway Station , Sale.
"W. J 3. O-IXnIESS,
CaMaetoa&er 4 H&gertafee?,
MAIN STREET,
BA IRNSDALE.


PUCHAN INN
D -o gIORE.
This SUPERIOR INN is NOW OPEN for the Reception of
Tourists and Others Yisitins the Oaves,
And Other Parts of this Beautiful district, for which a Guide
will be provided.
WINES AND SPIRITS
OF THE BEST BRANDS.
Well-grassed Paddocks. Good Stable Accommodation.
EVERY DESCRIPTION OF STORES KEPT.
FOSIOFIICE AnjOOISC THE PBEHISEg,
W. KELLIE, Proprietor.


ADELPHI HOTEL,
8 <J® & US-
W. BOLTON, Proprietor
ACCOMMODATION FOE TOUEISTS AND TRAVELLERS.
Bruthen Tannery,
ON TAMBO.
JOHN ABCHIBALD,
PROPRIETOR.
KANGAROO, WALLABY, and Every Description
of SKINS Always on Hand-
KANGAROO LACES all Lengths. SCHOOL BAGS.
EMU and NATIVE DOG SKINS TANNED.
'-■j -;0 **
sr *isEi,
Saddler and Harness laker,
RAYMOND STR BET,
SALE.


R. M'DOUGALL,
GENERAL
(fi ® P
f
DEAFER,
IRONMONGER,
aub I
AGENT FOR—
“AUSTRALASIAN." AUSTRALIAN WIDOWS and ORPHANS’
SOCIETY. COUTTS’ ACETIC ACID.
Licensed Vendor of Postage and Duty Stamps.


BAIRNSDALE CLUB HOTEL,
BAIBITSDALE.
This Superior Hotel is Now Open for the reception of
TOURISTSCOMMERCIAL GENTLEMEN, * FAMILIES.
to ts® Min
Can be sure of First-class ACCOMMODATION at Batt’s Hotel.
Commodious Private Sitting-rooms.
Commercial-room.
Sample-rooms.
Billiard-room,
HOT AND COLD BATHS. GOOD STABLING.
WINES & SPIRITS
BEST QUALITY.
Office for Cobb & Co.’s Coaches. Conveyances Meet all the Steamers,
THOMAS DUGGAN, Proprietor.
(Late of the Criterion Hotel, Sale.)


J. G. COUPAR,
1:A K Kil & CONFECTIONER,
FOSTER STREET,
SALE.
0. F. CUNNINGHAM,
S a iile? Ik Harness Mi
OMEO,
REPAIRS NEATLY EXECUTED, AGENT for the LONDON
and LANCASHIRE FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY.
TONGIO BOTBL
OMEO ROAD.
JOHN FHEGON, Proprietor.
WINES AND SPIRITS OF TEE BEST BRANDS.
GOOD ACCOMMODATION.
The Hostelry is nicely situated, the scenery in the vicinity
being of the most romantic character.
The Proprietor also announces that he has a Superior Store at
DAY STREET, OMEO.


QMEO HOTEL
This Well-known Establishment is replete with every
convenience for
TRAVELLERS,
VISITORS, and
TOURISTS.
THE BEST BRANDS OF
Wiiii & Spirits
ARE KEPT IN STOCK,
And the Public may always depend on receiving First-class Liquors,
PROPRIETO R—
JAMES CLARE,
OMEO.


Established for a Quarter of a Century.
WILLIAM B. ROSS,
sWet( ast Jjlak«.
All Kinds of WATCHES. CLOCKS, and JEWELLERY Carefully
Repaired. Charges Strictly Moderate.
Best SNUFFS, TOBACCOES, CIGARS, and PIPES.
rj\ as. wa&ax&KS, rjs
Wholesale & Retail Boot Manufactory,
MAIN STREET,
BAIBNSDALE.
FAIR BANK HOTEL,
'Y'EIEIR/CJIEsrG-.
86 Miles from Bairnsdale. 18 Miles from Sale.
MICHAEL MOONEY, PROPRIETOR.
Sport of Every Description. Every Accommodation for Sportsmen.
W. PUTTICK,
Mereliaat Tailor,
FOSTER STREET,
OPPOSITE COUNCIL CHAMBERS,
SALE.


F. M. GRANT,
Qeaeral &€msmssl§i Agmt
MAIN STREET,
BAIBNTSDALE.
RESTAURANT & BOARDING-HOUSE.
THE TRAVELLER’S BEST.
MRS. TOOLS, Proprietress.
FIRST-GLASS ACCOMMODATION for VISITORS.
In conjunction with which is
HAIRDRESSING SALOON,
MAIN STREET, BAIRNSDALE.
2L* A.
MAIN ST., BAIRNSDALE,
FANCY WAREHOUSE.
STATIONERY of all Descriptions kepi in Stock.
WHOLESALE and UETAII !0H1((0.\1ST.
%
None but American Brands Supplied.


J, C. DAHLSEH & CO ,
FURNISHING & GENERAL
IRONMONGERS
TIMBER ana IRON MERCHANTS,
BAIENSDALB.
BUILDING MATERIALS & BUILDERS’ IRONMONGERY,
PAPERHAN6INGS, COLORS, BRUSHES,
OILS, VARNISHES, &c., &c.
Agricultural Implements (IneM & Colonial,
OVAL SAMSON & ROUND FENCING WIRE.
GUNS, POWDER, SHOT, &c.
A Large Assortment of Kerosene Lamps, Basketware & Brushware.
Blasting Powder, Dynamite, Fnse, &c., Brass and Iron
Bedsteads, Fender and Fireirons.
Cutlery, Electro-plate Ware, and Every Description of Furnishing
Ironmongery.
Agents for the Celebrated ALTHOUSE WINDMILLS, and
the DERWENT and TAMAR FIRE and MARINE INSURANCE
COMPANY.
Bone Dust and Guano, Flood Pumps for Hopgrowers,
Bobbie's Broadcast Seed Growers.


C. H. HODGSON & Co.,
’lfldliiili ii|i s®liil
DRAPERS AND IRONMONGERS,
WINE AND SPIRIT MERCHANTS,
DAY STREET, OMEO.
JOHN LYOJXT,
Bator ami €§mte€ti§m« 9
DAY STREET, OMEO,
WEDDING AND CHRISTMAS CAKES MADE TO ORDER.
HORSES LET ON HIRE.
CHRISTOPHER RODGERS,
mMmkh memmwm,
DRAPER, <j- WINE # SPIRIT MERCHANT,
DAY STREET, OMEO.
Goods Sold at the Lowest Possible Prices for Cash.
HIGHEST PRICE GIVEN FOR GOLD.
18. CL. JOHNSON,
fiwfeeefter, 4JJine $ ||irit
Has the pleasure to announce that being in communication with the
Leading Melbourne Houses, he can supply Groceries, Wines and
Spirits, at prices which defy competition.
Note the Address—E. J. JOHNSON, DAY STREET, OMEO.


•RRUTHEN JNN
JULJEI S. O’BIELLY,
PROPRIETRESS.
The BRUTHEN INN is Situated on one of the most charming Spots
On the TAMBO.
TOURISTS will find Every Accommodation at the Hotel.
SADDLE HORSES AHD VEHICLES
Can be HIRED by Visitors ■wishing to Explore the Buchan Caves,
the Beauties of Omeo, or the Lakes’ Entrance.
On Receipt of Telegram, a Conveyance will Meet Steamer at
Mossiface, and Convey Tourists to Bruthen at
MODERATE CHARGES.
O'Mly’s Telegraph Line of Coaches,
RUNNING IN CONNECTION WITH COBB & GO.,
Leave the Booking Office, Batt’s Hotel, Bairnsdale, for Bruthen
and intermediate places at 8 p.m., on arrival of Coach from Sale.
Sunday at 10 a.m.
Leave the Booking Office, Star. Hotel., Bruthen, for Bairnsdale,
at 7 a.m.
These CoacljEV arrive. in .time to deliver passengers for Cobb
& Co.’s Coaci to^Sjle.
PARCELS Gained at exceedingly Low Rates in connection
with J. Johnston’s . Jloyal Mail to Delegate, antL T. Kendall’s
Omeo Weekly Parcelb Express.
Full Particulars on application at the Booking Offices.


BAIRNSDALE
AND
Rruthen newS
GEORGE VOGT, Proprietor.
The B. & B NEWS enjoys a Very LARGE CIRCULATION, andas
an ADVERTISING MEDIUM, is
UNSURPASSED IN NORTH GIPPSLAND.
A glance at its Advertising Columns proves the fact that it is
patronised by every Trade, Calling, and Profession.
THE JOBBING DEPARTMENT
Is Replete with the LATEST TYPE.
CIRCULARS, CARDS, POSTERS,
And Every Description of
PHIJTm. AT TUX! CUEIPEBI HATE*.
Numbering from 1 to 99,999, Done on the Premises.
MA_ I X STREET,
BAIRNSDALE.


ALL YOUR WANTS CAN BE SUPI'L I E ])
L. JENSEN & CO.,
TIMBER & IB#i MlE€liMS,
YORK-STREET, SALE,
euiliriig glatmals a«i Jluilkts’ Irtimoiijttj
Of Emnj description ;
TOOLS for ALL TRADES from the Best MAKERS :
.. Ornamental Irdn Castings, Columns, &c., for Balconies
and Verandahs;
rc
0
1 PAPERHAHGIWfrS. & BECOKATTUKS.
<
<
O
h
French, English, and Continental, the largest and
Pest assortment. in (Jippsland ;
OILS, COLOURS, VARNISHES and BRUSHES;
S AGPICULTUPAL IMPLEMENTS
;\ VlxYTe
..b.s :i :j
!t\f? :.\ . r) • "rffvs' fn re - •.>
ivu-jb:u .cut-i 1 jhx* l
English and (’oloni;d.
< FABM i AHQ! GAHOFH i REQUISITES,
g Fencing, Windmills, Pumps, and Fitting-.;
* GLAZED PIPES, BENDS & JUNCTIONS, All Sizes;
Guns, Fistoh, Gunpowder, Shot, and Ammunition :
(!TJ)aiiMmg, liamps, ©asftttmgsi, anti (Sas
, LINOLEUMS, FLOORCLOTH. MATS A MATTING,
PALLIASSES, Hi 1’ TRES S E S, KAP 0 K
(better than Feathers), FIBRE, &e.
BASKETWARE AND BR USIIWA RE ;
BLASTING POWDER, DYNAMITE, FUSE. \
Brass and Iron Bedsteads,
FENDERS, and FIREIRONS,
CHOICE CUTLER Y, FUSE ST FLA TED GOODS,
and every description of
furnishing ironmongery,
FROM A CRADLE TO A COFF


W. HOWARD SMITH
AND SONS,
Regular Communication between
Melbourne, Sydney, Newcastle, Bris-
bane, Maryborough, Rockhampton,
Geelong, and Portarlington.
■
STEAMERS :
OFFICES;
Melbourne Market Street
Sydney Smith’s New Wliarf
Newcastle A. A. Co. Wharf
Brisbane New Government
M ary borough Corporation
h’oekliampton Corporation
and at Geelong, Ballarat and London.
AGENCIES:
Maryborough J. E. Brown
W. R. Cave and Co.


LONDON HOUSE
By the Post Office,
BAIRNSDALE.
The Most Complete
DRAPERY & OUTFITTING- HOUSE
IST
GIPFSLAND.
MILLINERY distinct from the General Business, and under
Experienced Direction.
sg- - >
Boots, Shoes, and Leatherwork of the Best Quality, and
Lowest Possible Prices.
FJLNiGY
8-(
»OBS
& PXCTUBEB
In Variety.
Agents for the
Australian Mutual Provident Life Assurance Society.


JAMES MORROW & CO,,
ami gstat«
PROPERTY OFFICE,
Bailey-Street, Bairnadale,
Have for sale and to let some Splendid Agricultural Lands in
blocks from
10 ACRES and upwards,;
Suitable for
HOLS, Maize, or POTATO crops,
and s't untcd on the
Mitchell Nicholson, Tambo, and Snowy Rivers.
Also some crood
GR AZI3STG- LANDS
with never failing supply of pure water.
Intending purchasers can obtain LITHOGRAPH PLANS
at our Office, and receive every informaPon respecting the
capabilities, etc., of all Properties in the district.
We are also in a position to give reliable information re-
specting LANDS OPEN FOR SELECTION. Our Mr.
Morrow’s thorough knowledge of the Bairnsdale and other
districts,gives us unequalled facilities for introducing clients to
suitable properties.
Monthly list of properties for Sale and to Let, posted to any
address.


MONEY ADVANCED ON FREEHOLD PROPERTY
AT REDUCED RATES OF INTEREST.
Fourth Victoria Permanent Property Building &
Investment Society,
24 Collins Street East, Melbourne.
Pkesident.
G. NAPIER TURNER, Esq. (Messrs. Jus. Turner Son.
Committee of Managment.
GEORGE CHAMBERS, Esq. (Messrs. Chambers and Clutten).
SIMON FRASER, Esq., M.P.
RICHARD HODGSON. Esq.. J.P.
THOMPSON MOORE, Esq., J.P.
Shares, £25 Each
Fortnightly subscription on investing shares, one shilling per share.
Entrance fee, one shilling per share.
Loans g:ante J on freehold property for any term from one to twelve
yea.s, repayable by fortnightly, monthly, quarterly, or balf-yeaify instal-
ments.
Persons borrowing from this Society can redeem their debt at any time
by paying the unpaid principal only ; or they can change from one rate to
another on equitable terms.
Agencies have been established in many of the leading country towns,
and the society is now making advances in those districts either for the
erection of buildings or for any other purpose
Applications for loans received daily and dealt with promptly. No
back subscriptions and no premiums charged.
Deposits received at current rates of interest.
Prospectuses and all information obtainable at (he offices, 24 Collins
Street east.
Agents at Sale, Messrs. E. GUXHKIDGE and Co.
Agent, at Rainisdale. Mi'. EDWARD JENNINGS.
JOHN M DAVIDSON. Secretary.


d» ig ps I anfr College,
S jSL li S,
For the Education of
YOUNG LADIES & GENTLEMEN,
In Separate Class Booms.
Head Master:
The Dev. Dr. Spooner, T.E.A.S., E.A.S.L.,
For many years successfully engaged in tuition and in preparing
students for the various Professions and Universities. A re-
quisite number of Efficient Masters.
The curriculum of study embraces all 'subjects necessary for a
thorough English, Commercial, Classical, and Mathematical
Education.
Hours of attendance, 10 to 12.30, and 1.30 to 3.30.
FEES (payable quarterly in advance) :
DAT SCHOLARS,
One Pupil
Two „
Three „
Four ~
A Fifth Pupil Free. No extras.
BOARDERS.
... £3 3 0 per quarter
... 5 10 0 „ „
... 6 10 0 „ „
... 7 10 0 „ „
Fifteen Guineas each per quarter, but a considerable reduction made for the
daughters and sons of ministers of religion, and for two or more members of
the same family. A quarter’s notice of half the fees required before the re-
moval of a boarder. Quarter days in the yearlBB3, Januaryloth, April 16th,
July 16th, October 15th. After the Christmas and Midwinter vacations, studies
■will be resumed January 29th, and July 30th. Pupils entering after the
commencement of a quarter, pay in proportion to the remaining time. The
scholars receive the personal superintendence of the Principal, so that every
attention is paid to their intellectual, moral, and religious training, as well
as to their health and manners, and they enjoy the privileges of a gentleman’s
home, combined with an efficient discipline. A correct report of the pro-
gress of each pupil will be sent to the parents half-yearly. Numerous local
and other references kindly permitted. Students thoroughly prepared for
the Civil Service and the Colonial and British Universities by Dr. Spooner
himself.
Dr. S. takes this opportunity of thanking parents and others for their support and in-
fluence, and begs to add that no efforts -will be spared in order to make the College a suc-
cess. Sale being well known for its healthy climate and artesian wells, is admirably suited
for a college. Attention is drawn to an advertisement in another column in which the
Rev, Dr. Spooner announces that he has established a high-class school in Sale. Dr.
Spooner possesses some very superior testimonials, and as Gippsland is noted for its healthy
climate, no doubt many parents at a distance will seize the opportunity of allowing their
children to receive a high-class education in such a favourable locality. The Rev. Dr.
Spooner, though only having established the College but a short time, has already become a
great favourite with both parents and children. There is some talk of a prospectus being
issued for the building of a college on a large scale. Xo doubt if the matter were taken in
hand properly it would be a success. —Gippsland Times,” Sept. 8.


ANNOUNCEMENT.
The National Mortgage & Agency
Company of New Zealand (Limited).
CAPITAL, £1,000,000.
Head Office: 37 Lombard Street, London. E.C.
Chairman of Directors: H. R. GRENFELL, ESQ.,
Governor of Bank of England.
General Manager: J. M. RITCHIE, Duncain
Local Manager: H. R. CARTER, ESQ., Melbourne.
NEW ZEALAND BRANCHES:
Dunedin, Christchurch, Wellington, Oamaru, Timaru, and
Invercargill.
Agencies throughout the Colonies.
Melbourne Offices ; f 0 Queen-street.
— I WUIT ■
The MELBOURNE BRANCH of this Company has been
opened under the Management of the undersigned (of the late
firm of Everingham, Greenfield and Carter) for the purpose of
transacting business in, and making advances upon, all kinds of
Colonial Produce placed in the Company’s hands for irab in
London, or any of the Colonial Markets.
H. R. CARTER,
Local Manager.


IMPORTER
And GENERAL MERCHANT,
y^Tc^ns^c
i u- a a y a t
ra^ss-s?
anfc %xmx,
Wine, Spirit, and Provision Merchant,
Ironmongery, Crockery, Glassware,
&c. 9 itc.j
AND
HOUSE HFTJZEOUHISEmSTCH
Clothing, Boots, Hats, &c.
ELEGANT AND COMMODIOUS SHOWROOMS.


lakes *)itijijun§
REGULAR TRADERS
FROM
MELBOURNE TO SALE & BAtRNSGALE
THE SCHOONERS
“ MAEERi,”
41 SIR WILFRED LAWSON,”
“ ENTERPRISE.”
The Paddle Steamer “ LADY OF THE LAKE”
is always in attendant; to Tow these vessels inwards
and outwards over th. bar.
MELBOURNE AGENT—
ARCHD. BRAIM.9 Market Street.
BAIRNSDALE AGENTS—
Messrs. J. C- DAHLgEN & Go.
SALE AGENTS—
Messrs. PERMEWAN,\RIGHT & Co.


IMPOETE R,
Has always on hand a large stock of General
BEJLFIEI, CLOTIII&,
BOOTS & SHOES,
And General Groceries.
AGENT FOR SAGER’S
M A INSTREET,
®>'RKB®.AXE*


v. R -
MRS. THOMAS’
flCTfliil HOTSL,
LATROBB BIRIIDGKB,
SA L 1
(Under the Patronage of His Excellency the Marquis of Nor-
manby, Governor of Victoria ; Sir John Coode, and
other Distinguished Visitors).
The Hotel was expressly built for the Accommoda-
tion of Tourists, Sportsmen and Anglers.
The Premises are Replete with every convenience for
Visitors.
PRIVATE APARTMENTS FOR FAMILIES OR SINGLE
GENTLEMEN.
The Hotel is near the Latrobe Wharf, whence the
Lakes’ Steamers depart, and is also in the very centre
of the best Shooting and Fishing grounds in the
district.
HAMPERS FOR PICNIC, SHOOTING, FISHING, OR
EXCURSION PARTIES,
BOATS FOR HIRE, FISHING TACKLE, FRESH BAIT.
CABS FROM SALE AT ALL HOURS.
WITTES, SPIRITS & ALES
OF THE BEST BBANDS.
ST ABLIN G.
S. THOMAS, Proprietress.


♦ - V
T.TT! T7 r T^ I T , O‘P
Published Everj TUESDAY, r JHUES| AY, & SATURDAY,
Has been enlarged for the fourth time within nine years, mak-
ing it now equal to eight columns larger than any other Paper
published in the district, and it still commands fully three times
more bona-fide subscribers. It has been appointed the legal
paper for the advertisements of the Borough of Sale and shires
of Avon, Maffra, Rosedale and Traralgon ; it has also been
appointed by Government the paper in which to advertise land
applications to be heard at the Sale, Rosedale, and Traralgon
Local I,and Boards. The Mercuky is the acknowledged ad-
vertising medium for Gippsland Its politics are Liberal and
Independent, and it encourages every legitimate movement
tending to correct abuses, and to promote the social and moral
elevation of the people.
HENRY LUKE, Proprietor.
®tie iHijjslaitlr -pmOT
J©»BSHS 3)EI'ART
T •
Is furnished with ecery requisite for supplying all the
requirements of the district.
I’OSTE KS. EX VK 1.01 'E S
HANDBILLS. RECEIPT BOOKS,
BILLHEADS. MINING IUTLES.
MEMO. EOIIMS, MINING SCRIP.
C I ECULAKS, CALL NOTICES.
BUSINESS GAUDS, PROSPECTUSES,
MEGHAN IGS" (CATALOGUES.
BOROUGH AND SHIRE WORK,
RATE NOTICE BOOKS BOUND.
NUMBERING from 1 to 99,999, and PERFORATING to 20
inches wide, done on the Premises.
Tiie only
Steam Printing- Office in Gippsland.
COBHEB OF rOSTEB & YOBK-STBHETH,
SAL E.




WILLIAM ADAMSON,
sib m;
HAS REMOVED TO NEW PREMISES,
4B Collins Street West.
d:
flow**
SEEDS.
Also, Splendid Assortment of
BULBS in SEASON.
Agent for Brunning and Son, St. Kilda Nurseries.
Seed and Plant Catalogues Free on application.


QUINN & CROFT,
WHOLESALE & RETAIL
'M
,mt, Spirit,
Crorhcrntoavc Blcvcbairts,
OPPOSITE POST & GOVERNMENT OFFICES,


THE GIPPSLANB LAKES.
Che lloslmbille Hotel,
u
o
METUNG-.
Splendid Scenery. Fishing, Shottirg, and Ecaling.
ENCLOSED LADIES’ BATHS.
TABLE PLENTIFULLY SUPPLIED WITH FRESH FISH.
T 15 II SI S tl O l» i: II A 'l' K.
LIQUORS OF THE BIST BRANDS.
Steamers Daily from Bairnsdale and Sale.
EDWARD HILL,
Proprietor.


SEWING MACHINES
HAVE
NO
EQUAL!!
ra
CHALLENGE
THE
WORLD!!
RECEIVED THE
FIRST PRIZE/ PHILADELPHIA INTERNATIONAL
EXHIBITION, 1870 ;
AND
GOLD MEDAL J
SCOTT LEGACY 1 AWARDED BY THE FRANKLIN
GOLD MEDAL
THE ONLY
INSTITUTE, 1880 ;
SYDNEY INTERNATI ONAL EXHIBITION 1880;
AND
FIRST PRIZE * l MELBOURNE INTERNATIONAL'EXHIBTIOX,
1880-81, Eor Hand and Treadle Machims.
TWO AWARDS.
GOLD MEDAL'
THE ONLY
FIRST PRIZE' At the Adelaide Exhibition 1881,
Importers—
HENRY BISHOP & CO.,
79 BOXJE.K:E3 ST. BJjAST,
Next the Theatre Roaal,
MELBOURNE,


THE VERTICAL FEED. —The Vertical Feed is above the bed
of the Machine: ' The goods rcstpn a perfectly smooth surface, being held
lirmly by tiie pvesser-foot until the feed has “ stepped’’ forward. At this
time the needle penetrates the fabric, the pressure is automatically trans-
mitted to the feed (which comes down on the goods close behind the
needle), and the is raised. When the needle has reached its
lowest point, the full pressure has been transmitted to the feed, and it and
the needle-bar are moved together the desired length of stitch, both moving
in unison at their highest and lowest points- From the above description
it will be seen that—lst.—The presser-foot is always raised from the fabric
when the feed takes place, and presents no resistance to seams or ridges;
2nd.—The needle being in the fabric, moving with the Vertical Feed with
its full pressure on the goods, renders the Feed sure and strong, and the
stitches uniform in length ; 3rd.—The needle being in the. goods at the
time the feed takes place renders it impossible to full one p J ece while the
other is stretched ; 4th—The Vertical Feed being behind the needle, the
machine is capable of sewing any elastic goods, making a smooth and
flexible seam with stitch alike on both sides ; also of sewing any number of
thicknesses without basting, operating with equal facility on the heaviest as
well as the lightest fabrics. 1 u addition to the foregoing invaluable fea-
tures, which are peculiar to this machine alone, we urge the following ad-
ditional points which it possesses, and which are essential in any machine
worthy of a place in the -family or manufactory; —Ist,— Simplicity. —It
has no under works to be looked after or get out of order ; the working
parts being closely confined in the head of the machine, requiring no other
attention or adjusting than occasionally putting a drop of oil in (he holes
provided for the purpose ; it is composed of a less number of working parts
than any other shuttle machine ; its use is more easily and quickly learned ;
it is especially adapted to the diversified wants of family sewing, and is so
simple that it can be used efficiently by any one with facility; 2nd. —
Durability. —Its working parts are made of the best material, arc compact,
strong, and durable, each point of friction being case-hardened, insuring
the longest) wear with the least expense for repairs. We also have added
simple appliances by which ail “lost motion” from wear by long use can be
taken up ; 3rd.— Efficiency. —lt will do the greatest variety of stitching,
from the lightest cambric through all grades of fabric to harness leather ;
4th.— Practicability and Economy.— The vertical feed enables the
operator to turn the work at ar.y curve or angle while the machine is in
motion without changing the tension or length of stitch, consequently it can
easily do in a given time one-third more work than any under-feed machine.
The shuttle bolds a large amount of thread and gives an even tension in the
most simple manner.
fr\ .A 'tTffCfJ
iLYfrA '.! itKJ
SEE WHAT Tin:
Y Jo; J. ft ft iogaL-U
■WITHOUT ZB-A-STIEjSrGr,
-V J-.V I v-f ■
■r’tgff-r w
'J J fi.UiU
'r'\/c\
j./'iy
■
It will sew over uneven surfaces as well as plain. It will sew over seams
in any garment, without making long or short stitches, breaking of thread,
or puckering the lining of the goods at the seam, requiring no assistance
from the operator, except to run the machine and to guide the work, A


point which no other machine possesses. It will sew a'curved piece on a
straight one, or two curved edges together. It will make wide and narrow
hems, and hem all kinds of goods, such as soft merino, or goods difficult (o
hem on other machines. It is the only practical machine for hemming bias
alpacas, poplins, muslins, and other similar goods without basting, and it is
the only machine in the world that will turn a wide hem across the end of a
sheet without pulling the under or upper side of the hem.. It will turn a
hem and stitch on trimming at ore operation. It will turn a hem and sew
in a fold at one operation. It will do felling, bias or straight, on any cotton
or woollen goods. It will fell across seams on any goods., It will bind dress
goods with the same or other material, either scallops, points, squares, or
straights. It is the only machine that will bind hats, cloaks, or other articles
with bias satin or silk, from one-half to three inches in width, without bast-
ing. It will put on dress braid and sew in facing at one operation with or
without shortening the stitches. It will put on dress braid and sew in fac-
ing and a bias fold at one operation, without drawing either dress, braid or
skirt, and without showing the stitch on right side. It will make french
folds. Make French folds and sew on at the same time. Fold bias trim-
ming and sew on at one operation. Make milliners’ folds with different
colors, and pieces of goods at one operation, and sew on at the same time.
It will turn the edge of bias bands and sew on either one or two pipings
without showing the stitches. It will cover cord and sew it in between
edges at one operation. It will cover the cord for seams or waists, cushions
or furniture covers, and sew the seams at the same time. it will sew in a
sleeve, covering a cord, and stitching it, into the seam at the same time. It
will sew the cord on the edges of military coats, jackets, &c. It will gather
without sewing on. It will gather and sew on at the lametime. It will
gather between two bands, showing tee stitches at the right side, at one
operation. It will make and sew on a ruffle on any part of a dress skirt, and
sew on a bias fold for heading at one operation, showing the stitches on the
right side. It will gather and sew on a band with piping between ruffle and
band, at one operation.
It will make plaited trimming either straight or scalloped. Make plaited
trimming and sew on at the same time. Make plaited trimming either
scalloped or straight and sew on a band, and edge stitch the band, at one
operation. It will make plaited trimming, either scalloped or straight, and
sew a piping on at the same time. It will make knife plaiting. It will
make a more elastic stitch than any other machine. It is the only machine
that will sew velvet or plush, without drawing or puckering. It sews from
lace to leather without changing stitch or tension. For tucking,- cording,
quilting, embroidering, shoe-fitting, . diessmaking, tailoring and general
family use or general manufacturing, it has no equal.
MMmvm MUimikml ExlwHtioa,
1880-81.
VJ
The fo.lowing' Extract from Hie Government Gazette Ex-
traordinary (No. 61, July 4th, 1881), needs no comment:


First Order of Merit.— THE Davis SEWING Machine CO.,
Watertown, N.Y., I'amily Sewing Machines, treadle operated GOLD
MEDAL. First Order of Merit.— the davis sewing machine
CO , Waterton, hand-power. GOLD MEDAL. Second Order of Merit.—
Wheeler and Wilson Manufacturing Co., Bridgeport, Conn., Family Sewing
Machine, hand-power. No Medal. Second Order of Merit. —Standard,
New York, Family Sewing Machine, treadle operated. No Medal. Se-
cond Order of Merit.—Standard, New York, Family Sewing Machines,
hand-power. No medal. Second Order of Merit—Jones and Co., Man-
chester, Family Sewing Machines, hand-power. No medal. Second Order
of Merit. —Joseph Wertheim, Prankfort-on-the-Maine, Family Sewing
Machines, treadle operated. No Medal. Second Order of Merit. —Joseph
Wertheim, Frankfort-ou-the-Maine, Family Sewing Machines,;band-power.
No medal. Third Order of Merit. —Bradbury and Go., (Limited), Oldham,
England, Family Sewing Machines, treadle operated. No medal. Third
Order of Merit.—Bradbury and Co. (Limited), Oldham, England, Family
Sewing Machines, hand-power. No medal.
Such being the official records, no person has a right to pretend that any
other Domestic Sewing Machine obtained the highest awards, either at Syd-
ney or Melbourne International Exhibition, 1880-81.
The ONLY GOLD MEDALS ever awarded at Interna-
tional Exhibition in Australia were to the Family
Machine of The Davis Sewing Machine Company,
Watertown, New York.
“ For extreme simplicity of its construction, the number of working parts being greatly re-
duced, with a consequent decrease of wear and tear.”
A Jury of Experts certified that the DAVIS SEWING MACHINE pos-
sesses more steel parts by three to one than any other Machine exhibited,
and yet composed of twenty parts less than any other. The same certificate
shows that in a go-as-you-please contest for half-an-hour, THE DAVIS
turned out 22 perfect specimens of the work, while the most that were
furnished by any competitor only amounted to seven.
IMPORTER S-
HENRY BISHOP & Go., 79 Bourke-street East,
Next to the Theatre Royal,
■ 0CO»OO3°
Sole Agents for the Bicycle and Tricyle Supply Association, London
—Matchless Bicycles.
Sole Agents for Hydes and Wigfall, Sheffield—Marmion Bicycles.
Importers of Rosenkranz Pianos. PRIZE MEDAL at Dresden,
Vienna, Linz, and Sydney Exhibitions.
DA VIS’S Sewing Machines, Bicyles, and Pianos may he
obtained upon easy terms under time payment system.


M. L. HUTCHINSON,
IHjjMcsah anb lUtail Dtfoksdler anb JMatiuiw,
15 COLLINS STREET WEST,
Supplies Cheaper than any other House in Melbourne.
STANDARD LITERATURE for the Family Library ,
FROM ALL THE LEADING PUBLISHERS,
SCHOOL BOOKS & REQUISITES
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION.
Children’s Illustrated Books at English Prices.
WRITING DESKS, INKSTANDS, WORKBOXES.
Photographic Albums, Scrap Books,
and Scraps.
Sunday-school Hymn Books, Reward Cards and Texts.
PSALM AND HYMN BOOKS POK THE CHURCHES.
TAMILI BIBLES POE THE PEOPLE
IN SUPERIOR BINDINGS.
VICTORIAN AGENT FOR THE
NATIONAL BIBLE SOCIETY OF SCOTLAND,
Drummond’s Stirling Publications,
A THACKER & CO.’S
IN Kyo^lin(S,^M}/;» PEIGoGPEH t
Marking Ink and Everlasting Dyes,
'OT3BE3SS ME) <o<o>o’il
AND SOLE CONSIGNEE FOR
F- Coutts and Sons Guaranteed Acetic Acid.
OFFICE OF THE
WELCOME, the hast Family Magazine published,
MUSIC and ILLUSTRATIONS,
SUBSCRIPTION, 9s. PER ANNUM, POST FREE.
15 COLLINS STEEET WEST, MELBOUENE.


STRATFORD, GIPPSLAND,
Being tlie Only Two-storied Building
out of Sale, can offer
SUPERIOR ACCOMMODATION
To Commercial Travellers, Families, and the
Public in General.
BA&@)Li m ® ®U)d©()i§
Always Available.
Excellent Hall, Piano &c., for
Public Entertainments.
Pishing and Shooting in Close
Proximity to the Hotel.
CHARGES STRICTLY ATO3CH3I2,A.T3iJ.
COBB and Co.’s COACHES STAET from the above HOTEL
TWICE A DAY.


ENGLISH, PECK & CO.,
HORSE, CATTLE & SHEEP SALESMEN,
SALE, MAFFHA, BAJHESGALH, AEG
THAEALGOfL
AG-ENTS FOR
THE LAND MORTGAGE BANK,
PENINSULAR & ORIENTAL STEAM NAVIGATION CO.,
THE CURATOR OF THE ESTATES OF
DECEASED PERSONS,
MESSRS. GOLDSBROUGH & CO., WOOLBROKERS,
THE LIVERPOOL AND LONDON AND GLOBE
INSURANCE CO.
Auction Sales conducted and Valuations made in
any part of Gippsland.
Money to Lend in Large and Small Sums on
Freehold Estates.


Jmmtete antr fapt Me.ejpra'if,
7 OTe/FT. SAT iTH
W. L. DAVIES.
Parties Furnishing will find the Best assortment of Goods
in the district at this establishment
'A. T LOWEST EE.ICES,
Bedsteads, Bedding, Carpets,
Linoleum, &c.
and Furniture of every description.
Furniture Repaired, Polished, and
Upholstered on the premises.
W. L. DAVIES,
YORK STREET, SALE.
B O O It S
On Spiritualism, Freethought, Mesmerism, Physiology,
Phrenology, Hydropathy, Ohromopathy, Social Science,
Hygeine, and advanced literature generally,
IMPORTED and SOI.D by
W. I I. TERRY,
Book Depot and Botanic Dispensary,
84 Russell Street, Melbourne.
Catalogues Free.
Office of the “ Harbinger of Eight,” Spiritualistic and Preethought
Journal.
AWARDED SILVER MEDAL.
WM. KADFOED,
WHOLESALE & RETAIL
TINSMITH AND IRONWORKER,
GALVANISER, JAPANNER, & COPPERSMITH,
19 POST-OFFICE PLACE
[Late Little Uourke-street East),
MELBOURNE.
BATHS, TANKS, and VENTILATORS Made to Order.


SALE HIGH SCHOOL,
GIITSLAND,
Principal: Mr. F. FORSYTH CHEFFINS,
I .ate Resilient Assistant Master at Queen's College, St. Kilda:
brunswiek College. brunswiek ; Head Master and
Proprietor of tlie Uoscdale Private School.
The above School was Opened for the Instruction of young
gentlemen in Latin, French. Greek. English subjects, Arithmetic,
bookkeeping, Euclid. Algebra. Elementary Linear Drawing, also
Drilling, and Gymnastics.
TERMS per quarter, payable in advance Hoard and
Tuition, CIO 10s. ; Matriculation and Civil Service, .C 3 35. ; Com-
mercial Comse, £2 2s. ; Junior Class (boys under 10), el Is.
Evening 1 Classes on Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and
Fridays, from 7to 0 ; C 2 2s. )K?r quarter. Ladies* Classes (both
advanced and elementary) are held Every Day, Saturdays exceptid,
from 3.30 to 5.30, and on Saturdays from 10 to 12. Terms, C 2 2s.
per quarter.
The School Horn's arc from 9.30 to 12, and from 1 to 3,
Lectures on Natural Science given every other Wednesday.
The Course of Instruction is such as to tit Voting Gentlemen
cither for the University or Commercial Life. Great attention will
IHi paid to English, Arithmetic, and Writing: and every effort will
l»e used to make the Pupils thoroughly proficient in all the branches
of a Sound ami Liberal Education.
llomk Woiik. —Lessons arc daily prescril>ed to be prepared at
home, and parents arc respectfully requested to arrange that a
proper amount of t : me he devoted to their preparation.
Monthly reports of the conduct ami progress of each pupil will
be sent to the parents. A quarters notice, or half a quarter’s fee, is
required before the removal of a pupil.
The High School is situate I in York Street. Sale, on a very
healthy site, and within easy reach of the river, where good bathing
and 1 suiting can be obtained. The rooms are well ventilated, ami
there is a good Plunge Hath, with a plentiful supply of water on the
premises. A large Playground and tint* Orchard are attached to the
house. There is a well-selected Library provided for the use of the
Hoarders. The number of Boarders is limited to 10. They may
attend any place of worship their parents may wish. As much
liberty is allowed as is compatible with discipline, ami everything is
done to make the school life happy and comfortable, all healthy
games being greatly encouraged.
QUARTER DA VS.—lst Quarter commences Monday, January
15; 2nd, Monday, April 1G ; 3rd. Monday, July 10: 4th, Monday,
October 15.
New boys should present themselves at 0 a.m. on Monday
morning.


H. J. H. SCHOER,
DAY STREET, OMEO.
H. J. F. S. bogs to inform his numerous patrons ami the inhabitants
of Omeo and the surrounding district, that having made arrange-
ments with ,he Leading Houses in Melbourne, he is prepare i to
Supply Goods of the hirst Quality from the Best Foreign and
Colonial Markets at Excessively LOW KATES. Ins])ection Invited.
Every Description of Boot MAUL to ORDER on the Premises. Kit
Guaranteed. Repairs Executed with Neatness and Despatch.
Country Orders attended to punctually.
SOUTER’S
CHEAP BOOK SHOP,
28 HARGREAVES STREET,
SANDHURST.
A SFLKMID MSOETMKJT of ROOKS
SUITABLE FOR
CHRISTMAS & NEW YEAR PRESENTS.
ACtEXT FO II C«TTT'B ACETIC Atilt
J. W. M‘OOY,
DAY STREET, OMEO.
The Proprietor hopes by strict attention to Business, to merit a share
of public patronage.
Horses Shod with care, and General Repairs to all Vebie'es
EXECUTED WITH PH IMPTNESS AND DESPATCH.


CRITERION HOTEL,
■SALE.
V.
R.
(Under the Distinguished Patronage of His Excellency
the Marquis of Normanby, Governor of Victoria.)
DEGIMUB LAMB,
(LATE OF DENILIQUIN, N. S, W.),
PROPRIETOR.
Every Accommodation and Attendance for Visitors.
COMMERCIAL & SAMPLE ROOMS for GENTLEMEN.
Coaches Run to and fro between Trains and Steamers and the Hotel.
SHOOTING PARTIES
Can Receive the Most Reliable Information, and Guides, on
Application to the Proprietor.
DOGS FOR SHOOTING PARTIES.
Hampers for Excursion, Shooting and Fishing Parties.
THE LIVERY STABLES
In connection with the Hotel are the Largest and Most Con-
venient in the locality.
Saddle Horses, Buggies, Covered Coitches, and Conveyances
for Private Families for Hire ,
At a Moment’s Notice, and on the Most Moderate Terms.
EXPERIENCED GROOMS & CAREFUL DRIVERS.


LAKES’ NAVIGATION
COMPANY, LIMITED.
REGULAR COMMUNICATION
WITH
Paynwmlle, 0 ll<>s Jw w i U*',
Lakes* Knfrniicc,
Tiunho, and Pack Lakes,
The Favourite Steamers u Tanjil, ” “ Bairnsdalc,” ami
“ Sarah,” are now Running Regular Trips to
all the above places.
For Time Tabic see Advertisements iu “Argus” and local Papers.
Meals and Refreshments at Melbourne Rates.
KOJJERT STELE WAG, Sucuktaiiv.
Head Office: RAYMOND STRKKT. SALK, which ha*
Telephonic Communication with the Wharf j Latrube Bridge.
N.R. —Parties visiting the Lakes will find it to their advantage
to obtain Dateless Return Tickets for Train and Steamer,
which can be had at the Hallway Station, Prince's bridge, or of
Mu. M. L. II ITCH INSOX. I.‘> Poi.i.ixs Strkkt Wk.st, the
Mkluouuxk Aukxt, from whom all information can be had.


DAVID E. WILLIAMS,
drain ami produce
MEROHAISTT,
Takes tins opportunity of thanking his friends and the public for the
liberal patronage he has hitherto received, and desires to intimate
that,, in consequence of Increasing trade, lie lias
To those Large and Commodious Premises lately occupied hy
Messrs. J. LxVW and CO., in RAYMOND STREET. SALK, and
which he has opened as a HAY and CORN STORE.
Produce of Every Description, and the Best Quality, in Stock,
GRAIN, FLOIJE, POLLARD, POTATOES,
JIAY, BRAN, FOWLS’ FEED, &c., &c.
At tlie Lowest Pos#il»l« Prices,
GARDEN SEEDS & FRUIT TREES,
Suitable for the Season and of Guaranteed Quality, for Sale
on Liberal Terms.
PLEASE NOTE THE ADDRESS :
STREET,
LATE J. LAW and Co.’s TIMBER YARD.
Arms
EMUVALI).
EDWIN JONES - - PROPRIETOR.
SPORTSMEN can Obtain KANGAROO, HARES, DUCK, and
SNIPE in the Locality.
Cobb’s Coacb passes Daily. First-class Accommodation.


GEO. A. STOW’S
3*
anS
v>
SANATORIA M.
Mr. STOW begs to intimate to his Friends and the Public that
he has built a
COMMODIOUS HOMESTEAD
( N THE
GIPPSLAND LAKE©
Opposite Rosherville,
And that he is now ready to receive Visitors and Sportsmen.
Those desirous of a Quiet and Comfortable Home may rely on the
endeavour of the Proprietor to give satisfaction.
DIRECTIONS FOR INTENDING VISITORS.
Take 'Train from Melbourne to Sale ; Cab—about three miles—
to Latrobc River, where they meet the Steamers. Any of the
Captains will either leave Passengers on my jetty, or give infor-
mation how to proceed. Boats at all times in attendance.
GEO. A. STOW , Proprietor,
TERMS REASONABLE.
ADDRESS—
POINT NORMANBY. METUNG.


The "TtWWIW*
COMBINED
taD
P=l
PQ
<=■l
cc 3
pel
a
&
<
TIFFIN EARTH BORING
AND
ROCK DRILLING
MACHINES
>
Q
w
M
3
H
fesJ
a
CD
t=l
l-S
t=a
ac?
07er 200 of these Machines
now in Successful Operation in the Australian Colonies.
SOL'S AGENTS—
M'LEAN BROS. & RIGG,
MELBOURNE.
a
m
a
o
W
a
a
<
m
Q
Sole Agents i M'LEAN BROS & RIGS, Melbourne-


THE
LAKES’ ENTRANCE HOTEL,
CUNINGHAME,
(LAKES’ ENTRANCE).
ilas the Best Accommodation for Tourists to the Gippsland Lakes.
The House lias 80 Rooms, and can accommodate 40 Visitors. It is
admirably situated for Visitors to the Entrance, a)id has a Large
balcony from which grand Views can he obtained of the principal
features of the Entrance ami the Ocean.
THE TELEGRAPH OFFICE
Ts within a few yarls of the Main Entrance to Hie Hotel. The
Hotel is on the main road to
BRUT HEN, BUCHAN, and the SNOWY RIVER.
Coaches for Visitors to Lake Tyers, the Fern Tree Cullies,
And OTHER PICTURESQUE SPOTS in the VICINITY.
BOATS fresh from Melbourne for the Use of Visitors.
FRESH BAIT EVERY MORNING. SADDLE HORSES.
All Information s«ii»]>lic‘<l to B'xcnr ionlwt*.
WINES, SPIRITS, and ALES
OE THE REST BRAN PS.
T. LAUGHTON,
Proprietor.


UAVID MASTERTON
AND RICHARDSON,
HO Lt ESS Lt E 6 R O C E R S;;
T E A., —
Was <& Spirit Mercfeaßts
29 MARKET ST., 29
MI3X.BOUK.IVi:,
OPPOSITE VICTORIA IXSL'RAXCE COMPANY.


THE
ClrVB lOTil,
BAIBNSD ALE,
Offers superior Accommodation for Visitors to Baimsdale
and the Lakes.
Private Families can always be provided with Apartments at a
reasonable cost, while every convenience is offered to
Tourists and Commercial Gentlemen.
The HOUSE has been GREATLY ENLARGED, to meat the
requirements of TOURISTS, and SPECIAL ATTENTION is
paid to the COMFORT and CONVENIENCE of VISITORS.
THE NTAIII.E A((UHIIOII.ITIOT IS COXPIEIE,
And Tourists can at anjy time obtain Conveyances to the many
places of interest in the District.
Hampers probiinb fait!) tbtrn requisite. ®bertr information afforbeb
to Slrcursionists bn SaniJ or Slater.
Conveyances meet the Steamers at the Wharf on
arrival and departure, free of charge.
PLUNGE AND SHOWER BATHS.
Fishing Tackle provided. Guns and Ammunition to be
obtained at the shortest notice.
EXPERIENCED DRIVERS AND GUIDES.
C. PETERSEN,
Proprietor.


the
BAIRNSOALE ADVERTISER
THE CHEAPEST NEWSPAPER CIRCULATING IN
NORTH GIPPSLAND.
Published every TUESDAY, THURSDAY, and SATURDAY.
Price Reduced to 6s. per Quarter.
The Bairnsdale Advertiser has an extensive circulation
throughout the Shires of Bairnsdale, 'fambo, and Omeo, and
contains the Latest Intelligence of Current Events in the
Colonies and England ; it reports the operations of the
Markets fully, and pays particular attention to
Stock Movements.
It is the best Advertising Medium in the District.
fh 6
Is replete with a
LARGE and VARIED ASSORTMENT of TYPE,
And all descriptions of work are completed with neatness
and despatch.
o
BAKER & WEST,
Proprietors.


7 COLLINS STREET WEST.
MR. W. G. FRASER
IS PREPARED TO UNDERTAKE
GENERAL COMMISSIONS,
ALSO TO
Represent Country Firms in Melbourne,
Insurances Effected at Lowest Rates.
TRADESMEN’S BOOKS AUDITED AND KEPT.
ACCOUNTANTS’ WORK EXECUTED.
Cricketers’ Arms.
MRS. TUCKER
Has Excellent Accommodation for Travellers, Visitors, and
Excursionists.
BOATS for Pleasure or Fishing Parties ALWAYS READY.
The house is pleasantly situated, facing Lake
Victoria and Newland’s Backwater, and offers a quiet
retreat for parties visiting the Lakes.
All Steamers Call Daily to and fr'om BairVsPalk
and Sale.


IQ ATP TO 73 TA G
ttjXivj/ X JTXXii Jtv>jo ij
COMMERCIAL AND
GENERAL PRINTERS,
And I'KOPK'IHTOKS.
NORTH MELBOURNE ADVERTISER,
ESSENDON & VLE MINOT ON CHRONICLE,
BRUNSWICK & COBURG ADVERTISER.
KvrAll Advertisements appear in the Three Papers.
IS sum? SpHnitii] Diimrlminnl
is Complete with the Newest Design of Type.
BILLHEADS, POSTERS, CARDS, PROGRAMMES. &c.,
Executed in the liest Style, and at the Cheapest Pates.
Elcctrotqpinc| £ Stereotyping Jione on the Shortcut JSfoticc.
96 ELIZABETH STREET NORTH.
Omeo Butchering Establishment,' Day-street, Omeo.
CONDON BROS.,
(B uccKS.'Oits to C. RODGERS),
WHOLESALE and RETAIL BUTCHERS,
SMALL WOODSMEN, Ac.
CONDON BROS, having leased the above Business, beg to notify to
the I üblie of Omeo and surrounding locality that they are prepaid
to execute all orders with promptness and despatch. They trust, by
attention to Business, to receive suppot> and patronage so long
accorded their predecessor.
OiiDEits Solicited in the Town. Sheep Every Mousing.


ROADKNIGHT’S
MERRANGBAUR HOUSE,
LAKES' ENTRANCE.
Best Sea View of Any House on the Lakes or on the
Ninety-Mile Beach,
THERE IS A
Large GARDEN of 25 Years’ Standing,
ADJOINING THE HOUSE,
So that Visitors can be supplied with an unlimited quantity of Fruit.
Ten New Rooms have just been added to the previously
Extensive Establishment.
EVERY ACCOMMODATION FOR FAMILIES.
LuiUes and Children driven to the Beach in 10 Minutes, in a
comfortable conveyance.
CHARGES MODERATE.


NEW PUBLICATION!
NOW READY!
NOW READY! !
4
3
3
as
&
ft
*
n» U
By JOHN RAE, Sandhurst.
563 Pages Reading Matter, 14 Plates, and Poems.
PBICE, »IX IHILUICII.
M. L. HUTCHINSON, PUBLISHER, 15 COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE.
THE BEST WORE OF THE DAY.
PUBLICATION!


Gipps Mm l2Mts
Showing the Routes of Steamers TaNJllandßairnsdme


ML4N and Co.,
COLLINS ST. EAST, MELBOURNE.
mmmmi ommsi music i
S ° tife ‘FAJtaL'S f ° r } Smith American Organs. ! T "of liEEnOIiGAX
es
£ S"
> C
c H
£■* t
* °
** >*
<3 2
S o
c ~
y<
c
the WORLD.
• S 5
S 3
P'l‘3s
c n
oo
<**
l-Cj
PrW
CQ
o
cz
C
lai-
t=j
SQ
>
as
*~ve
■A A-
SOLE AGENCIES
SCHIEDMAVER and SOEHKE I'IAXOS.^
THE PIANO OF THE WORLD.
and SQHKT PI-£NOS>
A MARVEL OF LEVUTT ANp CHEAPNESS.
Illustrated Lists post free. Correspondence Invited.
RAE HRO«., PRINTERS, KLIZARETH-sT. X., MELBOURNE.
