

OUR CHURCH
ON THE
RIVER DARLING.
A REMINISCENCE.
VEN, HRCHDEHCON F. B, BOyCE.
SYDNEY
MADGVVICK AND SONS, GENERAL PRINTERS,
528 Kent Street.
1910.


1
NAT, q%
% 17 AUG. 1927 C
V y
D + y*
%
'


OUR CHURCH
ON THE
RIVER DRFJUNG.
A REMINISCENCE.
PEN. ARCHDEACON P. B, BO?CE.
Reading about the Bush Brotherhood and hearing at a
public meeting in St. dames' Hall, Sydney, of their work in
the far western interior of New South Wales, I have thought
that notes of pioneering efforts in the same extensive area
of country might appropriately be published I know that
my journey at the time, covering so long a distance in the
saddle, aroused considerable interest, and several friends
have told me that an account of it ought to be given in some
permanent form.




Our Church on the River Darling.
A REMINISCENCE.
(By Ven. Archdeacon F. B. Boyce).
IT was: stormy and raining heavi-ly when I started from
Molong on the morning of Monday, 3rd August, 1874. It
was a very wet winter and it had been raining for days. I
did not postpone, as I wanted to get ahead of the inevitable
flood in the Bogan River, which would probably extend for
miles over some of the very flat country and thus stop trav-
elling. A flood there would rise so gradually that this was
not difficult. It continued to rain hard all day. At Yul-
lundry, Trappitt and Lane's station, I crossed the creek
without difficulty as the water had not risen to the saddle
flaps; at Obley getting across the small river there was not
so easy, but no trouble resulted. I stayed the first night
at Mr. Crawford's station, a short way from the township.
The next day I left behind all farmers and agriculture.
There were 40 miles with only one hut on the track. I
Came to Bulgandramine, John Newell Gilmour's station, in
the evening, land thus reached the Bogan River. The music
of the deep bass of bellowing bullocks makes the arrival
at a big cattle station quite impressive. It again
rained hard tall day., I was, however, ahead of a flood on the
Bogan. I was not wet, having a good long
leather leggings, and over my hat some oilskin. But these
two days were the last of that rain. From then right on
to my return with slight exceptions the weather overhead
was fine,
TRAVELLING THEN AND NOW.
Travelling at this time was not the easy thing it is
to day. There was no railway, in fact the iron horse


bad not gone further than Bathurst, and it was several
.years after ere it even reached Molong. Now one can go
to Bourke with comparative comfort and in less than 24
hours. He can read his newspaper and book in the train
and if he has a sleeper he can get there with scarcely any
fatigue. Then there were no bicycles or motors, by which
great distances could be covered. There was no quick
journeying. There were not even bridges over any creek
or river I crossed, and after I left Oblev scarcely any
made roads, only bush tracks. Travelling then was
absolutely different from now. Forty or fifty miles a day
for horses were long journeys and could not be kept up by
the best animals for many days together. How very
dhianged things aire now!
I had two fine horses, the favorite was "Warwick,"
which I had ridden on many journeys. He had before I
bought him been taken and used by bushrangers, and
somewhat disfigured by having his neck burnt, so as to imitate
collar marks and make it appear that he had been in har-
ness. He was a good friend, and would let me caitch him
in a paddock when no one else could. The other horse was
strong, but tricky. I rode and led each in turn. The one
I was not riding carried the saddle bags; two pairs of
bobbles and a pannikin jingled at the side. I had among
my things a surplice, hood and stole, a small Bible and
Prayer Book, about 40 little hymn books, having only about
25 hymns elaich, forms for marriages, etc. Of course, my
belongings were as light as I could possibly have them, so
as to spare the horses any load.
MY COMMISSION.
Dr. Marsden, the kindly dispositioned Bishop of
Bathurst, had requested! me to spend two months as
organising missioner on the River Darling, There was
no clergyman or any building of our Church in that great
lone West on that line of country beyond Dubbo, and I was
to try to raise money for stipends and churches. I was
to hold services in the towns and on the stations, etc. I was
to go direct to Bourke. which was about 400 miles, and if
time permitted visit both WilCannia and Brewarrina. but
T was to give the "lion's share of the services to Bourke."
That place was in the eyes of most at this time the ultima
thule of civilization, as there was no township beyond in
the further great interior that stretched across to Western
Australia.
A clergyman, the first of our Church, the Rev. W. W.
Tarlton. >1.4... had been stationed at Bourke for about
three years. He was ia great, talker and erratic. He had
now gone over to the Roman Catholic Church, and left the


place, and, except for a few faithful laymen, all was dis-
order. He later practised as a barrister in Sydney.
ON THE BOGAN.
My parish of Molong was as large as Scotland. It
included the Bogan River to a little beyond Oanonbar and
a part of the Mara. I paid it la regular quarterly visit, in-
cluding a journey there and back of about 500 miles, and
preached lat Canonbar whenever the fifth Sunday of a
month occurred. I was therefore doing a part of my regu-
lar duty, (and as I had sent word the people expected me
at each place. I was to preach on the Sunday at Canonbar,
but little thought as I pushed on that I was not destined
to reach the township.
O'lie Bogan at first sight appears a most unimportant river,
yet its sinuous course stretches out to between 300 and 400
miles. It is very narrow and in many places shallow. In
an extreme drought it becomes dry in most parts and it
could be passed over without it being known that it was a
river. When I reached it I found the water just up to the
banks, it would probably overflow the next day. I was in
time to keep ahead of a flood. Like all the rivers in this
very flat country the current wias so slow as to be imper-
ceptible, except on close observation. On reaching it I
had left belhind the hilly and thick bush, and had come to
a country that was monotonously level and very lightly
timbered and with many open plains, often covered with
salt bush. I crossed the river with my belongings in a
little canoe and the horses swam. I had a fairly dry
track as I went down the river on the left bank until I met
the Macquarie water. I was told by several old hands as
I went along that if there were a flood in the Macquarie, a
river running parallel, I should not get through.
I covered about 40 miles the next day and stayed at Mr.
Richardson's at Dandaloo at night. I usually held short
services at every station and on this day there were four
and another at the township. Dandaloo had an inn,
Richardson's, and a small store, I think, attached to
it. There were a couple of huts, but Ido not remember
any other buildings.
The next day, Thursday, was easy as I only had about
23 miles to Tabratong, Mr. Lee's station. The following
day I went another short distance to Mr. Thomas Brown's
at Muddall, where they were shearing. Saturday left me a
long ride into Canonbar, a township of about a hundred
persons, where I was expected. I called at Nyngan,
now a. flourishing town, and from which the railway now
makes a bee line to Bourke, then having only one little hut.


THE OVERFLOWS OF THE MACQUARIE.
* To get there I had to leave the Bogan River and cut
across to a part of the Duck Creek, on the banks of which
it was placed. But I was stopped. There ihad been a
flood in the Macquarie and a big one, and the waters had
come down and had spread out over the country at this
point. I had to face the "overflows" of the Macquarie.
They were between five and seven miles wide. I had heard
of them in one great flood as having been nine miles, but
the lesser was a complete bar to me. I Ihad in a previous
journey crossed about a mile with ,am expert bushman of
the locality as a guide, and I found the waters mostly up
to the saddle flaps and at one part there was a short
swim. At this time I had no guide, the overflows were
much wider than then, and leading a second horse made
matters much more difficult. I could not tell what might
happen, so I did not venture. As I could not get into
Canonbar, I turned back and went off to Moonagee, Mr.
William Richardson's station, and there spent one of the
quietest Sundays of my life. Mr. Richardson was a
bachelor, and there were only five or six persons at the
homestead. I had service in the morning, and prayers and
a Bible reading in the evening. The horses had their day
of rest, after, considering the rain, etc., having done a good
week's work.
GETTING THROUGH.
As I passed along the southern bank of the Bogan, and
now out of my parish, I found that all vehicular traffic was
stopped because of the state of the country largely through
the Macquarie water.
There was a clear sky, but the sticky black soil in some
places land the water were a caution. The mud was to be
remembered. The coaches between Dubbo and Bourke
were not able to run and the mails were carried on horse-
back. A teamster was occasionally seen smoking the pipe
of peace in waiting for the track to dry. I saw a doctor,
who was journeying to Bourke to practice there, camped
with his wife and children. Their wagonette could not be
moved. I was advised at more than one station to wait
two or three weeks. I, however, wiais due in Bourke for the
Sunday. I thought that if the mailman could ride through
% I might here explain my connection with the Diocese of
Bathurst by saying that I was sent to the West by Bishop Barker
directly after I left college and my ordination (I had never the ad-
vantage of being a curaite or even catechist) to succeed Rev. Henry
A. Langley, afterwards Bishop of Bendi?o, as Incumbent at George's
Plains, and was left there when it was cut off from Sydney and
the new diocese formed. Later I was appointed to Molong and
later again to Orange, and did not return to Sydney until 1882.


I could do the same. I felt lliat a man who carried the
standard of the cross should be at least as good as the one
who carried Her Majesty's maid.
One saw very few persons on the track, and wlhen I met
any one I generally stayed for a brief talk. Occasionally
a shepherd with his sheep would be seen. the con-
versation would commonly be on the state of the country
and the rain, and, what was ever interesting, the sticky
nature of the soil few* the horses, I was always on the look
out to bring the talk round to the highest and most price-
less possession of any man, i.e., the soul. I realised that I
should very probably never see the man again, so would
not have another opportunity. A text I found myself con-
stantly quoting was "What shall it profit man if he gain
tjhe whole world and lose his own soul?"
I had trouble in trying to take a short cut. I ciame to
what I might call an arm of the river caused by the flood.
I was cautious and would not attempt to cross, the water
was too muddy to show me the depth. I turned off and
rode along it until it was plainly safe to venture. Instead
of following it back to the river I believed I knew the
direction through the buish, and made straight for it, as I
thought. Riding on there was no river and still no river.
The dread of being lost as other men had been and had
paid the penalty with their lives made me turn to get back.
Fortunately I was able to follow the track of my horses'
ihoofs. On reaching the arm of the river I followed it back
to the river itself, /and then safely got on the so-called
road.
The squattages now I found very large. I often saw
blacks, and in the scantiest clothing, indeed some without
any.
Widgery, a bush inn, seemed placed in one of the
wettest and muddiest parts. Stories of men being de-
layed there for weeks were plentiful, especially as to the
wet winter of '7O.
I reached Oongolgon, 90 miles from Bourke. It was
a place about the size of Ganonbar, and where I touched a
telegraph office. As there was no site for a church there
I selected three vacant allotments and telegraphed a de-
scription to the Bishop of Bathurst, asking him to apply to
the Government for the grant. In those days the Crown
gave 1% acres to a church. I wired as I found that the
land was likely to be snapped up in another way.
THE LAST DAY OUT.
Friday found me with the last sixty miles to do to get
into Bourke. The road being away from the river was
dry and good and travelling was easier, but with horses not
fresh one had to ride with judgment. One had become


lame. I proposed going to Mr. Russell Barton's, Mool
culta, ten miles this side of Bourke, and getting into the
town early on the Saturday. I was told that there was a
track turning off to the right for Moolcutta and that the
homestead was not very far from the road. But I could
see no track. It had become dark, and therefore I missed
the place. I could only push on to the town. With weary
horses it wtas slow travelling. It was very lonely. Ido
not remember meeting any one. I had constantly to stop
and get off and strike a match down close to the road to
see whether I was upon it. Personally I was quite cheer-
ful at being near the journey's end, and kept on repeating
out loud or singing, knowing there was no person to hear
me, parts of hymns, "Rock of Ages," etc. At last the joy-
ful sig!ht was the lights of Bourke. It was nearly midnight
when I got in and the whole town seemed fast asleep. The
Commercial Bank was in the main street, where I was to
stay, and I soon found it. I knocked up Mr. J. G. Beazley,
the manager, who gave me a hearty welcome. I was cared
for, and the tired horses rested. I never forget the night
I arrived in Bourke.
BOURKE.
Bourke, on the Barling, was at this time, 1874, a town
of between 600 and 800 inhabitants. As to history, people
usually dated matters from the flood of 1864. That was,
they said, before the flood, or that was after the flood.
Through water carriage by tjhe river it was much in com-
munication with South Australia, and Victoria; indeed, I
seemed to have entered another colony than New South
Wales The river was high, 23 feet above summer level,
and there were two or three steamers there, built in, I
believe, the Mississippi! style, but smaller and, they went
to Echucca and the Murray. Most of the wool went down
the river. Without any railway communication our own
colony was at a great disadvantage. The isolation of
Bourke was indicated by the way men talked about arrivals.
A teamster on the road would be spoken of as so many
days out, as though a ship were referred to. A buggy
might be expected "in" on my Saturday. Cobb's coach in
good weather was fairly regular, but "she" would get "in"
by say Monday afternoon. Mr. Joseph Becker, a large
storekeeper, was styled the King of Bourke. He was a
Roman Catholic, but his wife was of our Church, and he
often attended our services with her. There were some big
squattages around the town and a few small blacks' camps.
Drink was greatly in evidence, as, indeed, it was in all
these distant towns.
Our Church was in avf yy weak condition. Mr. Tarlton,
who had been in the town for about three years, and had,


as I before said, gone oyer to Rome, had left things in a
sad state, and in a district suffering from long neglect.
Spiritual life was at a very low ebb indeed. The Roman
Catholics had put up ia good brick Church, the only Church
of any kind I heard of on the Darling, and in the most con-
conspicuous position attainlable. The country was very
level land there were no hill tops, so it was placed on land
at the end of the main street, and that ran across it. Any
one going along that street westerly would always have
the church in view. It was a position ingenously planned.
I found great and strange friendliness between the Church
of England people and the Roman.
OUR CHURCH AT BOURKE.
All honour to some of our Church people who kept the
flag flying. Our services were held in the Court House.
Mr. Grant, the Police Magistrate, read the prayers and a
sermon from a book. Others would occasionally take his
place. Mr. Scrymgour played an harmonium' and some of
the choir occupied the "dock." I was five Sundays in the
town and conducted the services there. The attendances
were only moderate for a place of the size. There were
but 5 communicants.
I found matters in train for building a church. A
considerable sum, about £1,400, had been already raised,
plans settled and a contract taken. There were many meet-
ings of the Committee while I was there. It was resolved
to lay the foundation during my stay, and I was requested
to perform the ceremony. I protested, saying that some
leading resident should be asked to do so, and that I was
only ;a young clergyman, but the Committee had made up
its mind as to me, so I agreed. The many preparations
were made.
I think that I cannot do better than quote the report of
the ceremony from the "Central Australian."
LAYING THE FOUNDATION STONE OF THE CHURCH OF
ENGLAND AT BOURKE.
The foundation stone of the Church of England was laid on
Wednesday last at 5 p.m., by the Rev. ¥. B. Boyce, Acting-In-
cumbent. There was a large assembly of' townspeople and others
present on the occasion After the usual services for such occasions
had been gone through, Mr. J. G. Beazley, hon. treasurer of the
Church Committee, read a copy of the following document: —
THE FOUNDATION STONE
of this
ST. STEPHEN'S CHURCH,
In the town and parish of Bourke, in the Diocese of Bathurst, was
laid this day (Wednesday), 126 th August, A.D. 1874, by the Rev.


Francis Bertie Boyce, Acting-Incumbent (the Rev. W. W. Tarleton,
M.A. having been the previous Incumbent.) Bishop of the Diocese,
the Right Reverend Samuel Edward Marsden, D.D. Sir Hercules
George Robert Robinson being Governor of the Colony of New South
Wales, in which Bourke is situate. . Victoria R. in the 37th year
of her reign.
Building Committee—
M. S. Grant, hon. Secretary.
J. G. Beazley, hon. Treasurer.
Members of Committee—
A. O. Grant, M. Scrymgour, J. Addison, M. Good, W. V. Wallace,
T. Hudson, T. Trader, G. Harris, H. Colless, H. G. Salmon,
F. Willoughby, J. Whitehorn, C. J. Grant, M.D.
J. Horbury Hunt, Architect.
E. Heseler, Contractor.
Mr. Beazley then deposited in a receptacle prepared in the
stone, a bottle containing the above document, as also a copy of the
Central Australian and Bourke Telegraph, of 22nd August, the Aus-
tralian Churchman of 15th August, and a shilling and sixpence in
silver. He then on behalf of the Committee requested the Rev.
F. B. Boyce to lay the stone, and handed to him a mallet and a
silver trowel for the purpose. The rev. gentleman then performed
the ceremony according to the ordinary usage, and addressed the
assembly as follows:
"We have met together to-day to lay the foundation stone of a
church, to be called St. Stephen's Church. May the ministers who
preach in it, when built, be as earnest as St. Stephen, as sound in
doctrine, and as full of the Holy Ghost; may they have many seals
to their ministry, and many souls for their hire. This act is an-
other proof of the love of British Christians for the religion of their
fathers. Here we meet on the bank of the Darling in Central Aus-
tralia, 300 miles from any other Church of our faith, yet not for-
getting the glories of the land that gave us birth, and the oft told
secret of England's greatness, the Bible. Yes, we do not forget the
hallowed fanes of England—the ivied towers on her hills and in her
valleys, or the Sabbath bells chiming the call to worship God. Here
we wish to perpetuate those memories. To go back further. This
reminds us of the temple erected by God's ancient people in majesty
and beauty, and of the willingness of all to help, for gold and silver
to more than the value of the National Debt were given. We cannot
approach its splendour, but we can the hearty way in which the
work was carried out. And this takes us further back to the first
tabernacle erected in the wilderness. It reminds us of the desire
of the people to give as we read, "and they came both men and
women, as many as were willing-hearted, and brought bracelets and
earrings, and rings and tablets all jewels of gold and every man of-
fered an offering of gold unto the Lord." May we have a like spirit
of earnestness. The Church we erect will be both substantial Snd
handsome. In it will meet Sunday after Sunday those who desire
to unite and publicly worship the great Ruler of this Universe, who
desire to praise him for his wondrous love as shown in the gift
of his dear Son for sinners, and who desire to be strengthened in the
good fight for faith by the preaching of the word. The building, as
the years pass away, will be mixed with your most sacred and loved
recollections—in it children will receive the initiatory Sacrament of
Baptism—in it young men and maidens will receive the apostolic rite
of confirmation—in it happy lovers, surrounded by kind friends, will
be united in the bonds of holy matrimony—and lastly in it when the
souls of dear relatives are taken to that rest that remaineth for the


people of God, their bodies will be placed in the aisle whilst a por-
tion of our sublime (burial service is read; thus the associations will
be the holiest and dearest. Now you are asked to lay your offerings
on the stone. Let me remind you of the fruitful seasons—of the
general prosperity—of the temporal blessings our Heavenly Father
has scattered around you with his lavish hand —of the marvellous
condescension of the Lord Jesus —the blood that was shed—the
debt that was paid, surely freely you have received. Our Lord
says, "It is more blessed to give than to receive." Let us adopt his
maxim, and having uttered an ejaculatory prayer for guidance to the
one dwelling amidst the splendours of the upper sanctuary, freely
give."
The Collection was then made on the stone, and the very credit-
able sum of £l5O was announced as the result. The Church oc-
cupies a prominent position at the corner of Mitchell and Richard
streets, opposite the Commercial Bank, and from the appearance of
the plan it may be expected that St. Stephen's will (be a substantial
building, which will be an ornament to the town. Provision has
been made for any future enlargement. The sum laid on the stone
included the handsome donation of £IOO from Russell Barton, Esq.,
J.P., of Mooculta. It is estimated that £250 to £3OO additional is
required to complete the building free of debt; of course this does
not include seats and other internal fittings.
After the ceremony there was a tea meeting in the Pub-
lic School, for which Mrs. Reed, senior, kindly provided all
the tea, eatables, etc. The room was crowded. There was
a programme after the tea of music, recitations and shokt
speeches. Mr. Beazley, the zealous treasurer, read the
statement of accounts.
OFF TO WILCANNIA.
On the Monday morning after I started for Wilcanniia, which
was 225 miles down the Darling. There were large squat-
tages all the way. I was told that Mr. Tarleton's last visit
was nearly two years before, and that no Protestant min-
ister of any kind had been there since. At Toorallie, 50
miles on, where I stayed the first night, I was lent ia, good
horse for the rest of the trip, to leave on my return. I call-
ed at Louth the next day, a small township of five or six
houses. I expected to arrive (at Wilcannia on the Saturday.
Two incidents, by (the way, are of interest.
AT MR. ACRES' STATION.
I reached the station of Mr. E. H. Acres in the morn-
ing at about 10 o'clock. I hoped to have had a short service
(and then to proceed another 30 miles that day. But Mr.
Acres had just sold out, and was leaving the Darling,.and
he said on that day was a farewell gathering of all his
friends. He had invited them for miles round. He kindly
said that I had better stay and that if I went on for even
50 miles I should find no one at home. It was awkward,
as it meant heavier ride® on the other days. I thought,


however, that the best thing was to stay, and that it would
give me an opportunity of talking to miany persons about
church matters. The friends soon began to arrive. Most
came on horseback, but the many kinds of conveyance were
a revelation. Buggies drawn by two horses were chiefly
in evidence, and one had four. It was open house and a
fine example of bush hospitality and friendliness. Games
were pllayed and various other amusements, in which the
many ladies took a lively part. The many "'young bloods,"
gentlemen engaged on the stations, were in full vigour.
Mr. Acres, and I shall never forget his thoughtfulness, about
four in the afternoon stopped everything that I might conduct
a service, and at which all, about 40, attended. This took
about three-quarters of an hour. I preached on Blind
Bartimeus.
How the evening was spent I scarcely remember. Liquor
was plentiful, but I did not observe any drunkenness. Early
hours were common on the Darling, and between 10 and 11
ia.ll went to bed. It was a comfortable homestead, but
how they were all stowed away I never knew 7 . The young
fellows and most of the married men slept on the big ver-
andah. I was given a room to myself. We were not,
however, to be quiet all night. Between one land two there
was a great commotion. A restless young fellow woke up
full of mischief and dragged another by the heels all along
the verandah, rousing every one there. At once they all
became very wide awake indeed. They procured something
to drink and they resolved to get out all the men. There
was hammering at doors and every male had to show up,
and in very scanty attire. I was left undisturbed, but in
a wooden building everything could be distinctly heard.
They held a meeting at which they discovered Mr. Byrne, the
Commissioner of Lands, wlas missing and they got him out.
Then they wanted the parson out and I thought that I
should have to go, but Mr. Acres, a stalwart fellow of over
6 feet, put his back lagainst my door and stopped them.
Among the toasts I heard was that of "Mr. and Mrs. Acres
and might all the young Acres become square miles." There
was little more sleep that night for any one.
A MARRIAGE UNDER THE BLUE SKY.
The other incident was a wedding. In riding along I
saw a tilted cart and in it a man and a woman. They wish-
ed to speak directly they saw me, and I found that they
were going on slowly to Wilcannia, and after some con-
versation they said that their object was to get married.
They wanted to stop the cart and be married then and
there. There were no witnesses, etc., land it could not be
done and they were much disappointed. I rode on about


8 miles and went off the road to call at :a station on the
river. On regaining the roia/d I saw the tilted cart com-
ing on and a man and his wife (happened to be camping near
at hand. We /asked them to act as witnesses and the mar-
riage took place. I wrote out the papers on the tail board
of the dart. The ceremony was not under a gum tree, for
there were none there, as it was a plain. Our beautiful
service was read and the bride and bridegroom, while the
words were repeated, "Those whoml God hlath joined to-
gether, let no man put asunder," knelt, not in a fine Gothic
•church, but under the blue sky and open canopy of heaven;
in a word, in nature's magnificent cathedral.
WILCANNIA.
I did not reach Wilcannia until after dark on the Satur-
day. Unfortunately no notification of my coming Ihad been
made, although a letter had been sent to a certain gentleman,
and my arrival created surprise. Before having tea at the
small hotel I put up at, I was interviewed by two or three
persons who each asked me to have a drink, and I think
confidence in me was given when they found that I did not
take any intoxicants.
How was Ito arrange for the morrow? The neglect
to make any provision for me might mean trouble. After
tea I went out to see about holding services. I made en-
quiries and found that the only place in the town that could
be termed a hall was a long skillion room used for a public
school. This I secured without trouble for the day. I put
notices in the stores of the services and told wlhlat people I
could. Wilcannia had a population of about 400. I found
that four or five dear Christian people (I wish I could re-
member all their names) conducted a small Sunday-school,
and so witnessed for Christ and taught the children about
Him and the way to heaven. I did not hear of any church
services held by laymen las in Bourke.
The Sunday was one I never forget. News of my arri-
val quickly spread and I had, considering the size of the
town, a fairly lfarge congregation in the morning. In the
afternoon I had a children's service connected with the
Sunday-school, which was held in the same buiding. It
was an unusual attendance and the children were most at-
tentive. I had one or two christenings afterwards. In
the evening the room was packed and many could not
get in. Mr. J. C. Woore, the Police Magistrate, who dur-
ing the day, heard of *nv arrival at once did all he could to
help. He found out a harmonium in the town and having
brought it to the pllaee, arranged for Mrs. Woore to play it,
so we had music. It seemed to me a very hearty service.
I preached on the condescension of Christ and his great love
for the souls of men. I trust that the last great day may
show some fruit from the seed sown.


Afterwards Mr. Woore drove me out to his place to stay
the night.
MONDAY IN WILCANNIA.
At each service I had explained that the chief object of
my visit and the desire of the Bishop was to arrange to
station a clergyman in the town. In conference with
others I found that the only possible room was one in Mc
George's Wileannia Hotel, that in which I had held the ser-
vice was wanted for the Public School.
At 11 a.m. I found a good attendance there, and repre-
sentative of the best people in the town. Briefly after
explaining fully the object of the meeting, I asked that first
£lO a quarter should be paid the clergyman who was to be
stationed iat Bourke. He was to visit the town quarterly.
The journey there and back was 450 miles. This was at
once agreed to.
The main question was then entered upon, he., that of
having a resident minister at Wileannia. There was a
long discussion. I asked for £3OO for him. A list was
opened and various men promised annual sums, and, allow-
ing for some called certainties not present, the whole was
made up.
offered a suitable house at £5O a year. The rent was sub-
scribed in the room in a few minutes. My expectations
were quite exceeded, but a greater surprise was to follow.
Mr. Martin, of Murtee Station, said that they
must have a church and offered to give £l5O towards build-
ing one. Another discussion. Of course las chairman I
warmly advocated the erection of a church. Imagine a
town of British people without any House of God. The
movement caught on and before the end of the meeting no
less than £385 was subscribed in the room to the object.
This, after the previous promises for the stipend and house,
was most remarkable.
It was a long meeting, but the interest was fully sus-
tained to the end. Here were men living without Sunday
service or the public worship of God, indicating that their
consciences showed faith and love for the church of their
fathers, and told them of duty. Before ending a commit-
tee was formed, and it then accompanied me to different
points in the town to select a site, 1y 2 acres of vacant Gov-
ernment land, for church purposes'. We settled upon the
place, and a little later I sent the description to the Bishop
that he might make the formal application and have the
land secured. Further particulars are given of the visit
in the report of the "Willcannia Times," of 10th September,
which I reprint here, though in one or two points it does
not accord with my notes:—


CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
The Rev. F. B. Boyce, Acting-Incumbent of Bourke, arrived in
Wilcannia on Saturday evening last. In consequence of the Bourke
mail, which contained' the intelligence that Mr. Boyce was on the
road to Wilcannia, not arriving until after our last issue had ap-
peared, the matter was not generally known until Saturday evening.
Mr. Boyce did not arrive until 8 p.m., but fatigued as he was after
a long ride, he visited a few of the leading members of his Church
before he retired to take the rest he so much needed. On Sunday
he preached morning and evening in the schoolroom. The attend-
ance in the morning was large, but in the evening it surpassed
anything we have seen on the river, and we believe that Wentworth
is the only township on the Darling that could produce such a num-
ber of church goers. The room was crowded to excess, and there
were numbers standing in the street, who had arrived too late to
obtain a seat. The sermons were eloquent and were thoroughly ap-
preciated by everybody. We must certainly compliment Mr.
Boyce for having adopted a style of preaching for the bush that is in
every way suitable. People who very rarely see a clergyman and
who allow their Bibles to get covered in dust, do not require a
minister to introduce Latin quotations or far-fetched ideas, but
merely want to hear in as simple a manner as can be told the "truth
as it is in Jesus." After witnessing the congregation of Sunday
last, one naturally asks why we have not got a clergyman? The
question is easily answered. We possess the most dilatory lot in
Wilcannia ever a township was inflicted with. No energy, no care
for promoting the district, no anxiety to obtain anything that would
benefit the place morally or socially, they go from day to day in a
style that is painful to anyone with a go-ahead spirit. We want
such men as the pioneers of Dubbo and Bourke—men who are not
afraid to remind a thoughtless Government we have some claim
upon the distribution of the revenue. We are sure if the matter
were laid before the Bishop of Bathurst in a proper light he would
not only send us a clergyman, but assist us to build a church. We
hope yet to shame our citizens into action.
After the service on Sunday evening, twelve children were
baptized.
Will Wonders Ever Cease?—We believe that the Millennium
has come, for O, Mirabile dictu! we have seen a live Church of
England clergyman—not a picture, nor a portrait, but a human being.
We once heard the Rev. W. Taylor, while lecturing in Mudgee,
some years ago, in speaking about the Californian rush, say that so
great was the stampede in some towns that one particular village was
entirely deserted by all the male portion who were old enough to
rock a digger's cradle. One man, who thought "there is no place
like home," returned to the bosom of his family. Just as he was
going through the main street a young girl happened to be standing
outside the house, and lifting her eyes, with one loud shriek exclaim-
ed, ''Oh, Mother, there's a _ man!" We might almost venture
to say that something of a similar nature was said on Sunday last.
The savages of the South Sea Islands have greater facilities for wor-
shipping God than ithe inhabitants of Wilcannia. Our only redeem-
ing feature is a very nice Sunday School—for which we are indebted
solely to Mr. and Mrs. Vaughan, and were it not for them a num-
ber of our already too precocious children would not even be aihle
to sing that little hymn—
"l was not born as .thousands are,
Where God is never known."
People in this town appear to have sufficient intercourse _ with
"spirits," require no teaching, and heed but little the apostolic in-
junction "Forgeit not assembling yourselves together."


PUBLIC MEETING.
Pursuant to notice given by Mr. Boyoe after the service on
Sunday, a meeting was held at McGregor's Wilcannia Hotel on
Monday morning last. Among others we noticed our worthy
Police Magistrate, Messrs. E. Martin, Vaughan, Brayley, Kirk-
patrick, and Tewsley. The meeting was of a conversational nature.
The Rev. F. B. Boyce said he was sorry such neglect had 'been
displayed, in not sending a clergyman before; but it was understood
that Mr. Tarleton was to visit Wilcannia periodically, but a subse-
quent engagement made by that gentlerrtan with; the people of
Bourke, altered the arrangements that the Bishop of Bathurst intend-
ed Mr. Tar'ieton to carry out. He (the speaker) wished to remedy
the present state of things. They had met together that morning
to discuss matters relative to the church, and the first under their
notice was to arrange for a clergyman to visit Wilcannia every three
or four months, and to remain for one week on each occasion. He
hoped that by next June Wilcannia would have a resident clergyman.
He thought that a clergyman should receive £lO towards his stipend
upon each visit.
Mr. E. Martin said he would give £5 per annum for a clergy-
man to visit us three or four times in the year.
It was then decided that the clergyman receive £lO upon the
occasion of each visit.
Mr. Boyce said the next matter was to arrange for a resident
clergyman, to go as high up the river as Kallara, up the Paroo, down
to Menindie, and visit a number of the back stations. From what
he had heard and seen he was sure there would be no difficulty in
maintaining a clergyman in this place.
An estimate was then gone into when it was proved that over
£4OlO per annum could be guaranteed to a resident clergyman.
Amongst other subscriptions the following were promised by those
in the room, viz.: Messrs. E. Martin, Kirkpatrick, Fysh and Tews-
ley, Vaughan and Brayley, and T. McGeorge, £lO each. A num-
ber of others promised from £5 down to £l.
Mr. Boyce said the next business was the erection of a church.
He thought there was no time like the present, and we might almost
have our church erected by the time our minister arrived. The
preliminaries generally occupied a deal of time, and the sooner we
commenced the sooner we should have a fair start.
Mr. Kirkpatrick said Mr. Edward Martin would give £l5O to-
wards the erection of a church. (Applause.)
A subscription list was handed round the room, and afterwards
taken round the town, when the sum of £385 was promised.
Amongst the larger amounts were—Mr. E. Martin, £150; Mr. Kirk-
patrick, £25; Messrs. Vaughan and Brayley, £25; Messrs. Fysh and
Tewsley, £25; Mr. Woore, P.M., £10; and Mr. T. McGeorge, £lO.
The following gentlemen were then appointed to act as a Church
Committee:—Mr. Kirkpatrick, Hon. Treasurer; Mr. Vaughan, Hon.
Secretary; and Messrs. Martin,, Woore, Tewsley, S. A. Harris, F.
Bonney, A. De Sali and R. (Frew, with power to add to their num-
ber.
Mr. Boyce was instructed to procure plans, and transact other
business connected with the building of a new church.
During the afternoon I married two couples, christened
more children, and visited some homes. A cordial good-bye was
given. At about Bin the evening on that Monday I rode on
on my wtay back to Bourke with Mr. Martin to his station,
Mnrtee, eight miles out, where I stayed the night. Many


persons told rue afterwards that I had spent a very remark-
able two days in the town.
BACK TO BOURKE.
1 was due in Bourke for the next Sunday, so had little
time to spare, as I rode up the river. I lost three or four
hours through laj gentleman kindly driving me back a few
miles and off the track to see a wealthy man whom I wish-
ed to ask for a substantial sum towards church work, but
unfortunately found that he was away on a distant part of
the station. I called in on Mr. Acres, the celebration of
whose departure had been held on my way down, and dis-
covered that he had not yet left. I asked him for £IOO to-
wards building a parsonage at Bourke, which he generously
agreed to give.
There seemed on my return to be pleasure in Bourke at
the general success of the Wilcannia trip. I only stayed a few
days in the town and then left for Gongolgon and Rrewar-
rina. Could I get to Cobar? I was very anxious to do so
but there seemed to be little prospect owing to a want of
time, as I was due home at Molong early the next month.
OFF TO BREWARRINA.
I left riding Warwick, the Kingmaker, as a friend play-
fully called him. I covered the 90 miles in two days to
Gongolgon, calling at some stations on the way. I held a
service in the township in a place I think was used as a
school, and had a meeting after it, at which £25 was pro-
mised towards the stipend of the Bourke clergymen. This
I t ( hought liberal considering the township was very small.
I made enquiries about getting to Cobar, as I knew I
had no time to go round by road. I was told that it was
130 miles, 90 of which was bush with no track whatever.
The next day, Saturday, I rode over to Brewarrina on a
track of 30 miles where I was expected for the Sunday.
On that track a man not long after lost his way and died of
thirst. I stayed at Mr. R. Kelly's, who treated me very kindly.
There was tan active minded Methodist minister, Rev. G. R.
Glasson, stationed there, and who had recently come. He
was absent on duty northward ia,t the time of my visit.
There was no church there. ,
The river was high and picturesque and there was an
abundance of grass, it being a fine spring. There were not
so many blacks about as I expected, as it was known as the
"Fisheries," as found at other points on the river.
I was struck with the enterprise of the little handful
of residents and their strong belief in the future of the town.
They had erected a good School of Arts. The Sunday seem-


ed well observed as to business. Not only were the stores
strictly closed but by mutual consent the hotels as well, and
On the Sunday, the 20th, I conducted service in the
when it was legal to keep them open from 1 p.m. to 3 p.m.
Court House, morning and evening. In the afternoon there
was ia gathering of •children that I addressed. On the Mon-
day I visited various families and held small meetings of
church people. They wanted ia, resident clergyman but it
wtas not on full consideration seen possible to support one,
so it was resolved to give £75 a year to the one for Bourke,
on condition that he visited the town once ia. month. The
idea of a resident clergyman was to be taken up later on.
I left on Tuesday morning, having passed two happy days
in the little town.
THE RIDE TO COBAR.
On the Tuesday morning I rode the 30 miles over to Gon-
goEgan. and reached it soon after noon. I was resolved if it
were possible, to get across to Cobar. It was 130 miles and
I had to remember that I was due in Bourke for Sunday. I
talked the matter over with the policeman, the storekeeper
and others. I wish that I could remember their names, and
received information and advice. The advice was, generally,
not to try. However, difficulties were cleared away. A very
reliable blackfellow was found and recommended as guide
and I bought a fresh horse for £5. I knew that I could not take
my loved Warwick on such a journey as he had already done
30 miles that diay. I left him in a paddock to take him on
my return. The township was on the main road from Bourke.
We took a supply of provisions, a dozen people gathered
to see us start at about 3 p.m. We had to cut (across through
the bush 90 miles it was said, to Tindarra, where we would
strike the main road from Bourke to Cobar. We purposed
riding about 50 miles, the distance named to me, that even-
ing to a place called Bye, where there was water, and the only
place they knew where there was any,and then camp. I was
to get into Tindarra in the middle of next day. The country
was lightly timbered and much of it open plain.
The blackfellow was a capital guide, and riding a few yards
in front led the way and made the pace. We {halted soon
after sundown for a time to rest the horses. The night was
fine and clear. The only incident was over the native dogs
or dingoes. I often ,siaw one or two and they looked very
surprised at our trespass in this country. Soon after dark
their number grew and a pack of between twenty and forty
followed and then surrounded us. Had we been on foot the
case might have been serious as they were known when
working together, to attack any man they siaw, but as we


were riding no danger was felt. We kept up a good pace, and
I slashed at them with a riding whip I carried when they
came in reach. They were with us nearly an hour, a silent,
strange, weird lot, then gradually drew off finding at last
the pace too much. At about 11 o'clock we reached the
water, and then proceeding la little further, to near a de-
serted sheep yard, we agreed to camp.
Having hobbled out the horses we, the blackfellow chief-
ly, made a big fire, partly with the idea of keeping off the
dingoes. The billy soon boiled and we had tea and sup-
per. My companion said little, and by about midnight was
sound asleep. I must confess I did not get a wink until
three or four o'clock. I could not feel sure of my guide,
although ! had not the least reason to doubt him, but a
story of a recent murder was in my mind. A gentleman
had gone on the other side of Bourke alone, looking for
new country, with la blackfellow whom he fully trusted.
When camping in the middle of the night the man had risen
and hit him on the head with a tomahawk; he was only
partly stunned and was rising, when the blackfellow struck
him again, and he went down and the murder was completed.
The man was later arrested and confessed the particulars.
T,his helped to keep me awake, and I was unaccustomed to
camping out. But I 'had some sleep. At 7 a.m we were
having our breakfast. Before 8 o'clock the horses were
caught and saddled and we were once more on the wing to
cover the distance to Tindarra. Little did I dream as I left
our camp, 40 miles from any house, that some day the iron
horse would pass that way and a town, Byrock, be formed
there. Whenever I see Byrock mentioned in the newspapers
I think of that night.
What a splendid guide that aborigine was. How he found
his way in that country without a track Ido not know. I
thought it a fine piece of bushmanship; he took me nut of the
bush soon aftei one o'clock directly at Tindarra on the
Bourke road to Oobar. The only dwelling there was a pub-
lic house.
I had a good meal, and paid off the blackfellow and
said as kindly and serious a farewell to him as I could.
I was thoughtfully lent a fresh horse, and at 2.30 had
mounted to start when a waggonette came up from the
Cobiar direction with a young man and woman in it. The
man beckoned to me and I found that the couple wanted
to be married and were on the road to Bourke to meet me
there. Nothing would do but have the wedding then and
there. I consented, the ceremony was in the parlour; I made
them, I hope, happy, but was to meet them again as the
reader will find. I Was delayed nearly an hour. I reached
Cobar at about nine o'clock. How glad I was to see its
light! I had ridden 160 miles since I had left Brewarrina


on the previous morning I have had no other so great a
ride in my life.
COBAR.
My arrival in the little mining township of about 300 peo-
ple, as I had been unable to send any word, created a great
surprise. There was no telegraph. The news that a parson
had come seemed to go through the place like a shot. I
could only trace one minister, Mr. Tarleton as having ever
visited the town, and his visit had been about two years
before. Within an hour I was waited on by two bride-
grooms wanting to be married and I arranged with them for
the next day, to be my only day in the place. It was sudden
for the brides. I need scarcely say that after such a jour-
ney I had a thoroughly good night's rest.
The day at Cobar, 24th September, was well filled.
I called on or interviewed many persons. I arranged for a
large shed in which to hold a service in the evening, and
did the best I could to give notice. There was no church of
any kind. I had several christenings and two marriages. I ob-
tained some promises of support for a clergyman provided
he visited the place regularly. In the evening the whole pop-
ulation seemed to attend the service and the attention and
interest was most encouraging, though before the night was
over I had serious doubts as to any good effect. I preached
from the text (2 Cor. viii., 9) "For you know the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your
sakes He became poor, that ye through His poverty might
be rich."
It was Thursday night and I had to be in Bourke, 120
miles off, for Sunday. Knowing that I should have a long
ride the next day I did not stay up late. I went to bed,
but, alas, not to sleep. The town appeared determined to
celebrate the weddings and it would not go to rest. In the
inn I stayed at dancing began at about 10.30, and did not
finish until about 4 a.m. The town was (all alive and some
were more than noisy. In the wooden building with thin
walls or calico lined slabs, not too close together, the jubi-
lations were not shut off. When the dancers finished I
thought that there would be a nice quiet time, and went
off to sleep, but before daylight some young fellows went
through the street tin-kettling the newly married couples,
so there was enough again to keep most people awake. Ex-
cept in these celebrations I was treated with the greatest
kindness.
THE YELLOW WATER HOLES.
I was on the road (now there is a nearer one)
before 9 a.m. I reached Tindarra for a late lunch


and returned the horse so kindly lent me and pro-
ceeded on. I was told that the only place to stay was a
shepherd's hut at the Yellow Water Holes, which was
70 miles from Cobar. On the road I caught up with two
others riding to Bourke, and we thought that we 'had better
keep company. One was a baker and the other a barman.
We hoped to get a decent night's lodging from the shep-
herd. In due course we arrived, but as we neared I recog-
nised a waggonette that on the Wednesday previous had
brought the couple to Tindarra, and whom I had married.
My idea of staying in the hut was disappearing. I found
that the young couple were in full possession, and were
spending their honeymoon there, and had bribed the shep-
herd to go off into the bush and camp. There was no second
room in the hut. What could we do ? The three of us slept
under the waggonette, and as it rained in the night, mat-
ters were none too comfortable. We had, however, plenty
to eat, so good huraoredly contented ourselves.
BOURKE ONCE MORE.
On the next day, Saturday, late in the afternoon, I cover-
ed the remaining 50 miles to Bourke and once more rested
under Mr. Beaizley's hospitable roof. There seemed to be
general surprise when the facts of my ride to Cobar became
known.
* The last Sunday at Bourke was full of interest.
LEAVING BOURKE.
The time had come for me to leave. I found that friends
seemed to think that my visit to the river had proved
very satisfactory and helpful. Certainly the objects of ar
ranging for the settlement of clergymen on the Darling had
been accomplished, and I believed that I had done other
things of moment for the Church in the far West. A little
later Bishop Marsden sent Rev. J. C. Bravey to Bourke and
Rev. E. H. Wright to Wilcannia. Not only had men been
spoken to about eternal things in the towns and on the
widely separated squattages, but isolated shepherds and
others when seen had been reminded of their faith and duty
and shown in their loneliness that they were not alone, as
God would be with them. At least, I had tried to witness
for the Master Christ and the last great day may show that
the seed sown haa produced good fruit.
* Then on that line of country there was no clergyman sfcat'oncd
beyond Dubiho. Now there is a clergyman of our Church at
each of the following .places:—Bourke, Wilcannia, Brewar-
rina, Cobar, Coonabarrabran, Warren, Coonamble, Walgett, Narra-
mine and Nyngan. In addition there is the Buah Brotherhood.


Early in the week I left the town and with mingled feel-
ings. I was sorry to say good-bye, but happy at the thought
that my face was towards home. The trowel a-nd mallet
given me to lay the foundation stone of the church I retain
as a miost valued memento of the visit.
HOMEWARD BOUND.
Leading the .horse with my saddlebags I started for
home. At Oongolgon I picked up Warwick and left to be
sold the horsethat I had bought for the Cobar ride, and for
which a year or two after I received my money back. My
own two horses, great friends, were glad to be together
again and homeward bound, were in a specially good temper.
The track was dry and good. I called in fit Canonbar on the
wtay, which I could not in going reach, through the flood,
and the service was well attended. All along the Bogan
much interest was shown in my trip and I was plied with
questions; but in the 400 miles which took me the greater
part of a fortnight to cover, there was no incident of
note. The last evening I stayed at Mr. Maculloch's at
Buckinbah, 32 miles from Molong. I was home at the Par-
sonage shortly after 1 o'clock the next day. What to me
had become music, the jingle of the hobbles and pannikin,
ceased. It was Friday, the 9th of October, and I Shad been
out two months and six days.
* I shall never forget the happiness of getting into the
town. It was a most beautiful spring, and as I neared it,
the richness of the green grass and of the foliage generally,
was most striking. The Bogan in a good season was called
a barley field, but neither there nor on the Barling was there
the lovely colouring of Molong. There it was a dull green
and sombre, but here it was bright and fresh as in English
meadows. The beauty seemed to culminate round the town.
I entered by the "West End." As I rode through the street,
the friendly hands that waved their welcome to me on
either side from many doors and verandahs were very pleas-
ing. Persons standing outside went in to tell others, and
they came out and waved too. In not many minutes I was
with my wife and young son, and it was home, sweet home
*1 think that I can claim to have done something towards recipro-
cating the kindness shown me on the Darling. When the great
flood of 1890 caused devastation at Bourke and up the river I started
a requisition in Sydney, and took it round and obtained influential
signatures asking the Mayor to convene a public meeting to obtain
funds to relieve distress. The meeting was held and steps taken.
Over £1 ojooo were raised and distributed.


A few days later the church was densely packed with
friends to hear an account of my journey. I was able to
say that I was very thankful to God for travelling mercies,
having ridden in very lonely roads and tracks, and when there
were no tracks, nearly 2,000 miles. I hoped that I had done
my duty and with it something at least towards establishing
our beloved Church on the banks of the Darling.


