

A PROSPEROUS COUNTRY REQUIRES
THE NOBLEST HEARTS TO PROMPT,
THE WISEST HEADS TO PLAN,
THE MOST SKILFUL HANDS TO EXECUTE.
“In proportion as the structure of a Government gives force to
Public Opinion, it is essential that Public Opinion
should be enlightened.”
PUBLIC SCHOOLS
BY
W. CATTON GRASSY,
AUTHOR OF “SCHOOLS IN THREE CONTINENTS."
AN EDUCATIONAL POLICY FOR AUSTRALIA.
1. Free Public Schools.
2. Abolition of Result Examinations.
3. Abolition Teacher System and the Employ-
ment of Adult Tarned Teachers.
4. Practical Lducation — Kindergarten, Manual, Agri-
cultural, and Training.
5. Reform in School Buildings.
6. Public Secondary Schools and Agricultural Colleges.
ONE SHILLING.
Adelaide:
HUSSEY & GÌLLINGHAM. 28, WAYMOUTH STREET.
1891.


OUR PUBLIC SCHOOLS:
BY
W. CATTON GRASBY,
AUTHOR OF “SCHOOLS IN THREE CONTINENTS.”
SUMMARY OF CONTENTS.
PAGE
Introductory ... ... ... .. ... ... ••• 3
A Review of Educational Progress in South Australia—Old Times,
Council of Education, Education Department ... ... ... 6
How The State Values Education ... ... ... ... 13
Teaching—a Profession, Trade, or Art ? ... ... ... ... 14
Pupil Teacher System a Relic of the Past ... ... ... 15
Acquiring the Power to Drive a Team or Training Teachers ... 17
How Can the Defects be Remedied ? ... ... ... ... 18
Result Examinations—“ Going through the Mill;” Examinations Mechani-
cal, Arbitrary, and Unfair ; Teachers’ Opinions; Mr. Hartley’s
Definition of Cram; Hotbeds of Cram ... ... ... 21
Course of Study ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
Manual Training.—The New Education in England, America, the Continent
of Europe; the Psychological Basis of Manual Training; Mr.
Hartley and Manual Training; Objections to Manual Training;
Kindergarten ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
SchoolhousesandFurniture.—ASerious Charge; 111-adapted Sohoolhouses,
Barbarous Seats ; Ignorance of the Department; Waste of Public
Money ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 88
Classification and Promotion ... ... ... ... ... 44
Staff.—Altogether insufficient; Fallacies ; Overwork ; Summary, with Re-
flections, dedicated to Members of Parliament and Trades Unions... 45
A Mania for Economy ; Centralization ; Indirect Tax on Teachers’ Incomes 49
Secondary Education ... ... ... ... ... ... 51
Free Education ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 56
What will it all Cost V ... ... ... ... ... ... 57
Several Suggestions ... ... ... ... ... ... 69
Conclusion ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 63
Appendix.—Proving Charges re School Buildings ; Plans and Elevation of
Currie-street School; Plans and Elevation of a School giving
between twenty and thirty thousand cubic feet, additional, of
Class-room Space, as well as other conveniences, for the same
amount of outside wall ... ... .. ... ... 64


INTRODUCTORY.
Object of the Pamphlet.—During the latter part of last year Mr.
Hartley sent for me, and kindly offered to recommend me for the
Inspectorship of the schools of West Australia, which had been
virtually placed in his gift. Among his reasons for having selected me as
most suitable for the position he stated that, in addition to my experience
and success as a practical teacher, I had acquired by travel, by business,
and intercourse with men of educational standing in various lands, that
“detachment of mind ” which would enable me to take a comprehensive
view of an educational system. To fill such an onerous position
in a province of the importance of West Australia, when just receiving
the privilege of constitutional government, was a tempting offer to one
deeply interested in the practical work of education; but my enquiries in
America and Europe having convinced me of the great need for radical
changes in the educational policy of South Australia, I decided to decline
the honour and work for reform here. For the same reasons I declined
to re-enter the service of the Education Department to work under a
policy I believe to be wrong.
In order to indicate in what respects, and why I consider the
policy injurious to the best interests of the province, this pamphlet
is published.
Scope of the Pamphlet.—l do not, to any extent, deal with the
details of school work. My purpose is broader, and only concerns
details in an indirect way, from the fact that the greater includes the
less. My purpose is to sketch an Educational Policy. Govern-
ment of the people, by the people, for the people is the supposed
condition of a community having political equality—that is, of a
democracy. Will any one in South Australia claim that we have
this? Probably not even the scheming political hypocrite, who
gains power—like the medicine-man of the savage tribe, whose
modern representative he is—by pandering to the prejudices of men ; nor
the ignorant but honest demagogue, whose horizon has been circumscribed
in consequence of circumstances largely beyond his control. Certainly that
body of my fellow-citizens, to whom I respectfully address these pages,
will agree that, however greatly we desire this ideal state of government,
we are a long way from realizing it. Liberty does not mean the oppor-
tunity to “take it out of the other fellow now.” Freedom never meant
the right to loaf. “ Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity ”is a very pretty
motto. I like it. So apparently does the Frenchman. He prints it
in large gold letters over a strong but ornamental sculptured portico
covering massive iron-studded doors, in front of which guards pace day
and night with fixed bayonets. We should strive for realities, not names.
Some weaknesses are really indicative of strength which should
stimulate us to be of good courage, take heart, and quit us like men. It is


a sound doctrine that “all that is necessary in the long run to secure
good government and to cure evils of any kind in the body politic, is that
the people should be correctly informed and should know all the facts.”
Our weakness is that the Government tries to keep the people ignorant of
the facts. My purpose is to urge the claims of national education, and to
urge them strongly ; to ask Australians to insist that the young shall be
equipped in the best possible manner for their duties as future
citizens, but at the same time to try and avoid joining the ranks of “ one-
idea men ” who see in one necessary branch of reform the salvation of the
race. The human race cannot be ferried along the stream of time and
landed in the millennium in a dream. All that I claim, and I think it is
reasonable to do so, is that true education (not merely schooling)
must precede all reforms, because it alone renders them possible.
The point on which most people will differ from me will be what is the
nature of true education.
No human mind has ever yet encompassed truth. A few great men
have formed beautiful conceptions of her greatness and purity ; but even
these are not unfrequently more or less wrong, and always very imperfect,
because people wish to prove that a preconceived opinion is right, instead
of casting it aside and waiting until truth shall reveal something of
herself. Lesser minds have caught glimpses of her reflected glory, and,
being dazzled by a vision so strange as even the shadow of truth must be
to eyes bleared by error, have thought the distorted reflection of a portion
to be the whole truth. How else can we account for the number of
sincere men who wish to carry humanity to perfection in a one-horse car 1
No one should accept my conclusions, but should enquire for himself. If
he cannot, and it is only possible for very few to do so, I ask, and I
think justly, that my judgment should be taken before that of any one who
has not had at least equal opportunities, and has not devoted equal time
and thought in an earnest endeavor to reach correct conclusions on public
education irrespective of their nature. I am fully conscious that other
men, after observing the same facts, hearing the same arguments, and
watching the same processes, would come to different, possibly exactly
opposite conclusions ; but, as this is not a philosophical essay, I shall not
discuss the natural cause of this fact, for it does not affect my position in
the least. I have no doubt that many of the opinions I express will
meet with opposition; but I ask those to whom anything may seem
impracticable or utopian to bear in mind that they are not new or sudden
conclusions.
Many of the opinions advanced, particularly those relating to pupil
teachers and the system of examination, were committed to paper almost
in their present form in 1885. They were the result principally of three
causes :—l. Observations and enquiries made during my first visit to
Europe in 1881. 2. A study of the science of teaching. 3. My acquaintance
with the evils of the system under which I had been trained and was
working. I did not carry out a suggestion to publish my views in 1886,
because while I knew the evils of the system I was uncertain as to the
remedies, and considered that they were largely unavoidable. But apart
from this, loyalty to the department and admiration for its head, who was
working against great opposition, would have prevented me. These


objections no longer exist. I have seen how others have remedied the
evils from which we suffer. I have left, and declined to re-enter a depart-
ment whose policy I cannot endorse, and admiration or otherwise of the
man entrusted by the community with the administration of a department
should not interfere with a citizen’s criticism of the policy of the country
or of the working of the department.
Messrs. Cassell <fe Company, Limited, have in press, and will shortly
publish, simultaneously in England and America, a volume entitled
“ Schools in Three Continents,” in which I compare some of the
public school systems of the United States, Canada, England, France,
Germany, and Australia. To this work I must refer my readers for further
evidence on which many of the proposals herein made are based. Limits
of space have necessitated my cutting these notes down very greatly, and
in any estimate of their value it should be remembered that I
claim little originality for any proposal. I have chiefly played
the part of a collector of information on public education in those
countries in which it has made the greatest progress, and I believe
every suggestion I make is in operation with greater or less per-
fection in some part of the world. I have merely gathered and
pieced them together. I am well aware that the fact that a certain
system or practice is in operation more or less widely is no proof
either of its desirability or practicability. The fondness of the South Sea
Islander for baked missionary is not taken as an argument in favor of
making well-conditioned, self-denying, religious instructors minister to
bodily appetites rather than to spiritual necessities. But it may be
claimed that when the desirability of a change has been shown, the fact
that it is in successful operation elsewhere under thoughtful, progressive
men is a strong argument in favor of our trying it.
Educational ideas develop in different directions in various countries.
A strong feature in one country is often a weak one in another. Thus
one of the strongest points in the English system is the fact that althougn
the schools are not free, every child must attend school, and be dosed with
what is misnamed education. One of the greatest weaknesses of the much
superior public schools of many of the United States is the fact that while
the schools are free to all from the age of five to twenty-one years, a child
need not attend at all, but may grow up in ignorance—a menace to the
well-being of the nation. Again, elementary education is free in Victoria
Queensland, and New Zealand, while the other colonies embracing,
roughly speaking, an equal population, lag behind, and charge fees. But
though Victoria is an example to New South Wales and South Australia
in having made her schools free, the parent colony gives her perky child
sister, no less than South Australia, a lesson in the matter of providing
secondary education on precisely the same terms as elementary, and it
may be safely said that South Australia leads all the colonies in the
matter of scientific, modem, well-graduated standards.
Going further afield, the same tendency is seen in America. Massa-
chusetts, for example, makes education compulsory between the ages of
eight and fourteen, and free to any student irrespective of age, but only
to the limit of the high school course. Some of the Western States, on
the other hand, which cannot be persuaded to pass—or, at all events, to


enforce—compulsory laws, not only provide free elementary and secondary
schools, with text-books given in, but also offer the privileges of the State
Universities free of charge.
Now, my argument is that where a system has advanced in any
direction beyond us we should give our Department no rest until it
progresses too.
Take an example in another direction. We have a system of pupil
teachers “ more’s the shame.” How they manage as well as they do is no
less a marvel to the observer than a credit to the young people and the
principal teachers. England, to her disgrace and the disgust of her best
educationalists, also depends on a pupil teacher system, antiquated and
illogical though it be ; but in the leading centres, notably in London, they
only teach for a very brief period each week of the first two years of their
apprenticeship, and, during the remaining tw T o years, have to spend
considerable time at the various colleges for study under special masters.
In Germany, France, Belgium, Switzerland, the United States, and the
part of Canada I visited, the system of teaching by pupil teachers does
not exist, and only men and women of more mature minds, and generally
with special educational and professional training, are allowed to teach.
Now, why should South Australia stick (like a limpet to a rook or a money
lender to a victim) to a system condemned in the countries possessing
the best educational systems, and which England, with her weight of
conservative influences, is endeavoring to shake off? There is no
reason why she should ; but the reason why she does is not far to seek.
First, Because the head of the department is an autocrat, and sticks to
English ideas ; and second ,• because the public of South Australia have
not awakened to the true condition of their education system, and are too
niggardly to provide funds for progressive work. Nothing proves this more
clearly than the stock expression used by men who have never been inside
one of our schools, to the effect that they compare favorably with those of
other countries : or the more cautious and diplomatic one used by those
political jellyfish who wish to flatter their hearers with pleasing platitudes
and yet keep peace with the ghosts of their former consciences (if they
ever had any) and so say, “ Our educational system is one of the most
perfect of its hind in the world.” The Indian’s ox-cart may be the most
perfect of its hind, but that does not make the jolting any the less
uncomfortable.
A REVIEW OF EDUCATIONAL PROGRESS IN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Old Times.— lt is interesting to think of the progress of elementary
education in South Australia for the past twenty years. Senior-Inspector
Dewhirst and a very few old teachers remain in the service, connecting
by a slender link the old with the new. How great has been the change.
In former days, when the Inspector visited a school he would put a few
questions to the elder children, and then the head boy of the school
would ask for a half-holiday. This being granted, three cheers were
given, and the juveniles scrambled forth,
Happy in the freedom of school let out.


Teachers and pupils alike looked forward to the Inspector’s visit with
pleasure. Would it were so now. It ought to be. It might be. Why
is it not 1 The answer lies in the one word, “ Results.”
The teaching in those days was not usually of a high order; but it
was better than we are wont to admit. Probably it was better than its
surroundings and its pay. There were many good men and true engaged
in the work amidst numerous difficulties. They had poor buildings,
wretched appliances, irregular attendance, squabbling trustees, precarious
sources of income, and other drawbacks to contend with; but they served
their generation to the best of their ability, and for the most part have
fallen out of the ranks, their places being filled by more vigorous and
progressive men. Let us not forget their work.
Progress Made. —Undoubtedly the progress has been great, and the
general direction forward, notwithstanding that many steps have been
rather aside than ahead. Our biggest leap was in 1885, when we
scrambled over the hedge of bad standards, but only to fall up to our
necks in the ditch of mechanical tests. There we have floundered ever
since, getting deeper in the mud each year, because we refuse to throw
aside the heavy weights of conservative notions. Mr. Hartley has been
identified with the system of public education from the time when it
commenced to make progress. In fact, it has advanced with him, and
largely through him. I do not know, and it is not my intention to
speculate as to the extent to which he was responsible for the earlier
stages of advancement. Whenever the slow workings of the public mind
have demanded a change he has carried it out, and at times he has had
the strength to initiate reforms against public opinion. It will be
advantageous to glance at the epochs of development since the revival
in 1872.
Historical — First Big School. —ln 1874 the G-rote Street School was
opened. It is a monument of how little those who had to guide the
initial steps of the public education reform knew about the subject. It
is hard to conceive of a building erected during the past quarter of a
century more unsuited for its purpose than the Grote Street School, which
formed the basis of the plans for the public schools for some time. Since
then we have spent between three and four hundred thousand pounds
in school buildings, many of which are equally ill-adapted for the purposes
of education. It has often occurred to me that had the government, in
view of the intended expenditure, selected a practical, progressive man,
a teacher for choice, and sent him to the countries in which public
education had made the greatest strides to obtain the latest ideas on
school buildings, we should have saved his expenses twenty times over,
and been spared the humiliation of knowing that our buildings cannot be
made to suit modern requirements. With the opening of the Grote
Street Model School, as it was called, there were initiated the two
greatest evils of the Educational Policy.
1. The Pupil Teacher System.
2. Result examinations.
In these, as in other matters, we followed England, where the public
education idea was merely dawning. Even now, in spite of the strides


which have been made, England is admittedly behind other nations in
nearly all matters appertaining to public education. With regard to the
standards, no one recognizes this more clearly than the Inspector
General, and yet in our methods of training teachers and judging their
work, as well as in our general ideas on education, we follow conservative
England, rather than the progressive centres of the United States, Paris,
and best German examples.
Council of Education. —The old Board of Education was abolished in
1875, and its place taken by the Council of Education, with Mr. Hartley
as Chairman ; but the same policy was followed. Buildings were erected
as rapidly as possible, and not a few blunders were made apart from the
general unfitness. At the Burra, for example, the population is clustered
round two centres, perhaps a mile and a half apart. Instead of building
two schools convenient for the pupils at each centre, an immense,
ill-contrived, inconvenient, expensive building was erected—twice the
necessary size—half a mile from either centre, in a position which necessi-
tates a large portion of the children going past one of the largest cattle
sale yards in the province, and which in wet weather is shut in on three
sides by creeks. To supply the new schools with teachers, a number
came from the other colonies. These were all first-rate men, who have
in many ways justified their selection, but men who were usually
unacquainted with any other systems than those of Great Britain and her
colonies, and who, therefore, nursed the pupil teacher and result systems
which are now proving such hard taskmasters.
Training College. —The Training College was established in 1887,
and has been a further means of extending the evils of which I have
spoken. The fact that of the great number of teachers I know who have
been through the institution, very few look back upon their college
career with satisfaction as a period of educational inspiration or
intellectual culture, may well cause serious reflections. That it is
considered to have failed to answer its purpose is indicated by the fact
that this year the policy of the institution has been changed, but changed
unmistakably for the worse, because the students will have less
opportunity than before for that culture which has always been the most
serious want in the college. As one, who should know, has said, “ Our
students do not need practice in teaching so much as study.” I am well
aware of the serious nature of this charge ; but I am prepared to go
further, and say that our training system is opposed to the soundest
principles of pedagogics as understood by the foremost educational writers
of all those countries which have devoted most attention to the subject.
It entirely fails to produce anything like a fair proportion of students,
thinkers, or lovers of knowledge among its trained teachers ; but it does
produce result-getters. I am quite prepared for the arguments in its
favour. I have often discussed the matter, and will give the reply of one
of the ablest School Board clerks in England, who thus defended the
system : —“ I must confess that the German method of training produces
better students, men of wider experience, with a greater knowledge of
the science of education; but ours gives better teachers. The English
method certainly fails to give us cultured, educated men who are life-long
students for the sake of knowledge ; but the English schoolmaster can


teach, and that is what we want.' - ' While I was listening to such
arguments as this on one side of the globe, a deputation on behalf of
teachers in Adelaide was being told that the Department did not require
education so much as ability to “ drive a team.”
The Education Department —ln 1878 the Council of Education
was abolished, and all the powers exercised by that body were vested
directly in the Minister of Education. As a matter of fact, the
Chairman of the Council received the title of Inspector-General of
Schools, and became invested with all the powers formerly exercised by
the Council, and to these he added others. I say, as a matter of fact,
because, nominally, all power is in the hands of the Minister of Education.
But, beyond making the Minister a foil to shield himself from responsibility,
it is questionable whether the various Ministers exercise any control over
the policy of the department, except through the finances. Virtually for
eleven years the Inspector-General of Schools has been an autocrat,
governing the daily life of, in round numbers, a thousand men and women,
and between thirty and forty thousand children. He has said plainly
that no Minister interferes with him in his control of the schools. There
are advantages in this. Teachers are able to realise the beauties of
Russian despotism. Probably no department in the Government
service is more free from political influence than the Education
Department. Teachers rarely think of taking anything into consideration
when an appointment is concerned other than the opinion of the
Inspector-General. A few exceptions are on record, when it has been
generally believed that certain appointments have been made in opposition
to the wish of the “ chief,” and no properly certified facts could be more
implicitly believed than several such impressions. I have at times been
amused when these reports have been spoken of to hear those who
believed them seriously state that “ So-and-So had better mind his P.’s
and Q.’s, because the ‘ chief ’ will take the first opportunity of showing the
Minister who made the appointment over his head that his judgment was
right.” Many superstitions vanish before knowledge. A slight acquaintance
with politics, the recognition of the diplomatic side of the Inspector-
General, a little insight into the ways of the function called administering
a department might still the tongue of more than one Sir Oracle.
The fact that he has had the autocratic power, which he so dearly
loves, must not be lost sight of in estimating his work. No one, probably
not Mr. Hartley himself, fully knows what opposition he has had to
contend against; but whatever it has been, I have no hesitation in
asserting that fully half of it has been due to his impetuosity, his
overbearing ways, his want of generosity in giving credit to his officers
for disinterested work, his claiming originality for reforms which have
been in operation for years in other countries, and his want of tact
in obtaining the best work from the assortment of minds over which
he has had to rule. There are few bodies of men harder to deal
with than teachers, trained under such narrowing systems as those
in force in England and Australia. Added to this, they are pro-
hibited from taking any part in public affairs, so that there is no
influence to knock off the angularities of isolation, the love of having
their own way, and the dogmatism or cock-sure-ed-ness which is


the outcome of having to deal with those who cannot contradict. The
teacher who expects unreasoning obedience to his own whims from his
pupils is the man who objects to the Inspector-General exercising the
same power over him, and that is just what the Inspector-General
requires above all other things. Probably some will think I am unjust
in this, because with one of the peculiar contradictions of human nature
he will often argue a point with a man—or, to be accurate, he will argue
round a point—for an hour at a time; but I never heard of his
acknowledging a mistake. Indeed, he once told me he had never made a
mistake in proposing a change. But this was in an argument, and, like
the flourish of the conjuror’s wand, was perhaps intended for effect. It
had an effect !
Many teachers hold that if he finds he has wronged a man by his
hasty judgment—while he will carefully uphold his decision, and on no
account admit the mistake—he will take the first opportunity of giving
the injured one a promotion. This may ease his conscience, but does not
satisfy the feeling of justice in the heart of the teacher, who would rather
have had his position acknowledged than receive a material advantage.
If this belief be true, the policy is not wise, for no one should—probably no
one does know better than the Inspector-General that material advantage
is not by any means the only or the most powerful incentive even in this
business age. Let no one use these expressions of opinion as arguments
unless confirmed. They are written for those who will understand them.
The Inspector-General has finely developed the power of word
jugglery, that faculty by which the worse is made the better reason. He
invites the criticisms and suggestions of teachers—but I never heard of
his accepting one or the other when it did not correspond with his own
ideas. Teachers go to him with certain opinions, and, to their minds,
conclusive reasons in support of them, but he raises secondary, side or
false issues, and apparently delights in proving by words that the teacher
is wrong. Such a thing as drawing from the teacher his process of
reasoning and endeavoring to enter into his position I have not known,
but I have known dozens of instances of talking teachers into surrender,
or, at all events, retreat in more or less confusion, while their positions
were really unassailed. A teacher blurts out his conclusions with the
candour and confidence of conviction, probably to find that his ideas are
pooh-poohed, or an exceedingly plausible and friendly chat is entered into,
which, when it is thought over, is found to have consisted of pretty
phrases which have had no direct bearing on the subject of the interview.
This may be clever, but it is not fair or candid treatment, neither is it
the way to satisfy, although it may set aside a teacher’s wishes. In time
it engenders a feeling of want of confidence, which is intensified when, as
sometimes happens, the proposal or idea which was said to be absurd or
impossible is advanced from head quarters as original. Ido not wish to
infer that he deliberately pooh-poohs an idea and then adopts it. I
believe those who hold such an opinion, and they are not a few, are in
error. He probably arrives at the same or a similar conclusion from like
evidence, and by the same process as they. Still he owes the initial
thought to their suggestion.
As a man, what 1 have written may not do Mr. Hartley justice : but


I have only to deal with him as an official, and with respect to his policy.
Were it otherwise I should write much of the unselfish help he has
freely given to assist teachers both in school work and in their private
studies. In this he is largely a contradiction of -what I have written
respecting his discouraging study for its own sake. I believe not a few
teachers owe their certificates to more or less private coaching given
generously with the purest of motives and the kindest intentions.
One feature of the Inspector-General’s Policy is its changeableness, and
yet he says, and I think honestly believes, that he is free from this virtue.
For years he was known to be as opposed to drawing and Kindergarten
exercises as he yet is to Manual Training. At the time the Royal Com-
mission was sitting a meeting of teachers was held on the Peninsula. A
leading teacher wffio has always favoured drawing advocated its introduc-
tion into the schools ; but the Inspector-General forcibly expressed the
decision that it could not be done, and it would be absurd to try. “You
can’t teach drawing in elementary schools.” Certainly he kept it out as
long as possible, but when, in addition to the Report of the Technical
Education Commission, Dr. Oockburn carried a resolution in the House
that it should be introduced, he entered into the question with his
characteristic energy, would have none of the recommendations of men
who had studied the question for years, and as a result has introduced a
hotch-potch named system of elementary drawing which he pronounces a
great success, and it is wonderful what the teachers and pupils have done
since it was put into the schools. Its success is largely its weakness for
it is due to its mechanical character. It gives a certain power to copy
forms, but it falls far short of being a thorough educational process such
as the most approved systems of form, study and drawing, the basis of
which is clay modelling. Still it is a benefit.
In judging Mr. Hartley s splendid work we must not look at the
mistakes by themselves, but in connection with the great scope for errors
which his position has given him. No comparison is just which does not
place the whole of the excellencies against the whole of the defects, A
thousand gallons of water is a lot in itself, and will provide a home for
numerous tadpoles, but even compared with our muddy Torrens Lake, it
is insignificant. So with the education system and its administration.
Some of the faults are so great that many will be inclined to condemn
the whole thing. To such I would say be calm, it must not be. Some of
the defects are very grave indeed, and demand immediate and
decisive remedial measures, but they do not condemn our Public
Schools. We are at least in a splendid position for making progress.
The loss of £IO,OOO may be a serious matter, but it does not affect the
stability of a sound bank, I wish these principles to be kept in mind in
connection with all my criticisms of the education system. My object is
reform ; but I would be sorry to do an injustice to anyone. “We should be
proud of our schools,” says Mr. Scherk. Certainly. The parent is also
proud of his little boy, but that prompts him to keep a careful oversight
over him that he may correct his faults at whatever cost, trouble, or pain,
and thus make him the more deserving of his pride. Those who are the
most conscious of the many defects of our public schools are often among
the strongest advocates of State Education. They recognise the great


improvement in the schools, ami the many excellencies of the system.
They see that from the head of the department to the tiny toddlers of five
years all are, hard worked. They admit that honesty of purpose is the
guiding motive of the Inspector-General, even where he is blundering in
the dark or with the stubbornness of a mule along a wrong track ' And,
so great is the power of a determined honesty of intention, that they
would rather allow the existing evils than by interference in any way
hamper the safety of a system which has had too many ignorant maligners.
Many consider the evils to be unavoidable in a public system, because
they cannot devise means to remedy them. It is unfortunately too
frequently true that the reputation for efficiency of a prominent
public officer is accepted as a guarantee for that of his department.
Confidence in the head suggests belief in the soundness of the whole
of the machinery. This is anything but a safe guide, and in the ease
of the Education Department altogether misleading.
The people of old in preparing an ox for sacrifice to Jupiter chalked
out the dark spots to make him appear all pure. They paid but a poor
compliment to the god’s sense. People to-day who wish because a man
has done good work to gloss over the mistakes are as little wise. Let us
dispense with the whitewash, accept the noble and good, and denounce all
else. So only will our high hopes of progress be realized. But why all
this? The Inspector-General is a public servant. We are citizens of a
young country wishing to develop a generation of intelligent men and
women capable and willing to make the best use of all their faculties in
order to LIVE WELL with all that that embraces. This is why we
have Public Schools, and for this reason WE MUST HAVE THAT
PURPOSE CARRIED OUT.
That much progress has been made is nothing to do with the question,
which is— Do our schools fulfil to the greatest extent those purposes
for which the State undertakes the purpose of education? For an
answer, we may ask the teacher who feels his noble aims and
purposes stifled, and his best energies cramped and prostituted by
the curse of a mechanical examination. Question the thoughtful
parent whose child is placed under the control of a boy or girl
pupil teacher unable to understand the objects or means of educa-
tion to be crammed with undigested facts, taught to admire smart-
ness instead of thoroughness, led to work in order to pass a paltry
examination instead of for the love of knowledge, prompted to adopt
dishonest tricks in order to ensure a pass, and finally is turned out
with no conception of the dignity and independence of work, and no
power to make the hand the instrument for executing the conceptions of
the mind. Further than this, he has the degrading idea, that, because he
has passed the elementary examination by a process of memory jugglery,
he is educated, and therefore altogether too smart and clever a fellow to
wear rough clothes and dirty his hands with the work of a farmer or
tradesman. Interview the business man, the tradesman, the manu-
facturer, the farmer, and from each the reply is received that the schools
do not fit the boys for the realities of useful lives. It is no argument to
say that the private schools are worse than the public. That is all the
more reason for making the public schools better.


HOW THE STATE VALUES EDUCATION.
Public Estimate of the Education Service The future of the State
depends on the individual qualifications of the people. The very best men
and women and every appliance that can be devised should be provided
unsparingly for the purpose of preparing each boy and girl in the best
way for the work they are best fitted to do. The keenest intellects, the
most cultivated minds, the noblest and purest hearts, the most skilful
hands should be devoted to the work of education.
Let us enquire what value we place on education compared
with other work. —Public opinion values the services of the Chairman
of Railway Commissioners at £2,500 a year, two Commissioners at £I,OOO
each, a Traffic Manager at £I,OOO, all for directing the traffic on about
1,800 miles of railway, while the services of an Inspector-General of
Schools for directing the education of 49,000 of the country’s future
citizens are merely valued at £BOO. I shall be at once reminded of the
great cost of the railways, the revenue involved, and the convenience of the
public which must be considered. This is beside the point. lam not saying
one word against what is paid for the management of the railways ; but
I submit that the country has more to gain and lose from her proper
treatment of the education question than from the management
of any public works.
We vote £50,000 annually for defence purposes. It is not
my intention to enter upon a tirade against militaryism. This would
be no place for it if I felt so inclined, and while I find my round shoulders
instinctively straightening, and my steps becoming less heavy, and my
hand wanting to clutch a broom-handle under the influence of a stirring
march, I shall consider the matter very carefully before doing so. lam
compelled to admit that however much we may be attracted by the
military spirit, very few, other than nervous alarmists, or those interested
for personal ends, for one moment consider that there will ever be the
slightest need for a defence force. No foreign power has ever thought of
interfering with either a North or South American State ; much less
would they meddle with us unless it be in virtue of the privilege of being
a province of the British Empire. It is a privilege to be intimately
associated with an Empire having a numerous intellectual Royal
Family and a virtuous, talented House of Lords, but if it is to
entail the continuance, in new lands with unimaginable prospects of
greatness, of obsolete customs, the wasteful tendencies of militaryism, and
the possible barbarities of war, then there can be no question whatever
that we should, while increasing the higher ties of sympathy with the
the mother land, take up a position which will set us free from the evils
I have mentioned. The idea of fostering an anti-English feeling is as
harmful as it is childish; but a national Australian sentiment is not
antagonistic to England any more than the cultivation of new home ties on
the part of a man and woman after marriage is opposed to affection
for the old home and the loving memories of childhood. On
the other hand, it is not good to feel that irresponsible Ministers
in London, who know nothing of our special conditions, our national
hopes and fears, our struggles and our difficulties in working out our
great possibilities, may involve us in dangers which cannot give us


anything but may cost us much, and be of no benefit to anybody.
We learn to do by doing is a sound principle for nations as well
as individuals, and although we may make sad mistakes in our attempts
at carrying on a Government of the people, for the people, by the people, it
is only by trying to do so that we shall in the end accomplish our purpose,
and anyhow we may obtain a crumb of comfort from the consideration
that we cannot blunder worse than the so called Statesmen of Europe,
whose party tricks and time-serving ways are often as contemptible as are
the tactics of the most unscrupulous misnamed democrats.
This is somewhat of a digression, but the point is one of great
importance, for it must ever be remembered that the man who is
proud of his country is the more likely to do something to make his
country proud of him. I think, however, that national pride is some-
thing above the accident of birth. Though an Australian, and proud
of it, I have little sympathy with a party embodying the idea that
a native-born Australian is thereby superior to an immigrant, whether
carried ashore in long robes, or who has had the best foreign educational
advantages. Patriotism and national sentiment should be above the
accident of birth.
To return. For the noble purpose of superintending the training a
handful of men to shoot others, we pay a commandant £I,OOO a year, and
several other officers nearly as much ; while for directing the education
of the children of the State we pay £BOO a year. This is the
same as saying that preparing soldiers is several times more important
than training good citizens. I am not for one moment hinting that
the officers do not earn their salaries. As directors of the national
fireworks and general show business they deserve our admiration. Surely
it is worth the money to see plain civilians being inwardly consumed with
envy when witnessing the display of scarlet and gold on levee and parade
days. Then we get the smoke and noise given in. A considerable
portion of the money goes into the hands of the men as compensation for
attendance at drills and so forth. This may be said to be spent in paying
citizens to undergo a course of education directed partly to the improve-
ment of the physical and executive qualities. How very utopian it would be
considered were I to propose that we should pay our boys and girls to
remain under the best educational influences in the widest sense until
eighteen years of age. But Tam not proposing that. I only ask that
we exercise the same common sense in education as in other things,
and provide properly-trained teachers for our schools.
A PROFESSION, TRADE, OR ART?
False Ideas. —We have false ideas of the dignity and respecta-
bility of different occupations. Why should it be considered more
respectable to defend the vilest scoundrels in a court than to train future
citizens? Why should it be more dignified to repair the body than
to teach the laws of health which would render much of the patching
unnecessary ? Wherein is it more honourable to advocate the happiness
or warn of the torments of other worlds rather than fit sojourners for
good and useful lives in the present? To speak in the plainest language,


Public Opinion cannot be considered in a healthy condition when the
professions of the law, medicine, or the church are considered more
honourable than the profession of the educator. The reasons for this
cannot be given in the space at my disposal, and I shall therefore merely
refer to one point and pass on. This idea is almost world-wide; but more
prevalent in Great Britain and her colonies than elsewhere. In South
Australia the system of training teachers has been and, as long as it
exists, will continue to be an effective hindrance to the realisation of the
importance of the office of educator. But apart from this, the depart-
ment has failed to place a sufficiently high ideal before the teachers and
the public. Perhaps it could not do so when teaching is not considered
anything more than a trade.
Education a trade 1 Nay, not a trade, though as such it should be
equal in honour with a profession ; but it is the noblest of professions and
the highest of the arts. A sculptor fashions marble, a teacher mind ; a
musician wakens strings to life, a teacher ideas : a painter works on
canvas coarse and rough, but the teacher on a soul more sensitive than
photographer’s plate. The realisation of the one idea is a Rubens, a
Raphael , a Millet, each the object of a nation’s care, before which men find
their passions stirred, their sympathies moved, their hearts softened, and
their lives enlarged; but a picture appeals only to those who go to see it,
whereas the realisation of the ideal of one of whom men may speak in
semi-scorn as “ only a teacher ” is far greater, because the noble purpose
implanted in the soul of a child burns itself into his nature, until its
influence being transferred to action rouses nations, encircles the world,
and re-echoes down the ages in still increasing influence.
A RELIC OF THE PAST.
Pupil Teachers. —We countenance many silly things, but few more
idiotic than the attempt to educate children by means of boys and girls
themselves uneducated. We have elaborate well-graded standards, but
those who have to carry them out are, in the natural order of things,
unable to understand their significance. To speak of improvement on the
time when the standards were as faulty as the teachers were untrained,
and the buildings inadequate, is begging the question. As well might we
say to the man who from buffeting the waves unaided has caught a floating
spar that he is better off than he was, and should be satisfied.
No progressive people outside the British Empire retains the stupid,
baneful, pupil teacher system, and within this limit some at least have
advanced beyond it. In Toronto, for example, all the teachers are
In Germany, Switzerland, Belgium, Austria, France, and all parts of
the United States I visited, teachers do not commence to teach until at
least eighteen years of age, and in most places until several years older.
In fact foreign educationalists, I believe, without exception, condemn the
system. M. Braun, the celebrated Belgian educationalist, in speaking of
an English educationalist of repute and influence, is reported to have once
remarked: “What can be done with such a man? Why he is still an
adherent of Bell and Lancaster,” i.e., he believes in the pupil teacher
system. Mr. A. Sonnensshein says : “To set children to teach children


has been tried in a few places besides England, and abandoned ; we still
cling to it. France gave the ‘ enseignement mutuel ’an exhaustive trial,
and has abandoned it; it is still, however, retained in the village schools
of Russia, but solely on the plea of poverty.”
Object of State Education defeated The State takes charge of
the education of the children (a duty which some still claim as the sole
right of the parent), in order that she shall not suffer in consequence of
education being neglected. And yet the great aim of the State in so doing
is largely defeated by the means it adopts to attain the desired end.
Supposing, for the time being, we grant that the system is cheaper, i.e., costs
less money, what do we pay for our supposed cheapness ? An apprentice to a
carpenter, without being blameworthy, may spoil a plank which should have
made a door. A pupil teacher likewise, in his inexperience, is no more suc-
cessful than the apprentice ; but whereas the one merely spoils a piece of
wood, the other does irreparable injury to the delicately balanced organism
of a sensitive boy—spoils not a door, but one of God’s tender children,
and maybe calls him “wooden-headed,” “stupid,” “dunce,” “blockhead,”
because forsooth he had no more reasoning power than his so-called teacher,
does not understand human nature any better, and human tyranny as well
as he. Can any money compensate for such cruel wrong? And yet the
falsely so-called training of a teacher, according to our plan, is really more
expensive than were we to follow a rational method.
Every parent, every friend of children, every advocate of education,
should join in insisting that the barbarous pupil teacher system should he
abolished.
A gardener, wishing to raise a vigorous and healthy plant, endeavours
to shield it from scorching wind or biting frost.
The minds of children are surely not less worthy of attention
and rational treatment than plants ; but their tender budding sensibilities,
are allowed to be blighted by the fretful petulance and small tyranny of
mere children, or withered by the hot blast of a boy or girl’s temper as yet
uncontrolled by reason. Even were it desirable, old heads cannot be put
on young shoulders. The human mind must take time to mature,
and until it has become somewhat balanced and developed it is
not capable of rightly instructing and controlling, much less
educating other minds. “ You teach not only by what you say
and do, but largely by what you are.” Children are restless. A boy or
girl pupil teacher cannot understand that this is a matter for congratula-
tion rather than blame, that it is in fact the most powerful helper the
true teacher has. By and through this restless, inquisitive activity the true
educator ceases to be an imparter of facts, a dispenser of knowledge, and
becomes “guide, philosopher, and friend,” directing the energies of the
child to search and discover so that whether he learns many or few facts,
whether he can pass a standard or not, he has at least gone through the
process by which all fresh knowledge can be acquired. Pupil teachers
cannot understand anything of this, and it is a cruel wrong to place them
in a position where they can do so much mischief to themselves and the
pupils. The natural and proper restlessness of his pupils troubles the
young teacher. “ They won’t sit still.” This irritates him, and he naggles
and worries them in turn. They have nearly as much experience as he.


are less wearied, and having the sympathy of numbers, they frequently
act in more or less open opposition. He knows little of moral control,
and bullies and tyrannizes over them to the lasting injury of the tempers
and dispositions of both.
From whatever side we look at the pupil teacher system, we
find its influence baneful alike to the pupil and future teacher.
“ACQUIRING THE POWER TO DRIVE A TEAM."
Training of Teachers —l will briefly summarize the preparation of a
teacher in South Australia. At the age of 13 or 14 years a boy,
after passing the candidates’ examination, is appointed a monitor, and, if
paid at all, receives 16s. Bd. a month. A visitor going through our schools
will often find several of these in charge of from 20 to 50 children. After
the teacher and inspector have reported on the suitability and power
to manage a class, if the average of the school for the past year has been
large enough, the monitor is appointed a pupil teacher, and he signs
indentures for four years. He has to go to school at 8.15 a.m., and has
an hour’s instruction by the head teacher, or works on his own account.
He teaches from 9.30 to 12.30, and then has nominally an hour for
lunch, but more frequently he corrects exercise books during most of the
time in the vitiated air of the schoolroom, and eats his lunch at
the same time. It is not uncommon to find a pupil teacher with fifteen or
twenty kept-in children, correcting exercise books, and eating his luncheon
to economise time. He teaches from 2.0 to 4.0 p.m., and attends to kept-
in pupils half an hour after that. I not infrequently find children
in school up to 5.30 p.m., and for some time before the examination
in schools with reputations for big results, classes are kept in till six o’clock.
The tired youth goes home, and if he does his duty has to work from one
to three hours in the evening at his own studies, or preparing lessons for
his class. Once a year he goes up for examination, and if he fails has to
present himself again in six months. It appears that during the last three
years only sixty-five per cent, of those presenting themselves at the
regular examinations have passed.
With here and there an exception, the work done is of a most
superficial character. Indeed, it could not be otherwise, considering what
these young people have to go through. Girls have to work under the
same conditions as boys. It is often positively barbarous.
At theageof from 18 to 20 years they go to the Training College without
habits of study, and having, as a rule, read nothing beyond their text
books. The “ training ” has been a farce, and will be worse, for, as the
whole work of teaching in the Grote Street School has to be done by the
students, they can have little time for study. They go to the
college without a pretence of mental culture, and during the term in the
college have little opportunity of gaining any. The majority simply
cram for the teacher’s certificate, which will enable them to throw aside
their books for ever. The end, as is the case with ignoble aims, is
usually attained. The few who would pursue their studies as a rule
receive little encouragement. There have been exceptions, but I think
the general statement is strictly correct, strange as it may appear. I
do not blame the teachers. When we find a large body of men
B


and women, whom we would naturally expect to act differently,
obeying one general impulse, we may be sure that the cause is
outside themselves. I have no hesitation in attributing it to the soul-
killing, health-destroying policy of the Department. On one occasion,
when a deputation waited upon the Inspector-General, asking the
Department to meet the University Council in reducing the fees payable
by assistant teachers, the members reported that Mr. Hartley had
received them very kindly, and they thought he was favourable to the
proposal; but he said there would be a difficulty with the Minister, and
after making some cutting sarcastic remarks about the ambition of some
young men to write certain letters after their names, further informed the
deputation that teachers received as much education as was needed in the
Training College, and that when he wanted a man for a given position, he
did not ask what education he had, but could he drive a team. I believe
the University performed its part, but the Department has not made
any concessions. Another evidence of the practical discouragement
of culture by the Department is seen in its policy with reference
to the bonuses for the study of the science of teaching. There
has always been a feeling among the teachers that it does not matter
whether the special study of the science of education is under-
taken or not, and since 1885 the regulation is so framed that the
best teachers do not receive the bonus at all. By some process of logic
which I cannot understand, as soon as a teacher becomes qualified to take
charge of a school of 200 pupils he ceases to be entitled to draw a bonus.
In one case a teacher had to wait eighteen months after applying to be
examined in the science of teaching before the examination was held.
Nine months elapsed before he knew the result, and another year before
his certificate was ready. This was some years since; but usually when
I have urged men to take up the special work, I have been met with
the reply:—“What’s the good; the Department takes no notice of
anything but discipline and results.”
I have shown the evils of the present system of training teachers,
which stands condemned, because it injures the pupil, it spoils the
teacher, it wrongs the State. Much more might be said for example
on the question of ruined health, particularly of female teachers. I
have been moderate in every statement of the evils, although I
have omitted to put forward the small redeeming features, simply from
want of space. In country schools, for example, the head teacher’s
influence may so pervade the school, and everything be so continually
under his eye, that the children do not suffer so much, and were a
rational method of judging the work adopted, the different feeling which
would gradually grow in the schools would modify the objections still
more. With regard to the larger schools, there is not one redeeming
feature.
HOW CAN THE EVILS BE REMEDIED?
A sudden change is neither possible nor desirable, but we must aim
to gradually substitute for pupil teachers men and women of mature age
who have undergone a thorough preparatory training in the broad general
underlying principles of the profession, as well as in the practice of


teaching under the best supervision. Education is an art depending on
the science of the development of the human mind. Therefore only those
should be entrusted with it who have been subject to carefully regulated
educational influences, and who have studied the science on which it is
based. T will outline two methods by which this may be accomplished.
Neither is original, and both plans have been proved to be effective.
A System of Secondary Schools. -The first involves the general
adoption of secondary schools and advanced classes on the same terms
as the elementary schools, so that pupils might be promoted directly
from one to the other without any overlapping of work. The course
of study in the secondary or advanced schools should be elective.
That is to say, the course should cover a range of studies so devised
that it would be impossible for any pupil to take all. The subjects
would be grouped so that each pupil would only take those best suited to
his particular bent of mind. Thus one boy or girl with a special gift for
language would naturally gravitate into what may be called the classical
course which would lead to the arts course of the University. The pupil
with a taste for science would take up the group of studies in which, in
addition to the general practical education common to all, science would
take the place of language in the former. This would lead to the science
and medical courses at the University. The greater number of pupils,
however, would take up the practical course in which a careful treat-
ment of science, a greater attention to manual training, and practical
business studies would take the place of the special work in the other
courses. This would lead to the electrical, mechanical, or mining
engineering courses of the University or Technological Institute. But
by far the greater number of the pupils working in this department would
have the intention of taking their places in agricultural, manufacturing
or commercial business, and would frequently never complete the full
term of study.
College of Pedagogies. —When a student had completed one or other
of these courses, and, if possible, taken the whole or part of a University
course in addition, if he wished to become a teacher he would, at the age of
not less than eighteen years, enter the Collage of Pedagogics for at least
two years’ study of the science of pedagogics and the art of teaching. The
time would be divided between the study of child nature and its develop-
ment, and careful practice under proper direction. Of course I am speaking
with a supreme disregard for the cost. I can deal with ways and means
at the proper time. At present I musk ask that attention may be con-
centrated on the desirability and workability of the plan. This for the
future ; but until such a desirable condition of things can be brought
about in Adelaide as it is in principle and in most of its details elsewhere,
we must consider an alternative plan which would at any time fit into the
one just outlined, but could be adopted at once.
A Normal School.—Until we can adopt a complete system of
secondary schools, I would suggest that when a boy or girl wishes
to become a teacher, and has passed through the fifth class in a public
school, that he or she, if of good health, be allowed to attend a school
which lam calling, for convenience, a Normal School. For the first
four years they would go through an advanced course of general study,
b 2


including science and manual training (in its full sense). The fifth year
might be more specialized, and the sixth devoted entirely to the theory
and practice of teaching. I have no doubt but that a most desirable
class of pupils would gladly attend such a preparatory school, although
they are not allowed to run the risk of ruined health and other evils by
becoming pupil teachers.
Comparison of Cost. —I have shown that the training of a teacher
under the present system is unsatisfactory in every way, and I have
indicated how a change can be made. I wish now to compare
the cost. A male pupil teacher receives £2O, £3O, £4O, and £SO;
and a female £lB, £24, £3O, and £36 for first, second, third, and
fourth years respectively, so that with the cost of the Training College
(£7O per student in 1879, the last year’s figures available, and I under-
stand that under the new arrangement the cost will be about the same,
the difference being made up by the saving in Grote Street School),
the bonuses to head teachers, books and incidental expenses, the
total cost is probably £250 for a male, and £220 for a female
teacher. Against this the Department receives, say, an average
of four and a half years’ service of an unsatisfactory, -if not
positively harmful, character. By either of the plans I have
outlined (the first only being practicable with a complete system of
advanced schools), the intending teacher receives no money until he has
completed his training, whereas, under the pupil teacher system, the
State not only educates the future teacher (or professes to do so), but
keeps him as well. By the suggested plan he is simply educated by the
public. In each case a man gains his certificate to teach at about the
same time, that is, at the age of from 20 upwards. The cost of
training teachers under this system would be the expense of providing
free education for six years, and taking the Advanced School for Girls
as a basis, this could be done for £lO or £l2 per year per pupil. When
this reform is an accomplished fact it may be necessary to impress upon
the public the importance of making the training of a teacher still more
exact and thorough by raising the age several years.
From 1887 to 1890 the Training College turned out 85 classified
teachers at a cost of £7,292, or an average of £BS per teacher. Now,
such a school as I have outlined might easily be worked for the same
sum, and with, say 200 pupils, would, allowing over 25 per cent, for
leakages, give an equal average supply of well-educated, properly trained
teachers who would gradually exert an elevating tendency throughout our
schools.
I would like to see a complete system of free secondary schools
with a College of Pedagogics, University, Technical College, Agricultural
College and so forth, above, and I have no doubt but that I shall see all
these; but not, I am sorry to think, yet. Failing that, I advocate the
Normal School or Advanced School and Training Class in place of the
present Training College, to gradually do away with the need of pupil
teachers.
I have been met with the objection that this system would shut out
poor boys or girls from becoming teachers. The thoughtful Member of
Parliament who said this did so on the spur of the moment, and probably


ere this will have seen his error. Experience elsewhere is against him.
I think I know our teachers fairly well, and I do not remember an
instance where one, worthy of his calling, would not have been the better
for the plan I have outlined, and I do not think any desirable teachers
would be shut out. But there is another answer. lam not aware that
the schools exist for any class. They are Public Schools provided by the
State for the public good, and, if there be one thing that will damage
them, it is the introduction of the class idea. We want men and women
as teachers who will exert an educative influence, and with schools such
as I propose we would get them from the people. I care not whether
they have big bank balances or none at all.
RESULT EXAMINATIONS.
The plan of judging a teacher’s work by a yearly result examination
should be once and for ever swept away. A plan is required whereby
the State can. satisfy itself that the money it is spending on education
is accomplishing to the greatest possible extent the purpose intended, and
at the same time one that will allow teaching to be recognised as a
spiritual function, and will not compel all teachers to work on the same
lines. In the judgment of the best educationalists the present method
of testing the work of a teacher is wrong. In name a teacher is
employed to educate. As a matter of fact his chief business is to get
results, and the surest and quickest way to do this is to cram.
He may educate much or little, but if he cannot marshal a proper
percentage of young minds properly loaded and primed with facts
and reasons, no matter whether understood or not, to be fired singly
or in volleys at the call of an examiner, his more arduous and bene-
ficial efforts “to teach the young idea how to shoot” avail him nothing.
The percentage gained is the chief standard by which the proficiency of a
school is gauged, and the worth of a teacher judged. Teaching is
the teacher’s profession, and of course he wishes to rise in it. He also
desires to have his school well thought of by the parents, who are taught
to judge almost entirely by the percentage gained. Therefore, for his
professional status, for his popularity, and to some extent for his pay, a
teacher must get results. To obtain them, instruction, and not education,
is the chief means.
Going Through the Mill. —Even were it possible to correctly test
the work of a teacher by an examination, the time devoted to the
task is so limited, that a true estimate of the facts known cannot
be formed, much less a judgment passed as to the means by
which they were taught. It is no uncommon thing to hear the
inspectors boasting of their records in the way of “ putting through ” the
greatest number in the shortest time. A collection of such records
would be curious reading. It appears to be highly commendable, and a
proof of competency and smartness, to go to a school where teachers and
pupils have for weeks and months been in a state of nervous tension with
regard to the coming ordeal which is to decide on the one hand the future
position of the teacher, and on the other the promotion of the pupils, and
to treat the tender nervous children like sheep during a shearing
competition. How many can I put through in a day 2 or how soon can I


get through this school 1 are the questions an inspector not only asks
himself, but sometimes puts to the teacher. I have not heard of the
record of the Inspector-General being beaten when in a city school I
timed him while he “examined” (?) 120 odd slates, each with one side
filled with a grammar exercise representing a year’s work, in exactly
three minutes and twenty-five seconds. I need hardly say that the
thing was an idiotic farce, although the Inspector-General would argue
round an orbit as large as that of the planet Saturn sooner than admit
that the examination was not “at least a correct estimate of the work done
and necessary to ensure honest effort from the teachers.” As a set off
against this, I may say that I have also watched Mr. Hartley when
examining a class of little children exercise a degree of patience only
equalled by the skill he exhibited in drawing information from the
iuveniles with whom he had made himself thoroughly at home. At such
times I have thought that if a man had unlimited time, a liver guaranteed
not to get out of order, a temper which would not get ruffled, and a body
which would not get tired, I would not oppose the testing of work by an
annual examination, although even then another plan would be preferable.
But nature did not build either the Inspector-General or the Inspsctors
that way.
The duties of an Inspector are threefold— lst, He has to take
stock of slates, reading books, pens, pencils, ink, desks, inkwells, maps,
blackboards, diagrams, dusters, etc., etc. ; to report on the condition of
the building, the need for repairs, state of the fences, playground,
appliances for washing, prevalence of smells and the condition of out-
office and sanitary accommodation. 2nd, He has to inspect the
processes of teaching, estimate the moral tone of the school, the
work of pupil teachers, character of the teaching, and to give hints
and directions as to improved methods, etc. 3rd, He conducts the
yearly examination for results. Two visits are paid to each school during
the year. The first is officially unannounced, but a telegram to the hotel
to reserve a room or prepare dinner answers the same end in a country
town. Duties one and two are performed. The stock-taking and so forth
often take up so much time that but little can be devoted to watching
the methods of teaching.
Inspector of Stock and Buildings. To remedy these evils several
smart young men should be employed to inspect stock and buildings.
The office might be made a step between the positions of assistant and
head teacher, and would do the service much good. Thus relieved,
with result examinations abolished, and the staff increased, the Inspectors
could visit all schools many times a year, and be a real check and
assistance.
The Examinations are Mechanical, Arbitrary, and Unfair.— The
Department rightly condemns mechanical teaching in the most direct
and unmeasured terms. How, if mechanical teaching be wrong, can
mechanical examination be right ? But the annual result tests are
not only mechanical, they are in many respects arbitrary and unjust, and
little more than guesses at the acquirements of the children. Take
writing for example—a subject where quality should be the chief aim, and
which is exceedingly well taught in our schools. Is it not arbitrary that a


transcription book with 75 pages of the most excellent work must fail
because there are five pages blank, while another with 80 pages of very-
medium quality work will pass without question 1 Is it not arbitrary that
a comparatively poor writer who has finished a copy book should pass,
while his neighbour who may write beautifully must fail, very likely with-
out having his work so much as looked at, because his book needs one or
two more pages to be written in order to complete it 1 Is it not arbitrary
that a boy may fail because his teacher did not correct his book with
colored ink or pencil ? Is it not unjust to the children to be failed for
these reasons when the teacher is, very likely, chiefly to blame for the
lack of quantity, and solely' for the method of marking ? The evil is not
in making it a rule that completed books shall be shown. This can
generally be done, though it is of little value after all; but in making the
rule as inelastic as a cast-iron column. If the teacher fails in his duty,
he and he only should bear the punishment. It is monstrous that the
instincts of Justice in a tender child should be perverted for the sole
reason of punishing a man or woman. The evil is intensified by the
superficial way in which the books are “examined” when completed.
There is no time to do more than glance at a book, and yet the examiner
is supposed to see whether every error has been marked with coloured ink
or pencil, and each exercise initialled by the teacher and corrected by the
pupil. The examiners may' feel that it is a moral and physical impossi-
bility to give more time to each child than they do ; and the teachers are
no less strongly convinced that it is an equal impossibility to test the
children’s knowledge, much less their intelligence and ideas—were that
possible —in the time devoted to it.
I will quote a few opinions from various teachers. Most are from
men holding the best positions in the service :
A. —“ I know that my teaching suffers very much from my having to keep
constantly in view the fact that I must get a good percentage. Often in the
middle of a lesson, in which I have lost sight of the fact in the interest the
subject has awakened in the pupils, I have to pull myself up with the mental
comment, ‘this won’t pay, it is outside the regulations,’ and go back to the less
interesting teaching of facts.”
B. —“ Results undoubtedly lead to cheating in various ways. Such things
as writing up copy-books, exercise-books, etc., are common. An inspector’s
boys went home from school, and in course of talk about school said : ‘ Mr.
is a very foolish teacher.’ ‘Why?’ ‘Oh! all the boys say so. He won’t let
us write new copy-books for the exam., and a lot of us will fail. I have a
beautiful book I could fill if I wrote three pages every day up to the exam., but
he won’t let me. All the other teachers do.’ The inspector afterwards told the
teacher what his boys had told him.”
o.—“ I don’t know which book to take. is best, but the other has a
few questions at end of each chapter which would be a great help in preparing
for exam. The inspectors judge of the teaching by the way hard questions are
answered. If I were to asx general questions leading up to a result, he would
say, ‘ That is too simple ’ If I ask them to do experiments, he would make
some such remark as ‘ Any one can burn a piece of paper.’ ”
D. —“ As long as there are result exams., consciously or unconsciously, they
will mould the character of the teacher’s work, and the teaching for success at
an examination is not the teaching most beneficial to the children’s well-being.”
E. —“ Teachers who gain high percentages almost without exception keep
their children in after school hours to cram them up for the examination. They
may ease their consciences by nominally shifting the reason, but the examination


shapes their teaching, and the wise directions of the Department go for nothing
when the inspector is not about. I do not mind the amount of work. Every
average teacher should be able to teach everything in the present course of
study, and teach it in the way directed, or one as good ; but, without cram, it is
impossible to have the children ready to fire off answers to questions perhaps on
lessons taken two years before. An inspector could not do so.”
F. —“I have known an inspector, with watch in hand, set to work to examine
a class in the last subject in a given number of minutes in order to catch a train
or coach. The object then is to give questions which will not be answered, so
that he may pass round the class with his ‘ Next! next! ’ and get the farce
over.”
I might fill a pamphlet with such expressions, but these will show
how the teachers feel on the subject.
One of our foremost head-masters said, referring to an assistant-teacher,
“It is a real pleasure to listen to him give a science lesson, and the boys
look upon them as the treat of the week ; but Mr. , who knows little
or nothing of science, and whose boys have a perfect dislike to his lessons,
can get a much better result at the inspector’s exam.” .
Another head-master, speaking of an assistant, said ; “ Ves, is the
best fellow in many respects I have ever had to do with, but he can't get a
good percentage. The tone of the whole school is raised by his presence,
and the boys would do anything for him. He seldom punished a boy, yet
he has the best discipline in the school.” “ What is the secret of his not
getting a good percentage?” “The plain truth is, he teaches too well.
Mind, his class never breaks down, but is always below the average. He
teaches all the time, and that does not do for an exam.”
To these opinions of our own teachers 1 will add that of Dr. Edward
Thring:—
“ fhe Inspector destroys teaching, because he is bound by law and neces-
sity to examine according to a given pattern ; and the perfection of teaching is
that it does not work by a given pattern. Minds cannot be inspected.”
Result Examinations defined. —Before leaving the question of result
examinations it may be well to define clearly what I mean by the term ; for
many people are apt to confuse a result examination with payment by
results. The latter includes the former; but a system of result examina-
tion, i.e., testing of the teacher’s work by the examination of each pupil
each year in each subject, may exist without payment by results. Payment
by results nominally only exists to a small extent in South Australia, but,
as a matter of fact, it may form one-fifth of an assistant’s salary. I hold
the whole system of payment by results to be utterly wrong; but if it be
justified, the present plan of deciding the bonus is very unfair, because a
teacher who earns 90 per cent, may only be paid for 70 because others have
done badly. A gain, should there be a collapse in a big school, the salary
of the head-master, who is responsible, would be reduced by perhaps one-
twentieth, while the irresponsible assistants would suffer to the extent of
from one-sixth or one-seventh.
But my objection goes deeper, and extends beyond any bonus or direct
payment by results, Mr. Hartley has placed it on record that he is firmly
convinced that “the careful examination of each child each year in each subject
has very considerably raised the standard of instruction in the public schools
of the province.” The standard has been raised; but the examinations have


helped in the same way that a driver frequently helps his horse to drag a
heavy load up a hill. He places the load badly, seats himself on
the top, and then applies the whip. It is more creditable to the horse,
but how about the driver t Examinations are opposed to the best interests
of true education, fail ignominiously in the purpose for which they were
instituted, and for which they have from time to time been made more
stringent, lead to a serious amount of dishonesty, and promote all the evils
of cram.
Cram. —I have always been careful in the use of the word cram, which
is frequently wrongly understood, and when I commenced to arrange these
notes I intended to avoid the word altogether ; but I accidentally came
across a carefully-worded definition by Mr. Hartley, and was so struck
with its application to much of the work that I have no hesitation in saying
that many of our schools are hotbeds of cram. The Inspector-General says ;
“ The word cram is properly applied to the forcing into the mind of
knowledge to be produced at a given moment without caring whether it
is retained or not. It fetters the efforts of the teachers, and narrows the
minds of the children.”
I have discussed the matter with many of the best teachers in the
service, and they are all of the opinion that cramming in the above sense is
one of the evils of the schools. It is necessary that I should add that it is
usually practised in classes or schools other than those presided over by the
teachers discussing the subject. There are a few men and women
who say “ Cram 1 of course I cram; we all cram; what are we paid
for but to get a good percentage, and we cannot do that unless we cram.
I teach as well as I can, but the few teachers who only do that never
get promoted, so I teach as well as I can, and cram up the rest.”
Briefly stated, then, result examinations are wrong in principle;
they are vexatious and unjust to the children; they worry the
teachers ; they are the cause of fraud; they deceive the Department
and the public; and they do not serve the purpose for which they
are intended.
THE COURSE OF STUDY.
A Strong Point.— The course of study and the general principles
of teaching laid down by the Education Department are the most praise-
worthy in our system of education. In these particulars there are few
more progressive men than the Inspector-General ; and, possibly, within
its limits, our course of study is as much in accord with what are
considered modern educational principles as any in the British Empire.
Unfortunately, Parliament will only provide for a staff utterly incapable of
teaching according to the excellent principles laid down, and the method
adopted for testing the work offers a premium for cram and dishonesty, and
thus defeats its own ends. The folly of putting new wine into old skins is
wisdom compared with adding a modern scientific course of study on to a
system worked by pupil teachers and tested by result examinations. To set
children to educate children is as reasonable as to expect an up-country
fiddler to take his place in an orchestra about to perform one of Wagner’s
operas ; and to measure the circumference of a circle with a rigid yard-stick
is an easy task compared to testing methods of teaching and growth of the
mind by a yearly examination conducted against time.


The country is largely responsible for the pupil teacher system and its
evils. I say largely because Parliament has never voted money for a proper
staff; but lam not aware that the Department entrusted with the education
of the children of the Province has ever represented to the fountain from
which it draws alike its authority and its funds the inadequacy of pupil
teachers for the work of the public schools. Neither has it done its duty
to the country by showing that the apprenticeship system of training
teachers was only adopted as a make-shift, and is utterly opposed to sound
principles of education
The South Australian Parliament has hitherto found money for almost
anything which has been persistently pressed upon it. It may have been
for a railway from Nowhere to Anywhere, for the sole benefit of a
few nobodies; for a jetty from a sandhill to a sandbank; or for a
pretty gunboat, that high officials and do-nothings may play at fireworks,
have a jolly time, and, when imbued with energy enough, do a little fishing.
I have yet to learn that my fellow Australians, with a world-wide reputation
for liberality, progress, and democracy, will refuse to supply money for the
proper training of her future citizens. I object to my country being
charged with stinginess in this respect, because the administrators have been
actuated with the niggardly desire to so conduct our schools that they can
year by year boast that they cost less than those of am r country professing
to care for public education at all. For the method of testing the work of
our schools the Inspector-General is alone to blame, and the wrong he
causes by his system of examinations, unfortunately largely outweighs the
debt of gratitude due by a grateful country to him for his splendid work in
other directions.
Suggested Changes. —l have now to show in what way the course of
study is defective,but before doing so I must clear the way a little. In the first
place, however strongly I may feel the necessity for more practical teaching,
I am most emphatically of opinion that no fresh work can be
undertaken in the schools until the system of examination is
very materially modified. The energies of both teachers and
pupils are already overtaxed, although it is largely with work
of an unnecessary character. In the second place, I am not advo-
cating technical education. That is out of place in elementary schools.
We must aim at availability of mind, soul, and body, and of all alike in
harmony. Technical education is training with a view to special
occupations, and the elementary school is no place for that. It may seem
strange to say that the public schools have been, and are, too “ technical,”
because the effect of their one-sided training is to give the pupils a bias
towards particular callings which, unfortunately, are not of a creative or
productive character. We should try to give a child a training which will
not fit him for any calling more than another, but leave him free to fall into
that one for which he is naturally best fitted. There are more than suffi-
cient things for a child to learn which he can make use of, and which he
should utilize, without making his mind a sort of lumber-room of miscel-
laneous facts in the hope that they may be of use some time. Theoretically,
nothing should be inflicted on a child which is not available for his stock-
in-trade, for by making use of our present knowledge we are best fitting
ourselves for further acquisition in the future. This is an ideal unattain


able under present conditions, but that is no reason why we slould not
keep the ideal in view ; for if the country will provide the money (it will
not take much more), and the Department get rid of the bricks-and-mortar
idea, it would be gradually brought about.
In harmony with this view, we should, while gradually improving
our teaching on the lines indicated, and changing the system of testing
the work done, proceed to weave into our course of study—not merely
add to it—Manual Training and Elementary Science.
• Elementary Science.—l use the term because it is the best available,
although it conveys a more or less erroneous impression to the minds of
those who associate science with long names, who confuse the clothing for
the thing clothed. I shall probably be informed that Elementary Science
has already been added to the course of study, and is now taught in the
schools in place of “ special lessons.” To this I reply as respectfully as
emphatically, that, excepting the often unrecognised work of a compara-
tively few teachers, science is neither taught nor attempted to be taught in
the public schools of South Australia. There are teachers who are imbued
with the love of the subject, and whose pupils look forward to the science
lesson with pleasant anticipations, who, nevertheless, from time to time
receive poor reports for teaching it. There are men who systematically
neglect the lessons for ten or twelve months, then cram up a lot
of catechism work, and are commended for their excellent teaching.
I do not say this is the rule : it is not, although it takes place every
year.
Last year a teacher in one of the most highly-thought-of schools told me
mehehardly gave a lesson in physiology until a month before the examination,
and got high marks. Said he : —“ The inspector knew nothing of science, and
so I never let on when a boy answered wrongly. I always take care tohavesome
taking questions ready.” Can anything be more deplorable than this 1 Yet
this man is considered one of the most promising teachers. He possesses in
a very high degree “ the technical art of the schoolmaster,” and, it is said,
there is no position in the service to which he may not rise.
The head master of a large school said of an assistant: —“ Yes ;
is a good teacher ; but he does not fix the information so that his class can get
a good result. He goes too deeply into his lessons. We must stick to what
will be examined.” I hope no one will attempt to free the teachers from
blame in matters like these. They do not attempt to do so themselves.
The chief blame, however, rests with the Department. It is a game of
smartness between inspector and teacher, and the teacher generally wins.
It cannot be too clearly recognized that science in an elementary school
requires quite a different treatment to the same subject in the University or
an advanced school. In an article published in November, 1886, I said :
“ We should train the senses and deductive powers of the mind by a prac-
tical, systematic, but, at the same time, essentially elementary study of science.
Nothing need be said to prove the value of science in daily life. Here a little
chemistry is useful; there physics prove of service j at one time physiology is
required; at another some knowledge of natural history is of immense
advantage.
“At first, indeed, one is almost frightened at the mass of information
apparently requisite; but if we look into the matter carefully we find that in


our daily life only the fundamental facts and the simplest principles are neces-
sary. Salt need not be called chloride of sodium—in fact I would not lead the
children to think they were learning anything bearing such formidable names as
‘ physiology,’ ‘ mineralogy,’ and so forth. I would have them interested in
science , and not talk about studying it. Some teachers do this with great
success. Others, just as anxious to benefit the children, give highly interesting
experimental lessons on chemistry and physics, but with questionable value so
far as scientific training is concerned. The wonder of the children is excited
rather than their faculties developed. The want of success may be due to the
lessons not being simple enough, and in consequence breaking the cardinal law
of science— ‘ proceed from the known to the unknown.’
“ Any of the various branches might be taken, but the manner of teaching,
and not imparting a technical knowledge of the science, should be the chief aim
in all the lessons ; or, stated in another way, the aim should be to give ideas and
develop reason, not teach facts.”
But Professor Huxley in the course of an address given in the
Manchester Town Hal], on November 29, 1887, indicates more clearly what
is required :
“ The other matter in which we want some systematic and good teaching is
what I have hardly a name for, but which may best be explained as a sort of
developed object lesson. Anybody who knows his business in science can make
anything subservient to that purpose. You know it was said of Dean Swift
that he could write an admirable poem on a broomstick, and the man who has a
real knowledge of science can make the commonest object in the world sub-
servient to an introduction to the principles and greater truths of natural
knowledge. It is in that icay that your science must be taught if it is to he of
real service. Do not suppose that any amount of book work, any repetition by
rote of catechisms, and other abominations of that kind are of value for our
object. That is mere wasting of time. But take the commonest object and
lead the child from that foundation to such truths of a higher order as may be
within his grasp.”
The Inspector-General is a graduate in science with distinction at the
London University. He has worked at least one branch as a recreation.
As a teacher of botany lie has probably no superior in South Australia, and
he has at various times taken much trouble to teach the subject from pure
love of it, and he has always taught it so that his students loved it, too,
and yet, so strange is human nature, the polio// of the Department has
always had the effect of rendering science teaching only possible under
great discouragement.
MANUAL TRAINING.
Concerning' Definitions. —Many people confuse Manual Training
with Technical Education. Ho system of Technical Education will be
satisfactory unless Manual Training has preceded it, but the objects of the
two are in a large degree different. Technical Education prepares for trades
and so forth, and comes later. Manual Training is the complement of the
present course of study, and would so extend its scope that the whole of the
faculties of the child would be included in tire system of education in
which it formed a part.
For some years I have carefully studied this subject in all its bearings,
and in 1889 and 1890 I visited the United States, Canada, Great Britain
and Ireland, France, and Germany in order to make myself acquainted with
the latest thought and experiments on the question of Practical Education
and Elementary Science Teaching.


I have discussed the matter with scores of prominent educators, some
of whom are enthusiasts for, and others bitter opponents of, Educational
Reform. I have examined work, inspected schools, and spent weeks in
workshops watching the methods of instruction being followed, and testing
the educational and practical value of the work done.
A most confusing variety of terms and definitions have been used by
speakers and writers on the subject. It is not my intention to add to these,
because I do not care whether the “New Education” be called Practical
Education, Industrial Education, Hand and Eye Education, Whole Educa-
tion, Technical Education, Utilitarian Education, Manual Training, or by
any other name. What lam concerned about is the thing itself, which
must be incorporated into our course of study if our schools are to fulfil
their proper function.
Perhaps this will be a suitable place to indicate how my own conception
of the subject has changed. In 1886, when I did not distinguish between
making things as an end, and making things as a means of education, I
wrote :
“ The proposal to teach boys, as a body, the use of tools is impracticable,
because : —l. It is outside the proper sphere of the school teacher, 2. Only
tools of certain trades could be used. 3. It would be very expensive. 4. It
would be commencing too high up. Some who deserve all credit for downright
honesty of purpose, and the earnest wish to cure what they see to be an evil,
would like to see boys made amateur carpenters, printers, engravers, engineers,
farmers, etc. This cannot be, but more should be done. . . .”
When I began to realize that I had based the above conclusions on
insufficient knowledge, the immense importance of the subject became
apparent.
Technical Education—What does it mean ?—ln England one hears
most of what is called Technical Education, but every third person appears
to vary more or less in his conception of the meaning of the term. After a
very careful study, however, I made the following classification :
1. Those who understand Technical Education to mean the actual
teaching or the direct preparation for trades and industries. The
English Technical School is established to carry out this idea.
2. Many use the term in a limited sense, to mean a certain amount oj
handiwork (such as bench work in wood) and Science Teaching. To
this class belong those who advocate the introduction of Technical
Education into elementary schools, and the majority do so because
of the influence they believe it would have on the industries of the
country. Indeed, it is the exception to find an article written on
Technical Education which does not contain some reference to the
progress of Germany in consequence of the attention she has paid to
the subject, and the consequent necessity of England taking up the
matter vigorously if she wishes to maintain her position as a manu-
facturing country. The leaders of the movement—-so far as the
elementary schools are concerned—are wiser. While not forgetting
this after advantage, they urge the adoption of a systematic instruc-
tion in the use of tools as a means of education.


3. A numerous section of people understand Technical Education in a
restricted sense, as merely embracing systems of day or evening classes
in the arts and sciences underlying manufactures. These, they con-
sider, should be provided for apprentices and artisans to supplement
the experience of the mill, factory, or workshop.
These three conceptions are clearly definable ; but there is a very numerous
residium of people who do not come under either of the above groups.
These are :
4. Those who imagine that, as Technical Education is something new, it
must therefore be dangerous. They think that it is an attempt to
make mechanics or factory hands of all hoys and girls, and so
denounce it as an impracticable meddling icith the natural laws of
supply and demand, and altogether a thing to be denounced as revolu-
tionary.
The Technical Instruction Act of 1889 defines “Technical Instruction”
as “instruction in the principles of science and art applicable to industries,
and in the application of special branches of science and art to specific
industries and employments. It does not include teaching the practice of
any trade.”
A separate definition is given of Manual Instruction, which is stated
to include the use of tools and modelling in clay, wood, or other material.
The use of the term “ Manual Instruction,” or “ Manual Training,” is
not general in England, but it is rapidly becoming popular. It has passed
the experimental stage, and is being rapidly and extensively adopted in
various centres. The most practicable and complete system has been
elaborated by Mr. Geo. Ricks, B.Sc., Chief Inspector of Schools under the
London School Board, who has been appointed to superintend the introduc-
tion of his “Hand and Eye Training 1 ” throughout the Schools of the
city of London.
Apparently in pursuance of a policy of keeping the teachers as ignorant
as possible of a subject until he can place some scheme before them which
he can claim as his own, the Inspector-General has suppressed all information
concerning this splendid development of practical education, although it is
being systematically introduced into schools attended by children greatly
exceeding in number the total population of South Australia. Space in the
Education Gazette has been devoted to notices of books on tool work, which
are neither educational nor practical; but, although he has had copies of
Mr. Ricks’ works in his possession for over a year, and knows the estimation
in which they are held by English educators, he has not allowed them to be
mentioned in its columns.
I will insert a summary of Mr. Ricks’ “ Hand and Eye Training ” ;
Fob Children from 7 to 10 Yeaes op Age.
1. Paper Folding, Cutting, and Mounting (First Series).
2. Drawing, Cutting, and Mounting.
3. Building with Kindergarten Bricks, Cubes, Ac., and Drawing the Plane and
Elevations of structures built.
4. Clay Modelling.
5. Drawing and Coloring,


Fob Pupils fbom 10 xo 14 Yeabs.
6. Drawing and Coloring to be continued.
7. Clay Modelling for those showing special aptitude.
8. Paper Folding, Cutting, Mounting ; Designing in Form and Color (Series II.)
9. Drawing and Cutting Geometric Forms, &c.
10. Modelling in Cardboard, &c.
11. Bench-work in Wood.
It is not intended that all this should be taken in the same school; but that
one or two items should be selected most suitable to special needs. It has been adopted
by the Bristol School Board, as well as by the authorities in London as already
mentioned.
Practical education has made greater progress in the schools of Paris
and some German centres than in any places I have visited. The industrial
idea appears to pievail to a much greater extent in the Parisian than in the
German schools ; but, even there, in the elementary school, the hand is
trained rather for educational than for industrial purposes. I have sufficient
notes on the schools of France and Germany to make a volume in them-
selves : and, as I cannot do justice to them here, I will merely insert the
course of study which is being effectively carried out in Paris.
MANUAL TRAINING IN PRIMARY SCHOOLS OF PARIS.
Special Equipment to carry out Full Course :
1. Woodwork Shop.—Eight to twelve benches about 4 ft. 6 in. long, 2 ft.
6 in. wide, and 30 to 34 in. high (each bench accommodates two boys) ; four turning
lathes; suitable tools.
2. Workshop pob leoh. —Bight to twelve vices, forge, anvil, and ordinary tools.
The following is the programme worked out by the school authorities for Manual
Training in primary schools ;
Manual Exercises intended to develop the children’s skill of hand.
I. ELEMENTARY CLASS.
In operation in nearly all the Schools, Work done in ordinary Classrooms.
[Eor pupils seven and eight years old. One hour per day.]
Elementary Exercises in Freehand Drawing, Symmetrical Arrangement of Forms,
Cutting out pieces of Colored Paper and applying them upon Geometrical Forms,
Exercises in Coloring, Cutting out Geometrical Forms in Cardbord, Representa-
tions of Geometrical Solids. All these exercises to be done first on squared and
subsequently on plain paper.
Small Basket Work. Arrangement of strips of Colored Paper ; (1) In Interwoven
Forms. (2) In plaited Patterns.
Modelling : Reproduction of Geometric Solids and Simple Objects.
11. INTERMEDIATE CLASS.
Chiefly performed in Classrooms.
[Nine and ten years old. One hour per day.]
Cutting out Cardboard Patterns, Construction of Regular Geometric Solids, Construc-
tion by the Pupils of Cardboard Models covered with Colored Drawings or
Colored Paper.
Small Basket Work; Combination of Plaits ; Basket Making.
Objects made of Wire ; Trellis or Netting j Wire Chain Making.


Combination of Iron and Wood : Cages.
Modelling Simple Architectural Ornaments.
Object Lessons ; Principal Characteristics of Wood and the Common Metals.
111. UPPER CLASS.
In operation in from one-third to half of the Boys' Primary Schools.
(Eleven and twelve years old. Two hours per day.]
Drawing and Modelling ; Continuation of the exercises in the preceding Class ; Repeti-
tion of the Ornaments previously executed, in the form of Sketches, with
dimensions attached to them ; Drawing the requisite Sections for this purpose j
Reproducing the Sections as Measured Sketches; Study of the various Tools
used in working Wood—Hammer, Mallet, Chisel, Gimlet, Centre-bit, Brace,
Screwdriver, Compasses, Square, Marking-guage, Saws of different kinds, Jack-
plane, Trying-plane, Smoothing-plane, Piles and Rasps, Level.
Theoretical and Practical Lessons in the above.
Planing and Sawing Wood; Construction of Simple Joints.
Boxes Hailed together, or Jointed without Tacks.
Wood Lathe; Tools used in Turning; Turning Simple Geometrical Forms.
Study of the Tools used in Working Iron —Hammer, Chisel, Cutting-tool, Cold Chisel,
Squares, Compass, Files, &c.
Theoretical and Practical Lessons concerning them.
Exercises in Filing, Smoothing, and Finishing Rough Forgings or Castings (Cubes,
Polygonal Nuts).
The Practical Work in the Shops in Primary Schools is to be followed by Gymnastic
Exercises in accordance with the Specialised Programme.
The expression, Manual Training', has been used with nearly as
great latitude of meaning in America as I have shown exists in England
with respect to the term “Technical Education.” It owes its origin to Dr.
Woodward, Principal of the St. Louis Manual Training School, whose con-
tinuous and able advocacy, by tongue and pen, of the principles of the
system have earned for him the designation of “ Apostle of Manual
Training,” The way in which the movement has spread over the L T nited
States is one of the most remarkable instances of the developments of
educational thought, and proves unmistakably that it is a necessary adjunct
to the education of the age.
Although Manual Training has only quite recently been placed on a
scientific basis, and even now is not complete in all its details throughout
the school course, the idea is not new at all, Comenius, in his Didactica
Magna, specifically directs that it should form part of a true course of
education. Locke and Rousseau both advocate it, but from different
reasons, which, curiously enough, represent the two parties of present-day
advocates. Locke, with Comenius, considered it necessary on account of
its influence on practical life : Rousseau, on the other hand, advocated it
chiefly because of its educational value as an adjunct to the proper mental
development of the pupil.
The following definition was adopted by the Rew Jersey Council of
Education of Manual Training :
“Resolved that the New Jersey Council of Education defines Manual
Training as training in thought expression by other means than gesture and
verbal language, in such a carefully graded course of study as shall also provide
adequate training for the judgment and the executive faculty. This training
will necessarily include drawing and constructive work.”


Psychological Basis of Manual Training :
The faculties of the mind are of two kinds.
1. The Receptive.
2. The Expressive.
The primary receptive faculties are the five senses and their adjuncts.
The impressions which these primary faculties convey to the brain are
enriched by the imagination, the memory, and the will, which may be
called the secondary receptives. The ideas thus received are of no use, and
indeed would soon clog the brain, were it not for the associated expressive
faculties. Now the means of expression cannot be disassociated from the
means of reception. We have hitherto relied almost entirely on language
and gesture as the means of expression in the schools, whereas the hand
should play a very important part. It is on account of this mistaken
neglect that the boys have not received the least useful portion of their
education in the playground. Recognising this two-fold, but at the same
time inseparable, nature of the faculties it is the purpose of the school to
educate, the position which the teacher must take is clear. He must place
himself on the expressive side of the pupil, and set his faculties to work,
and if his mental apparatus is in healthy condition, ho will do all the
acquiring himself. The mental food must be prepared for him and made
available, but that is all. If the hand is kept doing, and is not allowed to
work from mere habit in a purely mechanical way, there is no fear of the
mental faculties being neglected. The hand can do nothing, express
nothing, make nothing without receiving its directions from an active
directing mind. In other words, the expressive faculties cannot work
without the receptive, and the receptive faculties will always be active when
stimulated by the desire for expression. The process may be compared to
an automatic ball-tap feeding a water trough. When the trough is full the
tap remains closed and inoperative, but if water be drawn the ball falls, the
tap opens, and the water begins to flow. The faster it is taken from the
trough the faster it flows in until the limit of the mechanical arrange-
ment is reached. So in the child, the more he does with pleasure the more
he receives until the limit of his mental capacity is reached.
In the higher classes Manual Training involves the use of various tools,
but in the lower classes the material operated on is clay, paper, cardboard,
sticks, gum, and so forth, and the only tools required are pencil, scissors,
and knife.
When a boy begins to construct things he is compelled to begin to
think, deliberate, reason, and conclude. This is slow work, and cannot be
completed in a given time like a brick wall, but the lad is gradually
brought into contact with powerful natural forces. Thus the use
of tools quickens and stimulates the intellect. The worker is carried from
the realm of thought to the arena of action, and from the doing to specu-
lating. If he would control, direct, and apply the forces with which he is
dealing he finds he must first master the laws by which they are governed.
This study of the phenomena of matter will almost assuredly lead to the
higher study of mind and spirit. The course of the mind from the thought-
ful consideration of matter to the investigaiion of the mysteries of philosophy
and religion is natural, if it be allowed time. Thus by training the hand
c


and eye we have a practical object In fitting for earning a living,
and a higher aim in cultivating the brain and stimulating it to investiga-
tion in the realms of science and philosophy.
This, then, is the chief argument in favour of Manual Training:
It is necessary for the complete development of the faculties of the
mind as well as the powers of the body.
But there are other important considerations. It is unfortunate that
the old idea developed in times when only slaves and inferior persons
worked with their hands is still prevalent. People still consider that hand-
work, manual labour, handicraft, are themselves degrading. Politicians,
who are often incapable of intellectual and too lazy for manual labour,
are given to talk much of the dignity of labour and their respect for the
working man. This would be satisfactory if we could only be sure the
working man would properly despise the politician, and follow statesmen
who, with knowledge more varied and keener vision, more extended horizon
and stronger determination, are willing to work for their fellows but decline
to grovel in the train of any party by whatever name it may be called.
We have succeeded in making it the end and aim of a smart boy to
pass an examination. The teachers try to make him do this, and parents
have largely been led to consider it as the measure of success of a school.
The boy having been made to pass one exam, by means of cram is praised
by his teacher for personal ends, i.e., to glorify the school. He is thus led
to consider his few facts to be knowledge. The parent is hoodwinked by
the teacher’s self-interest and the lad’s unnatural ignorant conceit, to imagine
that his boy is altogether too clever for an ordinary walk of life, such as his
abilities naturally fit him for, and where he might do credit to himself and
earn an honest living. He must, accordingly, go through more exams.,
more cram, and never gains real knowledge, true education, which is the
liberality and breadth of mind consequent on “knowing what you know, and
what you don’t know, knowing that you don’t know it.” Knowledge is rather
the consciousness of ignorance than the possession of so-called facts, which
may be undigested, and in the light of future enquiry may prove to be
wrong.
To counteract this Manual Training is needed. It is the high privilege
of this age to clearly say that “ labour is not a commodity, but a spark of
divinity, man’s sole creative attribute.” The dignity of manual work will
never be taught by precept by those who cannot drive a nail or handle a
spade, and are ashamed to be seen with dirty hands or without a coat,
except for lawn tennis or cricket. The dignity of labour is shown by one
who is a “ gentleman ” either in broadcloth or rough moleskins ; who is
dignified and courteous to all, but subservient to none; whose arm can
swing a hammer, guide a plough, or use a pen ; who does not confuse
democracy with mob rule ; and who does not consider that to show manly
independence requires rudeness, insolence, or laziness. When the executive
faculties have been developed all along with the inceptive, it is perfectly
natural to recognise the equal and joint importance and dignity of mental
and manual work, and we shall laugh at the idea of any one having to
advocate it.
Attitude of the Inspector-General to Manual Training.— The
Inspector-General does not believe in Manual Training, or perhaps it would


be more correct to say he has not yet grasped the Manual Training idea.
He does not yet discriminate between developing a boy’s faculties through
the use of his hands, in the advanced stages of which training the use of
tools forms a prominent feature, and making an amateur carpenter. This is
somewhat surprising, because he is a good amateur himself, and firmly
believes in concrete teaching applied to arithmetic and other subjects.
Granting that Manual Training consists in “ sticking a carpenter’s shop
in the corner of the playground,” his attitude is easily understood.
It is not the opinions of the Inspector-General which I wish to discuss,
but his attitude towards the movement which he recognises must come;
which, indeed, had he carried out the wishes of the people of South
Australia, as represented in Parliament, should already be in a fair way to
accomplishment.
The Inspector-General knows that Manual Training must be introduced,
but he is not willing that his teachers should obtain a grasp of the question
before he does, and prefers that those whose inclinations would lead them to
be pioneers should be kept as much in the dark as possible. This is greatly
to be regretted, because he has opportunities of becoming acquainted with
the latest thought and experiment which his officers can only gain through
him. This is thoroughly in harmony with his policy, and is a fair example
of the weakness of his administration. I can only compare his system of
directing the work of his department to an army commander who, instead of
directing a battle from a suitable vantage ground, would attempt to personally
lead each individual company.
A few weeks after writing the above, when talking to a teacher who
stands very high in the estimation of the Department, perhaps none more so,
I put this question to him, “ You have always been to the fore in progressive
movements, and I know that you usually are among the first to learn the
lines upon which the Inspector-General is working in any new departure,
and when there is any preliminary experimenting you have usually been
selected as one of the first to have the objects and means explained, can you
tell me the attitude of Mr. Hartley towards Manual Training 1 ” He replied
—“ I have for some time been of the opinion that Mr. Hartley does not like
anyone to take up a subject until he has himself first mastered it and made
the suggestion, and until he is ready to advocate it he will discourage it all
he can.” I have permission to use his name, but in accordance with my
policy I refrain, for I would not publish the statement were it not that I
have p a similar questions to several other progressive men who are also
thoroughly loyal to the head of the Department, and have received similar
replies. *
* Since the above was in print I have received further confirmation from a country teacher. He
is about the last from whom I expected to receive such an expression of opinion, and probably were the
Inspector-General to know its source he would begin to understand that I do not speak without book
when I say that a large majority of his best teachers feel more or less strongly that his policy is failing
in its purpose. His plan of raising side issues and talking people down does not alter firm convic-
tions based on daily and hourly experience, and autocx’atic power may shut people’s mouths, but does
not satisfy a man’s sense of justice and right.
“ I wish something could be done to make our system educational as well as departmental, as it
is at present. One of ,the grimmest satires ever enacted by the Department is unfolding itself at
present. Forced by public opinion, ‘ Manual Training ’ has been introduced into the system. As the
Inspector-General appears to be as ignorant as possible on the subject, no instructions of any definiteness
have been issued. The consequence is no one knows where he is or what he is expected to do. No
plan, no materials. Think what a state country schools must be in!
c 2


Objections to Manual Training There are two classes of objectors to
Manual Training.
1. Those who fail to see the difference, for example, between teaching
carpentry as a trade and teaching the use of carpenters’ tools as an intellectual
exercise.
When the Inspector-General spoke of Manual Training as “ sticking a
Carpenter’s shop in a corner of the playground,” I classed him as belonging
to this section.
It cannot, however, be too frequently or too forcibly stated that Manual
Training must not be confused with Industrial or Technical Education. It
is true they are related, and the one prepares for the other, but “ sticking a
carpenter’s shop in the playground ” is no more Manual Training than
sticking some sums on the blackboard is teaching arithmetic. To have a
carpenter’s shop in connection with the Training College, or to have
workshops at the schools is good, but it is not Manual Training.
2. Those who think that as the majority of the children to be foundin'
our public schools either will or should be engaged in manual work of some
kind all their lives, every possible moment of school time should be devoted
to intellectual work and the storing of useful knowledge.
I deem it to be cheaper and more satisfactory in every way to store
useful knowledge in an encyclopaedia and give the child the power and love
for useful action that he may feel the relation between his head and hand in
other things beside cricket. I have no hesitation in saying that a boy who
has developed the power of intelligent action will never be at a loss for
facts in these days of cheap books, but experience shows that the boy whose
head has been turned into a lumber room for scraps of knowledge on all con-
ceivable subjects is a veritable noodle when he has to appty some of the
stock-in-trade his teachers have been at such pains to unnaturally force upon
him.
Lord Armstrong’s Opinion Lord Armstrong may be taken as
expressing the views of practical business men when he says—“ A man’s
success in life depends incomparably more upon his capacity for useful
action than upon his acquirements and knowledge, and the education of the
young should therefore be directed to the developing of faculties and valuable
qualities rather than to the acquisition of knowledge.”
A Practical Farmer’s Opinion. —Following the statement of Lord
Armstrong, I will state the opinion of a dear old friend of my boyhood,
one of the truest and most upright men I have known. He is a plain
country farmer whose farm, dairy, and garden have always been models Jor
the neighbours to copy. “ Well, William,” said he one day in the course of
conversation on our schools, “ you have had more advantages than I have
and ought to know better; but it seems to me that you don’t do the best for
the boys at the schools. Over seventy years of life have shown me that the
amount of schooling a man has matters very little as long as he can read,
write, and keep accounts, for if he is thrifty, handy, and industrious he can
get on, and he will soon learn a thing when he finds it will help him.”
I replied, “have you not often wished you had had more schooling 1 ”
“ Yes, William, I have; I would like every boy to have as much as
possible —the more the better. It will enable him to obtain more pleasure


and happiness from life, and do many things I have had to miss. You did
not understand me. What I mean is that all that is taught is no good
without thrift, industry, and hard work, and I cannot see that the schools
aid in this. I think the first aim of the schools should be to enable the
boys and girls to be more useful. Add as much else as you can, but unless
they are willing and know how to work, you do harm instead of good.”
Kindergarten. —After all, we only have to follow Nature as Froebel
has done. He must be credited with first putting theory into practice in
his greatly misunderstood Kindergarten system, which is the basis not only
of the present-day rational teaching, but of all efforts to place Manual
Training in the curriculum of the elementary if not the secondary school.
His Kindergarten is merely a system of child education through the
activities. It is unfortunate that there is a very erroneous conception in
England and here as to what is meant by Kindergarten. The usual idea is
that it is the introduction of certain games and occupations into the infant
school. That is good ; but it is not Kindergarten. The Kindergarten, as
Froebel elaborated it, and as it is to be seen in America, is child develop-
ment, irrespective of any connection with reading, writing, and other
inseparables from the English idea of school.
If children are to be prepared for artisans, the Kindergarten is the very
best beginning, because it inculcates the principles of industry from their
starting point in Nature. But this preparation is but incidental. It is
equally beneficial without this ulterior object, for in the true Kindergarten,
such as its founder contemplated, and as seen in St. Louis, Boston, and
Philadelphia, the industry of the child is a means and not an end.
The true Kindergarten does not place so much value on the
things made as on the making of things.— She attaches chief
importance to the experience gained in applying natural laws for making the
inward thought appear in outward form. The paper mat, the carefully
moulded clay is—or should be —the expression of ideas which under the
patient industry of the child have taken form outside his mind. The little
boy expressed this very beautifully when he told his mother that in draw-
ing “ You think and think, and then draw a line round your think.”
It is because the drawing which Mr. Hartley is forcing with such
unmerciful, ill-judged haste on the unfortunate teachers and pupils is
mechanical and ignores the principles of which I have spoken, that I question
its educational value.
In my visits to American Kindergartens I was pleased with the pretty
things I saw ; but I paid little attention to these. I went to see how and
why they were made, and in all my school associations I have experienced
nothing so delightful as watching how the splendid women, who have
charge of the Kindergartens of St. Louis, inculcate grand and beautiful
thoughts through playful exercises. Beading, writing and arithmetic are
never heard of in a Kindergarten. There the child’s nature is cultivated as
carefully as the plants in a conservatory.
It was because most of the infant teachers in England systematically
ignore this higher work that I came to the conclusion that they know not
what Kindergarten means. I found a few exceptions which confirmed my


opinion. They sorrowfully admitted that the “ Grant ” made it difficult to
get a teacher to work for any other aim.
It is because I find that the teachers of South Australia are being led
to confuse Kindergarten with making paper mats, folding paper, cutting
cards and so forth, that I make these comparisons, and I most respectfully,
but earnestly urge upon all the absolute necessity of studying the true
principles and working for the higher ideal. lam deeply conscious of the
painful fact that the system even more than the buildings prevent true
Kindergarten teaching—but the teachers can do much if they understand
what it means.
From the time a child of four or five years enters one of our infant
schools, he is subjected to the cramming process in order that he may pass a
satisfactory examination. Let the reader imagine an individual examination
of dots of five years and six months of age by an Inspector who has twice
or thrice as much work to do as any man can properly perform in the time
at his disposal. I sometimes see things in connection with these babies’
classes which make my blood boil, they are so inhuman, and yet I cannot
blame the bright girl monitors who have to teach from thirty to fifty pupils,
either for nothing, or for thirteen shillings and fourpence a month.
To show that Froebel’s methods are not costly, I may mention that
the New Jersey State Board of Education after a careful consideration of
the subject found that £l2 will properly equip a Kindergarten for twenty-
five children, and report that the subsequent annual cost is not great.
SCHOOLHOUSES AND FURNITURE.
“ Versatility, readiness, application, continuity, power to con-
centrate on a narrow field, and frequently repeat a fact in every
varying form, are the attributes to a successful instructor. In
education more is required. It is intensity, depth, soul—in fact
the man himself that counts. A happy combination of these two
sets of attributes constitutes the ideal schoolmaster. When a
school system is conducted by a staff chiefly composed of such men,
there will be no further discussion as to whether teaching is a
profession. The genius does not assert himself, he works.
“A skilful surgeon requires the most perfect operating-room
with the best instruments procurable. Apart from a few exceptions
what we call skill, is applied carefulness. The good teacher will
give his pupils a good education with nothing but the seabeach for
copy book and nature for text books. He does not wish to be so
limited :it is not good that he should. The learned English
professor and eminent scientist who, when asked to give a lesson
in a little village school, went and bought a pennyworth of candy,
and kept children, who had never heard of science, thoroughly
interested in a lesson on crystals, was independent of apparatus ;
but if he were not an exception his name would not be honoured
the world over. The ordinary teacher needs the best appliances
which can be procured, and the welfare of the pupils demands that
he should have them.”-—From Schools in Three Continents.


111-adapted School Buildings. —lt is not my wish to make things
seem worse than they really are. Neither have I space to speak of the
improvements which have taken place.
The question to he considered is —
Are ithe School Buildings well adapted for their purpose, and
are the latest erections in accordance with modern standards?
My reply is an emphatic—
No! they are decidedly behind the times, and are built in utter
disregard of several most important principles of school architecture.
In other places I have had to speak of niggardly economy. It is not
so here. The country has provided the money, and it has been spent in
more or less glaring disregard of some of the most important fundamental
principles of school architecture. When in England for the first time in
1881, I was impressed with the fact that many of the buildings were more
expensive than ours, but noticed that they were usually built on the same
plan. My visit last year showed me what enormous strides the authorities
had made in nine years. England is still behind America, Germany, and
Paris, but she has left us far in the rear.
It is hardly possible to have schools built on the modern principles
until we throw aside that abominable relic of the past, the Pupil Teacher
System, which, like the Scotch thistle, the sparrow, and other noxious
things, flourishes where it should never have been introduced. But we
could at least keep up to Conservative England, where the same system is
in force. If she can have separate classrooms and can arrange the lighting
on hygienic principles, we should also. And so with other things.
In constructing a machine, the inventor aims at reducing the friction
and waste of power to the smallest possible amount. How much more
should this be the purpose of an administrator of a school system; but had
the inventive powers of a genius attempted to contrive a plan for wasting
energy and time, he could hardly have attained his purpose more completely
than is done in our large schools.
Relation of School Buildings to Discipline. —l was struck with the
splendid discipline of the American schools, which is maintained without
effort. The visitor rarely hears any of that unconscious nagging and ordering
so common in our schools. The teachers treat their pupils with courtesy and
are so treated in turn.
I spoke to Dr. W. T. Harris, the United States Commissioner of
Education, on the subject, and asked him if I was right in attributing it to
the construction of the buildings and the employment of adult teachers.
He informed me that while the character of the teachers had, of course,
much to do with it, it was only rendered possible, and might, therefore, be
considered due to the sohoolhouses. He said—“ The system of having
separate rooms, so far as it related to America, was first introduced in
Boston, and is the secret of the mild discipline of American schools. In
St. Louis, when the old plan was in force, as many as one hundred oases of
corporal punishment were recorded in a week. At a later period, during his
superintendency, it got down to about ten cases in a term of about ten
weeks in schools of 700 children.”


On the Continent of Europe and in the United States, it has long been
recognised that a schoolroom shall be square, and the light shall fall
on the pupil’s left hand. —They will not allow a room to be lighted
from the front, back, or right hand. The London School Board now
recognise the same thing, and accordingly their new buildings are
arranged to give effect to the principle. They also agree in entirely con-
demning the long narrow windows so general here. The American schools
have large sash windows, and those of recent construction there, as well as
in Leeds and London, are glazed with large sheets of plate-glass. Our
schools nearly always look bright and cheerful, but they are very defective
for work, and are worse for teachers than pupils.
In a properly constructed room the teacher can see all his pupils at
once, a thing impossible in most of our big schools. By having the light on
the left hand the shadow falls away from the pupil during writing, drawing,
arithmetic, sewing, and such lessons, and it neither injures the eyes of pupil
or teacher. In our schools, the visitor notices that the flood of light from
the back causes the pupil’s face to be in shadow and dazzles the eyes of the
teacher. The consequence is that pupils are seen trying to twist themselves
round to get the light on their slates and books, thereby not only doing
permanent harm to their backs but rendering themselves liable to rebuke for
being “ out of position.” This is one of those points which our inspectors,
failing to grasp the meaning of real discipline, carefully note on entering a
school.
Seats. The seats in most of our Schools are barbarous.—
All through the country and in the smaller suburban schools the forms have
no backs. I would like to make members of Parliament sit on school seats
for five hours a day until they voted money to provide seating accommodation
more in accord with ideas of civilisation and hygienic principles. This
would perhaps reduce “Hansard” somewhat.
It would pay the people of South Australia to make bonfires of much
of the school furniture.
Apparently the Department is too Conservative to adopt an idea on its
merits. To say that a suggested improvement is “ American ”is to condemn
it at once. Yet American School boards had adopted scientific standards
many years before the Inspector-General adapted ours from the German and
other Continental codes, and allowed, if not led, the teachers of South
Australia to oppose and condemn it as a fad of his own. The correspondence
which took place will be remembered by some of my readers, who will
recall the fact that Mr. Hartley said nothing to show that the ideas were not
new at all; having been in force in Europe for many years. I knew and
he must have known such was the case, and yet he deliberately neglected his
strongest claim to support. He might have shown his teachers that, not
only had the countries of Europe, having the best school systems, long since
adopted codes similar to the one he was introducing, but that the conference
on code reform, comprising many of the most advanced educationalists in
England, petitioned the Lords of the Committee of Council on Education
(I think in 1880) to adopt a similar code for the English schools. I know
he was aware this had been done. This would have disarmed opposition
and assisted progress by calling forth the best instincts of his teachers to aid
him in bringing our course of study and methods of teaching into harmony


with the progressive countries of the world. Many teachers believe even
now that the code of 1885 was an invention of his own.
The Cost Of Conservatism. -Many thousands are wasted through
ignorance and prejudice for every hundred saved by grinding economy,
pearly £B,OOO has just been expended on a new school in Currie
Street. It is, no doubt, much better than any former building, but alike in
its arrangements, its lighting, and its fittings ; it is anything but up to date.
If it were a question of economy, the blame would rest upon other
shoulders, but it is not. The money has been expended in an unsatis-
factory manner, whereas, had the head of the department understood
the principles upon which a school should be built, we might have had a
building of which educationalists would have been proud.
There is absolutely no excuse for the mistakes of the Department with
regard to this school. I returned to South Australia when the plans
were being prepared. A representative of the Register met me on the
steamer, and in the course, of his interview put the question—“ How do our
school buildings differ from those of England and America V’ I replied—
“ Our schools are built on the plan of the old-fashioned English schools.
The modern buildings provide for much more classroom accommodation, and
the London School Board now build that each class shall have a separate
room, and each department is provided with an assembly hall. In America
each class has a separate room. Ido not remember seeing a school in which
two or more teachers had to work side by side, and nearly all are provided
with an assembly hall, which is frequently most elegantly and comfortably
seated with opera chairs. I hear that a new school is to be built in West
Adelaide. I earnestly hope that it will be planned on more modern
principles than those already in existence in the city.”
A few days after landing, I suppose in consequence of the above
remark, I received a courteous message from Mr. Adamson very kindly
inviting me to accompany him on his official visit, as a representative of the
Board of Advice, to inspect the draft plans of the new school. I was asked
to point out wherein the design differed from the best schools I had seen,
and I did so. The Superintendent of Public Buildings said he did not care
how the building was arranged. His business was to construct a school
according to the instructions given him.
Although very busy, I took the trouble to wait on the Inspector-
General and showed him plans of numerous English and American schools,
and offered to go fully into the question of adapting the best ideas I had
seen to our special conditions. His action in this ease was, I think, typical
of his attitude when a proposal does not originate with himself. He had
much to say in depreciation of American education, which besides being
more or less erroneous, had nothing to do with the matter about which I had
called. He characterised the buildings, photographs, and plans of which I
showed him, as ugly, expensive, and unsuited for South Australia.
There is little reason to be proud of the beauty of our school buildings,
but I would be the last to mention this if they were convenient. I think the
average American school has a more presentable appearance than ours, hut
the chief feature is its suitability.


I said I believed that by adapting their ideas to suit our climate we
could erect a school embodying all the advantages of the latest Parisian,
London and American models (except the Assembl}’ Hall) at no greater, and
probably at less cost than would be required to build the school con-
templated. I offered to go fully into the matter and to show how it could
be done, but having made an assertion, he stuck to it, and we have paid
nearly £B,OOO for another illustration of how a school should not be built.
It only remains to be said that there was no personal element in the
matter. It was simply a question of policy. The Inspector General would
not voluntarily recommend a man to take charge of the education system
of another colony, when his opinion was not worth taking on such a matter
as building a school-house.
Confirmation. So far as the Inspector-General is concerned, nothing
further need be said. He condemned that which he did not understand,
and although it would have cost nothing, and taken no more time than
he occupied in proving the fallacy of phantoms of his own creation, he would
not take the trouble to enquire into the accuracy of my assertions. Since
then, however, I have gone into the matter more fully, and through the
kindness of Mr. T. H. Smeaton, whose abilities as an architect are
well known, I am able to state positively that my estimate left
a margin for architectural embellishment ; after giving a separate room
for every fifty pupils, greatly increased space per pupil, a correct system of
lighting, more convenient arrangements, and greater comfort to teachers and
pupils.
No feature of the American schools struck me more forcibly than the
provision for the comfort of both teachers and pupils. Ido not see how a
child brought up in the average public school of the United States could
tolerate an uncomfortable or untidy home. Attendance at the schools is an
education in itself.
I was so much impressed with the beauty, comfort and convenience of the
desks that I persuaded one of the best and largest manufacturing firms to
present a set of their admirable
“GLOBE DESKS”
for our Teclmilogical Museum, where they excite the envy of the boys and
girls who see them. Those who would form an idea of the elegance of an
American school should make a point of seeing them, and when they
remember that everything is in keeping, they will recognise how much need
there is for progress.
Apparently neither the officials nor the general public realise the
enormous waste of time, and the expenditure of unnecessary vital
energy in securing and maintaining what is called discipline
in our badly arranged, uncomfortably furnished school buildings, worked
under the antiquated pupil teacher system.
Pupil teachers have not the skill to control and direct the healthy
activity, which does away with the need for that military order, called by
our authorities discipline, as surely as the light of day renders a kerosine
lamp unnecessary. But the best teachers in existence could not teach
satisfactorily in our large schools.


I have collected the answers of a number of teachers to the question—
“ What does your Inspector consider good Discipline?” The replies are
expressed in this statement —“ Where there is good discipline there must be
no noise, no restlessness, the children must all sit or stand in the same
position (hands rightly placed, feet together and so forth), and every order
must be obeyed with military promptness and regularity.” Now, that is
unnatural, and therefore wrong, and yet work would be impossible in such
schools as Grote Street without some such stupidity.
I may here point out one of the strongest points of contrast between
German and American schools on the one hand, and English and Australian
on the other. In England, as well as here, the authorities, by constructing
unsuitable buildings and employing immature teachers, and not sufficient of
these, render the higher discipline impossible, and then enforce an artificial
substitute which is as injurious to the welfare of the children as it is a tax on
the time and energies of the teachers. England is correcting her mistakes,
we stick to ours.
The Germans and Americans (I might add Parisians, Belgians, and
others) construct buildings suitable for the development of natural powers
by natural activities, and then place sufficient matured men and women in
charge of such numbers as can be readily guided and controlled by one
mind.
The result of our neglect is obvious. The energy which should be
devoted to education is spent in irritation, and the most wearying part of
the teachers’ work is “keeping order,” or “maintaining discipline.”
Waste of Time in oup Schools —lt will be admitted by those who
know anything of the working of our schools, that a very considerable
percentage of the time which the children spend in school is as good as
wasted. Perhaps it would be more correct to say worse than merely wasted,
because, while the young teacher who is endeavoring to “ keep order,”
perhaps in a room with several other classes, the pupils not only have to
spend considerable time idle, but have to sit in uncomfortable positions and
practise doing nothing until it not infrequently became an injurious habit.
This is when the teacher is able to subdue the tendency on the part of
the enforced idle to find employment in forbidden channels known as
mischief. Ido not blame teachers for this. I know too well the difficulties
they have to contend with, to say an unkind word against them. They are
part of an imperfect system which has ruined the health of many noble
women.
I think that those who have had experience of actual teaching in our
large schools, will, after careful consideration, admit that they could teach
the children more in four hours than they do now in five, and do it much
better, provided that they could have a room to themselves and not more
than fifty pupils.
These conditions would mean increased cost, particularly as the Depart-
ment has blundered so with regard to the erection of school buildings.
But it would bring the conditions of teaching and the average number of
children taught by each adult teacher more nearly in accord with the
practice of German, French, and American educationalists. It would also
give one hour a day for Manual Training and Agricultural Teaching
without increasing the hours.


Classification and Promotion. —There is urgent need for reform in
the system of classifying and promoting pupils. Subject to the right of
appeal, the promotion of the children should be entirely in the hands
of the teachers. With the result examinations the power would
probably be abused ; but this is another reason for abolishing the “ per-
centage mill ” —that the legitimate right of the teacher could be conceded;
No one can know as well as he when a pupil is ready for promotion ; but
the Department works on the principle that an inspector, on seeing a child
for the first time, or at best once a year, is able in a few minutes to form a
more correct judgment of his acquirements and capabilities than the teacher
who has taught him for years.
An American Plan. —Among many other privileges, the American
teacher usually has the right of promoting the pupils when they are ready.
The plan followed varies in its details in different centres, but the following
general statement will give an idea of how pi emotions are made under some
of the best School Boards ;
The schools are usually much more carefully graded than ours. This
is rendered easy in consequence of the suitability of the buildings, the stafl
allowed, and the absence of the result test. Where co-education is the
custom, and such is commonly the case, classification is still further
simplified.
The superintendents or supervising teachers can at any time examine a
class in any recent work to test the result of the teaching; but greater
importance is attached to the methods employed and their general effect.
I usually found that instead of the six grades or classes of our schools
(junior, first, second, third, fourth, and fifth), there were virtually (I speak
of large schools) from twelve to twenty, and the difference between any two
classes is consequently slight, allowing the gradation of work to be constant
and continuous.
By our method children progress by a series of steps, whereas, under
the one I am describing, they rise by means of an educational inclined plane.
By our system a child may be ready for the next class several months before
the examination, but he must wait until that event before he is promoted,
and then he goes up with others who would be better in the old class for a
considerable time longer. Under the most complete American plan, when a
teacher considers a pupil fit for the next class he is promoted at once, but
should the next teacher think that the promotion is premature and the two
cannot agree, the matter is decided by the principal or supervising teacher.
When a parent considers his child is promoted too rapidly or detained too
long in a class, he appeals to the supervising teacher or superintendent, who
examines the pupil and enquires into the case on its own merits. Of course
the promotions usually only take place at definite periods, that is at the
beginning of school terms.
I think that the parents of the children attending our schools will
realise as well as the teachers, how great a benefit it must be to have a plan
which abolishes the period of heavy strain and undue excitement followed
by the collapse when the examination is over.


I will conclude my reference to this subject, which is treated at some
length in my notes on “ Schools in Three Continents,” by quoting from the
opinion of the Principal of the Washington Normal School—
“ ‘ Banking by Per Cent.’ is well nigb forgotten here, although it is not very long
since it was omnipotent. We are glad to forget. Frequent tesbs, oral and written, are
given, but the formal examinations deciding promotions do not exist. Teachers pro-
mote pupils by the exercise of their judgment. All the year they are being measured,
no longer by the number of facts they can get and keep , but by the power of the
mental grasp in new lines. Teachers feel the added responsibility and dignity and
unfitted pupils are not sent on. We like it ! ”
“The tests spoken of are given by the Supervising Teachers, who occupy a
position, as far as I know, unique, but the plan appears to work splendidly. These
officers combine many of the functions of our Head Masters with the duties of
Inspectors. Each supervises a small district of the city, so that he can visit all his
schools in a day or can spend a week in one or two. There are no controlling
Principals in the schools. In ordinary matters each teacher conducts her own room
as though it were a separate school and is responsible to the supervising teacher.”
STAFF.
Mentally and Physically Incapable of Allotted Work.—Pupil
Teachers form nearly fifty per cent, of the staff in the large schools.
I have pointed out that these are utterly incapable of teaching according
to the excellent principles laid down in the course of instruction, because
they are unacquainted with the laws governing child nature and mental
development, and are in the nature of things unable to understand the
principles which are to direct their teaching. I believe it is impossible
to find such a contradiction as here exists, where playful boys and giggling
girls (this is no slight on my overworked young friends) are set to carry
out a course of study which taxes the greatest skill and energy of the
mature and trained mind, and to do so in such a way that it can be tested
by a “ hurry-skurry” examination once a year.
Unfortunately this is not all for, from a purely physical stand-
point, the staff provided is altogether inadequate for the work to be
done. The effectiveness of the schools is crippled by the \wretched
economy forced on the department by the people of the province acting through
their representatives. I cannot deal at length with this point, but it is
painful to go from school to school and find what parliamentary niggardliness
has brought about.
Nominal Staff a Fallacy. —The regulations provide for an assistant for
every 60, or a pupil teacher for every 80 children. This would be
insufficient, but there are several considerations which make the actual
numbers much higher. For example, the staff allowed is based on the
average attendance for the previous year, so that a teacher may often have
over 80 scholars and yet the average for the whole year may be below
sixty. The system of classification into departments, as well as that
dependent on the result of examinations, would render it impossible to
arrange the pupils so as to carry out the regulations even if the wretchedly
contrived buildings would allow it to be done. The large schools are
divided into three departments (boys, girls, and infants) for ordinary work,
but in deciding upon the staff allowed the three are considered as one, and
the Head Mistress and Infant Mistress are virtually assistants. Again the


regulations provide that a monitor may be appointed instead of a pupil
teacher, and the department is driven to practise economy to such an extent
that this is constantly done.
Recently, after going through a large school, I remarked to the Head
Master, “Your classes are very uneven in size.” He replied—“ That is
just what the Inspector said, but I told him I was a teacher short and the
classification would not allow any other arrangement to be made. He told
me to keep to the regulations, and made an entry to that effect. I asked
him to go through the school and advise me how a change could be made to
re-adjust matters. This he declined to do, but left me with the injunction
that I was not to allow the regulation numbers to be exceeded.”
Another source of mischief is the fact that it not unfrequently happens
that three or four pupil teachers will finish their term of service together
and their places have to be taken by the same number of entirely untrained
boys and girls of from thirteen to fifteen years of age.
What I Saw One Morning. —l will give the result of one morning’s
observation, which may be taken as typical of what may be seen in
our large schools.
In one school a young man recently from the Training College was
endeavoring to teach 91 boys. In the next room a pupil teacher mentally
struggling with 70 second-class pupils in a room built to accommodate at most
fifty children. I need hardly say that the state of the atmosphere, as is
frequently the case in the classrooms, was simply abominable. In another
school a lady assistant had 86 girls, and she told me her average for some
time had been about 80. A third year female pupil teacher had 60 boys,
and the infant mistress and a pupil teacher were educating (?) 187 little
boys and girls in one big room. Usually, I believe, they have the assistance
of a girl of fifteen who takes the “ babies.” She has been helping for about
eighteen months, but gets no pay, although she teaches from 40 to 50
children. In the next room a girl of fourteen years of age was conducting
a class of 42 boys and girls of from seven to eleven years of age. She had
the title of paid irujnitor, and received the munificent sum of thirteen
shillings and fourpence a month.
These are not exceptional cases, although a prominent member of the
Assembly, who should know, wished to convince me that such was the
case. I replied—“ Call a cab, and in an hour I will show you that what I
say is correct with regard to nearly every school about town.” I will give
the result of my observation in another school;—
No. I—Boy Monitor, 15 years of age, has taught for 3 months without pay,
comes at 8.10 a m,, leaves at 4.45 to 5.15 p.m., does not leave premises in lunch hour, takes
averageof 21 hours of an evening to do his home lessons, in charge of a first classof 46 boys.
No. 2 —Girl Monitor, nearly 17 years of age, has taught 3 years without pay,
expects appointment directly at 13s. 4d. a month, comes at 8.10 a.m., leaves at 4.30 or 5
p.m., average 2 or 2\ hours an evening, does not leave at lunch hour, was teaching
junior class of 37 boys.
No. 3 —Girl Pupil Teacher, first year, 15 years of age, taught 1 year
as unpaid monitor, and 15 months as first'year pupil teacher at salary of £lB a year,
comes at 8.10 a.m., leaves at 4.45 or 5 p.m., does not leave school at lunch hour, takes
2 to 3 hours for home lessons, was in charge of 54 little boys and girls, takes 170 or 180
children to gallery lesson twice a week.


No. 4—Girl Monitor, receives 13s. 4d. a month, was teaching babies’ class of
44 pupils.
No. 6 —Girl Pupil Teacher, Ist year, salary £lB a year, comes at 8.10 a.m.,
leaves, 4.45 p.m., takes 2 to 2j hours for home lessons, had charge of 45 junior girls,
does not leave at lunch hour.
No. 7 Girl Pupil Teacher, Ist year, salary, £lB a year, comes at S.Kfi a m., leaves at
from 4.45 t05.15p.m .teaches third class,47 girls present, finds it hard work, correcting books
take long time, takes 2 to 3 hours for home lessons, mother won’t let her work after 10 p.m.
if she can help it, does not leave at lunch hour.
No. B—Girl Pupil Teacher, 2nd year, salary, 9s. 2d. a week, comes at 8.10 a.m.,
leaves at 5 to 5.30 p.m., and has to take exercise books home to correct, two weeks
out of three she goes home to lunch, taking 30 to 40 minutes, works from 7 to 10
p.m. at correcting books and home lessons, and has to correct books on Saturday,
teaches a fifth class of 30 girls.
No, 9 —Female Assistant, over 90 second class girls (usual number), comes at
from 7.30 to 8.30 a.m., leaves at 5 or 5.30 p.m., remains on premises for lunch, does not
have time to make cup of tea, no provision for boiling water most of the year, has to
take books home nearly every day, has to correct over 90 books eight or nine times a
week, marking all mistakes and initialling each exercise with red ink, complains, as does
every teacher of a second class, of the drawing.
No. 10—Male Assistant, in charge of 85 boys, similar work to above.
No 11—Head Master, teaching 83 fourth class boys.
The Head Mistress, Infant Mistress, and other teachers had classes ranging from
35 to 66.
Summary with Reflections Dedicated to Members of Parliament
and Trades Unions. —Will my readers consider what the facts I have
mentioned really mean. Here were 273 children being taught by six
apprentice teachers at a total cost of £62 a year. If anyone will take the
trouble to work the thing out, he will find that these young people work
from nine to eleven hours a day, and from half-past seven in the morning to
six in the evening taste nothing but a little cold lunch.
Words cannot be found too strong to denounce a policy which makes
young girls, at the most critical period of life, take charge of from thirty to
fifty chilren, and stand for five hours a day in the impure air of our schools,
alike in the heat of summer, with bad ventilation, and the cold of winter
without a five, and this often from six months to three, years without pay.
In addition they have to spend at least half an hour daily at incidental work
about the school, and have an hour’s lessons from the Head Teacher. As a
matter of fact, many go to school at 8 a.m. and do not leave until 5 p.m.
In the evening at least half an hour is required to prepare for next day’s
lessons, and an average of two hours must be devoted to study. This gives
a minimum of nine hours of trying work each day, with little or no fresh air
or stimulating exercise. Then people wonder why our teachers do not
enjoy good health, “ for teaching is easy work, you know.” Let those who
talk about the evils of sweating enquire into this. Let contemptible
office seekers and time-serving Members of Parliament, who bow down
to do homage before labor unions who will not allow strong men to
work as long at purely physical and less wearying employments, have
this Civilised Barbarism reformed out of existence before they talk with
the confidence of absolute ignorance about our “ Education System working
well and comparing favorably with any in the world.”
I would remind the public that the schools are not private institutions,
but are open to any citizen provided he does not interfere with the work.


Some Comparisons. —The London School Board count 30 pupils in
average attendance, for the Head Teacher, 60 for each assistant, and 30 for
each third or fourth year pupil teacher. Candidates on probation and first
and second year pupil teachers do not count although they are paid and
teach one or two days a week to lighten the work of the other teachers.
They spend most of their time in the Pupil Teachers’ College under special
masters. In London, taking these juniors into consideration, there is only
one pupil teacher to five adults.
In the eight large schools about Adelaide nearly half (46 per cent.)
of those employed in the schools are pupil teachers who teach every school
day and all the school year.
In America I found that while all the teachers were adults, and each
had a separate room, the number of pupils varied from 30 to 50, the
general number being from 40 to 45. Provision is also nearly always
made for supplying the place of any teacher who may be away for a day
or longer through illness or other cause. This is, of course, necessary
because a room will only hold one class. In our schools the work of a
sick teacher falls on the remaining members of the already too hardly-
worked staff.
In France and Germany, where all are adult teachers, I seldom found
the rooms provided with more than 48 or 50 seats, and there were usually
some vacant. There were some exceptions, and in a few schools the rooms
varied very much, one seating perhaps 26 and the next 60 ; but I never
found two classes in a room. It is only fair to say that I think these were
all old buildings, and that the new sohoolhouses appear to be provided
with rooms of more uniform size and seated for from 40 to 50 pupils.
Excellence of our Country Schools.— When addressing meetings in
other countries on the subject of education in Australia, it was always a
pleasure to be able to draw very favorable comparisons between the
provision made for the instruction of the children in scattered districts of
Australia and similarly situated people elsewhere. The statement that
out-of-the-way bush townships are provided with facilities for elementary
education very slightly inferior to those of the larger towns was always
greeted with applause, and on one occasion, when speaking to some two
thousand teachers and friends at an American Educational Convention,
the remark was received with more enthusiasm than any other statement
made at the meeting.
It may here be remarked that I seldom speak of the weak points of
foreign schools, and when I do, only as a warning or for the purpose of
illustration. In the same way, I found that strangers were most interested
in the best features of our schools, and indeed, unless asked, I never
mentioned any other. I told others of the best points of our system, and
looked for features worthy of imitation in theirs. These pages show that
there is no necessity to wander round the world searching for errors;
but my fellow Australians may be assured that, however plainly I speak
at home, I did not go about advertising our weaknesses.
Our country schools are not nearly what they ought to be, or what
they might be, for they share the general evils of our system ; but it is a
matter for public congratulation that the children of the pioneers in new


districts have been so well looked after, and still more so that the school
facilities have been so highly valued and used where the necessary evil of
compulsion is entirely out of question.
The relatively great expense of providing this education for the
scattered population raises the average cost per head of our school system
very greatly. Notwithstanding this it is one of the cheapest I know,
so that tve must conclude that the average cost in the city schools is very low
indeed —much too low, in fact, for proper efficiency.
A Mania for Economy. —Except when he is trying' experiments,
which a knowledge of what has been done elsewhere would frequently
prove to be of little use, the Inspector-General seems to breathe an
atmosphere of “What will it Cost?”
This has apparently grown to be such a habit that it occasionally
becomes a matter of comment on the part of gentlemen from otherplaces who
visit our schools in his company. One of two visitors remarked ; “Your
Inspector-General appears to have peculiar ideas of doing many things,
but the most striking characteristic is his habit of measuring everything
by ‘ What does it cost 1 ’ He seems to have a mania for economy, and
accordingly does not enquire whether another plan is more beneficial, but
does it cost more.”
Perhaps one or two political incidents may throw some light on this
habit. I once attended a meeting of electors to hear the candidates for
the House of Assembly explain how they loved the opinions of the voters
more dearly than their own. One said, in reply to a question about
education, “ Gentlemen 1 my opinion is that our schools are costing a
jolly sight too much ! ” He was loudly cheered, and whether this had
anything to do with the result or not, he was returned, and in a short
time became Minister of Education. He afterwards informed the House
that the Education Department was more economically managed than
any other, and it was impossible to reduce the vote and maintain the
schools in a state of efficiency.
When Mr. Grainger was endeavoring to carry his motion in favour
of free education, he invited his fellow members of the House of Assembly
to meet the representative teachers, so that they might obtain an
expression of the views held by the men and women most familiar with
the working of the present system. The teachers gathered in force, and
the schools, attended by the majority of the children were, I believe,
represented. Three members of Parliament availed themselves of the
opportunity of gaining correct views of a phase of the question little
understood, but I have often wondered how many times three would have
attended a meeting of labor representatives under similar conditions.
I would advise each teacher to ponder such things, and then con-
stitute himself a centre for the propagation of correct views on education.
Teachers are citizens, and should not neglect to further the welfare of
their country. Whether they agree with the regulation or not, they
must not take an active part in public affairs until the rule is altered; but
the best work is not noisy work. Their duty is to educate the public
mind.


Centralization. One of the cardinal principles of the teacher is
contained in the truism, “We learn to do by doing.” This principle
the Department wishes to see carried out in the schools ; but strange to
say, while the teachers are enjoined to apply it to their children, they are
denied the right to exercise the principle with regard to themselves. They
are under a despotic autocracy, as pronounced as the Imperialism of
Germany. The teachers are governed entirely on the lines of ‘You shall!’
‘ You must !’ ‘ Do this, or beware the penalties ! ’
Teachers are enjoined not to take any part in politics other than by
the exercise of the franchise. The reason for the regulation is obvious
enough ; but I think much more good woidd arise were the teachers
encouraged to exercise an active judicious interest in public affairs. It is
absolutely necessary that they should do so to keep in touch with the
world around. At present all the influences of a teacher’s life tend to
make him a novice in outside affairs. How can he exert a liberal
influence under such conditions 2
Teachers are not only servants, but citizens of the state. To a certain
extent, no doubt, the twofold condition of master and servant may lead to
injudicious action on the part of an unevenly balanced mind. It should
not be so, but on the other hand should be beneficial. Any evil results
are entirely due either to defective training, causing failure to grasp the
true principles of representative government, or a condition of mind ren-
dering a man unfit for the responsibilities of an educator.
The law is itself a schoolmaster to the public mind, because the
people learn to do by doing, learn to govern by governing. No amount
of preparation under any form of class government, by whatever name it
may be called, will enable a people to govern themselves satisfactorily
without the actual experience, attended probably with many blunders,
against which those, whose control they will not have, could at once have
warned them. One source of weakness in our fair land is the fact that
those who claim to be and, if advantages count, should be the most
cultured, best educated and most thoughtful, largely hold aloof from
taking a part in the government of the state, and as a penalty have to
live under the government of men they consider less intelligent than
themselves.
It is surely short-sighted policy to enact that the body of mens
intelligent enough to be entrusted with the most responsible of duties—
the education of men and women, to conduct the future government of
the state —shall not themselves take any interest in the all-important
function of government. A wiser course would be to endeavor to bring
about such an enlightened condition of public opinion that the whole
weight of the most intelligent portion of the people should be actively
exercised in the government of the country.
Indirect Taxes on Teachers’ Incomes.— The nominal salary paid to
the teachers is much greater than the actual amounts received for personal
uses. They are constantly taxed to pay for things which should he provided
by the Department. Some of the schools of South Australia are as well
supplied with pictures and specimens as any I have seen ] but the
Department can take no credit for this. The teachers alone deserve all the


praise. Some have spent scores of pounds in this way. We have to read
through the yearly reports of the Inspectors to learn how the tax is levied;
for, of course, there is no compulsion in the matter. Some willingly
spend the money, and probably obtain as much pleasure as it would give
them if used in any other way. Some are actuated by the feeling that
they must not be outdone by others, or in the belief that it will be a
paying speculation by helping them to good reports and promotion. Then
there are very many who steadily refuse to spend their salaries on their
schools. In the early part of 1890 several paragraphs appeared in the
daily papers respecting some diagrams for the schools. One commenced
as follows :
“Hew Lessons for School Children.—The Minister of Education
(Hon. J. H. Gordon, M.L.C.) has given an order for fifty copies of
‘ Yaggy’s Anatomical Study,’ for use in the principal schools of the colony.
This production is of a very high-class character It would
be difficult to produce a more exquisite set of illustrations, and the Minister
is so pleased with the study that he proposes to have lithographed copies
of the set for teachers in the less important schools to give instructions
from. A Melbourne firm has received the order, and in the course of a
week or two ‘Yaggy’s Anatomical Study’ will be added to the curriculum
of the State schools of the colony.”
It will hardly be credited that the teachers had to pay about £3 each
for these diagrams out of their own pockets. Yet this is only one out of
many instances.
From the April issue of the Education Gazette, I learn that the
Gumeracha Teachers’ Association feel so strongly on this point that at
their last meeting they passed the following resolution ; —Maintenance
allowance. —“ That considering the heavy expenditure caused by the
purchase of apparatus, etc., for science lessons, maps for geography, toys
for Kindergarten plays, the Education Department be requested to
consider the question of increasing the allowance.” If the salaries are
considered too high, let them be openly reduced. It is not fair to take
advantage of a teacher’s helplessness by bringing pressure upon him to
buy necessary apparatus with his private means.
SECONDARY EDUCATION.
The Advanced School fop Girls. —In establishing this institution,
the Inspector General—the chief credit must, I believe, be given to him—
did more for the higher education of women of South Australia than the
combined efforts of all other men since I have been able to follow educa-
tional movements. Its strongest opponents will admit that its manage-
ment has been a credit to the talented women, whose health it has done
much to undermine, and that its influence has been very beneficial in
many ways, especially by raising the standard of work in the private
schools, and opening the University to many women who would otherwise
never have been able to enter its lecture rooms and laboratories. These
women are now acting their part in influencing the education of their sex
in many quarters where the Advanced School is not thought of as a factor
at all.
n 2


I wish I could stop with these words of praise, for I am glad the
Advanced Schools for girls was instituted. But lam sorry that although
it is worked by the Education Department, it is no part of our public
system, and is based and conducted on pernicious principles which
are utterly opposed to the interests of Public Education.
The Advanced School for girls is no part of our public system,
because it violates the cardinal principles of our free constitution. It is
based on the idea that children of parents having comfortable or large
incomes should have a higher education than those whose parents are
poor.
Although it is somewhat of a digression, I will briefly consider one
aspect of the question I have just raised. If there is a difference, which I
do not admit, it is the other way, for the child of the poor parent having
to fight against odds in the battle of life should have the best possible
equipment for the struggle, and that is education. Ido not mean the
particular “ education ” given at the Advanced School, because the object
there is not to train good mothers and useful practical women, but
successful students. One of the teachers said—“ The whole of the highest
class have to work for the senior public examination, whether they enter
for it or not; but there is no cram, no attempt to teach for the purpose of
enabling students to pass the exam., rather than for the educative influence
of study.” I do not say a word against what is taught, or how it is
taught ; but I would like to say much in favour of what is left out.
My objection to the principle on which the Advanced School is
founded is that the State is doing itself a wrong in recognising the
parentage of a child. All children are equal so far as the State is concerned.
All children of citizens are her children, and any part the Government
may take in the work of education, which is primarily the duty of the
parent alone, can only be justified in the public interests of the State.
The social and political questions of the day cannot be separated
from the educational. It is being more generally believed that the world
is losing much by having men laboring who should be directing, and men
directing who should be laboring. To remedy this it is argued that
facilities should be provided for every child in the State for as nearly as
possible equal training, so that the State should be able to make the best
use of all its best men, which it does not, and cannot do until some such
course is taken. As education progresses we hear less about the doctrine
of equality, but more about equal opportunity. The law of heredity will,
as a rule, give the child of intellectual parents a great advantage, and
early influence will do even more. There are many considerations which
it is not my purpose to discuss which make this question one of great
difficulty and complexity.
The really able man will forge his way in spite of disadvantages of
education, of position, and other difficulties ; but he wastes energies in
doing so which should be devoted to more useful work. The man of
natural power and ability should be able to take his proper place in the
nation without difficulty. He should not have to labor under disadvantages
to which a man mentally—and may be morally —his inferior is not
subject.


I wish to omit the important consideration of the advantages of
money. The man of ability is not only able to make headway without,
but may be the better for having to do so. It is debateable whether the
world has lost much through the poverty of her great men, though the
possession of wealth may have deprived her of many masterpieces. Few
men can properly attend to broad acres, bank balances, mortgages, and
stocks, and at the same time enrich the domains of art, science, literature ;
or in any other way add to the world’s stock-in-trade for her future better-
ment ; but the number of those who are not anxious to make the attempt
is still smaller. Humanity is ever willing for self-sacrifice on an altar of
Broken Hill shares.
Bursaries and Exhibitions. —l shall no doubt be reminded that pro-
vision is made for poor children by means of bursaries and exhibitions. If
this were so, it would not affect my position, for the Government has no
more right to favor the child whose father occupies the coachman’s box
than it has the son or daughter of the man who reclines inside the
carriage. I am not preaching equality, which, in the present era of
the world’s history, would be absurd; but I do claim that all possible
disabilities should be removed which make it so difficult for a child to
enter upon the sphere of life for which he is best fitted, and in which he
might achieve distinction. I do not merely refer to the very great
hindrances to advancement, even in South Australia, in the way of the
talented child bom under disadvantageous circumstances. The mother
may be most at home in a two-roomed cabin, the father engaged in
congenial and fitting employment as an ordinary laborer, but the boy
have abilities which, if properly developed, would enable him to occupy
any of those spheres of life which are most honored and best paid. Under a
democracy, opportunity for this development should be given, because it is
a waste to have a man using the pick and shovel who might be wisely
directing the labor of others to the individual saving of effort and the
general advantage. This cannot be done by offering a few prizes, w hich
may be gained rather by smartness than by thoroughness.
On the other hand, the surroundings of the son of parents of wealth or
of high social position may be just as effectual a barrier to his being able
and willing to take his proper place in the community. With false ideas
of superiority inculcated from the cradle, and a training which not only
renders him disinclined, but positively unfitted to engage in an employ-
ment suitable to his particular natural abilities ; he may, by force of social
circumstances and influence, be placed in a position for which he has no
liking or aptitude. The result is that many waste their lives, and the world is
relieved when they quit it. Many good men, whose parents considered
silly ideas of respectability, but never fitness, taste, or adaptability,
patiently work at uncongenial occupations, bound by social chains in the
life-long thraldom of a profession or an office, when they would have made
really good and happy tradesmen, or served their day and generation as
cultivators of the soil. We have men who are living lies, acting or
burlesquing as ministers of the gospel of Truth ; and men who love retire-
ment, and whose instincts prompt them to promote peace and goodwill,
feeling the pinch of honest respectable poverty because their parents
stinted themselves to pay high premiums and college fees to make them


lawyers, but could not provide them with clients. We meet with men
who would have made respectable butchers, killing the patients they are
paid to heal; and see around us numerous individuals whose abilities
would be taxed in conducting a country store, or who, morally
and intellectually, would be in the proper sphere sweeping the gutters or
cleaning the sewers, holding high positions as directors of the public
service.
I do not claim that any system of public education will cure these
evils, but I do claim that it is a necessary part of the treatment which
will gradually enable the nation to outgrow its disease. The point I
desire to place before my readers is, that it is injurious to the best
interests of a community to endeavour to make children follow the same
occupations as their parents. It may be advantageous for them to do so,
or it may not. If the son of a good doctor is best fitted for the work of a
blacksmith, that is where he should be placed; and if the son of an
indifferent laborer has the genius of an engineer, every opportunity and
assistance should be given to enable him to take his proper place in the ,
nation’s economic system. The clever son of a man of ability, of wealth,
or of social position need never fear the competition of one of only equal
ability from the ranks below. These advantages will always be a
good handicap, and if, in spite of them, he is beaten, he should give place to
his natural superior. What I claim the State should do is to lessen the
handicap, and as far as possible equalise the opportunities. At present it
assists the wrong side. Ido not anticipate that anything will make men
equal.
If bursaries and exhibitions are justifiable, they should be open to
all on equal terms, but they are not. I have watched the working of the
regulations bearing on this subject most carefully since their institution,
and have had special advantages and reasons for doing so which would
naturally tend to make me look as favorably as possibly upon them ; but
I cannot avoid the assertion that the bursaries and exhibitions are not
open to all the children of the public schools. Boys and girls whose
parents can command special teaching have superior opportunies of
securing them. The qualification for a bursary includes a knowledge of
German and a work of English literature, while to gain an exhibition the
candidate must pass in Latin and Mathematics. Now, not only are these
subjects not included in the school course, but the majority of the teachers
are not qualified to teach them; therefore, a boy or girl can only
compete when a teacher is able and kind enough to give special
instruction, or when a parent can pay specialists to teach these
extras. If the teacher does this in school hours he must neglect his
other pupils. This is manifestly unfair, although it is done (or parents
think i'. is done) in those schools which carry off most of the prizes. If
the ordinary pupil is not neglected the teacher must devote his time out
of school hours to a few particular scholars, and thus render himself liable
to the charge of favoritism from the parents of the other children, who
are slow to acknowledge the superiority of the selected ones. If the
assistance of outside teachers is obtained, then only those who can pay for
it have a chance of securing the prizes which are provided by a generous
Government as a reward for special ability on the part of those who would


not otherwise have the advantages of higher education. Ido not wish it
to be understood that the prizes fall to the children of wealthy parents.
They do not. The evidence of teachers tends to show that, as a rule, it is
very difficult to induce such pupils to work sufficiently hard. Bursaries
and exhibitions are usually won by those who are not poor, but are only
rich in that they strictly limit the definition of the term “necessities.”
Up to the present most of the bursaries and exhibitions have fallen
to the pupils of three schools. As far as I know, no boy from a small
school has yet won an exhibition, and only four bursaries have been
carried off by girls from small schools. The first was gained in 1885 by
a girl from Oakbank, who owed it to the assistance of a winner of one of
the first bursaries given at the opening of the Advanced School. The
girl, however, had to throw it up because of the expense of living
in Adelaide. Had she been a boy she would have been entitled to £2O a
year for board. One was carried off by a pupil from Kingston in 1888,
while the other two fell to girls from Norton’s Summit and Salisbury
last year.
As gaining a bursary or exhibition depends on the good nature of
the teacher or the ability of the parent to pay for special coaching
rather than on the special ability of the pupil, it cannot with any pretence
of accuracy be said that they are open equally to all the bright pupils of
the province, or even of the city. Nevertheless, they have done and will
do good, and until we can have secondary schools on the same conditions
as the elementary, let us by all means retain them. I believe all who
have gained them have been worthy of them, and the money spent by the
Department in this way has been well invested. It is not a question as to
whether the few who have received them deserved them ; but the fact that
very many equally deserving have had no chance to compete.
Some Anomalies. —There is one other point in connection with these
rewards which must be noticed. The provision for girls and boys is not
equal.
Regulations 290-304 provide :
1. That six exhibitions shall be annually offered (under certain
conditions) of the annual value of £2O for three years if the winner is
able to attend school as a day scholar, and £4O if otherwise. As the
Advanced School is one of the schools mentioned, these are open to girls
as well as boys, and, as a matter of fact, several have been carried off by
girls, thus reducing the number available for boys.
2. That six bursaries will be offered to girls, giving the right to free
instruction at the Advanced School for three years. The fees at the school
are £3 ss. 6d. a quarter, so that the value of a bursary is therefore
£39 65., while that of an exhibition is £6O ; or, if the winner be from the
country, £l2O. It is worthy of note here that, although a boy from the
country who wins an exhibition gets his board free and a girl has to pay
her own, country boys do not compete, while four girls have won
prizes.
Prom these facts I may make the following deductions :
1. Girls have twelve prizes to compete for, while boys have only six.


2. That, as girls have the exclusive right to the bursaries, and an
equal right with the boys to the exhibitions, it might be possible for them
to win all the prizes, leaving none for the boys.
3. A girl from a country school entering for a bursary has to study
exactly the same English subjects as a boy or girl entering for an
exhibition. The bursary candidate, however, takes, as extras, German and
literature, while the candidate for exhibition takes mathematics and Latin.
Competition being equal, one is as difficult as the other, yet the winner of
the latter receives £4O a year, while the winner of the bursary is simply
entitled to three year’s free education at the Advanced School.
4. Either a girl must be content with a lesser prize than a boy, or
she must enter into competition with him for an exhibition, while he
cannot reciprocate by competing for a bursary.
I drew the attention of the Inspector-General to these anomalies in
1886.
Advantages of State Management. —The above comparison of the
regulations relating to exhibitions and bursaries will naturally suggest the
advantage of State undertaking secondary education. I have stated the
money value of an exhibition to be £2O a year, and of a bursary £l3 2s.
But parents, who have had experience of both, place a higher value on a
year’s work of the Advanced School than they do on a year’s work at the
best boys’ schools; while the general public, who judge by the only
available standard (a deceptive one, I admit), success at the University
examinations, also place the Advanced School for Girls as equal, if
not superior to any Boys’ School. Now if the Education Department
can pay rent, salaries, and all expenses, and leave a profit at £l3 2s. a
year, why should it pay £2O a year to privately endowed institutions for
doing the same work ? Either the Advanced School teachers are under-
paid, or there is something unsatisfactory about the private institutions.
FREE EDUCATION.
I believe that the question of Free Education is virtually decided in
South Australia, and shall therefore say little about it. I am only
astonished that we have remained behind the times so long.
The Editor of Subjects of the Bay, a Quarterly Review cf Current
Topics, in summing up the eleven articles by some of the foremost writers
and thinkers on the public education, says
“ Turning to the distinctive features in the educational systems of
various countries and the effect they have produced or are producing on the
national life and character, we find that in many States, both in the old and
the new world, universally gratuitous and compulsory instruction has long
been in operation, and that in some of those countries the lower classes
have attained a higher standard of knowledge than where such a system
is absent, or but recently introduced. Other things being equal, the
effect of gratuitous primary education is undoubtedly to diminish
pauperism and mendicancy, and to add to the national prosperity.”
And further on, in referring specially to England, he says : “If there
be one principle upon which all thoughtful people seem to be agreed, it is


that elementary education, which is compulsory, should also be gratuitous,
and it is no longer a question whether, but when and by whom it shall be
granted.”
Chief Argument.—The most important consideration in my mind is
the necessity of the schools being in the truest sense public institutions.
In order that they may be all this, they must be open to all
children on the same terms, irrespective of the bank balances or
social position of the parents.
Perhaps mention should be made of the objection which is frequently
raised by those who say that to grant Free Education is an attempt to
pauperise the people, who will not value what they do not pay for.
In the first place, the cost of Free Education, being provided from the
public revenue, is paid by the people.
In the second place, it is opposed to fact to say people do not value
what is provided at the public cost. It is false with respect to Prussia; it
is false with respect to Paris ; it is doubly false and perfectly ridiculous
with respect to the United States, for if there be one institution of which
the American is proud it is his public school, free to all from five to
twenty-one years of age. And he is not proud without cause, for the
schools of many States are not surpassed in any English speaking
community. If this is the effect of pauperising the people, let us make
them paupers without delay.
WHAT WILL ALL THIS COST?
It would very often be well if we set about doing a thing instead of
spending the time that would do it in counting the cost. Some of the
grandest works of greatest men have been accomplished largely because
they resolved to do them and resolutely avoided counting the cost.
It was my intention, however, to enter somewhat fully into the
financial aspect of my proposals; but space will not allow me to say much,
and I would rather that attention should at first be confined to the
suggestions themselves. The matter is too momentous to be dismissed with
the excuse “We can’t afford it,” and I ask my readers to carefully
consider the points to which I direct attention in a liberal public spirit.
I hope the majority will agree with me, but many will honestly differ. In
either case, a thoughtful consideration of this vital question will be
beneficial.
An urgent national reform should be carried out irrespective of
monetary expense, for whatever that may be the end will justify it. We
must count the cost of neglecting to do as carefully as we figure out the
expense of doing. No wise business man neglects to pinch himself to
carry out a reform in his methods or machinery when he clearly sees that
failing to do so means working under continued difficulties and chances of
failure. The consideration of the necessity for a change must precede the
discussion of ways and means of carrying it out. I will submit a few
considerations, which may assist in forming an opinion.
What is the cost to the community of thousands of boys and girls
leaving our schools (public and private) each year with very little suitable
educational training fitting them for the duties of life, but, on the other


hand, with silly notions of cleverness and superiority because they have
passed certain examinations. This is bad in any case, but the evil is
intensified by the trickery, if not actual dishonesty, which not infrequently
enters into an examination.
Can any one count the cost of depriving the country of the best
services of thousands of the children of hard-working, straightforward,
thoughtful, but perhaps somewhat unschooled parents, often among the
best in the community, because the most honest ? I say the best services,
because boys who, in the natural course of events, should and would have
gone to work on their fathers’ farms, at trades, or other creative occupa-
tions, have been so filled with false notions and spoiled by the schools
(private even more than public), that they have been put to occupations
where they can do little for themselves, and add less to the wealth or
greatness of their country. Our fertile lands cry aloud for intelligent
workers to change dusty plains into orchards and vineyards; but the
schools make it the ambition of a boy to be a clerk or a shopman.
True education would the better fit them for spheres of usefulness.
It would at once create the desire, and enable them to continue to improve
themselves and their work that they might take their full share in the
government of the country, and add to its wealth by the creations of their
hands and brains. It would also usually enable them to find out the
work for which they are the best fitted, whether it be farming, black-
smithing, mining, or any other; and would prevent a man with a natural
genius for mechanics wasting his time and being for ever unhappy in a
lawyer’s office.
I mention the above industries because they are examples of callings
which require much more ability on the part of those who excel in them
than do others which permit men to wear fashionable clothes, and are
therefore called “ higher occupations.” The fact cannot be too forcibly
expressed that the trades demanding the exercise of the executive faculties
are really much higher than occupations into which routine enters largely,
or mere sharpness is the best paying quality.
Let short-sighted, though may be well-intentioned, men who fear the
expense, estimate the cost of prostituting the idea of education, which
means the leading out, the cultivation, the developing of all the faculties
of a child—whether they be physical, mental, or moral—so that he may,
in the best possible way, fulfil the function of living; to mean the
cramming of a poor unfortunate, helpless youngster for a yearly examina-
tion conducted with such haste that, even of its kind, it becomes a farce.
It will be time enough to discuss whether the country can afford
money for making our schools essentially institutions for the national
benefit, when we have figured out the cost of inculcating in children the
pernicious idea that it is more honorable to have smooth hands and stand
behind a counter, persuading people to buy what they don’t want, than it
is to use a spade, follow a plough, make a door or shoe a horse. Yet my
readers know that such occupations as that of draper’s assistant are
crowded, while the rich horticultural lands lie idle, and we import our
raisins, currants and so forth, and do not consume half the fruit we ought
in such a climate as ours.


-Let those who say we cannot afford to make our schools at least as
good as those of other lands, consider the cost to the nation of devoting
nearly all our care to developing one side of the threefold nature of man.
Let them try and estimate the loss to the community through failing to
train a boy’s hands, so that they are capable of putting into practice the
ideas conceived in his head. Let them think what might be gained were
we to educate the children to think and act, instead of cramming them
with the undigested ideas of others. Let them ponder over the waste
through the great surplus of men and women seeking to live by the
various unproductive occupations of the cities, rather than by the
productive callings of the country in a province where the land is so
fruitful but put to such little use. I want to see the land as intensely
cultivated as the fruit colonies of California, and no expense would be too
great to secure this.
The systems of public education in England and Australia undoubtedly
have tended to crowd the unproductive occupations. The country needs
workers, and the schools not only fail to teach them how to work, but
create a disinclination for labor. It may be that this is a necessary step
in the progress of the race. I will not discuss that. The fact is, schools
have produced the present combination of satisfactory progress and
deplorable waste. The schools must remedy the evil thep have helped,
perhaps in the natural condition of things, to bring about. Every day
they neglect to do so, adds to the loss which the country suffers, and until
the cost of such neglect can be shown to he less than the cost of an honest
endeavour to bring about a better condition cf things we need not trouble
about wasting our days in calculating the cost of reforms which require all
our time and all our energies.
A country can always afford money for its most vital interests,
and there is no more important responsibility resting on a Government
than the proper education of the people.
As a matter of actual fact, however, the difference between the cost
of an efficient and an inefficient system is comparatively slight, and some
of the reforms require no additional expenditure of money, although they
require a generous outlay of energy and honest endeavor.
A Few Suggestive Figures. —l would ask those who cry out against
the cost of education to carefully consider these figures. Last year
Parliament voted the following sums for the purposes named :
Police ... ... ... £92,000.
Gaols and Prisons ... ... £IB,OOO.
Law Offices and Courts * ... £30,000.
Making a total 0f... ... £140,000.
Education, £106,000.
We are sup'posed to be an orderly community, yet Parliament votes
£34,000 more for the purpose of keeping the people in order than for
educating future citizens, who will soon have charge of the destinies of
the province. Now, whether we like Democracy or not, we must face the
fact that we have a representative Government which depends entirely on
public opinion. The most conservative amongst us should therefore


strongly advocate the extension of the facilities for true education,
because that only renders Government by the people safe. I may also
point out that true education is always conservative in the best sense,
and therefore the more we neglect this safeguard, the more are we
placing the balance of power in the hands of unscrupulous politicians and
agitating demagogues. I flmly believe in the principles of a pure
Democracy ; but I understand the position and realise the arguments of
those who just as honestly do not. To such I would say, we must each
work for our country in our own way ; but this we can be agreed upon.
The people have the power and are likely to keep it. Let every-
thing be done to enable them to rightly use it.
Again, the Government has lately accepted a tender for the supply of
locomotives whereby it is variously estimated that from £60,000 to
£120,000 is presented by the country to a small section of the community.
In the face of such profuse liberality, is there any sense in cutting down
the vote for education so that the work has to be done by boys and girls
working eleven hours a day at less than a penny an hour 1
SEVERAL SUGGESTIONS.
Chair of Pedagogy at the University.— ln connection with the
efficient training of teachers, I may mention a matter which has frequently
occurred to me, but which I must leave to others to work out if it be
considered of sufficient importance. It will be admitted that, though as a
rule the public school teachers are strong in controlling power and the
art of imparting facts, they have, while there is a tendency towards
improvement, generally speaking, neglected the study of the higher ideals
of the profession. The works of the best writers on the science of
education are not as well known as they deserve to be, and I do not know
of a collection of pedagogical works available for the public. The subject
has been very greatly neglected, no less by the Education Department
than by the people.
It would, I believe, do much to raise the status of teachers, as well as
assist materially in improving education generally, were the authorities to
establish a Chair of Pedagogy—or, failing that, a lectureship -in connection
with the University. The occupier of the position might or might not be a
successful practical educationalist, although that would perhaps be
preferable, for he would deal with the science and history of education
rather than its application.
The best of our public school teachers, as well as progressive private
teachers, would attend his lectures and follow the prescribed course of
reading, while graduates and others wishing to take up the profession of
teaching would attend the course, and the certificate of having kept such
a course would at least be a guarantee that the holder was more or less
theoretically conversant with the high aims of his intended vocation. The
influence of such a course of study would permeate the whole province and
raise the standard of education.
Pedagogical Reading Circle. —Until such an addition of our
University course can be made, and perhaps afterwards in conjunction
with it, I would suggest that our practical educators should establish a


reading circle for the promotion of the systematic reading of standard
works on the history and philosophy of education. Every teacher should
study such works as the following, in order that he may properly grasp
the greatness of his work :
History of Pedagogy—Compayre.
Education —H. Spencer.
Philosophy of Education—Rosenkranz.
Leonard and Gertrude—Pestalozzi.
History of Education—Painter.
Emile—Rousseau.
Education of Man—Froebel.
Kindergarten and Child Culture—Barnard.
Educational Institutes.— One of the features of American education
is the all hut universal interest taken in the public schools. We have
Centralization to a dangerous degree. The United States have carried
Localization to an extreme. There is an undoubted tendency in many
of the States towards greater uniformity and central control, so far as
standards are concerned. We should, on the other hand, tend towards
the extension of the principle of local self-government; but we must
be careful in this respect not to go beyond the happy medium.
The effect of the district management of the schools has been to so
educate the public that there is probably no country, where ordinary
citizens have such an intelligent grasp of the question, as the people of
New England. One consequence is that when meetings of teachers are
held, as they very frequently are under the name of institutes, the public
attend in large numbers to listen to papers on the science and practice of
teaching, and often to join in the discussions. Another feature of these
meetings is the goodwill existing between public and private teachers.
Business is conducted with that regular and strict conformity to
Parliamentary rule which is a characteristic of American gatherings.
Unfortunately our public and private teachers appear to have little
in common and certainly never meet to endeavor to promote the education
of the province. There is great scope, for those who possess a talent for
organizing, to get the public to join the teachers of both public and
private schools to hold Conventions or “ Institutes ” to discuss the broader
and wider questions of education.
CONCLUSION.
If it were possible to put our theories into practice, without bias
towards any means of earning a living, we should be able to send young
men from our schools with powers so developed by evenly-balanced training
that they would have the best preparation for following the vocation for
which their peculiar constitution best fitted them. The particular occupation
would still need to be learned, but there would be no prejudice towards any.
We shall be long ere we reach this ideal, because the greater part of present
day education is a more or less special, though very poor training for
particular callings.


Indeed, a study of the development of education through the ages will
show that instruction has always, though with varied distinctness, followed
this idea. Much of the present world-wide agitation in favor of Educational
Reform is due to the undoubted fact that the schools have been and are—
let there be no mistake about this, so far as South Australia is
concerned —giving a special training, fitting for the non-producing vocations
and drawing attention from the more important group of producing
occupations. The bright country boy, who is sent to town to “finish off,”
learns to look upon the occupation of his father as unequal in dignity to
that of the city man ; and who can estimate the mischief of this 1
With the demand for practical education is the call for special training
in agriculture. This is most important, and I regret that I cannot now
enter into a discussion of the subject and point out the danger of quackery,
whereby a smattering of questionable theory is given to boys under the
name of “Agricultural Education.” I recently visited a school where high
fees are paid, and noticed on the course of study—“ Agricultural Chemistry.”
I asked to see the laboratory, and found that the subject was taught by
requiring the boys to learn pages of a text book. Ho wonder plain common-
sense farmers speak of scientific agricultural training as “ Blooming rot.”
Greek education sought beauty, mental and physical. The aim of
Monastic education was asceticism and a soul dead to the world. The
object of Renaissance education was classical culture and a minute
acquaintance with the literature of Greece and Rome. The nineteenth
century has broadened the conception of culture until it embraces modern
literatures and natural science.
The Department controlling education in South Australia theoretically
recognises that words are useless unless expressive of ideas ; that teaching
must be objective rather than subjective ; and that the understanding of
processes and principles is preferable to an accumulation of facts. Only
another step in the development—so far as the theory is concerned—is at
present required to give that training which is best fitted for preparing the
pupil for the great busy life in which he is soon to play his part.
This further demand is the recognition of the psychological principle
that the nerves which carry impulses out of the brain are distinct from
those which carry stimuli into it; that in order for the latter to be fully
active the former must be so; that expression is equally and correspondingly
important with reception; that the hand is as important a factor of
expression as language ; that undue prominence cannot be given to one set
of faculties without detriment to the other; and that, for a perfectly
harmonious development of the whole of child nature, the executive
faculties depending on the observation and judgment must be provided for
equally and in conjunction with the memory and reason.
The principle is not new, though the practical application is. Before
any principle can be put into operation it has to resist all the arranged
powers of conservatism. This test Manual Training has withstood, and is
ready for admission into our schools ; but if we are to have Manual Training
it must not be tacked on to the present school work as a sort of appendix;
but must be a feature of the whole course of instruction from the
Kindergarten upwards.


It must also be clearly understood that Manual Training cannot be
carried out in schools worked by pupil teachers and tested by result
examinations.
We have a course of study which, as far as it goes, is worked out on
scientific principles. It is happily, of a character which will admit of the
incorporation (not the adding to) of the Kindergarten, form study and
drawing, and Manual Training. But, however urgent these extensions of
the course of study may be, it is of far greater importance that the reforms
in the working of the Department should be at once instituted, in order that
the present curriculum may be carried out in a manner approaching a true
educational spirit. That this is not being done, I assert unhesitatingly
and emphatically, notwithstanding the fact that all conscientious teachers
are greatly overworked to the lasting injury of many.
The fact must ever be remembered that to correct mistakes and atone
for the neglect of many years will be, of necessity, a slow and patient task,
which will require much more than the transient wave of popular opinion
which may be necessary to enforce the initiatory steps.
It is in the hope that I may promote, in some small degree, the
attainment of needed reforms that I have written these pages.
W. C. GRASBY.
Adelaide, June, 1891.


j
I Currie Street
1 School.
Mr. Smeaton’s
Plans.
Outside Walling, super jards
i
1,778
1,389
Inside Walling, „
876
1,430
Superficial Area of Roof, in square feet
8,486
8,576
Number of Class Rooms
12
16
Number of square feet in Class Booms
8,495
10,625
,, ,, Teachers’Booms...
457
1,000
„ ,, Storerooms
282
372
,, „ Corridors...
1,768
1,826
,, cubic feet of air space per child up to 800
Pupils ...
170
212
Pupils.
Pupils,
Accommodation, allowing 200 cubic feet (the American
limit) for each Pupil ...
679
850
Accommodation, allowing 10 square feet of floor space and
160 cubic feet air (rather more than our schools
usually allow) ...
849
1,062
APPENDIX.
PLANS OF SCHOOL BUILDINGS.
After the preceding pages were in type, I was fortunate enough to obtain the
aid of Mr. T. H. Smeaton, whose reputation as an architect is publicly recognised,
to design a building on the lines I have indicated, to cost no more than Currie Street
or Sturt Street schools. There are other ways in which the principles I advocate could
be carried out, but this one will commend itself for the great convenience and simplicity
of the ground plan and the handsome appearance of the general design.
I have copied his plans on a small scale, and, by way of comparison, have also
drawn special plans of Currie Street School from measurement to the same scale.
Both of these crude drawings are reproduced on the following pages. I have submitted
Mr. Smeaton’s plans to an old contractor, who says there would be no difficulty in
carrying them out for between seven and eight thousand pounds.
I must here express my warmest thanks to Mr. Smeaton for the very great and
disinterested trouble he has taken to assist me ; and I would also take this opportunity
of acknowledging the courtesy of the Superintendent of Public Buildings and his
officers, particularly, for enabling me to check my measurements of the Currie Street
School.
I have worked out the following comparative figures which bear out my statements
to a greater extent even than I expected. I give the figures as approximately correct,
and as I have followed exactly the same method for both sets of plans, they will serve
all purposes of comparison.
It will be seen that had the Inspector-General fallen in with the suggestions I
made he could either have given each of 800 pupils 42 cubic feet extra of air space, or
could have accommodated 200 extra pupils for the same money. This is equal to a
saving of £l,BOO.






THE GARDEN AND FIELD.
17th year of PUBLICATION,
A JOURNAL OF POPULAR SCIENCE
AND
RURAL LNDUSTRLES.
CONDUCTED BY
W. CATTON GRASSY, 81, GRENFELL STREET, ADELAIDE.
PUBLISHED OUT THE} EIBST O! El ACH MONTH.
THE GARDEN AND FIELD contains the Journal of the Bureau
of Agriculture, Proceedings of the Field Naturalists’ and Micro-
scopical Sections of the Royal Society, Reports of the S.A. Gardeners’
Society, the Beekeepers' Association, Articles on the Application of
Science to Industries, etc. ; but no General News.
It deals with all matters pertaining to the cultivation of the soil,
whether Farm, Garden, Orchard, or Vineyard ; and is particularly valuable
to Amateur Gardeners.
Special attention is paid to the latest Discoveries and Experiments
in Economic Entomology and Vegetable Pathology by authorities in
America, England, and Australia
All who have to do with Horses, Cows, Sheep, Poultry, Bees, Flowers,
Shrubs, and Trees, will find valuable hints in its pages.
The Editor requests the cordial support and co-operation of all
interested in the promotion of Intense Culture, Practical Education, and
the extension of Rural Industries, upon which the prosperity of the
Province so largely depends. This can be shown by subscribing, intro-
ducing the Journal to the notice of others, and by taking an active
interest in promoting the aims of The Garden and Field.
Subscription, 6s. 6d. Yearly, in Advance, posted to any
part of Australia; or 6d. a copy.
May be ordered from thf. Publishers, Vakdon & Pritchard, Gresham Street,
or from any Bookseller, Newsagent, or Seedsman.
