

(Reprinted from “The Australian Worker,” September 3, 1930.)
OUR MOST DANGEROUS
ENEMY,
HOW LONG WILL WE
ENDURE IT?
do we mean when we speak of the
Money Power? The Money Power is
Capitalism in its most evil manifestation.
industrial capitalist renders some ser-
vice to society. The money capitalist is
entirely parasitic in his functions. Yet in
the effects he produces, and the influence - he
exercises, he is much more powerful than
his fellow exploiter.
JN his collective capacity, as the lender and
manipulator of money, this pernicious
parasite completely dominates our civilisa-
tion.
He is then the embodiment of the
Money Power.
gUBJUGATED by this Power, the world
to-day is suffering from a trade depres-
sion of unprecedented virulence. Industry
is smitten as with some mysterious and
crippling disease. Commerce is languishing
as though at the point of death.
Avere there so many workers out
of work. The official statistics of un-
employment are appalling, and they do not
reveal the worst. In England, Germany and
America alone there are 10,000,000 men de-
pendent on their labor who can find no
means of earning a living.
X HE number only intermittently employed
is greater still. It is estimated that in
England there are 6,600,000 of these, and
this figure may be accepted as indicating the
position in other countries.
'pHE world is staggering under a burden
of debt to the Money PoAver. And as
though this were not enough, the Lords of
High Finance are deliberately aggravating
the situation, and by restricting credit are
forcing a universal fall in prices and wages,
Avith the object of still further increasing
the affluence of their class, and tightening
their grip upon the nations.
American authority, referring to the
Money PoAver, says; “It is a new
tyranny, for Avhich our language contains
no name. We know what aristocracy, auto-
cracy and democracy are, but we have no
rd to express government by moneyed
corporations.”
VEARS ago Frederic Harrison wrote;
“The financial institutions own half the
press of Europe. They influence, and some-
times make, half the Governments cf
Europe.”
Since then the Money Power has
extended its dominion and consoli-
dated its despotism.
pHREB men in the United States control
fifty per cent, of the capital on which
the Avholc economic life of the country de-
pends. A dozen financiers in London, New
York, Berlin and Paris, secretly acting to-
gether, can practically do what they like
with the trade and commerce of the world.
pIIIS is the power that Australia is up
against—the Money Power. This is the
Power that has created the so-called depres-
sion here, as in other countries. This is the
Power that is seeking to smash our Labor
Movement and degrade the conditions of our
people. This is the PoAver for which Sir
Otto Niemeyer spoke Avhen he lectured the
Premiers’ Conference in Melbourne, and
told them that our standard of living was
too high—a mellifluous way of intimating
that wages must be reduced.
TOEHOLD an enemy more dangerous than
any we fought in the Great War! An
enemy aggressive, unscrupulous, callous, re-
sourceful, insidious, cunning—an enemy,
moreover, aided and abetted by traitors
Avithin our gates.
Labor will need all its strength and
all its courage, and unbroken solid-
arity, to thwart the nefarious designs
of the Money Power.
H. 8.8.
we talk about this depression, we
should always remember that it is purely
a financial depression.
It is not due to any shortage of real
wealth, but is wholly and solely
attributable to the manipulation of
money, which is merely a token of
wealth.
JJVHERE is no worldwide famine to account
for a worldwide depression. There is no
scarcity of any of the commodities essential
to civilised existence. On the contrary, the
output of all forms of real wealth is simply
enormous. We live in the richest age man-
kind has ever known.
pHE -world’s factories, worked to their
fullest capacity, would pour out goods
of every kind in a ceaseless stream of abund-
ance. The pastures and cultivatable lands,
put to their highest use, would furnish every
human being with food and clothing in
plenty.
Jj]VEN as things are, with the factories
only partly employed, and the lands in
the grip of monopolists and market-riggers,
there is so much real wealth in the world
that, under any equitable system of distri-
bution, no one would hunger, no one would
go ill-clad, no one Avould lack a roof above
his head.
pHE stores and warehouses are crowded
Avith goods the traders cannot sell. The
people stare in the shop-windows at the
goods they need and cannot buy.
JT is obvious, therefore, that there is no
genuine depression, no paucity of real
wealth. Ahvays Ave must bear that in mind
in these critical days, when ingenious at-
tempts are being made to throw us off the
track, and erudite economists are filling the
columns of the newspapers with their brain-
muddling jargon.
That which is known as the depres-
sion cannot be traced to any natural
cause or causes.
JT has been deliberately brought to pass by
the great financial institutions of the
world, conspiring to depreciate the value of
commodities, and thus enhance the Amine of
money, in Avhich they deal.
PJNDER the existing monetary system—
falsely based as it is on a scarce metal
called gold—industry and developmental
enterprise are absolutely dependent on huge
financial combines, which create credit, ex-
pand credit and contract credit, not with
the primary purpose of promoting human
welfare, but first and foremost AAdth the ob-
ject of enriching their principal shareholders
at the expense of the general community.
JT is Avell-known that a small group of men
control the finances of the world. When
it suits these moneymongers to have a boom
in trade, they extend credits freely, and a
boom results. When, on the other hand, a
trade depression Avould be more advan-
tageous to them, credits are withheld, money
becomes “tight,” and very soon the depres-
sion is in full swing, doing its deadly work
in the interests of financial conspirators
hidden from vieAV, but watching the process
of decay with the keen and ravenous eyes of
vultures.
pRICES fall, wages fall, trade and industry
are paralysed, millions of men in the
various countries are thrown out of work.
Everything slumps in value, save the one
thing these unscrupulous schemers own and
control—money.
pHE price of money rises. Debtors—in-
cluding nations like Australia—who
borrowed when money Avas cheaper, are com-
pelled to produce much more to discharge
their debts, or pay the interest on them. ■
pHAT’S the position to-day. There is no
real depression, no scarcity of real
wealth. Get down to the root of the matter.
And let this question ring throughout th" l
land:
How long will we permit the money-
mongers to delude and
defraud us?
H.E.B.
