

OUR DEBT TO FRANCE.
flu flDDras
TO THE
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY UNION
On FRIDAY, 24th September, 1915,
BY THE
HON. W. A. HOLMAN, M.L.A.,
PREMIER OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
SYDNEY:
WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
*9 J -
■45931—A


OUR DEBT TO FRANCE.
AN ADDRESS to the Sydney University Union on Friday,
24th September, 1915, by the Hon. W. A. HOLMAN,
M.L.A., Premier of New South Wales.
Mr. President, Ladies, and Gentlemen : One of the primary purposes of
culture, including, of course, University culture, is to implant in the breast
a wholesome distrust of what we read in the newspapers. The theme which
I have taken to-night is one which will be found, I believe, as I progress
with it, to illustrate strikingly and interestingly that valuable proposition.
Up to some eighteen months ago—that is to say, before the present war and
the diplomatic complications leading up to it occupied the minds of the
Australian public—l take it the majority of us had a conception of France
as a nation, and of France as a factor in the intellectual growth
of the world which was largely based upon the scattered and
generally disparaging references to French affairs that we were able
to read in the daily papers. Since the outbreak of the war, since
the entente has developed into a strict alliance, and we hive found our-
selves bound in such fraternal ties with the comparatively unknown
people of France, there has been an anxiety in many quarters to make up for
the neglect of many previous years by generous and sometimes possibly over-
coloured statements of the claims that that great country has upon our
regard. Those who take upon themselves the difficult task of moulding
public opinion through the columns of our public journals have gone from
the extreme of almost complete neglect to the other extreme of the occasional
—one might say frequent and habitual—repetition of phrases which many
of us find it a little difficult to undeistand and a little difficult to justify.
We read that France has been the intellectual leader of Europe, and the
most civilised country in the world. We read statements of this kind, and
we find it difficult to know exactly what is in the minds—l will not say of
those who use them, for my own experience of the newspaper world teaches
me that they have nothing whatever in their minds when they use a phrase
of that kind—but what was in the minds of those who originated the phrases
from which the journalists got them. And it was with the idea of uttering
a few words upon that question, and possibly of offering some suggestions that
might lead towards ascertaining the real position of our great ally at the
present moment, that I ventured to offer this subject to your Union when I
was asked to fulfil my long-standing promise.
Now, if I may be permitted, I will begin my attempt in this direction
to-night by going back—after the fashion of one of H. G. Wells’ heroes—to
the beginning of my own political consciousness in the early eighties. That
will probably be the easiest period for me to take as a starting point from
which to make certain comparisons with the affairs of the intellectual world
as we find them to-day ; easier for me because, in those days, I began, I
suppose for the first time, to take some small notice of public affairs. Now,
at that period, if you will forgive a purely personal strain of reminiscence for
a moment or two, I was living in London, I was reading the English papers
as a boy, and I can at this moment reproduce with some vividness in my own
memory the feeling of the typical average middle-class Briton towards foreign


affairs and tow rds the European situation of that day. And in that day,
and at that date, the overwhelming superiority of the Ger man intellect as
manifested in arms and in diplomacy; in philosophy, in science, and
in art, was accepted as a self-evident proposition by practically every
patriotic Briton. Our insular position, our technical superiority
at sea, and the general pluckiness of the British troops, were matters
which we regarded as giving us, as it were, a look in in the struggle
of nations ; but as far es things of the mind were concerned, and so far as
the higher direction and the higher c rntrol of the body were concerned —I
mean the play of material forces—it was generally believed that there was
no comparison to be made between England and Germany. This may
come as a remarkable statement'to many of my hearers whose own memories
do not go back quite as far as mine, for I may begin to claim some of the
privileges of a senior nowadays and speak of things seen in earlier days, and
lam not going, of course, to pretend that this conception of the situation was
universal, or to assert oven that it was held by the majority of English
people at that date. What was its quantitative extent, it is almost
impossible for me to guess ; but that it was held, and held \ery largely, I
think I can show you to be absolutely a fact.
English opinion ran something like this at that moment. The
greatest soldier in the world was, of course, Von Moltke, He and
his lieutenants were not only first but they were first and the rest
were nowhere. There were no other soldiers; and the whole military
world was hastening to do the best it c mid for itself l>y imitating the
only and admirable models set for rs by Germany. It is a striking
f HC k a little one, but one which illustrates what 1 mean—that the shape
of the soldiers’ caps of the British army to-day is a deliberate tribute—
that imitation which is the sincerest form of flattery —to the prestige
of the German army ; and a few months ago one of the most distinguished
of my colleagues characterised his initiation as Minister in charge of
the police force of this State by miking the valuable body of officers
engaged in controlling the traffic wear another cap which w'as in itself
an imitation of the British soldier’s cap. Thus this is, at second hand,
an imitation of the cap worn by the German army in the early eighties; one
of the unconscious and unpremeditated compliments which are in these
days rendered to the admitted superiority of a generation ago. During the
period of which I am speaking, German diplomacy, as personified by the
formidable figure of Prince Bismarck, w T as again absolutely without lival
in the world. I remember well—l am still speaking in reminiscence
and you must forgive these personal pieces of evidence seeing a
cartoon in London “ Punch,” at the time of the Constantinople
crisis—that would be,, of course, 1879—in which England and Russia
were represented as two express trains coming along the railway towards
one another, and Prince Bismarck shown as the pointsman who was
to determine whether or no there was to be a collision between
them. The idea at that moment that there was any brain power or
any diplomacy in Great Britain which could secure peace if Prince
Bismark had determined upon war, was an idea which the cartoon drawer
in Punch had treated as a thing inconceivable and incredible: what
Bismarck said in the w r orld of diplomacy would go. There w r as nobody in
all Europe who dared to look him in the face; the Austrians, the Russians,
and the Italians were swept into his net one after the other; we in Great
Britain were content, of course, to be thankful for our splendid isolation ;
though that phrase had not come in in those days, and France was simply
nowhere in the running. _
So in the world of science : there were no scientists like the Germans;
there was no systematic inquiry such as there was in Germany ; research was


only really understood in Germany. There was some justification for us to
think that, but the belief was very much more widely spread than the justifi-
cation. With regard to philosophy, we had Thomas ('arlyle telling us that
there was no philosophy to be found anywhere outside the German Universities ;
and it was generally accepted, T think, throughout the British speak mg
world that really profound thought was essentially a German product. Tfee
greatest musicGn of that day was a G rman ; it was not only believed that
he was a great genius, an incxlearial outcrop which might happen in any
country, but it was believed that W agner was a genius because be
embodied in bis music to a singular degree the profundity and penetration of
German phi'osophy. There was supposed to be a psychological value about
his music which was not to be found in anybody eWs; the music of the
future was essentially a manifestation of the German spirit. German
education, of course, was far better than anybody else’s ; it was systematised,
it was thorough. German manufacturers were just beginning to drive
British manufacturers, who bad for some time field their own, right off the
field. The German clerk, who spoke three langu ages and was a certificated
accountant, had begun to cross to London, and at fifteen shillings a week had
begun to throw the English clerks out of their offices. No matter in which'
direction we turned for a trial, the feeling throughout all England in
those days was that in matters of the intellect, while we were capable
of great individual brilliancies, capable of producing great minds like
Darwin and one or two others whom nobody could deny, we were nevertheless
unsystematic, and shallow, we were not well trained ; and if we wanted
profundity, method, and technique, we must go to the Fatherland.
I remember well about that period too —it might have been a year or two
later—even in the world of chess playing—and in my boyhood’s days I took
some interest in that game —-the brilliant Zukertort being defeated at the
close of one of the great tournaments by Steinitz, who, at that time, was
one of the profoundest representatives of German thought on the chess-board,
It was taken for granted that he would win. They were both Germans, as a
matter of fact; but one had not been faithful to the German tradition :he
went in for playing a dashing and interesting game instead of systematically
setting himself to work to kill his opponent, inch by inch, and he naturally
lost the culminating game of a masters’ tournament. At that period tlve
supremacy of Germany was a thing that was firmly established in
the British mind ; and, as far as I can judge—l am not in a position to
offer a very valuble judgment as to the position in the rest of Europe—l am
inclined to think, from vhat I know of the period, that it was accepted
everywhere else too. Austria was a feeble imitator of Germany. Russia
was a rival, not an enemy, for very many years afterwards. Italy was
gradually brought into line with the Triple Alliance. France, of course,
was always hostile; but Prance was at that time a negligible quantity.
Great Britain was nothing at all; she was isolated ; she was dull; she was
not in the European combination.
Now, how that state of mind, which was a very real state of mind,
was brought about, ladies and gentlemen, is of course a matter of great
interest though of some difficulty to determine. Let me say this again: I
am not disposed for a moment to assert that there were not many
who even at that period stoutly contradicted this frame of mind
and stoutly declared the opposite ; there were many such, but that the
general drift was in the direction I have spoken of, until the early
nineties at all events, is, I think, unquestionable. It was brought about, it
seems to me, by the combination of two or three forces. First of all there
was, of course, the enormous moral and material effect of the great German
victories of 1864, 1866, and 1870. Germany was on (op ; her material
success was undeniable; her material success gave a kind of prestige to her


intellectual prowess as well. It was believed that she was successful because
her thinking was so accurate and so profound. It was believed that the
country of philosophers would naturally be the country of successful military
operations. Philosophy had trickled down from the universities down to the
military schools. In the next place, almost at that date, that is in
the early seventies, almost immediately after the Franco-Prussian war,
the two men whose special function in English literature it had been
for a whole generation to act as interpreters of the French heart and
the French mind to Great Britain, I mean John Stuart Mill, who
understood the French intellect better than any other Englishman at that
time, and Charles Dickens, who understood the French soul better than any
other man of that time, both died. During the later seventies and the early
eighties Great Britain was left to contemplate the appalling spectacle of the
sudden rise of Germany’s phenomenal material power, without the guidance of
the two great minds who had on different planes and in different ways done
more, I suppose, to make the early Victorian Briton understand the con-
temporary Frenchman than any other two men in either of the nations. They
•were dead. Unhappily for us, as we can see now, Carlyle was not dead; he was
-alive ; and he asserted his then almost unopposed influence, his great and un-
,ri vailed influence,wholly in favor of the accomplished fact and of proved success.
I do not intend taking up any of your time in a discussion of Carlyle’s genius;
.that would be possibly a very good subject for some other evening’s considera-
tion ; but the fact remains that with Carlyle nothing succeeded like success,
—nothing succeeded with him, if one may use Wilde’s phrase, like excess.
His heroes were the Fredericks the Great of one century and the Bismarcks
of another, who had ploughed their way through chaos and through slaughter
to some position of actual domination, and there ruled with an iron hand
and introduced some order*—-no matter how cruel, no matter how unjust-—out
■of the chaos which they had themselves created. I say Carlyle taught this
philosophy, and he taught it with many attractive adjectives, whose force
-one must not underrate; but the essence of the whole thing was that, by the
early eighties England had learnt the lesson that the greatest power in
Europe was Germany; that Germany owed that power to her intellectual
superiority; that the best thing England could do was to sit at her feet,
assimilate her precepts, and follow her example; and when England learnt
this, the rest of Europe readily adopted the same attitude. That, I say, is
no unjust appreciation of the position of the intellectual world at that date.
My own experience, if I may refer to it once again for the last time, is that
■of being brought up in the overwhelming shadow of Germany’s intellectual
supremacy. To be German was the last word. Of course, an exception was
.always made in the case of German bands, which were admittedly inferior;
but that was explicable. It was believed that only musicians who failed to
pass a certain standard in the Fatherland were permitted to go outside. So,
too, German sausage and German silver were also articles of recognised
inferiority. But with those exceptions—and they were but trifling excep-
tions—to be German was to be thorough, was to be good, was to be well
trained, was to have a subtlety and a profundity to which the other nations
aspired in vain.
In order that I may compare that with the frame of mind which prevailed—
I will not say which prevails to-day—because to-day we are actually at war,
and in the awfulness of war many illusions melt and disappear—but to
compare that with the frame of mind which prevailed, say, eighteen
months ago, before the war broke out, let me just rapidly enumerate the
various items in which I have asserted the general belief in German
superiority in the eighties. In the first place, let us take diplomacy. The
diplomacy of Germany has for the last eight or ten years been a laughing- -
stock ; those gentlemen who write articles in the magazines to tell us what


the Swede intend, and what the French, have made it one of their common-
places for some years past now, that Germany lias failed in hei foreign policy,
that she is bankrupt of plans, and that in one direction after anouier she bad
merely blustered much and achieved nothing. "W hether that is true 01 false
is not the point; it is the attitude of the critic to which I wish to direct
your attention for the moment, an attitude in such complete contrast to
that bated breath and whispering humbleness with which German
foreign policy was spoken of in the days when Bismarck was Consul.
Now take her military position : to-day the limits of the military power of
Germany have been disclosed, and we are in a position to form some opinion
about them. But, take the Agadir crisis of 1911, when Germany rattled her
sabre most ferociously and threatened France. In that year the French
attitude was “ let Germany come ” ; all classes closed up for the moment in
France, and instead of the military menace of the greatest of military powers
being efficacious as it would ha\e been practically any time for thirty
years .before, the German Government found that they were challenged
to do their worst. Whether France could have met her challenge, of course,
is a point lam not going to say anything about; but again I ask you to
notice the difference which had come over the situation. A compaiatnely
weaker power like France, supposed to be unready, actually unready, whoso
ally had not yet recovered from the crushing effects of the Japanese war,
was prepared then nevertheless to run the risk of the full shock of the
German attack.
German science is a thing that I do not pretend to discuss. 1 have not
the qualifications for passing any judgment upon it; but I venture to say
that the attitude of the scientific world towards Germany to-day—and when
I say to-day I would like that remark to apply also; to a year or a couple of
years ago—is one of very much franker and self -respecting criticism than
was possible in those early days of which I speak.
As to German philosophy, while I wish to speak of that with all the
respect which attaches to one of the subjects in which men get degrees in a
home of learning like this, I am bound to say that the general failure of our
neo-German writers in philosophy, of gentlemen who have been continuing the
German traditions of the last few years, is now sufficiently notorious to hai e
reached the ears of an outsider like myself; and I believe that the super-
stition which once surrounded certain German names has faded
away. I am not going to say anything disrespectful about German
music; it seems to me that that will always survive as one of the
abiding glories of the race and of the country; but except for a few
belated thinkers like Bernard Shaw, who reproduce in this genera-
tion the exploded fallacies of the previous one, you will find no one now
who speaks of Wagner as a psychologist. We treat him as a musician, as a
great one, and we measure him on his merits as a musician as we do a
musician of any other nation ; but the idea that his having written raucji
incomprehensible nonsense on the metaphysics of music distinguishes his
work from the work of more lucid and less pretentious composers is an idea
which I think we now abandon. And so, right through the field of intellec-
tual activity to-day—and again when I say to-day, 1 do not mean to-day,
but before the war broke out —we find the European world largely free from
this nightmare of German intellectual oppression which has for some thirty
years weighed down its talents, and arrested its progress.
Now, the thesis which I propose to lay before this meeting to-night, Mr.
President, is this: that in this revolt against the pretence of German
superiority, in this renaissance that we enjoy to-day, the leadership of (he
new movement rested almost wholly’ with F ranee, and that the debt which
the world, and which we, as the intellectual heirs of the world, owe to Franco,
is mainly this, that France, which has been the liberatress in so many other


directions, has also liberated us from the superstition of German superiority.
If, after I ha,ve given some evidence in support of that view, your indulgence
will bear with me a little further, I hope to consider for a moment or two
what may be the causes of this intellectual stubbornness which has made
France refuse to bow the neck where so many of the other nations of Europe
were content .to follow in the German train. But in the first place, let me
put to you what I believe to be the facts.
Now, the supremacy of German culture was mainly due to the victory of
the German arms ; the German view was apparently that her material
supremacy, her acquisitions in the world of actual force, imposed upon her a
right, one might say a duty, to carry her culture through the rest of the
world. As against that, Ido not think I overstate the case when I say that
the attitude of the French mind has been always that the race which can
demonstrate a spiritual superiority will ultimately prove that superiority in
the world of material force; it is the trust of the French in enlightenment,
in clear thinking, and in freedom, which has been their principal weapon in the
great struggle in which they had to lead ; and it is by relying largely on
these factors and the advantages which flow from them that France
has been able to give a lead to the rest of Europe in this great encounter.
France arose from the great struggle of 1870 absolutely vanquished, humbled
to the dust; her people looked around with the keen glance and the remorse
less logic which has always characterised their race, and asked themselves
pitilessly what had been at fault, asked themselves how it was that a race
like their own, which they had every reason to believe man for man to be
superior to the Teutonic race, had yet failed so utterly in the struggle.
They looked into it, and one general answer was that the French intellect
had run after strange gods ; that France, which in the early part of the
nineteenth century had been the most scientific country in Europe, had been
false to its traditions ; that for a generation the finest intellect of the nation
had been devoted almost wholly to literary display; that while the best
brains of France had been writing vaudeville for the Parisian stage,
functioning as dramatists, as novelists, as creators of the lighter types of
social work, they had permitted themselves to be distanced in the race by
another nation which had kept abreast of the march of science, of the
progress of invention, of the application of scientific principles to the
systematisation of the national services; and that they were, therefore,
defeated when the testing day came by a community, individually,
possibly, inferior to themselves, but better trained, better ordered, and
better equipped for a struggle. The French saw this, and just as there was
a great turn in the earlier part of the century from science towards literature,
so after the seventies there was another gigantic turn in France from
literature back towards science. First-class minds no longer regarded the
writing of a successful play as the crown and fruit of an intellectual career, but
admitted the necessity for equipment with technical knowledge. What were the
exact steps taken in France to bring these results about I am unable to say—
though they were numerous, they were systematic, and they were successful.
It is apparent to anybody who will look over the intellectual history of
France during the nineteenth century, that there is a brilliant scientific
period at the beginning when some of the giants of the European scientific
world were to be found in Paris ; there is another at the end, say from the
later eighties onward, when men of unrivalled standing in the scientific world
were also to be found in Paris ; and there is a kind of gap, if I may venture
•n the assertion with some diffidence, in the central period when, with th«
exception of the one great and unrivalled name of Pasteur, there was no one
Frenchman whom one would describe as in the front rank of the scientific world.
That was of course during the period of the second Empire, when the prizes held
out to ephemeral merit were extraordinarily great; and when there was a cer


tain measure of discouragement, even if only by comparison, to the less showy
and more laborious efforts which are essential to science.
Apparently that period passed away, and the scientific sceptre which had
long been held in certain departments by France returned to her. Her old
traditional superiority in mathematics asserted itself once more. We had great
chemists and physicists in France ; thanks to Pasteur and his successors at the
institute biological research recommenced there; there was a quickening and
revival of scientific activity throughout France, throughout the whole of her
universities, throughout the whole of her academies and institutes, which, I
venture to say, is practically without parallel in the history of the intellectual
world. I wish, too, to make this point clear—this revival led, not merely to
the great increase in the technical knowledge and equipment of the nation,
but it led to the adoption of scientific method in greater completeness in all
national affairs. France not only challenged the technical scientific
supremacy of Germany—she not only produced cherpists better than the
German chemists and physicists better than the German physicists;
but she produced the spirit of method in inquiry, and the spirit of
organisation in the administration of her public affairs to a degree
which, while differing in very many details of its application from the
spirit which prevailed in German affairs, was nevertheless more flexible
and better adapted on the whole to the requirements of the French character
and gave larger possibilities of success in any future struggle arising out of the
national rivalries. These results were achieved largely through the inveterate
determination of the French iace to rely wholly upon itself. Her scientists,
I am assured by those who are capable of passing judgment upon it, are
originators. There is necessarily a certain apostolic succession in science.
I have no doubt if anyone traced out the work of a thinker like Becquerel,
for example, it could be shown that he learnt a great deal from the German
or English physicists who preceded him, and that his work is based to a
certain extent upon the foundations laid for him by the investigators of other
nations; those who are better acquainted with physical science than I can
claim to be can better give an opinion on that point. But lam assured by
those who are capable of forming an opinion, that in almost every depart-
ment the French scientists of the latter end of the nineteenth century made
new and striking departures ; they have refused to be the pupils of the
established priesthood of Germany; they have not only faced new
problems, but they have faced those new problems from an entirely
new point of view. They have started thinking for themselves ; they were
French chemists, they were French mathematicians, they looked at things in
a new way, they dug the whole tiling out so to speak de novo ; and whether
they were always fortunate in the conclusions at which they arrived, or not,
the intellectual disciplining for themselves, and for their pupils, the
nation, was invaluable. Originality, always the key note of the French
intellect, began to display itself not merely in cheap realistic novels, or in
smart comedies, but once more in the world of science.
When I come, if I may for a moment, to the area of philosophy—a subject
of which I speak with the profound diffidence of complete ignorance—l
would say this; that the illustrious name of Bergson, while it does not
necessarily suggest to any of us who have attempted to read his books any
very definite or satisfying conclusions, suggests I think to anyone who has
made that attempt, in an overwhelming degree, the spirit of an absolutely
implacable determination to face every problem from a new point of view.
Whether Bergson is going to live or not is a matter which those who are
studying philosophy may be able to tell us something about; but whether
or not, no one can attempt to read one of his books (an attempt which
I have most conscientiously made before I offer this opinion) without
being overwhelmed by the absolute originality of the point of view with


which he approaches all the stereotyped problems of metaphysics. Well,
I turn from him after this contemplation of a moment.
This wave of original thought, and this determination to grapple with
problems, passed, of course, from the world of abstract science and philosophy
to the world of applied science. In that period in France we had not only
various great discoveries like radio-activity, and wireless telegraphy, which is,
of course, actually a French discovery, although Marconi was the man who
gave it its practical application ; but we had a whole series of brilliant inven-
tions chiefly applicable to war, such things as the flying machine, the
dirigible, the submarine, smokeless powder, and quick-firing artillery, all of
which I think maybe attributed to that period and that race. We had a dozen
things affecting military strength to be attributed to the nation, but all
directly affiliated to the scientific revolution to which I have been alluding.
I need not remind you of the extraordinary resurgence which occurred
in this period in French engineering, a little blown upon for a
time by the failure of De Lesseps in the Panama scheme, but to day
re-established, as I think the gentlemen of the engineering school
here—one of the finest schools of engineering in the world—will bear
me out. In all these directions the French mind applied itself to
practical problems, the problems first of knowledge, secondly of organization,
and thirdly to the material application of knowledge and organization; and
applied itself with so much success that at the end of the period to which I
am alluding—l again refer to two years ago in all those departments—the
French leader of thought and the French expert could afford to meet his
German confrere not merely on equal terms, but, in almost all of them, to
regard his German confrere as a failure rather than a leader, as one who was
behind himself in the race.
Now I pass from that for a moment to the world of absolute politics, of
military and diplomatic effort. I need not remind you how entirely French
diplomacy has reasserted itself as the first in Europe during the last ten
years. The name of the German foreign secretary has ceased to be heard ;
that of Delcasse is easily the foremost name in the world of foreign
politics to-day. The tradition of the I'ace to be foremost in diplomacy
revived as soon as the difficulties of the second Empire passed away.
I desire to dwell for somewhat longer upon certain changes in the
French military preparation and organisation. This is a matter,
interest in which has been forced upon us by the events of the
last eighteen months. lam anxious to put to you the immense difficulties
which lay before those responsible for military preparation and organisation
in France, and also the extraordinary manner in which those difficulties were
overcome. In the year 1887, seventeen years after the Franco-Prussian war,
an incident took place on the Franco-Prussian frontier, the arrest of some
French official by the German frontier guard, which for some weeks was ex-
pected to give rise to a war. In connection with that Sir Charles Dilke, then
a member of the English House of Commons, and although a civilian, an
extraordinarily competent and well informed critic of military affairs, went
to France and was permitted to obtain a good deal of information at first
hand about the French army. He came back to England and wrote a series
of remarkable articles which I remember to this day, in which he asserted
that the French army was entirely recovered from the shock of Sedan and
was again what it had been in the early fifties—the first army in Europe.
The organization had been completed; there was a spirit of self-sacrifice
amongst the officers, the French army could face the German army with
equanimity. But, unhappily for the national strength, almost imraedi
ately after that the Boulanger episode occurred, an episode which I,
living in London at the time, can recollect well as being followed with
breathless interest on the English side of the Channel, as well as in France.


This was an attempt to effect a coup d'etat and impose a Dictatorship upon
the French Republic. The general was ultimately wounded in a duel by the
Premier of the day—fairly hard lines, gentlemen, for a Premier to have to
turn out and face some military hero who objected to his politics with a small
sword—but still M. Floquet did it, and not only did it, but in the duel put
Boulanger out of action, and thus, in the opinion of many, saved the Re-
public. While that was in itself a very excellent thing, it led to this ; it led to
the bringing back of the army once more under more direct poli'ical control;
and, however admirable a thing political control may be in New South Wales,
it has proved in military matters a very disastrous thing in France. After
that, the army went to pieces once more for some years. Cliqueism and
secret influences, political and others, were at work; there was wild rivalry
amongst juniors ; there was favouritism; ans, in the midst of the struggles,
those who were responsible for the proper organisation of the army and the
proper allocation of the funds devoted to it, neglected their duty, and the
army went to the dogs. Nevertheless, in spite of that, during this period of
disorganisation, two things took place in the history of the French army,
which, I venture to think, will ultimately be regarded by historians as the
two most important military events of all this half century.
The first of these was the Dreyfus case and the ultimate appointment
of Colonel Picquart as Minister of War. I want to make a parenthesis
for a moment and tell you of that incident, those of you who do not
remember it, so that you may understand it in detail and its importance.
Dreyfus was comfortably condemned and imprisoned, the whole trouble was
over and there was nothing to worry about, when Colonel Picquart became
appointed chief of the Intelligence Department of the French army. ’Colonel
Picquart discovered that the leaking out of secret intelligence, which was
supposed to be due to Dreyfus, was still going on although Dreyfus was
under lock and key, and he reported to his superiors that it could be traced
to a certain section of the staff. He was told by his superiors not to
meddle with tilings that did not concern him, and when he insisted on
meddling he was sent away to an exceedingly dangerous post in one of the
French Colonies where it was to be reasonably anticipated that he would
either be shot or that fever would carry him off'. He survived the dangers of
this post and conducted himself there with extraordinary distinction. He
came back to France, and again took action about this matter, and was
this time dismissed from the array with disgrace. The matter went further.
I do not pretend to remember the pi’ecise order of events for the moment;
other developments occurred, whether they were the result of discoveries, or
the result of leakage of information to the enemy, something occurred which
gave Picquart another chance, and he again wrote, I think this time to the
press, or if not to the President. This time he was imprisoned himself.
Those were the experiences of Colonel Picquart in his endeavour to get the
guilt of treason sheeted home to the right quarters. Well, he was ultimately
released ; the matter went on still further; he came out of gaol of course,
and gave his evidence. He fought a duel with one of the principal parties
in the conspiracy against Dreyfus ; the whole ghastly conspiracy was exposed,
and Picquart was restored to his rank in the army with honour. Somewhat
later he was made Minister for war in Clemenceau’s Cabinet. And his
period at the Ministry of War was probably the most brilliant period
of administration which (he French army has seen since the days of
■Carnot. During that period two things occurred. First the expedition to
Morocco, which gave the French army its smell of powder which so
fortunately strengthened it for the present contest. Many faults were
discovered, corrected, the army was put on a proper basis of organi-
sation. Secondly during that period, the whole of the French artillery
was reorganised and rearmed. The celebrated quick-firing gun which has


been so extraordinarily an important factor in the pr. sent war was
introduced. Both of those things were due to Colonel Picquart, and both of
those things have played a very critical part in the struggle we are going
through to-day. That, I say, is one of the most important military episodes
in the war of the century.
The other is an even more interesting thing—the discovery by t 1 e French
staff of what was regarded by them as the forgotten secret of Napoleon’s
strategy. It seems almost too romantic to believe that such a tlrng could
be possible, but it must be remembered that Napoleon s methods, that is, his
guiding principles, were not at any time clearly or critically explained by
himself. He wrote, it is true, a great deal about his methods ; but he wrote
cryptically, and he wrote largely with an eye to his own glorification. He
frequently mis stated the facts, and alleged, by an after thought, that he
had entered upon certain manoeuvres with a certain design when, actually,
he had probably drifted into them with no design at all. His own writings
are in this and in other ways of smaller value than one would expect, so I
understand, to a military student in understanding his methods.
The task of unravelling and interpreting his methods fell into the hands
of a number of writers, a Swiss and half a dozen Germans, who undertook
it. A body of doctrine hal grown up as to what Napoleon’s methods
actually were. When the French army had been reorganised in the early
eighties, however, a certain Captain Gilbert, who was a member of the
historical section of the general s f aff, after close study of the history of
Napoleon’s campaigns, came to the conclusion that Napoleon had two
methods—one, I gather, mainly suitable for attack, the other mainly
suitable for defence. This officer announced to the staff that the German
view, the view that had been acted upon by Von Voltke, that Napoleon’s
victories were due to a certain method of manoeuvring, was a partial and
imperfect view; that there was another method of manocvring which would
beat, if rigidly adhered to, the system that the Germans had adopted. This
discovery—because it was nothing else than a scientific discovery—was
closely considered by the French staff. It was approved by generals like
Bonnal and Langlois, and it was given effect to by Joffre and Foch during the
recent struggle. The French nation staked its existence wit h the most resolute
fortitude upon the validity of a certain definite logical process. It reminds
one of the travellers in Jules Verne’s story, who put themselves inside a
cannon-ball, and had it fired to the moon when the formula had been worked
out, in absolute confidence in the validity of mathematics. In exactly the
same way the French nation, with that unhesitating confidence in logic
which has always distinguished it, staked its whole fortunes on the correctness
of the new military deductions. Of course, the event gloriously justified it.
These two things, the discovery of a new method of strategy, and the discovery
of Colonel Picquart, and the consequent reorganisation of the French artillery
and of the French army generally after the period of decadence which was
marked by the Dreyfus case, were the two incidents which turned the history
of the French army and made of it the formidable weapon of war which
we have found it to be during the last few’ months; the one power which
stood between continents! Europe and universal Gemini domination
If time permitted, I would like to go on to discuss what France has
done in certain other directions ; her efforts in industry, in art, and in
literature during this period, but I am not concerned with those things
for the moment. What lam concerned in asserting is this, that when
France, recovering from the staggering blow of the disaster of 1870, pulling
herself together, reviewed the situation, she went quietly, methodically,
inveterately to work, and by sheer dependence upon her own resources
by refusing to be an imitator in any single direction, by absolute originality,
forced her way to the very front of the intellectual campaign that


was then raging in Europe. You'do not find a French soldier dressed in a
cheap imitation of the German soldier; no French Minister for "W ar has ever
introduced the flat cap or any German equipment into the French army.
You do not find the French scientists becoming the pupils of any outside
school. France is a world apart, a world alone. Although isolation in
itself is a very great disadvantage, and has led in many cases to France and
French thinkers just losing the culminating point of some great new idea which
they had introduced, for want of some prac ical addition which could easily be
learnt in some other part of the world; still, in itself, it has been the secret of
France’s intellectual strength. She has always refused to look abroad ; what
she cannot do, what she cannot spin out of her own bowels she goes without;
she takes nothing from anywhere ; she is in a position, so she boasts, to give
freely to the whole of tbe outside world Although that noast may not be
wholly true, and may not be wholly justified, it is believed by her that it is
true. A spirit of determined and unflagging originality has been the backbone
of the intellectual strength of France, has made her the leader of this insur-
rection against the domination which, forty’ years ago, Germany exercised
over intellectual Europe.
Now, I beg you to consider with me if you will, for one moment, Ladies
and Gentleman, where it is, and how it is, that this intellectual originality
has been achieved—what it is derived from. Well, I hope I shall not be
misunderstood when I say that I believe definitely that it is derived
from the democracy plus the intelligence and spirit of France I have
no superstitious confidence in the efficacy of democracy. Democracy
may produce He poorest of results just as it may produce the brightest.
It is not bound to produce results of any particular kind. In France,
however, democracy is better understood, and has been more fully analysed,
—has been more frequently contrasted with other forms of govern-
ment than in any other part of the world. W hatever political disabilities
the French have laboured under during the nineteenth century, they
have not laboured under the disability of having no experience of any
otherkindof government. When they are asked what they think of a Republic
they can answer, because they 1 ave always had recent memories of an Empire,
and of a Kingdom to contrast it with. Democracy, therefore, means rather
more in France than it does in England or Australia. England I suppose
one may venture on this observation even in the fourteenth month of the
war—England is the classic home of liberty ; we have been told this
frequently, Ladies and Gentlemen, and some of us perhaps are not in danger
of forgetting it. But France is the only land in which one sees inscriptions
upon the public buildings, which show that it is not merely liberty that it
has adopted as its ideal, but liberty plus equality and fraternity. Now I
venture to assert that it is the spirit of equality as understood by the French
that is really at the root of this proud refusal to accept the leadership of any
alien race. Equality has been the key-note of French political aspirations
for more than a century. I do not wbh, of course, to suggest that every
Frenchman values equality, that every Frenchman believes in equality, any
more than I suggest that every Englishman believes in libert) T . But if one
asks what is the essential ideal around which the 'ast majority of Englishmen
would rally, it is undoubtedly the ideal of f < eedom. If you want to do some’ hing
to arouse the slumbering anger of a wh'de Anglo-Saxon community, interfere
with the Habeas Corpus Act, interfere with trial by jury, interfere with one
of the old-established constitutional precautions, and you find people who
hardly know the meaning of the words, boiling over with indignation at the
idea that the sacred rights, the sacred safeguards of the liberties English-
men, should be interfered with. This is true also of France. Ihe ideal
of liberty intoxicates the French mind, as Heine long ago reminded us.
Still, liberty by itself, liberty without the co-ordinate ideas of equality and


fraternity makes but small appeal to them. It is the spirit of equality, the
idea that every one of us is a living human soul with possibilities and
faculties equal to those of everybody else, that the humblest peasant may
bring into the world a child who, with a chance, may become the greatest
of mankind, the idea that we are all equal, that there are no classes,
that there are no distinctions; it is this idea, I say, which is the
inspiring soul and spirit of all French political thought.
This idea is, I believe, immediately and directly co-related to the determina-
tion of the French intellectual world never for a moment to regard
themselves as the inferiors of any outside race. No Frenchman is ever the
inferior of anybody. You meet the French waiter-, the French workman,
the French steward on board the mail-boat; he is, like yourself, a gentleman,
he takes you for one and he expects that you will take him for one. He has
his place, and he has his duties, and he has his customs; in his heart he is a
man and a brother, your equal—not your superior—he does not think that
for a moment—but your equal in every way. And in exactly the same way
the French man of intellect, the French man of letters, the French man of
science, understood when this movement of insurrection came about that he
was the equal of his brother in any part of the world. It may be that
certain professors in German universities had, for a moment, the reputation
of knowing more of Chinese metaphysics than anyone else ; that was nothing.
The French said, “We are equal to any professors of metaphysics in the
world; we will not go to them and learn from them; that would
be debasing to the French spirit; we will dig the whole thing out
afresh for ourselves; make a new start, get fresh lights, fresh points
of view.” They did it; not always, of course with a complete measure
of success; sometimes with just that measure of failure which comes of nob
knowing, or not fully understanding or appreciating the achievements already
made by some foreign worker in the same field ; but still with an enormous
measure of value to the mental vitality and the spiritual discipline of the
nation as a whole. That is, I say, the spirit which can, I think, be traced
throughout the French intellectual world of to-day. I regard it myself as
directly allied to the.spirit of democracy. That spirit, no doubt, manifests
itself somewhat disastrously in French politics. We must never judge
France by her politics, which, in part, are in bad hands and in a bad way.
It is the spirit of democracy which permeates her science ; and it is, on the
other hand, the spirit of enlightenment, the spirit of scientific system which
inspires and elevates, and which we trust will more and more inspire and
elevate the aspirations of French democracy. lam not going to enter
to-night into the tangled maze of French politic*, of which indeed I under-
stand exceedingly little, and which it has been almost impossible to follow
with any comprehension in Australia during the last ten years ; but still, I
say, I think we can see clearly the connecting links between the public spirit
of France as manifested in her government and her ideals, and her intellectual
re-awakening which has done so much for Europe during the last forty years.
Now, I want to say one thing more on this point before I leave it. It may be
said, “ Surely England has had something to do with this escape from German
domination.” Well, I do not want to be understood as denying absolutely
that our own race has played a part in it. 11 has played some part; but no
one who followed the melancholy subjugation of English ideals up to the.
middle of the nineties can believe that we could have worked out our
salvation I do not mean our political salvation, but our salvation in the-
world of intellect—by ourseh es. Up to the middle of the nineties we followed
servilely in the steps of Germany. If Germany wanted Heligoland, she got
it; if a German prince wanted to b° married, we just sent over one of the
English princesses, and he married her; they got that; if they wanted to
send clerks to learn the English language, they sent clerks to London to get


billets; they got that. Those were the days when Lord Salisbury was
Prime Minister, and when Queen Victoria was on the throne, and when both
those distinguished personages thought that an alliance with the German
Empire was, next to the direct blessing of the Almighty, the best assurance
of peace and happiness in our time on earth.
Then there came the Imperialist revival in England, when for some
years we went around talking about the white man’s burden, and
bragging of the extraordinary way in which we governed places like
Australia and Egypt—the majority of Imperialists seemed to imagine that
Australia and Egypt were governed very much on the same lines and under
very much the same institutions. That came to an end with the discoveries
of the Boer war, when we learnt that what Mr. Kipling had told us about
Tommy Atkins and the organisation of the British army was not wholly
reliable. From that time, when the whole Imperialistic regime collapsed,
in 1902 or 1903 onwards, our hope and our prospect have lain in the fact
that from that time we came to terms with our brothers in France, and
were prepared to walk along the path in which France had for so many
years been struggling. But I think that at the close of that period, when
that Entente was made in 1903 and 1904, the path we then walked in had
been made for us by the efforts of France, We had been wandering in
strange wildernesses, both in the world of thought and of political action.
It was France who had, by many strenuous efforts and many sacrifices, hewn
out that path; and into that path under the guidance of Delcasse, aided by
the late King and by Sir Edward Grey, the two great allied nations have
walked in friendship and in understanding ever since.
I have spoken of our duty to France on the side of intellect. I wish to say
a final word of our debt to France in the world of the heart. We have no
realization of how much we owe to the fortitude and courage of France in the
present struggle. The conventional idea that France is a nation which was
soundly thrashed by us at Waterloo, and by the Germans in 1870 at Sedan, and
was therefore a negligible quantity as a military proposition, is an idea which
wants a little looking at for one moment. At Waterloo the French forces
arrayed on the field had to fight a British and Prussian army of twice their
number. They nearly beat us; it was touch and-go, as Wellington himself
admitted. The French strategy was so admirable, and the French attack so furi-
ous, that although we had 220,000 men to their 120,000,we were nearly beaten.
Of course we have these scribblers of to-day,Fitchett and others, who are ever-
lastingly describing this most glorious of British victories, who have no idea of
what was the valour and what was the military strength put forward on that
occasion by our foes. But they may be ignored. Ko French military writer
over blushes over the episode of Waterloo; it was an episode glorious in every
way to the French army which came off the field, if not with success, with a
glory that will never die. At Sedan the French army, whose numbers are
disputed, but which was outnumbered by the Prussian army by nearly two
to one at any rate, was badly led; the commander in-chief was shot in the
first hour of the conflict, the control of the battle fell into the hands of a
second general, who ordered a complete change of plans ; and later on into the
hands of a third general, who ordered another complete change of plans while
the battle was being carried on. That army was surrounded and ultimately
had to surrender. Although the generalship was bad, and the struggle perhaps
not so resolute as it would have been under better leaders, there was
nothing in the conduct of the fight that in any way reflects upon the
extraordinary military capacity of the French race. Those two great battles,
Waterloo and Sedan, disastrous as they were for the nation, must
be observed with a close and analytical eye by students of affairs,
such as I take it all my hearers are, before any conclusion
adverse, to French military prowe-s can be drawn from them. I put


that by, and I would only ask you to remember this—that after Sedan,
when the last French army in the field bad surrendered, and what French
forces there still were were surrounded at Metz, the indomitable spirit of
the French nation manifested itself by a levy en masse-, 700,000 citizen
troops came into existence, and a furious, though fruitless, struggle
was carried on for over four months. This is the resolute spirit of the
French race. After Jena, when the Prussians met with an almost equally
overwhelming disaster, within two or three weeks the last effort of military
resistance had been stamped out. The Prussians showed no capacity for
rising over their misfortunes or for carrying on the struggle. They yielded
weakly and miserably, in many cases shamefully, under the sword of the
conqueror.
We and the French have many ideals in common. The French are a
chivalrous nation, and so are we. The Normans, who imprinted many
surviving traditions and ideals upon our race, learned them from
the Franks; and although there have been divergencies, yet side by
side, certain conceptions of warfare and certain conceptions of the
intercourse of humanity, have come down to both of us. We hold that a
resolute resistance in disaster is the highest possible display of human
courage. It is not dash that we claim ; it is not, at all events, merely dash,
not merely readiness in attack, but it is that serenity of soul which rises
superior to disaster and defeat, and which maintains in the darkest
hour a steadfast countenance and a determination to put forth every energy
which may still wrest victory out of defeat. That conception is the concep-
tion of the French as well; and they have proved it in many a stubbornly
fought field. They are slightly more dashing than we are, and we possibly
are slightly more stubborn than they are ; but there are no more dashing-
races than the English and French, and there are no more stubborn races
than the English and the French. And our valiant allies, who in the face of
the overwhelming strength wi'h which Germany marched to the assault at
the commencement of this war, and in the face of the overwhelming losses
and the overwhelming sufferings which they have endured since the commence-
ment of this war, have to-day, without one single word of whimpering,
without a solitary note of complaint from end to end of the country, steeled
themselves for the endurance of the campaign, now in the fourteenth
month of the war, contemplate a struggle right through the winter, and are
determined to hold their ground unt'l the long promised, and often delayed,
hour arrives, when British reinforcements shall come to their succour. Here
is a nation which sets us an example of steadfastness and resolution in its
hour of trial. These things make us proud of their alliance, make us indeed
recognise the debt which we and all Europe owe to them to-day, and makes
us, I hope, Gentlemen, determined to play our part like men also in this
struggle, resolving never to give in until victory is finally accomplished.
fjdnej’ ; William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.—l9l6.
