

ei©2
g
®*v9
OUE EIYEE:
PRACTICAL SUGGESTION
BRITISH PATRIOTS.
“Pro Bono Publico.”
A. COLONIAL BRITON.
IRntixcrn::
W. KENT & CO., PATERNOSTER ROW.
MELBOURNE: SANDS & McDOUGALL, COLLINS STREET.
MDCCCLXXI. 6) (c)
■■■■ ■
PBICE OUSTS SHILLUSTG.




OUR RIVER:
PRACTICAL SUGGESTION
BRITISH PATRIOTS.
“ Pro Bono Publico.”
A COLONIAL BRITON.
If mtkm:
W. KENT & CO., PATERNOSTER ROW.
MELBOURNE: SANDS & McDOUGALL, COLLINS STREET.
MDCCCLXXX,




INTRODUCTORY.
/*?
tt~S-77
Ron some years past, and more especially since
the 16th July, 1870, the G-eeman Rhine has
held a remarkably prominent position before
the world.
For a still longer period the great stream of
British nationality has been rushing heedlessly
and unheeded over its submerged embank-
ments, in a turbid, uncared for, and almost
unnavigable flood. If it ever had a channel of
deep national opinion, that channel is now
occupied by a succession of shallows, whirl-
pools, snags, sandbanks, and other general
obstacles to navigation. It has some lights in
its vicinity that serve, in some sort, to guide its
mariners, but only incidentally and imperfectly,
for the lights, if not intended are invariably
used for entirely different purposes; while an
attempt that was recently made to raise a
trustworthy beacon to assist at a specially dan-
gerous part of the navigation failed, and the
beacon, so far as it was constructed, remains
little better than a bulrush, to be whirled
beneath the surface of the current alike by ebb
and flow.
The river is well supplied with landmark-
lighthouses, buoys, and tide gauges, but the
lighthouses are peculiar, inasmuch as they are
our leading public men, who are almost always
local magnates also, at some point or other on
b -2


the margin of the stream. Now it so happens
that the river has for centuries been noted for
the richness of its still rapidly increasing
fisheries, and that a very large proportion of
the public men just referred to, besides being
local magnates, have been and are great fisher-
men. The buoys and tide gauges are also
peculiar ones, being in common parlance known
respectively as the Public Press and Political
Economists of the day. The buoys have their
individual specialities of form and colour to
indicate the particular positions which they
occupy, while the tide gauges should mark dis-
tinctly the depth of water in their vicinity.
Still in working up or down the stream mar-
iners are sorely puzzled to find their way, for in
the day-time a mysterious indistinctness seems
to veil the figures on the tide gauges, while a
uniform mud colour closely assimilates the ap-
pearance of nearly all the buoys, and at night
the lighthouses are found to throw few or no
guiding rays upon the river. But how can
these things be? The tide gauges when examined
are found to be wholly defaced with hooks and
ring-bolts, driven recklessly through all their
figures to serve as general moorings for the local
magnates’ fishing craft; the buoys are in the day
time almost always covered with the muddy
nets of the local magnate fishermen; and at
night when the nets are being used their canny
owners take a double advantage by keeping the
river dark for their fishing, while the lighthouse
reflectors turned landwards dazzle the local


residents with a display of more or less re-
spectable but dreadfully misdirected brilliancy.
The buoys, although they sturdily refuse to
budge for wind or waves, seem in fine weather
—as indeed may be but natural for buoys—-
quite unconscious of the false colours and
appearance they present when indolently rolling
under the local nets whose meshed and knotted
lines always impede the progress of broad
and liberal national ideas, but storms now
and then quite as naturally sweep away the
rubbish and afford glimpses of the bright and
true colours that, to be of their full use ought
always to be seen, as in truth they would be but
for the nets. Such, essentially, is the present
general condition of these important adjuncts
to our river.
The questions are, shall we have all these mat-
ters readjusted P shall the British Biver continue
a navigable one ? shall it still bear our flag aloft
through our world-wide empire? or shall we
Britons, in meek humility, as becomes the dis-
gustingly mean representatives of a better but
extinct race, quietly subside in the base admis-
sion that in our hands the fame of our ancestors,
the honor of our flag, the unity of our empire,
and the due conservancy and direction of the
great stream of our nationality cannot be sus-
tained P
February, 1871.




Section I.
STRAWS FROM THE SURFACE.
Before proceeding to the subject about to be
discussed, perhaps it may be as well to state
distinctly at the outset what classes of persons are
herein addressed as British patriots. The British
name in its broad modern comprehensive mean-
ing, must he considered to belong to every
member of the British race, hor the pre-
sent purpose every honest man, horn or
duly naturalized in any British community,
is deemed to he in all essentials a Briton.
Amongst these Britons there is always to
he found a goodly number prepared at any
time to take very decided measures of a legiti-
mate character, in any truly national cause.
There is also a still larger number who, under
similar circumstances are equally willing with
those first mentioned, but not at all times equally
ready for energetic action, while there is
a yet larger body who would cordially agree
with the "two former but who are sadly in-
different to what is going on around them in the


greater political world, simply in most cases
because they do not appreciate the very serious
and weighty principles that frequently underlie
the trivial political affairs which, for the most
part engage whatever attention they have time
to devote to such subjects. To the careful con-
sideration of all these Britons, whether their
lot be cast in British Europe, British America,
British Africa, British Asia, or British Austra-
lasia, the writer as one of their number, re-
spectfully, disinterestedly, but earnestly com-
mends the subject discussed in the following
pages in the hope that those who being un-
trammelled by local political considerations are
free to act in a national patriotic movement,
will do so in their own neighbourhood to assist
in averting a great national misfortune to which
we are now unquestionably exposed.
If we review the course of events in the world
about us of late years, we cannot fail to observe
that the people of the United States of America
have at enormous cost affirmed their determination
to become one nation ; that with the fullest ap-
probation of Europe and the world at large,
Italy and Germany have made similar arrange-
ments, while vague suspicions are not wanting
that other races have like ends in view to be
attained whenever suitable opportunities may
offer. There is one nation, however, that has
for years past pursued a widely different course.
That nation is our own, and the true direction
of the course it is pursuing is at length being
fully recognised in all quarters, as the following


extracts* selected from the columns of the
newspaper and periodical press go far to prove.
From the general tenor of these extracts, it will
be evident to those who are not otherwise
acquainted with the fact, that throughout the
British world the danger of national dissolution
is at present generally believed to menace our
future, and while this is an admitted and un-
deniable fact, it is ominous that no one questions
the possibility of disruption, and that nearly
all who discuss it look upon some such ultimate
result as a foregone and probably imminent
conclusion.
In an excellent article in Fraser's Magazine
for September, 1870, the whole of which might
be perused with profit, Mr. Froude says :
“ It is well known that to particular classes the
colonies appear only a burden. What is to be
done with them, whether they are to remain
attached to us, or are to be affronted or encour-
aged into separation, and what is called
independence, is a matter on which the nation
itself is alone competent to form and pronounce
an opinion. The present Government, how-
ever, has been suspected of secretly favouring
* It should be observed that tbe newspaper extracts are
chiefly taken at second band from tbe European Mail
and Some News ; tbe writer bas had no opportunity to
verify them, but they are doubtless sufficiently accurate
to justify tbe use it is here intended to make of them.


the views of the separatists. They have several
times been called on during the late session to
explain their real views, and the tone which
they have taken in their replies indicates at any
rate most signally the estimate which they have
formed of the political magnitude of the ques-
tion. Lord Granville has again and again repu-
diated all intention of shaking olf the colonies.
He insists that the policy which he pursues is
that which on the whole gives most satisfaction
to the colonists themselves, and tends more
than any other which could be pursued to
secure their attachment. He has said also, and
whenever challenged he has repeated, as if with
a consciousness that he was wronged by the
suspicions entertained of him, that he admits
the duty in case of war of defending
the colonies against aggression with the whole
force of the empire.* The assurance is good in
itself, but it is little to the point. No one
suspects the Government of meditating treason,
and it would be nothing less than treason
wilfully to abandon the protection of any part
* It must be observed, however, that nothing whatever
is even now being done to give any such force a real
organized existence.


of her Majesty’s dominions. But whereas there
are two possible colonial policies —one to
regard them as integral parts of the British
Empire * * * the other * * *
to educate the colonies in self-dependence,
that at the earliest moment they may
themselves sever the links which bind them
to us —of these two policies it is believed
that the Grovernment deliberately prefer the
second, and nothing that Lord Granville or any
other member of the Cabinet has said upon the
subject leads us to suppose that the belief is
unfounded. A few words would have sufficed
to remove the uneasiness, but those words
have not been spoken.
“ Lord Granville is transferred to another de-
partment, but it is evident that there is to be no
change in the colonial policy. Lord Kimberley’s
language is identical with his predecessor’s.
It is quite certain that in the opinion of Mr.
Gladstone’s Administration, the colonies are
rather elements of weakness to us than of
strength.
“We say nothing of the withdrawal of the
troops. The self-governed colonies are per-


fectly capable of taking care of themselves, and
they will defend to the last each their own
portion of the British Empire, if they may be
assured that they are to continue to belong to
it. But the entire drift of the action of the
Colonial Office points to a desire on our part
that as soon as possible they should rid us of
all responsibility for them. Our statesmen own
in their conduct what in words they are still
compelled to disclaim. Our leading colonists
are not invited to a share in the established
dignities of the empire. They are not made
members of the Privy Council. They are not ad-
mitted to the Bath, still less to the high distinction
of the Garter. A new order is created especially
as the reward of colonial merit. A difference in
its flag is forced upon Victoria. The unani-
mous desire of the Australians for the annexa-
tion of the Eiji Islands is refused, as if to goad
them into separate action on their own account,
lest those islands should be appropriated for a
naval or a penal station by some other power.
When the Dominion of Canada was proclaimed,
the Government organs declared with no
uncertain voice, that British North America


might now be independent when it pleased. The
present Governor-General, though he afterwards
explained away his words, expressed a distinct
wish that the gift of independence might he
soon accepted. It is incredible that he would
have dared to use such words unless they had
been prompted from home. The late Governor,
when Lord Granville disclaimed any desire to
part with Canada, and denied that his policy
tended towards separation, said in his place in
the House of Lords, that it undoubtedly had
such a tendency, and for that reason he hoped
the Government would persevere in it. The
new Knighthood w r as bestowed ostentatiously
on a Canadian statesman* who had avowed
publicly his desire that Canada should he
annexed to the United States.
A few weeks ago the Times spoke no less point-
edly of the proposed confederation of the Aus-
tralian Colonies and New Zealand as the birth
of a new nationality. All this can bear but one
interpretation. Such confederations in them-
selves may be good things or bad. They need
not necessarily involve a separation from Eng-
* Sir A. Galt.


land, but tbe separation is what the party at
present in power desire to promote, and the
purpose is hut faintly concealed in a few
reluctant and partial concessions to public
opinion. * * * #
“We do not believe that such a policy can
he approved by the country in general. Were
the issue fairly before the people it would be
instantly repudiated. The fear is rather that
they will look on inattentively, supposing that
all is going well, till the mischief is consum-
mated. It will be then past remedy. * * *
We choose the present moment therefore, when
the position of England must be causing serious
thought to every one who is capable of under-
standing it, to recall attention to a question
which appears to us to be one of life or death.”
Viscount Bury in his inaugural address as
first President of the new Colonial Society,
said: —
“There is among us a school of politicians
whose leading idea appears to be that colonies
are an excrescence of our empire, rather than
an important element of its prosperity; an in-
cumbrance rather than a material element of its


strength; a source of commercial and political
loss rather than of national wealth. Now, this
school of politicians are respectable for their
learning, their eloquence, their ability; formid-
able on account of the persistent vigour of their
attacks. Their doctrines attack not only the
root of our colonial system —which would of
itself be serious and well worthy of attention—
but the very existence of our colonial empire,
which is of infinitely more importance; a faulty
system may be reconstructed; an empire thrown
away can never be recovered.”
Speaking in the House of Lords on the 14th
February, 1870, Earl Granville is reported to
have said: —
“There are many thoughtful men who con-
sider that the time is not far distant when a
friendly separation may take place between
England and Canada.”
The Earl of Derby said: —
“l do not think that in the present state
of things, or in any state of things like
the present, much difficulty is likely to arise;
but we have this to bear in mind, that we
cannot expect a state of peace always to


continuG. Take, for instance, the case of Aus-
tralia. The ties between this country and
Australia are undoubtedly strong enough to all
appearance, and I believe strong enough in
reality. But we know, nevertheless, that under
present circumstances there is no strain what-
ever upon them. The strain would arise if we
unfortunately became involved in some great
European quarrel, and if, as the consequence of
that quarrel, the Australian colonists found that
their commerce was interrupted, that they were
suffering heavy losses, and obliged to put them-
selves in an attitude of defence, and all this on
account of some dispute in Europe about which
they neither knew nor cared. That is a state of
things which, if ever it arises, may lead many of
the colonists to take a view which they do not
take now as to the greater advantages of a
position of independence. That I look upon as
being the danger of the future, the rock ahead
as regards the maintenance of the empire. Ido
not say that it is a state of things for which I
have any remedy to propose, but it is at least
something to see when a danger is likely to
arise, and not to be taken unprepared, as un-


fortunately has been very much an English
habit of late in reference to many foreign and
colonial questions.”
And upon this debate the Times remarked: —
“This discussion entirely confirms us in the
opinions we have from time to time put forth on
our colonial relations. We have not thought it
right to encourage a factitious enthusiasm for
what is called a more intimate union with the
colonies, which means the adoption of a clumsy
and impracticable political machinery; and we
have expressed a belief that the present system
does, by its very pliancy, produce a mutual
friendliness which rigid political bonds might
perhaps stifle. This opinion is supported by
the chief speakers in the House of Lords,
though Lord Derby doubts whether the present
relations could be maintained in time of war.
Peace, however, is the normal state of England,
and still more of the British Colonies; for, with
the exception of Canada, which may soon assume
an independent position, there is no colony which
has any reasonable fear of invasion, even were
the mother country at war. Eor the present,
and so far as we can see into the future, the


state of the world is such that England and her
colonies need not subordinate her relations to
the necessities of a military and naval alliance.”
“ A New Victorian Flag, which, at the sug-
gestion of the Admiralty, has been designed as
the distinguishing mark of the Victorian mer-
cantile navy, has been formally adopted by the
Government. The ensign will have five white
stars on the blue ground, and the ‘jack’ five
white stars in the cross of St. George, which
forms the central lineof thepattern.” —European
Mail, 25th March, 1870.
The New Colonial Policy. —The Spectator
says: —
“No one can deny that if in Canada, if in
the Cape, if in New Zealand, separation is
believed by official persons on adequate grounds
to be the deliberate policy of the Government,
it was incumbent on the ministry which had
formed so novel and hardy a design to com-
municate its views to Parliament, and take the
opinion of the nation on the boldest and most
startling innovation in modern statesmanship.
To carry out this policy to the bitter end in the


extreme case of New Zealand, without ever
informing Parliament of the real motive, and
leaving it to be supposed that the last regiment
is withdrawn from New Zealand solely because
New Zealand can do very well, if not better,
without it, is not candid, is not worthy of a
policy which, however foolish and fatal it may
be, and we think is, is at least both courageous
and original. The nation is apathetic in part at
least because it is only half awake to what is hap-
pening. Let the Ministry boldly propound its
plans, and persuade the United Kingdom to
shear itself as soon as may be of its great
colonial possessions if it can. But it is neither
constitutional nor just to commit us to an irre-
trievable policy, before any substantial fraction
of the English people know what they are
sanctioning and whither they are drifting.”
New Zealand. —The Ti7nes correspondent at
Wellington writes :
“It were idle to gloss over the fact that
but one feeling with regard to that docu-
ment (Lord Granville’s dispatch) prevails
in New Zealand, and that is one of profound
and undisguised indignation. As the immediate
c 2


consequence of Earl Granville’s expressions,
and his declaration of the Imperial policy
towards New Zealand, the expediency of declar-
ing the independence of the colony, of refusing
to maintain the vice-regal establishment, and
even of annexation with the United States, has
been freely discussed; and it is only because
the case of the colony appears to have attracted
considerable attention, and called forth the
sympathy of a large and influential section
of the English people, that no decided steps
have been taken in one of these directions. It
is also expected that the colonial question will
be fully considered during the next session of
parliament, and the more moderate section of
the community is Avilling to wait the event of
that discussion before accepting any proposal
for a radical change.” —J European Mail, April,
1870.
“Earl Granville and the Colonies. —A
contemporary commenting on Earl Granville’s
policy, says: —
‘ A few months may make all the differ-
ence between a contented and united empire
and a general dissolution of its members.


While Lord Granville is lulling himself to rest
in the fool’s paradise of the belief that his bene-
ficent policy has diffused general happiness
through the colonies, and that they desire no
other good fortune than to be always lectured
on their moral duties, and always left unpro-
tected, there are abundant signs from every
quarter of the colonial empire to prove the
utter hollowness of this elysium. Instead of
there being £ no colony with a grievance,’ it
would be much more accurate to say that there
is scarcely any colony which has not some grave
cause of discontent, which is not growing seri-
ously alarmed as to the prospects of its future.
It is true that there is not a war or rebellion in
each of them, and that therefore they have not
all had an opportunity of practically testing
Lord Granville’s policy.’ After reviewing the
position of affairs in Canada, the Red River, and
British Columbia, the writer proceeds to say
that New Zealand has energetically protested
against the injustice and harshness of its treat-
ment by the Colonial Office, and that it is pre-
pared to take steps, should Lord Granville’s
policy not be revoked, for separating from the


empire. A petition has already been sent to
the General Assembly from Wanganui, praying
that, inasmuch as the Imperial Government
will not lend the colony any troops, the
salary of the Governor, which comes out
of the pockets of the colonists, should be
stopped, as that officer no longer represents
any influence which is beneficial to New Zea-
land. The next step, there cannot be a doubt,
will be a formal demand for independence, a
demand which, we are informed, the New Zea-
land commissioners are fully prepared to make,
should Lord Granville continue to pay no heed
to their just complaints. The Australian
Colonies are on their own account quiescent,
for the simple and sufficient reason they
are not immediately affected by anything Lord
Granville has done, and, being in no danger
from any enemy, have no need of Imperial
soldiers. But that the Australian colonists are
watching, and are profiting by the experiment
which has been tried on their weaker sister,
New Zealand, is abundantly manifest from the
tone of the local press, and even from the very
documents which Lord Granville has had the


hardihood to put forth in his own justification.
We have seen that the dispatch from Queens-
land, while disapproving of the mode in which
the representatives of the colonies in this
country have acted for the general interest,
insisted quite as strongly as New Zealand did
uoon the duties which the mother country is
expected to discharge towards her children.
As for Victoria, the most capable of all the
Australian Colonies for self-government, and
which least needs Imperial assistance in any
emergency, this is the tone of the principal
local journal upon the colonial question :
‘We may venture to assert, on behalf not only
of the inhabitants of this colony, hut of those
of the neighbouring provinces, that they are
warmly attached to the empire, and that they
expect from the mother-country an explicit
assurance that they will not he summarily cast
adrift without the expression of a unanimous
desire upon the part of the whole group that
they should be so detached. They make this
demand in no timid or distrustful spirit. In
becoming colonists they have not ceased to be
Britons. They cherish the proud self-reliance


which characterises their countrymen at home.
In accepting the privileges of self-government
they willingly assume the whole of its respon-
sibilities. They would not ask, under any
circumstances, for a single penny from the
Imperial treasury. But in certain grave con-
tingencies —such, for example, as those which
arise from time to time in New Zealand —they
do expect either that England would give the
Imperial guarantee to a colonial loan to he
raised for defensive purposes, or would afford
them the use of some of those military and
naval forces which are rusting in idleness at
home.’ These sentiments are certainly not in
accordance with the spirit of Lord Granville’s
policy, and although they may show that Vic-
toria has at present no grievance, it is purely
because there has been no opportunity for try-
ing upon her the experiment which has been
made upon unfortunate New Zealand. Einally,
if we look to the Cape of Good Hope, we hear,
by the very last mail, of a speech delivered by
Sir Philip Wodehouse, the Glovernor, no doubt
in accordance with instructions from home,
in effect advising the colonists to prepare for


independence, since England will no longer be
troubled with their charge —a speech against
which the representatives of the colony in the
Legislative Council have strongly protested.
From this summary of the colonial position it
is evident that so far from all the colonies
being contented, and not requiring any expres-
sion of our views as to their future, there is not
one of them which is a colony at all in the true
sense, which is not either in rebellion, in violent
agitation, in half-smothered disaffection, or in
anxious perplexity as to its true position.
There is not one of them , even the most pros-
perous, which is not presently occupied with the
question, not as a mere fanciful hypothesis or
remote speculation, hut as a near and contingent
event, of its separation from England. It may
be that this is the very result which Lord
Granville desires to obtain, and that he rather
plumes himself upon his dexterous management
in so contriving that those which are not vio-
lently thrust out should be preparing to take
their departure. But nevertheless it is a fact
which surely demands the serious attention of
the British Parliament and people. They who


desire to precipitate the dismemberment of the
empire, as well as they who wish to prevent it,
should be equally interested in having the ques-
tion fairly and fully discussed. Nor can there
he any time for the discussion so opportune as
the present. In another year or two we may
not have the option of having any opinion on
the matter. The policy of Lord Granville is a
policy which fulfills itself. If we permit the
colonies to entertain the idea that we are in
doubt as to the value of their connection, we
may be sure that they will he quick to take the
hint. It is not likely that they will wait our
time for turning them out. They will claim
the right of electing their own day of depar-
ture.’” —European Mail, 22nd April, 1870.
An English paper reports that Viscount
Sandon, replying, on 26th April, 1870, to asser-
tions of the Under-Secretary for the Colonies,
said: —
“ £ There was a growing feeling of uneasiness
in the colonies with regard to the policy of the
Imperial Government —not a feeling of dis-
loyalty towards England on the part of the
colonies, but a fear that England was preparing


to be disloyal to her colonies, by leaving them
to their own resources. The existence of this
feeling of uneasiness was testified by the news-
papers of Canada and Australia, and by private
letters from resident colonists ; but he did not
believe that any but a small sect in England
entertained the desire to see the mother country
separated from her dependencies.’ Mr. Glad-
stone said ‘ The feeling of uneasiness referred to
by the noble lord was not a phenomenon which
had arisen under the hands of the present
Government, as appeared to be the idea enter-
tained by some speakers. The uneasiness had
existed for the last thirty years, ever since the
British Government had adopted the policy of
responsible government for the colonies; and
when in the present time that policy had been
carried to its natural issue, and the Imperial
Government had reduced the military force
provided for the colonies, the feeling of uneasi-
ness had increased, the secret and soul of
modern colonial policy was, not to accelerate
the separation of the colonies from the mother
country , hut to bring the relations of England
and her colonies into such a state , that when the


day of separation did come, it might be met in a
peaceable and friendly spirit.’ ”
Lord Granville and his Successor in
the Colonial Department. —“ Lord Gran-
ville’s promotion —for in our curious official
hierarchy the Foreign Office ranks far above
the Colonies —is a considerable gain. Lord
Granville will make an excellent Foreign Sec-
retary, if he will remember that Napoleon,
sagacious as he is, does not quite understand
English temper ; and it is with a sigh of relief
that we see him quit his department before any
colony has declared at once its independence
and its undying hostility to Great Britain. It
was a very near thing indeed; Mr. Fox, Pre-
mier of New Zealand, having in a public letter
to the Governor announced that ‘ the colony is
sacrificed to Imperial policy;’ that ‘the theories
of Lord Granville as to responsibility can only
be satisfied by New Zealand ceasing to be a
part of the empire ;’ that his despatch on the
recall of the troops ‘implied an invitation to
the colony to leave the empire,’ and that his
conduct has left and will leave ‘ a rankling feel-
ing of alienation from the mother country.’


That danger has, however, been happily averted
by a timely return to moderation; the sale of
the Gambia settlement to Trance in the teeth
of the wish of its inhabitants will be cancelled
by Parliament; and Lord Kimberley certainly
has the opportunity, and may possess the will,
to reconcile the Government at once with the
colonies and with the immense majority of the
British people, who do not pay taxes in order
that their country may become a third-rate
power.”— Spectator.
“In the House of Lords on the 20th June,
1870, Lord Northbrook denying that the Gov-
ernment in any manner desired the severance
of the ties between Great Britain and her
Colonies, pointed out that successive Govern-
ments and Parliaments had laid down the prin-
ciple that colonists enjoying constitutional
government were hound to a great extent to
undertake their own defence. Lord Grey
said * * * * the principles laid
down hy successive Colonial Secretaries must
necessarily lead to the dissolution of our Colonial
Empire .”


Professor Seeley touching incidentally about
the same time on the colonial question, said:—
“The nation decides to govern the Colonies
in a certain way, because successive Colonial
Ministers have agreed that it is the best way.”
-— Macmillan's Magazine , August, 1870.
Our Colonial Policy.— The following, dated
Pathurst, New South Wales, July 22nd, ap-
peared in the Standard of October 17th, 1870: —
“ I read a part of a letter which some Canadian
had addressed to you, and which gave expression
to the Canadian feeling with respect to Earl
Giranville’s colonial policy —if policy that may
be called which is a course most insane. Having
lived for some years in Canada, I know well the
sorrow of that noble province at the thought of
what is so coolly threatened them. With us
here there is a deepening feeling of disgust,
mingled with amazement; but our people in
Australia can lose nothing, while the Canadians
dread absorption. It is very sad, however, to
see an empire like ours dismembered by half-a-
dozen men known as Cabinet Ministers; it is
disgusting-to think that this is contemplated on
the ground of economy, and in the name of fair


play. We all deplore what is so boldly indi-
cated; and Great Britain, we think, is the true
sufferer. * * * Thankful would I
be for the sake of Britain, and that her ruin
may be warded off, if any word of mine could in
any way affect public opinion at home. It is
not too much to hope that colonial statements
may be perused and considered.
I trust, Sir, that the liberty I now take may be
pardoned. I shrink with horror from the
thought of that ruin which will overtake
Britain if the Granville policy is sustained.—
I have, &c., A, C. Geikie.”
“ Canada as an Ally. —The Spectator says:—
£ If you have a friend who is warmly attached
to you, and who is efficient, who can and will
help in your undertakings and wants little but
friendship in return, snub him continually. It
will develop his self-reliance, and self-reliance
is good for people.’ That is the substance and
moral of the extremely interesting and ex-
tremely cold-hearted speech with which Lord
Northbrook on June 20 entertained the House
of Lords, a speech which we greatly fear has
not been read as widely as it deserved to be.


]STo more striking testimony to the value of
English institutions and English principles of
statecraft has ever been given, than his account
of the advance made by the Dominion towards
an independent and a noble national life.
After going over the various phases of the argu-
ments pro and con, our contemporary says: —
‘We can, say the advocates of economy,
defend Canada from attack more easily when
our troops are withdrawn than when they are
locked up in Quebec. Very likely; but shall
we? —that is the Canadian doubt —and is
defence from attack all that Canada desires ?
If it be, she can obtain her desire much more
completely and much more easily by joining
the Union; but as we understand her people,
they desire not only a protection to which they
now contribute at least their share, but a place
in the Empire, a recognition that they are not
only to be defended, but are worthy of defence
—a visible proof that they are still Britons, sub-
jects of the Queen, members of an Imperial
organization, men who are to share in the good
and ill fortune of this little island with its
unique history. While the redcoats remain,


every Canadian is for all that interests the
imagination, also something more —a man en-
titled to boast of the triumphs and share the
reverses of the first, or at all events the most
world-wide, of existing Powers. It is merely a
sentiment, no doubt, but then so is patriotism,
and nobody has ever discovered an emotion
which could supersede patriotism in giving
vitality to States and Empires. It may take
ten thousand men and a million sterling a year,
to keep the flag flyiug in the English-speaking
colonies—that is, to keep up the moral unity of
the Empire, to secure the unshakable alliance
of a ring of States, of which one only has within
five years made itself the second power upon
the American continent. It is for the people
of England, and not for the Colonial Office, to
judge whether that result is worth the money
invested in securing it.’ ”
Annexation. — Mr. Polind introduced, on
June 20,1870, in the House of Representatives,
a resolution requesting the President to open
negotiations with Great Britain for the annexa-
tion of the British North American possessions
to the United States.


“Newfoundland. —An influential deputation
have waited upon tlie Earl of Kimberley, on the
subject of tlie removal from the colony of the
troops heretofore stationed there. The deputa-
tion was introduced by Mr. J. Grieve, M.P. for
Greenock, and was supported by Lord Sandon,
M.P., Mr. Graves, M.P., Mr. Eathbone, M.P.;
and among those present were Mr. Thomas
Hunt, Mr. N. E. Yail, Mr. Justice Eobinson
tone of the Judges of the Supreme Court), and
others. In introducing the business, Mr.
Grieve expressed the alarm that was felt by all
classes in the colony at the proposed removal of
the troops. Mr. Justice Eobinson said ‘that
the deputation, without dissenting from the
Imperial policy of withdrawing troops from the
colonies, believed that the circumstances of
Newfoundland should make it an exception.
The withdrawal of the troops would be a severe
shock to all Avho respected order and loved the
British connection.’ Lord Kimberley com-
batted tlie arguments of Judge Eobinson, and
said ‘that the duty of maintaining internal
order properly belonged to the local govern-
ment ; that they, being endued with the power


of taxation and enjoying free institutions, were
responsible for tbe maintenance of internal
peace; that an invasion of a piratical descrip-
tion should be prevented from tbe sea rather
than from tbe land; that tbe people of New-
foundland bad no claim upon the Imperial
Government by reason of the French treaty,
because when it was made at Versailles it was
an advantage to Englishmen frequenting the
colony, who otherwise might have been deprived
of the whole island; that Ireland was part of
the United Kingdom, and contributed towards
the expenses of the troops quartered there, and
therefore differed from the colony; that whilst
the Imperial authority would be always ready
to guard her colonies from a foreign foe, it was
the policy of the present Government to leave
such colonies to their own resources for pro-
tection from intestine commotion, and that
troops were maintained at Halifax and Quebec
for Imperial, and not for colonial purposes.” —
European Mail , Sept., 1870.
“The Examiner , in the course of an intelligent
article on the affairs of New Zealand, says: —
‘ The outlook of New Zealand is clear and


steady, and her self-reliant path is traced
henceforth in a direction not to be mistaken.
She still clings filially to the connection with
the old country, hut in the remarkable words of
Mr. Fox, her chief Minister, she asks, ‘ Is it im-
possible to consolidate the empire into a vast
Federalism with a federal force on sea and land,
with common interests and concentrated power?
Such a policy is worthier of statesmen than a
policy of disintegration. Is it not strange that
the colonies by which Great Britain has set
such store in the past, and which have operated
so much as a stimulus to her national glory,
should be goaded or allowed to drift into
separation just at the time when science has
practically conquered the obstacles which dis-
tance has interposed to their close union, and
the necessities on either side naturally point to
that union?’ These are questions that will
sink deep into the heart of every unsophisti-
cated politician who values the place his
country has hitherto occupied in the modern
history of the world; and sooner or later
they will be answered in a sense that will
attest the indestructible truth of the instincts


that have prompted them.’ The Spectator,
writing on the same subject, has the following: —
‘ A federation calmly created, as the Aus-
tralian Federation at first would principally
be, for the sake of a more efficient and
economical administration of those depart-
ments of Government which are needed equally
by all the colonies, and which would be all the
more efficient for being conducted on the same
plan, and by the same organisation for all alike,
would have immense advantages over any
hastily originated in a time of excitement and
danger for the purpose of repelling a foe. A
federal administration that had gained strength
and confidence in the management of the in-
ternal affairs of the federated colonies, would
command an authority and a trust in time of
danger such as no extemporised organisation
could dream of attaining. And it is simply
absurd to expect that a Federal Government
for determining tariff questions, organising the
telegraphic and postal services, lighting the
coast, organising intercolonial roads and rail-
ways, and, preparing, at least, the kernel of a
colonial army and navy, would now be prema-


ture —to say nothing of the indefinite moral
advantages of promoting political intercourse
between the colonies, and bringing home to
each the higher standards of achievement set
up and attained by the others. The opponents
of federation themselves furnish the best proof
that the time for it is ripe, when they urge that
it will diminish the individual power of the
separate colonies to consult their own selfish
interests. If already a selfish policy of isolation
is growing up in each the time must be come to
neutralise it by inviting the generous co-opera-
tion of all. One enormous advantage which the
policy of colonial federation, wherever it can be
applied, has over all other intermediate policies,
is that it can be, and is, supported with equal
earnestness both by those who believe—we fear
with the majority of our own Cabinet—that the
time is near when the larger colonies must
break off from the empire—and by those who,
with ourselves, and some of the best statesmen
in all our colonies, look forward to a future in
which the bonds of the various British colonies
all over the globe will be drawn closer, by some
species of organised alliance with the Govern-


ment at home. It is not we who can feel any
jealousy of the growth of independent counsels
and independent resources among the great
colonies for whose gratitude, friendship, and
alliance we so heartily wish. If they could be
kept in union with Great Britain only by being
kept weak and isolated, we would at once give
up the hope of continued union. That which
we desire so earnestly to see, the steady growth
of a certain pride and pleasure in their con-
nection with the great State ot which they are
the offspring, is totally inconsistent with the
feeling of abject dependence and solicitors
need. The value of the Imperial tie in its
highest sense, implies something near equality
of position, the consciousness of power to give
no less than to receive, the existence of political
pride and political intelligence of a high kind,
all of which cannot possibly exist in feeble,
fearful, and servile States. We desire, there-
fore, most heartily to see federation carried to
the highest point that will yield a substantial
increase of power among our scattered colonies,
be the result, as it may be, ultimate separation;
or, as we venture to hope, the transformation of


our colonial empire into a closely-knitted chain
of allied powers.” —Home News, Sept. 9th, 1870.
An article in the Melbourne Daily Telegraph
of 7th November, 1870, says :
“ Since the last mail [to England] left we
have witnessed the departure of the last
trace of the occupation of the colony by
the legions of the Empire. From the Im-
perial policy which has led to this result
we have expressed a profound dissent. The
soldiers, a mere handful as they were, were a
symbol of British rule, and without symbols
national faith is apt to grow weak. Their
absence confronted the colonies at once with
the question of the value of their union with
the mother country, and it is marvellous what
sets-off have already been discovered. Already
the advantages of separation are being placed
before the public in the most agreeable light.
We may expect this separation question to grow
and grow.”
Mr. W. Eorster, of Sydney, N. S. W., writing
to Mr. G-avan Duffy under date 16th December,
1870, with reference to the proposed Australian
confederation, says :


“ It appears to me that, in so far as
such proposed federal union of any parti-
cular group of British colonies, or of any
particular section or sections of the British
Empire aims at future nationality for itself, or
national sovereignty and independence for a
particular group or section, or in other words,
at complete and final separation from its pre-
sent Federal or Imperial centre in Great
Britain, the movement to that extent must be
regarded as distinct from, and even in a certain
sense antagonistic to, the idea of a grand Anglo-
Saxon or Anglo-Celtic World-Federation, which
should unite these various groups of colonies,
or sections of the Empire, with equal rights,
privileges and functions for each colony, group,
or section, under one homogeneous maritime,
Imperial sovereignty, or empire, possibly even
extending to or including America herself, such
as, I am apt to think, can alone save our race,
or union of races, from the disintegrating and
centrifugal effect of our present principles of
representative self-government, by which in
fact, America was severed, and by which the
British Empire —nay, perhaps, even Anglo-


Saxon or Anglo-Celtic nationality—threatens
in course of time to be finally dismembered.”
Mr. Strangways, a leading politician in the
colony of South Australia, addresses Mr.
Duffy on the same subject on the 24th
October, 1870. His observations also bring
into prominence one of the insidious in-
fluences that are being resorted to, to tie
the hands and weaken the power of the
great British nation. As he intimates, some few
men in Australia are advocating the neutraliza-
tion of these colonies in British wars, hoping
thereby to divide the colonies from the old
country at the only times when the strength
of these national outposts would be of vital
national importance. As yet the movement is
not popular, and, whatever others may do, true
patriotic Britons will hope that it never may
become so. Mr. Strangways, who was Attorney
General of his colony, writes :
“ * * I think that the question of the neutral-
ity of the colonies in time of war ought to be dealt
with at once, and I can see no reason why each
of them should not be declared by act of the
Imperial Parliament an independent sovereign
state for such purposes, but to remain subject
to the jurisdiction of her Majesty in manner
and on the points to be declared in such act.
I believe that if such a course is adopted the


ultimate federation of the colonies will be
expedited. * * * I should be disposed to
urge that you and your colleagues should direct
your attention to these two points : —lst. The
neutrality of the colonies in time of war. 2nd.
That each colony should have full power of
legislation, subject to the restrictions I have
mentioned. I do not see how the neutrality
can be secured unless England regards the
colonies as independent sovereign states; and I
can see no reason why any of these colonies
should not be in that position, although the
King or Queen of England was the sovereign.
Many analogous precedents could be found for
such a position, and several of them are in-
dicated in part three of the report sent by you.
If England declares that for all purposes
except one or two minor points, and with
which other nations could have no concern,
each one of these colonies is an independent
sovereign state, and confers on the legisla-
tures of such colonies all powers necessarily
incident to such position, other nations must
recognise and acknowledge the action of
England. The question of any one of such


colonies engaging in war could be easily pro-
vided for, and the presence of a Governor
appointed from home would be almost a suffi-
cient check. I do not see that the position I
have mentioned would be in any way inconsis-
tent with England’s protecting these colonies
by means of her navy, though a difficulty might
arise if England used any of the colonial ports
to facilitate her operations in levying war on
nations with whom such colonies were at peace.
Replying specifically to the question in your
letter, I would say that I do not think such a
bill would be desirable at present; but that if
the Imperial Parliament would pass an act
declaring these colonies to be independent
sovereign states, with the limitations I have
mentioned, I believe that a Federal Union
would be the natural result. You may use this
letter in any way that you may think expedient;
and, if the views I have expressed should find
general favour, I think the various colonies
interested should send delegates to England
specially charged to urge on the home Govern-
ment and Parliament the immediate passing of
the necessary act.”


Section 11.
OBSTACLES TO NAVIGATION.
Perhaps some may imagine that, owing to an
apparent change of opinion that has quite
recently taken place in certain influential quar-
ters in England, the great danger has passed,
not to return. Nothing could be more errone-
ous. If the mere change of opinion on the
subject by some dozen or so of leading English
politicians can by any means whatever, in any
material degree, either create or remove such a
momentous possibility as that now under con-
sideration, no other feature of the case equals
this in alarming significance ; for if this be so,
a simple difference of opinion between these
men on this or almost any other subject, may
any day suffice to dash the existing national
combination from the pinnacle of uncertainty,
on which it is even now violently oscillating,
into fragments that nothing would ever again
unite. Perhaps it may be objected that the fore-
going expressions of opinion are not recent,
and therefore not relevant to the present aspect
of the question. But if they are not recent,
the attendant circumstances are such that the
fact does not detract from their relevancy.


The real point is not what views any persons
did or do hold on the question, hut what causes
led to such expressions of opinion, and have
those causes been removed? So far is this
from being the case that the work of ascertain-
ing what these causes are has yet to he entered
upon, for up to the present date no one seems
to have attempted to discover them, or to
suspect that they may exist. The truth is that
although public attention has been, in a great
measure, diverted for a time from this subject,
the circumstances that called forth the opinions
referred to are in no way altered. Whatever
causes have operated to place the several
isolated divisions of our nation in their present
non-cohesive relations to each other are still in
full operation, and if the bulk of the nation is
unfortunately induced, by any means, to over-
look this fact, those patriots who are more alive
to the very serious possibilities attaching to it,
cannot act too promptly nor too vigorously on
their own better knowledge. The vital nature
of the subject, as it affects our future, will not
change to mere triviality, and, as such, remain
in abeyance until we may find it convenient
to deal with it in its true character, that
of a great national danger, which needs only
time to develope into an irreparable national
misfortune.
But how is it that this danger has arisen ?
And now that attention has been directed
to it, why is it not at once and completely
removed? We are very much disposed as a


people to be proud of our political institu-
tions ; are we quite clearly of opinion that if
our political institutions were sentient entities
they would be equally proud of us and of the
dreaming reliance we place upon them ? Ad-
mitting that our institutions are good, is it not
possible to rely improperly on institutions to
secure what ought in reality to spring from
ourselves? We, the British people, generally
flatter ourselves that we are a free people, that
we are an eminently competent people in the
art of self-government, and that the art of self-
government as practiced by us is, on the
whole, very nearly what it should be. Now,
in the present state of our affairs, as
depicted in the foregoing quotations, does
it not appear that our free competent self-
government has carried us to the extraordinary
position we now occupy, on the very verge of
national disintegration ? Yet if we look closer
into the matter we shall find that our national
political institutions, admirably as they are
adapted to our peculiar circumstances, are,
nevertheless, precisely calculated, in various
respects, to bring about this now deprecated
result, unless those institutions are supple-
mented, and their objectionable tendencies
counterpoised by a solid, well-informed, general
national patriotism ; while it is from the people,
and not from their institutions, that this re-
straining, consolidating, and invigorating patri-
otism must emanate.
We have acted, and are acting, as though


endowing our people with the fullest freedom in
local affairs were in itself equivalent to placing
the nation on a sound and stable basis.
Throughout the length and breadth of our
possessions (except in Ireland), we have carried
the principle of local self-government to the
utmost extent that any very moderate number
of British people have anywhere reasonably
demanded, and in so doing we have no doubt
acted judiciously (with the exception named), as
regards the several communities interested, for
we have thereby enabled the people to manage
their own affairs in their own way, very much
to their general satisfaction, even although
their way may not be the best one. But
in doing this we have also created in every
instance a new local centre of political feeling,
and of growing political power in the realm,
centres of feeling and power which may be
thoroughly patriotic in all their instincts and
acts, and yet whose national patriotism may be so
limited in certain respects by local influences
as to render them in a high degree centres
of involuntary mischievous tendencies. Each
one of these centres competes with all its
fellows in converting those who should be
the calm thoughtful statesmen of the empire,
into mere local politicians. It never favors
but is. necessarily either indifferent to, or
jealous of and then decidedly antagonistic to
all external connections that may on any
ground question its authority, for it recognizes
or at any rate is inclined to voluntarily subject
itself to no avoidable bonds whatever.


Amidst the numerous remarkable features of
the present phase of British nationality there
are none more distinctly prominent than the
fact that our public men have everywhere
allowed, and are still allowing, themselves to
become so entirely absorbed in purely local
affairs, that the great empire in which each of
them plays a more or less important local part,
is just now exposed to the danger of disintegra-
tion, because no one of them can spare sufficient
time from local matters to devise some work-
able plan for generally organising, and binding
together our scattered provinces and people.
No doubt these local matters are, in a certain
sense, important ones, but unfortunately for
the general interests of the nation, there is
a never ending prospective supply of similar
important local questions for consideration,
and by the time they are settled it is quite
possible that the great British empire of to-day
may also have long been finally disposed of.
The empire as at present constituted may be
said to consist of numerous provinces, of which
provinces the British Islands are of course at
present* the most important and influential.
But these islands are in fact as regards the
empire, neither more nor less than its principal
* Those who demur to this expression must not over-
look the fact that, but for the uncontrolled folly of
former English provincial politicians, the North Ameri-
can colonies would in all probability even now have been
at least as important a province of the empire as are the
British Isles.


province, and the local political affairs of
these islands, like those of the other provinces—
differing therefrom only in degree —with the
men who confine their attention to such affairs,
are respectively, hut provincial politics and
provincial politicians.
All our numerous local parliaments and
politicians do and will naturally act with a view
to secure the more immediate interests and the
support of their own constituents, they will do
so in respect to national as well as other matters,
and as they will endeavour by all available
means in those other matters, to secure local
power for one or other of the particular parties
in the local state, so will they, and do they,
unhesitatingly use or abuse national questions
whenever opportunity suits, simply to secure
the same small party ends.
These are the natural consequences of
our placing unlimited and unreasoning trust
in free political institutions. No English or
Colonial minister dare avow, in the face of a
local antagonistic legislature, a determination to
proceed in any national policy or under-
taking whatever, and as all local legislatures
are either indifferent, or antagonistic to matters
that are above or in any way beyond their own
unfettered control, national interests being both
above and beyond the individual control of any
one existing legislature, although really of the
first importance, are either neglected altogether
or entirely subordinated to minor considera-
tions. In' England they are almost invariably


treated as subservient to some petty economy,
to freetrade, or to English expediency generally
when they are not lost sight of altogether in
some one or more of these and other similar
narrow provincial influences.
Now the pernicious effect of this objection-
able concentration of the national mind on free
local institutions and local politics, to the exclu-
sion of national patriotism, has been made
apparent in the growth of the curious theory,
that it was incumbent on the English people
and their government so to manage the colonies
that these latter portions of the nation should
be induced to regard their separation from the
rest of the empire as a matter of supreme indif-
ference to all but the colony concerned. Bv
gradually throwing each colony, or group of
colonies, on its own resources, mental and
material ;'by studiously abstaining from forming
any ties that would be likely to bind the colonies
together and as a whole to the mother-country;
by making them feel as distinctly as possible
that their people are considered to have ceased
to be Britons, or to retain any British feelings
in their hearts, English provincial politicians
have apparently sought, and, as matters stand
at present, they seem but too likely to gain,
two objects, one —for public recognition—
styled by its propounders “ fitting the colonies
for independence,” the other —for private con-
gratulation —successfully shelving the unpala-
table fact that from the force of more pressing,
but infinitely minor considerations, these poli-
e 2


ticians have not been, are not, and will continue
not to be, at liberty to initiate any measures for
effectually binding the nation together into a
locally free, yet universally strong and united
whole. It would be beside the present pur-
pose, and might also savour of impertinence,
to suggest here what really competent and
patriotic British statesmen might do in our
present circumstances, but it is very necessary
for ordinary patriotic Britons to perceive and
to bear in mind that while English politicians
have been, and are, devoting all their time and
considerable talking talents to the keen prose-
cution of their petty provincial party warfare
(for, in reality, even such locally important
matters as the Irish Church and Land Bills,
and the English Household Suffrage revolution,
are, to the empire at large, provincial politics,
and nothing more) our fundamental national
interests have been uncared for, their constitu-
tional cohesiveness has been, and is being,
sapped and weakened daily in numerous direc-
tions, and in consequence of all this, if we are
not actually called upon for an immediate answer
to the question “ Shall our empire and nation be
dissolved?” that question is already before the
public, and the answer alone now remains to be
considered.
Another potent element of mischief cannot
be lost sight of. There are not many contin-
gencies in which our public press is not fully
prepared to propose various arrangements, all
more or less worthy of consideration, and


adapted to secure the desired results, whatever
they may he, hut in this case our journalists
seem to be generally overcome by the prevailing
local infirmity. That this is so seems clear from
the pitiable appeals they make for suggestions
that in other matters would certainly emanate
from themselves. What could indicate a more
unsatisfactory state of things in this respect
than the Times saying, as it has done* —We have
frequently acknowledged the grandeur of the
picture of England and the Colonies in the
future presenting to the world the front of one
power, and we ask to he shown how to realize it ?
Or the Pall Mall Gazette of the previous day
asking —What are the wishes of the Colonies,
what methods would they propose, and what
sacrifices are they prepared to make? Now,
why did not the Times point out some rational
course to be followed in this emergency, and
why did the Pall Mall Gazette insinuate that the
colonists ought to make or offer to make some
unspecified sacrifices in the matter? Simply
because the journals in question looked at the
case they were pretending to discuss but de-
termined to evade, from their stand-point as
English journals, English in the narrow sense
which sets that designation in contrast or in
opposition to the term Colonial ; because, in
short, local English interests were, as they
possibly still are, deemed by these influential
journals to be fully entitled to not only para-


mount but exclusive consideration. In the
interests of Britain and all Britons it is most
devoutly to be hoped that our national press
will shake off this dangerous thraldom to local
influences without delay, and rise at once to
face and deal impartially with the real national
exigencies of the present time, for the benefit
of the great British world.
The British nation—besides (and, unfor-
tunately, minus) the 7,000,000 or so that have
been lost to us within the last three or four
decades —comprises about 23,000,000 in Great
Britain, 6,000,000 in Ireland, and, at a moderate
estimate, 7,000,000 elsewhere. Great Britain
contains a great concentration of the intel-
lectual capacity of the empire, for English
intellects have few suitable opportunities and
fewer motives, for withdrawing from their com-
manding central position, while Irish and Colo-
nial ones naturally gravitate to the same
attraction. It might be expected that such
a concentration of the superior mental powers
of any empire would produce at least a party
exhibiting some direct interest in questions of
general imperial concern ; but here it is not so.
Under the influence of local party feeling
writers in English newspapers, magazines,
reviews, or more formidable volumes, English
thinkers, and English politicians, although they
do comprise the concentrated quintessence of
universal British intellectual capacity, are won-
derfully agreed on one point, however divergent
their opinions may be on others, and that point


is, they will neither write of, nor speak of, nor
promulgate, nor entertain in any shape, the
idea of the united nationality ot the British
population of the empire. To them, one and all,
the British nation is the people of England, or
at most that of the United Kingdom; they
abstain in toto from discussing any question
whatever on any other than this narrow, in-
accurate, and imperfect national basis; and
whenever national questions have to be touched
upon, as.perforce they sometimes must, they
are dealt with on the assumption that England’s
views, wants, trade, position, or prospects are
the only ones to be considered. Koods of
speeches, articles, correspondence, published
travels, Colonial office productions, &c., &c.,
have the one sickening, selfish burden —“ can
England make a profit, or advantage, or escape
some trivial loss or disadvantage from her con-
nection with the rest ot the empire by what-
ever process may be under notice, it not, we
the national writers,, speakers, and legislators,
although forming, as we do not deny, the collec-
tive metropolitan intellect of the whole empire
are not further concerned, and, in any case, we
are concerned only for England.’ Avowedly
or inadvertently this is the theme alike of those
who advocate the dissolution of the empire, of
those who urge its preservation, and of those
who are utterly indifferent which way that ques-
tion is decided. It is one, too, that is not alto-
gether without certain plausible features
recommend it, but tor all that it is full ol


danger to our national well-being, and it pro-
pagates itself (as it is now everywhere doing
thanks tokjthe Gladstonian-Granville policy)
with a certainty that when once it becomes as
fairly established in the other parts of the
empire as it already appears to be in England,
that empire will be virtually dissolved.
The case may be compared to the stealthy
advance of night over a clear spring or autumn
sky; at first a mere strip along the eastern hori-
zon assumes a distinctly deeper and apparently
clearer hue, free from what appears to be a
hazy condition of the air above it; at this stage
few recognise it to be really night that is thus
partly visible, but so it is, for gradually the
same and no other deep and still apparently
clear hue occupies all the east, the zenith, and
the west, and when it closes on the western
horizon night’reigns supreme. So in this case
the advancing national ruin may positively
appear free from much that is objectionable in
the present state of things, and some of us may
hail the seemingly clear promise of the future
thus presented, only however to find ourselves
a vexatiously and hopelessly disunited race
when that future shall arrive—no more a
nation.
When such a mode of dealing with these
matters as that referred to, prevails in England at
the instance or from misconception on the part
of that concentrated national intellect which
should be the best general repository, and the
persistent exponent of broad national opinions,


it is not surprising to find that a corres-
ponding locally selfish disposition has begun
to manifest itself at the seat of every minor
Government in the empire, and that even
foreigners are preparing to take advantage of it.
If England is to look exclusively to her own
interests in the Imperial connection, the Colonial
leaders must of necessity follow suit as best they
may, though in despite of their own better
knowledge and convictions. England’s choice
in the matter was wholly free and might have
been magnanimous, whereas that which she
appears to he now deliberately making sets
the worst possible example, and imposes an
imperative and unavoidable obligation on the
colonies to follow it whatever may be the
ultimate result.
Again, we have on one side a constant super-
abundance of capital and population of all
classes, and on the other vast expanses of
unoccupied territory that would absorb this
surplusage, and in so doing increase our
national strength and prosperity. How do our
local political institutions manage this business ?
English politicians will take no step tending to
diminish the confessedly superabundant supply
of home laborers, because they would be pre-
senting the colonies with population, and
because such a course would be unpalatable to
English manufacturing or rate-paying constitu-
encies. Colonial politicians, actuated by pre-
cisely similar considerations, will not assist in
any movement having for its object a consider-


able introduction of population from England,
as it would be relieving rich England at the
expense of struggling colonists, and, at the
same time, it would derange the colonial labor
market. Now it cannot be denied that locally
there is some show of reason to justify each of
these parties in acting thus, but nationally the
effect of their doing so is deplorable beyond
measure. We are engaged in a severe compe-
tition for the retention of our high position in
the world, a position that is of the greatest
value to us; the retention of that position de-
pends absolutely on our developing our national
strength and resources to the utmost; we have
all the means to urge forward that development
at a speed that would achieve our object, and
yet our local political action is such that if it
does not force those means to range themselves
altogether with our competitors and against
ourselves to all future time, it does so to an
extent that, under existing circumstances, is
little less prejudicial to our national future.
It is almost impossible to peruse anything
that is said or written on the “ Colonial
Question,” without meeting a popular delusion
which has done, and is doing, much mischief.
The Parliament, Government, Army, and Navy,
of the United Kingdom are commonly styled
and relied upon as Imperial institutions. But
it is not at all clear in what sense, if any, they
have a right to be so designated. In relation to
the empire generally, the English Parliament
and Government are neither of them Imperial


in constitution, being purely local or provincial,
as would at once be proved if any serious
difference arose between them and the corres-
ponding bodies in other parts of the empire. And
if England were threatened with invasion by
any one of several possible combinations of
powers, each of which combinations would in
these days of steam, rail, and telegraph, be far
more formidable than anything with which she
ever yet had to contend, there is not a shadow
of reason to believe that she could part with a
single regiment, or despatch a single ship to
defend other portions of the empire. She
would justify herself and would be deemed
justified in such a course under the circum-
stances, upon the fact that the Army and Navy
are her own , not those of the empire, even
although such a justification would have to serve
as an apology for the collapse of the so-called
Imperial system. Up to quite recently it is
true the Army was British, in so far as it
undertook the defence of all the British
dominions, now however, we see it reduced by
the effect of local political action on local
politicians to be merely the Army of England.
Her local politicians in their other and higher
capacity as British Statesmen had an alterna-
tive, they might have organised an Imperial
Army and Navy with suitable local divisions,
arsenals, &c., in every part of the empire, and
they would have had the hearty moral and
adequately liberal pecuniary support of every
province of the empire in the work, but they


preferred to act in the matter as mere local
politicians when of course the national alterna-
tive remained unheeded. Thus, without any
adequate national reasons or compensating
equivalents corresponding to those which
justify a localizing policy with regard to our
political institutions, our military establish-
ment is already and our naval one probably
is to he similarly localized. The effect of this
cannot but be lamentably prejudicial in every
way. It places the political, military, and naval
institutions all on the same disintegrated local
footing, and gives them all the same tendencies, in
a manner that is utterly reckless of consequences.
Rival armies and navies in our several provinces,
handled by rival provincial Parliaments and
Governments, will complete what the external
tendencies of our local political institutions have
already begun, and all true national feeling
and patriotism will be opposed, or rather over-
whelmed, at point by local prejudice.
The worst feature of the case is that this
ruinous policy is wholly unnecessary, no one
asked for it, and no one is satisfied with it but
the self-complacent politicians who do not dare to
avow their real object if they have one, or their
short-sightedness if they have not, in adopting
it. One grand Imperial British army, and a
navy to correspond, representing the real power
of the whole nation, would have been strong
bonds of union to our race, alike acceptable and
effective, for they would have materially helped
to furnish a fitting counterpoise to the disin-


tegrating tendencies of our political institutions;
but in also localizing our military and naval
establishments, we are simply the
acknowledged difficulties of our national position
by still further weakening the weakest points
of our system.
Under these circumstances it is dangerous
folly for the whole empire to rely dreamily
on the so-called Imperial Institutions re-
ferred to. If we should ever have a really
Imperial Parliament, Government, Army and
Navy, we may safely speak of and trust to
them respectively as such, but in the mean-
time it will be a great step towards regain-
ing our ancient national health and vigour, if
we endeavour henceforward to recognise obvious
facts however unpleasant, by giving to all our
national institutions their most appropriate
designations, and by trusting them just so far
in national affairs* as their really provincial
character may warrant.
One other source of weakness in our national
system demands attention. If our political
institutions had a national character based on
any satisfactory system of national representa-
tion, those institutions would be at once the
result and the object of a general and more or
less intelligent national opinion. Or if, being
what they are, these institutions were now sub-
ject to the action of such a national opinion they
would be restrained in their movements within
nationally patriotic limits. Unfortunately, how-
ever, the institutions have either been developed


without the aid of a national opinion, or they
have degraded that national opinion, as they
have our national statesmen, to their own pro-
vincial level, the result being that we have
neither national institutions that can he pro-
perly so called, nor a national public opinion
capable of imparting to the institutions we do
possess a sufficiently national character to resist
their inherent anti-national tendencies. Had
we either political institutions of a truly
national kind, or a national public opinion
suited to our present institutions, so much as
might he absolutely essential of the other alter-
native would he assured, and with it our
national stability, hut having neither the one
nor the other, our national position and pros-
pects have quite naturally become just what we
now find them to be.
It is submitted then in reply to the opening
queries of this section, that the existing danger
of national disintegration has arisen, and that
on perception of that danger it is not at once
effectually dealt with by us, because our politi-
cal institutions are not so much calculated to
promote national unity as to secure local free-
dom ; because they are not in any way calculated
to induce our public men to hold national
statesmanship generally above the more im-
mediate exigencies of local politics; because
their mutually divergent tendencies are not
checked and counterpoised by a sound national
public opinion, which opinion they are also more
fitted to destroy than to develope.


The faults* in our institutions are, however,
not such as should induce us to abandon the
great preponderance of what is good in them
which has led us to adopt them, neither is it
likely that our public men will, under existing
arrangements, altogether avoid being influ-
enced to a prejudicial extent from a national
point of view by the provincial character of the
institutions under which they have to act;
there remains, therefore, but one course clearly
#Tlie following extract goes to sliow that our insti-
tutions have other objectionable features than those
herein referred to: —
“ In all countries, men who can organise an army, are
very rare indeed. The very nature of English political
and social institutions renders it almost hopeless for us
to seek such a man. What qualities are requisite in
him? The qualities requisite for a good War Minister
are the following:—
“He must be a statesman, yet a soldier; an able
speaker, yet intimately acquainted with the details of
the army and its requirements ; he must be firm, yet con-
ciliatory ; and, above all, must be left sufficiently long in
office to carry out his views.
“Such a man it is indeed hopeless to expect to find;
consequently it would be unjust in the extreme to blame
men (all of whom have been most earnest and pains-
taking, striving to do good after their lights) for what is
the fault of our institutions.
“It is the duty of the press of this country to point
out the shortcomings of those institutions, to warn the
nation of the results that must ensue if they are not
altered. The power of altering or modifying those insti-
tutions rests with the nation itself.” — MacMillan’s
Magazine, October, 1870.


open. We must evoke a well-informed, well-
organized, and thoroughly effective public
opinion throughout the empire; an opinion
capable of seeing, and determined to see, that
while our free institutions are preserved, our
public men act generally together as national
patriots irrespective of their local views; and
that while particular interests receive adequate
local attention, the national well-being is duly
cared for in all our public measures, under all
circumstances, and in all quarters of the empire.
It is extremely desirable that whatever is
done in the direction indicated, should be done
promptly, before the sinister influences now at
work have carried their prejudicial operations
beyond remedy, and culminated in a catastrophe
that the nation as a whole would ever after
fruitlessly regret, that all its enemies would
hail with unmixed satisfaction, and that all
posterity would condemn as a most inglorious
end to an otherwise noble career.
It rests upon the one competent authority in
the empire, that is also sufficiently untram-
melled by antiquated traditions or local influ-
ences, to avert the danger with which we are
threatened. The patriotic British public, if
thoroughly aroused and properly organized,
may yet save the grand old British name
with its great modern empire for a glorious
future.


Section 111.
THE BEACON.
In the next place, although there are doubtless
multitudes of true patriots in every British
community willing to uphold a right national
feeling, yet wanting as they do in this matter
all those elements of reliable general inform-
ation and organisation which are essential to
united action, having no means for making their
joint opinions (if they have any) on national
questions felt, nor for ascertaining amongst
themselves what those joint opinions are, nor
even for advising together as to what such
opinions should be, it is neither surprising nor
uncommon to find these identical patriots
advocating diametrically opposite views on
what, for the time at least, and so far as their
own localities are respectively concerned, they
are pleased to consider fundamental national
principles. England is almost monomaniacal
on the fair appearance of free trade from her
point of view; the colonists get occasional
glimpses of the darker aspects of this object,
and therefore incline to view it less favourably,
and so in other matters the result at times being
that the aforesaid patriots stand in some one or


more of their several provinces, opposed to their
fellows in some other one, and so while pro-
vincial politics have a positive tendency to
direct mutual antagonism, it is also a fact that
in the absence of broad well-informed national
influences and proper organization, the best of
patriots may fall into utterly irreconcilable
diversities of opinion, the danger of disruption
to the nation, scattered and isolated as its
sections are, being without doubt vastly in-
creased thereby.
It is true that for the present the deprecated
danger seems to be latent; it is probably also
true that the politicians engaged in conducting
the local affairs of the different parts of the
empire endeavour, as far as circumstances will
permit, to keep it latent, for they are all con-
scious of its existence, but it is most distinctly
to be observed that in doing so they neither
remove it, nor provide any adequate means for
dealing with it when some unhappy occurrence
shall arouse its destructive powers to what may
easily and rapidly become irrepressible mis-
chievous activity. The catastrophe may be
precipitated by any one of many extremely
probable contingencies which might, however, if
they should arise, be effectively met by suitable
arguments, but these arguments must be ad-
vanced at the right time and place by a national
party able to sustain itself locally until sup-
ported by friends outside, aware that it will he
so supported and sufficiently organised and
strong enough when called upon generally to


remove or mediate successfully in all cases of
dissatisfaction, wherever they may be found.
But we have no such national party anywhere :
who in Canada knows or cares anything about
Avhat transpires at the Cape, who in Australia
concerns himself about the well-being of British
Columbia, what considerable body of New
Zealanders have an intelligent national interest
in the West Indies, how much does Ireland
know about Tasmania, or who in Great Britain
outside or within the political ring cares a thou-
sandth part so much whether equal justice is
measured in allowing unlimited self-government
to convict Western Australia, and to infini-
tesimal, and in most quarters utterly unknown
West Indian islands, while wholly denying it
to Ireland, as they pretend they care for their
pet manias economy and free trade, by means
of which angling politicians play and fool them
beyond measure, greatly to the amusement
and satisfaction of such anglers as Gladstone,
Disraeli, or even the ex-colonists Lowe and
Childers ?
At present probably not one person in ten
of the population either of the empire at large,
or of any considerable portion of it in particular,
is even moderately well informed respecting
the geographical position of its numerous pro-
vinces, certainly not one person in a hundred
can legitimately assert a mastery of the multitu-
dinous details involved in a knowledge of their
condition and prospects, while in the great
majority of even these instances that knowledge
f 2


is either extremely superficial or of compara-
tively antiquated and therefore practically use-
less dates. This is the worst feature of the
case ; in spite of our boasted civilization ignor-
ance of the wants and capabilities of our own
people and provinces holds our state balance,
and instead of our being always and everywhere
prepared on grounds of already recognised
sufficiency to make mutual concessions in the
national interest when we are called upon to
do so, we find ourselves everywhere, through
our local politicians, asking what have we to do
with the matter (what for instance has England
to do with murdering Maories or Kaffirs, or
Australia with the mother country’s European
quarrels), and how can we with least disgrace,
or regardless of disgrace, shirk the claims of
people who are nothing to us hut inhabitants
of some remote so called British territory ?
It is time to endeavour to place ourselves in a
more satisfactory national position. Britons
are neither less capable, less numerous, nor less
patriotic than Germans. If we have no British
statesman to do for our empire, what the
Prussian Bismarck has nobly done for Germany,
we cannot afford to wait for one, and if we
would remain a powerful united people, as we
happily yet can do, it remains for our people to
organize themselves and so ward off the evils
that a dismembered empire would inevitably
entail upon them.
There is very much indeed that an organized
British patriotic public may do. If that public


after due consideration announces its mature
conclusion that certain things should be done
which it deems expedient for the national
welfare, our legislative bodies will not be slow
to conform their measures to its views in what-
ever directions they may tend. Such a public
may or may not concur in opinions now current,
but should it do so it will probably insist on
the establishment of a national Army and Navy
without any avoidable delay, and also of an
Imperial Council so constituted as to be able
to rise above local politics and to bring to
the consideration of national and international
questions, the best and most experienced talents
of the whole empire; it will develope an
Imperial policy and above all it will create and
foster an enduring universal bond of national
feeling, kept alive by mutual interest, armed
everywhere with complete information on every
national question, and embracing every man of
every degree in every British clime who deems
it an honor worth possessing to call himself a
Briton. Were such binding influences as these
once fairly in operation all our other national
difficulties would disappear and Britons might
once again feel that they belong to a great,
vigorous and growing nation, rather than (as
they have latterly been taught on every hand),
to a rickety tottering agglomeration of discon-
nected national materials, leaning towards each
other at present, but ready to topple headlong
in a score directions upon the slightest real or
nominal provocation.


A perception of some of these or other very
similar considerations has already given birth
to one movement intended to operate towards
the conservation of the empire. But unfortu-
nately that movement seems to have been
entered upon in a great tide of popular feeling,
without sufficient consideration as to what it
was to effect, and what means it had at its dis-
posal for employment. The movement in
question is the organisation now styled the
Boyal Colonial Institute. With regard to the
objects of this body, we find that at the
inauguration dinner Mr. Gladstone stated
them concisely in concluding his speech, as fol-
lows :
“ I rejoice that the time has come when the
facilities that bring into communication the re-
motest quarters of the globe have enabled you
to organise a society which aims at developing
that strong intercourse between the feelings
and relationships which should unite all our
colonies. Other clubs have in view the main-
tenance of social relations among friends or
classes; your society contemplates a nobler
object, for it seeks to promote in the present
time, and to hand down from generation to
generation, that great and noble sentiment and
tradition —the unity of the British race.”


And in the inaugural address, Viscount Bury
said: —
“ You will not think me unduly pertinacious
if I again and again recur to the main object of
this address —the importance of our Society.
Each of the dependencies I have noted is more
or less isolated —they have no common centre,
no point of social reunion in this country —no
mart, if I may use the expression, to which
their members can bring the treasures of their
information —no body of associates to whom
they can turn for the advantages of counsel or
discussion; no forum to whose consideration a
suggestion could be submitted or a crotchet
ventilated with the certainty of an appreciative
audience ; no place in which a colonial hobby
may he made to exhibit his graceful paces with
the certainty of ready and at the same time
discriminating spectators. Our Society pro-
poses to otfer such a centre. One of the
objects which the Society proposes to itself is
to alford an opportunity of reading and discuss-
ing at our periodical meetings papers, by its
Fellows, on subjects of interest connected with
the Colonies,”


Now the Eoyal Colonial Institute is in reality
either a Colonial organisation that has attracted
certain influential English adherents, or it is an
English organisation embracing certain Colonial
elements. It must be borne in mind that to
such a body, or when viewed in connection with
such a body, the British Empire consists of the
United Kingdom—or for perspicuity’s sake say
England —and the Colonies; and in the same
relation that which is essentially Colonial, is
also either anti-English, or simply, if such a
term be admissible, not-English, while on the
other hand, what is essentially English, is also
either anti-Colonial, or simply not-Colonial.
Now so long as this Institute contents itself
with discussing the philosophy of colonisation
in any of its numerous aspects and ramifica-
tions, and so long as it abstains from more
direct interference with practical affairs, it may
be of the utmost use in its sphere, it may
render most excellent service, and it may go on
smoothly in a peaceful and prosperous career,
but if it step out of this path it is almost cer-
tain to do so —in fact it may be doubted if it can
help doing so —in either one or the other of its
party characters, and at once it is beset with
difficulties. If it urge redress of a Colonial
grievance at home, it may be listened to, but
from the first it and its adopted cause are
weakened, or what is equivalent to this, the
opposite side is aroused and strengthened by
their not-English character. If it attempt to
recommend the colonists to concede some point


to the mother country, it is sure to he met as
the exponent of a proposition that is at the best
not-Colonial. In any case the powers that he
will take direct or indirect care to thwart any
proposal that the Institute may itself contem-
plate carrying to a practical issue, if only to
prove to the world that right or wrong the said
“powers that be” are not to be so interfered
with. Viewed in this light it is evident that
the mere term “ Colonial” contains elements that
are of themselves sufficient to ensure want of
confidence on one side or the other, when the
subject is a practical proposition, nay, more, the
treatment that the recent proposal to hold a
Colonial Conference in London met with, goes
far to show that in such cases there is a danger
of both sides standing aloof In short it
appears that while this professedly learned body
may to great public advantage continue to
exercise itself, as it proposes, in discussing the
whole theoretical bearings of colonisation, it
cannot hope to give practical effect to its con-
clusions, nor indeed is it clear that it proposes
to do so, but whether it do or not, the obstacles
it would encounter were it to make any such
attempt, must certainly prove equally formid-
able to any other body similarly constituted.
It has been necessary to draw attention to
these peculiarities of this case because it is
requisite to provide some common ground for
the organization of all true British patriots that
shall be free from obvious self-contained ele-
ments of antagonism, likely to interfere in


patriotic national work. The original promoters
of the Colonial Society (as it was first called),
may have had something similar to this in view,
but if so it was necessarily subordinated to
another object which was deemed, and possibly
was in reality then of more importance, that of
bringing the home influence of colonial ex-
perience to a focus in London, while the
possibility that such a Colonial organization
might prove to he, or at any rate might be held
by the public to be a class organization, was
either overlooked or merged in the knowledge
that the class referred to represented the whole
British Colonial Empire.
But it is needful to avoid all these objectioual
possibilities. We have to combine the influence
of universal British patriotism in the general
exercise of an effective national public opinion;
we have to organize the patriotism, to develope
the opinion, and to shun everything having a
tendency to impede the work in either its
earlier or later stages.
This portion of our subject may be very
appropriately closed by quoting at length and
without comment a recent definition by Pro-
fessor Seeley, of exactly such a public opinion as
our present circumstances seem to demand:—
“ Public opinion,” says the Professor “is not
merely the sum of the opinions of the individuals
composing the public. The individuals must
be brought into relation with each other, and


be formed into some sort of organic whole,
before anything worthy to be called a public
opinion can spring up among them. It is by
discussion and communication that men arrive
at a common understanding. But supposing
such a common understanding created, it could
not become a commanding force in politics
except in certain conditions. It would require
first, some means of obtaining a constant supply
of information upon public affairs, and secondly,
some means of making its conclusions known.
Public opinion is organized when it has three
things —sources of information, means of dis-
cussion, organs of expression, these three things
are enough for organization. Wanting them,
public opinion is powerless : possessing them
it becomes a power.” — Macmillan’s Magazine ,
September, 1870.


Section IV.
TO ADJUST LIGHTS, BUOYS, AND
GAUGES.
When fairly stated, tlie problem that waits
solution is—How, under the peculiar circum-
stances in which they are placed, may all
patriotic Britons, in every part of the British
dominions, simultaneously and unitedly address
themselves to the urgent duty, which wholly
devolves upon them, of caring effectively for
the preservation of their nationality P
It is now submitted that this problem may
be solved by establishing a new organised
national Eraternity, and it is suggested that
such a body should be established under the
style of The Imperial Fraternity of Patriot
Britons.
It is proposed that the more immediate
objects of this organisation should be —
1. To bind together, for mutual support and
co-operation, all those persons who be-
lieve that the maintenance of the unity
of the British Empire, as at present
territorially constituted, is essential to
our best national interests, and to en-
courage the growth of national patri-
otism on that basis.


2. To collect and place before all its members
complete and reliable information on all
matters of national interest from every
part of the empire.
3. To aid in removing any local causes of
dissatisfaction with our national institu-
tions that may at any time exist in any
part of the empire.
4. To endeavour, by all legitimate means, to
preserve the nationality of our emigrat-
ing countrymen, so as to stop or reduce
the enormous waste of our strength that
has been going on in this direction for
many years.
5. To promote the general well-being of all
its members by all such methods as it
may, from time to time, be found expe-
dient to adopt.
Generally, from a social point of view, the
Fraternity will care for the interests, and exert
itself, as occasion may arise, for the benefit
either of its individual members or of the Fra-
ternity as a whole, or of the nation at large;
and politically the well-being of the whole
empire, as well as that of each one of its com-
ponent provinces in particular, will be fitting
objects for its unceasing watchful supervision.
It is to be understood that what is herein
proposed is intended to be a kind of foundation
merely for a great national superstructure,
every subsequent stage of which is to be raised
with, and only with the full knowledge of all
who may feel sufiiciently interested in patriotic


progress, to take any part however great or
infinitesimal in the movement; and further that
the arrangements thus proposed are capable of
expansion, contraction, diversion or modification
to any extent, and in any desirable direction by
processes provided for therein.
. It is considered that the mode of proceeding
may be as follows :
If this suggestion should be acted upon
either in its entirety or in some slightly modi-
ini* 7 oj
tied iorm, let all the arrangements that may be
made in the first instance be provisional, let a
period of (say) three years be allowed for a
reasonably full development, then let them be
thoroughly revised, and subsequently subject
them to a similar process every seventh year.
For the present purpose let the Empire be
divided into eight Provinces viz. : 1 Great
Britain (B) ; 2 Ireland (I) ; 3 Canada (C) ;
4 West Indies and Central America (W) ;
5 South Africa (S) ; 6 India and the East
(E) ; 7 Australia and Tasmania (A) ; and 8
New Zealand (Z).
Let the Provinces be divided into Sections,
viz.: B into three, England, Scotland, and Wales;
I into its four provinces; C into the several
colonies in North America ; W into the several
governments; S into its separate colonies ; E
into its governments ; A into its colonies ; and
Z into its provinces.
Let each of these Sections be again divided
into Counties, let very large towns also be
deemed counties, and let all counties be sub-


divided into parishes. Wherever boundaries are
already defined, let the same limits of counties
and parishes be adopted, but wherever such
boundaries are not yet defined, as will of course
sometimes occur in the colonies, let the best
local arrangements be made in this respect
that circumstances will permit, to be relin-
quished for legal boundaries when the latter
are established.
If the members of the Fraternity in any
parish be sufficiently numerous, let them be
formed into a Parochial Patriotic Club ; if they
be not sufficiently numerous, or if the country
be not yet legally divided into parishes, let any
conveniently located sufficient number of such
members be constituted a temporary District
Club.
Let every person joining the Fraternity be
elected and continue during his membership a
brother in some Parochial or District Club,
with all reasonable rights of transfer from club
to club throughout the empire that may be
expedient.
Let every member on being admitted to the
Fraternity pledge himself in writing to obey its
rules, to do all that lies in his power to sustain
its views, and to extend its influence during his
term of membership.
There is a very general idea in some quarters
that Britons are republican at heart, and no
doubt the mother country has done much
toAvards making republics of her colonies, tak-
ing very special care to exclude resident colo-


nists from anything like the fair share of the
national honors to which their numbers, their
zeal, and their general success in the national
cause entitle them. It is, however, yet at least
very doubtful whether the nation generally is
disposed to entertain republican predilections
in preference to its own old established and
well tried system, and since this system does
not countenance the republican idea of equality,
it will be both convenient and expedient to
recognise that fact in organising a national
movement, whose chief object will be to con-
serve our institutions, and to bring out some of
their very best, though hitherto latent, good
qualities. One principal effect of the proposed
mode of doing this will be to elevate and bring
into much greater prominence the aristocracy
of patriotism. If this should at first sight seem
objectionable, it must be remembered that the
aristocracies of birth and education (or intel-
lect) have, with others, each an appropriate
place in our social system, without prejudice to
each other; while in raising patriotism to a
similar position, it will only be necessary to
preserve for it the first place in its own sphere,
without in any way under-valuing or excluding
either good birth or high intellectual or other
capacity.
Let there be then, at first , four contributing
orders of Members of the Fraternity, viz.:—
Nobles, Gentlemen, Yeomen, and Ordinary.
In the first instance let only men who satisfy
competent examiners that they are in the


enjoyment of large independent means, derived
to the extent of at least two thirds from invest-
ments in real property or the public funds;
that they are not engaged in any professional,
commercial, or equivalent pursuits, with a view
to realise pecuniary business gains therefrom,
and that they are at liberty to devote their
whole time and attention to national affairs if
they see fit to do so, be deemed eligible as
candidates for election to the Order of Nobles
of the Fraternity.
Let the candidature to the Order of Gentle-
men of the Fraternity be open to men of
independent means, to members of the liberal
professions, to large investors of capital in com-
mercial, manufacturing, agricultural, pastoral,
or similar enterprises, to persons holding high
responsible positions in the service of large
proprietors, firms, or joint stock companies, and
generally to all the superior classes of the
people who are not eligible for the Order of
Nobles.
Let the Orders of Yeomen and Ordinary
Members of the Fraternity be open to any
person as a candidate.
Let election to the Club by simple majority
of its members suffice for the enrolment of
Ordinary Members of the Fraternity.
Let election to the Club stand as a nomination ,
For Yeomen to be confirmed by the Yeomen
of the county.
For Gentlemen subject to approval, first by
the Yeomen of the county, then by the
Gentlemen of the section. And


For Nobles subject to confirmation first by
the Yeomen of the county, then by
the Gentlemen of the section, and finally
by the Nobles of the‘province.
Let the several test ballots be taken at intervals
of not less than one month at the club meetings.
Let every member be enrolled for a full year
at least, but let the year commence at anytime.
Let each order pay in addition to club
expenses, a special scale of annual subscriptions
to the General Fund of the Fraternity, and on
the basis of duplicated subscriptions for each
extension of capacity, let any member have the
option of extending bis personal action beyond
the sphere of bis club, to that of the county, or
of the section, or of the province, or of the
empire. This will create five classes of sub-
scriptions in each order, making the parochial
subscription one rate, the county subscription
two rates, the sectional subscription four rates,
the provincial subscription eight rates, and the
imperial subscription sixteen rates. Let the
following be the scale of annual subscriptions
to the General Fund of the Fraternity at the
outset, one of the subscriptions only to be paid
annually by each individual.
Parochial. County. Sectional. Provincial. Imperial,
Nobles £2O £4O £BO £l6O £320
Gentlemen 10 20 40
Yeomen 2 4 8
Ordinary 12 4
80 160
16 32
8 16
Let the name, address, order, and class of the
enrolment of each member, when completed, be


notified to the Fraternity in the next issue of
the local provincial journal.
The legitimate influence of the Fraternity
will he extended as the number of its members
is increased, provided that adequate pecuniary
resources are also available. Let the Fra-
ternity therefore aim persistently at enroll-
ing amongst its members at least one individual
in every British household throughout the
world. Although this object will of course
never he completely gained, yet in continually
striving for it the Fraternity will always, after
a certain point has been reached, be in a
position to communicate at any time with every
British family, and the power to do this will be
fully worth the otherwise possibly unfruitful
efforts through which it will incidentally accrue.
But besides members, funds will be needed.
Now if it were attempted to raise any con-
siderable funds from a uniform subscription, the
latter would have to be so high as to deter the
masses of our countrymen from joining the
Fraternity, which would thus lose in personal
influence more than it could gain from mere
financial strength. By the course suggested it
is hoped that both objects will be secured, and
it is not to be supposed that the patriotism of
our wealthier fellow-countrymen will be found
wanting under such a test. If the rates quoted
should prove to be considerably, more pro-
ductive than they need be, let the surplus
funds be re-credited to the subscribers pro rata,
by allowing the amounts in reduction of the


subscriptions for tbe next year but one to that
in which the surplus accrued, this will admit of
all the accounts being finally closed and settled
before dealing with the surplus.
Let there be a fifth, in all other respects
equal but non-contributing and strictly hono-
rary, order of members, styled Freemen. Let
members of the Fraternity or any other persons
who have rendered special service to the national
cause, or to the Fraternity, or who have performed
noble or generous deeds, be made Freemen of
the Club,* of the Guild,* of the Society,* of
the Association,* or of the Fraternity.
Let this honor be conferable only by abso-
lute majorities, let every nomination for it be
made in or by a club, and let it be in each in-
stance of the First or Second class, according as
the nomination may be assented to nem. dis.;
or only by an absolute majority of tbe members
in the* Club for a Club Freedom, of the Clubs
in the Guild for a Guild Freedom, of the Guilds
in the Society for a Society Freedom, of the
Societies in the A ssociation for an Association
Freedom, and of the Associations in the Fra-
ternity for a Fraternity Freedom.
Let no mere accident, such as high birth
or station or wealth, under any circumstances
whatever, be deemed a sufficient reason for
admission to this order.
Let the name of the Freeman, a description
of the nature of the services rendered by him,
* The relative value of these terms will be shown
immediately.


and the date of their performance, with the
date, the class, and the degree of the Freedom
conferred, be notified in the next issue of the
local provincial journal of the Fraternity; let
all these particulars he kept posted, on suitable
printed forms, by the club secretaries, in every
club-room of the Fraternity, during a period of
three months from receipt of the notification,
and let them be registered in a book to be
specially kept for the purpose by every club in
the Fraternity.
Let all the rights of instalment in the dif-
ferent orders be accompanied by equal rights
of expulsion, to be exercised and published
throughout the Fraternity, upon sufficient cause
being shown from any quarter.
Let the Clubs in each county be subordinate
to the County Guild, and let the County Guild
consist of all members in the county paying
county or higher subscriptions, and two mem-
bers elected annually by each club in the county.
Let the County Guilds in each section he
subordinate to the Sectional Society, and let
this Society consist of all members in the sec-
tion paying sectional or higher subscriptions,
and three members elected annually by each
guild in the section.
Let the Sectional Societies in each province
be subordinate to the Provincial Association,
and let this Association consist of all members
in the province paying provincial or imperial
subscriptions, and three members elected annu-
ally by each society iu the province.


Let the Provincial Associations he subor-
dinate to the National Diet, and let this Diet
consist of all members paying imperial sub-
scriptions, and seven members elected by each
association in the empire, the senior one of each
seven retiring annually.
Let every member have one vote at every
assemblage, in which he is on any ground en-
titled to take part.
Let the Fraternity be governed by a Central
Council of twenty-four in all, to consist of the
three seniors of the seven representative mem-
bers of the Diet from each province for the
time being.
Let all questions before the Central Council
be decided by a majority of the provinces.
If on any question no provincial majority be
obtained, but a majority of members declare
the determination of the point to be urgently
necessary, let it be referred to the whole of the
members of the Diet that may assemble at such
notice as the circumstances will admit, otherwise
let the question stand over till the next annual
change of members has taken effect in the
Council. On all important questions when
needful to authoritatively decide a point, re-
quire every member of either Council or Diet
to vote; if absent let the member’s vote be
transmitted but counted at only half its value.
Let the Provincial Association elect from its
own members and be governed by a Provincial
Council, consisting of two of the three members
representing each of its Sectional Societies, and


an equal number of its non-representative
members.
Let the Sectional Society elect from its own
members and be governed by a Sectional Board,
consisting of two of the three representatives
from each of its county guilds, and an equal
number of non-representative members.
Let the County Guild elect annually from its
ranks and be governed by a committee of seven,
of which let not less than three be club repre-
sentative members.
Let each Club elect annually and let its affairs
be conducted by a committee composed of a
chairman, three stewards and a secretary.
Let the chairman and secretary be also the
Joint treasurers of the club. Let the secretary
conduct the correspondence, keep all the ac-
counts and records of the club, and in con-
junction with the other members of the
committee, let him also prepare a concise
monthly report of the proceedings and condition
of the club in duplicate, forwarding one copy
to the County Guild, one to the Provincial
Council.
Let meetings of the Clubs be held monthly,
those of the Guilds quarterly, those of the
Societies half-yearly, and those of the Associa-
tions annually, in each case for the transaction
of routine business, and for the discussion
of such national affairs as may need considera-
tion. Let the Diet be deemed to be constantly
in session.
Let each Club report to its Guild, each Guild


to its Society, each Society to its Association,
and each Association to the National Diet as
soon after each periodical meeting as possible,
and more frequently if expedient.
Let every club defray its own local working
expenses by raising a special fund for that pur-
pose, paying such fees to its officers as it may
think fit, and using such degree of economy as
may he suited to the private means of its
members, hut let all printed forms and other
general appliances be supplied to the clubs at
the cost of the General Lund, and let all other
charges against the Fraternity whatsoever, be
defrayed from the latter source.
Let the Fraternity establish and maintain a
printing office in each province in some central
town, that may be convenient to the local Pro-
vincial Council. These offices will not compete
with other establishments, but will solely do the
work of the Fraternity, which will fully employ
them. Let these offices all be supplied with
steam printing presses, type and appliances of
the best suitable kinds, and of uniform patterns,
so that the work produced by them may all be
of equal and good quality.
Let the Central Council organise and entirely
support from the General Fund a complete
Journalistic Staff, possessing the requisite quali-
fications for the peculiar duties to be under-
taken by it.
Let the journalists he stationed one in each
province, as the provincial journalist of the
Fraternity. Let them have confidential access


to the papers of the Provincial Councils, and
co-operate with those bodies in selecting matter
for publication, from the sectional and other
reports. Let them also compile for the in-
formation of the Fraternity, a clear and im-
partial monthly statement of the course of
public affairs in the province.
Let the Fraternity establish and publish
regularly, for private circulation amongst its
members, an independent monthly local journal
of its own in every province. Let each of these
journals be under the charge of the provincial
journalist, aided by the Provincial Council.
Let the eight journals be named the Central,
Irish, North American, West Indian, African,
Asiatic, Australian, and New Zealand Journals
of the Fraternity respectively. Let the Fra-
ternity provide, at its own cost, printing offices,
plant, and materials, for each journal. Let the
journals be uniform in style and appearance,
and consist of 16, 24, or 32 pages royal Bvo {i. e.
Chambers' Journal size of page), as the circum-
stances of the province, or of the particular issue,
may require. Let extra sheets be invariably
used for advertisements, so that the journals
may be bound without them if so preferred.
Let each of the journals contain —(1.) Busi-
ness matters of the Fraternity ; (2.) The jour-
nalist’s monthly review of local politics and
political parties for national readers; (3.) A
carefully compiled summary of such non-poli-
tical information as may be of interest to the
empire at large ; (4.) Short descriptions, scien-


tific or otherwise, of the country, its productions
or capabilities, &c.; (5.) Statistical information
of all kinds likely to he of national value ; (6.)
Correspondence that merits general attention.
Let all suggestions for increasing the useful-
ness of the Lraternity to the public, or to its
members, be made in the journal of the province
in which they originate ; let all such suggestions
at once receive attention from the Central
Council; and let such of them as the Council
may deem worthy, be submitted by that body
through the Central Journal, to be dealt with
by a direct vote or otherwise in each club of
the Fraternity.
It is stated on trustworthy authority that
exclusive of the salaries of the journalistic
staff, and of the interest on capital that may be
invested in the printing establishments, the" net
cost of supplying these journals —including
paper, type, ink, labour, and forwarding as
freight (not by post) to the remotest parochial
clubs for delivery to members —may be safely
taken at an average of lid. per 32 pages of the
size contemplated, the number of copies being
not less than 25,000. Thus supposing each of
the proposed eight provinces to issue such a
monthly sheet of 32 pages, or that they average
that between them, some being larger, others
smaller, the eight sheets could be supplied to
members at a cost to the Gleneral Fund of the
Fraternity of Is. per head, per month.
As the journals will be especially intended
to supply reliable national information rather


than to disseminate the very latest general
news of the day, and as, within moderate limits,
the placing of each copy in the hands of the
member for whom it is printed, at the lowest
possible cost, will be a point of considerable im-
portance, and as moreover the cost of postage
would in many cases actually exceed that of the
journal itself, let the journals of each pro-
vince he distributed as soon as printed to each
member in its own province, through the
parochial clubs, and let those for other pro-
vinces be forwarded by the first convenient
opportunity offering after publication, as freight
by first-class ships to the offices of the journals
of the other provinces, to be distributed there
with the next issue of the local journal.
Let the publication of all the provincial
journals commence simultaneously on a certain
date to be previously fixed and fully notified.
Let the first number of each journal contain a
complete list of the names, addresses, orders,
and classes of all those who may then have
provisionally joined the Fraternity in the
province, and let this list be specially styled
“ The Founders’ Record.” Let the year of the
Founders’ subscriptions commence from the
date of the first issue of the journals above
referred to.
Until the Fraternity is in a position to ap-
point journalists, and to provide the provincial
printing offices, &c., let the journals he pre-
pared under printing committees of the Pro-
vincial Councils, and printed by contract.


Let the Central Council cause a complete
system of maps of all parts of the empire to he
prepared in a form that can be issued, used, and
bound with the monthly journals. Let these
maps be prepared at the sole cost of the Fra-
ternity, under the careful supervision of a
competent paid staff, acting in conjunction as
far as possible with the local governmental
survey departments, and let the maps be of the
very highest degree of excellence that art can
produce.
Let the maps be issued periodically, monthly
if possible, as supplements to and with the
Central Journals. Let the plates of all the maps
be constantly kept up to date, so that they may
be promptly reissued in case of emergency or
when such a course may become desirable on
ordinary grounds.
Let every member be entitled to be supplied
gratis at his club, with a complete set of the
journals and maps issued by the Fraternity
during the term of his membership.
The maps, four times the size of the pages
of the proposed journals, may it is affirmed by
competent parties, be produced at 3d. each in-
cluding all costs except those incidental to
the preparation of the plates, which, with the
salaries of all professional employes, and all the
capital that it may be necessary to invest, should
be provided for direct from the General Fund,
on accounts separate from those of the printing
departments.
It appears then that a first class map of some


one important or interesting part of the empire,
and sound trustworthy intelligence from every
part of the empire may be placed in the hands
of every member of the proposed organization,
at Is. 3d. per month or 15s. per annum, and
therefore in fixing the minimum subscription to
the General Fund at 20s. per annum, a fair
margin for contingencies is allowed.
These estimates are based upon an assumed
minimum circulation of 25,000 copies; if it
should be thought advisable to commence
issuing journals and maps in smaller numbers
there may be some additional cost. It should
also he said that all these estimates are framed
on the data of a market that taken altogether is
probably the dearest in the world.
As has already been stated, this general
opening up of intelligent inter-communication
between the different parts of the empire,
should be one of the first and permanent objects
to be kept in view ; many others will no doubt
subsequently, and perhaps soon, be added with
great advantage, but it will be time enough to
discuss them when so much as has been already
suggested is in a fair way for realisation.
The publication of the whole of the journals
and the maps, might be commenced as soon as
the Fraternity numbers 25,000 or 30,000 mem-
bers in all parts of the world together, provided
that the other essential arrangements can be
completed in time.
In each parish throughout the empire, as
soon as the necessary publication of the prin-


ciples, objects, and rules of the Fraternity can
be made, let all the male inhabitants over 25
years of age be invited by circular, or at public
meetings, to enrol themselves as members, and
let this general invitation to non-members be
annually repeated on the anniversary of the
birthday of the reigning monarch. It is of
course not intended that the first general
invitation should be made all over the world
simultaneously, nor can it be the first opera-
tion, but there is reason to believe that it may
be done with a rapidity that will surprise some
persons, for many thousands of willing hands
throughout the empire are only waiting to enter
upon such work to promote its welfare when-
ever they are called upon in a proper manner to
undertake the task.
To commence the organization of the Fra-
ternity in the first instance, and also whenever
it may be desirable to establish a branch of
the Fraternity in any county without waiting
for external operations, let persons who would
be disposed to become county subscribers
hold an Inauguration meeting in some
town that may be most readily accessible
from all parts of the county, and let those
persons constitute themselves (provisionally and
subject to the rules of the Fraternity that may
be adopted) the parochial club of the parish in
which the meeting is held ; then let them make
such arrangements as they may deem best to
open clubs in the other parishes in the county,
and as this goes on let any promoter of the


original club transfer his membership to such
other club in the county as may at any time be
most convenient for him. Let all persons
joining the Fraternity at such Inauguration
meetings be deemed to be enrolled as members
on the understanding that members of the
superior orders are to pass their several
additional processes of election three years
after the inauguration meeting, or sooner if the
local provincial organization shall be sufficiently
developed.
London being the metropolis of the empire
should also be the metropolitan county of the
Fraternity. It should take the initiative by
first commencing operations to form its own
national guild, and if it should happen that
similar steps are simultaneously taken elsewhere
the latter should be provisional only so as to
avoid any injurious collision of opinions
at the outset. The London Guild if formed
will probably be strong and influential, well able
in all respects to appoint suitable committees to
frame a provisional code of bye-laws, and gene-
rally to undertake the unavoidable preliminary
work. There is one danger here that it is re-
spectfully submitted shouldbe atall cost avoided.
In this matter London should on no account
attempt to assume an unduly dominant position.
As the first and metropolitan county guild of the
Fraternity, it cannot fail to secure ample in-
fluence and the very highest respect and
deference from all the other kindred bodies.
The London County Guild would on the plan


proposed consist of as many parochial clubs, as
it might he found expedient to establish amidst
its vast population, it would form part of the
Sectional Society of England and of the Pro-
vincial Association of Great Britain. When it is
fairly constituted let it send organizing deputa-
tions to the other provinces to establish the
local associations and to see that these associa-
tions are initiated on a uniform plan. When
this has been done the several provincial associa-
tions so started may he left to extend their
operations until, as already suggested, the
Fraternity is known in every British home.
The Fraternity should in all purely local
matters, and in all religious matters, be strictly
neutral, taking care throughout its organisation
rigorously and perpetually to exclude all pos-
sible elements of discord. It should aim at
securing the adhesion of all classes, of all shades
of politics, and of all creeds, and it should so
deal with the immense national interests to
which it may be expected to address itself, that
all Britons may co-operate harmoniously under
its auspices for the national good.
Having thus imperfectly laid before his
readers the ideas that occur to him on the
particular aspect of this important question
that presents itself to his mind, the writer
trusts that patriotic men more favourably cir-
cumstanced than himself may find it convenient
to carry out either the plan herein suggested,
or some other one still better calculated to
secure the ends in view.
Sands & McDougall, Printers, Collins Street, Melbourne.


Iliose persons who would approve generally of the
adoption of some such plan as the one herein suggested,
are respectfully requested to invite the attention of their
friends thereto.
Gentlemen who may feel inclined to assist in com-
mencing this movement in Victoria will forward that
object by sending their names and addresses to the
Melbourne Publishers.


