

p�T \ H rm^
mr cruise to
. , ., ? '? - :^.y
~ "t>,ssc ? \.S-if'' ' ?'? .
VILLAGE SKETCHED BY R.TOLLEMACHE,ESQ, R.N.
jlXTS�l| I|EYSEE
Price One Shilling.
P>(,Y I


.
.


OUB CBUISE
NEW GUINEA.
ARTHUR KEYSER.
LONDON:
W. RIDGWAY, 169, PICCADILLY, W.
All 1 tights Reserved.


LONDON - ;
G. NORMAN AND SON, PRINTERS, HART STREET,
COVENT GARDEN.


PREFACE.
HE author feels that some explanation is due
before offering these extracts from a roughly
kept journal to the public.
The journal was written for his own private use,
to be kept as a memento of a very pleasant cruise, but
after it had been perused by a few friends, it was
suggested to him that as it contained several facts
about New Guinea that were little known, it might be
interesting to the outside public as well as to ourselves.
The author yielding to their request the book has
been published, and this unambitious little account of
how we established a Protectorate over New Guinea,
is now exalted to the honour of print.




OUR CRUISE TO NEW GUINEA.
N the 22nd of October, H.M.S. Nelson,
commanded by Commodore James Erskine,
A.D.C., left Sydney for the purpose of
proclaiming a protectorate over the South-eastern shores
of New Guinea; she had on board as passengers, a
member of the Royal Geographical Society of New
South Wales, an artist, a correspondent to the Australian
papers, two photographers, a gentleman connected with
the Government of New South Wales, and another
civilian, a guest of the officers. We were all in good
spirits, and looking forward to our trip, notwithstanding
that we were obliged to forego the Melbourne Cup and
all the festivities of that eminently gay city, which we
were on the point of visiting when the orders came to
proceed to New Guinea. We expected to be absent
about two months, which for a small craft would not


appear to be a very serious matter, but the departure
of the flag ship from the fleshpots of Sydney for
so long a period was an occurrence of no mean
importance, especially as some of the officers were
recently married, while others contemplated following
their example at an early date.
After having called in at Brisbane, and duly
performed the voyage to the town in our old friend
s.s. Kate, we left for Port Moresby, New Guinea.
The weather the whole way was as perfect as could be
desired, and on Sunday, Nov. and, we reached our
destination and anchored in the harbour, where we
found lying H.M.S. Harrier, Swinger, and Raven,
the Espiegle arriving a few hours later. The entrance
to the bay was very beautiful, owing to the long
ranges of hills on either side, and the opal green of
the water among the reefs. Many were the remarks
and speculations as to what we should find on shore
made by the idlers on the fore-bridge as we steamed
up the harbour, and our oracle, who always has a
large audience on these occasions, was as usual
infallible, giving reasons for each strange sight that
met our view and pointing out the fires along the
shore, which he informed us were watch fires lit as
signals of our approach.


As soon as we were at anchor, we heard to onr
astonishment that Lieut.-Commander Willcox, of H.M.S.
Harrier, had, by request of Mr. Deputy-Commissioner
Romilly, hoisted the British flag ten days previously,
being unaware that the Nelson was coming to New
Guinea. Of course this led to wild speculation, and
each one was eager to express an opinion as to what
we should probably do. It was, however, decided by
the powers that the act of hoisting the flag was illegal,
consequently the original programme remained unaltered.
Accordingly the Espiegle and Raven were sent along the
coast east and west to proclaim to the chiefs the approach-
ing ceremony of establishing a Protectorate over this
portion of New Guinea, and on board of the Raven
went Mr. Chalmers, one of the missionaries, a charming
man, who is not only a good fellow, but probably
knows more about New Guinea and its inhabitants than
any man living. These ships were instructed to bring
back on board as many chiefs from the neighbouring
tribes as they could collect. They were away for two
days, thus enabling us to have a look at the country about
Port Moresby, and see something of its inhabitants.
The village is built on piles along the shore, and
populated by men, women, dogs, pigs, and children,
in seemingly the most hopeless confusion. I place


the children last, as, so far as we could judge, the pigs
and mongrel dogs appeared to possess quite the front
place in the estimation of their masters and mistresses.
The houses are of two storeys, and the canoes are
moored off the entrance to the sea, thus affording a
ready means of escape when attacked by foes from
the hills. The country beyond the village consists of
apparently endless ranges of hills, dry and barren
looking, and uninviting in appearance to even the
keenest sportsmen among us.
The day after our arrival a party went away in the
jolly boat to Fisherman Island, distant about five miles;
the island is merely a coral reef overgrown with
scrub, and the walking was very severe, as one?s feet
occasionally got jammed in deep holes between sharp
pieces of coral. The heat was something phenomenal,
but this being a first visit to the shores of New
Guinea, our sportsmen were full of ardour, and
tramped about after quail regardless of coral and
oblivious of heat. About eight brace of quail were
bagged altogether, besides a wallaby and two large
pigeons. The next morning the hills of the mainland
were scoured for game, with no better result than a
brace of New Guinea pheasants, which, however, were
very good eating.


The natives whom we met in our wanderings struck
us chiefly by the appearance of their heads, which were
surmounted by enormous erections of hair, something
in the Fiji fashion, though without being as tidy and
w'ell-cared for. From this coiffure they derive their name,
the word Papua (the native name for New Guinea)
meaning frizzly haired. Some of the feathers worn in
their hair are fastened to the end of what is called a comb,
which in reality is more used for appeasing irritation than
for combing the hair. For ornaments they mostly wear
a semi-circle of mother-of-pearl shell round their neck,
with a quill like that of a porcupine stuck through
the nose, the curves of the quill upwards, thus
giving them rather a fierce appearance. The men
are small, and almost devoid of clothing, while the
women wear short skirts of grass around their waist,
about as deep as the evening dress of a Christmas
columbine.
After the two days were over, the Espiegle and
Raven reappeared, each having on board about ten
chiefs from the adjoining coasts, who had been collected
for the ceremony of hoisting the flag on the morrow.
Some twenty chiefs had been hastily assembled at Port
Moresby, but unfortunately many of the most influential
men had that morning left in their canoes to trade


along the coast, unable to defer their departure for fear
of losing the fair wind that was then blowing. However,
in the afternoon, forty chiefs came off to the Nelson,
which ship was gaily decorated with flags for the
occasion. With the natives came Mr. Lawes and
Mr. Chalmers, the two well-known and deservedly
popular missionaries. The chiefs were invited to sit in
rows on the quarter-deck, and the palaver commenced
by serving out to each man a bowl of rice and sugar,
which the missionaries had suggested as the kind of
food most likely to be appreciated. Nor were they
wrong; for though a little dubious as to what was
in store for them, whether good things or ill, the first
taste of the sugar assured them that this, at any rate,
was good, and with one accord, forgetful of their
strange surroundings and the large crowd watching their
proceedings, each man went for his bowl of rice as
though it had been decided to race who should finish
first. But to finish a bowl did not convey to its possessor
that he must stop eating, for after gazing round to see
which of his neighbours had the fullest bowl still
remaining, he proceeded without ceremony to attack it
with his spoon, until that also was finished. After the
feeding the band struck up, much to the delight of the
visitors. Then the Commodore came on deck, and in


a few well-chosen words assured the assembled chiefs
of the good-will of the Queen, and explained the
meaning of the ceremony that would take place in the
morning. They were told that their lands would be
secured to them, and their interests protected from evil-
disposed men who attempted to interfere with them or
their possessions. The Commodore then summoned
Boi Vaga, chief of Port Moresby, who, though not a
great fighting chief, is one who possesses much influence
among the people. He was given a long ebony stick,
with a florin let in on the top, the Queen?s head being
uppermost, and was informed that this was his staff of
office, and symbol of the authority he was to wield for
the dispensation of justice and the order and welfare
of all those in his district. The Commodore then shook
hands with him, and introduced this first recognized
chief of New Guinea to Mr. Deputy-Commissioner
Romilly, who is to assume the reins of government
until the arrival of the Governor of New Guinea. All
this was translated by Mr. Lawes, who speaks the
language with fluency. During this time the photo-
grapher was not idle, and Boi Vaga, crowned with a red
flannel tennis cap, and clothed in a check shirt, the
worse for wear, grasping his newly acquired stick in
one hand as he fearlessly gave the other to the


Commodore to shake, was quickly immortalized by being
reproduced on a prepared plate; while the picture was
completed by the remainder of the chiefs squatting
behind him gently digesting their rice, and over their
heads a crowd of officers and passengers, flanked by a
side view of blue jackets and marines. The photography
over, and the palaver at an end, it was judged expedient
to show our guests a little what Queen Victoria could
do. Accordingly several rounds were fired from a
Nordenfeldt gun, and from a Gardner in the top, but
very few of the natives could be persuaded to watch
the target or follow the course of the shot, the majority
trembling with terror, and cowering on deck as they
hid their faces in their hands. A shell was then fired
from one of the eighteen-ton guns, and this had a far
greater success, for when the shell burst in the distance
there arose an unanimous grunt of delight from our
hitherto undemonstrative guests, and when the water
was seen to be dashed about beneath the falling shell,
the grunt of delight expanded into an ? ah! ah! ?of
approval. The chiefs were then marshalled in line, and
each one in turn went aft into the Commodore?s cabin,
where he presented them severally with gifts of hatchets
and tobacco. The afternoon was now over, and the
work of getting our visitors on shore commenced.


With arms full of newspaper parcels, and carrying
almost more ship?s biscuit than they could manage,
they were at length got into the cutter and started
ashore. There was one person who was glad to see
the last of our friends, and this was the midship-
man in charge of the cutter, for the landing being
difficult the boat ran ashore. The chiefs had a panic
which utterly prevented the crew from unshipping the
mast or getting out their oars, the result being that the
boat remained on its rock while a dinner party this
officer had arranged was raging in his absence. On
his return it was a case of tardis venientibus ossa,
and the bill to pay in the morning ; so he at least had
some cause for blessing Boi Vaga and his companions,
which he most probably did do in the ?silent solitude
of the gunroom. These chiefs were of various types,
some very old and shaky with bald heads, others with
large bushy heads of hair decorated with shells and
feathers of birds of paradise. Several were close
cropped and curly headed. One of these latter was
boasting how he had killed men, women, and children,
and in token thereof pointed to lines of tattoo across
his chest, which are only permitted to be worn after
having slain an enemy. To wear this mark of
distinction without having earned it in the ordinary


way is an offence punishable by death. Many had
scars of spear wounds telling of hard fought battles,
while one old chief explained how only last night his
foes had fired his village and killed his brother, but as
this ancient warrior had been one of the greediest
during the feed of sugar and rice, his grief for that
brother cannot have been of a very lasting character. In
the evening their minds were to be still further astonished
by the electric light being turned on the village, while
rockets went up both from our own ship and the
Espiegle; and to add to the horrors of this wonderful
night the steam syren yelled forth its hideous music,
which being echoed back from the land, must have
frightened the traders who had left that morning in
their canoes. It certainly frightened those remaining on
shore, as appeared in the morning : some thought it the
baying of a great angry dog, and fled into the bush to
escape its clutches, others imagined the ship was hungry,
and yearning for food, while the greater part of the
population imagined the light to be the eye of the evil
one, and hastened to the bush to join forces with those
who were escaping from that terrible dog. This is the
same syren that an old Scotch lady on an island near
New Zealand took for the last trump, and regardless
of the assurances of her relations to the contrary insisted


upon drawing down the blinds and making all prepara-
tions for a decent exit from the world.
The next day, November 6th, the Union Jack was
hoisted on New Guinea for the first time, by command
of the Queen. Everyone remembers that two years ago
the Queensland Government annexed New Guinea,
through Mr. Chester, Chief Magistrate of Thursday Island,
and that the English Government refused to recognize
this act. On other occasions the flag has been flown
at Port Moresby, but on the 6th of November, 1884,
it was hoisted with full honours by Commodore Erskine,
Commodore of the Australian Station, acting under
orders from home. Two companies of blue jackets
and one of marines landed from the Nelson, the
other ships also contributing their number. The men
were drawn up in three sides of a square, the flagstaff
being in the middle. The Commodore landed in the
barge, and was received on the beach by a guard of
honour of marines. The band preceding, they marched
to the Mission House, and there on the verandah,
forming as it were the fourth side of the square, the
Commodore, surrounded by his staff, and having on
either side of him Messrs. Romilly, Chester, Lawes, and
Chalmers, read the following Proclamation, declaring it
as the intention of the Queen to establish a Protectorate
over these shores.


? Proclamation.
1 Proclamation on behalf of her Most Gracious Majesty Victoria,
by the grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland. Queen, Defender of the Faith, Empress
of India, establishing a Protectorate of her Most Gracious
Majesty over a portion of New Guinea and the islands
adjacent thereto.
? To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting :
?Whereas it has become essential for the protection of the
lives and properties of the native of New Guinea,
and for the purpose of preventing the occupation of portions of
that country by persons whose proceedings, unsanctioned by any
lawful authority, might tend to injustice, strife, and bloodshed,
and who, under the pretence of legitimate trade and intercourse,
might endanger the liberties and possess themselves of the lands
of such native inhabitants, that a British Protectorate should be
established over a certain portion of such country and the islands
adjacent thereto.
?And whereas her Majesty having taken into her gracious
consideration the urgent necessity of her protection to such
inhabitants, has directed me to proclaim such protection in a
formal manner at this place : Now, I, James Elphinstone Erskine,
captain in the Royal Navy, and Commodore of the Australian
station, one of her Majesty s naval aides-de-camp, do hereby, in
the name of her Most Gracious Majesty, declare and proclaim
the establishment of such Protectorate over such portions of the
coast and the adjacent islands as is more particularly described
in the schedule hereunto annexed.
? And X hereby proclaim and declare that no acquisition of
land, whensoever or howsoever acquired, within the limits of the
Protectorate hereby established, will be recognized by her Majesty.
And I do hereby, on behalf of her Majesty, command and enjoin
all persons whom it may concern to take notice of this
proclamation.
? SCHEDULE.
? All that portion of the southern shores of New Guinea
commencing from the boundary of that portion of the country
claimed by the Government of the Netherlands on the 141 st
meridian of east longitude to East Cape, with all islands adjacent
thereto south of East Cape to Kosmann Island inclusive, together
with the islands in the Goschen Straits.
? * Given on board her Majesty?s ship Nelson, at the harbour
of Port Moresby, on the 6th day of November, 1884.
?(Signed) James Elphinstone Erskine,
? Commodore.
? God Save the Queen.?,


The flag was then hoisted, the band playing ? God
save the Queen,? a royal salute was fired from the
Nelson in harbour, and three rounds of feu de joie
were fired by the blue jackets and marines. The
Commodore in a short address declared the ceremony
over, and called for three cheers for the Queen, which
were given with customary heartiness. No one was
sorry to return on board, for a three hours? roasting in
a blazing sun, arrayed in cocked hats and epaulettes,
was a somewhat trying ordeal to the chief performers
in this ceremony.
The next day we arrived at Hall?s Sound, and
the sight of the trees and green upon the mainland
and adjoining island was quite refreshing, after the
monotonous brown of the Port Moresby Hills. Mr.
Chalmers started off to interview chiefs, and to arrange
for what we had all now dropped into calling our
morning ? meke,? from the Fijian word descriptive of
a dance or any great show. A few of us landed on
the island in the skiff, armed with written words of
friendship as a shibboleth, in case the natives should
receive the boat with spears, but beyond entangling
several of our fishing lines during the passage, and
returning very late for dinner, there was no result to
this expedition. The next morning at 4 a.m. a party


went on shore to the village to erect a flagstaff, and
prepare for the hoisting of the flag in the afternoon.
An energetic quartette armed with guns joined this duty
party, and went ashore at that hour for pleasure,
having listened too well to the wonderful yarns told
overnight of the pigeons and birds of paradise that
flocked about this particular spot in New Guinea.
These four were full of ardour and brimming with self-
satisfaction at having sacrificed so many hours sleep
in their love of sport. Five weary hours, however, of
wandering, falling, and thirsting in the mangrove swamps
cooled their eagerness, for it was a case of birds
twittering everywhere, but not a bird to shoot, on
account of the thickness of the bush. The horrible
little native guides insisted upon meandering about in
circles and murmuring at intervals ? koko ? (tobacco),
and ? kai kai ? (food), till exasperated at their laziness,
and silent from thirst, our sportsmen were only too
glad to toil their way back to the Mission House,
labouring beneath the weight of one pigeon, which
represented all the game that their united forces had
been able to capture. The flagstaff was nearly up, and
its party one degree less thirsty than the new arrivals, as
water had occasionally been served out to them by the
kind wife of the native teacher. After being refreshed


in the same manner, two of the shooters proceeded to
the beach to wait for the incoming boat, while the
remaining two, who were midshipmen, started off once
more to seek for pigeons until the afternoon, but as
they had had no breakfast, and their stock of provisions
consisted of two biscuits and a paw paw, no one felt
inclined to envy them the happy day they proposed
to spend.
In the afternoon chiefs had been collected, and
everything arranged for the hoisting of the flag. The
whole of the landing party went on board the Raven,
which ship got under way, and steamed about two miles
closer in shore than we could ourselves, then all embarked
in the boats which had been towed with us, and we
landed on the beach.
There was a sun that afternoon that none who
were exposed to it will ever forget. The officer
who had been in charge of the flagstaff party was
seen in the distance gesticulating for food, he having-
lauded at four in the morning, and fasted till two
in the afternoon. Luckily friendly forethought had
prompted someone to take him a basket of provisions,
which he eagerly seized upon and devoured before an
admiring crowd of natives.
The Commodore arriving, the band struck up, and


we marched, or rather scrambled, in consequence of
having to get through a hole in the fence, to where
the men were drawn up in three sides of a square
round the flagstaff, and the business of hoisting the
flag commenced. The chiefs were all grouped
picturesquely in the centre of the square, and they
were mostly very chief-like in appearance, for all were
arrayed in their grandest bravery. Foremost of all
sat the Queen, Kolaloka by name, the only woman
who is known to hold power in New Guinea. Her
father, a most popular old chief, assembled his people
round him on his deathbed, and requested them to
let his daughter rule over them, instead of any of
his sons, as she was, of all his children, the most fit.
His request was granted, and there sat Her Majesty,
facing the Commodore, listening to the message of
peace and good-will from that other Queen across the
sea. Among those behind her, was a chief, whose
personal appearance must have cost him many an hour
of anxiety and pain. His face was painted bright
yellow, picked out with black, while on his head were
spread the plumes of at least three birds of paradise
in regular tiers, like halos about his lengthy hair
a long stick through his nose, with earrings and
necklaces of the teeth of sharks and dogs, together


with lockets of tusks and shells, adorned his upper
person, while round his waist was a broad belt, painted
red, drawn so tight that the flesh bulged out on either
side, necessitating his keeping his elbows at right angles
to his body, a position to facilitate breathing that may
often be seen in more fashionable places than Hall s
Sound, New Guinea. He had tight bands round his
arms, and bone and shell bracelets laced together right
up to the elbow, as though he were encased in armour.
Behind him, as a solemn contrast, sat a tall individual
all in black, or rather more strictly speaking, painted
black all over, like the typical conscientious Christy
Minstrel. His face was grave and stricken with grief,
and over his head reared plumes of black feathers,
gathered from every kind of dusky bird that exists in
this place; there were black shells round his neck,
and black bands for his waist and arms, with more
black feathers stuck beneath them, and again great
black plumes were bound round his legs. He sat
regarding the whole scene as though it were frivolous
and out of place, never moving a muscle of his grim
countenance. I was not surprised to hear that this
chief was in mourning for his mother. There were
other people no less striking in appearance, but one?s


mind could really hardly grasp more than a few of these
wonders at a time.
All went well till the commencement of the feu
de joie, when the consternation that fell upon the
countenances of the chiefs in the square was a sight
well worth witnessing. They certainly must have
thought that the word for a general massacre had been
given, for nothing else could account for the signs of
panic that took place. The masher with the yellow
face desisted from his absorbing occupation of coaxing
the paint out of his eyes by the aid of a leaf, and
calling up a sickly smile, endeavoured to survey the
company as though he had met a feu de joie every
day of his life; but the effort was too much, his fears
got the better of his dignity, and finally burying his face in
the lap of his neighbour, he gave way to a perfect paroxysm
of fear, regardless of the irreparable damage he was most
probably doing to his appearance. As for the orphaned
chief, he had commenced beating his head sadly on
the ground after the discharge of the very first gun,
while the men on either side of him were burrowing
their faces in the earth, and endeavouring to use this
solemn personage as a shield between them and the
? joie.? The poor Queen dissolved into royal tears.


and it took all the persuasion of her consort to calm
her outraged majesty. Ultimately all became reassured,
and when the firing was over we adjourned to
the Mission House. The yellow-faced swell gazed
comically round to see how much of his fears had been
noticed, the sombre chief looked lugubriously at his
companions, and the Queen retired to be photographed.
She was a nice little fat Queen, tattooed all over in the
most mysterious manner, and she evinced great interest
in the Proclamation read in the name of Queen Victoria,
whom she doubtless imagined to be another tattooed
sovereign similar to herself. Of course most of us
were taken as well, for our energetic photographer had
been busy the whole ceremony breaking down trees
and otherwise getting his apparatus into good position
opposite the flagstaff, the picture of which might or
might not include the Commodore and officers.
No one who was present will ever forget the heat,
which all agreed to be the greatest we had ever
experienced, though many of us had passed some time
in tropical countries. Several anxious ones looked upon
sunstroke as a certain sequel to this exposure, but
beyond the reddening of a few noses, and the loss
of a little skin, no one appeared much the worse for
the ordeal.


After we had all returned safely on boards the ship
got under way for Motu Motu, which place was reached
that evening. We anchored some distance out, and
our first view of the land disclosed a long line of cocoa-
nut trees and other tropical vegetation. Surf was
breaking on the beach, and as far as we could see
there appeared no passage through the long rollers that
were being driven on the shore. Everyone was anxious
to land here, as the inhabitants of this place are but
little known, and are as good specimens of the genus
savage as we were ever likely to meet. They had at
present only seen two white men, and the missionaries
had established a station there not longer than three
months. Although it was getting late, our Commander
allowed the cutter to be called away for those who
wished to go ashore, and also the whaler, which boat
was ordered to go ahead and pilot the cutter through the
surf. The boats sailed off in rather a heavy swell till the
breakers were reached, when the cutter wisely anchored
and waited to see what the whaler would do. One
passage was tried, and before the officer in command
could discover the meaning of the shouts from the
native teacher on the beach, the rollers were upon the
boat, and all felt they were in for at least a first-rate
ducking, but the men gave way right well, and once


more we were outside the breakers, wondering where we
should try next.
The second venture was more successful, and when
through the worst part of the rollers, the natives dashed
into the surf, surrounding the boat on all sides, and
swimming with her, dragged us up high, though not
exactly dry, upon the beach. Then commenced as
curious a scene as anything we had before experienced.
About five hundred natives arrayed In the most marvellous
fashion completely surrounded us, dancing and yelling
in a manner perfectly deafening to our ears. They got
into the boat and prevented our talking to each other
or signalling, as we wished to do, to the cutter to stop
her from attempting the passage through which we had
just come. Our new friends all endeavoured to shake
hands with us at the same time, and we were so patted
and pawed in token of their amity and astonishment,
that it was difficult to continue the good natured smile
it was necessary to keep up in order to show that we
appreciated their welcome. I said that they were all
yelling, but when by dint of pinching it was discovered
that we were white under our clothes, the yells became
screams of amazement. One would have thought that
the climax of astonishment had been reached, but a
new wonder was in store for them, for one of us


feeling the heat oppressive, innocently removed his hat,
and disclosed to view a head of very white hair, while
another of our party, who rejoices in the possession of
a peculiarly red covering to his head, chanced at that
moment to execute the same manoeuvre; this unpre-
meditated coup de theatre literally brought down the
house, and at the same time it was not altogether
unpleasant for the performers to find their appearance
thus appreciated, and to discover that they had so
suddenly and easily become famous. After we had
been pulled about for some time, we managed to get
room to turn our attention to the cutter, which boat was
still pitching uncomfortably at anchor outside the breakers,
and its occupants had to be informed that there was
no time to fetch them in the whaler, and that their
only alternative was to return to the ship.
After making these signals, we were released in an
unexpected manner from the friendly persecutions of our
admirers, for on board the cutter there chanced to be
a most undaunted midshipman, whose soul was set on
exchanging hatchets for curios, and bartering among
natives with tobacco. A return to the ship was not
a course of which he at all approved, so attaching
himself to a canoe that happened to be within reach,
he cast himself, his sketch book, and his trade tobacco


upon the tender mercies of the breakers and the natives.
No one knew whether these natives were going to be
friendly or not before landing, but this mattered nothing
to the midshipman, and his faith was not misplaced,
for hundreds of shrieking people dragged him through
the surf, and after landing him upon the beach, thronged
round to bid him welcome. We were now no longer
the centre of attraction, and our noses were for a time
disjointed by the new arrival. Being a young officer of
a pink and white kind, the astonishment of the natives
knew no bounds, and they all seemed eager to convey
to him their appreciation of his confidence in them.
We watched our small shipmate, undisturbed from his
usual collected demeanour, submitting to be pinched and
patted in the most condescending manner, and finally
borne off to the village in triumph, escorted by hundreds
of shouting natives holding his hands, and occasionally
feeling his ribs, as they probably confided to each other
what excellent ? kai kai ? this little tit-bit would make.
We managed to get through the surf on our return
journey better than before, as we were piloted by the
Mission whaler, which boat was taking off chiefs to
the ship.
After hearing the report of our adventures, everyone
wondered how the men would be landed for the hoisting


of the flag. But when the order came that the landing
party was to leave the ship at 5.30 a.m., we saw that
it was not intended to permit the surf to stop our usual
morning mekc.
The Mission whaler had brought off a large party of
chiefs, most of whom had been collected along the coast
by the Raven; and it says a great deal for the influence
possessed by Messrs. Lawes and Chalmers, that men
who have never seen a vessel larger than the Mission
schooner should consent to come off and pass a night on
board the Nelson,
It was entertaining to watch these savages over their
rice and sugar, and to observe their astonishment when
presented with a looking-glass. One old chief in
particular could not at all understand that it was his
own reflection, and felt persuaded that some other
ugly savage was amusing himself by exactly imitating
his actions. The master-at-arms finally put them all to
bed on the main-deck, and they appeared well contented
with their quarters, after becoming somewhat accustomed
to the unusual noises going on around them.
The customary party prepared to leave the ship in
the morning, barring the marines and bandsmen, as
being people more likely to come to grief in the
breakers than the blue jackets. The cutters, the steam


cutter, and the jolly boat anchored outside the rollers,
while our whaler and the Raven?s jolly boat made
frequent trips to the shore till all the men were landed.
It was most amusing to lie at anchor and watch the
fate of each boat-load as it went ashore. The whaler
was commanded by an intrepid midshipman, who stood
up in the stern sheets and steered his boat as though
he had done just the same job every morning for weeks ;
while the jolly boat had an equally energetic officer
who performed each trip with a beaming smile, and
when alongside the cutter, his boat gave a lurch and
capsized him into deep water, he reappeared from the
sea wearing the same urbane expression with which he
had left his post.
It was of course great fun observing the march of
events, and even at five in the morning one can be
amused at seeing artists and photographers, politicians,
missionaries, officers, and blue jackets all struggling
in the surf, some nearly swamped, and others
wading knee-deep almost too fast for their equilibrium,
with frightened backward glances at the rollers which
pursued them. The scene was an odd one when
ordinary people were getting wet, but a hush came
upon us when the galley appeared in sight, and all
silently wondered whether the waves had lost their


daring since the time of Canute, and whether it was
possible that the Commodore could be capsized. But he
buckled to it like the meanest of us, and taking off
his coat prepared for the worst. Fate, however, was
kind to him, thanks to the seamanlike manner in which
he steered his boat, and he landed in safety with but a
slight sprinkling of salt water, and was able to resume
his coat the driest of us all.
Ultimately all were ashore without accident, and
the ceremony of hoisting the flag commenced in the
presence of the largest number of natives we had yet
seen. To us the meke seemed a dull affair without
the band, but then we were wet and apt to cavil at
trifles. The feu de joie had its usual success, and
as it commenced the natives lay down like one man,
as though they had been specially trained in this
particular figure.
When the hoisting was over, and we had duly
admired the inhabitants of Motu Motu, there appeared
on the scene the dressiest individual who never wore
clothes. No one thought of wondering that he was late,
for it would have been impossible to imitate his get-
up and judge of the time it would take, without being
wrong by a few hours. He was tall and well built,
the plumes of birds of paradise were arranged upon his


head, the hair of which was most perfectly combed and
upright as though it were made of wire. Huge rings
of tortoise shell to the number of twenty bore the lobe
of each ear almost down to his shoulders, where they
met the laced armlets of shell and bone that started
from his wrists. Broad bands of shell, cut like beads,
lay across his forehead, the ends of which were
entwined in his hair and lay in festoons all down his
back. There were circlets of teeth around his neck,
and pigs? tusks lay thick upon his chest. A broad
tight band almost cut his body in two, and from it
dangled teeth and shells in reckless profusion. His
legs were decked in rings. of coloured grass, and large
white shells that jingled as he walked. Mere words
cannot adequately describe the tout ensemble of this
wonderful man as he quietly marched into our midst,
posing himself in an attitude which seemed to invite
criticism, and silently requesting to be admired. No one,
however, was loath to give admiration to a person who
had earned it with so much trouble, and I fear we
pinched and patted him almost as curiously as we
ourselves had been pinched and patted the evening
before. Quite calmly this noble savage submitted to
our civilities, but firm he was in one respect, and that
was in resolutely declining all offers of trade, and


refusing to part with any portion of his marvellous
ornaments, although tempted with axes and tobacco
sufficient to have purchased in entirety almost any
village we had seen ; and in proportion as we waxed
eager to acquire his property, the more resolute did he
become in refusing to part with it for paltry ?trade.?
t, personally, could only gaze at the gentleman and
think what a waste he was at Motu Motu, and what a
fortune he would represent at Madame Tussaud?s, or
the Westminster Aquarium, could he but be transferred
thither just as he stood.
We were reluctant to leave this interesting place,
and lounged about the beach as long as possible,
especially as we were aware what an undignified retreat
our departure through the surf would be. But the
order came to embark in the boats, and then recom-
menced the fun of the morning. The whaler and the
jolly boat began their journeys, and after several
amusing episodes everyone was safely deposited on
board of his own boat, and a start was made for the
ship, where we all arrived agreed in two things : firstly
that we were very hungry and ready for breakfast, and
secondly, that this had been quite the jolliest morning
we had spent for some time. Only one contretemps
occurred, and that was the loss of Port, the Com-


modore?s dog. He had swum ashore from one of
the cutters, and arriving on the beach, had scattered
the natives right and left. Since then he had not
been seen, and as he was a favourite on board, we
were all sorry to leave him behind. We heard
before leaving New Guinea that he had fallen a victim
to an alligator.
We left Motu Motu in the forenoon and shaped
our course for Port Moresby, which place was reached
that evening. Here we were to remain some days in
order to coal, and also for the purpose of landing coal
on shore.
A. small party of us took advantage of this com-
paratively long stay to go away for a couple of days?
shooting. Accordingly we started in the skiff for Fairfax
Harbour, a most beautiful bay not far from Port Moresby.
We had a strong breeze with us and speedily became
wet, which might have been annoying, as our provisions
and clothing were soon in a most soppy condition. I say
might, in case we had been ordinary people, but one
of our party was celebrated for the constant smile of
content with which he faced all occurrences, whether
agreeable or otherwise. Another delighted in rising to
the occasion and showing of what metal he was made;
therefore the more uncomfortable the occasion the better


metal did he appear, and as we had very wet weather
in the skiff before we had done, we were all grateful
for the skill he displayed in looking after the boat, the
provisions, and ourselves. The third was of a ? laissez
alter ? disposition, though equal to any emergency,
and almost as contented as number one, yet lacking
his peculiar smile. Our fourth member had not the
knack of seeing everything in so rosy a light, and
though able to rough it with the rest, was unable
to repress an occasional wish that his clothes were
more dry, or his food a little less tasting of the salty
sea.
After a three hours? sail, we landed upon a little
sandy cove, and then drew lots as to who should shoot
and who prepare the camp. As luck would have it the
two most fitted for conscientiously making things com-
fortable set out to shoot, while our most energetic walker,
who we often think could rival Weston, was one of
those left behind to fell trees and manufacture a fire,
though his heart was with the wallaby over the hill.
However, by dark there was plenty of wood and a
wonderful fire, and after we had done justice to a
couple of pigeons and a wallaby stew, we lay down on
the sand to sleep, regardless of natives, snakes, and
alligators. There were marks of these latter along


the shore, but we could only hope for the best and
trust that they would be as scared at sight of us as
we should be of them.
Next morning at daybreak we started to walk over
the high stony hills that were on every side. A more
rough and barren looking country would be hard to
imagine, and as we came across nothing in the shape
of fresh water, it was scarcely a matter of surprise that
our bag was again limited to a few Torres Straits?
pigeons. But we had some reward in finding a bower
bird?s bower, which is a thing we had often wished to
see. It is usually close to the nest and constructed
by two neat little mounds of sticks, about a yard apart,
connected by a narrow line of upright twigs closely
packed side by side, thus forming a high wall to the
passage which joins the two ends. Around lay several
fern and other berries, the bower bird always seizing-
on anything bright or shining to decorate this peculiar
playground. After returning to the camp and partaking
of a meal, most dexterously cooked by one of our
party, we sailed over to Ryan Point, which was further
to windward, hoping thus to break the back of our
long journey of the morrow.
After sundry mishaps and the shipping of much
water we made our point, which was a low sandy


beach protected at the back by a high hill. It looked
a perfect camping ground, but, alas, our night was a miser-
able one, mosquitoes and sand flies having been beforehand
in selecting this site. We accordingly lay awake and
longed for daylight, when we made a start for the ship so
as to arrive before the sea breeze should come on and
render our return impossible, as we were dead to leeward.
When on board, we found that our stay at Port
Moresby was likely to be still further prolonged, so a
party of midshipmen determined to get leave to go
some few miles into the interior to visit the river
Lalokie, which was reported to be a beautiful broad
stream, sounding to our ears as a sort of promised land
after so many weary wanderings over country where
water was not to be procured.
Messrs. Lawes and Chalmers kindly provided a
packhorse, and armed with guns, a stew pan, and a
large ? billy,? we started in the morning heat across
the first range of hills. To our delight we found that
after this ascent our path lay through valleys where
the walking was comparatively easy, and where we
occasionally got a shot at a wallaby, quail, or pigeon.
When towards evening we were becoming very tired
and almost speechless with thirst, the welcome sight
of the river met our view. It was on all sides


surrounded by almost impenetrable bush, except where
the track led up to it, and here was an opening where
water could easily be procured. We pitched a small
tent, kindly lent us by Mr. Chalmers, and then pro-
ceeded to cook the game we had shot en route, also
making a large brew of strong green tea.
When the sun went down our four native guides
crouched round the fire showing every symptom of
terror at the darkness, while they endeavoured to explain
to us that at any moment hostile ? New Guinea boys
might spear the whole party without provocation.
But as they saw that we continued to eat and drink
much as we had done in the daylight their alarm
abated, till the discovery was made that their water
supply had run short; then, after much consultation
and singing they made a dive at the lire, and seizing
liresticks proceeded to walk the two hundred yards that
divided us from the river; but their fears got the better
of them, and before they had gone many paces they
returned in a stampede to the camp. Nothing would
induce them to repeat their attempt, and the result was
that two of us were obliged to brave meeting the
? devil devil,? and go and draw water for our guides.
Our tent appeared the picture of comfort, and w r e
all looked forward to an excellent night, but w'e had


reckoned without our billy of green tea. Of course
no one could ever feel sleepy after indulging his thirst
in such a beverage, and with much grumbling and
self-pity each one gradually adjourned to the fire and
prepared to wait until daylight should enable us to start
and shoot. There was one aggravating exception,
however, who slept as though he had gone tealess to
bed in his own comfortable hammock.
In the morning we all forgot our troubles and were
eager to be away, anxious to shoot some of the
?gowra gowra ? pigeons, which are as large as small
turkeys and have beautiful grey crests resembling a
feathery fern of fine texture. We were in good luck,
and procured several, but it was most difficult to preserve
the skins on account of the red ants that swarmed over
everything they could reach. These pigeons were only
found in the dense bush around the river, and as the
undergrowth consisted chiefly of ? wait a bit ? ferns, so-
called from their insinuating thorns, the walking was
not altogether too agreeable. One is obliged to scramble
after a dusky gentleman without encumbrances in the
shape of gun or clothes, who takes, you through the
thick bush at a reckless pace, occasionally stopping to
point at a supposed pigeon whose whereabouts you have
to take on trust, as it is impossible to discover it with


your eye. We also got a quantity of duck and waterfowl
on the river and marshes, but our good fortune did not
extend to bagging a bird of paradise, which we should
have shot with the same satisfaction as the only woodcock
of the day at home.
A bathe in the river, after being so long without a
swim, was a real luxury. The natives warned us that
the river was full of alligators, but a midshipman is not
easily deterred by fear of danger. The bathe quite
equalled our expectations, but after we had emerged
from the river we were rather curdled by seeing a
real live alligator calmly gliding over the very water-
hole where we had been swimming. He disappeared
again too suddenly for our one rifle to be procured
and brought to bear upon him. There must have
been a great number of these animals in the river, for
when shooting we constantly came across their tracks
in the sand. After our bathe we partook of breakfast,
which was prepared for us by the champion gun-room
? x chaser,? which, to the uninitiated, means a midship-
man who can pursue the ? x ? of algebra with success.
We were delighted to find that he numbered cooking
among his other accomplishments.
After this repast we had a flying visit from our
Commander, who was out for a ride with otie or two


other people. Wishing to offer him the hospitality of
our camp, we put a megapode in the ?billy? to boil,
but when our backs were turned the guides made short
work of this dainty, although they had but recently
devoured two whole kangaroos, three pigeons, and a
hawk. And when we indignantly exclaimed, ? You bad
men, you no good,? they would only grin as though
waiting to do the same again at the first opportunity.
Our hospitable intentions thus frustrated, the visitors
had to fall back upon the tinned meats that they had
brought with them. Just then our ?Weston? strolled
over from the ship, making little of the ten miles in a
tropical sun, proposing to shoot all day, and stride home
in the evening. He was accompanied by another naval
officer who had started in canvas shoes, which weie
soon walked through, obliging him to complete the
journey in his socks. We were glad to welcome these
visitors, but their arrival must have been a tax upon
our cook, who doubtless found chasing the billy almost
as severe labour as pursuing his favourite ? x.?
We shot again that afternoon, and crossed the river
to visit a native village which we had heard was built in
the trees.* We certainly expected to see houses in trees,
* See Sketch on the outside wrapper.


but the actual sight of them perfectly astonished us.
'They were built in very slight, almost leafless trees, and
one house must have been at least eighty feet from the
ground. Experience has probably taught the inhabitants
that this kind of residence serves as a protection against
their foes, but we could not help thinking that with one
of our trade axes we could very quickly chop down the
whole village. The inhabitants appeared very friendly,
and offered us yams and sweet potatoes in exchange for
our sticks of tobacco, which do for money in this country.
These people resembled in appearance the other natives
we had seen, though with fewer ornaments. The men
were small in stature, and the women thickly tattooed
all over their bodies. After endeavouring to explain the
object of our visit by coo-cooing and quacking as well as
we were able, we managed to excite some interest in the
pursuit of pigeons and duck, and our party was soon
augmented by the presence of many volunteer guides.
These allies rushed for every bird that we shot, and,
despite our remonstrances, deprived it of all its principal
feathers to adorn their huge heads of hair, while the
empty cartridge was carried in triumph in the lobe of
their ear. As may be supposed, after this long day on
the top of a sleepless night, we were somewhat fatigued,
but the heat was so great, the temperature of the tent was


not to be borne. Accordingly, with the aid of our guides
some of us prepared beds of dried grass out in the
open, endeavouring by this means to smooth some of
the rocky places with a soft covering. When turning
m we placed our rugs as we thought upon the
grass and prepared to sleep, but were unable to
acknowledge that the trouble we had taken at all pro-
tected us from the sharp angles of the stones. Imagine
our disgust m the morning on finding that we resembled
Mark I? wain?s heroes, who on a Swiss mountain had
camped miserably beneath the shelter of a rock, to
discover in the morning that their rock was the front
door of an enormous hotel, for we had spread our
rugs upon the unyielding ground, while by our side
were the beautiful beds that we had prepared in the
dark. Daybreak again saw us in pursuit of game, and
after a mid-day meal we started back for the ship, well
pleased with our expedition.
The next morning the Nelson left for Hood Bay,
where she anchored that evening. About five miles
from this place is Kalo, said by Mr. Chalmers to be
the best built and cleanest village in New Guinea,
having about 2,500 inhabitants. Some four years ago
these people committed several very cruel murders, and
the Wolverene, then flag ship on the Australian station,


scut an expedition against them, when the Kalo men
wounded several blue jackets with their spears. Five
of the natives were killed, four of whom, strange to say,
had been concerned personally in the murders.
Arrived at Hood Bay a few of us went ashore
before dark, the village appearing a large one and
more promising than any we had yet seen. It was a
long pull on shore, but we managed to beach the boat
on the sand at the mouth of a large lagoon, where lay
the Espieglc, fully two miles further in than the
Nelson. This village is the great canoe building
centre along the coast, and the people are a very
warlike tribe.
The whole shore was one long stretch of cocoa-nut,
sago, and banana trees, almost as far as the eye could
reach; this must therefore be a very rich district. The
houses were as usual built on piles, but with more
attempt at style and ornamentation than any others we
had seen, many of them being conical in shape with
overhanging eaves decorated with shells and skulls of
kangaroo. We got many good spears here for two
slicks of tobacco a-piece, but when it was discovered
that one of us had in his possession a pig?s curly tusk
from the New Hebrides, all trade with tobacco was at
an end, and the owner of this treasure was so mobbed


and pressed with ?tom toms? and birds of paradise
that he became quite embarrassed, at his sudden
popularity.
In the morning the flag was hoisted in the square
of the village, which was named Espiegle Square by the
officers of that ship, who had been the first to land
there; and this name, printed on a board, was ostenta-
tiously displayed by one of the chiefs on the lower storey
of his family mansion. The usual ceremony was then
gone through before a very large assemblage of natives,
who grouped themselves on the platforms of their
houses and watched the proceedings with interest. The
chiefs here seemed more intelligent than any we had
come across, and judging from the questions they put
through the interpreter, appeared to understand a great
deal of the Proclamation and subsequent function.
The people were fine looking and well built, but
many were suffering from skin disease, which greatly
detracted from their appearance. We had here the honour
of being introduced to Koapena, the chief of Aroma,
who the missionaries told us was the finest chief they
knew in New Guinea. He certainly possessed a
magnificent physique and was the most muscular looking
native we had met. He had sixty-three blue tattoo
lines on his chest, which represented the number


of enemies he had slain, and was evidently a terrible
warrior.
After presents of bananas and cocoa-nuts had been
sent off to the ship, she started for Argyle Bay, which
place was reached that day at noon. A more perfectly
beautiful spot than this would be hard to discover. A
large harbour surrounded on all sides by hills covered
with most luxuriant tropical growth right down to the
water?s edge, while here and there a village peeped out
from among the palm trees along some sandy beach.
After an hour or so canoes put off to the ship, but
with a degree of caution that caused much amusement.
They lay a long way off, and were with difficulty
enticed alongside, with the exception of one containing
a very small boy, who boarded us and harangued the
ship in the most self-possessed manner. He was a
sturdy little fellow, with a bushy head, a stick through
his nose, and a line of black paint from each corner
of his mouth to his ears, with another streak of black
beneath each eye. Around his loins he wore a girdle
of his own hair attached to a band of dried banana leaf.
For the most part the natives were small and puny,
while the peculiar skin disease before noticed appeared
more prevalent than ever.
In the morning the flag was hoisted at the nearest


village before a small and very inattentive audience of the
inhabitants, who during the ceremony were more busy
prowling round to annex unclaimed property or filch
unprotected pockets, than in listening to the message
of peace from her Majesty Queen ? Vittoria.? It
was here that Mr. Chalmers was attacked when he
first landed, so it was probably from the promptings
of an evil conscience that our arrival caused terror in
their midst.
We did not lose much time here, and after takino-
' O
some chiefs on board, and vainly trying to persuade
them to eat rice instead of escaping through the ports
and over the side, the ship got under way for South
Cape, which place was reached that evening. This,
also, was a most beautiful harbour, somewhat resembling
Argyle Bay. There is a large and most comfortable
Mission House built here, and Mr. and Mrs. Lawes went
on shore to take up their abode there soon after our
arrival. The natives of the villages around this harbour
have until quite recently been cannibals, but since the
arrival of the missionaries, the practice of cannibalism
has almost ceased.
The flag was hoisted next morning in front of the
Mission House on Stacey Island, and as there was a
large open beach, the business was more easy than


usual. There chanced to be a few small palms, under
which I was gratefully standing, enjoying their shade,
but the lynx eye of our photographer soon lighted upon
these waving boughs, and summoning his assistant the
usual raid was commenced against their natural enemies,
with the result that before long I found myself shelterless
beneath a blazing sun.
After the hoisting a party under the leadership of
Mr. Chalmers started to ascend Cloudy Mountain,
which is about 4,060 feet high, and as there is no
track and the whole face is covered with thick bush,
the task before them was not an easy one. At night it
came on to rain heavily, preventing all efforts to light
a fire, but a Union Jack was hoisted on the summit,
and on their return the members of this adventurous
party refused to own that they had passed anything
but a comfortable night among the clouds. The less
energetic contented themselves with paddling, or rather
being paddled around the lagoon in canoes, and
gliding quietly up the innumerable little creeks in
search of pigeon and duck. These creeks, shaded by
overhanging trees, are the most ideal streams imagin-
able, but being excessively shallow are often only
navigable by canoes.
The next morning we got under way for Dinner Island,


one of the islands in the Goschen Straits. This island
belongs to the Mission ; it is well cultivated and perfectly
kept. All kinds of orchids and crotons are here in
abundance.
In the evening several chiefs came on board from
the islands and mainland, and partook of our usual
hospitality. They all talked a strange tongue, which
was perfectly unintelligible to Mr. Lawes, or to the
natives we had brought with us from Port Moresby.
It really seems as if the curse of Babel had fallen on
this country, no two villages of any considerable
distance apart speaking the same language. The
assembled chiefs were a great addition to our after-
dinner smoking circle; and our torpedo lieutenant
contributed largely to the amusement of the evening by
arriving on the scene with an electric battery, which
had a great success among the natives, who roared
with laughter as each one in turn took a try at this
wonderful medicine.
The Espiegle arrived in the evening from Basilica,
at which place they had called to land the returned
labourers who had been kidnapped by the schooner
Hopeful and taken to Queensland some months since.
These men we had brought round with us from Port
Moresby. The people on shore were found in deep


mourning, and had evidently been in great grief at
the loss of so many of their number. The natives as
they landed were received with acclamations of joy,
while the chief said to Mr. Chalmers, ? You have
brought them to us out of the grave, but where are
the remainder ? If you will bring them back we will
give you a whole shipful of pigs! ? The chief absolutely
refused to come on board, or assist in any manner at
the hoisting of the flag, till the whole of those who had
been kidnapped were restored. There was a goodly show
of natives, however, when this ceremony was performed
on Dinner Island, and those present appeared to stand fire
in the shape of a feu de joie better than most inhabitants
of New Guinea. By-the-bye it is an odd thing that there
is no English equivalent for feu de joie, and the varied
pronounciation it receives from the firers thereof is most
amusing.
At i p.m. we left for Killerton Island. As usual
we found most of the islands rather out of position.
Both here and at Dinner Island it is difficult to find
an anchorage, on account of the great depth of water.
The Swinger arrived in the evening, bringing in
three chiefs, one of them having been found actually
in the act of devouring two men he had killed that
morning. He had also killed a woman, but thrown


her away as uneatable. This hero was so gorged that
he could scarcely stand ; however, they induced him to
come on board, he stipulating that he should be allowed
to bring his son with him. Some of us went ashore
on the mainland before dark, taking our guns, but the
natives dived into the bush at our approach, leaving-
no one in the village but one poor woman, who was too
lame to walk. But, while wandering in search of pigeons,
some of us came across a few men, who being persuaded
of our peaceful intentions, followed in our train, bubbling
with conversation. There was not much to fear from
these people however, though many of them wore tattoo
marks upon their chests, in token of having killed some
man, woman, or child. As I have before mentioned, to
possess this badge without having duly earned it, is a
grave offence. But it must not be supposed that their
distinction is always obtained in fair fight, for a native
will watch his opportunity for weeks, and when at length
he catches his enemy asleep, will first wound him and
then keep him alive till all the men of his village have
had a dig with their spears into his unfortunate body.
All these desperate warriors will henceforth be entitled
to have a tattoo upon their chests. Notwithstanding
their murderous proclivities, they were rather fine-looking
fellows, wearing for dress the same girdle made of their


own hair as we saw at Argyle Bay and Dinner Island.
Some of our party missed the boat, but eventually
managed by ranch making of signs to procure canoes
to bring them off to the ship. We felt it a great
assistance possessing the moral force of the Nelson at
anchor in the bay, for without it I doubt whether the
escort or canoes would have been so readily forthcoming;
even as it was our guides could not help feeling the
legs and thighs of the plumpest of our party with the
most suggestive grunts of approval.
The next morning, in pouring rain, we started to
hoist the flag before the Mission station on the island,
and although there was a tribal war in full swing at
that moment, the belligerent chiefs did not seem to
object meeting one another at the ceremony, or disdain
to share the same basin of rice on board later on.
There were a few wounded warriors on shore with
rather nasty spear thrusts through their arms and legs.
It is almost impossible to fathom the reason of these
fights, but as a rule it is the old case of Cherchez
la femme. Frequently they arise from the superstition
of the natives, who are unable to believe that a man
in the prime of life can possibly die from natural
causes. Therefore his demise is supposed to have been


caused by the spirits of his departed enemies. The
wise men of the district are even prepared to name
the tribe to which these vindictive spirits had belonged
when in the flesh, and it then remains a point of
honour with the relations of the deceased to avenge
his death upon the particular tribe thus accused as his
murderers.
After hoisting the flag and entertaining the chiefs on
board, we steamed back to Dinner Island to pick up our
mail, and then on as fast as the Chief Engineer could
take us to Teste Island. The whole afternoon it poured
with rain, making it very difficult to see reefs or the
discoloured water which betokens their presence.
We managed to arrive before dark, overtaking the
Espiegle and the Raven, and anchored in something-
like an open roadstead. In the morning we landed,
but the place was so shallow that we had to be put
ashore by the skiff and dingy. One of the boat loads
managed to get swamped, and its occupants were
obliged to wade on shore, a midshipman gallantly
saving the colours and heroically bearing them through
two feet of water.
The natives here almost pretended to be civilized,
on the strength of having had some dealings with


traders. They knew the value of a stick of tobacco,
and appreciated the difference between an axe that was
sharp and one with a jagged edge. During the ceremony
they all preserved an unbroken silence, and when one
individual, proud of possessing the only hat in the
community, continued to wear it upon his head during
the performance of ? God save the Queen,? he was
rushed at by his countrymen, who forcibly removed
this covering from its place.
The Commodore said a few appropriate words as we
concluded the task that had been assigned to us, having,
I venture to suppose, established the Protectorate over
these shores in as thorough a manner as it was possible
to do. Also, it must not be forgotten that for six
weeks we had been cruising in almost unsurveyed seas,
teeming with rocks and reefs of coral. Our ship was
of course by far the largest that has entered these waters;
but thanks to our Captain and the skill of our celebrated
Staff-Commander, we had safely weathered all dangers.
After returning on board from Teste Island we got
up steam for Sydney, and away to civilization, each one
of us carrying away a stock of yarns and personal
experiences sufficient to drown the conversation of any
ordinary shore-going people..


We arrived in Sydney early on the morning of
Tuesday, December 2nd; our Chief Engineer having
taken us the distance of 1,460 miles in five days
sixteen hours. Considering the length of time since
the ship had been in dock this was good going, and
not a bad record for the last run of the commission.


�
I


?
? 4
