

OUR
KILTED
SOLDIERS






Our Kilted Soldiers.


In the garb of old Gaul, with the fire of
old Rome,
From the heath covered mountains of
Scotia we come.
Our loud sounding pipe jareathes the
true martial ?te*n,
And our hearts still the old Scottish
valour retain.
Sir Harry Erskine.
[all rights reserved,]


Our Kilted Soldiers.
G tile an an fheilidh.
:o:
WHO THEY AEE,
AND
WHAT THEY HAVE DONE.
BY
DAVID B. WALKER,
Author of “Donald Mackenzie,” etc., etc.
Nemo me impune lacessit.




THIS LITTLE WORK
is
DEDICATED
. TO
The Hon. Sir JOHN McINTYRL, K.C.M.G., M.P., &c.
ANI) THE
Office-Bearers and Members of the
CALEDONIAN SOCIETY,
AND
THE SCOTTISH THISTLE CLUB
OF VICTORIA,
By their Fellow-Countryman,
The Author.
St. Kilda,
20th September, 1898.




CONTENTS.
PAGE
Introductory - - - 1
Origin . - - - 3
Black Watch - - - -7
Gordon Highlanders - - - “21
Sutherland Highlanders - - - 35
Cameron Highlanders - - - 43
Highland Light Infantry - - 47
Seaforth Highlanders - - 53
Ancient Corps - - - - 55
'Conclusion - - - - 63




Our Kilted Soldiers.
INTRODUCTORY.
“How wild the work of Highland steel,
When conquered thousands backward reel,
See, see the warriors of the North,
To death or glory rustling forth.”
Alexander Mac Lagan.
npHE enthusiastic manner in which the
proposition to form a Scottish
Volunteer Regiment has been taken up
is the cause of this little brochure. Scots
soldiers have played their part so manfully
in all parts of the world that every British
military history has perforce much to say
of them and their doings, and these records
form part of the glorious heritage that
every man of Scots blood enjoys.
The latest development of this martial
spirit is being shown in our own colony,
where
“Brogues and brochan and a’,
Brochan and brogues and a’,
And up with the bonnie blue bonnet,
The kilt, the feather and a’..
promises to become as popular as at the
mess table of the Gordon Highlanders.


The writer was pleasantly surprised
with the outbreak of national feeling from
Scottish born and Scottish descended alike,
and it seemed to him that a short account
of some of the innumerable incidents,
that go to make up the stirring story of
our “ Highland Regiments,” might be
-acceptable to those who have neither the
time nor opportunity to consult the
numerous histories and accounts that
teem with spirit-moving stories of Scot-
tish valour.
The work was one of great difficulty,
simply on account of the superabundance
of magnificent material lying to hand.
Self restraint of the most severe kind has
had to be practised in order to keep the
work within the prescribed bounds ; the
object being merely to whet the appetite
which may be further gratified by a
perusal of the pages of Murray, Grant and
-other military writers, who have loved to
descant on the doings of
Our Kilted Soldiers*


ORIGIN.
A century and a half ago the Highlanders
were regarded as little better than savages,
their dress, language and manners being
constant subjects of ridicule by their
southern neighbours, who, on account of
the well-known attachment of the clans
to the Stuarts, distrusted and suspected
the fidelity of the Highlanders. In this
mistrust and suspicion the Government
shared. “In fact,” says Macaulay, “when
the English thought of the Highlander at
all, and it was seldom they did so, they
considered him as a filthy abject savage, a
slave, a papist, a cut-throat and a thief.”
According to the historian, this pleasing
estimate was very near the truth. He
seemed to feel a cruel pleasure in exposing
the weaknesses of those whose blood
flowed in his own veins. Doubtless, he
meant, by depicting in lurid language the
frailties of the Highlanders, to show his
own impartiality. He quoted largely from
“Burt’s Letters,” and gave credence to all
that writer said against the Highlanders,
without reflecting that Burt, as an officer
of engineers employed under General
Wade in making roads through the High-
lands, was disliked and execrated by the
Gael, and heartily returned these senti-
ments.
or. Johnson,
too, although of Scottish descent, went to
the Highlands full of bitter prejudice
against everything Scottish. This pre-
judice was much softened by the


hospitality shown him in the Highlands,
and a reaction in favour of the plaided
denizens of the north was caused by the
publication of Johnson’s “Tour to the
Hebrides.” Then came the booming of
the Highlands by the glowing pictures
painted by Scott, which caused a furore
for everything Highland. Royalty itself
condescended to listen to
Jacobite Songs,
the singing of which a few years earlier
would have cost the singers their liberty,
and in some cases their lives. The High-
land dress was assumed by many who had
no title to wear it, the tartan became a
favourite pattern of dress, every nook of
the Highlands was explored, the land of
Ossian became the land of Romance and
the inhabitants were invested with every
virtue.
The Gallant Deeds
performed by the Highland regiments in
every quarter of the globe added to tire
general enthusiasm for Caledonia. It was
long, however, before the Government
would trust the Scots. They disliked and
distrusted the clan spirit whick they
feared was favourable to the Stuarts, and
it was not until 1730 that the first experi-
ment was made by raising six companies
of Highlanders. Each company was in-
dependent of the other, but the regiment


was known as Freicudan Dhu, or
Black Watch,
to distinguish them from the Saidairean
:Dearg or Red Soldiers. There was no lack
of men, gentlemen of good family being
only too proud to serve as privates under
their native officers who were their clans-
men and relatives. One reason for this
was that the whole country had been dis-
armed, and, as the bearing of arms in the
Highlands was considered an unfailing
mark of gentle blood, the restriction, to
these proud, haughty mountain spirits,
was intolerable. No gentleman, even in
times of peace, went abroad without his
dirk and claymore, and, therefore, the in-
dignity of being forbidden to wear arms
was keenly felt. The newly-raised regi-
ment was stationed in small detachments
about the country doing duties now per-
formed by the police. In 1739 four
additional companies were raised, and the
whole formed into a regiment of line,
vender the famous name of the Black
Watch. The work of enlistment in the
Highland Regiments
went on apace. Between 1778 and 1804
the Highlands contributed no less than
Eighty Thetisand Men
to the service of the Empire. The country
was, of course, more thickly populated
then, and every glen and strath poured


out its living tide of belted, plaided, stal-
wart young warriors until in eighty-six
regiments the Celt was predominant
The great
Lord Chatham,
in a stirring speech that should be known
to every man of Scottish blood, took
credit to himself for this happy conversion
of a fierce, turbulent foe into one of the-
best bulwarks of the State. He said, “ I
sought for merit where it was to be found.
It was my boast that I was the first
minister who looked for it and found it in
the mountains of the North. I called it
forth and drew into your service a
Hardy and Intrepid Race
of men, who, when left alone by your
jealousy, became a prey to the artifice of
your enemies, and had gone nigh to have
overturned the State in the war before
the last. These men in the last war were
brought to combat by your side. They
served you with fidelity and they fought
with valour, and conquered for you in
every part of the world.”


BLACK WATCH
“■A feather in his bonnet, and a kilt
aboon his knee,
He’s a bonnie Highland laddie I . .
Incorporation.
The following is the letter of service by
■which the Independent Corps of the
Freicudan Dhu became the 43rd, and
afterwards the 42nd Begiment of the
Line
“ George B. Whereas we have
thought fit that a Begiment of Foot be
formed under your command, and to con-
sist of ten companies, each to contain one
captain, one lieutenant, one ensign, three
sergeants, three corporals, two drummers
and one hundred effective private men •,
which said regiment shall be formed out
of six Independent Companies of Foot in
the Highlands of North Britain, three of
which are now commanded by captains,
and three by captain-lieuten nts: Our
will and our pleasure, therefore, is that
one sergeant, one corporal and fifty pri-
vate men be forthwith taken out of the
three companies commanded by captains,,
and ten private men from the three com-
manded by -captain-lieu- mants, making
one hundred and eight ~ nen, who are to-
be equally distributed n the four com-
panies hereby to be raised ; and the three


sergeants'and three corporals draughted
as aforesaid to be placed to such of the
four companies as you shall judge proper.
and the remainder of the non-commission-
ed officers and private men, wanted to
•omplete them to the above number, to
be raised in the Highlands with all possible
speed, the men to be natives of the coun-
try and none other to be taken. The
regiment shall commence and take place
according to the establishment thereof.
And of these, our orders and commands,
you and the said three captains, and the
three captain-lieutenants, commanding at
present the six Independent Highland
Companies, and all others concerned, are to
take notice and yield obedience thereunto
aocordingly.
Given at our Court of St. James, this
7th day of November, 1739, and in
the thirteenth year of our reign.
By His Majesty’s command,
(Signed) William Yongb.
To our right trusty and well-beloved
cousin John, Earl of Crauford and
Lindsay.”
j-
Raising Regiments.
Every gentleman of g >od birth wh#
raised one hundred men was appointed a
•aptain, and throughout the Highland regi-
ments Gaelic was spoken alike by officers
and men. Even the chaplains were Higk-
landers, and so intense became the feeling


that men of other nationalities who sought
admission had to resort to all kinds of
devices before being allowed to enlist,
although the bounty money was only a
crown.
Paddy Re*ehristened.
In Glasgow eighteen Irishmen were
smuggled into a Highland regiment ; but
as it was known that the colonel, Lord
Murray, would have none but Highlanders,
Pat O’Donnell became Dougal Macdonald,
Tim O’Brien masqueraded as Donald
Macßrier, while the O’Loghlens were
transmuted into douce MacLachlans, and
so evaded the colonel’s suspicion. The
incident is said to have been paralleled by
the Dunedin contractor who tendered for
a corporation work as Donald McTavish,
but who, when called in to sign the con-
tract, proved to be an unmistakable
Chinaman, who had taken the only means
possible of having his tender considered.
- Who Joined ?
The Lowland Scots seldom entered
these regiments, and at the battle of
Fentenoy not one of the soldiers in the
Black Watch had been born south of the
Grampians; while of the Milesian High-
landers only two remained alive. The
enlisting officers could always pick and
•hoose since recruits were more numerous
than were required ; the hardy moun-
taineers enlisting not for gold but for
§k>ry. Nowadays the Highland recruit*


barely supply the requirements of a
couple of regiments, whereas in the first
forty years of this century the Isle of
Skye, which is only forty-five miles in
length by fifteen in width, alone supplied
twenty-one generals, forty-live colonels
and sixty other officers, besides 10,000
privates and 120|pipers.
Religious Soldiers.
The Highlanders in the army have
always been noted for their strict atten-
tion to religious observances, although
this strain of sincere piety has never had
the effect of weakening their fighting
qualities. “The army swore terribly in
Flanders,” it is true, but the Highland
soldiers were always noted for their seem-
ly behaviour and language. When the.
42nd visited London it was noted with
surprise, according to an English historian,
that “ these savages, from officers to com-
mon men, before commencing a meal,
first stood up and pulled off: their bonnets,
then, raising their eyes in a devout man-
ner, muttered something in their own
gibberish as if they had been so many
Christians ! ” —So much for intelligent,
courteous criticism.
Fighting Parsons
were not uncommon in the Highland
regiments since the chaplains did not
scruple to freely expose themselves to fire
in order to encourage young soldiers by


their example. This was specially notice-
able in the American war. Where no
ehaplains were attached to the regiments
the soldiers themselves subscribed funds
for the payment of elders. The advan-
tages of this widespread religious feeling
were shown in the freedom from vice and
petty crime enjoyed by the Highland
regiments as compared with soldiers in
the other branches of the British Army.
Classical Scholars
were by no means rare among the rank
and file, and the narrowminded critics,
who considered Gaelic a gibberish not
likely to be understood by the Creator,
would have been surprised, as were the
Continental priests, to hear common sol-
diers among these petticoated savages
conversing freely in the language of
ancient Rome with foreigners who knew
no English, and with whose language the
Highlanders were unacquainted. This
surprising proficiency was, of course, due
to the high character and cheapness of
parish school education throughout
Scotland.
Rigid Honesty,
as a rule, characterised their monetary
dealings, care being taken by them, of
course, that they personally suffered
nc loss. On one occasion, a Highland
regiment landed in Ireland, and on their
entrance into the town of Waterford were


paid billet money. The same evening
they received orders to march to New
Itoss where they were provided for. Most
soldiers would have looked upon the
Waterford money as a fair perquisite, but
these men returned it to the paymaster.
Mo Flogging
was the rule in the Highland regiments at
a time when the triangles were con-
stantly in use and but few soldiers’ backs
were unscarred by the cat. For forty
years there was not a single case of flog-
ging in the 42nd regiment, and but few
courtmartials. When, however, the
foreign element was introduced in the
>H ighland regiments, crime became more
frequent, although old soldiers refused to
•associate with those who had been flogged;
while in other regiments a flogging was
merely looked upon as a misfortune not
necessarily detrimental to a man’s charac-
ter or standing among his fellows. So
strong was the feeling of disgrace attach-
ed by these simple-minded men to flog-
ging that it was no uncommon thing in
the Scottish regiments, after the foreign
element had introduced corporal punish-
ment where hitherto it had been unknown,
for the regiment to subscribe the neces-
sary funds to
Purchase the Discharge
of a man that had been flogged.


The 42nd distinguished itself at Fon-
tenoy by a
mode of warfare
which surprised friends and foes alike,
but which has since been recognised as a
telling manoeuvre when infantry are ex-
posed to artillery. Unable to get at the
French infantry which were strongly en-
trenched, and, unable to use their clay-
mores with effect, the Black Watch
marched to the ground with bagpipes
playing. They took up a position, fired a
volley, and then threw themselves flat on
the ground, allowing the French fire to
pass over them. The only exception was
the colonel, Sir Robert Monroe, who.
standing erect, received the enemy’s fire
unhurt, he being
too fat
to lie down, except at the risk of neve] 1
rising again.
One man of the 42nd, at Fontenoy,
killed nine Frenchmen with his claymore
while a young sergeant of the 78th, in
Egypt, disposed of half a-dozen French-
men in the same manner. He fought their
bayonets, and was eventually killed from
behind with a sabre.
Major Murray, in the American war of
1776, was attacked by three Yankees. His
dirk slapped behind his back, and, being
very corpulent, he could not reach it, but
was forced to
defend himself


with his fusil, until, snatching a sword
from one assailant, he put the three to
flight.. During the same war a young re-
cruit slew seven of the enemy, his bayonet,
at the close of the engagement, being
twisted like a corkscrew.
Marshal Saxe, describing Fontenoy,
says: “ The British behaved well and
could be exceeded in ardour by none of
our officers, who animated their troops by
their example, when the
Highland furies
unshed in upon us with more violence
than ever did a sea driven by a tempest.”
It is noteworthy that the 42nd and 76th
regiments went through no less than five
hard-fought campaigns without one man
deserting.
At Tel-el-Kebir Sir Archibald Alison’s
Highland Brigade consisted of veterans,
covered with medals, and of whom none
had seen less than seven years’ service.
One writer says: "How grandly these
sturdy Scotsmen did look as they formed
up under the eye of their leader, the
one-armed General,
whom they all loved.
At the same battle Sergeant McNeill,
one of the finest soldiers ki the forces,
killed six of the enemy with his claymore
before he fell. He was the sole support
of his widowed mother and had remained
unmarried for her sake.


The bulk of the members of the Black
Watch were men of good birth and po-
sition. and, like the musketeers of Louis
XIV., „in many cases kept servants al-
though themselves ranking as private
soldiers. This did not, however, in any
way militate against the
proper performance
of their military duties, but induced a
loftiness of spirit and sense of duty that
caused their conduct to be marked by an
■exactness and conscientiousness not always
noticeable in the ranks. This feeling was
well exemplified in the case of Privates
McGregor and Campbell who were sum-
moned to appear at Windsor before the
King to give an illustration of the national
-dances. After dancing and exercising in
-a manner that won the
admiration of King George,
that by no means generous monarch pre-
sented each of the men with a guinea—no
mean sum in those days. From royalty
the gift even of money could not be re-
fused ; but, as the men passed out, they
tossed the King-given guineas to the
lodge porter, and trudged away to their
barracks penniless but undegraded in their
-own eyes by the receipt of what, to their
proud spirit, seemed alms.
In 1743, when in Flanders, the 42nd
were attacked by a number of
Frenchmen in disguise


at L’Orient, the attacking 1 party having 1
clad themselves so that in the dim light
they looked like Highlanders. By this
trick they gained such an advantageous
position that, with their superiority of
numbers, victory seemed certain. The
indignation of the Highlanders was so
great, however, when they found out the
trick, that they, regardless of position or
numerical disparity, repulsed the
French shams
with such angry vigour that before long:
they were driving their deceivers before
them.
America, including the West Indies, was
their next scene of service, and how well
they acquitted themselves may be imagined
from an impassioned address made in
1785 in Nova Scotia by Major-General
Campbell when presenting the regiment
with new oolours. He said, referring to
their conduct at Fontenoy, “As long as
the bravery of the fifteen battalions at
that conflict shall
grace the historic page
and fill the breast of every Highlander
with pleasure and admiration, so long will
the
superior gallantry
of the 42nd bear a conspicuous part in the
well-fought action of that day, and be
recorded in the annals of Fame to our


latest posterity.” Painful duty in the
Highland troubles at the time of the
French Revolution followed, varied by
service in the West Indies and Mediter-
ranean. Then came
snore congenial work
when, in 1801, they landed at Aboulcir and
in company with other Highland regi-
ments did so much to win Alexandria,
where they beat Napoleon’s proudly-
named Invincible Legion. It was in this
action that their general, Sir Ralph Aber-
cromby, seeing them almost overcome, and
unable to send them reinforcements, cried,
“My brave Highlanders!
remember your country, remember your
forefathers ! ” Such w T as the inspiriting
character of this direct personal appeal to
men imbued with the old clan spirit that
the result was read in general orders after
the engagement where it was stated “ The
conduct of each man
exalted still more
the high character of the regiment. Fresh
glories awaited them in the Peninsula,
where, almost from the outset, they were
engaged. The poet tells us that—
“On dark Corunna’s woeful day,
When Moore’s brave spirit passed away,
Our Highlandmen, they firmly stood,
Nor France’s marshalled armies could
Break through the men of Scotland!”'
B


At the battle of Toulouse Sir Denis
Pack obtained leave for the 42nd to lead
the attack, and what that meant can be
understood when we read that out of five
hundred men who gaily followed their
leaders, scarce ninety lived to reach the
redoubt.
At Quatre Bras, Marshal Ney’s princi-
pal attack was directed against the 42nd
and 92nd ; while, at Waterloo, Sir Denis
Pack summed up his feelings in the terse
speech : “ You have
saved the day, Highlanders.”
“ And on the plain of Waterloo,
The world confessed the bravest few
Were kilted men frae Scotland!”
In the Crimea they, with the 79th and
93rd, formed the Highland Brigade,
and such was the steadfast character of
their action that they were described as
those
“Rocks of Gaelic Infantry.”
In the Indian Mutiny they, like all the
Highland regiments, took an active part
throughout. Still later, when the Gor-
dons and Camerons forming the apex of a
triangle at Tel-el-Kebir, were manfully
withstanding “countless hordes of sav-
ages,” the Black Watch also retained its
historic renown.
At the engagement of Tamai, on the
Bed Sea, in 1884, a battle described by
chroniclers as
peculiar for its cruelty,


where the enemy lost fully 4000 against
the British loss of 220 in killed and
wounded, the Black Watch, Gordons and
other Highland regiments were ever in
the front. It was in this engagement
that Private Thomas Edwards, of the
42nd, by
daring bravery
in a moment of apparent repulse, won the
tenth Victoria Cross given in the regi-
ment since the Indian Mutiny.
Donald 'versus Jonathan.
Sergeant Macgregor, of the Forty
Second, during an engagement with the
Americans in the War of Independence,
was severely wounded and lay insensible
on the ground. Unlike Captain Crawley,
who donned his oldest uniform for
Waterloo so as to increase the value of
the effects he was leaving to his prospec-
tive widow, the artless Becky Sharp, the
sergeant was apparently a bit of a dandy,
and had dressed himself as if for a ball
instead of a battle. He wore a new
jacket resplendent with silver lace, silver
buckles on his shoes, and a handsome
watch. This display of wealth aroused
the cupidity of an American soldier, who,
to strip the Highlander without inter-
ference, hoisted him on his back and
startct for his own lines. The rough
motion of his human steed revived Mac,
who at once realised the position. With
one hand he drew his dirk, while with the


other he grasped the Yankee’s throat.
He promised to stab his would-be captor
to the heart unless he conveyed him to
the British camp. A none too gentle
prod from the dirk convinced Jonathan
his jockey was in earnest, and puffing and
blowing he obeyed. The pair met Lord
Cornwallis, who thanked the American
for his supposed humanity. When, how-
ever, the true facts of the case were
shamefacedly admitted by the American,
the commander-in-chief laughed loudly
and released Macgregor’s prisoner. When,
later on, the worthy sergeant retired from
the service, his lordship procured for him
a post in the Leith customs house, con-
sidering, no doubt, that a man who could
entrap a Yankee would be more than a
match for the wiliest of smugglers.
Colours and Distinctions.
The Black Watch bear on their colours,
the Royal Cypher within the G-arter, the
Royal Cypher ensigned with the Imperial
Crown and the insignia of St. Andrew, and
also the names of the following battles :
“Mysore,” “Mangalore,” “ Seringapatam,’’
“Egypt,” (the Sphinx superscribed), “Co-
runna,” “Fuentes ’d Onor,” “Pyrenees,”
“Nivelle,” “Nive,” “ Orthes,” “Toulouse,”
“ peninsula,” “Waterloo,” “ South Africa,
1846-7, 1851-2-3,” “Alma,” “Sevastopol,”
“ Lucknow,” “ Egypt, 1882-4,” “ Tel-el-
Kebir,” “ Nile, 1884-5.” “ Kirbekan.” The
facings are blue, with kilt.


THE GORDON
HIGHLANDERS.
“The Gordon is gude in a hurry,
And Campbell is steel to the bane ;
And Grant and Mackenzie and Murray
And Cameron will hurkle to nane.
The Stewart is sturdy and wannel,
And sae is Macleod and Mackay;
And I, their gude brither Macdonald,
Sail never be last in the fray! ”
This world-famous corps comprises
two regiments, the 75th and 92nd. The
75th was raised in 1787, and three years
after enrolment was engaged in India
against Tippoo, under Lord Cornwallis.
At Siddapore, Seringapatam, Bhurtpore
and numerous other places in India, the
regiment gained great honour, and so
severely did the twenty years’ fighting
tell on them that a month after their re-
turn to England in 1807 only forty-four
men remained. During the following year
they were forced to discard the Highland
uniform, and it was not until 1882 that
they were restored to equality with their
brethren of the Ninety Twa by being
allowed to resume
the Kilts.


If “ every soil is to a brave man his father-
land,” mere change of dress does not de-
crease his courage. So during the three
parts of a century that the soldiers of the
75th were without their national dress,
their prowess was well shown, princi-
pally in India, where, at Bhurtpore and
numerous other places, they were ever in
the very front of the fight. In 1835,
the first year after their Indian career
that they were engaged in any campaign
of note, they earned “ South Africa ” as a
distinction in a small Cape war. More
piping times of peace followed, until the
terrible war-cloud of the
Indian Mutiny
broke. Says the historian: —“ Early in
the morning of the Bth of June, 1857, the
army having started at one o’clock in the
morning, came upon a strong body of
mutineers, with twelve pieces of artillery.
The order was given, “ Charge, and carry
those guns! ” With a loud and hearty
cheer —almost a hoarse roar of joy that
they were about to grapple with the des-
troyers of so many innocent people—Her
Majesty’s 75th, or Stirlingshire Regiment
as it was then called, swept in line to the
front under a storm of musketry, and
carried the guns by the bayonet, driving
back the Sepoys. The 75th joined Sir
Colin Campbell’s force for the relief of
Lucknow, and were placed in charge of
the Alumbagh, where they repulsed an
attempt made to take it by the enemy,.


Amongst the awards of the
Victoria Sross
was one to Ensign K. Wadeson (who had
risen from the ranks and eventually be-
came Lieutenant-Colonel of the regiment)’
for the gallant manner in which, at im-
minent risk to himself, he saved the lives
of two men. The other crosses were
gained by men of the 75th at Budlee-ke-
Serai. Private Corbett lay wounded and
surrounded by the enemy. Sergeant
Coghlan of the 75th did not “ like ” this
arrangement, and forthwith, with three of
his comrades to help him, entered the
Serai where Corbett lay and brought him
back to the British lines. Later on he
displayed conspicuous coolness and cour-
age, and attained the coveted honour of a
V.C. The third cross fell to Private
Green, who, seeing a wounded comrade in
imminent risk of being butchered, “ went
out into the open and undei a fire
carried him back.” Before the mutiny
was finally quelled, the 75th did good ser-
vice in Oude under Captain Brookes.
With the exception of somi desultory
skirmishing with the Kaffir tribes in
1872 -74, no further active service of note
fell to the share of the 75th till the recent
Egyptian campaign. Here they were in
the Third Brigade under Sir Archibald
Alison, and found plenh- of opportunities
for the display of thei- dour. After a
period spent in more or :ss unimportant
skirmishing, the Highland Brigade at the


end of August were ordered to Ismailia,
arriving there early in September, and in
the march to Kasassin, which immediately
follower!, the columns were led by the
‘■Gordon Highlanders. At Tel-el-Kebir
they, with the Cameron Highlanders, were
for a time, as has been before observed, in
the position of the ‘apex of a wedge’
thrust into the heart of the Egyptian
army, and being opposed by the Ist
Guards of Arabi’s forces, experienced
some severe fighting. Their loss was one
officer and five non-coms, and men killed,
one officer and twenty-nine non-coms, and
men wounded. This phase of the war
was now practically over, as predicted by
Sir Garnet Wolseley, and the Gordon
Highlanders had added ‘ Egypt ’ and ‘ Tel-
el-Kebir ’ to the list of their honours. At
the grand review, which was held in Cairo,
it is related by a Scottish writer that the
regiment was preceded by the ‘ dog of the
regiment, Juno,’ who went with it into
Tel-el-Kebir, and was decorated with a
handsome silver collar.”
Colours and Distinctions.
The Gordon Highlanders bear as badges
the Thistle on cap and the Royal Tiger
on collar ; on the buttons the Sphinx and
“Egypt,” with the Cross o£ St. Andrew
and the Royal Tiger; the inotto is
“Bydand,” the motto of the Marquis of
Huntly. On their colours are the names:
“Seringapatam,” “India,” “Egmont-op-
Zee,” “Mandora.” “Egypt,” “Corunna,”


“Fuentes d’Onor“Almaraz,” “Vittoria,”
“Pyrenees,” “Nive,” “Orthes,” “Penin-
sula,” “Waterloo,” “ South Africa, 1885,”
“ Delhi,” “ Lucknow,” “ Charasiah,” “ Ka-
bul, 1879,” “Kandahar, 1880,” “Afghanis-*
tan, 1878-80,” “Egypt, 1882-84,” “Tel-el-
Kebir,” “Nile, 1884-85.” The uniform is
scarlet, with facings of yellow, and kilt,
and the head-dress the “feather bonnet.”
The more famous Second Battalion of
the Gordon Highlanders consists of the old
Ninety-Second,
a regiment whose career has been as ad-
venturous as its origin was romantic. The
regiment was raised in 1794 by the Mar-
quis of Huntly, afterwards the last Duke
of Gordon, and the story is familiar to
every one how the beautiful duchess, his
mother, assisted to recruit her son’s regi-
ment, placing —when all other arguments
failed —the given bounty between her
peerless lips. To quote a somewhat
hackneyed modern song, many were the
stalwart Highlanders who gladly allowed
themselves to be thus “ bought and sold
for a kiss.” More fortunate than the
First Battalion our heroes were, from the
formation of the regiment, engaged in
Continental Service.
For the first few years of their existence
Gibralta and Corsica were the scenes of
their exploits; but in 1798 the regiment,
which had hitherto been known as the


100th, received its present number, and ia-
the following spring joined the Russo-
British Expedition in Holland against the
French. The historians tell us they dis-
played signal courage at Oude Sluys, Aik-
maar and Egmont-op-Zee in this campaign.
From Holland, after a short spell of un-
important service on the coast of France,
they went to Egypt, where, in March,
1801, they joined Abercrombie at Aboukir
Bay. Five days after landing the Gordon
Highlanders led the left column at Man-
dora and, making a brilliant charge, cap-
tured a battery. It is noteworthy that
the landing at Aboukir was made under
heavy fire, and, in fact, the whole of their
stay in
Egypt
may be considered to have been under
fire. A short Danish campaign followed,,
and then the regiment, which by this
time, was conjoined with the 75th, or Stir-
lingshire, found themselves in the
Peninsula, where they were fated to win
such continuous distinction as has, per-
haps, fallen to no other body of soldiers
mentioned in history.
At Corunna, under Sir John Moore, they
served with distinction; but, in 1810.
when they joined Wellington’s army their
career of honour fairly began. The light
company of the regiment, under Cameron
of Fassiefern, was particularly dis-
tinguished, despite all kinds of untoward'
circumstances. Not the least of these


drawbacks to success was the
faulty commissariat.
So bad were these arrangements that,
according to the historian of the Cold-
stream Guards, the 92nd, when thej
arrived in position at Fuentes d’Onoro,
were literally starving ; and, when this
became known to the Coldstreams, these
fine fellows, with brotherly self-abnega-
tion, voluntarily gave up the scanty ration
of biscuit then in their haversacks. These
fine-hearted fellows were themselves in
but little better case than their Highland
brethren. .
At Arroyo dos Molinos, under Colonel
Stewart, they commenced the attack, their
appearance, according to Lord de Eos,
striking terror among the Spanish peas-
ants as the Highlandmen marched in, nine
pipers at their head sending forth the
strains of “Hey, Johnny Cope, are ye
waken yet ? ” Almaraz gave them a new
distinction, since, under Sir Howland Hill,
they practically carried the town at the
point of the bayonet. A daring act of
gallantry was here performed by Privates
Gall and Somerville of the Grenadier
Company of the 92nd. These brave fel-
lows, seeing the pontoon bridge over the
Tagus had become loosened, “tossedaside
bonnets and muskets, flung themselves
into the river and daringly swam across”
to fetch back the bridge. This magnifi-
cent feat enabled their comrades to cross


and capture the tower of Ragusa. At
Maya, according to Napier, their “stern
valour would have
graced TfcerHMpyiss.*’
In this engagement they lost two-thirds
of their numbers, and the enemy was
actually stopped by the heaped mass of
dead and dying. At St. Pierre their gal-
lant colonel, Cameron of Fassiefern, was
nearly killed, and the regiment had to fall
back. In conjunction with this, an inci-
dent that vividly portrays the unselfish
devotion inculcated by the clan spirit took
place. Cameron’s horse, being wounded)
fell, and nearly crushed him. A French-
man rushed forward to bayonet him
while thus disabled ; but before the blow
had reached, Ewen Macmillan (the colo-
nel’s foster-brother), came up and pierced
him to the heart. He raised his master
from his dangerous position, and conduct-
ed him to a place of safety, after which
he returned and carried off the saddle on
which Cameron had sat. All this was
done with the greatest coolness, though
the battle was at its height, and the bul-
lets of the enemy were flying on every
side. When Ewen rejoined his company,
he displayed his trophy to his comrades,
and exultingly exclaimed, ‘ We must leave
them the carcass, but they sha’n’t get th#
saddle where Fassiefern sat.’ ”
Other troops coming up gave the Gordon
Highlanders time to reform, and, re-


mounted, Cameron
once more led
the regiment down to the road with colours
flying and music playing. Napier thus
comments“ How gloriously did that
regiment come forth again to the charge,
with the colours flying and its national
music playing as if going to a review !
This was to understand war. The man
who in that moment, and immediately
after a repulse, thought of such military
pomp was by nature a soldier. The 92nd
was but a small clump compared with the
heavy mass in its front, and the French
soldiers seemed willing enough to close
with the bayonet, until an officer riding
at their head suddenly turned his horse,
waved his sword, and appeared to order a
retreat. Then they faced about, and re-
tired across the valley to their original
position ; in good order, however, and
scarcely pursued by the allies, so exhaust-
ed were the victors. This retrograde
movement was produced partly by the
gallant advance of the 92nd.”
The Lower Pyrenees and the plains of
France gave these gallant fellows oppor-
tunities to win fresh distinctions, when
the declaration of peace allowed them to
revisit Scotland and enjoy
a well-earned rest.
Napoleon’s escape from Elba brought
the Gordons again into the field, and,


under Pack at Quatre Bras, they came in
for the thick of the fighting.
Death of Cameron.
“ How, upon bloody Quatre Bras,
Brave Cameron heard the wild hurrah
Of conquest as he fell I ”
Here the regiment lost its much-loved
colonel, John Cameron of Fassiefern. of
whom it was well said that he “ was less
the colonel than the chief of that gallant
regiment, which was raised partly in
Lochabar, his native district. He knew
every man in his regiment, and watched
over their interests as if they had been
his brothers or his sons. An angry look
or a stern word from him was dreaded
more than the lash. He was their father,
and when he fell there rose from his
mountain children that wild wail of sor-
row which once heard can never be
forgotten.”
At La Haye Sainte, says an eye wit-
ness : —“ On the advance of a heavy
column of French infantry, a number of
of the Highlanders sang the stirring verses
of ‘ Bruce’s Address to his Army,’ which,
at such a time, had a most powerful effect
on their comrades; and long may such
sentiments animate their representatives,
as they are the best incentives to heroism
and to
honest emulation!'*


The usual course of foreign service fol-
lowed until the Crimean war and Indian
Mutiny again found them active employ-
ment. In 1879 they accompanied Roberts
to Afghanistan to avenge Cavagnari’s
murder, and, under Major White, were
actively engaged at Charasiah. Major
Mitford, in his account of the campaign,
says:—“ The advance of the 9‘2nd was a
splendid sight. The dark-green kilts went
up the steep, rocky hillside at a fine rate,
though one would occasionally drop and
roll several feet down the slope, showing
that the rattling fire kept up by the enemy
was not all show. . • • Still the gal-
lant kilts kept on and on, and it was
altogether as pretty a piece of light in-
fantry drill as could be seen.” At Takt-
i-Shah Lieutenant Dick Cunyngham
gained the Victoria Cross for saving, at
great personal risk, the day, which was
beginning to look threateningly for the
British. “ A short but desperate struggle
ensued. . • • The mass of Afghans
in front, with flashing eyes acd fierce
aspect, waved their swords and threatened
a terrible charge. Their bullets searched
the ground * around the Highlanders.
These wavered slightly, but in a moment
Lieutenant Dick Cunyngham rushed for-
ward full in the fire of the enemy, shouting
to his men to follow. The Afghans’ shots
whistled past him in hundreds, but, as if
he bore a charmed life, he went forward
unhurt. Then, with a cry of revenge, the


Highlanders, with bayonets at the charge,
hurled themselves upon their foes, carried
them back in the rush, and won the first
position. ’ Major White, again, won
another Victoria Cross for a signal act of
readiness and courage. “With two com-
panies of his regiment he came upon a
body of the enemy strongly posted, and
outnumbering his force by
eighteen to one.
His men being much exhausted, and im-
mediate action necessary. Major White
took a rifle, and, going on by himself, shot
dead the leader of the enemy.” Through-
out the campaign the 92nd well sustained
their high reputation. At its close it fell
to Captain McCullum and two hundred of
the regiment to secure booty valued at
about £90,000. Acting “on information
received,” they “surrounded a building
said to contain a vast amount of treasure.
A search was made, and soon a couple of
rooms were found piled up with boxes ;
these, on being opened, were found to
contain all sorts of miscellaneous articles
from soap to brilliants and gold, besides
beautiful china, silks, satins, and costly
furs, handsome guns, swords and pistols
• • . over nine lacs’ worth of treasure,
most of it in the gold coin of the country."
With Sir Evelyn Wood they were in
South Africa in 1881, and one hundred
and fifty of them were present at the de-
plorable tragedy of Majuba Hill.


In the
whirlwind of destruction
that overtook the devoted seven hundred
British soldiers, Majors Hay and Single-
ton, Lieutenants Hector Macdonald, lan
Hamilton and lan Macdonald behaved
with signal courage and devotion. Hamil-
ton, with his thirty heroes, held his posi-
tion longer than appeared possible during
the rain of accurately-aimed Boer bullets;
lan Macdonald tried in vain, revolver in
hand, to check the rout that seemed im-
minent ; above the gunshots and hoarse
cries of pain and shouts of triumph, Major
Hay s voice was heard, calmly and cheerily
as ever, Men of the 92nd, don’t forget
your bayonets!” The exhortation was
well heeded. Again and again “ the Boers,
with fierce and exultant shouts, swarmed
up the side of the hill and made furious
attempts to carry it with a rush, but each
time were driven back by the bayonets,
many of which were dyed with blood.’ r
Then came the end. The Times’ report
stated that “ the handful of Highlanders
were the last to leave the hill, and re-
mained there throwing down stones on
the Boers and receiving them at the point
of the bayonet.”
When storming
Tel-el*Kebir
young Brookes, of the Gordons, won fresh
fame for himself and his regiment. When
c


the troops halted he found he had lost his
gword and could not find it in the dark-
ness. “Never mind.” said the plucky
fellow, as he seized a handy spade, “Arabi
has no bullets for me to-day.” Alas ! his
prediction was fated to be false, as. when
the engagement was over, he was found
dead on a pile of Arab corpses with five
bullets in his body and his
spade all dented.
Of their latest achievement at Dargai,
where Piper Findlater and others won
undying glory, the newspapers have
given such full accounts that further
mention here would be both superfluous
and futile.


THE SUTHERLAND
HIGHLANDERS;
“Bouse, rouse ye kilted warriors,
Bouse, ye heroes of the North !
Bouse and join your chieftain’s army,
’Tis your prince that leads you forth.”
When the territorial regiments were
re-arranged in 1881 the majority of them
were made to consist of two battalions.
In the case of the Princess Louise’s
Argyll and Sutherland High-
landers, these battalions were formed of
the 91st and 93rd regiments, each of
which has had three predecessors bearing
the same number.
The 91st was formed in 1794 and was
sent out to Cape Town being numbered
the 98th for the first four years of its
existence. There they did good work ;
but, in 1807, when they were attached to
Crauford’s Brigade in the Peninsular war.
they fairly commenced their career of
glory. At Waterloo they were not
actually engaged, much to their chagrin,
being detailed for the important duty of
covering the the road to Brussels. Then
came a spell of West Indian duty, follow-
ed by brilliant service in South Africa
during the war of 1846-47.


Though the story has often been told*
it is impossible in any account of the
regiment to omit mention of the wreck of
the Bir/u-nhead.
“ Bravery,”
Thackeray declares, “never goes out of:
fashion,” and conduct such as that of the
91st and their heroic comrades have still
power to stir the pulse as strongly as ever
did “ the old song of Percy and Douglas!”
A draft of reinforcements, chiefly for the-
91st, had all but arrived at the Cape in the
Birkenhead when she struck on a hidden
lock, and in an instant was sinking.
“ Barely twenty minutes elapsed between
the time of the ship striking and her
going to pieces.” The commanding offi-
cer—Colonel Seton, of the 74th—ordered
the bugle to be sounded, and steadily, as
]f for parade, the men fell into their ranks,-
while around them the hungry sea was
surging ever nearer and more greedily..
All must have known that it was
their last parade,
that death was but a matter of minutes,
and that never again would the absent
ones of home be seen; that here, in a
leai ful way, was an end to all dreams of
ambition and plans of happiness for the
coming years. It was not an ordinary
death, where merciful weakness deadens
the faculties, or the splendid fury of war
blmds to all but glory and victory; the


men of the 91st had to stand and wait to
be drowned. Before the ship went to
pieces “ the whole of the women and
children w T ere sent safely off in the boats,
and our gallant soldiers remained behind
to die, every man doing his duty to the
last. According to the report of Captain
Wright, of the 91st, who swam ashore,
many of the men on the lower troop deck
must have perished in their hammocks.
* Every man
did as he was directed, and there was not
■ a cry or murmur amongst them until the
vessel made her final plunge. All received
their orders, and had them carried out as
if the men were embarking and not going
to the bottom.’ ” Out of a total of 631
only 193 were saved.
In 1871, after a spell of Indian duty, the
91st received a special command to furnish
a guard of honour at the marriage of
Princess Louise.
South Africa received them again in
1879, where they bravely sustained their
reputation at the battle of Gliing'ilovo,
They held the rear face, and in the even-
ing it was against their position that the
Zulus flung themselves four separate
times to he repulsed with dreadful
slaughter.
The 93rd, omsecond battalion, which was
raised in 1800 as “Major-General Wemys’s
Regiment of Infantry,” was the successor


to tli r “ Sutherland Fencibles.” After
service in Ireland they gained great dis-
tinction at the Cape under Sir David
Baird, who formed the Sutherlands, the
71st and 72nd into a Highland Brigade.
They missed
the Peninsular and Waterloo campaigns ;
but in 1815, at New Orleans, tjiey lost in
killed, wounded and missing, no less than
584 of all ranks. They served in Canada,
but their
full hardest of honour
came with the Crimea and the Indian
mutiny. In the former war the Suther-
land Highlanders, the Black Watch and
Cameron Highlanders formed the famous
Highland Brigade under Sir Colin Camp-
bell. At the Alma “ their
ardour was irresistible,
and conjointly with the Guards . . .
they scaled the bristling height, and drove-
back the Russians at the point of the
bayonet. A Scottish historian thus des-
cribes the charge of the Highland Brigade:
*• And now to the eyes of the superstitious-
Russians the strange uniforms of these
bare-kneed troops seemed novel and even
terrible; their white waving sporrans,
were taken for the heads of low horses ;
and they cried to each other that the-
angel of light had departed, and the angel


of death had come.” At Balaklava it was
the 93rd, the Sutherland Highlanders,
who formed that
“thin red streak,
tipped with a line of steel,” which its own
heroism and the matchless eloquence of
one who told its deeds have rendered im-
mortal. The Turks were driven back
before the impetuous attack of twenty-
five thousand Russians, who seemed able
to engulf the slender double line —
numbering only five hundred and fifty
in all—of the Sutherland Highlanders,
which alone barred the way. The Suther-
land Highlanders were drawn up on
rising ground ; ‘‘on. with uplifted swords
or lances levelled, spurring came the Rus-
sians, with a sound as of thunder rolling
through the air. The word of command
was given ; the Minie rifles were levelled
from the shoulder : the
black plumed bonnets
were seen to droop a little from the light
and front as each man took his steady
aim : then from flank to flank a withering
volley rang, and when the smoke rolled
away a confused heap of men and horses
were seen writhing and tumbling over
each other, with swords, lances, and caps
scattered far and near. Many lay there
who would rise no more nd beyond them
all were seen the retrem ..g squadrons.”


Still sterner work
awaited them in India. In the attack on
the Secunderabagh in 1857 and the attack
on the Begum’s palace in the following
year the 93rd were particularly active,
“hurling out
the defenders with their avenging
bayonets; and, distinguished even
amongst the many brave there, were
Colonel Hay, Captain Middleton, Captain
Clarke and Lieutenant Maclean, the latter
officer being reputed as having
killed eleven
of the enemy with his own hand.
In the attack on Roohea, where the
brave Adrian Hope, a relative of our late
governor, Lord Hopetoun, fell —his death
casting a gloom “thick and palpable” over
the minds of all—the regiment fought
desperately and with considerable loss.
They remained in India until 1869. When
incorporated with the 91st, in 1881, Her
Royal Highness Princess Louise is said to
have herself designed some of the badges.
He did not like the Pipes.
A French officer, who had married a
Scottish heiress, with his 1 a ide visited her
castle in the Highlands, arriving at night.
The strangeness of his surroundings
caused him to pass a wakeful night, and
just as he was falling to sleep in the early


morning he was aroused by a terrible din
underneath his window, where the family
piper, who had followed the lady’s father
to the wars in the Sutherland High-
landers, was strutting proudly back-
wards and forwards making the welkin
ring with the piercing strains of “ Hey,
Johnnie Cope, are ye wakin’ yet ? ” Mon-
sieur le mari, as soon as he realised that
the castle was not being invested by a
thousand demons, popped his head out
of the window and yelled, “Ah cochon,
allez allez vous en tout de suite I” “Sir?”
said Donald, surprised at the strange
language which he had not heard since
the Passage of the Nive. “Go, go away
at once, you savage,” cried the Frenchman,
“your music kills me, it is execrable, it is
murderous, it is barbarous.” Donald
stood aghast, hardly believing his ears.
“He disna like the bagpipes,” he mur-
mured, and cast about in his mind for the
reason of this unaccountable dislike.
His pipes were silent, but he walked back-
wards and forwards with head high in air,
his whole form swelling with indignation,
while he snorted defiance at the terrible
insult offered to his beloved instrument.
At last his face cleared as he said, loud
•enough for the lady to hear, “By my soul,
I hae it noo ; the carle heard too much of
them at Waterloo.”
Colours and Distinctions.
The Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders


have as regimental badges the coronet
and cypher of the Princess Louise, with a
boar’s head (Campbell) and cat (Suther-
land). They bear as mottoes “Ae oblivi-
scaris,” and “Sans peur.” On their
colours are inscribed “ Cape of Good
Hope, 1806,” “Roleia,” “Yimiera,” “Co-
runna,” “Pyrenees,” “Nivelle,” “Nive,”
“Orthes,” “ Toulouse,” “ Peninsula,”
“ South Africa, 1851-8,” “ Alma,” “ Bala-
klava,” “Sevastopol,” “Lucknow,” “South
Africa, 1879:” The uniform is scarlet
with facings of yellow, kilt, and feather
bonnet with white feather and scarlet and
white diced border.


THE CAMERON
HIGHLANDERS.
“ There’s many a man of the Cameron clan
Has followed his chief to the field ;
He has sworn to support him, or die by
his side,
For a Cameron never can yield! ”
The 79th, or Cameron Highlanders, was
founded in 179)1 by Sir Allan Cameron
from his clan which previously had dis-
tinguished itself in its devoted lojalty to
the Stuarts.
Holland, the West Indies. Egypt, all
bore witness to their bravery ; while at
Fuentes d’Onor, in the Peninsular war,,
they won
special encomiums
from Lord Wellington. At Quatre Bras-
and Waterloo they took part in those
memorable charges that once and foi all
broke Napoleon’s power. They formed
the second of the three regiments that at
the Alma hurled themselves in echelon on
the twelve regiments of Russians and, as
has been described elsewhere, right nobly
did they respond to the command of
their leader to
“Make me prana
of my Highland Brigade 1 ”


Like the other Highland regiments the
name of the Camerons is indissolubly con-
nected with the stern work of vengeance
that had to be performed in India. After
the Mutiny, and still later in Egypt, they
fully availed themselves of the chances of
distinction. They were to the left of the
Highland Brigade at Tel-el-Kebir, and
as the Highlanders met the enemy first,
headed by their pipers,
whose pibrochs sounded shrilly over the
bullets din, they dashed forward against
the strongest point of the whole line.
Donald Cameron, of the Cameron High-
landers, was the first to mount the wa‘ll
and the
second to fall.
It was in this skirmish that Sergeant
MclSTeill, of the 42nd, performed his dar-
ing deeds.
The artillery was sent forward to relieve
the Highland infantry, and, as the brave
gunners passed their kilted brethren in
arms, they generously saluted them with
cries of “ Scotland for ever.”
Hr&b Wooers Surprised.
In the first Soudan war the kilts of the
Camerons were a continual puzzle
to the Arabs. One party of Bedouins,
after a severe attack on a British post at


Ghezireh, thought, as the gray dawn
revealed to' them the figures of the petti-
coated soldiers on guard, that they had
killed or disabled all the men who had
been forced to send their wives to fight.
1 he amorous sons of the desert conceived
ideas of adding the famed Xazarene
beauties to their harems and swooped
down on the supposed fair ones. That
African edition of the Rape of the
Sabines never came olf, as the prospective
brides with well-aimed volleys emptied
half a hundred saddles before the would-
be wooers realised that the coy damsels
were in reality soldiers of a type that
understood fighting better than they them-
selves. History is silent as to the regi-
mental jokes and badinage Tonal and
Tougal had served out to them by their
merciless brother in arms, Tommy Atkins.
©oloisrs and Distinctions.
The Cameron Highlanders bear on
their colours, the Thistle ensigned with
the Imperial Crown ; the Sphinx. super-
scribed Egypt; also the names of the
following battles : “ Egmont-op-Zee.”'
“ Fuentes’d Onor,” “ Salamanca,” "Pyre-
nees,” “ Nivolle,” “ Xive,” “ Toulouse,"
“ Peninsula,” “Waterloo,” “Alma.” “Se-
vastopol,” “Lucknow,” “Egypt, 1882.”
1- 01-el-Eebir, “Xile, 1884-0. The uni-
form is scarlet, with facings of blue,
feather bonnet with white hackle, and
kilt with Cameron tartan. The reg men*


tal badges are St. Andrew, with the cross
in a thistle wreath on glengarry, and
thistle surmounted with Imperial Crown
©n collar. The motto, " Nemo me impune
•lacessit.”


THE HIGHLAND
LIGHT INFANTRY.
“ Oh, to see his tartan trews,
Bonnet blue, and laigh-heeled shoes,
Philabeg aboon his knee—
That’s the lad that I’ll gang wi’ !
Ohon ! my Highlandman ! ”
This corps consists of two battalions,
The first of which was raised in 1777. and
was known as Macleod’s Highlanders, or,
the 73rd regiment. Under this title it
won fame in the campaigns against Hyder
Ali and Tippoo Saib. Nine years after
incorporation it was re-numbered as the
71st, which number it still retains. At
•Conjeveram it had a terrible experience,
being surrounded by Hyder Ali’s army
.and subjected to the fire of
sixty pieces of cannon.
Despite the overwhelming odds, it seemed
for a time as if the gallant handful of
brave men would achieve a victory, and
Hyder’s cavalry were already in retreat,
when an accidental explosion caused some
confusion in the British lines, and the
•enemy closed in on the remnant of the
regiment which only numbered four
hundred. To avoid further-sacrifice of
life they reluctantly surrendered, only to
learn that the most painful death in battle


would have been, by comparison, easy and
pleasant. ~N o sooner had the troops laid
down their arms than they, the sick and
the wounded were all attacked with re-
morseless fury, and the most merciless,
butchery ensued. Of Macleod’s High-
landers eighty-eight were killed and one.
hundred and fifteen taken prisoners; only
twenty-three being unwounded. At a.
score of other places in India the 71st-
found themselves confronting the merci-
less Eastern foe, until, at last, India
succumbed to the untiring efforts of the
handful of British soldiers, of which the
71st and their present ‘‘linked battalion,”
the Ath, formed a part. Pondicherry,
Ceylon, the Cape, Buenos Ayres, all ex-
perience !
tlseir prowess,
the South American campaign resulting,
through their general, Sir Home Popham,
not being properly supported, in the
British troops being, for a short time,
prisoners of war.
In ISOB the regiment was re-christened
the
Glasgow Regiment,
and under this title they fought bravely
in the Peninsula. At Vimiera they took
part in the magnificent bayonet charge
which scattered the flower of the French
army. A contemporary account has given
a graphic description of the charge. The


French “came up to the charge like men
accustomed to victory, but no troops,
however brave,' however accustomed to
victory, have ever withstood the charge of
the British bayonet. In a moment their
foremost rank fell, like a line of grass
beneath the scythes of the mowers.”
Even after the decisive charge had been
given the 71st were called upon to resist a
determined attempt on the part of the
enemy to “ turn the doubtful day again; ”
with terrific fury the French, under the
gallant Kellerman, swept on to the valley
where, panting from their past exertions,
the 71st and 82nd were resting. The
British fell back a little, but their object
in doing so was soon evident.; Arrived at
a rising ground they, like the Roman
broadswords of old, “cleave deep their gory
way. As they advanced to the charge
their piper was shot through the thigh.
He refused to leave the field, and, sitting
down, continued to play, with the cheery
asseveration, “ Deil hae me, lads, if ye
shall want music.” In the struggle, the
Irench general, Bernier, was taken and
would have been killed had not Corporal
Mackay of the 71st intervened. To the
General's intense astonishment Mackay
lefused the proffered purse ; the explana-
tion given- by Colonel Pack to the be-
wildered inquiry, “What manner of man
is this who saves my life and refuses my
money?” was typical of the spirit of
British warfare, “Sir, we are British
D


soldiers, not plunderers.” The corporal
one is glad to record, was, at Lord Wel-
lington’s ..special direction, immediately
promoted to the rank of sergeant. After
Yimiera came Corunna, at which they
were engaged, and after that, at a short
interval, the expedition to Flushing. The
year 1810 saw them in Portugal, commen-
cing an era of surpassing fame. At
Fuentes d’Onor they fought stubbornly
and long with the columns of Massena ;
at Arroyo dos Molinos the charge made
by them and the 92nd lives in the bril-
liant pages of Napier ; they shared in the
Homeric struggle at Ciudad Eodrigo ; in
the blood-coloured canvas on which the
siege of Badajos is portrayed some of the
combatants are seen to be men -of the
71st. At Almaraz they took a standard
from the enemy; at Salamanca they
fought and conquered ; at Yittoria, where
Fheir leader, General Cadogan, fell, they
avenged right grimly his death, “three
.hundred remaing fit for duty out of a
thousand who drew rations that morning.”
We can mention but the principal of the
many engagements in which the 71st were
engaged. They shared with their country-
men of the 92nd the glory of the combat
at Aratesque; they number Nivelle and
Nive amongst their exploits; at St. Pierre
they well atoned for the inexplicable error
which, in the early part of the fray, had
withdrawn them from action; at Orthes
and Toulouse they bore themselves right


valiantly ; they bear—and the name tells
of their historic gallantry on the day—the
crowning honour of “ Waterloo.” After
Waterloo the 71st served with the army
of occupation, and from that till the
Crimea they were quartered at home, in
Canada, and the Bermudas. On their
colours are “ Sevastopol ” and “ Central
India,” the tale of which has often been
told before.
The Second Battalion,
or 74th, raised in 1787, has a record much
the same as that of the 71st. Throughout
their Indian career we find the same
accounts of stubborn daring crowned by
conspicuous valour in the Peninsular war.
The 74th was the first regiment to enter
Tippoo’s palace when that tyrant’s hour
had come, and the general orders issued
to the troops speak of the
" unparalleled valour ”
shown by the 74th at Ahmednuggur in
1803. Their conduct was “the admiration
of Major-General Wellesley,” and in the
same year, at Assaye, so fiercely were
they engaged that
every officer
was either killed or wounded. Five years’"
rest from their Indian toils followed
and then they found themselves gathering
fresh laurels under their old commander
Wellington, in Spain; Captain Campbell


being, according to Gleig, instrumental on
one occasion in saving the Commander-in-
Chief from capture. In 1851 they showed
their mettle in the Kaffir war., As if the
perils of the field were not great enough
for this historic regiment we read that,
when the ill-fated Birkenhead transport
went down she took with her Colonel
Seton and sixty-six men of the 74th, who
met their fate as calmly as if they had
been on the parade ground instead of the
decks of
- a sinking ship.
Egypt was the scene of their next active
service; and at Tel-el-Kebir they came
in for, probably, the fiercest fighting of
the battle. The redoubt which faced
them baffled all efforts at a front attack,
and they had to try to force a way in at
the sides. Time will not permit me to
more than mention that, as might be
expected, they suffered more severely
than any other regiment, having three
officers and fourteen non-commissioned
officers and men killed, fifty-two non-
commissioned officers and men wounded,
eleven missing. correspondent of one
of the papers reported that in front of
one of the bastions he saw six men of the
74th all lying in a row, heads and bayonets
pointed forward, while immediately in
front of' these was the body of young
Lieutenant Somerville, who •♦’had been
leading, claymore in hand, when a volley
laid them all low.


THE SEAFORTH
HIGHLANDERS.
■“The foe well kenn’d the tartan front,
Which never shunned the battle’s brunt;
The chieftain of our Highland men
' That led them on to victory then,
As aye, he cried ‘ For Scotland! ’ ”
The first battalion of this fine regiment
was raised in 1778, and was numbered as
the 78th ; that designation, however, be-
ing changed in 1786 to the 72nd, and, with
the second battalion, which was raised in
1793, after service in Holland, covered
themselves with glory in India before the
end of the century. In fact, a monument
erected in Edinburgh designates “the
scion of the Seaforths ” as the
“Saviour of India."
The two battalions, although generally
known as the Seaforth Highlanders, have,
until lately, been known individually as
the Rossshire Buffs and the Duke of
Albany’s Highlanders, but are now men-
tioned in the army list as the 72nd or
Seaforth Highlanders. Unlike the other
Highland regiments, they were not in
.Europe during the Peninsular war.


Their valour
was, however, displayed in South Africa
and the Malayan Archipelago, and in the
Crimea Campaigns inPersiaand Afghani-
stan followed, after which they joined’
their kilted brethren in repressing the
Indian Mutiny. More Asiatic service
followed, and then came the .Egyptian
campaign—their efforts at Tel-el-Kebir
winning unbounded praise.
Colours and Distinctions.
The Seaforth Highlanders bear as a
badge the Jate Duke of York’s Cypher
and coronet. The motto is “ Cnidich ’n
Khi.” On their colours are “ Carnatic,”
“Mysore,” “Hindoostan,” “ Assaye ’’(with
the Elephant), “ Cape of Good Hope,
1806,’ “Maida,” “Java,” “South Africa,
1835,” “ Sevastopol,” “ Persia,” “ Kooshab,”
“Lucknow,” “Central India,” “Peiwar
Kotal,” “ Charasiah,” “Kabul, 1879,”
“ Kandahar, 1880,” “ Afghanistan, 1878,
1880.” “ Egypt, 1882,” “ Tel-el-Kebir,’^
‘ Chitral.” The facings are yellow.


ANCIENT CORPS.
“Heroes, in your ancestral line
Hallow the shades of ‘Auld Langsyne,’
Men who in their country’s story
Shine brightly in the page of glory,
Noo sleep in bonnie Scotland.”
The first or Royal Scots Regiment oh
Foot dates hack to 882, when Charles 111.
of France selected certain Scottish exiles
as a special guard. They followed Louis
IX. to Egypt during the Crusades, and
during the fifteenth century fought
against England after Agincourt; but
their history does not properly belong to
such a record as the present. So, not
even a passing reference can be made to
Lord Buchan’s army of seven thousand
Scots, who followed him to France, nor
the thirteen Scottish regiments who
fought under - Gustavus Adolphus of
Sweden, Hepburn’s Scots regiments or
the numerous others who denied con-
genial employment under their native
princes, took active part in the
stirring turbulent wars
that ever raged in Europe.
Of the quantity of material from which
supplies could be drawn, some idea may
be formed when we learn that shortly


after Culloden, the
fighting strength
of the clans was rated at thirty-tw®
thousand men, all active, strong,' hardy
men trained to arms.
The oldest of the purely Highland regi-
ments is considered to be Loudon’s High-
landers who were raised in 1745 and dis-
banded in 1748.
• Then came Montgomery’s Highlanders,
raised in 1757 and disbanded in 1775.
Fraser’s Highlanders, raised in 1757, were
disbanded six years later, after a spell of
service in America, but the 71st also bore
the title of Fraser’s.
Other s .
short-lived corps
of Highlanders were the 87th, or Keith’s,
and the 88th, or Cameron’s, 89th, or Duke
of Gordon’s, 106th, or Johnstone’s, all of
which were enrolled in 1759 and disbanded
in 1768.
The 71st, or Fraser’s, and the 76th, or
McDonald’s, fought bravely in America,
while the 74th, or Royal Highland Emi-
grant Regiment, was composed of Scots-
men who had settled in America after
service in the Highland Brigade, of which
the Black Watch is now the only repre-
sentative.
The Atholl, Aberdeenshire. Strathspey
and Perthshire Regiments of Highlanders
all, at various times, showed that when


stern fighting had to be done the ancient
valour of the race glowed as brightly
under the tartan as in the days of Ossian.
R foreign criticism
of the Highland troops in the British
Army, written in the latter part of the
eigh eenth century, is at least amusing in
its outspokenness. It says : “ They are
a people totally different in their dress,
manners and temper from the other in-
habitants of Great Britain. They are
caught in the mountains
when young, and still run with a sur-
prising degree of swiftness. As they are
strangers to fear they make very good
soldiers when disciplined.”
R Highland Muster.
One of the stock amusements of the
good Edinburgh burgesses at the end of
the last century was to attend the evening
roll-call of the newly-raised Highland
regiments. There they were entertained
by the ingenuity of the drill sergeants in
distinguishing between the countless
Macs and Donalds of the same name in
the different companies. There was
Tonal of the Red hair, Lang Leggit Tonal,
Knock-kneed Tougal, Tougal na ’Ord and
so on. “Tonald MacTonald Number
Five,” cried a sergeant one evening.
“Here!” answered a voice so shrill and
abrupt as to excite a general titter in the


ranks and unbounded'indignation in the
sergeant, whose cheeks grew the colour of
boiled beetroot. Here, you tamn’d rogue,
is that the way she speaks to a shentle-
man ? But we a’ ken Tonald is a liar,
sae pit her doon absent and tak’ her to
the guard room.” Then he' went on,
“ Tonald MacTonald Number Six.” No
answer. The sergeant soliloquises:
11 Tonald MacTonald Number Six. That’s
my sister’s son frae Achallatus. Aye,
aye, Tonald she was aye a modest lad that
never spak till she was spoken to, sae we’ll
just pit her doon present.”
“ Highland Hearts
are Trsie as Steel,”
An incident that indicates of what stern
stulf our Highland lads are made occurred
in Ireland, where a private soldier showed
during the troubles of 1798 how to be true
to death. Told to guard a certain position
until relieved, he refused to leave when
an overwhelming force of the rebels-
attacked his post. To reach him they
had to climb half a dozen steps, and be-
fore he succumbed to his wounds he shot
down five of his assailants, only falling;
while reloading for the sixth time. The
account that notices the incident states
that as this humble hero fell many Irish,
bayonets
clashed in his body..


The piper-major of the Seaforths bit-
terly resented being ordered, at Assaye,to
retire to the rear with the flutes, whistles,
hautboys- and drums, that went to make
up the regimental music of the army, but
discipline had to be maintained, "while
at Argaun, the pipers had to be
kept silent
by the colonel for fear of bringing the
men on too quickly.
& Highland Heroine.
During the bombardment of Matagorda
in 1810 an incident occurred of which
Napier says: “It is difficult to say whether
it were more feminine or heroic.” While
the fire was at the hottest some water was
required, and a drummer-boy was ordered
to fetch some from a well The
child —he' was little else —hesitated,, as
well he might; it seemed certain death ;
the order was repeated angrily ; the boy
was silent, but a woman’s voice made
answer, “ The puir bairn is frightened, and
no "wonder ; gie the bucket to me. The
speaker was Marion Restron, wife of a
sergeant of the 94th ; she had been tend-
ing the "wounded under fire, and now,
heedless of the shot around her, went to •
the well and filled the bucket, yet not
before a shot had cut the rope she held in
her hand. “ I think I see her now,
writes one who was present, ‘"while the
shot and shell were flying thick about her,


bending her body to shield her child from
danger by the exposure of her own
person.” Throughout that terrible time
she was coolly cheerful and helpful, carry-
ing ammunition and refreshments to the
soldiers, aiding the surgeon and tending
the wounded. Yet no public or official
notice seems to have been taken of con-
duct surely heroic beyond praise.
The Highland Pipes.
No notice, however brief, of our High-
land regiments would be complete without
a reference to the national musical
instrument of Scotland. Its strange
effect on the sons of Caledonia is well
known. No better tribute to its wild
weird music and the thrilling power it
has over Scotsmen has been penned
than the following from Macdonald’s
“ Ancient Martial Music of Scotland ” :
6< ln halls of joy
and in scenes of mourning it has prevailed
—it has animated her warriors in battle,
and welcomed them back after their toils
to the homes of their love and the hills of
their nativity. Its strains were the first
sounded in the ears of infancy, and they
are the last to be forgotten in the wander-
ings of age. Even Highlanders will allow
that it is not the gentlest of instruments ;
but, when far from their mountain-homes,
what sounds, however melodious, could
thrill their hearts like one burst of their


own
wild native pipe?
The feelings which other instruments
awaken are general and undefined, be-
cause they talk alike to Frenchmen,
Spaniards. Germans, and Highlanders, for
they are common to all; but the bagpipe
is sacred to Scotland, and speaks a
language which Scotsmen only feel. It
talks to them of home and all the past,
and brings before them, on the burning
shores of India, the wild hills and oft-
frequented streams of Caledonia —the
friends that are thinking of them, and the
sweethearts and wives that are weeping
for them there. And need it be told
here to how many fields of
danger and victory
its proud strains have led? There is not
a battle that is honourable to Britain in
which its war-blast has not sounded; when
every other instrument has been hushed
by the confusion and carnage of the
scene, it has been borne into the thick of
the battle, and far in the advance its
bleeding but devoted bearer, sinking to
the earth, has sounded at once encourage-
ment to his countrymen—and his own
coronach! ”
The heroic work
done by the piper of Dargai is still fresh


in our memories, and, so long' as the
Highland regiments retaintheir distinct-
ive character, will the pipe music of the
ancient Gael be associated with their
■deeds of “ derring do.”


CONCLUSION.
Such is our love of liberty, our country
and our laws,
That, like our ancestors of old, we’ll stand
in Freedom’s cause!”
Scotland Yet.
As stated in my introductory remarks
-the difficulty in penning these pages has
•been to select from and condense the
rich material for such a work. No re-
ference has been possible to the Scots
Greys and other Scottish regiments, whose
achievements have won as undying fame
for Scotland as have those of the corps
who wear the national dress. Similarly
it has been impossible to glance at the
doings of the Highland corps in other
•countries. Enough has, however, it is
hoped, been written to draw the attention
•of
our young Scotsmen
to what has been done by their forbears
in the service of the Empire. As one
writer has tersely put it, “ Scotsmen who
remember the rich legacy of military
glory, bequeathed them by their
military forefathers,
specially registered in the history of the


Scottish Regiments, will be more im-
pressed with the duty devolving on them
to maintain and emulate the same.”
Their Latest Feats.
Even as these pages are going to press
there has been flashed across the sea the
brief telegraphic description of what is
described as “ the most picturesque battle
of the century,” where, near Omdurmanv
Sir Herbert Kitchener and his troops
completely routed from 40,000 to 60,000 of
the Khalifa’s troops. During the
hard fighting
that we are told lasted for seven hours,
the Seaforth and Cameron High-
landers occupied a position in the centre,
and nobly sustained the reputation won
in the past on so many hard-fought fields
by our Kilted Warriors,
It is deeds like those the pourtrayal of
which has been attempted in this little
work that causes the hearts of Scotsmen
in all climes to glow with pride and say
with fervour, “There’s nae folk like
OOR AIN FOLIC.”
Jjina


A Stirring appeal.
Translation of a Gaelic poem by Dr. (Sheriff) NiCOLSON.
On the slopes of Quatre Bras
The Frenchmen saw them stand unbroken.
On the field of Waterloo the pibroch
Blew where fire was hottest.
When the Alma heights were stormed.
Foremost went the Highland bonnets ;
And before their “ thin red line”
The Cossack rider turned and vanished.
When on India's burning plains
Dearly saved was Britain’s honour,
Outram. Havelock and Clyde
Led the Highlanders to conquest.
Joyful rang the pibroch loud
Through the sounding streets of Lucknow ;
And, like angels sent to save,
Came the brave ones to the succour.
As it was in days of yore
So the story shall be ever ;
When the doughtiest deeds are dared,
Shall the Gael be forward pressing.
Think, then, of the name ye bear,
Ye that wear the Highland tartan !
Jealous of its old renown,
Hand it down without a blemish I


A Stirring Appeal.
rranslation of a Gaelic poem by Dr. (Sheriff) NicOLSON.
On the slopes of Quatre Bras
The Frenchmen saw them stand unbroken.
On the field of Waterloo the pibroch
Blew where fire was hottest.
When the Alma heights were stormed.
Foremost went the Highland bonnets ;
And before their “thin red line”
The Cossack rider turned and vanished.
When on India's burning plains
Dearly saved was Britain’s honour,
Outram. Havelock and Clyde
Led the Highlanders to conquest.
Joyful rang the pibroch loud
Through the sounding streets of Lucknow ;
And, like angels sent to save,
Came the brave ones to the succour.
As it was in days of yore
So the story shall be ever ;
When the doughtiest deeds are dared,
Shall the Gael be forward pressing.
Think, then, of the name ye bear,
Ye that wear the Highland tartan !
Jealous of its old renown,
Hand it down without a blemish I


PRINTED BY
S WOIiDS BROTHERS,
DANDENONG.


Kilts
-••^^4 —*•
Scottish Regiment,
JAMES HOWIE,
Civil and Military Tailor,
27 BANK STREET,
- SOUTH MELBOURNE, -
Is the Only Firm in Melbourne who can
build you a suit of Kilts correct as to
cut and tartan.
ZBusiness and Suits at
LOWEST RATES,
SATISFACTION GUARANTEED.
Letters & Post-cards Promptly Attended To




