

Our Present Parliament;
What it is Worth.
Political Value
of the
Members
of the
Present Parliament
New South
Wales.
By an
Ex-M.L.A.
Price One Shilling.


w
►-3
Ln
g
EC
PP
o
<o
s- 5
hi a p
T CL
•c £-» nc
3 c
£ = a s?
fc-fe »
tt* I fj o
r a
5H *55 I
. 1 0
> §
*£s ” a.
si? 0 a
►£- f~
co Z 9
S-jT
P's | E
CD » £
H P
oo
«<
o-
£§ >3 t
f
O o -* *-»>
*-! O < Ih4 O
I*l* |
II? © |
?|Ja «
Mb ► I
J?sf«
» I 5
sr- °,
•V 8
S'-!
IH
sa
*sg.
=0
Q>
cs
I*
r>i a
=o §
I
5 =
1
Ct> 2
0 f
2
»
a
3
1
=0
si-
pa
H. T. Smith k Co., have now a large stock of the Harvey Safety Kerosene
Lamps, which have recently been tested in London and the United States
against every other lamp, including the’ 4 Rochester” and 44 Defries,” by Bover-
ton Redwood, P.C.R., F.S.C., Official Kerosene Analyst of London, at the
instance of Messis. Hinks and Son, of Birmingham, who have control of the
44 Harvey” lamp for Europe. The test gives our process the highest place and
greatest candle power ever obtained from kerosene with absolute safety. H. T.
Smith k Co., are sole agents and patentees for the Colonies and Lew Zealand.
o
“That the lighting arrangements were in every way a great success. This
was done by Messrs. H. T. Smith and Co. 4i>4 Kent street, Sydney. Mr. Smith
used for the purpose the latest improvements in kerosene lamps, called the <
Harvey Patent Safety Lamp. This truly wonderful lamp gives a most beautiful
light, far superior to gas, and is warranted absolutely safe from explosion. A
wick will last from 8 to 12 months ; there is scarcely any trimming or cleaning
| of chimney about it, and a quart of colonial kerosene will last about 10 hours,
j H.T S. k Co. are the sole agents and patentees for the Colonies.” — Tenterjield
Record.
Sydney Brewing Co., 555 Harris Street., Ultimo.
Messrs. H. T. Smith & Co., Brass lounders, Plumbers, Ac., 494 Kent street, Sydney.
Dear Sirs,— In reference to the Alnited Water Machinery you furnished ns with last
month, we beg to say the same is giving every satisfaction, and we are much
i pleased with the whole outfit. We may say that having been in the brewing and
Abating business for some years we have used or examined machinery of all
manufactories, and we freely admit that your long experience has enabled you to
produce an apparatus superior in a great many points to any we have seen One of
the principal advantages is the great capacity of the bottling Cylinder, thus enabling
from one to three racks to be constamly used, and keeping the whole of a uniform 4
quality even at reduced pressures. The gas engine also works the machine. To any
intending purchasers who desire a colonial-built machine, which for economy and
adaptability cannot be surpassed, we can confidently recommend the above.— We
remain, yours truly, WILL. JONES and CO.
S* * v-
H. T. SMITH & CO.,
Manufacturers and Proprietors of the Celebrated
CAS JVt ACHXW3:
Also Patentees of the




ST
MERCHANT TAILORS,
235 and 237 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
*
STITS
MEASURE
£3 3s.
EIGHT
HIGH
CLASS
9
CUTTERS
EM-
PLOYED.
s
IMMENSE
SELECTION
OF
WOOLLEN
GOODS.
SUITS
TO
MEASURE,
£3 3a,
SPLENDID
OUT.
BEAUTI-
FULLY
MADE.
ALL
WOOL
THOROUGHLY
SHRUNK.
A NIvW PARLIAMENT.
THE NEWLY ELEOTED MEMBERS BEFORE VISITING
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
SUMMERFIELD & COMPANY
Merchant Tailors,
235 and 237 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


473 GEORGE STREET,
LARGE STOCK OF SPRING
GOODS TO ORDER FRO AT,
INCLUDING
Latest Styles in Fancy Worsteds, Scotch Suitings
and West of England Tweeds.
Patterns, Prices, and Directions for Self-
measurement upon Application.
J. TURNER ROBINSON I CO.,
478 QEORQE STREET,
SYDNEY.


OUR
PRESENT PARLIAMENT,
WHAT IT IS WORTH.
By an Ex-M.L.A.
SYDNEY;
GEORGE MURRAY & CO.,
PAPBE MILLS FEINTING WORKS, 91 CLARENCE STEEET,.
WYNYAEI) SQUARE.




OUR PRESENT PARLIAMENT:
WHAT IT IS WORTH.
INTRODUCTION
It is now conceded, with ready unanimity, that the twelfth
Parliament of New South Wales gives sure promise of
being longer in session, of talking far more, and of doing
infinitely less work than any which has preceded it. Of
course, when I say that the reason is that its composition
is infinitely inferior to any of these (and some of them
were bad enough), 1 shall fairly lay myself open to the
reproach to which the fox subjected himself on an occasion
when he offered an opinion on the quality of certain
grapes. But I may say, on the other hand, that I shall
hardly be suspected of being influenced by envy when
I mention that 1 might have been a member of this Par-
liament had I so chosen, and that my not being chosen
was caused by my refusal to again offer myself to a con-
stituency of whose continued confidence in me 1 had every
possible proof. I am compelled to mention this in order
to do justice to the motives which influence me in writing
just now, and also to show that I possess some qualifica-
tions for estimating the value of our present Parliament.
And, though addressing myself to the people of New
South Wales, through the medium of the first person
singular, 1 can really claim that 1 am not prompted by
any spirit of egotism. I propose, then, to answer the
question, “ What is our present Parliament worth ? ” by


giving an analytical summing up of the value of each
particular member of which it is composed. And this,
I think, is a very fair and reasonable process by which
to arrive at a just and accurate conclusion. A plum
pudding containing weevily flour, bad suet, degenerated
raisins, decomposed currants, unwholesome citron, and
ration sugar, is not likely to offer a pleasant repast; and,
if I can show that our Parliament is just now, legislatively,
in a condition like the pudding mentioned, as to its mate-
rials, I fancy no one will have much difficulty in formu-
lating a decisive opinion as to what it is as a whole.
When Mr. Jack Bunsby, master mariner, was about to
be married by the Eev. Melchisedec Howler to the relict
of the late M‘Stinger, and his friend Captain Cuttle asked
him “ How goes it ? ” it will be remembered that, with
an irreverent forgetfulness of the sacred edifice which
sheltered them, he answered, “Damned bad.” 1 very
much fear that, after I shall have concluded my analysis
of “ our members,” anyone who has read it, and is asked
what he thinks of our Parliament, will be tempted into
a profanity similar to that of Mr. Bunsby. To proceed,
however. I have before me an official document with the
following caption, “Legislative Assembly, New South
Wales. Alphabetical List of Members. Twelfth Parlia-
ment. First Session.” In pursuit of the object I have
set myself to attain, let me, to the bare information as
to name and constituency which this list furnishes, give
some unofficial, though, I flatter myself, none the less
accurate or useful particulars as to the capabilities of
each member for performing his duties as a law-maker,
and this permission being granted 1 find


OUR PRESENT PARLIAMENT.
ABBOTT, THE HON. JOSEPH P., Esq.
(Gunnedah).
When the general election, which disturbed the dying
moments of the year 1882 made havoc of the Parkes-
Eobertson Ministry and its supporters every one was able
to predict that Mr. Abbott would be a member of the new
Cabinet. During his previous somewhat brief parlia-
mentary career he had continued, in season and out of
season, making the Land Act of 1861 his “ wash-pot.”
With a hard, cold, calculating and massive offensiveness,
that suited his physical characteristics, he occupied his
time in continually saying the bitterest possible things of
that Act and of its author. And, since Sir Henry Parkes
was Sir John Eobertson’s Premier, and Dr. Eenwick was
Sir Henry’s Minister of Mines (a department which dealt
with the “occupied” Crown lands of the colony), Mr.
Abbott, without turning aside for a moment from the main
object of his harsh, though solemn; dull, though acidulated
wrath, managed every now and again to drag in these
gentlemen and all their works, and to cover them with solid
and virulent abuse. He had, it was admitted, many quali-
fications for being a good authority on the practice, if not
upon the ethics, of land legislation. As a country solicitor
in rather extensive business, he had seen all sides of the
numerous evils which the Land Act of 1861 produced.
That Act had sown tares with wheat, and Mr. Abbott had
assisted at the garnering of the former crop. He might
know little of the different theories which so many thinkers
have put forward as foundations for land legislation, but of
the working of the existing laud law in New South Wales
few knew more. Speaking with a relatively extensive


knowledge of his subject, with decided mental power (wide
within certain fixed limits), Mr. Abbott became so distinct
a personage in Opposition that be was made Minister of
Mines in the Stuart-Dalley Administration, The claims of
Mr. Parnell to the portfolio of Lands could not be passed
over, or Mr. Abbott, as subsequent events proved, might
have found it in bis bands. One of his earliest official
utterances showed the political audacity and callousness
of the new Minister. He announced bis intention of
doing the very things for which he had scourged I)r.
Eenwick with scorpions, and he carried ultimately a
Babbit Act of even less use and greater costliness than
that which he had mercilessly condemned when it was the
work of his predecessor. During the three years that the
Stuart-Dalley Ministry remained in office, Mr. Abbott con-
trived to give more offence and to say nastier things than
any of his colleagues. There was a notable exception to this
however. He made expeditious into the never never
country; in one case as far as Silverton, and in the other
to Bourke ; and talked sufficiently sturdy nonsense on each
occasion to show that when presented with phases of prac-
tical land legislation with which he was unprofessionally
acquainted, he was all at sea about them. et his big
brain, suitable to his physical calibre, made him an
undoubtedly strong man amongst his colleagues, so strong
that no one was surprised when Mr. Dibbs, on succeeding
Sir Alexander Stuart as Premier, made him Minister of
Lands, and thus, as Mr. Garrett put it, retained 2 ft. of
the old Ministry in the new. The Dibbs Ministry dying,
unregretted by anyone except its few parliamentary sup-
porters, Mr. Abbott at once made himself conspicuous by
ungraciously desiring to refuse to declare the seats of the
members of the Bobertson-Burns Cabinet vacant, and by
attacking those gentlemen when they could not appear m
their places to reply to him, and before they had a chance
of putting their policy before the country. Yet he declined
to lead the Opposition against them, and, when Sir Patrick
Jennings took office, refused a portfolio on the very sensible
grounds that a too active participation in politics was
destructive to his professional success. Since then he has
figured in two principal characters —as “ the big brother of
the Ministry,” who now and again comes to its rescue when


it is getting decidedly the worst of a debate, and as a
pondrous coquette with protection, ever and anon coyly
declaring his affection for the faith of Mr, Luscombe, yet
now and again prevented by seeming modesty, or by
another engagement, from yielding to its embraces and
taking the chair at a lecture of Mr. Heydon’s. This then
is Mr. Abbott. These are his merits as told by his political
career. A strong man and a big man, unquestionably,
mentally and physically, but not one from whom much
useful legislation need be expected.
ABIGAIL, FRANCIS, Esq.
(West Sydney.)
This gentleman is a product of certain peculiar
germinating principles in our political life, the results of
which are generally very objectionable, and are also very
apparent in our present Parliament, as they have been in
the past. These results take the form of several members
who have been elected to, and kept in Parliament by
means of devious political workings. Orange peel and
cold water have combined to send in some ; others have
been returned by the combined efforts of sacerdotalism
and proof spirits. Of none of the gentlemen who have
found themselves in Parliament, on account of the causes
mentioned, can it be said that they are likely to do much
in shaping, and they will certainly do nothing in origina-
ting, useful legislation. But at the same time let it bo
said of Mr. Abigail 4hat Parliament might ill afford to
spare him. For he is the best watch-dog in the House,
and to him are due many exposures of ministerial and
departmental wrong-doings and carelessness that, but for
his efforts, would be secretly injuring the country by
their existence. And, in favor of Mr, Abigail it may also
be advanced that he is a fair and generous enemy and a
good friend. He never hits below the belt, can take his
punishment without flinching, and is more ready to do a
good turn than a bad turn. But of national finance he
knows as much as does an oyster ; of land legislation he
is as ignorant as a foremast hand on a steamer, and on
local self-government he is as good an authority as the


steersman on a whaleboat might be expected to be on a
double-furrow plough. Not much is to be hoped from
him in the way of legislative work, at any rate during this
session.
BAKEE, EZEKIEL ALEXANDER, Esq.
(Carcoar.)
A very few words will suffice to sum up this gentleman.
He got into the coalition Ministry of Sir Henry Parkes
and Sir John Robertson as one of the party of the latter.
He got out of it, and Parliament, as one of two reported
on by Mr. Salomons, acting as a Royal Commission. He
got back to Parliament because a majority practically
reversed the decision of a previous Parliament. It may
safely be said that he will never get into any Ministry
again. Nor should he be in Parliament. His expulsion,
however, should not be on account of the Milburn Creek
affair, but for the obvious reason that he never has been,
and never will be, as a legislator, “worth his salt.’
Without troubling about the past let us look at the
present session. Has Mr. Baker, on a single occasion,
added a tittle of information to a debate on any subj ect ?
Has he been listened to except by those members com-
pelled by the exigencies of party adherence “to keep a
House together?” And has not the ill-concealed
impatience of these unwilling listeners failed to stay the
dreary flow of his verbiage ? Can anything politically
good be the outcome of his presence in Parliament?
The unanimous “No ” which will go up from everyone
in answer to these questions settles Mr. Baker’s vahie as
a member of the Legislative Assembly.
ROBERT BARBOUR, Esq.
(The Murray.)
Mr. Barbour entered Parliament as a presumed repre-
sentative of “the conditional purchasers.” A man who
by judicious free selection was supposed to have acquired
a competence, should, it was thought, know something of
the workings of the free selecting clauses of the Land Act


•of 1861 and its amending Acts. And there is no doubt
that Mr. Barbour in his dull way had convinced himself
that he was an authority on the subject. If so, and if he
has retained the he is happy in being the sole
possessor of that precious idea. For no one now looks
upon him as being anything more than a mediocre judge
of what is or what is not beneficial land legislation. For
the rest he has consistently voted in the interests of the
pastoral tenants, and of general legislation he knows
nothing. But on many matters his vote may be counted
a pretty safe one with the existing Ministry, and verily
his constituents have their reward.
BARTON, EDMOND, Esq.
(East Sydney.)
As a member for the Sydney University (a constituency
now extinct), Mr. Barton distinguished himself by a
powerful speech during the stonewalling of the wood and
coal duties proposed by Mr. Watson, Treasurer of the
Parkes-Kobertson Government. That was all he did,
however, and at the general election of 1880 he would
have found a difficulty in getting back to Parliament, but
that the Wellington electorate was going a-begging. _ In
1882 he wisely, after a couple of years of inaction,
managed to put himself in the forefront of the crusade
against Sir John Robertson’s Land Bill, and when the
general election gave the Opposition an overwhelming
majority he was as its candidate for the Speaker-
ship at a caucus meeting. His proposer at the meeting
gave a naive reason for putting him forward. That
gentleman said, “ Something must be done for Barton.”
He would not care to see him in the Cabinet; but, though
a very lazy fellow, Barton could sit up all night with
any one and preserve his reason and judgment in good
condition. That being so he would make an excellent
Speaker. Accordingly Mr. Barton was proposed in the
House, and, there being a bitter feeling against Sir
George Wigram Allen, was elected by a narrow majority.
Since then his decisions have been right and have been
wrong, but as Speaker he has little to do with absolute


legislation, so may he left out of consideration just now.
Yet he has desired to he an active legislator, and a few-
indiscreet friends, not it is said without his knowledge,
tried once to work a coalition between him and Mr. Dibbs.
BARTON, RUSSELL, Esq.
(Bourke.)
When the Bogan constituency was split up in 1880, and
Bourke created out of it, Mr. Russell Barton -was chair-
man and managing director of the great Cobar copper
mine. He announced himself as a candidate for the
Parliamentary seat; thought until two days before the
nomination t hat he -was going to have a walk over;
found suddenly that Mr. Oliffe, now a member for South
Sydney, then just beaten there, was going to oppose him,
and finally he was returned by the mining votes in Cobar
and Nymagee, having been otherwise in a minority
throughout the electorate. Since then as a traight voter
in the squatters’ interests he has retained his seat, and is
only useful iu that capacity.
BOLTON, ALEXANDER THORNLEIGH, Esq.
(The Murrumbidgee.)
WTien the last general election inflicted Mr. Bolton on
Parliament, he dropped into his natural position by
moving the address in reply in direct contradiction to his
hustings pledges. In that position he has remained,
prepared to vote as blindly for the Jenrings-Dibbs
Government as he did for the Dibbs-Jennings Government.
And if the country cannot see that his presence in Parlia-
ment is beneficial, it is certain that the Government are
cognisant of his great utility.
BOWMAN, ALEXANDER, Esq.
(The Ilawkesbury.)
WTien the Hawkesbury is not represented by Mr.
M‘Quade, it is represented by Mr. Bowman, These


gentlemen come and go, like those little figures of a man
and woman connected with a piece of catgut, a cardboard
house, and a couple of doorways, which, in our childhood,
pretended to tell us whether we were to have fine weather
or not. But it is simply in their alternation of “in and
out” that Messrs. Bowman and M'Quade resemble a
primitive barometer. Iso matter who is in or who is out
the Hawkesbury, in its representation, enjoys the dullest
possible kind of political weather. If it bo true that an
electorate is always as well represented as it deserves to
be, then there is ample evidence that the deserts of the
Hawkesbury are very small, and that a most mediocre
representation is quite up to its merits. Mr. Bowman
never speaks in Parliament, and though this might, under
some circumstances, be something to his credit, still,
seeing that he never votes wisely, I am forced to the
conclusion that his silence, instead of concealing political
acumen, merely hides political incapacity. In other
respects than as a member of Parliament Mr. Bowman
has the reputation of being a jolly good fellow ; but
unfortunately, all the abilities he may possess in this way
do not qualify him to consider certain important pieces of
legislation of which the country stands sorely in need,
and which it is not likely to get in a desirable form from
our present Parliament.
BE OWN, HEEBEET HAEEINGTON, Esq.
'Durham.)
Mr. H. 11. Brown has been quite a long time in Parlia-
ment ; but except that he presents us with a model of
deportment in petto and Dundreary whiskers, which
silently rebukes our more modern fashion, and that he
can always be relied upon as a political sheep that will
never stray from the fold of the pastoral tenants, I do not
know that he is of any practical use in Parliament For
the rest he is a gentleman with a nice sense of honor that
makes him resent any imputation of voting except
according to the sternest dictates of patriotism, and he has
latterly, in one or two divisions on the financial proposals
of the Government, shown that he can resolve to vote


against them, and in the right fashion, without, however,
very distinctly understanding why he does so.
BROWNE, THOMAS FREDERIC DE COURCEA, Esq
(Mudgee.)
At the general election of 1882 Mr. Browne was beaten
tolerably narrowly for the Mudgee third seat by Mr.
Buchanan, but in 1885, Mr. Buchanan declining to come
forward again because he knew he had no chance of
re-election, Mr. Browne got in with ease and comfort.
He possesses, as a land and mining agent, just the same
knowledge of all the evils of our land and mining legisla-
tion that Mr. Abbott has attained to as an attorney. With
every imperfection, or supposed imperfection, in our la-ud
or mining laws Mr. Browne is well acquainted. But, like
Mr. Abbott, with the ethics, or the real principles on
which such laws , should be founded, Mr. Browne is not
on intimate terms. He votes Protection because, as I
shrewdly suspect, he has convinced himself that his con-
stituency likes this kind of thing, and he has no desire to
forfeit its confidence. He has plenty of shrewdness and
ability, but, in a political sense purely, is most unreliable
and untrustworthy. Duriug Sir John Robertson’s last
and shortlived Ministry he gave Government an unswerv-
ing support, because, outside of such a question as free-
trade or protection, any member for Mudgee who did not
support Sir John would have but a poor show for
re-election. He is giving the present Ministry a good
general support on the same principle, modified by the
retirement of Sir John Robertson from political life.
BRUNKER, JAMES NIXON, Esq.
[East Maitland.)
The sailor’s metaphor about the needle and the pole
supposed to be the best indication of unchanging constancy,
is almost feeble as a description of the devotion of East
Maitland to Mr. Brunker. And in some senses he
deserves it. Not only is he a man of sound and solid


understanding, but, as being altogether apart from and
above the political adventurers or nincompoops which some
districts lower down and higher up the Hunter River have
sent to Parliament, Mr. Brunker shines by a contrast
which reflects credit, in a way, on his constituency. At
the same time, his utility in Parliament at a period
when legislation on matters of vital national import is
required, is open to question. With everyone I regret his
recent enforced absence from the Assembly through a
serious illness. But lam compelled to admit that, as in
the past he has done, so in the present he gives promise
of doing that which is often most injurious to a nation’s
welfare. I mean by this the tendency of Mr. Brunker to
keep away from Parliament when the fray is hottest, and
to vote with Ministers simply because they have an over-
whelming majority on their side. It is all very well to
plead as excuse in the first instance that you are disgusted
with the way certain parliamentary “ swashbucklers ” on
either side of the House carry on warfare. Retiring from
the fight because each army has in its ranks many a
mavais sujet smacks of desertion and cowardice in real
warfare, and is not associated with the dignity and
patriotism it would claim for itself, and to give in simply
because the bigger battalions are opposed to you, is a
practice which, if it had been carried out in the past,
would have deprived the world of much of its best and
most useful history. What little is being done in Parlia-
ment now is fraught with difficulty and danger to the
country, what has to be done speedily in the way of
amended land laws and legislation for local Government
may be made dangerous if a flabby Ministry, backed by a
senseless and brutal majority, be permitted to do what it
pleases. The presence of men like Mr. Brunker will
assist the Ministry rather than the Opposition.
BULL, NATHANIEL GEORGE, Esq.
(Central Cumberland.)
When Mr. Lackey received an honorable reward for his
unwavering vote in favor of the Stuart-Farnell Land Act,
and was drawn up to the heaven of the Legislative


'Council, Mr. Varney Parkes beat Mr. Bull in a contest
for the vacant seat for Central Cumberland. Mr. Parkes’s
real strength in the contest lay in the fact that he was the
eon of his father, on whom the Government was just then
heaping insult and abuse, ignorant of the fact that the
country had no confidence in Ministers. And another card
that fell in Mr. Parkes’s favor was that, as a general
election was inevitable in a few months, there was but
little spirit in the contest except on the part of those who
wanted to vote straight against Government. But when
the dissolution and general election came Mr. Bull found
himself in a better position. He and Mr. MCulloch, one
of the old members, joined hands in a generous and
perfectly legal expenditure, to facilitate the polling of
every possible vote. The champion oarsman of the world
visited Hornsby and Peat’s Ferry in their interests, and
so, it was whispered, did Mr. Laurence Foley. Mr.
Toohey, the elect of South Sydney, addressed the honest
workmen at Prospect in a persuasive fashion intended to
make them go straight for Bull, and against anything
with a sound like Parkes in it, and Liverpool almost
plumped for Bull. In addition there were three other
candidates, who, though beaten at the poll, helped Mr.
Bull’s election. Mr. Fuller started with good chances,
but by making speeches and getting himself inordinately
puffed to the exclusion of everyone else, ruiued those
chances. A young Farnell came in at the last moment,
and polled well, because he was young was Australian,
and because his father had just been shamefully shelved
by Mr. Dibbs. A Mr. Scrivener, whose speeches should
have placed him at the top of the poll, entered the contest
too late, but made a good show. So Messrs. M‘Culloch,
Bull and Parkes were returned for one of the largest, and
what should be one of the most important constituencies
in the country. X give these details here because doing so
will save trouble when dealing with Mr. Bull’s colleagues.
Since his election Mr. Bull has fastened himself in willing
captivity to the chariot wheels of the Dibbs-Jennings,
and then of the Jennings-Uibbs Government, and, it may
safely be said, has never given a vote, in that capacity, of
tuility to the country. But he has in him the making of
41 magnificent roads and bridges member; is continually


in correspondence with a Government department about a
post-office, or a railway platform, or a drain, or a culvert,
or a footpath, in some portion of his electorate, and has
every chance of being returned again, especially as his
liberality at election time in a perfectly legitimate and
honorable way is not likely to suffer diminution.
BURDEKIN, SYDNEY, Esq.
{East Sydney).
Shortly after the Stuart Grovernment took office Mr. A.
G. Taylor discovered, and Parliament had unwillingly to
agree with him, that the Minister of Education, Mr. G.
H. Reid, was disqualified. Mr. Reid had to submit himself
for re-election, and was defeated by an extraordinary com-
bination which enclosed in its rank Messrs. A. G. Taylor,
M‘Elhone, John Davies, and O’Sullivan. The combination
put in Mr. Burdekin, a wealthy and worse than useless
political nonentity, who had in a previous Parliament mis-
represented a Northern constituency. In 1885, Mr.
Burdekin crept in for East Sydney, the lowest on the poll.
He occasionally speaks what is not worth listening to with
an air of placid complacency, and always votes in the
interest of the class to which he belongs. In private life
he is deservedly held in some esteem, an esteem which does
not follow him in his public career.
BURKE, MICHAEL, Esq.
( Tamworih ).
The results of the last dissolution gave Mr. H. Levien
Mr. Burke as a colleague in the representation of Tam-
worth. Mr. Burke, it is said, qualified himself for parlia-
mentary life by serving some time with honor to himself
and benefit to the country as a policeman, and it is a great
pity for his reputation so deservedly attained, that he
should have taken to politics. He was one of those who
gloried in the late exclusion of the Press from Parliament,
and he has said in his melancholy anger that all press men
are liars. lam not about to argue the truth of this latter


statement. When Mr. Burke speaks solemn and “co-
herent nonsense drums on the ears of listeners ; when he
votes, it is to keep the Government m office at ail hazards.
BUENS, JOHN FITZGEEALI), Esq.
{The Hunter.)
Through, evil report and good report the Hunter elec-
torate has stuck to Mr. Burns for many a long year.
Once a long time ago, it unexpectedly rejected him for
Mr Dillon. Mr. Burns himself has been Chairman of
Committees and twice Minister of the Crown On the
fixst occasion his occupancy of the office of Postmaster-
General was not a long one ; hut he was }ct long enoug
in office to leave a reputation asi the best «dmmmtrator
that department has over had. He had Messrs.
Fitzpatrick, Farnell, and the late W. Forster as colleagues.
The P second time he was Treasurer to Sir John Robertson
for about three months. And it may be said that he then
delivered the simplest and clearest
statement that has lately been made in New South V\ ales,
and that when he had eliminated from the opei ation of his
proposed property tax “ stocks in stores and warehouses
he Should 1 have had an overwhelming majority of the
House with him and the Government. But the intrigues
of opponents, who hated each other as much as they did
the Government, killed the last Eobertson Government.
Mr. Burns’s faults are a parliamentary style and manner
that have caused to be attached to him a
flippant appellation, and an impression firmly fixed in his
oJn mind and which he does not attempt to conceal that
any Ministry of which he is not a member is singularly
imperfect. This does not tend to make his presence in the
House as conducive to useful legislation as it might.other-
wise be. He is a thorough free trader, and his probity
is unquestioned.
BUTCHEE, EOBEET, Esq.
{Paddington.)
Mr. Butcher is in every sense an estimable gentleman
quite out of place in Parliament or as a legislator. He


is neither suited by political capacity to the one, nor by
an aptitude to understand a nation’s needs for the other.
As an alderman of Sydney and a Mayor of Woollahra he
was quite at home when voting- money for streets and
drains, and urging the claims of his ward to a liberal
expenditure of municipal money. As a member of Parlia-
ment, dealing with national taxation and legislation
affecting a people, his attendance has as much effect on
what is going on as if he had stayed at home and gone
comfortably to bed.
CASS, GEOEGE EDWIN, Esq.
(The Bogan.)
This gentleman is another product of the general
election of 1880, and at the general election of 1880
headed the poll. Neither fact is creditable to the public
spirit or acumen of the constituency, for Mr. Cass, as a
public man, and as a member of Parliament, brings the
political thermometer down to zero. His colleague is Sir
Patrick Jennings, and he has always helped to make an
insignificant joint in the party tail of the Stuart-Dibbs,
the Dibbs-Jennings, and the Jennings-Dibbs Govern-
ments. I shall not be in the least surprised if he is found
supporting the Premier’s inane proposals for celebrating
our centenary.
CHANTEE, JOHN MOOEE, Esq.
(The Murray.)
A free selector. Mr. Chanter was returned by free
selectors at the last general election, and very early in the
present session created a rather favorable impression by
offering a few practical and sensible remarks on the
necessity for amending the Land Act. But he lost no time
in destroying this impression by making a silly fuss over a
silly row with Mr. Levien, by joining the party whose
members wanted to impose an import duty on cereals, and
by showing that, except a few clauses of the Land Act
which he could not well avoid understanding, he knew
little of any other legislation. The Government have in
him a staunch and fitting supporter.


CLARKE, HENRY, Esq.
{Eden.)
For fully fifteen years Parliament has known the
presence of this gentleman, who represents a district in
which the Minister of Justice is his colleague, and yet has
much difficulty in getting a railway As a wharfinger
and produce merchant, Mr. H. Clarke commands the
respect of all who know him. As a member of Parlia-
ment, there is little or no doubt of the honesty of his
intentions, as there is also none on the point that in
carrying them out he utterly fails to assist useful legisla-
tion. He seldom or never favors the House with his
ideas upon any matter under its notice, and this is said to
arise rather from the fact that he has no ideas with which
to favor the House than from a feeling of modest
reticence.
CLARKE, WILLIAM, Esq.
{Orange.)
One way or another Mr. William Clarke has succeeded
in occupying far more public attention than he deserves.
From the first he determined to get into a Ministry, and
set himself to agcomplish this object by opposing any
Ministry that declined to recognise his merits. At one
time he would have been content to have accepted the
chairmanship of committees, but somehow, except from
himself he had no support for the position. He speaks
whenever there is a great debate, and succeeds in diminish-
ing the interest of such a debate. Assisted by Mr.
Fergusson, he desired once to form a third party, but
could not get even a third member to join him. His most
recent achievements have been a dispute with Mr. Lyne,
which extended outside the chamber, and an unfortunate
misconception of some remarks of bis by Mr. Lysaght,
which he turned away with the softest of answers. He
has managed a bank successfully, and is managing a land
company with general acceptance, which facts would go to
show that neither of these accomplishments qualify a
gentleman for shaping the legislation of his country in
good form.


COLLINS, CHARLES, Esq.
[The Namoi.)
Mr T. G. Dangar had for years represented the elec-
torate of the Namoi to such good effect that nowhere was
there a hack country district with such an ample supp y
of first-class bridges. But in 1884 Mr. Collins a successful
storekeeper in Narrabri and Walgett, and Mayor of the
former town, gave symptoms that he would like to replace
Mr. Dangar, and he worked things so successfully that in
1885 Mr Dangar did not contest the election with Mr.
Coffins, but tried his hand at Gwydir where coming at
the last moment, he polled wonderfully well, though
unsuccessfully. Since entering the House, Mr. Coffins,
except upon the ad valorem duties, has shown a disposition
to mould his political opinions upon the question of a
railway from Narrabri to Walgett. Now, that railway xs
a work that should be earned out, but Mr. Collins, by
devoting his gigantic intellect to it alone has managed to
drop info the position of a member of no great value, and
concerning whose opinions on any subject the House
■entertains no very high estimate.
COONAN, WALTER THOMAS, Esq.
[Forbes.)
When Mr. Coonan, then a very young man entered
Parliament as member for an enormous electorate, which
included Bourke as well as Forbes, he made himself
remarkable by a fiery and lengthy speech that compelled
a Government to alter its intentions. n ,
disappeared from %e Assembly during the general elec-
tion and somehow, despite his first success he had
managed by that time so to contrive things that no one
felt his loss In 1882 he came back to Parhament on the
wave of popular opinion which wrecked the Parkes-
Eobertson Ministry and their amending Land Bill. Since
then he has been remarkable for occasional Parliamentary
impertinences, and for having, in the practice of his pro-
fession as a solicitor, obtained a notoriety that attracted
public attention to the fact that he was a me^ be * °*
Parliament. As a thick-and-thm supporter of every


Government to which Sir Henry Parkes is in opposition,
Mr. Coonan naturally is in no small favor with the
present Ministry, which may console him for any chilly
reception on the part of an ungenerous press and public.
COPELAND, HENRY, Esq.
[Hast Sydney.)
Mr. Copeland, an old miner, who had by that time
represented more than one constituency, and then sat for
one away up on the New England tableland, at the end of
the year 1882, occupied the agreeable position of being a
member of the Opposition who, should his party come into
power, must be taken into the new Ministry ; and he had
not undeservedly attained this position. A man of large
natural abilities; self-educated in the best senses of the
word, obstinate to a degree, but only obstinate because he
was certain he was right, full of his native Yorkshire
shrewdness tempered by a good knowledge of men and
matters, with the rough edges of his disposition rounded
off by a kind of sturdy bonhommie ; Mr. Copeland seemed
to have in him a good deal of the stuff of which good and
capable Ministers of the Crown are made. Therefore
when the House met after a general election on January
16, 1883, and made a spectacle of what was left of the
Parkes-Robertson Government everyone knew that Mr.
Copeland would be one of Mr. Alexander Stuart’s
colleagues. And what everyone knew came to pass. Mr.
Copeland joined the Stuart-Earnell Ministry as Minister
for Works. But he speedily left it. Let me touch as
lightly as possible on this matter. If the cause of his
retirement was not quite creditable to himself, those who
made it “ the cause” did not do a very kind, or just, or
generous action. Let us say that Mr. Copeland’s political
sun set for a time. Other leaders of men have suffered
reverses. And doubtless, even in the height of any
political position he has since attained to, or may attain,
Mr. Copeland will think with sorrow of that fatal 17th of
March. During the nearly three years reign of his erst-
while colleagues, Mr. Copeland gave them a loyal support.
This wavered somewhat when Mr. Dibbs, as Premier, had


to admit the mesa which Mr. Dibbs, as merely Colonial
Treasurer, had got the - country into. But it never
changed into a support of two men who have ever stank
in the political nostrils of Mr. Copeland. Those two men
were Sir Henry Parkes and Sir John Robertson. When
Sir Patrick Jennings and his following were relieved of
the necessity of coalescing with better men in the shape
of Sir John Robertson and his colleagues, Sir Patrick
made Mr. Copeland Minister of Lands, and this was a sad
day for Mr. Copeland. Prom former political reverses
he has honorably recovered. When Newtown rejected
him on joining the Stuart Government East Sydney
opened her willing arms to him. But he will find it
hard to get over the political degradation to which he
has now sank. He has inoculated his colleagues with
some of his worst political “fads,” notably ad valorem
duties and a retaliatory protective policy, and in return
he is becoming politically disingenuous and oblivious
to gross acts of misgovernment which he would have
thundered against in former times. His presence in the
present Ministry has utterly destroyed his parliamentary
utility.
CRAMSIE, JOHN, Esq.
(Balranald.)
This gentleman seldom speaks in the Assembly, and his
name is not often to be found in the division lists unless
the interests of the pastoral tenants of the Crown or the
•existence of the Government is at stake. He is then
useful as having sincere and decided opinions in favor
of the squatter. He is an upright and honorable man
of business as a stock and station agent and as partner in
an extensive storekeeping firm in his electorate. He has
it will be seen, his metier in Parliament; and if mem-
bers were only returned to pass land laws, and to pass
them in the interests of a class, he would be a model
representative.


CEEEE, JOSEPH, Esq.
[Northumber land.)
In the variety of representatives it has returned to Par-
liament, Northumberland is a remarkable lt
has had able and politically creditable representatives.
It has had, and has, representatives who discredit its
political ability. It has had freetrade members; it has
had, and now has, protectionists. It has had a working-
man for its representative and it has also had Mr.
Hungerford. Of those whom it has had as members of
Parliament, Dr. Brookes was unquestionably the ablest,
and at the’ same time the most intractable. And even
bearing in mind that Mr. Luscombe has sat for
Northumberland, and that Messrs. Greer and Melville-
now sit .for it, I am safe in saying that its most useless
representative was Mr. Stephenson. While he was in
Parliament he distinguished himself by a mistake which
secured the election of the late Sir Greorge Wigram Allen
&8 Speaker. IVtr. Arnold, tlie best Speaker the Assembly
has ever had, was drowned during a flood in the
Paterson Eiver. Mr. Wisdom and Mr. Allen were
candidates for the chair. On a division Mr. Allen
secured two more votes than Mr. Wisdom, a,nd then
came explanations from which it appeared plainly that
Mr. Stephenson had intended to vote for Mr. Wisdom
but had actually voted for bis opponent, whilst Mr.
Bawden, who represented the Clarence, had been late by
half a second, the bar across the passage at the back
of the Speaker’s chair having been literally jammed
down in front of him as he was about to enter the
Chamber And Mr. Bawden was a supporter of Mr.
Wisdom. Then followed a curious scene. Mr. Allen,
the chosen Speaker acknowledged that his election had been
due to an accident; and, resigning, the voting was taken
over again, when Mr. Allen’s magnanimity was recog-
nised by the Assembly declining to alter its previous
decision. Besides those named, Northumberland has
also had as representatives Mr. Hodgson, Mr. Tighe,
Mr. Hammell, a local and a popular product in
every sense; Mr. Thomas Lewis, Mr. Turner, the
working man; and Mr. Luscombe. His election came


about curiously. When Mr. Burdekin opposed Mr. G.
H. Eeid for East Sydney in the circumstances previously
stated Mr. Luscoxnbe precipitated himself into the fray as
a third, or Protectionist candidate. His candidature was
considered more dangerous to Mr. Eeid than to Mr.
Burdekin, and therefore Mr. Melville, the Government
Whip, induced him to withdraw on a promise of being
given the first safe seat vacant. The opportunity came
some time afterwards with a vacancy for Northumberland,
and Mr. Melville being then very powerful there, and the
Stuart Government not having been found out by the
people, Mr. Luscombe was returned. But at the last general
election Mr. Melville had quite enough to do to look after
his own seat, poor little Mr. Luscombe had to paddle his
own political canoe, and was not only hopelessly beaten,
but was far, far behind such a person as Mr. Thomas
Walker, erstwhile sham trance medium and present ex-
ponent of freethought. At this election Northumberland
gave Mr. Greer to the Assembly. Mr. Greer is an im-
portant man in Newcastle, where he does a largo
auctioneering business, is great as a municipal councillor,
and still greater as a leader in the cause of total
abstinence. He commands the respectful admiration of
the local press, and, as an alderman and an auctioneer, is
deservedly held in high esteem by many people. But in
Parliament he is a failure, if that can be counted a failure
from which parliamentary success could never have been
hoped for. As a member of the Assembly he is terribly
vain, shallow, and egotistic. He forgets that Newcastle
is not the world, and that he has not entered the House in
order to teach and lecture 123 members. Consequently,
when he speaks few listen to him, and those few laugh
when he would wish them to be serious. He is a con-
sistent and thorough teetotaller, but whilst this may be
praiseworthy, it would have been more creditable to him
if, when he had converted a Minister of the Crown to his
views, he had not immediately boasted of it.
DALTON, THOMAS, Esq.
[Orange.)
“A good citizen” in the general acceptation of the
words is Mr. Dalton. That is to say, he is a storekeeper


in Orange and an importing merchant in Sydney, has
made money by honorable business acumen, and is now a
w ealthy upholder of law and order in the State, and of
obedience to all those who are placed in authority over us,
with a certain saving reservation in the case of Ireland.
Asa member of Parliament, as one who has to legislate
for a people he may be described as both narrow-minded
and ignorant, incapable of taking a broad view of any
question, and certain to vote always to keep Sir Henry
Parkes out of office, no matter that by doing so he may
keep a bad Ministry in office, and may help to pass laws
for the injury and not the benefit of the State.
DAVIES, JOHN, Esq.
[South Sydney .)
Mr, Davies was whip to the coalition Ministry which
lx eld office for four years with Sir Henry Parkes as
Premier. He was credited with having had a prominen t
share in bringing about the coalition between Sir Henry
and Sir John—of the latter of whom he has always been
a supporter. He was once Postmaster-General; but his
Ministerial career was void of distinction. For some
time before the general election of 1882 he had been
accorded a notoriety which did him no benefit as a public
man, and for some time after that period his notoriety
was continued partly for him and partly by himself.
The circumstances which gave him notoriety are known to
everyone, and would only waste time by repetition. He
was considered by those who liked him least to have been
politically extinguished by the general election of 1882.
Those who liked him most put him in at the head
of the poll for South Sydney in 1885. Like Mr.
Abigail, he is the product of peculiar germinating circum-
stances which frequently produce members of Parliament
in this country ; but, unlike Mr. Abigail, he is the
product of many opposite circumstances working in har-
mony for the time being. Thus, whilst at one time a
prominent engineer of the piece of machinery which ran
underground at aldermanic and parliamentary elections,
w hich was painted orange color, and had its bearings


MONUMENTS AND TOMBSTONES
In Marble, Granite, or hreestone.
PRICES to SUIT ALL CLASSES of PURCHASERS.
m o
Wm
JDRH
1
RIEM
W/cno*
hi
Sydney
5,1 V
HANSON, LEWIS & CO.,
BENT AND FHLLLIF STREETS
(NEAR TRAM TERMINUS), AND
237 ELIZABETH STREET (Near Buthurst-st.),


Important to Storekeepers,
Merchants & Shippers.
/
6
PAPER MILLS
PRINTING
to
J-
to
o
to
V.
AND
o
PAPER BAG
FACTORY
a:
GO
H
o
o
QC
r
H
co
o
A
■p
o
4
T
$
>*
CO
p -
Ln
to
w
T 3
CC
CO
o
o
j
EH
D-
-6
<c
CO
M
A.
■y
an
TEA
H
o
o
Q_
<</
to
w
s
O
pi
BLU
A
o
BAGS
0
PA
PE
\
/
GEO. MURRAY I CO.,
91 Clarence Street, Wynyard Square,
. . SYI3FEY.


A SEWING SONG.
IN that building long and tall.
Like a vast and stately hall.
With a busy, ceaseless whirr.
Human spiders spin and spin-
Ever weaving thread so thm
From the finest gossamer.
From the tender, siiowy floss,
Softer than the softest moss,
Gleam the long threads in the sun,
In a never-ending line,
Finest cob-vvebs not more fine,
Thus, the filament is spun.
Hark ! the noise of busy wheels,
Hark ! the hum of countless reels,
See! the silver web in piles,
Snow-white yarn in endless run,
Doubled, twisted, turned and spun
To innumerable miles.
Strong as wire, yet soft as silk,
Black as jet, or white as milk,
Firm and close, on bobbins round,
Spick and span, and bright and e'ean,
From th’ unwearying machine
Comes the cotton so renown’d.
Children playing in the sun,
Mirthful, blithe, and full of fiA,
Each one blooming like the rose;
Swift their nimble fingers fly.
Swift their needles do they ply,
Making dolly’s little clothes.
Tw) fair maidens in their bloom,
At the window of a ro im,
Like two white doves in a nest,
Say, as their deft, gentle hands
Stitch at gussets, seams and bands,
“ Brook’s Cotton is the best! '*
Or, perchance —Oh! blissful tale—
Working at the bridal veil—
Lace like shining gossamer;
Quickly through the fabric white
Drawn by fingers fair and light,
Cotton fine a* infants’ hair.
Matron, brooding, like a dove,
O’er her tender task of love.
Baby garments—Ah! so small —
Broidered boddice. skirt so long,
Softly croons her sewing song, _
Hers the holiest task of all.
Mother, with a son at sea,
Sits, her work upon her knee,
Making clothing thick and warm—
Woollen shirt and canvas smock,
Stout and heavy, that may mock
Nights of rain and cold and storm.
Grandame sits with specs on nose,
Patching up the children’s clothes,
Jackets, frocks, and trousers torn;
Granny says, as, staid and slow,
Goes her needle to and fro,
“ Sure such children ne’er were born I
Every state and every age—
Child and maiden, matron, sage—
Say, ‘ The truth stands out confessed,
Firm and close, and strong and sound,
Smooth and free, and bright and rourd
BROOK’S COTTON IS THE BEST!”
BROOKSA NAJLEPSZE ISM Cl,


AN INVALUABLE DOMESTIC REMEDY.
Of great potency in drawing, c’eaning, and healing all kinds of
wounds, sores, and putrid gatherings.
Midwives use it for sore nipples and gathered breasts.
May be obtained from all Chemists and Storekeepers.
is. per Stick. Per post is. 2d.
ft
■ifliauwiiaimaHa
MEANS “PEACE AT HOME,”
As it gives instant relief to Infants and Children suft’eri ig from
Wind, Acidity of the Stomach, Spasms, Convulsions, Cramps,
Diarrhoea, Vomiting, Loss Sleep, &c.
is. per Bottle.
Prepared by J■ BUTTERFIELD, M.P.S., Chemist,
135 Elizabeth-street, Redfern.
MOTHERS FRIEND
AND
Are composed of medicinal agents obtained entirely from the
Vegetable Kingdom, and are absolutely free from mercury.
They stimulate the Liver to healthy action, strengthen the
Stomach, cleanse the Bowels, and clear the Brain.
They are peculiarly adapted to Ladies; will remove all ohstruc•
structions, and restore to perfect health.
is. per Uox. Per post, Is. *d.
J. BUTTERFIELD, M.P.S., CHEMIST,
135 Elizabeth-street, Redfern.


cooled by temperance drinks, be has yet received support
in South Sydney from another underground bit of
machinery which is painted green, and fires up on alcohol.
During the present Parliament he opposed the Dibbs-
Jennings Government, supported thoroughly the short-
lived Ministry of Sir John Eobertson, which succeeded it,
and except upon the income tax, has supported the
Jennings-Dibbs Government. He has had a pretty long
experience in Parliament, and is at home in the bypaths
of politics. But his use as a legislator, in the proper
meaning of the word, has yet to be discovered. He was
by trade an excellent blacksmith, until, having honorably
attained a competence in various ways, he took to politics,
and is said not to have decreased his competence since, as
many a man with less self-control has done.
DAWSON, HENEY, Esq.
[Monaro.)
Mr. Dawson is a solicitor, which is nothing to his dis-
credit as a man, whatever it might be to him as a
politician. With Mr. Harold Stephen he shares the repre-
sentation, but not the loquacity, of Monaro _ Like Mr. H.
Stephen, he is a new member, and, unlike him, has given
no guide by which to estimate his utility, except that
■afforded by a steady and silent vote for the Jennings-
Dibbs combination. He brought himself into sudden
prominence, however, by knocking Mr. Shepherd down by
mistake, and expressing regret for doing so.
0
DAY, GEOEGE, Esq.
{Albury.)
Mr. JJay’s is a well-known face in the Assembly, as its
owner is pretty regular in attendance, and votes consis-
tently with vested interests of all kinds, including those in
land. He was once a miller in a large way at Albury,
and is now a stock and station agent, respected and trusted
by all who have had business with him. As a politician
his constituents retain their confidence in him at present.


which is more than those who would wish to see useful
legislation accomplished for the country are likely to do.
DIBBS, The Hox. GEORGE RICHARD, Esq.
(The Murrumbidgee.)
With Mr. Dibhs’s parliamentary history previous to the
general election of 1882, needs not to have much concern.
He had been in Parliament, and had suffered eclipse.
But in 1882 he came with a rush from the St. Leonards
constituency to the Colonial Treasurership in the Ministry
of Sir Alexander Stuart; and unfortunately, since that
time, he has made his parliamentary and political history
of sad and deep interest, too sad and too deep to the
country. He began his first treasurership by proposing
an increased duty on tea, and direct taxation. He then
abandoned both, and trusted to luck to make up the
revenue which he maintained was so much needed. He
finished this period of his career by denying that there was
a deficit or a necessity for increased taxation. He entered
upon his second Treasurership (combining with it the
Premiership) by announcing that there was a large deficit,
but remaining faithful to his assurance that increased
taxation was not needed. A third time in office, he, as
Colonial Secretary, is supporting through thick and thin
the proposals of his Premier to tax everybody and every-
thing. This plain statement should indicate Mr. Dibbs’s-
position for good and evil in Parliament. His friends
claim for him great force of character, which his enemies
admit, but at the same time claim the right to call his force
of character a blind and unreasoning obstinacy in main-
taining conclusions he has jumped at and not reasoned
out; and they say that a Cabinet Minister would be better
without such force of character. Mr. Dibbs, as a business
man, is one of unquestioned straightforwardness. He has
at times taken the management of matters outside politics,
such as a steam navigation company, and a lawsuit. In.
the latter capacity he was not eminently successful. He
is destitute of political tact, though his enemies accused
him of possessing some when he chose Mr. Badgery as his
Minister of Works, and so secured a powerful interest in


the St. Leonards electorate, which was not, however,
powerful enough to return him. But whatever fault IV r.
Dihhs may have as a politician, let me say at once that as
a man he is one who can be a fast and true friend where
he thinks his friendship well bestowed, or an unrelenting
and open enemy when he thinks he should be hostile.
He is open, generous, impulsive, to a fault; his faults are
on the surface.
EWING, THOMAS THOMPSON, Esq.
[The Richmond.)
Mr. Ewing’s fame was purely local until the general
election of 1885. And when he seconded the address in
reply he attracted a little attention which he has not since
increased. He is a self-opinioned young gentleman, of
that kind of appearance so generally described as nice,
and he frequently lectures the Opposition on the evil ot its
ways, but has never himself given a cogent or even a
plausible reason why he votes for anything or everything
the Government may propose. This as each side ot t &
House contains men who have thought out their political
convictions, has not added to his reputation for modesty as
a member. He is a surveyor, and as such is considered
to be highly gifted. This makes his friends regret that,
whilst thoroughly sound and accurate in practical men-
suration, he is quite unable to realise the very limited area
within which his political abilities are competent to exhibit
themselves.
FERGUSON* DAYID ALEXANDER, Esq.
[Wellington.)
Mr. Ferguson commands great respect as a thoroughly
good nudge of sheep and cattle, which causes no small
reliance to be placed upon him as a dealer in stock, ibis
reliance he thoroughly merits. As a member of Parlia-
ment his political judgment can only be ascertainedfrom Jus
votes, since he does not condescend to explain the points
by summing up which he mentally arrives at his con-
clusions. And as his votes are generally given contrary
to the interests of the people, it would seem that thn


excellent acumen he possesses in the practice of his private
business deserts him in the exercise of his duties as a
legislator.
FERGUSSON, WILLIAM JOHN, Esq.
(Glen Innes.)
Mr. Eergusson, who is a solicitor by profession, has now
sat in two Parliaments, a circumstance which is thought
to show either ineptitude for selection in his constituents
or that their field of choice was very limited. Early in
the present Parliament he assisted Mr. W. Clarke in an
attempt to form a third party, and since the conspicuous
failure that was then accomplished he has sat and voted
on the Opposition side of the House, less from sympathy
with, or a knowledge of, the principles of the Opposition
than from a desire to inflict as many wounds as possible
on the Government.
FITZGERALD, ROBERT GEORGE DUNDAS, Esq.
(The Tipper Hunter.)
In 1885 Mr. Fitzgerald, by the assistance of a late,
reluctant, and half-hearted candidature on the part of Mr.
M'Elhone, slipped into Parliament, where he has since
given no reason whatever to justify his election. He
belongs to the profession in which Mr. Coonan has recently
had an unfortunate experience, and of which he is an
ornament. He has a fashionable appearance, resembling
an aide-de-camp in mufti rather than a gentleman learned
in the law, is justly liked by all who have the privilege of
his private or his professional acquaintance, and votes
regularly with the Government.
FLETCHER, The Hon. JAMES, Esq.
[Newcastle.)
As having taken his share in public life before entering
Parliament, and as having had a sufficiently long parlia-
mentary career, Mr. Fletcher is a member of whom it would
be possible to speak in high terms, but for one thing, and


that is his retention of office in the present Ministry. For-
having joined Sir Patrick Jennings in forming a Govern-
ment he cannot be blamed. He had a previously spotless
record, and had refused office when offered to him.
Owing to the Governor’s refusal to grant Sir John Robert-
son a dissolution, there was no opportunity given the
country to properly range the party lines of Parliament.
The House, as it stood, was split up in all directions ; and
I am willing to admit that when Mr. Fletcher joined the
Ministry he had, dominating even the creditable ambition
to be in a Government, the sincere desire to do his best
towards the formation of a Ministry that would be strong
enough to benefit the country. His parliamentary career
had been an honorable one. His rugged eloquence had
won him a good place amongst the few speakers to whom
the House is always ready to listen; his hard, practical
sense and everyday shrewdness had made him a valuable
aid to legislation. No matter on what side of the Chamber
he sat, he had never pushed Opposition to mere obstinacy,
nor support to servility; in short, he gave strength to the
Cabinet of Sir Patrick Jennings. Essentially a working
man—not only as having sprung from the ranks of manual
labor, but as working out his own fortunes —he was self-
reliant and was relied upon. Unfortunately he took the port-
folio for which his early training best fitted him, but for
which his later and larger interests rendered him open to
criticism. However, this was passed over, because he
himself and his colleagues had no reticence in letting it be
known that his occupancy of the office of Minister of
Mines was purely temporary. Until his Premier disclosed
the wretched “ sneaking in ” financial policy at which all
but a miserable majority in Parliament are disgusted, Mr.
Fletcher held office with reasonable honor to himself, and
with every prospect of profit to the country. From that
day, however, he has been in a false position, from which
perhaps a sense of loyalty to his colleagues has prevented
his disentangling himself. Yet he cannot now complain if
he has to share the obloquy and the odium with which the
Government of which he is a member is justly covered.
He did not come out from amongst the unclean things.
He remains amidst the false prophets and worshippers of
a political Baal. We may be sorry that he is in the


political temple of idols and of parliamentary false gods,
but, to alter the metaphor, as he has made his political
bed so must he lie upon it. Whenever he meets his con-
stituents, and is re-elected, he will be successful on account
of his personal merits, and will have to thank them for
rescuing him from the fate to which his latest political
associations should properly condemn him. It remains to
be said that before entering Parliament he was a decided
protectionist, but from his entry into public life dates a
modification, if not a complete change in his political
creed.
FOESYTH, ARCHIBALD, Esq.
[South Sydney .)
Mr Forsyth is a new member, good-natured and well-
intentioned, but out of place in Parliament. Until
returned for South Sydney he had, by means of sententious
utterances, won for himself an undeserved reputation for
political insight. That reputation a brief experience of
some eleven months has completely dispelled. He is now
simply a bore of the first magnitude, He was once looked
forward to by protectionists as a possible leader; he is
now neither valued by them nor dreaded by freetraders.
Apart from politics he is a well-meaning, if rather narrow-
minded member of the community, of the strictest honesty,
and by occupation, until recently, a ropemaker.
FOSTER, WILLIAM JOHN, Esq.
[Newtown.)
Mr. Foster was Attorney-General in the Farnell-
Fitzpatrick Ministry, 1878. Whilst the Parkes-Robertson
Ministry was in the heyday of its prosperity its wily
Premier perceived a possible danger in Mr. Foster, who
taking up an independent position, seemed disposed to let
a third party gather around him, that by coalescing with
the Opposition might bring destruction to the Cabinet.
Accordingly, a vacancy occurring, Mr. Foster was made
M inister of Justice, and in 1882 shared the fate of so many
of his colleagues, who not only lost office, but their seats in


Parliament. With the revulsion of feeling in 1885 Mr.
Poster regained the confidence of Newtown, and came back
to the Assembly, where his presence could be pronounced
useful but for the way he voted on Tuesday, February 16,
1886. On the evening of that day he followed Sir Henry
Parkes and others, who had helped to turn the Bibbs-
Jennings Government out of office, and defeated the
Eobertson-Burns Ministry, which had succeeded. By
doing this he put in power the very men he was opposed
to, and assisted to bring about the chaos and confusion
which now prevails. Had Sir Henry Parkes, Mr. Foster,
•and others, some of whom would not join Sir John Eobert-
son in forming a Cabinet, recognised their duty, and sup-
ported his Ministry, Parliament and the country would
not be as they now are. At the same time, Mr. Foster
has latterly done his best to repair his mistake, and his
speech in moving a resolution in July last, condemnatory
of the Speaker’s ruling re a continuous sitting, was a very
masterpiece of calm and conclusive reasoning. Mr. Foster
occupies a good position in the House, does not speak
■often, and when he speaks talks sense. His style is
unattractive, but his matter is good. He does not oppose
a bill simply because Government brings it forward, but
when he does oppose, gives good grounds for his opposi-
tion. As a barrister in good practice he is a high-minded
and honorable man, and brings both these characteristics
into play as a politician.
GAELAND, CHAELES LAUNCELOT, Esq.
( Carcoar .)
This young gentleimfh, having previously suffered defeat,
was victorious at the last general election in Carcoar, in
which constituency he publishes a newspaper. For some
time after entering Parliament he made the not uncommon
mistake of newly-fledged members of trying to fly at game
beyond their powers. He went in to reform everything.
And he also obtruded himself in important debates, to the
wisdom of which he contributed nothing, and did this in a
way not calculated to conceal his deficiencies. But more
than one of his votes have been given in a proper and a
patriotic direction. And lie has the courage of his


opinions in that, though liis colleague is a protectionist and
he has himself been assured that his constituents have
leanings in that way, he has not hesitated to declare him-
self an uncompromising freetrader. He is an agent as
well as a newspaper proprietor, and may some day develop
into a useful member.
GARRARD, JACOB, Esq.
[Balmain.)
Mr. Garrard, who is now an auctioneer, came to Parlia-
ment from the artizan’s bench, and since his coming has
neither disgraced his origin nor his position as a legislator.
As a speaker he has many faults of style, but cannot be
said to be ineffective. He professes protectionist principles
but repudiates the sneaking in of those principles in the
shapeless body of an ad valorem duties system. Though
not in the first flight of politicians he occupied a suffi-
ciently good position to justify Sir John Robertson in
offering him the portfolio of works when the veteran found
himself deserted by those to whom he looked with justice
for support, and it is admitted that during his short tenure
of office Mr. Garrard gave proofs of an administrative
capacity which no one has since sought to decry. On the
land question he is not at home ; but on anything connected
with public works he is not only a safe authority, but is
capable of giving an unbiassed opinion. The drawback to-
his Parliamentary ability will now, I suspect, be found in
the fact that whenever the party he at present works with
comes into power he will look on office as his by right. He
is most popular in his constituency, and is not likely to lose
his seat at a general election.
GARRETT, THOMAS, Esq.
[Camden.)
This gentleman occupies a position perfectly unique im
Parliament. He is prominent without having a following
of any kind. Whenever he* speaks he adds to the know-
ledge of the question under discussion. He has great
natural abilities. He is a powerful and ready debater,


better in reply than in attack, though most dangerous in
the latter. With all the evils that have been and can be
accomplished under our land laws, he is as well acquainted
as Mr. Abbott, or, in fact, any man in the land. He is
essentially a clever man, and what the Americans call a
“smart” man. Yet he is held in no respect in Parlia-
ment ; and no matter how ably he may plead on the right
side, his talking has as little real effect as if he was pleading
on the wrong side. His greatest and best effort as a parlia-
mentary speaker was made more than four years ago, when he
saved himself by a narrow vote from a very unpleasant situa-
tion. Whatthat situation was, and what Mr. Garrett’s extra-
ordinary political career has been, are too well known to
need my wasting time or space in describing them. He
has been a Minister of the Crown, and has very nearly been
expelled from Parliament. I do not now say that he
should have been expelled. lam merely recording facts.
He has been, and may for years be a prominent man in
public affairs ; but it does not seem likely that he will ever
again be as powerful as he may be prominent, or as in-
fluential as he is undoubtedly interesting. The causes for
this anomalous state of things are not difficult to find.
His political life and reputation form a combination, which,
if such impalpable matters could be actually painted,
would have to be represented on canvass by ugly blurrs
and splashes, relieved by undoubted touches of brilliancy.
He has, throughout his political existence, been a firm
friend of Sir John Kobertson, and the chivalrous old gen-
tleman, in a truly feudal spirit of the best kind, has
protected and shielded, and befriended his political vassal
in fair knightly fsphion. Parliament would scarcely be
Parliament without Mr. Garrett. Hie electors of C amden
are so well satisfied on that point that they are not likely
to desert him. Yet he is a dangerous rather than a useful
man in the Assembly, one whose political motives are
always suspected, even if they are not open to suspicion,
and on whom little or no reliance, in a political sense, can
be placed. Mr. Garrett is one of the shrewdest and
sharpest land agents in New South AYales, and lias not
thought it unbecoming his position as a member of Parlia-
ment to address possible land litigants by means of a cir-
cular, the effect of which was that a good round sum of
c


money would retain his services, which, if not retained,
might he open to he taken advantage of by the other side.
In this, however, he did no more than barristers and
solicitors do without the aid of a circular.
GAEYAN, THE HON. JAMES PATEICK, Esq.
{Eden.)
It is the merest justice to say that until recently Mr.
Garvan had a stainless Parliamentary record. Since he
entered the Assembly at the general election of 1880 his
career had been one of singular independence, marked by
firmness and vigour of thought and speech. Prom the
time that he attacked Mr. Watson (Sir Henry Parkes’
Colonial Treasurer) down to his impeachment of Mr.
Wright, Mr. Garvan, whether in Opposition or as a
Government supporter, had never failed to run clear of
the ruck. And it was admitted that when he did attack
a public man high in office he contrived to do so without
the faintest tinge of personality, arguing on public grounds
and on public grounds alone. All this time, however, the
honorable ambition to be in office was scarcely disguised
in him ; but it was clear that Mr. Oarvan desired that
office should seem to seek him rather than that he should
seem to seek office. He carried his independence in tem-
poral affairs into matters spiritual, and as a member of
his church, did not, on occasions, fail to stand up and be
bold before an ecclesiasticism that generally ill brooks
such interference. Having this character for indepen-
dence, he exhibited it when Sir John Eobertson formed
his last Ministry. He had helped to create the oppor-
tunity which was afforded to Sir John to form a Govern-
ment; but on that Government being formed he not only
declined to help it, but moved the resolution on which it
was driven from office to gratify the ambition of worse
men, who dropped their personal and political animosi-
ties in order to conquer a common foe. When Sir Patrick
Jennings failed to coalesce with Sir John Eobertson he
invited Mr. Garvan to join him as Minister of Justice,
and Mr. Garvan consented. Since then he has presented
but an emasculated figure of his former political self.


Every political crime which in his independent days he so
sternly denounced he has aided his colleagues by his silent
consent to commit. In fact, reading the proceedings in
Parliament, as reported in “Hansard,” I am amazed not
so much at .the silence of Mr. Garvan in his present
position, as that he remains in his present position.
Night after night the Ministry of which he is a member
has “ sheeted home” to it accusations he must know to be
true, at which every drop of blood in his veins must tingle,
yet he is silent and holds office, instead of renouncing it
and once more obtaining freedom of speech. In Oppo-
sition, or as a Government supporter with a mind of his
own Mr. Garvan was not only of distinct use but a power
in Parliament. He could support a measure without,
thinking it perfect, simply because it came from his side
of the House, and he could oppose one without denying it
some merit, simply because it came from those to whom
he sat opposite. Thus he was a most capable critic of
legislation ; now he is worthless. In business life Mr.
Garvan manages an insurance association, and helps to
eonduct land companies with success.
GIBBES, FREDERICK JAMISON, Esq.
[Newtown.)
At the general election of 1882 there leaped into sud-
den prominence on the poll a gentleman hitherto un-
known to the public life outside Newtown. His election,
however was for. Possessed of sufficient
means to render him independent of occupation as a way
towards a livelihood, he had been returned to the New-
town Municipal Council. Having nothing to do but to be
a municipal councillor, his constituents found him, as
they believed, most useful. The most trivial complaint
made to a man for whom time had no value, was attended to
with zeal. He made the municipal officials loathe the very
sight of him. He was as instant in demanding the re-
moval of a dead cat from a gutter as in seeing the streets
under his care were well repaired. The burgesses of
Newtown thought that such a man should be i nvaluable
in Parliament, so they sent him there in 1882, and re-


turned him again in 1885. A gentleman liberally educated,
he had done nothing in the Assembly to justify his pre-
sence there. Indeed, the only attempt he made to do
something showed that he should not be in the Assembly.
I read a really good speech made by him on the third
reading of the Customs [Bill, a clear proof to my mind
that a man who could do this, and yet had been in Parlia-
ment over three years and said nothing, had simply wasted
his time there, and should have stuck solely to borough
business.
GORMLY, JAMES, Esq.
[The Murrumhidgee.)
Mr. Gormly, who accompanied Mr. Dibbs into Parlia-
ment when the Murrumhidgee consoled the latter for his
defeat at St. Leonards, is one of several candidates for the
distinction of being the best laughed at man in the House.
To the utmost of his abilities, he tills the place of the late
Mr. Andrew Lynch. He follows Mr. Dibbs, and any
Government or Opposition which Mr. Dibbs may lead, or
he included in. Though not politically remarkable, he is
celebrated even now as a bold driver and dare devil horse-
man. It is not long since he rode in a celebrated ten mile
race at Wagga Wagga. Mr. Gormly is what may be called
“ a bit of a selector,” and despite his insignificance in Par-
liament is regarded as quite an authority on most subjects
by the conditional purchasers in his electorate.
GOULD, ALBERT JOHN, Esq.
[Patricks' Plains.)
Mr. Gould is a quiet unostentatious member, though on
one or two occasions he and a few friends considered that
he would make a good chairman of committees. He does
not speak often, and when he does has not the most at-
tractive of styles, but he talks sense more frequently than
he does nonsense. He is quiet and gentlemanly in de-
meanor, and reading his speeches makes me think that he
does his best to make himself well acquainted with any
subject on which he desires to speak. He is a solicitor in
Singleton, and has the confidence of his clients.


HAMMOND, MAEK JOHN, Esq.
( Canterbury.)
Mr. Hammond made a reputation for himself outside
Canterbury by his conduct as alderman, and for several
successive years as Mayor of Ashfield. He displayed a
knowledge of what may be termed the ethics of local
government, that showed him to be far above the average
alderman or mayor. His efforts to get the borough
cheaply lighted by gas, which were successful, will not
soon be forgotten. He has not been so successful in Par-
liament, because he has a manner of speaking which does
not induce people to listen to him, and talks in a hesitating
style, disguising good thoughts in disjointed and
unconnected sentences. In addition, he gives his fellow-
members an idea that he thinks his merits are not capable
of proper development whilst he remains an ordinary
member, and that they would bloom with greater fragrance
were he a Minister of the Crown —say, for instance,
Colonial Treasurer. He may have no thoughts of this
kind, but the manner in which he has veered from party to
party, and other indications, give his fellow members an
idea that he has. And it may be the case that he considers
that parties veered from him rather than he from parties.
It would not be just to say that Mr. Hammond is a useless
member —it would be too much to affirm that his presence
in the House is of supreme utility.
HASSABL, THOMAS HENEY, Esq.
(The Owydir.)
Mr. Hassall is the most recent addition to the Assembly,
being the result of the retirement of Mr. Campbell. He
early distinguished himself by helping to exclude the press
on an important occasion. He has been from the first a
thick and thin supporter of the Government, and has got
the plans, sections, and book of reference of his railway
passed with flying colors. When I read his speeches 1
seem to be merely skimming the surface of things. He is
“ an independent gentleman.”


HAWTHOENE, JOHN STUAET, Esq.
[Balmain.)
Haying graduated in Good Templary, Mr. Hawthorne
entered Parliament and politics at the last general election.
He assisted by his vote to turn out the Dibbs-Jennings'-
Government. So far as his vote went he endeavored to-
keep Sir John Eobertson in office, and he is now in opposi-
tion to the Jennings-Dibbs Ministry. If he has not made
himself a splendid political reputation in Parliament, Mr.
Hawthorne has, on the other hand, not made himself un-
favorably known. He is not a great talker, and does not
show much of the materials of which statesmen are made.
Indeed, he seems from what little he has said on different
questions to be more fitted to shine at a suburban
municipal council table than in the Senate. Yet he is
possessed of plenty of shrewdness, and I see by a news-
paper report that he has the courage of his opinions as a
freetrader, and expressed these opinions recently, in spite
of opposition at a suburban public meeting. There are
many less useful members in the Assembly than Mr. Haw»
thorne, and his constituents might easily replace him with
a worse man, but might have some little difficulty in finding
a better. One thing in his favor is that he is politically
sincere. He is a land and general agent.
HAYES, JAMES, Esq.
(The Hume.)
Mr. Hayes is a new' member, and since his entry into the
House has done nothing except silently vote to keep,
firstly, Mr. Dibbs and Sir Patrick Jennings, and secondly,
Sir Patrick Jennings and Mr. Dibbs in power. The fact
that his colleague in the representation of the Hume (Mr,
Lyne) is included in the latter Ministerial combination
appears to have intensified the devotion which he exhibited
toward the first, and for which he has never given any
reason. Mr. Hayes is a storekeeper, and his business
wares are as good and reliable as his politics are unsound
and worthless.


HENSON, WILLIAM, Esq.
[Canterbury .)
When Government put Mr. Moses into the Upper
House, and created a vacancy for Canterbury, Mr. Henson,
who had previously been in Parliament, beat Mr, Hudson
(of Hudson Brothers) for the seat. Mr. Henson had the
advantage of being in opposition to the Stuart Administra-
tion, then moribund, of being conspicuous for piety, and
also of having a cry sedulously raised against Mr. Hudson
that his success would mean fat Government contracts for
Hudson Brothers ; otherwise Mr. Henson had nothing to
recommend him.. At the general election which followed
shortly afterwards Mr. Henson again secured his seat.
Since then his votes have been in opposition generally, but
his powers, as shown in “ Hansard,” of talking solemn
nonsense more than counterbalance this advantageous
qualification, which is also minimised by the fact that were
the present Ministry out of office, or were Mr. Henson in
a new Parliament, he might be found voting as doggedly
and as consistently with a bad Government as he has lately
been voting against one. Mr. Henson is a capitalist.
HEYDON, LOUIS EEANCIS, Esq.
(Yams Plains.)
Mr. Heydon stepped into the electoral shoes of the late
Mr. Eitzpatrick, and was returned for Yass Plains to fill
the vacancy caused by that gentleman’s death. At the
time there was only one active protectionist in the House,
Mr. David Buchanan, and no one paid any serious atten-
tion to him. But Mr. Heydon entered Parliament with
but one professed political object to attain, and that was
to make protection the financial law of the laud. Now,
with Mr. Buchanan the enforcement of protection was but
one of many projects for the amelioration of the social
condition of the human race. Both sides of the House
being free trade, Mr. Heydon, in his earlier parliamentary
days, followed Sir Henry Parkes, as Premier, who recipro-
cated this support by permitting him to make a dreary
speech on his one political idea, and by condescending to
answer it himself, thereby confirming , the political


neophyte’s by no means modest estimate of his own worth.
But Mr. Heydon deserted the Parkes-Robertson Govern-
ment on its amending Land Bill, and followed this up by
doing the same for Sir Alexander Stuart and Mr. Parnell
when their land bill was at its last stage. He then, after
the general election, became Minister of Justice with Sir
John Robertson, but resigned quickly on finding that his
colleagues declined to trust solely to protection and the
Custom-house for revenue, and were prepared to go in for
direct taxation. He has supported Sir Patrick Jennings in
the imposition of ad valorem and specific duties, but op-
posed the land and income taxes. He is useless in Parlia-
ment, for the simple reason that he devotes himself to one
subject solely, Protection, and yet does not understand it,
as is shown by his utter failure to comprehend that
wherever the items of a tariff are intended to be protective,
they must, to carry that intention properly out, be high enough
to be prohibitive, and therefore useless for purposes of
revenue. His failure to understand this augurs ill for any
success that might have attended his efforts to make him-
self acquainted with other subjects. He is a high-minded
and honorable solicitor, and a mediocre member of Parlia-
ment.
HOLBOROW, WILLIAM HILLIER, Esq.
{Argyle.)
This gentleman is now, I believe, a lieutenant-colonel in
our little nationalarmy, and at the time of the despatch of
the Soudan contingent was a major. His offer to accom-
pany the contingent was at first accepted, but, after he had
made ready all his accoutrements of war, up to even a
charger, his services were declined, which caused him
frequently to move the adjournment of the House to air
his grievance. In the present Parliament he has sat and
voted in direct opposition to the Dibbs-Jennings and
Jennings-Dibbs Government. But it would be difficult to
say that he has done this from a well-reasoned out political
conviction. Such speeches as he has made during the four
or five years of Parliamentary existence do not show that
he is politically capable of reasoning out a conviction.


He is interested in stock and stations, has a store in Rich-
mond, and in business and private life is remarkable tor
gentlemanly demeanor and integrity.
HOGAN, PATRICK, Esq.
[The Richmond.)
If Mr. Ewing lends an air of lightness to the represen-
tation of the Richmond electorate, Mr. Hogan counter-
balances this by contributing a due amount of seeming
solidity There is a sedateness about his demeanor
which may also be perceived in the few speeches he has
made, but that sedateness, so far as his utteranses are
concerned, does not cover political ability of kin .
He came into the Assembly ten months ago with a set
purpose to keep Sir Henry Parkes out of office. With
assistance, he has so far accomplished his purpose, and, as
a means to an end, has supported Sir Patrick Jennings
and Mr. Dibbs consistently and willingly. His votes
therefore, speak for themselves, and will merit approval
or disapproval accordingly, as people regard with favor or
with disfavor the present Administration. He is a com-
mission agent, and in his country’s vernacular “ a warm
man.” ’
HTJMPHERY, FREDERICK THOMAS, Esq.
( Shoalhaven.)
At the general election of 1880, Mr. Humphery, who
had retired on an honorably gained competence from the
position of an offiaal assignee, entered Parliament, where
he has since been distinguished by voting generally tor the
Stuart-Earnell, the Dibbs-Jennings, and the Jennmgs-
Dibbs Governments. Whenever a question cf figures is
before the House, he gives members the benefit of his
views, but cannot be said to contribute much towards the
intelligence of the debate. He lives on his means.
HUNGEREORD, THOMAS, Esq.
(The Upper Hunter.)
Mr. Hungerford, who, as has been previously noted, had
represented Northumberland for a time, and then gone


into political exile, was recalled by the Upper Hunter at
the last general election. If Mr. M‘Elhone’s unwilling
candidature contributed to Mr. Eitzgerald’s election in this
constituency, it contributed doubly to that of Mr. Hunger-
ford ; in fact, Mr. M‘Elhone was implored to stand in
order to “ keep out Hungerford.” It is plain, then, that
Mr. Hungerford has a strong opposition, which at any
time may be successful in his electorate. And this op-
position is not likely to be lessened by his Parliamentary
conduct. A squatter, his votes on the land question are
ever in the interests of monopolists. He dislikes direct
taxation, and votes heartily for ad valorem duties. He is
fond of speaking, and unintentionally amuses the House,
when he does not speak at too great length. He is
remarkable for never speaking without a reference to the
“ principles of justice.”
HYAM, SOLOMON HERBERT, Esq.
[Balmain.)
Mr. Hyam is a produce merchant, a protectionist, and a
popular man in his constituency. He supported the last
Ministry of Sir John Robertson though that Ministry was
an essentially freetrade one, because it contained one of
his colleagues in the representation of Balmain —Mr.
Garrard; and not to have supported Mr. Garrard
would have destroyed his popularity in his constituency.
He supports the present Government because He
thinks it leans decidedly to protection. He seldom or
ever speaks in the House, and when he does makes mem-
bers thankful that he so generally preserves silence. He
is a new member.
T
INGLIS, JAMES, Esq.
[New England.)
After several years devoted to the cultivation of litera-
ture on a little oatmeal, and to the importation of Indian
tea, Mr. Inglis, who is a fluent and ready speaker, offered
himself nearly a year ago to represent New England in
Parliament, and was accepted, As the possessor of great


conversational powers, with a fund of anecdote and no
small amount of general information, Mr Hughs was looked
upon by his constituents and friends as likely to astonish
members whenever he chose to speak. From what I have
read of his speeches I should be sorry to say that he has
succeeded in answering the requirements of his supporters.
This arises from the fact that in speaking on any question
he has too frequently—unintentionally, perhaps—conveyed
the impression to his fellow-members that he knew rather
more about the matter in hand than the whole of them.
But he is, in the truest sense of the word, a genial, pleasant
fellow', with more than the ordinary share of ready wit,
and his votes on all occasions seem to have been given
from fair and honest conviction rather than from any par-
tisan motive. He is a consistent free-trader, who has
stuck to his colors in this respect through evil report and
good report.
IVES, ISAAC ELLIS, Esq.
[St. Leonards.)
When poor little Mr. Holtermann, wdio had been accus-
tomed to address the House, to its infinite amusement, in
a Hans Brietman fashion, died, Mr. Ives, after a warm
election, succeeded him in the representation ot bt,
Leonards. After entering Parliament he took no decided
line in politics, but gave a general support to the Stuart
Government, in which Mr. Hibbs, his colleague in the
representation of St. Leonards, was Colonial Treasurer.
At the general election last year, when the fierce contest
between Sir Henry Parkes and Mr. Dibbs raged in his
constituency, Mr. Ives, like a sensible man, fought tor his
own hand, and did not positively identify himself tor or
against either of the distinguished combatants. As a result
he won his election. Since then he has sat in Opposition.
As a member he has formed an estimate of his own poli-
tical abilities which circumstances do not seem to warrant,
and which his fellow members do not entertain. He does
not often speak, and when he does I cannot say that what
he says reads badly. But there seems a ring of unwar-
ranted assumption of superior judgment about it that
takes away from its value. Eor this reason it is, I sup-


pose, that Mr. Ives’s position inthe House is singularly,
siud I cannot say undeservedly, unimportant. In mer-
cantile life Mr. Ives is justly respected.
JENNINGS, THE HON. SIR PATRICK ALFRED,
K.C.M.G.
[The Bogan.)
The outside public know little of the series of events,
«uch as combine to make political accidents, to which Sir
Patrick Jennings owes his Premiership. A sufficiently
wealthy pastoralist, and a prominent and distinguished
•adherent of a powerful church, he had long desired not
merely to be a member of the popular branch of the Legis-
lature, but to take a share in the responsible government
of the country. His ambition to be a member of the As-
sembly, however, only received for a long time transitory
and very temporary gratification. He was more generally
unsuccessful than successful. Once, over a decade ago,
when he offered himself for Mudgee, he was beaten by his
religion and his business. A Catholic and a squatter, he
had no chance against an Orangeman and a friend of the
free selectors. The latter could not speak fluently to the
electors, but he could let them vote for him. They did,
and Mr. Gould was returned. Subsequently Sir Patrick
Jennings was appointed to the Legislative Council, and
then was made Executive Commissioner for our Inter-
national Exhibition of 1879. In this position he distin-
guished himself by a gentlemanly demeanor, and by no-
thing else, and received his knighthood proper, being
already a Knight of St. Gregory. He left so much to sub-
ordinates that no one up to the present date has been
able to say with accuracy how much money was taken at
the doors. A gentleman himself of the strictest probity,
some of those under him were not quite so remarkable for
delicacy of honor. At the general election of 1880 he was
returned to the Assembly for the Bogan, and in November,
1882 he took part in the debate on the second reading of
the Parkes-Robertson Land Bill. He opposed this bill,
but professed such a liberal sympathy for free selectors
that he added to a good impression created by a speech of


Lis on tLe land question delivered some little time pre-
viously at Warren in Lis constituency. WLen tLe Stuart
Government was formed, Le was offered and accepted tLe
ornamental position of Vice-President of tLe Executive
Council wit Lout portfolio. At tLe opening of tLe railway
to Nyngan, Le made a long speecL, tLe burden of wLich
was that a Minister of Eailways should be created, and
that Le should Lave the office. The new portfolio was not
called into existence, and Sir Patrick soon afterwards left
the Ministry to which and its Land Bill, however, he gave
a tolerably faithful support subsequently. When Mr.
Dibbs formed Lis Government, he took Sir Patrick
Jennings as a colleague. Ihe member for the Bogan
would have very much liked the Treasurership, and indeed
some remarkable telegrams passed between himself and
Mr. Dibbs on this subject. Sir Patrick, however, had to
accept the Colonial Secretaryship, which, with its ad-
ditional £SOO a year, was no great sacrifice. At his
election, at the close of last year, he was very near losing
his office a couple of weeks after gaining it, for Mr. J. B.
Kelly ran him to a short head for second place on the poll,
and it is said should, bar certain accidents, have won.
When the short-lived Dibbs Ministry was succeeded by
the equally short-lived Ministry of Sir John Eobertson
and Mr. Burns, the position of leader of the Opposition,
with a prospective Premiership, went a begging. The true
Opposition at the time was but a limited party. Sir Henry
Parkes, Mr. Foster, Mr. Garvan, and others were against
Government, but not united with the Opposition. Mr.
Dibbs as leader meant party ruin. Mr. Abbott would
have none of the position. The unofficial office for some
time was put in commission, and then one day a meeting
was held, and Sir Patrick Jennings was elected by a couple
of votes. Soon afterwards Mr. Garvan moved his vote of
want of confidence, the Eobertson-Burns Ministry was
refused a dissolution, and resigned, an attempt to form a
coalition fell through, and everyone knows the rest. We
have Sir Patrick Jennings as Premier, having been, in
fact, hoisted up to that position by a small majority of a
small party, and the accident of political complications.
As Premier and Colonial Treasurer he has a large majority
of the House at his back, a majority prepared to keep him


there so long as Sir Henry Parkes leads the Opposition,
a majority of which often dictates to him, but which has
often to follow him whither he may choose for fear of the
constituency just mentioned. Aided by this majority he
has nearly completed the imposition on the country of the
worst financial proposals New South Wales has ever
known, has gone clean back from his last hustings pledges,
has contradicted himself on the New Hebrides Question,
has shown an utter incompetency to lead the House, and,
having made the phrase “ sneaking in” historic and a part
of our current literature has “ sneaked in” and “ sneaked
out” of many things in a political sense. As leader of the
House he displays the besetting failings of a weak mind.
He is terribly obstinate at the wrong time. In private
life Sir Patrick Jennings is a genial and courteous
gentleman.
JONES, TRAVERS, Esq.
{Tumut.)
In every sense of the word Mr. Travers Jones is an
unostentatious member. So unostentatious and unob-
trusive is he, indeed, that he rarely permits me, through
the medium of Hansard, an opportunity of judging what
kind of a member he makes, his name only appearing in
the division lists in that publication. From these I find,
however, that he has a decided opinion in favour of keep-
ing the Jennings-Dibbs Government in office, and as, on
one or two occasions that I took advantage of my privi-
lege as an ex-member to visit the House, and sit in the
place allotted to such as I am now, I noticed Mr. Jones
placed lugubriously amongst the extraordinary and motley
crew that crowds the Ministerial back bench, I have come
to the conclusion that he is a blind follower of blind
leaders. In business matters he has shown far more
discretion than in politics, having trodden the risky path
of quartz-mining with very considerable success.
JUDD, WILLIAM GEORGE, Esq.
( Canterbury .)
This gentleman furnishes another of the frequent in-
stances in which a presumed, or a tolerably well-proved,


capacity for the management of municipal matters is
accepted as proof of ability to deal with the larger affairs
of the State. For several years he carried on business as
a grocer in St. Peters, and served with success as aider-
man and mayor of that borough. Some land purchased,
when land was a drug in the market, beyond Cook’s
Fiver, placed him, by its great accession of value, amongst
thriving speculators in the land business, and also shifted
him to West Botany and out of the grocery line. He
soon took as active a part in the administration of the
West Botany as he had done in that of the St. Peters
municipality, and his reputation in both, with friends
throughout other parts of the electorate, sent him to
Parliament as one of the members for Canterbury at the
last general election. His career there has been modelled
on his aldermanic experience. He helped to turn out the
Dibbs-Jennings Government, seeing that its last day was
at hand, and that there was nothing to be got for his
district out of it. He was kind to the Eobertson-Burns
Government, being uncertain as to its fate, and thinking
it best to be friendly with it so long as it lasted. And
having squeezed one or two concessions from the Jennings-
Dibbs Ministry, and been denied others, in the way of
roads and bridges at suburban stations on the Illawarra
line, he is not malevolently disposed toward it, but
nevertheless leans a little to opposition. His use in a
Parliament which has to deal with matters such as are now
before the State, can be appreciated. He is a straight-
forward, respected man in private life.
•
KETHEL, ALEXANHEE, Esq.
(West Sydney.)
The last contested election in West Sydney, when the
Dibbs-Jennings Ministry dissolved Parliament, was a
very open affair indeed, except that all the other candi-
dates agreed that Mr. Kethel would go very close to the
top of the poll. There were very good reasons for this.
Mr. Kethel, though new to political life, was known and
respected throughout the constituency. A good Presby-
terian, he had on occasions exhibited a certain liberality


in religious matters not quite in consonance even with the
Shorter Catechism. A reading man, in his own way, he
had tempered his hard Scotch intellect by fervid admira-
tion, according to his lights, of Shakespere and other
great writers, and he did not forbear to lecture from plat-
forms and give other men the benefit of his thoughts.
An old sea-captain and present wharfinger and shipowner,
he had a way of dealing with men marked by an old-
fashioned style of prompt justice. Then he had none of
the disadvantages of the other candidates, whose political
lives had made them strong enemies as well as stout
supporters, all except Mr. J. D. Young, who had no
political life, but had a municipal reputation, not of the
sweetest kind, in the way of coarse invective and violent
attack. So Mr. Kethel went to the head of the poll; and
he has not behaved altogether badly since. His votes
have been generally in the right direction, and such few
speeches of his as I have perused in Hansard have struck
me as those of a man who in his own way endeavored
fairly to think out his conclusions. At the same time,
they have at times exhibited a tendency to that very stern
conservatism which men like him almost invariably fail to
shake off.
KIDD, JOHN, Esq.
{Camden.)
At the general election of 1880 Camden sent Mr. Kidd
to Parliament. He took an early opportunity of speaking,
and, being then myself a member, I recollect noticing
that his sententious manner of talking nonsense must
have deceived the gentlemen of the press into thinking
that what he was saying was worth noting, for he was
reported at some length all round. This was unfortunate,
because it induced him to talk at length on every question
that came before the House. Not even the ill-concealed im-
patience of his fellow-members whilst he kept the House
waiting, or the ignoring of him by the newspaper reporters,
who speedily found him out, could stop him, and no one
was sorry when the general election of 1882 sent him
back to private life. But Mr. Badgery’s foolish and un-
popular appointment as Minister of Works in the Q-overn-


ESTABLISHED 18A1.
TEAS. J. SOWN At CO.,
IMPOITEIS & MAOTIAGfUBEIS
OP
PUMPS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION,
Suitable for Wells of any depth, comprising Common Lift, and Lift
and Force, in Brass and Iron.
DEEP WELL PEMPS.
Of various designs, including Brass and Iron Barrel Pumps, mounted
in cast-iron frames.
IRON (Black and Galvanized) and LEAD PIPE of all.
sizes, to suit above Pumps, with. Fittings of all kinds.
Brass, Tin, Copper, and Composition Tube—all sizes.
BEEII EIGIIEB.
Gas Chandeliers, Pendants, Brackets; Hall, Vestibule, and
Beading Lamps.
Improved Gas Stoves for Laundry and Tailors’ Irons.
Vulcanised Indiarubber, Canvas and Leather Hose —
all sizes,
With Cocks, Unions, Directors, and other Fittings.
WATER METERS, STEAM COCKS, STEAM VALVES, & UNIONS.
BRASS FITTINGS FOR PLUMBERS & GASSFITTERS,
Stocks and Dies, Tube Vices, Tube Wrenches, Parallel Vices,
Tongs, Pliers; Burner, Taper, and Plug Taps, &c. Enamelled
and Earthenware Sinks, Urinals, and Wash Basins; Earthenware
and Pan Water Closets, and extra Fittings.
IROK baths.
Fire Engines, Hydrants, Improved Wheel Fire Valves,
Unions, and every description of Fire Extinguishing
Apparatus.
NOTE THE ADDRESS—
-101 & 107 BATHURST STREET,
svzms'V,


SPRINGHALL & CO.,
TEA IMPORTERS,
42 KING STREET,
-^SYBMT
Agents for the celebrated Champion Blend
Packet Teas,
JisK 6floCEfl TJIEJd.


ment of Mr. Dibbs gave Mr. Kidd back to Parliament at
the general election of 1885. The electors of Camden
had to prefer Mr. Kidd or Mr. Badgery, and bad as was
the lesser of two evils, they chose it. After hovering
ponderously in opposition to the Dibbs Government, and
in uncertainty about the Robertson Government, Mr.
Kidd has settled down as a steady general supporter of
the Ministry. His inutility in this position is somewhat
palliated by the fact that he does not inflict his utterances
on the House quite so often, or at quite such length, as
he was wont to do when formerly a member. He is the
independent owner of large and valuable estates near
Campbelltown, and is very much liked for his piety and
probity.
LEE, CHARLES ALFRED,' Esq.
(Tenterfield.)
When Sir Henry Parkes shook the political dust of
what he mostly considered an infamous Parliament from
off his feet, and retired from the representation of Ten-
terfield, to which Mr. Whereat had helped him, he was
succeeded by Mr. Lee, who has not, I find, spoken much,
but has voted straight against the Stuart-Farnell Govern-
ment, and, on his return to Parliament in the general
election of 1882, pursued his opposition to the Dibbs-
Jennings Ministry, supported that of Sir John Robertson,
and is now in direct opposition to the Jennings-Dibbs
combination. I have heard from time to time, in the
course of conversatfon with members, that though he does
not speak in the House, he is not inactive in helping to
keep his party’s forces together, and at caucus meetings
is strong in his adhesion to party ties. Such a member,
even though he may not contribute to debate, can, if his
vote be given in the right direction, and from conscien-
tious motives, do some considerable good. Naturally the
Opposition will agree that Mr. Lee has done that amount
of good, whilst the Government party will think exactly
the reverse. Mr. Lee is a storekeeper, and in business
commands an esteem which his fellow-townsmen extend
to him in all the affairs of life.
D


LEYIEN, ROBERT HENRY. Esq.
( Tamworth.)
Harry Levien, as he is popularly called, has now sat in
two Parliaments ; each time representing Tamworth. He
owes his seat partly to the fact of his being a successful
police court solicitor and partly to an affable, jaunty
manner. Both these things tend to make him popular
with an election crowd as well as with a certain class of
individuals. He has no politics, and accordingly makes a
first-class voting machine for whatever side may happen
to include the greatest number of those congenial spirits
of whom he is himself a conspicuous member. As in the
present Parliament the Jennings Government enjoys the
support of such. “ Harry” has consistently voted with it
on every occasion of the slightest importance, and will
continue to do so to the end of the chapter. He does not
often speak ; but when he does he never fails to give one
the impression that he speaks entirely from impulse, and
is incapable of looking below the surface of any question.
However he may shine as a limb of the law, he is quite out
of place as a law-maker.
LLOYD, THE HON. GEORGE ALFRED, Esq.
[Newcastle.)
Mr. Lloyd’s first entry to Parliament was, as he himself
has before now related for the benefit of myself and others,
largely due to accident. Mr., now Sir James Martin,
being then the head of the second Martin Ministry, and
having lost his own seat, was brought forward by the
Hammell faction for Newcastle. There was a strong
feeling of opposition to Mr. Martin in Coalopolis, but the
Oppositionists could not get a man they considered suffi-
ciently good to run against him. In this exigency one of
them happening to be in Sydney was talking to Mr. Lloyd,
then a merchant with large business connections in New-
castle, and was struck with the fluency, ease, and assump-
tion of wisdom which characterised his utterances, not only
on the engrossing political topics of the day, but on the
more interesting local questions of wharf accommodation,
harbor dues, and the like. “Why,” said the Newcastle


Oppositionist. “You are just the man for us.” George
Alfred Lloyd agreed with himself that he was, went down
to Newcastle, and beat “ Jimmy Martin” by a sufficiently
decisive, though not very heavy majority. A curious
thing in connection with this election was the extraordi-
nary partisanship displayed by the railway employes.
They were almost to a man opposed to Mr. Martin, and
the engine-drivers celebrated the victory of his antagonist
by decking their engines with flags, and running them up
and down the line. Lor this they were subsequently
severely censured; but being on the winning side, took
the censure with calmness. Had they been on the losing
side it might have gone harder with them. Into Mr.
Lloyd’s political history since his election it needs not to
enter. Like that of Mr. Garrett and others, it is known
to everyone. He held office under Sir Henry Parkes as
Colonial Treasurer, a fact to which he now not infrequently
refers in Parliament. Whilst in this position he wrote an
affecting letter to the little boys at the London school at
which he had been himself educated. The burden of the
letter was that they need only all take him for an example
and they might all become Colonial Treasurers. The letter,
extraordinary to say, found its way into the London, and sub-
sequently into the New South Wales press. Unfortunately,
it did not meet with the favor that it merited. It was indeed
irreverently called “ The Dotheboys’ Hall Letter.” As a
representative of Newcastle Mr. Lloyd had a tolerably
long period of favor with that constituency, but it would
be wrong to ascrilfe this to the fact that he always devoted
a portion of his electoral addresses to an effort to secure
the goodwill and countenance of the ladies. His abolition
of the tonnage dues was the act by which he is best and
most gratefully remembered there. The general election
of 1882, however, gave his seat to Mr. Ellis, and afforded
him an opportunity to visit Great Britain and Europe,
and to obtain permission from Her Majesty to assume
the title of “honorable” (within the colony.) The
general election of 1885 saw Mr. Lloyd back in the As-
sembly representing Newcastle. Since his return he has
devoted his energies to asserting that the colony was
never so sound financially as when he was Colonial
Treasurer, to watching an opportunity to get office him-


self, and to continually annoying Mr. Dibbs, to whom, for
reasons known to everyone, his appearance in debate acts
with more swift intensity than the exhibition of a red rag
to a bull is supposed to do. Mr. Lloyd helped to turn
the Dibbs-Jennings IVlinistry out of office, and, in the
hopes of political complications that might be advan-
tageous to his own ambition, and to that of political
lord and master, Sir Henry Parkes, did the same for the
Eobertson Cabinet, making a most feeble criticism of Mr.
Burns’s financial statement. He is now fighting by the
side of his chief, confident that whenever the member for
St. Leonards gets his opportunity he will give the member
for Newcastle a chance. After a chequered career in
business, at one time at the pinnacle of success, Mr.
Lloyd found himself in difficulties, which have since re-
ceived solution, if not absolution; and he is now r a
wealthy man, thanks to his far-seeing business under-
takings and speculations.
LLOYD, LEWIS, Esq.
(West Macquarie.)
This Mr. Lloyd, unlike the last, does not look back
upon a lengthy political life, which is, perhaps, advan-
tageous to him. He was returned for West Macquarie at
the last general election and has since voted consistently
for Sir Patrick Jennings and Mr. Dibbs, irrespec-
tive of the order of precedence given to their respective
names in the list of a Ministry. He is also a good
squatters’ member, and a silent sample of the Government
majority, although not a forbidding and repulsive example
as are certain others. The few times that I have noticed
him in the House made me think that he had the manners
and appearance of a gentleman, so that in his own way he
is helping the Premier to mismanage the country. He is
a successful mining investor, and hails from the land of
the Cymri.


LYNE, The Hon. WILLIAM JOHN, Esq.
(The Hume.)
When at the close o£ 1882 everyone was clamoring for
the impossible in the shape of a land law that should
satisfy both free selector and pastoral tenant, Mr. Lyne
made his first appearance in Parliament as one of the
consequences of the general election, and as a free selec-
tors’ representative. He immediately ranged himself on
the side of the Stuart Government, and to the astonish-
ment of everyone except, perhaps, Sir John Robertson,
whose practised eye saw how the cat was jumping,
developed into a most useful voice and vote on the
squatters’ side. Sir John, in his characteristic way ex-
pressed his knowledge and belief that Mr. Lyne had
really entered Parliament in the pastoral interest.
During the tenure of office of the Stuart-Dalley-
Farnell Ministry Mr. Lyne, as has been said, lent
it a steady support, and yet contrived to convey the
impression that should anything happen he expected
office. His heavy flaccid body seemed to contain a mind
capable of political sententiousness, and at the same
time of a good deal of political scheming. With all his
appearance of mental and physical slowness, there evi-
dently lurked within great aptitude to make the most
out of party complications, and to intrigue so that party
complications should be made to minister to personal
ambition. When Sir Alexander Stuart resigned, Mr.
Lyne was looked upon as almost a certainty in the new
Ministry, it being felt by all parties that it would be
dangerous to He was omitted, and did not
hesitate to denounce the appointment of Mr. Badgery
as Minister of Works. When Mr. Badgery was defeated
for Camden, and had to resign his portfolio, Mr. Lyne
succeeded him, but did not give the officials in his de-
partment, or the public, much time to judge of his
qualifications, as the Ministry of which he was a member
had but a short tenure of office. Immediately the
Bobertson-Burns Government met Parliament, Mr. Lyne
took a prominent place on the front Opposition bench,
and conducted himself like one who knew that when his
party next had an offer of office he must be amongst the


chosen nine. Indeed, thanks to one or two followers,
notably the member for Hartley, he managed to let it be
understood that he could have had the leadership of the
party if he so desired it. Then when the negotiations
for a coalition between the outgoing Sir John Robertson
and the incoming Sir Patrick Jennings were pending r
Mr, Lyne contrived to have it put about day by day,
assiduously, that the coalition was an accomplished fact,
and that he was Minister of Works. As a matter of fact,
the coalition was never accomplished, and ultimately, as
all know, the negotiations broke down irretrieveably.
But had the coalition been established, Mr. Burns, and
not Mr. Lyne, would have had the portfolio of Works.
As events turned out, however, Mr. Lyne received the
reward of his strategy and the coveted office. Since
then he has displayed some remarkable characteristics.
He has quite a reputation now for the ability, when a
serious charge is made against his department, to profess
that he knows nothing about it, or that “ there is nothing,
in it,” and presently his ignorance is shown by the fact
being made plain that there was a good deal in it. Again,
Mr. Lyne has, I see, been spending money most lavishly
in his department against the recommendations of his
officers. And, except where his personal interests are
concerned, he has shown a singular want of firmness and
decision —a desire to avoid giving offence, lest his Minis-
terial popularity, small though it be, should suffer. In
these eases he seems to suffer from what may be termed
“ mental flabbiness.” A notable instance was his treat-
ment of the Railway Commissioner’s minute on the forma-
tion of the Railway Employees’ Association. He came
out of this affair very badly —he feared to offend the
men, he dared not support the Commissioner ; yet he
wished to do the latter without doing the former. As a
result, he accomplished the opposite of his wishes, and
did offend the men without properly supporting his Com-
missioner. Backed by the large Government majority
which hangs on the Public WArks Estimates, he has done
some illegal things, for which no one can fathom the real
causes. Witness his purchase of rails and sleepers for a
line that will never be made from Forbes to Wilcannia,.
material that will —as I see has been said in the House


rust and rot at the latter township. To my mind, Mr.
Lyne is the very worst type of a Minister that has ever
lowered the political life of the country. Mr. Lyne is
or was a grazier in a small way at Corowa, and is inter-
ested in some station property in another direction. He
is a shrewd and honorable man in both occupations. As
a Minister he is alive to the social requirements of his
office, and occasionally entertains musicians and singers
and distinguished strangers in a Government launch.
LYSAGHT, ANDEBW, Esq.
[lllawarra.)
When Sir Alexander Stuart retired from the Ministry
and the representation of Wollongong, he was succeeded
by Mr. Lysaght, who came in on a certain amount of per-
sonal popularity and the deposit of a cheque for £4O with
the returning officer in lieu of cash. Mr. Lysaght is the
possessor of a personal appearance that may be described
without undue exaggeration as simply “ magnificentand,
at the time of his election, conducted a hotel on popular
principles and at popular prices, and immediately after-
wards sold out of this and went into the same line of busi-
ness in Sydney. He is singularly devoid of conceit, and,
as in Wollongong so in Sydney, it is quite delightful, I am
informed to see him drawing what is popularly called
“ a long beer” for a customer with one hand whilst with
the other he emphasises profound remarks on the political
situation of the moment. The reputation Mr. Lysaght
gained in Wollongong he has deservedly sustained in
Sydney. He combines the hotel business and the per-
sonification of politict# dignity, as no one else could. He
early defined his political principles by saying that he was
a protectionist when it suited him, and a freetrader when
it suited him. He has carried out those principles by an
unwavering adherence to the present Ministry, and he has
had his reward. He will never again he returned for
Illawarra, though his constituents fool him to the top of
his bent for the sake of what he may get for them from
the Government; and, when any of them visit town, he
carefully endeavours to impress them with a sense of the


influence he commands amongst his fellow members, and
the hold he has upon the Government.
MACGREGOR, WILLIAM PETER, Esq.
( Wentworth.)
This gentleman is a new member, and has said nothing
since his entry to Parliament, but has, with his fellow
squatters, supported the remnants of the Stuart Govern-
ment, whether under the Premiership of Mr. Dibbs or Sir
Patrick Jennings. But I believe he doos this from a sin-
cere conviction that he and his class sustain the whole
financial burden of the colony, and that withont them New
South Vv ales would not be worth living in. He is a man,
I am informed, of very independent convictions, and the
energetic Mr. Melville never asks him how he is going to
vote, lest perchance he might offend him. As has been
stated, he is a squatter of the squatters, and reported very
wealthy,
MACKINNON, JAMES ARCHIBALD, Esq.
( Young.)
After a see-saw struggle and an inquiry by the Com-
mittee on Elections and Qualifications, Mr. Mackitmon was
declared elected for Young, in room of Mr. Watson, since
deceased. He has done little else since then but vote for
Government. He is an “ agent,” a comprehensive term,
covering all sorts of business, and, as an agent, is held in
respect.
M'CULLOCH ANDREW HARDIE, Jun., Esq.
(Central Cumberland.)
In describing Mr. Bull’s candidature and election for
Central Cumberland sufficient was said of Mr. M'Culloch
in those respects. It may now be said of him as a repre-
sentative that he is a perverse nonentity, with an idea that
his opinions are valuable and are valued. This idea is, in
my judgment, a most mistaken one. He generally con-
trives to do a good deal of mischief by his votes. That is


to say, lie helps to put a party in power, and discovers too
late the evil he has done. He then proceeds to vote against
that party with a stolid innocence of, or indifference to, the
fact that but for him and certain like him, perhaps, the
evil he now revolts from would never have been accom-
plished. He is a solicitor; and is also interested in pas-
toral and other speculations, including mining in New
Caledonia. He is remarkable for a liberal expenditure in
the most legal and honorable way at election times, when
a contest demands such expenditure.
MEEKS, JOHN, Esq.
(The Glebe.)
After an apprenticeship in the City Council, where he
was, if the newspapers do not deceive me, always scenting
abuses, and very often the discoverer of that rare ornitho-
logical curiosity known as “A. mare s nest. Mr. Meeks
was returned for the Qiebe consequent upon the unpopu-
larity of Mr. Chapman. He came into Parliament as an
opponent of the Uibbs Government, but during the poli-
tical complications that have followed since the defeat of
that Ministry, he has gradually veered round, and now
generally votes with the Jennings Ministry. This latter
devotion is not unrewarded, as the Minister of Works snubs
the other Glebe representative, Hr. Wilkinson, and bestows
such favors on the constituency as a visit to Blackwattle
Swamp or the reduction of tram fares through Mr. Meeks.
These circumstances, no doubt, should have a benign in-
fluence whenever Mr. comes up again for election.
Mr. Meeks has made money b} r shrewd investments inland
and other outlets for capital.
MELVILLE, NINIAN, Esq.
( Northumberland.)
When Mr. Turner retired, in 1880, from the representa-
tion of Northumberland into the more stable position of a
school attendance officer, Mr. Ninian Melville hurried in
hot haste from Sydney, and was elected to the Parliamen-


tary vacancy, having the support of the teetotallers, the
evangelists, and the protectionists of the constituency. He
at once threw his powerful voice and diminutive frame
into the insignificant Opposition which then confronted the
Parkes-Eobertson Government, and helped to stonewall the
wool and coal duties of that Ministry out of existence.
During all the time that opposition to the Parkes-Eobertson
Government seemed only a forlorn hope Mr. Melville helped
Mr. D. O’Connor, who held such Opposition as there was
together. When under the leadership of Sir Alexander
(then Mr.) Stuart, the Opposition grew and gathered
strength Mr. Melville made himself prominent, though not
powerful or respected amongst that Opposition, by his long
and ear-splitting attacks on the Ministry whenever and
however he chose, without the smallest deference to the
wishes of his party as to whether he should speak or not.
And when Sir John Eobertson’s Amending Land Bill
wrecked the Government and a general election followed,
Mr. Melville came back from Northumberland at the head
of the poll, and was made whip for the new Stuart Ad-
ministration. And whatever may be his political faults,
he has been a splendid whip, from a party point of view.
He kept together the heterogeneous majority of the Stuart
Government, and did his best to maintain a majority for
the Dibbs-Jennings Ministry. When it went to the wall,
and another general election came on, he did not find him-
self quite so popular as before in Northumberland, but
was returned nevertheless. The member for Hartley,
who did not entertain a high opinion of Mr. Melville’s
talents as a whip, wrested that position from him for a
little time whilst his party was in Opposition ; but directly
Sir Patrick Jennings formed the Government now in
office, Mr. Melville got back his old office and an addi-
tional £IOO a-year. And he has earned his money by
having ready on all occasions the curiously composed and
obedient majority which now gives the Government a
decisive vote when its existence is threatened. In this
position Mr. Melville has his uses, and no matter how
politically objectionable such uses may be, they are at the
command of his political employers. He is also useful by
exasperating the Opposition, against the best and wisest
of whom without respect to age or experience, he hurla


terrible philippics, which those on his own side of the
House do not remain to hear, and which those opposed to
him try to treat with contempt. He has the common
fault of an exalted estimate of his own powers as a speaker
and debater, and the fact that he has often to speak by
the hour to a bare quorum, either somnolent or impatient
for the end, does not appear to diminish that estimate or
his political egotism. On the occasions that I have heard
him speak he stunned me by his voice, loud as a brass
trumpet, without sympathy or variation of tone, and dis-
cordant as the bagpipes. And when I have taken the
trouble to read his speeches in Hansard they have wearied
me by their verbosity. If the Jennings-Dibbs Government
be as bad as so many people make it out to be, then
should Mr. Melville’s political shoulders suffer many
stripes in expiation of its sins, for assuredly he has par-
ticipated in all its acts, and has been an active accomplice
in all its political crimes. Mr. Melville is by business an
undertaker and cabinetmaker; of the former he is fre-
quently playfully reminded. He has also been in evidence
as a member of Parliament who reduces interference at a
Government department on behalf of a client to a purely
business footing, and is not ashamed of it. In the only
case which obtained publicity, he received £25, and a
majority of the House decided that the services he ren-
dered on that occasion were not incompatible with his
position as a member of the Legislative Assembly, or with
his political purity, and that his fee was not excessive.
MOOEE, SAMUEL WILKINSON, Esq.
flnverell.) •
Mr. Moore, who is an energetic secretary and manager
of a land company, was returned at the last general elec-
tion for Inverell, where he was, and is, interested in
mining speculations. Since his entry into Parliament he
has devoted himself to the interests of the country and las
constituency, so far as they may be affected by the con-
struction of a railway between Glen Inues and Inverell.
He lias given tlie Government a general, though, not
unwavering, support, and has voted with the majority


which has brought the business of the country to its
present pass. Of his utility in Parliament these matters
will afford evidence for and against.
NEILD, JOHN CASH, Esq.
[Tadding ton.)
As the Parliament which expired at the end of 1885
had not the advantage of having Mr. Neild as a member,
I am debarred from writing of him, after having had the
privilege of sitting with him in the Assembly. On several
occasions during 1886 that I have visited, as a stranger,
the place where not long since I was an intimate, I have
seen Mr. Neild, and have once or twice heard him speak.
I confess, as a result, that Mr. Neild has compelled me to
look upon him as an intensely vain, weak, and conceited
member of Parliament. lam writing, I need scarcely
say, in a purely political sense, because the modest, un-
assuming, and unremarkable appearance he otherwise
possesses would prevent the terms I have used being
applied to him except as a politician. As a politician,
however, he irresistibly reminds one of a bird that would
be the result of a cross between a jay and a peacock, with
a dash of native companion thrown in. Since his election
Mr. Neild has been in steady opposition to the Dibbs-
Jenningsand the Jennings-Dibbs Governments, which is
certainly in his favor ; but I could see, when I visited the
Assembly, that not only by Government but by Oppo-
sition was Mr. Neild considered a bore of the very first
water. He was until recently a Sydney insurance agent
for an English company. He is understood to be pos-
sessed of independent means.
O’CONNOR, DANIEL, Esq.
(West Sydney.)
Very few members, as a general rule, have received
more irreverent attention, or been reported at such little
length, as Mr D. O’Connor. This shows that in some
way or another he is a remarkable man. And so he is.
When he first entered Parliament a good many of us were


anxious to hear him speak, as we had been informed that
he was an orator. But when he did speak Avhat a dis-
appointment there was in store for us ! The gift of words
he had in abundance, but in an abundance not tempered
by discretion. The manner in which he poured forth
string upon string of lofty, sounding words, without regard
to grammatical rules, and with a strongly flavoured pro-
nunciation, disappointed us. Some one has described a
speaker of his type as “ splashing in the froth of his own
rhetoric,” and this suits Mr. O’Connor exactly. And he
not only does this, or used to do it, for his quietness of late
is, perhaps a sign of reformation, but he distributes the
froth all around, and gets outside and wades in it. If he
would only condescend to think a little, and then to give
utterance to his thoughts in simple language, he might
have considerable effect as a speaker; but as his only
cogitations are devoted to agglomerating the most learned
words he can find, without much reference to cohesion, his
oratorical efforts are always laughed at. It must not be
forgotten, however, that Mr. O’Connor, despite his defects
as a speaker, did yeoman’s service in holding together an
Opposition to Sir Henry Parkes and Sir John Eobertson,
when to do so seemed a perfectly hopeless task. And
since our system of party government undoubtedly recog-
nises that office should be the reward of faithful and
valuable service, Mr. O’Connor deserved a portfolio when
the Stuart Ministry was formed. But Mr. Slattery got the
lion’s share of the credit of having led the Opposition to
victory, and Mr. O’Connor’s claims were ignored. No
wonder then that the member for West Sydney should
have taken an early opportunity of going into opposition
again. Sir John Eobertson, when he formed his last and
most short-lived Ministry, gave Mr. O’Connor office as
Postmaster-General, and enabled that gentleman to display
his abilities as an administrator. Since, however, his
official career was cut suddenly short, Mr. O’Connor has
not poured his eloquence too liberally upon members.
As a thinking politician Mr. O’Connor’s ability is on a
par for utility with his oratory; but as a hard-working
member of a party, and as a good partisan, Mr. O’Connor
has had, and may still have, his distinct uses in Parlia-
ment.


OLLIFFE, JOSEPH BENJAMIN, Esq.
[South Sydney.)
After haying been defeated for South Sydney and
Bourke at the general election of 1880, Mr, Olliffe
occupied a dignified retirement from public life for some
time. Even the licensed victuallers revolted from him, and
left him to run the Licensed Victuallers’ Association
almost alone, forming another organisation without him.
But at the general election of 1882 he presented himself
once more for South Sydney, with advantages not
possessed by him at the time of his former candidature.
Thus the Catholic vote, on which as a true member of the
old faith he should be able to count with certainty, was
not divided by another candidate. And the licensed
victuallers, little as they liked him, personally plumped
for him and “the cause.” Finally, the Parkes-Bobertson
Government was most unpopular, and he proclaimed him-
self dead against it. During the life of the Parliament of
1882, Mr. Olliffe distinguished himself by reading a
speech on the Stuart-Farnell Land Bill, which topped the
infinite of absurdity, and revelled in rhodomontade. He
also voted consistently with Government. On the dissolu-
tion and general election, in 1885, he was by no means a
favorite in the political race for South Sydney. An astute
move, however, induced Mr. O’Sullivan to stand, without
the smallest chance of success on his part, but with the
■certainty of so splitting the ultra democratic vote with Mr.
A. Miller, as to put that gentleman out of the running,
and help Messrs. Olliffe and Toohey. By this fortunate
combination of circumstances Mr. Olliffe was once more
elected. And he has since voted slavishly for Sir Patrick
Jennings and Mr Dibbs, or for anything which had not the
name of Parkes mixed up in it. At the same time, in an
effort to seem independent, he has more than once roundly
rated members of the Ministry, notably Mr. Lyne and Mr.
Fletcher. But he has never said a word or given a vote
which could do the Ministry real injury. He is the land-
lord of an hotel of quiet respectability, and conducts it in a
blameless manner which even teetotallers admire.


O’SULLIVAN, EDWARD WILLIAM, Esq.
( Queanbeyan.)
Someone has said somewhere that a man has only to
make up his mind to accomplish anything, and he can
•consider it as good as done. This seems to be true in Mr.
■O’Sullivan’s case. He’made up his mind several years
ago that he would enter Parliament, and during those
years more than one constituency made up their minds
that they would not have him, and told him their minds
plainly by means of their votes. At the general election
of 1885, he stood for South Sydney, in order to kill Mr.
Miller’s chances, as stated a little above, and was hopelessly
beaten. But a chance for him showed itself at Quean-
beyan, where no less than three local candidates, each with
a block personal vote, insisted on contesting one seat. At
this time Mr. O’Sullivan was clinging to Mr. Heydon’s
political coat-tails. That gentleman, after a sufficiently
close contest in his own electorate, went over to Quean-
beyan and helped Mr. O’Sullivan, who got the
Protectionist and a good deal of the Catholic vote. These
gave him a very small majority over each of his opponents,
•and a mere minority of the electors returned him to
Parliament. He poses as a Democrat, a Protectionist and
the friend of the working man. He is none of the three.
He neither comprehends democracy nor protection, and
politically he is the working man’s worst enemy. He is a
blatant demagogue of a useless type, and his value in
Parliament may be judged by this. lam told he is a
printer by trade. *
PAEKES, SIR HENRY, K.O.M.G.
{St. Leonards.)
It would be simply an insult to my readers to give the
story of Sir Henry Parkes’s political life. That story is
known to everyone. As a politician he strikes me as
having been an “ opportunist ” long before the late M.
Gambetta invented the word as applicable to politics. A
countryman of Gambetta has defined opportunism as doing
evil yourself lest it should be done by anyone else. And
really this seems to suit Sir Henry. His name is indelibly


marked on many pieces of our legislation, but they have
none of them been of his originating. Most of the
objects accomplished by them he had previously denounced
as evils, but, finding an irresistible wave of public opinion
bearing them onward on its crest, he has floated up with
them, and seemed to lead where in truth he was being
driven. The last Public Instruction Act is a case in point
He would never take up a cause as Mr. Gladstone did that
of Home Rule for Ireland, and sacrifice the rulership of
his country for it, confident that it was just, and must
ultimately triumph. He prefers waiting till the hour of
triumph is near at hand, and then heading the forces of
the future victors. He did once fall with his Ministry in
a losing cause. That was Sir John Robertson’s last
Amending Land Bill. But he had mistaken the feeling
of the country on the land question, and of the land
question itself he knew absolutely nothing. He has him-
self to thank if he has earned the undying hatred of the
Catholics by his conduct on the education question. It may
not be patriotic on the part of the Catholic members of Par-
liament to vote for any Government so long as their vote
keeps Parkes out of office, but at least he cannot blame
them, though the country may regret the effects of their
vindictiveness. As a man who has taken for a generation
a prominent part in the government of the country —who
has inextricably entwined his name in its history, who is
fitted for a Parliamentary leader, and whose political
ability no one wishes to deny—Sir Henry Parkes has
made his political bed for himself and is now uneasily re-
posing on it. An opportunist, as has been said, he has
frequently mistaken his opportunity. In a man of his ad-
mitted political sagacity, his frequent mistakes in this way
seem inexplicable. But he is possessed of an intense and
abounding egotism that often blinds him to the nearest and
safest path by which his ambition can gain its objects.
He may have had good and sufficient reasons for not join-
ing Sir John Robertson’s last Ministry. That was a matter
I am prepared to admit, of which he may have been the
best judge. But his subsequent conduct towards Sir John
and his Government was the direct cause of the deplorable
plight in which the country now finds itself. Had he not
so readily lent his aid to Mr. Garvan and Sir Patrick


Jennings to cut the political throats of Sir John and his
colleagues, Sir Henry would not now he leading the fight
against the worst and most incapable Government that has
ever blotted the political history of New South Wales.
Yet in what he is now doing he must have the support of
all patriotic men. He is battling bravely against evils
which it is true he contributed largely to bring about.
But none the less he is fighting on the right side, and I
cannot separate him now from his cause, but must confess
that were I in Parliament I should be found amongst his
warmest supporters. Intellectually, as a statesman and a
speaker, Sir Henry Parkes, in our present Parliament,
towers head and shoulders over nearly all his fellow mem-
bers, and he is measurably loftier than any of them. Wo
laudator temporis acti am I, but Sir Henry belongs to a
class of members which with this Parliament seems to have
passed away, but which I hope to see renewed in the near
future. Of those men he can truly say with the poet,
The tree of life has been shaken,
And but few of us linger now,
Like the prophet’s, two or three berries
On the top of the uppermost hough.
Sir Henry is a poor man.
PAEKES, YAENEY, Esq.
[Central Cumberland.)
The circumstances of Mr. Varney Parkes’s election as
one of three representatives of Central Cumberland have
already been detailed He derives his chief importance
from the fact that he is the son of his father. He is a
manly, well-meaning young fellow enough, but made me
feel sad on the only occasion I heard him speak. He
seemed to be weighed down by melancholy derived from a
sense of possession of important information, which fie
found great difficulty in communicating to anyone. Or his
melancholy was caused by his ignorance of the fact that he
really had no important information to give. In Parlia-
ment he has followed his father, and is therefore responsi-
ble with him for the present state of affairs ; but, equally,
he is now taking the responsibility of a battle for the right
against tremendous odds. He is an architect by profession.
£


PROCTOR, WILLIAM CONSETT, Esq.
{New England.')
Mr. Proctor has been an opponent of the Stuart-Earnell,
the Dibbs-Jennings, and the Jennings-Dibbs Ministries.
But during the stirring times of the last six months, he has
been, at best, but a craven knight in the political combat.
I am informed that he prefers his bed to Parliament when
a political struggle involves sitting up late. His value in
the Assembly is equal to that of a chip in porridge. He
is an attorney.
PURVES, JOHN MITCHELL, Esq.
{The Clarence.)
Mr. Purves seems to me to represent exactly what the
landlord of the hotel described to young Martin Chuzzlewit
as “ the gentlemanly interest.” The landlord on being
questioned further did not know exactly what that interest
was, but at election times, it will be remembered, he always
put on his top boots and voted for it. Mr. Purves, in the
exercise of his Parliamentary duties, acts up to the standard
which has been thus described, and, except on the ad
valorem duties, has voted for every act of the Jennings-
Dibbs Government, just as he voted for every act of the
Dibbs-Jennings and the Stuart-Dibbs Governments. In
the House also he pourtrays in himself what is described
in fashion papers as “The Court and Haut Ton,” and is
what is called a society man. People can tell from this
how useful he is as a framer of the country’s laws. He is
a member of a large auctioneering firm.
QUIN, EDWARD, Esq.
( Wentworth.)
Mr. Quin, who is a station holder in the North West of
Wilcannia, and was at the time a member of a large Mel-
bourne business firm, having branches in the south-west
country of New South Wales, was returned for Wentworth
at the general election of 1880. Since then he has spoken
not often, I almost believe not at all, but has voted for the
squatting interest on all occasions, and also, of course, for


the Stuart-Dibbs Ministry and its relics, the Ministry of
which Mr. Dibbs was head, and that which now afflicts the
country.
REID, GEORGE HOUSTON, Esq.
[East Sydney.)
Of all the men returned to Parliament at the general
election of 1880, Mr. Reid has made himself the most as-
sured position in the House. This, too, although he only
served a short year in the Parliament of 1882, and as a
Minister of Education in the Stuart Government. The
School of Arts Debating Society claims Mr. Reid as one of
its productions ; but except that he was an active member
of that society in its decent days his ability as a speaker
has little connection with it. He was trained as a Civil
Servant, first in the Treasury and then in the Attorney-
General’s Department. He took an active part in all dis-
cussions on the free trade v. protection question as a logical
and eloquent advocate of the former, in writing and in
speech. Being called to the Bar, his first election for East
Sydney, which calls itself the premier constituency of the
colony, was a veritable triumph, in that he was higher on
the poll among the successful candidates than the Premier
of the day, Sir Henry Parkes. Eor some time after enter-
ing Parliament he acted as an independent member, at the
same time giving a reasonable support to Government.
But, on the principle that the numerical strength of the
Ministry and its party was dangerous to good government,
and helped the arrogant of Sir Henry Parkes, he sud-
denly stepped over to the Opposition, after a candid speech
in which he announced his intentions. As everyone knows
the delay of the Parkes-Robertson Ministry in dealing
with the land question caused the Opposition to grow and
gather strength, and Mr. Reid being amongst the foremost
of the Opposition, and taking first rank amongst its mem-
bers, grew and gathered strength with it. When Sir
John Robertson nailed his colors to the mast in the battle
over his amending Land Bill of 1882, and had to see his
ship sink under him, Mr. Reid was amongst the chief
captains of the conquerors. And when the spoils went to the
victors; he got the portfolio of Public Instruction. Why he


had to leave this and Parliament have been narrated some-
where previously. At the general election of 1885 East
Sydney wiped out the electoral disgrace she had inflicted
on herself by preferring Burdekin to Reid in 1883, and
Mr. Eeid became again a member of the Assembly. Since
then, and until Tuesday, October 12, Mr. Reid whilst op-
posing the Customs Duties proposals of Government, has
voted to keep it in office, his sympathies in that way being
rather with Ministers than with the Opposition. And
as he voted against the last Robertson Government, his
influence until the date I have just named, has, I must
confess, seemed to me to have been cast in a way to do
injury to the colony. This the more especially because
when he was temporarily on the side of the Opposition,
whose members were fighting in the face of fearful odds
against the sneaking in of protection, he merely helped
them by an occasional speech, but kept aloof from the
heat of the battle, and the fiercest and thickest of the fray.
During the great final fight for free trade by the Opposi-
tion, I could not but lament that Mr. Reid’s sympathies
for the Government palsied his arm, and blunted his
blade and kept him from being foremost in the ranks of
those who were battling for his own dearest principles, and
I could not help saying to myself with one of our latter
day poets—
I» freedom’s final hope forlorn ! her last and worst death struggle
near !
Ah, shame ! And is thine only aid nought better than a coward’s
cheer.
But, as the common saying has it, I take all this back
now. Mr. Eeid preluded his magnificent speech and
patriotic action on Tuesday night by his eloquent note of
warning, on the Thursday previous, to the Government to
pause in its tyrannous and brutal effort to suppress Sir
Henry Parkes. And on Tuesday, as all the colony now
knows and applauds, he flung off all maudlin ties of per-
sonal sympathies with Ministers, and having denounced
them, and their supporter Mr. Abbott as a political bully
and a hypocrite, he at last left the contaminating neigh-
borhood of the Government benches, with its atmosphere
of parliamentary contagious disease, and sat down with


the Opposition, where I hope to see him soon an active
leader. Mr. Reid was always a good speaker, despite a
voice that becomes somewhat shrieky and squeaky
during moments of high excitement. But latterly he has
shown himself to be a great speaker. And he has an
inexhaustible fund of ready and gentlemanly raillery with
which to confound anyone who interrupts him, whilst he
surrounds his severest criticisms and sharpest invectives
with a covering of good humor and bonhommie which
disarms rude or savage reply. If Mr. Reid will not now
halt or falter in his new path, he may do his country incal-
culable good, and his country may, indeed must, reward
his legitimate and patriotic ambition by the highest offices
at her disposal.
EENWICK, The Hox. ARTHUR, Esq., M.D.
( Redfern .)
The election for East Sydney, which first sent Dr.
Renwick to Parliament nearly seven years ago was an
exciting one. Mr. Tooth was brought out with a flourish
of trumpets, ecclesiastic and alcoholic. Priests and
publicans were at his back. At first it seemed as if there
would be no opposition, but presently Dr. Renwick was
announced. Opposition to Mr. Tooth was, however,
laughed to scorn. Suddenly the power of the Catholic
Church was used in such a manner as to intensify the
bitterness of the contest, and to introduce new elements
into it. One at St, Mary’s Cathedral,
the late Archbishop Vaughan announced that Mr. Tooth
was the candidate his Church would support, and that
Catholics should support him. At once there was raised
that spirit of resistance to priestly interference and
intolerance that animated the Covenanters of old. And
not only the good old covenanting spirit manifested itself,
but all men who loved freedom, whether Calvinists or
Lutherans,, or those who had fled so far from Rome as to
have fled from Christendom roused themselves for the
fray. On the election day bands of music and omnibuses
and cabs and conveyances of all kinds paraded the town,
displaying Mr, Tooth’s election manifesto. And quiet


men, carrying 1 electoral rolls went about unostentatiously,
in Dr. Renwick’s interest. When the poll closed Mr.
Tooth was hopelessly beaten. The writ of election was
at once returned to the Speaker. Dr. Renwick went
straight from the hustings up the shouting street to the
Parliamentary buildings, was sworn in, and took his seat
amidst applause inside and outside the chamber. Next,
Sir Henry Parkes included him in his Ministry when a
portfolio became vacant, and as Minister of Mines he
lasted with that Ministry until its wreck resigned in
January, 1883. He had been previously beaten for East
Sydney. Soon after, when Mr. Copeland, being rejected
for Newtown, offered himself for East Sydney, Dr. Pen-
wick opposed him, and made a terrible mistake in his
hustings speech. In order to curry favor with the electors
he had the bad taste to disclose Cabinet secrets, and to-
assert that in the previous Ministry he had opposed Sir
John Robertson’s amending Land Bill, but had to yield to
his colleagues. He disgusted the electors instead of
pleasing them, and Sir John Robertson, who heard him
make his statement, characterised that statement, I am
informed, in characteristic language, the strength of which
was quite justified by the occasion. All Sir John’s chival-
rous nature was insulted by his late colleague’s conduct,
and that colleague was punished by his being badly beaten
at the poll. This sent Dr. Ren wick to retirement, from
which he emerged at the last general election by being re-
turned for Redfern. He is a very ambitious little gentle-
man, and has an enlarged idea of his own political worth
and abilities which some people share with him, but which
thinking politicians refuse to admit. Owing to his
connection with certain underground political influences
he is enabled to split the Orange vote, and therefore his
inclusion in the present Ministry takes away half of one
of Sir Henry Parkes’s political props. For this reason he
is useful to the present Ministry; and as one of the
present Ministry he is responsible for all its wrong-doings.
But being in the Ministry satisfies his ambition, and to its
wrong doings he is oblivious. For one act I can fairly
praise him—that is his attitude in respect to the claim
made by Cardinal Moran on behalf of the Catholic Church
to what has been known as the Catholic Orphanage,


Parrammatta. But knowing his political nature, I sus-
pect that his department spurred him on to that action,
and that he felt safe in taking it with such good Catholics
as his colleagues. For his action in regard to the Boarding-
out System he has received credit from all in favor of that
beneficent system, He makes as good a Minister of
Public Instruction as any that have preceded him, Mr.
Keid always excepted. That is to say he does nothing as
well as his predecessors. He has the happy Parliamen-
tary knack of knowing when to hold his tongue, a knack
which it is a pity he did not practice on the hustings.
Dr. B-enwick is a skilful medical man, of large indepen-
dent private means, honorably amassed, and in life out-
side politics obtains a regard and respect which he quite
deserves.
EGBERTS, CHARLES JAMES, Esq.
{'lhe Hastings and Manning.)
Mr. Roberts was a deservedly popular Mayor of Sydney
in 1879, and should have had a second year of office, but
for the exertions of an opposition cabal. At the general
election in 1882 he was returned to Parliament for his
electorate, where I understand he is popular in every
sense of the word. He is not an active member of Par-
liament, nor a fighting one, and is apt to absent himself
when an adherence to party duties would cause him to sit
up all night. He seftlom speaks, but when he does, takes
care that he addresses himself to some subject he under-
stands. At present his votes are being given to bring
about a dissolution, and therefore he is making himself
useful. His constituents, as has been said, place im-
plicit confidence in him. From the wine and spirit trade,
both wholesale and retail, he derives an ample income,
which he distributes with no small social success. He is
a quiet, unassuming gentleman, liked by everybody, and
always prompt to do kindness or courtesy.


ROSS, ANDREW, Esq., M.D.
[Molong.)
Dr. Ross is a distinct personage in Parliament. He is,
and always has been, in a chronic state of discontent with
the Public Works Department, in consequence of neglect
of portions of his constituency, and, when roused by in-
attention on the part of the Minister of Works to his just
grievances, he becomes terrible in his wrathful eloquence,
delivered with the discord of a bagpipes chant, but without
the soul-stirring music which the real bagpipes produce.
When the Orange-Molong railway was opened his mind
seemed at rest for a time; but the proposal to extend it to
Forbes from Borenore, instead of from Molong, roused
him to desperation once more —a desperation soothed by
the action of the Legislative Council. When I was in the
House, I remember Dr. Ross interlarded his oratory with
a frequent repetition of the words “ as it were,” which
induced numerical calculations as to how often he used
the words in a given time of speaking. As the press, 1
perceive, does not notice this matter now, I conclude that
Dr. Ross and “as it were” are not so intimate as they
were formerly. Dr. Ross is now in strong opposition, and,
though eccentric, I think him an honest and sincere repre-
sentative according to his lights. He is much liked in
Molong, wdiere he has acquired considerable property.
EYRIE, ALEXANDER, Esq.
[Braidwood.)
A pretty old member is Mr. Eyrie, a squatter, and a
supporter of all legislation tending towards the establish-
ment and maintenance of a monopoly of land. Conse-
quently he has supported the Grovernments of of Sir
Alexander Stuart and Mr. Dibbs, and is a staunch sup-
porter of that of Sir Patrick Jennings. His presence in
Parliament is, in my humble opinion, mischievous in its
effects on good legislation. He has a most gentlemanly
demeanor, the nicest possible sense of honor, and, outside
politics, is unobjectionable.


:SAWEES, WILLIAM BOWIE STEWAET CAMP
BELL, Esq.
[Bourke.)
So long ago as 1880, when the new Electoral Act made
Bourke a constituency, and Mr. Eussell Barton was elected
its first member, in circumstances mentioned early in these
papers, Mr. Sawers, the managing partner of a station near
Brewarrina, was spoken of as a likely man and a good man
to represent the electorate in Parliament. The managers
.and managing partners of stations are, of course, the salt
of the earth in districts like Bourke, and, whilst good hos-
pitable fellows, are about the worst public speakers one
could well imagine. Nor do they know much of politics,
except that no legislation should be accomplished without
•consulting the interests of the pastoral tenants of the
Crown in the first instance. And they have settled opinions
that Parliament should provide a settled, copious, periodi-
cal rainfall and a fixed high price for wool. _ Amongst
these excellent gentlemen Mr, Sawers was quite an au-
thority, in consequence of his being able to talk most
fluently after pastoral show dinners and on similar public
occasions. He had also a superficial knowledge, derived
from superficial reading, of some political questions of t le
day, and the airing of this knowledge quite astounded Ins
fellow squatters and station-managers. I was introduced
to Mr. Sawers on the occasion of a visit of his to Sydney
in 1885, and, having had his character as above described
previously narrated to me, a little conversation with him
•enabled me to bear testimony to its truth. When Bourke
obtained the privilege of electing a second member in
1882, Mr. Sawers did not offer himself, and Mr. Machattie
-obtained the seat. But in 1885 Mr. Sawers ran on a ticket
with Mr. Eussell Barton, when a local hotel-keeper named
O’Grady was put forward, in their mutual interests, to
.absorb the Catholic vote and injure Mr. Machattie as much
.as possible ; and these election artifices were successful,
Messrs. Barton and Sawers being returned, Since then
Mr. Sawers has voted for Sir Patrick Jennings and Mr.
Dibbs, and has found his level in the House as a very
insignificant member of the Government majority. On
•one or two occasions that he has spoken, his assumption or


superior knowledge, which used to go down so well at
Brewarrina and Bourke, simply made liim ridiculous in
Parliament.
SCOTT, LYALL, Esq.
(The Wollombi.)
When “the salmon” induced Messrs. Parnell and Levien
to make that exhibition of themselves at Gosford, and
when neither of them had any doubt about the chances of
the former for the electorate of Wollombi, knowing people
whispered that there was a Sydney wharfinger, with good
local connections, who was certain to be returned. And
at the general election of 1885 this turned out to be the
case. Mr, Parnell did not dare present himself, and the
wharfinger in question, Mr. Lyall Scott, was returned
after a shadow of a contest. Mr. Scott is a generally
silent and sure supporter of the present Ministry, being,,
in fact, one of the voting machines by whose help that
Ministry has accomplished so much mischief. On only
one subject is he capable of being roused into sufficient
interest to address the House —that is, when one of the
Opposition calls him “ The hon. member for Barranjoey."
He is not, I understand, likely to trouble the Assembly
with his presence after the present Parliament expires.
>
SEE, JOHN, Esq.
[Grafton.)
Mr. See was first returned for Grafton at the general
election of 1880, and gave an independent support to the-
Parkes-Eobertson Ministry until their amending Land
Bill was introduced, when be went into Opposition, and,
having been returned for Grafton again at the general
election which completed the fall of Sir Henry Parkes
and Sir John Eobertson, supported the Stuart-Parnell
Government during its existence, and was made
Postmaster-General when Mr. Hibbs succeeded to power-
At the general election of 1885 he was returned for his
old constituency without opposition, and in the present
Parliament has by his consistent support of the Jennings-


Bibbs Ministry helped to maintain it in office. But
though he deserves my condemnation for this, I am
willing to accord to Mr. See the merit not only of profess-
ing to give a conscientious political support to the Ministry,
but of being ready when occasions demand to give reasons
for that support other than those the Opposition credit
him with, namely, a devotion to the Grafton-Gilen Innes
railway, though that no doubt is his main reason. And I
should say that, despite his political wrong-doings, he is
so much liked by his constituents that whenever he again
offers himself for election his return may be considered
safe. He is the enterprising and energetic owner of a
fleet of steamers trading to our northern rivers.
SHEPHERD, JOHN, Esq.
(East Macquarie.)
Mr. Shepherd was one of those members whose parlia-
mentary existence was rudely terminated by the general
election of 1882. He came back again in 1885, and has
since displayed an earnest and sincere opposition to the
existing Ministry, as he did to that of Mr. Bibbs. This
would be commendable in every respect, but for its
manner, which is very often objectionable, and very often
silly. Still I may say that both these faults of manner
are, I think, at times intensified and developed in him by
the treatment I have seen him receive from the political
Punchinellos, whd? under the leadership of Mr. T.
Williamson and Mr. Toohey, sit on the front Ministerial
bench, and provoke the lesser lights of the Opposition by
rude and senseless interjections. There is a standing
feud between Mr. Shepherd and Mr. Bibbs, the causes of
which are known to everybody ; and when this at times
has manifested itself in Parliament Mr. Bibbs has often
come off second best. Mr. Slattery, as all know, when
acting as Chairman of Committees, appointed by Mr.
Trickett and himself, “acted splendidly” by suspending
Mr. Shepherd. Whether Mr. Slattery was right or wrong
on that occasion has yet to be decided. Mr. Shepherd is
a solicitor by profession.


SLATTERY, THOMAS MICHAEL, Esq.
(Chairman or Committees)
{Boorowa.)
Having occupied the position of Prothonotary for
several years with credit to himself and the office, Mr.
Slattery and the Judges of the Supreme Court conceived
that he was responsible to them alone; in fact that he
was their servant, and theirs only, they his masters and
no one else. Sir Henry Parkes and the Ministry of the
day took a different view, and the result was that Mr.
Slattery quitted the public service, began the practice of
his profession as a solicitor, and entered Parliament for
the constituency of Boorowo, which is understood to be
pretty much ol a pocket borough for Mr. John Nagle
Ryan. Mr. Slattery worked hard as a member of the
Opposition to the Parkes-Robertson Government during
its last days; and, indeed, when that Government was
defeated, took no small credit to himself for having
organised the forces that brought about the result. Not
only this, but if his friends, to whom I have sometimes
spoken, are correct, he had a good deal to do with
arranging the personnel of the Stuart Government, and
could have had a portfolio in that Government himself.
His friend Mr. Ryan was appointed to the Legislative
Council. All through the Parliament of 1882 Mr.
Slattery supported the Stuart Government, and when it
was prorogued and dissolved, the Ministry being first
reorganised, he was made Minister of Justice in the brief
Ministry of Mr. Dibbs. When the Dibbs-Jennings
Ministry succeeded, after the short reign of Sir John
Robertson, Mr. Slattery became naturally one of their
warmest followers, and was recently appointed Chairman
of Committees in circumstances too fresh in everyone’s
memory to need recapitulation here. I shall not indulge
in any criticism of his conduct in that position. News-
papers have taken the work quite out of my hands. I
may only say of Mr. Slattery that he is a kindly-natured,
genial gentleman, who, besides a strong sectarian bias,
has been in a state of political error for many years ; but
so good humoredly in error that he often disarms
reproach. He is a fluent but somewhat tedious and dis-


cursive speaker, which, as he is nearly always on th®
wrong side, does not help to better the cause he is advo-
cating.
SMITH, JAMES FRANCIS, Esq.
[Newtown.)
The ancient and honorable Smith family forms a party
of four in the Assembly. So far as nomenclature is con-
cerned, the party is most united, the spelling of the name
not being varied in any case. But in politics the party is
divided, three-fourths of it being in opposition to, and only
one-fourth being in support of, the Government. Mr. J.
P. Smith, one of the representatives of Newtown, has been
for many years an alderman, and has been several times
Mayor, of the Municipality from which his electorate de-
rives its name. Having long ago convinced himself that
he was an excellent authority on municipal government
and, indeed, on the subject of local government generally,
he had not much difficulty in persuading a good many of
his fellow citizens to share his opinions, regarding himself.
And he had not to be at great trouble to induce them to
extend their confidence in him from matters of local to
those of general administration. So that they returned
him to Parliament at the last general election. Without
being as active as he might have been, he has been gener-
ally loyal to the Opposition, and voted straight in the last
test division, that on Sir Henry Parke’s vote of censure on
the financial administration of the Grovernment. He is not
a talking member, and on the one or two occasions I saw
him seemed to me to extend to his personal appearance a
wood deal of the mental conceit with which I hear he is
fiberally endowed. He is a butcher by business.
SMITH, ROBERT BURDETT, Esq.
[The Maeleay.)
Like Mr. Purves, Mr. R. B. Smith typifies in a sense the
representative of the “ gentlemanly interests.” But after
this the parallel ceases to exist/ Mr. Smith is an old
member with a long, honorable, and not at all useless po-


litical career to look back upon. He has his little foible*
and vanities, which are easily played upon by his fellow
members, and there tend to reduce his influence in Parlia-
ment. And he has been for many years a knocker at the
door of the Public Works Department on behalf of his
•constituents. His knocks, too, have been satisfactorily
answered with great frequency, and he has sometimes been
invited to practically step inside and help himself. But
on great public questions he is a representative whose vote
follows his honest convictions, and were he in the colony
now I feel certain that Ministers could not do with him as
they have done with so many other members, and that is,
secure his vote by promises of lavish expenditure in the
way of railways and other works within his electorate.
The only pity is that Mr. Smith is not here to vote as he
should and would ; and though no one can begrudge him
a holiday after nearly twenty years’ service, this is the
fault that I have to find with him as a representative. He
is not the highest type of a legislator, but he is very far
from being of the low type to which our present Parlia-
ment has accustomed us. There have been more useful
members than Mr. R. B. Smith ; but there are many far
less useful than he is, even in his absence ; for his absence
is not like the presence of others, pernicious to good Gro-
vernment. Mr. Smith is a solicitor, in large and honorable
practice, and is a wealthy man.
SMITH, SYDNEY, Esq.
{East Macquarie.)
When Mr. “ Syd.” Smith, as he is most generally called,
first entered Parliament, I had good opportunities for ob-
serving him, and I confess that while he appeared to me
to be shrewd, energetic, and politically conscientious, I did
not think he would turn out to be the very useful member
he now is. New members may generally be roughly
divided into two classes : those who are diffident in the
way of making speeches and those who are anxious to
speak on all occasions. And Mr. Smith, when he was first
elected, suffered very much from the complaint of over-


anxiety to talk. Consequently a good many people began
to regard him as a bore in an undeveloped condition. It
was quite true that when he did talk he often talked sense,
and that of one public department, Kail ways and Works,
he knew more than any Minister in charge of the depart-
ment. But he talked too much, nevertheless, and his
charges against the Works Department were at times
somewhat trivial. But lam now bound to say that every
month in Parliament has had the effect of minimising Mr.
Sydney Smith’s defects and of increasing his merits. The
Opposition owe much to him. In all the battles that have
been fought against the Government he has been foremost
as an organiser and as a hard party worker. And for
three years past he has exposed successfully some of the
most flagrant jobs that have ever been perpetrated in the
Works Department. From the dump-car business of Mr.
Dibbs, down to the Forbes- Wilcannia rails and sleepers
affair of Mr. Lyne, Mr. Smith has unearthed a long root
of abuses. And he now never addresses the House unless
he has something really important to say. He is a distinct
power on his side of the Assembly, and he deserves to be
this, because he is a most useful member in the very best
sense of the word. Mr. Sydney Smith is a land auctioneer,
and also has, I am informed, a small freehold pastoral pro-
perty. But on the land question he is straightforward,
and is not a “ squatter’s man.”
SMITH, THPMAS RICHARD, Es q.
(The Nepean.)
This Mr. Smith is brother to Mr. Sydney Smith, and is,
like his brother, an auctioneer. He is very popular in
business and social circles. He has devoted himself in
Parliament to neutralising by his vote (for he seldom or
never speaks), so far as his vote goes, any good his brother
may do. On all questions which threaten the existence of
the Government, the names of the brothers Smith appear
in opposite division lists.


SPEING, GEEALD, Esq.
(Young.)
Mr. Spring entered Parliament in order as much as any-
thing to pay "off a debt of injury he owed to the Watson
family in general, and to that member of it who was
Treasurer in the Parkes-Eobertson Government m parti-
cular. He paid a considerable portion of this debt by beat-
ing Mr. Watson for Young at the general election for
1880 Since he entered Parliament he has, however, been
of distinct use. He understands the land question as it is
generally worked out in New South Wales, and is a con-
scientious, honest, member of Parliament. He was a
severe critic of the Stuart Government, after an endeavor
to give that Government support. Sir John Eobertson in-
cluded him in his last Ministry, and he gave evidence of
capability to make a much better Minister of than
Mr. Abbott who preceded, or Mr. Copeland, who succeeded
him. He is a plain, earnest speaker, not often rising to
address the House, but when he does rise, talking what is
worth listening to. He is in complete opposition to the
present Government, but has been unable to attend Par-
liament during the last few weeks of the session. Mr.
Spring was a Government assessor of pastoral rents, and
now lives on his private means.
STEPHEN HAEOLD WILBEEEOECE HIND-
MAESH, Esq.
(Monaro.)
A contributor to the provincial press, and little thought
of as likely to enter Parliament, Mr. Stephen went up to
Monaro at the last general election, and was returned for
there why, no one outside the constituency knows to this
day but probably because the electors had no one better
to put into Parliament, which reason, if it be the
correct one, would seem to indicate a great poverty of
choice. Mr. Stephen began by opposing the Dibbs-
Jennings Government, then supported that of Sir John
Eobertson, and is now a political barnacle clinging close to
the bottom of the hull of the Ministerial ship which Sir


Patrick Jennings commands in a fashion. Mr. Stephen, I
believe, has made no secret of the cause of his support of the
present Ministry. In no other way does he see a pros-
pect of obtaining payment of members, a principle of consti-
tutional Government for which he contends. I have only
heard him speak once; he then struck me as talking
very great nonsense in a squeaky tone, and with a most
ineffective manner.
STEPHEN, SEPTIMUS ALFRED, Esq.
[Canterbury.
Mr. Stephen, in the last Parliament, was by no means
so pronounced in his opposition to the Stuart-Dibbs
Government, as he is,.and has been in this, to the Dibbs-
Jennings and Jennings-Dibbs Administrations. He is
another representative of that “ gentlemanly interest ” of
which Mr. Purves represents the base, and Mr. R. B.
Smith the apex. He is also, as has been said, in opposi-
tion to the present Government; but I should hardly like
to say that, he occupies this position as a result of earnest
political convictions, founded on purely patriotic motives.
The chief reason why he is in opposition is that his
capitalist instincts are alarmed at “ The Deficit,” and that
he blames the Government for keeping the House sitting
so late of nights. Mr. Stephen is a son of the ex-Chief
Justice and present Lieutenant-Governor. He is a
solicitor in respectable practice, has what are called
“ sporting proclivities ” of an aristocratic nature, and, by
judicious investment# in pastoral and other properties is
possessed of large independent means.
STOKES, ALFRED, Esq.
[Forbes.)
Mr. Stokes, who was a comparatively unnoticed member
of the Government majority, remarkable only for saying
nothing, and for voting detrimentally to the interests of
the country, attained a sudden notoriety by a letter to his
constituents on the Supreme Court v. Coonan question, in
which he asked them to deal gently with Mr. Coonan, as


all hands were wanted at the pumps. In other words Mr.
Coonan could not he spared from Parliament until the
Borenore to Forbes railway was approved of. ihis placed
Mr. Stokes’ utility to the country at large, as a member ot
Parliament, in a very clear light, and his value m the
House can be now justly appreciated by those who place
the public good above the construction of the Borenore to
Forbes railway.
SUTHERLAND, JOHN, Esq.
[Redfern.)
“Honest John,” as he is popularly and properly called,
has been identified with public and parliamentary life in
New South Wales for more years than I care to remember.
Warm tempered and warm hearted, with a strict sense ot
•justice, and a probity never doubted, in polities or out ot
them, he has made mistakes, as all men have done, but he
has always made them in trying to do what seemed to him
to be right. He has been a Minister of the Crown more
than once, and has administered the affairs of the Public
Works Department in such a manner as to leave an ex-
cellent reputation behind him. He has been a member o
the Legislative Council, but, like Sir John Robertson his
old fighting spirit was out of place in the decorous dulness
of the Upper House. He must attack what he thinks
wrong in an active aggressive way, and must defend what
he thinks right boldly and valiantly. Consequently he is
far more at home in the Legislative Assembly, ihe hale
and hearty old gentleman, whom everyone admires and
respects, was absent from the Assembly for some time
lately, and since then has not been so regular m his at-
tendance as he, or those who have the welfare of the ktate
at heart, could have wished. But a nasty accident was the
cause of this ; and I have been told that the active mind of
the sturdy old political warrior fretted and chafed at Jus
detention from the battle field where a few of his comrades
were fighting for freedom and the people. lor he is an
Oppositionist to the Jennings-Dibbs Government to the
backbone. He was never a man to weary the House with
speaking, and he does not often say anything now ; but
what he does say is quick, and sharp, and to the point, and


does not leave any mistake as to his meaning. Redfern
will always return “Honest John” to Parliament, and
Redfern will he right in doing so. Mr. Sutherland is pos-
sessed of independent means, the result of a life of
industry.
STJTTOR, THE HON. FRANCIS BATHURST, Esq.
[Bathurst.)
Mr. Suttor is a member of one of the oldest of our
old colonial families. He was Postmaster-General,
Minister of Education, and Minister of Justice successively
in the Parkes-Robertson Ministry. When that Ministry
fell he was among the few of its members whom the general
election permitted to meet the new Parliament in January,
1883. All through that Parliament he was in active oppo-
sition to the Stuart Government, and was particularly
fierce in the final struggle over the Stuart-Farnell Land
Bill. During the closing scenes of this Parliament Mr.
Suttor made himself particularly virulent in opposition, but
did not enhance his reputation by this, because he spoiled
his attacks upon Government by accusations against an
officer of the Soudan expedition, which he afterward was
unable to support. Still he was a sufficiently prominent
man to be noted as having a claim to office whenever his
party might get into pow T er. He found no difficulty in ob-
taining the confidence of his constituents at the general
election of 1885, and helped to turn the Dibbs-Jennings
Ministry out of office. When its successor, the Robertson-
Burns Ministry wa| defeated and negotiations for a coali-
tion government fell through, Mr. Suttor accepted the offer
of a portfolio from Sir Patrick Jennings. Since then he
has taken his share of the responsibility for Ministerial
action or inaction that has brought about the present con-
dition of affairs political. A far inferior man in every
way to either Mr. Fletcher or Mr. Garvan his presence in
the Ministry is, considering his political antecedents,
quite as much a puzzle as is theirs. His constituents
showed what they thought of his merely joining the
Ministry by giving the notorious Mr. Mayne, who opposed
him, when taking office necessitated his re-election, a
number of votes that Mr. Mayne could not have possibly


polled under other circumstances. His constituents will
probably yet show Mr. Suttor what they think of his re-
maining in the Ministry after his Premier had betrayed
the hustings pledges of himself and his colleagues. Mr.
Suttor is a landed proprietor.
TAIT, FRANCIS, Esq.
( Argyle.)
Sir Henry Parkes electing to sit for St. Leonards at the
last general election, the Argyle constituency returned as
its second member a quiet and inoffensive gentleman in
the person of Mr. Tait, who is a land agent. So far as I
can gather from Hansaed, Mr. Tait has not opened his lips
except to ask a question in the Assembly since he entered
it. His votes during the earlier portion of the present
Assembly were a little erratic. His attendance in Parlia-
ment, though not constant, gives a better record than does
that of several of his fellow members, and he has been
lately voting steadily in favor of a dissolution.
TARGETT, WALTER SCOTT, Esq.
[Hartley.)
This gentleman made his first appearance in Parliament
at the general election of 1882, and immediately attached
himself to the Stuart Ministry in the capacity of a political
hanger on of the Government; and he did this without
reward (for an appointment as a water conservation com-
missioner cannot be called reward) during the existence of
that Parliament. He would not have been unwilling to
have been put forward as a candidate for the Chairmanship
of Committees in opposition to Mr. Angus Cameron ; but
the Ministrv could not agree with him. At the general
election of 1885 Mr. Target! had by no means an easy
task to get returned again for Hartley. On the formation
of the Hibbs-Jenniugs Ministry there was, I am informed,
some little difficulty with Mr. Melville, which led to Go-
vernment being for some time deprived of his services as
whip, and Mr. Target! was mentioned as a probable


recipient of the office. That Ministry, as we all know,
went to pieces very quickly, and Mr. Targett, who had
narrowed down his support of the Government into a close
political attachment to Mr. Lyne, acted for a time as semi-
official Opposition whip. Since the Jennings-Dibbs Ministry
took office, his friend Mr. Lyne being included in it, Mr.
Targett has given it an unswerving support, although he
was thrown over in the matter of the election of a Chair-
man of Committees. His support extended to voting
for what practically would have ended, had the move
been successful, in the expulsion of Sir Henry Parkes from
the Assembly. Mr. Targett has a high opinion of himself
and his political merits ; and how far this is correct is
shown by the fact that he is amongst the least important
of the unimportant gentlemen Avho compose the G overn-
ment majority. The Grovernment and Mr. Targett have
given an emphatic denial to a report that he was to be
appointed a resident magistrate, or that he will probably
remain a member of Parliament until a dissolution sends
him forth never to return. He is, or was, a newspaper
proprietor; but I understand that he is a good agricul-
turalist practically and theoretically, and if so I should
advise him, when he leaves Parliament, or Parliament
leaves him, to visit Western Australia, where as I can tell
him, the people know no more of agriculture than Mr,
Creer does of national finance, and where they cannot,
under the most favorable conditions, grow even lucerne.
He might find ample employment for his talents there.
•
TARRANT, HARMAN .JOHN, Esq.
(. Kiama .)
Dr. Tarrant came into Parliament as a supporter of the
Stuart Ministry, and has extended his favor to its succes-
sors under Mr. Dibbs and under Sir Patrick Jennings. His
parliamentary history may bo easily summed up. He has
helped the Governments he has so consistently supported
to accomplish the acts for which the people are condemning
them, and he has devoted himself to legislation to make
the medical profession, of which he is a worthy member,
as close a preserve as possible.


TAYLOE, ADOLPHUS GEOEGE, Esq.
[Mudgee.)
This young gentleman has taken good care that the
country should know all about his parliamentary career up
to the time of the last general election. Since then, owing
to ill-health, as I believe he has himself stated, he has,,
though a member of the House, not been able to take any
part whatever in parliamentary proceedings. This was
regarded as a great pity, because all who thought of his
past parliamentary conduct felt that, while blemished by
occasional indiscretion, it gave great promise for tle
future; and everyone hoped that had he only been able to
be present in Parliament he would have been foremost
amongst those who were resisting the brutal Government
and its brutal majority. But the division list on Sir Henry
Parkes’s last motion of censure on the Ministry will compel
the people to form a very different estimate of Mr.
Taylor’s parliamentary utility to that which the) enter-
tained before. None but political slaves or serfs could
have voted for the Government on that occasion. Mr.
Taylor, though unable, I presume, to come to the House
by reason of sickness, paired with Mr. D. O’Connor, who
was an opponent of the Ministry. Thus the senior member
for Mudgee not only voted for the Government and its
£2,100,000 deficit, but he deprived the Opposition of a
vote that should have been recorded for it; because I
scarcely think there was any illness to keep Mr. O’Connor
away from Parliament. I confess lam amazed at these
things. The last man I should have expected to find sup-
porting the Ministry was Mr. A. G. Taylor; the last man I
expected to see linking his live vote to a dead one was Mr.
O’Connor. Mr. Taylor is a smart, incisive writer, a really
good speaker when he likes, and can earn a living as a
journalist any day.
TAYLOE, HUGH, Esq.
( "Parramatta .)
Erom time immemorial there have been two factions in
Parramatta, the Byrneses and the Taylors. Their hatred
rivals that of the Big-Endians and the Little-Endians.


Alternately they have been in the ascendant, so far as the
parliamentary representation of the place has been con-
cerned. For some time past the Taylor family has been
triumphant. From a personal acquaintance with Mr. H,
Taylor, and from reading his election addresses I find that
he claims the confidence of his constituency on the giounds
of the solid Government benefits he has procured for it,
and the Government situations, especially on the railway s,
he has obtained for its young men. This being so his
parliamentary course has been an easy one. He has
generally, as 1 noticed a newspaper described it, “ sat with
the Opposition and voted with the Government. He
makes an exception to this rule, however, when Sir Henry
Parkes leads a party either in office or with a fair show of
getting there. Then “ Hughey ” Taylor, as he is generally
called, displays a dog-like fidelity to the member for St.
Leonards. He is doing this just at present. He has been
found useful in the House, in order to call attention to the
want of a quorum, and to procure a count-put. He is a
butcher, and is possessed of independent private means.
TEECE, WILLIAM, Jixn., Esq.
(■ Goulburn .)
Mr. Teece has a safe seat at Goulburn, which he has
now represented for a number of years. He is not a talk-
ing member, but works hard, being regular in his atten-
dance and of great use in keeping his party together. 1 e
opposed the Stuart and Dibbs-Jennings Governments,
heartily supported that of Sir John Robertson, and, until
the I)ibbs-Jennings # Ministry showed the cloven hoof, was
inclined apparently to give it an independent vote. But
since he found Ministers out he has been most active in
rallying the Opposition forces, and the public can judge
from this whether he is useful or not in Parliament.
THOMPSON, RICHARD WINDEYER, Esq.
(West Maitland.)
This little gentleman owes his return at the last general
election to the determination of the West Maitland people
to keep out another candidate. He has supported Sir


Patrick Jennings and Mr. Dibbs throughout, except upon
the ad valorem duties, and then his half-hearted adherence
to the Opposition was a source of weakness to that party
father than strength. He is very conceited, and is a
solicitor, I believe, fond of “ taking points.” This affection
he showed for some time after entering Parliament by
raising points of order, which only excited laughter. He
has I find lately somewhat curbed a tendency to make silly
speeches in a style of petty pomp.
TOOHEY, JAMES MATTHEW, Esq.
[South Sydney.)
For some time after Mr. Toohey was elected at the
close of 1885, he was suspected of being able to make a
good speech, and of being a member capable of doing
useful things politically. And as he himself did not dis-
courage this suspicion it grew almost into certainty
until, by speaking, he completely dispelled it and proved
himself to be by no means a good speaker, but a very vain,
shallow, and useless member altogether. He is a wealthy
brewer. His vote has been, and will be, until Parliament
is dissolved, at the beck and call of the Ministry, and he
hates Sir Henry Parkes.
TRICKETT, WILLIAM JOSEPH, Esq.
[Paddington.)
Another representative of the “gentlemanly interest,’
but better able to intrigue for his personal advancement
than other members of the same class. Mr. G-. H. Reid’s
enforced retirement caused a vacancy in the Stuart
Ministry, and Mr. Trickett got a portfolio, as it was
shrewdly expected that he might at any time go over to
the enemy. He has been a general supporter of the
Jennings-Hibbs Ministry, but has lately shown some
signs of repentance, not I suspect so much from an
alteration of opinion, based upon conviction, as from a
dread of the judgment to come. He is by profession a
solicitor, and has made a good deal of money.


HIGH-CLASS
• i*
7r
.
PRODUCED WITH
THE BEST EFFECT.
Catalogues, Price Lists, Memo. Headings,
Invoices, Statements, Customs Forms, Bills of
Lading. Bills of Exchange, Business Cards,
Insurance Policies, Pamphlets, Trade Lists, Scrip
Forms, Circulars.
PRODUCED IN
THE BEST STYDE OF THE ART.
Chromo Printing, Surveyors’ Sub-divisions,
Plans and Charts, Show Cards, Prize Certifi-
cates, Ball Programmes, Placards, Lithos. in
Handsome Colours, Auctioneers’ Plans.
j wimwbw
(F
rcoimt looks.
THE BIHDWG CAHNOT BE
SURPASSED FOR STREHGTH,
PERFECT FREEDOM OF OPEH-
IHG, AND FIHISH.
Ledgers, Journals, Day Books, Cash Books,
Letter Books, Bank and Mercantile Books of
Every Description.
GEORGE MURRAY & CO.,
MANUFACTURING STATIONERS, LITHOGRAPHIC AND LETTERPRESS PRINTERS,
91, Clarence Street, Wynvard Square, Sydney.




VAUGHN, ROBERT MATTESON, Esq.
(i Grenfell .)
This gentleman has been in Parliament for a long time
without doing anything in particular, or exhibiting any
signs of utility beyond the capability of looking wise
and making an occasional speech without much sense in
it when Sir John Robertson made him his Minister ot
Mines, in default of a better. He has since of course,
opposed the Jennings-Dibbs Government, and to that ex-
tent is useful, He is a mining speculator and contractor.
WALL, WILLIAM CHANDOS, Esq.
(. Mudgee .)
On the retirement of Sir John Robertson, Mr. Wall, a
selector and agent, who had impressed his fellow-citizens
with a sense of his political wisdom, was elected unopposed.
He has since voted for the Government and all its acts,
has attempted to reform the mining legislation of the
-colony by a resolution, and when he has spoken has con-
veyed to members of the House in general and of the Op-
position in particular, that he has a very poor opinion ox
them when compared with himself. I have searched
Hansaud in vain to find a sentence worth remembering in
his speeches.
WANT, THE HON. JOHN HENRY, Esq.
♦ ( Gundagai.)
When Mr. Bibbs cobbled up the Stuart Ministry he
made LVi r. Want, who had not then a seat in Parliament,
Attorney-General. Mr. IVant was at once returned bj
Gundagai at the general election on the faith of numerous
promises as to what the Government would do for the dis-
trict. When coalition between Sir John Robertson and
Sir Patrick Jennings failed, because Mr. Want would not
give way to Mr. Simpson in the matter of the Attorney-
Generalship, Mr. W ant obtained the office in the Jennings-
Dibbs Government. He is noticeable for what I may call
a brazen power of defending the worst acts of that


Ministry. He is a clever lawyer, and generally a smart
and, in a Parliamentary sense, vulgar young man. diffi-
dence or too much modesty will never bar his political
prospects. He can make a clever debating speech with
nothing in it except an ability to seize upon any weak
points in his opponent’s utterances. Anything like dignity
will never be found in him, and he is therefore apt at
making rude and often coarse interjections from the Trea-
sury benches.
WHITE, EGBERT HODDLE HEIBERG-, Esq.
[Gloucester.)
Placed in a position of affluence, as the result of a will
case, Mr. White was enabled to secure a seat in Parlia-
ment for Gloucester, to which constituency he has since
been most grateful. He is a generous donor in all that
may promote the welfare of the district. He subscribes
with equal cheerfulness to the funds of a race meeting, a
Sunday school picnic and prize day, or a school of arts
library or building fund. I hear, though, that some of the
more unthinking of his constituents are beginning to in-
quire whether other qualifications are *not necessary in a
member of Parliament. He supported the Stuart Ministry
until near the end of its life, and then its finance frightened
him. Were he not now in England sunning himself in
the smiles of Royalty, and presenting emu eggs to our
gracious Queen, he would be found voting in opposition.
Beyond his vote, however, he is doing quite as useful po-
litical work in England as he could ever do here.
WILKINSON, ROBERT BLISS, Esq.
(.Bair amid .)
A squatter, Mr. Wilkinson is a thorough-going squatter’s
representative, who has now sat in two Parliaments, and
has always voted in the interests of his class. He assumes
the appearance of one who can think upon political
matters, and is, therefore, distinguished amongst his
fellow pastoralists who are in the House. Of course, he is
always found voting with the Dibbs-Jennings Govern-
ment.


WILKINSON, WILLIAM CAMAC, Esq.
{The Glebe.)
Like Mr. Meeks, Air. Wilkinson (who is a doctor by the
wav) was returned for the Glebe, in order to keep the un-
popular Mr. Chapman out. At first he made a few boyish
speeches in the House ; but he has latterly shown a very
manly independence, and has more than once hi ou
straight against the Government, in opposition to whose
misdeeds his vote has been always recorded. He is P os
sessed of a most gentlemanly demeanor, in the pioper an
best sense of the word. He is a University lecturer with,
I believe, one student.
WILLIAMSON, THOMAS MICHAEL, Esq.
( Redfern )
This gentleman is the personification of political impu-
dence. He not only represents Redfern but a certain
sectarian hatred of the leader of the Opposition, which he
is always ready to display. He is a thick and thin o-
vernment supporter, a police court solicitor in good
practice, and as a politician, about as ignorant ‘ as they
make them,” which is saying a good deal.
WISDOM, ROBERT, Esq.
{Morpeth.)
Mr. Wisdom has a long parliamentary career, with no-
thing that I can find to his discredit, though a bold sense
of independence and utter political fearlessness have often
made his utterances particularly unpalatable to those
against whom they have been directed. He was Attorney-
General in the Parkes-Robertson Ministry, and bad
opposite him Mr. Jacob, now in the Upper House be-
tween whom and himself there has never been any love
lost At the general election of 1882 Mr. Jacobs did his
best to beat Mr. Wisdom for Morpeth, but was unsuc-
cessful. Mr. Wisdom never stopped or halted in his op-
position to the Governments of Sir Alexander Stuart, and
Mr. Dibbs, but gave his old political chief, and colleague,
and friend, Sir John Robertson a generous support. He
has been one of the boldest and most aggressive opponents


of the present Ministry, and has come into collision with
the Speaker and the majority in consequence. But his
conustitents are with him and he has received many ex-
pressions of public sympathy. Mr. Wisdom is a barrister,
and in private life is more than liked. He has, I regret to
say, suffered from domestic afflictions, sad enough to
sorrow for ever the stoutest heart, and this should be re-
membered by those who are at times inclined to be hard
upon him for his uncertain temper.
YOUNGr, JAMES HENRY, Esq.
[The Murray.)
Until he was made Minister of Education by Sir John
Robertson no one estimated Mr. Young at his proper
value. A storekeeper in his electorate, when he first
entered the House he seemed to be a man of limited ideas
and speech. But of late he has developed into a real
power on the Opposition side of the Chamber. He has
made more than one effective speech against the Ministry,
in which he showed a wide knowledge of political men
and matters. When he now rises to speak members stay
to listen, and generally hear something worth listening to.
He sits on the front Opposition bench, and being in the
gallery allotted to ex-members the other night, I heard a
stranger behind me say to another, of Mr. Young, and Mr.
Burns, and Mr. Wisdom and Mr. S. Smith, who were
sitting with him, that they were worth the whole Govern -
ment majority.
YOUNG, JOHN DOUGLAS, Esq.
(West Sydney.)
At the last general election Mr. Young, a violent and
virulent exposer of municipal abuses, and an alderman of
Sydney, expected, I believe, to be at the top of the poll,
but only got in fourth by a good majority. He has stuck
to the Dibbs-Jennings Government in hopes of retaining
the support of certain sections of his constituency who are
opposed to Sir Henry Parkes. All that need be said
about this gentleman is that during his time in Parliament
he has not thrown a glass of water at anybody, and with
this remark I wash my hands of our present Parliament.


POSTSCRIPT.
Though I have concluded my individual estimates o£ the
members of “Our Present Parliament” by saying that,
with the last of them, I wash my hands of the lot, I
cannot avoid adding a few remarks in the present publi-
cation as to what that Parliament has done, or rather
what it has not done, since it came into existence. It
was opened on the 16th of November, 1885, and there-
fore, when prorogued the other day, had been in session
nearly twelve months. During that time it has destroyed
two Ministries and given a large majority to a third.
It opened with the Dibbs- Jennings Government, and saw
the resignation of that Ministry exactly a month after-
ward. Sir John Robertson succeeded, and with an ad-
journment of over a month, Parliament permitted his
Government to last until February 16th, 1886. After
fruitless attempts at coalition, the Jennings-Dibbs Minis-
try was formed on the 26th of February, and met the
House on the 24th of March following. In his ministerial
statement of that date Sir Patrick Jennings said nothing
of course as to the form his taxation proposals would
take. He had previously pledged himself to the country,
from the hustings, that he would not “ sneak in protection
or disturb the tariff. He now promised three important
measures, namely, Bills to amend the Civil Service and
Land Acts and a Local Government Bill. < In addition,
he said ii might be found necessary to provide by Act of
Parliament for the appointment of another Minister and
for the better management of our railways. And Sir
Patrick Jennings further promised that the estimates
should be cut down considerably.


Now let us suppose that Parliament had no help for
itself but to destroy two Ministries. It is certain that
the Dibbs-Jennings Government should have been sent
to the right-about by a large majority. On the address
in reply to the speech which was put into the Lieutenant-
Governor’s mouth, Government only obtained a majority
of two the numbers being fifty-eight and fifty-six.
Ministers did not wait for a division on their financial
proposals, but resigned when they found that division
would be against them. Had they not resigned they
world have been defeated, but not by a very large
majority. This latter fact showed the temper of the
House from the first, and caused, with the action of
Sir Henry Parkes, the defeat of the Robertson Ministry.
This does not say much for the political character of
the combination which defeated that Ministry; but as
it could not command a majority in the House it had
to go.
Behold, then, the Jennings Ministry settling down with
a large majority behind it, and with the programme
just detailed. Now, what has it and its majority done ?
It has not carried a single item of that programme.
It has not attempted to carry a single item. The short
Civil Service Act, passed at the fag end of the session,
cannot be called an amendment. It has merely tem-
porarily plugged a leak. No great effort was made to
pass an amending Land Act, and the estimates, instead
of being cut down considerably, were added to. Now
whose fault was this? I say, that of Parliament as a
whole, and not of the Opposition. When Sir Patrick
Jennings falsified his election pledges and tampered with
the tariff—when, by his action, he induced the Legis-
lative Council to agree with him in tampering with the
tariff, and gave the Council good excuses for rejecting
his land and income tax proposals Parliament should
have got rid of him. I do not care whether members
were free traders or protectionists ; I regret that they
were broken up into other sections founded on personal
dislikes and religious prejudices. They should have
united against a Ministry which basely deceived them by
doing nothing it had promised to do, and doing the
very thing it had promised not to do. It sneaked in


protection and it tampered with the tariff. Parliament,
or its majority, slavishly supported Ministers in these
things. That support was gained, not by a fulfilment of
political faith, but by a shameful breach of it, and by
purchasing the votes of the squatters, the publicans, the
haters of Parkes, the railway members, and the pro-
tectionists. A Parliament that could give a majority so
■compounded cannot be worth anything. Our present
Parliament gave such a majority.




ADDENDUM
Though “ Our Present Parliament ” is moribund, the
estimate I recently formed of its worth seems to me to be
(if that estimate be correct) more opportune at the
present moment than at any other, inasmuch as it gives
an idea who the constituencies at the coming general
election should vote for in order to make the next Par-
liament, what that which is expiring certainly was not,
of real use to the country. I therefore desire on the eve
of a general election to complete my estimate of “ Our
present parliament ” by giving something concerning four
new members who have been elected since the prorogation.
To proceed then.
Mr. Stephenson now represents the Wollombi in place of
Mr. Lyall Scott. The former member, by an unswerving
support of the Jennings-Dibbs Ministry, helped the country
to its present pass. Mr. Stephenson seems likely, unless
he changes his ways, to do little to extricate it from its
difficulty. At his election he took a Laodicean, or luke-
warm, position as to the parties in the House. During
his election I noticed that the newspapers could get no
nearer his political opinions than that he was one of
those independent candidates who when elected became
devout adherents of the Jennings-Dibbs regime. After
his election I saw by the Evening Neivs that he wished
this to be contradicted to the extent that he was prepared
to vote for turning the Jennings Government out of
office, but further than that he would not go. And since
Parliament has opened Mr. Stephenson has shown a con-
siderable amount of indecision by the places in which he
has sat; whilst, as he has not spoken, no one can tell his
views from his speeches. But I am informed that he has
been for several years a member of the Sydney School of


Arts Debating Club, and as such displayed a remarkable
want of consistency in his speeches and his votes. For-
tunately, if this be his true character, he will have in a
week or two now to declare himself in a manner which
will leave no doubt as to his political views. He will
have to say whether he intends to support the Farkes
Administration or not, and if he declines to pledge him-
self, the electors will know the kind of man with whom
they have to deal. Mr. Stephenson is an ex-newspaper
proprietor in the Clarence Elver district, where he accu-
mulated a competency, and where a constituency expressed
its views on his fitness for Parliament by declining to
return him.
Mr. Colls has replaced Mr. Heyddn for Yass Plains.
Mr. Colls is a protectionist, a gentleman of sterling worth
in private life, but with a political knowledge and a
breadth of political views that might be jointly placed
upon a pin’s point, and room be then left for other occu-
pants. For many years he kept a first-class hotel in Yass,
where he has been frequently alderman and mayor. He
has given several hostages to fortune, and for four of
them fortune has been represented, I am told, by the
Civil Service of the country. One son is postmaster at
Yass. another post and telegraph master at Ginninderra,
another is a clerk in the Eailway Department, and yet
another is a clerk in the Tramways. Mr. Colls is a very
ineffective speaker, and was placed upon the Liquor Com-
mission. He received at his election the solid Catholic
vote, his opponent, Mr. Close, obtaining the block Orange
support, it is asserted that many liberally-minded men
did not vote at all, thinking that both candidates were
politically worthless. Mr. Colls is sixty years of age,
lives on his means, and is father-in-law of Mr. Vaughn,
the member for Grenfell.
In the Bourke electorate Mr. Waddell has replaced
Mr. Eussell Barton. Mr. Waddell is a station manager,
and, I understand, part owner of a property between
Nyngan and Byerock. He is a representative of the
squatters’ interests, tempered by a profession of sympathy
for the homestead lessees, and even for selectors. The
profession of sympathy goes of course for what it is


worth ; but it helped him to the top of the poll, whilst
the block squatting vote was his, of course, since he
advocates compensation for improvements, and, indeed,
anything or everything that would coddle up unlucky
speculators in pastoral properties at the cost of the
country. Mr. Waddell is a brother of the hank manager
at Orange, who obtained a large amount of publicity and
attracted considerable public attention when the Milburn
Creek affair was under its last and most serious dis-
cussion. „ , ~
Mr. Willis has succeeded Mr. Sawers, who was Mr.
Russell Barton’s colleague in the representation of Bourke.
Mr Willis is a storekeeper at Brewarrina, and though
professing a leaning towards protection, is a gentleman
of very considerable ability, and altogether in sympathy
with the homestead lessees and selectors, as opposed to
the great pastoral tenants of the Crown. He was returned
on these opinions, beating, but not by a very large
maiority, Mr. Wilson, an out-and-out sqpatters supporter.
The contest between the two was embittered by sectarian
Ur. Tarrant having retired from the representation of
Kiama, with the intention of entering the Legislative
Council, on the invitation of the Jennings Government,
prescribed Mr. Bruce Smith to the electors. Mr. Bruce
Smith declined to give a certain sound when interrogated
on party politics. He refused to promise to vote with the
Opposition and against the Jennings Government. Mr.
Angus Cameron promised not only what Mr. Smith
refused, but a gootUdeal more in the way of local option.
As the temper of the constituency was dead against the
Jennings Ministry, Mr. Smith was hopelessly beaten at
the poll. “ Circumstances over which they had no control
have since combined to prevent Sir Patrick Jennings and
his colleagues from extending the invitation to the Legis-
lative Council to Ur. Tarrant. Mr. Cameron is an old
member of Parliament, whose political history is the
property of anyone. Entering the House as a gehunie
working-man’s representative, he speedily showed himseit
to be possessed not only of more than ordinary debating
powers, but of a wide political knowledge. He was at


length made Chairman of Committees in succession to the
late Mr. Hichard Driver. In this position he acquitted
himself very well indeed whenever he took the chair.
Why the majority which maintained him in the chair
nai’rowed down to a single vote, and why the electors of
West Sydney rejected him in November, 1885, are best
known to Mr. Cameron himself. On more than one
occasion'a violent and inopportune utterance, when speak-
ing as an ordinary member during a party debate, did him
political discredit. His ability, however, no one denies,
and if he now continues on the straight path he has
marked out for himself, his Parliamentary career should
be only interrupted by success. Mr. Cameron was a
carpenter; he is now a director of building societies and
monetary institutions.


FOR GIVING A SPLENDID FINISH TO STARCHED LINEN.
MAKES OLD LINEN LOOK LIKE NEW.
Experienced Laundresses say it is unequalled.
Sold by all Grocers and Storekeepers, 3d. and Is.
Manufactured by J. BUTTERFIELD, Chemist,
135 Elizabeth-street, Redfern, Sydney.
BUTTERFIELD’S
COOLING & TEETHING
POWDERS
Are specially adapted to the ailments Children are
liable to in this climate during dentition.
They are not sleeping powders, though sound and refreshing
sleep often follows their administration.
They cool the system, allay fever, calm and regulate the pulse,
stimulate and strengthen the excretory organs, and thus bring the
whole system into vigorous action.
May be obtained from all Chemists and Storekeepers.
is. per packet; per post is. 2«1.
DECAMERON'S
CHLORODYNE
Contains all the latest improvements, and is one of the most per-
fect anodynes made. Its ingredients are so proportioned as to render
it free from the disadvantages that follow the use of other similar
preparations. . .
It is used for Inflammation, Cramps, English and Asiatic Cholera,
Diarrhoea, Ague, Asthma, Bronchitis, &c.
May be obtained from all Chemists and Storekeepers.
is. per Bottle.
J. BUTTERFIELD, Chemist, Redfern.


INDIA RUBBER MERCHANTS,
CORNER OF ERSKINE AND CLARENCE STREETS.
I
p E
w
a
S §
I g
G4ROEN HOSE
e ®
H *3
> Q
» H
P° w
H
