



Our Saddle Horses: What they were; What they
are 15 ow; What brought about the Deterioration;
and How their Superiority can be Restored.
I. WHAT OUR SADDLE HORSES WERE.
FROM AGRICULTURAL GAZETTE OF N. S. WALES.
December, 1901.
Miscellaneous Publication, No. 537.
ALEX. BRUCE,
Chief Inspector of Stock.
It can, I think, be safely affirmed that from, say, 1810 to 1850, New
South Wales had, as a whole, the best saddle horses to be found in
any country. Not only was this allowed by those who visited the
Colony from other parts of the world, and were qualified to express
an opinion on the subject: but, what carried greater weight, was the
acknowledgment time after time by the Indian authorities, whose best
and most reliable supply of cavalry and artillery horses was obtained
from New South Wales, and latterly from other of the Australian
States, under the name of “ Waters.” These horses were highly
appreciated by every military man who served in India, for their
speed, pluck, and endurance.
Nor was this anything but what might have been expected, when
the excellence of the sires from which they were descended, and the
exceptionally favorable nature of the climate, country, and pasture in
which they were bred, are considered.
The reason for their Superiority.
1. The excellence of the Sires of our Saddle Horses in the early days
of the Colony.
Very shortly after the settlement of the Colony, the English thorough-
bred began to be introduced, and the importations of that breed have
continued ever since; nor could any better sire of saddle and cavalry
horses than the thoroughbred horse of that day, have been found in
any other part of the world, as regards breeding, size, stoutness, and
endurance. The tests to which the rules of the turf in force at that
period subjected the racehorse most unquestionably show the high
standard he must have attained in these most important qualities.
The following extract from the Live Stock Journal of 13th July,
1900, bears this out: —
“ The most extraordinary series of dead-heats recorded in turf
history, was that at the Newcastle-under-Lyme Meeting in 1820.
Races at that period, it was hardly necessary to observe, were run in
heats, and the race in question was a handicap. The handicapper’s
name was Dr. Bellyse. Three horses started, Mr. My lion’s ‘ Handel ’
(7st. 11lb.), Sir Watkin Yym’s ' Tarragon’ (8st.), and Sir John
Egerton’s ‘ Ashbury’ (8st. 11lb.); 'Handel’ and 'Tarragon’ ran three
successive dead-heats; 'Ashbury’ was so close up in the first heat that
91250 A


the Judge found difficulty in placing him ; he did not run in heats No.
2 and 3; and coming out fresh for the fourth and fifth, he won/’
In writing on this phase of the subject in the paper which he read
at a meeting of the United Service Institute on sth July, 1895, on
the “ Australian Horse Trade, and its Development for Military and
Domestic Purposes,” Mr. Richard Rouse, of Guntawang, who is an
experienced breeder, and whose father was one of the most successful
breeders of stock in this State, said that in the early part of the
century there were a number of very high-class thoroughbred sires
imported : and further on he adds: “ Finer horses could not be
seen in the world, for symmetry, bone, and muscle, than those in some
of the earlier shipments and the excellence of the stock left by these
horses confirms Mr. Rouse’s statement.
All this goes to show that the deterioration which has since taken
place in our horses, is not accounted for by saying the early im-
portations were inferior, and laid the foundation of the deterioration,
but rather that these importations imparted to our saddle horses
the stoutness and endurance, combined with speed and sure-footedness,
for which they were at one time so justly famed.
Mr. Rouse further says on this part of the subject, that in the “ early
part of this century (1800), when really good horses were a positive
necessity, our forefathers produced from the high-class imported sires,
to which reference has been made, a class of horse necessary for the
requirements of the time, and we are constantly reminded by some of
our older people of the splendid qualities shown by the animal of those
days; but, forvarious reasons, no longer (inproportion to our population)
do we produce the number of good horses as of yore.”
The horse here alluded to by Mr. Rouse may be described as a
stylish, stout, well-shaped, rather short-legged, useful horse, with good
clear bone, sound legs and feet, —the progeny of such grand colonial-
bred sires as Sir Hercules, one of the descendants of the imported
horses to which Mr. Rouse refers.
The undeniable superiority of our saddle horses in the first half, and
particularly in the second quarter, of the century which has just gone,
arose from the following, among other, causes :
(1.) They were the progeny of some of the best and stoutest
thoroughbreds that could be found in England.
(2.) They were bred in country and under circumstances of the
most favorable description.
(8.) The rules of racing did not then, as they do now, lead to
light weights, short distances, and the abuse of handicapping;
but to substantial weights, good distances, and heats, which
were then the rule, and which in conjunction with the other
circumstances in which the horses were bred, led to the
production of thoroughbreds famed for their size, stoutness,
and endurance, which transmitted their good qualities to
their progeny.
During the period here referr<*?Utn, w k s n 0 uncommon thing for
horses on nothing but the nat\i\%f t&, carry an ordinary-sized


man eighty and in some cases even a hundred miles in the twenty-four
hours; and these horses did such distances because they had been got
by stout, weight-carrying, long-staying thoroughbreds, which again
were of that stamp because they were bred from sires which had to carry
what would now be termed crushing weights, run what would be
thought very long distances, and not infrequently do so in heats.
Running under such racing rules as were then in force, the horses of
that period, if they were to be successful, had to possess the qualities
of stoutness, weight-carrying, and endurance in an eminent degree.
They did possess them; and, favored as we are in our climate, country,
and pasture for the breeding of saddle and light harness horses, these
qualities were engrafted on their progeny by their sires ; and it is
scarcely necessary to add that, under similar circumstances, were we
to adopt the same racing rules, we would have the same stamp of stout,
well-bred, useful saddle and light harness horses.
2. The extremely favorable nature of the Climqte, Country, and Pasture
in which they were bred.
The climate, natural features, soil and pasture in the country known
as the Western Slopes of New South Wales—that is the hilly and
undulating country, not the mountainous—on the west side of the
Great Dividing Coast Range, which extends from the Southern to the
Northern boundary of the State, are such as to render it superior to
almost any other part of the world for horse-breeding, except, per-
haps, some tracts of similar country in the neighbouring states of
Victoria and Queensland. The climate is essentially temperate,
neither too hot nor too cold, and the winter being mild and short the
condition of the stock on the pasture, when it is sufficient, is scarcely
reduced at all by the cold. The hilly and undulating formation of
the country, again, with here and there strips of hard and stony
ground, and with plenty of fallen timber, develop the muscles of the
horse, and also give him good wind, sound hoofs, and free and safe
action, while the timber and brush in the hollows and gullies afford
the necessary shelter from the cold westerly and south-westerly winds.
With this shelter, and plenty of nutritious grass on the lower ground,
and the nice sweet pickings, of which the horses are so fond, on the
light, fertile rises, and sufficient water, this portion of New South
Wales supplies all that a horse can desire in ordinary favorable
seasons. There may be a few portions of the large tract of country,
here somewhat vaguely described, which are not sound for horses, but
they are not of any large extent; and on the other hand there are not
a few localities where they have the benefit of a limestone formation;
breeders, therefore, in this stretch of country have little to fear from their
horses suffering seriously from worms or other parasites. Even in the
mountainous portions of the State there are only a few badly-drained
localities at high altitudes in which horses suffer at all severely
from these ailments, and only when they are neglected. They also
suffer to some extent on the alluviak flats subject to inundation on
the larger rivers which fall into the Pacific Ocean.


But, while I have here brought prominently under notice the
extensive scope of excellent country so eminently fitted for the
breeding of high-class saddle and light harness horses, or, indeed,
any sort of horse or other stock, there is a wide extent of country
which is also very suitable for horse-breeding, where, although the
climate and other circumstances are not so very favourable as the
Western slopes for the breeding of high-class horses of the sorts men-
tioned, large numbers of first-class, full-sized, upstanding saddle and
light harness horses of the same stamp are produced, and at a very
reasonable cost. I allude more particularly to what has been termed
the intermediate portion of the State, that part of it which lies to
the west of the Western slopes, and between that and the purely salt-
bush plains, which i 3 the only portion of New South Wales not well
adapted for horse-breeding ; for numbers of good horses are bred in
what is termed the “ mountainous ” and what is known as “ The
Coast Country,” to the east of the Great Dividing llange.
Although, as a rule, the portions of the State here alluded to will,
in ordinary seasons, carry the horses and keep them in good growing
.condition on the natural pasture all the year round, provision ought
to be made, to a certain extent at least, by the breeder for unfavourable
seasons by growing cultivated food ; for nothing can be w r orse for
young horses or other stock, especially while they are sucking or shortly
after weaning, than to meet with a check by starving the mothers or the
youngsters themselves. This need not, however, occur in the portions
of the State to which I have here referred, for fair crops of oaten or
lucerne hay can be grown there as well as various green crops upon
any holding on which horse breeding is taken up; and it will pay the
breeder to grow such crops, for he might sell them if he did not
•require them for his own horses; but it is very seldom that he should
sell, for, after keeping a supply in case of drought, he should, as a
rule, give what he grows to them. They should always be kept in a
robust state of health.
So far, therefore, as regards the climate, natural features, soil, and
pasture, i.e., the surroundings, there has been nothing to cause the
deterioration in our horse stock; but, on the contrary, the circum-
stances under which our breeders followed their calling were of the
most favourable character compared with those in other parts of the
world. At the same time it must be allowed that our horse stock do
not now obtain either that abundance or freshness of pasture which
they had in the early days of the Colony, when it was so very greatly
understocked, and when, it may be said, horses could, in a measure,
roam as they liked, feeding on the sweetest and most nutritious
pasture.
II. WHAT THEY ARE NOW.
Our Saddle Horses have since 1850 as a whole deteriorated.
1. Evidence of their deterioration.
While we can with confidence give our saddle and cavalry horses of
sixty years ago the high character we have done, we have to


acknowledge with regret that the statement which, we frequently hear,
“ That our saddle horses, from which the cavalry horses for India
have for many years, and lately for South Africa, been drawn, have
greatly deteriorated,” is borne out by the opinion of all those who are
old enough to remember the horses of fifty or sixty years ago. The
statement is also confirmed by the opinions of judges of horses such
as Colonel Ben Williams, who, I think, visited the State about the
year 1880.
It was likewise the opinion expressed by Major-General E. T. 11.
Hutton, in a lecture delivered by him at the rooms of the Royal
Society, Sydney, under the auspices of the United Service Institute of
New South Wales, in August, 1894, which was to the following effect: —•
“ It is a fact, I fear, only too patent to any careful observer, that the
Australian horse is gradually deteriorating in bone and sinew, and,
therefore, in staying power, —in all those qualities which go to make a
horse valuable for military purposes, and, I might add, for domestic
purposes also. It is a subject which should engross the earnest
attention of every one interested in the future of the Colony, namely,
to consider what means should be taken to arrest the tendency to breed
light, narrow, thoroughbred horses, capable to nothing more useful
than to win a six furlong race. A future generation will, I fear, have
serious occasion to rue the slight heed paid to the development of a
breed of horses which shall be valuable for its general qualities of
utility.”
It is the opinion, too, of Colonel Finn, the Military Commandant,
Queensland, and is also borne out by the result of the selections of
the leading buyers for India, who on an average do not take more
than 10 per cent, of the horses offered them.
We have also confirmatory evidence in the fact that even fairly use-
ful saddle and light harness horses are not readily procurable in the
Sydney sale yards in any considerable number, while a purchaser
looking for a stout upstanding well-bred hack or hunter is often weeks
before he can find one.
No doubt the majority of horses which were sent from this State to
South Africa (and it is supposed that some 13,000 were shipped from
Sydney or Newcastle, or crossed the border and shipped from Mel-
bourne last year) maintained the reputation our horses have long held
in India, as compared with those from other parts of the world, but
the number of first-class remounts available to select from was small.
As to the prices they brought, it will be gathered from the quotations
given by Major-General French to the questions asked in Parliament
in August last year, that, although they were much better than our horses
have for many years been bringing, the prices for draught and cavalry
horses were only barely remunerative so far as the breeders were con-
cerned, for he puts the cost at the port of shipment of draught horses,
including artillery, at £2O, and of cavalry at £ls, and that would mean
£1 less, at least, to the breeder. What he terms mounted infantry,
cobs the breeder must have bred and broken in at a considerable loss,,
as he puts their cost at the port at an average of £10; while taking
into consideration the cost of the sire, the comparatively low percentage


of foals, the extent and quality of pasture required for horses, the
blemishes and accidents to which horse are liable, and the trouble
horse stock give on a run, it is considered that a less price than £l2
would not pay the breeder for even ordinary broken-in four year old
horses.
This all goes to show that the horse our breeders should breed
ought not to be of the mounted infantry stamp, but of the cavalry,
artillery and transport sorts —practically of the description which
have long been purchased in this and the other States for India, where
they bring £4O to £45; and if they are bred of this description, it is
believed a market would also be found for remounts and high-class
saddle and harness horses in the United Kingdom at prices, which,
with the reductions which may be expected to take place in the cost
of freight, would be paying ones for our breeders.
2. The seriousness of the deterioration.
That the horses should have deteriorated iu this and the other Aus-
tralian States to the extent here shown, ought to be a matter of the
greatest concern, not only because the breeding of inferior horses is a
very unprofitable speculation, but for the far more important reason
that our very independence as a people might turn upon the question
of the fitness of our horses for cavalry, artillery, and transport ser-
vice. If the experience of the South African war has taught us any-
thing it has taught us that.
The facts which I have here adduced show, I think, the urgent
necessity for improvement in our system of breeding ; and, in order to
indicate the direction this might take, I will here submit a statement
of what, in my opinion, were principal causes of the deterioration of
our saddle, and incidentally also to that of our light harness horses, and
offer some suggestions for their improvement.
III. WHAT LED TO THE DETERIORATION OE OUR SADDLE
HORSES.
Combination of Causes.
There were several causes for this, among which the following might
be mentioned : —•
1. The discovery of gold.
2. The introduction of draught blood.
3. The ignorance and neglect of the rules of breeding.
4. The increase of racing and betting, and relaxation of rules of
racing , with reduction of weights and distances.
5. The increase of two-year-old races.
6. The formation of Pony and Galloway Pacing Clubs.
1. The discovery of Gold.
On the discovery of gold, station hands left their employment and
went off to the diggings. This led to stock of all descriptions being
greatly neglected; and as the stations were not enclosed, the stock in


many places strayed on to other runs. This was especially the case as
regards horses; and as the young colts were not cut or branded, as
they grew np they got the mares and fillies in foal; so that it may be
said that in a good many districts the horses of different owners for a
time not only intermixed, but even interbred, without, of course, any
selection in regard to breed, or limit as to age.
2. Introduction of Draught Blood.
Then, through the great demand which the discovery created for
draught horses to take loading to the diggings and for working at the
the mines, any horse at all resembling the draught breed at that time
brought an exorbitant price, and the result was that a great many of
our good-sized, roomy, well-bred mares, which could very ill be spared
from those which should have been breeding upstanding saddle and
light-harness horses, were put to draught entires. This was injurious
to our saddle and light-harness horses in two ways; it both deprived
our saddle breed of some of the best brood mares of that breed, and
also gave us a large proportion of inferior young mares to breed saddle-
horses from, through the draught strain that was in them.
3. Ignorance and neglect of the rules of breeding.
There was still another source of deterioration, which, unfortunately,
still exists—that is, the all-but universal practice of breeding. from
worn-out mares, and exercising but scant judgment in the selection of
the sires. Nor is this practice confined to owners of a fair number of
horses; the craze also exists to a considerable extent among those
who have perhaps only a mare or two, and their choice of sire is a
mere matter of chance, resulting in disappointment.
The outcome was, that from (say) 18(50 to 1880, New South Wales
was completely overstocked with horses, the majority of which were of
an inferior description and a drug in the market, and, of course, a
heavy loss to the breeder. With the poor prices going, less and less
pains were bestowed by owners in the management and breeding of
their studs, and they, in many cases, got rid of their horses and put
on sheep.
4. Increase of racing and betting, and relaxation of the Rides of Racing.
While all this was taking place, a still more potent, but slow and
insidious, source of deterioration had been and is still at work.
With the diggings came what may be termed a general flush of
money, and with that an abnormal increase of racing. This led to a
large increase in the number of persons who followed racing as a
business, and a very large increase in the number of betting men and
bookmakers, who have gradually obtained such a say in the framing
of the rules of racing, and in the conduct of racing meetings, as to
lead to racing, by the reduction of weights and distances, deterior-
ating, instead of, as it ought to do, if properly conducted, improving
the breed of our saddle and light-harness horses.


The other descriptions of stock, as well as horses, suffered from
causes Nos. 1 and 2 ; but their deterioration was of comparatively
short duration; for, with the falling off in the returns of gold, and the
large increase in the population, together with the great prosperity of
of our stockowners, large sums were laid out by them in the purchase
of pure-bred horses, cattle, and sheep, and then followed a vast im-
provement in our draught horses, cattle, and sheep; but nothing was
done to introduce improved saddle-horses, and exceedingly little to
make our light-harness horses better.
So far as the improvement of saddle-horses is concerned, that was
left to our racehorse; and though he has, to a considerable extent,
eliminated the draught strain, he has, in other ways, which I shall
now proceed to notice at length, become the principal cause of the
deterioration of our saddle and cavalry, and, in a large measure, also,
our light-harness and artillery horses.
(1.) Reduction of Weights and Distances.
Prom what has been said, it will be gathered that the deterioration
of our saddle and light-harness horses cannot possibly be attributed
to our climate, country, or pasture, which can honestly be described
as some of the very best in the world ; nor to the inferiority of the
horses imported from England in early days, as the superiority of our
saddle-horse of fifty or sixty years back completely refutes that idea; nor
to the effect of the neglect which affected all sorts of stock on the out-
break of the diggings, for our saddle-horses should, as all other stock
did, have very soon recovered from that. No, the cause of their present
inferiority must be looked for in some other direction; and there is
not the slightest doubt that it is due to racing, as conducted during
the last fifty or sixty years. The rules and practices of the Turf
during that period, and especially during the last twenty years, have
notoriously led to reduction in the stoutness, endurance, and usefulness
of our racehorses as a whole; and as we have to take the thorough-bred
as a sire for our saddle, and, to a considerable extent, also for our light-
harness horses, he brings with him the serious defects which inevitably
led to the deterioration in these breeds of horses from which Australia
is now suffering.
Betting has, as I afterwards explain, brought about this deteriora-
tion, and the same result has followed the same cause in every age.
Sir Walter Gilbey, one of the highest authorities in England on
horses and horse-breeding, tells us in his work on “ Horses Past and
Present,” page 48, that in 1740, in order to prevent the deterioration
that was going on in the strength and size of the racehorse, an Act
was passed fixing the weights that racehorses had to carry, under
penalty of the forfeiture of the horse, and a fine on the owner of £2OO.
The weights were :
10 stone for 5-year olds.
11 stone for 6-year olds.
12 stone for 7-year olds.
Every race had to be finished on the same day —that is, all heats
were to be run off in one day.


This measure was too drastic to last, and five years afterwards was
modified ; but even then the weights prescribed for the Royal Plates
were heavy :
10 stone 4 lb. for 4-year olds.
11 stone 6 lb. for 5-year olds.
12 stone for 6-year olds.
And the heavy weights quoted, coupled with the fact that at that time,
and for nearly a century afterwards, a great many races were run in
heats, shows the source from which the English thoroughbred obtained
the weight-carrying and staying powers for which they were at one
time so famed all over the world.
Racing was established mainly for the purpose of testing how far
the different horses possessed, and were likely from their breeding to
convey to their progeny, the shapes and qualities which it is desirable
we should find in our saddle and light-harness horses, and as a con-
sequence in cur cavalry and artillery horses; and so long as the Rules
of Racing were framed with that object in view, no better sire for
producing cavalry and artillery horses of the right stamp could have
been found than the racehorse of that period, simply because it was
practically impossible for a horse then to be successful on the Turf,
and not possess in a high degree the qualities of stoutness, weight-
carrying, and endurance which are so sadly wanting in the great
majority of the racehorses of the present day. There is not one in
every twenty of them which would stand the test to which the horses
of those early days were subjected.
The racehorse had then, in most cases, to carry what would now be
termed excessive weight; to run long distances, frequently in heats;
while there were comparatively few handicaps and more weight for age,
and few two-year-old races. Racing then did improve the breed of horses
for useful and military purposes, and it attained the object for which
it was mainly established; but to hold the opinion that racing now
improves the breed of saddle and light-harness horses is to believe in
an utter fallacy, for there is not the shadow of a doubt that racing,
as now followed, tends, perhaps slowly but surely, to the deterioration
of our horses for useful and military purposes, by not only doing away
with the effective tests which at one time existed of the stoutness and
endurance of the race-horse, and with what was the strongest possible
incentive to horses of that stamp being bred, but is actually holding
out inducements to breed light, weedy, speedy horses, which, as a rule,
are all but useless for any but racing purposes, and which, of course,
when put to our saddle and light-harness mares, produce stock nearly
as useless for ordinary purposes as themselves.
The following may be mentioned as some of the causes which
brought this about, and tends to maintain and increase the existing
evils. .
Naturally the same Racing Rules were followed in the early days of
tli's State as in the United Kingdom, and with the same good results.


This is shown by the following extract from Sydney Race Club Rules
of the year 1810 :
Rule XXXVI.—The Ladies’ Cup, and the second Plate of fifty guineas given by this
Club, shall be run for in heats of three miles each ; and it is to be understood that the win-
ning of any Cup, Plate, or Purse shall not be a bar to the winner starting for any other Cup,
Plate, or Purse during the same races ; but such winning horse, mare, or gelding, in case
of so starting, shall be obliged to carry 3 lbs. extra for each Cup, Plate, or Purse so
previously won by him or her. Entire horses are at all times to carry 3 lbs. more than
mares or geldings.
XXXVII.—That the following weights shall be carried by mares and geldings running
for any Cup, Plate, or Purse :
st. lb.
Two years old ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 2
Three years old ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 4
Four years old ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 0
Five years old ... ... ... ... 812
Six years old ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 10
Aged ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 0
Entire horses to be subject to the 36th Rule.
With such thorough tests as here indicated by this advertisement,
in the shape of good weights,.long distances, and trying heats, which
were the rule at the date mentioned, and for perhaps thirty or forty
years (less or more) afterwards, it can easily be understood how the
racehorse of that period, descended from sires tested in the same
way, and bred and reared in a climate and country such as ours,
possessed in an exceptional degree of stoutness and endurance as well
as speed, and when used as sires of our saddle-horses how they con-
ferred on their progeny, along with their good shapes, the valuable
qualities which led to the establishment of the high character which
the “ Wafers ” sent to India in such large numbers as cavalry and
artillery horses obtained.
This state of things did not, however, last. The breeding of
thoroughbred horses increased, and as, of course, a good many of the
young stock, owing to the trying conditions under which races were
then run, failed to find purchasers (this was especially the case in
Victoria, where the thoroughbreds were lighter than in this State), the
breeders, with a view to more of their horses being eligible for the
Turf, and to places being thus found for the less stout colts and fillies,
began to ask that the Rules of Racing should be relaxed.
A slight reduction in the conditions might in several directions have
been called for, and would perhaps have done little or no harm, so long
as the racing was to a large extent confined to the breeders of the horses;
but, as has been said, with the gold discovery racing increased, and began
to be widely taken up as a profession, and with the racing-man came the
betting-man and bookmaker; and both here and in the United Kingdom,
as well as in other parts of the world, to serve their own purposes,
they have between them been but far too successful in depriving the
racehorse, with a comparatively few exceptions, of the stoutness and


endurance for which lie was at one time famed; and, as a natural
consequence, the deterioration of our saddle and light-harness horses
has followed.
The breeders attained their object, and the weights and distances
were reduced ; but they made a serious mistake in getting on the down
grade in these respects, for while they were breeding a stout serviceable
horse, compared with what the thoroughbred now is, their misfits for
racing, besides showing breeding and quality, had in most cases
sufficient size and substance for saddle and cavalry horses, and brought
good prices for export to India and China, and as stout well-bred
hacks for use in the State; whereas the majority of our thoroughbred
young stock, if they are not fit for racing, are little else but weeds, and
bring very poor prices.
It was, however, very much more in the interest of racing and betting
men 'that racing should be increased, because with increased racing
came increased betting, and increase to their business and profits. To
enable them to bring this about, the conditions on which the races
were run had to be relaxed in order to admit of the light and weedy
thoroughbreds, which suited their purpose better even than the stout
useful racehorse, having any chance on the Turf. Before they could
accomplish this they had to obtain the consent of the committees, of
the Racing Clubs to the alterations which they wished to make in the
Rules ; and this, again, they had to get by becoming members of the
clubs, using their personal influence with the members of committees
of management, and holding out inducements to them in the shape of
increased entries of horses for their races and larger takings at the
gates, as well as additions to the membership of the Club. Induced
by these and other influences, the Racing Clubs have, in almost every
instance, been led to relax the conditions on which their races are
run, and have thus done away with the tests which at the commence-
ment of racing in Australia did so very much to establish the stoutness
and staying power in the racehorses, the sires of our saddle and in
many cases also of the light-harness horse.
The outcome of this is that, as a rule, the thoroughbred is now
light and weedy ; but if he has foot, that, with some staying power,
is almost everything he requires to possess for racing with the
conditions under which the majority of races are now run. With
weights fixed at 8 stone and under, and distances of 7 furlongs or less,
it is safe to say that at least three-fourths of our racehorses are
sprinters, fit only to carry a boy a fair day’s journey through the bush,
and utterly unfit, unless put to mares full of draught blood, to get
cavalry horses which have to be up to 16 stone. Then, again, under
the system of handicapping, a feather-weight on what is otherwise a
useless animal, and a crushing handicap on the powerful useful
thoroughbred, bring the weed on equality with the stoutest and best
horse on the course. This is done solely for betting purposes, and is
altogether opposed to the improvement of the ordinary saddle-horse,
for it induces breeders of racehorses to keep speedy, weedy, animals
which are foolishly used by breeders of saddle-horses in their stud
because they win short-distance races by getting light handicaps;


while these weeds, if it were not for the sake of betting, would be
served the same as inferior stock of other kinds —they would be culled
out and got rid of, or, rather, they would seldom or never have been
bred. Then, as the racehorse is not required to do any real work,
except on the level, smooth turf, and as speed is the great desideratum,
that necessitates length of stride, and length of stride calls for low
action, as high action and extended stride are incompatible. The main
object, therefore, of the breeder of racehorses now is to obtain as much
propelling power as possible; and the more powerful hindquarters his
young stock have the more valuable they are for racing. He cares
little for the forequarter; and for racing, the large, powerful, and well-
formed forequarter, which makes a horse a stout, safe, and pleasant
hack, is a defect, because it brings with it high action and compara-
tively short stride. The ordinary racehorse, and many of his “ get,”
are what are known as “ daisy cutters,” and are on that account unsafe
to ride at ordinary work in the bush, and liable, if put in harness, to
tumble and break their knees, while a few days’ hard work and paddock
fare knocks them out of time.
It is no doubt true that races are run in quicker time; but this
advantage—if it can be so termed —has been gained at the sacrifice of
weight-carrying, endurance, and general usefulness in our thorough-
breds, on which breeders of saddle and cavalry horses have had to rely
for sires. To racing men, a single second of extra speed may be worth
thousands of pounds, whereas, in the case of saddle and cavalry
horses, such increases of speed would be of no moment, and if
obtained at the expense of even the least valuable of the qualities
which a saddle or cavalry horse should possess, ought on no account
to be sought for. With racing and betting men, and they now have
practically the control of the Turf, the great desideratum is, as I have
said, speed. If they get that, with a modicum of staying power, a race
can generally be found to fit the horse, as a suitable weight can be
worked round somehow. The truth is, the thoroughbred of the present
day is not bred for utility or military but for betting purposes, and
the proof of this is to be found in the records of the weights carried
by the winners of our principal races. Even the winners of the Mel-
bourne Cup, the great race of the Australian States, in only a very few
instances during the last ten or twelve years carried more than 8 stone ;
while the cavalry horse has to be up to 16 stone —that is to say, cavalry
horses carry double the weight that the winners of these important
races do; and while making every allowance for the difference of the
pace, there is no one who understands anything of breeding but will
say that the racehorse of the present day, if put to even exceptionally
large well-bred saddle or fair sized light-harness mares, would get
more than perhaps one really first-class useful horse out of every ten
which are bred; a few might be middling, and the balance inferior
and very inferior. This is borne out by the evidence I have adduced,
confirmed by the fact already stated, that though we have more than
400,000 horses in the Slate we were only able, after meeting our own
requirements, to export about one-thirtieth part of the whole number
to South Africa and India, many of which were barely second-class.


5. The increase of Tico-year old Races.
Then we have the deteriorating effect on the size, substance, useful-
ness, of our saddle and light-harness horses by two-year old racing
reducing, as it does, the stamina of the throughbred sire.. Common
sense is wholly opposed to such a practice. It is shortsighted, and
has a considerable share in shortening the annual cast of our first-class
saddle and cavalry horses.
This being the case, two-year old racing should be discouraged,
although it may, under the Rules of Racing now in force, like the
breeding of weeds and sprinters, seemingly benefit the breeder, and
the stopping of these races would at first no doubt cause him some
loss. There is, however little doubt but if the necessary amendments
were made in the racing rules the breeders of racehorses would obtain
guoh. improved prices for their misfits for the racecouise, foi saddle
and cavalry horses as would far more than recoup them for the losses
they sustained through doing away with two-year races or any of
the other alterations which would require to be made in these rules for
increasing the stoutness and staying-powers of our saddle horses.
G. Formation of Pony and Galloway Racing Clubs.
The Pony and Galloway Racing Associations which have been formed
in Sydney and the Suburbs and at a good many of the country towns
have been entirely in the interest of the betting men and for betting
purposes, and should be prohibited. These races tend to encourage
the breeding of inferior horses through finding places for some of the
numerous misfits which are got by our weedy thoroughbred sires, and
thus induce our breeders to keep using them instead, of procuring
stouter and more useful horses. These Galloways and Ponies although of
no practical use to the State, nor suitable for export, are very suitable
instruments for the purpose for which these races are run —the trans-
ference into the pockets of the betting men of a good share of the money
earned by our tradesmen, working men, by the young men and young
women too, and even by the boys in our shops,, offices, places of
business, and Government Departments. It is said that as many as
3,000 people in Sydney and Suburbs with their horses are now living
on these pony races, one of which is held every day of the week—
except Sunday —and even run on Christmas Day.
This class of racing is one of the most fruitful causes of the lament-
able falling off in the quality of our horse stock, and the danger, to
our reputation is so great that the time has arrived when legislative
action should be taken to regulate this class of sport in the general
public interest.
How the Deterioration of the Eacehorse as a Sire of Saddle
and Light Harness Horses affects them.
Having shown that the racehorse has deteriorated in stoutness, stay-
ing power, and usefulness, it follows as a matter of course that using
him as we have been continually doing as a sire has had a very
marked and injurious effect upon the power and endurance of our


true Australian saddle horse. The better to show how this has
actually taken place I will, as briefly as I can, glance at the description
of mares to which the thoroughbred sire has been put, and the result.
Speaking generally our saddle horses are bred from three descrip-
tion of mares by thoroughbred, or what are termed thoroughbred, sires.
(a) From mares of the saddle stamp.
(b) From what might be termed light harness mares; and
(c) From mares of the active draught type.
(a) Result of breeding from saddle mares.
It is breeding in this way which produces the light, weedy, unprofit-
able horses which are to be found in large numbers in all the
Australian States. This has arisen, not only through the owners with
fairly large studs failing, as a rule, to give the breeding of their horse
stock that care and attention which they bestow on sheep and cattle—
because the breeding of horses has for many years been very unprofit-
able—but it is also in a very large measure due to the owners of a few
horses breeding from their saddle mares as they become old and unfit
for work. In both cases the sire used has been the thoroughbred,
with the result that the progeny are almost invariably smaller than
the dam, and the majority of them light and weedy, wanting in size
and stoutness.
Another cause of the small number of really suitable saddle and
cavalry horses being bred from this stamp of mare, and, of course,
from any other class of mare to which the thoroughbred sire is put, is
that in a good many instances the thoroughbred sires have, along with
their want of stoutness, had what might be termed special defects
which, although they did not prevent them from racing, did seriously
affect them as sires of saddle horses, through these defects appearing
in their progeny, and detracting from their utility and value.
For instance, the successful racehorse is not infrequently ewe
necked, low in the wither, and straight in the shoulder; a good many
have turned out toes and defective action in walking and trotting, and
not a few have bad feet. Some of these defects, looking at the
question from a saddle and cavalry point of view, are to be met with
in the progeny of the thoroughbred of the present day, and with the
other faults, as a sire, account for our saddle and cavalry horses lacking
the necessary stoutness, action, and usefulness they should possess, as
well as being defective in size, style, carriage, and temper.
Then again, owners, especially those whose mares are well bred,
because a horse has won a race or two, without giving due attention
to the fact that he did so through running under very light weights
and short distances, use him as a sire with the hope of getting some-
thing that will race, and the progeny is often a comparatively
worthless weed.
(b) Breeding Saddle Horses From Light-Harness Mares.
In breeding saddle horses from light harness mares with the
thoroughbred as a sire, there is greater probability that the progeny


will be of a useful and saleable stamp for ordinary or military purposes
than by putting him to tlie saddle mare if the mare is of the right
stamp; but here, too, the want of stoutness in the sire leads,in many
cases to undue length of leg, lack of strength and other defects in the
progeny from which they would have been free if the sire had possessed
the stoutness and shape called for in sires of horses required for these
purposes, and the risk of defects in the progeny is of course increased
through the mares being themselves to a large extent crossbred and
only used to make up for the want of substance and strength in the
thoroughbred sire. The result is, in the majority of cases disappointing;
for while the breeder fondly hoped that by mating the light racehorse
with the larger framed mare he would get a good stout combination of
sire and dam, —she may with the draught blood in her veins throw
back to some rough progenitor, or the progeny may in other cases
exhibit traces of the weedy thoroughbred sire and prove to be an ill-
fitting combination of the light sire and heavy mare.
(c) The breeding of Saddle and Cavalry Horses from active draught
Mares.
The mares of this description which have been put to the thorough-
bred horse are the Clydesdale, the Cleveland, the Suffolk Punch, and
cross-bred mares with more or less of strains of these breeds. The
Clydesdale crosses have been the most frequent and upon the whole
the most successful especially in early days when the Clydesdale was
not the large heavy horse he now generally is. He was then in most
cases, an active, quick-stepping, short-backed, clean boned farm horse,
with good head and sloping shoulders, while now he may be termed a
heavy draught town horse and his increased size and weight has not
improved the mares of this cross as dams of saddle or light harness
horses.
The Scarcity or Brood Mares.
With a large oversupply of ordinary horses and excessively low
prices for many years, and very poor prices going for even first-class
saddle and light harness horses (including of course remounts for
India and China) many of our capable breeders became careless as
to the sires they used, while those who knew little or nothing about
breeding took the nearest and least expensive thoroughbred. All this
naturally led to a great scarcity of mares of the right stamp. This
scarcity still exists and must continue until we have a better class of
sires to get mares. It will only be by using better sires and exercising
the greatest care and sound judgment coupled with the closest culling
and casting of inferior mares that we can hope to bring them to such
a state of improvement as will enable us to breed horses of those
classes which will pay the breeder and be a credit to the State.
Although better prices have recently been obtained, on account of the
demand for horses for South Africa, they were very far—on account
of the comparative inferiority as regards a large proportion of the
horses sent there —from paying the breeders.


IV. HOW THE IMPROVEMENT OF OUR SADDLE AND LIGHT
HARNESS HORSES IS TO BE BROUGHT ABOUT.
If there is to be an early and effective improvement in our saddle
and light harness and cavalry and artillery horses, it must, I think, be
in either one or other of the two following ways :
1. By the establishment of confirmed breeds of saddle and light
harness horses; or
2. By making the thoroughbred a more suitable sire for them.
Before, however, considering the alterations which should be made
in the present faulty system of breeding these horses, I think it right
to call attention to two very important reasons for bringing about a
change which ought not to be overlooked. They are :
1. The Present System does not pay the Breeder of
Thoroughbreds.
This is a statement which the experience of by-gone years indis-
putably confirms. It is difficult to point to a single breeder of
racehorses in this, or, I believe, in any of the States, or even, in many
cases, in the United Kingdom, who has made a fortune in breeding
racehorses, or, I might say, has made money at the business, while
hundreds, perhaps thousands, have lost heavily, and not a few of our
pastoralists have been ruined by taking to it. The reason for this, as
already explained, is that the stamp of racehorse which they have,
during the last half of last century, been breeding, is not the stout,
useful, long-staying thoroughbreds such as we had in the early days
of the Colony, but in most cases, light, weedy, speedy “ sprinters,”
which suit the racing men and bookmakers for racing and betting
purposes, with the result that when the colt fails to race —and the
great majority do so —he is comparatively useless for anything else,
and is a dead loss to the breeder. Whereas, if he failed to race and
was stout and fairly shaped, he would bring a paying price as a well-
bred saddle, cavalry, or light harness horse. Instead of this, breeders
of thoroughbreds have preferred to breed horses to suit the existing
rules of racing, and these admit of such light weights, and such short
distances as to flood the States with swarms of light weedy horse
stock, and badly shaped nondescripts got by light weedy racehorses out
of heavy mares which have been put to the racehorse to get size and
substance, and are unprofitable to the breeder, and damaging to the
good name which the New South Wales horses had long ago established
in India and China.
No doubt the breeders of the present day may now and then obtain
long prices for their colts and fillies for the Turf, but it is only in
exceptional cases that they do so ; and the experience of those who have
taken to breeding for the Turf is that it would have paid them much
better to breed stouter and more useful horses which if they failed to
race could be sold as sires for saddle and light harness horses, or as
stylish fashionable hacks.


2. The efficiency of our Army will largely depend on the stoutness
and endurance of our Cavalry and Artillery Horses.
If anything more is wanted to confirm and emphasise what is here
stated with regard to the necessity for breeding the right stamp of
saddle and lig'ht harness horses, it is to be found in the exceedingly
important fact which the South African war has, with other things,
taught us, viz., that cavalry and artillery when they are of that
description, are to play a most important part in future warfare, and
that the efficiency of our Forces will largely depend upon, the ex-
cellence of the horses we can provide for our mounted infantry,
cavalry, and artillery.
3. The Establishment of Confirmed Breeds of Saddle and Light
Harness Horses.
This proposal, which was made by me as far back as 1884, and
latterly by Mr. W. E. Abbott, is a thoroughly practical one; for, as
pointed out by Sir Walter Gilbev in a letter in the Live StocL
Journal of 1900, the proposal when acted on and properly carried out
has been followed with excellent results; —in France, by the establish-
ment of the confirmed breed of the high-class Anglo-Norman light
harness and carriage horse, and also of a breed of excellent cavalry
horses by the introduction of large numbers of the Yorkshire coaching
horse, the English hackney, and the Arab; in Germany, by the
formation of an improved type of the Oldenburg coach-horse, by the
introduction of the Hackney, the Cleveland Bay, and \ orkshire coach-
ing horse; and in Austria, by the infusion of English thoroughbred
and English hackney blood.
Sir Walter Gibley, in a letter which appeared in the Times under the
heading of “Army Horses Abroad/’ says further on this subject.: —•
“ Much progress has been made by our neighbours.on the Continent
within the last forty years in producing horses for military purposes.
“ The Hungarian stud-masters particularly have been practising
methods which may be described as experimental, regulated by
experience and judgment. _ .
“ The secret of their success, I venture to think, lies in the fact
that none of the Continental Governments which devote attention to
horse-breeding pin their faith to one single breed, and depend upon
that to improve all breeds. The ground-plan of the system in each
country is to raise the standard of merit of each (native) biee.d
by providing the best procurable stallions of that breed for public
service at low fees, and (2), bv affording' the owners of mares a certain
range of choice in stallions, that defects may be eliminated oi im-
provement obtained by judicious crossing. M here this system has
been long in vogue we see the results in the shape of distinct stiains
which breed true to their type.” <
In fact, these three nations, by using the horses.mentioned, together
with the thoroughbred and Arab, have for some time apparently been
following with success the course here recommended of establishing
B


confirmed breeds of saddle and liglit-barness horses, and Sir Walter
Gilbey says that the progeny of these new breeds come true to their
type, which, of course, shows that the breeds are confirmed.
Sir Walter further says that “ Lord Cathcart, another well-known
authority on horse-breeding, makes the cogent remark that, in addition
and supplementary to blood, we must have substance from somewhere
The truth is that we must divest ourselves of the idea so resolutely
held that the thoroughbred is the only strain which can improve our
horses, and, like foreign breeders, seek bone and substance where
those qualities exist, and not where they only used to exist.
There is no doubt that like results would follow here, if the same
system were adopted and carried out with care and judgment, and
would be of immense advantage to all the Australian States. Indeed
we may add, to the United Kingdom too, as well as to India, for in
that case Australia would, without doubt, become one of the principal
sources of the supply of cavalry and artillery horses for the Imperial
Army in all quarters of the Globe.
To suit the different sorts of country, climate, and circumstances, as
well as the different uses and purposes, different distinct breeds and
types of horses, cattle, and sheep, have been built up within com-
paratively recent periods by men who were born breeders, and who
set themselves to breed certain types of stock having the natural
aptitude for such work, which is only possessed by the few. Possessing
tie means, and favoured by the circumstances in which they were
placed, these men succeeded in establishing confirmed breeds of stock.
Perhaps the most striking and more recent instances of this nature
have occurred in sheep-breeding in the United Kingdom, where so
many distinct new breeds have been formed; and coming nearer
home, although the instances are not so striking, the change which
has come over our merino sheep during the last thirty years shows
what can be done in establishing new and improved types by breeders
who possessed the necessary qualifications and made up their minds
to breed for certain shapes or qualities. We have had the Mudgee
type, the Collaroy type, the Wanganella, the Tasmanian, the South
Australian, and the Vermont types.
Prom what has been said, it will be seen that in numerous instances
new confirmed breeds and types of stock have been established with
skill and care, and, of course, breeding strictly according to the
established rules of breeding ; whereas our breeding of saddle and
light-harness horses has been almost wholly at variance with these
rules, and we have, in the all but universal use made of the thorough-
bred, been breeding crossbreds, and with crossbreds uncertainty and
disappointment.
No real and permanent improvement can be expected in our saddle-
horses while they continue to be bred as they now are. With scarcely
a single exception they are excessively cross-bred, being out of cross-
bred mares, themselves cross-bred for generations by thoroughbred or
well-bred horses. This, as any one with the least knowledge of
breeding must see, is in direct opposition to its fundamental principles,
and the result is a thoroughly unsatisfactory one so far as the breeder


is concerned, and most deteriorating to tire stock ; for the majority of
the young stock are not at all what the breeder expected, but generally
light, badly-shaped, and weedy.
To show the inconsistency of the present system of breeding saddle-
horses, the question has only to be asked what would be thought
of an owner of thoroughbred racehorses who, to gain strength or some
other quality in which his stud was deficient, put a half-bred sire to
his thoroughbred mares; or of an owner of pure merinoes who put
Leicester or Lincoln rams in his stud flock ; or of an owner of pure-
bred short-horn cattle who mated them with Herefords or Devons.
Such a course would be considered foolish in the extreme and highly
suicidal; and this is really what the breeders of saddle-horses are now
doing.
To get our saddle-horses we are constantly overlooking one of the
leading rules of breeding : we are breeding a continual cross in putting
comparatively stout mares to the light thoroughbred horse to obtain
substance and size; and if the short-horn cattle or merino sheep had
been bred in the same way as our saddle-horse, their owners would
long ago have been ruined.
The system, if system it can be termed, is radically wrong, and that
again is aggravated by the stamp of horse our thoroughbred race-
horse now is. Except in the case of sires worth 3,000 or 4,000 guineas,
and, therefore, quite out of the reach of the breeders of saddle horses,
the racehorse is by far too light in both body and bone as a sire of
hacks, and his action too low.
No doubt, in a first, or perhaps a second cross, you, in some cases,
obtain the stamp of horse you require, and excellent horses are bred in
both ways; but, as a rule, beyond that certainty ceases and disappoint-
ment follows, and the deterioration of our saddle and cavalry horses
proves this beyond all question. There ought to be a confirmed breed
of the right stamp to put the thoroughbred to if cross-breeding is to
be at all a success.
Unless, therefore, a distinct race of true saddle-horses, with sufficient
fire and strength, of a distinct type or breed, is established, and sire
and dam of that breed are mated, there cannot be either certainty in
the result or satisfaction or profit to the breeder.
It would take some time to establish such a breed, but there is no
real difficulty to the “ born ” breeder in the undertaking, for we see
that such men can establish new and distinct types or breeds of cattle
and sheep where they consider it their interest to do so; and the same
thing could be done with horses. The success of France, Germany
and Austria proves this. It would, no doubt, soon be attempted, but
for the unfortunate and mistaken idea that it is more profitable to
breed racehorses than horses for military purposes.
The only way in which anything approaching to certainty in breeding
saddle-horses or any other stock can be attained is to keep “ within
the lines ”in breeding, and mate animals of the same blood. It is
then only that you stand a fair chance of obtaining the results which
you desire, because it is only then that the saying that “ like begets
like ” is really applicable, for in that case sire and dam have for


generations been bred in the same line, and it is, of course, for this
reason that so much money is paid for pedigree.
We should, therefore, in these States have a race of true saddle-
horses, of good size and shape, and with sufficient pluck and fire to
make them willing, lasting, free-going hacks—such as we had some
fifty or sixty years ago —many of which could carry a man, as I have
said, 80, and some, at a pinch, even 100 miles in a day without
knocking up.
Until some of our breeders take up the business in a systematic and
practical manner, by purchasing a stout thoroughbred sire and one or
more of the following English horses —Cleveland Bay, Yorkshire
coaching-horse, the Anglo-Norman, the English hackney, the Norfolk
trotter, or the Welsh pony —selecting stout, roomy, short-legged, well-
bred mares of the right stamp, carefully mating the progeny, culling
out all the mares whose stock do not turn out sound, strong, shapely,
and stylish; and when stock of the right stamp are bred, continuing
to breed strictly within their lines, even though comparatively close
at first, until the breed is thoroughly established and jealously preserv-
ing it when once it is so, unless any falling-off should be observed in
the spirit and pluck of the breed, when temporary recourse could
again be had to the right class of thoroughbred.
There were a good many things stated at the recent horse-breeding
conference to the disparagement of the English hackney, which
showed that the persons saying these things were not acquainted with
that breed of horses, and an opportunity will be taken on a future
occasion to supply reliable information with respect to the breed,
which it is believed will induce breeders to look upon it in a different
light.
In the meantime, however, it is considered advisable to answer very
briefly some of the statements made at that meeting. It was stated :
1. That the English hackney is a mongrel and not a pure-
bred horse.
The reply is that the foundation of the hackney pedigree is found
in the “ Darley Arabian,” the sire of “ Flying Childers,” and the
stud-book of the breed is as correctly and regularly kept and pub-
lished as that of the thoroughbred.
2. That he has no pluck.
There are a good many long-distance half-bred hackney and
thoroughbred hunters and many more with hackney blood in their
veins.
There are two classes of hackneys—one, the more common, of the
harness type, and the other of the saddle type, from which hunters
are bred.
3. That the hackney is rough to ride.
The hackney’s natural pace now is the trot, and would for a long
journey be a tiresome one, but it must not be forgotten that the trot


HACKNEY STALLION GRAND CADET 4797.
TYPICAL ENGLISH HACKNEYS.


and not the canter is the military pace, and by Continental nations
has been considered, and is, a strong recommendation to his use as a
sire for remounts.
4. That he would require stabling.
The same may be said of the thoroughbred. This is only a matter
of acclimatisation.
5. He had no endurance and should not be asked to do long
journeys.
This cannot justly be said with regard to a horse that will do a
60-mile journey in a conveyance without a whip being laid on him.
An unprejudiced judge unacquainted with the breed had only to see
the blood-like head, short, strong back, powerful loins, lengthy body,
and easy style of going of the right sort of hackney to say he was
both a free goer and stayer.
6. The hackney did not stand the work in South Africa.
Ho more did the English thoroughbred, or any other of the horses
from the United Kingdom which had been accustomed to be stabled.
That horses of such a stamp as here described would eventually pay
better than thoroughbreds, large though the prices obtained for them
sometimes are, there is no doubt, for not only is the demand for
our own ordinary use —to say nothing for cavalry and police —large,
and good prices are now paid for horses of the right stamp, but India,
China, South Africa, and England will be buyers for far more horses
of this description than we or the other colonies can breed, at paying
prices.
It is hoped that some of our breeders who have the means and
the land for such an undertaking will take the matter in hand and
establish such a breed. To do so the breeder would have to adopt
some such course as the following : —He would select some stout,
roomy, short-legged, well-bred saddle mares ; some shapely useful,
stylish, light harness mares with good action, and some clean-legged,
active, light draught mares of the right stamp. He would then pur-
chase in this or in some of the other States a thoroughbred and Arab
whose stock showed they were of the right sort to breed from. He
would import entires, selected on the same principle, of the following
breeds, i.e., the Yorkshire coaching horse, the Anglo-Norman horse,
and the English hackney. Having got his mares and entires he would
consider which entires should be put to the several mares with the
best result, and mate them so as to produce the type of horse in each
case he wished to breed and mate them accordingly. Having done so
he would watch the result, and where the mating was successful he
would of course continue it, and where it was a failure he would
change the entire and in some cases get rid of the mares, and proceed
in this way until he found the mating which produced the description
of horse he desired to breed, whether it were saddle or light
cavalry or artillery.


4. How to make the Thoroughbred a more suitable Sire for
Saddle Horses.
While there is no doubt as to the soundness and practicability of
the proposal to establish a confirmed breed of high-class saddle horses
with sufficient foot, fire, weight-carrying power, and endurance, and,
also, a distinct breed of strong active light harness and stylish coach
horses, the establishment of these breeds would take a considerable
time, even if the enterprise were taken up at once. It is feared that
this will not be done, but that the drawback which has so long kept
capable men from turning their attention to the breeding of these
classes of horses —the desire to breed successful racehorses —will still
-lead them to neglect the breeding of the more useful sorts, although
all experience goes to show that the breeding of racehorses under the
existing rules of the Turf is an unprofitable speculation. .
As racing is now conducted, the breeding of racehorses is more a
luxury to be indulged in by the wealthy in connection with racing
than a profitable business to be entered on by breeders generally, and
should, like racing itself, be taken up only by those who can afford
to stand the loss which racing, even apart from betting, nearly always
entails.
As, therefore, it cannot be said that there is any immediate prospect
of confirmed breeds of true saddle horses, being formed, we will
have to continue the use of the thoroughbred as a sire ; and as this
is the case, it is very necessary that we should consider whether his
defects, to which reference has been made, cannot be remedied.
If this could be done, then the question how to breed the right
class' of saddle and cavalry horses would be solved. The racehorse
would then take his rightful place as their sire ; there would be a
speedy improvement in our horses; and the benefit to the breeders of
saddle and light harness horses, and especially to those who are
anxious to take up breeding for military purposes, would be incalculable,
as there are encouraging prospects of a strong demand for the right
stamp of horse at prices which will pay the breeder —not only for
India and South Africa —but also for the Imperial Government, now
that freights are becoming lower, and excellent steamers are engaged
in the trade.
Having shown that racing as conducted during the last fifty or sixty
years, instead of improving the breed of our saddle and light harness
horses, from which cavalry and artillery horses are drawn, has steadily
but surely caused their deterioration, as well as brought about a large
increase in racing, betting, and gambling : it is high time, in the
public interest, that a thorough change should be brought about in
the mode in which racing is now conducted.
There is no prospect that the racing and betting men, who now have
practically the control and management of racing’, will voluntarily
consent to any change which would remedy the evils alluded to, as
the conditions and rules under which racing is carried on have been
altered largely at their instance and in their interest, and they are
certain to resist any change. This being the case, the only remedy is


A GROUP OF ENGLISH HACKNEY MARES.
A GROUP BRED BY MR. J. A. ANGAS, OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


legislation, which would lay down such length of races and such weights,
according to the class and age of the horses, as they would have to
carry, and issue such regulations as would prevent any but stout,
useful, weight-carrying, long-distance horses from going on the Turf;
and thus provide suitable sires for the production of saddle and light
harness horses of a similar stamp, instead of the light, weedy sort
which are to be met with all over the Commonwealth, and which
have been sired by the speedy, weedy thoroughbred so often met with
on our racecourses.
As to the power to legislate in this direction, there can be no doubt.
Not only is there, as I have shown, precedent for such a law, but the
fact that during last Parliament a Bill was introduced at the instance
of racing men to, among other things, control all matters affecting
horse-racing, puts the legality of such legislation beyond challenge.
The only question, therefore, is, would such a measure effect the
necessary improvement in our saddle and light harness and cavalry
and artillery horses ? And there is not the shadow of a doubt but it
would do so most simply and effectually, for it would make the
statement that racing improves the breed of horses —which is, as racing
is now, an utterly erroneous and misleading one —perfectly true, as no
horse who had not stoutness and endurance, as well as foot, could have
any chance on the Turf.
THE OBJECT AND EFFECT OF LEGISLATION.
I. Its object.
The object of legislation is to put a stop to the deterioration which is
now going on in our saddle-horses, and by increasing their stoutness
and endurance, restore them to the proud position which they at
one time held, or being as a whole, the best in any country of the
world.
It should come gradually into force—the provisions relating to the
minimum weights to be carried, and the length of the races to be run,
being gradually raised at the beginning of one, two, and three years,
from the date on which the other provisions of the measure came into
operation, which would be, say, within one month of its receiving the
assent of the Governor.
11. The benefits which would accrue from legislation.
1. Legislation under which the weights to be carried on the turf
would be increased and the distances lengthened, and if deemed advisable,
heats would be re-established, —would lead to the production of weight-
carrying, long-staying, useful thoroughbreds, and give us the sires
which would enable us to breed horses admirably adapted, as ours at
one time were, for useful and military purposes.
2. It would make the breeding of thoroughbred horses a paying
speculation, which it has for many years only been in a very few


instances, except in those cases where the owners were breeding, not
for the turf, but for the Indian market, from sires of the stamp which
the legislation here advocated would tend to produce in sufficient
numbers to meet the general requirements.
3. If our farmers were to adopt a system which is followed in many
parts of Ireland, of doing their agricultural work with mares of the light
active draught stamp, many of them with a large dash of thoroughbred
blood in them, they would not only be able to put in and take off their
crops more expeditiously and economically than they would with
heavy horses, (the breeding of which should only be attempted on
very fertile land) but be able, if they could obtain thoroughbred sires
of the description which legislation of the character here suggested
would give us, to breed saddle and light-harness horses, of the class so
much in demand for useful and military purposes, and make horse-
breeding a paying speculation.
111. Who would be affected by legislation.
The breeder of thoroughbreds.
The racing and betting-men.
The betting public.
The general public.
1. Sow the Breeder of Racehorses would be affected.
The breeders of racehorses might for a year or two sustain some
loss through the passing of the proposed legislation, but if they did
at first suffer some loss it would be much more than made up to them
in other directions. This will be seen by taking the average annual
cast of racing colts and fillies, putting an average price on them, and
estimating the loss which such a measure would entail. There are
about 250 racing colts and fillies sold by auction annually, which,
with 50 more added for private sales and those raced by their
breeders, would make up the total number —say 300 ; and if these
were put at say £SO, which would be a fair estimate of the average price,
that would make a gross annual return of say £15,000. This is a con-
siderable sum, but looking at the breeding of racehorses in the light of
a national industry it is scarcely to be considered a very important one,
seeing that the colts and fillies are now bred for racing and betting,
and not for useful or military purposes, and supposing the loss entailed
on breeders by legislation were to amount for a time to 50 per cent,
(which would clearly be a very excessive estimate) that would make
the total loss sustained for a time by the breeders only £7,500, while
so far as regards the State that amount would be a very small matter,
and not for a moment to be accepted as a set-off to the deterioration
of our horses for useful and military purposes, which the existing rules
of racing entail. But no such loss as 50 per cent., or anything
approaching that extent, would be sustained by the breeder for, in the
first place, all our racing stock would by legislation be put on the
same footing. It would only be the breeders of the very weedy ones


that would suffer ; and, in the second place, as has been shown, the
breeding of racehorses suited for the turf is now an unprofitable
speculation, and it would pay the breeder of thoroughbreds much
better to breed from the stout useful stamp of entire which he would
have under legislation to put to his mares, and the result would be
that he would then secure a much higher average price for the whole
of his annual cast of colts and fillies. Instead, therefore, of being a
loser by legislation the breeder would be a gainer, while the benefit
which the use of such sires would confer on the State would be
immense, for it would lead to the establishment of an extensive export
trade in saddle, light harness-horses, cavalry and artillery horses.
2. The Racing and Betting-men and Bookmakers.
As it is almost invariably the case that the men who devote their
time to racing also bet, and the betting-men and bookmakers very
often own racehorses, they are here referred to as belonging to
the same class. They would suffer by legislation, as the minimum
weight fixed by law would not only disqualify some of their horses,
but would also, by lessening the number of races run lessen the
number of opportunities for running them, and reduce the amount of
betting. This would of course diminish their takings which, con-
sidering the gi’eat number of racing and betting-men and the heavy
bets they frequently make, must amount annually to a very large sum.
They are as a rule, the only class which, as a whole, profit by the
breeding of racehorses; and this being the case, the reduction of
racing and betting would not be a misfortune but a decided advantage,
for it is acknowledged on all hands that there is far too much of both;
and as the rules of racing have largely, at the instance of racing and
betting-men and entirely in their interests, been so altered as to make
racing as now conducted the chief cause of the deterioration of our
saddle aud light-harness horses, they have no right to complain if
steps are taken to secure the object for which races were originally
run —the improvement of our horses for useful and military purposes.
When we consider the incalculable importance it is to us as a
people—irrespective of the financial side of the matter —to have a
race of high-class, long-staying, useful, hardy horses, upon which we
can depend should necessity arise, and that our present methods are
undermining the strength and stamina of the sires from which our
saddle, light-harness, cavalry, and artillery horses are bred (and our
brood-mares suffer from the same cause), it is high time that decided
and effective measures should be taken to put a stop to this state of
things; and the only really effective measures which can be taken
is legislation such as that here alluded to.
4. The Betting Public.
The betting public, i.e., those who make a practice of attending race-
meetings for betting purposes, would no doubt be opposed to any
legislation which would diminish racing, as they would feel aggrieved
at its curtailment, seeing that would follow the reduction of the


opportunity and scops of the totting j tut tto answer to that complaint
is that the object for which they attend these meetings is one which
should te discouraged on account of the serious loss the State is now
sustaining under the existing rules of racing.
5. The General Public.
By far the majority of those who attend the respectable class of race-
meetings which take place, do so for the excitement of the racing and
to meet their friends. They seldom bet, but if they do so at all it is
only to the extent of a few shillings ; and it is the interest and comfort
of this class of visitors that the management of race-meetings ought
mainly to study, as it is the people of this class from whom the great
part of the gate-money comes. If their enjoyment were studied, and
legislation of the nature here proposed passed, it is believed that the
attendance at these meetings, instead of falling off would increase, and
the general public would be in no way opposed to legislation. In fact
they would welcome the change, for they would take far more interest
in a-mile-and-a-half or two-mile race than in one of five or six furlongs,
and more interest still if the races were run in heats, while legislation
would restore the superiority of our horses for useful and military
purposes and put their breeding on a paying footing.
As, therefore, the racing and betting men, who would be the only
classes prejudicially affected by legislation of the nature here indicated,
have acknowledged by the bill swhicji they have themselves brought
into Parliament for ths purpose—'as’ its' title provides for among other
things “ to control jierseracing—it is submitted
that the sole questions -jktr dflng&aefrSt'ion lire whether we are to allow
racing any longer to of the racing and
betting men, which I shovprit solely is, under rules which
are leading to the - serious deterioration of our saddle and light-harness
horses, and making the breeding of thoroughbreds a losing speculation;
or whether we are to take such powers by legislation as will prevent
any but stout, long-staying, useful horses from going on the turf, and
thus provide the stamp of sire which will again produce the saddle,
cavalry, and artillery horses for which at one time this State was so
famous.
[With plates.]
Sydney : William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.—-1901.




