

pern
2 4
OUR DEALINGS WITH
Maori Lands;
COMMENTS ON EUROPEAN DEALING'S FOR THE PURCHASE
AND LEASE OF NATIVE LANDS, AND THE
LEGISLATION THEREON.
Jjy JAMES M A CJC AV,
Late Civil Commissioner nor the Colony of New Zealand,
ETC., ETC., ETC.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
JVwc&fcmd:
KIDD A BOOKSELLERS, STATIONERS, AND PUBLISHERS.
MDCCCLXXXVH.


■
*
.


OUE DEALINGS WITH
Maori Lands;
COMMENTS ON EUEOPEAN DEALINGS FOR THE PURCHASE
AND LEASE OF NATIVE LANDS, AND THE
LEGISLATION THEREON.
Sy JA. ME S J£A. ce:a. m,
Late Civil Commissioner for the Colony of New Zealand,
ETC., ETC., ETC.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Jluc&Cans :
KIDD & WILDMAN, BOOKSELLERS, STATIONERS, AND PUBLISHERS.
MDCCCLXXXVII.




OUR DEALINGS WITH MAORI LANDS.
As very considerable dissatisfaction obtains
among those persons of the European race
who daring the last few years have purchased
or leased, or have negotiated for the purchase
or lease of native lands in the North Island
of New Zealand, principally owing to the
conflicting and fluctuating legislation on that
question, and as the present method of deal-
ing with their estates is universally depre-
cated by the Maori people. The disposition
and dealing with native lands, whether
by Government or otherwise, being one
of vital importance to the North Island,
I purpose, to endeavour to show soma
of the causes which have led to the
existing discontent in this matter, I con-
sider it to be the duty of all persons who
have any knowledge of the subject to give
such information as is in their power; in
order that steps may be taken by the Legis-
lature of the colony to enact such measures
as will remove or alleviate the difficulties at
present besetting this important question, In
order to do so, and make things clear to
persons who have recently arrived in the
colony, it is proposed to proceed with it as
follows ;
Firstly.—The Maori tenure of land before
the arrival of Europeans in New Zealand.
Secondly.—European dealings from their
first arrival until 1840, when the law of
England, so far as it was applicable to the
circumstances of the colony, became the law
of New Zealand.
Thirdly.—The system of Government land
purchases from 1840 until 1862, when the
Native Lands Act, 1862, was passed.
Fourthly—The legislation respecting Native
Lands Courts and Lands from 1862 to 1886.
Fifthly.—With measures which might be
enacted to facilitate and simplify the deal-
ings with, and disposition of Native Lands.
It is not my Intention to enter at length
into the subjects included in the three first
heads, but only so far as will make the
whole intelligible to the reader. The other
two will be dealt exhaustively with, as
being what immediately concerns the whole
colony at the present time.
Firstly.—The Maori tenure of land prior to
the arrival and settlement of Europeans in
New Zealand was not of such a vague and
undefined nature as many persons suppose.
There were a number of tribes inhabiting
the country, and the estate of each had
its well-known and established boundary.
Within these great external limits were
subdivisions for each sub-tribe or sept (h&pu)
in the tribe. These boundaries were occa-
sionally varied, altered, or expunged by
conquest in war, and in a few instances by
intermarriages. This latter was not a
general rule, because, according to native
custom, husband and wife were not one
as far as any description of property was
concerned. If a man belonged to one tribe
and his wife to another, ho could reside
with her on her people’s land, and “vice
versa,” but neither acquired any right to the
lands of the other. The children could
occupy the lands of both tribes, but they
always distinguished between that which
they inherited from the male line and that
which accrued to them from the female.
Sometimes an old chief would partition his
lands amongst his children together with
certain hapus. Land was occasionally given
for services rendered in war, or otherwise.
There are a few cases where an actual pur
chase has been made.
In the matter of acquiring land by
conquestlf a tribe was exterminated, or
if nearly annihilated, and the small rem-
nant was captured, they became the slaves
(taurekareka), and the land the absolute
property of the conquerors, the chiefs of
whom would at once proceed to mark
out portions for themselves and their
respective followers. The rule was first come
first served, precisely similar to miners
pegging out claims in a new rush on a gold-
field. One man would put up a pole with a
bunch of feathers on it, another would place
a long stone in the ground for his boundary.
A gentleman who did not like to travel to
the summit of a mountain, and who being of
high rank was very sacred (tapu), would
quietly observe, “that hill is my head.’
On one occasion a chief had been left out in
the scramble, and he went to an adjacent
forest and filled his hair with the berries of
the hinau tree. On rejoining his companions
he shook the berries on to the ground, and
said that is my piece, pointing to the
spot where he had procured them, and that
constituted a good and valid title, and his
descendants own that land to this day. If a
conquest was partial, each party held that
which they occupied ; but this generally pro-
duced further fighting. They both retained
possession until one was strong enough to
conquer or drive the other off. In the case
of the original owners being driven off the
land, and the victors occupying it, and the
fugitives by permission of the party in pos-
session being allowed to return and occupy
a portion of their former holdings, they then
became the vassals (rahi) of the dominant
tribe. They were not body servants, like the
slaves (tau rekareka), but had to perform feudal
service, join in war, paddle the chief’s canoe,
and supply food for tribal meetings. As far
as can be ascertained the lands of a sub-tribe
or sept (hapu) were held in common, and
there were no cases of individual rights or
ownership in land, unless by the death of all
but one of the members of a sub tribe.
There is probably no better illustration of
Maori tenure than that of the Highland
clans before the rebellion of 1745, with this
exception that there were no vassals or slaves
among the Highlanders ; they were all free


men. The Highlander paid no [rent to his
chief, who had no more proprietary right in
the soil than he had. He would aid his
chief in war; but there were cases both
among the Celts and the Maoris where the
head of a powerful sub-tribe or sept (hapu)
declined to join the forces of their acknow-
ledged lord. Then there is another simi-
larity. “Mao” in Scotch means “ son or
offspring of; ” in the Maori the word
“Ngati” has the same signification. For
instance, Mackay—offspring of Kay ; Mac-
donald—of Donald ; Ngatitamatera off-
spring of Tamatera; Ngatitoa —of Toa.
Now, for chiefs we have H-rio Mackay, Lord
Reay, head of the clan Kay, and the sub-
tribes or septs of Scowrie, Bighouse, &o. on
the Highland side, and Taraia Ngakutiof
the Ngatitamatera, and the septs (bapue) of
the Ngati pare of Cape Colville, and the
Ngatitawhake of Ohinemuri, &0., represent-
ing the Maori clan of Tamatera, Pare and
Tawhake being children of Tamatera.
Secondly.—The first Europeans who arrived
in New Zealand with the intention of living
in the country consisted of traders, runaway
sailors, and convicts who had escaped from
Botany Bay. The missionaries came at a
subsequent period. However, all four classes
dealt with Maori lands in much the same
manner—paying for large areas with goods
and articles of small value. But, in justice
to these old pioneers and to the natives, it
must be said that both parties were con-
tented with their bargains, and such a thing
as repudiation was unknown. A chief’s word
was his bond in those dajs. After the
Charter of New Zealand as a British colony,
on the 16th of November, 1840, and its sub-
sequent proclamation as such, these land
claims were investigated by Commissioners
specially appointed for the purpose, and
which though recognised as valid, yet the
most of them were reduced very considerably
in extent; but, strange to relate, the land
thus cut off, or excluded from the claim was
in many instances retained by the Crown,
and not given back to the original Maori
owners. The next and most extensive land
purchase operations were made by an associa-
tion which had been formed in Kngland.
known as the “New Zealand Company,”
for the purpose of acquiring lands in and
colonising New Zealand. Their operations
were, in the first instance, confined to the
country now forming the provincial districts
of Taranaki, Wellington, Nelson, and Marl-
borough, but were subsequently extended to
other portions of the Middle Island. This
company dealt in a more liberal and syste-
matic manner with the natives than the
previous mentioned classes of purchasers.
Their operations were in full swing when
Captain William Hobson, R.N., arrived at
the Bay of Islands as Her Majesty’s Consul,
etc., which brings us to the subjects dealt
with under the third heading.
Thirdly.—ln 1840 the Maori people were
very numerous and warlike, and were well-
supplied with arms and ammunition, and
any attempt to have taken their lands by
force would have resulted in the extermina-
tion of all the Europeans then residing in the
country. Captain Hobson therefore in that
year entered into a treaty, called the Treaty
of Waitangi, with a number of the principal
chiefs of the Northern tribes, at a place
known as Waitangi, at the Bay of Islands,
It was subsequently signed by the Waikato
and several other tribes. This treaty ex-
tended the Queen’s protection to the Maori
people, and guaranteed to conserve to them
all the rights to their lauds, forests,
fisheries, and other property they possessed.
In return the chiefs agreed to cede to the
Queen the sovereignty they possessed over
their respective tribes and people. Also,
that the Crown should have the pre-emptive
right to purchase such lands as the natives
were willing to sell.
New Zealand was thus made a British
colony, but as one of the dependencies of
New South Wales, and Captain Hobson,
8.N., was appointed to be the Lieutenant-
Governor thereof.
The Government, at first, only purchased
sufficient land for their immediate require-
ments in and around Auckland.
In 1842, Captain Wakefield, the agent for
the New Zealand Company at Nelson, and
several influential settlers, were killed by Te
Rauparaha and the Ngatitoa tribe, at Wai-
rau, Marlborough, owing to a dispute about
the purchase of that district by the New
Zealand Company. This was the first Euro-
pean blood shed in connection with the
purchase of land.
In 1846, Sir George Grey, then Governor
of the colony, inaugurated a system of Go-
vernment land purchase, and a very strin-
gent ordinance was enacted by the Governor
and the Legislative Council (November 16,
1846). The preamble is given to show how
determined the Crown were to uphold the
pre-emptive rights which had been acquired
under the “Treaty of Waitangi.”
“An ordinance to provide for the preven-
tion by summary proceedings of unautho-
rised purchases and leases of land.”
PREAMBLE.
“ Whereas, it is essential to both the
peaceable and prosperous colonisation of
New Zealand that the disposal of land
therein should be subject to the control of
the Government of the colony. And to that
end the right of pre-emption in and over all
lands within the colony hath been obtained
by treaty, and vested in Her Majesty, her
heirs, and successors. And all lands
alienated without the sanction of the Crown,
by any person of the native race to any
person not of the same race, do, by virtue of
such alienation, vest In the Crown as part of
the domain lands thereof. And, whereas,
divers persons have, without the sanction of
the Crown, entered into contracts for the
purchase, use, or occupation of lands, which
private contracts are not, and in most cases
cannot, be made with due regard to validity
of title to the land comprised therein, and are
often defective by reason of a want of a clear
understanding by the parties to the contract
of the terms and meaning thereof. And,
whereas, by such secret and irregular pur-
chases, not only is the law sought to be
evaded, but the general tranquillity of the
colony is liable to be seriously endangered.
For the purpose therefore of providing a


speedy and efficient remedy for the evils
aforesaid : Be it enacted by the Lieutenant-
Governor of New Zealand, with the advice
and consent of the Legislative Council
thereof, as follows :
It is unnecessary to give the provisions in
“extenso,” but they were shortly as fol-
lows :
1. Forbidding the purchase or lease of land
or purchase of timber.
2. Forbidding any peison from residing,
or, in any way occupying native land, with*
out being the holder of a license from the
Government.
3. Penalty for infringing the above not
less than £5, or more than £lOO, to be re-
covered in a summary way.
4. If any person continued in occupation
for one calendar month after conviction he
was liable to be fined again as above.
Land Purchase Commissioners were ap-
pointed, the chief of whom was the late
Sir Donald Maclean, and under this
system large areas of land were acquired
by the Crown in various parts of the
Colony. This plan worked pretty well
and smoothly until 1858 (Sir Thomas Gore
Browne was then Governor of the colony),
when complications arose at Taranaki, which
continued until the celebrated interview
took place between the Governor and
Wiremu King! Rangitake about the Waitara
block, which culminated in the first war at
Taranaki in 1860. After this the country
was in a disturbed state for some years, and
Government Land Purchase operations were
virtually suspended. In 1862 a Native
Lands Act was passed by the Legislature,
which brings us to the conclusion of the
third point under review.
Fourthly.—After the conclusion of the
Taranaki war of 1860, many persona (both
European and native) were of opinion
that if there had been any properly
constituted tribunal for the investiga-
tion of the title and claims of natives
to lands, that conflict could have been
averted. The Government then considered
it desirable to enact some measure dealing
with this question, and accordingly The
Native Lands Act, 1862, was passed. This
Act was “reserved for the signification of
Her Majesty’s pleasure thereon,” loth Sept.,
1862. On the 6th June, 1863, Sir George
Grey (then Governor) signed a proclamation
that “ Her Majesty had been pleased to
assent to it.” From this point the former
policy of the Government with reference to
the purchase of native lands was completely
reversed. The Crown relinquished and ab-
rogated the pre-emptive right of purchase,
which it had acquired under the provisions
of the Treaty of Waitangi. It will be re-
membered that document was made between
Queen Victoria on the one part, and certain
Maori chiefs on the other ; and the Legisla-
ture considered the question one of Imperial
policy and importance, or they would not
have inserted a section specially reserving
the Act for the Queen’s assent. Be that as
as it may, one of the contracting parties—
and the stronger one of the two—gave up a
certain right which had been obtained by
Her. This did not, however, release the
Crown from its other liabilities under that
treaty, and they were still bound to protect
the Maoris in undisturbed possession of their
lands, forests, fisheries, and other pro-
perty, It is also a law of nations
that a treaty shall be interpreted in
favour of the weaker party. The Act
will, however, speak for itself, and it is un-
necessary at this stage to make further
comment on it. The preamble is as follows,
viz. :
“Whereas by the Treaty of Waitangi
entered into by and between Her Majesty
and the chiefs of New Zealand, it was, among
other things, declared that Her Majesty
confirmed and guaranteed to the chiefs and
tribes of New Zealand and the respective
families and individuals thereof, the full ex-
clusive and undisturbed possession of their
lands and estates which they collectively or
individually held, so long as it should be
their desire to retain the same. And it was
further declared that the chiefs yielded to
Her Majesty the exclusive right of pre-
emption over such lands as the proprietors
thereof might be disposed to alienate. And
whereas it would greatly promote the peace-
able settlement of the colony and the ad-
vancement and civilisation of the natives if
their rights to land were ascertained, defined,
and declared, and if the ownership of such
when so ascertained, defined, and declared,
were assimilated as nearly as possible to the
ownership of land according to British law.
And whereas with a view to the foregoing
objects Her Majesty may be pleased to waive
in favour of the natives so much of the said
Treaty of Waitangi as reserves to Her
Majesty the right of pre-emption of their
lauds, and to establish courts, and to make
Other provisions for ascertaining and declaring
the rights of the natives to their lands, and
tor otherwise giving effect to the provi-
sions of this Act, and it is expedient that the
General Assembly of New Zealand should
facilitate the said objects by enacting such
provisions as are hereinafter contained.”
It will be necessary to refer shortly to
some of the provisions of this Act.
Section 2 sets forth—“ All lands In New
Zealand over which the native title has not
been extinguished, may save as hereinafter
excepted, and after the respective owners by
native custom of the same shall have been
ascertained as hereinafter provided, be dealt
with and disposed of under the provisions of
this Act.”
Further sections provide for the constitu-
tion of Courts. The appointment of Resident
Magistrates to be presidents of such Courts.
The making of rules for the empanelling of
any jury, and for generally conducting the
business of the Courts. Then for procedure,
the proceedings of the Court to be confirmed
by the Governor, and signified to the Presi-
dent. The Governor to have power to make
reserves, and to make such reserves in-
alienable, subject to such reservation, and
upon the confirmation of the proceedings of
the Court as aforesaid, the President and
members of the Court shall sign and issue a
certificate of title in favour of the tribe,
community, or individuals whose title shall
have been ascertained, defined, and regis-
tered as aforesaid.


By section 15 It was enacted, “ That
where a certificate was issued in favour of
any individual person or persons not being
more than twenty in number, the Governor
may endorse his signature on the certificate,
which, when sealed with the public seal of
the colony, shall have the same force and
effect us a grant in fee simple to the persons
described in the certificate.” Section 17
provides for the disposition of lands thus :
“ The individual person or persons named in
any certificate as the owner or owners
thereof, or as having any particular estate
Or interest therein, may dispose of the in-
terest which he or they may have in the
lands described in such certificate by way of
absolute sale or lease or exchange for other
lands or otherwise to any person or persons
whomsoever.” A duty was payable to the
Crown thus : “ Upon each first sale of land,
after the issue of the certificate or Crown
grant in exchange for the certificate, the
purchaser of the lands then sold shall pay a
duty or sum after the rate of £lO in every
£lOO upon the amount of the consideration
or purchase money of such lands, and upon
each subsequent sale of the same lands the
purchaser thereof shall pay a duty or
sum after the rate of £4 in every £lOO
upon the amount of consideration or pur-
chase money of such lands.” This section
further enacted “ that no transfer or convey-
ance shall be valid until such duty shall
have been paid.” It is unnecessary to make
further quotations from the above-mentioned
Act, it suffices to say that the Crown by it
relinquished their right of pre-emption, and
with the exception of lands reserved for their
benefit, use, and occupation, which were to be
Inalienable, the Maoris could deal with their
lands as they pleased. It may, however, be
mentioned that the Native Lands Act, 1862,
never had a fair trial, as the outbreak of war
at Waikato in 1863 unsettled both Europeans
and natives, and few, if any, titles were in-
vestigated and determined under its provi-
sions. One thing is certain, that it had this
merit, which cannot be claimed by any sub-
sequent law passed respecting native lands,
that it was clear, concise, and easy to
understand ; and instead of being obstructive
in its character, full and free permission was
given to any person to acquire land by pur-
chase, lease, or otherwise, with the single
exception above mentioned.
As if further to show that the natives
were to be placed on the same footing as
British subjects (it may be remembered that
in the preamble to “ The Native Lands Act,
1862,” it is stated that it is desirable that
native title, when ascertained and defined,
should be assimilated as nearly as possible
according to British law”), the Colonial Legis-
lature in 1865 passed “The Native bights
Act, 1865.” It is intituled "an Act to de-
clare that the Maoris shall be deemed to be
natural-born subjects of Her Majesty, and to
declare that the jurisdiction of the Queen’s
courts of law extends over the persons and
properties of all Her Majesty’s subjects
within the colony.”
This Act conferred on the Supreme Court
an original jurisdiction over lands held under
Maori custom. to land “ was to
be determined according to the ancient cus*
tom and usage of the Maori people so
far as the same can be ascertained.” In
actions involving questions of Maori title
to, or interests in land, the Judge be-
fore whom the case was tried “ shall direct
any issue or issues to be tried by the Native
Lands Court, and the Judge of the Native
Lands Court before whom the same shall be
tried, shall return the verdict or judgment,
as the case may be, into the Supreme Court,
and such verdict or judgment shall be taken
as conclusive, both as to fact and as to Maori
custom or usage, and shall be dealt with by
the Supreme Court in the same manner, and
shall have the same effect as the verdict of
a jury in the Supreme Court.” This Act is
still law, but I am unable to cite any case to
which it has been applied.
Luring the session of 1865, further legisla-
tion on native lands was enacted by the pass-
ing of “The Native Lands Act, 1865.” This
repealed “The Native Land Purchase Ordin-
ance, session 7,” No. 19, hereinbefore alluded
to, “The Intestate Natives Succession Act,
1861,” “The Native Lands Act, 1862,” and
“The Native Lands Act Amendment Act,
1864. ” It was Intituled “An Act to Amend
and Consolidate the Laws relating to Lands in
the Colony in which the Maori Proprietary
Customs still exist, and to provide for the as-
certainment of the Titles to such Lands, and
for Regulating the Descent thereof, and for
other purposes.”
This Act provided more extensive and
complicated machinery for the investigation
of Native title to lands than that of 1862.
A Chief Judge, Judges, and Assessors
were appointed under it. The certificate of
title ceased to be endorsed by the Governor,
but on it being forwarded to him “it was law-
ful for him to cause a grant from the Crown
to be made and issued under the public seal
of the Colony, of the lands comprised in the
certificate to the persons named therein for
the estate or interest therein described or
mentioned, and if the certificate shall have
been accompanied with any such recommen-
dation (to make the land inalienable, or
other conditions) of the Court as aforesaid,
it shall be lawful for the Governor to insert
in the grant any such restrictions on aliena-
bility, limitations, or conditions, or some
of them, as may be expressed in such recom-
mendation.”
The above section gave the Crown a greater
power than was conferred under the Native
Lands Act, 1862, By it the Governor had
authority to make restrictions in the case of
native reserves only. In the Act of 1862
the restrictions were for the benefit of the
natives alone, but in that of 1865 restrictions
could be recommended by the Court without
consulting the natives ; and it might not be
difficult to find a few instances where land
has been made inalienable because of its
value for public purposes—the Crown having
no power under these Acts to take land for
such objects, excepting for roads only.
In the Act of 1865 a very material altera-
tion was made in the matter of certificates of
title, the section (23) referring to them is as
follows :—“ At such sitting of the Court,
the Court shall ascertain by such evidence as


it shall think fit, the right, title, estate, or
interest of the applicant, and all other
claimants to or in the land, respecting which
notice shall have been given as aforesaid, and
the Court shall order a certificate of title to
be made and issued, which certificate shall
specify the names of the persons, or of the
tribe, who according to native custom own or
are interested in the land, describing the
natureof such estate or interest and describing
the land comprised in such certificate, or the
Court may in its discretion refuse to order a
certificate to issue to the claimant or any
other person, provided always that no cer-
tificate shall be ordered to more than ten
persons. Provided further that if the piece
of land adjudicated upon shall not exceed
five thousand acres such certificate may not
be made In favour of a tribe by name.”
Now the Act of 1862 provided that a cer-
tificate could be issued “In favour of any
persona not being more in number than
twenty,” and as under its provisions It was
competent to issue tribal certificates which
could at any time be subdivided, it is quite
fair to assume that where the number of
owners exceeded twenty that it was in-
tended a “tribal certificate” should be
ordered. By the Act of 1865 the Native
Lands Court is directed to “ascertain the
right, title, estate, or Interest of the appli
cant and all other claimants,” and further
enacts that the Court shall order a certificate
of title which shall specify the names of the
persons who own or are interested in such
land, etc. After taking all this trouble the
number was to be narrowed down to ten
unless they owned upwards of 5000 acres.
If they possessed an area in excess of that
quantity they could then obtain a tribal
certificate, but not otherwise. This cer-
tainly is a most extraordinary provision, and
not as farseeing or reaching in that respect
as the Act of 1862.
This section has done incalculable injury to
private purchasers of native lands, and has
inflicted gross injustice and robbery on
numerous persons of the Maori race, and has
been a fruitful source of ruinous litigation.
For instance, on the investigation of the
title to a block of land, say containing four
thousand nine hundred acres, it was found
there were four septs (hapus) of a tribe
entitled to the land, the aggregate number
of persons composing the same being sixty,
the Court then gave its decision accordingly,
and requested the natives to select the names
of ten of such owners to be placed in the
certificate. This being done, the title issued
in due course, leaving fifty of the acknow-
ledged owners out in the cold. It may be
said, “ Well, that is all right, the ten are
trustees for the other fifty but such was
not the case either in law or in fact. Others
will probably ask, “But why did not they
apply for four certificates, with ten names in
each. There was provision in the Act for
that?” The answer to this question is very
plain—namely, that the Maoris at that time
knew nothing of the working of the Native
Lands Act, as it was entirely new to them,
and neither the Court, or the would-be pur-
chasers enlightened them on the subject:
the former because the majority of the
Judges had a noted aversion to “ subdivisions
of hereditaments,” on account of the large
amount of trouble involved in investigating
and deciding such cases ; the latter, as the
fewer natives to deal with the better for them.
The Maoris who had been excluded from the
certificate speedily became acquainted with
one phase of the case. The ten men who
should have been trustees, in most instances
treated the estate as if it was their sole pro-
perty, and sold or leased it and pocketed the
proceeds, ignoring the other owners who had
as much right to the consideration money as
themselves. In a few cases the ten certifi-
cated owners behaved honourably to their
people, but these were the exception and
not the rule. The Government system of
purchase under the repealed Land Purchase
Ordinance of 1840, was greatly superior to
this, as far as the tribe was concerned, as
the money was paid at large public meetings
of natives, and although the Commissioner
might hand it to the principal chief, It was
almost invariably fairly divided among the
owners ; in fact, many participated In the
proceeds of sales whose claims would not now
be recognised by the Native Lands Court,
It is therefore not difficult to arrive at the
conclusion that the natives soon became
highly dissatisfied and disgusted with the
new land law.
By the Act of 1865 the duties payable to
the Crown were altered, and confined to pay-
ing on the first disposal of the land by sale or
lease a sum of ten pounds per centum on
the consideration or purchase money paid on
a conveyance in fee simple, and on the
amount of rent in each year (reserved)
in the lease. The provision contained in
the Act of 1862, for paying four pounds per
centum on the consideration for subsequent
dealings with the same land was dropped.
Before concluding the question about the
ten certificated owners or grantees it may
be expedient to direct attention to some of
the provisions of an Act passed in the last
session oi Parliament, styled “The Native
Equitable Owners Act, 1886,” which sets
forth in the preamble thereto that “ Whereas
under ‘ The Native Lands Act, 1865, ’
certificates of title and Crown grants of
certain lands were made in favour of or to
natives nominally as absolute owners. And
whereas in many oases such natives are only
entitled and were only intended to be clothed
with title as trustees for themselves and
others, members of their tribe or hapu or
otherwise. Be it therefore enacted by the
General Assembly of New Zealand, in Parlia-
ment assembled, and by the authority of the
same, as follows
Section 2. Upon the application of any
native claimant to be beneficially interested in
any land as aforesaid, the Native Land Court
of New Zealand may make inquiry into the
nature of the title to such land, and into the
existence of any intended trust affecting the
title thereto.
3, According to the result of such inquiry,
the Court may declare that no such trust
exists, or if it finds that any such trust does
or was intended to exist, then it may declare
who are the persons beneficially entitled.
4. The Court may thereupon make order
that the persons so declared entitled to such
beneficial ownership shall be owners as


tenants in common of the land, the subject
of such trust, and they shall be deemed to
be such owners in like manner as if their
names had been inserted in the certificate or
grant affecting such land.
5. The foregoing enactments shall not ap-
ply where the land the subject of such cer-
tificate or Crown Grant as aforesaid or any
share therein has heretofore been sold or con-
veyed by such nominal owners or any of
them or their successors, but this exception
shall not apply to lands in the South Island
portions whereof have been disposed of to
the Government. Provided always that no
native claimant shall have any claim on the
Government or be allowed to question the
title of the Government to any land pur-
chased by it. Where land subject to this
Act is also subject to a lease for an unexpired
term of years, any order made as aforesaid
shall not prejudice the estate or term of the
lessee, but the lessee, after notice of such
order, shall pay any rent to accrue, due
under his lease, to the Public Trustee, whose
receipt shall be a good discharge for the
same. Such rent shall be paid out to and
among the parties beneficially entitled in ac-
cordance with any partition or determination
of interests as aforesaid.
It is improbable that many cases will be
brought forward under the statute above
alluded to, as a very large proportion of the
lands granted under the Act of 1865 have
been sold. It is also very doubtful whether
any advantage which may accrue from this
ex post facto legislation, is equivalent to
the mischief which may be done by educat-
ing the natives up to the Idea that titles
derived from the Crown are not worth the
parchment they are written on, and can
be set aside by the same tribunal which
created them. A Maori can understand
a final decision, but if he finds there
are any legal loopholes he will endeavour
to squeeze through them. In the old days
of Government land purchase if a native was
aggrieved at the action of the District Com-
missioner he would appeal to the Chief
Commissioner, and was generally satisfied
with his ruling, but in some instances nothing
would please him but personally interview-
ing the Governor on the question, after which
the matter would be dropped. Another great
disadvantage of interfering with existing
titles granted by the Crown is that European
capitalists are now very chary about invest-
ing in estates which have been acquired
under any law affecting native lands. It
will be observed that the Crown are very
careful to guard themselves against the
outside owner being able to make any claim
upon them or to question their title. Why
do not they extend the same protection to
the Europeans who have purchased from the
ten certificated owners or grantees ? In the
case of an existing lease, and the lessee
having a right to a renewal thereof, his
position may be found to be very difficult
from the importation of additional landlords
into the question, who, it is highly probable,
would be antagonistic to the original lessors.
The lessee is not to blame in the matter ;
the law allowed him to take a lease from the
ten ostensible owners,and if anyonels culpable
it Is the Crown, and they ought to uphold
the legal rights of purchasers and lessees ;
and if any natives have been wronged by
defective laws the Government should give
compensation for such grievances, but should
refrain from upsetting existing grants and
titles.
Another subject which demands some
attention is the manner In which we taught
the natives to repudiate agreements entered
into in good faith between themselves and
Europeans. It bad been the custom for
Europeans to enter into agreements for the
purchase and lease of lands, and to make
advances in money thereon previous to the
investigation of the title, or the issue of a
certificate of title, for the same. For a long
time good faith was maintained on both sides,
and when the Court made the order for a
certificate, the balance of the purchase money
or rent was paid over to the natives, who exe-
cuted the conveyance or lease, as the case
might be. Unscrupulous persons, who were
desirous of ousting the original nego-
tiator, told the natives that, under
the various Native Lands Acts, such
“ agreements were absolutely void, and
that no action could be maintained for the
recovery of any moneys or other considera-
tion paid or given thereon.” The natives,
finding this to be true, had no scruple in
ignoring agreements and payments on ac-
count ; and, having acquired this know-
ledge, they next proceeded to attempt
to upset conveyances and leases which
had been executed subsequent to the
issue of certificates of title, memorials of
ownership, or Crown grants. A person
advancing moneys to natives before the in-
vestigation of the title to land ran a con-
siderable risk of paying the wrong owners,
or of having numbers to deal with in addition
to those to whom he had already made ad-
vances whensoever the title was settled.
He might also lie out of his money for years
before it was possible to complete his con-
veyance or lease ; and it only appears reason-
able that, after running all the risk, and
expending an enormous amount of time and
trouble, he should be allowed to conduct his
operations to a successful issue without the
law authorising a system of repudiation.
Any person in the slightest degree acquainted
with the question of native land purchases
knows full well but for the system
of prior advances and agreements the area
of land the title to which has been investi-
gated, and which has been conveyed and
leased, would not have attained to Its pre-
sent large proportions ; and large tracts, now
occupied and Improved, would have still re-
mained native land. Before surveys could
be made or titles decided some person had
to negotiate and advance money, as the
natives were powerless to do so themselves
from want of the necessary funds ; and pur-
chases generally commenced by the natives
requesting a European to advance money for
survey purposes, which subsequently ended
in a purchase or lease.
In 1867 an addition to “The Native Lands
Act, 1865,” was passed,known as “The Native
Lands Act, 1867.” It repealed or amended
seme clauses of the former measure. The
most important change, and which is more
immediately connected with the sale and
lease of native land, is the radical alteration


made in the matter of * ‘ Certificates of Title
whereas by the statute of 1865 the names of
ten persons only could be inserted in a certi-
ficate of title ; under the provisions of that
of 1867 cognisance could be taken of the
claims of any number of persons. By re-
ferring to section 17 of that Act it will be
seen that, after providing that the interests
of all persons, whether they have put in a
claim or not, shall be ascertained by the
Court, it further enacts that: “Provided
that when it shall appear to the Court, upon
such inquiry, that any persons more than
ten in number, or that any tribe or hapu are
interested in such land, and that such per-
sons, tribe, or hapu so interested consent
that a certificate in favour of persons should
be ordered to issue to certain of the persons
interested therein, not exceeding ten in
number, in such case a certificate may, at
the discretion of the Court, be ordered to
be issued to such last-mentioned persons;
and the Court shall cause to be registered in
the Court the names of all the persons inte-
rested in such land, including those named in
the certificate, and the particulars of the inte-
rests of all such persons ; and in the certificate
to be issued in such cases, there shall be a
recital that the certificate is issued under
this section of this Act, and no portion of
the land comprised in such certificate shall,
until it shall have been subdivided as herein-
after provided, be alienated by sale, gift,
mortgage, lease, or otherwise, except by
lease for a term not exceeding twenty-one
years, and no such lease shall contain or be
made subject to any proviso, agreement, or
condition for the renewal thereof.” This
section further provides for a subdivision of
the land comprised in the certificate, if the
persons interested, or a majority of them,
make application to the Court in that
behalf. It is a very peculiar circumstance
that, while under the Act of 1865 the ten
persons named In the certificate had the
absolute right to dispose of the land in any
manner they pleased, to the injury of the
people they represented, yet, when the
names of all the persons interested in the
land are inserted, either in the certificate of
title or in the Court register, they are not
allowed to sell it, or to lease it, for any term
exceeding twenty-one years. Presumably it
was enacted on account of the wrongs done
in the cases where, under the Act of 1865,
only ten names appeared in the certificate of
title ; but why was the restriction on alien-
ability added ?
The ten persons named in the certificate
in many instances leased the land to Euro-
peans, and the “registered owners” were
not consulted in the matter. The ten
“ certificated owners ” received the rent from
the lessee, and generally put it in their own
pockets, and did not account to the other
persons interested for their shares of it.
Occasionally, though very rarely, the “ cer-
tificated owners ” might be found acting
honourably in the matter, and dividing the
rents fairly among all the parties interested.
The result of the working of the 17th section
of the Act of 1867 was very unsatisfactory ;
and there were interested and unscrupulous
persons of the European race who endea-
voured to persuade the “Registered Owners ”
that they could upset leases made under its
provisions, on the ground that those instru-
ments should have been executed by all the
owners, whether their names were in the
certificate or on the “Court Register,” and
that they could compel the lessee to pay rent
to them, and that there were good grounds
for actions in the Supreme Court against such
lessee. If it had been the intention of the Le-
gislature that the ten “ Certificated Owners ”
should not have the power to lease the land,
they would have inserted a proviso “ that no
lease should be valid without the consent of
all the owners thereto.” The Supreme Court
and the Court of Appeal have decided that a
lease made by the ten owners is good in law,
and if they fail to pay to the “ Registered
Owners” their fair proportion of the rent,
the latter have their remedy against them,
but not against the lessee. If there is any
doubt on this point, it should be set at rest
forthwith by legislation, because the cases
affected thereby are very numerous, and
highly valuable and important interests are
at stake.
Between 1867 and 1873 a large area of land
was leased under the provisions of section 17
of the Native Lands Act, 1867, but in 1873 a
Native Lands Act was passed which repealed
the former statute. The new law came into
operation on the Ist January, 1874. The
preamble was as follows, viz. :
“ Whereas it is highly desirable to estab-
lish a system by which the natives shall be
enabled at a less cost to have their surplus
land surveyed, their titles thereto ascertained
and recorded, and the transfer and dealings
relating thereto facilitated. And whereas it
is of the highest importance that a roll should
be prepared of the native land throughout
the colony, showing as accurately as possible
the extent and ownership thereof, with a
view of assuring to the natives without any
doubt whatever a suffioienoy of their land
for their support and maintenance, as also
for the purpose of establishing endowments
for their permanent general benefit.”
After authorising the appointment of
judges and assessors, a new feature was in-
troduced by creating District Officers, who
were to make certain inquiries and report to
the Chief Judge thereon. But in accordance
with all previous experience in native affairs,
the administrative branch of the Native
Department, and the Native Land Court
Judges did not work amicably, or in concert
together, and in a short time district officers
virtually ceased to act. It was also provided
that the judge should make preliminary
inquiries with a view to ascertaining whether
the application to bring the land under the
Act was in accordance with the wishes of
the ostensible owners thereof. No attempt
was ever made to give effect to this provision,
and it became a dead letter. Another
departure from the principles of the Acts of
1862, 1865, and 1867 was the substituting
memorials of ownership for certificates of
title. The sections relating thereto are as
under :
47. After the inquiry shall have been
completed, the court shall cause to be in-
scribed on a separate folium in the court
rolls, a memorial of ownership in the form
No, 1 of the schedule hereto, giving the name


and description of the land adjudicated upon,
and declaring the names of all the persona
who have been found to be the owners there-
of, or are thenceforward to be regarded as
the owners thereof under any voluntary
arrangement, as above mentioned (section 46
made provision for the Court adopting
arrangements voluntarily come to amongst
themselves by the claimants and counter-
claimants) and of their respective hapu, and
in each case (when so required by the
majority in number of the owners) the
amount of the proportionate share of each
owner. Every such memorial shall have
drawn thereon or annexed thereto a plan of
the land comprised therein, founded on the
map approved as hereinafter mentioned, and
signed by the Judge and sealed with the seal
of the Court.
48, To every such memorial there shall be
annexed the following condition, namely,
that the owners of the piece of land referred
to in such memorial have not power to sell
or make any other disposition of the said
land, except that they may lease the same
for any term not exceeding 21 years in pos-
session, and not in reversion without fine,
premium, or foregift, and without agreement
or covenant for renewal or for purchase at a
future time.
49. Nothing, however, in the foregoing
conditions annexed to any memorial of
ownership shall be deemed to preclude any
tale of the land comprised in such memorial
where all the owners of such land agree to
the sale thereof, or to prevent any partition
of such land in manner hereinafter provided
if required.
62. No lease of any land held under memo-
rial of ownership shall be valid unless all the
owners of the land comprised in such lease
shall assent thereto, and the Court shall
satisfy itself in every case of lease of the
fairness and justice of the transaction, of the
rents to be paid, and assent of all the owners
to such lease; such leases shall be signed by
all the owners in the manner hereinafter
providsd in respect of the signing of deeds
and instruments.
63. In any case of a proposed sale or lease
of land, held under memorial of ownership,
if the Court shall find that all the owners
are not desirous to sell or lease the said land,
but that there are dissentients thereto, the
Court shall ascertain the number of such
last-mentioned persons ; and if the Court
shall find that the majority of the owners in
either case are desirous that a subdivision of
the land shall be made between them, then
in every such case the Court may cause a
partition of the whole land to be made into
two aggregate allotments proportioned to the
interests of those who wish to sell or lease,
and of those who dissent, and shall award the
same as the Court shall think just, one of
these allotments to the dissentients, the
other to the intending sellers or lessors, and
thereafter the Court shall proceed in further
matter of the particular sale or lease as herein-
before provided.
97. After the passing of this Act no land
comprised in any certificate of title heretofore
issued under the seventeenth section of “ The
Native Lands Act, 1867,” shall, until it shall
have been subdivided and awarded, be alien-
ated by sale, gift, or mortgage, lease, or
otherwise, except in accordance with the
provisions of this Act: Provided that it shall
be lawful for the persons found by the Court
to be interested, or for any of them to apply
to the Court to subdivide the land comprised
in such certificate, and thereupon the Court
shall have such and the same power as it has in
cases of partition in the case of dissentients
to any sale or lease as hereinbefore provided,
and a subdivision may be ordered notwith-
standing that a lease or leases of such land or
some part thereof may have been heretofore
made ; but no award of partition in such case
shall take effect during the subsistence of any
lease of the land comprised in such award.
98. All lands comprised in any such certifi-
cate issued as last aforesaid respecting which
no conveyance, lease, mortgage, or contract
has been made, may be dealt with in the
like manner as land held under memorial of
ownership under this Act: Provided that
land comprised in any such certificate res-
pecting which any dealings may have hereto-
fore been had, may be dealt with in the like
manner as land held under memorial of owner-
ship under this Act; but only in the case that
in every dealing with such laud the patties
to such transactions shall satisfy the Court
that they have the assent of all the persons
whose names are endorsed on the certificate
as well as the assent of those named on the
face of the certificate to any such transac-
tion.
It will be seen by the above recited clauses
that lands held under certificate of title issued
in accordance with the provisions of the 17th
section of the Act of 1867 are assimilated to
the position of lands held under the memorial
of ownership provided for by the Act of 1873,
with this exception, that in the case of dis-
sentients to a proposed sale or lease of lands
held under memorial of ownership, a majority
of the owners must apply for a subdivision or
partition of such lands ; whereas, in the case
of the persons holding by a certificate issued
under the provisions of the above quoted
seventeenth section any of them can apply
for a subdivision (see section 97 above).
The reason why this difference of procedure
under the same Act should exist is not ap-
parent.
Another conflict takes place in the provi-
sions of sections 48 and 49. The first abso-
lutely forbids any dealings with land held
under memorial of ownership except by
lease for a term not exceeding twenty-one
years. The last sets forth that nothing how-
ever in the foregoing condition shall be
deemed to preclude the sale of the land
comprised in such memorial where all the
owners of such lands agree to the sale there-
of.
In the preamble to the Act of 1873 it is
announced among other things, that it is
highly desirable . . . that the transfer
and dealings relating thereto (land) he facili-
tated. It must be borne in mind that any
number of names could be inserted in a
memorial of ownership, and that, in fact,
such documents have been issued containing
several hundred names for one piece of land,
and instances can be adduced where the
persons representing such interests are scat


tered throughout the country extending
from the East Cape to Wairarapa and inland
to Lake Taupo. Now it is utterly impossi-
ble to bring dll these natives together to
assent to any sale or lease. The Act of 1873
could not have been drawn by any person
acquainted with native land purchase trans-
actions, not only for the above, but for other
reasons. Some natives included in a
memorial might be Hauhaus or Kingites,
and nothing would induce them to agree
to any sale or lease of the land.
Others might wish to reserve their shares for
their families ; and several might object to
the price offered or the amount of rent pay-
able. On the Act being brought into opera-
tion it was found to be utterly unworkable.
The Judges did not attempt to make the
preliminary inquiries required by the Act,
because they had no power or machinery for
calling the natives together for that object.
The district officers ceased to act; and the
Native Lands Court made subdivisions of
lands sold or leased, without the assent of all
the persons interested therein. Such was the
position of affairs ; and the provisions of the
Act of 1873 were so conflicting that it was
understood that the Chief Judge would not
sign any memorials of ownership ordered
under its provisions, until the Native
Minister guaranteed that the discrepancies
and irregularities should be set right by
further legislation. In the case of a pro-
posed sale or lease, provision is made for a
subdivision of the interests of dissentients
thereto. It is somewhat strange that it did
not occur to the person who drew that sec-
tion (and who, in the preamble, deemed it
to be highly desirable that the transfer and
dealings relating to land should be facili-
tated), that there might be some dissentients
to a conveyance or lease which had been
partly executed; or that a purchaser or
lessee, having acquired all the interests he
could, might desire to secure them by obtain-
ing a subdivision.
Until 1873, the duties on sales, and lease 8
of native lands were levied under the
Native Lands Acts, but in that year “ The
Native Land Duties Act ” was passed. The
duties were the same as in the Native Lands
Acts, viz., £lO per centum where the estate
is an interest in fee simple ; and in respect
of any lease a duty or sum in each year
equal to £lO per centum yearly upon the
aggregate amount of rent payable for each
and every year of the lease. A new pro-
vision was introduced in respect to “ duties
in arrears and still remaining unpaid, ’
“ that over and above such amount of duty,
a further sum by way of interest calculated
at the rate of £lO per centum per annum
upon the amount of such doty in arrear,
from the day on which any such duty be-
came due and payable.” The above Act was
repealed by “ The Stamp Act, 1875, Amend-
ment Act, 1881,” and the duties have since
been payable under the Stamp Act. This
question will be considered separately in an-
other portion of the pamphlet, but it was
deemed necessary to allude to it here in
order to show its severance from the Native
Lands Act.
As before stated, subdivisions were fre-
quently made by the Court without
all the owners of the land assenting thereto,
because it was found impossible to comply
with the provisions of the Act of 1873 in that
respect ; and in 1878, in an amendment Act,
the following section appears :
11. “Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary thereto in “ The Native Land Act,
1873,” or any amendments thereto, it shall be
lawful for the Court in its discretion, on the
application of any native owner or other
person interested therein, to hear and deter-
mine the value or extent of any estate or
interest in any land held by such applicant
under memorial of ownership or Crown grant,
or award or conveyance ; and if it shall deem
fit to make an order vesting any part or
portion of such land in such applicant.”
Here, again, we have an enactment dia-
metrically opposed to the policy of the Act
of 1873. That Act provides “that a sale
can be effected if all the persons interested
in the land assent to such sale.” By this
section it would appear that individual
interests had been acquired, or the shares of
a portion of the owners, and the Legislature
gave the Court the power to deal with such
cases. This section should have gone further,
and validated all purchases of individual
interests acquired up to the passing of the
Amendment Act of 1878, provided that such
purchases passed the Trust Commissioner
appointed under “The Native Land Frauds
Prevention Act,” and declared that for the
future the assent of all the owners to a sale
or lease was unnecessary.
Such a proceeding would have quieted
many titles, removed ambiguity in the law,
and prevented numerous costly lawsuits.
In 1880 “The Native Lands Court Act,
1880,” was passed ; among other provisions
it was enacted by section 70, that “So much
of‘The Native Land Act, 1873,’as is re-
pugnant to this Act is hereby repealed—pro-
vided that a certificate of title issued under
this Act shall have the same force and effect,
and may be dealt with as a memorial of owner-
ship under ‘ The Native Laud Act, 1873.’ ”
The above statute contained no provisions
respecting the sale or lease of land—it princi-
pally related to the procedure of the Native
Land Court, but why certificates of title
were substituted for memorials of ownership
is not apprrent ? except it was from a mere
desire to alter the existing law, and cause
confusion as to the name of the Maori instru-
ment of title.
In 1882 “ The Native Lands Acts Amend-
ment Act, 1882,” was passed. It contained
the following important section
7. “And whereas claims to lands have been
heard and decided, or partly decided, and
proceedings have been taken by the Native
Land Court under “The Native Land Act,
1873,” and its amendments, in which sundry
provisions of the said Acts have not been
technically complied with.
“Be it enacted thaton the applicationof my
person interested either originally or deriva-
tively in any such land, it shall be lawful for
the Court to inquire into the matter and
make such order respecting the same as shall
appear to the Court justly to remedy any
mistake or any error in the proceedings.


“An endorsement made by the Court on any
such order or on any instrument of disposi-
tion shall be valid and effectual for effecting
the objects specified in such order, and an
entry shall be made in the Registry of the
Land Transfers and the Registry of Deeds
Offices to the effect that such orders have
been made.”
It may be assumed that this provision was
intended to be made to cover, amend, and
legalise certain acts of omission and commis-
sion.
Firstly : For the very imperfect perform-
ance of their duties by the District Officers.
Secondly : The Judges never having made
any of the preliminary inquiries as directed
by the Act,
Thirdly : For Europeans having made pur-
chases of shares or interests in land without
having the assent of all the owners to the
same.
Fourthly: For the Court having made
orders for subdivisions of lands without the
assent of all or of a majority of the persons
interested therein.
Now, whether such proceedings or non-
proceedings, contrary to the text and mean-
ing of the statute, can be classed as a non-
compliance with technicalities is very doubt-
ful, Taking the above-quoted section for
what it is worth, it evidently refers
more to dealings for the purchase or lease
of lands than to any other question. Un-
der “ The Native Lands Act, 1873,” a person
who had purchased the interests of all the
owners could apply to the Court for an
order vesting the land comprised in the
memorial in him under freehold tenure. If
this was given the Judge would recommend
the issue of a Crown Grant to the purchaser,
and there would be no occasion to make an
entry in the Registry of the Land Transfers
and the Registry of Deeds offices that such
an order had been made; consequently the
above recited section must be deemed to
apply to cases where a person had purchased
certain interests in a block of land but not
all, and was unable to register his deeds be-
cause of not having the assent of all the
persons named in the memorial of ownership.
The Court then has to inquire into the merits
of the case and make such order respecting
the same as shall appear to the Court justly
to remedy any mistake or any error in the
proceedings. Then when the Court endorses
the instrument of disposition, it can be regis-
tered. If this view is correct, it tends again
to show, in despite of anything to the con-
trary in the Act of 1873, that purchases of
shares less than the whole of those comprised
in a memorial of ownership were made, and
orders of partition of such interests were
granted by the Court.
By “The Native Land Division Act, 1882,’’
it was enacted, among other things, as fol-
lows :
Section 2. “ This Act shall apply to all
lands title to which is derived through the
Native Land Court, and to all lands title to
which is derived through “ The Poverty Bay
Grants Act, 1869,” or to any Act amending
same, or making further provision in refer-
ence thereto, and shall not apply to any
native reserve.”
Section 4. “If any native grantee shall be
desirous that division shall be made of the
land included in his grant, or of any part
thereof, he may apply to the Court to
make such provision ; and the Court may
proceed thereupon, and may order a defined
portion of the land to be granted to the ap-
plicant ; or, if it shall appear to the Court
that a majority in number desires that a
division of the whole should be made, the
Court may order such division as it shall
deem just, and may order grants to be issued
accordingly.”
“ (1.) The Court may orderinany such grant
any conditions,restrictions, or limitations, even
in cases where the original grant was not sub-
ject to any such, or in extension or enlarge-
ment thereof if any such there were, and
may order such new grants, or any of them,
without any conditions, restrictions, or
limitations, although the original grant may
have been subject to such.”
Further provision is made for the surrender
of original grants, such surrender having the
same effect as a repeal by scire facias. If
such grant or other instrument of title is not
produced at the hearing by the Court, it has
power to declare such grant or other instru-
ment of title to be null and void.
Section 10. “ Land held by natives under
the Land Transfer Acts may mutatis
mutandis be similarly dealt with, and new
certificates of title under the said Acts may
be similarly issued
“Lands held by natives under memorial of
ownership, or certificate of title under “The
Native Land Court Act, 1880,” may mutatis
mutandis be similarly dealt with. Provided
that the new instruments of title shall be
Crown grants, or certificates under the Land
Transfer Acts.
“Lands held by natives under the seven-
teenth section of “The Native Lands Act,
1867,” may be similarly dealt with mutatis
mutandis, but in these cases all the persons
registered as owners, or their representatives
as aforesaid if dead, shall be treated as owners
in the division, though an application shall
be sufficient if made by a majority of those
named in the body of the certificate, or their
representatives as aforesaid.”
Section eleven provides for subdivision of
lands granted to a tribe or hapu by name.
Any persons claiming to belong to the tribe,
not less than five in number, may apply to
the Court for a subdivision. The proceedings
being the same otherwise as in section ten.
Section 12, “ Any person who, before the
passing of this Act, has acquired an undi-
vided share in any land granted to natives,
or any estate or interest therein, may apply
to have his estate or interest defined, and
thereupon the Court may order a defined
portion of the block to be granted to him
proportionate to the value of the estate or
interest acquired.
“ Proceedings may be taken for perfecting
his title thereto in manner before set forth
for dividing land granted to natives mutatis
mutandis. If the estate acquired is a lease-
hold, the Court may define a portion of the
block to which the lease shall thereafter
solely apply, and shall endorse a description


and plan of such portion on the lease. The
endorsement shall be signed by a Judge, and
sealed with the seal of the court, and the
lease shall then cease to have any application
to any portion of the block other than that
contained in the description and plan.”
The wording of section 4, above quoted, is
rather ambiguous. One person can apply to
have his share or part of his share or interest
subdivided or partitioned, but if a subdivi-
sion of the whole block is required the appli-
cation must apparently be made by a majority
in number of those interested therein. This
also conflicts with section 11 of “The Native
Lands .Act Amendment Act 1878,” which is
as follows: —“Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary thereto in ‘The Native Lands Act
1873,’ or any amendment thereto, it shall be
lawful for the court in its discretion, on the
application of any owner or other person in-
terested therein, to hear and determine the
value or extent of any estate or interest in
any land held by such applicant under memo-
rial of ownership or Crown grant, or award
or conveyance, and if it shall deem fit
to make an order vesting any part or portion
of such land in such applicant.”
The investigation of the value or extent
of any interest would necessitate the hearing
of every person interested in the block,
and the effect would generally be to cause
a subdivision of the whole, consequently the
application or desire of the majority would
be a matter of little importance. The
part of section 10 above recited, referring to
lands held by certificate, issued under the
seventeenth section of “The Native Land Act,
1867,” traverses the ninety-seventh section of
“ The Native Land Act, 1873,” which provides
with respect to such lands, “ that it shall be
lawful for the persons found by the Court to
be interested, or for any of them, to apply
to the Court to subdivide the land comprised
in such certificate.” Whereas that now under
consideration enacts that an application shall
be sufficient if made by a majority of those
named in the body of the certificate.
In 1883, Parliament passed “The Native
Land Laws Amendment Act, 1883.” Among
other things it enacted, that “No person
shall in any case be permitted to appear in
Court by, or to have the assistance therein
of, any counsel, solicitor, agent, or other
representative.
“ Provided that, if it is shown to the
Court that any party to the proceeding is,
through age, sickness, or infirmity, or
through unavoidable absence, unable to ap-
pear, or if appearing is incompetent to con-
duct his case, such person may, in
the discretion of the Court, be al-
lowed to appear by a native.” The
above section was a means of frequently
inflicting injustice on the natives. For in-
stance, many an old chief, shrewd enough to
take his own part in a Maori meeting
or runanga, but unacquainted with the
proceedings of our Courts, has been pitted
against a well educated young Maori, and
although having a good claim, has been
w orsted in the investigation of the title.
If inquiry were made, numerous examples
could be found of cases in which a clever
native has been engaged and put forward to
conduct qlaims in the Court, and appear as
one of the claimants or counter claimants
when he had not a particle of title or right
to the land the subject of investigation.
Surely the above section was an infringe-
ment of “ The Native Rights Act, 1865,” as
British subjects have the right to appear by
counsel in any proceeding in any Court of
Law.
By the above Act of 1883, a person could
not deal for any “native land” until after
the expiration of the time allowed for a
re-hearing (three months), and a further
term of forty days. Before the passing of
this Act, it had been customary to commence
the execution of instruments of title imme-
diately after the Court bad made its order
for the issue of a certificate of title or a
memorial of ownership. The following
section, which inflicts a very heavy penalty
for its contravention, is a prominent and
remarkable feature in this Act,
Section 8. “ Any person who on his own
behalf, or as agent or trustee for any
other person, shall after the passing of this
Act, and before the day to be so fixed as
aforesaid, take or accept any conveyance,
lease, transfer, gift, or other assurance from
any native, whether to himself solely, or to
himself and others of any native land, or
be a parly to any negotiation, agree-
ment, contract, or promise for the making to
him or to him and others, or to any other
person of any such conveyance, lease, trans-
fer, gift, or other assurance shall forfeit and
pay a penalty not exceeding £5OO, to be
recovered in a summary way. And every
such conveyance, lease, transfer, gift, and
other assurance and promise shall, except as
hereinafter provided, be null and void.”
“Native land ” in this and the next pre-
ceding section does not include land in
respect of which a certificate of title or
memorial of ownership has been ordered to
be issued before the passing of this Act.”
This statute further provided for the Trust
Commissioner appointed under “The Land
Frauds Prevention Act, 1881,” making an
inquiry as to whether the negotiations in
respect of any instrument of title presented
for his certificate had been commenced or
carried on after the passing of this Act and
before the day fixed by proclamation as
aforesaid. If it was found that negotiations
bad been so made, then the Commissioner
was to endorse a certificate to that effect on
the instrument of title, which prevented the
document from being registered in any Re-
gistry of Deeds or Land Office.
The above enactments applied not only
to lands held under native title or custom,
the title to which had not been investigated
by the Native Land Court, but also to lands
the title to which had been investigated under
“The Native Land Court Act, 1880,” for a
period of three mouths and forty days
after such adjudication. At the time the
Crown held the right of pre-emption over
native lands ; the penalty imposed for deal-
ing with such lands was any sum not less
than £5 or more than £IOO. In “ The Native
Land Act, 1862,” and subsequent enactments,
it was laid down that all dealings for
lands before the title thereto had been in-
vestigated by the Native Lands Court


were null and void. But even supposing
It were right to inflict a penalty for
such proceedings, no person has yet been
able to discover why the penalty was im-
posed in cases where the title had been
investigated, and an order made for a certifi
cate of title to issue. A party purchasing or
leasing the land under such circumstances
had to take his chance as to whether there
was a rehearing of the case or not. If the
purchaser pleased to risk losing his money,
in the event of a rehearing, that is a matter
which apparently concerned himself only,
and did not call for legislative interference
or the infliction of a penalty.
A •* Native Committees Act” was passed in
1883, which contains a proviso relating to
laud as follows :
Section 14.—"1n any of the following
cases
" (1) Where it is desired to ascertain the
names of the owners of any block of land
being or to be passed through the Native
Land Court; or
" (2) Where It is desired to ascertain the
successors of any deceased owner ; or
“ (3) Where disputes have arisen as to the
location of the boundary between lands
claimed by natives, the committee may make
such inquiries as it shall think fit, and may
report their decision thereon certified in
writing in the Maori language under the
hand of the chairman of the committee, to
the Chief Judge of the said Court for the
information of the Court.”
No operations have been initiated under
this section, but if acted on carefully and
properly, the Native Committees could render
material aid to the Native Land Court by
making preliminary investigations of claims
to land, ascertaining the matters agreed to
and those disputed, and leaving the latter
as issues to be tried by the Court.
"The Native Land Alienation Restriction
Act 1884,” was enacted with the object of
preventing Europeans dealing In any way for
certain lands in the provincial districts of
Auckland, Taranaki, and Wellington. This
territory is known as the "King Country.”
it is not necessary to follow the boundaries
minutely as set forth in the schedule. But
approximately they are;
Commencing at Aotea Harbour on the
West Coast of the North Island, thence by
Te Wharauroa block to the Waitetuna river,
thence by the northern boundary of the
confiscated lands in the Waikato district, to
the junction of the Wairaka stream with the
Puniu river, thence by the Wairaka stream
to its source, thence by a straight line to the
confluence of the Mangare stream with the
Waikato river, thence up that river to the
Waipapa stream, and by that stream to its
source ; thence by the Tatua Whangamata
block to Lake Taupo, thence across the lake
to the mouth of the Tauranga river, thence
by that river to its source in the Kaimanawa
range, thence by the summit of that range
to the source of the Moawhango river, thence
by that river and the Rangitikei river to the
southern boundary line of the Otairi No. 5
Block, thence towards the south generally
by the southern boundary line of that block
and the Otairi No, 2a Block to the Manga-
papa stream, thence by that stream and the
Turakina river to the southern boundary of
the Maungakaretu block, thence by the
southern and south-western boundary line of
that block to the Whangaehu river, thence
by that river and the Heao, and Paratieke
blocks, to the Mangawhero river, thence by
that river to the Mangakowai stream and
by that stream to the north-western corner
of the Ohineiti block, thence by the produc-
tion of the northern boundary of that block
to Karewarewa block, thence by that block
and the Parihouhou, Aratowaka, and Puke-
nul blocks to the Whanganui river, thence
by that river to the mouth of the Whanga-
momona River, thence by the latter river
to its source, thence by a line due west to
the boundary of confiscated lands at Tara-
naki, thence by that line to Parininihi (the
White Cliffs), thence by the sea coast to
Aotea Harbour, the place of commence-*
ment.
As a matter of public policy, and in order
to prevent complications arising through
negotiations for purchases of lands from
natives living under allegiance to Tawhiao
(the Maori King), it was desirable to lock
up this country for a time until the Main
Trunk Line of railway was arranged for, and
the position of it definitely decided on.
The Government, however, as usual, made
an attempt to return to the pre-emptive
right of purchase system, while debarring
others from dealing they reserved the right
to do so ti themselves, thus, by section 7 •
“ Nothing in this Act contained shall be held
to preclude the Governor from negotiating
with the native owners of any land within
the territory aforesaid for the purchase or
other acquisition by Her Majesty of any such
land they may wish to dispose of upon such
terms and conditions as may be agreed upon
between the Governor and such owners.” It
may not be generally known that the Crown
could, by exercising the powers conferred on
them by " The Government Native Land Pur-
chases Act, 1877,” and the Amendment Act
of 1878, lock up any land as they pleased.
It was only necessary for a land purchase
officer to pay £5 or less to each of twenty chiefs
or natives on the same number of blocks, and
European negotiators would be forthwith
debarred from further dealings by a "notifica-
tion published in the New Zealand Gazette
signed by or on behalf of the Governor
that money had been so paid for the pur-
chase or acquisition of such land or an estate
or interest thereon, or that negotiations bad
been entered into in respect thereof, which
would be sufficient notice to all persons of
the prior rights of the Crown In respect of
the land mentioned or described in the
notice.” On publication of such notice a
copy of it was served on the District Land
Registrar, and he lodged a caveat on behalf
of Her Majesty the Queen, her heirs and
successors, in respect of such land.
The Governor, by similar notification, could
annul the first notification, and the lands were
then open for purchase or lease, after the ex-
piration of two months from the date of the
publication of the notification of withdrawal
of the Crown’s negotiations.
The Government were in nowise particular
as to whether they paid a deposit to the right


owners, or not before issuing a notification
under “ The Government Native Land Pur-
chase Act of 1877.” For instance, in the
Whanganui district a block of land known as
Rangitatau, containing 47,000 acres, was
thoroughly understood to belong to certain
members of the Ngarauru tribe, residing at
Waitotara. This was situated to the north-
ward of the boundary line of the lands owned
by the Whanganui tribes, which division had
been frequently alluded to in the Native
Lands Court, and affirmed by it, and was
universally accepted by the natives as being
correct. The Government desired to acquire
the land, and endeavoured to deal for it with
the proper owners of the Ngarauru tribe, who
were at that time in negotiation with some
European settlers for the sale of it to
them. The natives, finding the latter
would give a higher price than that
offered by the Government, declined to
sell to them. The land purchase officer
then found some three or four natives
residing at Whanganui among the tribe of
that name, but who were distantly related to
the Ngarauru, and he paid them a sum of
money for their claims to the Rangitatau
block, and it was forthwith proclaimed as
“land under negotiation by the Crown.”
The European negotiators completed the
survey of the block, and after it had be; n for
a long period under proclamation, a sitting of
the Native Land Court was held, at Wha-
n„anui, and the Ngarauru tribe wtre found
to be the owners. The persons who had re-
ceived money from the Crown were adjudged
not to be entitled to any interest in it, and
the European settlers completed their pur-
chase. It is unnecessary to supply further
examples, but they are numerous, and from
that now given it is not difficult to come to
the conclusion that a power thus wielded by
a Government could be used to inflict hard-
ships and injustices on both natives and
Europeans.
“The Native Land Alienation Restriction
Act, 1884,"has been repealed by “ The Native
Lands Administration Act, 1886,” but “ i he
Government Native land Purchase Act,
1877,” and “ The Government Native Land
Purchase Act Amendment Act, 1878,” still
remain on the Statute Rook.
Before leaving this branch of the subject it
may be as well to briefly notice “The Thermal
Springs District Act, 1881,” and its amend-
ments. The following extracts will explain
its purport :
Section 2.—“ The Governor may issue
proclamations from t.me to time defining
districts of the colony to be subject to this
Act, being localities in which there are con-
siderable numbers of the ngawha, waiariki,
or hot or mineral springs, lakes, rivers, or
waters \ and from time to time may vary
the boundaries or abolish any of such dis-
tricts.
“3, After the publication in the Gazette
of any proclamation defining a district as
aforesaid, this Act shall be in force therein,
and it shall not be lawful for any person
other than Her Majesty to acquire any
estate or Interest in native land therein,
except by virtue of or through means
prescribed or permitted by this Act.
The Government, it is said, made over-
tures in the public interest, and rightly so,
to the native owners of lands in the neighbour-
hood of Ohinemutu, Lake Rotorua, to allow
the Crown to conserve, control, and manage
certain lands which contained thermal
springs, etc., so as to prevent them from
falling into the hands of European specula-
tors to the detriment of the general public.
The natives of the INgatiwhakaue tribe
agreed to allow the Crown to deal with a
certain portion of their lands near Lake
Rotorua, and on the 25th November, 1880,
through the agency of F. D. Fenton, Esq.,
entered into an agreement to that effect.
“The Thermal Springs District Act” was
passed in 1881, Un the 12th October in
that year the Governor, by proclamation,
brought the Pukeroa-a-Ruawhata block, con-
taining 3200 acres, under the provisions of
that Act. (This is the land the subject of
Mr. Fenton’s agreement.) Subsequently, on
the 22ud October, 1881, by a further
proclamation, the Tauranga and East
Taupo district, containing 616,890 acres,
was defined under the Act, and on
the 24th October, 1881, an addition of
29,900 acres was made to the East Taupo
district. The natives express great amaze-
ment and dissatisfaction at such a large area
of their lands having been proclaimed under
“The Thermal Springs District Act, 1881,”
and state (with what accuracy cannot here be
exactly determined) that they never entered
into any agreement to let the Crown ad-
minister some 650,000 acres of their lands.
This statement is in a manner borne out by
the preamble to “ The Thermal Spiings Dis-
trict Act, 1883,” which sets forth that the
agreement was made with the chiefs of Ngati-
whakauae for lands adjacent to Lake Rotorua,
which was confirmed by subsequent arrange-
ments made by Mr. H. T. Clarke, on behalf
of the Government, for the same lands. Had
there been any other agreements they would
doubtless have been alluded to in the same
preamble. On one point, however, there is no
difficulty in arriving at a conclusion, that is,
that the Ngatiwhakauae tribe could not cede
the large territory so proclaimed, as only a
small proportion of it is owned by them.
The natives complain that there are included
within the districts proclaimed under the
Thermal Springs Act large areas of land
which do not contain any “ngawha,
waiarlki,” or hot or mineral springs, lakes,
rivers, or waters; and which lands they
desire to sell, lease, or otherwise deal with.
They also complain that the Government
administration of the township land at
Rotorua, is very unsatisfactory to them.
There is another class of land which has
not heretofore been alluded to, known as
“ Confiscated Lands.” These lands are
situated in the provincial districts of Auck-
land and Taranaki, and were principally the
property of natives who rebelled against the
Queen’s authority, and took part in the
Waikato and Taranaki wars. The confisca-
tion was made under the provisions of “ The
New Zealand Settlements Act, 1863.” Such
natives as remained loyal were awarded
compensation for their claims in money and
land. Thosenatlves who had been in rebellion,


and subsequently returned to their allegi-
ance, also received land sufficient for their
use and maintenance. Natives who re-
mained aloof from Europeans in the King
Country and elsewhere, have also been re-
peatedly offered land within the confiscated
territory. Lands taken under “ The New
Zealand Settlement Acts” are not subject to
the ordinary native land laws and Courts, as
they are deemed to be lands over which the
native title has been extinguished, except-
ing that by special enactment the Native
Land Court has the power to subdivide
blocks awarded to tribes by the Compensa-
tion Courts established by “TheNewZea
land Settlements Act,,,1833. ”
The lands confiscated in the Waikato and
Bay of Plenty districts were dealt with by
the Compensation Courts, Those at Tara-
naki were partly investigated by such
Courts, but a considerable portion was not
adjudicated on by them, and some large
areas were abandoned by the Crown, “by
which they reverted to the position of
4 native lands,’ ” The whole of this question
has been recently legislated on under “ The
West Coast Settlement (North Island) Act
1880.” This was, in effect, a reconfiscation of
the whole district, so far as it was not then
awarded to loyal natives, or sold to Euro-
peans, Large reserves were made for the
use and occupation of the natives, and others
were set aside to be leased for their benefit.
The result, however, is not satisfactory, as
the natives complain that their lands were
not dealt with in the same manner as those
in the Waikato and Bay of Plenty districts,
and that the loyal Natives were for years kept
out of the Crown Grants for the lands which
had been awarded to them by the Compen-
sation Courts, and in some cases where they
had in good faith sold the whole or part of
such lands to Europeans they were placed in
a very awkward position by the subsequent
action of the Government. Also, that the
rentals received from the reserves set apart
for their benefit are greatly diminished in
amount, by the large deductions made by
the Government for administration.
Lands confiscated at Tauranga were
originally taken under “ The New Zealand
Settlements Act, 1863,” but the Government
only retained 50,000 acres. They purchased
Te Puna-Katikati Block ; and, on the 18th
May, 1865, Sir George Grey (then Governor)
returned the remainder to the natives. The
latter portion was dealt with under a special
enactment, “ The Tauranga District Lands
Act, 1867.” A Commissioner was appointed
under that Act to inquire into and investigate
the claims to the landsabandoned or
given back to the Crown.” This has worked
on the whole satisfactorily. *Q|The only
objection raised by the natives to the
operation of it is, that lands been
made inalienable which they had pre-
viously arranged to sell to Europeans.
A Commissioner was recently appointed
to ascertain the necessity or otherwise of im-
posing such restrictions, but his decisions
in soma cases have not given'satisfaction to
any of the parties concerned,
in consequence of the rebellion of; some
tribes at Poverty Bay, it was intended to
confiscate certain lands there, but an ar-
rangement was come to between the Crown
and the loyal natives, by which a consider-
able area was ceded to the former, subject to
the investigation of the claims of the loyal
natives. To accomplish this “The East Coast
Land Titles Investigation Act, 1866,” was
enacted by the Legislature. The Courts estab-
lished in accordance with this statute had
powers similar to those conferred on Native
Lands Courts. These tribunals gave satis-
faction to the natives, but an unfortunate
error was made in the Crown grants issued
in lieu of the Court Certificates—the owners
were made “joint tenants” instead of being
“ tenants in common.” This has been par-
tially amended by subsequent legislation,
but great injustice has been done to persons
who should have succeeded to deceased
intestate owners. The I' ative Lands Court
having refused to allow a son to inherit his
father’s Interest, on the ground that the land
being held by the owners as joint tenants,
the interest on death lapsed in favour of the
survivors. This should be rectified by legis-
lation, as the son not being able to succeed
to bis father’s estate, is neither in accordance
with justice or Maori custom. The several
Native Lands Acts have contained provisions
for deciding what person or persons are en-
titled to succeed to estates of natives dying
intestate.
The interpretation sections of “ The Native
Land Acts of 1865 and 1873,” and “ The Na-
tive Land Court Act of 1880,” contain the
following :
“ Native ” means an aboriginal native of
the colony of New Zealand, and includes all
half-castes, and their descendants by na-
tives.
To exemplify the operation of this section,
a case is here cited : Two half-castes, who
are well-educated, marry two European
women, both have children by these mar-
riages. The younger recently died intestate,
leaving several pieces of land with titles
thereto. Application was made to the
Court by the surviving uncle, on behalf of
his brother’s children, for a succession order in
their favour. The Court sat, and on finding
the children were not “the descendants of
half-castes by Maoris,” declined to make any
order on their behalf, but issued it in the name
of the uncle. He, being an honourable man,
at once conveyed the interests to his brother’s
children. Had he been otherwise, what would
have been the position of the orphans ?
In passing, it may be as well to allude to
wills as made by natives. These are often
very vague, and not properly attested. The
Act permits informal wills to be received by
the Court, but there is room for some altera-
tions and amendments in that respect. In
“ The Native Land Court Act, 1886,” section
U, it is enacted ; “If the deceased made
a will or left any writing bearing his
signature or marie which, though not legally
executed as a will, the Court shall be of
opinion was intended to be a testamentary
disposition of any such estate, share, or
interest, it shall make the order as nearly as
may be in accordance therewith.”
Maoris are not at all particular about sign-
ing the names of other people without their
consent being first obtained. It ought, there


fore, to be'indlspensable that such documents
should be executed before two persons hav-
ing no interest in the property to be devised,
and if possible these witnesses should be
Europeans, and not Maoris (which could
easily be done in settled districts); the Go-
vernment could render assistance in this
matter by publishing in the “ Maori Kahiti”
(Gazette) a form of will to be used by natives,
with plain directions as to its execution and
attestation, then there would be no excuse
for informal documents of that description.
In any case a scrap of paper not witnessed,
and presented by the man claiming to suc-
ceed to “ real estate,” should not be received
by the Court, Many of these so-called wills
bar the rights of the persons who are next
of kin, and who, according to both European
and Maori custom, would be justly entitled
to succeed to the hereditaments of the de-
ceased person.
Having thus briefly reviewed the laws
affecting dealings with' native lands from
1862 to 1885; the important and entirely
new departure in legislation on these ques-
tions, which was the outcome of the last
session of Parliament, next demands most
careful and serious consideration. The
statutes alluded to are “ The Native Land
Court Act, 1886,”“TheNstiveLand Adminis-
tration Act, 1886,” and “The Native Equit-
able Owners'Act, 1886,” The provisions of the
latter have been discussed in an earlier
portion of this pamphlet, and it does not
appear necessary to refer to them again.
“ The Native Land Court Act, 1886,’’
repealed a large number of statutes relating to
native lands. The Act, however, contains
provision for continuing proceedings which
had been commenced under the repealed
Acts as follows Section 115. “Provided
that any incompleted procedure thereunder
shall from its stage when this Act comes into
operation be, at the discretion of a judge,
either continued and completed under this
Act, in like manner as if such procedure had
been commenced hereunder, or dis-
cretion shall be continued and completed
under the Act under which jsuclLprocedure
was initiated.”
Applications for Investigation of title,
division, or succession, heretofore made, if
not dealt with beyond gazetting, shall have
the effect of applications for investigation,
partition, or succession under this Act.
116. The several courts constituted under
“The Native Lands Act, 1865,” “The Native
Land Act, 1873/' “The Native Land Court
Act, 1880” ; and under this Act sball,nowith-
standing the repeal of any Act, be deemed,
and taken to have been, and to be, and con-
tinue to be, one continuous Court.”
117. “Any proceedingl t commenced, and
any right or duty given to, or imposed on.
or accrued to, any one of such Courts shall
be deemed to have continued to any or all of
such subsequently created Courts, which
subsequent Courts respectively shall be
deemed to have had, and the Court under
this Act shall be deemed ' to have full juris-
diction to complete such proceeding, to
exercise such right, and perform such duty.”
The question of inheritance of lands by
the descendants of half castes by Europeans
has been already considered herein ; also the
enactment respecting Maori wills. Section
26 contains a new feature with regard _to
“succession orders,” viz. “If during
any hearing it appear that a native has
died entitled to an interest in the land to be
partitioned, but that no succession order has
been made in respect of such interest, the
Court may, if it deem fit, summarily appoint
a successor to such interest, in like manner
and with like effect as if the matter of such
succession were then properly before It on
an application under this Act for succession,
but no rehearing shall be had in respect of
any such appointment.”
This, at first sight, appears very simple,
and also facilitates a subdivision; but a
native properly entitled to succeed to the es-
tate of a deceased person might be a hundred
miles away at the time the land he was Inter-
ested in came on for subdivision in the Court;
and there being no previous application
lodged in the Court or notified in the
Gazette, he might even be ignorant of the
death of the relative whose estate he was
entitled to succeed to. At some subsequent
period he ascertains that a succession order
has been made in favour of a distant kins-
man of the deceased person, and he has no
redress, because the statute has decreed that
there shall be no rehearing in such a case.
To show the necessity of careful dealing, and
due notice being given, and even then how
very grave mistakes may occur, the following
instance, which actually took place at a
recent sitting of the Native (.and Court,
will suffice. Two natives rejoiced in the
name of H Te W , rightfully they
ought both to have been included in a grant
of a pie ce of land, which may be styled the
“M block.” One (the younger of the two)
had his name inserted in the grant of “ M” ;
the elder was left out. H— le W—, senior,
died, and a native nearly related to him,
who may be called 8., applied for a “ Sue-
cession Order,” it was gazetted, in due
course the Court sat. H — Te w—, junior,
was absent, and B. appeared before it. He
proved that there was a native named H
Te W— in the grant of “ M block”; that
he died at a certain time, and a certain
place ; and that he (B ) was the next of kin
(which was all correct, as far as it went, B.
being under the misapprehension that H
Te W—, senior, was the grantee in “ M ").
The Court made an order accordingly in
favour of B. The natives present at the
Court, discussed the question among them-
selves, after the adjournment. They all
knew that both the H— Te W— s were own-
era in the M block, according to Maori cus-
tom, but that only one was entitled under the
Crown grant. Next day H — Te W—-, jun.,
having been informed of the proceedings in
the Court, brought a number of his co-
grantees with him and appeared on the scene.
Ho first interviewed a native land agent, and
asked him “ if a living man could have a suc-
cessor appointed for hia estate during his
lift time without his consent being obtained ?”
On being answered In the negative,he entered
the Court and informed the Judge that he
“was the H— Te W— whose name ap-
peared in the grant of the M block.” This


statement being duly substantiated by proper
witnesses, the Court decided in his favour.
Then the difficulty arose ;H— Te W— had
been proved to be dead, and B. had
been granted a succession order to in-
herit his interests in “the M.
blockso to prevent further compli
cations the name of B, was struck out
in the order (the Court had the power to
amend errors in proceedings), and that of
H- Te W , junr,, substituted in lieu
thereof, so H— Te W had the hereto
fore unheard of right to succeed to his own
undoubted interest in “the M block.” The
presiding judge at first contemplated cancel-
ling the order, but that was in excess of his
powers, and could only be done by the Chief
Judge granting a rehearing of the case (the
law then in force allowed re-hearings), but he
had the authority to amend defects and
errors in proceedings in his Court, and he
altered the order accordingly, and H— Te
W , junr., succeeded to H— Te W ,
junr., in his own right.
Now, if such an error could be made when
an application had been duly lodged in the
Court, and gazetted, is it not to be expected
that numerous and greater mistakes will
arise when in the hearing of a sub-division
case, any native can (unknown to the proper
successors) jump up in the Court and claim
to succeed to the deceased owner of an in-
terest in the land under investigation. And
the wrong done could not be remedied except
by a special Act empowering the Court to re-
hear the cose.
By section 23 it is enacted “ That any
native owner of land held otherwise than in
severalty, or any person who may claim to
have purchased or acquired an undivided
share therein, may apply to the Court to
make partition thereof, and thereon the
Court may proceed to partition as hereinafser
provided :
Section 31.—Where the title to land the
subject of partition is memorial of owner-
ship, or certificate of title under any
Act relating to native land, each par-
tition order shall be prepared in dupli-
cate, and when the approved plan of the
parcel of land shall be placed or endorsed
thereon, and when the title to the parcel of
land, the subject of such order, shall have
become ascertained, such duplicate order
shall be signed by a judge, and sealed. A
judge shall then mark the muniment of
original title as cancelled, and it shall
thereby be cancelled.
The above recited sections of the Act of
1886 go still further to prove that the
acquisition by sale or lease of individual and
undivided shares, or interests in lands held
under a certificate of title issued in accor-
dance with the seventeenth section of
“The Native Lands Act, 1867,” or by a
memorial of ownership under “ The Native
Land Act, 1873,” is Legal, although ait the
persons interested therein have not assented
to such sale or lease. If it is not so, then
why authorise any person who may claim
(not “has purchased”) to have purchased or
acquired an undivided share in land to apply
to the Court to make partition thereof ?
Nine-tenths of the applications for sub-
division which have been, or will hereafter
be, made by European purchasers or lessees
will be for lands comprised in the two above-
mentioned instruments of title, as it must
not be overlooked that the Acts of 1867 and
1873 were in operation for thirteen years,
during which period laud transactions were
very numerous, until a new provision was
made in ‘‘The Native Land Court Act,
1880,” substituting “Certificates of Title” for
“ Memorials of Ownership.” Also that, as
previously mentioned, certificates issued
under the seventeenth section of the Act of
1867 had in effect become memorials of
ownership.
Section 120 of the Act of 1886 is rather
ambiguous. It is as follows :—“ A convey-
ance or lease of land not held under Crown
Grant, or of any estate or interest therein
[except, and until prohibited by law), shall
be as effectual to vest in a grantee or lessee
the estate purporting to be assured, as it
would if such land were held by Crown
Grant.”
The only documents of title issued under
the respective Native Land Acts, and amend-
ments thereto, are “ Orders of the Court,”
“Certificates of Title” of two or three
kinds, “Memorials of Ownership,” and
“Crown Grants.” As the above quoted
section does not apply to the latter descrip-
tion of instruments of title, it must be
deemed to refer to alt the others, as there is
no exception made to any of them. If deal-
ings with lands, the title to which is a
“ Memorial of Ownership,” is not prohibited
by law, it follows that the acquisition of un-
divided interests therein, without the assent
of all the owners, is legal.
Undoubtedly in the first instance, under the
Act of 1873, conveyances and leases so ob-
tained were illegal; but can any person who
considers the tendency of subsequent legisla-
tion do otherwise than come to the conclu-
sion that subdivisions of undivided iuteiests
in lands so acquired have been authorised by
statute, anything in the Act of 1873 not-
withstanding; which view taken together with
other enactments is confirmed by Section 11
of the Act of 1878, thus: “11. Notwith-
standing anything to the contrary thereto in
• The Native Land Act 1873,’ or any amend-
ments thereto.it shall he lawful for the Court
in its discretion, on the application of any
Native owner or other person interested
therein to hear and determine the value or
extent of any estate or interest in any land
held by such applicant under memorial of
ownership, or Crown grant, or award,
or conveyance, and if it shall deem fit, to
make an order vesting any part or portion
of such land in such applicant.” And further
is it not a proper deduction to arrive at, that
as the Court has such a power conferred on
it, the person (European purchaser) applying
to it must have had the right to purchase
any estat.) or interest therein (less than the
whole) otherwise what need for a partition ?
Assuming section 120 to read thus : “ A
conveyance or lease of land held under
‘ Memorial of Ownership,’ or Certificate of
Title, or of any estate or interest therein
(except, and until prohibited by law) shall be
as effectual to vest in a grantee (meaning
a purchaser) or lessee the estate purporting
to be assured as it would if such land


were held by Crown grant,” Then taking
the words “except prohibited by law,” and
leaving out “until,” raises the question—
were any conveyances or leases prohibited by
law? Apparently there is notuing in any
repealed Act which prohibits the taking
of a conveyance or lease of land held
under a Memorial of Ownership, it is
merely provided that alt the ascer-
tained native owners shall either sign
or assent to such sale or lease. It may be
asked, in what manner can a would-be pur-
chaser or lessee ascertain whether ail the
owners, would execute or sign a conveyance
or lease to him other than by getting as many
signatures or assents as possible to such
documents? And forsooth when he finally
finds a few dissentients thereto, he is to lose
his time and money (for he certainly would
have to pay in full to all persons who
executed the conveyance), and his title be
deemed null and void, because the whole of
those interested in the land did not assent
thereto. Yet the present statute provides
“ for vesting any estate or interest therein in
the purchaser (grantee) or lessee, as it
would if such laud were held under Crown
grant. It may perhaps be argued that
section 120 only applies to lands held under
certificates of title issued in accordance with
the Acts of 1862, 1865, and 1880, and not to
memorials of ownership under the Act of 1873,
or to certificates of title created by the
seventeenth section of the Act of 1867,
admitting that, why does not section 120
contain an exception in those cases ? Ihe
only instrument of title derived through the
Native Lands Act which is excluded is a
Crown grant. The words “ except prohibited
by Law" are very vague. Can any person say
clearly and without fear of contradiction,
“ What is the law respecting Memorials of
Ownership ?” Only one reply appears pos-
sible, viz . “ That it is a network woven out
of contradictions and conflicting
The words, “ and until prohibited by law
are easily understood. By “ The Native
Lands Administration Act, 1886,” all private
dealings with native lands are forbidden
after it coming into operation on the first day
of January, 1887, except incomplete transac-
tions, which can be completed in the manner
prescribed by the twenty-fourth section of
that Act.
The only other section of “ The Native
Land Court Act, 1886,” which it appears
necessary to direct attention to is number
thirty-five. “ Where deeds intended to
affect land divided under any Act, hereby
repealed, or partitioned under this Act, have
by any natives taking under any such parti-
tion or division as aforesaid been executed
since the day when, as to the land divided
or partitioned, the certificate of Native Land
Court title or memorial of ownership therefor
took effect, a Crown grant issued, or to be
issued, for any parcel of such land shall, for
the purpose of completing the title of parties
under such deeds be deemed to have had
effect on and from the day when the certifi-
cate or memorial took effect as aforesaid.
This apparently refers to cases where
persons have acquired by deed undivided
interests held under certificate of title or
memorial of ownership, and which having
been subdivided, provides for vesting the
estate or interest in the native for one parcel
and the purchaser for another, and for the
purpose of completing the title of parties
under such deeds shall have effect from the
date of the making of the original certificate
or memorial. This appears to be a further
confirmation of the legality of purchasing
individual or undivided shares held under
“ Memorial of Ownership,” and making good
incomplete titles.
It is perhaps expedient to show the de-
finition of the word “ Land ” as set forth in
the interpretation section (No. 3), it Is,
“ Land ” means land held under :
A Crown grant, or the subject of an order
therefor under this Act or any Act
hereby repealed.
A Memorial of Ownership.
A certificate of title under Land Transfer
Act or any Act relating to native land.
But only where such instruments were
made or issued in favour of natives.
The other matters provided for in the
above Act relate more to the method of
procedure in Court and the general adminis-
tration of the Department than to the trans-
fer or demising of land. There are, however,
no objectionable features at present apparent
in that portion of it; and, in any case, it is
not advisable to mix up those questions with
that now under consideration.
“ The Native Land Administration Act,
1886,” is, as its title imports, a measure to
control dealings with native lands. It is,
however, not for facilitating the settlement:
of incomplete titles between natives and
Europeans, as might be supposed, but to
prohibit and make penal any direct negotia-
tions by private persons for the acquisition
of land held by natives, whether under
Crown grant, certificate of title, memorial
of ownership, or any other instrument of
title derived through any order of the
Native Land Court. The Crown takes to
itself (with the exceptions mentioned in
Section 24) the sole right of dispismg of
native lands the title to which has been in-
the Native Laud Courts. This
is irrespective of dealings with lauds, the
title to which has not been so investigated,
which are entirely and absolutely forbidden.
This Act came into operation on the first day
of January, 1887, and “The Native Land
Court Act, 1886,” on the first day of October,
1886. Having thus briefly shown the
purport of the Act, it will be necessary to
refer to several sections of it, In order to
completely understand its operation,
By section 2 : The Act apply to
laud—
Administrate by the Public Trustee, under
“ The Native Reserves Act, 1882.”
Set apart as a reserve for natives under
“ The West Coast Settlement (North Island)
Act, 1880.”
While subject to “The Thermal Springs
Districts Act, 1881.”
Nor to land held by natives under their
custom or usage, the title whereto has not
been investigated and by the
Native Land Court, except so far as is herein
specially provided.


Only sections thirty-two and thirty-three
of this Act shall apply to land now the
subject of a lease for an outstanding term
during the continuance of such term.
“ The Railways Construction and Land
Act, 1881,” shall have effect as if this Act
had not been passed.”
3.—ln this Act, if not inconsistent with
the context,
“Commissioner” means a commissioner
appointed under the Act, and “ the ” before
commissioner means “either” or “any.”
“Court” means the Native Land Court of
New Zealand.
“Land” means land owned by natives,
except land purchased by a native from the
Crown or from Europeans, and held under
Crown grant or conveyance to such owner
individually.
“Disposable land” means land or any part
of land becoming disposable under this Act.
“ Native” means an aboriginal native of
New Zealand, and includes half-castes and
their descendants by natives.
“Owner” means any native owner of land,
and includes persons registered under section
seventeen of “The Native Laud Act, 1867.”
“ Registration ” means registration under
any Act relating to registration of deeds or
to land transfer.
“ Sealed ” means sealed with the seal of
office.
It will be noticed that this section con-
tinues the injustice to the offspring of
marriages between half-castes and Euro-
peans.
4. “The Governor may from to time
appoint such person or persons as he may
think fit to be a Commissioner or Com.
missioners under this Act, and from time to
time as he may think fit remove such
Commissioner or Commissioners.”
5. Provides for the appointment of Deputy
Commissioners.
6. The Governor may define districts
within which each Commissioner may exer-
cise the powers vested in him under this
Act.
The Native Minuter shall provide the
Commissioner with a seal of office, where-
with all deeds made by a Commissioner
under this Act shall be sealed.
The sections following the above relate to
the election of Committees, but this need not
be given in detail, and can be summed up
thus
A committee consisting of seven members
may be elected from among the owners of
any block of land, where such owners are
more than seven in number. An election
shall be by nomination in writing, signed by
a majority of owners. Each owner can
nominate seven owners or any less number,
of whom he may be one. Attestation of no-
mination papers is provided for. Nomination
papers are to be transmitted to the Commis-
sioner. When not less than six of the
owners of land owned by more than seven
apply to the Commissioner in writing, ho
has to publish a notice in the Gazette and
Kahiti that an election will be held, and
that nomination papers will be received by i
him at any time not later than sixty days
after the date of such notification. Names
of elected owners to be “ entered in the
Committee Register.” On registration the
committee shall be duly constituted.
Where the owners are less than eight
in number, a majority of them can apply
to the Commissioner, who, if satisfied, can
constitute them a committee for that block
of land. This committee can be less than
seven in number. At the first meeting of the
committee a chairman to be appointed, and
his name to be inscribed in the committee
register* Members may resign. If a vacancy
occurs by death, &c., another owner may be
elected, and his name entered in the committee
register. Committee shall continue to act,
although a vacancy exists. The Governor
may dissolve a committee. A committee shall
cease to be a committee when dissolved as
aforesaid, or when its duties in relation to the
land in respect whereof they were nominated,
have been performed.
Section 16 “Owners desiring that their
land shall not be dealt with under this Act,
herein called ‘objecting owners,’ may give
notice of such desire injwrlting, signed by
them, and delivered to the Commissioner
within thirty days after the inscription of the
names of the committee as aforesaid. Owners
not giving such notice shall be deemed to have
assented to their land being dealt with under
this Act.”
17. “If owners have all assented as
aforesaid, the land may be forthwith dis-
posed of in manner hereinafter provided in
that behalf. An assent to a sale or lease
once given shall not be revoked.”
18, .Provides, in case of all the owners not
assenting, that the Native Land Court can
partition the land between the parties as-
senting, and those objecting to it being
brought under the Act.
19. As to land where all the owners have
assented, or where some have objected, then
as to so much of such land as shall have
been partitioned by the Court to those not
objecting, the committee may by writing,
signed by a majority of its members, make
its direction whether such disposable land
shall be sold or leased, or partly sold
and partly leased, and may therein include
such suggestions as to details]of the proposed
disposition, or as to parts of such disposable
land to be reserved from disposition as it
may think fit. Such writing shall be trans
mitted to the Commissioner, who, if satisfied
that it is signed as prescribed,’shall enter a
minute thereof in the Committee Register
aforesaid.
20. “Owner may convey or’demise land to
the Crown without or notwithstanding the
appointment of a Committee. A Committee
may convey or demise land to the Crown.
But it shall be a condition precedent to any
such sale or lease that a meeting of the
owners of the land the subject thereof shall
have been convened by the Commissioners for
the purpose of discussing the terms of such
sale or lease, and that the time fixed for such
meeting shall have passed.”
21. Provides that owners of land not sub-
ject to restriction on alienation can sell and


convey their interests in the same to a na-
tive, but such native cannot dispose of it to
any European except through the Com-
missioner.
22. Enacts that when a committee ceases
to exist its previous acts are not prejudiced
by its termination.
By section 23 minora cannot sign nomina-
tion papers for the election of a committee.
Any person knowingly attesting the signature
of a minor is liable to a penalty of not less
than £5 or more than £5O.
The Commissioners who have been ap-
pointed up to the present time, are the per-
sons holding the office of Commissioners of
Crown Lands in the provincial districts of
Auckland, Hawke's Bay, Wellington, and
Taranaki ; and from the onerous duties they
have to perform in their present depart-
ments, taken with their not being ac-
quainted with Maori customs, it is utterly
impossible for them to set the machinery
of the Act in motion.
The provision in section 16 is likely to
deal hardly with some persons. “Ob-
jecting owners ” are to give a certain
notice within thirty days of the in-
scription of the names of the Committee
in the register. Owners not giving such
notice shall be deemed to have assented
to their land being dealt with under the Act.
No exception is made in the case of any such
owners being sick, unavoidably absent, or
dead. In part of section 17 it is enacted
that “ an assent to a sale or lease once given
shall not be revoked.” This appears to
be very arbitrary and might have been im-
proved by adding the words, “ unless good
and sufficient reason is shown to the Com-
missioner for the revocation of such assent.”
By section 19 it does not appear that the
Committee have any voice in fixing the price
for which their land is to be sold or the
amount of annual rental to be paid. In
the next section, where the Crown, either
without or with the intervention of a Com-
mittee, can deal for land, a meeting of all the
owners must bo convened by the Commis-
sioner for the purpose of discussing the terms
of such sale or lease. The Crown, as usual,
endeavour to maintain a pre-emptive right,
and secure it to themselves by taking power
to deal in a different manner with the natives
for their lands than that prescribed for the
general public. Another objectionable fea-
ture is that the Commissioner is to assume
the functions of a Government land purchase
agent, and apparently negotiate for the sale
or lease of lan Is to the Crown, which would
place him in a very false position.
In sales to private persons it is enacted by
section 29 : “ That land to be disposed of by
the Commissioner under this Act shall be so
disposed of in accordance with the provisions
of ‘The Land Act, 1885/ or of any Act
passed in substitution thereof, and he shall
have all the powers of a Land Board. For
this purpose the Governor may from time to
time proclaim that any portion of the afore-
said Act shall apply to any disposable land.’>
The Commissioner appointed under this
Act has more power than a Commissioner of
Crown Lands—that officer has to act with
the consent of a majority of the Land Beard.
Why should not the section read thus : The
Commissioner together with the Committee
so appointed by the owners of any block of
land shall have all the powers of a Land
Board with regard to'such land ? The owners
would thus have a voice in fixing the upset
price of the sale or lease.
Section 30 validates any conveyance or
lease, or contract for a conveyance or lease
of disposable land made by the Commis-
sioner, and such document shall be entitled
to registration.
Section 31 confers on the Commissioner
power to sue for, recover, receive, and give
receipts for moneys accruing through pur-
chases, leases, etc.
By section 37 moneys received by the
Commissioner as purchase money or rent in
respect of each parcel of disposable inland
shall so soon as convenient be paid to the
owners after deducting therefrom -Five
pounds per centum towards the cost not
otherwise provided for of giving effect to
this Act; and a further sum sufficient to
repay such costs of surveys and road making
as may have been previously agreed on be-
tween the Commissioner and the committee.
Having thus shortly reviewed those portions
of “The Native Land Administration*Act,
1886/' which relate to the duties of Commis-
sioners and Committees, and the plan laid
down for future dealings and dispositions of
native lands, it is now expedient to turn to
the important question of outstanding private
purchases and leases, and the provisions con-
tained in the Act for the completion thereof.
The sections referring to that branch of the
subject are given in “ extenso,” in order that
their purport may be clear and intelligible to
the reader.
24. “A person who may claim to have
purchased or leased the share or interest of
some out of several owners of land (the title
whereto was not at the time of
chase or lease subject to any restriction
precluding such purchase or lease) may
within three months after the coming into
operation of this Act notify the fact of such
purchase or lease to the Commissioner, and
also the Chief Judge of the Native Land
Court; and it shall thereupon be the duty of
a Judge to inquire into the circumstances
thereof, and who, if satisfied that
there has been a purchase or lease as
alleged, and that the transaction was bona
fide, and that a fair value or rent was given
or reserved, may give his certificate to that
effect to the person alleging himself to be
such purchaser or lessee, who shall transmit
the same to the Commissioner.”
25. “ On the grant of such certificate the
person theiein named
“ (a) If a purchaser shall be the owner of
the share of his vendor in the land the sub-<
ject of such purchase, and shall be entitled
to have partitioned to him in severalty such
part of the land as the Court may deem just.
“ (b) Or he may within one month after the
date of the certificate give/notice to the
Commissioner that he is desircus of purchas-
ing the shares or interests which he has not
already acquired, and in such case he may,
on obtaining such certificate from a Judge,


that such Judge is satisfied that he had
before the first day of July, 1886, obtained
the signature of one or more owner or
owners to a writing purporting or agreeing
to convey the share or interests of the per-
sons signing at any time within twelve
months from the said first day of July, 1886,
but not afterwards, purchase all or any of
such shares or interests.
If all such outstanding shares or interests
are not purchased he shall be entitled to
have partitioned to him such part of the
land as the Court may deem just.”
Subsections (c) and ( d ) contain precisely
similar provisions with respect to incomplete
leases as those relating to purchases in (a)
and (6).
27. “ Where a person has acquired from
owners a valid lease for a term one-
third of which shall have expired on
the first day of July, 1886, and such
person is in actual beneficial occupation
of the land demised, it shall be law-
ful for him to obtain a renewal of his
lease for the whole or part of the land the
subject thereof for a further term not exceed-
ing fourteen years, upon such terms as may
be agreed upon between the owners and the
lessee, and be approved by the Commis-
sioner.”
This would have been more explicit if
after the words “ it shall be lawful for him”
there had been added the words, on the ex-
piration of the first-mentioned term, to
obtain,’ &c.
Section 33.—“jSave as provided by this
Act no person shall by himself or his agent
purchase or acquire, or contract or agree to
purchase or acquire from any owner, except
a person becoming an owner under section
twenty-five, any land, whether or not title
thereto may have been investigated and deter-
mined by the Court or any estate therein.”
(Note —The purchase under Section 25 is be-
tween one Native grantee and another of an
interest in the same block.) “ Any person so
doing shall be liable to imprisonment for not
less than three or more than twelve months,or
to a penalty of not less than twenty or more
than five hundred pounds, and any estate
in laud the subject of any such prohibited
dealing which shall become vested in any
such person by reason of any such dealing,
shall be forfeited to the Crown.”
Reverting to Section twenty four, it may
be reasonably assumed that the words “ the
title whereto was not at the time of such
purchase or lease subject to any restriction
precluding such purchase or lease ” refer to
certain lands held under Crown grant, which
cannot be dealt with by purchase or lease
without the Governor’s assent being first
obtained to such purchase or lease, or to
another class which cannot be dealt with,
except by lease not exceeding twenty-one
years, unless a similar assent is obtained. It
would have been better and removed any
ambiguity or doubt, if the particular kind of
restriction alluded to had been defined.
The provision for completing outstanding
purchases and leases is so absurd as to be
almost laughable, but for the magnitude of
the interests involved, and the prospective
ruin of many a straggling settler on the
eastern side of this island. A man has per-
haps been striving for years, day and night,
to procure all the signatures to his deeds,
and has expended large amounts for the
services of agents and interpreters in
that behalf. The Memorial of Owner-
ship or Certificate of Title contains the
names of (we will say) eight hundred
owners (no uncommon number either). Of
these 600 have executed the deeds during
the last four years, and the purchaser has
made advances on account of purchase to
some of the others who have not yet
signed. Others are absent from the district,
and some are unwilling to sell or lease.
Now, this man duly applies to the
Commissioner and Chief Judge within
the three months (from Ist January to 31st
March, 1887) specified in section 24. The
Judge may have made the inquiry and
granted a certificate, perhaps, by the end of
March last. Next a notice has to be given to
the Commissioner within one month after the
granting of the Judge’s certificate. Then,
under the most favourable circumstances
everything may have been settled and ready
to proceed with the purchase or lease by the
end of the first week in April last. Now, how
is it possible to complete the title and get 200
signatures before the 30th June, 1887 ? The
above case is not in any way exaggerated,
there are documents of title issued by the
Native Land Court, which contain more
names than now mentioned. Let the case of
the unfortunates who duly lodged their ap-
plications, and who have not yet received
their certificates be next taken into con-
sideration. This is nearly the end of May,
and June alone remains to them, how can
they hope to complete their title by that
date ? It is reported that between three
and four hundred applications are now in
the hands of the Chief Judge of the Native
Land Court, and ho is investigating the
cases himself, only. It would surely have
been justifiable under the circumstances
to have suspended all the sittings of
the Native Land Courts for the pre-
sent, and employed the judges in ad-
judicating on these important claims only.
The only conceivable excuse that can be
made for enacting such provisions as are
contained in sec ion 24 and its sub sections
is that the person who drafted them must
have been profoundly ignorant of everything
connected with the purchase and lease of
native lands, and the difficulties attendant in
negotiating for them. If the Act is not re-
pealed altogether, which it certainly ought
to be, as it is detested by both natives and
Europeans in the North Island, it certainly
should be amended by allowing a fur-
ther term of four years from the
30th June, 1887, to complete all unfinished
transactions between private persona and
the native owners. It will probably be
argued that if the purchaser or lessee is not
able to procure a complete title before the
30th June, 1887, that he is then entitled to
have partitioned to him the shares or
interests he may have acquired to that date.
To which it may be replied that a person
who has improved a property (which in
numerous instances has been done) under
the belief and impression, that he would
eventually become the freeholder of it,


would be injuriously affected by being
driven to apply for a sub-division under such
circumstances.
“The Native Land Administration Act,
1886,” Is in direct contravention of the pro-
visions of “The Native Land Act, 1862.” A
statute which, by of one its sections, was
specially reserved for Her Majesty’s assent,
and which enactment, when approved,
waived the Crown’s right of “preemption
of purchasing such lands as the natives were
willing to sell,” which had been acquired by
the “Treaty of Waitangi,” and which further
provided in s ction 17 that “the individual,
person, or persons named in any certificate
as the owner or owners thereof, or having
any particular estate or interest therein,
may dispose of the interest which he or they
may have in the lands described in such cer-
tificate, by way of absolute sate or lease, or
exchange for other lands, or otherwise, to
any person or persons whomsoever.” Here
the power to deal with individual and
undivided interests was clearly con-
ferred on both natives and Europeans.
This Act, as shown in the preamble, was
intended to waive, and did relinquish the
right of one of the contracting parties, under
the Treaty of Waitangi, to a pre-emptive
right to purchase such of the lands of the
other contracting parties as they were willing
to sell, and this not at the request of the
latter, but by the desire of the former of the
two. It may be therefore matter for con-
sideration whether the New Zealand Legisla-
ture could properly enact a measure which
to a certain extent authorises the Crown to
resume rights which had been given
back by it to the other contracting
party (the Maoris) without their consent
being first obtained to such resumption. If
the Act of 1862 was deemed to be so im-
portant a measure, and one affecting Imperial
interests, that it could not be brought into
operation without Her Majesty’s assent being
specially obtained to it; and being subse-
quently specially proclaimed by the Governor
in accordance with a provision contained iu
the Act, which was done on the 6ch June,
1865 f; may it not be reasonably assumed that
a similar course might have been pursued
with respect to the statute now under con-
sideration, it being an entire repeal of an Act
which was substituted for a certain provision
contained in a Treaty made between the Im-
perial Government and the natives.
“ The Native Rights Act, 1865,” which de-
clared the Maoris to be the same as British
born subjects, and conferred the same rights
and disabilities on them as on the colonists of
New Zealand, has not been repealed —and is
still law —and “The Native Lands Adminis-
tration Act, 1886,” is in direct contradiction
to its letter and spirit.
The Colonial Legislature almost appear to
have regretted the concessions made, and
the full and free permission given by the
Act of 1862 to the natives, to deal with the r
lands in any way they pleased, without any
restriction whatsoever, “ and to sell or lease
them to any person or persons whomsoever,”
except in the case of necessary reserves for
their use, benefit, and maintenance, in which
the Governor had the right to insert in the
Crown, grants restrictions on alienation.
Unfortunately each succeeding statute relat-
ing to native lands has little by little, and
step by step, by imposing restrictions of
various kinds, been gradually lessening the
powers conferred on the Maoris, to deal as
to them seemed best with their own lands,
until the culminating point has been reached
by passing the present highly unpopular and
ill advised law. The effect of all the enact-
ments about native lands, since the repeal of
the Act of 1862, has been to complicate
dealings, and establish a want of confidence
between natives and private persons, and by
opening the door to uncertainty and repudi-
ation, has caused a feeling of insecurity to
be engendered in the minds of both colonial
and foreign capitalists, who now decline to
enter into any transactions connected with
native lands, because of the flimsy nature of
the titles given by the Native Land Court,
which now has the power to annul the effect
of some of the instruments of title created by
itself (vide “The Native Equitable Owners
Act, 1886 ”), and to this, among other causes,
may be largely ascribed the financial depres-
sion which at present obtains throughout
this colony.
Before concluding the consideration of the
statutes affecting dealings with native lands,
it may be expedient to draw attention to
the question of the duties now payable to
the Crown on such transactions under “ The
Stamps Act, 1882,” and “The Stamps Act,
1882, Amendment Act, 1885.” In the inter-
pretation section of the Act of 1881, the words
‘ executed ” and “ execution,” with reference
to instruments, mean signed and signature
by any one or more of the parties thereto; or,
in the case of a corporation, sealed with its
seal. Section 137 of the same Act, subsec-
tion 1, sets forth, “ Upon every first con-
veyance on sale to a person other than a
native, a duty of ten pounds per centum on
the amount or value of the consideration.”
This was repealed by “The Stamp Act,
1882, Amendment Act, 1885,” which enacted
that “ Except when express provision to the
contrary is made by this or any other Act,
any unstamped or insufficiently stamped in-
strument may be stamped or further stamped
by the Commissioner after the first execu-
tion thereof, on payment of the unpaid duty
and fine, in addition to the duty, as follows ;
“ 1. When such instrument is presented to
be stamped more than one month and less
than three months after execution, a fine of
twenty-five per centum on the amount of
duty payable.
“2. When such Instrument is presented to
be stamped more than three mouths after
execution, a fine of one hundred per centum
on the amount of the duty payable ; but in
no case shall the last-metioned fine be less
than five pounds.”
Section 17< There shall be charged
for the use of Her Majesty, in addi-
tion to the other duties imposed by the
preceding parts of the said Act (Act of
1882), and this Act, the duties following,
that is to say :
1, “ Upon every conveyance on sale, or de-
vise in fee, of native land first made to, or
whereby the right to such land shall first


vest in a person other than a native, ten
pounds per centum on the value of the land
as such value may be estimated in any
manner the Commissioner shall think fit.
But, in case the purchaser under such con-
veyance shall have already paid any duties
under this part of this Act or any enactment
heretofore in force regarding similar duties
in respect of the land dealt with in such
conveyance, then the amount of such duties
previously paid shall be deducted from the
duties payable upon such conveyance, and
only the amount of the net balance shall be
paid under this Act on such conveyance.”
2, “ Upon every exchange of native land
by a native with a person other than a
native, ten pounds per centum on the value
cf the land, to be estimated as mentioned in
the foregoing subsection one.”
3. “ Upon every lease of native land to a
person other than a native, ten pounds per
centum upon the amount or value of any
consideration by way of premium in respect
of which such lease is granted, and also ten
pounds per centum upon the capitalised value
of any rent payable thereunder.”
The capitalisation of the rent is thus ar-
rived at by section 138 of “ The Stamp Act,
1882 ;”—“Where the lease is granted for a
term certain, not exceeding ninety years, the
capitalised value of the rent payable there-
under shall be the present value of an
annuity or annuities of the same annual
amount as the rent or rents, and payable for
the same periods ; rent for the purposes of
this part of this Act being deemed to be
payable yearly and at the end of the year,
and interest being calculated at the rate
of five pounds per centum per annum.”
Native Land Duties, as previously shown
herein, were first imposed under “The
Native Land Act, 1862,” but the provisions
therein contained were repealed by the
“The Native Land Act, 1865.” “The
Native Land Duties Act, 1873 ” repealed the
last-mentioned Act, and provided for the
payment of a duty on the first disposal by
sale, of ten pounds per centum on the con
sideration or purchase money, and in respect
of a lease, a duty in each year equal to £lO
per centum yearly upon the aggregate
amount of rent payable for each and every
year of the lease; and in cases where the
duties payable were in arrears interest at
£lO per centum per annum was chargeable.
This Act was repealed by “ The Stamp Act,
1875 Amendment Act, 1881,” when the
duties became leviable under the Stamp
Acts Those payable on conveyances re-
mained the same until 1885, namely, ten
per cent, on the consideration or purchase
money as set forth in the deed. But no in-
terest was chargeable on arrears of duty un-
paid. The only fine was that payable on
ordinary conveyances as between Europeans
when not stamped by a certain date. In
1881 the duties payable on leases were for
the first time capitalised, and have continued
so until the present time. In the case of
conveyances in fee simple, a very material
alteration was made by “The Stamp Act,
1882, Amendment Act, 1885,” the duty of
ten pounds per centum heretofore payable on
the amount of consideration or purchase
money, was altered, and it was provided
that it should be levied on the value of the
land, which value the Commissioner was
empowered to estimate.
The reason for herein noticing the subject
of duties is that great hardship is inflicted on
purchasers of native lands thereby. The Act
provides th%t a deed shall be considered to be
executed when signed “ by any one or more of
the parties thereto.” This may be very well
in the case of Europeans, where a bargain is
made, and the terms of sale are fixed and
understood by both parties ; but turn to the
position of a person purchasing land from
natives, and observe the difference. In the
transaction between Europeans only, the
vendor or vendors at once give possession to
the buyer ; but in that with the Maoris the
purchaser may be years before he can
complete his conveyance. The meaning will
be best Illustrated by the example following :
Mr. Smith wishes to acquire Te Wharau
block by purchase. The certificate of title
or memorial of ownership contains the
names of one hundred and fifty native
owners. He makes a bargain wiih two
of them to sell their interests for £3O
each, and they sign his conveyance. Be
then calculates that it will cost him at that
rate £4500, and fills that sum into the deed.
While the duty was payable under “The
Stamp Act of 1882,” on the amount of con-
sideration or purchase money, he would have
to disburse £450 for duty within three
months of the first execution of his deed, or
have a fine imposed of £lOO per centum
thereon. He consequently had to pay this
£450 duty forthwith, on the conveyance of
two interests, the consideration or purchase
money of which amounted to £6O only. This
conveyance might take ten years to com-
plete, and Mr. Smith has not the full
benefit of the land during that period, and
his title is incomplete ; yet he has been com-
pelled to pay the duty in the same manner
as if his deeds were fit to be registered. The
Government have doubless also been losers
to a considerable extent by this system
of levying native land duties. For imtance,
Mr. Smith has entered the sum of £4500 in
the body of his conveyance on the assump-
tion that the shares of the native owners
were equal, and that he would be able to
acquire all their interests for £3O each, but
he finds to his cost during his ten years’
negotiations that he has been mistaken, be
having paid to some of the vendors £4O,
£5O, £75, £lOO, £l2O, £l5O, or even £2OO
for their shares, respectively ; and on the
completion of his title discovers that the
purchase money totals up to £11,500 and not
£4500 as at first calculated. The Govern-
ment have received £450, it is true, but had
they waited until the final execution of the
deed they would have been entitled to
£ll5O. There are many cases in which the
title to lands on which duties have been
paid under the Act of 1882 are yet incom-
plete.
By “The Stamp Act, 1882, Amendment
Act, 1885,” the duty payable on conveyances
of native lands is ten pounds per centum on
the value thereof. Now, for an example, the
case of Mr. Brown, a would-be purchaser of
Te Horo block, Is given. In this block there


are one hundred ascertained owners. Mr.
Brown procures the signature of one native
to his deed, to whom he pays £SO, and he
finds the others unwilling to sell at that
rate; however, he must pay the iStamp
and Native Land Duty within three
months on the Commissioner’s valuation of
the land. That officer considers it to
be worth £IO,OOO. Mr. Brown had been
calculating it as being only £SOOO, and is
inclined to question the valuation, but hav-
ing the fear oi the £lO per centum fine before
him, he hands over £IOOO to the Commis-
sioner. This plan is the best and easiest for
the Government. But how about the pur-
chaser? He has paid duty amounting to
£IOOO on that which assuming the interests of
the native owners to be equal, and the Com-
missioner’s assessment of value to be correct,
is only equivalent to £IOO. In the first year
after this Mr. Brown, in addition to the first
execution, procures twenty-four signatures
to his deeds, in the second year seven; third,
four; fourth, five; fifth, eight; sixth,
twenty-two; seventh, five ; eighth, one ;
ninth, four; tenth, nine, making a total of
ninety interests acquired, at a cost of
(say) £6OOO, leaving ten owners who
decline to sell at any price. He next
applies to the Native Land Court for a sub-
division, and finds that the non-sellers are
larger owners than those he has dealt with,
and the Court awards them one-fifth of
the whole block, instead of one-tenth,
as he had anticipated, and these natives
probably pick out the most valuable
and best improved portion of it, and
say that “that part was their original hold-
ing before the Pakeha came on to it.” The
vendors do rot trouble themselves about it,
they have been paid for their shares, and
there is an end of it as far as they are
concerned. Now, according to the Commis-
sioners’ valuation the duty rightly payable on
the portion thus awarded by the Court to
Mr. Brown on the subdivision would be £BOO
only, but he has paid £IOOO, and laid out of it
for ten years, he not only loses the proportional
interest on the whole (his payments being
irregular and made as he procures signatures
to his deed), but, in addition, has given £2OO
for nothing, which he had no right whatso-
ever to have paid.
It is difficult how to find a remedy for this
evil unless by making the duties payable on
the complete execution of the deed of con-
veyance by all the owners, or when the
Native Land Court has made a partition of
the land between the purchaser and the
dissentients from the sale ; or, possibly, the
following plan might be found to answer :
when an incomplete deed was presented for
assessment, the Commissioner might, in
addition to valuing the land, the subject
of such conveyance, ascertain the number
of owners, and fix the amount of duty
to be charged against each share or interest
(for his purpose all the interests might be
deemed to be equal), and then the purchaser
should pay the proportion of duty equivalent
to the number of interests he had acquired
up to that time. Afterwards he might be per-
mitted, at the end of each succeeding year,
to pay the amount due on any further shares
which may have been added to the con-
veyance during that period. In default of
making a return of the signatures procured,
and paying the duties due thereon within
one month after the expiration of such year,
then a fine of £25 per centum per month to
be imposed until the Act was complied with.
Having made comments on the varied and
conflicting legislation respecting native lands
from 1840 to 1886, it may in con-
clusion be deemed advisable to shortly
recapitulate some of the most important
features thereof. In the first place the Crown
had in 1840 acquired the pre-emptive right of
purchasing such lands as the natives were
willing to sell. By the enactment of “ The
Native Lands Act, 1862,” the Crown waived
and gave up this right, and the natives were
empowered to sell their lands to any person
whomsoever. By “ The Native Lands Act,
1865,” ten names only were placed in a cer-
tificate of title, and those persons named had
the full right to dispose of the lands by sale or
lease, without consulting the large body of
owners, the names of whom were not in«
eluded in the certificate, and who had as
much right to the land as the ten whose
names were entered therein. The ten persons
as a rule generally pocketed the proceeds of
a sale, or the rents derived from a lease, and
ignored the existence of the outside owners.
In 1867 the Act of 1865 was amended by
making provision in section 17 for placing
ten names on the face of the certificate, and
endorsing the remainder on the back of it, and
registering them in the Court books. This
provision created ten “certificated owners,”
and made the others “registered owners.”
This section farther provided that the land,
comprised in such certificate, should not be
alienable except by a lease not exceeding
twenty-one years, and that no sale could be
effected until the land was subdivided. The
ten certificated owners had the right to lease
the lands and draw the rents, and although
the Legislature may have looked on them as
trustees for the other owners whose names
were registered, they, however, did not act
as such, and generally disregarded the rights
of the others, and retained the rents for
their own use. This section (17) further
provided that a subdivision could be effected
on an application being made to the Court
by the whole, or a majority of the owners. In a
subsequent statute “ The Native Land Act,
1873,” it was sot forth that any of the persons
interested inland held under the 17th section
of the Act of 1867 could apply for a sub-
division, but the land must be subdivided
before any sale or lease (except a lease for 21
years) could be made of it, unless all the
parties interested assented to such sale or
lease. It certainly appears very extraordi-
nary that the Acts of 1862 and 1865 per-
mitted twenty and ten persons, respectively
to dispose of the interests of hundreds of
their co-owners without question, but when
power is given for placing the names of all
the persons interested, either in a certificate
of title or a memorial of ownership, restric-
tions on alienation are immediately imposed
by the statute. The Act of 1873 provided
for the issue of memorials of ownership in
which the names of all the ascertained
owners were to be inserted, and the certifi-
cates of title under the seventeenth section of
the Act of 1867, were to be dealt with


under the Act of 1873, in the same manner
as memorials of ownership, where no dealings
in the shape of sales, leases, or mortgages
had been effected with such lands. It was
provided in the same Act (1873) that in any
proposed sale or lease of land held under
memorial of ownership that on the applica-
tion of a majority of the owners a subdivision
could be made. But no land could be sold
or leased until subdivided, unless in the case
of all assenting to such sale or lease, which
would then be valid. Section 48 enacted that
the persons named in the memorial of own-
ership could not deal with the land except
by lease for twenty-one years. The next
section lays down “ Nothing, however, in the
foregoing conditions annexed to any memo-
rial of ownership shall be deemed to preclude
any sale of the land comprised in such me-
morial where all the owners of such land agree
to the sale thereof. In 1878 an Amendment Act
was passed, and it again differed as to the
manner in which subdivisions were to be
applied for as follows : “ Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary thereto in * The
Native Land Act, 1873,’ or any amendment
thereto, it shall be lawful for the Court in
its discretion, on the application of any native
owner, or other person interested there-
in, to hear and determine the value or extent
of any" estate in any laud held by such
applicant under memorial of ownership, or
Crown grant, or award, or conveyance, and if
it shall deem fit to make an order vesting any
part or portion of such land in the appli-
cant. ”
Any person reading this would natu-
rally assume that, as there was power to
hear and determine the value or extent of
any estate or interest held under conveyance,
and to make an order vesting any part of tne
land in the applicant—that there must first
have been the right to purchase the interests
passing by such conveyance, or it would not
have been lawful to subdivide them. Here
the application by a majority of the owners
for a subdivision is dropped, and it is com-
petent for any native owner or other person
(European) to make an application—and it
is also clear that the section refers only to
lands held under Memorial Ownership
made under the Act of 1873, and to Cer-
tificates of Title issued under the seventeenth
section of the Act of 1867 (which had
in fact become Memorials of Ownership
by the Act of 1873) as the section com-
mences by alluding to the provisions of
the Act of 1573, which only refer to
those two classes of imtruinents of title. If
the natives had no power t > sell unless a sub-
division first took place, or all the owners had
assented to a sale, how can an European
apply to have the value and extent of his
estate and interest defined, and get an order
made in his favour, vesting any part or
portion of the land in h'm? This apparently
indicates that the law permitted tie pur
chase of individual shares, or intere-ts Jess
than thoseof all theowneis, otherwise what oc-
casion would there be to define the extent and
value of the interest acquired by a conveyance
to a European? If all assented and executed
the conveyance, it would be a perfect instru-
ment of title, and ready for the certificate of
the Trust Commissioner, under “ The JNative
Land Frauds Prevention Act.” It appears
to be intended to meet a case where the par*
chaser included the whole of a block in his
conveyance, and not being able to procure
the signatures of all the owners, comes to
the Court to have defined the extent and
value of what he has acquired under the
deed.
Again, in 1882, a “Native Land Act
Amendment Act” was passed, which tends to
show that the Act of 1873 had not been
technically complied with in several respects,
principally among them must have been the
acquisition of undivided shares and interests,
without the assent of all the owners
being obtained to such sales and purchases,
for it was specially enacted that “on the
application of any person interested, either
originally or derivatively, in any such land it
shall be lawful for the Court to inquire into
the matter, and make such order respecting
the same as shall appear to the Court justly
to remedy any mistake or any error in the
proceedings .” Then it further provides that
“ An endorsement made by the Court on any
such order or on any instrument of disposi-
tion shall be valid and effectual for effecting
the objects specified in such order, and an
entry shall be made in the Registry of the
Land Transfer and the Registry of Deeds
Offices to the effect that such orders have
been made.”
Now, firstly, the person applying who
is derivatively interested, must almost in-
variably be a European. Secondly, it may
be asked “ what has the Court to in-
quire into?” The answer might be “the
inquiry is about Mr. Smith’s deeds; he
cannot get them registered because he has
only acquired some of the interests of the
owners under a memorial of ownership,
without any sub-division having been made,
and without getting the assent of all the
parties interested, to his conveyance.” Then
another question may be put : What are the
mistakes or errors which are to be remedied
in the proceedings, and what proceedings
are alluded to ? The errors and mistakes
cannot be in the Court proceedings, but
must be in some instrument of disposition, as
the Court can make an endorsement on such,
and notify such endorsement to the offices
wherein registration of title is effected. It
may therefore be reasonably assumed that
the errors consisted in the land under the
memorial of ownership not being subdivided
before the conveyance was made ; that the
whole of the owners did not consent to the
sale, that the conveyance was executed
by a part of them only; and that
the European purchaser was not able
to understand the conflicting laws re*>
lating to the lease and sale of native lands.
Tnat he and a section of the owners of the
land had in good faith entered into a con-
tract for the sale and conveyance of it to
him, and the Court was empowered to
justly remedy such mistakes and errors.
If the purchaser had acquired the whole of the
interests he could have applied to the Court
for an order in freehold tenure which would
not necessitate any transactions with the
Registry of the Land transfer and the
Registry of Deeds offices. It, therefore,
would seem to be clear that the instrument of
disposition alluded to in the section of the Act


was a conveyance of certain interests in a
block which bad not been sub-divided.
“ The Land Division Act ” of 1882 also
provides for “ any person who, before the
passing of that Act, has acquired an undi-
vided share in any land granted to natives
(this, mutatis mutandis, applies also to memo-
rials of ownership, and certificates of title), or
any estate or interest therein, may apply to
have his estate or interest defined, and
thereupon the Court may order a defined
portion of the block to be granted to him
proportionate to the value of the estate or
interest acquired ”
Now if a conveyance is invalid unless the
land held under a memorial of ownership
(which includes a certificate of title under
the 17th section of the Act of 1867) has been
subdivided before the purchase is effected ;
or unless all the owners assent to such con-
veyance, then why does the law sanc-
tion the application of a person who
has acquired undivided shares, and a
Court to sit and award to him a defined
portion of the block proportionate to the
value of the estate or interest acquired? It
cannot therefore be a matter for astonish-
ment that ordinary persons, unacquainted
with the law, should be puzzled and make
mistakes ; but that is no reason why the
statutes should not be amended, and the
wrongs inflicted on innocent persons and
hard working settlers, be set right, and that
injustices and disabilities inflicted on the
native landowners should also be removed.
Fven higher authorities than mere land-
purchasers sometimes differ in their judg-
ments in these matters, as can be shown by
referring to those delivered by Mr. Justice
Richmond in the case in 1884, and
the Whangara case in 1887, respectively. In
the first of these it was held that the taking
a conveyance in the first instance from those
willing to sell, then procuring a subdivision,
and a fresh title for a portion of the land pro-
portionate to the interests sold (such fresh
certificate of title to be issued to the
natives who had excuted the conveyance),
the fresh title having been so ordered by the
Court (Native Land Court), the conveyance
previously executed by all the owners named
in suoh new title was held to be a com-
pliance with the riot. This was the question
raised and settled in the Kotarepaia case.
The judgment in the Whangara case is as
follows :
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW ZEALAND,
WELLINGTON DISRICT.
Sbymohu v. Macdonald.
Judgment of Richmond, J. (Delivered 14th April,
1887.)
In this case the plaintiff claims to be the purchaser
of the shares and interests of some of the native
owners of a block of land at Poverty Bay, known as
“ Whang .ra.” Tne block is held under a certificate
of title issued under section 17 of “ The Native Lands
Act, 1867.” The order for a certificate bears date 2nd
December, 1870; and on the Same day the presiding
Judge was ordered to report, and must be taken to
have reported, the opinion of the Native Land Court
that it was proper that the block should be inalien-
able by sale or mortgage or by lease for a longer
period than twenty-one years from the date thereof.
The plaintiff claims under a memorandum of transfer
alleged to have been executed in accordance with the
provisions of “ The Native Land Act, 1878.” Ihe
Commissioner appointed under " The Native Lands
Frauds Prevention Act, 1881,” has certified the trans-
action as not invalid under that Act; hut the certift-
ca'e and declaration of aJudgr <f the Native Land
Court required by sections eland 98 of “The Native
Laud Act, 1873,” have not been obtained. The con-
ditions of a valid alienation under the latter Act can-
not, it is obvious, have been complied with ; for it is
not pretended either that all the owners have signed
the memorandum of transfer, or that there has been a
Subdivision under section 97 of the Act. The plaintiff
has now made application to the Chief Judge of the
Native La d Court for a certificate under section 24
of “The Native Land Administration Act, 1886;”
and, upon the refusal of the Chief Judge to grant a
certificate, comes to this Court for a wr.t Of mandamus.
The 24th section expressly excepts cases where the
title to the land in which a share or interest i. c aimed
was at the time of the purchase nr lease —which must
mean at the time of the pretended purchase or lease
subject to any restriction precluding such purchase
or lease. The plaintiff Is therefore driven to contend
that this Whangara Block was not at the date of this
purchase subject to any such restriction. Accordingly
he argues that either the recommendation of the
Native Land Court respecting the imposition of such
a restriction was ultra vires and void c r that It ought
now to be disregarded by the Chief Judge.
In my opinion this contention cannot be sustained.
Ssct'on 20 of the «ct of 1867 requires the Native Land
Court to append to every certificate issued either
under the Act of 18*16 or under the Act of 1867, a re-
port, stating tin opinion of the Court on the question
whether it is or is not proper to restrain alienation ;
and if proper, then to what extent. It is argued that
such a report must be inoperative as regards certifi-
cates under the 17th section, because under that sec-
tion no Crown grant can issue ; so that a recommend-
ation to the Governor respecting conditions to be im-
posed by the grant is an absurdity. But it is con-
sistent with the provisions cf the 17th section that,
"tier partition or a block comprised in a certificate
issue 1 under that section, Crown grants may be issued
of the portions allot, d in severalty to the different
Native owners Partition, under the name < f subdivi-
sion, is contemplated by the section, and reference is
made to the provisions for that purpose o .ntatned in
the Act of 1865. 'J he reference to the 15th section of
the Act of 1885 is an evident misprint. The misiake
is so plain that I have no hesitation in saying that
for“lsoh”the Court must read “50th.” Now the
50th section of the Act of 1865 makes provision for
the issue of Crown grants of the allotted shares in a
block, and these pr visions are easily applicable to tire
case of holders under a c rt float) issued under sec-
tion 17 of the Act of 1873. Thera Is therefore no
d ffioulty in supposing tnac the restraint on aliena-
tion, if adopted by the Governor, I* to be inserted in
the grants of the several allotments afier partition.
Meantime, it appe irs to me impo)«ib e to contend
that the report c m be tiealed as a nullity by the very
Court which issued it. True, it is as yet only a
recommendation, which the Governor may ultima ely
decline to act uuon ; but the Court having once made
etch a rcc immendation is functus officii in the
matter. It would be clearly ultra vires in any Judge
of the Court to p-etend to anticipate the action of the
Governor, and lake th 3 matter out of His Excel-
lency’s hands by allowing alienation. 'I he land
thereforo muss be considered as subject to a re-
striction precluding alienation within the meaning of
section 24.
But even setting aside the special restraint on
alienation which existed in this case, and supposing
the block to have been held under certificate without
any such special restriction, I am of opinion that the
plaintiff mu t fail. The alienation uas never been
approved by the Native Land Court under section
61 of “ The Native Lands Act, 1873,” nor could it
properly have been so approved for the reason already
stated. It has been decided over and over agoin
that a memorandum of transfer under the Act of 1873
does not proprio vigore pass an estate to the pur
chaser The certificate and declaration mentioned in-
section 61 are essential pans of the conveyance, and
nothing vests till they are obtained.
The Act of 1880 can have made no difference in this
respect. Section 24 speaks of “ a person who may
claim to have heretofore purchased or leased the
share or interest of some out of several owners of
land ; ” and by the Interpretation clause “ owner ” in-
cludes persons registrred under section 17. Relying on
this language, I understand counsel for the plaintiff
to suggist that section 24 recognises transactions such
as the plaintiff’s alleged purchase, and does away with
the necessity for the approval of the Native Laud


Court. It is, however, quite possible to give effect to
the language of section 24 without resorting to such a
supposition. As regards leases the section may, no
doubt, apply to lands held under or
memorial of ownership : but as regards absolute alien-
ation the section does not in my opinion apply to
lands so held, but only to purchases of shares held by
natives In j lint tenancies, or as tenants in common
under Crown grants, l and so held is not within the
exception from the definition of “ land” contained in
section 3. that is to say, it is not “ land purchased hy
a native from the Crown or from Europeans, and held
under Crown gr-nt or conveyance to such owner indi-
vidually.” “ Individually” must here mean the same
thing as “ solely for it appears from section 21 that
land held under grants to more natives than one
comes within the general prohibitory enactment of
section 32. Therefore, in regard to purchases of
shares so held which had been made, but not com-
pleted by conveyance, prior to the Act, some special
provision was fair and proper ; and I take it that to
such purchasers, and to such purchasers only, sec-
tions 24 and 25 ap, ly. Effect is thus allowed to those
provisions without resorting to the supposition put
forward on the part of the plaintiff. But in any case
it cannot have been intended by those provisions to
do away with the existing restrictions upon the ac-
quisition by Europeans of partial interests held under
certificates and memorials of The policy
of the Act, as pointed out by Mr. Bell, is not to en-
able but to restrain the direct alienation of their
lands hy Natives to Europeans; and it cannot have
been intended to give validity to transactions which,
under the statutory provisions in force at the time of
the passing of the new Act, would have been inopera-
tive. Therefore, on this independent ground, my
Opinion is against the present application.
The motion for the issue of a writ must be refused
with costs.
As regards the above judgment in the
Whangara case, it may be noted that section
61 of “The Native Land Act, 1873,” applies
to a complete purchase, where all the persons
had signed the deed of conveyance, and the
Eurchaser has applied for an order for free-
old tenure. Now the case submitted to
the Court arose out of section 24 of “ The
Native Land Administration Act, 1886,” the
part referring to the case being as follows :
Section 24. “A person who may claim to
have purchased or leased the share or
interest of some out of several owners
of land (the title whereto was not at
the time of such purchase or lease, subject
to any restriction precluding such purchase
or lease), may notify, etc , and thereupon it
shall be the duty of a Judge thereof, and if
he is satisfied that there has been a purchase
or lease, as alleged, and that the transaction
was bona fide, and that a fair value or rent
was given or received, may give his certifi-
cate to that effect to the person alleging
himself to be such purchaser or lessee, who
shall transmit the same to the Commissioner.
By subsection (b) the purchaser may, within
one month after the date of the certificate,
give notice to the Commissioner that he is
desirous of purchasing the shares or interests
which he has not already acquired, and in
such case he may, on obtaining such certifi-
cate from a Judge, that such Judge is satisfied
that he had before the Ist day of July, 1886,
obtained the signature of one or more owner
or owners to a writing purporting or agree-
ing to convey the share or interests of the
persons signing at any time within twelve
months from the said Ist day of July, 1886,
but not afterwards, purchase all or any of
such shares or interest.” The case of Mr,
Seymour is simply this: He leased the
Whangara block for a term of years, and
during the currency of his lease some of the
owners sold and conveyed their interests to
him. He applied to the Chief Judge of the
Native Lands Court for a certificate under the
24th section above quoted. It appears
that the land was held by a certificate of
title made under the seventeenth section
of “The Native Land Act, 1867,” whereby
the land was rendered inalienable except by
lease for 21 years, unless it was subdivided,
when, it so subdivided, a purchase could be
made. The Chief Judge refused the applica-
tion, on the ground that the land, the sub-
ject of it, came under the proviso of section
24 of being subject to a restriction precluding
such purchase or lease. This was the issue
tried by Mr. Justice Richmond. He decided
that the land was subject to a restric-
tion at the time Mr, Seymour purchased
the interests. It may be urged, with
all deference to the opinion of the most
able authority on native land ques-
tions, who occupies the judicial bench
in New Zealand, that there was nothing in
any law in force within the colony prevent-
ing Mr. Seymour from entering into agree-
ments with the owners of land held by
certificate of title under the seventeenth
section of the Act of 1867, but on the
contrary, he might assert that he was
proceeding to procure the assent of all the
owners to such sale, until he was stopped in
his negotiations by the passing of “ The
Native Land Administration Act, 1886
that if he had been allowed to go on for
another two or three years he might, although
not being able to get all the owners to sign a
conveyance to him, have procured the
assent of the whole of them to a
sale, when he would then have been in
a position to have applied to the
Court to give him an order for freehold tenure
for the interests he had acquired, or the
partition of the interest of the dissentients
from those the subject of the proposed
sale to him. Assuming that the sale was
not good in law, then at least the documents
would be evidence of a proposed sale or
lease, and would come under the meaning of
section 65 of the Act of 1873. Now, turn-
ing to section 98, referred to by the learned
Judge, it is provided therein that “ All
lands comprised in any such certificate (the
certificate alluded to is one under the seven-
teenth section of the Act of 1867) issued
as last aforesaid respecting which no
conveyance, lease, mortgage or contract
has been made, may be dealt with in the
like manner as land held under memorial
of ownership under this Act. Provided
that land comprised in any such certifi-
cate respecting which any dealings may
have heretofore been had may be dealt
with in like manner as land held under me-
morial of ownership under this Act, but only
in the case that in every dealing for such
land the parties to such transactions shall
satisfy the Court that they have the assent
of all the persons (not the signatures) of all
the persons to a conveyance, whose names
are indorsed on the certificate, as well as the
assent of those named on the face of the
certificate to any such transaction.” “The
Native Land Court Act of 1886,” it is true,
repealed “The Native Laud Act, 1873,” but it
left very ample provision in section 117 for
carrying out anything that had been com-
menced under any of the repealed Acts.
Mr. Seymour might therefore have argued


thus with the Chief Judge of the Native Land
Court at the time his application came
before that officer. I have nob come before
you for the purpose of asking for an order of
freehold tenure for the interests alleged to
have been acquired by me in the Whangara
block; 1 only wish you to give me a certificate
which will enable me to proceed in procuring
the assent of all the owners to the sale of
the interests of those who are willing to con-
vey to me, or to procure the signatures of all
of the owners t® a conveyance. There is noth-
ing prohibiting me from doing so ; in fact,
I am complying with the Act of 1873 in
trying to obtain the assent of all to a sale,
or the signatures of all to a conveyance;
and at some future time I would have come
before you, either with a complete conveyance,
or a complete assent to a conveyance, and
would have then applied to you in the one case
for an order in freehold tenure under
section 59, or in the other for a partition
under sections 65 and 69 of the Act of 1873.”
•Section 240 f “The Native Land Administra-
tion Act, 1886,” refers to incomplete trans«
actions only, and not to those that have
been conducted to a conclusion with the
native owners holding under a memorial of
ownership. The judgment, however, sets
forth “that the certificate and declaration
of a Judge of the Native Land Court
required by sections 61 and 98 of
“The Native Land Act, 1873,” have
not been obtained. The condition of a valid
alienation under the latter Act cannot, it is
obvious, have been complied with, for it is
not pretended either that all the owners have
signed the memorandum of transfer, or there
has been a subdivision under section 97 of
the Act.”
The question before the Supreme Court was
whether the Chief Judge of the Native Land
Court was not bound in law to issue a certi-
ficate to enable Mr. Seymour to proceed with
an incomplete transaction, which in itself was
not illegal, but only inchoate and incomplete,
and had not arrived at the stage when it
would require to receive the certificate and
declaration of a Judge of the Native Land
Court It was not forbidden by law to obtain
the assent or signatures of any of the
native owners to a deed of conveyance,
but to validate that conveyance and procure
the certificate and declaration of a Judge of
the Native Land Court, it required the
signatures of all the owners either to the
conveyance or to an assent to the convey-
ance, that is, the non-sellers agreeing to the
sale by the others but retaining their own
shares. Mr. Seymour intended to procure
these, and was proceeding to do so when he
was stopped by the present law, and he
merely asks for a certificate to enable him to
complete what he had commenced. The
Court was not asked to give Its opinion as
to the validity of Mr. Seymour’s purchase,
but whether Mr. Seymour had “obtained
the signature of one or more owners to a
writing purporting or agreeing to convey the
share or interests of the persons sign-
ing it, the title whereto was not at
the time of such purchase subject to any
restriction precluding such purchase.’ The
word “ purchase ’ is in the commencement
of section 24 somewhat at variance with the
provisions of subsection (b) above quoted.
The one alludes to an absolute sale, and the
other relates to a document purporting to
agree to convey—not a conveyance. The
question is whether Mr. Seymour’s docu-
ment, which be submitted to the Chief Judge
of the Native Land Court, could not have been
looked on in the light of an agreement to
convey, which there was nothing in law to
prevent him from completing, and which
he could set up as being a proper
conveyance whenever he either pro-
cured the signatuies of all the owners
thereto or the assent of all to the sale being
made by the vendors. Section 48 of the Act
of 1873 contained a provision providing for
the following restriction on alienation: —
“To every such memorial there shall be
annexed the following condition : That the
owners of the piece of land referred to in
such memorial have not power to sell or
make any other disposition of the said land,
except that they may lease the same for any
term not exceeding twenty-one yearn.” The
next section (49) provides that : “Nothing,
however, in the foregoing conditions
annexed shall be deemed to preclude
any sate of the land comprised in such
memorial where all the owners of such
land agree to the sale thereof, or to prevent
any partition of such land in manner here-
inafter provided, if required.” The only
difference between this restriction and that
contained in section 17 of the Act of 1867 is,
that in the latter case, the laud could not
be dealt with otherwise than by lease not
exceeding twenty-one years until subdivided.
Now, by the Act of 1873, sections 97 and
98, it was clearly provided for that lands
under such certificates could be dealt with the
same as lands under memorial of ownership,
consequently, the restrictions in such certifi-
cates were waived in so faras they differed from
those imposed by section 48 above quoted ;
and by the next section (49) in despite
of the restriction, it was enacted that a
sale of the land comprised in such memorial
where all the owners agree to the sale
thereof was to be recognised. The
words are not where all the owners have
erecuted a conveyance thereof. Mr. Seymour
might allege, “lam in the course of getting
such agreement to a sale,” and is there any-
thing in the law which provides that he
cannot endeavour to do so ? The above
appears to refer to all cases where a Crown
grant of land under memorial of ownership
has not been issued. It is true that the Act
of 1867 provides for the insertion by the
Governor of restrictions on alienation in any
grant if the same shall have been recom-
mended by a Judge of the Native Land
Court, but a recommendation of a Judge
is one thing, and the placing it in a
grant is another matter. It seems to have
been so in the Whangara case. In the cer-
tificate of title the Judge had recommended
a restriction to be inserted in the grant, but
it is well known that except in one or two
instances where the grants were issued by
an oversight (as in Grice and Benn’s case),
none were prepared for lands held under a
certificate of title issued in accordance
with the seventeenth section of the
Native Land Act, 1867, consequently
if the Crown grant never issued for
the Whangara block, it was impossible for


it to contain a restriction on alienation, and
the recommendation on the face of the cer-
tificate could not be considered as a restric-
tion on alienation. If this is so, the only
restrictions, therefore, which had any force
or effect were the statutory restrictions
imposed by the Acts of 1867 and 1873 in
Certificates of Title and Memorials of Owner-
ship, which could be set aside by complying
with the provisions of section 49 of the Act
of 1873 ” Further, with reference to Mr.
Justice Richmond’s remarks that section 50
of the Act of 1865 makes “ provision for the
issue of Crown grants of the allotted shares
in a block, and these provisions are easily
applicable to the case of holders under a
certificate issued under section 17 of the Act
of 1873- There is, therefore, no difficulty in
supposing that the restraint on alienation, if
adopted by the Governor, is to be inserted
in the grants of the several allotments after
partition.” It may be urged that in the case
of land held by Memorial of Ownership a
grant could not be issued on the commutation
of Native Title to more than ten persons
(section 80, Act of 1873), and this may be
taken to also apply to any case of lands held
by certificate of title under section 17 of
the Act of 1867, if not before, at anyrate
subsequent to the passing of the Act of
1873, therefore, it was impossible to issue a
Crown grant for the Whangara block
after that date, as there were more
than ten certificated and registered owners
in the certificate for the block, and
the recommendation to impose a restriction
on alienation would then be null and void.
It is doubtless correct that a rest iction on
alienation could be inserted in the new
certificates granted on a subdivision, but the
Whangara block had never arrived at that
stage, and it may therefore be justifiable to
assume that the only bar to alienation was
the statutory restriction imposed bv section
17 of the Act of 1867, and section 48 of the
Act of 1873. The judgment throughout
appears to deal with what was not required
from the Supreme Court, namely, as to the
validity of the documents submitted by Mr.
Seymour, whereas it would appear that all
that was required to be determined was
whether Mr. Seymour had obtained a writing
purporting to agree to convey certain in-
terests, and is he entitled to receive a
certificate to enable him to complete his
conveyance? The answer might have been
Yes ; he may go on with his arrangements ;
but when he completes his conveyance he
must, to make it valid, if he does not pur-
chase all the shares, either apply for a
subdivision, as contemplated by the Act of
1873 and the Act of 1886, or shall in accord-
ance with the Act of 1873, satisfy the Court
that all the owners of such land either sold
their interests, or that the non-sellers agreed
to the sale by the others, but required a sub-
division of their portion of the block.
The Judge and Mr. Bell agree that
“ the policy of the Act of 1886 is
not to enable, but to restrain. the
direct alienation of their lands by natives
to Kuropeans;” and the Judge adds, “and
it cannot have been intended to give
validity to transactions which under the
statutory provisions in force at the time of
the passing of the new Act would have been
inoperative. Therefore, on this independent
ground, my opinion is against the present
application.” Doubtless “ The Native Land
Administration Act, 1886,” was enacted
with the above object; but it must be
remembered that the Act of 1873 sets forth
in the preamble thereto : That whereas it is
highly desirable to establish a system by
which natives shall be enabled at a less cost
to have their surplus land surveyed, their
titles thereto ascertained, and the transfer
and dealings thereto facilitated , be it
enacted, &c. The Judge had therefore to
look at the position of the case as it stood
under the Acts of 1865, 1867, and 1873, not
through the light of the Act of 1886. It
appears to have been entirely overlooked in
the case that the Native Land Court never
entirely complied with the provisions of the
Act of 1873 ; that it made subdivisions of
land under memorial of ownership when a
majority of the owners had not applied for
them. That Kuropeans purchased and obtained
orders for freehold tenure when all the per-
sons owning the land bad not assented to
the sale or executed the conveyance, and
although the purchase of such interests was
not strictly legal, that successive subsequent
Acts allowed the subdivision of shares or
interests so acquired, and that by inference
the so doing, if it did not create the right
to purchase them, facilitated the right to
obtain a supposed legal title to them when so
purchased.
Having so far endeavoured to place ** our
dealings with Maori lands,” and the defects
of our legislation thereon before the public,
the author will be satisfied if what has been
herein written in any way conduces to
amended legislation, and the introduction of
a better system of dealing with Native lands
which will be beneficial to both races of Her
Majesty’s subjects in New Zea'and, and
assist in the progress of civilisation and
settlement therein. With these objects
he has drafted an Act proposing
to deal with this important question, not
under the impression that it will provide
complete remedies for the evils now existing,
but that it may be used as a part of the
framework on which to construct a sound
and satisfactory law, by which future trans-
actions will be fairly and easily conducted,
and those of the past may be brought to a
satisfactory and honourable arrangement and
conclusion, not overlooking the fact that
these have been entered into under laws
which could not be understood or entirely
complied with. The writer, after submitting
the draft of the proposed Act for the con-
sideration of his readers, will make a few
remarks on several of the new features con-
tained in it. He, however, craves the in-
dulgence of the legal profession, and hopes
that they will not too severely criticise the
opinions on points of law herein expressed,
as they are those of a layman, and will not
be too hard on any of the language of the
draft Act now submitted for consideration,
but that they will give the question that
calm consideration which its importance
demands, and suggest such alterations and
amendments as may occur to them. He
trusts that nothing herein contained will
give offence to any person who has been
engaged either in legislating on the native


land question, or in administering the several
conflicting laws relating thereto, but that
everything herein will be taken in the same
spirit in which it is given and with
the same object namely, to promote
discussion, and cause valuable suggestions
to be made tending to the settlement of a
question which is hardly second in import-
ance to any other affecting the welfare
of this colony. He would not have ven-
Auckland, 31st May, 1887.
tured to write at all on the subject, but no
other person seemed to have the inclination
or leisure to ventilate it, and he therefore
gave his views of the matters which had
come under his notice during an experience
of twenty-nine years in native land purchase
transactions, in the expectation that others,
also acquainted with “our dealings with
Maori lands,” would contribute their quota
of information for the public weal.




INTRODUCTORY.
\HE difficulties and obstacles attendant on the acquisition
I of Native lands by Europeans having been fully entered
into in the previous pages of this pamphlet, it may be
expedient to here state succinctly the defects in previous legis-
lation on, and proceedings relating to, the Native Land question,
vhich it is proposed to remedy, and, if possible, remove by the
provisions of the Draft Act now submitted for consideration,
viz.:—
Ist.—The peripatetic nature of the sittings of the Native
Land Courts, caused by the Judges not being appointed
to and permanently stationed in defined districts.
2nd.—The consequent ignorance of the Judges and Assessors
of the natural features of the country, and the particular
class ot title prevailing in any district.
3rd.—The enormous expenses of executing surveys, caused by
two or three surveys being made by contending parties
for the same block.
4th. —The sittings of the Native Land Courts being frequently
fixed to be held at long distances from the land the
subject of investigation, thereby debarring large numbers
of elderly claimants, and infirm people, from attending
thereat; also entailing enormous expense and loss of
time by taking the active members of a tribe away from
their homes.
sth. —The method of procedure of the Native Land Court
being so greatly assimilated to the practice of the Supreme
and other English Courts of Law within the Colony,
which is not understood or appreciated by large numbers
of Natives, and the necessity of adopting such a course
of proceedings as will be more in accordance with the
Maori ideas of dealing with their land questions.


6th. —The frauds practised on large numbers of Natives
(frequently on the majority) interested in lands, the title
whereof had been investigated by the Native Lands
Court, by the limited number of persons whose names
were inserted in Certificates of Title and other instruments
made by order of the Native Land Court.
7th. —The enormous expense of procuring the signatures of
hundreds of Native owners (scattered all over the
country) to conveyances and leases of single blocks of
land.
Bth.—The doubts as to the validity of the titles of Europeans
through the conflicting legislation on Native land
questions.
9th. —The unsatisfactory state of outstanding and incomplete
purchases and leases.
10th.—The stagnation in all Native land transactions through
the provisions of recent enactments, seriously affecting the
position of the vendors, lessors, purchasers, and lessees of
the same, and the consequent prevention of the investment
of capital in that direction.
11th.—The extreme unpopularity of the “Native Land Ad-
ministration Act, 1886,” and the unwillingness of the
Natives to bring their lands under its operation.
12th. —The urgent necessity for speedily ascertaining and
determining the titles to N ative Lands throughout the
North Island, by which the necessity for special legis-
lation on Native matters could be dispensed with, and
the expense of the Native Minister’s Department could
be saved.


An Act to define and determine the title to lands held by Aboriginal Title
Natives under Maori Usage and Custom, and to make provision
for regulating the sale and other disposition of Native Lands,
and for validating and settling incomplete titles thereto.
WHEREAS considerable discontent and dissatisfaction at present Preamble
exists among the Aboriginal Natives of New Zealand with respect to
the laws governing the sale and other dispositions of their lands; and
it is expedient that their Proprietary Rights to and over all lands held
by them according to Maori Usage and Custom, should be speedily
ascertained, determined, finally settled, and clothed with a legal title,
assimilated as nearly as possible to European ownership under the
statutes in operation within the Colony. And it is further highly
desirable that steps should be taken without delay for securing per-
manently, and irrevocably to the Maori Race ample Reserves of such
lands for their use, maintenance, and benefit, and that provision shall
be made for granting titles thereto. And whereas Agreements have
from time to time been made between Europeans and Maoris for the
sale and lease, or other disposition of Native Lands, and numerous
Deeds of Conveyance and demise have been commenced and partly ex-
ecuted, and it is desirable for the well-being of both races of Her
Majesty’s subjects in the Colony of New Zealand, and for the encour-
agement of settlement and progress, that these incomplete and
outstanding purchases and leases should be completed, and finally and
legally settled with as little delay as possible. And whereas numerous
disputes and expensive suits at law have arisen through defects in,
and doubts as to the meaning and intent of, several of the statutes
relating to Native Lands, and to dealings therewith, and doubts have
arisen as to the validity of certain instruments of title intended and
supposed to have been made in accordance with such enactments, and
it is expedient that such disputes, lawsuits, and doubts should be
removed and for ever set at rest, and that all acts done in good faith
between the parties thereto should be set right, validated and con-
firmed :
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of New Zealand in
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :
1. The Short Title of this Act is “ The New Zealand Native Land Short Title
Titles Settlement and Determination Act, 1887.”
2. “ The Native Land Court Act, 1886,” “ The Native Land Ad- Repeal
ministration Act, 1886,” and “ The Native Equitable Owners’ Act,
1886,” together with the Acts named in Schedule 1 hereto are
hereby repealed.
3. In this Act, if not inconsistent with the context, — interpretation
“ Chief Commissioner ” means the person appointed to be Chief
Commissioner and General Registrar of Native Land Titles
under this Act. . .
“ Commissioner ” means a person appointed to be a Commissioner
and District Registrar of Native Title for a district under this
Act.
“Crown Grant” means a Crown Grant made under this Act, and
includes a Certificate of Title under “The Land Transfer
Act.”
“ Certificate of Title ” means r a Certificate of Title issued under
this Act, and includes Certificates of Title made by the Native
Land Court.
“ Court ” means a Commissioners’ Court held under this Act.


“District” means a Native Land District constituted under tliis
Act.
“ District Register of Title ” means a book or books kept in tbe
office of a Commissioner, wherein all matters pertaining to
Native Lands within a district are recorded.
“ District Reference Map ” means a map of each district compiled
by the Surveyor General, and certified by him.
“District Surveyor” means the officer in charge of surveys in a
district.
“Disposable Land” means land the title whereof has been
determined under this Act and is available for sale or lease.
“ General Register of Titles ” means a book or books kept in the
office of the Chief Commissioner, in which titles relating to all
districts constituted under this Act are recorded.
“ General Reference Map ” means a map of the North Island of
New Zealand showing each district constituted under this
Act, compiled by the Surveyor General and certified by him.
“Hapu Boundary” means the boundary of lands held by a “hapu”
(sept) of a tribe, within a Tribal boundary.
“ Hereditaments ” means lands held under a Crown Grant.
“ Memorial of Ownership” means a Memorial of Ownership made
by the Native Land Court.
“Native” means an aborignal Native of New Zealand, and
includes half-castes, i nd all descendants of half-castes whether
by Maoris or Europeans.
“Native Land ” means land held by Natives under Maori Usage
or Custom.
“Non-seller” means a person dissenting to an incomplete sale of
“ Titled Lands.”
“ Non-lessor ” means a person dissenting to an incomplete lease
of “ Titled Lands.”
“Notice” means a notice published within a District only, in
any way a Commissioner may deem fit to give publicity
to the same.
“Owner” means the person the title of whom to any land has
been ascertained and registered under this Act, or of any
person found to be an owner by any repealed Act relating to
Native land.
“Order” means an order made by a Commissioner under this
Act, and includes an order made by the Native Land Court.
“ Parcel of land ” means a piece of land partitioned under this
Act within any “ hapu ” holding.
“ Partition Order ” means any order for a partition of land made
by a Commissioner.
“ Person ” means a person, whether Native or otherwise.
“Published ” shall mean a notice published by a Commissioner in
the New Zealand Gazette, the Maori Kahiti , and one local
newspaper (if any is published) in a district.
“Registration” means registration in the General or District
Register of Titles.
“Reserved Land” means a parcel of land owned by a “hapu”
and set apart for their permanent use, maintenance, and
benefit.
“ Native Reserve ” means any land heretofore reserved for Native
purposes, and which the Governor may order to be adminis-
tered under this Act, and includes lands reserved under
“The West Coast Settlements Reserves Act, 1881,” and the
Amendments thereto.
“Succession Order” means an order made under this Act for a
person to succeed to the “real estate ” of a deceased person.
“Survey” means a survey ordered by a Commissioner.
“ Sealed ” means sealed with the seal of office.


“ Titled Land ” means land belonging to Natives, the title whereof
has been adjudicated on by the Native Land Court, or any
other legally constituted tribunal having jurisdiction over
any Native land, and applies to all such lands, whether held
under an Order, a Certificate of Title, a Memorial of Owner-
ship, or a Crown Grant, or any other instrument of title made
under any Native Land Act repealed, and shall include land
the title whereof may hereafter be determined under this Act.
“Tribal Boundary” means the external boundary of the lands
owned by any tribe, or the boundary line dividing the lands
of two or more tribes from that of another.
“ Trustees ” means Trustees elected by a “ hapu ” under this Act.
“ Will ” means a will made by a Native in accordance with this
4. The Governor may, by Order in Council, dividei the North
Island of New Zealand into districts to be styled “Native Land Districts,
giving a distinctive name to every such district, and may at time,
as he may think fit, alter the boundaries of, or abolish any such district.
In fixing the limits of such districts, in all cases where known tribal
boundaries exist, these shall be adopted; in cases where tribal
boundaries are not clearly defined, then the division line of districts
to follow some natural feature of the country such as a river, or a
range of hills, but in no case shall a straight line from one given
point to another be allowed except where an actual survey line has
been defined on the ground.
5, The Governor may from time to time appoint such person as The Governor
he may think fit, to be a Chief Commissioner and General Registrar of
Commissioner and
Native Land Titles under this Act, and may from time to time, as he Registrar
may think fit, remove such officer.
6 The Governor may from time to time appoint such persons as The Governor may
he may think fit to be Commissioners and District Registrars of “P*™ 1
Native Land Title, and may from time to time, as he may think fit, met Registrars
remove any or all of such officers. The Governor shall, on making any
such appointment, specify the district within which the person so
appointed shall exercise the powers vested in him under this Act.
7. The Governor may also, during the absence or illness of the The
Chief, or other Commissioner, appoint a deputy Commissioner who
shall,'during the Governor’s pleasure, have and exercise all the powers
vested in a Chief, or other Commissioner, under this Act.
8 The Governor may from time to time appoint such person as The Governor may
he may think fit to be a District Surveyor for any district constituted lstrict
under this Act, and from time to time, as he may think fit, remove such
District Surveyor.
9 The Governor may from time to time appoint such persons as The Governor may
he may think fit to be Assistant Surveyors, Clerks, Maori Interpreters, *PP° int other offi-
(the latter to be duly Licensed under this Act as hereinafter provided),
or such other officers as may appear to him to be necessary for
effectually carrying out the provisions of this Act, and from time to
time, as he may think fit, to remove any or all of such persons.
10 Provided that the person now holding the office of Chief judges and ex-judges
Judge of the Native Land Court, shall be eligible for appointment as g™ eigbkfor
Chief Commissioner, and any person now holding the office of Judge appointment
of the Native Land Court, or any retired Judge thereof, who shall be
willing to accept office under this Act, shall be eligible for appointment
as a Commissioner. If it is found that there are not sufficient persons,
who now hold or have heretofore held office as Judges of the Native
Land Court, to provide a Commissioner for each district constituted
under this Act, the Governor from time to time, from among fit and
proper persons, skilled in the Maori language and conversant with


Native Land tenure according to Maori Usage and Custom, appoint such
person or persons as he may think fit to he a Commissioner or Com-
missioners under this Act, and in like manner may fill up any
appointment rendered vacant, by the death, retirement, or removal of
any Chief or other Commissioner.
Seal of office to be H. The Minister for Lands shall furnish the Chief Commissioner
prtmded with a seal of office and every Commissioner with a similar seal, but
showing thereon the District for which it is issued.
The Governor may 12. The Governor shall constitute a Court for each district, which
district C ° urt f ° r shall be presided over by the Commissioner of the district, with
power, when necessary, to sit with the Chief, or any other Commis-
sioner or Commissioners, as hereinafter provided.
DUTIES OE CHIEF COMMISSIONER.
Chief Commissioner T 3. The person holding the office of Chief Commissioner and
General Registrar of Native Land Titles shall have control of the
Department u N a tiye Land Titles Department ” throughout the Colony of New
Zealand.
General Register of 14. The Chief Commissioner shall keep in his office a book or
byChief Commfs- books to be named “ The General Register of Native Titles,” in which
sioner s h a ll entered all Certificates of Title or orders made by any Com-
missioner appointed under this Act, also copies of any orders or
Certificates of Title or Memorials of Ownership heretofore made by the
Native Land Court, where the land or any part thereof the subject of
such instrument has not been dealt with by sale or lease. The title
relating to each District constituted under this Act shall be kept
separate from that of any other District. There shall also be entered
in a separate book, to be named the “Record of Native Grants,” a
duplicate of all Crown Grants prepared for the Governor’s signature,
and when so signed, if an} 1 - alterations or amendments have been made
in any Grant, such alterations or amendments shall be inscribed in
such duplicate.
Preparation of Crown 15. The Chief Commissioner, on the receipt from any Corn-
Grants missioner of a Certificate of Title made under this Act, as hereinafter
provided, shall forthwith prepare or cause to be prepared (except in
the case of a certificate granted to a hapu under section 37 of this Act)
a Crown grant in triplicate for the land the subject of such Certificate:
One of such to be signed by the Governor, which shall be delivered to
the owners mentioned therein; one copy to be deposited in the
Registry of Deeds Office in the Provincial District within which the
land comprised in such grant is situated; and the third to be trans-
mitted to the Minister of Lands for the time being, for record in his
Department. Provided also where Crown Grants are incomplete or
have not been prepared in respect of any Order, Certificate of Title,
or Memorial of Ownership heretofore made by the Native Land Court,
it shall be lawful for the Chief Commissioner to cause the same to be
completed or prepared in the manner above provided.
General Reference 16. The Surveyor-General shall, immediately after the coming
Map to be pro- i n to operation of this Act, prepare or cause to be prepared, on a large
Reference D scale, a Map of the North Island of New Zealand, to be known as the
etc. General Reference Map,” on which shall be shown all Districts con-
stituted under this Act. Provided also that any Tribal boundary or
boundaries which shall from time to time be fixed and determined by
any Commissioner, as hereinafter provided, shall be entered thereon
by some duly authorised surveyor. Hapu boundaries, when so fixed
and determined, shall also be entered on such “ General Reference
Map ” in like manner as above enacted.
The Surveyor-General shall in like manner prepare, on a large
scale, a Map of each Provincial District in the Middle Island, to be


known as the “Middle Island Reference Map,” showing thereon all
lands held by Natives under Crown Grant, or reserved for the use,
maintenance, or benefit of Natives, within each such Provincial District.
This shall be lodged in the Office of the Chief Commissioner.
The Surveyor-General shall in like manner prepare, or cause to be
prepared, on a large scale, in duplicate, maps to be known by the
name of “District Reference Maps ” of each district constituted under
this Act, and two certified copies thereof. One of such duplicate maps
shall be tiled of record in the Office of the Chief Commissioner, and
the other shall be filed in the Office of the Commissioner of the District
to which it relates. The copies thereof hereinbefore mentioned shall
be used as office and working plans by the Chief and District
Surveyor.
Every such “District Reference Map” shall contain the informa-
tion and particulars following, viz.:—
(a.) The position of all natural features which have been ascer-
tained and fixed within any district, such as mountains,
ranges of hills, rivers, streams, lakes, and forests; also
any known villages or settlements now occupied, or burial
grounds now used by Natives, or any ancient settlements,
fortifications, or burial grounds therein situate.
(i.) Such map shall show accurately all major and minor trigono-
metrical stations which have been established within each
district, and the bearings and distances between the same ;
also where any surveyed Crown or other lands adjoin or
abut on any “Native Land,” the bearings and distances
of all survey lines forming the boundary or boundaries
thereof.
[c.) All Crown Lands which have bean sold, leased, or otherwise
disposed of. Provided that only the external boundaries
thereof require to be shown on such map.
(. d .) Crown Lands remaining unsold or unappropriated for any
purposes. If it shall be deemed expedient for Public
information and reference in any district, the Surveyor
General may, in his discretion, indicate on such map the
allotments or sections into which this class of land has been
laid off or divided.
(e.) “ Titled Lands ” the title whereof has been ascertained and
determined by the Native Land Court, or other tribunal.
(/.) “Titled Lands ” which have been alienated by the owners
by sale, lease, or otherwise, to persons other than the
Government.
(y.) “Titled Lands” held by the owners, and not alienated to
any person.
(A.) “ Native Lands ” held by Natives under Maori Usage and
Custom, the title whereof has not been investigated, as-
certained, and determined.
Such District Reference Maps shall be certified to-as being correct,
and shall be signed by the Surveyor General personally.
17. The Chief Commissioner shall from time to time cause to be AddGeneralandiofs*
added to such General and District Reference Maps, such additional trict Reference
matters as shall be transmitted to him by any Commissioner, as herein- Ma P s
after provided, and shall place on such map his certificate of such entry
therein.
18. Any District Reference Map so prepared, certified, and filed District
in the office of the Chief, or any Commissioner shall be admissable in a bfe P in°evfdencT
evidence in any proceedings under this Act, or in any Court of Law
within the Colony of Now Zealand, and anything contained therein


so far as it refers to the matter under adjudication, or to any issue to
be tried, shall be deemed to be conclusive evidence therein, and shall
not be called into question.
Chief Commissioner 19. The Chief Commissioner may, in difficult or disputed cases,
missioncr’in on the application of any Commissioner, proceed to any district to aid
cult cases and assist such Commissioner in determining the question at issue
or in dispute.
Regulations to be 20. The Chief Commissioner may from time to time frame
Rules and Regulations for the general conduct of business in his own
department. And in like manner, at a meeting of Commissioners to
be convened by him for that purpose, shall, with their assistance,
frame Rules and Regulations for the general conduct of business in all
the Districts constituted under this Act. Provided that no such Rules
or Regulations shall come into operation until the assent of the
Governor in Council shall have been first obtained thereto. Such
Rules and Regulations may from time to time be annulled, altered, or
amended, in such manner as may appear to be necessary.
Graerai Register of X 21. TfeCommissioner shall keep in his office a book or books to
Comniis- be styled Register of Titles,” in which shall be entered all
sioner matters affecting Native Title within the district to which it relates.
And copies of all Orders, Certificates, and Certificates of Title, as from
time to time made by a Commissioner, shall be inscribed therein.
DUTIES OF COMMISSIONERS AND DISTRICT REGISTRARS OF NATIVE
X -2/ TITLE W T ITH RESPECT TO “ TITLED LANDS.”
Commissioner to pub- 22. Every Commissioner appointed to any district under this
ing Act, shall forthwith issue a notice in English and Maori, which shall
chases ami leases be published in the New Zealand Gazette and the Maori Kahiti and
in one local newspaper (if any) in circulation within any Native Land
District, calling upon all persons who have outstanding or incomplete
transactions for the sale or lease of any land with any owners within
such district, to forward the particulars of their claims to him within
three months from the date of such notice.
Commissione^ 23. As soon as may be convenient after the expiration of the
hearing above period of three months, the Commissioner shall, by notice to be
tions respecting published in the manner aforesaid, appoint a day (not less than one
incomplete tmns - 1 * 11 \
actions month from the date of such notice) for hearing and determining the
justice and validity of such claims, when, if satisfied that any such
transaction is bona fide and fair to all the parties concerned, he
shall issue a Certificate under seal to that effect to the applicant; which
Certificate shall show on the face thereof the number of sellers or
lessors, and the number of non-sellers or non-lessors, giving the name
of each person respectively. Such Certificate shall be given to the
applicant, and a copy thereof shall be inscribed in the District Register
of Title, and the General Register of Titles.
Proceedings when a 24. If on such hearing, as aforesaid, the Commissioner shall
£s™ ml to 10 make refuse to make a Certificate in respect of any claim, he shall
certificate make an order to that effect, and, if requested, shall give to the
claimant his reasons therefor in writing, and shall forward copies of
the evidence given in the case, and the reason of such refusal to the
Chief Commissioner and to the Minister for Lands for their information.
The Minister for Lands may, if he shall deem fit, on an application in
that behalf being made to him by the claimant, order the case to be
re-heard before the Chief Commissioner and the Commissioner for the
District within which it originated. If on such re-hearing the claimant
shall be found to be entitled to a Certificate, it shall be issued to him
and dealt with as provided for in the next previous sections. If on a
re-hearing the claimant shall be found not to be entitled to receive
a Certificate, an order to that effect shall be made and shall be signed


by the Chief Commissioner, and the Commissioner for the District, the
orders so made, whether by the Commissioner in the first instance
or by the Chief Commissioner and the Commissioner as above
enacted, shall be final and conclusive, and the legality thereof
shall not be called in question in any Court of Law in the Colony of
New Zealand. Any applicant for a Certificate may appear before the
Commissioner by counsel or agent. A copy of any such order shall be
inscribed in the District Register of Titles and the General Register
of Titles.
25. Any certificate so made and sealed, as far as the interests Effect of certificate
which have been acquired by purchase or lease are concerned, and
not otherwise, shall have the effect of a Certificate made by a Trust
Commissioner appointed under “The Native Land Frauds Prevention
Act, 1881,” and it shall also confer on the person named therein the
right to complete the purchase or lease of the land the subject of such
Certificate, and to acquire any outstanding interests therein, during a
period of three years from the date thereof. And such Certificate,
during the time it shall be in force, shall effectually bar the right of
any person whomsoever, other than the first purchaser or lessee, from
dealing with the land comprised in such Certificate. Unless it shall in
the meanwhile be cancelled by the holder thereof applying for and
obtaining a Partition Order under this Act, in which case the lands
awarded to the non-sellers or non-lessors shall be classed as “ Disposable
Lands,” and be open for dealing with in manner hereinafter provided
26. Such Certificate may, by permission of the Commissioner, be Certificate may be
transferred by the holder thereof to any other person; but a copy of transferred
such transfer must be inscribed in the District Register of Title.
27. At the time when a Commissioner shall order a Certificate to Partition maybe made
issue to an applicant to enable him to continue his purchase or lease, ,f required ' etc-
it shall be lawful for such person to then apply to the Commissioner to
partition the interests which have been acquired by him from those of
the non-sellers or non-lessors. Whereupon the Commissioner shall
direct the applicant to endeavour to make an arrangement with the
owners for the partition of the land in question, and shall fix a day
for the further hearing of the matter. On the day so fixed, if the
Commissioner is satisfied that all the parties concerned have agreed to
a partition of the land the subject of the claim, he shall then proceed
in the manner prescribed in the next following section. Failing any
such arrangement the Commissioner may, if convenient and all the
parties are present, proceed to hear the case forthwith, but, if otherwise,
he shall appoint a day for hearing the claim of the applicant, of which
a notice of at least one month shall be published as hereinbefore
provided. On the day so fixed the Commissioner shall sit in open
Court and proceed to hear and determine the case in the manner here-
inafter provided in Section 35, for hearing cases of disputed Tribal
boundaries inside districts.
28. On an arrangement being arrived at between the parties in On arrangement
the matter of any incomplete purchase, for the partition of the in- speef
terests acquired by the purchaser from those retained by non-sellers, piete purchase
the Commissioner having satisfied himself that such agreement is fair
and is understood by the parties thereto, shall forthwith cancel the
original muniment of title and shall make two Partition Orders, one in
favour of the purchaser, and the other in favour of the non-sellers, for
the respective parcels of land as arranged between them, and a Certificate
of Title shall be issued for each of such parcels of land in lieu of such
orders, on the production to the Commissioner of a proper survey map
thereof, prepared in the manner hereinafter prescribed for the making
of surveys. Such sub-divisional survey shall be made at the expense
of the purchaser.


The Certificates of Title, when completed, shall be transmitted to
the Chief Commissioner, and a copy thereof shall be inscribed in the
District Register of Title, together with a copy of the Partition Order.
° bein" made*i” r” 1 29. On an arrangement being arrived at between the parties in
specf oP an incom- the matter of any incomplete lease, for the partition of the interests
piete lease field py tfi e i egsee f ro nx those of the owners dissenting to such lease,
the Commissioner, having satisfied himself that such agreement
is fair and is understood by the parties thereto, shall forthwith
cancel the original muniment of title and shall make two Partition
Orders, one in favour of the lessors, and one in favour of the
non-lessors, for the respective parcels of land as arranged between
them; and a Certificate of Title shall be issued for each of such
parcels of land in lieu of such orders, on the production to
the Commissioner of a proper survey map thereof, prepared in the
manner hereinafter prescribed for the making of surveys. Such sub-
divisional survey shall be made at the joint cost of the lessors and the
lessee. The lessee may, at the time of the making of the Partition
Orders aforesaid, make application to the Commissioner for a Leasing
Order for the parcel of land allotted to the lessors; the Commissioner shall
thereupon order that a Leasing Order shall issue for the parcel of land
to which it refers. The effect of such Leasing Order shall be to confirm
the original lease over the land forming the subject of such order;
and the rent reserved by such lease shall be diminished in proportion
to the area of the parcel of land which has been cut off from the
original lease; or if the lessors and the lessee shall elect to dispense
with a Leasing Order, and make a new lease for such rent and for
such term as may be agreed on between them, it shall be competent
for them to do so. Such new lease shall be executed in the presence
of the Commissioner, and shall be attested and sealed by him.
Copies of such Partition Orders, Certificates of Title, and Leasing
Orders, or of the new lease, if made in lieu of the Leasing Order,
shall be inscribed in the District Register of Title, and the Certificate
of Title made for each of the parcels of land shall be transmitted to
the Chief Commissioner.
30. The holder of any certificate ordered or issued in respect of
any incomplete purchase, in accordance with the provisions herein-
before made, may at any time during the throe years within which
the same is in operation, or at any time thereafter, make application
to the Commissioner for a partition of the land the subject of such cer-
tificate. And the application for such partition shall be hoard and a
Partition Order made in the manner previously set forth in sections
27, 28, and 29 hereof.
REGARDING NATIVE LANDS.
31. Immediately after taking charge of the District allotted to
him, the Commissioner shall arrange with the Commissioners of the
adjoining Districts for the laying off and defining of any Tribal
boundary dividing their Districts, or which may be near to the
boundary of such districts, as proclaimed by the Governor under this
Act. Notice of the times when the respective boundaries of adjoining
Districts will be arranged shall be published for at least one month
before the convening of a meeting of the Tribes interested therein.
On the day so fixed the tribes interested in the boundary which shall
have been agreed on to be first dealt with, shall meet at the place
named in the notice, which shall be as convenient to the boundary as
circumstances will admit. The question shall be publicly discussed in
the presence of the two Commissioners concerned therein. If the tribes
disagree as to the boundary or boundaries, each Commissioner shall
cause the tribes belonging to his District to select seven of the exper-
ienced and elder men of each such tribe who, with the two Commis-
sioners, shall proceed, accompanied by the District Surveyors of each


District, to personally inspect the disputed boundary on the ground. The
District Surveyors shall note such portions of the boundary or division
line which are mutually agreed on as being correct, and where such line
is disputed he shall note the position of the portion disputed. On
completion of the inspection of the first boundary, the next shall be
taken in the same order as published in the notice and dealt with in a
similar manner to the first boundary, and so on until all the sides
bounded by other districts shall have been so inspected and noted.
The District Surveyors of the adjoining Districts, and of the District
the boundaries of which are the subject of settlement, shall forthwith
proceed to cut, define, mark, and accurately survey the boundary
claimed by each of the parties ; if more than two lines have been
claimed at any of the places so disputed, then such other lines shall be
similarly dealt with. On the completion of the survey maps of the
the same the Commissioners concerned therein shall fix the day or days
on which the claim of each of the parties shall be heard.
32. On the day so appointed for hearing, the two Commissioners Hearing in cases of
concerned in the first portion of the boundary shall point out on the dls P uted b ° undar y
Survey Map to the tribes interested therein the position of the lines
agreed on, and of those disputed, and shall give the disputants three
days to endeavour to amicably arrange the questions at issue. During
the adjournment, the Commissioners of the respective districts affected
thereby shall in like manner deal with all the other portions of the
boundary. On the day appointed, the Natives interested having as-
sembled, they shall be asked if they have come to any arrangement with
respect to the matters in dispute. If a settlement has been arrived at by
mutual consent the Commissioners shall give effect thereto, and shall
make an order defining the boundary accordingly, which order, when so
made, shall be irrevocable.
If any such disputed boundary cannot be fixed by mutual
arrangements, a Court shall be formed consisting of the whole of the
Commissioners then present, who, after taking all evidence brought
before them, shall give such judgment as to them, or the majority of
them, shall seem just and fair to all parties. If any case is very
difficult to decide, the Commissioners may, if they think fit,
during the course of the hearing or before the delivery of
the judgment, but not afterwards, suggest a basis for a settle-
ment of the matters in dispute, and may adjourn the case for such
time as they may deem proper, to allow the Natives interested therein
to consider their suggestions. On such suggestions being adopted, or
any arrangement being made, or if the judgment of the Court shall be
given, it shall make an order defining the boundary in accordance with
such arrangement or judgment, which shall be signed by all the Com-
missioners present at the Court, which order, when so made shall be
irrevocable. The District Surveyors shall forthwith proceed to survey
the boundaries in accordance with such orders. On completion of the
survey map, as hereinafter provided, the District Surveyors shall enter
the whole of the boundaries on the District Deference Maps of their
respective districts affected thereby, and on the working plans in
their custody, and the Commissioners shall transmit to the Chief Com-
missioner accurate certified copies of such surveys for the purpose of
defining the same and having them entered in the General Deference
Map.
33. On the completion of the external tribal boundaries of any The Governor may
district, the Chief Commissioner may recommend that the limits of
such district, as fixed by the first proclamation by the Governor, formity with tribal
shall be altered and amended, by substituting in lieu thereof the tribal boundanes
boundaries as ordered by the Commissioners’ Court. The Governor
may if he shall deem fit, by Order in Council, make such alterations
and amendments. Notwithstanding such alterations and amend-


ments in the boundaries of any district it shall not be necessary to
alter the appointment, or re-appoint the person holding the office of
Commissioner therein.
Commissioner to 34. On completion of the external boundaries of his district, the
persons 'in °lach Commissioner shall with all convenient speed proceed to form a list
napu showing the names of all the persons residing therein (men,
women, and children), and the divisions thereof into tribes, hapus, and
families within hapus. And shall make himself acquainted with the
settlements occupied by each tribe, and of each hapu of a tribe, and
shall make a preliminary inspection of the boundaries claimed by each.
Commissioner to ar- 35. The Commissioner having thus obtained sufficient informa-
betw«n b t°ribes a oc- on f° r his guidance, shall forthwith make and publish a notice
cupying his district fixing days (not less than one month from the date of such
notice), setting forth the times and places where the meetings
of the several tribes within his district shall be held, com-
mencing on one side of the district and extending to the boundary
opposite thereto. On the tribes interested in any internal
sub-division of a district meeting at the place appointed by such
notice, the Commissioner shall proceed in like manner as is set forth
in sections 31 and 32 respecting external tribal boundaries. In cases
of dispute necessitating a hearing, the Commissioner of the district
shall sit alone in open Court and take evidence and give judgment
therein. Provided that in any very difficult question he may adjourn
the meeting thereof, and request the Chief Commissioner to appoint
two other Commissioners to sit with him and adjudicate thereon. On
delivery of their judgment, the Commissioners shall make an order
defining such tribal boundary, which order shall be irrevocable. On
completion of the necessary surveys a Certificate of Title shall then be
issued to such tribe by name, which shall be registered in manner
hereinbefore provided. The same procedure shall be adopted in the
cases of all the tribes residing within the district, until the whole of the
boundaries have been arranged.
Commissioner to fix 36. Having finally completed all the tribal boundaries within
hapu boundaries the Commissioner shall in like manner proceed to deal
with the lands of the several hapus of the tribes residing therein.
These subdivisions shall be dealt with as hereinbefore prescribed by
sections 31, 32, and 35 hereof.
Certificates of title to 37. After hearing and determining the questions relating to the
be issued to hapus ]3 oun( i ar i es G f the lands held by the several hapus within his District,
the Commissioner shall next cancel the Certificates of Title which had
been made for the several tribes within the District, and on comple-
tion of the survey of the lands allotted to each hapu, as hereinafter
provided, he shall issue a Certificate of Title for the lands held by
each of such hapus. In every such certificate shall be set forth
the name of the hapu, and the names of all the persons composing
it, grouped in their respective families. Such Certificate shall be
registered in the manner hereinbefore provided, and a copy thereof
shall be transmitted to the Chief Commissioner for entry in the General
Eegister of Titles only, but no Crown Grant shall be prepared or
issued in respect of such Certificate.
Hapu lands to <( be 38. After the granting of the several Certificates to the hapus
served^lands/' " re within the district, the Commissioner shall next proceed with the
and “ disposable District Surveyor to the settlements of each hapu, and with the consent
of the whole, or a majority of the adult members thereof, shall divide
the lands of such hapu into two classes: One to be styled “ Reserved
Lands,” which term includes all lands to be set apart for the permanent
use, maintenance, and benefit of the people of such hapu; the
second class to be styled “Disposable Lands,” which term includes
all the lands which it is considered to be desirable to alienate by sale


or lease. On these being finally arranged, the District Surveyor shall
forthwith survey the several parcels, and on proper maps thereof being
completed, copies thereof shall be drawn on the Working Plan,
District Reference Map, and the General Reference Map.
39. On completion of the survey as aforesaid of the lands so Certificates Title
reserved for any hapu, the Commissioner shall next proceed to prepare h°a P u reserved lands
and issue Certificates of Title for the several parcels of land so set when surveyed
aside, which Certificates shall have written within them the names
of the hapu, and the names of all the persons composing it, grouped in
their respective families; and such Certificate shall contain a proviso
that the whole of the lands comprised therein shall be inalienable by
sale, lease, or otherwise. Such Certificate shall be registered in the
District Register of Title, and a copy thereof shall be transmitted to
the Chief Commissioner, who shall prepare a Crown Grant, containing
all the names appearing in the Certificate and in the same order of
families, for the signature of the Governor ; such grant shall contain a
proviso making the land the subject thereof inalienable by sale, lease,
or otherwise.
40. The boundaries of the parcel or parcels of lands to be Certificates of Tide
available for sale or lease having been surveyed, the Commissioner posabielands
shall ascertain whether the adult members of the hapu desire to have
any subdivisions made thereof, or whether they prefer one certificate for
the whole in an undivided block, or for each block. Certificates of
Title may then be made for each block or blocks as so arranged.
If a partition is required, the Commissioner, with the District Surveyor
and the owners, shall go on to the land and arrange the position and
boundaries of each parcel which is to be partitioned and when
such partition is effected, then a Certificate of Title shall be
made for each of the several parcels so partitioned. If there is
no application to the contrary, the whole of the names of the
persons comprising the hapu shall be entered in the certificate in
manner hereinbefore provided, or if an application is made to the
Commissioner to insert the names of certain persons only in any of the
certificates for such parcels in accordance with any arrangement arrived
at between the owners, and if he shall be satisfied that the arrange-
ment is fair to all the parties interested he shall give effect thereto,
and issue the certificate accordingly. Such certificates shall bear on
the face of them a proviso that the lands the subject of such certificates
are alienable by sale and lease only, and are not disposable in any
manner other than that which is hereinafter provided. At the time of
making any Certificate of Title for any Disposable Land, the Com-
missioner shall ascertain if any of the owners are minors, or under
other disability, in which case two Trustees shall be forthwith
appointed for each case, the names of whom shall be entered in the
District Register of Title.
41. In any case where the owners named in the Certificate of Truste ” t t e ° d b *
Title to be made for any parcel of “ Disposable Land ” shall exceed appomte
seven in number, the Commissioner, at a meeting to be specially con-
vened for that purpose, shall call on the owners (male and female) then
present to nominate seven adult male owners from among those to whom
any parcel of land has been allotted to act as Trustees in respect of the
land comprised in such certificate. If the number nominated shall not
exceed seven, the Commissioner shall then declare the persons so nomi-
nated to be duly elected. If the number nominated shall exceed seven, the
Commissioner shall then publicly fix a day for taking a Poll of the
adult owners and of one of the persons in each case who have been
appointed to be Trustees for any person under disability. The Com-
missioner shall preside at the Poll, which shall be open from the hour
of 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. The polling shall be by ballot, and the Com-
missioner shall declare the seven persons having the largest number
of votes respectively to be duly elected. No female, or any person who


lias been convicted of any infamous crime shall be eligible for election
as a Trustee, or any person who is infirm, imbecile, or of unsound mind.
No minor shall vote at any election or be eligible for the office of
Trustee.
After election of 42. After such Trustees shall have been elected the Commissioner
ofTitfe shall issue Certificates of Title for such disposable lands, in accordance
with the arrangements made, as provided in section 40 hereof, and in
addition to the proviso therein contained, which is to be inserted in the
certificate in respect of alienability, there shall be entered therein that
the land comprised in such certificate is to be held in Trust by the
Trustees (naming them) for themselves and the persons who have
been found entitled and named in the certificate, under the arrange-
ments provided in the said section 40, with the power to dispose of
the same by absolute sale or by lease only, and to execute conveyances
and leases of the same, subject to the provisions hereinafter contained
respecting the sale and lease of disposable lands.
Such Certificates when completed shall be entered on record in the
District Register of Titles, and a copy thereof shall be transmitted to
the Chief Commissioner, who shall prepare a Crown Grant for the
Governor’s signature, on which shall be shown the names of all the
owners of the parcel of land the subj ect of such Grant, as set forth in
the Certificate, together with the Trust thereby created and the names
of the Trustees who have been elected, also the other provisions as
enacted by section 40 hereof.
Election of fresh 43. In case of a vacancy arising through the resignation or
Trustee on vacancy (j ea th 0 f any Trustee, the Commissioner shall convene a meeting of the
owners of the lands affected thereby, and shall cause a Successor to be
elected in the manner hereinbefore provided in section 41 hereof.
Powers of Trustees 44. The Trustees so appointed shall have all the powers and the
same rights and liabilities as are now conferred by law on Trustees of
Estates, excepting as hereinafter provided, and that all moneys payable
under any sale or lease of land shall be paid to the Commissioner in the
first instance, and be by him lodged to the credit of a public account to
be styled the “ Native Land Fund Account,” such money to be drawn
by cheque only, as it may from time to time be required, as hereinafter
provided.
Persons may arrange 45. If any person desires to purchase or lease any lands vested in
forUie^pu such Trustees, he may enter into arrangements with them for the sale
lease of disposable or lease thereof. But it shall not be. lawful for any Trustee to enter
land into any arrangement for the mortgage of any disposable land, or for
any person to pay any sum of money by way of mortgage on any land
held by such Trustees, and any money so paid shall be forfeited to the
person to whom it may have been advanced or paid, and shall not be
recoverable back by the person paying the same. The Trustees shall
therupon convene a meeting of the adult owners of the land the subject
of such negotiations, and shall ascertain if the whole of them assent to the
proposed sale or lease. They shall then signify their assent by signing a
document in the form A in Schedule 2 hereunto annexed, which
document shall have two columns in it for signatures, one for the
names of the assenting, and the other for those of the dissenting parties.
The Trustees may thereupon request the District Surveyor to
survey the land the subject of such negotiation, and on their exhibiting
to him the document of assent, he may proceed to make a survey of
the same. If there are any dissentients to any such proposed sale or
lease, they shall sign their names in the column set apart for that
purpose, and no survey of such land shall be made until the matter
has been referred to the Commissioner for his decision thereon. The
Commissioner shall forthwith convene a meeting of both the assenters
and dissenters ; and he may partition an area equivalent to the shares
or interests of the dissenters to the sale or lease for them, and an area


equal to tlie shares or interests of the assenters, from within the
block vested in the Trustees, and shall issue new Certificates for each
of such parcels, copies of which shall be entered in the District Regis-
ter of Title and forwarded to the Chief Commissioner. The Trustees
may then proceed with their negotiations and the survey of the parcel
of land to be sold or leased ; and the dissenters may likewise cause a
survey to be made of the parcel of land allotted to them.
46. For the purposes of this Act, unless a special partition shall In j®'^ t ® d t ° 0 b j )<5
have been made thereof, with the assent of the family to which an eq uai, unless con-
owner belongs, there shall be no assumption of individual rights or trar >’ P roved
ownership to land, and the right, shares, and interests of each family
composing a hapu shall be deemed to be equal, unless valid reason to
the contrary shall be shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner,
who may then sit in Court to ascertain, define, and determine the
extent of such larger right, share, and interest. All minors or persons
under disability shall be represented in Court by their Trustees.
47. When the survey has been made of any parcel of land which b ° y f a con ’
has been so arranged to be sold, the Trustees and the purchaser shall Trustees
appear before the Commissioner, and they shall duly execute the con-
veyance in his presence. The purchaser shall then pay over to the
Commissioner the full price set forth in the conveyance as the con-
sideration for the land, and the Commissioner shall then direct the
purchaser to pay all duties leviable under “The Stamp Act, 1882,
Amendment Act, 1885.” On the return of the conveyance to the
Commissioner, duly stamped, that officer shall then certify that the
transaction was just and fair, and the deed was duly executed in his
presence, to which he shall sign his name and affix his seal of office.
A copy of the conveyance shall then be inscribed in the District
Register of Title and the General Register of Titles. Any conveyance
so executed and registered shall be entitled to registration in any
Deeds Registry Office, and if the purchaser or his heirs or assigns
shall so desire, a Land Transfer Certificate may be granted therefor
48. A lease of any parcel of land which has been so arranged for Execution of a lease
shall be executed in the same manner as provided for the execution
of conveyances in the next previous section, and shall be stamped and
registered in like manner as therein provided for conveyances in fee
simple. When completed the lease shall be given to the lessee, and the
duplicate thereof shall be held by the Trustees. The rents, as they
from time to time become due, shall be payable to the Commissioner,
and his receipt to the lessee for such payment shall be a full discharge
and acquittance of all demands in that behalf.
DISPOSITION OF MONEYS.
49. All moneys accruing under the provisions of this Act from Moneys received by
sales or leases of disposable lands or otherwise shall be paid to the ssl a ° n ne XiM
Commissioner, who shall day by day, or at such times as rules may account
prescribe, pay the same into such bank as the Governor directs, to the
credit of an official account of the Commissioner therein, to be called
the “ Native Land Fund Account.”
50. Such account shall be operated on only by cheque, signed by Money to be drawn
the Commissioner, or in such manner as rules may prescribe. y c eque on y
51. Such moneys shall be deemed to be public moneys within Money to be deemed
the meaning of “ The Public Revenues Act, 1878” and the Acts amend- P ubhc moneys
ino- the same, and all the provisions of the said Acts in relation to
public money and persons dealing therewith, except as otherwise
provided by this Act, shall apply to moneys accruing under this Act,
and to persons dealing with the same.


52. The Commissioner shall keep full accounts of the receipts
and payments of such moneys in such form as the Controller and
Auditor-General directs, and shall show therein separately the receipts
and payments in respect of each parcel of disposable land dealt with
under this Act, and shall, at the end of every month, send to the Audit
Office a copy or abstract of such accounts in such form as the Controller
and Auditor-General directs.
53. Moneys received by the Commissioner as purchase money or
rent in respect of each parcel of disposable land, shall, so soon as con-
venient, be paid to the owners in the manner following:
{a.) On the payment to the Commissioner of the proceeds of any
sale or lease, he shall hand to the Trustees a document in
the form B in Schedule 2 hereto, which shall contain, in
the first column, the names of each family having a claim
to a share of such money, and a second column ruled for
the entry of money, and a third column for the signatures
of the persons entitled to receive such moneys. The
Trustees shall forthwith proceed to convene a meeting of
all the families interested in the division of such money,
and shall submit a scheme of sub-division to them. If this
is agreed to, the families so agreeing shall have the amount
payable to each placed opposite their respective names, and
shall signify their assent thereto by signing their names in
the third column, and in the case of there being any dis-
sentients they shall sign their names in a fourth column ;
such document, when completed, shall be given by the
Trustees to the Commissioner who shall fix a day for the
payment of the money, if all have agreed to the division
thereof, or to hear and determine the matter in dispute
between the families entitled to receive such money. On
the question being finally arranged, the Commissioner shall
enter in the fifth column the amount of money payable to
each family, and in the sixth column shall take the receipts
of the members of each family for the amount paid to them.
If any dispute shall then occur between the members of
any family as to their individual shares in such money, the
Commissioner shall forthwith divide the money equally
among them. An arrangement once made for the division
of rents shall be irrevocable during the continuance of the
lease under whicli they accrue.
(b.) There shall be deducted from all purchase money so payable
to the owners under this Act a sum equal to ten pounds
per centum, and which shall be paid to Her Majesty towards
the costs of surveys, and other necessary expenses for giving
effect to this Act.
(c.) There shall be deducted from all rents so payable to the
owners under this Act the sum of five pounds per centum
on the capitalised value of any lease thereunder. For the
purpose of capitalising the value of the rent so payable,
every lease made under this Act shall, whether it be for a
shorter or a longer term, be deemed to be a lease for
twenty-one years, and the value thereof, when capitalised,
shall be the present value of an annuity or annuities of the
same annual amount as the rent or rents, and payable
for the same periods. Rent, for the purposes of this Act,
being deemed to be payable yearly, and at the end of the
year, and interest being calculated at the rate of five
pounds per centum per annum. On the expiration of the
first term for which any lease shall have been made, no
further deductions from the rents payable to the owners


shall he made on hehalf of the Crown on any renewal of
such lease, or any further demise of the lands comprised in
the original lease.
54. The Commissioner shall pay all moneys so deducted into the Moneys deducted to
Public Account to the credit of the Consolidated Fund. ConsoHdated Fund
55. Moneys accruing to owners, and other Natives having estate Moneys belonging to
in disposable land, respectively, under disability, may be apportioned j^ er dis *
by the Commissioner, with the assistance of the Trustees of such disposed of
persons under disability: firstly, to provide necessary clothing and
maintenance for the cestue que trust; secondly, for the investment of
the balance of such moneys in Government, or such other securities
as may be agreed on between the Commissioner and the Trustees in
every such case.
56. Moneys retained by the Commissioner by reason of his being Moneys retained to
unable to distribute them to the persons entitled thereto, shall be, bemvested
without delay, invested by him in Government securities until they
can be distributed, together with all interest accrued in respect thereof.
57. The whole or any portion of the proceeds of any disposable At request of owner
land dealt with under this Act, payable to the owners, may, upon a may be ’ n '
request made to the Commissioner in writing by any owner or owners
of any such disposable land, be invested by him to the best advantage
for the benefit of the owner or owners signing such request, in such
proportion as may be determined on, or the share of proceeds accruing
to any owner may at his request be expended in the purchase of an
annuity for such owner, or the Commissioner may, at the request in
writing of any owner or owners, deal with his or their share or shares
of the proceeds of any disposable land as may be otherwise desired by
such owner.
58. All moneys authorized to be invested by the Commissioner investments to be
shall be invested in such manner as the Controller and Auditor-General rronTr V and b Auditor
may approve generally, or specially in any particular case, and shall General
be invested in the joint names of the said Commissioner and Controller.
59. The Commissioner, on the thirty-first day of March in every Commissioner to fur-
year, shall furnish to the Minister of Lands a report giving a full nish annual report
statement and account showing as to each parcel of disposable land all
dealings had therewith, and all moneys received and disposed of by
him under this Act in relation to such disposable land.
60. A copy of such report shall be laid before each House of the Copy to be laid before
General Assembly, as soon as may be after its receipt by the Minister. Parliament
61. Any land the subject of a Certificate of Title, made under Respecting lands sub-
the seventeenth section of “ The Native Land Act, 1867,” or under a |fnder° f section 0 17*
Crown Grant issued in lieu of such certificate, where it still remains Act of 1867
the property of Natives, and is not subject to any agreement of sale,
or to a current lease, may be dealt with in the manner following.
62. If any owner (or owners) of any such land shall be desirous other names maybe
of giving out of his share thereof any interest therein, to any person or or grantVn'the
persons who he maybe of opinion were excluded owing to only ten plication of owner
names being permitted to be entered in such certificate, as aforesaid, it
shall be lawful for him to apply to the Commissioner for a Partition
Order inrespect of such land. The Commissioner shall proceed as here-
inbefore provided to make a partition of such lands, and shall cancel the
original muniment of title, and shall issue a Certificate of Title under
this Act for each of the parcels into which the original block of land
shall have been divided, and shall enter therein the name of the
person mentioned in the original certificate or grant, together with
such further names as may be agreed on between the parties to be
inserted therein. The new certificate or certificates so made shall be


entered in the District Register of Title and in the General Register
of Titles, and shall have the same force effect as the original
muniment of title. Such land so dealt with snail thereupon become
disposable land under this Act, and may be dealt with accordingly.
Leased lands may be 63. Any such land now the subject of a lease may, on the ex-
simiiariy dealt with piration 0 f ter m of such lease, if not renewed, be dealt with in the
manner prescribed in the previous section.
To remove doubts as 64. Doubts having arisen as to the_ validity of certain con-
to validity of cer- ve y ances and leases and documents purporting to be agreements for
‘and iease? y he n re e to- sales or leases heretofore made of lands, held by Certificate of Title
fore made under the seventeenth section of “The Native Land Act, 1867, and
by Memorial of Ownership under the provisions of “ The Native Land
Act, 1873,” because some of such conveyances, leases, and agreements
were not executed by, or assented to, by all the persons holding
interests therein as provided by the above recited Acts. It shall be
lawful for the person claiming under such conveyances, or leases, or
agreements, to submit the same to the Commissioner within
three months from the passing of this Act, who shall make
inquiries similar to those which a Trust Commissioner under “The
Native Land Frauds Prevention Act” is empowered to make.
If, on such inquiry, the Commissioner shall be satisfied of the lona
fides of the transactions, and of the sufficiency of the consideration
or rent set forth in such instruments of title, he shall thereupon endorse
a certificate on such conveyance, or lease, or agreement, that he has
made the necessary inquiries under this Act, and is satisfied with the re-
sult thereof, and shall sign his name and affix his seal thereto, whereupon
the purchaser or lessee shall be at liberty to register such deeds in any
office for the registry of deeds or land transfers.
On Commissioner re- 65. If a Commissioner shall refuse to grant a certificate for any
further such land, the same proceedings may bo taken as provided in section
be taken 24 hereof with respect to incomplete titles.
Respecting removal 66. Where any Crown Grant which has been issued for any land
of restrictions Title hereof was derived through the Native Lands Court, or
through any other duly constituted tribunal authorised to deal with
Native or Confiscated Lands, is subject to any restriction on alienation
by sale or lease, the owner, or any of the owners thereof, may apply
to the Commissioner to have such restriction removed. Whereupon
the Commissioner shall make inquiry into the circumstances of the
case. If he considers that it would be expedient, and for the benefit
of the owners to remove such restriction, he shall transmit the applica-
tion, together with his recommendation thereon, to the Chief Com-
missioner for his approval. On such approval being made, the
application shall be forwarded to the Minister for Lands, who, if he
shall deem fit, may recommend the Governor to remove the restriction.
On the removal of any such restriction, the land forming the subject
thereof shall become disposable land under this Act. If the Commis-
sioner shall object to recommend the removal of the restriction, or if
the Chief Commissioner shall disapprove of it, the application shall be
dismissed.
Providing for ar- 67. And whereas, before the passing of “ The Native Land Laws
rangemenu made Amendment Act, 1883,” persons other than Natives had entered into
of f "he -Native' 12 agreements in good faith for the purchase and lease of lands claimed
Land Laws Natives, the title whereof had not been investigated, ascertained,
1883." men ‘ Ct ’ and determined by the Native Land Court, and such persons, in
pursuance of such agreements entered upon, occupied and improved
the lands comprised therein. It shall be lawful for such persons
having been in occupation before the abovementioned Act of 1883
came into operation, and being still in peaceable possession thereof, to
make application to the Commissioner to enquire into the circumstances
of the case, and if the Natives interested in such land desire to confirm


the original agreement, and right to occupy the same, the Commissioner
shall forward all the particulars of such case to the Chief Commissioner.
The Chief Commissioner (although such dealings and occupation
are not valid in law) may, if he deems the claim to be an equitable one,
direct the Commissioner to allow the occupier to complete his title
whensoever the land so occupied shall become disposable land under
this Act.
GOVERNMENT RIGHTS AND DEALINGS WITH LAND.
68. In case of any outstanding and incomplete purchase or lease Manner of dealing
of Titled Land heretofore made by or on behalf of the Government, it Goveramenf'pm--
shall be lawful for any Government Native Land Purchase Agent, to chases and leases
apply to the Commissioner in the manner hereinbefore provided for
dealing with outstanding and incomplete purchases or leases, made by
private persons, and the Commissioner shall then proceed to ascertain
and determine the same in the manner provided for in sections 23, 24,
25, 27, 28, 29, and 30 hereof.
69. The Government shall not hereafter enter into any dealings Future proceedings
for Native Lands, and shall not acquire any other land whatsoever, in t 0
any manner different to that prescribed for dealings therewith by persons
persons other than the Crown.
70. Lines of road surveyed by any District Surveyor through or Lands required for
over any “ reserved ” or “ disposable land ” which may be required roads
now or hereafter, shall be vested in the Crown, but in return for the
cession of such lands for public roads by the Native owners, free of
charge, no highway or other rates shall be levied on any reserved land #
71. If it shall appear to the Governor to be desirable that any Lands may be taken
land should be reserved for railways, or for any other public purposes for P ubl,c purposes
(other than ordinary public roads) within any district, whether such
land be classed as Deserved Land or as Disposable Land, it shall be
lawful for the Governor to take the same under the provisions of “ The
Public Works Act,” and the amount of compensation to be given to
the owners shall be ascertained, determined, and paid in the manner
prescribed in the last-mentioned Act.
72. The Governor may order that any Native Reserve heretofore The Governor may
made within the Colony of New Zealand, under any repealed Ordinance ° e rd v e e r s K'dSt
or Act or under “ The West Coast Settlements Reserves Act, 1881,” with under this Act
may be dealt with under this Act, instead of by the Public Trustee,
and the Commissioner appointed to administer the same shall have all
the powers held by the Public Trustee in that behalf.
SUCCESSION AND WILLS.
73, In case anv Native has died, or shall die, entitled to any Succession to lands
estate, share, or interest in any Native land, or Titled land, whether t ° a f tc d o"“ ed ,ntes ’
held under Native usage or custom, or in severalty, or as tenant in
common or joint tenant, without having made any valid disposition
thereof by will, the Commissioner, on the application of any Native
claiming to be interested therein, shall inquire and ascertain who
ought to succeed to such estate, share, or interest in such Native or
Titled lands.
74, The Commissioner shall, by notice, to be published as herein- Hiring of ap P lica *
before provided, appoint a time and place for the hearing of such 1 n
application.
75. If, on any such hearing, any document purporting to be a will 6
is produced, the Commissioner shall, after proof of death, make the
inquiries following: —
(0.) Whether at the time of executing such document the devisor
was in a fit state, mentally or bodily, to make such will ?


(b.) Whether the document was duly attested by two disinterested
persons, having no interest directly or indirectly in the real
estate thereby intended to be devised ?
(c.) Whether the real estate has been devised out of the right line
of descent, according to Maori Usage and Custom, and if
there are any children, grandchildren, or great-grand-
children of the deceased person living ?
W cases ValidinCertam 76. After the passing of this Act, no document purporting to be a
will or devise of the real estate of any Native shall be valid unless
( a .) Properly attested by two disinterested persons having no
interest directly or indirectly in the estate thereby devised,
such witnesses to be, where possible, of the European race.
(If necessary, the Commissioner may summon the attesting
persons to prove the execution of the document.)
(b.) Which devises any real estate out of, or away from the direct
lineal descendants (that is to say living children, grand-
children, or great-grandchildren) of the devisor, who, accord-
ing to Maori usage and custom, are the proper persons to
succeed to such real estate.
(i c .) Where the person, on executing such will, shall be proved to
the satisfaction of the Commissioner to have been in an
unfit state, mentally or bodily, to understand the purport
thereof.
{d.) With the above exceptions, a Native may devise his real estate
to any person whomsoever he may deem fit.
Person other than a 77. In the case of any devise of real estate to a person other than
duty VC on° bequest a Native (as the term Native is defined in the interpretation section
under will hereof), the Commissioner having made the inquiries as hereinbefore
directed, shall order that the person so found to be entitled under the
will shall pay to Her Majesty the Queen a duty of ten pounds per
centum of the value of the estate so devised to him or her, and such
other stamp duty as may be imposed on any will under the provisions
of the Stamp Act for the time being in force within the Colony.
Manner in which de- 78. After making the inquiries hereinbefore required to be made,
cision to be made Commissioner shall decide thereon.
( a .) In respect of Native Land (where no valid will has been pro-
duced), in accordance with Native usage and custom.
( I .) In respect of Titled Land (where no valid will has been pro-
duced), in accordance with the law of New Zealand (where
it does not conflict with the provisions of this Act), as
nearly as it can be reconciled with Native usage and
custom.
(c.) In respect of a devise under a will where not repugnant
to the provisions of this Act, to the person or persons
entitled to succeed under the will, and in the best manner
calculated to give effect thereto.
Commissioner to 79. The Commissioner thereupon shall make an order, in dupli-
Order SuCCessi ° n CO I e > ca^ a Succession Order, which shall be signed by him and
sealed in favour of the person or persons found to be entitled to succeed
to such Native Land or Titled land, and shall set forth therein the
death, and if proved the date of the death of the owner, a description
of the land, and the name and place of abode, and occupation of the
person or persons entitled to succeed. If any person found
to be entitled to succeed to any share or interest shall be a minor
or other person under disability, the Commissioner shall order
the estate of such minor or other person under disability to vest in
Trustees then to be appointed. The age of such minor, as nearly as
it can be ascertained, shall be entered in such Succession Order. A


Succession Order shall be given to each of the persons mentioned
therein as Successors, and the duplicate thereof shall be filed of
record in the office of the Chief Commissioner, and a copy thereof
shall be inscribed in the District and General Register of Titles.
80. The Succession Order so made shall have the same force and Ef^ r j e ° f Success!on
effect in favour of the successor as the instrument (if any) under which
the deceased Native owner was entitled had in his favour at the time
of his decease, and as regards land held under Crown Grant shall be
entitled to registration under the Land Transfer Act, or the Deeds
Registration Act, in like manner as a valid will.
81. Whensoever any Native claims to succeed to the estate, share, Providing
or interest of any deceased person (which is not the subject of any valid j Tin Tenancy
will), who shall have died possessed of any estate held under “The
East Coast Native Land Act, 1868,” and “The East Coast District
Land Titles Validation Act, 1871,” or any certificate or Crown Grant
made under the authority thereof or any other Act referring to Native
lands in which the estate created thereby is one of “joint tenancy”
and not of “tenancy in common.” For the purpose of this Act and
notwithstanding any Act now in force, or the making of any such cer-
tificate or Crown Grant under the authority thereof, all Native owners
of such lands (where the fee simple thereof has not been disposed of
by conveyance) shall, after the passing of this Act, be, and be deemed
to be, “ tenants in common,” and shall be entitled to succeed to any
real estate as such; and a Succession Order shall be issued to such
person or persons as hereinbefore provided, and such order shall show
on the face thereof that it was made for land the subject of a title
in “ joint tenancy.”
82. If any person shall feel himself aggrieved by any decision Rehearing of Succes-
of a Commissioner in any matter of succession, he may apply to the slon clalms
Chief Commissioner for a re-hearing thereof, which shall be dealt with
in the manner prescribed herein in section 24 in cases of incomplete
title. A decision on a re-hearing shall be final and conclusive.
DUTIES OF DISTRICT SURVEYORS.
83. Every person holding an appointment as a District Surveyor, District Surveyor to
shall have charge of all surveys within the district for which he has b^ n a e n y s s werable fcr
been appointed, and shall be answerable for the proper execution
thereof. And he shall, from time to time, make such surveys as the
Commissioner may direct.
84. The District Surveyor shall, from time'to time, lay off within Roads and lands for
the District such lines of Road as may appear to him to be necessary P l !^ c ff works t 0 be
either for present or future requirements. And he is further required
to ascertain approximately the position and area of any lands which
may hereafter be taken for railways or other purposes within the
meaning of “The Public Works Act.”
85. All maps of surveys made within any district, shall be Maps to be approved
transmitted to the Surveyor General’s department for inspection and
approval. ment
86. On the return of any such map to the District Surveyor, and Approved Maps to be
it having been approved, he shall thereupon draw the same on the e p r b ed °" official
Working Plan of the District, and on the District Reference Map, and
shall forward a copy of such entry to the Chief Commissioner for
insertion in the maps kept in his department.
87- All surveys made under this Act shall be done in compliance Surveys to be
with Rules and Regulations to be from time to time prescribed by the wTh ac '
Surveyor General. Regulations


INTERPRETERS AND NATIVE LAND AGENTS.
In canceUed sLicenses 88. Any license heretofore issued to any person under the Acts
hereby repealed, authorising him to act as an interpreter of the
Maori language, is hereby revoked and cancelled.
Ch to f B9. Any person desirous of obtaining a license authorising him to
cant for interpre- act as a Maori Interpreter, or as Maori Interpreter and Land Agent,
ter s Licenses, etc. make application in that behalf to the Chief Commissioner. It
shall be the duty of such Chief Commissioner to forthwith inquire
into the character of the applicant, and to personally examine him as
to his knowledge of both the English and Moari languages, and his
ability to translate and re-translate the same in writing; also whether
he sufficiently understands the legal effect of any instrument of title
which he may be called upon to interpret or translate.
Chief Commissioner QQ > jf on completion of such inquiry, the Chief Commissioner shall
Governor to issue a be satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person, and is
Llcense competent to act as a Maori Interpreter, or as a Maori Interpreter and
Land Agent, he may recommend the Governor to issue a license under
his hand authorising such person to act in either one or both of such
capacities, in accordance with the recommendation of the Chief Com-
missioner. The Chief Commissioner may, if he shall deem fit, decline
to make any recommendation to the Governor on any application.
Effect of License 91, On such license being signed by the Governor and delivered
to the applicant, the holder thereof shall be entitled to act as a Maori
Interpreter, in the Supreme, or any other Court of Law within the
Colony of New Zealand, or in any Court established under this Act.
And any document written in the English language and requisite for
any process of law, or any Bill of Exchange or Promissory Note, shall
be invalid, and null and void if not translated in the Maori language
and written on or annexed to such document by a duly licensed inter-
preter, and thereon shall also be endorsed a certificate signed by such
interpreter as to the correctness of such translation.
(rt.) Any person licensed as a Maori Interpreter and Land Agent
shall be authorised to negotiate for a proposed sale or
lease of any Disposable or Titled land as between the
Trustees appointed under this Act, and any person other
than a Native.
(5.) A Maori Interpreter, not being the holder of a license to act
as a Land Agent, shall not enter into any negotiation
respecting Titled or Disposable lands, or he shall be liable
to the penalty hereinafter imposed on persons acting
without a license.
Fees on issue of 92. Every Maori Interpreter shall pay to the Chief Commissioner
or Commissioner, on the delivery of his license, a fee of two pounds,
and every person licensed as a Maori Interpreter and Land Agent a fee
of ten pounds. Such fees shall be used towards defraying the expenses
of compiling and publishing any dictionary of the Maori language, or
any history of the Maori race which shall hereafter be made under the
authority of the Government.
interpreters and 93. The Governor may, at his discretion, suspend or remove any
be n suspended m or Maori Interpreter or Maori Interpreter and Land Agent appointed
removed or acting under this Act A Commissioner may suspend any such
Interpreter, or Interpreter and Land Agent, but shall forthwith report
such suspension to the Governor, with the reason therefor.
94. Any person acting as a Maori Interpreter, or as a Maori In-
terpreter and Land Agent, who shall act during the suspension of his
license by any Commissioner as aforesaid, and until the Governor shall
have renewed such suspension, shall be liable to a penalty of not less
than one pound or more than ten pounds, to be recovered in a
summary way as hereinafter provided.


( a ,) Any person acting as, or pretending to be, a Licensed In-
terpreter, or a Licensed Interpreter and Land Agent under
this Act, and who is not the holder of a license duly em-
powering him in that behalf, shall be liable to a penalty
of not less than ten pounds or more than one hundred
pounds, to be recovered in a summary way as hereinafter
provided.
(J.) Any person licensed as a Maori Interpreter, or as a Maori In-
terpreter and Land Agent, who shall deal or negotiate for
any sale or lease of any Native Land (as the same is defined
in the Interpretation section of this Act), shall, on convic-
tion thereof, forfeit his license, and shall thereafter be for
ever incapable of holding a license, and shall be liable to a
penalty of not less than twenty pounds or more than one
hundred pounds, to be recovered in a summary way before
any Resident Magistrate or any two Justices of the Peace.
95. AH licenses issued to any persons as above provided, shall be chief Commissioner
recorded in the office of the Chief Commissioner, who, in addition to £>™ s d h i^ re .
the Gazette notice of such appointment, shall furnish to every Com- ters
missioner appointed under this Act, and to the Judges of the Supreme
Court, District Judges, and Resident Magistrates throughout the
Colony, a correct list of the names of all persons licensed to act as
Maori Interpreters under this Act, and from time to time to alter and
correct such list. And no Judicial Officer or Commissioner shall
allow any person to act before him as an interpreter in any matter
affecting Natives, unless he is satisfied that such interpreter is the
holder of a license empowering him so to act.
MISCELLANEOUS.
96. The Governor may from time to time make such rules as he The Governor may
may think fit for the better enabling this Act to be given effect to, and g ' VE
for regulating the procedure of persons engaged under it, and such
rules from time to time revoke or alter.
97. Such rules and altered rules, when gazetted, shall have like Rules to have same
effect as if the matter thereof had been enacted herein. ect as lf part °
98. The Governor may from time to time, by Order in Council, The Governor may
make temporary provision for anything not provided for in this Act,
and which may appear to him to be necessary for carrying into effect ters not provided
the provisions thereof. Provided that all such Orders in Council so for herem
made, shall, at the next Session of Parliament after the making thereof,
be laid before each House of the General Assembly within fourteen
days subsequent to the meeting thereof. And if the same shall be
approved by Parliament, shall be incorporated with, and read, as if
forming a part of this Act.
99. As to any matter or question which may arise in relation to The Governor may
any Titled or Native Land or the title thereto, or in relation to any
improvement thereon, over which no jurisdiction is given heretofore, diction in certain
but as to which it may be convenient that such jurisdiction should be cases
possessed by a Commissioner, the Governor in Council may by order
declare that any such matter or question which shall be specified in
such order, shall be within the jurisdiction of a Commissioner, and
thereupon each Commissioner, in his Court, shall have full juris-
diction and power to decide and make such order as he may deem fit,
and which decision or order shall be valid and binding in law.
100. The Governor may from time to time, out of moneys appro- The Governor may
printed by the General Assembly, advance to a Commissioner such c^ n ° e n r eys 10
moneys as the Governor may deem necessary for use by him in
executing his duties under this Act, and all moneys received by such
Commissioner, and payable by him into the Public Account, shall be
credited to the advances hereby authorised.


Salaries to be voted 101. Such salaries shall he paid to the several persons appointed
by General Assem- or em pi o y e( j un( J e r this Act, as shall he from time to time appropriated
for the purpose hy the General Assembly.
Commissioner forbid- 102. No person holding office as a Commissioner shall, on hehalf
foHand negotlate of himself or any private person, or of the Government, engage in any
negotiation for the purchase, lease, or acquisition of land or any interest
therein, and an;y Commissioner acting in contravention of this section
shall he deprived of his office, and be liable in addition to a fine of not
less than twenty pounds or more than one hundred pounds, to he
recovered in a summary way.
Deeds not made un 103. Save as made under, or authorized by, this Act, every deed
der Act invalid Qr wr^n g f rom an( i after the coming into operation of this Act, signed
and intended to affect Titled Land or Native Land other than sub-
leases, assignments, or assurances of existing leases or mortgages,
shall be illegal.
Dealings with any 104. Save as provided by this Act no person shall hereafter, by
himself or his agent, purchase or acquire, or contract or agree to pur-
except made under chase or acquire from any owner (except as between one Native owner
this Act and another Native owner) any land whether the same is “ disposable
land” or “ Native land” or any estate or interest therein.
Penalty for unauthor- 10 5 . Any person dealing with any * ‘ disposable land, ’ ’ unless in the
ised dealings with maimer authorised by this Act, shall be liable to a penalty of not less
isposa e an s twenty pounds or more than one hundred pounds, to be recovered
in a summary way.
Penalty for dealing 106- Any person dealing with any “Native Land ” shall be liable
with any Native tQ a p ena py 0 f no t less than twenty pounds or more than two hundred
pounds, or in default of payment, imprisonment for any term not less
than one month or more than six months, and any estate in land the
subject of any such prohibited dealing, which shall become vested in
any such person by reason of any such dealing, shall be forfeited to
the Crown.
SCHEDULES.
SCHEDULE I.
Acts Repealed.
“The Government Native Land Purchase Act, 1877.”
“ The Government Native Land Purchase Act Amendment
Act, 1878.”
“The Native Land Frauds Prevention Act, 1881.”
“ The Native Committees Act, 1883.”
“The Tauranga District Lands Act, 1867.”
“The Tauranga District Lands Act, 1868.”
“The Poverty Bay Land Titles Act, 1874.”
“The East Coast Native Lands Act, 1868.”
“The East Coast District Land Titles Validation Act, 1871.”
“The Gisborne Courts’ Proceedings Validation Act, 1883.”


j We, the undersigned,
acknowledge to have
Names of owners Amount pro- Amount opposite ourrlspTctfvl
grouped in farm- posed by Assentients. Dissentients. finally paid. names, being payment
lies. Trustees. 3 v ' in full of all our claims
to the block
sold to Mr.
SCHEDULE ll.— Form A.
Block, owned by
hapu
District of Provincial District of
Area proposed to be sold or leased
Names of Owners grouped Assentients.
in families.
Dissentients.
SCHEDULE ll.— Form B.
bapu
Block, owned by
Provincial District
or leased
District of
Area proposed to be


COMMENTS ON DRAFT ACT.
It will be noticed that one of the principal
features of the proposed measure is the throw-
ing a large portion of the administration of its
provisions on the Natives themselves, which
will have a tendency to make it popular
among them ; it being a very prominent ob-
jection made to “ The Native Land Ad-
ministration Act, 1886,” that the Natives
have no voice in fixing the price of their
disposable lands. The appointment of
Commissioners to defined districts, and their
constant residence therein, would also be
conducive to the establishment of greater
confidence in the minds of the Natives than
at present exists towards the Native Land
Court officials, who are never resident in any
district for a sufficient time to become ac-
quainted with its natural features or its
inhabitants.
The scheme of the Act is to permanently
define and finally settle the Native Title to
lands throughout the North Island. In order
to accomplish this, the Commissioner to be
appointed under the proposed Act would, in
the first instance, h>i ve to fix the external
tribal boundaries of his district with respect
to other tribes and districts. On this question
being completed, attention would be next
directed to determining the position and ex-
tent of the lands claimed by each tribe within
the district. Simultaneously with these
operations would be carried out one of the
most important duties devolving on a Com-
missioner, that is, the eliminating from the
lands of each tribe the portions forming the
subject of outstanding and incomplete
purchases and leases between the Native
owners and Europeans, or the Govern-
ment, and bringing these to a satisfactory
and just settlement; it being absolutely
necessary to effect this in order to clear
the way for sub-dividing the estates of
each tribe into hapu holdings, and for the
further classification of these under the heads
of “reserved” and “disposable lands.” It
is contemplated to conduct all outstanding
and incomplete land purchases and leases to
an equitable conclusion by giving certificates
to the purchasers and lessees in all cases
where the transactions have been lona fid#
and fair as between the parties concerned,
which will enable them to proceed with their
negotiations, protect them therein, and, if re-
quired, partition the interests of the vendors
and lessors from those of the dissentients to
sales and leases. And as the law relating
to such transactions has been of sdch a con-
flicting nature as to render it impossible to
be carried out, or its provisions understood, it
is intended, as far as possible, to clear up the
difficulties and validate all agreements which
have been made in good faith, whether the
law has been strictly complied with or not.
As regards future dealings with Native
Lands, the intention is to make these clear,
safe, satisfactory to all parties, speedy, and
final, and impossible to call into question on
any point. Reserved Lands are, for the pre-
sent, intended to be absolutely inalienable by
sale or lease, and no power is given to remove
these restrictions ; and this has been done for
several reasons, which it may be as well to
allude to.
If Europeans and Natives are placed closely
together on land, the result is invariably very
unsatisfactory to both parties. Reserves
ought therefore to be selected in as few and
as compact blocks as possible, and the nearer
they can be grouped together the better ; and
in determining the area, it should be borne in
mind that Native cultivations are not as a
rule permanent in their nature, but are made
and occupied for a few years only, and are
continued in one place until the soil becomes
impoverished, when a fresh clearing is made;
consequently the area of uncultivated land
adjacent to Native setlements is always con-
siderable, but, as they own large numbers of
horses, cattle, and pigs, these “ commons ”
are of advantage to them. It is possible, but
not probable, that in another generation the
Natives, having become more civilized, may
adopt European methods of husbandry, and
so require more land for that purpose than
at present. Another reason for rendering
reserved land inalienable by sale or lease
is that there are instances where Natives
owning large reserves have not suf-
ficient land for their own cultivation and
support, and although the extent of their
property, which has been leased by the Com-
missioner, is large, the rents accruing there-
from are so small as to produce no adequate
income. The history of the Native Reserves at
Porirua, near Wellington, would be instruc-
tive in this respect.
In dealing with lands disposable by sale
or lease, it must be remembered that this
question has been heretofore beset with
several difficulties. Numerous complaints
are made by Natives that they have been
great losers by the omission of their names
from Certificates of Title, Memorials of
Ownership, and Crown Grants, that, although
acknowledged as owners of land, they have been
deprived of their proper shares of purchase
moneys and rents received by the vendors and
lessors of it. The Europeans, on the other
hand, complain of the insecurity of their
tildes and the enormous expenses they are put
to in obtaining the signatures of Natives to
deeds of conveyance and lease, and the con-
stant dread, after the supposed proper execu-
tion of those Instruments of Title, that some
defect or flaw will be searched out and taken
advantage of by some unscrupulous person
(Native or European), the outcome of which
will be costly and protracted litigation. It is
purposed to obviate these difficulties by
promptly ascertaining and registering the
titles of all the persons in each hapu owning
land, vesting the same in Trustees, who have
the power themselves to contract for the sale
or lease of the land to any person, and to give
an indefeasible title to it through a Com-
missioner. The interests of the whole of the
Native owners are protected, as the money
receivable on a sale or for rent, is payable to


the Commissioner only, and can only emerge
from the public account, when the Trustees
have arranged for the equitable division of it
among the various claimants. The European
can enter into possession of the land from the
moment he pays his money to the Commis-
sioner. The Natives will have to submit to
a reasonable deduction from the proceeds of
any sale or lease for the purpose of defraying
the expense of surveying their lands, and
other costs of administration under the pro-
posed Act. Both Native owners and European
purchasers will be saved the enormous, and
frequently unnecessary, outlay which has
been heretofore incurred for surveys, as it is
proposed to execute the surveys of the lands
of each tribe and hapu as a whole, and not
piecemeal or two or three times over, which
has been customary in the past. The same
applies to the proceedings of the Native Land
Court, it only adjudicated on the Titles to a
few blocks at a time, leaving large tracts
untouched for future investigation, whereby
the cost to the Colony, the Natives, and all
concerned was materially increased without
any corresponding advantage arising there-
from.
It will doubtless be argued by the opponents
to the proposed scheme, that because the
Government are intended to be placed on pre-
cisely the same footing as private persons in
their dealings with Native Lands, the North
Island will be deprived of its Land Revenue.
In reply to this it may be stated, without fear
of contradiction, that if the total public ex-
penditure in the purchase of Native Lands,
the payment of Land Purchase Officers, Sur-
veyors, Crown Lands Departments, and Con-
tingent, War, and Defence Expenditure were
placed on the one side of the account, and the
receipts from the disposal of Crown Lands in
the North Island on the other side, the balance
would be on the wrong side of the ledger. In
the South Island, which cost a very inconsider-
able amount to purchase from the Natives,
very large revenues did accrue from Crown
sales and leases of lands, especially in the
Provinces of Canterbury and Otago, but such
can never be the case here, the Natives now
knowing the value of their lands quite as
well as we do. Another point which will
probably be raised is that disposable lands
will get into the hands of speculators. There
is, however, nothing to prevent the extent of
any purchase being limited to a reasonable
area, but in any case it is preferable for the
land to pass into the hands of Europeans, who
will utilise it, than to allow it to remain idle
and unproductive in the possession of the
Maoris. Again, it may be said, “it is stated
that * The Native Land Administration Act,
1886,’ is very unpopular with both Natives
and Europeans, how do we know that the
proposed measure will be popular among the
Natives, or be workable at all, and if it is
feasible the expense will be too great ?”
To this the writer replies that he has for
several years past discussed this scheme with
many of the most intelligent and influential
Native chiefs in various parts of the Colony,
and it has invariably been pronounced as
being satisfactory and right in principle. As
regards the practicable working of it, there
can be no doubt so far as determining the
tribal and intertribal boundaries is con-
cerned. In 1867 the Hauraki district, ex-
tending from Cape Colville on the north to
Te Aroha on the south, was a sealed book as
far as acquiring Native land was concerned,
and this was aggravated by the introduction
of Hauhau fanaticism. Gold was discovered
at the Thames in July of that year. The
writer was then Civil Commissioner in charge
of Native Affairs in this Province ; it became
his duty to enter into agreements with the
Natives for the cession of their lands for gold
mining purposes. There were four tribes
(theNgatitamatera, Ngatiwhanaunga, Ngati-
maru, and Ngatipaoa) holding the lands,
their possessions were mixed up and inter-
mingled in every direction. Between Cape
Colville and Te Aroha there were upwards of
fifty disputed boundaries which all had to be
arranged before the lands could be thrown
open for gold mining. Yet, although there
were numerous other duties to perform in
connection with a new goldfield, the whole of
these disputes were thoroughly settled within
less than eighteen months, without the inter-
vention of the Native Land Court, and by
one person only. It is true it took a much
longer period to acquire and open up the
country for gold mining on account of the
land league and Hauhau proclivities of the
Natives, but the fact remains that the
boundaries were then finally fixed, and no
question has since arisen about any of them.
The Native Land Court has subsequently held
numerous sittings, but these related to
holdings within tribal boundaries. As to the
expense of carrying the proposed Act into
effect, it would probably require a Chief Com-
missioner and ten Commissioners for a period
of two years to settle the whole of the
Native titles in the North Island, when the
number of such officers could be reduced to
three. And, as an inducement to the speedy
completion of the work, those who accom-
plished it with the greatest celerity, com-
bined with efficiency, should receive the
permanent Commissionerships.
If the title of the Natives to their lands
was fairly and permanently defined and de-
termined, and the present incomplete and
outstanding transactions between the Govern-
ment and the Natives, and the latter and
private persons, were amicably and justly
arranged, it would conduce to the settlement
and prosperity of the whole colony, as it
would give security for the investment of
capital in the purchase and utilisation
of Native Lands, and restore that con-
fidence outside the Colony which has of
late been so rudely shaken by our conflict-
ing and deterrent legislature in that respect.
And the Maoris, feeling that their real
interests are consulted and conserved by
allowing them the right to sell and lease their
disposable lands according to their own
pleasure, subject only to such restrictions as
will be beneficial to themselves, and that
their homes and cultivations are for ever
secured to them and their families, would
naturally cease from the excitement and state
of unrest which has prevailed among them
for the last thirty years, and become reconciled
to us, and to the justice of our laws.
The problem of dealing with uncivilized
races in such a manner as to win their con-
fidence is very difficult, and with the very
best intentions civilized people may offend
them from want of knowledge of their habits,
customs, and prejudices, and in no way easier
than in dealing with, or for their lands ; and it


*
I
3 1508 00075180 5
is impossible, in one or two generations, to
bring them to conform to our views on those
subjects. We are always too prone to consider
our own methods are the best, and that
we cannot learn anything from foreigners,
but in dealing with Maori lands it might
have been of service to all parties if
we had taken the Natives into our confi-
dence and conjointly arranged a system which
would have been more consistent with their
ideas, and not trammelled and hampered with
formal Courts and conflicting legal enact-
ments. As Great Britain and her Colonies are
entering on extensive enterprises in various
places in the South Pacific, it is to be hoped
that the experience we have acquired in our
dealings with Maori lands will not be thrown
away or lost sight of in similar proceedings
with those of the aborigines of Fiji, New
Guinea, etc., and that the troubles and dif-
ficulties which have arisen in New Zealand,
may, in a great measure, be provided against
if not entirely averted.
WILSONS AND HORTON, PRINTERS, QUEEN AND WYNDHAM STREETS, AUCKLAND.


.
'
■


‘
♦
*
f.
■
