













1 ©ur — == 1
i { pastoral fntaistrp ||
fi ; ! H
, Published by the Australian “Garden & Field,” Proprietary.
| ADELAIDE, 1910.
Printed by R. M. Osborne , Currie Street , Adelaide
<£)ur
pastoral




INDEX
Collingrove 1
(The property of Mr. Chas. H. Angas)
Hill River and Point Sturt Studs 19
(The Trustees of the late J. H. Angas)
The Murray Merinos 41
The Bowmans of the Lakes .. .. . . . . .. . 57
Urrbrae ~ 69
(The property of Mr. Peter Waite)
Hughes of Booyoolee 81
The Duttons of Anlaby . .. 89
The Old Werocata Shropshire Stud .. .. 113
Wirra Wirra 12 3
(Ihe property of Mr. Murray Dawson)
The Brownes of Moorak, Buckland Park, and Booboorowie 137
Keyneton .. . . .. .. 1 57
(The property of Mr. R. R. Keynes)
Koo-owie Merino Stud .. ~ 168
(The property of Mr. Thomas Sandland)
Hazeleigh 18 s
(The property of Mr. Lisle G. Johnson)
Sweetholme Shropshire Stud 193
(The property of Mr. Richard Smith)
The Barritts of Lyndoch . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 205
Highlands 209
(The property of Mr. Walter Barritt)


Riverside .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • • 216
(The property of Mr. Edwin Barritt)
Yattalunga .. .. .. . . .. • • • • 223
(The property of Mr. Frank Barritt)
The Gebhardts of the Burra •. 229
Corryton Park .. .. . . . . . . .. . . 233
(The property of Mr. Charles E. Gebhardt)
Mackerode .. . . .. .. .. .. . . .. 253
(The property of Mr. A. G. Gebhardt )
Mokota .. .. .. .. .. 269
(The property of Mr. L. W. Gebhardt)
Springfield . .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 285
(The property of the Hon. John Warren, M.L.C.)
Blair Place . . .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 297
(The property of the Estate of the late Thos. Hogarth)
Wirrilla Merinos .. .. .. 307
(The property of Mr. David Herbert Power)
The Riddochs of the South-East .. .. .. .. .. 317
Collinsville 337
(The property of Messrs. John Collins & Sons)
Blair 349
(The property of Messrs. E. A. & F. B. Thomas)
Windsor 355
(The property of Mr. .Joshua Gosden)
Millbrae Merinos. . . . .. . . .. 337
(The property of Mr. W. G. Mills)
Nerowie .. 375
(The property of Mr. B. H. K. Dunstan)
Craignook . . 38i
(The property of Mr. H. A. Giles)


Richmond Park Stud .. .. 385
(The property of Mr. J. H. Aldridge)
Mundi Mundi, Wilpena, and Wirrialpa .. .. .. .. .. .. 389
(The property of Mr. John Lewis)
Glenthorne Stud Farm .. . . ~ . . .. .. 397
(The property of Mr. Norman Brookman)
Bundaleer 405
(The property of Mr. J. F. Maslin)
North Bundaleer .. 421
(The property of Mr. George Edward Maslin)
Wandillah and Holm Hill .. .. .. .. .. 433
(The Property of Mr. Edmund Bowman)
The Glen .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 437
(The property of Messrs. J. & A. Hay)
West Creek .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 449
(The property of Mr. Patrick McAnaney)
Hummocks .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 453
(The property of Mr. T. E. Barr Smith)
Castle Hill .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 461
(The property of Mr. Benjamin Castle)
Munduney and Moralana .. . . .. .. . . .. 465
(The property of Messrs. John Davies & Son)
The Gums .. . . .. • . .... .. .. . . 481
(The property of Messrs. Thos. H. Pearse & Sons)
Mount Beevor . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 497
(The property of Mr. N, E. Brice)
Boconnoc Park • • - • •• •. •• 503
(The property of Mr. George Brooks)
Fair View . . - • • • • • • - 511
(The property of Mr. George Wait)
Wolta Wolta 515
(The property of Mr. R. E. H. Hope)


Mmtadloo .. .. .. .. . . 529
(The property of Messrs. Thos. Goode & Sons)
Grieveston .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . ■ ■ • - 545
(The property of Mr. Chas. Grieve)
Stony Gap and Finger Post .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 551
(The property of Mr. R. M. Mcßride)
Mulgundawa . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • . .. 559
(The property of Mr. Charles Johnston Knight)
Allandale and Allan Park .. .. .. .. . . 563
(The property of Mr. George Ben net)
Pareora .. .. . . .. • • •. • • .. ■ • ■ 587
(The property of Mr. Adolph G. Gebhardt)
Oakieigh and Redcliffe .. .. .. .. .. 593
(The property of Mr. Thos. Mcßride)
McCulloch of Yongala .. . . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 601
Nilpena .. .. .. .. •. 609
(The property of Mr. R. J. Matheson)
Aldina Merinos. .. .. .. .. .. 617
(The property of Mr. F. G. Dawson)
Chandada .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 621
Kooyong .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 623
(The property of Mr. A. B. McLean)
Glen Gillian .. .. . . - - .. . . .. 627
(The property of Mr. Robert Ross)
Meaford, Murray View, and Spring Bank . . 641
(The property of Mr. T. J. Hannam)
Hughes Park and Gum Creek .. „. .. . . 649
(The property of the Hon. J. J. Duncan, M.L.C.)
The Riggs of Gawler Hills . . .. . . 669


APPENDICES.
The Fowler’s Bay District ... II
Merino Stud Rams ... VI
(Bred by and the property of Mr. R. M. Mcßride)
“ Dandy Dinmont ” VIII
(The property of Messrs. John Collins & Sons, Collinsville)
Animal Photography and Photo Engraving IX
Shearing by Contract X
Australian Stock Saddles XII
Co-Operative Export Company XIV
Modern Economic Fencing XV
Bagot, Shakes & Lewis, Limited XVI




9
NO
\
o
l>l NG Ro
V
PONY STUD.
■ V"**'
A
■
,
■
m
GALLANT CROMPTON
(Height 14 14).
Imported Hackney Pony Stallion. Winner of First. Hackney Society’s Show, and many Other Prizes
CHARLES H
... The Property of ...
ANGAS, Collmgrove." ANGASTON. SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
V
ov
-Jt




r» . %& * jbcs; •. • w r > 2vws l ' ..• „■ jbbhb ? . ksOkpRSiHp
%1l> a 9Fj*g-jk ... ■■* •y-'-jgifv 1 \ | c-v’/jgBjHBBjBg •-» .a' <l^l'CTv l *
Ctje property of JVcr. Charles jffngas.
The name of Angas really begins the historical and incidentally the pastoral
alphabet of South Australia, for by far the greater share of the huge task of starting
the new colony upon its national career fell to the lot of George Fife Angas, who, though
he did not himself come to South Australia till 1850, when he was 60 years of age, will
always be remembered as the Father and Founder of the State.
To his second son, the late John Howard Angas, who came to the colony in 1843,
when only a youth of 19, belongs the honor of carrying into effect the wise, far-reaching
plans of his father. On arrival he proceeded almost at once to his father’s Barossa estate,
making Tarrawatta his head quarters, where he first camped with a shepherd, and after-
wards lived in a stone hut, which is still standing. If any man ever knew what the day
of small things meant it was J. H. Angas, who went through all the hardships associated
with pioneering. For many years he led a wandering busy life, and pages could be
written about the rough experiences he encountered. No man has been more closely
identified with the great producing interests of the State. He founded his famous
stud of Shorthorn cattle soon after his arrival in South Australia, with which he over and
over again swept the board in competition at the Royal Shows held at Adelaide,
Melbourne and Sydney. The Adelaide Shows even to-day, would be comparatively
small affairs in the stock lines without the Angas cattle to lend dignity and strength to
the grand parade. His best known estates were Collingrove, Mt. Remarkable, Wirrialpa,
Sturt’s Creek, Whittata, Hill River, Point Sturt, Kingsford, and Broadview. He died at
Collingrove on May 17, 1904.




'-: •-. '- ;>2 ,,,r;,^^^
H I ' i *v I B
I Hammer & Co - JOHN HOWARD ANGAS. y? J ® \


f' fMlf
f ■ . , • $t ’■ , ■ v ■ ;,
■t L
H fif -
* , --s^L * •»• .*,
fcw»jff7&aMBO»^lr ; i,^% “ * : • jt*,.-I^. . TtMMjpjP... jWt ■ •- - • \ ,?*- * -
■■ -■■*'• *
Scot t . COLLINGEOVE HOUSE. The Residence of Mrs. J. H. Angas.


■_ *• ■ 1 *" " -■- - ; - '”’ - - ~ ; * ■ *&' -• ■•*'*»• ‘ ■ - - * • * ♦'• -^-- ■' ■ -•"" 1 - • '■ •
a co +i LINDSAY HOUSE. The Residence of Mr. Chas. H. Angas.


;•' (■'■ ;' * l *« "■.,.
' " ' 8 •■ ’ ■' : . * ’ ’" ' ' , ' . r. ’ 1 ' *• ’ £
■ - - *
•» (‘ ■ " * ■' w .>, -. v - ~ ;*fv : ’ ‘ , . • !;•'* **•- '■%- * . ‘ : '-' y '':‘ : l‘ :^^<n
a •-, ■ - i *••
• ,. ,,•.*' ’ • nty? ., ; j v «, t y fg,
'. -. ■ i ’ "i
■ -
CLYDESDALES AT COLLINGROVE.
> ' --■:■■ V.^-^ fc - — —
■ ■
Scott. JERSEYS AT COLLINGROVE.
Collingrove Station, in the beautiful Barossa district, which John Howard Angas
made famous throughout Australia as the home of excellent studs of sheep, cattle,
ponies and Clydesdale horses, is now the property of his son, Mr, Charles H. Angas,
who is continuing them with the same thoroughness and skill. During the past six
years he has paid three visits to the United Kingdom, and on each occasion purchases
01 Shorthorn and Hereford cattle were made for the Angas Studs, also Hackney ponies
h ' Collingrove, the young stock from which promise to develop in a way which will
. dd many honors to the already long list.
Lindsay House, Mr. C. H. Angas’s residence on Collingrove, was built o iginally
by his grandfather, George hife Angas. It is situated in one of the most picturesque
spots in South Australia, and makes an ideal home. Great spreading gum trees give the
property a park-like appearance, and provide abundant shade and shelter for stock
Mr. Angas has a herd of Fallow deer in a small park, which is planted' with
English trees, also a herd of Indian Black Buck, which the climate evidently suits and a
small herd of highly bred Jerseys for bG own and the station use which eo back to
imported foundation stock. ’ 8


»
I' «. mt ,. &:«jL . .*■
i -* ~mK •*'< Jk:*,
Scott. TYPICAL COLLINGROVE COUNTRY.
Tfe Collirigrove Fogy Stud.
Ihe Collingrove pony stud was started about 46 years ago with some Shetland and
Welsh mares. Since that time thoroughbred and a small infusion of Arab blood has been
used, and the result has been a very handsome type of pony which has furnished many
prize-winners. In 1899 Mr. C. H. Angas secured the Hackney pony stallion, “ Young
Sir George ” (imported), a prize-winning son of Wilson’s “Sir George,” the best
Hackney pony in England at the time. The result of this cross on the Collingrove
ponies has left a number of very handsome mares with great bone and good hackney
action, altogether a most desirable type to breed from. In 1904 Mr. C. H. Angas
was fortunate in purchasing in England the three-year-old chestnut pony stallion “ Gallant
Crompton ” (8153), whose portrait in colors is reproduced. This colt has developed into
a beautiful animal. He is an active and stylish mover, with great bone and power. He
is leaving stock remarkably like himself in all these respects. “ Gallant Crompton,”
when exhibited in England and at Adelaide on several occasions, has always carried off
first honors in his class, including first at the Hackney Society’s Show, 1904. He is by
“ Royal Danegelt,” from “ Lady Dorothy,” and is full brother to “ Champion Bonnie Dane-
gelt.” At the last September show of the S.A. Royal Agricultural and Horticultural Society
he was represented by a prize-winning son, “ Cxolden Eagle,” a worthy representative of his
sire, who has inherited his bold, free action.
Another addition to the stud in 1904 was the polo pony mare “ Rosemary ” (page 9),
by “ Rosewater,” one of the best fourteen hand ponies Mr. Angas could find' in England!
and a winner at two Royal Shows and the Crystal Palace. Her sire, “ Rosewater,” won
36 firsts and champions. This mare came out in foal to the celebrated " Mootrub,” and
produced a filly foal. “ Mootrub ”is an Arab of the Seghawi Jedran strain from Nejd,
in Central Arabia, purchased by General Sir J. Hills, R.E., and brought to England, where
he won on nearly all occasions shown, taking 21 first prizes. He is the sire of many prize-
winners, including “ Sheen,” one of the finest tournament ponies of the day, and a heavy
weight class winner at Hurlingham and other English shows. “ Mootrub ”is also sire
of “ Panama ” and “ Emerald ” and other ponies playing in first class company. Mr.
Angas also imported the polo pony stallion “Autocrat,” a beautiful brown (see page 8),
who was placed on no less than 15 occasions at the best shows in England, and who is the


1J 11 III I Jin i
Imported Polo Pony Stallion, AUTOCRAT.


I f ■
■■ ;f» ' .£3*'°' , ' ’ J I ■ H t *
; jP V * ■ y
jj^^*Lj,..m-IKT ,-«,
■Hi 4k. |By| ,.v fF*^
'%- »«* *■ *'* ; ■TCBp ,,. £8 HP itfmLxJB - - * V
HB^wa v v - .- 8fJai .yfA &< £■'• - :'.r ■ - - «:* bE'S$5@® jp*? ‘‘inHHHSli "*• mf ‘Ww •./ £ * £&X£$Mi£ i
■ , 1 HB|li fKj>* ' '-t
' ,> l i ’ ■&,
BBBaB^^A^^&a^ggS8IHBHB^MBI^ • < V *- B^H-IBBf
■• ■' r ?^pj^ ,r ’‘ ;- • n : - BB1B0 - -
>>%■■"'■' ' •..>/'■?Tjwy yjfcgBr ,w JEwWK " **■“ • »jjj SB -*>
%>%>..
• • r<y - -*■ ‘
Imported Polo Pony Mare, ROSEMARY (1224). Prize Winner at Crystal Palace and Royal Shows, England.


a„„n STATION BUILDINGS, COLLINGEOVE.


sire of several English winners. He is by “ Hurlingham ” from “ Housemaid/’ a very
celebrated tournament mare. “Hurlingham” was by "Rosewater” from “Esmerelda,”
the best polo pony of modern times.
During his latest visit to England Mr. C. H. Angas purchased and sent out four more
ponies. On the score of breeding and performances in the most important show rings
throughout England they hold individual records that cannot be surpassed by any harness
ponies that have ever been brought to this country. The shipment consisted of one
stallion and three mares.
The former hails from the famous Shirley stud, founded by Mr. Thomas Smith, at
Hall Green, near Birmingham. This breeder has of late years turned out some of the most
notable prize-winners in the hackney world. This stallion, “ Shirley Free Lance,” is a
five-year-old, brown, standing 14 hands, bv “ Warrener,” by “ Whitegate Swell ” from
“ Mel Valley Princess.” The last-named is the most famous prize-winner ever known,
having in her time gained more than a hundred first and champion awards. “ Shirley
Free Lance ” himself has won eight prizes at Olympia and at the Hackney Societv’s Show,
and four at other shows, making twelve prizes at eight shows against the best ponies in
England in hand and harness. He is a rich dark brown, with a couple of white hind heels,
with well-sprung ribs and good loins, a very springy and much-accentuated action in front,
and a taking style of covering the ground.
Of the three pony mares, the one with the greatest record is “ Angram Rosarine,” a
four-year-old dark chestnut mare, standing 14.3. This mare is by “ Rosadore ” (by “ Dane-
gelt ” from “ Princess ” by “ Garton Duke of Connaught.” . Young as she is, she has
won twenty-six prizes, including two Lfackney Society’s medals, and reserve champion
at the leading shows in England in hand, harness, and saddle. Of the above num-
ber eighteen were first prizes. Her sire, “ Rosadore,” has taken three champions, and
between the years 1900 and 1909 has sired 212 winners. “ Garton Duke of Connaught ”
bears the credit of having sired 283 winners from 1900 to 1908. "Angram Rosarine”
is a dark liver chestnut, with a white star, and white on the near fore and the near hind
fetlocks.
The second mare is “ Polophelia,” also a dark liver colored chestnut, splashed on the
flank with white hairs, four years old, 14. H. She is by “ Polonius,” one of the best-known
prize-winners of the day, and the sire of 139 winners between 1900 and 1908. Her grand-
dam on the sire’s side was “ Ophelia,” a champion show mare, and one of the most successful
mares at the stud ever foaled. “ Polophelia ” has won fourteen prizes in harness, includ-
ing six at Olympia in 1908, three at the Hackney Horse Society’s Show, and reserve
champion. She was onlv exhibited at seven shows, but was considered to be the best
mare in England between 14 and 14.2, when purchased by Mr. Angas.
The third pony is one that will appeal to every Australian man, woman, and child
She is ore of the grandest little models of horseflesh that anvbody could wish to set eves on,
and such a mover as few would credit to one of her inches. She, too, is a dark chestnut,
13.2, of great power, low set and well topped with a particularly neat head. She is seven
years old, and up to the time of being purchased by Mr. Angas had only been shown once
at the Hackney Horse Society’s Show, where, when out of condition, she won a card. Since
then, at Olympia last year, she won five prizes against all the best ponies in England
in hand or harness. She is in foal to “ Little Rubv,” who bears the distinction of beinv
- . o
the champion pony of the world. The name of this little model is “ Rusper Midget,”
by “ Parbold Gordon ” out of “ Parbold Midget.” Her progeny should prove a valuable
acquisition anywhere.
Mr. Angas does not exhibit his ponies as a rule, but on the occasions that they have
competed they have won prizes. In 1908, at Adelaide September Show, they won seven
first prizes out of eight entries.
The annual draft for sale are disposed of unbroken, and in the hands of their owners
take a prominent position in the show ring. A large percentage of the prize-winning
ponies in South Australia carry the well-known Collingrove brand X


COLUNGROVE JV1ERIINO STUD.
I ‘ > ’"
’ *.
''‘> * - * <*$ .. ,
# % * ' * **
"£c.-
% «,,*■ .* K , '■ Jnfp • 7
- • , > , v.-> -*n\ - . i
y « «r * * . -J »* ' . , * »* *, * * > jL fc ♦** * -
Scoti STUD MERINO RAM, in use at Collingrove.


i,
v t ■ -• : ■ -
Scott. TRIO OF COLLINGROVE MERINO STUD EWES.
Tt]e Collingrove Merigo Stud,
The present Collingrove stud flock was formed by Mr. Chas. H. Angas, who, in October,
1887, and in the following year, brought down a small draft of selected sheep, consisting
of three stud rams, 46 ram lambs, 200 ewes, and 39 ewe lambs from Hill River to form the
nucleus of the new flock. Two of the three rams, namely, “ Caesar ” (aged') and “ Wonder-
land ” (2-tooth), were purchased by Mr. Chas. Angas at the Melbourne Ram Sales. Both
were animals of good pedigree, “ Caesar,” who had won good prizes in Tasmania, being by
‘‘Thunderbolt,” dam by “Sanscrit,” by “Sir Robert”; while “Wonderland” was by
“ Little^ Wonder 2nd,” by “Champion Little Wonder,” dam by “Sanscrit,” by “ Sir
Robert.” Most of the other sheep brought in were pure Hill River-bred, a few of the ewes
owning for their sire the fine ram “Hercules,” purchased by J. H. Angas for 1,150
guineas for use in the Hill River stud, their dams being Hill River-bred ewes.
“Caesar ” was unfortunately killed in an accident in the winter following Ins arrival
at Collingrove, but not before he had proved his value as a stud sire. Among other good
sheep he left a son named “ Anthony,” who took the first prize in his class at the Adelaide
Show of 1891, and, in addition, was awarded the distinction of Reserve Champion.
“Anthony,” in his turn, had many worthy descendants, several of whom annexed high
honors at Adelaide Shows.
“Wonderland” lived for seven years, and worthily justified his selection. As a
sire he left a large number of good sheep, who made their mark both in the show-ring
and as breeders. Possibly his best son was “ Surprise,” who gained the first prize in a
very strong class against 36 competitors at the Adelaide Show of 1890, and also cut two
prize fleeces.
Four rams from Mount Crawford, viz., “ King of the Ring,” “ Portland,” “ Mikado,”
and “ Baronet,” have been introduced since the stud was formed. The former, who was
sired by “ Champion Wool Prince,” was a prize-winner at the Adelaide Shows of 1889 and


a mH SCENES ON COLLINGROVE ESTATE.


% v l
; p '■ . - ... •
Scott. TRIO OF COLLINGROVE MERINO STUD RAMS.
189 L Portland was by Portsea.” A Tasmanian ram, “ Glasslough,” by “ Sovereign,”
by Golden Horn II.” ; the latter, the sire of “President,” sold for 1,600, and again,
when seven years old, for 1,000 guineas, w r as purchased and added to the stud in 1899.
I he stud flock at present includes some 300 breeding ewes, and, in spite of numerous
out-crosses of blood, shows a wonderful similarity of type, the sheep having beautiful heads,
being short-legged and deep of body, with well sprung ribs and grand constitutions The
ewes breed up to twelve years of age, and carry excellent fleeces to the last. The fleeces,
though light in condition and of a high quality for a South Australian wool, are large, give
a splendid yield, and realise just about the top price in the market for wool from this .State.
Rams of the best pedigree and highest class only having been used at Collingrove since the
stud there was started, and the most careful selection having always been made, the general
flocks have been raised to a high degree of excellence and character. As a result, the wool
is of good length, dense, even and very good on the back, this last quality being one for
which these sheep are particularly noted. As prices obtained for the product form the
best criterion of its excellence, it should suffice to record that nearly the whole of the fleece
wool of the Collin grove flocks for 1899, unclassed, brought U-kl. per lb., while the pieces
fetched 12d. per lb., the highest prices paid in Adelaide that year. As regards weight
of the fleeces, 7,854 sheep, including 4,000 breeding ewes, cut an average of 10 lb. 9 oz.
each, or, including 3,808 lambs, 8 lb. 4 oz., and these high averages have been well
maintained.
Collingrove is a wonderful place for grass in the spring and up to the end of January.
But from then until the winter rains set in, the sheep fall away badly on the dry feed, and,
owing to the frost and cold, do not begin to pick up condition again until September. They
suffer very severely during the winter months from exposure and want of feed, so that
a good constitution is absolutely necessary if sheep are to live and thrive there for any length
of time. This, however, the present flock has proved itself eminently capable of doing.


TTI-IE COLU1NGROVE LIINCOUIN STUD.
. STUD RAM, in use at Collingrove.
v r»r\ T r '


sib*’
LUSTRE QUEEN, Champion Lincoln Ewe.
Tt)e Collingrove Lincoln Stud,
Finding from the records of the Royal Agricultural Society of England that the Lincoln
breed of sheep produced a greater combined value of wool and carcase than any other kind,
the late J. H. Angas determined to make selections in England of that famous long-wool
breed for crossing with his already established Merino flocks for mutton purposes. Accord-
ingly, in 1865, he made his first importations of ewes and rams from the flocks of Messrs.
Hall, of Lincolnshire, and George Angas, of Bawtry, Yorkshire. Satisfied with the result
of this first experiment, he imported ten more pure-bred Lincolns in the following year
(1866). In 1869 a very choice selection of eighteen ewes and six rams were imported from
Messrs. Hall & Turner’s Lincoln flocks, and in 1871 and 1872 further shipments from Eng-
land of selected animals of this breed followed. In 1879 Mr. Angas made a selection from
the celebrated Lincoln studs of Messrs. Budding, of Panton House, Wragby, Lincolnshire.
Messrs. Budding have been the leading prize-takers in this class at the principal English
shows for many years, and their sheep are world-famed for their heavy carcass and quality
and weight of their fleeces, “ Panton Duke,” one of the rams then purchased by Mr.
Angas, clipped in 1878 no less than 30 lb. of washed wool, being only one year’s growth.
Pursuing his policy of recruiting and maintaining his flocks by importations of first-class
blood from England, Mr. Angas imported, in 1894, rams from the celebrated studs of Messrs,
Kirkham, of Biscathorpe, and Budding, of Panton House. Lincolnshire ; and more
recently he acquired selections from other leading Hocks. The results have been in all ways
satisfactory, and the successes of the Collingrove Lincoln sheep in the show-yard, as well
as in the stud, have been very conspicuous, they having secured no fewer than 325 prizes
at the principal Australian Shows since the establishment of the flock in the early “ sixties.”
Equally successful in the market has been the wool of these sheep. The Bradford Chamber
of Commerce awarded Mr. Angas the highest commendation for samples of Lincoln wool,
and equal praise was given him at the International Show at Vienna. It has been con-
clusively proved that the Lincoln makes one of the best crosses with the Merino, both for
wool and mutton. A shipment of Mr. Angas’ crossbred wool of this variety realised 20-fd.
and 21 d. per lb. in the grease, while his fat sheep have topped the Adelaide market. The
crossbred ewe (by a Lincoln ram from Merino ewe) has proved to be the most suitable ewe
to breed export fat lambs from in Australia, and a ready sale exists for this class of sheep.
Both championships for Lincolns and all first prizes but one were won by Collingrove sheep
at the Adelaide Show in 1899, the last occasion on which these sheep were exhibited.
In 1907 Mr. C. H. Angas secured a stud ram at the Melbourne sales at 110 guineas
from the stud flock of Mr. W. Forsyth, of Victoria. This ram was first and champion
at the A.S.B. Show, 1907, so that the high quality of the stud is being well maintained.


HILL RIVER MERINO STUD.
4 •' , »'* ty“ y jmQ^t-'. '*v**S \Jl : i*t' ik*fT ltV ~4p* * t *•*’
Bto ' JbrjT !*»' L- M yV V* |->4 .--~ y A* J ; \. W», ’jMH* i , *fu Jr ii mm ft * TB&- JAk
fc ■•* /J < u* V ■ V VV El? t wrl&fefei]l vjy* 4 I^IHIiMp&ISr 1 ***- J« B
MjBI I 4fc* «t.ijw>_ \ v JBff£/t-~~ * t %, '*** J^* 1 ' *fi| •*. ■ i oHRip^
Scott. TYPICAL “ANGAS” MERINO RAM.


Hill River aqd Point Sturt Studs,
. . . Controlled by . . .
C/je trustees of ttje Xate J. J(. jffrjgas
As is well known, Mr. J. H. Angas left a provision in his will expressing the hope
that his estates would be carried on for at least ten years after his death. This wish his
trustees are loyally respecting, with the result that the magnificent studs established by
him have been preserved intact, to the great gain of the stock-raising industry of Aus-
tralia, and are still being conducted on the lines by which their founder achieved such
splendid results. His son, Mr C. H. Angas, in whom is vested the chief management of
the various studs, has shown the same passion for pastoral enterprise, and a determina-
tion to keep the name he bears well to the front in association with the Merino, Here-
ford, and Shorthorn studs located at Hill River and Point Sturt, as well as in connection
with the Merinos, Lincolns, and ponies at his private estate at Collingrove, which have
already been referred to in preceding pages. As in the past, visitors who may desire to
inspect either of the studs are welcome to do so, and arrangements for such visits may be
made either through the office of the Trustees in Adelaide or with the resident managers
of the estates.
THE HILL RIVER MERINOS.
Hill River, where for many years the famous Angas Merino flocks have been kept,
lies about 90 miles north of Adelaide, from whence it may be reached by train to Farrell's
Flat, from which township the head station is but a few miles distant. The estate covers
a fine stretch of country, which was purchased by the late J. FI. Angas from the previous
owner, the late C. B. Fisher.
Hill River lies high, the general altitude being about one thousand five hundred feet,
and consists for the most part of open, healthy, well-grassed land, slightly undulating in
character, and sheltered by the two lines of low-lying hills which partially surround it.
Though there was at the time of purchase very little timber, there are now large plantations
of pine, acacias, and eucalypti throughout the run, for Mr. Angas spent many thousands
of pounds in thus providing natural shelter for the stock. This large expenditure has
proved remunerative, both for the purpose for which it was primarily intended, and in
the provision of suitable timber for building, well-making, fencing, and other station pur-
poses. Besides which, these extensive timbered areas are in themselves an important
asset added to the value of the property.
Hill River and the adjacent country has long been noted for its dry, salubrious climate,
which has resulted in the complete immunity from disease of any sort, which has always
characterised the flocks and herds bred and reared on it. The rainfall is scanty, but suffi-
cient for the deep-rooting, succulent native grasses and herbage which clothe the country.
As in all properties controlled by the late Mr. Angas, every necessary improvement likely
to enhance the value of the estate and add to its earning capacity has been provided
fencing, drafting yards, shearing sheds, station buildings, and watering facilities all being
on the most approved lines.
1 he Hill River flock, which is one of the largest in the State, numbers altogether between
fifty and sixty thousand, and had its origin in the very earliest days of the history of South
Australia, being descended from what was practically the first oversea importation to
reach the colony. Records in possession of the Angas family show that the first purchase
of sheep was made by the late J. H. Angas in 1845, soon after his arrival in the State.
These sheep were bought from the South Australian Company, who had formed their stud
in 1836 by the importation of a very fine lot of pure Merinos, selected from the Feutewitz,
Xischwitz, and Oschatz flocks in Saxony ; while later on several shipments were bought from
1 asmania. By this purchase about 750 pure-bred ewes were procured from the Company,
also a very choice lot of stud ewes and rams. Fresh blood was brought in by Mr. Angas
in 1855 from the stud of M. Godin, of Chattillon-sur-Seine, Fote d’or, France ; and further
importations in following years, including shipments of Spanish Merinos descended from
the historic Royal flock of King George HI.


* A . |ms . v .lH ♦$., %%'■ 1 ■ • >' ■' V****' araffTwi TTl '' - '* / I
&* r*** - ... ■&. ~~ -**' -•• " - '• - ■!,; ]'• '■’ . "*» . . -?» «' -'j» tfflfifwjk.* •{' E
,. • >t ? /„ ** v ,.>/„ r ' '? W/’i / I
■ ■■'■ §•■ J - W ax..,-^ >?• * stmt* Af\L r ' - . v \&<JL2tifcy \ .• I
ft- ~*'3' W> '} , 'S'"' , xi 1 J6.'• Tflffjjfc **. yiC~Sk %P** j* '4 • ' * • TE "’•iM! W*J;( • ». _3i ic’ . • •(£&** . • ■* • TjL. “* WT - * - ,*'. -• S. *%&£fjLL ’ ■fffBSQS&mb v I
Scott. GROUP OP HILL RIVER STUD RAMS.
arfVi*-#* sJ' - *
, jl JL. ‘ #> •'- 1&*Jb j|Bj. 'Aw. sHBMBVMiMSESSEUlBL. *-aE
22SLZ2-2 Ww --»*mKl&MtxW V •*. *; ,&«, a#-#L. .y , »rA * JMr ■ \ J( . . „, . .Jj ■ \ . .. . • Jr5 • •
; * X
,
Scott, GROUP OF HILL RIVER STUD EWES.


Coming to more recent times we find that in 1885 the celebrated stud ram “ Hercules ”
was purchased at the high price of /1,207 10/, and in 1887 the champion ram “ Caesar,”
both bred by Mr. David Taylor, St, Johnstone, Tasmania. These rams were remarkable
for their covering, density, and evenness of fleece, and left a marked effect by transmitting
these qualities to their progeny.
The South Australian Merino form a class of their own, differing in many respects
from the same named sheep as bred in Victoria and New South Wales, yet experts from
Eastern States, such as the Messrs. A. Austin and A. Austin, jun., names associated with
the famous Wanganella flock, publicly commended the South Australian Merino on the
last occasion of their judging at the Adelaide Show. Mr. Austin, sen., was reported by
the South Australian “ Register ” to have said that he “ believed in breeding sheep that
combine the greatest length with the greatest density,” which is a marked characteristic
of the type sought for by the leading South Australian breeders, whilst his colleague men-
tioned that he had been “ greatly impressed by the Hill River sheep shown under him,”
and described them as “ a fine type of Merino, being well covered, particular!}/ good on
the back, with a good staple, and a fine framed sheep with splendid constitutions.” These
characteristics, especially the density of the wool all over and the good backs of the Hill
River sheep are, no doubt, due to the judicious use of the high-class Tasmanian sires already
mentioned, and to the careful blending with his own stud of selected C. B. Fisher ewes
when Mr. Angas bought the Hill River Estate and live stock, that the Hill River sheep have
been brought to their present state of high excellence. As the accompanying illustrations
clearly show, the Angas Merino, which is so deservedlv held in the highest estima-
tion throughout Australasia, and even bevond the ocean, is characterised by the low-set,
large frames, carrying heavy fleeces of combing wool of the first quality, which realises top
prices in the London market, and is highly appreciated by American and other buyers of
such wool.
The Hill River sheep are not prepared specially for exhibition. They are all grass-fed*
and as the stud flocks there run to several thousands, the show sheep are practically examples
of this large number, being selected almost from the paddocks in which they were lambed.
The results, therefore, are all the more meritorious. In all nearlv 200 prizes have been
gained by the Hill River sheep and wool at the principal Agricultural Shows of Australia.
In 1901, in competition with selected representatives from other studs, they carried
off the champion cup for ram, also the Wendt 25-guinea silver challenge cup for Merino
ram for 1901 —a very handsome trophv —with a fine ram, “Success.” Second prize in
the aged ram class, first prize for 6-tooth ram, first and second prizes for 4-tooth rams, also
five prizes in the ewe classes, including first for 2-tooth ewe.
In the following year “ Progress II.,” already a winner, and a son of that very success-
ful ram, “ Progress,” was again first in his class, the second prize sheep being also from the
same stud ; three prizes in the ewe classes also falling to the Hill River representatives.
In 1903, the last year that the late J. H. Angas exhibited. Hill River rams were placed
in each of the four classes. The Trustees of the estate have not entered as largely as did the
founder of the flock, but upon occasions they have put up very excellent sheep for com-
petition, notably in the following year, when Hill River ewes won both the Murray and
Dalgety Cups.
It is worthy of mention that the Hill River sheep improve with age. For example,
the prize ram “ Progress,” having won the second prize at the Adelaide Show of 1897, was
first at that of the following year ; and in several other instances sheep from this stud have
won higher prizes as they grew older. These proofs of consistent improvement afford a
very valuable criterion of the thriving qualities of the Hill River sheep. In addition to
these exhibition honors and the high tributes of approbation from acknowledged experts,
valuable testimony of the hardy and suitable character of the Hill River sheep for dry and
rough salt bush country has been received from various parts of Australia from purchasers
of rams of this strain, resident principally in the north-western portions of New South
Wales and Western Australia, the south-western districts of Queensland, and along the
valley of the Darling River in New South Wales.


Scott. TYPICAL HILL RIVER MERINO STUD RAM.
Coming to the important question of the weight and quality of the wool of the Hill
River Merinos, it deserves mention that the manager of a large and well-known sheep
station on the Darling River volunteered figures showing the average weight of wool grown
on his station and shorn from Hill River and other South Australian-bred rams which he
had purchased. He found that the Hill River sheep, with 12 months’ growth, averaged
16{ lbs. each, or 2 lb. more per head than the other South Australian animals. As an
instance of success in another neighboring State, the following extract from the “ Northern
Public Opinion and Mining and Pastoral News ” of Western Australia may be taken :
Messrs. Withnell Bros., of Karratha Station, have received the gold medal awarded
by the Department of Agriculture for the best collection of locally-grown wool from the
North division at its annual show last April. For the purposes of the exhibition, the
State is divided into three divisions, ‘ North,’ Central,’ and ‘ Southern,’ three prizes (gold,
silver, and bronze medals) being awarded to each district. The North division comprises
the East and West Kimberley, Pilbarra, Roeburne, and Ashburton districts. The sheep
from which Messrs. Withnell Bros, clipped the wool for this exhibit were bred under the
management of Mr. W. P. Tozer, who was the first to introduce the Hill River (S.A.) strain
to this district. Owing to the good results which followed on the introduction of these
sheep, Messrs. Withnell Bros, imported in December last another consignment of 100 rams,
which, when shorn at Karratha, cut 15 lbs. 2 oz. of wool per head.
The following report by Mr. George Jeffrey, W'ool Expert of the South Australian
School of Mines and Industries, on the Hill River Merino ewes, dated April 28, 1899, affords
the highest testimony to the quality and class of the samples of wool from these sheep
submitted to this authority for judgment. The report says “ These samples are of
excellent quality, possessing all the characteristics of the pure Merino. They are well-
grown, shafty, bold, and robust, yet handle soft and kind. The curls or crimps wEich
denote character are even and well-defined. They are elastic, bright and light in condi-
tion ; yield when scoured, &c., about 47 per cent. ; spinning capacity, 60s. This type


wWf «Ji4ky f J» >* ■•c^^JIh<& ; gjy
* : ™5* ffiPtc ** AwBftwWPP^^B^^fc !:, ' *.<*' '‘jS? *\ ■* ’
'■' ."'££' ‘ ’ ; %: \r ¥*L *frr&' , Tv , v k . *jj •►
Scott. TYPICAL HILL RIVER MERINO STUD EWE.
of wool is a most profitable one to grow. Owing to the light condition, it is quite suitable
for the American market ; and as the spinning quality is always a useful one, the Bradford,
and a large section of the Continental combers, are always ready to purchase such wool.”
From a much fuller and more detailed report on samples of Hill River wool, from Mr.
Alfred Hawkesworth, Lecturer-in-charge of the Sheep and Wool Department of the Sydney
Technological Museum, the following extracts are taken : —“ The wool in this selection
is one of the most valuable additions to this Department, as it represents a distinct type
of Merino to that produced in any other colony. Wherever South Australian wool is
mentioned, long, bright, robust, heavy fleeces are expected, which might be correctly termed
‘ bale-fillers.’ The Hill River sheep have some of the finest strains of blood that ever came
to the colonies in their veins. It is often wondered where the length and lustre came from.
This is easily accounted for by saying that the climate has a tendency to encourage length
and make it bright ; but if these conditions were not ably seconded by careful selection
and proper management, the densitv and color would be, to a great extent, sacrificed.
We have only to consult the return per sheep to see that they compare favorably with the
heaviest-cutting sheep in the colonies. I have frequently come across these sheep in the
far west of Queensland, where, through their grand constitution, they stand great hardships
and come out well, producing a good-sized body, and well covered with a useful and service-
able wool. Few Merino flocks are more favorably known in the show-yards and sale-rings
than the Hill River.”
The averages of the wool produced by each class of the Hill River sheep are as fol-
lows : —Ewes, all ages, 10 lb. 5] oz. ; lambs, 4 lb. 3 oz. ; ram lambs, 5 lb. 10 oz. ; stud
rams, 2-tooth, up to 15 lb. 10 oz. ; stud rams, 4-tooth, up to 20 lb. 14 oz. ; stud rams, 6-
tooth, up to 19 lb. 8 oz. ; stud rams, aged, up to 17 lb. 12 oz. And on the averages Mr.
Hawkesworth remarks; —“It must be admitted that the above are great results, and,
as the wool is not by any means heavily-conditioned or yolky, the results are all the more
satisfactory.”
Throughout the rest of this report, which deals with the wool of each class of Hill River
sheep separately and in detail, the same strain of high approval and eulogy is maintained.


HILL RIVER HEREFORD STUD.
•n
I ' *• ■ v‘ .,. t . , 4b
pSHfeSP wMP -* - y ., — -'
•*■ / - w
iww f w - - f
IP *w - - ■• -. >•.■*«• % m , % * ,*- • * **' - ,„ , *
IB - % -^W^
IHr ***
*; **•--«. %?;».« ,* **”-. . ’’** •*» .’'* *v- , ( ~" 4 *♦ 4** ' • ;.t ~
* ' «•<*» __ ■ ■<•.,. " - ''■
r
* : I , ; ' . ' ■ 3 / ' ■ ' ;. ! " ; . ' I)
ii
J
I I ——————— ~—~ T —■ -^M-«-r».-«Tr.-~T--.T-t- Tr*rr*~rTrr-~r-ir*-7\^
MAGICIAN 16,832 (Imported).
One of the most successful sires used in the herd. Bred by J. Bowen Jones, Shropshire, England.


'If *•?' ** v^
,... «§ pK^ * -x 3HpK V^^ i
iM^^^^dbHManjflfeL / * * 4ri^
COUNT COMELY 11th, by Magician, from Collingrove Comely 3rd.
Tlje Hill River Hereford Herd.
The history of the Hereford, now so universally known the world over, goes back to
about the year 1650, or, roughly, 250 years. There seems to be little doubt that they
originated in the county from which their name is derived, probably from a cross of white-
faced blemish cattle introduced by a Lord Scudamore, with the local herds, which already
enjoyed a reputation as good grazing cattle. Since that far back time they have con-
sistently held a very high place amongst the notable breeds.
More than one hundred years ago, one of the greatest English authorities on live stock
declared his belief that the Hereford was the finest breed of cattle in the British Isles,”
and many well-known writers in following years have been almost as pronounced in their
praise of the breed. William Corbett, in his “ Rural Rides,” published in 1830, describes
the white-faced Hereford as “ certainly the finest and most beautiful of all horn cattle,”
and John Lawrence, in his “ General Treatise on Cattle,” considered it for some purposes
the best breed in the world, pre-eminently distinguished for the produce of beef and quick
feeding in proportion to growth and size, adding that “ no English breed could compete
with it in profitable return of quantity of beef whilst top prices attested to its quality.”
About the middle of last century the Hereford became very popular on the wide cattle
ranches of Western America, where it was found that their extreme hardihood, great ability
to travel, and wonderful endurance under severe climatic conditions, made them an ideal
beast for the open range. It was probably the reputation gained in America which first


MIUU RIVER HEREFORD STUD BULL.
' \ ' v y , : ■- " ■; 1
r -s’ [ ' - *■ * iiTifltiriw' * “ V , * c,< *-.. f , ' '.*«•' , , * -,>-•,.
•' TV' *yj T . - • •*• r - *••;>* “ .; *v v V ’;> • ~ *L . ••■
- T ~'^m e ii>ii *>->■*** «*•*■ • ; • • ’ww.> ~ r
SPARK 35th (Imported), by Argon (18209) from Spangle 64th. Winner Champion Prize, Melbourne, 1908.


led the late J. H. Angas to consider their special suitability for the somewhat similar condi-
tions which prevail throughout the large northern areas of Australia. Having once decided
that a proposition was theoretically sound, it was always Mr. Angas’ policy to practically
test it, and in this case he at once set about making preparations for establishing a stud
herd, drafts from which would be available for his Northern properties. The first im-
portation, made in 1869, consisted of the bull “ May Duke” (3985), bred by Mr. W. G.
Preece, of Salop, and the cows “ Lady Wilson,” “ Stately,” and “ Winifred.” Two years
later a bull named “ Bruce,” bred by Mr. P. Turner, Pembridge, was used in the herd.
In 1871 another bull, “ Bringewood ” (2981), bred by Mr. Price, of Hereford, was added
to the stud, all the breeders mentioned being in the forefront of the Hereford world in the
Old Country. Again, at a later date, Mr. Angas purchased from the late C. Price, of Hind-
marsh Island, for 200 guineas, the very handsome Hereford cow “ Jennie Deans,” with her
bull calf. This latter animal, afterwards named “Charlie Deans” (5252), won five first
prizes and a champion cup in Adelaide, in addition to first prize at the National Agri-
cultural Society of Victoria’s Show in 1881. In 1884 Mr. Angas purchased the two-year-old
prize bull “ Sir Roger,” from Mr. F. Reynolds, Tocal, New South Wales ; and a sire more
fruitful and more impressive has seldom been seen. He left a numerous and very handsome
progeny, amongst which have been many prize-winners. His bull calves, to speak of them
alone, won the champion prize at the Melbourne Show for five years in succession, actually
defeating imported bulls which had won first prize at the Royal Agricultural Show in Eng-
land. In 1885 the first prize heifers, “ Minerva 38th ” and “ Minerva 54th,” also the prize
two-year-old “ Comely 6th,” were acquired, and proved valuable breeders.
In 1894 the bull “ Magician,” by “ Assistant,” ex “ Peg,” destined to have a marked
influence on the Angas Hereford herd, was imported. “ Magician ” was undoubtedly
one of the finest Herefords ever brought into Australia. As will be seen from the photo-
graph (page 24), he had an excellent countenance, with perfect white markings, which
formed a pleasing contrast to his deep, rich color. A model of symmetry, presenting a
fine even outline, with good quarters and a magnificent depth of well-rounded ribs covered
with a splendid evenness of flesh, “ Magician,” with his aristocratic bearing, may be said
to have possessed in a highly conspicuous degree every possible good quality and point that
could be desired in a stud sire.
A well-known stud stock salesman, writing in reference to this animal at the time of
his shipment, said : —“ Not only is this bull remarkably handsome, but unusually well-
bred. His sire, “ Assistant,” w'as used in one of the best herds in Shropshire, where he
created a most beneficial impression. He was half-brother to the renowmed bull “ Archi-
bald,” winner of so many champion prizes at all our leading shows ; in fact, I think he
was never beaten, although shown for several years. “ Magician’s ” dam, “ Peg,” was a
very fine cow r , purchased by Mr. G. T. Forrester for 175 guineas at the famous Stockton-
bury sale, where her sire, “ Lord Wilton,” realised 3,800 guineas. With such splendid
blood on both sides, we can rely upon “ Magician ” getting stock of the highest merit, and
it is not often that one is able to obtain so good an individual animal with so fine a pedigree.
Had he beensshornw r n in England this summer, lam sure he would have been in the front rank,
as there w r as no animal of his age that could have beaten him.”
As a sire “Magician” amply fulfilled the above prediction, and left a very beneficial
mark on the stud by the impression of his own grand individuality on his progeny. He
sired several prominent prize winners, including “ Count Comely 11th,” “ Austral Wilton,”
‘‘Lady Minerva 13th,” “ Minerva’s Magician 3rd,” “ Rosebud sth,” and “ Mayfield 9th,”
all winners at one or the other of the metropolitan show's of Sydney, Melbourne, and
Adelaide.
In 1904 Mr. Chas. H. Angas selected “ Spark 35th ” from the herd of Mr. G. H. Green,
Herefordshire. He has proved a most prolific sire, and his stock have been most successful
when exhibited. A daughter, “ Mayflower 16th,” has never been beaten ; she won the
champion prize at Melbourne in 1908. At the same show r “ Spark 35th ” also w r on the
championship for Hereford bull.


Scott. Stud Bull (Imported), TWYFORD LANCER, by Lively Lad, from Lemon.
The latest addition to the stud is “ Twyford Lancer,” imported in 1908. He was
bred by the well-known breeder, James Edward Twyford, Pembridge. He is by “ Lively
Lad” (22967) from “Lemon,” by “ Bonifax.” “Twyford Lancer” is a grand young
bull of one of the best Hereford families in England. A real aristocrat in appearance,
who should do good work in the herd, and who may be relied on to get grand stock from
the daughters of “ Spark 35th,” for which purpose he was specially selected by Mr. Angas.
His first drop of calves are reported to be exceedingly promising, and to quite justify his
purchase.
The long list of splendid sires which have been used in the Angas Hereford herd during
the long series of years include “ Charlie Deans ” (5252), “ Bringewood ” (2981), “ General
Gordon," “ Sir Roger,” “ Roger,” “ Bravo,” “ Count Comely,” “ Mercury 2nd,” “ Mer-
cator,” “ Count Comely 11th,” “ Magician ” (imported), and “ Spark 35th ” (imported),
all winners of champion prizes, and the fact that the herd has been most carefully bred
ever since its foundation, has resulted in the fixing of a standard of symmetry, sub
stance, and quality which should satisfy the most exacting breeder, for they possess in the
highest degree the look of health and vigor which is so characteristic of the Hereford, with
the small head, pleasant, open countenance, broad forehead, and full and lively eye, and
the more important points of broad loin, wide hips, level eye, supple hide, and thick yet
mellow yielding flesh, which represent the acme of Hereford perfection.
With such qualifications the Angas Herefords enjoy an enviable and almost unap-
proached reputation amongst the herds of the Commonwealth, and as a result large numbers
of stud bulls have been sold to breeders throughout Australia with highly satisfactory re-
sults, while the record of prizes won by individual animals from the herd at the leading
agricultural shows ol Australia amounts to upwards of 400. It is noteworthy
that tor nine years in succession—from 1885 to 1893 —the grand champion prize of Australia
for Hereford bull was awarded to Mr. Angas at the Melbourne Show —a fact sufficient
of itself to stamp the Hill River herd as being of no ordiary merit.


-' . vr .a'»j-. '£/#* -<5* • • t.>. '•
J&'«* , v£l , v '* -.- , ‘ , , '■ v - ;.'
?.?&; - ■■-■»-■«*■■ r - T - ■ ' ' ' .
' ' - ** • ... '’ ’’A
♦ *. ■ •■' ' - v. • -
* • - '• . .' : ’ ' ; - ' -. • . - ■ . £•?
-~v • ■ ' . -.■>*-• •• . •*■» - J .
TY\e Point Sturt Shorthorn Herd
In whatever department of stock-raising the late J. H. Angas engaged, the studs
founded and supervised by him rapidly came to the front, and have remained in that posi-
tion to this day, but it was more particularly with his Shorthorns that this great stud
master stood head and shoulders above his contemporary breeders of the Commonwealth.
It is a fact of which South Australia has reason to be proud, that for more than half a cen-
tury the Angas Shorthorn has stood for all that is best in this magnificent breed. All
that wealth, together with great knowledge of the scientific principles of breeding, long
experience, and keen personal interest made possible, was done in the foundation, develop-
BEVERLEY DUKE 30th, with Stud Cows, at Point Sturt.
merit, and maintenance of the splendid herd which finds its home at Point Sturt, so that
the name of J. H. Angas will go down in Shorthorn history as one of the first —as he certainly
was the greatest —breeder of his time in the Southern Hemisphere.
It is indeed a question whether, either in England or America, a herd of equal size and
quality could be found. As to the individual merits of the champions of the herd, as com-
pared with the best Old World Shorthorns, the question of supremacy must remain un-
decided, for, in spite of the frequent and earnest efforts made by Mr. Angas to arrange for
the exhibition of his cattle at the big shows of Britain, the necessary permission from the
English authorities conld not be obtained. Indirect evidence, however, is forthcoming
in the testimony of Shorthorn breeders and experts, who have from time to time visited
Point Sturt, to the effect that in all round quality and individual excellence the herd could
hold its own in competition with selected representative herds of England.


STUD BULL I IN USE W POIINT STURT.
’ n .*'• V {•’■ , ~ !^V^r v •
Scott. ROYAL BLANCHE 96,864. Imported 1908. (See page 37).


This great success may be ascribed in part to each of two main factors. Firstly, the
judgment displayed in the selection of the original stock and subsequent additions to the
herd. Secondly, the great personal interest taken by the owner in his herd. For nearly
sixty years Mr. Angas found time to devote to the personal supervision of the breeding,
selection, and general management of his Shorthorns, a task of no small magnitude when
it is remembered that it included every detail of bringing up to such perfection a herd of
over 400 head of pedigree cattle, the individuals of which were all branded with stud num-
bers. The date of birth, and full pedigrees in each case being recorded for use in his Shorthorn
stud book—a work which, issued regularly for many years, has proved of immense value
to other breeders, for much careful thought was devoted to its compilation, the subject
matter being set forth in a clear and concise form.
Origin of the Herd.
More than sixty-five years have now passed since Mr. Angas first founded this cele-
brated stud by purchasing twenty picked heifers and an imported bull of the Bates breed —
a direct descendant of the famous sire “ Comet ” (155), bred by Charles Colling at the
beginning of the last century. These purchases were made from the South Australian
Company, which at that time had a large number of cattle running in the neighborhood of
Mount Pleasant. The animals thus acquired were all bred from imported and pedigree
stock, the bulls in use in the herd having been selected and sent out from England under
the supervision of Mr. George Fife Angas. These twenty heifers and the “ Comet ” bull
formed the original foundation, and all through the years which have passed neither trouble
nor expense has been spared in bringing it to the very highest standard.
In 1854 Mr. Angas visited England, and during his stay in the home land he selected
ten stud bulls and cows from the herds of Messrs. Tanqueray, of Hendon ; R. Stratton, of
Broad Hinton, Swindon ; J. Robinson, Clifton Pastures, Olney ; George Angus, Bromley ;
and Jonas Webb, Brabraham.
The year 1879 will long be remembered in Shorthorn history, for it was this year that
saw the importation into Australia of that famous cow, “ Rugia Niblett,” and her
daughter—animals destined to influence the Angas herd, and, through it, the herds of Aus-
tralia to an extraordinary degree. The story has often been told of how Mr. Angas, when
visiting England on a health trip, spent a good deal of his time in the old country in in-
specting the leading stud Shorthorn herds, purely for the pleasure of seeing good stock;
and while a guest of Lord Fitzhardinge at Berkeley Castle, Gloucestershire, purchased
“ Rugia Niblett,” at a price which, even in those days of big figures, would be considered
extremely high ; yet the owner of the two “ Rugia Niblett ” cows —mother and daughter—
never ceased to regret parting with these two high-bred beasts —a relinquishment which
was not effected without extreme reluctance —as in them were lost the keystones of the
herd.
It is no exaggeration to say that no family of Shorthorns in Australia has bred so true
to type and produced such high-class animals as the descendants of this remarkable cow.
During the last thirty years her progeny has won over 350 prizes at Melbourne, Sydney,
and Adelaide, the agricultural shows in these centres being the only ones at which the
Angas cattle are exhibited ; and several animals of this family have realised up to 500
guineas each —an abundantly sufficient criterion of excellence.
At the Melbourne Royal Agricultural Society’s Show in 1898 four descendants of
‘•Rugia Niblett” won each the first prize in its class, namely —‘‘Rugia Niblett 11th,”
first prize for cow four years old or over ; “ Rose of Connaught 16th,” first prize for heifer
three years old ; “ Rose of Connaught 20th,” first prize for heifer two years old ; “ Rugia
Niblett 19th,” first prize for heifer one year old. In addition, these four animals from
the South Australian stud were brought into the ring to be judged for the championship,
and “ Rose of Connaught 16th ” took the leading honors, as well as a special prize for best
three-year-old heifer. This is probably the only record of such a performance, namely,


TYPICAL A INGAS SHORTHORN.
BLANCHE ROSE 12th.
A Noted Cow. Winner of many Champion and Other Frizes in Adelaide, Melbourne 'and ' Sydney.


A “CONNAUGHT” GROUP.
lour animals bred by one owner and descended from the same family to contend for the
championship. And to add still further to the merits of the win, the sire of the champion
prize-winner, ” Lord Waterloo 6th,” was awarded the champion prize for bulls at the same
show.
How a really well-bred animal will dominate a herd is proved by these repeated suc-
cesses and the well-earned reproductive reputation of the descendants of Rugia Niblett ”
in the possession of Mr. Angas. Her daughter, “ Rose Niblett,” secured by Mr. Angas
at the same time as her mother from Lord Fitzhardinge, was acquired with the right of
service of that famous bull, ‘ Duke of Connaught ” (33604), the sire then in use at Berkeley
Castle, purchased by Lord Fitzhardinge at the Dunmore sale in 1875 for 4,500 guineas,
the record price for a Shorthorn bull. The subsequent achievements of Mr. Angas’ cattle
sufficiently attest the sound judgment and foresight displayed in making this selection of
high-class breeding stock. “ Rose Niblett ” gave birth to “ Rose of Connaught,” a rich
roan cow, the ancestress of the “ Connaught ” strain of Shorthorns, and who in the one
year annexed the ( hampionship at the Royal Societies’ Shows of three States, gaining
Rose of Connaught 31st. Rose of Connaught, 20th. Connaught 24th.
this premier distinction at Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide. And this at a time when
the Shorthorns in Australia were not only numerous, but also at their best, and when the
competition for highest honors in this class was exceptionally keen ! “ Rose of Con-
naught ” produced “ Rose of Connaught 3rd,” well known as the “ white cow,” also a
triple winner of the champion prize at the same metropolitan shows in one year, and winner
of three championships at the Melbourne Show in successive years ; while this latter
animal’s daughter, “ Rose of Connaught 20th,” has in turn won similar honors at Sydney
and Adelaide.
Another acquisition from the Berkeley Castle stud was “ Blanche Rose 6th,” a roan
one-year-old heifer, also sired by the “ Duke of Connaught ” (33604). This heifer developed
into a very massive cow, and gave birth to some of the heaviest and most thickly fleshed
cattle m the Angas stud. Her grand-daughter, “ Blanche Rose 12th,” won several cham-
pion prizes, including the championships at the Melbourne Show in 1894 and 1895, in addi-
tion to having taken the second position in the cow class in the two previous years to “ Rose
of Connaught 3rd,” the winner of the championship.


■ • • V . ' /•
- ■ . •. -■ ir:-Sfry>
■ ■■■ . - . . - - ;3&*&
r'- f . : W*-v-' •’-:"■ -y v r-*v-x - v .'. • ■ ,»;■•-
-,.*•' . *. - ■ 4 . ' .** ** .-. ‘ »•
F*V '**• ■ -...W v*V«T* * ' • ■
■ .f. • \ A : - > . - **
* ■> \> ' j ■ ** v " - .*■«*
■*' Ok f$ I
. ” ' ■ -'
f . z .,, : ’•': ■ \ ' , . ■
- -vitr- '■"• -■• '■' «•» , w,,
yf. ..
CHAMPION GROUP, MELBOURNE, 1894.
Lily Waterloo 7th, Lily Waterloo 11th, Lord Waterloo 10th, Blanche Rose 12th, Lily Waterloo Bth
CHAMPION GROUP MELBOURNE, 1895.
Rugia Niblett 11th, Lily Waterloo Bth, Lord Waterloo 6th, Lily Waterloo 11th, Blanche Rose 12th
CHAMPION GROUP, SYDNEY, 1897,
Rugia Niblett 13th, Lord Waterloo 6th, Lily Waterloo 11th, Rose of Connaught 16th.


. *■ * " '' . * ''' "' * ■ *'
if.:: .. . :-... ,..• ■ -- Vv. r^XrX&''X
: ■■■•■■• ••; : - j • - /
MiTUn
- ,r ~' '" " *■■■ ~
CHAMPION GROUP MELBOURNE, 1898.
Rugia Niblett 11th. Lord Waterloo 6th. Rose of Connaught 16th.
CHAMPION GROUP SYDNEY, 1900.
Rose of Connaught 25th. Rugia Niblett 19th. Lord Waterloo 28th. Rose of Connaught 20th
CHAMPION GROUP MELBOURNE, 1906.
Rose of Connaught 35th. Beverley Duke 30th. Rose of Connaught 38th.


POINT STURT SHORTHORN STUD BULL.
Scott. ADBOLTON THALIA KING 97,771. Imported 1908.


CHAMPION GROUP, SYDNEY, 1908,
:
' ' ' " ' * '
* ’ •-- ' . ■'•■•■ •, h * • , * P
4 , - ■* * ‘ ’ ' » J. ■ .■■ ■ \ ' - ■' / " '
- -v :k$'f ' .
“ Rugia Niblett ” was, no doubt, the gem of the twenty-one head included in
the 1879 importation, undoubtedly the most valuable which ever reached these
shores ; but the following cows, in addition to those already referred to, deserve special
mention : “ Dorothea ” and “ Lady Russell,” both sired by “ Duke of Connaught ” (33604);
“Duchess of Wortley,” “Beverley Duchess 16th,” “Lady Fortunate 2nd,” “Lady
Gracious,” “ Musical 18th,” “ Minstrel Bth,” “ Grand Duchess of Oxford Bth,” “ Countess
of Kirklevington,” and “ Charming Oxford.” The pick of the bulls were : —“ Baron
Graham ” (41030), by “ Duke of Connaught ” (33604) ; “ Baron Gwynne ” (42720), bred
by Lord Skelmersdale at Ormskirk ; “ Duke of Hazelcote 62nd ” (49312), bred by Colonel
Kingscote in Gloucestershire ; “ Oxford Beau 7th ” (42082), also bred by Colonel Kings-
cote ; and “Wild Prince 6th” (42620), by “Duke of Rosedale 6th” (38176), bred by
Lord Skelmersdale. “ Oxford Beau 7 th,” who was purchased as a calf for over £7OO,
had for his sire “ Duke of Hillhurst,” reckoned one of the best “ Duchess ” sires in England,
and whose mother cost over 1,000 guineas in 1868.
Rose of Connaught 40th. Rose of Connaught 35th. Lord Waterloo 65th. Duchess ot Connaught 22nd.
With this choice and typical selection of cattle —in which were included seven of the
progeny of “ Duke of Connaught ” (33604)— and with the subsequent judicious mating of
the various families, it was not necessary to make fresh importations of bulls from the old
country for 17 years, when, in 1894, two bulls, “ Waterloo Earl of Sockburn 3rd ” (63512)
and “ Viscount Oxford of Ruddington 2nd ” (66482), were introduced.
In 1908 two very high class Shorthorn bulls were selected by Mr. Charles Angas in
England, for which very high figures were paid. “ Royal Blanche ” (96864), a roan three-
year-old, bred by Lord Fitzhardinge, Berkeley Castle, Gloucestershire. Ihis bull is by
“Lord Inverness” (77067), and comes from the same Blanche family which has held so
prominent a position in the Angas stud since the seventies. A most promising drop of
calves is already to the credit of “ Royal Blanche ” at Point Sturt. The second importation
“ Adbolton Thalia King” (97771), a roan, calved March 5, 1907, was bred by Mr. A. W.
Hickling, Adbolton, Nottingham, and is by “ King Christian of Denmark,”.a famous bull in
the Both these bulls have grown considerably since their arrival, and have
developed in the right way. Excellent results are confidently expected from the intro-
duction of two bulls of such high character, undoubted pedigree, and sound constitution.
Besides these imported animals, several new families of the very best Shorthorn blood
have in past years been secured in Victoria, including “ Duchess of Manchester ” and
two “ Waterioo ” cows, all three descendants of the celebrated “ Bates ” herd. Two
pure-bred “ Duchess” heifers —“Duchess of York 7th and Bth” —acquired in Australia,
have also been added to the Point Sturt stud.


POINT STURT SHORTHORN STUD BULL.
Scott. LORD WATERLOO 65th, by Beverley Duke 30th, from Lily Waterloo 41st. One of Champion Group, Sydney, 1908.


r. ■>- * v il " ’ *
. :. . - -. y - • • ■>*'*■*■>**.,;■:*?&£«■- —-. -
?r/ v . - - ■* --»•». * "< w ' a,*. *■....•• ., >•. w? .... -,. fc.- **
I ' ~•• -' - " " *--. ...
Probably no herd south of the line can show such a record of prizes won as the Point
Sturt Shorthorns. For over forty years the stock have held a prominent position in the
show ring. At the Sydney Royal Show they have won all the group prizes for which they
have competed ; also 26 out of a possible 34 champion prizes for bulls and females, whilst
the total number of prizes won at metropolitan shows amounts to over a thousand.
Amongst the many champion Angas Shorthorns reproduced, one of the most interest-
ing is that of “ Lord Waterloo 6th,” a renowned prize-winner in the herd. This animal, a
rich roan, sired by ” Royal Connaught,” and whose dam was “ Lady Waterloo 33rd,” was
first exhibited as a calf at the Melbourne Agricultural Show of 1891, on which occasion he
succeeded in securing a prize. From that time forward his career as a show beast was
one of unbroken success. He won two championships at Sydney and three at Melbourne,
his successes in the Victorian capital being gained in the years 1896, 1897, and 1898. In
the last of these years he beat three imported bulls, two of which have since won champion-
ships at succeeding Melbourne .Shows. He also annexed five championships at Ade-
laide Shows, making ten championships in all. The famous “ Beverley Duke 30th,” known
to thousands of show goers as the “ white bull,” also finds a place in some of the groups,
whilst one of his best sons,“ Lord Waterloo 65th,” is shown on opposite page.
FIRST PRIZE PAIR OF FAT COWS (Grass-fed), Adelaide Show, 1900.
The White Cow dressed 1,218 lbs., and the Roan Cow 1,196 lbs.
As an instance of the great weight and size of the Angas Shorthorns, it may be men-
tioned that “ Lord Waterloo 6th,” at four and a-half years of age, turned the scale at 2,401
lb., the weight being taken at the Sydney Show. And it may be added that it is not unusual
for ordinary cows from this herd to scale over 1,200 lb. dressed weight. The pair that won
the first prize for fat cows at the Adelaide Show of September, 1900, also the animal that
gained the premier award for single cow on the same occasion, averaged over 1,2001b. each
dressed weight. All the beasts in the Point Sturt stud are exclusively grass-fed.
On account of their great weight and thickness of flesh it is commonly believed that
the Shorthorn is only suitable for beef, but many of the cows in the Point Sturt herd would
astonish dairymen, unacquainted with these cattle, with the quality and quantity of their
yield of milk. It is necessary to milk the cows for some considerable time after calving,
particularly in the flush of the season, the calves being unable to relieve their dams.
The Point Sturt Estate, on Lake Alexandrina (nine miles west of Milang) was pur-
chased for the exclusive use of the .Shorthorn stud. The country is undulating, well-
grassed, and lightly timbered with sheoaks ; while the great freshwater lake almost sur-


j
rounds the whole estate. The advantage of this abundant supply of water at all seasons
of the year can be best appreciated by those who have been engaged in rearing cattle in the
arid areas of Australia. A further great advantage of the Point Sturt locality for stock-
breeding is that although the soil is not rich, it is of a healthy limestone formation —so
valuable for bone-forming. The Point is within sound of the breakers at the mouth of the
Murray ; and the whole estate is exposed to the keen, invigorating south and south-westerly
breezes which blow up freshly from the Southern Ocean, and which, though very cold at
times, tend to give the stock, which are all grass-fed, a hardy nature and a good coat of
hair.
The natural advantages of the locality have been supplemented by all possible improve-
ments which experience, intelligently directed to the purposes in view, could suggest.
The property is divided into paddocks, each having direct access to the Lake, and all sub-
STUD COWS and Heifers at the Lake side, Point Sturt.
stantially fenced. There is no housing of the stock, only a few open yards being provided
for the accommodation of the stud bulls. This system of keeping the stock in the open all
the year round has been proved as far the best for maintaining the animals in robust
health and fitting them for all practical purposes.
Anyone interested in pedigree Shorthorns will be amply repaid by a visit to Point
Sturt, where the cattle are always available for inspection on giving notice. A superior
lot of wellgrown young bulls are offered for sale, which cannot fail to give every satisfaction
to buyers as heretofore. The station may be reached by rail to Milang, 65 miles from
Adelaide, on the southern line, the train leaving the city daily at 7.30 a.m. Visitors from
the Victorian side travel by the express which leaves Melbourne every afternoon, and,
by changing trains at Mount Barker Junction, can arrive at Point Sturt on the following
morning.


Sixty-seven years ago the late Mr. John Murray laid the foundation of the Murray Merino
Stud flocks, which are known throughout Australasia. The history of sheep breeding
in these States provides many striking examples of patient, determined work, over a series
of years, to attain some desired result, but it would be difficult to find anything to equal
the half century’s unassuming consistent labor of Mr. John Murray and the determination
displayed by him in achieving such great results as a breeder of high-class Merinos. The
founder of these flocks possessed a resolute will, a remarkably clear conception of the type
of sheep he desired to produce, and throughont the period of his work of construction pro-
ceeded on well-defined lines. He had faith in himself and in his plans, and believed in
the old adage that “ they can conquer who know they can.” He kne v exactly what he
wanted, and went quietly and resolutely to woik to attain the object constantly kept in
view. Criticism might be passed upon the results of his labors, advice given, or praise
bestowed on his success. It had little or no influence one way or the other upon Mr.
Murray. He was critic-proof and praise-proof, and the type of his flock was not interfered
with by any passing fancy of the moment —that “ fashion ” craze which has worked
havoc in some of the Merino flocks of Australasia. It is by reason of the indomitable
perseverance and strong Caledonian character of the late Mr. John Murray, and the ability
with which his work has been continued, that the Murray flocks to-day occupy a unique
position amongst the Merino flocks of Australasia. According to Darwin not one man
in a thousand has accuracy of eye and judgment sufficient to become an eminent breeder.
Mr. Murray had both to an unusual degree, and his mantle fell upon the able shoulders
of his sons, who also possessed rare ability in the breeding and management of sheep. Mr.
Murray practised in-and-in-breeding from the outset, and this was and still is being con-
tinued. There has only been one foundation in the creation of these flocks which exercise
a great influence throughout Australasia at the present time. They have been in-bred


P> //I
taps* I' (
Originator of the Murray founder of the present Mount Crawford, I
Rhine Park and Cappeedee Stud Flocks. S' //


for sixty-seven years, no other blood having been introduced into the flocks since the first
foundation in the early forties. This of itself gives to the “ Murray ” Merinos an im-
portance which is not shared by any other flock in South Australia. Apart from that, it
is well known that the influence of these sheep for many years past has been very con-
siderable, not only in this State, but throughout Australia, New Zealand, and in South
Africa. Then, the high prices paid for the Murray sheep at public and private sales, and
their phenomenal success at the Royal Show in Adelaide year after year attaches to them
a very wide interest.
It was in 1843 that Mr. A. B. Murray bought 100 ewes from Mr. McFariane, of
Mount Barker, which were said to have come from the flock imported by Mr. John
Macarthur, of Camden Park, N.S. Wales. As these sheep were not purchased direct,
“ TROPHY.”
Winner of the Old Colonists’ 150 Guinea Challenge Cup, Adelaide, 1873.
Mr. Murray, who was
exceedingly particular
about pedigrees, would
not say that these ewes
were from the famous
Macarthur flocks, al-
though there was not
wanting evidence that
this was the case. These
100 ewes were divided
amongst Mr. A. B.
Murray and his-sister-in-
law, MBs Scott—after-
wards Mrs. P.M Murray,
of Glen Tnrritt, Truro —
and Mr. John Murray.
One hundred ewes, in
lamb to a Tasmanian
ram, were afterwards
purchased from a Mr.
McVittie, of near Blum-
berg, and Mr. A. B. Mur-
ray had a Tasmanian
ram which he purchased
from the S. Australian
Company. From the
blending of the above
blood the famous Murray Merinos were formed. That the original sheep were high-
class is shown by the fact that a ram bred the year after Mr. Murray formed his flock
took champion prize at the Adelaide Show, although imported rams were placed against
it. This feat rather put South Australian flock masters on their mettle, and several fresh
importations were made, but Mr. Murray’s ram took the championship for six consecutive
years. Mr. Murray applied the science of in-and-in-breeding with consummate skill
gradually increasing the density and bulk of the fleece and the size of the carcase. His
motto was —(1) Constitution ; (2) constitution, and again constitution. The pronounced
type of the sheep he bred soon brought them into repute, and a strong demand for sires
from this flock sprang up from various parts of Australia. Those who had previously
made purchases and proved the sheep returned to buy more. The demand has steadily
increased, and was never stronger than it is now ; pastoralists, in their anxiety to secure
rams, making contracts several years in advance. N.S. Wales, Victorian, Queensland,
New Zealand, West Australian, South Australian, and South African squatters' have been
extensive buyers, and their reports in praise of the results obtained by using the Murrav
Merino rams would fill several volumes. From the outset the Murray sheep have cut heavy
fleeces of bold, robust, profitable wool. The judges’ remark at the Sydney Show, as far


SCENE AT MOUNT CRAWFORD.
Typical of the Country on which the Murray Merinos originated.


“LION.”- A TYPICAL MURRAY MERINO RAM.
Was Champion Ram, Adelaide, 1904. Cut fleece 231b. 8oz. Unhoused and fed on natural grasses only. Was bred by Mr. A. J. Murray and
proved one of the most successful sires in the records of the stud.


back as 1873, was : —“ Mr. Murray’s wool is a remarkable combination of softness and
strength ; a bright lustrous wool, exceedingly clean.” An expert in .South Africa, after
carefully examining some Murray sheep imported there, officially gave a most favorable
report on the sheep and the splendid quality of the wool they carried.
London wool buyers of the highest repute have reported on ” Murray ” wool with equal
praise, and it is intere ting to note that both the experts whose words we quote refer to
the fleece, that of the well known ewe “ The Queen,” as perfect. They write as follows :
“ We have examined the prize fleece with the greatest interest, and may at once say that
of this class of wool, it is the most beautiful specimen we have ever seen. Ihe growth is
deep and sound, the staple clear at the root and evenly and compactly formed —a picture
“ADMIRAL.”
By Nelson 111. Champion Ram, Adelaide, 1905. First Prize Fleece, 26 lbs., Adelaide, 1905.
Bred by the late John Murray, Jr. Unhoused and fed on natural grasses only.
of vigor and strength. The fibre is of strong quality, especially towards the skirts, but it
is not too coarse considering the great depth of the staple. The condition is light (about
55 per cent, yield) and the appearance bright and lustrous. Such wool as this will always
command attention, for, of its kind, it is a perfect article,” and again : “We had the
greatest pleasure in viewing this fleece, as we have never had such a perfect specimen under
our notice before. Our report on same is that it is a marvellous fleece and perfect in its
kind, good length, and remarkable even of staple, of good lustre, and of a yield of about
54 per cent, when the skirts and pieces have been removed. The quality though near 56/,
the best quality of crossbreds, is all the same a desirable and useful one, and is at all times
considered by the trade a favorable quality. The fleece is of immense size, and weighed
close upon 18 lb., and it was a pleasure to look at it. It was examined by brokers, spinners
and manufacturers, both English and Continental.”


The founder of the flock would never, under any consideration, artificially feed or house
his sheep. He believed in the doctrine of the “ survival of the fittest ”in regard to sheep
breeding, and an animal which did not do well under natural conditions and justify his or
her presence in the flock, paid the penalty. This policy is rigorously observed by the
present owners. They cull with a severely critical eye and a judgment which reflects the
genius possessed by their father and grandfather of knowing exactly what a sheep will
develop into. Ihe 2-tooth must give promise of something good or out he goes. No
Murray sheep has ever been artificially fed, housed, or otherwise pampered. “ Utility ”
is the object steadily kept in view, the idea being to breed an animal which will reproduce
strong characteristics when subjected to the trying conditions of dry, semi-desert, country
in the interior of Australia.
“ LADY MARY.”
By Royal Duke. Champion Ewe, Adelaide, 1905. First Prize Fleece, 161b5., Adelaide, 1906.
Bred by the late John Murray, Jr. Unhoused and fed on natural grasses only.
It is because these sheep are not unnaturally developed and artificially prepared that
they are not sent to compete in the show yards of other States. If artificially fed, some of
the prize-takers which have been at the Royal Shows in Adelaide would fill out to a
wonderful size, and with their robust constitutions, grand fleeces, and generally aristocratic
carriage, would take a lot of beating in any sheep show in Australasia. But the Messrs.
Murray have no desire to depart from their policy by artificially improving their sheep in
order to compete on equal terms with breeders elsewhere. This would be “ pampering,”
to their mind, and that is what they have never done, even to the slightest extent. It is
because of their natural robustness and this rigorous up bringing that the sheep have done
so remarkably well when exposed to the trying climate of some parts of Australia. The
science of line breeding with patience and mathematical precision, and that best of all
knowledge, intuition, has been followed by the most eminent breeders in Europe and


- i "
nil ,
Australasia with wonderful results. Professor Wallace, the well known authority on live
stock, says : “ The most prominent advantage of ‘ in-and-in-breeding ’ is the stamping
of family characters of type, and it cannot well be dispensed with in the formation of new
breeds or the improvement of old ones.” The late Mr. John Murray, and, in later years,
his sons and grandsons, have been remarkably successful in maintaining a high standard of
excellence in their flocks, and no better testimony in favor of “ in-breeding” could be
found than the condition in which we find the Murray Merinos to-day after over sixty years
of breeding without the introduction of fresh blood. There are many people, and amongst
them sheep breeders, who cannot comprehend how such continuous breeding within the
flock has been carried on without great deterioration. Ihe movement, however
in the Murray flocks has been all the other way, being one long record of improvement built
DRAFTING- SHEEP AT SHEARING TIME AT MOUNT CRAWFORD.
upon progress. But if only one man in a thousand, as Darwin maintained, has the required
accuracy of eye to make a breeder, only one in ten thousand possesses the necessary patience
and skill to line breed with good results. There is no royal road to successful sheep breed-
ing—not even a short cut or so much as a by-path. A good many breeders attempt to cut
off corners by the frequent introduction into their flocks of fresh blood, but they realise in
course of time that this means the loss of everything in the shape of a distinct type, their
sheep embracing the various characteristics of the “ fresh blood ” brought in from time to
time. It is easy to secure a good foundation for a flock ;it is quite another matter to keep
up the quality year after year. Patience, fine discriminating powers, continuity of pur-
pose, and the love of hard work are essentials, and of the truth of this the Murray Merinos
may be quoted as a striking example.
“ In-and-in-breeding ” is a two edge weapon to the flockowner who is not in the front
rank of his profession, and it is hardly a system to be followed without due consideration.
Mr. John Murray succeeded because he laid down lines of procedure with mathematical
precision, based upon natural laws, and worked upon them with the knowledge of an expert.


. '■ . - tV< »/' '•■ IP
I hough in-bred” in the sense that they are all lineal descendants of one ram,
the Mm ray Merino sheep are by no means “ close bred.” Every care is taken to avoid
this, and many hundreds of lambs are annually mothered, and the lambs labelled with a
number and marked down in the stud books. The sire and dam of sheep for generations
back are thus known. The rams are used in small paddocks singly, and an elaborate
system of line breeding is practised in the matter of mating a type of ram with a type of
ewe to produce some desired characteristic in the progeny. Some of the most successful
show and stud rams in these flocks have at times exhibited remarkable tendencies to throw
their stock better in either the male or female lines. As an instance of this tendency,
mention might be made of the champion ram “ Trophy,” which was also the winner of the
Old ( olonists 150 guinea trophy in 1873. His stock were stronger in the female line
HAULING TIMBER AT MOUNT CRAWFORD.
There are thousands of magnificent Red Gums on the Estate, and Sleeper Cutting on royalty
has been extensively carried on.
than m the male line in a most pronounced degree. On the other hand, a ram that sired
a number of fine ewes, but was syecially strong in the male line, was the double champion
winner, Duke of Edinburgh. His progeny also were particularly prepotent in their males
1 his indicates what skill is required in mating the sheep so as to breed up to a certain
standard and fix dominant types. As has been mentioned, the Messrs. Murray carefully
pedigree the different families, and sires are only used from such families as are considered
sufficiently prepotent in the male line. Another important factor which has
doubtless had considerable influence in the development of the remarkable strength of con-
stitution possessed by the Murray Merinos, may be found in the fact that for many years
first under the ownership of Mr. John Murray and afterwards under that of his four sons’
the flocks were bred on four estates situated in areas where climate and soil vary to some
extent, so that an exchange of sires, practically an outcross, yet within the flock could bp
effected when thought desirable.


jggaagSEgssaaas sssssssssbbob - s
j ; \ 1 11 I
'• ,: 'V;':'
T ‘5 ■: M^^a^flSSiBB
' «
i ; v; ?M: '. ■ >
THE LATE JOHN MURRAY, JR., OF RHINE PARK.
Rhine Park.
Rhine Park lies within easy reach of Adelaide, from which it is distant only some
40 or 50 miles in a north-easterly direction, near Eden Valley, where the headlands of the
Barossa Range sink to the wide plain which borders the Murray River.
It is a matter of historical interest that the nucleus of this property was purchased
by Mr. John Murray, the elder, from the Crown in or about 1859. It was afterwards
largely added to by further purchases from the Government and from various small
holders of the district.
Of the late John Murray, who succeeded his father (whose eldest son he was) in the
ownership of Rhine Park in 188 6, and who died there on the sth July, 1908, it may be
justly said that his name is writ large in the history of the pastoral progress of the State.
Quiet and unassuming, kindly and helpful to any in need, carrying out his social and such
official duties as he undertook with quiet dignity he earned the warm admiration and
genuine respect of all who knew him.
The Rhine Park and Cappeedee Studs are now carried on by his three sons, Messrs.
J. L, ( J. E. and W. S. Murray, under the name of Murray Bros.


*
Cappeedee.
The late Mr. W. A. Murray, the youngest of the brothers, was born in 1862, and
educated at St. Peter’s College. On taking up his future calling, he came rapidly to the
front as a breeder of high-class Merinos. Amongst other special sheep owned by him was
the well-known ram Cappeedee, which was said to be one of the very best stud sires ever
bred in Australia, and almost, if not quite, equal to the well-known sire Premier 11, or
the world-famous ram, Sir Thomas.
Mr. Murray died on December 3, 1901, and, in accordance with his will, the
Cappeedee stud sheep were, in 1902, equally divided among his three brothers. Mr. A. J.
Murray and the late Mr. T. Hope Murray took theirs to Mount Crawford and Mount
Beevor, respectively, but the owner of Rhine Park left his at Cappeedee, which property
he leased.
Cappeedee Estate, which lies about five miles nor’-west of the Hallett railway
station, and almost on the borders of the saltbush country, would not be considered an
ideal spot for the establishment of a stud, neither would it be a suitable place for coddling
delicate animals of any description. The wire fences which subdivide the estate into
handy paddocks, are the only protection against the strong bleak winter winds which
sweep up from Booboorowie, and the scorching nor’-easters in the summer.
The owners of Cappeedee, however, have always believed in the “ survival of the
fittest,” and in allowing natural conditions to have full sway, the result being the produc-
tion of an unusually bold robust sheep. In common with all Murray Merinos they are
known for their fine carriage, heavy and shapely frames and fleeces of great strength and
character.
Constitution has been from the commencement and still is the first point considered,
and as an indication of the grand frames and robustness of Murray sheep, which it
should be remembered are unhoused and grazed at large on natural grasses only, it need
only be mentioned that several of the rams, typical illustrations of which will be found
reproduced in these pages, have weighed over 200 lbs. when in breeding condition.
The Late Mr. T. Hope Murray.
The late Mr. T. Hope Murray was born on October 15th, 1854, Like his brothers
he was educated at St. Peter’s College. Subsequently, on the purchase of Cappeedee, Mr.
Murray was put in charge of that property. He afterwards managed Mount Beevor, to
which estate he succeeded on the death of his father, and where he resided until his death
on November 29th, 1906. Mr, Murray was a keen sportsman and held many offices in
connection with racing and coursing. He was a fine horseman, an excellent judge of
stock and an enthusiastic polo player.


MR. A. J. MURRAY, OF MOUNT CRAWFORD.


BMm ' ■ * ''-I- ’■; - I
>Jj%-~v ■*■ •- ' •.: • •. y/? ' r ; ‘ |
Mount Crawford.
Mount Crawford, known throughout the Commonwealth as the birth place of the
Murray Merino, takes its name from the hill Mount Crawford, which stands out boldly
on the estate and forms a conspicuous feature of the landscape. The native name was
“ Tetaki,” and its present designation, so says local tradition, is derived from the fact that
an early overlander named Crawford used to make his camp at its foot. The origin of
the Mount Crawford estate dates from 1841, when Mr. A. B. Murray purchased Section
918, Hundred of Para Wirra, part of the Barossa Special Survey; of which he was a
pioneer. In 1841, his brother, Mr. John Murray, came to South Australia, and, after two
years at Bulls Creek, purchased half of it (Section 918, Hundred of Para Wirra) from him,
and, although each had his own ewes, they worked together and used each others rams until
“LION II.”
By Lion. Twice Champion Ram, Adelaide, 1907-1908. Bred by Mr. A. J. Murray, and
classed by him as the best Murray Merino ever bred at Mount Crawford.
Mr. A.B. Murray left Mount Crawford for Tungkillo. It formed, together with the sheep, one-
fourth of the estates and flocks bequeathed by him to his four sons, the others being the well-
known properties, Rhine Park, Cappeedee and Mount Beevor. It is situated just 17 miles
to the east of Cxawler, in the Barossa Ranges, and, with its splendid timber, well-grassed
hills and shady valleys, makes a very beautiful pastoral home. The homestead, which is
approached from the main road by a fine avenue of well-grown English trees, is a one-
storied building of considerable extent, surrounded by well-arranged fruit and flower
gardens. Special interest attaches to the large central hall, for it covers the site of the
whole of the original house occupied by the founder of the Murray flocks, nearly seventy
years ago, the extensive additions —which have from time to time been made having
been built around this relic of the early days, which was purchase from Mr. Mitchell, who


had originally built it. Both Mr. A. B. Murray and Mr. John Murray first built and lived
on their respective halves of Section 918, Hundred of Para Mirra, until Mr. John Murray
purchased from Mr. Mitchell the Section on which the Mount Crawford homestead now
stands.
Mr. Alick J. Murray, the present owner of Mount Crawford is the third of the
four brothers who so ably continued their father’s life work. He was born in 1859 and
educated at St. Peter’s College. Mr. Murray is well-known as one of the foremost breeders
of Merinos in Australasia, and is, moreover, one of the keenest judges of stock generally
in the State. His interest in pastoral and agricultural work has been constant and
practical. He was for years a member of the Agricultural College Board, and has been
twice President of the South Australian Royal Agricultural and Horticultural Society and
“STELLA” (A Champion Ewe).
is a Director of Elder Smith & Co., Ltd. As Honorary Commissioner he has reported on and
purchased stock for the State Government, and on more than one occasion has made
liberal presentations to the Roseworthy College Farm. Mr. Murray’s work as a stock-
breeder has not been confined to Merinos, for, as a breeder of polo ponies, he earned an
enviable reputation for the Mount Crawford Stud. Bones (classed by Mr. Murray as the
best of his day), Ladybird, Pearl, Ruby, and others, will long be remembered by polo
players as some of the smartest ponies seen in South Australia.
The small but very select Jersey herd established by Mr. Murray in the early
nineties quickly took a leading position and maintained it until its dispersal a year or two
ago. It was founded by the purchase of imported stock from the Island and England.


.,;w : - ';',£v ■' T{,Y' ,;•
p**’
- ■ w -%.- •• • ■ * ■ .£*:..... j- •; Jl — * :. ,. i ,3*
- - .*.•■ •' r ■ - . *‘ .*-*'»-•.:1:.4-.
T wl^|fc.
Jr Igfa
,'. V- v- c ; ;^^'
,, - vn-* '•*. ■ * v «-■,.... •■ . .-,-■ - t?..^--*
V-. " : . v ■ •-. 1 ;< > r**
“CARNATION’S FOX ” (Imp.).
Winner Three First Prizes in Jersey. Champion at Royal Shows, Melbourne
and Adelaide.
“BLACK ANTIMONY’’ (Imp.).
Winner First Open Class, any age, London Dairy Show, 1906. Winner at many other
important shows in England. First and Champion Prize, Adelaide, 1907.


nifmnnHp %
-
When further purchases were made cost was of very secondary consideration, and many
animals of the highest class were from time to time imported from the home oi the
breed, and others from leading Australian studs.
For some years bulls from this herd were practically invincible in C hampionship
competitions in Melbourne and Adelaide. Thus, at the Melbourne Royal, Progress 111
won in 1892-3-4, Lady Superior’s Progress in 1895-6-7-8-9 and Cherry’s Pride m 1902-3,
THE LATE W. A. MURRAY, CAPPEEDEE.
THE LATE T. HOPE MURRAY, MOUNT BEEVOR.
whilst in Adelaide Progress 111, Defender, Columbus, Carnation’s Fox, and Black Antimony
were each successful in gaining the coveted award. Amongst the leading
cows of the stud we may recall to the memory of Jersey lovers such well-known matrons
as Lady Grey, Maitland Charlotte, Queen May, Baggage, Fairy Lass, Maitland Valentine,
Dinah IV, the three-times-champion cow, and the imported cow, Leda’s Snow Drop, who
has won champion prize the last two years (1909 and 1910) at the Royal Show, Sydney.
It is, however, as the original source of the plain-bodied South Australian Merino,
and as the home of such splendid examples of the type as Constitution, Jonah 11,
Lion, and his great son, Lion 11, Fame, the 500 guineas ram (whose purchaser classed
him as the cheapest animal he ever bought), Portsea, sire of five out of six Champion
sheep in three years and many others which may be said to have made history in the
Merino world, that Mount Crawford will long be remembered by Australian sheep men and
the name of Murray take rank with the great originators and masters in the records of
stock breeding. Probably no more convincing evidence of the standing of the Murray
flocks in South Australia could be quoted than the fact that Murray rams have gained
the Championship in Adelaide on all but 15 occasions during the last 67 years.


.«» j
Combined
Of the JYlurray JYlerino Stud flocks.
No detailed record of prizes won during the lifetime of the founder of the flock
is available, but the following awards of special importance may be mentioned.
The gold medal for five best combing Merino rams, 4-tooth or over, presented by His
Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, in 1867.
The gold medal for five best combing Merino ewes, 2-tooth, also presented by His
Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, in 1867.
The silver trophy of the value of 150 guineas, presented by old colonists in England in
1873, for the best combing woolled Merino ram, which was taken by a grass-fed sheep
competing against stall and artificially fed.
The silver cup, presented by Elder, Smith, & Co., in 1873, for the best combing Merino
ewes, 2-tooth or under.
The silver cup presented by Mr. W. L. Higgins for the best 2-tooth combing Merino
ram, 13th September, 1883.
The silver cup presented by Messrs. Luxmoore & Co., Limited, at Mount Barker, March,
1886.
The medal of the Great Exhibition in London, 1862, was awarded to Mr. John Murray
for fineness of quality and size of rams’ fleeces ; as was also the gold medal of the South
Australian Agricultural Society, presented by His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh
for combing Merino wool ; and also the special prize cups of the South Australian Agricul-
tural Society for combing Merino wool shorn in the years 1870 and 1871, besides that for
the wool taken from grass-fed sheep in 1872, and also the first prize for fleeces shorn in
1873, 1874, 1875, 1876, 1877, 1878, 1879 (second in 1880), 1881, 1882, 1883, and 1884
("second in 1885); and at the Great Philadelphia International Exhibition in 1876 the medal,
diploma, and report for six fleeces of Combing Merino wool.


Owing to the death of Mr. John Murray, Senr.; in September, 1886, no sheep were
exhibited at the Adelaide Show held that month.
Jubilee International Exhibition Wool Show, 1887. —Two first prizes for strong
combing lambs’ wool ; two second prizes for six rams’ fleeces ; two third prizes for six
ewes’ fleeces.
Adelaide, 1887. —Champion ram, prize silver medal, presented by R.A. and H. So-
ciety ; the silver cup, presented by Hon. G. C. Hawker, for best ram, value £ls 15/ ; the
only diploma given by Jubilee International Exhibition for combing Merino ram ; silver
cup, presented by Elder, Smith, & Co., for best ram and two ewes, value £lO 10/ ; second,
third, and fourth prizes for ram, over years ; second and fourth prizes for ram, 2J and
under years ; second prize for ram, under l\ years ; champion ewe, prize silver medal,
presented by R.A, and H. Society ; the silver cup, value £ls 15/, presented by Hon. G. C.
Hawker, for best ewe ; second prize for ewe with lamb at foot ; second prize for ewe, over
3| years ; third and fourth prizes for ewes, 2| and under 3| years ; third prize for ewe, under
years.
In 1888 and the following years the prizes recorded below were all gained at the
March and September Shows of the South Australian Royal Agricultural and Horticul-
tural Society,
Adelaide, 1888. —Champion prize, silver medal, presented by R.A. and H. Society
for best exhibit of greasy wool ; first, second, and third prizes for three rams’ fleeces ; first,
second, and third prizes for three ewes’ fleeces.
Adelaide, 1888. —Champion ram, silver cup ; the silver medal of R.A. and H. Society
for best ram, any age ; first, second, and third prizes for ram, over 3\ years ; second prize
for ram, 2\ and under 3-| years ; second, third, and fourth prizes for ram, under l£ years ;
first, second, and third prizes for ewe with lamb at foot ; third prize for ewe, 2\ and under
3\ years ; third prize for ewe, under years.
Adelaide, 1889. —Second and third prizes for best and most valuable three rams’
fleeces ; first, second, and third prizes for best and most valuable three ewes’ fleeces ; second
prize for best and most valuable three 2-tooth rams’ fleeces ; second prize for best and most
valuable three 2-tooth ewes’ fleeces.
Adelaide, 1889.— -Champion prize, silver cup, for best ram, over 1| years at the show ;
champion prize, silver cup, for best ewe, over years, at the show ; silver cup, presented
by Messrs. Elder, Smith, & Co., for best ram and two ewes ; special prize, silver cup, pre-
sented by Messrs. Luxmoore & Co., for five rams, six months to aged ; first and third prizes
for ram, over 3-| years ; third and fourth prizes for ram, 2\ and under 3£ years ; silver medal,
presented by R.A. and H. Society, for best ram, under years, also second and third
prize ; first, second, and third prizes for ewe, over 3£ years ; first, second, and fourth prizes
for ewe, 2\ and under 3£ years ; silver medal, presented by R.A. and H. Society for best
ewe, under l£ years ; also second, third, and fourth prizes ; silver medal, presented by R.A.
and H. Society for best ewe with lamb at foot, also third and fourth prizes.
Adelaide, 1890. —Champion prize, silver medal, for best exhibit of Merino wool in the
show ; first and third prizes for three rams’ fleeces, 4-tooth or over ; second and third prizes
for ewes’ fleeces 4-tooth or over.
Adelaide, 1890.-— Champion prize, silver cup, for best ewe, over l£ years ; silver cup,
presented by Elder, Smith, & Co., Limited, for best ram and two ewes, also second prize ;
special prize, presented by Messrs. Luxmoore & Co., for five ewes, over \\ years, and under
years ; third prize for ram, six years old or over ; fourth prize for ram, over years and
under years ; third prize for ram, over 2\ years and under years ; fourth prize for ram,


over 1 ¥ and under 2\ years ; second, third, and fourth prizes for ram under \\ years ; second
prize for ewe, over years, with lamb at foot ; first and fourth prizes for ewe, under 3\
years, with lamb at foot ; first, second, and fourth prizes for ewe, over 1|- years and under
2\ years ; first, second, and third prizes for ewe, under years.
Adelaide, 1891,—First, second, and third prizes for three rams’ fleeces ; first and second
prizes for three rams’ fleeces, 2-tooth, first and second prizes for three ewes’ fleeces ; first
and third prize for three ewes’ fleeces, 2-tooth.
Adelaide, 1891. —Champion prize, silver cup, presented by Hon. G. C. Hawker, for
best ram in showyard ; first, second, and third prizes for best ram, years or over ; silver
cup for best ram, 3 \ years and under 6|- years ; second and third prizes for best ram, 3\ years
and under years ; second, third, and fourth prizes for best ram, 2\ years and under 3|
years; silver medal for best ram, over years and under 2\ years; second, third, and fourth
prizes for best ram, over years and under 2\ years; silver medal for best ram, under
years; second and fourth prizes for best ram, under years; champion prize, silver cup,
for best ewe in the showyard; silver medal for best ewe and lamb, over 3|- years’ second
and fourth prizes for best ewe and lamb, over 3% years; first and third prizes for best ewe
and lamb, over 2\ years; second, third, and fourth prizes for best ewe, over 1-| years and
under 2\ years; silver medal for best ewe, under years; fourth prize for best ewe, under
I j years; silver cup, presented by Elder, Smith & Co., Limited, for best ram and two ewes;
second prize for best ram and two ewes; first and second prizes for five rams, ages 2\,
3 4\, and years; first and second prizes for five ewes, ages l£, 2\, 3\, 4\, and years.
Adelaide, 1892. —Silver medal for scoured fleece of highest value under special condition
of prize offered by Canowie proprietors; first and third prizes for best rams’ fleeces (any age);
first, second, and third prizes for best ewes’ fleeces (any age); first and second prizes for
best 2-tooth rams’ fleeces; first and second prizes for best 2-tooth ewes’ fleeces.
Adelaide, 1892. —Champion prize ram, silver cup, presented by Hon. G. C. Hawker;
first prize for ram, years; silver cup for best ram 4\ years, also second, third, and fourth
prizes; first, second, third, and fourth prizes for ram, years; silver medal for ram, 2\
years, also second, third, and fourth prizes; silver medal for ram, \\ years, also second and
third prizes; champion prize, silver cup, for best ewe on show ground; silver medal for ewe
over years, with lamb at foot, also second prize, first and fourth prizes for ewe, 34 years,
with lamb at foot; first, second, third, and fourth prizes for 4-tooth ewe; silver medal for
ewe, years, also second and fourth prizes; silver cup, presented by Elder, Smith & Co.,
for best ram and two ewes, also second and third prizes; first prize for five rams, aged
2\, 3\, 4\, and 5% years; first and third prizes for five ewes, aged 2\, 3£, 4\, and years.
Adelaide, 1893. —Silver cup, presented by Canowie proprietors, for scoured fleece of
highest value, shorn from a ram exhibited in 1892, having been previously shorn in 1890 and
1891, under the supervision of the R.A. and H. Society; first, second, and third prizes for
rams’ fleeces (any age); first and second prizes for 2-tooth rams’ fleeces; first, second, and
third prizes for ewes’ fleeces (any age); first and second prizes for 2-tooth ewes' fleeces.
Adelaide, 1893. Champion prize, silver cup, presented by Hon. G. C. Hawker, for
best ram in showyard; first, second, and third prizes for best ram, years or over; silver
cup for best ram, 3| years and under 6£ years, also second and third prizes; first, second,
third, and fourth prizes for best ram, over 2\ years and under years; silver medal for
best ram, over 1| years and under 2\ years, also second, third, and fourth prizes; silver
medal for best ram, under 1| years, also second, third, and fourth prizes; champion prize,
silver cup, for best ewe in show ground; silver medal for best ewe, over 2\ years, with lamb
at foot, also second and fourth prizes; first, second, third, and fourth prizes for best ewe, l£
years and under 2\ years; silver medal for best ewe, under 1| years, also second, third, and
fourth prize; special prize, presented by the Canowie proprietors, for best ram and two


ewes, H years and under 2\ years, also second and third prizes; special prize, presented by
Messrs. Luxmoore & Co., Limited, for five rams, ages \\, 2\, 3*, 4*, and over 4j yea
also second and third prizes; special prize, presented by Messrs Luxmoore & Co., Limite ,
for five ewes, ages 2\, 3\, 4\, and over 4\ years, also second prize.
Adelaide, 1884. —First, second, and third prizes for three rams fleeces (any a gGh
first and second prizes for three 2-tooth rams' fleeces; first, second, and thud pnzes or
three ewes’ fleeces (any age); first and second prizes for three 2-tooth ewes fleeces.
Adelaide, 1894.— Champion prize, silver cup, presented by Hon. G. C. Hawker, for
best ram in showyard; silver cup for best ram, 4\ years or over, also second, third, an our
prizes; first and second prizes for ram, 3\ years; silver medal for ram, years, also secon
and fourth prizes; silver medal for ram, years, also second and third prizes; champion
prize, silver cup, for best ewe in showyard; silver medal for ewe, 3\ years or over with l an L
at foot, also second prize; first and second prizes for ewes, 2\ years; silver medal tor e we,
years, also first, second, and third prizes; first and third prizes foi five rams, sj, 4-%, 2>
and years; first, second, and third prizes for ram and two ewes.
Adelaide, 1885. —First, second, and third prizes for best rams’ fleeces, 2\ years or over,
first and second prizes for best rams’ fleeces, \\ years or over; first, second, and third prizes
for best ewes’ fleeces, 2\ years or over ; first and second prizes for best ewes fleeces,
years.
Adelaide, 1895. —Champion prize, silver cup, for best ram, over years, in showyard;
special prizes for rams, years or over, presented by executors late Hon. G. C. Hawker,
also first and second prizes; first, second, and fourth prizes for ram, 3-g- years
and under years; first, third, and fourth prizes for ram, and under 3\ years, silvei
medal for ram, 11 and under 2\ years, also second and fourth prizes; third and fourth prizes
for ram under years; champion prize, silver cup, for best ewe over yeais in the show,
yard; special prizes for Merino ewe, years or over, presented by executois late Hon. G.
C. Hawker, also Ist and 2nd prizes; silver medal for ewe 2-| and undei yeais, also second
and third prizes; first, second, third, and fourth prizes for Merino ewe and undei 2\ years,
silver medal for ewe under years, also third prize; second and third prizes for best five
rams in showyard under 1 \ years, and under 2\ years, 2\ and under years, and
under 4\ years, 4\ years or over, presented by Messrs. Luxmoore & Co., Limited.
Adelaide, 1896. —Third prize for best three fleeces shorn from rams; first and third
prizes for best three fleeces shorn from 2-tooth rams; first, second, and third prizes for best
three fleeces shorn from ewes, first and second prizes for best three fleeces shorn from
2-tooth ewes.
Adelaide, 1896. —Champion prize, silver cup, for best ram over years in showyard;
first, third, and fourth prizes for ram years or over; first prize for ram 2\ and under
years; silver medal for ram \\ years and under 2-| years, also second and fomth piizes;
silver medal for ram under 1-|- years, also second and fourth prizes; champion prize, silvei
cup, for best ewe over years in showyard; special prizes for Merino ewe, years or over,
presented by executors late Hon. G. C. Hawker, also Ist and second prizes; silver medal for
ewe 2\ and under 3| years, also second prize; first, second, third, and fourth prizes for ewe
li- and under 2\ years; silver medal for ewe under years, also second, third, and fourth
prizes; special prize, cup, presented by Messrs. Luxmoore & Co., Limited, for best five rams
in showyard, under \\ years, llr and under 2\ years, 2\ and under 3\ years, and under
4\ years, 4\ years or over, also third prize.
Adelaide, 1897.— First, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from rams;
first and second prizes for best three fleeces shorn from 2-tooth rams; first, second, and third
prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes; first and second prizes for best three fleeces
shorn from 2-tooth ewes.


Adelaide, 1897.— Champion prize, silver cup, for the best ram over years in show-
yard; first prize for ram years or over; first and fourth prizes for ram 2\ and under 3\
years; silver medal for ram' and under 2\ years, also second and fourth prizes; silver
medal for ram under \\ years, also second, third, and fourth prizes; champion prize, silver
cup, for best ewe over years in showyard; special prize for Merino ewe 3|- years or over,
presented by executors late Hon. G. C. Hawker, also Ist and second prizes; silver medal for
ewe 2\ and under 3| years, also second, third, and fourth prizes; first, second, third, and
fourth prizes for ewe and under 2\ years ; silver medal for ewe under \ \ years, also second,
third, and fourth prizes.
Adelaide, 1898.—First, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from rams;
first and second prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes; first and second prizes for
best three fleeces shorn from 2-tooth ewes.
Adelaide, 1898.—Second and fourth prizes for ram 3J years or over; first prize for ram
2\ and under 3\ years ; first, second and fourth prizes for ram and under 2\ years ;
silver medal for ram under \\ years, also second, third, and fourth prizes ; champion
prize, silver cup for best ewe over years in showyard; special prizes for ewe 3\
years or over, presented by Messrs. Hawker Bros; first and second prizes; silver medal for
ewe 2\ and under 3| years, also second, third, and fourth prizes; first, second, and third
prizes for ewe l\ and under 2\ years; silver medal for ewe under 2\ years, also second and
fourth prizes.
Adelaide, 1899.—First, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from rams;
first, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from 2-tooth rams; two first, second,
and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes; first, second, and third prizes for
best three fleeces shorn from 2-tooth ewes.
Adelaide, 1899. —Champion prize, silver cup, for the best ram over 1| years in show-
yard; fourth prize for ram 3\ years or over; first and third prizes for ram 2\ and under 3\
years; silver medal for ram and under 2\ years, also second, third, and fourth prizes;
silver'medal for ram under 1| years, also fourth prize; special prize for best ram 2\ years
or over, unhoused, and a male and female progeny of same; 12 months old or over, pre-
sented by Dalgety & Co., Limited; champion prize, silver cup, for best ewe over years in
showyard; special prizes for ewe 3| years or over, presented by Messrs. Hawker Bros., first,
second, third, and fourth prizes; second, third, and fourth prizes for ewe 2\ and under 3%
years; first, third, and fourth prizes for ewe and under 2\ years; second and third prizes
for ewe under l£ years.
Adelaide, 1900. —First, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from rams;
first, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from rams under years; first,
second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes; first, second, and third prizes
for best three fleeces shorn from ewes under years.
Adelaide, 1900. —Champion prize, silver cup, for best ram over years in showyard,
also first holder of the Wendt Challenge Cup; first, second, and third prizes for ram 3\
years or over; first and second prizes for ram 2\ and under 3\ years; silver medal for ram
and under 2\ years, also second prize; second prize for ram under years; special prize for
best ram, 2\ years or over, unhoused, and a male and female progeny of same, 12 months
old or over, presented by Dalgety & Co., Limited; champion prize, silver cup, for best ewe
over 1| vears in showyard; special prize for ewe years or over, presented by Messrs.
Hawker Bros., also first, second, and 4th prizes; silver medal for ewe 2\ and under years,
also second and third prizes; first, second, third, and fourth prizes lor ewe and under 2\
years; silver medal for ewe under years, also first, second, third, and fourth prizes.


Adelaide, 1901. —First, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from rams;
first, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from rams under \ years; first,
second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes; first, second, and third prizes
for best three fleeces shorn from ewes under I \ years.
Adelaide, 1901. —Third and fourth prizes for ram 3fr years or over; third prize for ram
and under 3Jr years; third and fourth prizes for ram 1 \ and under 2\ years; second, third,
and fourth prizes for ram under years; champion prize, silver cup, for best ewe over I|-
years in showyard, also first holder of the Dalgety Challenge Cup first and fourth prizes
for ewe 3-| years or over; first and second prizes for ewe 2\ and under 3Jr years; first, second,
third, and fourth prizes for ewe IJr and under 2\ years; second and fourth prizes for ewe
under years.
Adelaide, 1902,—First and second prizes for best three fleeces shorn from rams; first,
second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from rams under years; first and
third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes; first and third for best three fleeces shorn
from ewes under years.
Adelaide, 1902. —Champion prize for best ram over iJr years in showyard, also holder
of the Wendt Challenge Cup; first, second, and third prizes for ram 3|- years or over; fourth
prize for ram 2jr and under years; trophy for ram 1 \ and under years, also second,
third, and fourth prizes; first, second, and fourth prizes for ram under 1 \ years; champion
prize for best ewe over iJr years in showyard, also holder of Dalgety Challenge Cup; first
and fourth prizes for ewe 3 \ years or over; first and second prizes for ewe 2\ and under 3 \
years; first, second, and third prizes for ewe IJr and under 2\ years; third prize for ewe and
under 2\ years; third prize for ewe under 1-| years.
Adelaide, 1903. —First, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from rams,
first and second prizes for best three fleeces shorn from rams under 1|- years; first, second,
and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes; first and third prizes for best three
fleeces shorn from ewes under \\ years.
Adelaide, 1803—First prize for combing Merino ram, 2\ and under 3| years;
third prize for combing Merino ram, 1 \ and under 2\ years ; first second
prizes for combing Merino ram under years; first prize pen of 5 combing Merino rams
over years ; champion prize for combing Merino ewe over years ; first, second, and
third prizes for combing Merino ewe 3] years or over ; first, second, and third prizes for
combing Merino ewe, 24 and under 34 years ; first, second, and third prizes for combing
Merino ewe, H and under years ; fourth prize combing Merino ewe under U years •
Dalgety Challenge Cup.
Adelaide, 1904 First, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from
rams over \\ years; first, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from
rams under 1 \ years ; first and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes under
I 4 years.
Adelaide, prize for the year for combing Merino ram, over fi years,
Angas Cup; first, second, and fourth prizes for combing Merino ram, 3| years or "over;
first and second prizes for combing Merino ram, 2\ years and under years ; first,
third, and fourth prizes for combing Merino ram, fi and under 2\ years; special prized
the McDougall Sheep Dip Prize Cup; first and fourth prizes for combing Merino ram, under
Cl years; Wendt Challenge Cup; second, third, and fourth prizes for combing Merino ewe,
H years or over; third and fourth prizes for combing Merino ewe, 2\ and under 3| years-
third prize for combing Merino ewe, and under 2\ years; first and second prizes for
cornbing Merino ewe, under years.


Adelaide, 1905. —First, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from
rams over years ; first, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from
rams under years ; first, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes
over H years ; first and second prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes under iJr years.
Adelaide, 1905. —Champion prize for the year for combing Merino ram, over years,
Angas Cup; first, second, and fourth combing Merino ram, 3-| years or over; first, second,
third, and fourth, combing Merino ram, 2\ and under years; first and third, combing
Merino ram, and under 2| years; first, second, and fourth, combing Merino ram, under
H years; Wendt Challenge Cup; champion prize for the year for combing Merino ewe,
over 1| years; first, second, and fourth, combing Merino ewe, years or over; first and
second combing Merino ewe, 2\ and under 3 \ years; first, third, and fifth, combing Merino
ewe, \\ and under 2\ years; first, second, fourth, and fifth, combing Merino ewe, under
years ; Dalgety Challenge Cup.
Adelaide, 1906. — First, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from
rams over 1 \ years ; first and second prizes for best three fleeces shorn from rams
under I.} years ; first prize for best three fleeces shorn from ewes over 1 1 years ; first,
second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes under Iyears.
Adelaide, 1906. —Champion prize for the year for combing Merino ram, over \\ years;
first, second, and third prizes, combing Merino ram, 3J years or over; first, second, and
third prizes, combing Merino ram, 2 \ and under years; first and second, combing Merino
ram; H and under 2| ; Griffiths Bros.’ Cup; first, second, and third prizes, combing
Merino ram, under years; champion prize for the year for combing Merino ewe, over
years; first, second, and third prizes, combing Merino ewe, 3-| years or over ; third prize,
combing Merino ewe, 2\ and under 3-|- years; first, third, and fourth, combing Merino ewe,
\\ and under 2\ years; Dalgety Challenge Cup; first, second, third, and fourth, combing
Merino ewe, under 1|- years.
Adelaide, 1907. —First, second, third, and fourth prizes for best three fleeces shorn
from rams over years; first, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn
from rams under 11 years; second and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes
over years; first, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes under
years.
Adelaide, 1907. —Champion prize for the year for combing Merino ram over
1 1 years; first, second, third, and fourth prizes for combing Merino ram years or
over ; first and fourth prizes for combing Merino ram, 2 | and under 3-| years ; first, second,
and third prizes for combing Merino ram, H and under 2 \ years ; first and third prizes
for combing Merino ram under years; Griffiths Bros. Proprietary Challenge Cup;
champion prize for the year for combing Merino ewe over 1 \ years; second prize for
combing Merino ewe 3 | years or over ; first, third, and fourth prizes combing Merino ewe,
and under years; first and third prizes for combing Merino ewe, and under 2|
years ; first and second prizes for combing Merino ewe under 1| years ; Dalgety Challenge
Cup.
Adelaide, 1908. First, second, and third prizes for best three fleeces shorn from
rams over years; second, third, and fourth for best three fleeces shorn from rams
under 1 \ years ; first, second, third, and fourth prizes for best three fleeces shorn from
ewes over L \ years; first and second prizes for the best three fleeces shorn from ewes
under 1 years.
Adelaide, 1908. —Fourth prize for combing Merino ram 3-| years or over ; first,
second, fourth, and sixth prizes for combing Merino ram, 2\ and under 3!, years;
second and sixth prizes for combing Merino ram, 1-J and under 2| years ; champion prize


for the year for combing Merino ewe over 1 \ years; first and second prizes for combing
Merino ewe years and over; first, second, and fourth prizes for combing Merino ewe,
1 1 and under’2?, years ; fourth and sixth prizes for combing Merino ewe under l \ years.
Adelaide, 1909. Second and third prizes for the best three fleeces shorn from
rams over I,y years; third and fourth prizes for best three fleeces shorn from rams under
years; first, second, and fourth prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes over I-3
years ; third and fourth prizes for best three fleeces shorn from ewes under 1 1 years.
Adelaide, 1909.— First, second, and third prizes for combing Merino ram,
years and over; sixth prize for combing Merino ram, 2.} and under 31 years first,
fourth, and fifth prizes for combing Merino ram, land under 2\ years; third and sixth
prizes for combing Merino ram under 1 years ; first, third, and lourth prizes for combing
Merino ewe, 3?, years or over ; first, second, third, and fourth prizes for combing Merino
ewe, 2\ and under 3} years ; second, third, fourth, and fifth prizes for combing Merino
ewe, l| and under 'years ; first, second, and third prizes for combing Merino ewe under
I| years
Adelaide, 1910. —Fourth prize ram., years or over ; sixth prize ram, 2\ and
under 3\ years ; first, second, third, fourth and fifth prizes for ewe, 3 \ years or over ; first,
third and fourth prizes for ewe, 21 and under 31 years ; second, third and fifth prizes for
ewe, U and under 2\ years ; third, fourth and sixth prizes for ewe under I years.
NOTE —No competitive wool classes were included in the Royal Agricultural and
Horticultural Show, March, 1910.


I - St ! O . I .„ _ ..._ ' _ C Or _ T _ T - ' _ ' ' ■
Ifohe poujmans or the lakes.
g -v. —
v .' ■ -*;, , "v
“CAMPBELL PARK.”
Situated on Lake Albert, S.E. of South Australia.
Campbell Park, the property of Mr. T. R. and A, P. Bowman, is situated on Lake
Albert, in the South-Eastern district about 90 miles distant from Adelaide, and can
be reached by rail from Adelaide to Milang (64 miles), thence by steamer across Lake
Alexanchina to Point McLeay (12 miles), leaving a drive of about 14 miles to Campbell Park
House, which is used as a summer residence by the owner.
The estate, which has always been noted for its superior breed of cattle and sheep,
was purchased by Messrs. Bowman Brothers in 1876, from the late Mr. John Malcolm, of
Poltalloch, Argyllshire (father of the present Lord Malcolm), and comprises in all about
25,000 acres freehold.
The former Mr. Malcolm started about 1844 by the purchase of 200 heifers of Durham
stock of the H / 5 brand, from Mr.Haldane, of Victoria, a brother of Mrs. Davison, of Blakiston,
Mount Barker, whose family connections in Durham were celebrated for their careful breed-
ing. Shortly after a considerable addition was made to the herd by the purchase of 200
well-bred Durham heifers of the U.R. brand in Victoria. Meantime Mr. Malcolm imported
several bulls of the well-known Butterfly-Bates blood, and purchased some of the progeny
of the famous “ Booth ” blood from the South Australian Company.
From such sources the celebrated M /v brand originated, and these cattle have always
commanded the very highest prices in the local market owing to their wonderful beef pro-
ducing characteristics.
In 1892 the Canowie herd was purchased, and some of the cows were bred from.
The Estate will carry, in fair seasons, 20,000 sheep and 500 head of cattle ; in addition
to which ostrich farming is carried on upon a moderate scale, between 500 and 600 birds
being at present on the property.


MR. T. R. BOWMAN,


* * * - - i.
* t
■&■$****£?''. *v * ’* ‘^*f «~, . . > -t '" '*■>■. .-• ■ •• ,.' **■ v>
|S?£?, ■— •.- ->>v >>-% ••;..■% : *
“ CAMPBELL PARK HOUSE.”
The breed of sheep preferred by Mr. Bowman is the pme Merino, from which he has
not often departed.
Beginning operations at Werockety with stock brought to South Australia from Tas-
mania in 1839, and which were afterwards carried on to Crystal Brook in 1856, a very high
class of sheep was soon established, fresh blood being introduced from time to time from
such well-known flocks as the following, viz. : —Mr. Joseph Keynes, Messrs. Dutton, of
Anlaby, Mr. C. B. Fisher, of Hill River, Hon. G. C. Hawker, of Bungaree, Mr. E. W. Pitts,
of The Levels, Dr. Browne, of Booborowie, Messrs. Murray, and others.
The wool from these sheep has been for many years past sent to London for sale, where
the brand c ß h is well known, and the wool always commands a very high price.
A MUSTER AT “CAMPBELL PARK”


SHEARING SHEDS AND SHEEP YARDS.




I V * -j o°O.0l /
1 °o • *. o c 0 /nl /
p;p__ —-- - ‘•^H:|
| I
I - - I
I lOO/vc'’ • * - •* 0 aO*"C)^i
•; \
THE LATE JOHN BOWMAN.


THE BOWMAN FAMILY.
The Late John Bowman. T. R. Bowman. The Late Edmund Bowman. The Late W. C. Bowman.
The story of South Australian development is very closely interwoven with the per-
sonal history of those of our leading pastoral families, which were founded in the early days
by those grand old pioneers who “blazed the track” and opened up for their fellow-colonists
vast areas of land and great opportunities for the acquirement of wealth. To such men Aus-
tralia owes a deep debt of gratitude, for it is to them that we of to-day are indebted for
the foundation of the prosperity of our State. Many of these fine old colonists have passed
away, but some are still with us enjoying in ripe old age the well-earned fruits of their
strenuous youth and manhood. To this class the subject of this sketch, Mr. T. R. Bowman,
of Campbell Park, belongs. Mr. Bowman looks back on a long life during the earlier part
of which he was closely associated with the opening of new country and the growth of the
pastoral industry, and. in which he still holds large interests. At what cost of personal
labor and hardship endured, success was often attained may in some measure be gathered
from the following interesting reminiscences of the early days of his family with which he
has been kind enough to supply us :
The history of our family as pastoralists dates back to the very early days, for it
ivas in the year 1829 that my father, the late Mr John Bowman, came out to Tasmania,
then called Van Diemen’s Land. In those days the ships that came out to Australia were
few and of small tonnage, and it was, therefore, difficult to obtain a passage out for a
family, especially when, as in the case of Mr. Bowman, it was a moderate sized one of six,
namely, two sons and four daughters.
It was, therefore, necessary to adopt some means to secure a passage, and my father
and a few others put their goods together, and thus enough was collected for it to be worth
while for the agents to charter a small ship and start her on her voyage to Western Aus-
tralia, their intended destination. Mr. Bowman left his farm in the hands of an agent to
be managed for him, probably thinking he might not be able to live in Australia when he
got there. Much to his and the other would-be passengers' chagrin, when they all arrived
at Liverpool they found the ship had been taken off the charter. My father, having let his
farm, was in a fix. Llowever, the passengers all went to the agents and placed before them
the awkward fix they had placed them in by taking the ship off the charter. The agents
then agreed to put another ship on. This ship, some old craft, was knocking about the
ocean for six months, and at last struck Tasmania instead of West Australia. The pas-
sengers were glad enough to land at Hobart, and not one of them went on.
Hobart at that time was a very small place, and practically all the work of building
and making roads was done by the convicts. My father, on settling in Tasmania, first
rented a small farm with a fairly good house on it, between Bridgewater and Risdon Ferry,
near Hobart. Up to this time a grant of land had been given to each child of any family
that landed in the colony from the old country, but whilst my father up country looking
for suitable land the grant was cancelled, so, unfortunately, w r e could not acquire any land
in that way.


Being unable to obtain suitable land elsewhere, father took a farm on the bank of the
Big Lagoon, then called Stokle’s Lagoon, which, though only a reedy swamp of about 1,200
acres in extent, was called Lake Tiberias, and it was here that I was born on St. Patrick’s
Day, 1835.
Sheep farming and agriculture were tried, and in a small drained swamp some good
crops of turnips were grown, on which the cattle were fed. After living here for some
years, father took another farm called “Woodlands,” close to the Coal River, so called on
account of the presence of coal in the neighbourhood.
Father, seeing that he had a family of sons growing up, and there not being much
available land in Tasmania, once more turned his attention to Australia. My eldest brother,
the late Edmund Bowman, then about twenty years of age, came over to South Australia
in one of the sailing boats to spy out the land. As this was in the year 1838, and the colony
had only been proclaimed in 1836, Adelaide was represented only by a few scattered houses
and a number of small, primitive erections. My brother Edmund’s voyage had an un-
pleasant termination, as the craft, the “ Parsea,” was wrecked on the Troubridge Shoals,
and he lost everything he had.
After his arrival in Adelaide my brother went with a survey party to the neighbourhood
of Encounter Bay, remaining there about tv o months making flying surveys and fixing
trigs ; he then returned to Tasmania, and in 1839 came back to Adelaide with a few sheep
and horses. One of the latter was sold to the Government for a hundred pounds —a good
price in those days.
Edmund fixed his camp at Islington, where the Government Workshops now stand.
A good many gum trees grew there then which have since been cleared away. On his
return to Tasmania our family decided that it would be better to sell off everything in Tas-
mania and remove to South Australia. Edmund therefore returned to South Australia
immediately, taking some stock with him, and the rest of the family followed him, leaving
two daughters at school in Hobart. A frame house of four rooms was put together, and
this was brought over and put up at Islington. Shortly after this Edmund bought a
section at Enfield.
Before the rest of the family came over my two brothers —John and William —were
sent over with a cargo of sheep from Tasmania, in a small craft called the “ Lady Emma,”
136 tons or so. John was thirteen years old and William not quite eleven. The man
sent with them in charge of the sheep turned careless, and the boys had to take full charge
of them, or they would have perished on the voyage over. The boys had to crawl through
among them and feed them with hay and water them out of bottles. Wild dogs rushed
and killed several sheep when the sheep were put on shore at a little north of where Largs
Bay is.
Wild dogs were very numerous at this time and troublesome to our sheep, which were
kept on the plains from Islington north for some time. After living at Islington for a while
a piese and brick house was built at Enfield, and all were removed up there. Two of my
sisters married about this time and went south to live at Willunga.
As the sheep increased —the land being taken up about Dry Creek —we removed the
greater portion of our flock to \\ illunga, where they remained for two or three years. Thence
we camped for a time along the hills at Dry Creek and ran the sheep on the hills and plains,
watering one day at the River Torrens, near where Beef acres is now, the next day on the
plains at the foot of Dry Creek.
I think about the year 1846 Mr. Kelsh and family came over from Tasmania, and later
on rented part of a special survey at the head of the Light River, and started sheep farming
there. Squatting was a term not then used. Scab was very bad in the colony at this


time, and wool brought poor prices. Mr. Kelsh sold his wool one year for sd. per pound,
and another year for s|d. Wild dogs were also very troublesome then, and Mr. Kelsh
got so disgusted with sheep farming that he sold all his sheep to us and went back to Ade-
laide to live. His sheep were coarser in wool than ours, but turned out very hardy and
strong, and the wethers were fine sheep.
About this time Mr. Emery, father of Mr. John Emery, now of Paradise, lived at
Beefacres. He was a fine old English gentleman. Mr. Emery ran a lot of cattle on Gilles
Plains, as that part was generally called in those days.
I remember seeing Captain Sturt’s Exploring Party start on his expedition to the
North ; I was shepherding my father’s sheep on Dry Creek plains at that time.
We shepherded our sheep by day, and at night slept in a “ watch-box,” a small wooden
box with a roof over to keep out the rain. The box had legs to stand on about 18 inches
high, and handles at each end to move it about from place to place.
We grew fair crops of wheat at Pine Forest, and a good quantity of maize, pie melons
and water melons, these being grown on the fallow land.
We rented some land on the banks of Dry Creek from the late Captain Bagot ; on this
we grew some fine wheat, and I think were among the very first to use Ridley’s reaping
machine, steered by a pole. Someone had to stand behind and take all the dust that came
out of the machine. What a change to see the splendid machines now in use. Mr. Ridley
tried to make a machine to reap, clean, and bag the wheat. I saw it, but it was nevei
brought to perfection. He also started to build a very large wind machine for irrigation,
&c., but that was not a success.
I think about the year 1844-5 our people took up country round where the Burra
Burra Mine was afterwards found, but, as there was little or no timber on it, they gave it
up, and took up some at the head of the Wakefield. About this time Mr. Price Maurice
took up the land at the head of the Gilbert, round what is now called Manoora. Mr. Stein
held country around what is now known as Farrell’s Flat. Our country ranged from near
the head of the Wakefield to Tottel’s Belt, thence by the Black Springs and the Flagstaff.
My brother afterwards bought the country known as Martindale from Doctors W. & J.
Browne.
The Lower Wakefield Run extended from what is now known as Balaclava to the back
of the South Hummocks, thence down the west side of the gulf, taking in the land owned
by the late Mr. William Fowler, known as “ Yararoo.” It is a pity the native names have
not been retained in all cases. We have taken the country from the blacks, but why
cheat them of their names ? Had the whites never appeared in Australia the blacks
would still have been here, a happy race in their way. Witwater should be “ Witarter,”
Nantywere should be spelt “ Nurnto Werrah,” meaning black kangaroo country; “ Nurnto ”
meant black kangaroo, “ Tunder ” red or plain kangaroo.
We had a station at the Gilbert for a time, and I put up a hut there. The wild dogs
were very bad at that place. I have known them drive our dogs up to our hut door, and
we had to throw fire sticks at them to keep them from the sheep.
At this time our family did nearly all their own work, and generally their own cooking.
It was an old country or Cumberland custom to stand in the water and hold and wash the
wool on the sheeps’ backs. My brothers did this for years. After this we put the flock
through the water twice the same day. This was also a wet job for us all. Our other
work included shearing our own sheep ; one year my three brothers shore 7,000 of their
own sheep. That was in the digging times when few shearers could be got, and most of


A ~ ' * * - ' ■■■■ - - / _
* \ iKji f pfc r •
SOME YOUNG OSTRICHES.
them bad shearers at that. We drove our own bullocks, built our own huts, cut the battens
and boards for our woolsheds, sank our own wells, and did a lot of boring for water on the
Werockety (new Werocata) and Crystal Brook runs. We also made miles of basket yards
out of the small mallee scrub for lambing purposes. The smaller sticks were woven in
between stakes, say 2\ feet apart, basket fashion. This makes a good close fence, and if
made high enough will keep native dogs out.
Prior to this time we had been troubled with scab. We got clear of it about the year
1847, but caught it again from some stray sheep belonging to a neighbor in 1853. How-
ever, we set to work with clay and bricks to make a dip hole, which we did by making a stiff
pug of clay all over the bottom and sides, then covering all over with bricks. The draining
pens were done in the same way. In those days we always washed our sheep in the river
before shearing them, putting each flock through twice in the one day. The year we went
to the Brook we washed, shore, and dipped 35,000 sheep in six weeks.
Messrs. H. T. Morris, J. Watson, and Allan McFarlane were inspectors of sheep in
those days, and no doubt the Scab Act of that date had a good deal to do with clearing the
sheep of scab in South Australia.
“CAMPBELL HOUSE.”


, _ *
lb
4iu #r - . t
„:, . r-.-L- i * ••
TgHk . . . ** •■ ."#> v. > .
‘ ' - ' i ' ' ■>■ . m*'. ■
STORE CATTLE ON THE LAKE SHORE.
In 1854 we brothers did a lot of boring for water on Werockety run. Mr. Williams,
as the Patent Copper Company’s agent at Port Wakefield, went to the Government and
got all the run south of the gulf roads resumed from us for the use of the Company’s bullocks
to run. Some time after the land was resumed the Government, seeing that the Com-
pany’s bullocks would not stop on the land, gave it back to us. My experience has been
that cattle would sooner feed where sheep have been fed than on new country.
Crystal Brook was purchased from Messrs. Younghusband & Co. It comprised 560
square miles of country, and was stocked with 25,000 sheep, 3,400 head of cattle, and about
200 head of horses. My brothers, John Bowman, W. C. Bowman, and I spent about
twenty years of our lives on the Crystal Brook run. For many years the work was hard
as up to that time very little had been done in the way of improvements. Wells had to
be sunk, and several dams put in the Broughton to spread the water over the
Lower Broughton Plains. These dams proved a great success, as the Lower Broughton,
land, before the dams were put in, was fearfully rotten and treacherous ground, and many
were the good busters we and our men got riding after the cattle, some of which were
wild, and took to the scrub kindly.
After a few floods had spread the mud sediment over the land for eight or nine years
following, the land became much more consolidated. When on the Broughton some time
ago I saw that the river had made quite a new creek on the south side of the upper dam
at Cockey’s Crossing. This allows the greater body of the flood water to flow out on the
/GROUP OF FATS.


south side of the old river, so that the water is not equally divided as it was in Bowman
Brothers’ days. This is, I think, a mistake, as the water does not spread over nearly as
much land on the south side of the old river as it does on the north side. I hear they are
getting fresh water in wells or bores a distance back from the river. this could not be
done before the dams were put in the river, as we put down over thirty bores, and all the
water was more or less salt, excepting three wells that were fairly good.
The years 1859, 1866-1869, and 1874 were terrible years. Fifteen thousand sheep died
one year and 10,000 another. Those that survived were kept alive by the porcupine
grass (Spinifex). In the hills the kangaroos died in great numbers ; a few were kept alive
by eating the bush known as the Sturt Thorn.
Dingoes were very numerous. We caught a great many by setting two steel traps
down together and hanging an enticing bait overhead. When a dog got a foot in each
trap he was tolerably safe. We also had some fine dogs —I think the breed was first got
by us from the late James Brown, of the South-East. These dogs, directly they heard
the howl of the dingo in the trap, would start off, even in the middle of the night and kill
it, and if put on the scent of a dingo’s trail would follow it up and kill the dingo. We lost
the breed when the distemper first came among the dogs.
With respect to the horses some were trained for racing, but most of the stock were
sent to India. The horse, “ South Australian,” was bought with the run, and few horses
did more to improve the breed of South Australian horses than the old horse “South Aus-
tralian.” He put his brand on all the foals, however coarse the mother might be.
A great many of the cattle were sent to Wallaroo in the early days of the Wallaroo
Mines. My late brother (William) and Mr. P. McAnaney, now of Strathalbyn, cut the
first road through the scrub from Mundura Bay to Wallaroo, and over this back track all
our cattle travelled to Wallaroo.
Much more could be said of the incidents of the early days. My brothers, after carting
bullock-dray loads of goods to our station at the head of the Wakefield, used to load up
with copper ore at the Burra and deliver it at Port Adelaide. Once my brother had to
walk from the Gilbert River to Werockety to find his bullocks, a distance of over thirty
miles each way, the bullocks having gone straight off to their old haunts when let loose at
night to feed. I have often been obliged to chain the team up to a tree at night to keep
them.
These lines are only written to show how much old colonists have to thank their parents
for, who suffered the discomforts of the early days, and ran the risks of the long voyages
in small craft to the far distant land of Australia, then so little known.


' , * '' " - * "*' '' ' •*r'”
v .^IIIIIIIIIIIBIIIIIBBBIIBIIIBBIIBII^^
Urrbrae
Ctje property of Jfir. peter "Waite.
Mr, Peter Waite was born seventy-six years ago near the town of Kirkcaldy, in
Fifeshire, Scotland, and it was there that he received his education. He spent his early
manhood in Scotland, finding commercial employment in Edinburgh and Aberdeen for
some years.
In 1859, however, being then twenty-five years old, he decided to come to South
Australia, and sailed by the ship “ The British Trident,” from which he disembarked at
Port Melbourne in .July, 1859. Mr. Waite did not spend any time in Melbourne, but came
URRBRAE.


Hammer & Co, MR. PETER WAITE.


11111 M |li||
*gf '*'*
;! k Tr. JHC . M4tf ,x '^||||BMB|KMf jJhl jMmHHH
4k W 'iC* 4 MoBkK* wfL *
'*'' , •■^r^ fc .-> ’’* IP? ■ W *%w
j?fS S# I a Wml: a» JSB(BBgdMM^Hy
||i 4>jV~ V * ‘ _£Y :: m x rjr* ■>•■!» fg?
9 flf ''^
I ■*&#&»*■■ v~t% •» P^.
fe "'t.„„. . J : • » • • . „ _, ‘
31 "»?■ • f' -.-.?»• HR
fl wc' : -. * n
**♦*.,. v * >t R
**' # ' 3E
fl ' • T*~ “' ** -' -:'m --r *- .* ,■ * . hB
P| *_ "- . .. , , _ m
« H
ENTRANCE OATES.


LAKE IN THE PARK.


- ..:i^lS-K j >x£ v. ' *//% _ «v * • <& • *J&? / '. *• 1 / SgLXdJkfi v , **y^t.
‘ %~. *“ *-•' */&, '. *. *. r ' .w „T »*f /»->x-cfV#^&rAA.f.F '. *i*.Jn 4 <* • 4m£* ~ i . -n
g|^»g^ $&!*££ j* **&* * <:.. ,^vH’/";; - *• * - .j£j>* • *v\;, ; rv ■
at once to his destination, Pandappa, a sheep station near Terowie, which was then held
by his brother, Mr. James Waite, in conjunction with Elder, Stirling, & Co,
After some years spent at Pandappa, during which he acquired a knowledge of all
matters pastoral, he became associated with the late Sir Thomas Elder. The first venture
entered into by the new firm was the purchase of the Paratoo run, which adjoined Pan-
dappa, and the two stations were afterwards worked under one management until the
expiry of the leases in 1888, when that portion of the holding was abandoned.
During this period Mr Waite acquired very extensive interests in a number of other
properties, including Cordillo Downs, Beltana, Murnpeowie, Mount Lyndhurst, Blanche-
VIEW FROM THE GARDENS.
water, Kanowana, Lake Charles, Mulyungarie, Mutooroo, Lilydale, and Momba, with the
management of all of which he has been and still is actively associated.
He is a large shareholder, and has from the formation of the Company been Chair-
man of Directors of that great pastoral, shipping, and financial business, Elder, Smith, &
Co., Ltd., and is also a Director of the Commercial Union Assurance Co., the British Broken
Hill Co., Limited, and the S.A. Woollen Co., Ltd.
Mr. Waite has at all times been a great believer in the value of personal supervision,
and from the commencment of his pastoral career has never relinquished the oversight
of the properties in which he is interested, though of late years his son, Mr, David Waite,
has relieved him of the personal inspection of the vast area over which his interest
extends. Practically all is situated in what is known as dry country, necessitating the
expenditure of vast sums of money in storing an adequate supply ofiwater for the[flocks
and herds depasturing over them.


- - &M* f*
■■ -mm ~ J k .
ENTRANCE TO THE GARDENS
|PART OF THE DRIVE.


'.,: iL, . '*1■ —“ ■ —“ 13 -'
' - 'pi. ‘ » ‘ % *‘ A > - v * ' * vj* ■' V 3 x
THE TENNIS COURT.
CLIMBING ROSES.


' i. t u a>- -A&'X
i a «■
A frequent saying of Mr. Waite’s serves to enunciate his policy, “ We have made
mistakes by not having our tanks big enough, never by having them too big,” and 'Large
tanks and small paddocks ” may be written as his watchword. The great expenditure is
thus easily explained, and his initial order sent to London in 1869 for 265 tons of fencing
wire was an earnest of things to come.
Like most really big men, we found Mr. Waite disconcertingly modest horn an
interviewer’s point of view, and it was far from easy to induce him to talk of the many
A SPLENDID ROSE BUSH.
notable achievements in his pastoral career. He, however, made available many facts and
figures from which may be gathered the magnitude of the undertakings in which he has
taken a leading part.
When first Mr. Waite became associated with the pastoral industry there were no
fences, and this alone added immensely to the difficulties of efficient management. The
first to grapple with the problem was Mr. Donald McLean, of North-west Bend, River
Murray, who found by this means and the systematic wholesale poisoning of wild dogs,
that the carrying capacity of the country could be very much increased, and great economy
effected in its working.


CATTLE IN THE PARK.


s Vs
, : , ,,
% 'V (
“°~* '-""Tirr,. 0*"*"" r .», ,r ir..---^' -■■■: n ** t < ' 4
..„ Jr , , T . -&^-
** v NassT .■■■ ■ - * . %..*fTvy w>. '■"‘•‘x Ta
':'r£-
THE OLD HOUSE AT “ URRBRAE.”


s %
0m
Sam
'
jbp; I
...... " - ■ ■ .
Mr. Waite was not slow to see the advantage of fenced paddocks, as against open
country, and in 1868 commenced fencing, and the whole of the enormous quantity of wire
previously referred to was erected in 1870 and 1871.
It is interesting to record here that when Mr. Waite took charge of Beltana, Um-
beratana, and Murnpeowie in 1860, they were practically unimproved, but between that
date and 1896 no less a sum than £214,000 was spent in fencing and watering. Since
then a further large amount has been expended in additional subdivision, in sinking wells
MEET OF THE HUNT CLUB AT • “ URRBRAE.”
and,in hnaking dams and tanks, and a similar development has taken place on all proper
ties'.in which Mr. Waite is interested.
Some idea of the expenditure in money and labor under one head alone may be
gathered from the fact that Mutooroo, Lilydale, Mulyungarie, Lake Charles, Murnpeowie,
and Mount Lyndhurst are all vermin fenced, the total mileage being one thousand and
one miles.
The result of this extensive system of improvement is shown by the fact that the
number of sheep on Paratoo rose to 260,000 in the year 1874, whilst on the Beltana pro-


perties that were at a later date 863,000. This was prior to the advent of the rabbit
and the occurrence of the big drought, which seriously reduced the numbers on these
stations, as elsewhere in the north.
In the development of our northern country Mr. Waite has had reason to become a
staunch supporter of the camel and the donkey for station and cartage purposes, both of
which were introduced into the State by the late Sir Thomas Elder. It was from those
herds that the first camels were sent to West Australia, where they are so very largely
used. Donkevs which also play an important part in the Western State, where they have
latterly risen greatlv in price, were also imported in large numbers from S.A.
In his home life Mr. Waite’s tastes turn towards gardening, and evidence of his love
for flowers is to be found in the large and beautiful gardens which surround his home,
“ Urrbrae,” which is situated in a finely timbered park upon the rising ground between
Mitcham and Glen Osmond. “ Urrbrae ” was originally owned by the late Mr. Mac George,
who was drowned in the Royal Charter ”in 1860. Some years before his death it had
been leased till 1864 bv the late Mr. Edward Stirling, and it was thus the boyhood home
of Professor E. C. Stirling and Sir Lancelot Stirling, President of the Legislative Council.
Mr. Waite purchased the property in 1874, and built the present house in 1890 and
1891. He married, in 1864, the daughter of the late Mr. James Methuen, of Leith. Scot-
land, and his family consists of two sons and three daughters.


Hughes, of Booyoolee, pronounced 800-yoo-lee, is a well known name throughout
the Commonwealth, for it has been associated with pastoral enterprise for nearly 70 years.
It was in the year 1839 that John Bristow Hughes, the first member of the family
which for more than six decades has been in possession of the beautiful estate near Glad-
stone, reached South Australia from India, and soon after his arrival took up from the
Crown the Bundaleer country, subsequently sold to the late CB. Fisher. Finding prospects
in the new land to be good, he advised his younger brothers, Bristow Herbert Hughes and
Herbert Bristow Hughes, to come out and take up the growing of wool and stock. This
they did, the former arriving in 1842, the latter reaching the colony in the following year.
In the same year (1843) the country adjoining Bundaleer, being then unoccupied,
was taken up from the Crown and formed the Booyoolee Run. The first station was
established at “ Koo-Ker-Poo,” then moved to “Gnangya,” near where the town of Laura,
named after Mrs. Hughes, now stands. A short time later the head station was, for more
convenient working of the run, moved to the site of the present Booyoolee Homestead.
The two biothers, Herbert and Bristow, remained in partnership until about 1858, when
Herbert Bristow Hughes bought his brother’s share and became sole owner. The latter
retiring to England, where he remained till he died.
Herbert Bristow Hughes.
Herbert Bristow Hughes, the third son of John Hughes, and his wife, Maria Bristow,
was born at Edge Hill, Lancashire, England, in 1820. He was educated at Prince’s School,
Liverpool, and afterwards apprenticed to Robert Benn, one of the old time shipowners
and merchants of Liverpool, where he gained that knowledge of business that proved so
useful in later life. On his arrival in South Australia by the “ John Davidson,” on the
23rd May, 1843, at the age of 23, he w 7 ent up to Bundaleer to his brother, John Bristow
Hughes, and, as already recorded, took up what is now 7 Booyoolee on pastoral lease from
the Crown with his brother, Bristow Herbert.


\ ••«
. w ■
'
0 r
;
, i i y^mSSt^0f^9'
1% iffw i ' y-' ’• .
amhk*»> -
fM%fz*' ja&*~**' ■*-
*<*wrW^RWSnffi# •
; ‘ *?; '■■^^w^^Hfe^~«»&i' , .«yfa - &yteaapfclLA • ■
. '
. * %' ■
•’'4m !^^*: . ? AfP'
• ■;#,
.-. ■' '■; • > ‘:*'.<Vi":i-' ■
‘.' '■ " }fj?^ r *
. - -::v<
•• • v
£ i 1
pr JS
p .ji.. _
Wfjf-’- Hi
tRMWp ' A*
lTtf ■/»’ - WMSmBt
V'
<.♦ *1lHl
■• : •-■• ...;-••• ft-' -.-.
'JRt /-■ "--' :•&*;-,
- f 4*$m§ /v* '&’'£* ; rv
*mjF .. *%%*■-- ‘‘Sfilsir ■ - ■•
J ■ Vi®, c : >u-
f- v :: "fm
■p ■ 4-jv% ■ ■ £s|e$
Kf v w ,* ' JR a^f- •; • *• ‘. iv-^5^\i ’. ‘
fe ABPT' r . .w .'V A 'gBL -l-i.it«««.-• •-> •-''•■ i#;.
' : * i -/^*i £^ V *V PK»-'-^>''v.“t’ < :V '-' 4 ■
■ 1m
®t#::^'mi t ...v.•?. &<Jmi : •■ „ Ml ; ‘ ■’SKri
■ -&kt •.. ■■ • | - ■'&% - . , mSm
After 27 years devoted to
the development and im-
provement of Booyoolee,
Mr. H. B. Hughes, in 1870,
bought Kinchega, on the
River Darling, N. S. W.,
from the English and Scot-
tish Bank. Kinchega Run
then consisted of some three
thousand miles of lease-
holds, which has, however,
since been reduced by half
under later Pastoral Acts
of New Soutli Wales. The
run then included the Pam-
amaroo cattle station near
Menindie. This he followed
up a year or two later by
buying “ Nocatunga,” then
consisting of the frontage
JOHN HUGHES.
Father of Herbert Bristow Hughes
Died 1827.
blocks on the River Wilson
near Thargomindah, in the
“ Gregory South ” District
of Queensland, adding to
the run at the same time
by taking up a large area
of tlie vacant back country
adjoining, making a total
holding of some three thou
sand miles there. “Noca-
tunga ” is used exclusively
as a horse and cattle sta-
tion ; “ Kinchega ” as a
sheep station.
In addition to his exten-
sive pastoral holdings, or
rather in conjunction with
them, Mr. Hushes became
' o
interested in the navigation
of the Murray and Darling
Rivers, and had the steamer “Decoy” and barges “Reliance” and “Croupier” built in Glas-
gow and brought out in sections. These he placed on the rivers and used for the carriage of
HERBERT BRISTOW HUGHES.
Born Enfield, England, 1820.
Died “ Athelney,” Adelaide, 1892.
HERBERT WHITE HUGHES.
Born Booyooloo, S.A., Mnv (sth, I So;'.


• * A - "* ’ ’ ■$$$ ' "4‘ * .*jS - *■ V.14 *% v > ' - 3j^FiSm r •
», >*' •-;-' * ' : -c. ‘i t *A&z '%%uM*" , T £* ■ \< :> V*$
'*"* M.#:.*!:." ~J''f'v*:*&*' V ’ *• ;• y'/ ?' 'b'J '*.'■£''•? ’ f ' ■ y‘*,tJ!' t *, 1 • v w »,* 4#* ' *“ y-
* '' '_'"> >* •■'*> 7 k ;j^' #> ‘^ '~ ■ '•" ■ ” ' • / ' *?
>■■'<(, BOOYOOLEE HOMESTEAD FROM THE NORTH, ERECTED 1855.
stock and wool to Morgan from his up river properties. This, of course, was before the
opening of the Broken Hill line. When this occurred the more certain railway communi-
cation thus made available, led to the selling of the vessels, but in their time they did good
work, and illustrated their owner’s bold policy in carrying out his undertakings. Another
instance ol his understanding of the necessities of successful pastoral work is found in the
iact that about 1870, owing to a glut of sheep, he went to considerable expense in the
establishment of a canning plant at Booyoolee for the treatment of surplus sheep from his
runs. Men were brought out from Scotland to run the works which, after having dis-
posed of a large number of sheep and cattle, were afterwards sold to Messrs. Dean and
Laughton and re-erected at Port Adelaide. This disposal of surplus stock at a time of
glut and low values led him to take a great interest in the freezing question, but the
machinery and appliances that have since led to so remarkable a development of the export
tiade were not then known of. Mr. Hughes had, however, for many years been in con-
stant correspondence with his brother, Mr. T. B. Hughes (who resided in England) on
the subject, and at the time the Bell and Colman dry air process came in he had hopes of
seeing the ideas and plans he had formulated carried out. The owneEof Booyoolee was a
linn believer in paddocking, and was one of the earliest pastoralists to use wire fences, and
some of the old No. 5 wire erected by him in the early days is still in existence. : He always
attiibuted his light losses in the big drought of 1864-5-6 to the' fact that they were able to
let the sheep loose in paddocks he then had up.
Mr. Hughes, though much interested in public affairs, never became a candidate for
lai liament, being too much occupied with his wide spread interests. He took an active
and keen interest in the early days of racing and the old S.A.J. ClubAvhen the names of
Joseph Gilbert, George Hawker, E. M. Bagot, John Baker, C. B. Fisher, John Formby, and
others were associated with the turf in South Australia.
. • Hughes married in England in 1854 Laura White, youngest daughter of Samuel
\\ lute-White, of Charlton Marshall, Dorset and Farncombe, Godaiming, Surrey, England, this


3 ; '* l iajfe; ;< -J: ' ’ j|
|.<|Mi- ,.• •..• . '. ... ~ 111 11, > ■ .■■;?
•■■.,}• '•*■ I C J r gjs> fji&x BB *** -^HK:
a^^BSr,■ . v«J *EafcS “~£ BT (x . .V? ;1 v ‘ * JBPb fl
jEBWBB -V;-. •':“' •" . - ?9j | 3 I y'. . ** '<*"- \'V’. < @Sm|
c .• ,. ' k 5 V ■ '■' ■ .<SBBBWbH B j ' B jHy c S ? \ .jsi ■ X
■ '-BWfi£ SSmSSL "S, *?>•' y** 'm* T nf » * ■ ' -"?• I fflK 3 Sfc ■’**' ’ ""”’ ,WcHt w ♦’ ■ •'■• w ®^Htt'r ; , ;*
Krischook. ATHELNEY, HACKNEY ROAD, ST. PETERS.
lady, being a sister of the Whites, of White Park and Charlton, now Wirrabaua. Ph
died in 1892 at the age of 72 at his town residence, “■ Athelney,” St. Peters. _ Mrs. Hughes
survived him for many years, living to the age of 80, her death taking place in Januaiy this
year (1909), the surviving family being five sons —Herbert White, Harold White, Arthur
Nicholas, Alfred, and Edgar Bristow —the youngest son, Oswald, having died at Nocatunga
a few years previously ; also two daughters, Laura Sophia, who lives at “ Athelney, and
Maria Ethel, who married her cousin, John Maddock Hughes, the eldest son of the 1 imotny
Bristow Hughes, the brother who never came out to Australia, there is one son of this
marriage, Reginald Herbert.
In 1892, on the death of Herbert Bristow Hughes, the property and estates held by him,
including Booyoolee, Kinchega, Nocatunga, the Netley grazing paddocks, and Athelney,
the family house in Adelaide, were vested in Trustees—Messrs. Herbert White and Harold
White Hughes, and are worked as one for the benefit of the family. Mr. Herbert White
Hughes is also general manager for the trust and manager of Booyoolee. Harold White
Hughes is manager of Kinchega for the Trustees, and Edgar Bristow takes part in the
management at Nocatunga.
Herbert White Hughes.
Herbert White Hughes, the eldest son of the late Herbert Bristow Hughes, was born
at Booyoolee Station on May 6, 1855. He was educated first at St. Peter s College, Ade-
laide, then at Malvern, England, from whence he went up to Oxford. in 1876, after leav-
ing Oxford and travelling on the Continent, he returned to South Australia, where he
worked on the various stations held by his father, and so gaining his knowledge of his
future calling, first under Mr. Harry J. Phillips, then manager of Kinchega Station, then
on Nocatunga, and finally taking charge of Booyoolee, in 1880, where he has since resided.
In 1889 Mr. Hughes married the eldest daughter of the (late AV. J. Crawford, for many
years manager of the Union Bank, Adelaide, who died on November 6, 1896. Iwo


Srott. CUTTING HAY ON THE RIVER FLATS. ( 1 m ) \ « m .1 I .
children were born of the marriage—Herbert Bristow in 1890, who died in 1902 as the
result of an accident, and Helen Margaret, born in 1894. The position Mr. Hughes holds
as manager of the large interest held by the family trust makes him a busy man, but he
has found time to take an active part in public affairs. He is a Justice of the Peace,
Visiting Justice at Gladstone Gaol. Has been Chairman of the District Council ; member
of the School Board of Advice ; has held many offices in connection with Agricultural
Shows and racing clubs, and taken an active interest in Anglican Church matters. He
is also a Director of the firm of Bagot, Shakes, & Lewis, of Adelaide. Mr. Hughes was
once a candidate for Parliamentary honors, but suffered defeat by the Radical candidate,
whose views were more “ advanced,” at all events theoretically so. Since then he has
had enough to do to attend to the affairs of the trust.
Booyoolee.
The estate, one of the most fertile and picturesque in the whole of South Australia
now consists of about 25,000 acres freehold, part of the original run taken up under lease
from the Crown in 1843. The River Flats along the Rocky River, having been purchased
from the Government as far back as 1853, whilst the freehold of the remainder of the
estate was acquired in 1872, after the agricultural areas were proclaimed, at which period
any land not selected under the provisions of that Act was left open for anyone to purchase
for cash, though this clause was subsequently revoked. Of the total area about 6,000
acres is now under cultivation, being let to tenants for general farming, and used for hay
and lucerne growing.
The River Flats are composed of rich alluvial soil splendidly adapted for agricultural
purposes and are largely used for lucerne and hay crops, for grazing, and fattening
cattle. The rougher hill country is well clothed with native grasses, and is essentially sheep
country, growing a good sound clean wool of strong combing quality. In the higher lands,


~ — " - ■ ■ — —
ijf
" ' . I f I v
Scott. ON THE PLATS AT BOOYCOLEE.


Scott. DATE PALM GROVE IN BOOYOOLEE GARDEN.
which are wire netted, with the result that rabbits are well kept under, there is some quantity
of Sheaoak timber, end a fine growth of Red Gum is to be found on the flats, but generally
speaking the estate is not heavily timbered. Possessing as it does such fine river frontages,
the water question presents little difficulty, but where necessary adequate prov sion has
been made throughout the estate. Owing to its natural advantages and because of its
central position, for it lies in direct railway communication with the greater part of the
State, Booyoolee is largely used as a depot for sheep and cattle from the other stat ons,
this stock being afterwards distributed to the various markets of the State.
Sheep.
The Merino flocks, now at Booyoolee, date from 1843, and had their origin in drafts
from Bundalcer, to which, in the early days, were added ewes purchased from the Dutton’s,
of Anlaby. Following this an importation of “ Steiger ” rams from Germany was made,
and at later dates stud rams have been purchased locally. They arc now essent ally a
dry country sheep, for the great majority of the rams bred are sent to Kinchega for use
on that property, and have been for many years past.
The object constantly kept in mind in the past has been to breed a class of animal
that, though not perhaps carrying so heavy a fleece as those of some show studs, yet gives
a sheep that is eminently adapted for dry interior conditions such as are met with at
Kinchega ; a class of sheep in fact, able to get about over that extensive country and to
battle against droughts and long distances to water. They are well up on the leg and not
hampered by fo'ds, wrinkles, or heavy wool on the face. The value of this plain com-
mercial type has been shown by the return to the smooth bodied sheep by “ Out Back ”
pastoralists who found that the craze for heavy folds was a mistake, such sheep being
entirely unable to stand the hardships of our dry interior, and perishing as soon as drought
conditions prevail.
About 14,000 to 16,000 sheep are shorn each year at Booyoolee, but at Kinchega the
numbers run up to 50,000. Only a proportion of the sheep shorn at Booyoolee carry a I*2


*
, J ,/ 0
CYMRO-BACH WELSH PONY STALLION.
Imported 1908. wars old. Bachelors* Hall at hack
STABLE YARD & COACH HOUSE.
months fleece of wool grown on the estate. This wool, under the B b ran( k
makes good prices when sold in Adelaide, as has been the custom for some years,
last year’s highest being 1/ a lb. The wool from the sheep brought down from the other
stations and grazed at Booyoolee is branded BO oVoolee does n °t bring so high a price,
having more foreign matter, as is customary with outside clips.
Reference to Booyoolee would not be complete without mention of the fine herd of
Shorthorns which was started there very many years ago, and has since been transferred
to Nocatunga. In the early days bulls were imported from England, and in more recent
years from Messrs. Robertson tS: McDougall’s noted herds in the Western District of \ic-
toria, also from the Angas herd at Hill River. A number of cows have also been brought
from Victoria, and others were obtained at the dispersal sale of the Beefacres stud. At
Nocatunga Herefords were tried in the early times, but subsequently given up and Short-
horns substituted. There is now a herd of 18,000 carrying the JDI Nocatunga brand.
Drafts from this station are regularly sent over for distribution to various markets in this
State after a spell in the fattening paddocks at Booyoolee.
The UZ brand on a horse is recognised throughout this State and others as a sure
index of quality, for from the first thoroughbred sires of the best English blood have been
used. The long list of importations ranging from 1852 to the present time includes such
well known names as Muley Molock, Emigrant, Croupier, Leonidas, Honestish, ST Edmund,
whilst Prince Consort and Lord Chesterfield have been purchased in S. Australia. Racing
men will readily call
to mind the numerous
winners that have been
sired by these stallions.
Susan and Abbess, well
known English mares,
were also brought out
to this stud.
During the last year
or so Lord Warman
and Cymro Bach, two
Welsh pom' sires, have
been imported, the re-
sult of this experiment
will be watched with
interest.
Booyoolee House
was erected in 1855, a
portion of an earlier
structure being incor-
porated in the present
building. It lies within
a mile of the town of
Gladstone. It is built
on slightly rising ground
facing the flooded flats
of the Rocky River,
and is surrounded by
extensive gardens and
plantations which flo-
urish exceedingly in
the rich and fertile
soil. The number of
solid stone buildings
and stables with silo
pits, shearing shed fitt-
ed with machinery,
near by, form of them-
selves a small township
In the Home pad-
docks there are many
noble red gums which
stand out grandly on
the verdant flats by
which the homestead
is surrounded, and add
their touch to the park-
like beauty of the scene.
FOUNTAIN IN BOOYOOLEE GARDEN


of^qlal^^ J
' ■ •■"''* ; Svs ' *"* ‘ • ' "'' "' '" " ” _ ''' . - *
In all parts of Australia there are to be found large individual properties devoted to
sheep breeding and the production of wool. Except for some minor differences due to
climatic or local conditions, the traveller will find much similarity in the system of manage-
ment and the routine work. The observant visitor, however, will not fail to note one point
which differentiates one class of sheep station from the other, and that is that whilst some
are merely run by managers for absentee owners or for financial institutions as money-
earning concerns, others are nod; only the property but also the homes of the owners, who
take a personal interest and part in the development of the land and the adornment and
extension of the homesteads. Anlaby, without doubt, belongs to the latter class.
THE FIRST HOMESTEAD, 1843.


jlHiiSl ; ' '* JiHK'ill rJdf~' wlWSm
mjm y‘ gHfl
••- ,WM0^--" mBsM S
*j£'-zfgfm MKRH
HISTORICAL AND PERSONAL.
Of the older generation of the family the brothers, Fred. Hansborough, Francis Stacker,
and \\ illiam Hampden Dutton, the three sons of the Mr. Dutton, who, after serving in the
British Diplomatic Service in Holland, subsequently settled in Victoria, are each more or
less intimately associated with the early history of Anlaby. The first link in this connection
is found in the recorded fact that Mr. F. H. Dutton, at the instance of Mr. Wm. H. Dutton,
who was already largely interested in pastoral properties in New South Wales, came to
South Australia in ’3B or ’39, certainly before 1841, at which time he was in partnership
with ( aptain Bagot in the Koonunga property. That he was interested in South Australia
at the earlier date is shown by the fact that his name appears in the first special survey
applied for in the history of this State, the exact date being January, 1839 ; this was
made in the Mount Barker district.
From the date of the establishment of Anlaby, which took place, as we shall relate, in
1841, till his death in England in 1890, Mr. F. H. Dutton was closely identified with pastoral
matters in South Australia. He was, in fact, the Dutton of Anlaby.
MR. FREDERICK HANSBOROUGH DUTTON.
Mr. F. S. Dutton, the other brother, came in the first instance to South Australia from
Brazil, at the invitation of his brother. His name will be associated for many years to
come with the mining and political life of this, his adopted State, for he shared with Captain
Bagot, his brother’s partner, the honor of the discovery of copper on the Koonunga Estate,
a discovery which was in the years to come to bring great wealth to the district and the
State. The story is one of the many incidents of interest in the history of Australian
pioneering and mining experience.
In the political world of his day Mr. Dutton was a man of mark. He was the first
candidate for legislative honors elected for Fast Adelaide, also a member of the first House
of Assembly. He held office in the Hanson Ministry as Commissioner of Crown Lands.
In 1863 he was asked to form a Ministry, in which attempt he then failed, but succeeded, how-
ever, in 1865. Upon his retirement he was appointed to the office of Agent-General, a position
he held to the time of his death in January, 1877. Prior to which his services had been
recognised by the bestowal upon him of the distinction of Companion of the Order of St.
Michael and St. George.


: # / / .- **^ r
>.
v |j
I' ;* %
Jfflk \‘C —i
... v . -/4T.^ :i '
•««Br :^'
JB
J
• n, ■
... _, - -< .
L.
. r-- : *\_‘ l **..T'
■
v ’Ijb, Jk •, '/.--^P* 1 -
• -, '•••.is*.
• ->• &*:■** * •*> . - * • * • v i«
Francis Stacker Dutton,
CM.G.
Premier
and Agent General.
William Hampden Dutton.
Father of the Present Owner
of Anlaby.


THE GROWTH OF ANLABY.
When the partnership between Mr. F. H. Dutton and Captain Bagot, which has already
been referred to, came to an end in 1841, Mr. Dutton took up 250 square miles of country,
afterwards an eighty-acre section was purchased, and a head station built by the
manager, Mr. A. Buchanan, near a spring discovered by an employee named Sebastian,
where the residence now stands, at a spot about eleven miles from Kapunda. This original
homestead, a photo, of which is still extant and is reproduced in these pages, was the centre
from which the Anlabv Estate, as it is now known, grew and developed. Up to that time
the district was known by the native name of Pudna, and was then renamed Anlaby by
Mr. F. H. Dutton, after a village in Yorkshire.
From this time continual development has taken place. In about 1850 the Govern-
ment surveyed and made available for purchase large areas of the original leasehold hold-
ing. Mr. Dutton was a large purchaser, and from time to time bought the freehold of no
less than 70,000 acres immediately adjoining the homestead block, as this land was acquired
the leases of the more distant country were dropped. For some years the area remained
the same, but subsequently a total of over 30,000 acres has been disposed of, partly to
the Government for closer settlement and partly to private purchasers.
The district is favored with an average rainfall of from 18 to 20 inches, whilst the soil
is as to the greater portion good strong land, with, of course, occasional outcrops and ridges.
It is well watered by the River Tight and the Ju'ia and Brady Creeks, as well as by the
numerous dams and never-failing springs on the Estate. In earlier days it was somewhat
heavily timbered; a great deal of the native wood has, however, been felled. Fresh
plantations have been periodically made so that there is no fear that this estate, as has
unfortunately been the case with many, will become denuded of its timber supply
ANLABY HOUSE TO-DAY.


■
THE VILLAGE OF HAMILTON.
Six miles from Anlahy, showing the Memorial Church.
ONE OF THE APPROACHES TO ANLABY.


r
■um -
THE PRESENT OWNER.
Mr. Henry Dutton, the present owner of the Anlaby property, is the son of Mr. \\ m.
Hampden Dutton, whose connection with Anlaby has been already referred to, and came to
South Australia early in life. He was educated at St. Peter’s C ol'ege, the Alma Matei of
so many of South Australia’s most distinguished sons. Subsequently he entered commei-
cial life in connecPon with the old Bank of South Australia, with which institution he was
associated till at the death of his uncle, Mr. F. H. Dutton, in 1890, he succeeded to the estate.
Since then he has been largely cccupied with the management of this extensive propelty
and of the other interests, pastoral and otherwise, with which he is connected. With Mr.
John Me’rose he some years ago purchased the well-known North Booboorowie Station, an
extensive well grassed property of some 36,000 acres, which is situated a few miles
from the Burra. This station carries on an average over 35,000 sheep, and is in itself a very
valuable holding.
PART 07 THE ROSERY.
MDutton’s acquisition of the James Martin ironworks and foundry at Gawler is a
matter of recent histoiy, and one of great importance to the very large number of workers
who would, had no action for continuing the works been taken, have been obliged to leave
the district where the majority of them had resided for a number of years.
Mr. Dutton’s principal recreation, apart from the extension and improvement of the
Anlaby gardens, is yachting. His latest purchase, The Adele, a steam yacht of considerable
tonnage, especially designed for extended cruising, is one of the best craft of her class in
Southern waters. As a landlord and a man of wealth and a large employer of labor, Air.
Dutton lives up to the traditions of his family, for he D always ready to recognise to the
utmost the claims of those who may be dependent on him in either of these capacities.
Mr. Dutton is one who claims the full rights of his position, but is ready to fulfil to the
uttermost the obligations which are associated with that hue old English name, “ The
Squire,” by which he is known far and wide.


anla^^
(Mr. Henry Dulton).


THE GARDENS.
Reference to An aby without mention of the gardens which are a crown and glory to
the estate, would be impossible. Anlaby house itself is of no particular beauty architec-
turally speaking. It s merely a spacious mansion, fitted with every appliance which
modern ccience has invented, but without the drawback of the uniformity and sense of
rawness which modernity so often brings. It is, in fact, an old established, well appointed
home. There is nothing unusual either about the offices, stables, agents and manager s
houses and men’s quarters, and the other appurtenances of a wealthy man’s residence, which
make them specially noteworthy. They are in keeping with the general air of complete-
THE MAIN CONSERVATORIES.
ness and thoroughness found at Anlaby, but the gardens are unique. Standing on the
upper terrace and looking over the narrow valley upon the northern side of which the home-
stead stands, one sees before him a wide expanse of cultivated beauty, the loveliness of
Nature aided and furthered by man’s art. Terrace succeeds terrace with wide sweeping
lawns and picturesquely grouped shrubberies, planted to enhance the beauty of the more
formally laid out gardens. On one side the main range of conservatories, on the other the
lily ponds, orchid, and fern houses. The rosaries, too, a blaze of varied bloom, mingle
with the softer greens of foliage, palms, and fern, and in the distance the tree-dotted hills
and beyond the blue Australian sky.


INTERIOR VIEWS OF PARTS OF THE CONSERVATORIES.


BBBWMB—B—BWBB—B——BBMi—————^—B————————
1 ''
■■■ :■■■ mum
■M BBS ■ BBS BBB I ■ ..
Ban BBB BBS B8B
I _ iii 2 ; ' > l| ■ • ■ |
111 1 1>'. f : : I
it,! i ’ P ,: «[ - : l Iiv
%ld^^PISli^^ffllH»«i
THE DUTTON MEMORIAL CHURCH.
In memory of his wife,
uncle and daughter Mr.
Dutton some years
ago built a church at
Hamilton, near Anla-
by, which he presented
to the parish. Ex-
ternally the design is
simple, following the
lines of early Norman
architecture, but a
wealth of cultured and
studious care is evi-
denced in the carvings
and traceries which
adorn the interior.
Massive oak, and ster-
ling silver, carved and
chased by expert hands
lend a beauty and fit-
ting magnificance to
this tribute of loving
memory paid by a hus-
band and father to
those whose loss he
mourns.
THE MAIN DOOR.
THE INTERIOR.


I
/ ;/*; ■t&y^/.'^ay^ /1
'i^yrfrjPrmfi 1 !.vkj*(c> «fc IwWriM |
-—»■— wnw——I ■ ■ iw IM IF m T . , ..^v^ur,..rr—,.i ,,»■ Iiw III II ■aaaBaaMMa«aMBaw«wwHaaBHa >
THE DUTTON MEMORIAL CHURCH AT HAMILTON.
The Architect of the original Church was Mr. F. T. Naish, and of late additions Mr. Walter Bagot, of Messrs.
Woods & Bagot. Of the interior decorations the windows, screen, panelling, and reredos are from Bacon Bros.,
of London. The roof of the chancel was designed by Mr. T. L. Jackson, H.A., of London, and Messrs. Mappin
and Webb supplied the silver work and lit tings.


ffvC Ja fr V ‘.fiAW r «• - t - TjyBWy ,* v —■* ’**•* /ywt |
, 4 *\ t '' HaffiKy ' *r ,.-*" <«■» < \f&£' - j
■? TO, r--• ■' '-■ 1 -x *9Hi ?T , «r 9H& ? v V'JI ’B- 'Ei .v-Btv ' Wy • Sfs*f
THE ALTAR IN THE MEMORIAL CHURCH.
THE ORGAN AT HAMILTON CHURCH.
The following is the specification of the organ presented by Mr. Dutton to the Memorial
Church at Hamilton :
GREAT ORGAN.
Compass CC to A. 58 Notes.
1 Open Diapason, spotted metal . . . . . . . . . . 8 feet. 58 pipes.
2 Stopd. Diapason, wood . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 “ 58
3 Dulciana, spotted metal . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 “ 58
4 Harmonic Flute, spotted metal .. .. .. .. .. 4“ 58“
5 Principal, spotted metal , . . . . . . . . . . . 4 58 “
6 Clarabella . . . . . . . . ~ . . . . . . 8 “ 58
SWELL ORGAN.
1 Violin Diapason, spotted metal . . . . . . . . . . 8 feet. 58 pipes.
2 Lieblich Gcdact, metal and wood . . . . . . . . 8 “ 58 “
3 Gamba (grooved bass), spotted metal . . . . . . . . 8 “ 46 “
4 Voix Celeste, spotted metal . . . . . . . . . . 8 “ 46 “
5 Suabe Flute, wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 “ 58 “
PEDAL ORGAN.
CCC to F. 30 Notes.
1 Bourdon, wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 feet. 30 pipes.
Balanced Crescendo Pedal to Swell Organ.
CHOIR ORGAN.
To which the following stops are now being added :
1 Lieblich Flute, wood . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 feet. 58 Notes
2 Salisonal, metal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 “ 58 “
3 Vox Angelica, metal . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 “ 46 “
4 Viol d’Orchestra, metal . . . . . . . . , . . . 8 “ 58 “
5 Saliect, metal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 “ 58 “
The Specification was prepared by Mr. Ernest Wood, Organist and Choirmaster St. Paul’s
Cathedral, Melbourne. Builder, Mr. F. Taylor, Hawthorn, Melbourne.


• ’’‘'i^P W * . V^ : xv *fghfffi _ ' &>■ ‘ *• v .*v w’ * ' - x& IBLraw
; . J»* -JP* ■• -•. • ’ -/te-msm** ’ • -•. •» . • . . . .:'*■•.;••>,. • • ,w? -•. Sp■
''Hk' ; ' ‘*V .. ’ _:'>■ >
&, j*P . ** 'l v •' •-' '-ifr-r-r -*a#»/■ M
1' if:- . ’ |
„*m. ' e’wtX* 1 iW^|MPB^>JilWiWi[^^j^ > j^i^tr^ > . - •’lal./ ■ *
.. ” Bu- ;l * * . -'.MMj
THE CHANCEL, ALTAR AND REREDOS,


- jr *s2 %SSfc **fe /***• ♦? «* *•• &• .
%* ', .•■«•. 1L>Cm T *..' J ’y : ME. ' •:', %• •■. ■»■
*33BbBt *** / *r : . •••> *£ ?» <*
THE STUD FLOCKS.
The foundation of the stud Hocks at Aulaby was laid when Mr. F. H. Dutton, in 38
or '39, despatched from N.S. Wales a mob of 5,000 sheep in charge of a Mr. MacKenzie.
With them also travelled 1,000 each belonging to Messrs. A. Buchanan, Ewen C ameron, and
Edward Spicer. These last lots were sold on arrival at 20s. 1 hese 5,000 sheep were taken
first to Koonunga, which was an already established station, and remained there till 1841,
at which date they had increased to 10,000. Half of these sheep were transferred to what
was soon to be known as Anlaby and placed in charge of Mr. Aleck Buchanan.
In 1856 Mr. Dutton imported some Kambouillet rams which raised the standard of
the flocks. Between that date and 1869 live or more different importations of specially
selected Merino rams (chosen by H. Schwartz & Co.) were imported from Saxony. These
rams materially helped in fixing the fine robust type of wool which lias always characterised
the Anlaby sheep. Besides these importations a few rams were purchased from The Levels,
and later from the Murray flocks. The object at Anlaby has always been to fix a high
average standard for flock rams and a heavy wool production per head from the ewes
rather than to breed for specially developed show sheep. 1 hat the various owners and
managers have been successful is shown by the demand which was early created for flock
rams, many large stations being constantly supplied from here. At the heaviest shearings
at Anlaby about 65,000 have passed under the shears. At first the wool was always sent
direct to London, but recently the Adelaide market has been tried with equally satisfactory
results. The following are the figures for 1903 —Stud rams gave up to 23 and 25 lbs.
Flock rams averaged 181, lbs. of wool. Wethers 8,000 averaged 13 lbs of wool.
Hoggets (10,000) averaged 10£ lbs. of wool. Lambs (10,000) averaged 4 lbs. of wool.
The later purchases have for some years been made from the Murray flocks. lo these
rams, Mr. Dutton informs us, is mainly due the present all-round quality and excellence of
the flocks now at Anlaby, They have proved the coping stone, the finishing touch to the
good foundation laid in bye-gone years. The sheep at Anlaby are, therefore, now practic-
ally a distinct strain of the famous Murray blood. It is not, perhaps, necessary to say that
only the very best procurable have been purchased by the Squire of Anlaby.
ONE OF THE SIRES.


, :^i: t- *•■.& a# • t~' *, ** ■ > a -*• 4 \ "v.', j ■,
*•:£ »-jjfcffTL v.w : : <^a-:• v %. •-..*j^S8p* : - ; ; . ■ \ ■ ‘ jjE cW* W .■ >#* ,- jf~. ' '*&■ * *.yffifr (
BREEDING EWES AT ANLABY.


;^t“.
' Vv 1 ,
.. , > \ 1 • •
.u V..- • * \
AN IMPORTED FOX TERRIER.
THE KENNELS ARE ORNATE. SUBSTANTIAL AND EXTENSIVE.


Lor some years Mr. McKinley, an expert of undoubted standing, assisted in classing
the stud flocks, but in the main the various managers who have had charge of the property
have been responsible for this department also. In the long history of Anlaby there have
by the way, been only four managers—Mr. A. Buchanan, who was in charge practicafly
from the start till his death in 1865, Mr.H.T. Morris, from ’65 to 1890, fo lowed by Messrs.
Peter and Mayoh Miller. Of late years Mr. H. H. Dutton has taken an increasingly large
share in the management of the large estates, which will one day be his own.
The Clydesdale Stud.
Quite a number of the best mares obtainable in the Commonwealth were acquired
to commence the stud Maggie McCormick 11., Lady Percival, Highland Lassie,
and Bonny—purchased at the dispersal sale jpf Mr. J. E. Walter, Werribee, Victoria.
Maggie McCormick 11. has not on 1 y proved her worth by carrying off the chief laurels of the
show yards in New Zea l and and Victoria, but as a brood mare she has also been a veritable
champion, and it is worthy of note that three of her progeny were sold at eighteen months
MR. HENRY HAMPDEN DUTTON.
o’d for 600 guineas. Lady Percival, another of the brood mares at Anlaby, had an un-
beaten record in Victoria, and her sire, Sir Percival, was for years champion of the Royal
Agricultural Society’s Show in Victoria. In selecting the choice collection o', mares which
is now to be seen at Anlaby, Mr. Dutton laid the future of a great stud. While on a
visit to Great Britain, Mr. Dutton, jun., acquired two of the best stallion; in Scotland
namely, Majestic and C.1.V., to stand at the head of the Anlaby stud.


-“•• *• ''VmL ■"j^RHh^^m •• .** *.' -a.-"--.-
«BHp -•.- t r ; '* • • •£*#• & k
' Ww . ' ;.\\: • ' / • \* \ IpffeL V : • . * V’.C •■; * } '. V*/’ ’ ' Tx-A
\-?5l
... %. .v %
"yr ' —— ,. _ ■ '&:':/%%■ \rnt-* .
’ WKT' '•-- ■• Sapfe'- :>-
- ;8k f'-*jMtefcg. ■ ■ s <; I
v - %. § .
Scottish breeders were strongly impressed with their quality and breeding, for at the
time of their leaving the old country the “ Scottish Farmer ” wrote as follows :
“ Mr. H. H. Dutton, Adelaide, South Australia, has purchased from the Messrs. A. and
W. Montgomery that grand horse Majestic (11,421), and the noted two-year-old prize colt,
C.I.V. (12,097). Majestic was bred by Mr. Tom Cabry, Turvylaws, Wooler, and is a re-
markably well-bred horse. His sire was Harmsworth (10,566), bred at Campbelltown,
and got by the celebrated Sir Everard (5,353) out of Mr. Young’s well-bred mare, Lily of
Drum. Harmsworth was full brother to Mr. Y oung’s celebrated champion mare which
won many honors at the Campbelltown Shows. Few better bred horses have ever been
exported, amongst the crosses in his pedigree being the Merry ton Prince of Wales (673 ■),
Old Times (579), Darnley (222), Prince Lawrence, and the horses already named. Majestic
was first at Kelso as a yearling in 1901.
“ C.I.V. was bred by the late Mr. P. McCulloch, Whitefield, and was fourth at Ayr as a
yearling, and this year second at Ayr ; C.I.V. was first at Castle Douglas as yearling, first
as two-year-old this year at Castle Douglas, and first at Edinburgh. He was got by the
champion horse, Baron’s Pride (9,122), out of a mare by the celebrated prize horse Sirdar,
which won first prize at Glasgow, also at the H. and A.S. He is own brother to the cele-
brated horse Baron Kitchener, winner of the Hamilton premium and many other prizes as
a two-year old, three-year-old, and four-year old. C.I.V. is an ideal horse for the Aus-
tralian market, and it is longUince one so big and weighty of his age has been seen.
C. I. V.
Coming now to the breeding of the stud mares, Maggie McCormick 11. (imported from
New Zealand), we find that her sire is Lord Salisbury (1,205, imp.), winner of many prizes.
Another celebrated matron at Anlaby is the bay mare Lady Percival. Her sire is the
champion stallion Sir Percival (imported from New Zealand). Lady Percival’s dam,
Flower, is by Botanist (imp.),


:. -:•.■•••'-. -■•■ ■•■• ■ .- ■•• • -- - ••-■- •.
I — —
: -
*1I ' 3 —J4dfc(i®^t| |Sflk>4tf -v;-
.• '•. > f* —, !/7Pi3bte>:- y —
—*£?- ...—i
High 1 and Lassie, another of the stud mares, was foa’ed in 1899. Her sire, King of
Hearts (imp.) won first prize at Barrow, as a yearling, in a c’ass o th rty-one, first prize at
K rkby and second prize at Kendall in 1894 in a class of 26. Highland Lassie’s dam,
Jessica, is by Flynn’s Admiral (imp.).
The mare Bonny is also a bay, and is remarkably well bred, her sire being Blue Ribbon
(imp.) ; her grandsire is Darnley. Bonny’s dam, Jess, is by Roderick Dhu (imp. ; grand
dam by Scotchman (imp.). Besides this foundation stock there are a very large number
of pedigreed mares to be found in the stud, the whole forming one of the most notab e col-
ect ons of Clydesdales in the Commonwealth.
On this page we reproduce (by courtesy of the Proprietors Elder’s Review) two very
interesting photographs of Anlaby —the one shows the house to advantage as seen from
one of the terraces, the other gives a comprehensive view of the homestead and its sur-
roundings.
ANLABY HOUSE FROM ONE OF THE TERRACES.
A BIRD'S EYE VIEW OF ANLABY HOMESTEAD.


STEAM YACHT “ ADELE.”
The steam yacht Adele, illustrated on the opposite page, was built to Mr. Dutton’s
order by Messrs. Hawthorn & Co., Ltd., the well-known engineers and shipbuilders of
Leith, and is one of the finest examples of a pleasure yacht sailing in Australian waters.
THE CUCUMBER HOUSE AT ANLABY.
She is built of first quality steel from drawings supplied by Mr. Alfred H. Brown, Naval
Architect, of London, and has Lloyd’s highest rating for hull and machinery.
The dimensions are :
Length B.P 140 ft.
Length on L.W.L . . 135 ft.
Breadth Moulded . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 ft. 3 in.
Depth Moulded 14 ft. 3 in.
tonnage .. . . .. .. . . .. . . . . 350 tons.
The bulwarks are of steel, neatly panelled with teak, and so arranged that they can
be taken down when the yacht is laid up. She is fitted with steam and hand steering
gear aft, teak and brass-mounted. The masts and bowspit are of Oregon pine finished
in the best manner, and she is rigged as a fore and aft schooner. She carries three boats
a gig 23 ft. long, cutter 18 ft., and a dinghy 14 ft., and a 22 ft. motor launch fitted with a
Gardner engine and a Gaine’s reversible propeller. The cutter is fitted with centreboard
mast, and sails.


STEAM YACHT “ ADELE.’’


The water supply is well provided fop there being galvanised water tanks capable of
containing 2,240 gallons of water. The bridge is connected to the engine room by duplex
reply telegraph and speaking tubes. The electrical connections of the yacht are perfect,
bells being fitted throughout. There is also an installation of 80 lights, with accumulators
sufficient to run all the lighting for eight hours. There are eight cabins neatly panelled
with polished hard woods, each containing lockers and drawers, dressing tables and ward-
robes, and the wash basins have a hot and cold water supply- Ike guaranteed speed is
111 knots per hour on a measured mile, and 11 knots for six hours.
The Dispersion of the Anlaby Clydesdale Stud.
Since our article on the Anlaby Estate was commenced it has been decided to relinquish
the breeding of Clydesdales on the same large scale as hitherto. The sale, which will have
far-reaching effect in horse breeding circles, is well described in the following extracts from
the “ Advertiser ” of July 22nd :
Anlaby and all roads leading thither presented a scene of great activity and bustle
on Monday, on the occasion of the dispersal of Mr. Henry Dutton’s Clydesdale stud. It
had been wisely determined to conduct the sale on the estate, at the back of the home
stables, and provide means of conveyance to and from Kapunda and Tarlee for all that
desired to attend. Genuine sales of this character invariably attract a business-like crowd,
and those who made the journey on Monday were literally representative of this qualifica-
tion. Practical men from all parts of the country, from the West Coast, the South-East,
the South, and Lower North, with a few visitors from Victoria, and a representative from
Central Australia, constituted the attendance. It is generally conceded that when a
stockowner decides upon unreservedly auctioning the fruit of his labors as an enthusiast,
or of his enterprise as a capitalist, the occasion is one not to be ignored by farmers, stock-
breeders, and all husbandmen. The opportunity for presenting themselves at the sale-
ring in the capacity of prospective buyers is too good to be missed. And so it was on this
occasion.
Messrs. Elder, Smith, & Co., who conducted the sale and all arrangements connected
therewith, had, as they thought, made ample provision to cope with the estimated traffic.
The anival of the tightly-packed passenger train from Roseworthy to supplement a big
detachment from Tarlee put a different complexion on the position, and, though doubtles-
an agreeable and none the less welcome surprise to the firm’s auctioneer, Mr. A. Richards
son, this necessitated further requisitioning of vehicles and redistribution of loads. The
weather was not altogether in favor of a big attendance, as a keen cold wind blew bois-
terously throughout, bringing along occasional squalls of rain and hail. However, it
takes a good deal to damp the enthusiasm of those who live much out of doors and have a
keen eye for either a horse or a bargain. The sale was conducted in the open, in a capacious
ring off the stallion boxes, with pens and races conveniently arranged and temporarily
constructed for the occasion. In this and in every other respect the arrangements for the
sale were carefully planned, and reflected credit on all concerned. Not the least pleasing
feature from a spectacular point of view was an imposing parade at noon of the sires and
brood mares in pairs. This gave a preliminary flourish to the proceedings, and acted as an
introduction, after a welcome discussion of luncheon, to the more serious part of the enter-
tainment.
Notwithstanding attempted interference on the part of the elements, it was evident
soon after Mr. Richardson had opened the proceedings in his capacity as auctioneer, that
brisk bidding and good prices would be the order of the day. The young stock sold well,
more especially a shapely yearling colt at 100 guineas, and several brood mares ran into
attractive prices. Some of the youngsters were handicapped by a rough-coated appear-
ance, and were not in the same trim or condition as their seniors. They sold well, but
lacked that external polish that would have made them sell better. However, this was
the bargain-seeker’s opportunity, and presumably he proved equal to it. Among the


buyers one was not surprised to meet with such an enthusiast as Mr. Stephen Ralli, though
it seems but a few months ago that he was taking a more active part in just such another
occasion at Werocata—himself then in the role of seller. Yellow-an d-black was the pre-
vailing color then, but at Anlaby it was yellow-and-blue. Ribbons of this color bound up
the tails of the brood mares, and the rosettes and gear that adorned the stallions were of
the same effective coloring.
The new owner of Werocata (Mr. G. S. Robinson) was present with his son, anxious
and willing to follow as opportunity might offer on the lines of his predecessor. Mr. R. T.
Melrose, of Mount Pleasant, bid frequently, and was successful in obtaining seven. Mr.
John Macgregor, the well-known breeder of Ballarat, seemed somewhat astonished at the
prices offering and at the keenness of competition.
Many a local farmer could be met with to agree with a notion that found utterance
around the ring that South Australia would have less occasion as time progressed to seek
improvement among her draught stock by importations from Victoria. Mr. R. Swan,
whose father bred Highland Lassie, one of the best Anlaby mares, and Mr. Ricketts, who
owns Lord Dundonald, a crack horse in the neighboring State, together with Mr. W. Bodey,
of Horsham, also represented Victoria, but made no purchases.
The Marshall Brothers, of Wasleys, and Messrs. S. Moyle and Young, of Long Plain,
Dublin, bought the two lords of the harem, the imported C.I.V. and Majestic. The former
was not a popular animal among the audience, but the latter was just the reverse. They
brought within a guinea of one another, and this in no way savors of favoritism. But
it was popularly held after the sale, during those evening discourses so dear to the hearts
of all who regularly attend sales, that Majestic was a bargain for the purchaser at 161
guineas. However, if pedigree counts for anything each of these Clydesdales can claim
illustrious descent right back to the best corner-stone of the breed’s stud-book. Each
cost a fancy price, and must be regarded as having been sold on the wrong side of the
ledger.
The bidding for that grand mare, Lady Percival, was brisk. She eventuallv fell to
the nod of Mr. William Lang, of Narridy, at 203 guineas. He must have been pleased
at finding his judgment confirmed by the prices which her progeny subsequently brought.
The King Brothers, of Minlaton, Yorke Peninsula, captured Princess Percival at 100
guineas, a good mare in Madam at 101 guineas, and another in Nell of Albyn at
86 guineas.
Mr. Philip Wheaton, of Redhill, was a consistent bidder throughout, but when com-
peting for the rising three-year-old fillies, met a doughty opponent in Mr. T. McCourt,
of Millicent. Mr. John Warburton, of Erldunda, Central Australia, could find nothing
within the limits of his buying order, and scores found the prices to exceed their ideas of
value.
Among the bidders one caught sight of the following ; —Messrs. W. Miller, M.P., J.
Moody ; R. Clezy, of Rowland’s Flat ; G. M. Davidson, of Crystal Brook ; W. Frost, of
Manoora ; J. R. Russell, Victor Harbor ; H. W. Lang, Caltowie ; V. Day, Reeves Plains ;
F. Greenslade, of Hill View, LTania ; A. and G. L. Greenslade, of Maitland ; J. Kelly,
Riverton ; W. H. Johns, Virginia ; J. Brogan, Gladstone ; W. Forest, Springton ; W.
Howard, Cuttlefish Bay, K.I. ; Horace Hart, of Edithburgh ; Mayoh Miller, Kapunda ;
William Shannon, Bagot’s Well ; E. A. Brooks, Kulpara ; G. W. Brooks, Mannanarie ;
A. J. Baker, Two Wells ; the three Daniel Brothers, of Kulpara ; W. H. Wait, Appila-
Yarrowie ; J. A. Thiele, Murray Bridge ; H. and G. C. Newman, Charleston ; G. Sandow,
Georgetown ; E. C. Lane, Booleroo Centre ; J. N. Dixon, Narridy ; T. Sandland,
Kooringa ; J. Penna, South Hummocks ; C. W. Mills, Balaklava ; A. P. Brown, Mintaro ;
W. S. Heaslip, Saddleworth ; F. T. Angel, Kulpara ; R. M. Longmuire, Kybunga ; R.
Shannon, of Yatara ; A. Murdoch, Warooka ; A. Kirk, Clement’s Gap ; C. Cant, Second


Valley ; G. Cant, Hamley Bridge ; R. Godfree, Mount Pleasant ; J. J. Ellery, Riverton ;
E. B. Rankin, Strathalbyn ; W. H. Hancock, Balaklava ; Andrew Ferrers, ( rystal Brook ;
George Hillier, Mount Gambier ; W. Varcoe, Millicent ; J. Bodey, Mount Gambier ; J.
W. Martin, Gawler ; Robert Armstrong, Adelaide ; F. H. Edwards, Pinnaroo, and many
others.
It is not displeasing to know that the details of this stud remain in this State, and
that the good work initiated by Mr. Dutton will be continued in various directions to the
advantage of the community.


!•,.-*’' <
trSuaHn• •Tvti:' *. *ry» * - ._ ■ ■ ■» ~» wrttafj,-1 <•- ’•»» , ;• • Jlf-i^.-»-3* ■• , ??ar <tr :
'*' i*IT ? itlfli' fflFMFff" -**Me.i »to ■ i/aiTi' i*. »ji iffi jj— v A' ,. t ■*‘ Jiff* 1 *'' ' I
• •>
MR. STEPHEN S. RALLI.
... HISTORY OP ...
The Weroeata Shropshire
THE HOMESTEAD.
These studs have, unfortunately, been dispersed by Mr. Ralli’s retirement from
active participation in pastoral matters in this State. This fact, however,
does not deter us from illustrating and describing them, as our record of South
Australian Studs would be incomplete without a detailed
account of the history and foundation of this once remarkable '%■
stud. A . i&t rk
Werocata Estate, once the home l of the noted
Shropshires, is situated on the Wakefield River, 60 miles north
of Adelaide, and was formed early in 1886 by the purchase of
portion of the then Werocata Estate from Mr. Chas.
Bowman. The area purchased by Mr. Ralli being 15,000
acres.
The homestead is about three miles from the Balaclava
Station on the Port Pirie railway. The Wakefield Creek runs
past the place. The homestead, which is a charming rural
villa well adapted for a hot climate, was substantially built of
stone by that family of builders, the Messrs. Bowman Bros,
who formerly owned the property. The stables are extensive
and admirably designed. This part of the steading was erected
by Mr. Ralli. The estate also contains one of the finest wool
sheds to be seen in the State, and was erected by Mr. Chas.
Bowman when Werocata Estate was larger in area than that
portion held by Mr. Ralli.


* f • ' * V.** V 4NMfe* ■
f^Ef v ktitoki/! "*v v ■• *^j^wf '£L v> a^v^w£?v\
■toe t>4 ''"w'di V v \ C* >f? * • t*‘ «ABl • * l^ySr^r^ 1 '&&**Sm • iWWiwip kj** . , :. •
elms p. Sin//. A CHAMPION SHROPSHIRE EWE.


Mr. Ralli is an Englishman, born in London in 1863. His education was obtained at
Eton, after which, in 1881, he arrived in South Australia, and, until the purchase of
Werocata, devoted his attention to obtaining an insight into the Pastoral Industry under
Australian conditions.
The Estate.
A gentleman who knew Mr. Ralli well in his younger days informs us that he can
call to mind the time when Mr. Ralli, as a small boy at Eton, devoted many of his leisure
hours away from the playing fields of that world-famed public school to acquiring
practical knowledge of smithy work and of the carpenter’s bench. The purpose he then
had in view was to qualify for the vocation which he deemed himself most fitted for,
namely, that of sheep farmer in Australia. He came out in the early eighties and lost
no time in acquiring further practical experience on Mr. B. Hughes’ Nockatunga Station
elsewhere. Here a residence of two years completed the orthodox curriculum of colonial
experience and taught the prospective pastoralist the advantages of inside country as
being more in accordance with his ideals.
The country included in this extensive and valuable estate is a pasture land,
consisting of open plains and belts of timber, the soil generally being a bright chocolate,
with low banks, on which the limestone often comes close to the surface. In the color of
the soil and general appearance the plains bear a resemblance to those met with in
Riverina, but there is a difference. The soil is darker and brighter in color, and there is a
growth of small cutting grass tussocks that is not seen on the other side of the Murray.
Cotton bush is plentiful in many of the open spaces, but it is said not to be as good a
sheep fodder here as it is further north. All the rich flats are covered with a strong
growth of artichoke, which a visitor is apt to set down as a piece of negligent
husbandry. This plant is in some districts a decided nuisance ; indeed it was some time
back included by the South Australian Government in the list of noxious weeds. The
local climatic condition in the district round Werocata is such that a plant regarded
elsewhere as a useless encumbrance in the pasture is here a splendid stand-by for the
stock. We are assured by Mr. Ralli that every particle of that strong growth that
lines the creek sides and spreads over every rich flat is eaten by the sheep before the
summer is over. As these plants grow 4ft. and sft. high in places, the quantity of
fodder supplied can be guessed. The fences on this property were of the best ;ah the
modern ones being of five smooth wires, with a barbed wire running along the top. The
height of-{the fences is 3ft. 6in. and they are said to be thoroughly effective. In order
to prevent an incursion of rabbits, Mr. Ralli has put up a rabbit-proof netting along his
western boundary. The paddocks are watered by means of wells. The water is raised
by windmill pumps to large tanks, raised several feet above the surface, and from
these tanks the water is led to troughs in the adjoining paddocks. Water is
generally struck about 50 ft. from the surface, and the windmills have an ingenious
arrangement (a local patent) by which they are automatically thrown out of gear when
the reservoir is full. The flock consisted mainly of large-framed Merino ewes, purchased
from some of the best northern flocks, which were used for breeding lambs by Shropshire
rams. The country is fair carrying land, but Mr. Ralli was careful never to approach
overstocking. He seldom had more than 10,000 sheep on the property, calculating the
cattle and horses in their equivalent of sheep. Occasionally there were a considerable
number of horses on the place, and to do them well Mr. Ralli liked to have plenty of
pasture and hay.
The Shropshire Stud.
The foundation of this stud was made by the selection in England of high class
stud ewes and rams from the flocks of Messrs. Matthew Williams, Whiston Grange, and
E. Nock, Brockton House, Shifnal, Mr. Williams sending a ram lamb and two shearling
ewes, and Mr. Nock a ram.
A second importation of high class sheep was made in January, 1894, consisting of
ten in-lamb shearling ewes, all of which arrived safely ; two of these were bred by Mr. H.


I ' ■ ■ ; ' ' ' ’ /,
vv .... •
SOME OF THE HORSES.
Williams, Newton, Shrewsbury. Three ewes in this shipment were bred by Mr. M. Williams,
of Whiston Grange. Two ewes came from the celebrated flock of Mr. J. Beach, The
Hattons, Wolverhampton, and one ewe each was supplied by Mr. E. Nock, Brockton,
Shifnal, and the Messrs. Evans, Shirlowe, Wellington.
In addition to the sheep imported by Mr. Ralli he acquired five ewes and one ram
which were imported by Messrs. P. Charley & Co., Belmont, New South Wales, from Mr
T. Fenn, Stonebrook House, Ludlow.
A fifth importation of six in-lamb ewes was secured by Mr. Ralli at the beginning of
1897. Two ewes were bred by Mr. A. Mansell, Harrington Hall, four were bred by Mr. H.
Williams, Newton, Shrewsbury.
Mr. Ralli was the second pastoralist to introduce the Shropshire into Australia • he
was quick to perceive the value of this general purpose breed of sheep, was a staunch advo-
cate of Shrops. for more than a decade, and never wavered in his allegiance to the breed
but time after time backed his convictions by making fresh importations from the best
studs in England, and at the time of his retirement was in possession of one of the most
valuable flocks in the Southern Hemisphere. The renowned sire, “ Balaklava Hero ”
who sired more winners than any other Shropshire in the Commonwealth, afterwards
disposed of to Mr. T. J. Burbury, of Tasmania, was bred by Mr. Ralli at Werocata.
With his massive deep framed specimens with a wealth of carcass and fleece his Shrop-
shires usually carried off the lion’s share of the prizes at the Adelaide Shows. * " P
The founding of the Shropshire Stud at Werocata was attended with most satisfactory
results. In 1894, the year after the arrivals of the original, Mr. Ralli won Champion
honors with a ram at the R.A. & H.S. Show in Adelaide, and in 1895 he practically swept
the decks, taking Championship in rams, first and second prizes for rams over U years


V ' * , - y. . f *• • ■ :$ *i ■ \ ij&t ,
' \ -<! ' ,’ifr -'* **' /V
**^ ,, • * ‘ * ••'*•* ‘*£-. *W£;' __ x 4 ■ "* * |
K »••’ gk »_t/.',V;:^py^fr^''4jpHp&1^fl., ■>*■&•& »• fN© -4* ■ * ' V#» w •* ,r **l . - ' Y** '*K $VvX*&Jt _ » .A** * «?■ $*'j>i* ** **^K^j^» f "■ jja* .* J '3N6 ,^k^» 'i» * tr * - ♦W.1-,
ciias. p. s-.cift. A TRIO OF PRIZE SHROPSHIRE EWES.


c/' p. « THE WOOLSHED AND SHEEP YARDS.


• .', Svv * ' ' ' • *
*Sjo|l WBb& -.. jfSjr ~**i jip '^SHStmz&StsSS^^SBKB^mmBKSKKKr^^J^^m
&>'ji■•* %£'m9f-‘' v y y
*w&‘ 'fWjl JPBTBS^P
"w'" j4V> ■ flX”*"
■ • -- ■ -Oat |
ARAB STALLION, “MARVEL.”
first and second for rams under 1 1 years, first prize for aged ewe, and second for ewe under
11 years, and during the succeeding years up to his retirement the Werocata Shropshires
were conspicuous winners. In 1904 Mr. Ralli was awarded the Silver Cup presented by
the Shropshire Breeders’ Association of S.A. and the Championship for rams, as well as
other premier awards.
In the Werocata Shropshire flocks great care was taken to obtain the finest examples
of the breed from the best English studs for the foundation stock. None but pedigree
sheep selected from some of the most noted Shropshire studs in England were admitted
into the flocks, and the breeding was skilfully conducted. That the Werocata Shropshires
were held in the highest esteem by breeders in this profitable variety of sheep throughout
Australia is therefore not surprising.
Mr. Ralli also interested himself, and was one of the pioneers in cross breeding Shrop-
shires with Merino ewes with the most satisfactory results. The crossbred lambs from
this estate were eagerly sought after, topping the Adelaide market in the export trade for
frozen carcases and, when shipped to London, sold well.
As an instance of the satisfactory results obtainable from crossing Merino Shrops.
it may be recorded that in 1894 Mr. Ralli shipped to England 50 18 months old wethers,
fattened on the natural grasses, and which sold in London, after being 40 days on the voyage,
for 37 6 per head. At the Adelaide Show in 1895 he exhibited a pen of four Merino Shrop.
wethers 15 months old which were 150 lb. live weight.
Horses.
Mr. Ralli took great interest in the breeding of horses, being especially noted for his
draught horses. He also bred extensively of Arabs. His principal stallions being Marvel,


A CHAMPION JERSEY COW.
Brat, and Greyling. During his tenure of Werocata Mr. Ralli entered the horse shipping
trade, and was a keen and frequent shipper to India and Manila.
The Brat, 13 hands 1J in. high, was one of the best racehorses in India. His color
was excellent a dark hard chestnut. His head and neck w r ere perfect, and he had a
beautiful shoulder, round barrel, splendid loins and quarters.
Ihe Brat won no fewer than 27 races, and in his class quite the Carbine of his day
m India. Marvel was another handsome Arab stallion.
Jersey Herd.
Mr. Ralli’s Jersey Herd at Werocata comprised a selection of high-class specimens
the foundation ol which was laid by the purchase of cattle from the herd of Mr Alick I
Murray Mount Crawford. With his Jerseys Mr. Ralli was successful in carrying off many
of the chief honors of the R.A. & H. Society’s Shows, Adelaide.
The Dispersal Sale.
The dispersal sale in September. 1906, of the Werocata stock, which' extended over
two days, will long be remembered as one of the most successful ever held in South
Austiaha. It called to the minds of the older buyers present the memorable sale at The


\ \ mfr* ( .v ,/ y>T ).V” £ j - v- ‘.’ I' £>fej V v s \ ; V'’ . : >. v ;- J ‘: *> *; 5®j£ti ; £ < r -: v'S 5 ' : ’» S& $ p®!™
,’■'»--«• | .. - I ft "L ; i - ■ 1 , f k 1 i . . s
4 '.. ■'‘ v\ ■’'’*v -if tX\ 'i • . ; .-■' .■' •■■'■■'•' '' ' ‘ - '■' ’ C r - ■'•<..■’ '%yi Jj ’’
*ak BWMfflaatii iMMiJUM glaBir •- Uf- ; .
/>* . v’.vfwV. . ■ ;v, ■
‘ ‘‘^t^j^'lTirf >*•'< •'' jfjj^BBMaSfth?* 1 >£***{ • *{,£■' f *’ - , • . . - * •
• -^/ vA .? -•*- mm:/-
I ' 10k-'**** w ~ •* A jk j* • V CTH i Sjt **, 1 ’ s <&L? ‘ iwMfc -|Sk|£ v J* jjT ‘ .
pLf ,« j8^ fa'* J’ -to. *p \ $ Jl % jk. yftfeg v
1 jiNwLaf- -x ff*^¥
fj^-^- fr j#■ j ,: jj^,' v c. 1 'jijrf&JfKKr mK/Sj ■ l« 4: ~xi_l • ,: ~ * 3 A •
.<* jtx.^*' i " '‘>- ; • " y \ . * i ’ j jUj2JBC
A FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAM.


Levels when the studs of the late Mr. E. M. Pitt were disposed of. Very keen com-
petition took place for the possession of some of the more select lots offered, which
consequently fetched prices which were a tribute to the judgment, skill, and wise ex-
penditure of money on foundation stock by means of which Mr. Ralli had built up the
tine studs then sold. The same animation was also noticeable right through the
catalogue. L T ndoubtedly such dispersal sales are, for sentimental reasons at all events,
to be regretted, for they frequently represent the breaking-up of a life’s work ; but, on
the other hand, they are the means of dispersing throughout the State and Commonwealth
stock which, in the hands of their purchasers, do their part in the development and im-
provement of our flocks and herds, and in this they tend to the general good.
Since Mr. Ralli’s disposal of Werocata he has purchased an estate in the A oung
district of N.S.W., where he has gone in for stud ram breeding and agriculture, and there
is no doubt that with his usual thoroughness and regard for detail Mr. Ralli will make
a thorough success of his new venture.


<- s | | s, y . ( r *
Che property of jYtr. Jtfurray T)awsoq.
1 his flock is an off-shoot of the famous Mount Crawford Stud. It was formed
in the year 1892 with 1,000 ewes and 17 rams, which were obtained from Mount
Crawford. The property named Wirra W irra was formerly part of the Mount Crawford
estate. There have been no outside sheep introduced into the stud since it was formed,
so that it is identical, in every respect, with the famous studs of the Messrs. Murray’
“Bruni,” in his “Australian Merino Studs,” wrote of the flock in 1904:
“There are at present 300 ewes in the special stud flock, and there is a
second stud of 700 ewes for breeding flock rams. The sheep in this stud possess
all the great qualities that distinguish the parent flock. They are of a large frame,
well-formed, and produce heavy fleeces of a most profitable type of wool. " Though
these sheep, like the parent flock, have been inbred for about sixty years, they are
among the most robust merinos in Australia.
In 1903 the grown sheep —2,556 in all—cut an average of 11 lbs. 12 ozs. This
is a remarkable yield of wool when the fact is taken into consideration that 1,100 of
the number were breeding ewes. The rams’ fleeces weighed up to 18lbs., and the ewes’
fleeces went as high as 18 lbs. These are by no means sensational weights, but the
average shows that the sheep must be of a uniform standard of excellence.”
JERSEYS AT WIRRA WIRRA.


r
THE LATE JAMES DAWSON.
V J
p" =^ _ ' = "1
.
Hammer &= Co. MR. MURRAY DAWSON.


>• x* v> ‘®ilaiti*^*-*^^ J *vf ■♦*" /^.v*^<WSTVPj<^iKpfiLj>^^K x • t JHf!
THE HOMESTEAD. (AVina AVirra).


'
. a. ’' : %v W ■ 4. ' ' M||- "7? *Nlp * ™' Ss
‘Scott 6-TOOTH STUD RAM, “ LOED DUDLEY.” (Wi.ra Winn)


• #' ’V. ' T ' «y , 'Jp*. * ' If** f^ 4^
. • *? * ••—. „ '' 4g$HR^8^^^QBg*BE^' V* . -jfc I < > *~y. »
Scott. 4-TOOTH STUD EWE. Mv .


r ~
Scott. STUD EAM-A PRIZE WINNER. nvin \\ ,",


The Estate.
The Estate, which is situated in the Barossa Ranges, comprises undulating park-
like country well covered with fine timber, which provides adequate shelter for cattle
and sheep. A noteworthy feature of the country is to be found in the number of natural
springs which afford an ample and permanent water supply for the flocks at all seasons of
the year.
The Homestead.
The Homestead, an imposing two-storied structure, is magnificently situated on a
hillside, from which a splendid view is obtained of beautiful stretches of country, with
Mount Pleasant in the distance. On the south a magnificent panorama is obtained of the
Mount Crawford country, whilst dotted in the foreground are many gigantic specimens of
gums, which add considerably to the picturesqueness and beauty of the scene.
The Orchard.
Mr. Dawson, who is thoroughly imbued with a spirit of progress and enterprise, has
lately embarked on a new and somewhat foreign venture to that of a studmaster by engag-
ing in fruitgrowing on commercial lines. About 100 acres are at present under cultivation
planted with all the best varieties of export apples, such as Cleopatra, Jonathan, Dunn’s
Seedling, Rome Beauty, London Pippin, Spitzenberg, &c. The orchard is divided into
three sections, one of which, of some 35 acres, faces the Homestead, and in spring time
when the trees are in full blossom presents a sight not easily forgotten.
Scott. STUD EWE (Winner of First Prize as Aged Ewe, with Lamb at Foot. (wimx Win-a).


rf jpsE*|3»’ .-iy^'y^<r '.->Jr^^ '^-il|F :^r:: y * jy t/ f ••'• ■ » ' yp-*> **
±w-mp* :?**■' ■> »?T! t < #pSAV * .. ■ ’**c '*& : > .-li
Scott. 4-TOOTH STUD RAM. (Wirra IVirra).


The total aiea under cultivation is very considerable, for more than ten thousand trees
ra\e ttn panted during the past three years, and the work is still being pushed on, so
ia in it near future the Wirra Wirra Orchard may be expected to take an important
place amongst the foremost apple producers of the State. The rapid growth made by
t lese trees in the short period that this orchard has been in existence speaks well as to
the suitability ot the land for fruit growing.
Mr Murray Dawson, who was born in 1871 and educated at St. Peter’s College is
the only son of the late James Dawson, of Gawler, who came from Stirlingshire
Scotland, and a grandson of the late John Murray, sen. After leaving college he spent
our years at Cappedee, where he gained the knowledge and experience which has since
stood him m good stead.
Gawler Park.
In addition to his W in a \\ irra Estate, Mr. Murray Dawson has a fine property of about
1,000 acres on the Gawler Plains, about two miles south of Gawler, known as “Gawler
I ark. Mr. Dawson’s shearing sheds are situated here, and as a rule a number of his
sheep are wintered on this property, where they have the advantage of warmer and drier
conditions than in the home paddocks, which are situated in high, cold country not
particularly rich in pasture. ’
Show Record.
During his caieei as an exhibitor Mr. Murray Dawson has had many successes details
of which appear under : ’
1896. this vas the first yeai that Mr. Dawson began to exhibit, when he secured a
second prize for a pen of five Combing Merino rams at the R. A. & H. S. Show in Adelaide.
Scott. 4-TOOTH PRIZE-WINNING EWE. (Wimi Wirra).


1 ; : ;
' v % \ ;• ■■/*'*% ■-■*.;•.♦ /.;-.'■ < • ''. - $'K k
. .-,. - ', • - ! , ; . - ., _ * < ,
""-■ -* I " ■ —■ • ft ~ *•*•*< :# . . -~ . .') .4./ -, |
Scott. SOME OF THE JERSEY CATTLE. (Wirra tVirra).


’ f ,. *t •^ t _.. • *%**. # *•*► v* "**0t m> ' * m'Jk .. <lrr * A
,JtAl\ *> .,♦ , :./■, #* * r.
- ■' 1&, '■ V^m'fart i-% y "t *ltyt* • ■ *-■'4 \f"V ’ %8L *■■ * fjf ,V " ** A ' jSto* *ifcjlf .Jf JBfgJ^
v * ''^k5^^^' < >^>* y Til •& • •** Jjfe .Pf, jffi ../'***& '%' *. -Jt jJT j?. ; v - * wi£r&$? ,r i, ?/*pv • ** Si *toilt •*‘ el
Scott. STUD EWES. (Wirra Wirra).
1897. —Combing Merino ram, years or over, fourth.
1898. Combing Merino ewe, years and under 2\ years, fourth. Combing Merino
ewe, under H years, third.
1899. Combing Merino ewe, years and under years, second.
1900. At the Wool Show Mr. Dawson’s exhibit of three fleeces was equal for second
place with Mr. Alick. J. Murray’s exhibit.
Scott. GROUP OF STUD EWES. ALL WINNERS 1907. (Wirra Wirra


stop-
' *• . *- • ,, . ■■
? , ,
46 ■ sr’-tm
■:¥.■>: w- • gjafli* -•• ■ ,•- *1
;f .-r- ■■ ■-■ Jigff-p --•■ '
: *.." ;■; . • f .■■ V, V. jlij I k '
■■ 1^ .■« ; • ,: — •■?&. ;i‘ ;
Scott. VIEW OF PORTION OF ORCHARD AND PASTORAL AREA FROM HOMESTEAD. (tVirra AVirra).


• $■-
v- •' *'* - * - '. ... ‘ ' 7> -'" : /■;*</ , H* [ Z ' ®* : M ’ ' :■• ■ * ' ' ' - ■
■ **"' ‘ ' X • •■*'<■ • ’ v ' / ‘ . ' 'y s v : <- . < ' *• * ■ * . 0 , \.. '■' ' y ' ’ s ' ' '«N®
’* x ' \ " *... ;*•. ' v ‘ V> * v , ' v , • ■' , • * • > W: > ;' A ' ' '**•** * , r ? ‘ \ .v •'& >* Smk
, ■ - * - " v*
■ •
■ % • f ., - a - , * - _ ..' , j _ .■ .. „ ... , ♦ ■ - v *'vw|
* ** 4 * ' * • yjj . > . 'M* i * * '"'**§ ' / i ] ‘ *■? * ' % t ' "'*' V t .' " * >; ir *>- - '■ |!jr ‘ v N ,c v s- j, V • , * n^n ✓ - \
-v . 'I A V % S* \ -J .<: ' < . JW’<% * Md * ' ’ -A '* \ '' ' •' '' > ' ; - & ■' ■ ' «•♦ -X ' X s
■ • ' % •• - §y%' V.'"f: x 'f' - . *\ytf . * f- sV ? ? ■< .% - - '- <- -■ s > N s sV >* i
'\ '*.,/ ' : .} f ••=• ; v sV !♦' "X, " %• - V*
' '■ ’ .
Scott. HAULING TIMBER. (Wirra tVirra).


1901. —Combing Merino ram, 2\ years and under 3| years, fourth. Combing Merino
ewe, 2C years and under years, third.
1902. —Combing Merino ram, 2\ and under years, third. C ombing Merino ewe,
years or over, second. Combing Merino ewe, l\ and under 2\ years, fourth. Combing
Merino ewe, under years, first and silver medal.
1903. —Combing Merino ram, 2\ and under years, second. C ombing Merino ram,
H and under 2\ years, second. Pen of five Combing Merino rams over \ \ years, second.
Combing Merino ewe, under years, second and third. Pen of five Combing Merino ewes,
over llr years, first.
1904. —Pen of five Combing Merino rams, first. Combing Merino ewe, years or
over, first. Combing Merino ewe, 2\ and under 3| years, first.
1905. —Combing Merino ram, years or over, third and fifth. Combing Merino ram,
1C and under 2\ years, fifth. Combing Merino ewe, and under 2\ years, second and
fourth.
1906. —Combing Merino ram, 1C and under 2\ years, fourth and C. ( ombing Merino
ewe, 3| years or over, C. Combing Merino ewe, under \ \ years, H.C.
1907. —Combing Merino ram, years and over, third and fifth. Combing Merino
ram, years and under 2\ years, fifth. Combing Merino ewe, H and under 2\ years,
second and fourth.
1908. —Combing Merino ewe, 3£ years or over, fourth and fifth. Combing Merino
ewe, 2\ years and under fifth and sixth. Combing Merino ewe, 1| and under 2C years,
sixth.
Scott. ONE OF THE DAMS. (Wirra Wirra).


Scott. The Sleeper Cutting Yards.
Panoramic View of Portion Wirra Wirra Estate, showing the Homestead in the Distance.




In the early history of South Australia there are few more interesting incidents than
the life story of the two young Englishmen, Drs. William James and John Harris Browne.
Coming to the Colony in its earliest days, with no experience in the great national industry,
in the development of which they were destined to take a leading part, and with com-
paratively little money, they lived to see their most sanguine expectations of progress more
than realised, and to reap in the goodwill and respect of their fellows, and, in personal
possessions, a rich harvest for the hardships and strenuous labors of their early manhood.
The brothers, who commenced life with the advantage of gentle birth and the educa-
tion befitting their station, were the sons of a Wiltshire landowner, whose home was on the
River Frome in that county, and it was there that W. J. Browne, the second son of the
family, was born on September 7th, 1815. The third son, J. H. Browne, was about two
years younger. The remaining and eldest son, Charles, died at the age of 19, some years
prior to the departure of the young emigrants from the Old Country. During the
Napoleonic wars, great numbers of English-landed families had become sadly impoverished,
and, in many cases, completely ruined. In this misfortune the elder Mr. Browne had
shared, thus it came about that the two brothers, who had already lost their father in child-
hood, found themselves, after leaving school, almost entirely dependent on their personal
energy and enterprise.
It was about this time that the Australian colonies had begun to attract attention
as a land possessing great opportunities for advancement, and hither the brothers deter-
mined to come. It is characteristic of their habit of thought and action that, having
come to this decision, they should at once set about fitting themselves to meet whatever
fortune might await, by preparing themselves for a profession which might be relied on


c*
.
it f
'V fi
4h3 »aBfcl. . V
BhP^^HH|PP p ''■
THE LATE (DR.) WILLIAM JAMES BROWNE
THE LATE (DR.) JOHN HARRIS BROWNE


V&,.. jL •*
HL.
wK ; < ! #$NS";
ME. LEONARD G. BROWNE.
MR. TOM L. BROWNE
COLONEL P. J. BROWNE, C.B.


Scott. SHORTHORN CATTLE AT BOOBOOROWIE.
to provide at least a means of subsistence should success in other ways in the new land
of their choice fail them. So, though they did not for a moment lose sight of their
ultimate object, which was to invest their somewhat limited capital in and devote their
energies to agricultural pursuits, they, with true foresight and commendable self-restraint,
determined to make assurance doubly sure. They accordingly decided upon the medical
profession, and studied for some time at Edinborough University, and afterwards in the
School of Medicine in Paris, under such eminent men as de Jussieu, Professor of Botany,
and Majendie, Professor of Physiology. French was not much better taught in English
schools then than it is now, and the brothers were thus severely handicapped, as all the
lectures were, of course, given in the French language. However, determination and
hard work overcame all difficulties, and they were eventually rewarded by taking the full
degree within the customary three years’ course.
In December, 1838, William, the elder, sailed for South Australia in the Bucking-
hamshire—a six months’ voyage in those days round Cape Horn. Amongst his fellow-
passengers were Mr. Joseph Gilbert, afterwards the owner of Pewsey Vale ; Mr. John
Ellis, and Captain Allen, who were the original owners of the Buckland Park Estate.
John, the younger brother, arrived in South Australia in 1840, bringing with him
their sister Anna, who, in 1848, married Mr. Joseph Gilbert, of Pewsey Vale, near Gawler.
The cost of education and other expenses had reduced the money inherited from their
father considerably, and, with a very modest capital, the brothers embarked upon a partner-
ship in Pastoral and Agricultural pursuits, which lasted for 38 years, and proved successful
far beyond their hopes.


IIrIII ■.'^^ ,i ' ****'■ ..■ Mill
Spn+ + PANORAMIC VIEW AT BOOBOOROWIE.
I
T»T ,;.-
/fl \y,,
r i *z> . . \-t ’.\/S ,. s. -
4 *• -«• r j t, '■■/■ '.\\ ym’ /* ».Vv. !■' V jjp»,5f
.*•** I ’h iA ■; --• ’vyA* . . ' / fe^ v v\ >>./ _*.vv '>■ &£.-■&*\
* %t»Jk., fFf 4 •/ .4*.:.a?h *>& "> : s ;S ir * IS —<, i, x 9, .5/ .. *>'£&, "•*■% 4', '
*~ "'■mjII
?' ? V' ’? <9 1* 91 * MBUgS 1 v ** Ak *. 'mbAB
/ ,. v , . 4*. f - w ttftm* i 3PR !>►- ■ i. jpiPj
; -iy a L3$' i:^ir^ : • > •:: ■
y-r.-naB*rtto.; •- - , ■•^ v . ■ '^W.--rv ' * ■ ■ ■ ••■ 1T5‘- > J V - ,.-\',t ■ ■■
.% nki;^*»■. «.^.^w!i|ag^^|3v\/=> ?^ItXt v ■/
yJgjgK iilow % clup »■ *■ I
»f V*
;v:y".'" / ' ;■* ;*
IpL-;..r/3#i^^^^r• ; : ' v ..V *
■j*l -KMiA, \.j&tSb? %&***&** ' JRk : #4 $:
»a»a»^MaMM^MgM^iiilMi^a^^'i l li iitf'Ti * 1 W« v*t
Ww 1
HUIiI 1 J3W m. iiltt 1 i'Shb3
1 pfl j|
• ■ -:^; : * . • : , ;
'■ ' *•'/ ' V; 4^ ■>• v: .
Edwards. CATTLE AT MOORAK,
Edwards. MOORAK HOMESTEAD.
Edwards. ONE OE THE SHEEP PADDOCKS AT MOORAK.




4*%-\-, * * X m --» 5* I I
•’-' . .
f-i . * ■> ’\ '■■•*.,,/ ‘V ,' -■ ’- ■• ? , , . - v .
r
After their arrival in South Australia, the brothers do not appear to have taken
any immediate steps to take up any landed interests, but they no doubt made very
careful enquiries about, and personal inspection of, all districts which were considered
most suitable for settlement in those days, as well as undertaking some exploratory work
in new country ; but, in the year 1843, Booboorowie and Canowie were acquired, though
the former station was not actually purchased till 1863. Mr. T. 1.. Browne thinks that
they held land from the S.A. Company at or prior to this date, situated near Lyndoch,
which they farmed for a year or two. Port Gawler, afterwards Buckland Park, was
bought from Messrs. Ellis and Allen in 1856, Moorak (Mt. Gambier) and German Creek
from Mr. David Power in 1862, with Woodlands from Mr. Clarke, and, a little later,
Koppio, Mikkera, Kalka and Talia were also added, with the Runs : Leigh’s Creek, Nilpena
and Wilpena, the last-named conjointly with Mr. Henry .Strong Price, who was
also a partner in Canowie.
On April 4th, 1650, Mr, William Browne married Miss Mary Dixon, who, having lost
her parents, had recently arrived from England, under the guardianship of Mrs. Day,
lor many years a resident of Norwood, a suburb of Adelaide. Their children were
Leonard Gilbert, born May 12, 1851 ; married September 18, 1877, Helen Mary,
eldest daughter of Henry Strong Price, of Delamere, Mitcham. William Byron,
born 1858 ; died 1885 on the Nile. Percival John, born 1862 ; married Gracia,
eldest daughter of the late T. E. Lees, of Woodfield, Oldham, Lancashire, and
sister of Sir Elliott Lees, Baronet, South Lytchett Manor, Dorset. Arthur Scott,
born 1866 ; married Mary Brands, second daughter of the Hon. Mark Rolle, of
Stevenstone, Devonshire. Edith Mary, born 1853 ; married the Rev. Vernon
Carter, who died September 19, 1898. Annie Ibbetson, born 1855 ; married
Colonel Torkington, R.A. Kathleen Frances, born 1860 ; married General
Dickson, C.8., C.M.G.
Edwards. THE MOUNT FROM MOORAK, MOUNT GAMBIER.


iSfe**j?i v I" *3™• ’■ jBsISSW&'i^
—- k JHBaHHH|Bgr TT“ ' >:: l^HHSB9£4f , Si
'■ V»-&■*- --f■ ■*-• v"'
‘/ .... , .... . v ■-,'’.V =-' - .• -' # V* *. ‘ •’ -* ; -•:■ ‘ -•*: . ;r£- *'?'* '*
?.<*' ' ’■ ' ■ r » ~T- i ' r>> "';. '^\"-V-vr^ 7 >».-V* *■ V f 'V -' ' j- f V, <W jMfjfe »•' * ’■ : -i-*« mI' - jefrft* ?* i 5 ; '-' "
“ -* ' , ♦ * ' “■■ '-' -V .'■*.*• - : -_£■>, 'T- *. -i'» >*£.”-*- «#•» 1
BUCKLAND PARK.
1. The Homestead. 2. Old Station. 3. The Statles.


(
||2
BUCKLAND PARK.
1. Lagoon, north side ot Gawler River. 2, Scene near Overseer’s Cottage.
3. Tippetts Bridge over Gawler River.


.
. s'
*h&s» -Jt **£ I '% wkh* w •£ J • *-• « % ♦
■% :*9 % * _**%,/ * * - ■■ •
uJlf., , 4 ,: & 'f&Wm. mk 1 v . . __;i,_.;' _** i * HOT MS®* * iiQL **Sfill. IKJ2 tw,! vft I
In 1863 Mr. and Mrs. William Browne and their children travelled overland, about
300 miles, from Adelaide to Mt. Gambier, and came to reside at Moorak.
Experiments were soon commenced in crossing the English Lincoln with the
Booboorowie Merino, resulting in a class of sheep that made the name ‘‘ Moorak ” known
throughout Australia. These crossbreds proved to be eminently adapted to the climatic
conditions of that fertile district, where drought may be said to be unknown.
It was due to the owner of Moorak that the foundation stone of Christ’s Church,
Mt. Gambier, was laid on February 21, 1865, he having given the land and contributed
more than half of the building fund. The first incumbent was the Rev, Henry Needham,
who died at the vicarage, Mt. Gambier, a few years later, and was succeeded by the Rev.
Basil Tudor Craig. After the death of the donor in 1894, an organ chamber in the
chancel was built, and a window put in bv his children, conjointly.
During his busv career, Mr. William Browne found time to devote his attention to
Colonial polilics, and was elected as member for the Flinders district. His Bill to abolish
the sale of Crown Lands, and let them on long or perpetual leases, was not acceptable in
those days—the early sixties —but the proposal was afterwards adopted. In 1866 he
took his family to England, where most of the members of it still reside, Mrs. Browne
died at Hatchlands, Guildford, Surrey, on January 1, 1878, during one of the visits of
her husband to South Australia, and while he was engaged in the final enterprise of his
life —the opening up of the Northern Territory cattle runs; “ Springvale ” on the
Katherine River, “ Delamere Downs ” near the Flora River, and “Newcastle Waters.”
Mr. Browne returned to England at the end of 1878, and never left it again. He
contested the Borough of Chelsea in 1880 in conjunction with Lord Inverurie, afterwards
well-known to South Australians as Lord Kintore, a most popular Governor. This was at
a time when a strong Radical reaction had set in, and they were defeated by Sir Charles
Dilke and Mr. Frith.
SHEARING SHED AT MOORAK


HHir “||| r
L m K ... w
The beautiful estate of Buckland Filleigh near Torrington, in North Devon, having
been about that time purchased, Mr. Browne went to live there with his two youngest
children. He greatly improved this property and restored the Church in the grounds,
in which is a window dedicated by brother officers to the memory of his second son,
William Byron, of the 16th Lancers, who died at Abou Fatma on the Nile River, in the
expedition of 1884-5, sent to the relief of General Gordon at Khartoum.
On December 4, 1894, Mr. William Browne passed away at Eastbourne, and was
buried in the cemetery at Guildford, Surrey, beside his wife.
Henry Strong Price.
During the long period throughout which Messrs. W. J. and J. H. Browne were
actively interested in pastoral work, they were frequently, more or less closely associated
in various enterprises with many other leading land-owners, but with none was their
connection so lasting, or so intimate, as with the late Henry Strong Price, who was for
many years a partner in some of their properties, and who afterwards became, and
continued for some years to be, attorney for and manager of the various South Australian
estates held by them.
Mr. Price was born at Marlborough, Wilts, on May 8, 1825, and was the second
son of Captain David Molloy Price, of the 36th Regiment, who had served through the
Peninsular campaign, until he was severely wounded at the battle of Salamanca on
July 22, 1812.
In recognition of his services during the War in Spain, Captain Price was offered
a Commission for either or both of his sons.
Edwards. SHEARERS AT WORK AT MOORAK.


Kris,hock. Bridge Across Lagoon near Old Station. BUCKLAND PARK. Another Scene near the Old Station.


» ' ** jS®
™ * "flaw
I . i> < c,
A v^|ik ; . %, 1 I
•*■’< * **£*- ’ /djQflL /^BSb : 1
•■••• J&thk, -
;-. L&WMHMStt
' - ■ - •
Mr. Henry Price, however, when a boy of 17, was induced by an old friend of his
father’s, the late Mr. Joseph Gilbert, of Pewsey Vale, Lyndoch, not far from Adelaide,
who, in 1838, had migrated to South Australia, to relinquish the chances of distinction
in a military career, and join him in the young colony. Mr. Price accordingly sailed
for South Australia in the s.s. “ Fortitude ”in October, 1842. For many years he was
en b a § e d in pastoral pursuits, first with Mr. Gilbert, and afterwards with Messrs. W. J.
and J. H. Browne, with whom he entered into partnership in the Canowie property, and
the Northern Run of Wilpena. He married, on July 26, 1855, Ellen March, daughter
of John March, R.N., who was then visiting South Australia. Their children were
Arthur Radcliffe, born 1861 ; educated in England at Harrow School and Pembroke
College, Oxford, and who died in Adelaide, S.A., November 9, 1888. Helen Mary,
born 1856, and who, in 1877, married Leonard G. Browne, of Buckland Park,
South Australia. Florence Annie, born 1858 ; married Major John Jervois, the
second son of Lieut.-General Sir William F. D. Jervois, then Governor of the
State of South Australia. Edith Caroline, born in 1860 ; married Colonel E. B.
Anderson, of Ringwood, Hants.
Mr. Henry Price was a director of several Banking and other important institutions
in the State of South Australia, and was one of the fortunate early investors in the
wonderful Broken Hill Silver Aline.
He died at his residence, Delamere, Mitcham, on November 30, 1899, four days before
the decease of his wife. They were both buried at the Mitcham Cemetery, beside the
grave of their son.
DELAMERE, MITCHAM.


Late Dr. J. H. Browne.
“ One of the finest men we have ever had here/’ was the comment of one of our old
colonists, when asked recently if he remembered Dr. John Harris Browne. Other old
colonists who could carry back their recollection to the period when Dr. Browne was in
his prime have a similar story to tell concerning him, and every one who knew him, early
or late, spoke of him as a complete gentleman, who spent his long and useful life in doing
kind and thoughtful actions to those about him.
John Harris Browne and his brother were both on the same day January 4, 1845)
registered by the Medical Board in Adelaide, their numbers on the roll being 9 and 19, a
sufficient proof of the youth of the State. Neither practised his profession to any great
extent.
It is now some four years since Dr. Browne died, but his name will always live in South
Australian history, not only by reason of the close connection he had with the establish-
ment of the pastoral history of this State, but also because of the intrepidity and fidelity
he displayed when a member of the arduous expedition led by Captain Charles Sturt —well
called the father of Australian exploration —into the centre of the continent.
Mount Browne stands on the map as a monument of Dr. Browne’s connection with
that terrible journey, but an even more effectual memorial is the splendid tribute which
Captain Sturt, in his journal and diary, pays to his high-minded and courageous friend and
companion.
Edwards. VIEW FROM MOORAK GARDENS.


r ‘ J - Browne, in 1844; was asked to accompany Captain Charles Sturt on his most
dim cult and most famous expedition in a journey that has made “ Sturt’s Stony Desert ”
and the Depot Glen known all over the world. The route lay from Adelaide via
Moorundi and along the northern bank of the River Murray to the Darling, which was
followed as far as Menindie, when the party pushed westward and camped on the actual
site ol broken Hill, and then northward to their halting place at Depot Glen. Favenc,
nmself an explorer, describes Dr. Browne as “ a thorough bus liman and an excellent surgeon
vlO vent as a volunteer and personal friend.” Poole was second in command, and there
vas also attached to the party in the capacity of Surveyor’s draftsman a man destined to
vnte his name in bold letters right across the continent. That man was J. McDouall
Stuait. 1 here were also a dozen men, with eleven horses, a spring cart, three bullock
drays, 30 bullocks, a horse dray, 200 sheep, four kangaroo dogs, and two sheep dogs. This
great cavalcade left Moorundi (Blanchetown of to-day) where E. J. Eyre, after whom
Eyre s Peninsula was named, was Protector of Aboriginals, and Eyre accompanied the
expedition as far as Lake Victoria, which was reached on September 10, 1844. They
passed the Barrier Range and on January 27 they camped at Depot Glen, and “ they little
thought, remarks Eavenc, “ that it would be July 17 before they would strike their tents
again.”
Sturt in his diary remarks, “ We were locked up in the desolate and heated region into
which we had penetrated as effectually as if we had wintered at the North Pole. Pro-
vidence had guided us to the only spot in the widespread desert where our wants could
have been permanently supplied, but had there stayed our further progress into a region
that almost appeared to be forbidden ground.”
In this lone spot the cheerful nature and the professional skill of Dr. Browne were
invaluable. More particularly as Poole was reduced to a frightful condition by scurvy,
and had at last to be sent back towards the Darling as the only hope of saving his life.
Poole, however, died on the first day’s journey from the camp, and his body was brought
back to be buried 3i miles from the camp at a spot now known as Mount Poole, where a
monolith marks his resting place. This is near Tibbuburra, in New South Wales. The
rain came shortly afterwards, and Captain Sturt dispatched part of his company back to
the Darling. He wished Dr. Browne to accompany them, “ but,” said Dr. Browne long
afterwards, “ for the first and only time, 1 disobeyed him. I had promised Mrs. Sturt to
look after him and bring him back safely, and so I did.”
The records of the expedition show how splendidly Dr. Browne behaved to Sturt,
and with what tenderness and skill he nursed the men attached to the party. On August
14, 1845, the Depot was left in charge of McDouall Stuart, while Captain Sturt, accom-
panied by Dr. Browne, pushed northward. During this trip suddenly they were con-
fronted by a wall of sand, and then toiled over 20 miles of successive ridges. Then they came
to the confines of “ Sturt’s Stony Desert,” which baffled their progress until they struck a
watercourse, which he named Eyre’s Creek. Dr. Browne’s hands were now full, for the
men with Sturt were sick, and again, having fallen back to Fort Grey on October 2, 1845,
the leader implored Dr. Browne to return while the way was yet open to the Darling. He
was resolute, however, to share the fate of the expedition, and once more the feet of the
explorers were turned towards the unknown. This time Cooper’s Creek was discovered and
followed, but once more the Stony Desert blocked the way. Dr. Browne, who was at
Fort Grey, had been forced to fall back on Depot Glen because of the badness of the water,
and thither Sturt followed him, arriving in such an exhausted condition that he could hardly
stand after dismounting.
“ The problem of their final escape had now to be resolved,” says Eavenc. ” The
water in Depot Creek was reduced so low that they feared there would be none left in Flood’s
Creek. If this failed they would be once more imprisoned.” Dr. Browne, who had
been suffering from the effects of privation and the terrible journey, was now much re-


\*Ar '*’ \ I * I jn "^T I iRm * \\ ,^^Kp|!
Ixl* 9 m f I'w* &' 1' '**&+*■ \1 ■ Te|J flSpr B T"|3p^ .-
a A v t : . ”%ifc&iKS'" * % ■ W>»,-*>
Q THREE FINE PASTORAL SCENES AT BOOBOOROWIE.


covered, and with characteristic courage he undertook the long ride (118 miles) to Flood’s
Creek, which was to decide their fate. He had prepared for the journey by filling a bul-
lock skin with water and sending a dray with it as far forward as possible. He was eight
days absent. When he returned Sturt, who still lay helpless in the tent, said : <( Well,
Browne what news ? Is it good or bad ? ”
“There is still water in the creek, ” replied Browne, “but that is all I can say.
What there is is as black as ink, and we must make haste, for in a week it will be gone.”
They made haste, abandoning all the heavier stores. Sturt had to be carried on one of
the drays and lifted off at every stopping place. But for Dr. Browne’s devoted care he
would never have reached the settled country alive, but at last, on December 21, 1845,
the camp of the relief party at Williorara was reached, and the journey over familiar
tracks to Adelaide was speedily completed.
This was Dr. Browne’s most dramatic service to his country. The greatest value
of his work, however, consisted in the opening up of the South Australian pastoral country.
He was physically but a small man, but he had the heart of a lion, and, although his
nature was sweet and gentle, no obstacle served to baffle or discourage him. He remained
in South Australia until about seven or eight years ago, and one of his last public ap-
pearances in Adelaide was at the funeral of Messrs. C. F. Wells and Jones, who perished
while on an exploring expedition in the North-Western part of Western Australia Of
Dr. J. H. Browne it may truly be said that “ he bore without abuse the grand old name
of gentleman,” and that he was held in affectionate regard by all who knew him.
Leonard Gilbert Browne.
Leonard Gilbert Browne, eldest son of the late William James Browne, the well-
known South Australian pioneer and pastoralist, was born on May 12, 1851, at Booboo-
rowie, near the Burra South xAmstralia, and received his education in England, at Chel-
tenham College, and Christ Church, Oxford, and married, in 1877, Helen Mary, eldest
daughter of Henry Strong Price, of Delamere, Mitcham, near Adelaide, S.A.
Mr. L. G. Browne lived at Buckland Park on the Gawler River for some 10 years,
after which he returned to England in 1888, and resided at Springfield, Parkstone, Dorset,
with his family, where he interests himself in political and municipal affairs, and was for
three years a Member of the Borough Council of Poole, Dorset.
Mr. and Mrs. Leonard Browne have five children :
John Gilbert, born July 26, 1878 ; educated at Wellington College and Magdalen
College, Oxford, and finally passed out from the R.M.C., Sandhurst, and served
with distinction throughout the Boer War of 1899-1902 while a Lieutenant in
the 14th Hussars ; became Captain in 1906 ; volunteered for service on the
West African Coast, where he took part in the Hadeija Expedition of April,
1906 ; he holds Queen’s Medal (South African War) and 7 clasps ; King’s Medal
and 2 Clasps, West African General Service Medal and one Clasp. Harold
Vernon, born August 25th, 1885 ; educated at Wellington College ; married
June 24, 1907, Mabel Doris, eldest daughter of John Tillard, Esq., of Blakeney
Norfolk.’ Kathleen Mary, born December 4,1880. Maude Edith, born Novem-
ber 4, 1882, who married on January 9, 1907, Captain Percy Balfour, High-
land Light Infantry, and has issue Elizabeth Marian Maxwell, born November
29, 1907, and Dorothy Radcliffe, born July 15, 1892.
Percival John Browne, C.B.
Lieut.-Colonel Percival Browne, C.8., is the third son of the late Dr. W. J. Browne,
and was born in 1862 at Delamere, near Adelaide, He was educated at Eton College,
and afterwards served in the Royal Dragoons from 1884-91. In the following year he
married Bernarda Gracia, eldest daughter of the late T. E. Lees, of Woodfield, Oldham,
Lancashire. In 1897 he joined the Dorset Yeomanry, of which he was in command


from 1902-08. Colonel Browne served with distinction in South Africa, 1900-01, where he
commanded the 7th battalion of the Imperial Yeomanry. For service during the
Campaign he was twice mentioned in despatches, and received the medal with five clasps,
and was made Companion of the Bath.
Mr. Browne now resides at Fifehead, Magdalen, Gillingham, Dorsetshire, which
property he purchased in 1904.
Arthur Scott Browne
Mr. A. S. Browne, the fourth son of the late Dr. W. J. Browne, was born at
Moorak on July 18, 1886, but in the following year was taken to England. He was
educated at Eton, from thence went to Sandhurst, preparatory 7 to entering the army, and
subsequently joined the 16th Lancers, in which regiment he held a Lieutenant’s commis-
sion from 1886-1891. He afterwards served in the Royal North Devon Yeomanry as
Major, 1892-1905. Mr. Browne takes much interest in the affairs of his adopted county
of Devonshire, and has a seat on the Council of the local Territorial Association ; He is
also a Justice of the Peace for County Devon. He married Mary Francis, second daugh-
ter of the Hon. Mark Rolle, of Stevenstone, Devonshire, and now lives at Buckland
Filleigh, Highampton, North Devon.
Thomas Lansdowne Browne.
Mr. T. L. Browne, who is now the sole representative of the families of the two
brothers (W. J. and J. H. Browne) residing in South Australia, is the only son of the
younger brother. He was born at Buckland Park in the year 1860. Mr. Browne was
educated in England, at Cheltenham College, and Worcester College, Oxford. Fie was
called to the Bar at the Inner Temple, London, in June, 1855, but in the same year
returned to South Australia, and was admitted as a Practitioner of the Supreme Court
in December of that year.
Mr. Browne did not practice his profession, for, shortly after his arrival, his father
started him on the Pondona Station in the Gawler Ranges, which he lived on and
managed for three years, afterwards selling out to Messrs. Simms and Colley, on the ex-
piration of the lease. He then spent about a year in the office of his friends, Messrs.
Fisher and Culross, of Adelaide, Solicitors.
Mr. Browne, in June, 1889, became attorney for the late'JDr. W. J Browne (taking
the position on the retirement of the late H. S. Price) and managed the Booboorowie
and Moorak Estates, and the Arkaba, Wilpena and Leigh’s Creek Runs, for five years
till his death in 1894. Subsequently Mr. Browne acted as attorney for the Trustees of
ths Estate, and realized the South Australian property for them. This included the sale
of half the Booboorowie estate, which was purchased by Messrs. Dutton & Melrose, and
is now known as North Booboorowie.
Following this, Mr. Browne went to Mt. Garnbier, where he managed the Moorak
Estate for six years, during which time he conducted the first subdivisional sale of
portion of that property, the total disposed of at that time being 9,000 acres.
Mr. Browne now lives at Buckland Park, and, in addition to acting as attorney for
his cousin, Mr. L. G, Browne, and managing the estate on his behalf, he is also attorney
and manager for Messrs, P. J. & A. S. Browne, who own, respectively, the Moorak and
Booboorowie properties.
In 1889, Mr, Browne married Catherine Campbell, second daughter of the late
W, J, Crawford, for many years manager of the Union Bank of Australia, Limited, in
Adelaide, and has a family of two daughters. He is Past Master of the Mount Garnbier
Lodge of Freemasons, a Past Grand Steward, and a member of other Lodges, Mr.
Browne is also interested in military affairs and holds the rank of Captain in the Aus-
tralian Light Horse, and is a Justice of the Peace of the State.


THE ESTATES.
The estates of Booboorowie, Buckland Park, and Moorak, now held by representatives
of the Browne family, are of special interest, for each may be taken as typical of one of
the three richest portions of South Australia. Moorak represents the heart of the rich
South-East, with its dry volcanic soil of great fertility and its abundant succulent grasses,
which are almost unequalled as fattening pastures. Strong alluvial country is found at
Buckland Park, where century old gums, native herbage, and pasture grass grow with
equal luxuriance. At Booboorowie a drier, warmer climate is met with, for it is situated
in the belt of clean and open country on which the South Australian Merino finds a natural
home, and grows the bright, clean wool for which the clips of this area are famous. There
could, in fact, be no more striking evidence of the expert knowledge and commercial acumen
of the Messrs. Browne than is afforded by the selection and purchase of these “ plums ”
of the pastoral and agricultural lands of the State. It would probably be a matter of
difficulty to name within the wide boundaries of South Australia any three properties
enjoying greater natural resources than do these.
Booboorowie.
Time has proved that the Messrs. Browne made no mistake when, years
ago, they took up an extensive tract of country which included the area now known as
Booboorowie, Canowie, and other properties on pastoral lease, for this district has since
become famous as perhaps the finest Merino country in the world. Dry, warm, well
clothed with the nutritious native grasses, sufficiently timbered and broken in contour
to give some natural shelter and protection, the Merino finds on these flats ideal condi-
tions for the production of its golden fleece. The estate of Booboorowie proper now covers
33,000 acres, consisting of undulating and open country. The homestead is well and
conveniently situated in the centre of an extensive plain, but in this open position
it is well protected by the extensive plantings of sugar gums which have been made around
it. The estate is suitably subdivided and well watered by creeks, springs, and dam
which prevent any possibility of water famine.
The Booboorowie Merino is well known throughout Australia. It has the usual
characteristics of the plain-bodied South Australian type, and is noted for its large frame
and robust constitution. Though the production of stud sheep is not the main considera-
tion at Booboorowie, it has followed as a natural consequence of the careful breeding which
has been practised for sixty-five (65) years, that the average quality of the flocks is
equal to if not superior to any of equal size in the State, as is proved by the keen demand
for rams and surplus ewes from this property. The clip invariably shows a high average
weight, and its quality is shown by the satisfactory prices realised at the annual sales.
Shorthorn cattle are also a feature at Booboorowie, where considerable expense has
been incurred in getting together a herd of all round Quality, and nothing has since been
neglected in keeping up that standard.
Moorak.
This compact and beautiful estate is situated quite close to the old and prosperous
town of Mount Gambier. The homestead, which faces the picturesque wooded hill —
which gives its name to the district-- being not more than two miles from the railway.
The scenic beauty of the Mount Gambier district is well known, as is also the great pro-
ductivity of its soil. Moorak is not a large estate as pastoral properties go in Australia,
but it is composed almost entirely of the free rich soil of volcanic origin which in the distant
past has been erupted from the now quiet mount. On this account, and because cf the
wealth and variety of the grasses which grow so luxuriously, its carrying capacity per acre
is extremely high, consequently it is used more for grazing and fattening than for breeding.
The land, though too rich and strong for the pure Merino, has been found to be excellent


f


jfdy:} f'


for English breeds of sheep, and for that reason a large flock of high grade Lincolns,
numbering 50,000, was established and kept there for many years. At present the property
is used entirely for fattening, for which purpose crossbreds are bought in the district and
the adjoining State. The estate also produces excellent export lambs. Cattle of a very
serviceable market type are also fattened in large numbers, so that ‘‘ Moorak ” yardings
always meet with a strong demand. The homestead is a modern residence built about
eight or nine years ago under the auspices of Messrs. English and Soward. The gardens
are extensive and well laid out, advantage being taken when they were first planted of the
suitability of the climate for the growth of ornamental and fruit-bearing trees and shrubs.
There have also been extensive plantations in the immediate vicinity of the homestead
which add to its beauty. The estate is thoroughly equipped on modern lines, for no ex-
pense has been spared in its development and improvement.
Considerable alterations have taken place in the area and boundaries of Moorak
since it was acquired by Dr. Browne in 1862 During the first few years of its occupation
large additions of outside country were made, some of which was afterwards disposed of.
About ten years ago a considerable area (about 9,000 acres) was sold, much of which has
since been used for dairying and general farming. Later on other portions were offered,
the land being freely bid for, with the result that up to £54 per acre was realised. Even
this price, it is said, was less than its value for the purpose of closer settlement.
Buckland Park.
Lying astride the mouth of the River Gawler, where it enters the gulf about 12
miles to the north of Adelaide, Buckland Park, one of the finest estates in the colony, is
beautifully situated. Its nearness to the chief market of the State is also advantageous,
for the cattle and sheep depastured on the rich flats reach the sale yards in the best
possible condition, a fact which is attested by the high average price which the Buckland
Park consignments invariably make.
The great natural fertility of a large portion of the estate is due to the fact that
the land is formed of rich silt brought down in some distant geologic period by the
streams and watercourses now known as the North and South Para Rivers and their
tributaries from the headlands and valleys of the Barossa Ranges, and distributed over
the low-lying lands at the junction of that old time river system with the sea. It is
estimated that there are at least 2,000 acres on the river banks, composed entirely of
this silt, of varying depth.
There are also several thousand acres of lighter land surrounding this valuable
pocket which, under any system of cultivation, would yield good returns, though it is
for the most part used as pasture.
Mr. George Milner Stephens was the first to select this country, or, rather, that
part of it which is known as the homestead block, and many visitors have in latter days
admired the judgment of this gentleman, who was a son in-law of Captain Hindmarsh
the first Governor of the State. Whether or no Mr. Stephens stocked the country or
whether any use was made of it in those early days is not, we believe, recorded ; but it
subsequently passed into the hands of Captains Ellis and Allan, from whom it was pur-
chased by Messrs. Browne in 1856. Later on Dr. J. H. Browne, who resided there for
eight years, sold out his interest to his brother, and in 1885 the estate became the pro-
perty of Mr. Leonard G. Browne, who lived there for some years before making his
permanent home in England. Early in its occupation by the Browne family large
additions were made to the area of the first survey, so that the estate at one time cover-
ed about 30,000 acres, its present area being about 20,000 acres of freehold.
During his residence at Buckland Park, Dr. J. H. Browne did much by clearing
and practical forestry, to preserve in unimpaired splendour the giant red gums, which
for a thousand years or more have grown and flourished on these fertile lands.


*Pe '
M»«f % Jm1M|
4 " : < . ,> . *• • * . -/,- . .'- ■ .;. - < , . • • , ., ; , 4 ; . ‘ ■ - > > : ’. >
• . ’• ; • ~-.,J‘ • * -v \ <v - •>./ ,., -<&»*. <i^|^y-i>^ ||iaigt .*''“■ V
••••.■■ j f** *'■ ~ 'Vr >k '_ ■ "' V *,’»>;■ V ,. . •'-• ■ •«*.-* t “ v * ' ,: *.*$<*"'■*’' * t " ‘ ’ ■„ , •■', , \ " y ■ 4 -’* *•*• ■■• '*"'*■ ;•■. .-£*' ~:£’[ ..*" . 4- '
i *' .*-■ '. ; ■ • .••'■■ ' • ,s ,*»P4gwi. -•'• w *. -• ‘ . » r \-■ • • - ( 4 V « : . 4^
IMlfcilWW —»■ g,nV‘-’ , 4 _ • ■ V ; .' . y .„ __ s * - ' .A >,.-. & ■ ■%. '%"r#f.
A*:&& ~i "‘■i % ii\ f ■’ ,. --. ■ .,- / ... ' ’" : .-
Sf ‘ ' ** J ■*, « ”’ ' % *’’■ "- ’ » • :■■■'* x4«|
y -■r--^4^^‘'- : '*- v "'' 11 ■ ••■ .' s ;f 4 ; ,.'ji); ) -•" ••; ■• Vr '■ ; -r' ; r . ;,,/v '\:..' .’.'* 1 " -^' : .' $ * '^'-‘•'^f'' r ~ *•’; • .•- , \ '*..*•, -■■ * ■’*
•ntnStH>4'‘&' , . - . _2 - _’_j - |
- ■ >T /
' -sj «y%*f * # ' P^ : < £ y e./-
7 ■ ■*' • V ’ " , -K |||f' * * r :- '■" .. m : : ■? • ; '^^ :r - '-.■■/'■ •; ,. : '' ‘ '.: "" 7? ? -■ " ..,. •'-
v *v' v -,, w ' ,. •;, .'/■.... K - ; ■ /’•: ■ f -r .... •• : , ' ., ' v - 4 /; ■
j,L%>:-; : - * 5 ' fi \ v % ' ' • - c. •>« '
.4 ‘ ' : *. '/-$?■•••
, >J2j' #' ’ 1» :-....v-fc; -. • L*^'' -r£~ ••■ :
& ' „ dlfetete.' -_ * 4 *■-. ~ Lt.jd.J* a f *m '»* « . 'jkJPaSftiftk 3ff
’flUT ' I S| MTiz. ?,'.$* y 7 " n '
vf*. il's-4\ ■BPNFV ’ *W 45 « ■ i £ }• • / W* r ~ w^6$^'' : ''T--M* ? t* itJ». 9HP . •, :••?/ r',\» : -
*• V _JB* l M ?i W s ‘ ■ " «■ - j3v -W* v y ■ V- 1ft . £. * *V • ♦ fr 1 .’ ■ •,
1* *■ <fV «■--.■« ’ nl ' S rf " I W* la. IS v V If I ■ ff f | 1
»1 I 111 If 51 mWSSz •• f 1. - --if gfl a f I U t »:•»>
I It jl» jP > • ;■ «» " ’ >v? | f | I ® ffnl 1 * , fI | *■ f-», f *• ■'■•.■ y vjfc*.'
’ll! ? If : f|| ..-.•> •_;... ' V 5te^^ ; ' :^: ' vr -'-> •'•■■ A '--
BUGKLAND PARK HOMESTEAD AND BUILDINGS.
STORE CATTLE IN PRESERVE PADDOCK, BUGKLAND PARK.




tfeyneion Estate,
Che property of JYtr. J{. J(eynes
Keyneton, the home of this pastoral family, is situated about 60 miles N.N.E. of Ade-
laide in' the midst of country admirably suited for stud sheep farming. The Estate was
named after the late Mr. Joseph Keynes, the founder of this flock, which now numbers
about 10,000.
Mr. Joseph Keynes was born at Blandford, Dorset, in 1810. He arrived in the State
on September 23, 1839, in the “ Anna Robertson,” under engagement to the late Mr. G. F.
Angas, and subsequently took up a run under lease from the Government in 1841, and
eventually obtained the freehold of it, the present area being, roughly, 17,000 acres.
Mr. Keynes, sen., devoted much interest to the pastoral and agricultural industries,
more particularly to the improvement of the Merino, and in this respect his labors were
known, not only in South Australia, but also in ad] oining States. He evinced great interest
in agricultural shows, and was elected a member of the Committee of the R. A. & H. Society
on October 28, 1840. He was also Chairman of the North Rhine District Council from
its formation in 1875 until his resignation in 1882, when he was made the recipient of a
presentation by his fellow townspeople. He took no active part in politics, but was for
many years a Justice of the Peace, and took much interest in local affairs.
Mr. Keynes took a general interest in his district and exerted himself in local educa-
tional matters. He was a nephew of the famous English Congregationalist, John Angell
James. His father and a brother were also both connected with the ministry of the same
church. Mr. Keynes died at Lockleys on May 14, 1883, in his 73rd year.


Hammer & Co.


\\ \ II I
, j I
■K I I
feel’ 4 v ,'jf &' it
» J I ar
j«p |k'^j?/ / By*
Hammer & Co. MR. R. R. KEYNES.


The Flocks.
The foundation of the flock was laid in 1842, when Mr. Joseph Keynes obtained a
large number of sheep from Mr. George Morphett, an Adelaide solicitor, and a smaller lot
in the same year from a Mr. Hull or Hall, of Grange Farm, South Road. These were all
Merinos, and were the nucleus of the fine flocks of the present day.
At the same time 14 rams were obtained from Castle Bagot, Fight River, also three
from Mr. Crisp, Gawler River. In 1847 some Murray rams were used, also some of Mr.
Joseph Gilbert’s from Pewsey Vale.
In 1851 an imported ram “ Nudicotan ” or “ Nudicot,” a direct descendant of the
Merinos sent by the King of Spain to King George, was obtained. In 1858 two imported
A SCENE IN THE PARK.
rams were bought from the flock of Adolph Steiger, at Fenteuritz, in Saxony. These two
rams were descended from the pure Merino flock of the Prince of Reuss at Klipphausen,
Saxony, which was composed of sheep descended from the famous stud flock of the Elector
Friedrich August, of Saxony, which had been presented to him by King Charles 111. of
Spain. These sheep, which included 92 rams and 128 ewes, arrived in Saxony in 1765.
The two rams purchased by Mr. Joseph Keynes were the two which were exhibited
by Mr. Otto Neuhaus in Melbourne and Sydney about this date, and obtained the first
awards. Since 1877, when two Murray rams were bought, no fresh blood was introduced
till 1906, when Mr. R. R. Keynes obtained a prize ram from Mr. Murray Dawson.


.
J I I ll
*W THE HOMESTEAD
THE WOOLSHED.


. W^TE^CZaisai/^ trT^^J^r7m.aKJ7-^aig: !GS'?r>yyik*: •*>'! TSfcl»*v -■■'▼■ --*?— » ..m .. ?
Scott. KRVNETON STUD M R R 1 N O RAM.


*==__ «
' I
6co«. A KEYNETON STUD MERINO EWE.


Scott. A GROUP OF KEYNETON SHORTHORNS.


/ « ♦* / S^Jjf
H/rVfb-i. % •4Afefc^Biwli^SKPa^Kr*^^S^ro^ySHr^^^P : ~ t.'~ ~
Scott. A KEYNETON STUD MERINO EWE.
7 7 1
RAM.


The late Mr. Keynes was a keen judge of sheep, and, having a clear and intelligent
conception of the type of sheep he wanted, went quietly and resolutely to work to obtain a
high standard Merino flock. i j
It is needless to say that the energy and perseverance displayed by him in attaining
results was rewarded. Improvement and fixing of type proceeded on well defined lines, and
once fixed was not interfered with by any passing fancy of the moment, but the flock was
KEYNETON STATION FROM THE ROAD
to a very large extent bred from within, and the guiding principles of his father have been
closely followed by his son, the present owner.
Keyneton Merinos are noted for their robust constitutions, grand fleeces, and aristo-
cratic carriage, and have found favor in many parts of the Commonwealth. Even under
most rigorous climatic conditions there has been no pampering or artificial improving of
these sheep, and they are grass fed. The present owner, Mr. Richard Keynes, who follows
in the footsteps of his father, was born in 1857. His early education was gained at Park-
stone, Dorset, England, after which he spent three years in London gaining mercantile
experience, and in 1877 joined his father on the Estate, of which he took control on his
father’s death in 1883.


Besides sheep Mr. Keynes is much interested in draught horses, and has also a
sma icid ol Shorthorn cattle, the nucleus of which were obtained from Mr. E. Bagot,
whilst Angas bulls have been used.
Mr. Keynes married, in 1884, Miss Shannon, fourth daughter of Mr. Abraham
Shannon, ol Moculta, and has a family of two sons and two daughters.
r - K- e yY es > hke his father, takes no active interest in politics, but devotes him-
tv - S T^ a^e . the welfare of his district. He was elected a member of
the Listnct Council in 1886, and since 1894 has occupied the position of Chairman.
A VIEW ON THE ESTATE.
Show Successes
I nfoi timately particulars of early show successes are not on record, but from the
elder Mr. Keynes’ diaries it appears probable that the first successful exhibits were made
at the Angaston Show in 1858, and at later dates prizes were won at Mount
Pleasant and Kapunda. Prior to 1883 some prizes were taken at the Adelaide
Shows for wool, but full particulars of these have not been preserved. The
following, however, are on record :
1876— Bronze medal and certificate of award at the International Exhibition
Philadelphia.
1885, Adelaide. —First prize for three rams’ fleeces.
1886. —Commemorative Medal at the Colonial and Indian Exhibitions. The
latter fleeces were from sheep bred by the r present owner. Cxreat credit is due for
these successes, when one considers that no great attention has been paid to getting
up show sheep or fleeces.


Ham


. ■.
■ ' ■■
Jhe properly of JVlr. Jfyonjas Sarjdland.
The Burra country, with its fertile plains and protecting hills, has long been recognised
as one of the chief sheep raising districts of South Australia. Many notable pastoral
located within fifty miles of the old mining township, which was in earlier
days one of the most busy centres of the State. Sheep and cattle, however, have now
more than taken the place of copper as a source of wealth, so that the Burra still maintains
its old time prosperity.
Koo-owie, the property of Mr. Thomas Sandland, which lies about twelve miles south
of the township, covers some nine thousand acres of gently undulating country —very
similar to the well-known “ Koonoona ” Station —broken by the well-grassed and sparsely
FOUR-TOOTH STUD EWES.


— -
; “ ‘ “ ‘ ft ' "' ' — ■ ■ 1
I Xq e* V ? ° ‘ qo!
1. TYPICAL “ KOO-OWIE ” MERINOS.
2. STUD RAM “ NUGGETT,” years, by “ Wirra,” First Prize, Burra Show, igoy


j Jl
j
I. STUD EWES (41 years).
Scott. 2. STUD EWES and 4A years), by “ Son of Riot,” from No. 112 Stud Ewes.


■ 1
■**[• r* -***«■*»- ■—»^^ ' £».j5EEr '^ v '
Scott. SI iill RAM, “NUGGETT." 3i years, by “ Wirra.” (First Prize Burra Show 1907)


'
Sr'' r f i* tnMLP? MZ& *• - r « »‘ $fcf**#£5 *5^-. ;*-fe
Wjp^ wt & Rfyfc-fBywIIIKiBSHIhmVHS
Scott. * STUD EWE » 4 Tears.


os .
•,. • - x - : '■• , %;; _ ;i . ■ - ••• - ; v.- ", _,_ -‘ ■
■ *■'**& ■■
Scott. STUD RAM, “ SOLOMON VIII,” li years, by ‘‘ Solomon.” (First Prize Burra Show. 190S).


I ' ■ . ■ , I ■]
STUD RAM “STOCKINGS,” 2\ years by “ Koo-owic II”. (First Prize Burra Show 1908).


Scott. STUD EWE (4£ years), by “Son of Riot.” (.Champion Ewe, Burra Show, 1905).


'■* »i ■ - , ~ ■»■’ \ %'\ • % '
*l*Jh j MT* * . >. y’ :——
Scott. “SOLOMON” (4i years), by “Son of Riot.” (Champion Earn, Burra Show, 1906).


' 'Ss, .'-*S - ■ ■'■■;“ ’*'•'• V . ' :' ;> ;’K •'■ ;„' ■ .■■• ' "■' ’ >***» c *. v{ '*
„
' * ' ' " *" ''* v ' *” * "*'* ''' '' ' ' *' ' '' ' * * ' ' ' *" " * " • ■ ' ~ '■ "*
MANAGER’S COTTAGE, STABLES AND WOOLSHEDS
STUD EWES (24 years).


timbered gullies which are so characteristic of this neighborhood. An excellent idea of
the appearance of the property may be gathered from the series of photographs which are
reproduced in these pages.
The water supply is unusually abundant, for three streams —Logan’s, Read’s, and
Burra Creeks traverse the estate. To this advantage must be added the fact that the
property is well covered with nutritious grasses, that the climate is healthy, and that
there is a fair rainfall, which has averaged 14 inches for a number of years.
The owner of Koo-owie, Mr. Thomas Sandland, J.P., the third son of the late John
Sandland, J.P., of Rowland’s Flat and Weinteriga Station, River Darling, N.S.W., one of
South Australia’s pioneer pastoralists, was born in 1853 at “ Rowland’s Flat,” near Tanunda
WOOLSHED AND YARDS.
and was educated at St. Peter’s College. After leaving school he decided to follow in his
father’s footsteps, and with this object in view his early pastoral experience was gained on
the River Darling at Moorara. On leaving Moorara he took charge of the Weinteriga
Pastoral Run, N.S.W., then the property of the Hon. Walter Duffield, and afterwards
became the managing partner of Messrs. Hamilton, Wilcox, & Sandland, who held “ Koona-
more ” in the North-East, but in 1889 he decided to sell out of this partnership and pur-
chased “ Koo-owie.”
During the years Mr. Sandland has resided in the district he has taken an active part
in all matters affecting local interests, and is a member of the District Hospital Board. He
is a staunch advocate of progress in all matters pastoral and agricultural, and is President
of the Burra Agricultural Society ; in fact, he really reorganised this Society some 12 years
back. He is also a member of the Pastoral Committee of the R. A. &H. Society. In
1882 Mr. Sandland was appointed to the Commission of the Peace.


Scott. LOGAN’S CREEK, “ KOO-OWIE ”


SHR -
“ HEATHMOUNT ’’.[(Mr. Sandland's Burra Residence).


Scott. LUCERNE PADDOCKS.
The Flocks.
The foundation of the flock, which now numbers about 4,000, was laid by the purchase
of 50 stud ewes from “ Rhine Park ” and 50 from Mr. Sandland has always
been a firm supporter of the Murray Merino, and has, since the first beginnings of the Koo-
owie flock, devoted his time to breeding this type of Merino, and purchases of Mount ( raw-
ford, Rhine Park, and Mount Beevor rams and ewes have from time to time been made,
with the result that the Koo-owie Merinos are large-framed and deep-bodied, carrying a
profitable fleece of free wool of good length and character ; in fact, sheep which show all
the characteristics of their Murray ancestry. At the 1907 wool sales Mr. Sandland obtained
up to 12dd. per lb., the sheep averaging 11 lbs. and the lambs 4 lbs. of wool.
“ Balah. ”
Mr, Sandland is also proprietor of Balah Station, comprising] 208 square miles of
salt bush country, situated some 50 miles east of the Burra and running 12,000 sheep, all
of which have been drawn from “ Koo-owie.” They are raised solely for wool, and not
for stud purposes. Wool from Balah last year realised llfd. in the Adelaide market.
In 1905 the grown sheep on this station cut the high average of 12 lbs. 10 oz., a good pro-
portion of them being breeding ewes.
Prize List.
Since 1901 the Koo-owie sheep have gained a fair share of prizes at Burra Show,
which is recognised as the best sheep show out of Adelaide, having taken eight champion
prizes, as follows : —Champion ram 1904, 1905, 1906 ; champion ewe 1901, 1902, 1905,
1907, 1908, also 11 first and 14 second prizes for rams and 12 firsts and 12 second prizes
for ewes. Mr. Sandland has also been the winner of the cup presented by Mr. L. W. Geb-
hardt for best pen of five Merino rams 1 \ years, to be won twice by same owner. This
was first given in 1905, and has since been won by Koo-owie sheep four years in succession.
In 1907 Mr. Sandland won special for best pen of five Merino ewes 1| years given by Mr. A.
Gebhardt, and in 1908 won special for best ewe with lamb at foot presented by Mr. T. Sand-
land. This ewe has an unbeaten record at Burra, winning first as years old, first and
champion as years old, and first with lamb at foot and champion and special as a year
old.
In 1905 the Koo-owie sheep took both champions and all other prizes in open Merino
class, which is a record of which their owner may be justly proud.


" ' ' r
-||EUICfl —
Che property of Jtfr. Xisle Q. Johnson.
Mr. Lisle G. Johnson, youngest son of the late James Angas Johnson, and a
great grandson of the late George Fife Angas, was born in 1878, at Medindie,
and educated at Whinham College, which he left at the age of fourteen in order
to enter his father’s office.
After a few years spent in gaining commercial experience he was entrusted with
the office management and personal supervision of the Orrie Cowie Estate, on
Southern Yorkes’ Peninsula (for the two years previous to its being sold) and the
Hazeleigh Estate, Saddleworth.
Since the death of his father, in 1902, he has been engaged in the management
of the family estate, and of Hazeleigh, which at that date became his own property.
Mr. Johnson now resides in Adelaide, but looks forward to taking over in the
near future the personal management of his country home, for he is devoted to
rural life, and is greatly interested in the progress and development of the Agri-
cultural and Pastoral interests. He took an active part in forming, and has been
President of the Saddleworth Agricultural Society since its inception in 1904, with
the exception of the year he was in England.
Hazeleigh extends to within half a mile of the township of Saddleworth,
although the homestead is some three miles distant. The property consists of
about 4,000 acres of beautiful, well-grassed country, well-suited for both agricultural and
pastoral purposes. Of this area about 1,000 acres are under cultivation, and ex-
cellent results have been obtained. Large numbers of trees have been planted on
the estate by Mr. Johnson for its beautification, and as a shelter for sheep, of which
there are at present about three thousand. The owner of Hazeleigh also leases
about 10,000 acres in the saltbush country, about 40 miles distant, where all the
young sheep and horses are sent for the first year or two, in order to develop the
frame and bone so essential in breeding stud stock. This is a great advantage and
one not enjoyed by all stud masters. He has been most suecesrful at all the country
shows that he has exhibited at, and hopes shortly to be a large competitor in Adelaide.


11


•• v * ■•••••••• ggr v? °X\
(y,...•> -, c ;- .. .-■ y ■; \^
I vfehk • — - ' 3§?,- I
/1 . II
■ : ,« l^|
I - :; ; • : f p ••- .Uih|
/rV\ Hammel - MR. LISLE G. JOHNSON. \


'*&s&JsLs4~'
“
-■ r o>%5%,
Scott, FLOCK OF DORSET HORN STUD EWES. (Hazeleigli).


<gWA&£Wtto,:jk' r niii'~'ritr n
v..V" ; : : ,■■*.'•; ■ ?* ■• ' •
- / "■ • ,• ; . ■ - , • . ' ,. t '' 1
: - ' . J ■ ■ :> ' ' . - ■■ ■ ... ■ . . ■ ,/
- ■ ' ' • M ''' ' '
fc—— - . ■ ■ •■ i •• - - - • ' - ' »
PASTORAL AREA AND STATION BUILDINGS AT HAZELEIGH.
THE HOMESTEAD.
ONE OF THE HORSE PADDOCKS.




Scott TWO-TOOTH STUD MERINO RAMS.
The Flocks.
When the Hazeleigh Estate was purchased by the late James Angas Johnson,
some twelve or thirteen years ago, the flocks were practically non est , but a number of
Merinos were brought over from the Orrie Cowie Estate. These were bred from for a
time, but some five years ago practically the whole of the sheep were cleared off, and
the estate has since been re-stocked from the well-known Koonoona stud. Mr. Johnson,
though best known as a breeder of Dorset Horns, is a great admirer of the Merino,
and has spared neither trouble nor expense in maintaining a high standard in the
flock.
The Dorset Stud.
This Stud, which now numbers about 150 head, was established in 1905 by the
importation of two rams and eight ewes from the famous flocks of Mr. W. R. Flower,
West Stafford, Dorsetshire.
Mr. Johnson, who was then in England, was allowed to take the pick of his
young rams and ewes, and was afterwards complimented by Mr. Flower on his selection.
The second importation was made in April, 1906, and consisted of 20 ewes, ten of
which came from Mr. John Creed, Burstock Grange, Dorsetshire, and were part of a
great prize flock. The remaining ten came from the well-known flocks of Mr. W.
A. Johnston, of Stafford Park, Dorsetshire. Some of these ewes were in lamb to rams
bred by Mr. G. Poole, Mr. Fowler, and by Mr. C. H. Crawford —all well-known
English breeders. The third and last importation was made in December, 1907, and
consisted of 20 ewes from Mr. J. H. Creed. One of the ewes included in the second
importation took the Champion Prize at last year’s (1908) Royal Show in Adelaide.
She is a particularly fine sheep, three years and seven months old, of large symmetrical
well-proportioned frame, weighing 266 lbs. The length from nose to butt of tail is
4ft. 9in., girth round belly 6ft., girth back of shoulders sft. Bin., height to shoulder


t C ' I . / : ; . , x,- mi %
■Ur ~ _i_t r jT/ ' /f 1 i f • 4 ». '.’}'■* *Al -. iL^^WJgSn
WSmr Up* "VC^A’/V/ 1 V* 4< V. f *h i f 1 ' , V //»> a£*9<
'’ JBpC> *. # '” , f
v v» .* —- * «■ , ;:'* -* $5 *' , . *'l JfcjSl vl
r**S: *$C r --.,- 'z&jki L ' &M; ‘'*w i jm
• , v *f r *- : ' \''y j 'ShbOj .!'.
' ■*'■* 1&SSSiSS3S£
Scott. DORSET HORN STUD RAM. (HazelcimM
Scott. DORSET HORN STUD EWE,


MERINO STUD RAM. (Tlazeleigh).
MERINO STUD EWES. (Hazoleigh).


2ft. 9in. At last shearing she cut 9 lbs. of wool. Thus, she combines all the essential
points of a good mutton sheep. In this connection the following quotation from a
letter recently received by Mr. Johnson from the Secretary of the Dorset Horn Sheep
Breeders’ Association in reply to questions as to the weights (wool and carcass) of
sheep which are being shown in England, will be of interest.
Mr. Ensor writes f< Mr. W. R. Flower’s 10 Ewe Hoggetts, which were shown at
the Bath and West of England Show in May last (1908), averaged 256 lbs. apiece when
16 months old, and cut off 11 lbs. each of washed wool. The Shearling Rams shown
at the same Show weighed 360 and 285 lbs., respectively, and cut off 14lbs. washed
wool. An old ram <f Flowers No. 114” shown at the same Show weighed 404 lbs.
and cut off 12 lbs washed wool. One hundred and twenty Ewe Hoggets not forced, or
got up in any way, cut 8 lb. 5 ozs. of washed wool at shearing time last year.
Three Dorset Horn Wether lambs at Smithfield Show in December last weighed
6 cwt 0 qrs. Blbs.”
Mr. Johnson is a great advocate of the Dorset for early lambs, for he
believes that they mature much earlier than any other breed, as he finds it possible
to place them on the market at three months old, whilst at five months they go
over sixty lbs. For an all round mutton sheep, however, he considers the Dorset-
Merino cross the best, using Dorset rams on Merino ewes.
Besides sheep, Mr. Johnson has a weakness for a good horse, and some high
class buggy and draught horses, besides ponies, are bred at Hazeleigh. At present
there are about 30 ponies and 100 head of horses, including the noted pony stallion
“ Furreed.” There is also the nucleus of a fine Berkshire Pig Stud, to which the
owner is constantly adding from the best blood obtainable.
Scott. PONY STALLION “ PURREED.” (Hazelei^h).


' J ' ! 9*5
-«-■ - *“*'
mmm.
. , ■ ' ■ ** * -
Che property of Jtfr. Richard Smith.
In addition to the old pioneer pastoralists, whose names have been associated
with the industry since the early beginnings of the history of South Australia, and
whose families are still largely represented, there have, more especially of recent
years, been many instances of men, who, having acquired fortune in commercial life or
in one of the professions, have, either as a business proposition or in order to secure
a home and interests apart from city life, invested largely in pastoral properties, and
are now taking rank with the older generation of <c squatters ” as representatives
of the greatest producing industry of the country. Of such men, Mr. Richard Smith,
one of the principal proprietors of the great importing and distributing house of
Messrs. G. P. Harris, Scarfe & Co., is a notable example.
Mr. Smith first became directly connected with pastoral matters just fifteen
years ago, for it was in 1894 that he purchased the Kindaruar property, situated
near Lake Alexandrina, and commenced the establishment of his well-known Shropshire
Stud, with which he has since attained very considerable success. Breeding operations
were not long continued at Kindaruar, for it was found that the Lakes country
Scott GROUP OF SWEETHOLME WINNING SHROPSHIRES.


■flHffiir ’^ii^^B
«5s ■■
'-
.. ■ mmm—
•„ '


was not entirely adapted for the class of sheep Mr. Smith had selected, so the property
was disposed of and the flock transferred to Sweetholme, a beautiful estate some
few miles from the picturesque old town of Strathalbyn, which Mr. Smith at that time
purchased as a country home for himself and family.
Ihe name Sweetholme has a peculiarly English sound, and naturally calls
to mind some charming scene in rural England. Nor would the visitor to Mr. Smith’s
Strathalbyn home be disappointed in such expectations, for the twelve hundred acres,
which the estate now covers, consists of delightfully varied country. Rich and fertile
flats, with tracts of broken hilly land and occasional stony rises, the whole well-clothed
with native and imported grasses, which, in the genial climate of this favored district,
keep green and succulent during the greater part of the year. There is a fair amount
of good timber, for the indigenous growth has been largely supplemented by extensive
plantings, which are already adding largely to the supply. A tributary of the Angas
River runs through the estate, making a delightful addition from a scenic point of
view, and, what is of more'importance, providing a permanent supply of fresh pure
water for the stock. The pastoral portion is equipped on up-to-date lines, conveniently
subdivided and rabbit-proof-fenced throughout. The homestead is pleasantly situated,
is commodious and fitted with all modern conveniences. The gardens and planta-
tions are extensive and beautiful. In addition to Sweetholme, Mr. Smith has a
small holding at Virginia, which he uses in conjunction with the Strathalbyn property
for his Shropshires, some of the young stock being wintered there. The soil being rich
warm alluvial, early feed is easily grown, and any amount of water can be obtained
at 70ft. for irrigation for summer fodders.
(Krischock). SCENE AT SWEETHOLME.


- ** - ••
• ” < v .
“ CARDIFF ” (Champion Ram). (Sweeth


The Flocks.
Ihe flock, though not very large, is composed of sheep of very high average
quality, for the owner spared no expense in procuring the very best foundation,
and has, from time to time, made additions from the best flocks of the old country.
As already recorded, the Stud was commenced in 1894, when 25 high-class pedigreed
Shropshires were purchased from Mr. Thomas Mason, of Tasmania. In 1896, a further
consignment of 10 high-class pedigreed ewes was received from England, from the
flocks of Messrs. Peter Everall, Ryton Grove, Shropshire ; Thomas Jones, Cotwell,
Shropshire ; and Richard Bromley, Felton Butler, Shropshire. These ewes were served
by some of the best rams in England. A special stud ram, Bath Bishton (7,822)
sire Bath Brick (5,797), sire of dam Bishton Long Dad (3,367), sire of g. dam Blue
Patriot (2,400), sire of g.g. dam Treble Call (1,716), bred by Mr. J. Bowen Jones, of
Shropshire, was brought out with these ewes. In 1897, thirty pedigreed ewes were
chosen from the flock of Mr. R. Studley Steel ; also, in 1897 a second importation
was made from England of six ewes and one ram —the best procurable. The
selection of the English stock was entrusted to Mr. Preece, of Shrewsbury, who is one
of the most expert judges in England. The ram selected was Corston Royal Victor,
sire Corston Victor (8,951), sire of Dam Blink Bonny (7,323), sire of g. dam Lord
Patriot (4,267), sire of g.g. dam Corston True Blue (2,550).
Since that date additions have been made from Messrs. Button, of Tasmania,
and also from the flocks of such successful breeders as Messrs. Wilson & Williams,
and Mr. A. J. Simpson. These purchases have, for the most part, consisted of
selected ewes with a few special rams.
It will thus be seen that the sheep at Sweethohne have been bred on
up-to-date lines with a strong infusion of some of the most aristocratic blood in
the Shropshire world. They are now big-framed sheep, well and evenly wooded
on the head and throughout the body. They dress well on the block and the
wool is of good length of staple. They cut a good fleece of very fine light wool,
Krischock. A GROUP OF SHROPSHIRES. (Swectholme).


t “ SWEETHOLME BEAUTY ” (Champion Stud Ewe). s . , .


running an Blbs. average from the ewes, whilst flock rams average up to 12lbs.
The clip is sold in Adelaide, and at the last sales made Bd. per lb. The flock
now numbers about one thousand head, for which there is an increasing demand,
and satisfactory sales of stud animals are made to Western Australia, New South
Wales and Victoria ; in fact, they have been sent to all parts of the Common-
wealth. The Shropshire, will, of course, never compete with the Merino as the
national sheep, nor are they suited for the arid areas of our northern country —
but, for cool and hilly districts, as sires for the production of fat lambs for the
export trade, and as butchers’ sheep, they have made, and are quite upholding,
a most creditable reputation, and it is satisfactory to know that the interests of the
breed will be well looked after, and their quality maintained, when owners of the
calibre of Mr. Richard Smith are to be found amongst their most prominent
supporters.
Show Record.
The flock has had its full share of success in the Show yard, for, up to
March, 1903, Sweetholme sheep had been awarded at Adelaide Shows —One Ten
Guinea Cup, four Champion prizes, ten firsts, nine seconds, three thirds ; also, first
prize for three rams’ fleeces and first for three ewes’ fleeces. At Country Shows,
to the same date, they had accounted for One Ten-Guinea Cup, eleven Champion
prizes, sixteen firsts, and twenty seconds. Since then they have won at Adelaide
Royal Shows : —September, 1903, first ram and third ewe over 2 \ years ; in 1904-5
they did not compete ; in 1906 the record was : first Champion and Gold Medal
ram, first and Champion ewe, first, second and third ewes over 1J years, first ewe
under years ; in 1907 only one prize (third, for ram over 2| years) was awarded
to representatives of this flock ; in 1908, however, they did much better, as the
following list shows : first ram over 2 \ years, third and fourth rams over H- years,
Silver Cup for ewe over years, first and third ewes over 2| years, first and second
ewes over 1 \ years, third and fourth ewes l£ years or under.
Nangetty, W.A.
Mr. Smith probably regards his South Australian pastoral interests more as
a hobby than as a serious business venture, but in Western Australia he has
an extensive holding, which he is working with all the shrewdness and foresight
which have made his name so well known in South Australian commercial circles.
It is only four years ago that —in the face of much well-meant advice that W.A. was
“impossible,” pastorally speaking—Mr. Smith purchased Nangetty, a property of
35,000 acres, situated about 18 miles from the township of Minegenew, on the
Midland Railway, about eleven hours’ journey from Perth.
Nangetty run comprises a compact block of land, which measures, roughly,
eight miles by six miles, and includes much of the best land of the valley of
the River Irwin, one of the “dry” rivers of the West. Up to the time of pur-
chase, this run, like many great tracts of the Western Australian pastoral lands,
was lying comparatively idle for lack of water, not because it was a rainless country,
for the average yearly rainfall is something over twelve inches, but because practically
no provision had been made for storage. Now, however, under the vigorous and
progressive direction of the resident manager, Mr. Wells, backed by unstinted capital
by the owner, all this is changed, and the great natural capacity of the country is
being rapidly developed, and in a very few years this hitherto wasted country will
be utilised to its fullest extent. Even now, Nangetty is an object lesson which
is bearing fruit, for neighbouring owners are following the example of the man who
had the pluck to lead the way, and spend many thousands of pounds in tanks,
dams and water conservation schemes generally. A recent visitor to the Station
writes as follows “ To-day there are 24 paddocks, each supplied with permanent
water, and no part of the run is more than a mile and a half or two miles from
a water trough, constantly supplied with clean water. Besides the original wells,
and several new ones on the sand plain, there are now eight large excavated tanks,
which have involved the removal of over 43,000 cubic yards of earth, or equal to
over 7 5- million gallons of water. At the present time, the tanks are more than
full, for each one has its depth and capacity greatly increased by embankments,


O “FORTRESS” (First Prize Ram, under 24 years, R.A.S. Show, Melbourne, 1906). (Swretholme).


.9 ■ ,4' ; v
and the water still stands above the excavation line in most. In addition to this,
on the catchment side of each tank is a dam, intended to trap the silt and form
a supplementary supply. In most cases, these are, in themselves, extensive works,
and render it unnecessary to draw from the tanks until late in the summer. The
dam adjoining the big two-and-a-quarter-million-gallon tank near the homestead
is now holding about eight feet of water, and in the north tank the water is
fifteen feet deep. Taking the eight big tanks, the dams and iron tanks, I should
say there must be very nearly nine million gallons of water stored at the present time.”
On taking over the station there were only a few thousand sheep on the
run, but last year over twenty thousand were shorn. The original flocks varied
from medium to poor quality, but during the last five years Mr. Smith has sent
over several thousand selected Merino ewes, with a number of rams, from the best
South Australian flocks, so that Mr. Gordon Law Smith —who represents his father
in W.A., and is especially interested in the flocks, and has had considerable experience
in handling wool—will, in the course of a year or two, be able to make a big
showing under the Nangetty brand. Mr. Smith has also commenced to build
up a Shorthorn herd, and, about three years ago, sent over a very fine bull, “ Duke
of Connaught 15th,” purchased from the Campbell House Stud, and has now a
fine lot of young stock of his get from cows from Bulloo Downs, in Queens-
land, and from Wellington Lodge, in South Australia. Some very fine horses
are bred, the principal stallion on the Station being a fine Suffolk Punch, “ Royal
Duke,” imported from New South Wales. There are also a number of entires for
breeding a lighter type from the fifty mares which are run on the property.
Personal.
In business circles Mr. Smith has made his name honorably known, and is
everywhere regarded as an upright and far-seeing man. He has every detail of
the vast business at his finger ends, and much of the colossal success of his firm
Krischock. ENTRANCE GATES TO “WOODLANDS” (Mr. Smith’s Home at Glenelg).


Krischock “ WOODLANDS,” GLENELG.


K rise bock. THE DRAWING ROOM AT “ WOODLANDS.”
K ri.' ( 'hock. A PART OF THE CONSERVATORY AT “WOODLANDS.”


is due to his clearness of vision, his shrewdness and his enterprise. He has always
kept in close touch with the office, and this has given him little leisure to devote
to public affairs. He has never shown any desire to secure a seat in the legislature,
for instance, although it is just men of his stamp —men who have succeeded in thei
own business, and have shown a genius for the administration of a large and far-
reaching establishment —who are most needed in Parliament. Mr. Smith has given
attention to the wants of local government at Glenelg, and his advice, which is always
much sought
after and very
highly valued,
has been avail-
able to those
who have asked
for it in regard
to matters af-
fecting that
town, but he
has invariably
shown a great
disinclination
to take a prom-
inent position
in the eyes of
the public.
Mr. Smith is
known every-
where for his
open - handed
hospitality and
in his beautiful
home at Glen-
elg he acts the
host with liber-
ality and tact-
ful courtesy.
There is a solid
air of comfort
about his sur-
roundings
which is in
complete con
sonance with
his character.
It must not be
imagined that
because he de-
votes himself
so closely to
his office, and
so assiduously
to his home,
that his know-
ledge of occur-
rences in the
outside world
of politics and
of public affairs
is notboth wide
and accurate.
He is a man
accessible to all
who have rea-
son to ap-
proach him,
and his kind-
Krischock. A SHADY WALK AT “ WOODLANDS.”
ness of disposition is often tested by those who require monetary help for deserving
objects. Under such circumstances appeals are seldom made to him in vain, but
he is careful to see that his philanthropic instincts are not abused. He, in fact,
belongs to the best class of commercial men, honorable, upright, and full of a
cheery optimism, which enables him not only to succeed himself but to assist
others to do likewise.


The founder of this South Australian family was the late Mr. Joseph Barritt, who
was born at Maldon, Essex, in 1816, being the fifth son in a family of nine. In 1838,
having heard from reliable sources of the success of many of those who had gone previously
to the new colony of South Australia, he made up his mind to try his luck also. So at
the age of 23 years he left Gravesend in the ship Anna Robertson for South Australia on
May 25, 1839, with a determination to succeed and confident of his ability to do so.
In an old diary Mr. Barritt records that “ after an uneventful voyage, during which
they were becalmed for a week when crossing the line, they steered away to South America
to get the trade winds passing between the island of Trinidad and the mainland, then taking
a S.E. course wide of the Cape of Good Hope, they anchored in Holdfast Bay on September
21.” On landing with his companions the party camped on the shore for a week until
they got all their baggage landed, when they hired a house in Adelaide, also a bullock team
to convey their goods there. Mr. Barritt remarked that they found “ the town in a much
more forward state than they expected.”
Mr. Barritt brought a letter of introduction to the late Mr. John Barton Hack (who
proved a good kind friend and helper), who advised him to settle on his own special survey
at Strangways Valley on the sources of the River Bara, which he agreed to do. After
staying there a few weeks and building a dairy, he went to Mount Barker to Messrs. J. B.
and Stephen Hack’s cattle station, where 2,000 head of cattle were kept. There he bought


Scott. A SCENE ON THE RIVER, from which the Estate of “Riverside” took its name.


what he required, and drove them to his home on the Para, where he broke them in to
milking and began dairying. He also hired a team of bullocks and dray, and, having got
a large stock of grass hay together, he sold it in Adelaide at £lO to £l2 a ton, though the
year before it had been as high as £2O a ton. As showing the high prices of provisions
in those days Mr. Barritt, in writing to his father in May, 1840, says “ that flour was then
selling at £6 10/ per bag of 200 lbs., bread 2/ to 2/6 the 4 lb. loaf, and before last harvest
as high as 3/6 ; beef and mutton, 9d. per lb. ; cheese, 1/6 to 2/ ; colonial butter, 3/ to
3/6 per lb.”
After about six months Mr. Hack sold his land, a r part to Mr. Jacob Hagen and the
other to a Mr. Richardson, Mr. Barritt agreeing to manage for the latter. At the same
time the late Hon. Walter Duffield, who had also recently amived in the colony, under-
took the same office for the
former. This was a very
satisfactory arrangement for
Messrs. Barritt and Duffield,
as they were both of the
same age and from the same
county in England. A plea-
sant companionship ensued,
to shortly after develop into
a partnership in a large sheep
station, and subsequently ri-
pen into a life long friendship.
Mr. Barritt was, we learn
from the same source, very
pleased with his adopted
country, and enjoyed life to
the utmost, and did his best,
by repeatedly writing urging
several of his brothers to join
him, but in vain. He found
the growth and luxuriance of
grass and herbage wonderful,
in some places as thick as
an English meadow, and so
high in othem as to wet
him to the knee when riding
on horseback. He men-
tions also the beauty of the
scenery, and adds that “ he
could see Adelaide, 15 miles
distant, and the Port and
Holdfast Bay with all the
shipping, often 25 to 30
vessels loading or discharg-
ing their cargo.”
It was at the end of the
year 1840 that he started
independently by renting 100
acres from Mr. Jacob Hagen,
and, having purchased his
plant, stock,&c., began farm-
ing with the hope in another
year of being the owner of a
flock of sheep as well, as he
writes of several farmers
doing well with sheep, and
THE LATE MR. JOSEPH BARRITT.
of a Mr. Kelly, who lived about three miles distant, having 1,000, evidently a
large number in those days. A year or so after found his ambition realised,
for he had a considerable flock which were fed and shepherded on the country
towards Dry Creek. There was one drawback, however, for the wild dogs were then a
terrible nuisance, which meant that the shepherd had to sleep near them in a watch house
at night with sheep dogs to give the alarm. Calves even were not safe, and numbers were
killed if left out at nights. At this time he writes that potatoes which were raised on his
land yielded prolificly, and for his crop he got £l2 and {l4 a ton, whilst the wheat grown
averaged over 20 bushels to the acre. At first this was sold for 8/ and 10/ per bushel, but
after Mr. Duffield’s wheat from the next section had taken first prize in Adelaide, Mr.
Barritt sold the rest of his crop for seed at 14/ to 15/ per bushel, which he considered re-
markably good.
Being now in a prosperous condition, and having erected a comfortable dwelling and
farm houses, his thoughts naturally turned to matrimony, and wrote to England to the
lady of his choice, who shortly afterwards arrived, and they were married, d hree children
were born in the years 1843, 1845, and 1847, then misfortune befell him in the loss of his
first born, a little boy of three years, who was drowned in the river, and he lost his wife
some time later. It was soon after this sad occurrence that he decided on getting further
into the country, and purchased land on the North Para River, near Lyndoch Valley,
which was used mostly for farming and sheep grazing.


The correct spelling of the name Lyndoch is Lynedoch, as it was named after Lord
Lynedoch, but has since been contractad to its present form. The present appropriate
name of the estate was not adopted by Mr. Barritt till 1858, when the present homstead
was built.
it was soon after this the discovery of copper mines at the Burra having caused people
to, go there in large numbers, and, the surrounding country being so suitable for grazing
purposes, Mr. Barritt and his friend (Mr. Duffield) entered into a partnership in a sheep
run —the Princess Royal Station and adjoining country comprising some of the present
Koonoona Station.
In the year 1850, having two young motherless children, Mr. Barritt decided to pay
a visit to his native land to see his family again, taking the children (one of each sex) with
him. He returned to Australia the next year, but left the children with relatives in Eng-
land, where they remained till 1859. On his return he decided to settle at Lyndoch, and
added to his estate there, and built a residence at “ Riverside,” the future home of the
family, which was completed in 1858. In the meantime Mr. Barritt had again married,
in 1854, Hannah, one of the daughters of the late Joseph May, of Mount Barker. That
family arrived in the colony with him in 1839 by the same vessel ; of this union there were
eight children, four sons and four daughters, who were all born at Lyndoch, and who all
survived him.
In the year 1860 Messrs. Barritt and Duffield dissolved partnership, and the following
year Mr. Barritt purchased the Glen Alpine property of Mr. William Barker in the Barossa
Range, adjoining the Pewsey Vale and Corryton Park estates ; he also leased from Mr.
Stephen Goldup Finn the rest of the property, comprising the present Highlands estate,
with the right of purchase, which was carried out in 1878, and the house built in the next
year. This property was used for raising sheep, cattle, and horses in connection with
his other estate a few miles distant.
About this time (1861) he bought the Moorara Station on the River Darling, N.S.W.,
from Mr. McLeod, and worked it successfully for many years as a sheep and station, adding
largely to its extent during his ownership by taking up the outside country. This pro-
perty he sold, about 1875, to his eldest son (Mr. Charles Barritt, who still resides on Mallara
Station adjoining) and partner. Moorara is now in the possession of Mr. Ben Chaffey.
In 1877-8 he purchased the Yattalunga Estate from Mr. Phillip Butler, also that of
South Para from Mr. Trego Williams.
Mr. Barritt took a deep interest in the affairs of his adopted land from the very being-
ning both in local matters and those pertaining to the whole colony, and he served the
various districts in which he resided as Councillor on many occasions. He was keenly
interested in politics, and was elected as a member of the House of Assembly for the Dis-
trict of Barossa in 1863, but on account of his poor eyesight he had to resign next vear.
This affliction, with the prospect of total blindness, was a great strain upon him at this
time. In 1871 he entirely lost his sight, which he felt sorely, for it obliged him to live in
retirement during the last ten years of his life, though he continued to conduct his business
to the last, and his interest in all that affected the welfare of the country never abated.
In the year 1881 the family was broken up by the death of both mother and father in
June and August respectively, and the landed properties were divided among the sons.


Jl\e property of jYtr. Walter parritt.
This beautiful estate, part of which was included in the Wiltshire Special Survey, is
well situated in the Barossa Ranges, some few miles from the township of Lyndoch, and
comprises an area of 1,500 acres of steep rough hills, with undulating slopes of fair pastoral
and agricultural country interspersed with magnificent timber, chiefly red gum, especially in
the deep gullies and well grassed with various native fodder grasses. The homestead is
built on a site which commands a beautiful view over the Barossa plains as far as the
eye can reach. In addition to sheep breeding and wool production, vine growing has been
undertaken by Mr. Walter Barritt on a somewhat extensive scale at Highlands, and has
proved fairly satisfactory.
Mr. Walter Barritt, born at Lyndoch in 1856, is the eldest son of the second family
of the late Mr. Joseph Barritt, and was educated at St. Peters and Whinham Colleges.
After leaving school he joined his father, who had then lost his sight, as his secretary, book-
keeper, and overseer, and gained his first experience in pastoral matters at “ Riverside,” the
original home of the Barritt family. Here he remained until past his 23rd year when, in
1880, he went to reside on that portion of the estate known as the Highlands property,
which he inherited on the death of his father during the next year.
Mr. Barritt takes a deep interest in politics and was instrumental in forming a branch
of the Australian National League at Lyndoch, of which he is President. He was also in the
Council for some years as Chairman of the Barossa East District, and is Chairman of the
Lyndoch Board of Advice for the School District, which position he has held continuously


Hammer & MR. WALTE^^B ARRITT,


Scott. VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD FROM THE SIDE.


> • m
■ JtjT- '
J v ' ' *
J * viu- 4 ■' & • •• ** * ,• ’ •• ■•.. .'{ *\.?.'., **•••■ • / .' /■' ••>■... $^jfi/:
■. '’ifcs*’. r ’ *'»•<£- >^%t£j -■* S ”* £u'-. V ’%’&$&, •■■ '*«»■''■■' ’^S8cL**i »*
£' ;, SCi«> »c - ■ v :> : • ■-
**. •\* > fr*y* •,"* l ' v Jf * J''« ~ ' v ' xV ' '*"' .;■£ ’vv -v *£- V/' *^ t,<^
• ' • t ■•-■' • • • Jr, -' : ' ..•_•■
» * ■ I - .
*'■ • ■'■'• j/ ,, '>‘ * v xBifaHX2i^■ >/. ' *>jifciM|fcT?
Scott SHEEP AND CROSSBRED LAMBS.


iBBmMmm \ ■♦ jW C** f t ' /’ /
* *** '* ... >* ? * iBr*- . ■ ,'^
.-V’
MhpCtiH<|C5&iA^i* i r JimEBjBF *&-^‘f > mf* SjLMWttKT *•*-. ••£' -■> -Jhifc. .<m»'
VJflK'%• *!#,» , |s *■*.. ,. - •- i rrtTtw^B
’ v. • fv qB’ : .’i*. $*,’ : -* ,; /•> ■ - 4 ..^_»: -v- ..^ik ♦;~
■ , JPHj WfrnBSk BHR *<* .
•'■*■'•■■ . ... rv ’' M ''- • l ’*-' •";■ V-U-I'-- ■•“' / ** ' ■ ‘ '■' v -v>.- ;, 4 . _. •■-.^vito'ir*
' •- ■■’' ••• ,-- :■ * *• < ■ s ••,.?£.*.' ' / . . . , ' .' '. ~ - ■••: •" -.- ' *■ v •-••,■ ',''* •* • '-• . “ -.. -; • .<... •
A SHADY CORNER.




■ .' .~ V *g.V •■/>■'• \ifi&*i£ : ■.'.. -ijvsi
for 26 years. He was married in 1880 to Miss Ellen Mary Capper, of Unley, and his family
consists of three sons and one daughter. The eldest son, Walter Reginald, is in’ 1 Queens-
land on the land, stock raising, and the others —Francis Cawthorne and Jasper Kenneth—
have not left the paternal roof, but are acquiring experience on the property. They were
all educated at Hahndorf College, and subsequently at Roseworthy Agricultural College
with a view to farming and sheep farming pursuits.
The Flocks.
Mr. Barritt originally bought the Highlands docks from his father; tney are not
bred for stud purposes, but mostly for the fat lamb export trade. They consist chiedy of
Merinos, drst cross Merino-Lincolns, Shropshires, and Lincolns. The Merino rams in the
drst instance were obtained from the late Mr. John Murray and the late Mr. Joseph Keynes,
of Keyneton, they were put to ewes of the Murray strain ; latterly rams have been obtained
from Mr. Win. Gilbert of Pewsey Vale. The Shropshire rams used are from the “ Yatta-
lunga ” stud. The number of sheep at shearing time is generally about 2,000,
including lambs, which are then ready for sale. Mr. Barritt disposes the whole of his
freezing lambs direct to England through the Co-Operative Export Co., of which he is a
Director.
The Vineyard.
There are some 38 acres under vines at Highlands, a portion of which, mostly Madeira,
was planted in the forties, the greater part of the vineyard, however dates from 1891.
The varieties grown are chiedy Carbinet, Sauvignon, Shiraz, Malbec, and Mataro. Wine
is not made, but the whole of the crop is sold in bulk delivered at the Chateau Tanunda
wine cellars.
A CHARMING SCENE


Scott. SOME OF THE CATTLE
Che property of jYtr. Sc/win parritt.
Riverside, situated within 2 or 3 miles of the township of Lyndoch, is the oiiginal
home of the Barritts, having been purchased from the Crown in the late forties. The
estate covers about 2,000 acres ol beautiful picturesque country, excellent alike for
pastoral and agricultural purposes. It is well timbered with red gum and watered b\
the North Para River, which runs through the property.
Mr. Edwin Barritt, the owner of Riverdale, who was born in 1859, is the second son
by the second wife of the late Mr. Joseph Barritt. He was educated at \\ hinham College.
After completing his education he entered Messrs. Harrold Brothers office in order to
gain a commercial training, where he remained for a few years. On relinguishing his
position with the firm he was for a time on a station in the North East, afterwards join-
ing his father at Riverside, which became his property on death of Mr. Barritt, Senr., in
1881. He married in 1887 Miss Jessie Williams, and has a family of one daughter.
Mr. Barritt takes a deep interest in politics, is a Justice of the Peace, and for many
years acted as Chairman of the Barossa East District Ccuncil. His recreations are golf
and polo.
The Flocks.
When Mr. Barritt took over the estate and flocks in 1881 it was his intention to
commence breeding pedigree sheep, and he at once cleared off the stock on the estate.
He then laid the foundation of a stud flock by extensive purchases from “ Koonoona.”
After four or five years, however, during which he met with a fair amount of success,
he decided to devote himself to the production of fat lambs for the London market. The
Merino ewes then on the estate made an excellent foundation for this purpose, and he at


' v M&ki
Scott. THE ORIGINAL HOMESTEAD OF THE BARRITT FAMILY.


j' MR. EDWIN BARRITT.


Scott. GENERAL VIEW.


. >f %*?.
if* ' ' , J|
\ ' V* A: S '% * '' '
i „ ■ V vj. I- / ••’v‘» ■ . >«& '
S cott A BEAUTY SPOT ON THE RIVER.


g, WM^l
feL .wfUffa. J
Scott. ONE OF THE PADDOCKS.
. % . -•,,, .., <v , • > - ± tf -
■ '«*•*••' ' 'fa •'*? mJJ* > ' *g
... ... nt aHPP?®^'
' f-^ J 2Nl <' M| ii*”" wfcSftT* tBBT
_*..... *“ ■ ■ mk&ki
CROSSBRED EWES AND FAT LAMBS


• j
MARES AND FOALS.
once purchased Lincoln rams from the late J. H. Angas to be used as sires. The half
bred Lincoln ewes were then crossed by Shropshire and Dorset Horn rams. The price
netted last year in London averaged 17s. per head, and is in itself sufficient evidence of
the value of the cross. Mr. Barritt markets from 700 to 1000 lambs each year, and being
a great believer in rape and barley for fattening his lambs raises a large quantity of these
fodders. The half bred ewes at Riverside are a hire class of sheep, for they cut a fleece
averaging about 10 lb. right through the hock, for which he has obtained up to lid.
per lb.
Mr. Barritt has about 900 acres of land under cultivation, wheat, oats and barley
being the principal crops. He has had exceedingly good results, 25 bushels to the acie of
wheat, 56 bushels of oats, and 40 bushels of barley. Like his brother at Highlands, Mr.
Barritt goes in for the production of wine grapes, for he has some 20 acres under vines,
mostly Mintaro, with a few currants. Like his brother also he does not manufacture his
own wine, but sends the grapes to Chateau Tanunda, of which he is a shareholder.
VINEYARD AND ORCHARD.


I[ V- ; - ■’ -j I ifSlKBBl ’ y ■ *~ ■ < fJVtf' ' f-w B
«#^§wr w ' * • "c _ Ida
- -
Cfye property of Jfir. prank parritt
This beautiful pastoral home is situated some 6 miles from the township of Gawler.
The estate was first taken up by the late Philip Butler, uncle of the Hon. Richard
Butler, M.P., and the homestead which is of a most substantial nature was built at the
time the diggings broke out in Victoria, and in those days was considered one of the
largest mansions outside of Adelaide. Subsequent to Mr. Butler’s ownership, Mr. Grant,
of Messrs. Grant & Stokes, leased the property and lived there for some considerable
time, after which the late W. B. Sells resided there, renting it for some years, Yattalunga
subsequently passing into the hands of the late Mr. Joseph Barritt about the year 1878,
when he purchased the property without the sheep. Messrs. Frank and Iderbert E.
Barritt inherited this estate on the death of Mr. Joseph Barritt in 1881, but the partner-
ship was dissolved about 1900, when Mr. Frank Barritt remained in possession of the
property.
The estate, which includes the old South Para property purchased from Mr. Trego
Williams, comprises some most beautiful undulating country well covered with natural
fodder grasses, and is watered by the Tennafete Creek and the South Para River.
lln 1896 Mr. Frank Barritt decided to go in for a stud flock, and for this purpose pur-
chased about 30 Shropshire Ewes from Beatty’s, of Victoria, and the ram “Young Sub-
stance,” from Kadlunga. Rams were also obtained from Werocata and Watalunga, the


'■S^'' _
T..Kv«v,U the homestead.


’ ”-2S*r^«£' ' **
■„... • •;• ;•• .'. ;•• ...... . ., ■;. . :■**.*" . <• •%!> ,•• • • ■> ; , •.*-’ ' *"‘ v
SIS#
iSHSfc' iv ■■ ... • -*y * , ■ ”'• ■ ■
Edwards. A VIEW OF THE HOUSE FROM THE PADEOCKS.
‘- f . -~ac-.- vcjjK0KUk, ■*■
illiWWjflii i ~ 1 1 9v..tMfll&i . jBb& -.-.
!g?ia8iiiii 11 aa -rtaKSa-v- /.-v .-_■ ,.., \v1®. ; '-,i\ a ■ .■•w>»-x-
g ; . Bg&» 1 ‘■JMBL'
ONE OF THE GULLIES.


*g£
jSm£SL±\ &&£ . . v - ■ f-r» -fc^sfe 1
. y.y y : -/.re, ■, %\Mp x ~ ~ M^'
ggSiSjffi
Edwards. THE < ORCHARD.
Edwards. THE TENNIS COURT.


♦.
SCENES ON THE ESTATE


MR. FRANK BARRITT.
stud flock in those days numbered some 200, for which a good demand was found, not
only in South Australia, but in the other States, but after a few years Mr. Barritt deci e
to relinquish stud breeding and confine himself entirely to the frozen lamb trade using
Shropshire rams and Merino and first cross ewes, and this owing to the early and good
fattening conditions of the pastures has been very remunerative.
Mr. Frank Barritt was born at Lyndoch in 1863, and is the third son of the second
family of the late Mr. John Barritt. He was educated at Winham College After leaving
school he joined his fathei at ; Riverside, Lyndoch, and gained his first experience in
pastoral matters there.
He married in 1889, and has a family of one son, F. E. Barritt, who is following
inf his' father’s footsteps. Mr. F. E. Barritt received his education at St. Peters Co ege,
and finally at Repton, England.


South Australia as a State and Australia as a whole owe much to those pioneer colonists
of German birth or parentage who in the early days of our history left the Fatherland for
the freer life and wider opportunities enjoyed in Australia
In politics and law, in rural as well as commercial life, these pioneers made their mark,
and to-day some of the most progressive and enterprising of our people are to be found
amongst the descendants of those sturdy nation-makers who so well and truly laid the
foundation of a great industry. Prominent amongst the names of those who in those
early days became and still are closely associated with pastoral matters is that of Gebhardt.
The founder of this family, the late Mr. Gustav Adolph Gebhardt, was born at Duder-
stadt, Hanover, in 1833, and arrived in South Australia in February, 1858. It is interest-
ing in these days of swift travel and frequent communication with the old world to note
that the good ship Ohio, by which Mr. Gebhardt sailed, occupied over four months on
the passage —truly a wearisome prelude to life in a new land.
1‘ oi a short time after his arrival Mr. Gebhardt found employment in Adelaide, but
it was not long before he went to the Burra, where, in the face of considerable difficulty,
he built up an extensive butchering business, which he held for some years and then sold
to his brothers. It was at this period that he decided to devote his time to sheep breeding
and pastoral matters generally. He began by purchasing 2,000 acres, situated at Mount
( one, from the ( rown. This was the commencement of a prosperous career during which
Mr. Gebhardt never looked back, for during the next 30 years and until his death in 1900
he was a large occupier of land in various parts of the colony. Amongst other holdings
being Markaranka, near Morgan, where he leased 500 square miles ; Poorulka in the north


/ M r> Oo I \ y yts \i\O °o . • , • ‘ •» - <* * V- 1 I _y o,a^\
fi$sp}sj41*zS) Uo&i::;.v r^y&Jn'
Vl"-> o *''.*■' • *~ t • —• —' ' ' 0 ~~**^*^*
W
I Voo/ * 0 Sv^v\\O ]o°w
Hammer & Cu. THE LATE G. A. GEBHARDT.


Edwards. ENTRANCE TO “PA TARAHUNGA.”
Edwards. “ PA TARAHUNGA,” GLENELG.


which consisted of some 70 square miles of country ; Clifton, 10,000 acres, east of Burra ;
Pareora, near Port Wakefield, 10,000 acres, in addition to Mackerode, a splendid property
of 30,000 acres situated near the Burra, which was for many years the principal station ;
in fact, the Home of the Gebhardts, and which is still held by a member of the family.
During this long period Mr. Gebhardt spent a very large sum of money in water conserva-
tion, fencing, and general improvements.
In 1889 Mr. Gebhardt retired from the active control of his numerous properties,
which were then made., over to 4 his four sons, Mr. Adolph Gebhardt taking
“ Pareora ”as his share. The other^sons —Charles, Ludwig, and Albert —carried on the
other estates in partnership for some years. At this time he purchased Pa Tarahunga, a
handsome residence with ample grounds on the Brighton-road, Glenelg. Pa Tarahunga
is the Maori expression for a beautiful view, and in this case it is not a misnomer. Mrs.
Gebhardt, who survives her husband, still resides there. In 1875 Mr. Gebhardt took a
trip to his native land, taking his family with him, and returned in the following year.
Mr. Gebhardt will as a tiockmaster be long remembered as one of the first to introduce
Lincoln sheep into Australia. He was for years one of their strongest supporters and
largest breeder. He was an enthusiast in his work, and the outcome was a flock of 12,600,
built up and maintained on lines which preserved and developed the bold, bulky frames
and wealth of wool which characterised the imported stock, with which Mr. Gebhardt
founded the Mackerode flocks. This pronounced type and the general high standard of
excellence, obtained for them a reputation which extended far beyond the borders of the
State, and led to a very general and profitable demand for the annual drafts. Sufficient
testimony this, as to the skill and judgment exercised by Mr. Gebhardt as a breeder, who
was also a successful exhibitor of the breed in Adelaide and at Auburn, Burra, and James-
town.
In 1882 it was, though not without reluctance, decided dispose of the Lincolns,
as it was thought that for the Burra country the Merino would prove an even more pro-
fitable sheep. A purchaser was found who took the whole flock. The rams were shipped
to the buyer, but, unfortunately, an attempt was made to take the ewes overland, with
disastrous results.
Almost immediately after the disposal of the Lincolns Mr. Gebhardt, with
characteristic energy, commenced the task of restocking with Merinos, and, being fully
alive to the importance of good blood, he bought largely from the Nalpa flock and others.
Altogether 3,000 ewes were purchased, together with Gilmour, Canowie, and Murray rams.
But of the development of the Gebhardt Merinos we shall write more fully when describing
the flocks as they are at the present time.
Mr. Gebhardt, who died in 1900, was a man of great courage and indomitable per-
severance. He was widely known, and enjoyed the respect and goodwill of all with whom
he was brought in contact. As a breeder his knowledge and generous willingness to place
it at the disposal of his brother pastoralists was largely availed of, for he was recognised
as an expert and had on more than one occasion the honor of judging some of the more
important shows in the eastern capitals.
Mr. Gebhardt married, iipißs9, Wilhclmina Horstmann, a native of Oldenburg, and
had a family of four sons and three daughters —C. E. Gebhardt, of Corryton Park ; A. G.
Gebhardt, of Pareora, Port Wakefield ; L. W. Gebhardt, of Mokota, Mount Bryan ; and
Albert George Gebhardt, of Mackerode, Burra ; Mrs. Duff, widow of John Finlay Duff, of
Glenelg ; Mrs. Herman Heinecke, of Adelaide, and Miss Crystal Gebhardt, who resides
with her mother.


Jt]e property of J/ir. Quarles €. Qebhardt.
Mr. Charles Ernest Gebhardt, the owner of Corryton Park, is the eldest son of the
late G. A. Gebhardt, of the Burra, and was born in 1863. With the exception of a short
period spent at Prince Alfred College he has, since boyhood, been engaged in pastoral
affairs, first with his father at “ Mackerode ” and of late years at his beautiful home at
Corryton Park. It was in 1889 that the late Mr. Gebhardt, owing to failing health, retired
from active participation in the supervision of his numerous properties, and took up his
residence at Glenelg, handing over the management to his sons, Charles and Adolph.
Previously Mr. Gebhardt had purchased the Two Mile—since named “ Pareora
which previously belonged to Bowman Bros., his son Adolph had the management oi this
property and subsequently acquired it from his father as his share, the balance oi the pro-
perties being handed over to the remaining sons —Charles, Ludwig, and Albert, which they
carried on as Gebhardt Bros.
On the purchase of Corryton Park in 1898 from Mr. John Rounsevell, Mr. C. E. Geb-
hardt took possession and the property was worked in conjunction with Mackerode until
1902, when he purchased it out of the partnership and devoted himself to the improvement
of the estate, by clearing and burning up large quantities of timber, netting the place in
on three sides —the Pewsey Vale boundary on the north being previously netted —and
destroying all harbor and rabbits.
Corryton Park is a beautiful and picturesque estate, delightfully situated in the Barossa
Ranges, 36 miles from Adelaide, and consists of 2,500 acres of beautiful, well grassed,
undulating country dotted with magnificent gums and carrying a flock of some 2,600 sheep.
A very good idea of the charming nature of the scenery and surroundings may be gathered
from the excellent photographs we reproduce. It is good country, too, for an inspection
of the soil discloses the fact that there is a constant variation from chocolate to deep black


I' |
& :’ J&tfL ? w
Hammer & Co. MR. CHARLES E. GEBHARDT,


q rriH “ CORRYTON PARK” HOUSE.


in the ridges and undulations which spread over the estate, so that from a pastoral point of
view, although not large, it is an exceptionally valuable property, for the healthy and sound
character of the country lends itself to the production of a sound, clean, lustrous type of
wool. Ihe climate is, however, wet and cold in winter and consequently the sheep are
too backward for exhibition at the Adelaide Shows, which Mr. Gebhardt regards as the
only drawback.
The Merinos.
Immediately after the purchase of the property the sheep then on the estate were
cleared off and it was stocked with some of the pick of the sheep from “ Mackerode.” In
1901, with the object of putting more density of fleece on to the sheep, Mr. Gebhardt pur-
chased the champion ram “ Senator,” a son of “ President,” the famous 1,600 guinea ram.
” Senator ” was champion of Tasmania, that noted home of noted sheep, and at that time
might with )ustice be said to be the champion Merino of Australia. “ Senator ” was
Scott. THE AVENUE.
bred by Mr. W. H. Gibson, of Fairfield, Tasmania, and was champion of Campbelltown,
1899, winner of Goldsborough Mort & Co.’s special prize, champion of the yard at the
Midland of Tasmania Sheep Show in 1900, and sire of the champion strong wool ewe in
the 1901 show. He was a sheep of wonderful development and tremendous fleece. It
is interesting to record that in his best year he cut lb. of wool, and never less than 24.
He was, moreover, a great sire, having in the highest degree the power of transmitting his
characterisl ics of his flock. He was also a prolific stockgetter, and in every way so great
a success that Mr. Gebhardt has confined his selection of sires to his descendants, several
of them including such well-known rams as “ Blucher,” “ Nelson,” and “ Bismarck,”
illustrations of which appear in these pages, are very highly prized, and are now being used
in the stud. “ Senator ” was afterwards sold in Melbourne with seven of his sons for 1,440
guineas.
That “ Senator ” was a great acquisition, and that Mr. Gebhardt has shown great skill
and foresight in his use of him and in the breeding of his flocks generally is evidenced by
the fact that he has built up his yield of wool from 36 bales to 62 from practically the same


Panoramic View of “ Corryton Park,” indicative of the Characteristics of the Pastoral Area and Homestead Section.
Panoramic View of “Corryton Park” Homestead, typifying the Magnificent Red Gums on the Estate.




- • r * i$tm ~/> *^aHpp|Hlp^^^^WHI^BB^M^^BB^. jt-. jjjSjgy
Scott. CHAMPION RAM “ SENATOR, M by “President.”


(1) FLOCK RAMS. (2) FLOCK RAMS. 3) 2-TOOTH STUD EWES.


— s — i — \
STUD EWES.


„ * » i Su
, v ftr % ’ r * -i pHi
■■ **
■ ' ;: v /V '■•'■. * ■ >
— .:■ . ’ ■■ - .•_ .5*' _ ‘ 1
THE HOUSE FROM THE BACK.
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HOUSE.


Scot i. STUD RAM “BISMARCK” (3 Years), by “ Blucher,” by “Senator.”
Fleece from this ram was sent to and exhibited at the recent Franco- British Exhibition.


TYPICAL VIEWS ON THE ESTATE.


Scott. STUD RAM “ BLUCHER” (7 years) by “ Senator/’ Cut 2?i tbs. wool.


Scott. SOME OF THE HEREFORDS.


Scott. STUD EWES.




' LET. ’ ’


c nn *i ANOTHER PHOTOGRAPH OF “ BLUCHER,” (by “Senator.”)


i -4* - 1- r *v :41|#ma y !Sp^jPy|!Pp8i|p^^
Scott. STUD EWE (7 years old) by “ Senator.”


- ” * w *“
Scott. A CHARMING SCENE.


*
? ~ yl gHp.^
&*^*^ Jfifc:$~\ • • ''.' K^fv^k.
.V>;• V ■ v *** ~ •**~ >J
r£.-. ; ;j > jB^^ r ■ - '_ »
Scott. SHROPSHIRE EWES.
SHROPSHIRE RAM (Untrimmed). ,By “ Renown ” (Imp.)


Scott. STUD RAM This Ham cut 231 tbs. at 2 w
number of sheep. As to the excellence of the quality of the clip, this is abundantly demon-
strated by the fact that it has on several occasions brought top price in the Adelaide market,
and in 1907 put up a record in Adelaide for greasy wool, viz., per lb.
Shropshires.
Mr. Gebhardt has lately purchased a small lot of Shropshire ewes from Messrs. Button
Bros., Oatlands, Tasmania, in lamb to that celebrated imported ram, “ Renown.” A
more even and beautiful lot of this breed it would be difficult to find. Mr. Gebhardt has
the greatest admiration for these sheep, as they are so docile, and stand the cold and wet
even better than Merinos, and as all round sheep for carcase and fleece can give them points
as profit makers. A small parcel of their wool brought per lb. in Adelaide, and
lambs from these sheep 11 months old on poor feed dressed lbs., and as an index of
their prolificacy it may be stated that 10 ewes at Corryton Park produced 17 lambs last year.
Hereford Cattle.
In addition to sheep, Mr. Gebhardt has established a well-bred herd of Herefords.
“ Spark 34,” the sire purchased to head the stud was bred by Mr. G. H. Green, of Wigmore
Grange, Herefordshire, England. He is a noble animal of ample proportions and aristo-
cratic carriage, and as a stock getter has proved of rare merit for his stock are exceptionally
even and true to type and character. So much is this the case that, on viewing the C orryton
Park sires one is at a loss, without careful examination, to distinguish father from son.
Ten pure cows were purchased from Lake Albert station in 1903, and the herd now numbers
55. They are a great success in producing excellent beef and keeping down the rough
growth of grass, and do not in any way lessen the carrying capacity for sheep.
Mr. Gebhardt is a stockman by instinct and training, and recognises to the full the
value of rigid selection in the high ideal he has set himself in the breeding of the sheep and
cattle. “ Nothing but the best is good enough is a maxim which he believes in and
invariably acts upon with the result that on the solid basis of carefully selected founda-
tion stock he has built up and is maintaining a very high standard in the Merinos, Shrop-
shires, and Herefords, which the visitor finds at Corryton Park.


Jhe property of Jtfr. jff. Q. Qebhardt.
This well-known station is situated 100 miles north of Adelaide and eight miles from
the Burra railway, in the heart of some of the best sheep raising country in the State. The
property was originally purchased by the late Mr. G. A. Gebhardt, and it was here that the
one-time famous Mackerode Lincoln flocks were kept.
In 1882 Merinos were substituted as being more suitable for the district. These were
procured from the Nalpa flock and from Mr. Wm. Jervois, of Wellington. In 1902, when
the present owner took over his share of his father’s estate, Mackerode comprised 14,000
acres, and was stocked with a quarter (about 8,000) of the old Mackerode flock.
Since then Mr. Gebhardt has added 2,600 acres, so that the total area of the estate is now
over 16,000 acres, for the most part good grazing land with a small portion agricultural.
This country, though splendid for fattening purposes, has a lot of grass seed that affects
the wool to such an extent that it does not command the price that it would otherwise
do. The carrying capacity of the estate is about 10,000. The owner of this fine
property is, and always has been, a strong believer in the purely commercial type of sheep,
an animal that will always command a good price in the markets, and carry a strong
fleece of profitable wool. He is, in fact, following very closely the ideals of his father in
this respect, so the Mackerode sheep continue to be of the old type, big and bold,
good doers, and able to thrive in any climate.
Mr. Gebhardt does not go in extensively for ram breeding, but what surplus rams he
has always find a ready market ; in fact, a portion have been sold to Victoria up till 1910.
Mackerode wool is of good length and excels in density and weight of fleece. Last year
on a falling market the clip brought up to lljd. per lb., and the flock averaged, not
including lambs, 11 lb. oz. of wool.
In addition to sheep raising, Mr. Gebhardt devotes portion of the estate to agricul-
tural purposes, and grows a good deal of wheat. He also has 70 acres under lucerne which


| GEBHARDT.


Scott. THE AVENUE. (Mackerode).


Ji jlfi 9 r V\jjlk j *Iso
- J, "^^* > * ..' : ' „>. jj. tt jfJiMt. * 7JF >» fttptfn >ffi -y Vfit
/u. • •’,\ 3
* '^'f l' , *$Mpir/ v *’-^> 'i^g
Ik >VT yf i J^m^)tid$'lv
HI' :
..... f
yjj' ?£ $ jf Aji. 1gHp|| t
3hB6?*mB8 .' . <4jaBSaBg>^f^^^fe^S^bf^JgfiwWUHiaBjMlBBara^BirffiPMiScya^fe^Sy/*^.SwvS^MiTOAi„
. j*JiSagWBfe»F^A3as|»S|R «* ,
Scott. STUD RAM. (Mackcrodc.)


-. * IViV '
- ., * V * c
•.f- I? u, ‘a ** r J AJLt'-Jm $% * • Tm»r
, Jjj•sy® ' ; 4ra#TT* W', - ; VjHHMgp9
*' Aw
HHH& ■ • jaL "' *~ i%&- •.» - *^ r “ fiwpyr. Jt i jr ; jfep'* 1 >$ ,/• 1^'^
Scott. STUD EWE, (Mackero'd^.)


Scott. THE HOMESTEAD. (IffnrkerocM.


« '-5 ’ 1 t, * 1 ~ ' • ■* ‘ " „ -S’*. ** * *«* * ' \ ;JL^ -
:♦ , ■* - '*“'" '* • -* i
'■’**' 5 V * ' , : * * ' - ■■/• ■';'*■ ; /gf* -’ -':
i , v >*** m*> v
.
Krischock. ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD. (Mackerode).


<rntt. A GROUP OF STUD EWES. (Mackpmrlp 1


BSP y • * '"•* - | i jv :
Plw*** jLt/d /Hfl -V' VS* 'fjJ^v/V*
-# ' > ■s*’"'- s> -ji-s , ?.. .♦‘•v <C "m. » Jr < * .V. ■ •£ ■ ■ * *5
Ij. jjir n 5 ’. "£i"*v v ' *■ *-■
Scott. 2-TOOTH RAMS. t Mackprorlp.'l


Krischock. MOTOR HOUSE.
(Mackerode).


W' *1 "v* ' P
< &jBkf ‘ |bB
v< |®4 _ |Jj||
1 /> BKTOlffi '>^S^V ; ' : ‘
. '* * ' 4- .,4 „ '*•■ • ;. . „ • v• -fiJ' iliP
* * v ”* * ti ‘ • \ || *•
/ >: " *' '"*'" * ■*'**' ,* * tl
Krisdiock. VIEW 0 F THE AVENUE EROM THE HOUSE. I Mack.jrotk'l


c,ntt A GROUP OF SELECTED RAMS. fMaokorodtO


ScotL LOOKING ACROSS LUCERNE PADDOCKS. ,, r , , .


' ■ ■ 'L « •* , ■” ‘ -
'-■H---...-- . ... r- - ' - J •
■ ■ r 7 • '• - .-4f .. - ' r-r-. '■• ! - ■- *
‘ • ■- * •;-**< >***■» jr* ,■*•*■■ . ■ ■ - * " ■ -., - -'■•% - ' • -
* -' % • '' ‘ t *i ' ' * *
u . f • . ■ ~ '• ; •
■ v *~ ■* f; ..* * ' . J* *!: \*/2 * • * ** / . ■* . * . - - <v "; ;
****'• "'* '-■ ' V**!* ■ ’-V:, - ; » ■ • '• 4 *V r ’ f ..! ' ■ ~ w * •» % ' * '•■'
* , i > **■ ■ ** ,/•* > -r, .- .• -, --
|* ■- , f* • ’ % £ ■*■ ' ,* * ** V* ** ’ • V ■ > '
. . . . . A CORNER OF THE ORCHARD. (Mackerode).


-
Kriscli'»« ’ A STACK OF LUCERNE. (Mackerode).


T : - rngm
* r&~**
: *■ m .
BURRA CREEK AFTER A FLOOD. HOMESTEAD IN THE DISTANCE.
he finds very valuable. This year he cut 200 tons of lucerne hay, and the paddock in a
fortnight had another nice crop of lucerne over it.
Personal.
Mr. Albert Gottlieb Gebhardt, the owner of this estate, the youngest son of the late
Mr. G. A. Gebhardt, was born at Mackerode on August 29, 1879, and was educated at
the Glenelg Grammar School, after which he joined his brothers at Mackerode. Mr.
Gebhardt takes a great interest in local affairs, is a member of the Hospital Board and of
the Burra Show Committee. He is a thorough sportsman, a genial host, a kindly neighbor,
and one of the most popular residents of the district. In 1908, in conjunction with six
other gentlemen, he presented a block of 79 acres to the township of Burra for recreation
purposes, show grounds, polo grounds, &c.
Mr. Gebhardt married, in 1906, May, the eldest daughter of Dr. John I. Sangster, of
Burra. There is one boy, John Macke.


Krischock. Flock Sheep at Mackerode
■‘fv „_ I.,
_* .n>« r>in i~ii i ~hihm n nm 11 ti~mn, ~ itm
*^ r i_ __ ■ <fp ■■ .X3K -'-J^
_ ,1 1 v «-. wr . * ‘Satekv ■*
• r * ' *'**\ ;'.•■* * t'?*} ? . .<?* • , , *' _.■ •'?**?• _ ' ’* K * 4 ' i '‘. -:‘5 > ''J^»
j^jfe 1^' fr i.^ijfiyj|^i^[*'' . . . * ■ ,jim. - - *sC . "y* ■ k *^* > .-■ ~yjfe•■-'*• .'---\)u m.
» .i*>Hi*WLf- • • *• ' — ' •t'ntmjr'z'vetkiti&L:’ . gy. • : ' w..‘>*. . sHHHRHhiHH8l0Hffia*..'. • vHiHHft •**v- • •■>*
Krischock. Panoramic View of Mackerode Station.




Che property of Jtfr. X. V. Qebhardt ,
Mr. Ludwig Wilhelm Gebhardt, the owner of Mokota, is the third son of the late Mr.
G. A. Gebhardt. He was born in Braunschweig, Germany, in the year 1875, during a
visit paid by his parents to their native land. He received his education at the Glenelg
Grammar School, and afterwards entered the office of Messrs. Elder, Smith, & Co., where
he remained for about 18 months, gaining an insight into commerce. On leaving Elder’s
he joined his father and brothers at Mackerode.
The Homestead.
Mokota, a Maori name chosen by Mr. Gebhardt, meaning “Fine View,” was the northern
portion of the original Mackerode estate founded by his father. It comprises about 11,000
acres of magnihcent pastoral country, and came into his possession in 1903 as his share
of the property till that date held in partnership by the four brothers.
The homestead of Mokota, a fine building of neat architecture, was erected in 1804
on a site from which some magnificent views are obtained. From the front of the home-
stead Mount Bryan is seen, whilst from the eastern slope the Hallet’s Hill Range is the
most striking feature of the outlook. The estate is subdivided into conveniently sized
paddocks, all substantially fenced and watered by dams and bores.
The Flocks.
The flocks on this estate were a portion of the noted Mackerode Merinos, the foundation
of which was laid by the late Mr. G. A. Gebhardt in 1882 by the purchase of 3,000 ewes
from the flocks of Messrs. W. Jervois, of Wellington, and Messrs. Stirling, of Nalpa, with
which Gilmour rams from Mount Pleasant and Murray and Tasmanian rams were used. On
this foundation Mr. Gebhardt has by careful selection and close culling obtained a splendid


I
| 11;11 m ii■. r i MR. L. W.


K)i il|i rl A VIEW ON MOKOTA STATION. (Mokota).


Scott. STUD HEREFORDS. (Mokota).


■HSuqa ,
,&4jQ*
, '.J 3 . y im a# »**> «*.- * 3h .» *U
lii f '-iW ► %!** iWf* * *>J»
gp" jjLtt -\ .,■* * • *• • «■ ,
... ;•
■ -■’* ■ .%i ■• ~y
.sjm>
: r
“A HEAD STUDY.” (Mokota).
special Stud Ram, 3 A years. Cut 21 lbs. 7 ozs. Wool.


I - I
w, ®
Scott - MOKOTA HOMESTEAD.


*■ * *„
Krischock. THE WOOLSHED. (Mokotak


Scott. TWO-TOOTH STUD EWES. (Mokota)
Cut an average of 14 lbs. i oz. of High Quality Wool.


Scott - STUD EWE. /TI . , .
(A! okota).


\-J - > •: ' ■ - .
< Jp / ii; ■.
- if . lf‘* : r- .
pi-
bcott SPECIAL STUD RAM. (Cut 23i lbs. Wool). (Mokotn).


. yf : x * * -.


STUD EWES. (Mokota).
Scott.


'
Scott ' STDD EWE - (Mokota).


I'' I
I 1(1
Scott HEREFORD STUD BULL (2J years old). ()Fok otn).


’ HEREFORD CATTLE.


type of sheep with deep massive frames and robust constitutions, carrying a good weight
of profitable wool. The flock now numbers about seven thousand high grade evenly
bred sheep of good size and type, which, when sold to graziers for fattening purposes, a way-
command a good figure. They also carry a profitable fleece, for the cip rom - 0 cl
last season averaged the satisfactory price of nine shillings per head for grown sheep. mi
stud purposes the Mokota sheep are also becoming widely and favorably known in the
Eastern States and Western Australia, with the result that Mr. Gebhardt finds a read',
market for his rams ; so favorably are they known, m fact, that all the drop lor 19 )8 tha
he can spare have already been placed in Victoria. They are all grazed on natural grasses
only.
The owner of Mokota is not one of those who, in homely phrase, believe m putting
all their eggs in one basket, for, in addition to the large number of sheep raised he keeps
a considerable herd of Hereford cattle, goes in largely for mixed farming, anc glows
large quantity of wheat, the area under cereals this year being close on a thousand acres.
Mr. Gebhardt also believes that land should be put to its fullest use, and that a station
farm should, as far as possible, be self supporting in the matter of its food supplies A
glance round the homestead, with its gardens, dairy, piggeries, &c., is sufficient evidence
that in this matter he acts on his belief.
The Hereford herd is quite an important item at Mokota, for Mr. Gebhardt finds the
white faces with their fine bone, good fattening qualities, and hardy constitutions to b(
very suitable for his requirements. His first stock of ten cows was obtained m 1903 Iron
Mr. Philip Charley, of the old Narrung Station, Lake Albert. A high-class bull bred by
the late J. H. Angas was purchased at the same time. Since then no pains have been
spared in keeping up and improving the standard of the herd. Mr. Gebhardt has beer
successful in this, and as a result finds a ready call for any stock which he is able to spam
In spite of this, however, the herd has increased, and there are now between 40 and 50 hear
of breeding cows and heifers on the estate.
Though breeding a high-class of Merino, Mr. Gebhardt has not been an exhibitor at
the Adelaide Shows, but has of late years been largely represented at the Burra, where he
has been eminently successful, the following being some of the prizes secured .
1904.— Champion Merino ewe, first prize ewe over 2-tooth, first prize ewe 2-tooth,
first prize ram 2-tooth.
1906. —Champion ewe and four other first prizes.
1907. First prize ewe and lamb. Won Mr. T. Sandland’s silver shield for ewe witl
lamb and four other first prizes, besides numerous second prizes in each year.


Krischock. Sheep Feeding in Lucerne Paddock, Mokota.
Krisphock Panoramic View oi Mokota Station.




Cfje property of J{on. John Warren, JYi.X.Q.
The family of which the Hon. John Warren is the head, is one of the oldest in the State
for It was as far back as the year 1838 that his father, the late John Warren, disembarked
rOm the Royal Admiral, in which he sailed from the old country. His first occupation in
this new land was that of brewing, and it is a matter of historical interest that his brewery
on the Torrens, small and primitive as it no doubt was, was the first establishment of its
kind m the State.
Pioneer John Warren was, however, one of those who heard the land calling so after
three years spent m this business, he joined a syndicate to take up land under the old system


r-^"5 °}&W
t'f
Hammer & Co. THE LATE JOHN WARREN.


THE H0N ' J0HN WARREy,^M- L -C>


vk\ / ire $&ms « ~ v -* |Bfc
Sm| ‘“JWf '
i 1
BIRD’S EYE VIEW OE SPRINGFIELD.


• ' ''
-
*’ Si* " •
A VIEW ON THE ESTATE. fSra-imr(i,.UH
of special survey. 1 his syndicate first applied for a special survey of 20,000 acres in the
district of Finniss, but after lurther investigation found that neither the area nor the class
of country available were suitable for their requirements, so they subsequently applied
foi a special survey for and obtained it in the Mount Crawford district, and paid £l per
acie for the land they selected. When the special survey was divided among the share-
holders Mi. \\ arren selected Springfield as his portion, and built his home there —thus
Springfield has been the home of this family since the earliest days. He appears to
ha\ e been the leading spirit of the syndicate, and was one of the first to carry on dairy-
ing combined with grazing and farming in the province.
In 1843, however, the Murrays brought the first sheep to the district, and the success
attending this importation at once demonstrated the suitability of the country for wool
producing, and John Warren was not slow to see the possibilities presented in this direction,
for in 1846 he purchased a number of ewes from the Strathalbyn district. This first venture
in sheep breeding was not, however, a success, for scab, at that time very prevalent in the
neighbourhood, got into the flock, the whole of which was in consequence disposed of in
1851.
I he Hon. John Warren, the present owner of Springfield, was born at Coxton, Moray-
shire, Scotland, on September 3, 1830, and is, therefore, now in his 79th year. He com-
menced his education at New Spynie in the same country, but at the age of eleven came to
South Australia with Ins brother and sister in the “ lona.” On arrival in 1842 he went
at once to Springfield to join his father, with whom he remained till 1852, when he went to
the \ ictorian goldfields and spent some little time there, chiefly at Mount Alexander, where
lie met with considerable success. Mr. Warren would probably have remained on the
other side longer had it not been that his father required his assistance at home. From
this time onward he worked Springfield. On his father’s death in 1873, and subse-
quently, a great part of the estate became his property.


Vi .' V vj \ " J
WINTER SNOW. (SprinoTicld I
... '5
SUMMER GREEN. (Springfield).


'
Shortly after his return a second beginning was made with sheep, this time by the
purchase of 1,500 ewes of Merino type from the late John H. Angas. At the same time
some pure Merino rams were hired from Mr. John Murray, of Mount Crawford. The flock
begun on these lines in 1853 has been continued and increased till the present day. In
addition to the sheep, general farming, fruit growing and wine making were added, so
that in the management and active supervision of this property a less energetic man might
have found ample scope for his life work.
In 1862, however, at the time the Northern Areas were giving promise of the future,
they have since to a large extent realised. Mr. Warren, in conjunction with the late Wm.
Bakewell and the late Mr. Julius Jeffreys, took up an area of 500 square miles, now known
as Anna Creek, at Strangways Springs. This run was first stocked with sheep only, but
afterwards cattle and horses were added. Mr. Jeffreys did not remain in the partnership
ANNA CREEK HEAD STATION. This Photo, is as taken by Mr. Warren many Years ago.
very long, and Mr. Bakewell soon afterwards retired. Mr. Warren was then joined by the
late Hon.Thos. Hogarth, who remained in the partnership till his death in 1893, and whose
interests have since been held by his sons. Anna Creek has since those early days been
greatly increased, for it now covers between four and five thousand square miles of well
improved country.
In addition to his work at Anna Creek pioneering in the remote districts has fallen
to Mr. Warren, and there are few men who know more than he does of the outside pastoral
country. It was a knowledge of this fact that induced the Government of the day to
choose him ten years ago as one of the members of the Pastoral Commission, and as one of
that body he travelled thousands of miles through “ the Great North-West ” and Central
Australia as far inland as the MacDonnell Ranges. Mr. Warren took his camera with
him, and he secured scores of excellent photographs of the country passed through, many of


VIEWS ON THE ESTATE.


them having been reproduced on his return to the confines of civilization. It was a long
and arduous expedition for those members of the party who were unaccustomed to bush
life, but Mr. Warren is a splendid bushman, and the experiences of real exploration had
no terrors for him.
Mr. \\ arren is as well acquainted with the quality and value of farm and garden land
as he is with that of the pastoral areas. He has lived for 66 years in the State, and he has
all a Scotchman’s shrewdness and aptitude for observation, so that it may well be under-
stood that his mind is a rich storehouse of information concerning the producing interests
of South Australia.
Mr. A arren early showed a desire to help his country. So long ago as 1854 he entered
upon District ( ouncil work, and since that time he has done much for local Government
MAJOR GOLLAN. LIEUT.-COLONEL ROBERTS. CAPTAIN WARREN
The First three Long-Service Medallists.
institutions, whether as a member or as Chairman. He manifested his patriotism by
joining the volunteer force at the time of the Russian scare which followed the Crimean
war, and he attained to the rank of captain over 46 years ago, and still holds the rank of
Honorary Captain in the Mounted Rifles, and on military occasions may be seen in uniform;
he was a real enthusiast in his military work, eschewing with characteristic practicality
the mere frills and fripperies and undertaking the more solid business of a genuine soldier.
In 18 36 Mr. Warren was made a Justice of the Peace, and as a Magistrate he has won general
respect by the impartiality and strong common sense displayed in his decisions whenever
called upon to adjudicate. His first election to Legislative Council for the North-Eastern
District took place in 1888, and ever since then he has won re-election with little trouble.
No member of the Council is more highly respected, though there may be many who
do not agree with his political views, there is nobody who does not give him credit for


A SCENE IN THE GARDEN. f Springfield),
(>a « -3
A SPLENDID GUELDER ROSE. iSnrinof, P ld)


■in i *'ifcwi ' ' .'" •
THE TENNIS COURT. f SDrincrlioMI
sterling honesty, complete integrity and sturdy independence. “ Unskillful he to fawn
or see ' tor power by doctrines fashioned to the varying hour.” He has the courage to
adhere to what he considers to be the right path no matter how many persons there may
e arrayed against him. He has been termed “ a rigid conservative,” but such designations
~l ol l lbl c llm - always firmly on the side of those who are working for the
m s antial ad\ ancement oi the interests of the State and most conscientiously ever since
ic en ered the political arena he has done everything that he could to push the community
forward on what he considers to be the right lines. He has been equally determined, too
in resisting advance on what he believes to be wrong ones. No one can truthfully accuse
nm of showing the white feather in any political controversy, no matter what the odds
against him _He has stood stalwartly and gone on fighting for his cause until either victory
rf S 11S e^or^s or until he has been defeated by the sheer weight of numbers. Men
like Hr. Warren aie invaluable to the State. While he is in public life the people may be
sure that no pioposal with which he does not agree or which he conceives to be dangerous
ill its tendencies, will ever pass into law without at least being subjected to searching criti-
cism, This, too, although Mr. Warren is now far past his seventieth year, and despite
the fact that he has worked hard all his life. He is a tower of strength to his party in the
Chamber, and the disinterestedness of his actions as a legislator have been everywhere
recognised. No vote or speech of his has ever been influenced by desire for personal
aggrandisement in any direction.
Mr. Warren is always direct in the statement of his political views. “ 1 consider,”
he said a few years ago, “ that the South Australian Constitution is a model one. I would
prefer that confirmed criminals and persons who can show no honest, respectable means of
living were disfranchised. lam in favor of giving private enterprise fair encouragement
to develop the resources of the State, especially the Northern Territory, and am strongly


■*r . ' • —’
' . /r . ;'■•■ *' " , ' . • *£ f
v * **
. - , , Jf« - ■
• #
ONE OF THE POLO PONIES. (Springfield.)
in favor of introducing Indian coolies to work there.” Mr. Warren is ready to defend th ■
right of this State in the River Murray, and is willing even to take the matter to the 1 nv\
Council if necessary. He is strongly opposed to the present Federal Constitution, and to
the wasteful expenditure and ruinous policy of the C ommonwealth Governments and
Parliaments. In this connection it is interesting to record that he was the only membei
of the S.A. Legislature who finally voted against the ( ommonwealth Dill. He indeed,
would approve of the secession by South Australia from the hederation. He is de mteh
opposed to borrowing money except for necessary reproductive undertakings, and
that public works should be carried out by contract on fair terms. He objects to uniair
taxation on land, and looks upon the White Australia policy so far as it relates to the .\or-
them Territory as a fad, and the White Ocean policy as an absurdity. It will be seen
that Mr. Warren has strong and definite views, backed up by the courage to put them in
plain language. Mr. Warren has been a lay reader of the Church of England for the past
24 years. As an amateur photographer he is quite first-class. Most of the photographs
used to illustrate this article were taken by him during the last few years.
Mr. Warren married, in the year 1863, Margaret, the eldest daughter of the late Hon.
Thomas Hogarth, and has a family of seven sons and four daughters surviving of the thirteen
children born to him, and there are 11 grand children.


Jhe property of
Che Gsfate of t/je Xate Ghonjccs Hogarth
The late Mr. 1 homas Hogarth, who was born in the parish of Kilwinning Ayrshire
Scotland on the 6th September, 1815, was one of South Australia’s earliest and most
successful pioneers. \\ hilst still a young man he left the old country in 1839, sailing by
the slnp “Delhi.” He was accompanied on the voyage by his brother, who, however
died shortly after landing in the province. The brothers paid their own passage and did
not come as assisted emigrants.
After ani\ ing in South Australia, I homas Hogarth followed various occupations for
some years, but finally took up land at Black Forest, which he farmed for some time.
His next move in 1849 was to Smithfield, of which district he was one of the first settlers.
Ihe property which he then purchased consisted of 1100 acres of freehold for some of
which he paid as much as £l5 per acre. This land he used for fattening stock for the
Adelaide market and for wheat growing, in which he was highly successful. After some
years spent at Smithfield, Mr. Hogarth became associated with the Hon. John Warren in
the Strangways Springs run, afterwards known as Anna Creek.
Edwards. STOCK YARD AND WOOL SHED. (Blair Place.)


\\ * 4F* s " i 1 1
\\ -j / • //
1 r //
b , //
I y’ / I
jj | ' f
S X o\\ .' • • •
/ 0 °\\ * • .*
/;]D0 CA\ .■•*//
Hammer & Co. THE LATE THOMAS HOGARTH.


Hammer & Co. MR. JOHN HOGARTH.


Edwards. THE HOMESTEAD. (Blair Bhu-o.)
Edwards. THE DRIVE. (Blair Placo.)


Mr. Hogarth was a keen politician, and for some nineteen years before his death occu-
pied a seat in the Legislative Council. He was at all times a busy man, active and ener-
getic. It is a fact not very widely known that the first threshing machine and the second
reaping machine manufactured in the colony were made by Mr. Hogarth. These were not
the only instances of his inventive ability and mechanical skill. In agricultural matters
Mr. Hogarth was always to the front, and was a member of the first committee of the first
Agricultural Society formed in South Australia.
Mr. Hogarth married, in 1842, Miss Jane Smith, a daughter of a well known and highly
respected South Australian, and had a family of five sons and three daughters, Mr. John
Hogarth, the present occupier of the estate, being the eldest son.
Mr. John Hogarth.
Mr. John Hogarth was born on 28th July, 1844, and educated principally at Whinham
College, he gained his early pastoral experience with his father. When the Strangways
Edwards. CORNER OF ORANGERY. (Blair Place).
Springs property was purchased he became manager for the partners, and remained in this
position for 26 years, but in 1892 he relinquished these duties, being succeeded by his
brother, Mr. Thomas Hogarth. On his retirement he came to Blair Place, at Smithfield,
the original homestead of his father. Although relinquishing the management at Anna
Creek, Mr. Hogarth nevertheless still retains an active interest, and undertakes the buying
and selling of the stock. Mr. Hogarth is a land owner in the Gawler district, and goes in
largely for the fat lamb export trade for the London market. The cross he prefers for
this purpose being the Shropshire—Merino. He married, in 1896, Edith Caroline, daughter
of Mr. Henry Hodgson, and the issue was two daughters. Mr. Hogarth takes a very
active interest in the welfare of his district. He is a Justice of the Peace, and is connected
with the Australian National League, of the Smithfield branch of which he is President.


Edwards. ONE OF THE PADDOCKS. (Blair Place).
Strangways Springs.
This station was originally taken up by Mr. Hugh Glass, of Victoria, but the country
finally passed out of his hands to Messrs. Bakewell, Jeffreys, & Warren, who held it until
1867, when the late Mr. Thomas Hogarth purchased the interests of Messrs. Bakewell and
Jeffreys, and the management of the estate was, as already stated, entrusted to Mr. John
Hogarth, under whose care the original area of 500 square miles was increased to its
present largely increased area. Mr. John Hogarth, too, was responsible for the carry-
ing out of the extensive improvements which have been effected, for during his term as
manager 350 miles of sheep proof fencing were erected, whilst over 3,000 feet of well sinking
was undertaken, and the total boring for water also amounted to over 3,000 feet. Since
then another fifty miles of sheep proof fencing has been put up, a hundred and fifty
miles of vermin proof fencing have been erected, and a number of additional wells and
bores put down. When first Mr. Hogarth went to Strangways Springs all the wool
had to be carted by team to Port Augusta, a distance of 350 miles, and owing to the
sheep being shepherded, the wool was very dirty, and consequently costly to cart. All
the wool had to be scoured by hand, so Messrs. Warren and Hogarth went about invent-
ing a scouring machine, and it is still used for all dirty wool, though it is not so necessary
at this date as in the early days, as the railway carts the wool for not much more than
a fourth what it cost by road and team. As against this, however, the carrying capacity
of the country is not what it used to be, owing to the rabbits, which first made their appear-
ance about 16 years ago ; and, owing to the wild dogs being now able to get food easily,
they have increased enormously, which adds to the difficulty of occupying that country
with its scanty rainfall —a five inch average for the last thirty years. It is interesting to
record that Mr. Hogarth was the first to strike artesian water in the North. There is
now a plentiful supply on the station, and, though the water in many of the wells is strongly
impregnated with mineral matter, it is nevertheless found to be extremely healthy for the
stock.
Edwards. DAIRY CATTLE. (Blair Place).


SCENE ON ANNA CREEK, STRANGWAYS SPRINGS.


j
SCENES AT STRANGWAYS SPRINGS.


SCENES AT STRANGWAYS SPRINGS.


Anna Creek is famous for the high standard maintained in all the stock, whether
it be the Merinos, the cattle, or the horses, all of which are largely bred. The Merinos,
of which there are at present rather more than 50,000, are rcbust, large-framed sheep,
with wool of good body and length of staple. The Murray blood has been largely used
in the formation of this flock. The Hon. John Warren, one of the partners, breeds all
the rams on his estate, from whence they are sent to the station from time to time,
thus ensuring a constant succession of carefully-bred sires, reared under different
conditions. The Anna Creek brand commands good prices for the drafts of grade
Shorthorn cattle which are regularly sent to the city market. Sires from the Angas
Shorthorn herd have from time to time been purchased and a very desirable type for
market purposes has been secured. In horses, both light and heavy draughts are bred,
“PADLOCK,” a, Highlander Stock Horse. Used on Anna Creek for 14 years by Mr. George Warren
as well as a fair number of a light class for saddle and buggy work. Good sires are
used, and, as in other stock bred, no pains are spared to keep the brand well to the
front.
Recently Messrs. Hogarth & Warren purchased a block of 80 acres of the old
Levels Estate, for resting drafts from the North, for if stock go direct to market from
so long a distance, they look wasted, and, though started in prime condition, do not
fetch their real value. Good water has been struck at 170 feet, with a flow of 7,000
gallons a day on the new property, which is also very conveniently situated in regard to
the stock sale yards and abattoirs.


Che property of JVir. J)avicl Herbert power.
Mr. D. H. Power, born on the 12th of August, 1853, at Mount Gambier, is a son of the
late Mr. David Power, a well remembered pioneer who at that time held “ Moorak ” at
Mount Gambier as a cattle station. He was educated at Leamington, England, and St.
Andrew’s, Fifeshire, Scotland. After completing his education, as “ Moorak ” had been
sold, Mr. Power spent some eleven years in England, and was for one year in a well-known
English wool broker’s office. He afterwards returned to Australia with his father, and
was for some little time in the Melbourne office of the A.M.P. Society.
Mr. Power had, however, early decided on his future career, so after gaining experience
in t! Ie Darling country, where he was for some years manager of “ Cuthero ” Station, he in
1890 purchased Wirrilla, which was a portion of the Martindale Estate, where he has since
resided. Mr. Power married, in 1893, Miss Moore, by whom there is one daughter, and in
1900 Mrs. Kerr, daughter of late Hon. E. Parsons, by whom there are three sons.
The Wirrilla Estate comprises some 5,400 acres of magnificent sheep country, con-
sisting of undulating well timbered plains, interspersed with rich flats and rises. It is
situated about six miles from the Manoora railway station on the great northern line, 75
miles from Adelaide.
The Homestead.
The homestead, a commodious and comfortable modern residence, is pleasantly situated
on rising ground, from which some fine views of the pastoral area are obtained. Like the
homestead, the outbuildings—comprising offices, stables, store, shearing shed, &c. — are of
modern character, and include all the conveniences and requirements of an up-to-date and
well equipped sheep station. The house is surrounded by neatly laid out and extensive
gardens, as well as enclosures for fruit and vegetables. A large never failing dam in view
of the homestead, from which water is obtained by means of an oil engine, affords a copious
anti complete service for domestic and other purposes.
Scott. 2-TOOTH STUD EWES. (Win-ilia.)


i’ ( r C
9 Rhk’ friX'*’ ’ tJ 9
MR. DAVID HERBERT POWER. OVunlhi.)


r- —
THE HOMESTEAD. , w . .,, ,


Scott. STUD RAM, “ STAPLE,” 5 years old. i


The Flocks.
The foundation of the present flocks were the ewes on the property at the time of
purchase which were from Mr. Bowman’s Martindale stud flock, and rams from the well-
know n Koonoona stud. these sheep possessed large symmetrical frames, free from
wrinkles, with good neck folds and robust constitutions, yielding heavy weights of wool.
In 1902 Wanganella blood was introduced by the purchase of several high-class stud
rams and ewes. These sheep nicked well with the bold, big sheep of the home flocks, and the
effect, has been to produce a more uniformly robust w y ool combined with density and quality.
They have proved themselves to be splendidly adapted to the conditions of life in the great
diy aieas of the Upper North and Central Australia, more suitable it is said than sheep
growing a hirer and perhaps more attractive type of wool.
Having laid this solid foundation, Mr. Power set himself the task of producing a big
framed sheep carrying a dense fleece of long bright robust wool, with broad, solid backs,
good shoulders, and so w r ell covered that dust and sand have little chance of
also having good long wool of even quality on the bellies and with the points well covered,
but without wool round the eye.
( areful selection has gone hand in hand with close culling, and that these methods
have been successful is proved by the heavy and constant demand made for stock from
various parts of Australia.
The first importation of Wanganella blood having been so successful, Mr. Power decided
in 1906 to purchase the double stud ram, Mikado, a well-known Wanganella sire. It may
be interesting to mention here that this famous old stud, purchased by Messrs. Austin and
Millier in 1878, was formed in 1858 by Messrs. Peppin & Sons on a foundation of selected
stock from the then best studs of Australia. Amongst noted early purchases some of the
TYPICAL HEADS WIRRILLA STUD MERINOS.


Scott. EVENING AT THE DAM. (Win-ilia.)


iMh a r^B^H^ ) -yfPffH| >^7 n^ ’1 oyfey/jifcaj^l^ *' Iu**5l- %i£* > ‘ N> %W*$S
Scott. STUD RAM (6-tooth). (Wirrilla.)
Scott. STUD EWE. Champion Clare and Saddleworth, 1908. (Win-ilia.)


: “'S. . r--> 4%
ScolL (Wirrilla.)
i
i
I
\
Scotfc - STUD EWES. ALL PRIZE WINNERS. (Wirrilla.)


Scott - (Wirrilla.)
j
Scott. STUD RAMS. (Wirrilla.)


famous old Mount Crawford rams were included, and this no doubt accounts in some mea-
sure for the satisfactory way in which the Wanganella blood nicks with South Australian
sheep.
There are some 4,000 sheep on the Wirrilla property, and, judging by their excellent
size and condition and the feed in the paddocks, it is evident that the owner does not e ie\ e
in overstocking.
The wool produced is undoubtedly of very high merit. It is a clean, long staple, with
plenty of character and with good body. Last year s clip was sold on American account
at the following prices : —Merino fleece, 12fd. to i3fd. ; lambs, lOfd. ; A.A. piece,
A. piece, 9fd., the grown sheep averaging 10 lb. Ilf oz. of wool.
The following summary of results for 1907 will be of interest :
58 per cent, of Merino sheep shorn had lambs at foot.
42 per cent, of Merino sheep shorn were dry, mostly hoggets.
Average weight of wool per head, 10 lbs. 1 If oz.
Average money value return per head, 9/9f.
Highest price per lb. for wool, 13fd.
Average price per lb. for wool, including locks, &c., all round, 10fd.
Show Record.
Naturally Mr. Power, being a comparatively new breeder, has not had the advantage
of years to pile up show records, nevertheless, since his first appearance at the Buna Show
in 1907, where he secured second in two-tooth rams and second in four-tooth ewes, he has
been consistently successful. In addition to the above, a ram bred on his pastures and
exhibited by Mr. Mcßride, of “ Finger Post,” Burra, was awarded first prize in the class
over two-tooth grazed on blue and salt bush country, and cut 24 lbs. of wool immediately
after the show. Amongst other wins secured during that season mention may be made
of First prize for ewe, If and under 2f years, also champion for best ewe for Mr. G. E.
Maslin’s silver cup at Clare. At Saddleworth, Mr. Power again secured first and second
f or ewe If and under 2f years, and second for ewe under If years and champion for best
ewe, also second for ram under If years, all these honors being secured against strong
competition.
In 1908 the following stand to Mr. Power’s credit At Clare—Champion ewe, second
leg in for Mr. Maslin’s silver cup. Ewe over 2f years, first. Fwes over If and under 2f,
first and second. At Saddleworth—Champion ewe and leg in for silver cup. Ewes over
2f years, first and second. Ewe over If and under 2f years, second.
The champion ewe in both instances was machine shorn in 1907, and carried under
12 months’ growth of wool. This record is all the more satisfactory because only four ewes
were shown in each instance in consequence of other sheep being out of condition. It
should also be mentioned that many other prize winners at Saddleworth and Clare Shows
(1908) are progeny of Wirrilla bred rams, so that Mr. Power has every reason to feel pleased
with the showing his stock have made up-to-date.


Tfje property of ttje d(orj. George Riddoch, jYt.JO.Q.
That portion of S Australia known as the “South East,” which, roughly speaking
includes the country south of a line drawn from the Murray mouth to Bordertown and
frequently spoken of as “ The Garden of the Colony,” and with justice, for its abundant
rainfall, equable temperatures and the wonderful natural fertility of the soil, all tend to
(Id not only to the comfort of life, but to the ease and certainty with which a livelihood
may be gamed or competency assured by the cultivation of its broad acres.
The value of the South East for agricultural, grazing and stock raising purposes was
recognised m the early days of settlement when land was freely taken up. To-day some
-1 the oldest and most prosperous homesteads in South Australia are to be found'in this
avored district, where for nearly 50 years the name of Riddoch has been honorably
issociated with progress and development. In experimental work, so necessary in the
settlement of new country, it has been foremost in much that has tended to the general
;ood. In the science of land drainage, so all important in the moist South East in pest
prevention, m the encouragement of agricultural development on the share system in the
opening up and sub-division of land into small holdings and allotments suitable for'intense
culture, m the progress of dairying and its allied industries on up-to-date lines, in tree
planting and fruit culture as at the Coonawarra Fruit Colony, the history of the' South
hast bears abundant testimony to the active part taken by the Honorable George
Kiddoch, M.L.C., and his elder brother, the late Mr. John Riddoch, in its development.


II a miner, THE LATE JOHN RIDDOCH.


' m ijl- '* M
Ij j||
I am me r. THE, HON. GEO. EIDDOCH, M.L.C.


H
ipp'
VrU, nrvl« KOORINE (Front View). (Koorine.)


Early History.
It was in 1851 and 1852 that the brothers and their parents left Scotland and landed
in Victoria, where they resided for some years. During this time the elder brother was
engaged in commercial pursuits on some of the principal gold fields then in their infancy,
whilst the younger completed his education at the Geelong Seminary, at that time under
the headmastership of the well-known Mr. Ross.
Ten years elapsed before the move to South Australia was made, for it was not; till
1861 Mr. John Riddoch, then 35 years of age, purchased Vallum, a pastoral lease of
considerable extent with 3,000 acres freehold (which was subsequently very greatly
increased), and entered upon the life of a land owner and stock raiser. Mr. George
Riddoch came to South Australia during the same year, and after a short period of
Edwards. THE ENTRANCE HALL. (Koorinc.)
practical work undertook the management of the estate. From this time onward for
many years the brothers were actively engaged in the work incidental to the life of large
pastoralists, for during this time extensive interests were acquired, not only in the South
East, but near Swan Hill in Victoria, and Weinteriga in New South Wales. In South
Australia the properties held during this period were Vallum, purchased in 1861, Nalang
in 1868, and afterwards Cannawigra, Wirraga and Glencoe in 1881. The last named
estate being divided at the termination of the partnership in 1898, Mr. George Riddoch
then forming a new homestead at the northern or Kalangadoo end, which he named
Koorine.


Historical.
A few words descriptive of these various properties will be of interest, for they take
high place in the list of the pastoral holdings of the State.
Yallum.
This property was, as has been already recorded, purchased by Mr. John Riddoch
in 1861 from Messrs. T. A. &H. E. Wells. Prior to occupation by the Messrs. Wells,
Yallum had been the property of Mr. Thos. Austin, of Barwon Park, Victoria. Katnook
was added to the Yallum property by Mr. Austin, and some years after Mr. Riddoch
purchased, a large area was devoted to agricultural purposes. Katnook was subse-
quently sold to the Goverment in 1905 for closer settlement.
Nalang.
Nalang was purchased by Messrs. John and George Riddoch in 1878, and to this
holding Carrawigra and Wirraga were afterwards added. It is situated in the latiara
district, on the Victorian border. On taking possession extensive improvements in
fencing, well sinking, etc., were at once undertaken. As an instance of the expedition
with which the work was carried on, it is of interest to record that 100 miles of fencing
were erected in less than six months. The class of country met with on these holdings,
though not of the same quality as that found in the central district, is still fairly good.
The carrying capacity during its occupation by Messrs. Riddoch was very largely
increased. These properties were afterwards disposed of.
Swan Hill.
The station in the Swan Hill district was purchased by Mr. Geo. Riddoch in 1874, and
was held till 1879. It is an interesting fact that it was whilst in possession of this property,
which was infested by rabbits, that Mr. Riddoch first used phosphorus as a rabbit poison.
This trial and its subsequent adoption throughout Australia and New Zealand came about
Edwards. ENTRANCE TO DRIVE. (Kouiinc.)


Edwards. PART OF THE DRIVE. (Koorine.)
Edwards. HOUSE FROM THE DRIVE. (Koorine.)


Edwards POND NEAR THE HOUSE. (Koorine.)


through a paragraph which Mr. Riddoch noticed in a Californian paper which described
m detail the method of mixing and using this poison. Mr. Riddoch at once began
expeiimental work with satisfactory results. Shortly afterwards a friend in New Zealand
hearing of this wrote asking particulars, which Mr. Riddoch supplied in a letter, which
was published in the u Omaroo limes,” with the result that this method of rabbit
destiuction came into general use. It was from this district in New Zealand that Captain
Raymond came to Australia and made known an improved method of mixing the phos-
phorus and grain.
Weinteriga.
It was alter parting with the latiara country that the possibilities of the Darling
District in New South W ales attracted the attention of Mr. George Riddoch, who shortly
aftei wards purchased \\ einteriga from Messrs. Harrold & Duffield, in the ownership of
which he was shortly afterwards joined by his brother. A very large sum of money was
spent in improving this property, in putting up hundreds of miles of fencing, sinking a
Edwards. THE LAWN. (Koorine.)
number of wells and furnishing them with engines and pumps and all the necessary appli-
ances for watering a large number of sheep or cattle. Besides the wells numerous tanks
and dams were made, and the carrying capacity of the run largely increased. Great im-
provement was also effected in the quality of the stock, with the result that for a number
of years the sheep and horses from Weinteriga practically swept the board at all district
shows.
Glencoe.
In 1881 Mr. John Riddoch purchased the Glencoe estate, comprising 53,000 acres of
freehold and a large area of Crown Lands originally taken up by Messrs. Robert and
Edward Leake. Mr. George Riddoch joined his brother in this purchase, and leaving
Weinteriga came to live in the South East once more. Glencoe embraces the now pros-
perous agricultural district of the same name, which has during recent years returned
some of the heaviest crops ever reaped in South Australia. Mr. Riddoch had prior to this
undertaken some rather hard tasks in connection with the development and improvement


4- j $ • •
Rd wards. VIEW FROM THE HOUSE. (Koorine.
1 wlwaids. A CROP OP OATS, (Ivoorinc.)


I
-r* - 4*/. , » * . »>/ • : » ,
' ■" , 1 ;♦;••'* • ■ • / ij. *$r
. 'in . a*- ■' , • . ?'* ' ■* •
of land, but Glencoe was m those days an even more severe test of .Air. Riddoch’s
capacity lor the estate was wet, heavily timbered and the land sour, with the result that
S i° C n ° i ° " dl f l° sses weie frequent and heavy. It was, therefore, necessary to
1, sin plus timber and spend many thousands of pounds in drainage. After this
uVf U +i ° C V ' n f| m g that much land that was covered with timber and rank bracken was
bette! than had been supposed, had this cleared of the timber and cultivated on the share
s\b em, the tenants getting two-thirds of the yield. As much as 8,000 acres were so treated
in one \ear. tis also voithy of note that with this thorough cultivation and the growth
oi natural and imported grasses, the land carried three times the number of stock that
had been possible in its unimproved condition.
Koorine.
This fine pastoral estate is situated some twenty miles north of Mount Gambler and
the town of Kalangadoo is near its centre. The name is derived from the native word for
my daughter. It covers some 22,000 acresfrf riclTgrass land; including well Timbered
THE FRUIT GARDEN. (Koorino.)
country, with tine undulating slopes to the south, whilst a portion is of rich volcanic soil,
1 °al pockets of fertility. Drought is a word which loses its terror to the South Eastern
1 astoralist, and at Koorine the average rainfall for a number of years has been thirty
inches.
Even with these great natural advantages, however, the carrying capacity would not
1,6 as high as U sheep to the acre, which is at present considered fair stocking, had the
sand not been taken in hand and systematically drained and improved to the present high
andard In fact, in earlier days one sheep to two acres was considered about the limit,
vonderful instance this of benefit gained by the wise expenditure of capital. To clear
sis property of surplus timber and drain it of surplus water has been a costly task. The
estate is covered with a network of miles of drains, but the result lias abundantly justified
the outlay. Not only is Koorine a fairly dry and healthy country, but it is also clean, for


... . THE WOOLSHED. (Ivooriw. )


, < fc I —— I
n T • 1 |hH "fw ■ ■ *- I
rabbits and star thistle, those twin curses of the South Eastern land owner, are conspicu-
ous by their absence.
1 he homestead is a commodious modern residence, erected in 1905, of the “ Scottish
Lodge ’ type of architecture, the material used in its construction being the beautiful white
South Eastern shell or sand stone. A six acre block surrounding the residence is set apart
as a garden, which is tastefully laid out with a keen eye to natural beauty. Every known
plant which will thrive in this climate finds its place. Gooseberries, cherries, strawberries,
vines, pears, apples, walnuts, figs, filberts, oaks, and willows, as well as many varieties of
shrubs and flowers, grow in luxuriant profusion. A deer park also adjoins the homestead.
The Stock.
To attempt to record the full history of the flocks on the various properties would be
a task rather beyond our ability, but some few words of their origin and development will
be of interest. The sheep on the Vallum property were in their day considered to be some
Webbor. STUD RAM. (Koorine.)
of the best in the State. Mr. Thomas Austin, the original owner, had been a noted breeder,
l aving commenced in the early forties to build up a strain of pure merinos. The origin
of his flocks was undoubtedly Tasmanian. The sheep were characterised by considerable
t neness and quality, the wool being of the true character of the pure Merino, tending to
fineness and density, and cutting a valuable fleece which was in great request. Mr.
flddoch, on assuming the management, continued on the same lines. At Nalang a
Agger, more robust type of sheep, more suitable for the class of country was grown.
The nature of the country at Glencoe made it essential that a robust, active, hardy
ype of sheep should be bred. Selections were made from several of the northern flocks
of South Australia, the Levels flocks also being heavily drawn upon in attaining this end.
ombined with the pure stock, Mr. Riddoch has found it profitable to breed crossbreds


"Edwards. DRAIN IN GUM FOREST. There are many miles of these drains on Koorine. (Koorine.)


ior fattening purposes, as well as a large number of Comebacks. By this combination
die estate has always been able to provide an animal in good demand in the markets,
which also yielded wool of a character commanding excellent prices.
South Eastern sheep are not noted for their size of carcase, but Mr. Riddoch has
ueen able to obtain a larger frame than is generally bred in this district without much
detriment to the quality of the dense, clean wool. Koorine wool has lately sold up to
y4h per lb., the average for the fleece being 1/2-1- per lb. The property carries some
30,000 sheep.
The wool shed is a most up-to-date and commodious building, attached to which is a
aige drying shed built to hold about 800 sheep, which they enter en route to the shearing
died. Ihe idea of this shed is to shelter the sheep from rain. The sheep stand on a
aised battened flooring, covered by a roof projecting verandah fashion about six feet on
Webber. STUD RAMS. (Koorine.)
two sides, consisting of rails at out six inches apart so that a current of air can circulate
around them and so help to dry the wool on the sheep. This system was originated by
Mr. Riddoch and has since been adopted on other properties.
As in some other parts of the South East, dipping for tick is necessary. Mr. Riddoch
has a couple of very useful contrivances for facilitating the necessary work in connection
with this. In dipping, the sheep are run up an inclined approach to a platform, beyond
which a pen of decoys are placed, this platform can be tilted by means of a lever, and the
sheep bhot immediately into a tank full of dip solution, from which they go to a battened
platform for draining. In examination for footrot the sheep are put through a drafting-
race direct on to a raised battened platform, in which position a careful scrutiny of their
f ;et may be made within a minimum expenditure of time and labor.
Whilst at Glencoe in 1884, Mr. George Riddoch decided on breeding a few choice
Herefords, and obtained from Mr. C. Price, of Hindmarsh Island, the nucleus of the


present Koorine herd, additions were made from the Messrs. Reynolds famous “ local
stud, and from other sources. These cattle did remarkably well on the rich Glencoe
pastures, and were noted in the markets for weight and quality. Ihe herd was subse-
quently transfered to Koorine, where about 600 head are kept. Additions of th
“ Beattie ” strain have recently been made with satisfactory results.
It is interesting to record that the whole of the herd, with the exception of the stuc
animals, are dehorned. This operation is in Mr. Riddoch’s opinion highly desirable, an
the animals appear to suffer no inconvenience, for they resume feeding immediately it is
over, whilst the gain is very considerable, as the animals are contented and do not gore
each other either on the pasture or in the railway trucks.
Personal.
Mr. John Riddoch was born in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, and received his education in
that country. He married Miss Elizabeth King in 1854, some years before coming to
South Australia, and had a family of one son, John Alexander, and four daughters.
Edwards. DRAIN IN NEW PADDOCK. (Koorine.)
In March, 1865, Mr. Riddoch was elected to the House of Assembly for the Southern
District. He had for the first eighteen months as his colleague in the representation of the
constituency, the poet, Adam Lindsay Gordon, between whom and Mr. Riddoch a great
friendship always existed. Mr. Riddoch kept his seat for five years, but after 1870 he
retired from public life and did not again seek to enter it, being content with the distinction
he always enjoyed as the hospitable and large-hearted squire of Yallum Park. During the
remainder of his residence in the South East he continued to be actively associated with
all matters affecting the welfare of the district. He was chairman of the first District
Council of Penola, a position he held for many years, also president of the Agricultural
Society, and chief of the Caledonian Society at Mount Gambier.


ji' jJ'. .-I> k
gf ?*L-\,' A^*^'* V<
Edwards. HOW THE SHEEP ARE DIPPED. (Koorine.i
Mr. George Riddoch was born at Turriff, in Aberdeenshire, in 1842. He arrived in
South Australia in 1861, and soon afterwards assumed the management of Yallum estate.
He quickly developed an interest in stock of all kinds, but especially devoted himself to
the improvement of the sheep, and under the capable guidance of Mr. Wade, who had
gained a thorough knowledge of wool in England and France, soon acquired a very clear
insight into all matters pertaining to the various branches of wool production. Mr. G.
Riddoch has led a busy life both in private and public affairs, for he is not only a large
landfowner and stock breeder on his own account, but was at various times actively
engaged in the management of his late brother’s affairs during his absence in England.
his extended over a period of seven or eight years. In connection with the management of
the joint interests Mr. Riddoch paid periodic visits to Nalang and other properties,
travelling on horseback or by buggy, often doing the distance of 90 miles in twelve hours,
over roads which were the reverse of easy. During this period he gained an intimate
.nowledge of the capabilities of the sheep country in the three States mentioned, and also
secured a fund of expert information on the river question. It was, in fact, at this time
that Mr. Riddoch first turned his attention to the questions of irrigation and drainage,
which since then he has so thoroughly investigated to the advantage of the whole com-


... ,, , -■ \
■ 1 1 • i
Edwards. Two Lakes on Koorine. The top Picture represents Lake Edward, the bottom is Lake Leake.


.:'*$,*■ ..-afc ,
r,rr._. • *• v' '
■-.'■•■ - . ■ . ■ -.
. - ■ '">7
Edwards. ONE OF THE SHEEP PADDOCKS. (Koorine.)
munity- Some years ago he acted as a special Commissioner on behalf of the South
Australian Government to enquire into the extensive irrigation schemes of India, America and
Egypt, and on his return wrote most valuable reports on the subject. These were after-
vards published in pamphlet form, and are widely recognised as being most valuable
contributions to the literature on the subject.
In public life he has devoted about eleven years to the services of his country as a
legislator, for he entered Parliament in 1893 as a member of the House of Assembly,
and, after an interval, in 1901 was elected to the Legislative Council, where he still
occupies a seat as a representative of the Southern district. His speeches have always
been marked by a thorough knowledge of his subject, and have commanded a wide
respect, particularly when dealing with matters of which he has made a special study,
'iich as irrigation and reclamation schemes, to the consideration of which he brings a
store of practical knowledge acquired in the school of experience, and many other sub-
jects which closely affect the great primary productions of the State.
Before he entered the House of Assembly, Mr. Riddoch had acted as a member of the
South Eastern Road Board, and was afterwards associated with the New South Wales
Sheep and Vermin Board. He took an active part in the formation of the S.A. Pastoralists’
Association, being one of the earliest vice-presidents, and after that president. In 1891
he was one of the delegates to meet the Shearers’ Union in conference, and he took an
Edwards. STUD HEREFORDS. (Koorine.)


jftSf ■
f}
important part in respect to pastoral conferences in Sydney and elsewhere. He was there-
fore well equipped with the knowledge and experience likely to prove useful when he was
selected by the people of the South East to represent them in the House of Assembly.
His wide range of information on many subjects of practical utility is always placed
unreservedly at the disposal of his fellow members and the country. He is blessed with a
strong common sense and a keen insight which enables him to take progressive views on
the subjects which are brought up for discussion. Although he possesses strong convic-
tions and always has the courage to express them in direct language, he is tolerant of the
opinions of others and always listens patiently to both sides of the argument. Courteous,
considerate and kindly hearted, Mr. Eiddoch has always stood high in the regard of those
who know him. Few Legislators have done such excellent work in so short a time, for it
is fair to assert that the establishment of the Produce Export Department was the direct
result of action taken by Mr. Eiddoch within a very short time of his entrance into
Parliament. He tried at the outset to form an association of sheep owners to start a
freezing depot, and when he was unsuccessful the S. A. Government took the
matter up. He has also taken a prominent part in many public movements, and has been
president of various agricultural and pastoral societies in the South East. He is an ex-
chief of the Mount Gambier branch of the South Australian Caledonian Society, and was
appointed a Justice of the Peace of South Australia in 1866 and of New South Wales in
1880.
Mr. Eiddoch married, in 1873, a daughter of the Eev. James Yelverton Wilson (C. E.),
of Portland, Victoria, and had one daughter, Adelaide Mary, who married Captain
George F. Napier, 2nd Oxford Light Infantry, in 1898, and died in 1904, leaving one
daughter (Adelaide Beatrice), born in 1899.
Edwards. HEREFORD STUD BULL. (Koorine.)


Mr. Henry Collins.
Ctje property of
jYiessrs. Johrj Qollins $ Soqs.
Mr. John Collins, the senior
partner in the well-known firm
of John Collins & Sons, of
Collinsville and Pulpara, was
born in 1859, and is the son of
one of the earliest farmers and
graziers of the Burra district,
Mr. Henry Collins, who, still
ale and hearty, resides at
mcerndale, Mount Bryan. Mr.
ollins, senior, came to South
vustralia very early in the his-
ory of the State, for it was in
he early ’4o’s, either in ’4O or
41 that he landed on these
hores from the ship Isabel
Catson, in which he made the
voya.ge from the old country.
This vessel was, it will be re-
membered, wrecked some few
years after this date off Port
Phillip Heads, the disaster being
attended with serious loss of life.
Mr. Collins soon after his
arrival went to the North and
settled in the district, which
became his permanent home.
A few years later he married
a daughter of Mr. John Thomas,
a much respected resident of
Burra, who came to South Aus-
tralia in 1847 by the “ William
Money.”


Hammer & Co.


Scott - the homestead. (r „■ -
(Collinsville.)


Scott. 4-TOOTH STUD RAM. (A CUP WINNER). (Collinsville.)


It#
Mr John Collins was the second son of a large family. After spending his early
Doyhood with his parents, he was sent later on to Mr. Cole’s school at Watervale.
there he returned to the family home, where he assisted his father in the farming
■nd pastoral pursuits in which the elder Mr. Collins was then actively engaged. After
ie y e ars spent on his father’s properties, during which period Mr. Collins married the
Iciest daughter of Mr. F. Simpson, of Burra, another of the old pioneers of the colony he
mrchased, m the year 1889, the estate which he then named Collinsville, but which was at
■hat time a pait of the old Caroona Station. ( ollinsville is now a well-improved property
if 47,000 acres, which in equipment and development is in no way behind the times. The
xmndary is v ire-netted and vermin proof, all subdivisions are of the same materia], and
he whole estate is splendidly watered, both by tanks and dams. The country is
hiefly salt and blue bush of lirst-class quality, but there is also a good area of rich alluvial,
amcipally about the homestead and along the watercourses. The rainfall is only fair,
he average for the past eleven years being slightly under nine inches, but lucerne does
xceedmgly well on the flats, and is a great standby, for as many as ten sheep to the
.ere are often grazed on this very valuable fodder.
Such is Collinsville to-day, a comfortable homestead, and an up-to-date, well stocked
Mate, but it was not always so, and the success which has been attained is the result of
.■al giaft. it is an interesting experience to hear Mr. Collins relate the story of the
ght. When first the estate was taken up, dogs and rabbits were very bad, so bad, in
ict, that the former in some years reduced the percentage of lambs to a mere nothing,
.abbits, too, worked havoc, and were not so easily destroyed as they are at the present
ay. However, Mr. Collins set to and netted the property, with the result that these
ests were greatly reduced in numbers. There was, however, another trial in store, for
ardly had the netting been finished when the big drought closed down on the country,
ad for the next eight years, till the better seasons came, things were indeed gloomy.
Scott. 6-TOOTH STUD EWE (First Prize Winner). (Collinsville).


fr* eo tt. FIRST PRIZE STUD 2-TOOTH RAM. (Collinsville).


I
2 - T 0 0 T H STUD Cup W i
Scott. 2-TOOTH STUD EWE. (A Cup Winner.) (Collinsville).


a Mm '
V
MR. HORACE C. J. COLLINS (Eldest Son). MR. FRED H. R. COLLINS (Second Son)
MR. H. MELVIN COLLINS (Third Son). MR. P. NEWTON COLLINS (Fourth Son).


I here was little feed for stock, tanks and dams were dry, sheep were practically
unsaleable at times, high interest had to be paid, up to ten per cent., with one and a
quarter on three month renewals, and on the top of all, high Government rents. No
wonder that many a stout hearted grazier and squatter went down financially, some finally
beaten in the struggle, but others fortunately to rise again in better times. It was a big
battle through the black years. Those were the days in which the harsh doctrine of
the survival of the fittest had free play, for it was only the men of grit and unbeatable
pluck who pulled through and were still on top when the fight was over. People who
envy the pastoralist his free life, fine estate, and big bank balance, are too often apt to
forget the cost at which they have often been earnt, but such men carry the marks after-
wards, and though they may like to look back and think of the ups and downs and the
fight they made to hold their own when Nature was doing her worst, there are few who
want another experience of the Big Drought, though most are in better shape owing to
water conservation and the growing of fodders to meet one should it come. Of late the
seasons have been splendid, and now Mr. Collins has a cheery tale to tell of the past few
years, and has hopeful anticipations for the future of the industry in which he is so
keenly interested. Interest and rents have come down. The freezers are hungry for fat
lambs. there is a ready market for sheep. Dogs are almost a thing of the past, though
foxes are unfortunately becoming more plentiful, and finally, bunny is getting the worst
of the bout with poisoned pollard.
Pulpara.
In addition to Collinsville, Mr. Collins is interested in Pulpara, an estate of 53,000
acres, which he purchased two years ago. Pulpara, though not far from Collinsville, is
wholly in the salt bush country, and carries 8,000 sheep, all of which w r ere drafted from
Collinsville. Mr. Collins has taken four of his sons into partnership in wmrking this pro-
perty, which he believes holds good prospects for the future. These four sons are the
eldest of his family of seven sons and tw T o daughters.
Scott. 2-TOOTH STUD EWE. (First Prize Winner). (CoHinsvillv.)


■ I
, ■ ■
jt “tr ,*' % - J&t -'A ■ '--
Scott. DRAUGHT MARES AND FOALS. , r , r , ls .„ .


TOP—2-TOOTH STUD EWES. MIDDLE GROUP OF STUD RAMS. BOTTOM RAM AND TWO EWES,
WINNERS OF KOONOONA CUP.


Scott. STUD RAMS. (Collinsville).
The Flocks.
In 1893, Mr. Collins decided to build up a stud flock, and with this in view purchased
rams and ewes from Koonoona. Since then he has progressed rapidly, and his sheep have
been very successful at the Burra Shows —the only ones at which he has exhibited. In
1901 he gained two first prizes and one second ; in 1905, three firsts and one second ; in
1906 he did not exhibit ; in 1907, one first and one second, and the Koonoona Cup for
ram and two ewes (grazed on saltbush country) ; 1908, five firsts, also Koonoona Cup,
for the second time. Stud sheep from Collinsville find a ready sale in Western Australia,
where purchasers speak very highly of them. A well-known firm of stock agents writing
from Perth under recent date, say, <c Your rams are a very suitable type for Western Aus-
tralian requirements. Some of those bought from you this year sold very well at the
Royal Show Sales here, and we say with certainty that you are supplying a better class
of ram than some stations with a big name. We have already written our Adelaide office,
asking for the offer of your sale rams for the coming season, and shall be glad of your
response in due course.” The same firm, writing to their Adelaide agents, also make the
following satisfactory comment on Collinsville rams —“ We would like to add that
are a fine lot, and this year’s lot are considered by good men to be the best lot offered at
the Royal Show. They were the only lot which sold well.” Most of the sheep photo-
graphs reproduced in our illustrations are first prize saltbush sheep at Burra shows, and
they undoubtedly show that Mr. Collins has ample reason to be pleased with the line class
of Merinos he has bred. There are now 9,000 sheep on Collinsville.
Scot t. BULLOCK TEAM. (Collinsville).


Scott. The Homestead and Outbuildings at Collinsville.
Scott. Cattle at the Homestead Dam, Collinsville. This Photograph gives an excellent idea of the Nature of the Country and Surroundings.




Che property of Messrs. 6. J7- B- Thomas.
Mr. Edward Arthur Thomas, who, of recent years, has come very much to the
front as a breeder of high-class Merinos, is the second son of the late Frederick
Thomas, of Sandy Creek, Gawler.
It was in the year 1899 that he, with his brother (Mr. F. B. Thomas), came
into possession of the One-Tree-Hill property as their share of their late father’s
estate, and Mr. E. A. Thomas dates his career as a stud breeder from that period.
At about the same time the brothers secured the lease of a fine property at
Lower Light. This was an opportune acquisition, for the two estates, being worked
in conjunction, proved to be admirably adapted for the purpose intended. For the
hills land, although providing splendid pasture and being grand summer country, is
somewhat wet and cold during the winter months, so it was found of great advantage
to remove the stud animals, especially the ewes and lambs, to the earlier and warmer
country of the other estate, for by this means a good even growth is obtained right
through the year.
Having secured suitable land, Mr. Thomas’ next move was to get together a
solid foundation on which to build up the successful flock which he was, even in
those early days, ambitious to possess. This he accomplished, and did so without
any very great expense, for he relied then, as he has since, on careful selection,
together with the very closest attention to all the details of breeding. That this
course was wise was soon shown, for as early as 1901 (the first time Mr. Thomas
exhibited in the open class at the Royal Agricultural Shows) he secured first prize
or Merino Ram under l£ years old. This initial success, at the first time of
asking, was naturally very gratifying to the young breeder, who, though, as he
says, greatly elated at what was really a considerable triumph, did not for a
moment consider that he had done more than get a footing, from which he might
row to big things in the future, nor did he acquire any symptom of that strange
disease sometimes known as “swelled head,” which occasionally afflicts even level
i eaded men on attaining their first big success. On the contrary, he devoted him-
self with the same steady perseverance, and even greater ardour, to the improvement
of his flock. That he has been eminently successful in this is shown by the long
st of awards which stand to his credit in the Adelaide Royal Agricultural Show prize
st, which will be found detailed on another page. It is said that so far Mr.


| JTammftr Co. MR. E. |


Edwards. PASTORAL LAND AT ONE-TREE HILL.


s#** *•* * v - -**■ *
Thomas has been more especially successful in getting the very highest quality in
his rams, and this prize-list seems to bear this out, but experts and fellow ex-
hibitors agree that he is one of the coming men —if, indeed, he has not already
arrived—and will, in a very short time, take a leading place with the biggest breeders
of the State in all classes.
Before entering in the open classes, Mr. Thomas had been a very successful
exhibitor in the classes for owners of not more than 2,000 sheep, and as early as
1892 sheep from his flock won Messrs. Elder Smith & Co.’s Special prize of £5 ss.
for two rams under \\ years. He was also a consistent exhibitor and winner at
the Gawler Shows from 1889 to 1896. After the latter date, however, he decided to
stand out, as he had been winning a large proportion of the prizes and did not
think that such monopoly was in the best interests of those concerned.
Mr. Thomas is a firm believer in the plain-bodied robust type of Merino. He
has this faith in the South Australian type, not for the simple, if rather incon-
clusive, reason that it is the only one he has handled, but as the result of practical
experience, for, in 1904, when on a visit to Sydney to see the Sheep Breeders’ Associa-
tion Show, he was so pleased with a ram Mr. Horsfall, of Widgiewa, exhibited in
the plain-bodied class that he bought him at a rather high figure, to be used as an
experiment with his own ewes.
This purchase was an instance of the disappointments, which sometimes come to
the sheep breeder as to other mortals, for the ram proved to be absolutely useless as
a sire, for he never during Mr. Thomas’ possession of him, got a single lamb. Mr.
Horsfall, on learning this, at once agreed to take the ram back and supply another to
take its place, and Mr. Thomas proceeded to Widgiewa and selected another ram,
which, though an undoubtedly fine sheep, was, Mr. Thomas thought, not as near his
ideal as the first purchase, though he has bred some fine sheep from him with which
he has been well pleased. It is perhaps well to emphasize the fact that this
strain is kept perfectly distinct from the general Mock. Mr. Thomas assures us
that he is most careful on this point, so that buyers of his rams need have no
fear of getting Vermont blood unless they specially ask for it.
Edwards. BLAIR FROM THE ROAD. (Blair).


Another important purchase was made in 1907, when Mr. Thomas gave Mr.
A. J. Murray a high price for an exceptionally fine 2-tooth ram, with which he has
since been very successful. This ram is now the leading sire of the Stud, and he is
already represented by a very promising lot of young stock.
The exact origin of the sheep with which Mr. Thomas commenced to work is
not known, for his father, though he combined sheep-farming with agriculture, and
was a lirst-rate judge of a sheep, did not give his Hock the attention necessary to
come to the front as a stud breeder, although his clip always commanded good
prices. It is known that the flock was commenced in the early sixties, and that a
notable purchase was made in 1864, when the elder Mr. Thomas bought a ram from
the late Mr. Forbes. This sheep was one of the best procurable at that time and
had a marked influence on the Hock, for Mr. Thomas bred from him and his stock for
many years with splendid results, and without any necessity arising for the introduc-
tion of fresh blood.
Mr. E. A. Thomas is known to his friends, and they are many, as a modest, un-
assuming man. He is widely recognized as possessing a keen knowledge of the Merino,
and his services are frequently sought for as judge at some of the more important
country shows. His brother, Mr. F. B. Thomas —the joint owner of the properties—is
also a sound judge of stock, but, as he recognizes that a stud flock is best under
one management, he has always left this department to the sole care of his
brother.
As the lease of the land which the brothers have occupied at Lower Light for
some years is shortly to expire, they have quite recently purchased a very fine
property situated in the same district.
Mr. E. A. Thomas, in 1907, married Miss Edith Bowman, a daughter of the
late John Bowman, of Garden Creek, One-Tree-Hill, and since the purchase of the
Blair Estate has made that his home.
Edwards. BLAIR HOMESTEAD AND OUTBUILDINGS.


' N *' ' ' ~' r 7 ~ ‘ " rr r " — w ~— ■*— — ■ * — rr^
' * . •
' '
v V. iffilniR i ii nj im
im ■in ■■■ Ml) ii rT1 , Iy
■
‘ ,***7 ; > •„./ v • \,7 t ; / '■'■ ; vt7 ’ • . . ,7.' ♦ * . .. -7 .;
«f.*ydr^ 4 . ■'■“ * S> • t f ■'• ' • ■*• " ■."< ••'■ : . •., ./ ■ f
g *jjrjlfcy' m&jmff- * ‘y ~ ' ifil ‘
** a '[1 ' '
▼v a 1 y* B77*
| Sfey |B|| ** v
■ :\ :. **£••: V ' • ; 41 . v f r • ■»•• '1 'W''- ' ’ •■ " • ■ '
Scott. 3rd PRISE 4-TOOTH MERINO RAM (Adelaide, 1908).


?< *
Mbn—iiu*. ]1 »wv
jSK&k. wZSfe T%i^Ml^8wHHBKjgPI^
* : . 'j0\.** jr
■ '•' ' v * .' ' , • j*' •' #< * ~ %'
. %• *
■■' -■• ■ ' :? *
*x' 4- v-* ’J;.■. :- >.' ■ *•■? / #t ■■•>"- «' .*• ** ** . : '--r
1 . - y #
., s .„ , >» #K'a >r| | fr . . t | i iin J iVi?iii 'ifoflrft'iiifla
«■ • ’ 'v^MfflBTO^ay'' v v >'.. J®|||v !t T^tBW
Scott. 1st PRIZE 4-TOOTH MERINO RAM (Adelaide, 1908).


Scott. STUD EWE (First Prize, under It years, Adelaide). (Blair).


r ■
Edwards. SCOULAR’S BRIDGE ON BLAIR ESTATE.


Scott. 4-TOOTH STUD EWE.


-'•.•SSlv
Scott - 2-TOOTH STUD EWE


** V/-- V
g co tt. STUD RAM (3 years). Second Prize Adelaide, 1907. (Blair).


1 —
I
Edwards. PASTURE LAND AT ONE-TREE-HILL.


' --
Edwards, A CHARMING SCENE AT ONE-TREE HILL.


r 1
I
Edwards. ANOTHER SCENE AT ONE-TREE HILL.


Show Record.
As mentioned earlier in this sketch, Mr. Thomas made his debut as an ex-
hibitor at Adelaide Shows in 1901, and since then he has been consistently suc-
cessful. The following is the complete list of prizes won.
1901 . —lst Ram, under lb years.
1902. 4th Ewe, over 2\ and under 3b years, with lamb at foot.
1903. Ist Ewe, under \\ years ; 4th Ewe, over 3b years, with lamb at foot.
1904. —3rd Ram, under years ; 4th Ewe, over lb and under 2\ years ; 4th
Ewe, under 1|- years.
1905. —2nd Ram, over 1| and under 2| years ; 3rd Ram, under lb years.
1906. 4th Ram, over 3b years. This year Mr. Thomas was unfortunate in
having some of his show ewes destroyed by dogs, and the others so knocked
about that they could not be exhibited, although several entries had been
made.
1907. —2nd Ram, over 2 b and under 3|- years ; 4th Ram, under lb years ; 6th
Ram, under 1 \ years.
1908. Ist Ram, over and under 2b years , 3rd Ram, over 1|- and under
2b years ; sth Ram, under lb years ; sth Ewe, under lb years.
Edwards. HOMESTEAD AT ONE-TREE HILL.


THE LATE HIRAM GOSHEN MR JOSHUA GOSDEN
Che property of Jrfr. Joshua Qosden
The late Hiram Gosden was one of those early settlers who came to the State with
less than the proverbial half-crown and had to depend entirely upon their own energy
and ability in gaining a footing in their new home.
A native of the town of Arlington in the County of Sussex, England, Mr. Gosden
left the Old Country in 1840 and arrived in South Australia on the 17th of May of that
year, being then 21 years of age. He was by occupation a wheelwright and carpenter,
and, as trade appears to have been brisk when he arrived, he was soon at work in and
around Adelaide. Shortly afterwards, however, he moved further afield to Golden Grove,
one of the earliest farming districts in the State, where he worked for a time. Following
this, he was employed for some years at The Hermitage, Houghton, during wdiich period
he married. His next move was to Mount Crawford, where he was engaged by the late
Robert Rankine.
As soon as he felt his feet and was ready to make an independent move, he
devoted his savings to the purchase of a section of land in the neighborhood of Houghton,
and there made his first start at farming on his own account. He did not, however,
stay there long, for a year later he moved with his wife and young family to Kenton
Valley, where he secured a section of land, which holding he soon increased to four


sections. He farmed this land profitably for the next ten years, during which time he
did useful work in the district, and became one of the founders of the local Baptist
Church, of which he was a deacon and trustee. Looking for a wider scope for his efforts
he removed to Mount Pleasant, but still held his Kenton Valley land. At the Mount he
acquired 500 acres for farming and dairying, and on which he built a new house, where he
lived for nearly forty years. Here he found himself surrounded by successful sheep
farmers, the late Mr. A. B. Murray, the late Mr. George Melrose, the late Honorable John
Baker, and the late Mr. Joseph Gilbert, being all near neighbours. Under such circum-
stances it naturally happened that he became ambitious to follow their lead and establish
himself in the same occupation. With this in view he bought 2,000 acres of land in the
Rhine Hills, and, with a nucleus of 500 ewes, began sheep-farming.
Mr. Gosden was one who fully recognised his responsibilities as a father. As his
elder sons grew to manhood, he purchased suitable farming properties, on which he
established them on their own account, whilst to his two younger sons fell the manage-
ment of the Rhine Hills station. On leaving Mount Pleasant Mr. Gosden removed to
Mannum, where he purchased a thousand acres of land on the eastern side of the river.
Here he built a new home, where he remained about five years, until he decided to spend
his declining years in retirement near Adelaide. He then bought a home for himself at
Clarence Park, which he named '‘Arlington,” after his birth-place in England. Here he
resided for several years in the full enjoyment of a serene and hale old age, till he died at
the age of 90 on December 26, 190 7.
Mr. Joshua Gosden, the fifth son of the late Hiram Gosden, managed the Rhine
property known at “ Windsor,” near Eden Valley, for 25 years. After the death of his
father he bought this estate and worked it with his farm on the Murray Flats, near
Towitta, where he carries on mixed-farming. He also took over the stock of Merino
sheep on the Rhine property which were bred from Murray stock. Mr. Gosden has
recently purchased a house at North Walkerville, where he now resides.
MR. GOSDEN’S RESIDENCE AT NORTH WALKERVILLE.


Clje property of J)/tr. W. Q. Jtfills.
The history of this flock, which is taking a leading place amongst the smaller studs of
the State, is especially interesting because in its origin and development it is typical of
many in which ultimate success has grown from small beginnings and been attained in spite
of many serious obstacles.
Richard Mills, the father of the present owner of “ Millbrae,” was of good yeoman
descent —a class recognised for centuries as the backbone of the old country A class, too,
from which sprang many, if not most, of the great army of pioneers who, in their time’
laid the foundations of the wealth and freedom of Australia. Strong men they were, hard
of hand and level-headed, with pluck and endurance that would not know defeat. ' Old
Richard Mills was one of them, for he was born in Kent, England, in the year 1828. His
father was of English birth and parentage, whilst his mother hailed from Scotland. He
arrived in South Australia in 1839 at the age of eleven. The ship in which the family
sailed being the “ Royal Admiral.” He married in 1852, Marget Henry, an Irish girl
of Scotch descent, whose forebears had in far-back days fled to Ireland to escape the perse-
cutions and religious disabilities of the old Covenanting times. Shortly after his marriage
he, like so many of his fellow-colonists, went to seek fortune on the Victorian goldfields.
In this quest he met with moderate success, enough at all events to permit of his returning
and taking up under Government lease the section of 640 acres where the homestead of
Millbrae now stands. During the next few years adjoining land was at various times
purchased, so that at the time of his retirement in 1881, through failing health, the estate
had risen to one thousand eight hundred acres. At this time the greater part of the pro-
perty was sold, but 500 acres surrounding the homestead were leased to his sons —Messrs.
W. G. and R. J. Mills —to whom he at this time gave 400 sheep and a few horses. Mr. R. 1.
Mills, the younger brother, shortly afterwards decided to relinquish country life, and ar-
ranged for his brother to take over the whole of the property and stock. Mr. Mills who
was then a little over twenty years of age, had plenty of energy and determination, and
for some years did practically the whole of the work himself, including the shearing,
wool-packing, and carting, but Millbrae has grown since those days, for it is now a
compact and valuable property of five thousand acres, including Bondleigh, where Mr.
Mills has recently started his eldest son.


Hammer & Co. MR. W. G. MILLS . Hammer & Co. THE LATE RICHARD MILLS.


.■V
r» ■ •, SvA
\v : ’
Scott. STUD RAM “ UNKNOWN ” (6-tooth). (\y q_ Mills).
Third Prize S.A.It.A. & H. Society Show September. 190S


* d
‘ IT??* , . • ■
% * “
; ,. N ,.- « - _, -- ‘ .... '♦ - , *' .s ” a!
The Flock.
It was not till about the year 1875 that Richard Mills turned his attention to woo.
raising. Prior to this he had devoted his time to wheat growing and geneial farming. In
that year he purchased 400 ewes from Donald Mc( uish. these sheep were of the then well-
known A. B. Murray strain, and for a number of years rams from the same flock were used
and a high grade maintained at Millbrae, though the owner never went in foi show sheep.
Smith. “MILLBRAE” HOMESTEAD.” (W. G. Mills)
The flock was continued on the same lines till 1885, when Mr. W. G. Mills made his first
start as a stud sheep breeder. As a beginning he purchased a ram from Mr. A. J. Murray,
who was at that time managing the Mount Beevor estate for his father. This ram effected
considerable improvement in the flocks. The next purchase made a few r years later,
when some stud rams were procured from Messrs. Shepherd Bros, of Harrogate, and subse-
quently small drafts of stud were on two occasions bought from Mount Beevor. Mr.
Mills had by this time begun to exhibit, but without much success, though he occasionally
won prizes for his fat Merino 'wethers. This non-success, hovrever, did not daunt Mr.
Mills, whose next purchase w-as a ram from Mr. Crozier, then of Rockbrook, Kapunda.
This was about ten years ago, and proved to be an exceedingly lucky purchase, for the
ram nicked w r ell with the selected ewes put to him, for from this time forward Mr. Mills’


"
x ■> ’
> ' % J
i: -■ " '-i * '■-: K ‘ il iml'\ ' # * V II'
: .1 | < iMKr * -• * *v
, r * ** w y , * 7f #*h>* 01 mH\\f v 4. v. '8HHBkSbr,<, * * 5 ■
I "% fr -* ■ ‘%W
i > - I y X \^5wV t •,.. v
ft -. :■ 5
'
Scott. STUD RAM, “PROSPECTOR.” (w. G. Mills).
Champion Ram, Mount Barker, 1909 ; 4th Prize 6-tooth, Royal A. & H. Society Show, September. 1909.


S( . ott STUD RAM, “BONANZA II.” (W. Mills).
Winner Silver Medal, R. A. & H. Society’s September Show, 1909.


* - jp% yu* / i Jly m^ f /f * W
Wf .y/*ji ’ v ' w 4 •* -^T., Jfcp v & % r *li lkau#£j -**'9* wfm ’^S^-
|F, >* >4? * • ■ |Sf •, |PlEr * . #Ayf jP' w&ni: wm
::^nwn- :^ ; *&&&■ ifcVk: \ *
‘ . % • '■' *;'
V ¥ ' 1 * : ':i -- • ■ >
?|' - * ' ■ ‘; ’ / • .’ ■ ■ -
~u, ■•-* : ** *• ’
■ - » - ■ . _/;’
name began to figure more frequently in the prize lists. The next step forward was when
Mr. Mills, whilst visiting Melbourne, attended the sheep sales held at the time of the big
show. He there saw offered a line of over a hundred rams, with some of which he was
favorably impressed. Finding that they were properly branded and numbered he selected
and purchased one which he considered to be of special merit. Later enquiries revealed the
tact that this ram came originally from Boonooke, Deniliquin, N.S.W., having been bred
by Mr. Faulkner, the owner of that famous stud. This animal again was of great service
in the flock, for his get proved to be very large framed, straight backed, heavy sheep, with
long stapled wool, well packed on all over, especially so on the back, an important point
Smith. GROUP OF STUD EWES. (W. G. Mills).
in which the old A. B. Murray strain had been somewhat weak. They carried very heavy
fleeces, but mostly with a light tip. Mr. Mills next went to Tasmania, in 1905, in search
of something to suit his purpose, and, after having visited several of the most important
sheep men of the Island State, he bought a ram from the late W. H. Gibson, of “ Fairfield,”
by his well known ram “ Goldfinder,” tracing back to the renowned “ Primus ” and “ Pre-
sident.” By this purchase Mr. Mills combined in his stud the blood of three of the most
famous flocks in Australia, viz., the Murray, “ Boonooke,” and Gibson. It is rather
generally held by sheep breeders that the Murray and Gibson stock do not as a rule blend
well, but the reverse has been the case at Millbrae, for the top cross of the Gibson strain,
added of course to the most careful and well considered matings,has proved of great advan-
tage, as the stud flock has steadily improved in average size of sheep as well as in quality
and weight of wool (single rams cutting to 27 lb.) so that the Millbrae exhibits have come
to be considered as very strong competitors at our shows, where an increasing share of the
awards have fallen to their lot. Up to a couple of years ago comparatively few rams were
sold, but lately Mr. Mills has found a quickly increasing demand for his stock, and he is
justly proud of the fact that animals which he has sold have held their own in the prize ring
against all comers in this and other States.
The average weight of the clip from the full grown sheep at “ Millbrae ” has been about
11 lb. for some years past. This is a wonderful improvement on the early returns when
the flock was managed purely on the survival of the fittest theory, for the country, then
largely covered with scrub, was stocked far above its true carrying capacity, and those


sheep that could not hud a living simply died. For the last 20 years, however, careful and
heavy culling, breeding only the best to the best, and keeping the numbers well below the
danger line, has been constantly kept in mind, and its wisdom is shown in the marked
improvement of both flock and pasture.
The prizes won by the Millbrae Native Valley Merinos, up to the end of 1908, are
as follows :—One silver medal for best ram under 1|- years at the R.A. & H.S., 1908. One
special certificate of merit for ram over 2 years at Mount Pleasant, ten champions, 80 Ist
prizes, 55 2nd prizes, six 3rd prizes, two 4th, one sth, and one 6th. All the above have
been won during the last few years at the R.A. & H.S. Adelaide and Mount Barker and
Mount Pleasant shows for sheep and wool in competition with the best flocks in S.A. 1 his
year (1909) has been a good one for Millbrae Merinos, for their owner won the
Champion prize at Mount Barker with his ram, “ Prospector,” and seven or eight other
cards. At the September Show of the R.A. &H. Society Show in Adelaide, he repeated
his last year’s success —with “Bonanza Boy” —with “Bonanza IT,” a fine young ram,
which was awarded the Silver Medal for the best ram under years. “ Prospector,”
another good ram, shown by Mr. Mills, placed fourth in the 6-tooth class, was afterwards
sold at a very satisfactory figure, and another Millbrae ram was awarded fifth prize in the
aged ram class. Mr. Mills was also to the front at the March Wool Show, where he made
a very fine showing in strong competition. In the class for aged rams Mr. Mills was
awarded first with three fleeces, which weighed respectively 23 lbs. 5 ozs., 26 lbs. 5 ozs.,
and 22 lbs. 10 ozs., which, even in a strong class, stood out well for all round quality.
In the class for fleeces from rams under \\ years, he won second prize, the fleeces weighing
19 lbs. ozs., 19 lbs. \2\ ozs., and 20 lbs" 3 ozs., and he also scored second place in the
class for ewes under If years, with fleeces which went 17 lbs. 10 ozs., 16 lbs. 4 ozs., and 17
lbs. 12 ozs. On the whole, 1909 has been a particularly successful year for the owner
of Millbrae, and one which will deservedly add greatly to the reputation of his Merinos.
“BONANZA BOY,”
Silver Medal, Ram under years,
Adelaide Royal Show, 1908.


m^^mm»^ . /j jwi > 7 V| • ; fa!y • wp^i
Jl}e property of JYir. $. J{. X. J)urjstan
The late John Dunstan, father of Mr. B. H. K. Dunstan,
the owner of Nerowie, was one of the old pioneers of the
Burra district. He was born on June 24, in the year
1826, at Stithian’s in the County of Cornwall, England,
but came to this colony in 1853, arriving at Port Adelaide
with his wife and two children on August 4, of that year,
by the sailing ship ‘ f Calabar.”
Immediately on his arrival in South Australia, Mr.
Dunstan, who was a practical miner, went to the Burra,
where he became a tributor in the old Burra mine. Here
he remained for a few months, after which he proceeded
to the Victorian goldfields, where, however, he did not
remain long, returning to his adopted State and again
settling at the Burra.
Following this, in the year 1859 he was appointed
to the management of the old Wheal Sarah copper mine,
which was situated near Bundaleer. Mr. Dunstan held
THE LATE JOHN DUNSTAN,
this position for three years, during which considerable development took place in the
property under his charge. His next engagement took him further afield, for he under-
took the leadership of a prospecting party to the Far North, which was fitted out aud
despatched by the late Sir Thomas Elder. Mr. Dunstan’s party, during this extended
trip, though they did not come across another Burra, discovered and opened up several
promising shows, which were, in later years, worked with some success. Mr. Dunstan
was keenly interested in the mining industry, especially in the discovery and development
of copper mines, and travelled considerably from field to field, so that at the time he
settled down to other occupations, he was able to say that he had inspected every South
Australian copper mine north of Kapunda. His later years were spent at Nerowie Mount
Bryan East, where he followed the calling of farmer and grazier till his death, which
took place on April 22nd, 1895.
Mr, B. H. K. Dunstan, the youngest son of the worthy colonist whose career we
have thus briefly sketched, was born at the Burra in the year 1875. In early manhood
he assisted his father in the successful working of the farm, and afterwards worked it
on his own account. This continued for some years, but in 1896-7 Mr. Dunstan en-
countered one of the reverses which occasionally come to those who follow the same




v v , ?<.y. o v> ,.
...~ . 4 > ; : , Jm£ x *. "- jb*4 f* :> •# % ” , _ ./
.»•„ I:., -■ *™ J» Jr* jhmT . * / ■*. J* # &'* > ffiag*
! - r _ * > ' ' * T ** **
v S&jfc ; *v ***y * ■ ..v ■ 14 ** ;
‘v - ‘ V * ‘
Edwards. GROUP OF 4-TOOTH RAMS
(JNerowie).


Edwards. Top. — FULL-MOUTHED EWE. (Nerowie).
Centre, SIX-TOOTH EWE.
Bottom FOUR-TOOTH EWE (First Prize Burra Show).


’ -V' 1 • &/V - * f >
; " c ' ■ y‘ ' .
\T mm '-’'' T
.. , ; ;,
.
M -.V .AafcL: IBtojvvftw
■ ***^4 vj ,v*' % . •■ <r- s.4|., :• -'.
%J$0% ‘ ?il ' *&£ - # „ iv *, *.
*'*'"* % v*- r %t^j$*
.«* ' £ £ /% /*^C' : t>^£a-.* * * ~*' '
< : ■ ■ ; ;t Or v
Edwards. FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAM. (Nerowie
Edwards. SIX-TOOTH STUD RAM, “TOMMY BURNS.” (Nerowie)


••» I- *tft $??. <;' 4t &£*,-»•*“ * * * a T^ j wj .. •' jSsiSWPijgfr. 1 •\i sIz^BBMMBfe^MMflHI.
’Wfe ' v . 0^mKK
s.
Edwards. VIEW AT NEEOWIE
calling, for the drought closed down, with the result that no crops grew and the greater
portion of his stock died.
After this experience, Mr. Dunstan decided to go in more extensively for wool
growing and stud sheep breeding, with the result that he now possesses a flock of 1,000
good class Merinos, which trace back to Mount Bryan, Canowie, and Cappeedee stock,
which Mr. Dunstan has at different times purchased.
Mr. Dunstan is one who makes a pleasure of his work, and the result of his care
and intelligent understanding of his sheep has led to the very satisfactory progress made
in the comparatively short period which has elapsed since he first entered the ranks of
Merino Stud men. Mr. Dunstan has recently purchased ewes and rams from Messrs.
Murray Bros., Cappeedee, and will, in future, breed pure Murray strain.
Nerowie sheep are becoming known, and their owner is able to report a satis-
factory call for his surplus rams, some of which he has recently sent to Western Australia.
AGED STUD RAM, “ TRAFALGA.”


'
t) “ Craignook. ” (7 == ===^)j
The Property of Mr. H. A. Giles.
H & H lr 4 rT7 hhu t ™ es> A® °! lly survivin § member of the firm of Messrs.
A ‘ x ( f! les ’ fount Pleasant, who resides at “ Lansdowne ” Mt. Pleasant is the
e.dest son of the late Mr. John Giles, of Portbury, Somersetshire, England He was born
i !845 at Walton near Glastonbury, Somerset. In 1866, being attracted to Australia
A r. Giles embarked with his brother, Thomas, on the “Essex,” for Melbourne but only
remamed a little while m Victoria, leaving for Mt. Pleasant ok a visit to lus kncle who
-d established a mill in that town. His uncle induced Mr. Giles to remain at Mt
rJeasant and enter his business, and so impressed was the elder Mr. Giles with the fore-
sig it and business acumen displayed by his nephew that he was afterwards admitted
11 to partnership. _ The same year the business was enlarged and gradually extended
o her branches being added from time to time as the district progressed ' and rapid
q. 1^ es we . re ma( Je to success. In 1878 the Giles (uncle and nephew) purchased “Pine ”
) ation, situated North-West of Port Augusta, which comprised 444 square miles of open
country stocked with three thousand sheep. The flocks grew and were added to from
ne to time. S°me of the very best of the Murray Merino rams were selected for
i purpose, and the patient, determined work consistently followed by Mr. Giles over
a series of years, and his intelligent conception of the type of sheep he desired to
pi iduce was rewarded. So rapid was the development of these flocks that it was not
oig before they numbered 18,000. For a number of years his uncle was a sleeping
cr rnhm onn interests and, when he died in 1892, his nephew assumed entire
cc drol till 1900, when the property was sold.
In 1891 Mr. Giles purchased " Craignook,” a fine estate of 1,800 acres, on
h , n “r ay - + u Th M ‘f, a u s P ! S, ndld property, having an eight-mile river frontage,
t mded on the North by Purnong, and on the South by Chucka Bend. For
ne years this Estate was under the management of Mr. G. Pilmore, but was last


ll if I
| Crown St MR. H. A. GILES. 1


MT 5 r>*:v . . , aT" '
A>. Duryea. Morgan. “ CRAIGNOOK,”
Showing Orchard and Irrigated Lucerne.
year leased to two of Mr. Giles’ sons. Some 20 acres are under lucerne and a
similar area is devoted to fruit growing, from which several tons of jams are annually
obtained, after supplying the neighborhood with fresh fruit.
Another property of 8,000 acres belonging to Mr. Giles is also situated on the
Murray in the Hundreds of Bandon and Vincent, and is also leased to his sons who
carry on mixed farming there. J
Mr. Giles has always been active in promoting the welfare of his district in which
he is well-known and greatly respected. He has at various times occupied a leading
position in connection with all local societies, etc. His knowledge of stock is admittedly
great, and he has frequently been appointed to judge in this and other States.
Mr. Giles married in 1868, but lost his wife in 1897. Of his family five sons and
five daughters survive, and several grandchildren.
A PROLIFIC EWE.


Show Record.
The following are some of the prizes gained by Mr. Giles.
1892. First prize for wool grown on saltbush, R.A. &H. Society’s Show.
1893. —Kapunda, Champion Merino ram and ewe ; also eleven prizes with
nine sheep. Gawler, Champion ram and ewe ; also seven prizes with
five sheep.
1894. —Adelaide, Saltbush wool (one fleece weighed 291b5.), first and second
prizes. Angaston, Wool prizes. Mt. Barker, Champion ram and ewe
(13 prizes in all being obtained at this Show). Mt. Pleasant, Champion
ram and ewe (29 prizes for sheep and wool being obtained at this show).
1894. Gawler Show, Champion Merino ram and ewe. Ten prizes were obtained
at this show with eight exhibits. Kapunda Show, Champion Ram and Ewe,
also twelve other awards. His total of prizes won for the year 1894 was 71.
1895. —Angaston, four first prizes for wool. Mount Barker, ten prizes for sheep
and wool. Mount Pleasant, 28 prizes. The total for the year was 42 prize
winners.
1896. —ln this year Mr. Giles did not exhibit at any of the shows.
1897. —Mount Pleasant, seven prizes for sheep and wool.
1898. —Seven prizes.
1899 —Mount Pleasant, eight prizes, including Champion ram,
1900 —Mount Barker, Champion ram ; also, seven firsts.
1901. —Mount Pleasant, four prizes.
1902. Mount Pleasant, nine prizes for sheep and wool.
1903. —Angaston, 6 prizes. Mount Pleasant, 6 prizes.
1904. Angaston, four prizes. Mount Barker, three prizes. Mount Pleasant,
three prizes.
1905. Angaston, five prizes. Mount Barker, five prizes. Mount Pleasant, five
prizes. Mannum, three prizes.
1908. —Angaston, four prizes. Mount Pleasant, four prizes. Mannum, four
prizes.
1907.- -Mount Pleasant, three prizes.
Mr. Giles is exceedingly proud, and naturally so, of being the prize-taker for
Champion Rams and Ewes at Kapunda, Angaston, Mount Barker and Mount Pleasant
for two consecutive years. In addition, he has taken many prizes for horses, cattle'
pigs and poultry.


Richmond parl{ Stud.
“ Liang ” (imp.). BROOD MARES. “ Gambit ” (imp.).
Che property of jYtr. j. d(. jfildridge.
One of the most noted homes of the thoroughbred in Australia is Richmond Park the
property of Mr. J. H. Aldridge. The stud was first established by Mr. Aldridge in 1889
and is to-day held m high repute throughout the Commonwealth, for it is associated with
some of the best known names in the racing world.
The Estate, which is an ideal place for the purpose to which it has been put is divided
into numerous sheltered and well shaded paddocks, where the mares, foals, and yearlings
enjoy the best possible conditions. There is a splendid water supply, and’the fertility of
the soil is shown by the_ fine timber and the remarkably luxuriant growth of the various
grasses, lucerne, &c., which are cultivated there and add to the attractiveness of the pro-
perty, which has been visited and admired by breeders and sportsmen from all parts of
Australia. 1
Mr. Aldridge, the owner of this successful stud, is a keen and enthusiastic judge of a
horse, who will long be remembered amongst Australian turfites as the owner of Sardius
one of the best horses which ever ran on an Australian course, whose career was unfor-
tunately, cut short when he fell in the Caulfield Cup won by Grace Darling. Sardius is
but one of many winners bred and owned by Mr. Aldridge, whose colors have been carried
to the front on many memorable occasions. Amongst others, Antilles, a mare of his own
breeding, which won the double —City Handicap and Cup.
The stud was first brought into special prominence by that good performer and great
sire Carlyon, but the purchase of the Carbine horse, Pistol, in England in 1904 is the most
noteworthy, as it has been the most remunerative event in its history. The enterprise
of this popular owner in buying this son of the expatriated Carbine is destined to have
considerable effect on the Australian turf, for many of the stock sired by him are showing
great promise for the future.
The same judgment which prompted the buying of Pistol has been manifest in the
selection of the mares at Richmond Park, for many of the matrons in the paddocks are real
gems of the Stud Book. That this is recognised is shown by the attendance of buyers
and the spirited bidding when the drafts from the stud come to the hammer.
Mr. Leslie Aldridge, who manages at Richmond Park, is as enthusiastic as his father
n the breeding of the thoroughbred, and the excellent condition in which the yearlings
are brought into the ring at the annual sales is always commented on by experts, especially
oy trainers whose vocation it is to prepare these youngsters for the future, and who know
and appreciate the value of a good foundation.


“j-istol” aridJome of yearlings.
PISToi. ' '' r> ' A1A i: A 11<^
THE “ .NOLINE ” COLT. Sold for I THE THOEA Fliiiji. Sold for ooo feS.


ui g*. •• restful' ni.lv' 1 no


The Stud.
Carlyon, who was lord of the liarem at Richmond Park for many years, was bred 1 y
the late Hon. James White, of N.S.W., and was a son of Chester (by Yattendon from Lady
Chester), whose record on the turf was a brilliant one, and who lives in the annals of Aus-
tralian racing as the winner of the Caulfield Guineas, V.R.C. Handicap, Australian Cup,
Loch Plate, Anniversary Handicap, &c. Carlyon sired a great number of winners, amongst
them being such successful performers as Carlton, Carlos, Bloodstone, St. David, Dirk Ham-
merhand, Thorinda, Gunga Din, Thorax, Antilles, Troubridge, Rienzi, ( hatter, Carleon,
St. Vincent, and a number of others.
Pistol, who is now the chief sire of the stud, was bred in England, by Carbine from
Wenonah (dam of Wabun, Nenemoosha, &c.), by Galopin (sire of St. Simon), from Esa by
Uncas from Fleada by Hermit from Cradle by Saunterer from Margery Daw (dam of See
Saw and Eccosais). He had a notable career on the English turf prior to his purchase by
Mr. Aldridge, winning the Newmarket Hopeful Stakes (£562), Moulton Stakes (£487 /,
Crawford Stakes (£400), Payne Stakes (£675), North Derby (£1,275), carrying weights as
a three-year-old up to 9 st. 7 lb. He ran second in the Two Thousand Guineas won by
the famous Sceptre, beating Ard Patrick for second place. Both Sceptre and Ard Patrick
were afterwards sold for £20,000 or over, and were each of their sex about the best that
ever looked through a bridle. Altogether he started in 30 races before leaving England,
and was placed in fifteen.
Pistol is an exceptionally handsome dark bay horse, standing nearly 16 hands, with
all the appearances of a great sire, a very powerful evenly built horse showing pro-
nounced quality, with all the great strength and galloping power of his illustrious sire.
He is akin to Carbine too in his docility, and gives one the impression of possessing all
that grand old horse’s bull dog courage. He is also beautifully ribbed up, besides being
a grand topped animal with great muscular quarters, and it is an undoubted fact that
the loss to the Australian turf sustained by the loss of Carbine is in large measure compen-
sated for by the importation of this, one of his best sons. As a sire he has been in great
request, mares from several of the States having been sent to him, besides having the pick
of the home stud, so that in years to come his name should be one of the foremost in turf
history, and his stock command increased prices, especially as the Carbine blood is growing
in demand in England, where six of his yearlings in 1905 realised 3,700 guineas, an average
of 617 guineas.
Amongst the best known matrons at Richmond Park are —Brown Alice, a handsome
mare by Maribyrnong out of Fair Alice (imp.). She is the dam of Gunga Din and Rienzi.
The former won the Adelaide Cup in 1901 (8 st. 9 lb.), Federation Handicap, Adelaide
Stakes, Mayor’s Mile, S.A. Derby, New Year’s Gift, &c.
Thora, dam of Lord Carlyon (by Carlyon), and Thorina (by Pistol), by Somnus (imp,),
out of Astarte, sister to Richmond.
Flanoline, by Grand Flaneur out of Atholine (imp.).
Hebron, by Neckersgat out of Tyropean (imp.).
Limber, by Light Artillery, out of Tyropean.
Olga Nethersole, by Newminster out of Emmie, dam of Emir.
Gun Carriage, by Carlyon out of Limber.
Gratuity, by Richmond out of Gratitude.
Wonderland, by Carlyon out of Brown Alice.
Briar Rose, by Newminster out of Primrose.
School Miss, by Metal, out of Gerton.
Connection by Carlyon out of Sylvan Queen.
Alveary, by Eiridspord out of Busy Bee ;
Cardinal and Black, by Metal, out of Our Colours.
Restful, by Far Niente, out of Lady G., by Gozo (imp.), sire of Gaulus and Tie
Grafter, each a winner of the Melbourne Cup.
Mr. Aldridge has also just added to his stud two mares purchased by Dr. Lang, of
Corowa, Gambit, three years, by Crackenthorpe (by Hermit), out of a Gallinule mare, and
Liang, full sister to Linacre, by Wolf’s Crag, out of Lismaine. The grand dam of Liang
is the only female descendant of the great Ormonde.


Jhe property of Jtfr. John JOewis,
Jenterderj, Woodville.
One of the early families who made their home in this State is that of Lewis,
the first member of which was the late Mr. Henry Lewis, who settled at Macclesfield
early in the history of the State, and founded that, in its day, well-known estate
“ Comonella,” but which is now, perhaps, only remembered by the older generation.
1 his gentleman was one of the best known pastoralists of his day on account of the
pure-blooded sheep and cattle which he was wont to send to market. In this con-
nection he held the record for the highest-priced beast for some considerable time, the
price being £52 10s. In addition to his pastoral interests, Mr. Lewis was the proprietor
of the well-known Macclesfield Brewery, and obtained a gold medal at the International
Exhibition, London, for his “ Macclesfield Ale ” in 1873.
Mr. John Lewis, J.P.
The present head of the family is Mr. John Lewis, who was born at Macclesfield
in 1855, and educated at Seven Hills College, near Clare. Mr. Lewis showed considerable
enterprise in launching out, some thirteen years ago, when station property was at a very
low ebb, as the country was passing through some very severe trials, such as droughts,
rabbits, dingoes, etc.
Mr Lewis’ enterprise is perhaps not as well recognised as it should be, for it
generally remains for a future generation to do honor to such men, who, by their
courageous and adventurous nature, have carved out new provinces from the “beyond”
and who, by these distant outposts, prepare the way for future settlement and develop-
ment by those who follow.
Mr. Lewis takes an active interest in the supervision of the properties of Nilpena,
lundi Mundi and Wirrialpa, but finds time for recreation in yachting and racing, for
leis an enthusiastic and generous supporter of the “ Sport of Kings.” He was one


MR. JOHN LEWIS, J.P. THE LATE HENRY LEWIS.


il ~***
, : __ . ■ ■ ■
°f I! 16 Adelaide Racing Club, and has been for over 20 years a member
ot the Committee and also a Steward of that body. To patrons of the turf he is well-
known as a popular racing owner, and his colors (Red, White and Blue) are often seen
at the winning post. Mr. Lewis has always taken a great interest in military affairs, and
m the dancers for four years, during which he won the much coveted Military Cup
presented by Lord Kmtore. y
In connection with the other pastime he favors, he is the owner of a very fine
a, nd well-appointed motor launch “Lotus,” which is quite one of the best craft of its
c ass m the State, and in which Mr. Lewis has made many pleasant excursions around
our shores.
Nilpena.
i pastoral experience was gained at Nilpena, which property he
puichased, thirteen years ago in conjunction with Mr. R. J. Matheson. When Mr.
Lewis took up Nilpena there were 17,000 sheep on the estate, but on the disposal of his
interest two years after the flocks had increased to 35,000.
Mundi Mundi.
On disposing of his share in Nilpena Mr. Lewis purchased Mundi Mundi on his
own account. This estate, which comprises some 600 miles of country, is situated near
Silverton, and lies partly in New South Wales and partly in South' Australia. This
•state is an old-established station, and was purchased from the Union Bank into whose
lands it had passed some years previously.
The country is mostly flat, well-clothed with saltbush and grass. Since its acquire-
ment Mr. Lewis has spent many thousands in improvements, more especially in water
conservation, and the holding is now well and permanently watered by a dozen dams,
CARTING WOOL AT MUNDI MUNDI.


\ i jr
''
MUNDI MUNDI HOMESTEAD.


' ' '• ‘ . ... •
m j f
\\ells Several dams have an aggregate area of 18,000 yards, and wells have been
sunk 4( Ott deep. The border fence has all been wire netted, and the Run is com-
paratively free of vermin.
The flocks are a splendid strain of Merinos, and number about 30,000, tire rams
emg principally Murray, Bungaree, Boonoke and Mt. Beevor, and the wool is considered
o eol the very best quality and is much sought after by the various wool-buyers.
Wilpena.
This is another estate owned by Mr. Lewis, and lies 30 miles north of Hawker,
comprises an area of 810 miles, consisting of undulating grass and saltbush
country, well-timbered by a variety of useful trees. It is considered one of the best-
watered runs m the north, being rich in permanent springs and possessing some half
dozen w'ells. ° 1 &
This estate was purchased from Mr. Sydney Kidman, who had used it as a cattle
l un '. pasturage consists of spear grass, barley grass, clover, geranium, etc. Mr.
ew is has fenced this station at a cost of some £6,000. In addition to sheep, some tw r o
or three hundred of cattle are run on the property.
The flocks depasturing on Wilpena number 20,000 Merino sheep but the carrying
capacity is estimated at 35,000. Mr. Lewds is a great believer in not overstocking,
the animals are of hardy constitution, plain bodied, slightly folded at the necks, and
carrying a dense fine w T ool of fairly long staple. These points, together with large
frame, aie the points chiefly aimed for by the owner, In their breeding, Bungaree,
Nalpa, and Hill River rams (Mr. Lewis has a preference for the Bungarees) have been
chiefly used on Mundi Mundi stock, and have left a strong impress of their good qualities
STATION BUILDINGS, WILPENA.


. •
Kris chock , TENTERDEN (Mr. John Lewis’s Home at Woodville).


Wirrialpa.
This estate, which was purchased some four years ago by Mr. Lewis and the
Messis. W are Bros., lies some 20 miles from Blinman and comprises an area of 1,600
square miles, on which are depastured some 20,000 sheep and 1,400 head of cattle,
the paitnership lias, however, been recently dissolved and the estate now belongs
entirely to Mr. Lewis.
the flocks are a good strain of Merino, having an admixture of Lkmgaree, Mintaro,
Angas and Lake A ictoria blood. They are large-framed animals of hardy constitution,
carrying a long staple of fine wool with plenty of density.
Ihe country is flat with some undulating areas, and is watered principally by
wells and springs. Ihe forage consists of various native grasses, salt bush, blue bush,
and several other useful fodders. The estate is well-timbered with mulga and other
native growth. It has been recently vermin-proof fenced at a cost of about £10,060.
this was highly essential, as before this was done some 9,000 sheep were lost through
the agency of dogs. Owing to these losses the flock has been practically renewed
by the inti oduction of blood from the studs referred to above. As evidence of their
number it may be mentioned that in one year at Wirrialpa 283 dogs were destroyed.
the cattle on this estate are Llerefords, the original stock of which were obtained
nom the estate of the late J. H. Angas, and have since been kept up to a high
standard by a judicious purchase of bulls from the same source. They are now a
splendid type of animal, and we should probably not be overstating their merit in saying
that there is not a better herd of similar size in South Australia. Mr. Lewis, however,
Uas no ambdion towards the show ring, but breeds solely for beef, and in this has
been extremely successful, for the average returns have been excellent, whilst occasionally
exceptionally good prices have been obtained.
Krischock. DRAWING ROOM AT TENTERDEN.


Tenterden.
Mr. Lewis, like many of our northern pastoralists, has made his home in one
of the beautiful suburbs of Adelaide, for he now resides at Tenterden, Woodville, which
he purchased from the Trustees of the late Captain Simpson. Tenterden is a
charming property situated within a short walk of the station, so that the home com-
bines the advantages of city life with the pleasures of a rural neighborhood. The home
itself —a handsome two-storied edifice —is large and commodious, the rooms being lofty
and fitted with all the elegancies and conveniences which wealth and taste may
Krischock. HALL AND STAIRWAY.
procure. It is, moreover, surrounded by extensive gardens, which have the charm
which age gives as well as that which comes from the care and thoroughness of their
up-keeping, and there is some beautiful limber in the paddocks, which form part of the
property, which add greatly to the beauty of this estate.
Mr. Lewis married in 1888 Alexandrina Helena, youngest daughter of the late Mr.
John Pearson, of Islington House, South Road, and has a family of three sons and five
daughters. The eldest son is at present with Elder Smith & Co., gaining experience in
prosaic business details before joining his father in the management of his northern
estates.


•
: I
♦
I £gfi
k - j ;^-
MOTOR YACHT “LOTUS”
B ~ . * i .- i
I - ifc i& iiUiSraiSSi . lift, *r g: -~”“ ife ’ ffc - ,aj iHBBHBHIlMlB —i r *
I ®»^Sr■• r / CSBfeiAi' I’’’".’^
i/yl' ' ■* w # ImKf - »™fl* J * I l* & t.A
I ISfefc' #JHii»- M-iBKii •-» •\ V T?» s fc --^^g?§^w^>^. B ■ffMT' * ■,
I * ' % ‘* JUJ '" :
I IpjlPsiM J* * 1 ■■"^■iii_n I i| j^.^—
I 8£- - >^t : ' - f. afe.,.
II ~BiSH3M^^Ka^g^lirNi^BLi/^^
j I ■» .aBE^ : ;
II -'•’•J*- / J
MAIL DAY AT WIRRIALPA.
1^gr- ***^^^ffirtiMw^S^lTS^tTT^^tf^K^^-^^^***^”. vjfe *** ; ,■ i .M2g fagt vft ' ' ■*4" I s\» ’•* ’ f * "" * "■■ 1 " ‘s *~ ’ .,,!■ ■ j%"• v^>c^r<y^ 1 M 1 p^jpt?
; .. / -
Krischock. THE GARDENS, TENTEEDEN.




Scott. OUTBUILDINGS, GLENTHORNE.
Jtje property of Jtfr. JYormap prookrparj
Mr. Norman Brookman, the owner of Glenthorne, is the second son of the Hon. George
Brockman, M.L.C., one of Adelaide’s best known citizens, and one who, though still com-
paratively a young man, may, paradoxical as it may seem, claim to be an old colonist,
for he came to Adelaide with his father, Mr. Benjamin Brookman, more than forty-six
years ago. He was then a boy of two, and, like so many successful South Australians,
he was born in Scotland. The particular city of his birth was Glasgow. He was educated
at the school of which the late James Bath, afterwards for many years Secretary to the
Education Department was headmaster. Mr. Brookman received his early business train-
ing in Adelaide. Ultimately he entered the realm of finance, and shoitly after the dis-
covery and opening up of the Barrier silver field, he became a member of the Adelaide
Stock Exchange
In 1893 Mr. Brookman organised the Adelaide Prospecting Syndicate which despatched
Messrs. W. G. Brookman and G. W. Pearce to Western Australia. All the world knows
how these pioneers discovered the Kalgoorlie group of mines, now known by the well-
earned title of “The Golden Mile.” It afterwards became Mr. Brookman’s task to obtain
the capital necessary to hold and develop these mines, and by his means large sums of
English money were made available for work on the new fields.




*£/*? 'i*' , if
■'■' •*■ A •
Pffd- -— ’ — _ ■- -••?■■■
ENGLISH SUFFOLK PUNCH STALLION, “ RENDELSHAM MAJOR GRAY,” 3278 (IMP.).
Foaled 1905. Color-Whole Colored Red Chestnut. Bred bv William Gray, Parhan Hall Wickham Mkt V.-p
Smith s Saturn 2,663, Winner of many Champions and ' First Prizes in Fimland -,'l • f’l ,.• o • T
Adelaide Royal A. & IT. September Show. I Jam-" Daisy ” 4 398 b L " S Si, fc|
Mignonette ” 3,565 by Duke of Hamilton’s “ Saunterer,” 1.716 SuttmSuell 2.1,86. G. Dam-


' '* ' '' *' "" '
tt. SUFFOLK PUNCH STALLION “RENDLESHAM COLLEGIAN.’
SUFFOLK PUNCH MARE, “RENDLESHAM SNOWDROP.’


V ' ; *■' - ‘
Mr. Brookman has done much to adorn the city in which he has spent the greater
part of his life. The fine edifice in Grenfell-street known as Brookman’s Building was
built by him, and he has shown a patriotic desire to help forward the cause of technical
education which is so important a factor in the prosperity of a young country by his muni-
ficent gift of £15,000 to the building fund of the School of Mines and Industries. In con-
junction with Mr. D. J. Gordon he called the first meeting of the River Murray League
and was President of the Association_ for some years. He was also associated with the
late J. L. Parsons in the old transcontinental railway proposals.
Mr. Brookman’s first public office was that of member of the Walkerville Municipal
v ouncil, of which he was subsequently ( hairman. He has also acted as one of the Governors
of the National Museum, Public Library, and Art Gallery, besides devoting valuable time
to the Children s LTospital and the Adelaide University. For seven years, too, he has
been Chairman of the Adelaide Hospital Board, in which capacity he has rendered most
Scott. SUFFOLK PUNCH STALLION, “ GLENTHORNE MONARCH.”
( , % " Remllcsham Collegian,” out of “ Rcrullesham Snowdrop.”
Bred by Mr. Norman Brookman and purchased by the Queensland Govern ment for the State Farm
valuable service to that magnificent institution. In 1901 he contested the Central District
of the Legislative Council, with the result that he was placed at the head of the poll by a
very large majority.
Mr. Brookman’s connection with the pastoral industry dates back but a few years,
when he bought a property of 3,000 acres in the North Goulbourne District of New South
Wales for his eldest son, Mr. George Brookman, jun., and in 1903 purchased “ Glenthorne,”
situated at O’Halloran Hill, about ten miles from Adelaide, from Mr. Hedley Porter, for
his second son, Mr. Norman Brookman. It is interesting to record that this estate'was
originally the property of Major O’Halloran, a fine old colonist, to whose good work South
Australia owes so much, it having been granted him by the Crown for public services.
I he estate now consists of 2,200 acres of undulating hilly country, well grassed and
lightly timbered, which extends from the Happy Valley Reservoir to the sea. ' There is a
plentiful water supply, permanent water being available in each of the many paddocks
into which the estate is divided. The fencing is throughout of a substantial character,


. ■ 1
Scott. TRIO OF DORSET HORN EWES.
Bred by Mr. W. R. Flower, West Staffordshire, England.
and is all sheep proof. The homestead, a comfortable two-storied building, is pleasantly
situated in a sheltered position at the head of a valley which opens out towards the sea.
Mr. Norman Brookman was born at Gilberton, Adelaide, in 1883. He was educated
at St. Peter’s College, and afterwards spent some years at Roseworthy College preparatory
to taking up, first the management and subsequently the ownership, of “ Glenthorne,
and the now well-known Suffolk Punch and Dorset Horn Studs. The Suffolk is one of
the most popular breeds in the old country, and in this, where conditions are perhaps even
more favorable to its general, almost universal use, it is likely to prove even more so, for,
as an all round animal it is hard to find its equal. Hardy, compact, active, a good walker,
an easy trotter, staunch and sweet tempered, this breed possess all the qualities which the
farmer looks for in his working stock.
When Mr. G. Brookman first decided to establish a Suffolk Punch Stud he determined
that a beginning should be made with the best blood in England, and his initial purchases du -
ing a visit to that country in 1904 were from Mr. A. J. Smith, of Woodbridge, in the counu
from which the breed takes its name. This importation consisted of a stallion (Rendleshai i
Collegian) and two mares of the same great prize-winning family. Rendlesham Collegia i
(3,175) was sired by Smith’s Prince Albert (2,525), winner of numerous prizes in England,
including one champion and five first prizes ; by Smith’s Wedgewood (1,749), winner cf
five champions and eight first prizes. Dam —Diamond (2,394), by Wolton’s Checkin at 1
1,566), granddam Smart (2,279), by Waller’s Volunteer (1,241). Collegian won the
champion prize at the Royal Show in Adelaide in 1905, and first prize for the class three
years and over in 1907. Pie was in every respect a very taking animal, and his young
stock have proved a great success, for they have splendid constitutions, and are line movers
in harness.


Finding this first importation to be so entirely satisfactory, Mr. Brookman, in the
following year, commissioned one of the best English judges of the Suffolk to procure for
him tluee mares. this was done, and in due time this important addition to the stud
ai rived at Glenthorne. Ihe pick of the trio was in foal to Saturn, said to have been one
of the greatest Suffolks ever bred, and a winner of many of the principal awards of the
English show ring.
Mr. Brookman was unfortunate enough to lose “ Collegian,” but his place at the head
of the stud has since been taken by the magnificent imported stallion “ Rendlesham Major
may, also purchased from Mr. A. J. Smith, but bred by Mr. William Gray, Parhan Hall,
Wickham Mkt. “ Major Gray ” was got by “ Saturn,” and has therefore a strong infusion
>f Rendlesham” blood, and so is peculiarly well suited for the “Glenthorne” mares.
Major Gray possesses the characteristics of the Suffolk in a marked degree, being short
in back and loins, with short clean legs, good feet, and is also a beautifully free mover.
DORSET HORN EWE,
Champion Royal Show, Adelaide, 1907.
This horse was foaled in 1905, and is therefore hardly yet in his prime, but was a consider-
able winner in England before his purchase by Mr. Brookman. Last year (1908) as a
three-year-old his wins included—First Woodbridge Spring Show, first and champion at
Suffolk Agricultural Show, first and champion at Royal Agricultural Show, also Champion
‘ up, valued at £SO. His only appearance in an Australian Show Ring, was at the Adelaide
Royal Show (1909), where he was awarded the Champion Prize. Such a record may be
taken as sufficient evidence of his quality, and his possession augurs well for the future
success of the Glenthorne stud.
In his selections of Dorset Horns Mr. G. Brookman was equally insistent on getting
foundation stock of the very highest class. This importation consisted of five rams and
25 ewes, all being from the noted flock of Mr. W. R. Flower, of West Staffordshire. That
Mr. Brookman made no mistake in this purchase was shown by the fact that they were
described by the “ Live Stock Journal ” before shipment as being of “ rare good quality
and character, of first rank, merit and type,” and it has also been proved by the all round
excellence of the flock which has been bred up from them. This flock of stud sheep now
numbers 125, and it speaks well for the growing popularity of the Dorset that the demand
for rams is greater than can be met. To the “Flower” flock Mr. Brookman last year


|‘ ' .^% i ;> V »®Kt * - • . t i|
’ [ ■ ?, jdflj^B||jBk
added the whole of the Ulooloo flock, numbering 175, which he purchased from Mr. Mel-
rose.
Strong evidence of the adaptability of the Dorset is found in the fact that the Ulooloo
flock, with which such good results had been obtained on country just on Goyder’s line,
should also prove completely satisfactory in the south. Up to the present Mr. Brookman
has kept the two strains entirely distinct, for with the English sheep it is his ambition to
follow closely Mr. Flower’s ideas and methods of breeding, so that his Dorsets may be,
to all intents and purposes, an Australian offshoot of the parent flock.
The Glenthorne country has been found extremely suitable for this class of sheep,
which show the same valuable qualities of coming to maturity early and extraordinary
fecundity which make them so desirable for the production of lambs for the export trade.
In addition to the pure stock Mr. Brookman has a number of stout crossbred mares
of the medium to heavy draught type from which lie breeds a very fine class of animal
for trolly and general farm use. There also are about a thousand sheep of a useful cross-
Scott. DORSET HORN RAM.
First Prize under I.V, years, Royal Show, Adelaide, 1907. Bred by Mr. Norman Brockman
bred'type on the property from which a fine quality of export lamb is bred. The owner of
Glenthorne is a thorough believer in heavy feeding for the in-lamb ewes, and for the growing
lambs. Large quantities of fodder are therefore grown, there being altogether about 300
acres under cultivation on a rotation system which Mr. Rrookman has Droved to give en-
tirely satisfactory results. At present the estate carries (inclusive of sheep, cattle, and
horses) rather more than one sheep to the acre. At one time Mr. Brookman was inter-
ested in the possibilities of an export trade in poultry, and made several valuable impor-
tations from England which will, should this much discussed branch of export business
ever develop, be found to have been of some service to those interested.
The Glenthorne stock, which was first exhibited in Adelaide in 1905, has already
made its mark in local show rings, for, though competition in the Suffolk and Dorset Horn
sections has sometimes been disappointingly meagre, the quality has invariably been such
as to attract the attention of judges and visitors alike.


Che property of Jyfr. J. f. Jtfaslin.
The history of the pastoral areas now known as Bundaleer goes back to the very
wLh yS ° f t h Sta r’/° r '* IVaSl VaS in 1839 ’ two >’ ears the Proclamation of South
Inhi ; a u Cr T rn C u ] ° n l’ that 11 was taken up from the Government by the late
John -Bristow Hughes, by whom it was subsequently sold to the late C. B Fisher and
u tnnadely acquired by the late John Mashn, who played so prominent a part in the
pastoral development of the Middle North, was born in 1828 in the county of Wiltshire
f 1S P arei jts were of Scottish origin, and the adventurous nature and sterling
qualities of haid-headed perseverance and pluck, which are generally accredited to that
race, were inherited by their son, who came to South Australia in the ship " Agincourt ”
somewhere m the early fifties, being accompanied on the voyage by his wife. He did
not however upon that occasion remain in this State, for in 1857 he set out for Bendigo
to try his fortune on those rich goldfields. Not being successful there he soon after-
wards removed to the Loudon fields, where Dame Fortune treated him with greater
tavor. firing of the rough life of the diggings, however, he once more returned to
S.A., and immediately commenced to lay the foundation of his very successful pastoral
caroor ; i first v f nture was made in conjunction with Messrs. George Angas Swinden
and Moorhouse, with whom he purchased Saltia Station and other Runs.
After retiring from this partnership, he took a trip to Queensland, and on his
return he visited the North, but, finding nothing he deemed suitable, he returned to
. 0 aid G where he resided for a little while. He did not, however remain long in
inactivity, for shortly afterwards he became associated with Mr. R Barr Smith with
whom he purchased Koolunga, Hummocks and Warrakimbo Runs, the active manage-
merit of Hummocks Station being undertaken by Mr. Maslm. It was this partnership
which subsequently acquired the Bundaleer country for the large sum of a quarter of
a million sterling. 1


/fe • : v: • •;:: <.
J uo o 0 ov, '■•y' I . , i o« o 0 ° A ° ,
/ OOo O o°o!*y/ ■ o, / 0 ooOoj\
( ooOy J
THE LATE JOHN MASLIN.


Hammer. MR. J. F. MASLIN.




/ * ‘ tfe * ‘ A, **- "*
__- *— JBHK j 9k.
* " t ■. "
- . ' • - ;■ *’■■'
•■ t ’ , ;-..? , i )SgL : *.:?** * * ‘ ; * v? '^ : '
, M *** t g't&*%:** -
0n the termination of this association Mr. Maslin became the sole owner of
Bundaleer and Warrakimbo, which was afterwards managed by his son, Mr. C. B. Maslin
who predeceased his father. Nilpena Station was, at one time, included in the pastoral
area controlled by him, but this was eventually sold. Ten years before his death, which
took place in May, 1908, at the great age of 80, he gave the Bundaleer property to his
two surviving sons. The late Mr. Maslin was a well-liked man, who had earned for
himself the esteem and good will of the settlers around Snowtown, Jamestown and
Georgetown, by the kindly aid which was always readily given to them, for, soon after
the northern areas were first thrown open, many of the small holders in the district,
were, through adverse seasons, in a precarious condition, and in many cases it was only
by the help accorded them by the late owner of Bundaleer that they were able to hold
out till better times arrived. For this he earned the title " Friend of the Farmer ” of
which he was legitimately proud.
Bundaleer.
Mr. J. F. Maslin is the fifth son of the late John Maslin, and was educated at
I rrnce Alfred’s College. On leaving College he returned to Bundaleer, where he assisted
GROUP OF BUNDALEER EWES
his father in the management of that station and in the general supervision of his
pastoral interests. He continued in this position till, in the year 1898, the property
was divided between himself and his brother.
Bundaleer is situated thirty miles north of Clare, midway between that prosperous
township and Jamestown. The estate covers 37.000 acres of country typical of this
celebrated district, being open hilly land, with some little native timber, principally
Sheoak, and permanently watered by the River Broughton and Bundaleer Creek, whilst
all paddocks not having a frontage to these sources of supply, are fully served by tanks
and dams, so that shortage of water is a difficulty with which the owner of Bundaleer
will never have to contend.


Kris chock. BUNDAXjEER HOUSE.


— ;— : : t “ t 7 “ 1
t ' / \ ■ • • .. ■. * . • • • . ; •.
•■•*.' ' ■ ' ' • : 7.'
r- , v .... •
' - : : ■' ,
' * ir - : ’ '
Krischock. BUNDALEER CREEK.


BUILDIN^


\l I: U N D A I. I. I I.'


Krischock. GROUP OF BUNDALEER RAMS.


I •
Krischock. TYPICAL BUNDALEER COUNTRY.


Krischock. BUNDALEER STUD EWE.


r ■ .
Krischock. BUNDALEER STUD RAM.


| ; ' ■ . ' ”
g .t£~jrfBL * JCWp^ t .7? ' > .. f_. *J r jj|» , j ,, \ ■
Krischock. VIEW SHOWING PORTION OF BTJNDALEER RESERVOIR.


' ’,. ' % *. < -*-ik^vfcfc^y^&? f ’ *\
I
Krischock. BUNDALEEE FLOCK RAM.


u:< ¥ r
‘Ji&fimL * WBSBaKBBKBUmi • a' %
The property is well-fenced throughout, and so arranged and subdivided that it
can be worked with the minimum of labor and the maximum of efficiency, and the
station buildings generally are'on modern up-to-date lines.
The sheep, which number about thirty-five thousand, are all pure Merinos, largely
of the C. B. Fisher’s strain, the foundation of the present flock being the sheep which
were on the property when it was purchased from that well-known old flock master the
late C. B. Fisher, 34 years ago. Since that period various introductions of imported
stock have been made and used in the flock, the first of any importance being from
Tasmania. Following this, a number of rams of Wanganella blood were introduced with
satisfactory results, and finally the Bungaree stud has been drawn on. This latest
addition Mr. Maslin regards with great favor, as he considers that the result has been
a decided improvement in the all-round quality of his stock. The Bundaleer sheep
may now be described as well up to the accepted standard of the South Australian plain
A BUNDALEER STUD EWE.
bodied Merino, being long-backed, deep-framed animals, giving heavy,, fleeces of bright
clean wool with a good staple and plenty of character. Weight as a flock-average runs
high considering the number shorn, last year’s clip giving a return of between 10 and
lllbs. Mr. Maslin ships his wool direct to London, as he considers this a more re-
munerative method of disposal. Last year's clip sold there at a half-penny over the
shilling per lb.
Though not bred on extreme lines as a stud flock, the Bundaleer merinos have,
through long continued and careful classing, been brought up to a good all round
standard, and have usually met with a fair measure of success upon the few occasions
upon which they have been exhibited. In future, it is Mr. Maslin’s intention to es-
tablish a select stud of Bundaleer Merinos, and devote more attention to the breeding
of stock of the very highest class. In doing so he will follow the lines which have m
the past gained for his flock the high reputation they now enjoy.


Che property of jYtr. Qeorge Edward jYiasliq.
Mr. George Edward Maslin is the third son of the late John Maslin, and elder bro-
ther ol Mr. J. F. Maslin, of the adjoining estate of Bundaleer, of which at one time the
present North Bundaleer formed part, for after holding the original Bundaleer property
lor some years with Mr. R. Barr Smith, the late Mr. Maslin became the sole owner, and
continued to be so until he divided the estate, and handed it over to his two sons in 1898.
North Bundaleer lies along the hilly country between Jamestown and Spalding, in
the heart of what 60 years of experience have shown to be unexcelled as wool producing
country. It covers altogether 23,000 acres, with the range running down its centre, and
beautiful rich flats on either side. An ideal combination in fact for the stock. The hill
sides are nicely studded with sheoak, and here and there along the flats, belts and patches
of blue gum are to be seen. The country is warm and fertile, so that feed is good through-
VIEW FROM THE HOUSE.




'&S ~' .. . - ■ ’* ,. _... ' . - ■ *'“• --...
■ -
%:■-- . ■ . , ' .. • — y, ...
. . _ ...... . .. . - ; -V,, V ; -- — -
— ■ : ■ ■ ■- - ■ : . * ■■?&&■:. , *';
Krischock. ENTRANCE GATES, NORTH BUNDALEER.
out the year. Geranium and barley come with the early rains. In spring the spear grass
makes gieat growth, and this, with the deep rooted native grasses carries the stock over
the balance of the year.
Ihe property is well watered, having about six miles of the Bundaleer Creek run-
ning through it, which even in the dryest summer months holds a good supply of clear
deep water in the permanent holes. In the paddocks not watered by the Creek, there are
excellent wells with automatic wind-mills, and the property is also well furnished with
dams, having splendid catchment areas.
Mr. Maslin since entering into possession of the property, has spared no expense
in bringing it right to the front in every respect, and it is now nicely subdivided, and
thoroughly well improved. It is almost entirely encircled with vermin proof fencing.
The rabbit pest which ten years ago was extremely serious has been overcome. This has
entailed hard work and great expense, but the result in practically clearing the estate of
the vermin has justified both. The wool shed, and men’s quarters are substantial well
equipped buildings, whilst the stables and all the outbuildings are fitted according to
modern ideas. Water is laid on everywhere throughout gardens, grounds, and station
buildings. The homestead as may be gathered from the photographs reproduced is one
of the finest in the North. The gardens are very extensive and beautifully laid out
whilst there is a superb collection of roses.
The North Bundaleer sheep are big framed and plain bodied, with just enough
neck to please the expert eye, but without any excess in this direction. Last season 400
four tooth ewes cut the wonderful weight of 14lb. per sheep. The surplus ewes from the
flock always command keen competition, and bring top prices at all the Northern Sales,


w _
Kri-schock. IN THE GARDENS. (North Bundaleer.)


JsT %^.
Scott. A CORNER OF THE GARDEN. (North Humlalerr.)
and the fat wethers have repeatedly topped the markets in the Jamestown and adjoining
towns. They trace back to the C. B. Fisher sheep which were on the property at the time
of its purchase. In addition, Wanganella blood was used at one time, but though satisfac-
tory in many ways, it was found that this blend had a tendency to develop fleeces which
were somewhat too fine in character. About ten years ago Mr. Maslin decided to try
rams from the Messrs. Murray, and bought from the late John Murray, of Rhine Park,
the then well known ram “General Buller,” paying three hundred guineas for him.
Shortly afterwards he purchased from Mr. A. J. Murray of Mount Crawford “ Portsea’s
Chief ”at the same figure. From time to time during the last few years he has also drawn
on the same source for selected ewes. Events have proved Mr. Mashn’s policy of using
the Murray strain, to have been sound, for the desired effect of securing a bolder, more
robust wool, was attained and this characteristic is now well marked throughout the flock.
Careful classing has been constantly carried out in the flock, so that the North Bundaleer
Merinocs now take high rank amongst the more important flocks of the State, and this
well deserved reputation has led to a satisfactory demand from Western Australia where
they are rapidly becoming favourably known, they are also making headway in New
South Wales. At the Shows of our own Middle North, Mr. Maslin has been a frequent
and successful exhibitor. In addition to sheep, the owner of North Bundaleershas
always had a for Shorthorn cattle, and a few have been bred on the station.
Recently, however, Mr. Maslin decided upon starting a herd of pedigree stock, and a
shipment is now on its way from England. This importation comprises the roan bull,
Village Rover, 104275, calved January 20, 1908, and bred by Messrs. MS T. Garnet and
Son, Aldsworth, Gloucestershire ; also four females, namely : —Darlington 42nd, calved
March 27, 1906 ; Aldsworth Maid 2nd, calved January 11, 1908 ; Rosemary 120, calved
March 10, 1907 ; and Melody 3rd, calved September 6, 1904.


' '
Krischock. SCENES ON


-/' ;*; * , .
NORTH BUNDALEER.


H ffi|n. |" i^S
Jh js **
*';» T s $/ .rf\- *'N • #*-i
« vV .%**w ,
K rise hock. GROUP OF £TUD EWIS. (North Hundaleer.)


nfe; ..
■ $ Bajf ’~3MH'
* '-v * a— I / /- ',. . , ‘‘“-- 1 " ‘
Krisehock. GROUP OF NORTH BUNDALEER EWES


p g *C jfMfc.# Its* %L|, , riM -—
4HL -• • s "jmL - n .i
A ,,, **A£ri”* ' m# ( '"""\ * fjjr *? * % ,
' B|r
ggdjB "•'■■'■r /.-
- i s «&*» .^Hi^.5^‘ ; 1# '!> '
0te*m | 1 ; # > f^fJWttgjj^KK■
■{l ■_., ' |^Rr y. * ' . ■■.-■-• ■■/ l ' $mMLm9.$*^
. ./-jft ' Hfvu * 2
■< jftfr jjBi ji * * ■*!**' - y^ ?^ i ' 1?
$ HQr'V ’ >&■ m£atr>?i fiST''*
_ ■ Mfa
. ,__ , t^ *“. •, !c .
JSfl
Krischock. STUD RAM. (North Bundaleer.)


Krischock. SHEEP ON THE HILL PASTURES. , v J ,


Krischock. A PAIR OF NORTH BUNDALEER RAMS.
Krischock. ANOTHER CHARMING VIEW OF THE HOUSE
Mr. Maslin, who is at present in England, is a hard worker and thoroughly piactical
man, for he has been engaged amongst sheep since he left \\ hinham College where he vas
educated. He has lately introduced farming on the share system at Bundaleer, where a
number of farmers are now breaking up and cultivating land, to his and their satisfaction
so that he has every reason to be pleased with the result of his experiment, the scope of
which will probably be extended as time goes on. He is keen on the welfare and general
progress of his district, and has at all times taken a leading pait in its affairs. Pnoi to
his departure for England, however, he resigned his office of President of the Lt al
Agricultural Society as well as that of Chairman of the Belalie District Council, both of
which positions he has occupied for some considerable time. Mr. Maslin married a
daughter of the late John Young, of Mount Templeton, and has a family of three sons and
three daughters.


Scott. THE HOMESTEAD, NORTH BUNDALEER.
j dmM
■ .
■ : , '^1B': >V , J ‘--L
f *0' ■■■‘ -'•'4^^i
;v.fL 3&» .i.^aAryr?
VI If - .<-.JI^»l.--.. m - ,.i]Br|r I I f
?:"'■ .-7 :^Jtig:I v -.•..■•':■/■■ ■ ■ :
' . ■. - :>:, .-. ,„;
' •• ; ■■■: '.X'-;'- ' ■ •
■ fe-~ . . •■■■■■•■■■. ■:-;.n'--Vj' n: ■■•■■- .'">'■ - ;__ __
Scott. IN THE HORSE PADDOCK.
Scotl. A CORNER OF THE DAM,
■V




MNmi||m *mm hill
t i y *
Cfje property of JYlr . Gdnjuncl pownjcrrj
Mr. Edmund Bowmian, the owner of Wan-
dillah, was born at Enfield in 1855, and was
educated at St. Peter’s College, and afterwards at
( lare College, Cambridge. His first experience in
pastoral matters was gained at Martindale.
The Martindale property —which was pur-
chased from Drs. W. and J. H. Brown, about 1850,
by his father (the late Edmund Bowman), the eldest
of the four sons of the late John Bowman, of whom
Mr. T. R. Bowman, of Campbell House, is the only
survivor—consisted of 14,000 acres of splendid
sheep country.
On the death of Mr. Edmund Bowman, senr.,
the property was conducted by the trustees, and
managed by Mr. Wm. Bowman, and it was due to
his able management that the flock attained the
high standard it did. Murray blood was used, but
at the breaking up of the Levels Stud, Mr. Bowman
purchased a fine stud ram. Mr. W. T. Mortlock,
who purchased the larger portion of the Martindale
Estate, took over most of the stud Sheep.
MR. EDMUND BOWMAN.
Mr. Bowman’s experience in the North West Country proved very disastrous for
him and his brothers, and led to their selling the more favourably situated estates of
Werocata, Martindale, Mt. Bryan, and Wandillah.
On leaving Martindale, Mr. Bowman went to Holm Hill, an estate purchased from
a cousin of his father. This property situated about three miles East of
Mintaro Railway Station, is still retained by him. At the time of the purchase its area
was 1,600 acres, but additions have been made from time to time, and it now contains
3,000 acres. He remained there for two years, when he left to take charge of Wandillah
for Messrs. Ayers Brothers. Mr. Bowman’s eldest son soon after took charge of Holm
Hill and is still there.
In 1906 the Government acquired 3,000 or 4,000 acres on M andillah for Closer
Settlement, and the remaining portion was divided into lots and sold. The homestead
and land around was purchased by Mr. Bowman, and Holm Hill and Wandillah are now
worked in conjunction.


j* , '
> % j$ f *
. JHKg^flBWHKMaTSjgB^rSfflBy 111 - &5. * ■ r>4 ‘\ ' $im Vy’*f fw • ■j«yijyL* 2 *
».• -
Edwards. AGED STUD RAM (No. 66). (Wandillah and Holm H


STUD EWE, li years.
Jr*- ■ . ..,<■*“%* % \
Edwards. STUD RAM, 3i year3 (No. 82). (Wandillah and Holm Hill).
STUD RAM, years (No. 80).


Edwards. THE AMEER.
The breeding ewes and stud rams are kept at the former places, whilst the sale rams
are sent to the latter, where intending buyers can inspect with little trouble, the home-
stead being situated about four miles from the Burra, overlooking the main road and
railway.
The country on both properties is undulating, and through -judicious stocking
the paddocks at Holm Hill have a thick coating of spear grass ; whilst at Wandillah,
geranium, clover, and spear grass do well, and lucerne thrives on the rich flats.
At Holm Hill from 200 to 300 acres are farmed on the share system, and a gocd
stock of hay is always kept in case of bad seasons.
Sheep.
The present stud flock is descended from the old Martindale stud. On one
occasion only, has fresh blood been introduced, when a ram was purchased from the pro-
prietors of the Bungaree estate.
Mr. Bowman’s aim has been to produce a large framed, plain bodied, strong con-
stituted sheep, with a well covered body and dense back, suitable for our Northern
country.
Particular attention has been paid to the class of wool, and a finer wool than is
usually found on South Australian sheep has been the result.
A number of rams have been sent to the West, and other parts, and the first lot o
selected rams sent to the Claremont stud sales, W.A., in 1908, made the highest average
of any sent from this State. Mr. Bowman does not exhibit, except at the Burra, where
lie has taken First and Champion in 1900, 1901, 1902, and 1903 ; and second, 1904.
Mr. Bowman is a great lover cf horses and always has some of the best. At the
sale of the Rapid Bay Stud, he purchased the imported horse Tregeagle. Wattle
Umslopogaas, Lady Kintore, Small Talk, and many others were bred at Martindale. He
still breeds a few, and that well bred horse The Ameer, now does stud duty at Wandillah,
whilst a fine New Zealand bred draught colt, recently purchased, is at Holm Hill.
Mr. Bowman married in 1884, Miss Cowle, third daughter of the late C. T. Cowlc
and has a family of two sons and four daughters. He takes an active part in local affairs
and has been in the District Council of Burra for many years. He is also on the Connci
of the Pastoral Association of S.A., representing the Burra District. He is fond of al
sport, he rowed for his College at Cambridge, and hunted for many years. A keen
polo player, he has been playing since 1879, and many times has assisted in upholding tin
colors of this .State against visiting teams from other parts of the Commonwealth.


jSSt 3*^*
Che property of Messrs. J. <$ jtf.
THE LATE
ARCHIBALD DAUNTLESS HAY.
c + 1 Th u- ( ? le ! 1 * where Messrs - j- & A - Hay have a Merino
Stud, which has of late years come rapidly to the front
lies about thirty miles east of Adelaide, in the picturesque
hilly country of the Braemar Range around Harrogate
horn which pretty township the homestead is abouMour
miles distant. Ihe land which formed the nucleus of the
present estate was taken up in the year 1871 by the late
Archibald Dauntless Hay, who received the name Dauntless
because he was born on the ship of that name, by which his
parents came to this State in the year 1840.
The area then acquired was 600 acres, but this has
been gradually increased until the property now covers
between four and hve thousand acres of typical hills country
on which a flock of about three thousand five hundred
Merinos is maintained. The greater portion is heavily grass-
ed, though some of the hillsides and higher lands run bare
with a good deal of rocky outcrop and boulder which form
natural shelter for the sheep.
. .... rh + ere * P len ‘y of , fi ' le ? a t lve , tlmber > eucal ypti, as usual, being most abundant in
addition to which a good deal of planting of pine, etc., has from time to time been done
Ihe Braemar Creek runs past and through a portion of the estate, along the course of
which there are some fertile Hats, but as will be seen from the photographs reproduced the
country is, for the most part, very hilly. 1


O^oV-. v " T 4ot^\
n t> *% t* P . I
** - * • “ s==! 5l -■' o<> a|
* ,^ c j — ;
|°V';V , =. ■■— " ,. lr ...
I O Cs ft ■ . • ‘>‘Q£>|
ff n C> '■',*. - ° i r, I
/ l •' ‘ ' ' > ' , oo^ c, ° 0 l
Hammer, MR. JAMES H. HAY.


n
\ I
♦> lH
W " **\\. ? 11
HHHKf *$U *\ *
Hammer. MR. ANDREW HAY.


'■**** fR|
% - 'i\ i %*j£^m ' ' * " , i||k
‘ % ,<i^r • - x < • - ,
SCENES ON THE BRAEMAR CREEK. (J. & A. Hay).


S THE '' H0^E i
i i „ \ >1 I tl \ ated a ®. il: is . in one of the wettest districts of the State, growth is late, and the
. co c unn § le winter months, but it enjoys the compensating advantage of carrying
is natlve pasture grasses in good grazing condition well on into the summer
Sheep bred and reared under such circumstances are of necessity hardy thrifty
stock, especially as housing of any description, or hand feeding are never resorted to.
ere is one disadvantage attached to such late country, and it is a serious one to such
ambitious breeders and exhibitors as the Messrs. Hay, and that is, that sheep grazed on it
cannot be got ready for the big Adelaide Show. This, they have in part, however, over-
y pure basing a property near Monarto, which, though only twenty odd miles from
the home stud, is nevertheless, much warmer and drier, and it is by working the two
oge her that they have been able to obtain the excellent results which already stand to
their credit. 7
Merino sheep were first kept at The Glen by the late Archibald Hay, who purchased
a small lot from the Murray flocks in 1871, at the time he took up the land. With these
he founded a small stud, with which he had attained considerable success at the time of
his death in 1886. The late Mr. Hay was widely known and respected throughout the
district in which he resided for the integrity, energy and perseverance which characterized
his life and work. He was a Justice of the Peace~ and had been Chairman of the Nairne
District Council on several occasions. Mr. Hay believed in healthy sport, and was for
many years a Steward of the Onkaparinga Club. His death, at the comparatively
early age of 46, was felt as a personal loss by many with whom he had been brought
m contact.


Scott TWO TOOTH STUD RAM -‘COMPASS.” (J. & A. Hay).
Scott. AGED STUD RAM. (J. & A. Hay).


,*{ ■ ■ >
Scott. FOUR TOOTH STUD EWE. (J. & A. Hay),
jir'-.
•_>
Scott. PRIZE STUD EWE. (J. & A. Hay).


‘ - -*
Scott. PRIZE STUD RAM “GLITTER.” (J. & A. Hay).
Scott. AGED STUD EWE “GOLDEN QUEEN.” (J. & A. Hay).


+ v Subsequently, Ihe Glen was managed by Trustees for the present owners, and
e stud was not persevered with, so the beginning of the flock now at The Glen
i" if f Y aic u ° c a^ e rom 1894, when Mr. James Hay attained his majority, and on be-
hall ot himself and younger brother, Mr. Andrew Hay, re-formed it by selecting twenty
t the best ewe? of the old flock, to which were added 20 first stud old ewes and 300
> oung ewes purchased from Mt. Beevor. From the same flock, they at the same time
ought a special stud ram “Block 16” together with several selected rams. On this
onnaa ion me Messrs. Hay set about the task of building up a stud flock which they
loped would one day rank with the foremost in the State, and they look back with
gratitude to the kindly interest their neighbour at Mt. Beevor took in their flock and
to tue assistance he was always ready to give them by valuable advice and suggestion
as to their work.
FLOCK OF STUD EWES. (J. & A . Hay).
For the first few years they confined themselves to the breeding and selection of the
original stock, but in 1900 they made another purchase of 100 breeding ewes from Mr. T.
H. Murray, which were in lamb to Mount Beevor rams, and in 1904 added a special stud
ram “ Portsca Prince” to their stud. “ Portsea Prince” was bought from Mr. A. f
Murray, of Mount Crawford, and proved a valuable addition to their flock, as he has sired
several winners, amongst them transport,” a particular fine ram with which Messrs
Hay have been successful. “Cable,” a son of “Transport,” is another ram which has
been largely used at The Glen, as has “ Glitter ” by the Mount Beevor ram “ Young Port-
light. “Glitter ’ was a prize ram at the Adelaide September Show in 1907 also this
year.
Since the purchase of “ Portsea Prince ” other Murray sheep have been brought
into the flock, which has from its commencment, been carried on entirely on the same


5ll
Scott. VIEW ON THE BRAEMAR CREEK, SHOWING WOOLSHED. (•). & A. Hay).


•'fcl > ' “ ’vi£. * ■
J® y J|| 5
.*
I :.^:,f. • gA ' -f v J < -‘ .j-* ?'■•’< ’: '. J
Scott. STUD AND SELECTED SHEEP AT THE GLEN. (J. & A. Hay).


« co (i A SCENE ON THE GLEN. (J. & A. Hay).
lines as the parent flocks, no other blood whatever being used, for the Messrs. Hay believe
that in the Murray type they have the best possible standard to breed to. Quite lecently
they purchased a fine Rhine Park ram by “ Admiral,” a champion ram by Nelson 111.
The sheep at The Glen, as might be expected from their breeding, are of high
quality right through the flock, being of the best type of plain bodied Merino. hhey
are large in frame and carry heavy fleeces of bold white wool, with which the owners
of The Glen usually top the market at the Adelaide sales for clips from their district.
Other evidence of the excellence of wool grown, is found in the records of this yeai s W ool
Show, where Messrs. Hay secured one of the most satisfactory successes which have fallen
to their lot, for in competition with the best wool grown in the State, they gained the high
honor of winning first for three fleeces shorn from rams under yeais, first
for three fleeces shorn from ewes under 1| years, and third for three fleeces
shorn from aged ewes. The weights in the young ram class were 19lbs. fHozs,
•24lbs. and 17lbs. 7f-ozs. for 300 days wool. In the young ewe class the figures
were 19lbs. llfrozs., 17lbs. and 18lbs. loz. In aged ewes the weights were respect-
ively 15lbs. 12ozs.,’l6lbs. and 17lbs. Is£ozs. They have also won their share of
honors in the prize list of the September R. A. & H. Society’s Shows, including 4th prize,
2 tooth ram, 1899 ; 3rd prize, pen of 5 rams, 1900 ; 4th prize, ewe with lamb at foot,
1906 ; 2nd and sth prizes, 2 tooth ram, 1907 ; sth prizeram, 3£ years, and sth prize ewe,
3lr years, with lamb at foot, 1 909.


./';': ; v'i , '.’/■ '' : " v: . ■' r ' ’’ ' : *' : "" 5 ='"' '*'■" ■'' ;:: ;: " 1 ‘* ' ' ■ , ■; ’ : '"";-' r ' •■■ ! ' ■■ . •' • : mA
* »
jjSgf JHjHy • t ‘ ■',, 'JSBh Jy£ ;> ■■- >'”' v '' * * • v • A •_ _
r-. s •^* w t -.>■ ■ •* . V* ’ . .** ■ .**• | _? ■ ■* , '* / ’• ' ■«,' w« - .. . •* * ' Cj "■I' -/|jJ| #_ • y^ > irj>t SjftgjSr* ‘
a„„,4 STUD RAMS AT “THE GLEN.” (J• & A. Hay).
’■'■■■■■'■ '"■■ '■'• /• ■•••:•. . • j agaagsawu»»L..
i. . ■ . • • •..•,.•■ _
p vsA JjjHgL;' 2r >«®P->•• -.T. »~aJpsB
jj- ■ *■ -.: V''.' ‘•'•‘._r ? 1 f ; ML’ ’jT J . * . •/’*„ ,^‘ j*’'* '•*
■. ■■'''■ ■' ' J 'f** |" - * f ■ .- - y; ■- - . ■ v.; '■ ... x.~ *; :: ; V . -;> j* •.,' - : - - a* ■ • |
■■' ■ -
v < «f T¥i^'~ : “■ ‘ .... • .-, v ■ 4 ■ ’ -■ * •'-••■ > v \-#VijR' , ,o*-V v^ f V ■ •••£ »'■ •• ■■■ '*••■»* ’'"'»* ’**■•. ' ■ ’ c *??*
Scott HOMESTEAD AT “THE GLEN,” IN THE BRAEMAR RANGE. (J. & A. Hay).




VfesrCp^iy
. . *j' , - * ’^]^i£t'. _
«m
(/
Jhe property of Jtfr. Patrick jYtcpTqapey
The owner of West Creek Farm is a native of
Ireland, for he was born at Dublin in the year 1841.
He left the old country as a boy, and arrived here
with his parents in 1851, where as a young man he
entered the employment of Messrs. Bowman Bros,
at their Martindale and Werokety estates.
On the Messrs. Bowman taking up Crystal
Brook run in 1856, Mr. McAnaney went there and
remained till 1868, in which year he was placed in
charge of some new land taken up by his employers,
situated 35 miles north east of Orroroo, which was
called Minburra.
Many difficulties had to be surmounted before
this country could be stocked. The fencing was the
first work that engaged Mr. McAnaney’s attention on
reaching Mmburra and this occupied some considerable
time —three hundred and fifty square miles of country
being ring fenced, all available labor being obtained
for the purpose. The water supply was obtained by
using an old engine for distilling the salt water. When
MR. PATRICK McANANEY.
engine got out of order which was not infrequently the case, water had to be carted a
distance of from 25 to 30 miles from Oladdy Station which was more fortunately situated.
This was, to put it in Mr. McAnaney’s own words/'no treat, especially on a blazing hot
day and the only method by bullock teams.” On the completion of the fence a dam was
sunk which removed the manager’s anxiety as regards the water, but even then it had to
be very closely preserved.
At odd periods after the dams were finished, the engine had to be used for con-
densing purposes, and at one time it had to be used permanently for about two years
both summer and winter, no rain having fallen for that time, though this was, of
course, an abnormal experience. Before, however, the dams were sunk, and whilst
the fencing was in progress, fresh water was looked on as a ration and of the same


; ' ROADSTER AND PONY 1VIARES.
“BOSCO” (Trotting Horse). “ OTAHUHU (Trotting Horse).
, I , .1 SHEEP ON LAKE SHORE. O', i ir \


'■ • " • " DRAUGHT JrOOD MARKS (West (’reek).
Krischock. THE DAIRY HERD. rw^


value as the hour, so some idea may be gathered as to the straits to which they were
reduced. No fresh w r ater fcr washing, whether for personal use or otherwise, was used,
the uncondensed salt, being considered good enough ior that purpose. During the whole
of the time, three years, occupied in erecting the fence and sinking the dam, Mr. McAnaney
lived in a tent. It w r as not till after the completion of the dam that the first houses were
put up.
The fence and dams on Minburra w r ere the first to be completed in that uart of the
State, and the amount of hard and ceaseless work which had to be borne by the Messrs.
Bowman and Mr. McAnaney w r as deserving of more success than fell to theii lot. The
seasons w T ere disappointing, and as if to balance a good one, two or three dry ones w r ould
be experienced. At the end of 16 years, during the whole of which time Mr. McAnaney
managed the property, Messrs. Bowman Bros, decided to relinquish it. It w T as at this
time that the property at West Creek was acquired by Mr. McAnaney.
West Creek Farm.
West Creek Farm, situated on the shores of Lake Alexandrina, w 7 as originally
part of the old West Erskine Estate. Mr. McAnaney purchased it from Mr. T. R, Bowman
in 1884. It consists of 4,000 acres and is typical of the Lake country , being flat with
small hillocks rising at intervals. There is not much large timber on the property but
the scrubby mallee is dotted all over it. It is partially fenced with a vermin proof fence
though the vermin trouble is not very serious. There is an abundance of water on the
property, the main supply being drawn from the Lake whilst a few wells have been sunk
in the back country.
Mr. McAnaney first stocked his land by purchasing 5,000 Boolcoomatta wethers
which were subsequently sold. Having disposed of these he commenced breeding cross-
breds for the fat lamb trade. For this purpose he used Lincoln rams on Merino ew 7 es.
This cross he considers did remarkably w T ell on this land. Ihe Lincoln rams first used
were purchased from the late J. H. Angas, but afterwards a further lot w 7 as obtained from
Victoria. He also breeds Come-Backs of which he has a flock numbering 2,000.
Mr. McAnaney makes the wool his first consideration, and it is of excellent quality
and has at times topped the market in price. It is of good strength,with along staple.
The price realised lor West Creek Farm wool at the local wool sales in 1907 w r as 13 Jd,
which is indicative of its quality.
For some years now dairy cattle have been bred at the Station with encouraging
results. For this purpose a Shorthorn Bull was purchased, which w-as used with Jersey
cows. Afterwards a Jersey bull, purchased from Mr. T. R. Bowman, w 7 as tried with Short-
horn cows, and the result w 7 as more satisfactory in Mr. McAnaney’s opinion than the
former cross.
The owner of West Creek Farm is an enthusiastic breeder of roadster stock, and
his efforts have been rewarded with several prizes gained at the Adelaide and Country
Shows. A fact of which he is proud is that a draught pair, bred by him and exhibited at
several local shows, holds an unbeaten record. With a roadster mare named “ Tipperary
Lass ”he has also w r on several prizes, whilst he has also been successful with a team of
trolly horses, and with plough and waggon teams.
Mr. McAnaney who now lives at (< Minburra,” Strathalbyn, looks back on a long
life of active w T ork, and has a fund of information of doings of the early days in the
northern country. One interesting experience he relates is of the making of the first road
through the scrub from Wundura Bay to Wallaroo, in which undertaking he w r as associa-
ted with Mr. T. R. Bow'man. He takes a deep interest in the progress of the district in
which he resides, and has for years been connected with the Local Councils at Braemar
and Brinkley. He is also a popular judge at Agricultural Shows.


Ctje property of jYtr. C. parr Smith.
The name of Barr Smith has for more than half a century been held in high
esteem in South Australia, and it will always be honorably associated with the history
of pastoral and mineral development in this State. Mr. Robert Barr Smith, whose
father was a leading clergyman of the Free Church of Scotland, before coming to
Australia in the early fifties married a sister of the late Sir Thomas Elder, one of the
most open-handed and broad-minded of Australian philanthropist-.
Mr. Thomas Elder Barr Smith bears, in conjunction, the names of two of the
most valued citizens of the Commonwealth, and he has worthily upheld the reputation of
both. He has not considered it to be his duty to enter public life, but he has, in the
sphere of activity which he has made his own, done much valuable service for the
community. He received his early education at St. Peter’s College, Adelaide, and
subsequently he entered at Trinity Hall, Cambridge Universitv, where he obtained his
degree in Arts. Returning to Adelaide, Mr. T. E. Barr Smith attached himself to the
interests of his father, and now acts as Attorney for the estate of Sir Thomas Elder,
besides managing the affairs of Mr. R. Barr Smith He owns the Hummocks Station,
a property comprising 30,000 acres of excellent pastoral country, yielding about 500
bales of wool each season. He is also interested in and a Director of the Belt ana
Pastoral Company and the Mootooroo Pastoral Company, in S.A., and of the Momba
Pastoral Company, in N.S.W., and the Milo Pastoral Company, in Queensland. He is a
large shareholder in and a Director of the Adelaide Steamship Company, and a member
of the Board of Advice of the South Australian Company. He has been honored by
his brother pastoralists, who have chosen him as President of the) Pastoraiists‘ Associ-
ation of South Australia. When the motor made its appearance in Australia, Mr
Barr Smith was one of the first to adopt the new method of travelling, and he possesses
more than one fine car, whilst he is President of the Automobile Club. His place of
residence is Birksgate, which was bequeathed him by Sir Thomas Elder, and he has a
summer retreat at Aldgate.


■ ''' * • " - '* ’’ ‘ " " ' x '~ ■ -■ ■ ' ' '-——
Krischock. TOP Flock of Sheep and Pastoral Area, showing Timber on Baninga Creek. (Hummcu-ks.)
BOTTOM Station Buildings and Woolshed,


*r . ' •" . • 4 ’ *^py''
Ivrischock. THE HOMESTEAD. (Hummocks.)
Krischock. A GROUP OF EWES. (Hummocks.)


' ; I**»- a,% . r . : ' * /f j
Krischock. SHEEP ON THE PASTURES. (Hummocks.)
A FLOCK OF EWES.
Krisrhock. A FLOCK OF EWES. (Hummocks.)


Kiischock. BOXERS’ DAM, BARUNGA PADDOCK. (Hummocks
Krischock. VIEW ON KOOLIATA DAM. (Hummocks


mffMIBW.il. 1
Krjschock. VIEW ON BARUNGA CREEK. (Hummocks.)


- — —
m
Krischock. WOOLSHED. (Hammocks.)
Krjschock. TEAM OF 16 BULLOCKS AND 15-FURROW PLOUGH. (Hummocks.)


:-:V> r : , . -
. v * '* »vr* .* r •
. .jy- ■ ' _.. ■ ■ ~- ; ■ -•- •
Mr. Barr Smith, like his uncle (Sir Thomas Elder), has a great love for a good
horse, and his colors in time past were often seen at South Australian race meetings, hi t
of late he has given up the sport so far as ownership is concerned, though still a
Steward of the S.A.J.C., and a Member of the S.A.J.C. Committee. He was for yea s
a prominent and skilful polo player, and he has shown his prowess in that sport, not
only in this State, but on the polo grounds of the neighbor states. Over and over aga n
he has assisted materially in winning a victory for his ( lub or his State.
Mr. Barr Smith has a family of two sons and four daughters, one of whom was
recently married to Mr. J. H. Gosse. He is seldom seen outside the realms of bis
business enterprises, or the society and the recreations with which he has all his life been
associated. He has never had any ambition to enter municipal or parliamentary
life, nor does he aspire to the semi-public career involved in acceptance of office m
connection with State institutions.
Kris,hock. A GROUP OF CATTLE. (Hummocks.)
The Hummocks Station, so called from the nature of the country in the vicinit ,
comprises an area of some 30,000 acres of splendid grazing and pastoral land, neei
Snowtown, carrying 22,000 Merino sheep. The original flocks were obtained in ti c
early fifties from the Bundaleer flocks. From time to time fresh introductions of blood
have been made by the purchase of Murray sires, which have given the sheep the plain
bodied appearance, with large frames—typical of the South Australian Merino,
record has been kept of Show successes, but whenever exhibited, principally at connTy
shows, Hummocks Merinos have been extremely successful. The average weight ol
last season’s clip was about Blbs. of wool of good quality, being extremely clean aid
free from grease.
The homestead, which is situated on the Barunga Creek, was built in the eany
fifties, and is a substantial, comfortable residence.


.... ' " " ■■■
v JBpt?; .
/'SyjHHfb^' i ?*'*^ !A ,■ 2 ,* *'><ife^'
. > % [*
Jhe property of jYir. penjamin Qastle.
Castle Hill estate which is situated about five
miles from Strathalbyn, and half a mile from Gem-
meH’s Siding, comprises an area of 1,000 acres.
It was originally purchased from the Government
by William Castles, the father of the present owner,
in 1848, and includes some of the prettiest country in
the pastoral areas around Strathalbyn. The country
is hilly, but fertile, well timbered with immense
trees, principally gums, under which the sheep find
shelter from the cold bleakwinds in winter, and the
hot sun iu summer. Various grasses, assisted by a
bounteous rainfall, grow here in abundance, and afford
ample feed for the comparatively large number of
sheep grazed on the property. A number of creeks
of permanent running water supply the needs of the
station in this respect.
The stud, which consists of pure Merino sheep,
was first formed in 1885, when purchases were made
from Mr. C. J. Knight of Mulgundawa, and from the
well-known Bellevue Stud, Tasmania, owned by the
Hon. Jos. Gibson. Mr. Castle was extremely for-
MR. BENJAMIN CASTLE.
tunate in his first selection, as the Young stock which lie bred, retained in a marked degree
the characteristics of the parent sheep. In consequence of this, very few fresh importa-
tions have been made. A few rams, however, have been purchased from the Bellevue
Stud to give greater density to the fleece, and for the same purpose a fine ram was
obtained from Messrs. W. Gibson and Sons, Scone Stud, Tasmania. These introductions
had the desired effect, and Mr. Castle has confined himself to methodical breeding for the
last few years.


Scott. DAIRY CATTLE AT CASTLE HILL. VIEW ON CASTLE HILL.
THE HOMESTEAD. STUD EWES.


jj,;», • 1 J|^ J^JL:
, y * . * * wi«
* ’ <■ 1 • • ; 5
Top. 2-TOOTH STUD EWES. Centre.—4-TOOTH STUD RAMS.
Bottom.-AGED STUD RAM.


The sheep are now large framed with a good neck and thigh, and bred with a view to
suit a dry country. The w 7 ool is of a good lustrous description with a fairly long staple,
and is classed as medium to strong. At the Wool Sales in 1908, ( astle Hill w r ool realised
9ML, and as this w r as unskirted and unclassed, it can with justice be considered a \ cry good
price. The average amount cut from the flock equals L2lbs., but the clip from 2.3 two
tooth stud ewes averaged 14libs. A notable cut from a ram bred at Castle Hill was 29lbs.
whilst a two tooth ewe cut IBlbs. Mr. Castle finds a ready market for his rams., wdiich have
been sold principally to local buyers.
The late William Castle, the first proprietor of Castle Hill and father of the present
owner, w 7 as born in Berkshire, England, wthere he received his education. Attracted by
the news of the fortunes made in Australia, he set out for this land, and arrived here in
1848, in the ship Royal George. Taking up Castle Hill he turned his attention to sheep
breeding, and bred a mixed lot. He, however, soon came to regard the Merino as the
most profitable, and in time the various other breeds w r ere w'eeded out.
The present owner, Mr. Benjamin ( astle, w T as born in 1869, and w 7 as educated at St.
Peter’s College. On the completion of his education he settled on the property wdiere his
experience has been gained. On the death of his father in 1886 he succeeded to the estate
and it w 7 as in that year that he laid the foundation of his stud flock.
Situated on the side of a hill, and surrounded by a beautiful flow 7 er gaiden and
shrubberies, the Castle Hill homestead is very pleasantly placed. Standing on the veran-
dah a glorious view 7 is obtained, which can be readily understood when it is remembeied
that this district is perhaps the prettiest in the State. The house was built by the late
William Castle, but since his decease extensive additions have been made. Large com-
modious rooms have been included in the additions to the original building, and the
whole now makes a beautiful and comfortable home. Mr. Castle is unmarried, and his
sister Miss Castle helps him in entertaining their many visitors.
The following is
the full List of
Prizes taken by
Castle Hill Merino
Sheep ;
Mt Barker, 1 898,
First, three ewe
lambs ; Strathal-
bvn, 1898, First
and Second, three
ewes, two tooth or
under, First three
ewes with lambs at
foot; Strathalbvn,
1899, First and
Champion 4-tooth
ewe, Second two-
tooth ewe ; Mount
Barker, 1900, First
and Second, four-
tooth ew'es, and
Champion; Mount
Barker,’ol, Cham-
pion ewe, First
ram (one year and
under two years),
First and Second
four tooth ewes,
First, three ewe
lambs ; Strath-
albyn, 1901, First,
ram one year and
under two years,
First tour tooth
ewe, First and
Second, two tooth
ewe, First and
Second ew r e with
Smith A FINE BUGGY PAIR. (Castle Hill),
foot, Champion ewe ; Adelaide, 1901, First, ram, one year and under two, Second, two-
tooth ewe ; Meadows, 1902, First, ram, First, ewe ; Mt. Barker, 1902, First two-tooth ewe,
Second ram, Second three ewe lambs ; Strathalbyn, 1902, First and Second ewe with lamb,
First two tooth ewe ; Mount Barker, 1903, First ram, Second ewe lamb, Second ram lamb ;
Strathalbyn, 1903, First two-tooth ewe, Second four-tooth ewe, First and Second ewe
with lamb ; ’ Meadows 1905, First and Second, two-tooth ram ; Mount Barker, 1905, First
ram, First and Second ram I f and under 2 years, Champion, ram ; Strathalbyn, 1905,
First and Champion ram, Strathalbyn, 1907, First, two-tooth ewe ; Strathalbyn, 1908,
First, four tooth ewe, First two-tooth ram, Second, two tooth ewe.


_ ~~
CMvndvjvgv' ~T\
\ f MOffALANA^
| ' • ■ • ' {
■
'
■ f?:
Scott. MUNDUNEY HOMESTEAD.
Che property of jYlessrs. John 7)avies <$ Sop.
, T i Mr ‘ . Edw£ pd Davies, father of the present principal owner of Munduney and
* oialana, is a \velshman, born at Rolandthee, Fylch, Montgomeryshire in 1829 who
came out to this country in 1851 in the ship “ China.” Soon after his arrival he settled
on some land on the \\ akefield River, near Mintaro, which he farmed very successfully
for some years. In 1869, however, he took advantage of a favourable opportunity of
disposing of this holding, and purchased 2,000 acres —a portion of what is now Munduney.
Heie he remained for some years till he retired from active work in 1890 when he came
to reside, first at Kensington Park, then at the Semaphore. In 1903 he visited his native
land but returned to South Australia, and now lives at the Semaphore hale and hearty.
Davies was born at his father’s property near Mintaro, but came with
the family to Munduney, where he obtained his early 7 experience of stock. He took over
the estate m 1888, and retained the sole ownership till recently, when his eldest son was
taken into partnership.
Munduney, which means “ beautiful water,” is situated within a few miles of the
town of Spalding, and was, in the early days, part of the Booboorowie and Hill River
properties. The original acreage has been largely increased, and the estate now consists


' 1 )
. .. MR. EDWARD


f )oO • '■.■■••■•'■■ • ,-v^ \\po §%{' 7 a<) o 0 X\
%=—!: v ■ -
y I
I U^ Hammer & Co. MR. JOHN DAVIES. J \\
1^ \


j? : K . -.gd
MR. E II ar mer & Co. S '
xii’ly V -j J« Ad
h°JO S - -• " - .... « s I
| :


. •*
.
Scott. BROUGHTON CREEK. (Munduney).
of 8,000 acres, most of which is hilly and undulating in character. The Spalding district is
noted foi the fertility of its soil, and the greater portion of Munduney is well suited for
Agricultural purposes. Ihe hilly land consists for the most part of good dark soil ;at
t e northern end of the estate there are about 2,000 acres of limestone country, with
some quantity of Bay of Biscay land.
Timbei is somewhat scarce, a considerable quantity having been cut in the early
da\s foi the Burra mines. There is some small quantity on the lulls and some planting
has been done. The estate is well watered by a number of natural springs, and the Hill
River and Broughton ('reek run through a portion of the property. There are also a
number of wells and dams. Native grasses are abundant, and the greater part of the
estate carries a heavy crop of spear, silver barley grass, clover and geranium, on which
the stock does well. On some portion of the land recently purchased there is a good
deal of tussock and black grass, but the owner hopes, by ploughing and cropping for a
year or two to bring this to the same good grazing condition as the remainder.
TheJVlunduney Merino flock, which numbers rather more than 10,000, goes back to
the time when the late owner acquired the property and purchased a number of
Booboorowie ewes, and, at the same time, bought rams from the late John Murray, of
Rhine Park. This proved a very successful beginning, and little fresh 'blood has been
introduced into the flock since its foundation. Recently, however, Mr. Davies made a
purchase of Bungaree bred stock, which he greatly favors. Thus it ’will be seen that the
flock has been practically bred within itself since it was first established. This careful
breeding has resulted in fixing a very desirable standard, for the sheep are large-framed
animals (they are known, indeed, as some of the heaviest in the Spalding district), of
robust constitution, carrying a dense fleece of white wool, which is rather on the fine side


j~* - jfeawfr l
/*T <** fF>*


Scott. FATTENING CATTLE ON THE FLATS. (Mundunpv'l


(Munduneyi.


-Stott. SELECTED TWO-TOOTH RAMS. (Munduney).


■
STU1> * ’




/ v . jpfq : , : «
*■ ’* V : ' y-*‘ ' ,, '' ' ' ”' ■■' .*• „ - ’ ’
* Ti*r•-• jBBBBhA •v Jtv 1
AGED STUD RAM. (Munduney).
STUD EWE (3i years). (Munduney).


Hunt. ENTRANCE TO MORALANA, FLINDERS RANGE IN THE DISTANCE.
Hunt. GENERAL VIEW OF MORALANA.


Hunt. GENERAL VIEW OF HUTS, SHED AND SHEEPYARDS AT MORALANA.
Hunt. VIEW NEAR HEAD STATION. (Moralana).


—I
; r :v ry
Hunt. MANAGER’S HOUSE. (Moralana).
Hunt. THE WOOLSHED. (Moralana).


as compared with the general average of wool grown in the district. The Munduney clip )
which is machine shorn, is shipped direct to the Old Country, where, generally speaking, it
realizes top rates.
In addition to the Spalding property, the firm own the Northern run of
Moralana which they purchased in 1904 from Mr. S. Matheson. Moralana lies about
32 miles north of Hawker, the Head Station being about a dozen miles from Mernmerna.
This run covers some 150 square miles of country, situated between the Great Northern
Line and Lake Torrens. There is a gcod variety of herbage at Moralana, blue bush, salt
bush, spinach, geranium, native cabbage, milk thistle and melon, the last-named being a
Scott. MUNDUNEY WOOLSHED.
cross between the native or wild melon and the cultivated melon. There is also a good
growth of buck bush and camel bush, besides acacia, bull-oak and mulga scrub. For
watering purposes, wells are mainly depended on, there being several at which good water
has been struck at from one to two hundred feet. A very large dam was sunk just
before the present owners took possession, but, as it is by no means good holding country,
wells are now preferred.
The flocks at Moralana have been largely increased, as they now number 13,000,
as against 7,000 when the property was purchased. Mnnduney rams have been used and
the present owner looks forward to possessing a fleck equal to any in the Far North in
the near future.
Mr. Davies takes his share in all local affairs. He has been Chairman of the
District Council for a considerable time, and his appointment as Justice of the Peace dates
back many years. He married in 1881 the third daughter of the late Alfred Coon, of
Gumbowie, and has a family of three sons—of whom John Stanley and Edward Reginald
are engaged in the active management of the two estates—and three daughters.


Ctje property of jYtessrs. Chos. 3{. pearse <$ Sons.
Mr. T hos. H. Pearse was born at Holne, in Devon —on the banks of the lovely
River Dart, and within sight of the celebrated Tors of Devon—being one of a family of
nine boys, whose ancestors had lived in the district for centuries. Mr. Pearse received
his education under the Rev. John Gill, vicar of the parish, who is still alive, and,
though ninety-two years of age, still preaches twice a day, and carries on all the duties
of his parish with the zeal and vigor of a much younger man. The Rev. Charles
Kingsley, of “ Westward Ho ” fame, was his predecessor, and one of the rooms in the old
ivy-clad Vicarage is still known as u Kingsley’s” room.
Mr. Pearse came to South Australia in the year 1877, being barely 20 years of age,
doing so chiefly on the advice of Sir Robert Torrens, who originated the well-known set
of land laws which bear his name, and who, on his return to England from South
Australia, bought a property, and settled down in the district in which Mr. Pearse was
born.
Mr. Pearse had not been many years in the colony before he turned his attention
to sheep, and, in the year 1884, in conjunction with Mr. W. Cockrum, purchased The
Gums from Mr. R. J. Mcßride. This partnership was, however, dissolved by mutual
consent in the year 1895, and Mr. Pearse retained the property on his own account.
The owner of The Gums, who takes a sincere interest in all that pertains to the
welfare of his district, and the State in general, is a member of two District Councils,
member of the Morgan School Board of Advice, and, for many years, has been a Justice
of the Peace. He is also a member of the Burra and Morgan Racing Clubs, and has,
in addition, always been a strong supporter of local Rifle Clubs, in which he thoroughly
believes.


//tt{ l Ja^0V\
/MnOc\ X D O • •.. ■ *■*' dA XCi ( — y oys\


tSair
«■ H
’■k “ ■
r "
/ /
■ ”c ■
w . *
|_ ,’JIK'--, ■ ’■
HL . ., f?v
MR. B. W. PEARSE (Owner of Caroona Station).
MR. H. L. PEARSE
(Owner of Grassville Station).
MR. N. H. PEARSE
(In Partnership with his Father).


'7 - c . __ *. -_ _ ' ’ 'V r : -V' ; V* ■ ■ ~ * v >**-
■ , '• , ■ • • ‘ '- ■•■•' -v •- . ■' _.. ~ •‘I, ■ ; -• ’'■•• '•*
* ’ - • - ~ r ” " *rV
■ ~ ~ * - v . -
* , - . : w..,:-• v
' : «. ' ~ S&
. - .v - ■ _ ■■<*** ' -, /,^ s _
> .. <• «* * 2 v v -. ’ ■* * ■' '. > . ■ '»
: . , * ' v ‘ * > *. M •-
** * * - »«■' •>•<• . ” «• V,. ■* - ■'*' f* „. V
. , . - ■
** »* • ■ _ "V _ ' j
- <• ... >■ , «* w ± ~ .. v V***
- * •■■■'. * . **>S.. - * sV i W '
k' ♦ m * * .
Edwards THE GUMS HEAD STATION (Situated on the Burra Creek).


The Gums.
The Gums is situated about 35 miles east of Burra, and comprises 80,000 acres of
salt and blue bush country. Though very lightly timbered, there is a considerable
quantity of sandalwood on the property, which has at times proved most useful, for,
during one heavy drought that of 1891-2—three thousand lambing ewes were kept
alive by being fed on this Other fodders are spear grass, barley grass, native prairie
grass, wild oats and geranium.
The Buna Creek runs for seven miles through The Gums, and the estate is, in
addition, well watered by dams and wells, and Mr. Pearse is so well satisfied with the
possibilities of obtaining a sub-artesian supply, that he is putting down bores in various
parts of the property, and doing so wholly at his own expense, without any Government
MEN’S KITCHEN, DINING ROOM AND HUTS.
assistance. In addition to these improvements practically the whole of the Estate has been
enclosed with vermin-proof fencing at a cost running into thousands.
Mr. Pearse is one who is not afraid to undertake large expenditure in the improve-
ment of country, if circumstances appear to warrant it, and he considers that the
grandest thing that ever happened for the Eastern country was the passing of the Per-
petual lease with Right of Purchase laws, for this has been the means of settling this
country, by allowing pastoralists to effect costly improvements without fear of ultimate
resumption, for the district, admirably adapted as it is for wool growing, is absolutely
unsuited for farming, except in exceptional seasons. So disastrous have farming oper-
ations proved in the past, that the attempt has been practically abandoned, Mr. Pearse
himself having bought out no less than 33 farmers in the district, and it is a fact fully
demonstrated by experience that, were it not for men of his stamp, this outside country
would be given over entirely to the rabbit.


rr- :\ ; :T • -a* ■
FdwarcF SCENE ON BURRA CREEK SWAMP (adjoining Head Station). (The Gums).


I
Edwards. STUD RAM, “MARS ” (3 years). (The Gums).


Fd wards. “JUNO,” STUD EWE (1£ years; Cut 191bs. Wool this year). (The Gums).


• ft’
Mfcwww'TS>Ti. Bggm '
IS £jK|g|
Edwards. STUD RAM, “MERCURY” years). (The Gums).
. timumrn . i-. . • '•
■ • • ■ ' , ,
' *
“Venus.” “Juno.” “Iris.”
Edwards. STUD EWES (1£ years; Cut this year 181bs,, 191b5., 201bs. Wool). (The Gams).


‘ |
. ■ ' ■■ •■ --■“ ’ --' ■ ’/.
L_ ’:- - ---■-■■■..U'..'- ..■ ■■■•; -** " - .„
:WSx8b&\:\ 4 *“ •^’MB*.- ! •Jfl^ffij&awfc -2 *•'‘MWtMwWKftJi C^immm^^,—_,.
iPrl mKKBm
e - -’■■ .-• r > • •■ J-~- •■ - ’• ■*r^^i.*‘ T * £*> • v
'**- ••••, - ;-'. , s-. > ,. ,■*' ■, ♦,/v,:^,;;'■ ~ t *** . -
-:•*** - * \ >:f.*.':/ ■' * r H'-* ~ ;: 4 ■ *./?• "... " ,*.*■?• ■ '
- “ ’’ V*'' - ••••-..♦;; .. ■ - ~ /.-.■■■•.’.*■ ■'$."- - . - * “* £~:
* -~-\*»~ • *',■« ' «• ■.''*•■• • , . .... * ■*■> • * --- t: j* -«,„i
I- - • : - ■
Edwards. STUD EWE, “ PANDORA ”(3 years old) AND LAMB. (The Gums)
Edwards. A GROUP OF STUD EWES (3 years old). (The Gums).


— I
Mr. Pearse has been three times married, firstly to Emily Elizabeth, secondly to
Adeline (both daughters of George Hiles, of Petherton House, Hallett, a gentleman upon
whose judgment Mr. Pearse largely relied in the early days of his pasroral work), and
thirdly, to Eveline Mathilda, daughter of C. Meinck, of Jamestown and Round Hill,
Ouorn. There are three sons and one daughter of the first marriage.
Mr. Pearse and his family are great believers in the capabilities of Australia,
especially South Australia, and believe there is no country in the world where men of
brain and energy have a better chance of success.
The three sons are already engaged in the same calling as their father. The
eldest son, Mr. R. W. Pearse, was educated at Whinham College, and is now owner of
Caroona Station, situated 40 miles N.W. of The Gums, comprising about 40,000 acres of
good saltbush country, which he has splendidly improved, his fruit garden especially
being the talk of the district. Cocker-Spaniel breeding is a hobby of his which he has
Edwards, MR. B. W. PEARSE’S PRIZE COCKER SPANIELS.
‘■Tess.” “ Zulu Chief.” “Soda.” “ Cookie Bendie.” “Maori.”
(Unbeaten Champion). (Champion). (2-months’-old
puppy).
made a great success numbers of animals from his Kennels having been sent to
various parts of the Commonwealth, where they have taken numerous prizes whenever
shown.
Mr. N. H. Pearse, the second son, was educated at private schools in Adelaide,
finishing up at Roseworthy under Professor Lowrie, where he took his diploma. Following
this, his father took him into partnership, and he is now part-owner of The Gums Estate.
In his work on the Station, he finds that the experience gained at Roseworthy has been
invaluable.


~ r " 11 r —— n^—i U "
; ’ * : v “ „. *** *
* ■’' ' ~\gi '' ~ ~ ‘ \ -
Edwards. “THE DERVISH” AND BROOD MARES. (The Gums).


Edwards, “ CORRA LINN.” (The Gums).
Residence of Mr. N. Hiles Pearse, situated two miles East of the Gums.


Edwards. STUD RAM, “JUPITER” (4 years old). (The Gums).
p
WOOLSHED AND STOCKYARDS. (The Gums).


I **- : ' •-. ~". - ;. c r J
, *v- • sl I '- MmL
I —.., ..,—. —,.~_. - ■» ~ in in 1 in ifiTT
j. j '#» * - 11111 •*
I- : V ■ f *‘ * ■ '-Ir MU «„
Mr. H. L. Pearse, the youngest son, is the owner of Grassville, which adjoins The
Gums. He was educated at St. Peter’s, and at the School of Mines and Roseworthy
College. He also received a thorough training in wool-classing under Mr. Geo. Jeffery.
Grassville is a property of about 15,000 acres, consisting of country similar to that met
with on The Gums, and it is worked in conjunction with it. The sheep also are of a
similar type, growing heavy fleeces, carried on big frames.
Mr. Pearse and his sons have always had a keen eye for a good horse, and during
the last few years have bred some excellent stock, chiefly of the station hack and polo
pony type. At present they are breeding from “The Dervish,” who is throwing some
grand stock. “ The Dervish ”is a dark-brown horse, with tan points, by “ The Ameer,”
out of a mare by “Furreed,” and is a perfect model of a station sire.
The Flocks.
The flocks on The Gums at the present time may be said to have originated only
during the past decade, for, during the first few years of his ownership of the Estate,
“THE DERVISH” (By “The Ameer”). (The Gums).
Mr. Pearse continued with the sheep taken over with the property, but, having become
impressed with the possibilities of stud breeding, he determined to establish a stud flock
on a somewhat large scale. With this object in view, all the sheep on the place were,
with characteristic thoroughness, cleared off, and a large number of Petherton ewes
were purchased —these sheep being of pure Canowie blood —with which Mr. Pearse used
Koonoona and Murray rams, which were bought at the same time. Since these first
purchases were made no outside blood has been used beyond an interchange of sires
between Caroona and Grassville Stations, held by Mr. Pearse’s sons, and The Gums. In
this Mr. Pearse is endeavouring to follow the course so long carried out by the Murray


family in the production of their famous studs. Like the Murray sheep, too, the stud
flock at The Gums are fed on natural herbage only, and are not housed or artificially
treated in any manner.
The object Mr. Pearse has had in mind since he founded the stud, has been to
obtain a large-framed, strong-constitutioned sheep, with large well-folded necks, well
covered on the points, and carrying a long-stapled bold wool, with plenty of character,
and having a nice dark tip—a sheep which, in his opinion, will prove an ideal anima
for the saltbush country. He has already made great strides towards attaining this
end, for he is able to report the average clip as about 12lbs per grown sheep. The
highest cut yet obtained from a stud ram has been 30 lbs., with which ram, and two
ewes, Mr. Pearse won a cup at the 1905 Burra Show for saltbush-grown sheep. The
SHORTHORN BULL.
highest cut from a stud ewe has been 24 lbs. In addition to these exceptionally good
weights, the owner of The Gums, two shearings ago, cut lbs. of wool per head from
150 2-tooth stud ewes, which realised 9|d. per lb. in an ordinary market, and last season,
which was a light one at The Gums, 200 stud ewes cut an average of 16| lbs., whilst 52
stud ewe lambs returned 6 lbs., and 50 stud ram lambs 7lbs. each.
Mr. Pearse finds that the tendency of wool grown in the Eastern country is to run
to too great fineness, with consequent loss of boldness of character. This he is
endeavoring to counteract, and, in doing so, finds it an advantage to rely mainly on
strong bold-woolled sires of Koonoona or Murray type.
Though The Gums Stud is not yet largely advertised, the quality of the sheep is
becoming known, and many enquiries are being received for rams, especially from the
River and Northern districts.


'ibk at-.,
m'm
* 'wmm SHiSx
C tje property of JYtr. JY. £. price
Mr. N. E. Brice, the owner of the well-known
Mount Beevor estate, is the second son of the late
Edward Brice, an old colonist and resident of the
Mount Pleasant district, who was born on August 23,
in the year 1824, at his father’s farm near the town of
Colaton-Raleigh, in the county of Devon, England.
Mr. Brice married in 1856, and in the same year came
to South Australia in the ship “ Albura.” Soon after
his arrival he took up from the Government two
sections (160 acres) of land near Mount Pleasant, and
settled down to the occupation of farming. He early
became interested in stock-raising and pastoral work
generally, in which he achieved considerable success,
with the result that he largely extended his holding,
and the Henton Park property, under his able
management, grew to be a compact and valuable
estate of 2,000 acres.
Mr. Brice took a leading part in the progress
and development of the district, and an active interest
in political and other public affairs. He was a
member of the South Rhine District Council, and, at
THE LATE EDWARD BRICE.
the time of his death, wasfone of the oldest and most valued members of the Mount
Pleasant Agricultural, Horticultural and Floricultural Society, of which association he had
at different times occupied every office, having been Hon. Secretary, Vice-President,
President, and, for many years, a zealous committeeman, and in every capacity he did
his utmost to promote the good of the Society. He was also President of the local
Institute, and in this office showed the same energy and conscientious devotion to duty.
Mr. Brice lived to a good old age, and his death at the age of 75, was felt as a loss
throughout the district. He left a family of one son and three daughters, his eldest son
having predeceased him.


r:/ V’.*
I
■hSu*;, '• $SnS!l» ■ 3-1 '%f'J' ' l|HK
<*' Hammer & Co. MR. N. E. BRICE. / ♦ •
x V Js-''
9** -- — ■ ., c ; --, - ■ - -~*r >y c o
p *2 v « - . 0 V C b o **
/VO P(> . , • .j o c /-j A
o’ <*• * 0 -% ° c 0 ° 0>°
kU Of <.> f ' ,,-oa L oo o
<1 y, ~ „V


Kl 'S ’^-Jr
Mount Beevor.
i Bee^ or is a name well-known in pastoral circles, for it was for many years held
by the elder John Murray, and the home of one of the famous Murray flocks. On the death
ot ms lather the estate passed into the possession of the late T. Hope Murray. During his
ownership Mt. Beevor merinos continued to be regarded as amongst the foremost in the
Mate, and the great dispersal sale which took place after his death will long beremembered
as an event of importance in Merino history in South Australia. Mr. Brice, who had for
some time been on the lookout for a suitable property for a stud merino flock which he
Pom? 086 i to es^ abllsi h purchased Mt. Beevor from the estate of the previous owmer in
ir b) aT I d > at the same lime, bought 25 rams and 1,000 breeding ewes of the old Mt.
r eeVC^rTA k ’ f , e ,Vr.°* tliese were selected as the foundation of his stud, and additions
from Mt. Crawford,^ Mirra Wirra and Rhine Park have been made. With this beginning
mt ? Cf ex P ects > in time, to be able to produce and place on the market a high class
ot iVleimo worthy of Mount Beevor traditions. At present he is running about 5,000 sheep
Seou. STUD RAMS. (Mt. Beevor).
on the property for wool production, including 1,000 breeding ewes for the fat lamb trade,
Shropshire sires being used with first cross ewes. This mating gives excellent lambs'
which; have fetched high prices. The Mt. Beevor clip is also of good quality, and has
this season realised very satisfactory rates. A few cattle and horses are also bred.
Mt. Beevor lies about seven miles from the township of Nairne, and comprises
about 7,000 acres, the greater part being well-grassed hills, with occasional flats. There
is a quantity of fine timber on the estate, principally red and blue gum. The Braemar
Creek runs through the property for about a mile, and this, with the natural springs and
several dams, provide ample water for the stock.
The homestead, which was built by Mr. Hope Murray, is, as will be seen from the
fine panoramic view reproduced, delightfully situated in a sheltered position among the
hills, and is a large and well-appointed residence.


g cott SHEARING IN FULL SWING. (Mt. Beevor).


mmmmm
-■t' ' ■ * v „ f t$t
,. . •; ; ;
"* * yjraKc£[4j1|| _ '
Scott. BRINGING IN HOGGETTS TO THE SHEARING SHED. (Mt. Beevor).
Scott> MERINO RAM LAMBS. (Mt. lieevor).


■i\ .'. Mr ' itT
*«■<» ’ If Sk , i»M
Scott. A FINE FLOCK OF FAT LAMBS. (Mt. Beevor).
Mr. Norman Edward Brice, the owner of Henton Park, and of Mt. Beevor, was
born at Mt. Pleasant on the 30th January, 1865, and was educated at Mr. Caterer’s
Grammar School, at Glenelg. hollowing upon this Mr. Brice spent some years in the
office of Messrs. Elder Smith & Co., which he left in order to start business on his own
account. In 1886 he established himself as a stock and share broker, and became a
member of the South Australian Stock Exchange. On the formation of the Stock
Exchange of Adelaide Mr. Brice became one of its first members, and has since occupied
a seat on the Exchange. He has always taken an interest in public matters, and has
been prominently identified with civic affairs, having been a member of the Adelaide City
Council as a representative of the McDonnell Ward. Mr. Brice has been twice married.
First, in 1888, to Jennie, daughter of Mr. John Budge, of Dunnolly, Victoria, there being
one son of this union ; secondly, to Susie, daughter of Mr. John Byrne, of Strathalbym
of which marriage there is^onefdaughter.
Scott. THE KENNELS. (Mt. Bcevoi).




J 'I [ * * '* %
yjtf - ■■' - “ %?: . Ji -
; : ® £ ,/: ■** i. ;*.* ■:. r **■ * *>••■■- '^Is^IhH
Scott. GENERAL VIEW OF MOUNT BEEVOR, WITH SCENES IN THE GARDENS.


I • -. IE . j v if. 4^' ; -.- *,V " k .•
Jtje property of JYir. Qeorge p rooks
Mr. George Brooks is one of the oldest pastoralists who are natives of South
Australia, for he was born at Gumeracha in 1849. Afterwards his parents removed to
Wallaroo, where he received his education at the local Public School. Early in life he
decided to make agricultural and pastoral work his calling, and, whilst still a young man,
in 1885 he removed to Kulpara, situated about 21 miles from the town of Kadina.
Mr. Brooks remained at Kulpara for about fifteen years, during which he engaged
largely and successfully in farming and sheep raising. Kulpara consists of about 10,000
acres, a considerable proportion of which is fairly rich agricultural land. This property
Mr. Brooks afterwards sold to his sons, G. W. and E. A. Brooks, who have since conducted
it successfully, combining general farming with raising export lambs on a rather large
scale.
Mr. Brooks’s next purchase was that of Moorowie Station from the late William
Fowler. Moorowie consisted of 16,500 acres of freehold. This property Mr. Brooks held
for about five years, when he sold out to his sons, who in turn sold to the Government
Scott. A PAIR OP STUD RAMS. (Boconnoc Park).




Scott. SCENES AT BOCONNOC PARK.
Entrance. The Drive.
Garden. Homestead and Orchard.


under the Closer Settlement Act, with the result that the estate has been cut up. It was
on this property that the stud of the Merinos originated, with which the name of Brooks
is associated. Rams were, in the first instance, purchased from Mount Crawford, wh Ist
the ewes w r ere drawn from Bungaree. At a later date a few ewes w r ere imported fiom the
Warranook stud, in Victoria.
Mr. Brooks’s next move was to Orrie Cowie Station, five miles due west of W arooka
on Southern Yorke’s Peninsula, which he purchased from the late Angas Johnson. Orrie
Cowie consisted of about 25,000 acres, which Mr. Brooks devoted to wool growing, at the
same time establishing a stud flock, with which he was quickly successful. Many prizes at
Yorketown and Minlaton being won by his sheep during the time he owned this property.
The Orrie Cowie flock was largely of the Murray type, as both Mount Crawford and
Scott. WATTLE PARK, BURNSIDE.
Rhine Park rams were used, the only other addition being from Wanganella. Orrie Cowie,
which Mr. Brooks sold to his eldest son in 1905, is flat limestone country, lightly timbered
with tea tree and sheaoak, the herbage being principally wild oats and spear grass.
In 1905 Mr. Brooks purchased Boconnoc Park from Mr. Harry Carter. This
property, which is situated amongst the hills about five miles from the prosperous town-
ship of Clare, consists of 3,300 acres of the rich and fertile land, which is typical of much
of this favored district. The estate is well-clothed with natural grasses, such as spear
and barley, on which, with squatter’s oats, the sheep do excellently. Mr. Brooks, however,
shortly after taking over Boconnoc, put in a considerable area of perennial rye, paspalum
grass,'and lucerne, intermixed, and finds that this makes a splendid addition to the grazing
capacity of his land. The water supply is excellent, there being a permanent stream
running through the property. The Boconnoc sheep have been bred from those taken
over from the previous owner, together with some brought by Mr. Brooks from Orrie
Cowie, which, as previously recorded, were founded on Murray, Bungaree and W anganella
stock. The flock now numbers 3,300 of fine typical South Australian Merinos, hardy and
active sheep, and great wool producers, which are proving very successful at the country
shows at which Mr. Brooks exhibits. There is also a small herd of Shorthorns.


—
Scott - ' ' '' SHEEP 'at"' i •
Stud Earn. Q . , t.
Stud Ewe.
Group of Two-tooth Rams. Group of Stud Ewes.


Scott> SCENES AT BOCONNOC PAEK.
Selecting Sheep for Show. Stud Ewes and Lambs.
Nearing Boconnoc Park. ' a,e Show.


Scott. SCENES AT WATTLE PARK.
Entrance. The Drive.
The Lawn. Corner of the Garden.


In addition to Boconnoc, Mr. Brooks owns Bald Hill, near Port Wakefield, which
he purchased in 1890 from the Commercial Bank. Bald Hill consists of 4,500 acres, most
of which is good agricultural land. At present Mr. Brooks cultivates only a portion, the
area under wheat last season being about 600 acres. He also runs about 2,000 sheep on
the property, all his cull ewes being sent there, where they are used with Shropshire rams
as breeders for the fat lamb trade. There is also a small Shorthorn herd of about thirty
head kept for fattening and general purposes.
After his busy life, during which he has achieved very considerable success, Mr.
Brooks now contemplates retiring from the active management of his properties, and will
soon settle down near Adelaide, where he has recently purchased Mr. A. A. Scarfe’s fine
home, at Burnside. Wattle Park, as it is called, stands in 33 acres of ground, and is a
large and very handsome residence, built only a few years ago and designed on the most
modern lines. It is beautifully fitted throughout, and the extensive gardens are
delightfully laid out. There was some fine old timber on the land when it was built on,
and this adds greatly to the beauty of this suburban home.
Scott. STUD RAM. (Boconnoc Park).
Mr. Brooks has been twice married, first in 1875, of which marriage there were
three sons and four daughters, and, secondly, in 1900, when he married a daughter of
the late J. H. Morrisson, of Medindie.
In whatever district Mr. Brooks has resided he has been to the fore in local affairs.
Whilst at Kulpara he was appointed a J.P., and was on the District Council. He was also
Chairman of the Council of Warooka for three years, Member of the School Board o:
Advice, Trustee of the Methodist Church, and a liberal patron and supporter of all
amateur sports. On his leaving that district the residents presented him with an
illuminated address in recognition of his many services amongst them. He is also much
interested in Masonic affairs, and has been a member of the fraternity for many years.
Mr. Brooks’ sons are following the same calling as their father, and, in addition to
the properties already mentioned, they hold the Mannanarie Estate of 3,400 acres, situated
about 12 miles north of Jamestown, where they go in for general farming and stud sheep
raising. They have about 150 acres under lucerne, which they find of great value in
fattening sheep and cattle. In the Young district of New South Wales they, up till
recently, owned the Murringo ” property of 7,300 acres, which they sold about three
years ago. Since then they have purchased a property of 7,000 acres on the Upper
Hunter River, which they have stocked with 7,000 sheep and 600 head of cattle.


MPT!V* ~y ttw.^‘‘‘'‘ 'j|^!|*^r' t i; " msst j»~--~-, - -^TT’****'''''*'*** • •" i(^^^^..._CTMt .. *—■■...B— "** ** U*t 4ijjK
lrf* v ' ** Ih#**
Top. WATTLE PARK, MR, BROOKS’ RESIDENCE NEAR ADELAIDE. Bottom.—BlßD’S EYE VIEW OF BOCONNOC PARK.




' I X
I^1 lll^^
mammmmmmmmm g
wg m b .
Br’ *-■ -
Bask. - Jsgg,. ,
Scot t ilOMKSt!.\i)
Jhe property of JYlr. Qeorge Wait, J,p.
Fairview, the property of Mr. George Wait, is
situated near Rhynie. It was taken up in 1858 by
the late Francis Wait, the father of the present owner,
who farmed the land, but it was not until after Mr.
Wait, Senr., let the farm to his son, that sheep were
bred on the property, Mr. George Wait making his first
start in sheep breeding in 1884, in which he has since
been very successful.
A beginning was made by the purchase of a number
of ewes from the Canowie stud, and rams from the famous
Murray flock. Afterwards ewes from Bungaree and
Mount Beevor were obtained, and the results have been
quite up to the expectations of their owner, for the main
characteristics of the original sheep have been well
maintained. The sheep of Fairview stud are of strong
robust type. They have in breeding parlance “ good
backs ” and “ good necks,” for Mr. Wait’s aim has
always been to breed a good robust sheep, which will
MR. GEO. WAIT
maintain the reputation which his flock has already attained Mr. Wait’s sales have
been principally made to New South Wales buyers, though he has sent several rams to
Western Australia, and the local market absorbs any surplus which he may have to
dispose of.


; 1
' -‘'V
TOP.—Stud Ram “Paris.” (Fairview).
First prize as 2-tooth at Balaclava and Tarlee, 1908 ; First prize Bala-
clava, under years, 1909.
CENTRE. —Group of Stud Rams.
BOTTOM.—Six-Tooth Stud Ram. “Sir John.”
Twice Champion at Tarlee, once at Balaclava. First in class three
years following at Clare, and many other prizes.


Scott. FOUR PRIZE STUD EWES AT FAIRVIEW.
S I i An ■
f *yyyj«\ < <#.* r* * ■ ,■ .* :
The fleece is very even and of medium length of staple, shows plenty of character
and is rather on the strong side. The average clip from the sheep last season was
eleven pounds. This average was considerably increased by a number of rams, some of
which produced 23 lbs. of wool, whilst a ewe —which has secured a number of prizes,
including a championship—cut 17lb. The highest price for wool bearing the Fairview
brand has been but the price realised at the last season’s wool sales for the clip,
which was sold in one line, was per lb. This year the price obtained was
lid. per lb.
Though the stud numbers only 200 ewes and 30 rams, the sheep have obtained
many prizes in competition against larger breeders; in fact, sheep bred by Mr. Wait
have gained the championship honors at Auburn, Clare, Kapunda, Saddleworth,
Balaclava and Tarlee shows, in addition to numerous first, second and third prizes.
At the South Australian Royal Agricultural and Horticultural Society’s Show, in
the class for owners of flocks not exceeding 2 000 sheep, a number of prizes have been
secured. The owner of the stud is very proud of these successes, which he ascribes to the
fortunate selection made at the commencement, and to the careful breeding which he
has consistently practised.
Scott. STUD EWE, “DAISY.”
First and Champion, Tarlee, 1007 and 19'0'S :
First prize, Kapnnda, 190S ; First and Special
prize Glare, 1909 ; First Ewe, with lamb,
Saddlcworth 1909.
STUD EWE, “ LADY II.”
First prize Balaclava as 2-toolli, 1908 ; First
prize Balaclava, under 2-. 1 , years, 1909.


Scott. GROUP OF STUD RAMS (Showing great depth and breath of frame). (l-airvic\s).
Fairview is not solely confined to sheep, as" a number of horses are hied there,
Prince Roy, by Young Royal Oak, from a Time o’ Day mare, a well-known prize-taker,
being one'of them. 1 His wins include first prize as a two-year-old, and second as a
three-year-old at the Adelaide Royal Show, whilst at the Auburn Show, March, 1907, he
was awarded the Championship prize, and also first prize.
A mare, Duchess, imported from Victoria, and owned by Mr. Wait, has also been
very successful in the show ring, as have some of the other brood mares.
The country is of good sound description, being hilly and well-timbered. The
natural grasses thrive in abundance, and plenty of feed is available all the year round.
The Estate is watered by the Woolshed Creek, which runs through it, and affoids
a permanent supply, but a number of dams have been constructed that water may
be available in every paddock.
Mr. Wait’s four sons are all engaged in sheep-farming. Messrs. F. O. and Stanley
Wait are at Fairview with their father, whilst the elder sons, Messrs. W. G. and H. R.
Wait manage two properties which are run in conjunction with Fairview.
At Stockport, where Mr. W. G. Wait is situated, the holding consists of 760 acres
of good agricultural land, on which sheep are bred and do exceedingly well, but the
greater part of the land is cultivated.
The other property is situated near Albury. This is managed by Mr. H. R. Wait.
The sheep are from the Fairview flock, and are of good robust type, carrying a profitable
fleece of wool.
Mr. Francis Wait, father of the present owner, arrived in South Australia m 1848.
He was born in Bristol, where he also received his education. Mr. George Wait w T as
born in 1850 at Bowden, and was educated at Mr. Lawton’s school. He married, in
1875, the fourth daughter of the late Mr. George Uppill. He has always been associ-
ated with the progress of the district in which he resides, and has been a member of the
District Council of Rhynie for eight years, and for five years was Chairman of that body.
Besides other local offices which he holds, he is a Justice of the Peace for the State of
South Australia.
g cott DRAUGHT BROOD MARE, “DUCHESS.” (Fairview).
With foal by “ Sir Hector McDonald.” “Duchess” was First and Champion prize at Auburn, 190 S.


Che property of jYtr. /?.
The late John Hope, one of the earliest pastoralists to take up country in the Clare
district, was born in 1808, at Maghera, Londondery, Ireland, being the second son of John
Hope and his wife Elizabeth, nee Henderson. He set out for Australia about the year
1837, but the vessel in which he sailed was wrecked on the South American coast
Eventually, Mr. Hope landed in Western Australia, but, not being attracted by what he
saw of that country, he came on to South Australia, which he reached in 1839. Soon
after his arrival he took up from the Government the Koolunga country on the Broughton
River, and about the same time purchased Wolta Wolta, which was'then only a small
property, but which has since been added to from time to time by the purchase of
adjacent land. Following this, the late Mr. Hope became largely interested in the
Hummocks Station, and continued to be for some years, but in 1870 sold out his holding
in Hummocks, together with Koolunga, to Mr. R. Barr Smith.
Mr. Hope’s next purchase was in 1873, when he bought the Para Station on the
River Darling, in New South Wales, from the late James Scott. Para was at this time
a very large holding, but has since been reduced in area. A few years after the purchase
of this estate, he took up a very extensive area on the Cooper River, in Queensland
known as Keeroongooloo, which he stocked with cattle. At the time of his'death this
run was carrying over 20,000 head, but was shortly afterwards sold by the trustees of his
estate, to the late G. P. Scarfe.
Mr. Hope married, in 1859, Isabel Matilda, eldest daughter of the Rev. Robert
Edward Herbert Kenny, Ireland. Mr. Hope made his principal home at Wolta Wolta
where he built the original homestead (extensive additions being made to the house in
1869), and it was here that all his children were born. Mr. Hope died in 1881 and
his estates were vested in trustees for the benefit of his wife, with reversion to his
five children. On the death of Mrs. Hope, which occurred in 1899, the estate was
under the terms of Mr. Hope’s will, divided between his surviving children.


igP^^u^^L
/m* w*m^
THE LATE JOHN HOPE.
WOLTA WOLTA IN 1865.


xm ***
.w
MR. R. E. H. HOPE.
WOLTA WOLTA IN 1909.


Scott. THE DRIVE. (Wolta Wolta).
Scott. PINK HAWTHORN IN BLOOM IN THE GARDEN. (Wolta Wolta).


Mr. R. E. H. Hope.
w u e ’ second son of the late John Hope, and present owner of
\\ olta Wolta, was born there in 1865. After managing the estate for the Trustees he
bought out the other beneficiaries in 1904, and continued the stud flock which he had
founded during his term of management. The first purchase which had been made con-
sisted of two rams and a number of ewes from Bungaree. Later on some Cappeedee rams
. acc l later a few Irom Mount Crawford. Last year a very valuable
addition to the flock was made by the purchase of the special stud ram de Lion,” from
Mr. A. | Murray, at a high figure. This ram is a son of the celebrated “ Lion,” and was
the first prize ram under one and a half years at the Adelaide Show of 1907. His get
Scott - THE GARDEN. (Wolta Wolta).
-Mr. Hope’s eldest son faces the camera and thinks it rather good fun.
ate very promising indeed, and, with this addition to his already carefully selected stud,
. li. Hope expects to put the finishing touches to the work of bringing his flock right into
the front rank, m which undertaking he has for years taken a deep interest The total
number of sheep at Wolta Wolta is 4,500, which closely follow the Murray type, befim
large, lobust, bold sheep, well-covered with dense wool of lengthy staple. As yet they
have been exhibited only at Clare shows, where they have been constant prizetakers, many
championships for rams and ewes being secured by representatives of this flock. The pick
of the rams bred have of recent years been sent to Para, and in future a still larger
number will be required for Winbar, a recently purchased property on the River Darling
lying about 400 miles north of Para.


Scott. THE CURRANT VINEYARD. A CROP OF WHEAT. (Wolta Wolta).
AT THE DAM. THE WOOLSHED.


Wolta Wolta how covers an area of 5,500 acres of fertile, well-timbered land. The
homestead is beautifully situated in a wide but sheltered gully, formed in the shape of a
horse shoe by three hills. It faces the east, and overlooks the pretty township of Clare.
The three hills were originally comparatively bare of timber, but the trees planted by the
late John Hope now clothe them thickly, and beautiful color contrasts are afforded by
the varying shades of foliage. A notable feature of the outer gardens and hillsides is the
great number of bulbous plants, such as Spraxia and Ixias, which have spread in every
direction, making a gorgeous sight in Spring—a perfect sheet of bloom. The Spraxia
flowers hist, and then the Ixias come, with all the beauty of their more delicate tints.
The gardens aie extensive, and, having been long establishedi there is a wealth of foliage
which surrounds and shelters the house.
FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAM, No. 177. (Wolta Wolta).
The (Tare district is noted for the excellence of the roses grown and Wolta Wolta
appears to be a specially favored spot, for they grow there with a profusion and beauty
which can nowhere be excelled.
In addition to his stock-raising interests, Mr. Hope has taken advantage of the
suitability of a portion of his land for vine growing, for in 1892 he planted a vineyard of
80 acres under the lee of the Hill River Range. Wine grapes were principally grown at
first, but latterly a large proportion have been grafted over to Zante currants. There is
also an orchard of six acres planted to good varieties of export apples, and, in addition,
land to the extent of three to four hundred acres is cropped annually with wheat.


'\^
Scott. THESE GEOUPS OF TYPICAL STUD EWES. (Wolta Wolta).


r—
FOUR-TOOTH STUD EWE. (Wolta Wolta).
Scott. TWO-TOOTH STUD RAM. (Wolta Wolta).


Scott GROUP OF STUD EWES. (Wolta Wolta).


tfcott, GROUP OF STUD RAMS. (Wolta Wolta).


Scott. EWES AND LAMBS. (Wolta Wolta).
Scott. CATTLE AT THE DAM. (Wolta Wolta).


Scott. TOUR-TOOTH STUD RAM, No. 142. (Wolta Wolta)
Para and Winbar.
The owner of Wolta W olta does not confine his pastoral interests to this State, for,
as already mentioned, he holds Para Station, beyond Wentworth, on the Darling, about
35 miles from the junction of that river with the Murray. Para comprises 165,000 acres
of flat, well-grassed country, with a few sand ridges. On the frontage the timber is mostly
box and gum, whilst out back the country is open with belts of sandalwood and belah,
and a few patches of gum. The run is watered by 24 miles frontage to the river. In the
back country there are numerous tanks. The boundary is netted. Para adjoins Avoca
on the south west, Mallara lies to the north, and across the river are the Topio and
Burtundy Runs. The number of sheep on Para is between 20 and 25 thousand, in
addition to which a few hundred head of cattle are bred.
HOMESTEAD AT WINBAR,


: ni—rii i ri l
Winbar, Mr. Hope’s other station on the Darling, lies about 400 miles north of
Para, being situated 75 miles south of Bourke. The nearest township is Louth, which is
situated on the northern boundary, and from which the homestead is about 15 miles
distant. The Winbar country, which covers half a million acres, is mostly flat, but a
high range of rough hill country rises abruptly from the plain and divides the run.
On the frontage, which extends for 35 miles along the Darling the country is
mostly open black soil plain, carrying patches of box and gum, and there is a good deal
of mulga scrub in the back country. There are numerous tanks and dams on the run,
and recently Mr. Hope has been fortunate in striking a good sub-artesian supply. There
are now seven bores from 80 to 200 feet in depth, on which windmills have been erected.
At present Winbar carries 40,000 sheep, but it is Mr. Hope’s intention to bring up the
number to approximately the full carrying capacity of the run. As at Para, a few
hundred head of cattle are bred.
The late Mr. Hope was a large breeder of horses, both at Koolunga and Wolta
Wolta, which were favorably known throughout the estate, and his son has inherited
his love for a good horse, for he has always been a keen student of breeding, and has bred
a few blood horses annually. Mr. Hope takes a great interest in racing, with which he
has been associated since his boyhood, and has, for a long time, been identified with the
(dare Racing (dub, of which he is now President. He has acted as Judge for the South
Australian Jockey Club, the Adelaide Racing Club, and the Onkaparinga Racing Club, for
a number of years, and is now a committeeman of the S.A J.C. Mr. idope has also been
closely connected with coursing, and for many years filled the office of Judge at S.A.
Waterloo Cup and other meetings. The owner of Wolta Wolta is widely recognised as a
thoroughly good judge of Merino sheep, and has on many occasions had the honor of
judging these classes at the S.A. Royal Shows, and at other agricultural fixtures.
Mr. Hope married, in 1905, a daughter of Mr. W. E. Frazer, of the Bank of New
South Wales, and has a family of two sons and one daughter.
Scott. BROOD MARES AND FOALS. (Wolta Wolta).


■ . •:^'..n|^M8HB^..'' s - |i® : ' ■ z£5 •'* . v -V.'*’-' • ' kj&juUKSfaSk. •* --
MR. R, E. H. HOPE’S RESIDENCE AT WOLTA WOLTA, AND THE GARDENS.




Jhe property of jYcessrs. Chos. Goode Sons.
Mr, Thomas Goode, senior partner of the firm of Thos. Goode & Sons, of Mintadloo,
Farrell’s Flat, was born at Pigeon Farm Parish of Kyre Magna, Worcestershire,
England, in 1835. The Pigeon House Farm was occupied by his father for about 20
years, and here he spent his boyhood, afterwards removing to Felton Court, the home
of his uncle, Matthew Goode, who was a very successful breeder of Hereford cattle.
Here he remained for two years; and, in 1857 (being then 22 years old), he came to
South Australia, with his brothers, H. A., W. and B. P. Goode (now of Port Pirie) in
the sailing vessel Hope.”
Having acquired some knowledge of agriculture and stock in the old country, he
determined to turn this to account in his new home. His first engagement was with
Messrs. Scott, James & Co., proprietors of Canowie Station, his idea being to gain an
insight into sheep farming in the Colonies. Mr. Goode thus began an association with
Canowie Station, which was destined to last for 34 years. Soon after his arrival he was
g.ven the posit on of storekeeper, and, within two years, he was made overseer, in which
position his natural aptitude for the management of stock, quickly made itself apparent,
with the result that in a very few years (in 1864) he was appointed to the position of
manager, which he held until 1891. During that long period he not only saw changes in
the ownership but still greater ones in the development of the estate, which, under his
care, became one of the most thoroughly improved and successfully conducted properties
in the State.


%t J||
, i^yjaStolS
ST , ' /<■> _ '/' n$£«[
»& . r"~ I
" ”' 1 * * I
J MR. THOMAS GOODE. 1 111


■
.
, lip
w J%
mX,
Irgiigijp. v”
■ - r
< 8§j|& : v^wotBI
*dWg* 1«
■ i
MR. CLARENCE GOODE, M.P.
MR. A. P. GOODE.


gcott TYPICAL “MINTADLOO” COUNTRY.


Mr. Goode remembers that when he first went to the station the wool usually
sold at a penny to a penny-half-penny per lb. less than that from the leading stations.
On taking over the management he at once set to work to improve the stock. In this he
was so successful that, in comparatively few years, he had the satisfaction of topping the
English market with the Canowie clip. During these years also the Canowie merinos,
became well-known in the show rings of the State. In this connection he can
call to mind the taking of 22 prizes out of a possible 32, inclusive of live cups, all won on
the one day at the September Show of the S.A. Royal Agricultuial Society, and on
another occasion securing every prize, in every class, for Merino ewes. Mr. Goode believes
that one of his sales of Canowie wethers still stands as a record, two truck-loads averaging
4 3 shillings per head, hie also recollects that a consignment of 20 rams which he sent to
Victoria returned the magnificent average of £l5O.
The first introduction of outside blood into the Canowie flock during Mr. Goode’s
time was in 1862, when five imported Rarnboulliet rams were purchased from the late Mr.
C. B. Fisher. In 1864 fifteen Murray rams from Mount Crawford were purchased, and in
TWO-TOOTH, FOUR-TOOTH and SIX-TOOTH STUD RAMS.
the following year five additional rams were obtained from the same source, and, several
years later, one more. With these he established the Canowie Stud, and from that date
till his retirement no other blood was brought in, the flock being bred wholly within itself.
In 1891 further changes took place at Canowie, and Mr. Goode accepted the
position of general manager for the late Mr. J. H. Angas, the Hill River estate being the
base of his operations. This engagement lasted for nine years, during which period
he devoted the same expert knowledge and close attention to the improvement of the
sheep, and, with such success, that some of the leading breeders expressed surprise at the
noticeable improvement in the flock in such a short time.


Scott. FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAM.


Scott. FOUR-TOOTH STUD EWE. (Mintadloo).


Scott. TWO-TOOTH STUD RAM. (Mintadloo).
Scott. SIX-TOOTH STUD RAM. (Mintadloo).


Scott. SIX-TOOTH STUD EWE. (Mintadloo).
Scott. TWO-TOOTH STUD EWZ. (Mintadloo).


Scott. 700 SHORN EWES AND LAMBS. (Mintadloo).


' f ’
Scott. HORSES AT THE DAM. (Mintadloo).
Scott. CATTLE AT THE DAM. (Mintadloo).


Scott THE ENTRANCE GATES. (Mintadloo).


In 1903 Mr. Goode took charge of the Petherton Estate, which position he occupied
for about four years, when the estate was sold to the Government for closer settlement.
It was upon leaving Petherton that he entered into partnership with his two sons
—Albert Powell Goode, and Clarence Goode—and purchased the Mintadloo property
in 1906.
From the foregoing it will be seen that Mr. Goode, Sen., has had over 50 years
experience as a breeder of high-class Merinos in this State, and, with the knowledge of
this long experience brought to bear upon his own sheep, we may expect to find them
attaining the same prominence in the show ring, and favor amongst buyers, as did the
Canowie and Hill River under his skilful breeding.
Mr. Goode purchased a number of stud ewes and rams at the Petherton dispersal
sale. The Petherton flock consisted originally wholly of Canowie blood, but during the
first year that Mr. Goode had the Petherton sheep under his care he introduced some
Scott. HORSES ON PASTURE NEAR HOMESTEAD. (Mintadloo).
Bungaree rams (specially selected by himself), and it was the progeny resulting from this
mating which formed the nucleus of the Mintadloo stud. These sheep are large deep-
framed, strong-constitutioned animals, being densely and evenly-covered with bright wool
of great length of staple and character. In November of 1905, Mr. Goode purchased
1,100 Koonoona ewes, from which he made a special selection to suit several of the rams
from Petherton, and the young ewes from this mating will come into use during the next
season.
Messrs. Thos. Goode & Sons, therefore, have at Mintadloo three of the oldest and
best-known strains of Merinos in the State—a combination of Canowie, Bungaree and
Koonoona blood. This is the material with which Mr. Goode is now building, and in his
competent hands we may expect great things from the Mintadloo sheep. The progress
already made, as indicated by the photographs reproduced, is an indication that in the
near future these sheep will be recognised as being amongst the best in the State, and
worthy rivals of the flocks from which they have sprung.


1
/A Amt . }r ..i* ;*/. • *; t * r
••#» i . * *»4
.* V * ' / • * . :M
I * , r •
m) % «* **''»'• m _ ,. i
** * Jfc ■ *- **
Scott. SCENES AT HARVEST TIME


— " ——■ ■■ ■
AT MINTADLOO.


f ‘ Mintadloo,” which is the original rendering of the native word which has
degenerated into the modern “ Mintaro,” is situated between Hill River and Kadlunga
estate, and three miles from the township of Farrell’s Flat. It consists of 4,300 acres of
undulating well-grassed, lightly timbered lands, which, like the rest of this well-known
district, is exceptionally well suited for merinos. Geranium, clover and spear are the
principal grasses. Water is plentiful, there being a number of surface springs which
supply the estate.
Messrs. Goode & Sons are not confining their attention solely to sheep, but are
putting a considerable area of their estate under cultivation.
The two junior members of the firm, previous to joining their father, were known
as the firm of Messrs. A, P. & C. Goode, of Gladstone, and there had considerable ex-
perience in wheat growing, and are now turning this knowledge to account in their
Scott. ON THE VERANDAH. (Mintadloo).
operations at Mintadloo. Mr. A. P. Goode assumes the more particular management of
this sphere of labor, in conjunction with his brother, Mr. Clarence Goode, who is one of
the representatives for the District of Stanley in the House of Assembly.
During the last three years some heavy returns of wheat have been obtained, each
season portions of the crop yielding over 30 bushels per acre. But the harvest just
concluded has easily eclipsed all previous records, the average for 750 acres being over 30
bushels, while favored parts of the crop yielded from 40 to 50 bushels per acre. These
returns were secured from Federation wheat.
This speaks for the fertility of the district, and, as proof of its reliability it may be
mentioned that in the drought of 1902, 40 bushels of wheat per acre was reaped on land
adjoining the Mintadloo property. Oats, barley, peas, vetches and clover have also
been tried with excellent results.
The homestead is a large, comfortable, modern structure, conveniently situated,
and the station buildings generally are commodious and well-arranged.


Q^ u THE HOMESTEAD AT MINTADLOO.
STOCK AT THE DAM IN ONE OF THE HOME PADDOCKS.




CPlEVESTON^fg^
Zhe property of Jtfr. Qtjarles grieve.
ibis estate comprises 5,222 acres of freehold land, which is situated about CO miles
north-east of Adelaide in the Barossa Ranges ; it is about 10 miles from Angaston, and
wh'ur the railway is completed Angaston will be the nearest station. Truro is the nearest
post office, being about three miles from the homestead ; there is a daily mail telegraph
office, and agencies of the Bank of Adelaide and the Savings Bank.' The’country P
undulating, with some fair sized hills, there are about 2000 acres of arable land in the
estate, the timber is principally white and blue gum, sheoak, and peppermint—wherever
the peppermint grows it is invariably rich wheat and grazing land, —the grasses are mostly
indigenous, and have good fattening qualities. Lucerne would grow well on many
portions of the estate. Owing to not overstocking the country is all well covered with a
thick sward of grass. The average rainfall for the last 23 years has been 17-50 inches
which is ample for the merino sheep or wheat.
Ihe property is sub-divided into 21 sheep-proof paddocks, and is well and per-
manently watered by the Truro Creek, which runs right through the estate, and by other
creeks and tanks. The carrying capacity is about one sheep to lj acres. Mr. Grieve is
a great enemy to noxious weeds and rabbits, and scarcely any of either of these pests can
be found on the place. The method adopted to exterminate the rabbits is, in Mr. Grieve’
opinion, the only successful wav. This is by digging cut all the burrows, and destroying
all cover of any kind ; when this is properly done, there is then no difficulty in dealing
with the pest. ' ' 5
Stock.
For close upon 60 years the merino has found a congenial home at Grieveston and
for the last 34 years, during the management of the present proprietor, the sheep have to
a very large extent, been in-bred, but have better constitutions to-day than ever before
During this time, three of the late John Murray’s rams have been used in the stud”
also the champion ram, “ Rover,” by " President the 2nd,” by “ President.” " President ”
was sold in Sydney for 1,600 guineas, when six years old, and again in Melbourne lor
1,000 guineas, when eight years old. These sheep were all bred by the late Hon. James
Gibson, of Bellevue, 1 asmania. “ Rover ” was a very shapely sheep, very wide on top of
shoulder, and wide between the hocks, and possessed'a splendid constitution. During the
time he was at Grieveston, he was never out of sorts for one minute to anyone’s knowledge
and was killed in his 14th year. This ram has improved the sheep beyond expectation’
as the results below will demonstrate. The descendants of “Rover” have splendid
constitutions, are well-made, and covered with a dense, robust wool of great staple with
a most uniform length of staple right round the whole body, which Mr. Grieve considers a


I '. mSmgSH
■ ••jfjy# rW- \ f j


-
m mfim I ' **'* f . U i i . , ft|
(li 9 ,g 1 y W 1% yf k 4$
most important point in the Merino. They are of good size, but Mr. Grieve does not
favor an overgrown animal of any kind, for he contends that the more compact animal
is a better doer, and, in times of scarcity, can hustle better for a living. The Grieveston
sheep have good fronts, with plain bodies, and some of the stud rams scale over 200 lbs.,
and the wethers, when offered in the market, are nearly always top in price. The average
weight of wool per grown sheep (nearly all ewes) for the last seven years has been
1 1 lbs. sozs., some of the rams cutting over 30 lbs. and some of the stud ewes cutting
over 20 lbs. In 1907, when the wool was sold in Adelaide, the following sheep—no culls
having been taken out before shearing, and the best of the wethers having been sold up to
265, in the Kapunda market —were shorn :
45 per cent, of ewes, 3J to 12 years old, and reared 82 per cent, of lambs, which
averaged 31bs. 9 ozs of wool.
33 per cent, of young ewes.
19 per cent, of wethers, two-tooth.
3 per cent, of rams, various ages.
The wool from the above averaged 11 lbs. 14 oz., and realized, including locks and
everything, 10.1 Id. per lb., or just about exactly 10s per sheep for the wool.
The Adelaide Show is held too early for the sheep to be in show condition, but they
have been exhibited at 14 Shows in Kapunda, with the following results : —37 first prizes,
including many champions for both rams and ewes, and 21 second prizes. Three rams’
fleeces were exhibited at the Jubilee Exhibition held in 1887, the only time that Grieveston
wool has been shown in Adelaide. On that occasion there were seventeen competitors,
including seven from New South Wales, and ten from South Australia, and the Grieveston
wool was fifth in order of merit and value.
Very few cattle are bred, sheep being more profitable, but Mr. Grieve is a great
admirer of all animals, and generally has a few symmetrical and useful horses. There is
also some wheat grown, some on the share principle, and some otherwise.
Scott. “TO QUENCH THEIR THIRST.” (Grieveston).


M - ■ ---- ——
Scott . TYPICAL MAIDEN EWES. (Grieveston).


IYPICAL STUD EWE. ■■
• (Grieves Lon).
TYPICAL STUD RAM. (Grieveston).


tr.*,** . m.jj|»w 'I wwi’ii niMMWii ,„,„ , t
'7; |V* -w '
Scott. MR. GRIEVE AND HIS DAUGHTER, WITH SHEEP DOGS.
Fruits of nearly all
kinds grow well, and,with
the exception of oranges
and lemons, without irri-
gation, simply cultiva-
tion. Sugar Gums also
grow well. Mr. Grieve
recently cut all the posts
used in a stable from
trees which he has grown,
some of which measured
Ift 4in. in diameter, and
of good height.
The Grieveston Es-
tate has been held by
the Grieve family for
close upon 60 years, and
for the last 34 years has
been managed by the
present owner, Mr. Chas.
Grieve, third son of the
late Andrew Grieve, of
Moray, Canada He was
born in 1854, his father
and mother being Scotch.
In 1878 he married Eliza
Shannon,the third daugh-
ter of the late Abraham
Shannon, of Moculta.
There are tw r o sons and
tw T o daughters. The sons
have settled in the
famous Grenfell district
in New South Wales,
where they have about
14,000 acres of splendid
wdieat or grazing land,
and are actively engaged
in improving these pro-
perties, which are known
as Mylandra Park and
Mvlandra Station. The
average rainfall there is
24 inches.
Mr. Grieve, whilst
always interested in poli-
tics. has never aspired to
parliamentary honors,
feeling that his own
business demanded the
whole of his time, but he
has been continuously
SHOWING UNDER-COVERING.
for 29 years a member of the Truro District Council, and for 18 years has
been Chairman of that body, and, as showing his popularity, it may be mentioned that
he has only been twice opposed at an election. Mr. Grieve is also a Justice of the Peace
for the State of New South Wales.


• ‘<r '" * 'wM *i
■* —*n V' .. ---^^MPiBiistm. 31IT*. , ■fe 6 ■ ,i< , .^k.*M
**m ( m***.: «•**•* * u . * , ™' HMfe Sfc- -*4B& *SmM ML ..* • ••■ .
- rtm.i I..UI* l<sri _ * • t Mm i !
... ■* ' ,.,* ’ _ ft" ' ; -, .. ” ■, |
_ . ,~, «,.,./• * f- «. ' ,, „ ■' - .■=, -~ ’, ;•., •■ ' s- , ■■■• % '- '\ ...... .-. ' ' /.<*■.•■■ ■■■■’ '"; h - • * •» > - . .-,/■ :■ " .* ' - K -\ r - ... ;T ,V '
TOP.—Dairy Cattle at the Homestead Dam. BOTTOM.—Bird’s Eye View of Homestead and Surroundings.




Jhe property of jYir. T{. JY(. pfic pride
Robert Martin Mcßride, the second son of Mr. R. J. Mcßride, who came to this
country in October, 1855, from Newry, Ireland, where he was born in the year 1830.
Mr. R. J. Mcßride has been associated with the pastoral industry for a great
number of years, during which he held large areas around the Burra, and in the North.
Amongst other properties which Mr. Mcßride at different times owned, were The Gums,
now owned by Messrs.Thos. H. Pearse & Son, and Pine Valley Station. Mr. Mcßride now
holds about 3,000 square miles in the north, including Outalpa and Oulnina, besides 3,500
acres of valuable freehold, called Norman Farm, near the Burra.
Mr. R. M. Mcßride was born in 1860 at the Burra, in which town he also received
his education. During his father’s ownership of The Gums, near Florieton, he was
engaged on that property for eighteen years, during which he became thoroughly con-
versant with the management of that class of country. He was afterwards in charge of
Braemar Station, for Messrs. Elder, Smith & Co., for a period of two years. Following
this, he decided to take up country on his own account. Mr. Mcßride’s first purchase
was the Finger Post Station, part of the old Gums run, thirty miles to the east of Burra,
near Oakleigh, which is occupied by his brother, Mr. Thomas Mcßride. Finger Post, of
which Mr. Mcßride's eldest son is now manager, consists of about 17,000 acres of saltbush
country, with some area of open spear and geranium grass land. Timber is not plentiful,
but there is some sandal wood and black oak.
Mr. Mcßride runs about 3,500 sheep on this property, which are descended from
Murray, Koonoona and Wirrilla stock. They are a good class of saltbush sheep, cutting
an average for the flock of between 10 and li pounds of strong, long-stapled wool, which
is sold in Adelaide.


JH l^JpF^
- >W< Aitiii
..' ~ m JIm
MR. R. J. McBRIDE.
MR. R. M. McBRIDE
MR. R. T. McBRIDE.


K'?f': •-■'■* ? "(t/
; * /■ ".
F-dwanls. MERINO EWES. (R. M. Mcßride).


mm&m.. . 1 m
■' | , ■ *
. •*, . ■ ' -
>• - ’ • 1 * J ■ .»
1 MB h
. .^.* ; '-jigfi-■ •> • .... .1^;
jl ' '
. gaf S& S «feg?,g imMwffiSBSfo ima 5SM 5 .w»f5S.-
b| yw,m 1 .--?
Edwards. STONY GAP. (R. M. Mcßride).


, /' fv ■ : ' ! ' * y^ ♦ * ,.r
Edwards. FINGER POST. (R. M. Mcßride).


: . • .
I ’ •
I
-
I
“Mr
. I ' ft || ■
j ' ’* <^ L C . . **v.■
■ $.J$H, II n u
Jj-J#! >• • / : %’ •., '\ '\ ..; S<* • ' • i ’ ' ' • •
Edwards. STUD EWES. (E. M. McBride).


&H±.LP AT FINGER POST. ( B . M . McBride).


Edwards. TRIO OF STUD EWES. (R. M. Mcßride).
Jn 1907, Mr. Mcßride purchased Stony Gap from Mr. W. Berryman. This station
is situated ten miles south of Burra, adjoining Koo-owie. The property consists oi
about 2,600 acres, and it is here that Mr. Mcßride recently started a small stud with
about 150 selected ewes of the same breeding as the Finger Post sheep, his aim being to
raise good class lams for use in his outside country and the improvement of the general
flock. He is meeting with considerable success in this endeavor to breed a big, rangy,
strong-constitutioned sheep, carrying a close fleece of strong wool, with long staple and
good tip, and he looks forward to becoming a more frequent exhibitor at local shows in
the future, where his successes have so far been confined to first and second prizes, which
he was awarded in 1906 for saltbush sheep.
Stony Gap, where Mr. Mcßride resides, is, for the most part, hilly, well-grassed
land, but there is also a considerable area of rich, strong soil, which Mr. Mcßride has
under cultivation. There is some timber, chiefly sheaoak and gum, and the property
is watered by several wells and dams. The flock numbers 1,000.
Mr. Mcßride married, in 1885, a daughter of Mr. Stoddart, and has a family oi
two sons and four daughters.
STUD RAMS.


y
J fye property of jYtr . Charles Jotjnston J(nig/jt.
Mulgundawa, which is situated about twelve miles
horn Langhorne's Creek, and nine miles from Wellington
was taken up from the Government in 1856 by the present
owner, Mr. Charles Johnston Knight, who arrived in the
colony in A The Arab,” in 1843.
His first experience was at Bull’s Creek, where his
uncle, Mr. J. S. Johnston, was engaged in farming. He did
not, however, remain in that district for any length of time,
for, on his uncle purchasing a sheep-station near Wellington!
he went there, and so gained his first practical experience
amongst sheep. Afterwards he entered the employ of Mr.
Francis Grote, who was sheep-farming at Guichen Bay
Following this, Mr. Knight and his brother, Mr. Geo. Knight,
acquired some land between Hampden and Strathalbyn’
which they farmed with varying success. This partnership
lasted till the year 1856, when Mr. C. J. Knight took up
Mulgundawa.
MR. CHARLES JOHNSTON KNIGHT.
The sheep at Mulgundawa are all Merinos, the stud numbering .100 whilst the
totat flock is 900. Ihe stud was founded in 1884-5 by purchases from Wellington and
Nalpa, the last-named flock being then very largely from Mount Crawford. This
commencement proved fortunate, for these sheep produced what their breeder particularlv
desired, namely, a good-framed animal, having short legs and a good depth of girth
capable of carrying a heavy fleece. 8 *
Scott. HOMESTEAD AT MULGUNDAWA.


',- si^l' ' ' ' .
r
*' #* # *’*%'* ' s '" - - ' 'mjp $ & t ,*%, * * i* »> $M « ‘*** :: ’ * »
% I
Scott. AGED STUD RAM, “WARRIOR.” (Mulgundawa).
Scott. FIRST STUD AGED EWE. (Mulgundawa).


j. JBL r%||r'' '» Jfl *WMBi' •■■ itHumii m jfr* fgi-*$ML ■- mm^sm
• jg jt Bffi w11 jw .y : y , w i fjTIS
Mr. Knight’s second son, Mr. John S. Knight, under whose management the stud
has been worked, next turned his attention to producing a finer wool and obtaining
greater density. Purchases were made from the late John Raker’s Terlinga stud, and
from Corryton Park, then owned by Mr. Rounsevell. Four ewes from Tasmania were
purchased in Adelaide but it is not known from what stud they came. At the dispersion
of the Levels stud a ram by Big Prince, bred by Messrs. W. Gibson & Sons, Scone, was
purchased. This ram proved an excellent sire, and, when five years old, his scoured
fleece weighed lOlbs. 5 oz. His produce from the Nalpa ewes were excellent, and they
were put to another Scone ram —a son of Royal Duke V —a sire which had a great
influence in the stud. Since then Mr. Knight has continued to use Tasmanian blood,
iams from the Bellevue and Winton studs having been purchased. Results
have pioved the soundness of Mr. Knight’s judgment, for it led to the development of a
flock of Merinos of such profitable description that no less an authority than the late
G. A. Brown (Bruni) classed it 11 as probably unequalled in Australia in money returns from
wool production alone,” and to the attainment of the excellent reputation which the
Mulgundawa’stud enjoys.
Scott. FOUR-TOOTH STUD EWES. (Mulgundawa).
Mr. Knight believes in the large-framed, robust type of Merino. He is particularly
careful to avoid any tendency to body wrinkle, but breeds for good swinging neck folds.
In choosing sires for use in the stud he lays stress on bold, masculine appearance, with
plenty of quality in the fleece. Rams showing signs of lightness or feminine character in
the wool are at once discarded, and it is to his consistent selection on these lines that he
largely ascribes the satisfaction expressed by buyers of rams from his stud. The hardy
constitution of the sheep enables them to do well in all countries suitable for Merinos, and
it is satisfactory to Mr. Knight to be able to say that repeat orders generally follow the
first sale. It is also satisfactory to know that sales are made not only to the States of
the Commonwealth, but also to foreign countries, the furthest shipment yet made being
to East Africa. Mr. Knight rarely exhibits his sheep, but in other hands they have been
consistently successful.
The average amount of wool cut from this flock (exclusive of lambs) is from 12 to
13 lbs.—an exceedingly high average for a full flock. One of the best cuts was from a
four-tooth ewe, which turned the scales at 22£ lbs., whilst 28 lbs. has, on several occasions,
been taken from rams. The Mulgundawa wool is fine, with plenty of character, and is of
extra good spinning quality, the fleeces being dense, with medium length of staple. This
season the clip has been the best on record, the average (exclusive of lambs) being 131bs.
3jozs , or (including lambs) 11 lbs. 2^ozs.


?
Scott. FATTENING BULLOCKS AT MULGUNDAWA.
Like all the country round Lake Alexandria, Mulgundawa consists of low-lying
flats interspersed with a few rising hillocks. There is very little timber on the property,
the trees having been cut down in the early days, though a few sheoaks still remain. Tire
soil is of a light sandy description, which, combined with a splendid rainfall, produces
natural grasses in abundance, the principal of these being barley, whilst burr, clover and
couch also thrive.
Most of the paddocks have a frontage to the Lake, from which the stock is watered.
Wells provide for the needs of the sheep on the flats, but in the back country Mr. Knight
has had a bore put down, in which water was struck at a depth of 300 ft., and this serves
all the land near the northern boundary. Many improvements have of late been carried
out on the property, with the result that all the land is sub-divided into small paddocks,
which enables it to be worked in the most advantageous manner.
The homestead, built within half a mile of the Lake, is situated on a rise, and
commands an excellent view of the surrounding country. Good shooting can be obtained,
for thousands of ducks and other wild fowl may at any time be seen on the Lake, which
also affords excellent fishing.
Mr. Knight, Senior, who has now reached a ripe old age, has given up the manage-
ment of his property, which is now entrusted to his sons, Messrs. John S. Knight and
Joseph B. Knight.
ME. J. B. KNIGHT.
MR. J. S. KNIGHT.


ERRATUM.
For 44 Bennett ” read 44 Bennet "
throughout this Section.
r. Qeorge Jiennett
It is to Mr George Bennett, owner of Allandale Station, and sturdy back-country
men °t Ins kind, that the State is much indebted for the largeness and the prosperity
0 lts pastoral mdustn/. Simply to see Mr. Bennett is to realise that his life has been
successful. 1 here is nothing of the spoon-fed type about him. He is a man who sees
things for himself and who carries things out for himself. Indeed, to use a favorite
pnase or his own, “thoroughness is one of the main elements of success,” and Mr,
Bennett is nothing if not thorough. Like many another man to whom South Australia
owes its development, Mr. Bennett is practically self-made, and if his life history
includes no very stirring incidents, it is more or less replete with day-to-day conflict
with natural elements. ‘ J
Allandale Station, a compact, well-watered and conveniently-situated run, consists
of about 3,000 square miles of country, which practically surrounds the head of the
Great Northern Railway line, the homestead being 12 miles from Oodnadatta. Mr.
Bennett is not one of those who subscribe to the theory that the Far North of South'
u^ ra '^ a a desert countiy—country hardly fit for white occupation and quite bereft
of both utility and picturesqueness. On the contrary, he believes the Far North to
contain (quoting his own words) “ some of the best stock country in Australia.” Of
course there is the usual if. Said Mr. Bennett recently, “If every season were good
no country in Australia could approach it for healthfulness or for stock raising.” He
estimates that three seasons out of four on the average are good, and considers that
under such conditions progress and success are possible to most people, and certain to
those who are “thorough.” As a matter of fact the official rainfall at Farina has
averaged 6 inches for very many years past, while at Oodnadatta the record is slightly
less, but it a recognised fact that no rain gauge in the Far North can possibly give
an accurate idea of the general rain of the country, because rain storms travel
along irregular zones, so that while an inch of rain falls in one place, no rain may be
experienced a few miles away. Be that as it may, Mr. Bennett regards the ordinary
rainfall as being quite sufficient for the country. Even in dry times—the one season
m four—there is good stock feed. Salt bush, cotton bush, and Mitchell grass are well
disseminated over the country and provide first-class feed.. Indeed one of the features
of Allandale is the dense growth of Mitchell grass on the table lands. This provides
good fattening feed during the best times of the vear, and insures fresh provender to
carry stock over any dry periods that may occur.


\y jr* —- 1
Che property of jYtr. Qeorge pennett.
It is to Mr. George Bennett, owner of Allandale Station, and sturdy back-country
men of his kind, that the State is much indebted for the largeness and the prosperity
of its pastoral industry. Simply to see Mr. Bennett is to realise that his life has been
successful. There is nothing of the spoon-fed type about him. He is a man who sees
things for himself and who carries things out for himself. Indeed, to use a favorite
phrase of his own, “ thoroughness is one of the main elements of success,” and Mr,
Bennett is nothing if not thorough. Like many another man to whom South Australia
owes its development, Mr. Bennett is practically self-made, and if his life history
includes no very stirring incidents, it is more or less replete with day-to-day conflict
with natural elements.
Allandale Station, a compact, well-watered and conveniently-situated run, consists
of about 3,000 square miles of country, which practically surrounds the head of the
Great Northern Railway line, the homestead being 12 miles from Mr.
Bennett is not one of those who subscribe to the theory that the Far North of South
Australia is a desert country—country hardly fit for white occupation, and quite bereft
of both utility and picturesqueness. On the contiary, he believes the Far North to
contain (quoting his own words) “ some of the best stock county in Australia.” Of
course there is the usual “ if.” Said Mr. Bennett recently, “If every season were good
no country in Australia could approach it for healthfulness or for stock raising.” He
estimates that three seasons out of four on the average are good, and considers _ that
under such conditions progress and success are possible to most people, and certain to
those who are “thorough.” As a matter of fact the official rainfall at Farina has
averaged 6 inches for very many years past, while at Oodnadatta the record is slightly
less but it is a recognised fact that no rain gauge in the Far North can possibly give
an accurate idea of the general rain of the country, because lain stoims tia\el
along irregular zones, so that while an inch of rain falls in one place, no rain may be
experienced a few miles away. Be that as it may, Mr. Bennett regards the ordinary
rainfall as being quite sufficient for the country. Even in dry times —the one season
in f our __there is good stock feed. Salt bush, cotton bush, and Mitchell grass are well
disseminated over the country and provide first-class feed.. Indeed one of the features
of \llandale is the dense growth of Mitchell grass on the table lands. Ibis provides
good fattening feed during the best times of the year, and insures fresh provender to
carry stock over any dry periods that may occur.


I
Hammer & Co. MR. GEORGE BENNETT.


Scott. ALLANDALE HEAD STATION.


Scott WATERHOLE ON ALLANDALE.


’*>-*_ - ■ ■; _ t ‘T-’ ' - ■ .
5.AW',- /•’*," ■, ; ; ,ij.
' ,>* -■ \ • r-:- r
- A.**,.. " ' ** *
, ’# **** -v ,-
*> J|* -*.,
4pae *\ - T> r ' • .
Ihese facts speak for themselves in regard to the country. At any rate they
entirely disprove a too-common belief that South Australia’s Far North is a land of
desert, drought and disappointment. Allandale has only been Allandale since the
beginning of the century, for it was in 1900 that Mr. Bennett took up his residence as
owner on Cecelia Creek, a run which is really the genesis of the fine property so well
known to stock buyers in Adelaide. The property really consists of the three old
stations —Wondillina, Warringina and Cecelia Creek, to which have been added
certain blocks of adjacent country. With the exception of four horse-paddocks, the
country is practically unfenced. The Northern boundary of the run is at Storm Creek,
some 12 miles north of Oodnadatta, and Mr. Bennett’s holdings extend southwards on
either side of the railway line to a point close to the famous Algebuckina waterhole on
the Neale’s River. Macumba on the North and The Peake on the South, both run by
Mr. Sidney Kidman, are the Allandale boundaries. “ Practically the whole of the run,”
said Mr. Bennett recently, “is good country. I don’t think that there is more than
Scott. ALGEBUCKINA BRIDGE.
Divides Allandale and Peake Stations.
five square miles of sand hill on the station, which otherwise consists of tablelands,
and flats along watercourses. The two principal watercourses are the Neales’ River
and the Cecilia Creek. Like all Central Australian Rivers, these run only during the
wet season (which practically corresponds to the winter time of Adelaide), but both
courses have many very fine holes along their entire length, which retain sufficient water
lor stock purposes in between rains.
It is not easy for those who are not acquainted with the Far North to appreciate
the wonderful fertility of the ground when it receives its due rain. Tablelands that look
practically bare of food and appear as dry and hard as a city street, are, within two
weeks of a fall of rain, green and luxuriant with fodder. This is due to the marvellous
vitality of the fodder plants indigenous to Allandale, and generally common to the Far
North. And, in this connection it is interesting to note Mr. Bennett’s conviction that
not so much drought, but bad management, is the cause of the ruin which has over-
taken certain pastoralists of Northern South Australia. The bad management consists


t - V *" • ...» - *- «**• ' ‘ • :. . T’ - “T • " »» ,. i
' - - ’ -' . •“• . -•• $ ■- - v* x -••
& - * -'i**** ' ' ' • - •-" -•■• ' ■"***•« • v A*!
y co tt. HEREFORD STUD COWS. (Homestead on Other Side of the Creek).


principally of over-stocking. Managers in the past have been too greedy in their
estimates of capacity. Constantly before them have they cherished ideals of immense
lerds of cattle and heavy marketings, but, though the Far North lias a heavy stock-
ing capacity during the best of seasons, when dry weather comes along country
that has been overstocked is natuially in no condition to stand the strain. The results
|? av( h therefore, been disastrous. the same principle, of course, applies even in the
fertile lands of the South. No land can stand over-cropping or over-stocking, but it
mav be claimed that the revivifying powers of the Far North are unequalled in South
Australia. Over-stocking of country is now becoming a generally realised fault in the
hai North. And in view of the lessons of the past in this respect it is unlikely that
the countiy will ever experience the fearful losses which in years gone by have tended to
gi\e it a character and reputation which it ill deserves.
M hile the Neales and Cecelia Creek are the main watercourses on Allandale, the
mu also has many smallei streams and waterholes. The flats along the Neales are
regarded by Mr. Bennett as the best fattening country of the run. The timber on the
station consists principally of gidgea, box, and gum. All these timbers are fairly large
and useful for fencing, building, and domestic purposes. Some of the tree boles run to
a big size along the river banks. The tablelands are practically bare, and, like the rest
of the Far North, Allandale cannot claim to be more than sparsely timbered. There is,
however, sufficient timber for the purpose of settlement, sufficient food for the purpose of
cattle-breeding, and sufficient rain to keep the main waterholes good for 10 to 14 months.
And, after all, these are the great essentials for successful pastoral occupation.
A good deal has been heard down South of the stock raised by Mr. Bennett, on
Allandale. Considering the fact that the Hereford Stud herd belonging to Mr. Bennett
had its beginning only six years ago, it may well be classed as one of the most
successful herds of the State. Within eighteen months of entering into possession of
Allandale, in 1900, Mr. Bennett set about improving the stock, and, to" this end, purchased
some Hereford from Lake Albert (Murray Lakes District). Although the Lake
Albert herd is now broken up and distributed, at that time it was one of the finest in
Australia. At the same time he purchased the stud bull, Earl of Trediger, from Mr.
Philip Charley’s Naming Estate, this being the germ of the Allandale stud, which now
numbers 50. Earl J rediger w 7 as seven years old wffien Mr. Bennett acquired him, and
w r as a noted prize-winner, for he w 7 as four times Champion at the Royal Agricultural
Society’s Show in Melbourne. Quite recentlv Mr. Bennett, still pursuing his intent of
making his Hereford stud second to none in the State purchased Sir Grace from the Hill
River Stud. Sir Grace claims as his sire the imported Spark 35th. Besides this
magnificent sire, Mr. Bennett has also, from time to time, purchased six other high class
Hereford bulls. b
The successful manner in which Mr. Bennett has carried out his ideals of stock
raising is indicated in the fact that when he took possession of the original portion of
Allandale there were only 600 head of very ordinary cattle on the place. At the present
time the station herd numbers about 5,000 cattle, infinitely better in every respect than
the original 600. the herd, in fact, is improved out of all knowledge. Aliandale’s 3,000
square miles of country is quite capable in ordinary seasons of carrying double or treble
the number at present on the run. “But,” Mr. Bennett says, “ I have seen so much loss
by overstocking, that I am determined not to let the herd increase on what it is at
present.” Ihe owner of Allandale is strongly impressed in favor of Hereford blood as
giving the best class of cattle for the Far North. His reasons are that they are hardy
and well able to stand any climatic vicissitudes. In addition to their hardiness they are
much favored by those whose business it is to purchase butcher’s cattle.
In addition to his Herefords, however, Mr. Bennett has some very fine Shorthorn
bulls which he purchased from Ft. Sturt and Bolinda Vale. From the latter place he
purchased eleven animals, all of which are by the noted prize- taker, Duke of York, an
imported bull of splendid quality. The Bolinda Vale eleven, and the seven from Ft.
Sturt Estate, have been used in the general herd on Allandale, and their introduction
has led to a vast improvement in quality. Thus year by year the class of cattle on


K|HWB£jMMM|fcy gnil
■ " •, , t - *^2 ! %K “ __' ji w,
fs^
gcott SOME OF THE HEREFORDS.


Allandale has improved, and is now sufficiently good to frequently top the
Adelaide market. For the past two years 600 cattle, mainly bullocks, have been
forwarded to Adelaide, and their average price has been £l2 75., while some lots have
sold up to £ls for the whole consignment. Comparing these figures with the value of
the original 600 which Mr. Bennett found on Allandale is sufficient indication of the vast
improvement made by the introduction of better methods.
Allandale cattle, more or less in common with that of other stations are marketed
in their youth and prime. Mr. Bennett said recently :“ I send away all my cattle at
about four years of age. Years ago owners used to keep them until they were six or
seven years old. But all that has changed now, and we find it more profitable for us and
more suited to market requirements to truck the cattle at about three or four years.”
Continuing, Mr. Bennett remarked that it was possible the tendency to market young
cattle was being overdone, “Some owners,” he said, in this connection, “send away
anything at all that is fat, if it is only 18 months old, but as far as possible, I keep
them until they are four years.” The owner of Allandale regards the Shorthorn sires
on pure or grade Herefords as giving the best beast for market. These cattle are noted
for their hardiness and for the quantity of meat they carry. Besides this, they are
particularly adapted to the country, as they inherit the Hereford nature. It is prin-
cipally cattle of this breeding that have made the name of Allandale so good in the
metropolitan market. It is very interesting to know, that in regard to the possibilities
of the cattle trade of South Australia in the future, Mr. Bennett is very sanguine.
He is not a believer in the pessimism which looks forward to a serious decline in the
price of cattle for some years to come. Speaking lately on this point he said, “ I
cannot see that cattle can decrease in value for the next 10 years at least. It is the
law of supply and demand which determines all values, and, owing to the depletion of
many stations —due to the selling of young stock as much as to drought—l cannot see
that there can be an over-supply before at least the period mentioned.”
Mr. Bennett has not by any means confined his stock-raising enterprise solely to
cattle, for he has over 1,200 head of horse stock on Allandale, including a few thorough-
bred mares and a number of first-class medium draught stallions. His objective in
horse-breeding is primarily the production of a class of animal suitable for the Indian
Remount trade, and for Artillery use. For this purpose the natural and climatic conditions
of the Allandale country are superbly suited. It is a commonly acknowledged fact that
the horses of Central Australia are as good as any bred within the Commonwealth, and it
may not be too much to say that the horses on Allandale are equal to any in the great
Central area of the Continent.
It is, in fact, Mr. Bennett’s well-considered opinion that no better country than
that which he occupies is to be found for this special purpose, and indeed the testimony of
stock salesmen, and the evidence of prices received, goes to show that there is a distinct
liking for Allandale horses amongst the best buyers of the metropolitan market. This
pleasing fact speaks volumes for the thoroughness with which Mr. Bennett has conducted
operations, for when he came into possession of Allandale the stock thereon was far from
being of the class which is now found there, but, with characteristic energy, he at once set
about the task of bringing to its present standard the stock carrying the Allandale brand.
One of his first purchases was that of the fine draught entire “ King.” This
horse has been used on Allandale for several years, and with great success, for, during this
period he has sired a number of animals which have taken honors at Adelaide Shows.
Since those early days Mr, Bennett has purchased and sent North a large number of well-
bred stallions and mares, and there are now in use on the station no less than twenty high-
class sires, some of which, it may be mentioned, have been obtained from Mr. Cdeggett, the
well-known breeder of Langhorn’s Creek.
As already indicated, the policy Mr Bennett has adopted has resulted in a vast
improvement in all round quality, and it is not surprising that Allandale consignments,
which usually number about 100 head, realize the fine average of from £2O to £25 in
the Adelaide market. Many horses of the Allandale brand are in use around the city


and suburbs, and, with these and his representatives on country and metropolitan race
courses, the name of George Bennett is becoming increasingly well and favourably known
amongst those who are interested in the great horse-breeding industry of our State.
Owing to the fact that only a very small portion of Allandale consists of sand
hills, the rabbit trouble is not felt on the run, for it is in the sand hills that the rabbits
live and breed. On the tablelands, owing to the scarcity of food and water, rabbits
die in the summer time in such numbers as to automatically keep them down as a pest.
The station is also fortunate in regard to dogs. they are fairly numerous certainly,
but Mr. Bennett’s experience has been that they do not do much harm. In dry seasons,
when cattle are more or less poor, the dogs, having been driven in fiom the back
country, are rather severe on calves, particularly calves which have been neglected by
their mothers. On Allandale the usual checking methods are adopted. Poison is always
carried bv the stockmen on the run, and whenever a beast is found dead from natmai
causes, or killed for some other reason, the carcass is poisoned. This treatment accounts
for a large number of dogs every year, although Mr. Bennett feels unable to go into
figures in this regard. “At Christmas time,” he said, “you might be on the run for
a week in a good season and not see a dog.” Such a statement is not only indicatne
of the value of Allandale as a pastoral property, but also re-assuring to those who are
so much worried about the possibilities of the bar North being eaten out by dogs and
rabbits, and other natural pests.
To Mr. Bennett, as to ah other pastoralists in the north of South Australia, the
question of water service is all important. Nature has not been veiy kind in this
respect to the districts indicated, for while the rainfall is limited the natural opportunities
for conserving such rain as falls are more limited still. In every big rain huge quantities
of water flood the country and either escape to lower country or rapidly e\ aporate.
As a result there are fairly large areas of good country which cannot be used foi stock
purposes without the provision of artificial water supplies. Owing to the great success
which for years past has attended the efforts of Queensland in boring for artesian and
sub-artesian water supplies, both the Government and pastoralists of South Australia within
the last decade have taken to the same means of watering otherwise dry areas. The
happy results of this policy may be seen in numberless places throughout the Far North.
Bores have been put down at a cost reaching up to £2 a foot, and in nearly every case
water has been struck at depths varying from 300 odd feet (as at Hergott Springs) to
1,600 feet (as at Oodnadatta) and over 4,000 feet (as at Patchewarra). Following the
general example Mr. Bennett has sunk nine bores on Allandale. None of these are
deeper than 300 feet, a circumstance which makes for the good fortune of the run, and
which doubtless has a good deal to do with the fact that the water in all bores is
particularly good. The flow varies very considerably in these bores, and is estimated at
from 5,000* gallons per day to 100,000 gallons per day in different bores. Stock thrive
exceedingly on bore water, owing to certain medicinal qualities which are present
naturally. Water from the bore at Wondillina is so good that a considerable quantity
of lucerne is grow r n by its aid. Of a truth, when large patches of beautiful lucerne are to
be found growing in the Far North, it is high time for slanderers of this State to close
their mouths and promulgate no more false statements about “ arid country and “ desert
expanses.” Mr. Bennett’s policy will be to continue the putting down of more bore
holes in different parts of Allandale, as circumstances may dictate.
Needless to say. utility and not beauty is the quality most to be expected in
Allandale as throughout the Far North. Nevertheless, scenes of beauty are by no
means rare, especially around many of the deep waterholes which are a feature of the
country. These vary considerably in extent, but they invariably are bordered by
beautiful timber and surrounded in many cases by rich fiats. Big patches of rushes and
cane grass and low knolls, covered with bushy shrubs, lend to these spots an air of pic-
turesqueness which would charm the eye of an artist. And, indeed, numbers of
photographs might be obtained, which, shown to one ignorant of the original locality,
might easily be passed off as coming from the most favored districts, or the best
known beauty spots of hederated Australia.


When Mr. Bennett first went to Allandale in 1900, he lived on the old station at
Cecelia C reek ; subsequently f however, acquiring the adjacent property (Wondilline), he
formed a new homestead on Cecelia Creek, and it is now one of the best in that part of
the country. Ihe house is picturesquely situated on the edge of a creek. The waterhole
by its side is three-quarters of a mile long, and up to 40 yards wide, and, when full, from
20 to 25 feet deep. Beautiful gums margin this fine sheet of water, which, together with a
well, supplies plenty of water for domestic, stock and irrigating purposes. The house is
nicely built of stone, being well-appointed inside and out. It is furnished with a fine
vegetable garden, and a fruit garden is now being formed, for Mr. Bennett is one of those
who believe in having home comforts for himself, his wife, his three children, and those who
may be visiting Allandale. The homestead is about four miles from the railway line,
and is reached by a 12-mile drive, either from Oodnadatta or Warrina. It looks like
the oasis that it really is to one travelling over the adjacent table lands, and in its
selection of site and provision of comfort, reflects the very greatest credit upon the
genial owner of Allandale.
The personal history of Mr. Geo. Bennett is of considerable interest. A native of
Victor Harbor, wTere his father (Mr. Geo. Bennett) was farming,he received his education
in that well-known pleasure resort. Born in the year 1870, he was only 16 when he had
Scott. A STATUE IN EEONY.
to take to the more serous avocations of life. About that time he accompanied}} his
father and brother to the Far North, where the former had been appointed as Manager
of Macumba Station, and on this run the owner of Allandale laid the foundations of a
knowledge of the Far North and its industries which has stood him in such good stead
ever since. He was quite a young man when an unkind fate called upon him to endure
one of the most severe trials made possible by the hard conditions of early Central Aus-
tralia. His father and brother were lifting cattle on Macumba Station during exceed-
ingly hot weather, and by some means which will remain a secret until all the mysteries
of the bush are revealed, they perished with the mob of cattle. This was in 1888, but
the frightful experience did not deter the owner of Allandale from conquering those very
elements which had proved so disastrous to his father and brother. He subsequently went
to work for the Willowie Pastoral Co. on Stuarts Creek Station (Coward Springs) and later
worked on Cecilia Creek for Mr Jas. Allan who then owned the property. He continued
in the latter’s employ for nearly six years and then went as head stockman to Cootanoor-
ina, a property belonging to Mr. A. B. Murray. In that capacity he was not only a valued
servant of the owner but a careful man into the bargain, and after seven years’ service he
decided to start on his own. With his savings he purchased 500 head of cattle and
travelled them to some country outside Cecilia Creek, but now forming part of Allandale
Station. Shortly after his arrival in that district his former employer, Mr. James Allan,
died and left the Cecilia Creek run to Mr. Bennett. That was in the year 1900, and
having taken possession of his newly-acquired property Mr. Bennett commenced a career
of success, which has become more and more emphasised with the passing years.


jffllarj park.
We have mentioned incidentally that Mr. Bennett is a racing man. it was,
therefore, natural that, when a year or two ago he decided on purchasing a home near
Adelaide, he should look around for one with the necessary establishment and adjuncts
for the following up of his interest in the world of sport Such a property he was
fortunate in finding at what was, until lately, known as Jordan lark, which, wit is
private training track, has for many years been a well-known landmark near Edwardstown.
Jordan Park, or, as we should say, Allan Park, has an interesting history. It is
roughly half a century old, probably more. The house was built by a well-known man o
his day and owing to its outward aspect came to be known as “Ihe C astle. it is a
remarkably stoutly built place; the walls arc unusually thick being feet of solid
masonry, and even the dividing walls are as strong as the outer shell. Further the walls
Sco tt. RESIDENCE AT ALLAN PARK.
go beneath the ground a considerable depth, and there arc tine underground rooms, which
are delightfully cool in summer. The whole place is strong enough to withstand a seige
against aught less destructive than artillery. The story handed down from those distant
times is that the house was so strongly built because its underground rooms were used to
cover up an illicit still. This still proved profitable and though the place was suspected,
it was not easily raided. At last, however, the authorities found a means to circumvent
the “ moonlighter ” who was heavily fined. His plant was destroyed and shortly after-
wards he disposed of the property, That was in the sixties.
“ The Castle ” next came into the hands of Messrs. W. Gerrard and Tom Jordan,
and for the first time became the centre of operations of a racing stable. Tom Jordan was
then right in the front as a trainer and the association with Mr. Gerrard brought the part-
ners more prominently than ever into the public eye. Mr. Gerrard so long ago as that
had a fine property at Rapid Bay, with which district the family has ever since been


GENERAL VIEW OF ALLAN PARK.




associated, 1 here he bred many horses and his idea in acquiring “ The Castle ” property
was to have a place where they could be trained privately. The association of Tom
Jordan with the place, of course, led to its being called Jordan Park. Mr. Gerrard! im-
ported from England The Ace, a beautiful stallion, that unfortunately died early in his
career, but left a few good horses, among them Ace of Diamonds, one of the best of his
day. One of the best known race horses that Messrs. Gerrard and Jordan had was
Lockleys, winner of many races. Another that was trained at Jordan Park was Emulation
an Adelaide Cup winner, and for Mr. Gabriel Bennett they trained a useful performer in
Impudence. Later on they had the fine horse General Sarsfield, sire of, among others, the
present day Steeplechaser Generality. Messrs. Gerrard and Jordan were quite leading men
of their day —the seventies —and when they sold off their horses, capital prices were
realised Mr. Gerrard died not long afterwards, but Tom Jordan remained at the Park
awhile. The stables were most elaborate and up-to-date, and the eight originally built by
Mr. Gerrard cost £I,OOO. As Jordan grew in years his fortunes waned and finally he left
Jordan Park.
1 be next proprietor of the Park was the well known racing identity Mr. Seth Ferry,
whose horses and fortunes are familiar to hundreds of the present day race goers. At
first Mr. Ferry merely trained his horses at the Park, and lived himself at Brighton, but
feeling the disadvantage of being so far away from his work, he decided to reside on the
spot. He had the old “ Castle” thoroughly renovated, altered the title to Sydney Park,
and went to live there. The horses he had through his hands are legion. They were
chiefly used for cross country work, and to this day, there is in South Australia no better
judge of a horse for stceplechasing than “ the Master”—otherwise Seth Ferry—who brought
before the public eye many good horses. Altogether Mr. Ferry either owned or partly
owned over 200 horses and many’s the stake they won. Many racing men have been in-
terested in horses with Mr. Ferry, but none more pleasurably or successfully than the
fine sportsman, the late T. Hope Murray. “The Master” had a special fondness
for Booyoolie-bred horses whose value he discovered through the Oakbank performances
of Darkie, and afterwards many of the best that he had through his hands came from
the Northern Station. Only three or four years have elapsed since Mr. Ferry gave up
racing horses, and at the same time left Sydney Park. The next owner being Mr.
Bennett, who has re-named the old place Allan Park.
A visit to the Park, and an inspection of the property and the livestock, is con-
vincing proof that Mr. Bennett possesses an estate which does much credit to his judgment
under existing circumstances, and to his prophetic vision respecting its enhanced value in
the near future. Being close to the city, at the foot of the western slope of the Mount
Lofty ranges, the Park is in an excellent position, is furnished with every convenience,
and may be regarded as a country estate, within half an hour’s drive of the metropolis,
and close to all the leading racecourses of South Australia. When Mr. Bennett purchased
it, the place was in a sadly neglected condition, but already many improvements have
been made, and it now assumes the appearance of a carefully managed racing establish-
ment, or a model farm The eighty acres round the homestead comprises magnificent
paddocks of rich soil. The latter will grow anything, and 4 J tons per acre of hay was
produced this season, whilst there is a splendid lucerne plot, which supplies the young
horses with green fodder. An abundance of healthy fruit trees, such as orange, peach
and almond, have been planted, and look vigorous. Many improvements have been
effected to the residence, and one finds also one of the most substantial and best-fitted
stone stables in the State. The stable alone cost £I,OOO to pnt into its
present condition, and it contains large, airy boxes to accommodate the valuable
racehorses on the estate. All the premises, including, of course, the stables, are
lighted at night by the patent De Laitte gas, the apparatus for producing which was
imported from France. Everything about the Park shows that great care has been
exercised in providing the most modern methods for the care and attention of the racing
stud, regardless of expense. There is an extensive training track, which was largely used
by former owners of Jordan Park, but, under Mr. Bennett, it will merely form a schooling
ground for his young horses occasionally, and will not be used for trials.


The estate is liberally supplied with belts of timber, which supply shade and
shelter, has a magnificent view of the hill slopes, and running through it are two
picturesque avenues of red gums. The proposed railway to Brighton would run close to
it, and greatly increase its value and that of the other land in the vicinity.
The Stud.
Mr. Bennett is a keen sportsman, as his turf career proves. Already he has been
very successful at country meetings, and has pulled off some good wins on metropolitan
courses. Among the principal races which have fallen to him are TattersalTs Spring-
Handicap, The President’s Cup, Sturt Handicap (twice), September Handicap, and the
Port Adelaide Spring Handicap. At present there are some fine horses in the luxurious
loose boxes. The magnificent bay stallion, “ Step Out,” is one of the most brilliant
and consistent performers on the Australian turf, as his list of successes shows. “ Step
Scott. AVENUE OF GUMS.
Out” is by '‘Thunderbolt,” out of “Footstep,” the latter being one of the best bred
mares that Australia ever produced. Another fine horse (a gelding) is “Radiant,” bv
“ Duke of Richmond,” from “Trojan Lass,” “ Trojan Lass ” being by “ Pride of the Hills ”
out of “Troy.” “Troy” is a sister to a Melbourne Cup and Newmarket Handicap
winner. The stallion “Goodwood,” another well-known performer, is by “ Duke of
Richmond,” out of “Thunder Queen,” the latter being one of the best mares in Australia,
a winner of the Oaks. Another of the cracks is “Scintillation,” by “Amherst” (imp.)
from “ Glittering Star,” a mare that traces back to “ Gasworks,” a winner of the St.
Ledger and the Australian Cup. " Scintillation ”isto be used later on at Allandale, but
“ Step Out ” will be retained at the Park for stud purposes.
Two promising two-year-olds—one, own brother to “ Goodwood,” and the other,
a filly, half-sister to “ Ganemedes,” “ Phaedra,” and “ Palotta” —are now at the Park, and
several brood mares may be seen in the fine paddocks on the estate. One of the best,
“ Alethea,” sister to “ Phaedra,” is at present in Victoria, visiting the imported stallion


r
'
Scott. STABLES AND HORSES IN TRAINING.


' w j-lSt * -jjL *' -y # v **
“■■" '"' * " * ' ■ . ■'• /'■ ,
„ • v ' *
. g
Scott. RETURNING FROM EXERCISE.C^i^f
T
' 4


i M ww V ill ft gfe iMifcy^ ftt IBiy mmtftm **t|
| gjf w Jpl IB CB M Vp K ~
p| ]■ flW Jr, B| JB ■
J y||y
» v • ».,,. ** > *'
♦ &P*
'
*.vV» * *■*" » -i ■?■..'<*• ■ * " - < v
-/ • : . . ' . ■- . '. ... • . ■•
‘ '"* • * . , s m - i ■
Scott. THE TWO-YEAR OLDS.


■|Sf
If
El VP ,
■ «W*y<’.
. , . V v * ,. ... ~ ■ ■*-. • -*■•'■ '■ l .,“
Si ■& .. . 9 U "’ *rr
' 9 .^r
-~ *"'■”“ ’iK? * ‘ *i»-. *- V - '* J*
I - ■ ; .- ■*£-. ~ ■ .,: ■ • . ■ • ■■■
Scott. SCINTILLATION (By Amherst (imp.) Glittering Star).


; ..
■ ;
'
Scott. STEP OUT (By Thunder Bolt—Footstep).


»■
;.'"■ '-^fe'J 1 - •'.. V..■% ..'Tr£ • | ' /‘* J : ■ :■ ' ’ ■' ■ -F'ZZ-. .. $
• '<**.: •■/-' '•:•'? if- * 4 ••'■ ' r 1 ". V ..
|? ;■ ■ ■*"*■■ ; •' *; ' •• *• —- ••■ » JW5 .*.*/%:*•_> ',
Scott RADIANT (By Duke of Richmond -Trojan Lass).


"
;o tt. GOODWOOD (By Duke ot Richmond Thunder Queen).


■
' ' J — .... .*’**' *~ ■>■ '"*'■ ~*.
4T-*. * *2
Scott. HOMER.
A station-bred horse. Winner of 14 Firsts and I Second out of 15 starts, at Oodnadatta Races. Total number of wins 20.


iTimiiHiVTlf' mi £> "*« r“Tf **, ’ ■ *N >' ’■’'•* * -» 'W«? ■ ~ .. t* v*» v«r *•
Fraquair.” Among the others are “Bernice,” by ‘‘Thunderbolt,” out of ‘‘Miss
Heslop,’ a winner of many races, and dam of several winners ; “ Unley Park,” by
“Thunderbolt,” from “De Novo ” ; “Lady Lyon,” by ‘‘Carlyon,” from “Endurance,”
dam of “ Silver Hill ” and “Foretell ” ; “ Albinia,” by “ Goldsbrough,” from ‘‘Algeria”
(imp.), the latter being a mare that ran second in the V.R.C. Oaks, and won many
other races. Two of these mares have foals at foot. “ Unley Park’s ” foal is a fine
colt, and “Lady Lyon” has a nice filly, both by “Sojourner,” an Adelaide Cup winner,
the other mares are stinted to “Step Out ” and “ Playbill ” (imp.). Their number will be
increased later on, but their owner expects it will be a couple of years yet before he gets
his property into the model condition he is working for.
On the subject of racing generally, and the benefit of breeding good race horses,
Mr. Bennett recently said : “I race more for the sport itself than anything else, but at
the same time I think it makes a name for mares and stallions, which I intend to use on
Scott. BROOD MARES AND FOALS
ilie station, and the winning of a race certainly enhances the value of the sires. Breeding
racediorses is an expensive game, but, personally, I have been very successful so far,
though I believe racing should be carried on, not simply as a money-making concern, but
for the sake of the sport, and principally because it tends to improve the horse stock of
the State.
“As to the best policy for a racing man, that’s simple. Get your horse fit and well
first, and then let him go ; anyway, that’s my idea, and so far I have been very satisfied
with my own successes. My great ambition is to win a Derby, and I would sooner annex
that than the Melbourne Cup, for 1 want the Blue Ribbon. Last year I had good luck
for the first six months, but after that 1 dropped back. Training for a race improves any
horse, but, of course, a great deal depends on the type of animal selected. Some people
go in for too much pedigree and not enough horse, but 1 most certainly believe that
good racing sires and mares, when properly mated —and it is here that the breeders’
individuality comes in—should produce a splendid type of horse for use on stations, and


- ■ - ■ ■ -
m
the kind of animal that would be most valuable to export for military purposes, or for
use in an Australian Army. I also believe in getting a good stamp of horse into general
use throughout the country, on the stations, etc., and the use of good racing sires will
certainly help in this.”
“ Our practice of stabling and rugging our racehorses does not deteriorate the
quality of the young stock bred from them in any way, for they are able to go out to
the hard country of the interior and live and thrive there just as well as station bred
horses. On good country, and if commonsense methods are adopted, you will get sound,
healthy, military horses that will stand the Indian climate and go through a hard
campaign with any horse in the world, by breeding on these lines. For my part, though
1 intend to keep l< Step Out” at Edwardstown, when the other stallions have finished
racing 1 shall send them up to Allandale. Thejyoungsters will also be sent to the station,
to let them mature on hard country.”
Scott. ONE OF THE LUCERNE PADDOCKS.
As to the future, Mr. Bennett added: “I intend to live here altogether in the
near future, and thoroughly improve this property and increase the racing stud. It will
not be a large stud, but a select one, and I want to get the best horses ! can, both to
race and to breed from, and this seems to be a good place to carry out the scheme, as
the soil will grow the food we require, there is an abundance ot. water, and we are close
to the city. My private trainer, 1. Reid, has done good work, and I owe a good deal
of my success to his ability and care. He lives here, and has charge of the place in my
absence, and takes excellent care of the horses, Reid is a young, but careful, trainer,
and is fast making a name for himself.”
When Mr. Bennett carries out His intention and comes to live at His Adelaide
home, there is every prospect of increased successes for the Allan Park stud, for the
owner, besides being a keen sportsman, is a smart judge of a horse, and he will also
bring to bear the thoroughness and administrative ability which have already gained for
him such marked success in the Far North.


MB—MMIBIIMW iU>BHBWCMKBBB8MMMMBBMMKWWMBBBWWBBWB!^CgBljXRIHBairiiinniBWWlTTiirriTrWBaHMaftag^gg > »MnPa3Ig?eS33MHIB'' TUI ■■ 11 HI I 1 M'I IT———
T
Che property of jYir. pf. Q.
Mr. Adolph Gustav Gebhardt, the second son of the late G. A. Gebhardt, was born
in 1866, at Kooringa, and received his education at Prince Alfred College, after which he
returned to ‘‘ Mackerode,” where he remained for some years. Subsequently he went to
reside at “ Pareora/’ which he managed on his father’s account till Mr. Gebhardt, Senior’s,
retirement, in 1889, when he became the owner of the property.
“ Pareora,” which was previously known as Two-Mile, was originally part of the
country on the Lower Wakefield, taken up by the Messrs. Bowman Brothers. It now
consists of 9,000 acres of splendid agricultural and pastoral land. The soil is for the most
part rich and fertile, capable of producing heavy yields of cereals and root crops, so that
the estate is an extremely valuable one, and likely to become increasingly so. The country
is very flat, but the Hummocks Hills may be seen in the distance, and break the monotony
of the landscape. There is some timber on the estate, chiefly around the homestead.
One of the dams, supplied from the overflow of the Wakefield River, is a tine sheet of
water, which, with the well-grown trees around it, makes a pretty picture, which is
reproduced herein.
At the present time Mr. Gebhardt cultivates a considerable area, but it is for the
most part devoted to grazing Merino sheep, as well as the small herd of high-class
Hereford cattle, which are kept on the property. The Merino sheep are descended from
the drafts from “ Mackerode,” with which the late Mr. Gebhardt stocked the property
when he purchased it in 1896.
Scott. HEREFORD AND HEREFORD-CROSS BULLOCK TEAM. (Pareora)


o^°oV v -4&S1
0 n i' a - c % • . I
?**•••*'■ (CT 5J -'’ 09 °|
* ***tf** —~~ ' e ~ "•"~" — T I
1 r JPWSjR
| ' H • MR. A. G. GEI
; x J I
h-%-: <c=? —“———fea
I r\0 C aT . - "•‘'‘Olftl
I v c* ?* . A I
/ l^^ 00 ■ * • -


Scott. Mr. Gebhardt on Ms hack, “ Svengali,” by The Garage.
Sir J. P. Boucaut’s Arab, “Rakyf.” (Pareorai
In the Garden. On the Homestead Dam.


# - ., *•- •. - ,N.r
TOP.—Merino Ewes. MlDDLE.—Hereford (Bull, Wolsley 11. and Stud Cows.
BOTTOM.—A Group of Pareora Stud Rams.


Mr. A. G. Gebhardt, since his possession of the estate, has paid careful attention
to the Hock, and has, when necessary, strengthened the stud by purchases of high-class
rams. In 1899 he imported an exceptionally fine ram of the Rambouillet type, which
he purchased in Germany, and has since used successfully with his sheep. The total
number of the flock now kept at “ Pareora ” is 9,000, the sheep being throughout of good
quality, cutting heavy fleeces of wool, which fetch satisfactory prices at the Adelaide sales.
Mr. Gebhardt finds no difficulty in quitting any surplus rams he may have from his
selected flock, which have found buyers in many parts of this State, in addition to
substantial orders received from New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia
In cattle Mr. Gebhardt, like his brothers, favours the Hereford, and runs a small
but well-bred herd, which do splendidly on the rich pastures at ‘'Pareora” The bull
now at the head of the herd, “ Wolsley II,” is, as will be seen from the photograph, an
extremely fine animal. In addition to stock-raising, Mr. Gebhardt goes in for farming
on a large scale, the area under wheat being 3,000 acres, which returns in the neighborhood
of 18 to 20 bushels to the acre. As an indication of the fertility of the land at ‘‘ Pareora,”
it may be mentioned that yields up to 27 bushels per acre have been secured in particularly
good seasons. Mr. Gebhardt also grows oats and barley extensively, and has a com-
paratively large area under lucerne, from which 12 cuttings are obtained each year, giving
a total return of 10 to 12 tons to the acre.
MR. GEBHARDT AND FAMILY IN HIS MOTOR.
“ Pareora ” homestead is pleasantly situated about three miles from the thriving
township of Port Wakefield, so that the property enjoys the advantage of being in close
touch with both sea and rail communication, and it is throughout well improved, being
provided with everything necessary for economical working. The residence is a well-built
and commodious structure, and the station buildings, etc., are conveniently and well-
arranged. In addition to ‘'Pareora,” Mr. Gebhardt owns a valuable little property of about
2,000 acres at Skilly, near Clare, which he purchased in 1904 from the late John Maslin,
which he works on the same lines as his home estate.
The owner of “ Pareora ” is a keen follower of sport, and has, during the last year
or two, begun to get together a few useful horses, with which he has done a little racing.
He also intends to start a thoroughbred stud. This will be in addition to the half-bred
mares, which he has in the past used for the production of a good type of station hack,
in breeding which he has been very successful. Mr. Gebhardt is an enthusiastic motorist,
and owns a very fine touring car. He also finds time for a little yachting.


Scott. “ASTON,” EDWIN TERRACE, MED1NDIE.
Mr. Gebhardt married, in 1899, the second daughter of the late W. H. Rosman
of which marriage there are two daughters and a son.
VIEW FROM “ASTON,” SHOWING PART OF STABLES (Mount Lofty Range in the distance).
Quite recently Mr. Gebhardt has purchased a handsome, well-appointed residence
at Medindie, and it is his intention in future, to spend some portion of the year in Town.


iT < yLSsif'SI
grille'll i x n "* V tf "' * * 4 ** ✓» ■* - >,’ 1 * , ", 1 * c „ hK‘ ’ .' •• ?’*«M * ■’■''■■-. _■ •.. I™ I i .,<»■ ♦**' ** _ * ,• . ,*'■ ■ . ABBA -
EJSpBj RUSr ’■* a' ■ **Ca ■ * -4
Scott. HOMESTEAD DAM.
Scott. MEN HUTS, WOOLSHED AND STATION BUILDINGS AT PAitEORA.




I
: *^ ; ~ - ■
Clje property of jYtr. Jhomas jYtcpride
Mr. Thomas Mcßride is the fourth son of Mr. R. J. M. Mcßride. He was born in
1869, at the Gum’s Station, 30 miles East of Burra, and received his education at the
Glenelg Grammar School. On leaving school he returned to his father, who was then
owner of Pine Valley Station, situated 90 miles East of the Burra. Here he remained for
some five or six years, during which he received a fair grounding in the management of
sheep. Eollowing this experience, he went to Broken Hill, where he engaged in business
for some years; subsequently selling out and returning to the Burra district to
take charge of a small property known as Oakleigh Station, purchased by Mr. R. J. M.
Mcßride from Mr. C. F. W. Pfitzner. After it was thoroughly improved with vermin proof
fences, dams, etc., Mr. Mcßride, Senr., sold the property to its present owner.
Oakleigh Station contains about 34,000 acres, and is situated 40 miles from Burra
towards Morgan. The nearest post town is Elorrieton, via Mt. Mary Railway Station!
It is undulating lime stone and sandy country, such as is common to the district. There
is a considerable quantity of timber, chiefly black oak, sandal wood, and peach wood.
The principal grasses are spear and barley. The run is vermin proof fenced, and the
improvements consist of a number of tanks, all fenced with dog proof fences, and pro-
vided with the necessary mills, troughs, etc., which ensure a sufficient water supply
in ordinary seasons. There is also a well on the property in which good water was struck
at a depth of 230 feet,


J \
j[lLiI
I L =te^^ , --^^^\
Hammer & Cp. MR. THOMAS McBRIDE.


S
Edwards. GROUP OP TWO-TOOTH MERINO RAMS, (T McBride


' - " — — —— — —
fl
Edwards. FOUR-TOOTH MERINO EWES IN CROP (SHOWING DAM IN BACKGROUND). (T. McBride).


- ,• *
■> »|HK »flF •'3KStLs»flap ;/ V, /‘
■ • i -.' ■>;,
• s • ~ * ■■ ■:..... ’ 1 ' ~ "
_
• . ■■ , *•'. .-K.;. <
■
Edwards. THE RASP (Broken Hill—Satanella). (T. Mcßride).
Edwards. WHEAT CROP, (T. Mcßride)


: :f:;. "' : , - f _ ''*„ '*' k %" „
•“- „y -% \ X
Edwards. FOUR-TOOTH MERINO EWES. (T. McBride).


5!
Edwards. FOUR-TOOTH RAM (2nd Koonoona Cup). (T. Mcßride)
Edwards. THE WOOLSHED, (>j> t Mcßride)


The carrying capacity of such country does not, of course, compare with that of
more favourably situated districts, but a very satisfactory class of stock and wool is
grown.
About two years ago, Mr. Mcßride purchased from Mr. Henry Scott, the neighbour-
ing property of Redcliffe Station of 28,000 acres, which was at one time part of the old
Nor’ West Bend Station on the Murray. Redcliffe is very similar in all respects to Oak-
leigh, and Mr. Mcßride finds this addition to his holding to be very satisfactory. Since
its purchase he has spent considerable sums in improvements, such as mills, etc., which
have added largety to its value.
Only merino sheep are bred on the combined properties, the total number at last
shearing being in the neighbourhood of 13,000. The present flock originated from a much
smaller one in which Murray rams were used with Koonoona ewes. The sheep are large
framed, showing good length of body, and, as careful attention has been paid to classing
the breeding ewes, the wool is of good lengthy staple and medium strength carrying
plenty of grease ; a really useful quality which sells well in the Adelaide market. The
1907 clip from all grown sheep averaged 12|lbs., making lid. per lb. Last year, in
sympathy with the all round decline, the price for the whole clip unclassed was B]d.
Mr. Mcßride is a strong supporter of the Koonoona sheep, for he believes them to
be the most suited, of all the inside grown sheep, to the dry areas ; they seem to
take to the bush and do well right from the start, and their wool seems to improve.
Mr. Mcßride has recently made a beginning towards the formation of a stud flock, using
Rockbrook rams with selected ewes from his own flock.
A few horses and cattle are bred. In the former Mr. Mcßride uses a typical
thoroughbred, “The Rasp,” and breeds some fine stock from blood and draught mares.
Mr. Mcßride also purchased at his father’s sale of his Burra properties the well
known Harris’s Farm of some 900 acres, where he intends to try wheat growing, for he
believes that with the long spell the country has had from cropping, and with the aid of
manures, it should grow as good crops as are obtained the other side of the Burra.


The late Alexandei McC ulloch, who held a large area of pastoral country was one
ol those who came to the State in the earliest days of its settlement, and, foreseeing its
iituie prosperity, had the pluck and ability to make full use of the splendid opportunity
which this new land offered even to those who, though possessed of little or no capital
were willing and able to take part in its development.
Mr. McCulloch was born in 1809 on the estate of Ochtertyre, at the foot of the
Grampian Hills, in Perthshire, Scotland, where his father was a tenant sheep farmer, and
it is probable that he in turn would have followed the same occupation had not Mr.
Henry Dundas Murray, a younger son of Sir Patrick Murray, the owner of Ochtertyre
decided on coming to Australia, with the intention of taking up some sheep country
and who, knowing young McCulloch to be a capable and trustworthy man amongst sheep'
induced him to join him in the voyage to this country, promising him the management of the
property he intended to purchase on arrival. This offer Mr. McCulloch accepted, and
accompanied by his wife, Margaret McEwin, a daughter of a neighboring sheep-farmer
whom he married just prior to starting, set sail for South Australia with Mr. Murray in
the ship “ OrleanaA The vessel was a small one, and, although she left Glasgow in August,
1838, it was not until the following January that she appeared off Glenelg. Mr. Murray’s
party encountered the usual difficulties and discomforts of those primitive days, and Mr.
McCulloch used to relate how, after walking up to Adelaide (or what there was of it), and
boi rowing a dray and bullocks (a novel experience for the young Scotchman), he returned
to the Bay, loaded up their goods and drove back to what is now the corner of King
William and Bundle Street, and there pitched their tent, which became their head-
quarters for a time,
Mr. Murray, spent some time in the State, residing where Turretfield now stands,
but, after visiting New South Wales and Tasmania, returned to Scotland for a time!
Mr. McCulloch, however, had at once determined to remain in the hope of taking up
land on his own account. As a beginning, he entered the employ of Mr. John
Reid, father of Mr. Ross Reid and the late W. L. Reid (afterwards of Tolarno, on the
Darling), who then had a run (part of the Gawler Special Survey, on which Gawler now
stands, which he had taken up in conjunction with Mr. Murray and others) and a few
sheep on the Gawler Plains. This engagement did not last'long, for Mr. McCulloch
soon considered himself qualified to start sheep-farming on his own account, which he
did in 1841, and in which occupation he continued till his death on October 16, 1890, in
his eighty-first year.
The land leased from the Government in 1841 was situated on the Gilbert River,
between what is now Stockport and the junction of the Gilbert and Light Rivers, and
extended towards Hamley Bridge. Mr. McCulloch stocked this property with sheep, but


\ 1
I
I
I I C*—-—~ ■——■ "~— * 11
-**»^ 111l]JJj 11 \\ M1 IlITlTlTrrm-r^ _
THE LATE ALEXANDER McCULLOCH,


carripn'on S' 1 * farm “g ( and wheat growing. Farming in those days, however, was
were harveste/with dlff “ ultl , es ' and - g° od as the land was, the fact that the crops
rere harvested with reaping hooks, and that wheat sold in some years in Adelaide down
prowine and snVvf /i! \° M j McCulloch devoting his holding almost exclusively to wool
growing, and so laid the foundation of the success which the future brought to him.
Early in his occupation he built his homestead on the Gilbert, at a spot about
do . wn . the r ‘Y r from Stockport, and it was here that he resided for the next
years, during which most of the members of his family of eight children were bom,
n a In 1856 _ the land occupied by Mr. McCulloch was resumed by the Government and
d r rthM S rd - Wlth hIS famlly t0 the adjoining runs of F.ldrotrilla, which he had
awn up from the government, and Gottlieb’s Wells, purchased from the late James
ogan and which, up to this time he had carried on in conjunction with the Gilbert
pioperty, and afterwards worked till they were resumed by the government.
n , J h A i°u Tne l’ x 11 0? aS was > com P ar atively speaking, took a fortnight, and was
the d familv & whl f B ° e J trek ’ f ? r sheep ’ Cattle > S oats > etc - wef c taken, and
tne famify with ah househdd goods, implements and necessaries, were conveyed in
at ru bl ! ock drays, and camped each night in patriarchal style. On arrival Mr
McCulloch formed his new home at Gottlieb’s Wells, two miles south of the site of the
present township of Terowie and it was here that he resided for practically the rest of
hniHin’ Tben^ ollowe d many busy years, during which Mr. McCulloch extended his pastoral
ho,dings by the purchase or lease of the Princess Royal, Yongala, Baratta, Black Rock
oHso OOOsheep sheadng tallies amounted in good seasons to upwards
h.ttlP ft though ultimately very successful, had, like other fpastoralists, to
f b lfp U h?«T hrou f b bad + Pmes ’_ such af the big drought of 1864-5-6, the most serious known in
mstory oi the state It was during his residence at Gottlieb’s Wells that Mr McCulloch
gamed the experience of local rainfall conditions which enabled him to so materially assist
Mi. Goyder m the delineation of his well known Rainfall Line in that district which
subsequent years have proved to be wonderfully accurate.
In public affairs Mr. McCulloch took as much part as the time at his disposal per-
nutted and was always regarded as a good friend to the Burra district during the many
years he resided there. This was shown m 1867, when he was asked to represent it in
parliament, and was returned unopposed. Mr. McCulloch occupied a seat in the House of
Assembly till the expiration of that parliament, but finding that town life and town inter-
ests die not suit him, he did not seek re-election, though he recognised and appreciated
the honour which the people of the Burra had done him.
The Princess Royal.
The Princess Royal Station is of interest because of its association with the dis-
covery and early history of the Burra Copper mine, for it is a portion of the original
Special Survey of 20,000 acres taken out in 1845 by the two parties, “Nobs and Snobs ” as
they were popularly called in those days, whose struggle for the possession of this famous
mme is a well-known incident of mining history. Fortune, it will be remembered, favoured
the Snobs, who after the division of the lease into two equal portions, drew the northern
half by lot with its rich stores of high grade surface ore, which has since contributed so
largely to the world s supply of copper. The southern half, which also showed promising
inductions, was named the Princess Royal by its owners, and was worked for a time but
with very disappointing result, and afterwards abandoned. It eventually passed into the
hands of Mr, Tyler, who in 1863 sold the freehold estate to Mr. McCulloch, who used it as
a sheep run. This property adjoined the present mining leases on their southern boundary
and extended to Koonoona. After Mr. McCulloch’s death the estate was for eleven years
carried on by the trustees of his estate and was then sold to the present owner Mr lohn
Tennant. ’ J


BIRD'S EYE VIEW BOOLCOOMMATTA HOMESTEAD AND STATION BUILDINGS.
MOB OF 700 BOOLCOOMMATTA WETHEES READY FOR MARKET.


jAiu .
FLOCK OF ANGORA GOATS AT BOOLCOOMMATTA.
Yongala.
In 1869 Mr. McCulloch purchased the lease of the Yongala Run from the late D
( udmore, and when in 1869, on the expiration of the lease, it was put up for auction by
the Government, he bought the freehold of 53,000 acres and formed the Yongala Estate
1 his he held till his death and it was afterwards worked by his Trustees for eleven years'
when it was purchased by the Government under the Closer Settlement Act.
Baratta.
This station, originally purchased by McCulloch Bros, from Mr. Andrew Tennant
in 1874, was afterwards bought from them by Mr. A. McCulloch, who worked it in part-
nership with Mr. Finlay, a brother of Sir Robert Finlay (who was Solicitor-General in the
last Conservative Government in England), under the name of McCulloch and Finlay till
it was resumed by the Government. The Hundred of McCulloch, of which Baratta ‘as it
then was, formed part, was named after the late Mr. A/'McCulloch/Amd commemorates
his association with the, district.
ONE OF THE DAMS AT BOOLCOOMMATTA.


i f j
Black Rock.
In 1868 Mr. McCulloch started his sons, Messrs. Alick and John McCulloch in pas-
toral work under the name of McCulloch Bros., by purchasing for them from the late John
Williams the Black Rock Station of 270 sq. miles, with 23,000 sheep. Black Rock lies a few
miles to the north of Petersburg, or about 170 miles north of Adelaide. It is dry, warm
country, 1,500 feet above sea level. It was under the management of Mr. Alick
McCulloch for seven years till 1875, when it was resumed by the Government, During
this time the number of sheep increased to 64,000.
Mr. John McCulloch, who, with his brother Duncan, was educated at Whinham
School, in Buxton Street —which, by a coincidence is now the private residence of
Mr, Alick McCulloch —was for some years engaged in the management of various
properties belonging to his father. In 1877 he went to England, where he married Julia,
MR. ALICK McCULLOCH,
MR. DUNCAN McCULLOCH.
second daughter of Mr. J. Hannum, a gentleman of private means, living in London. He
afterwards came back to South Australia, but subsequently returned to England. He
died at Southsea in 1888, where he was buried.
Boolcoommatta.
Though better known as Boolcoommatta, this fine northern station possesses another
name in Benowrie. Its ownership by the McCulloch family dates back to 1 875, when it was
purchased by the late Mr. McCulloch from the late Mr. John Beck. Since his death it has been
owned and carried on by his family, with Mr. A. Tyndall as managing partner, Mr. Duncan
McCulloch, the third son, who now lives in England, holding the larger share. Previous
to his residence in England he followed John, his brother, in the supervision of his
father’s interests in South Australia. Mr. Duncan McCulloch married Florence, only
daughter of Thomas Ebbs, of Brookfield, County Wicklow, Ireland.


JUP * 6 r- WWm *W3ml | MK hH-: ifnrB gtBim
. , . .Jhe station, which covers 1,000 square miles, is situated 300 miles north east of
de aide the head station being 20 miles nor’west of the township of Mingary, on the
Broken Hill line, and the run extends to within a few miles of the New South Wales boun-
dary at Cockburn.
Situated as it is on the long slope which extends from the highlands of the Flinders
Range to the valley of the Darling, the country is typical saltbush plain, with little to
break the monotony of the grey green sea of saltbush beyond occasional belts of mulga
scrub, with now and again a thin line of gum, following creeks which are generally water-
less, but, fortunately lor Australian pastoralists, the merino thrives exceeding!} 7 on these
dry hot uplands, where its ancestral inheritance of ability to endure drought and to live
on herbage possessing little succulence makes it the only' possible sheep for a very laree
proportion of pastoral Australia. b
s l tation * s subdivided into 40 paddocks, aud is well fenced throughout. Wild
dogs and i abbits have in the past given trouble, but the present vermin proof fencing has
greatly reduced it. Water, as elsewhere throughout the north, is a matter of prime impor-
tance and this is amply provided for by dams and wells, so that the owners can look for-
w’aid to anything but a very exceptional season without fear.
“CAROGLEN,” MR. A. McCULLOCH’S RESIDENCE, NORTH ADELAIDE.
The sheep are all merinos, 60,000 of which are shorn annually. They are good
framed and robust, growing wool possessing good length of staple, bright and lustrous
and with fair density of fleece. Rams from Booboorowie and Yongala Estates have been
used for the last 35 years, so that the character of the flocks and the quality of the wool
has been not only well maintained but shown satisfactory improvement.
Mr. Alick McCulloch.
Mr. Alick McCulloch and his eldest sister (who married Sir James Penn Boucaut)
are the only surviving children of the late Alexander McCulloch residing in South
Australia. Mr. A. McCulloch was born on the River Gilbert and educated first at home
under a tutor, and afterwards at Bruce Castle School in England, under Dr. Hill’
brother of Rowland Hill, of penny postage fame, who was one of the masters in the
school. He married, in 1866, Ethel, second daughter of the late George de la Poer
Beresford, who came' to South Australia as private secretary to Sir Richard McDonnell
sometime governor of the state. In 1868 he began pastoral work on his own account
at Black Rock. Mr. McCulloch retains his interest in Boolcoommatta. He also owns a
station called “The Oaks,” in New South Wales, which he visits occasionally but lives
for the greater part of the year in North Adelaide.


HHl HPV IHBk ImM WJ
\ rw of 19 • |f|mJr
WELSH COB STALLION, “GLYNDWR.”
Of the remaining members of the family, the youngest daughter married M
Fielder King dor many years manager of Yongala), and after his death resided m England
where she married Mr. Charles Peel. Another daughter (Miss Kitty McCulloch) lives m
London.
Mr. McCulloch makes a hobby of pony breeding, and m 1904 purchased a small
property on the Torrens, near Klemzig, which he has named Eldrotnlla aftei one o the
firsfMaLons his father took up—where he keeps a small stud of Melsh cobs which he
imported direct from Wales. The stallion m use at present is Glyndwr. a dark
chestnut, standing 14.1 hands, a typical animal of his class.
WELSH COBS AT ELDROTEILLA, KLEMZIG.


*
'V y -TlirVr^--'-tJ>*~^-'*' — m. 7
•'- ■ ~?*' gar . • •«■•
Clje property of Jtfr. /?, j.
Mr. Roderick John Matheson, third son of the late James Matheson, was born at
Buckland Park during the term of his father’s management of that property.
After his school days were over he continued with his father until his twentieth
year, when he removed with the family to Templeton in the South-East, where he joined
his father and brothers in farming for some years. From there he went to Tolarno
Station, on the River Murray, which was then owned by Messrs. Ross Reid & Co., where
he remained for twelve months, gaining experience of the management of stock’ in dry
country. Mr. Matheson’s next engagement was with Dr. W. J. Browne, for whom he
undertook the management of the Delamere Station on the Flora River, in the Northern
Territory, which appointment he held for three years.
Mr. Matheson then returned to Adelaide, afterwards going again to the North as
overseer of Arkaba Station for Dr. Browne. Following this, he undertook the manage-
ment of Nilpena, which was then held by the late Dr. W. J. Browne. After the death of
this gentlemen, Mr. Matheson, together with Mr. John Fewis, purchased Nilpena from the
Estate. This partnership continued for about two years, at which date Mr. Matheson
bought out his partner’s interest, and, since then, has carried on the property on his own
account.
Nilpena is situated 350 miles north of Adelaide on the Great Northern line, the
homestead being about nine miles from Blackfellows’ Creek Siding. The country,
generally speaking, is of an undulating character, with some area "of sand hill and
occasional low ranges of broken country, and is covered in parts with Mulga scrub. The
principle /grasses are geranium and spear, but saltbush and cotton bush are mainly
depended on for the stock.


»• V •' <t$ '■*> * *'\J m *' •'‘ 4| ‘W-i te ‘-'. *' V ‘
Edwards. ENTRANCE “NILPENA,” GLENELG.
“ NILPENA,’’ GLENELG, THE RESIDENCE OF MR. R. J. MATHESON.


Edwards. The Tennis Court. “NILPENA,” GLENELG. Corner of the Garden.
The Drive. The Law'n.


©
» • , * •
« 1
' (J.
• •*
Hunt TYPICAL NILPENA COUNTRY.
General View Pastoral Area. ’ Lar ‘8' e Freshwater Lake. St Mary’s Peak showing in the
distance is 40 miles south-east from head statio'n.
Another General View. Showing Mount Deception 26 miles due north. View from
sandhill from which this photo was taken, covers 25 miles
of level country in all directions.


• c •
— '
• I
mt. One of the Lakes (Native Companions on the far shore). NILPENA. Woplshed and Station Buddings.
View showing Mount Bailey an/J Red Range, also Mount Freshwater Lake
Deception in the distance.


, I.
Ilu-t. WOOLSHED, WITH GROUP OF STATION HORSES.
• 4f.it x
WOOLSHED AND BULLOCK TEAM.


1 . .. . fc r „
-..T •- -'••* • . ■• ‘' V •
* •■* ■’ -
.-. ' ■ ■ - ."; r .. -
>--■■'■ V:# m
— i 1 ' ' ■■■
a* 1 -' *■*>•
L__ ii ________ • •••-.■.
HOMESTEAD AND STATION BUILDINGS,
Hunt. STONE TANK AT BREAKFAST TIME WELL.
Said to be the first constructed in the North. Has been stand ing over 50 years. Never
known to dry out and has capacity for watering 3,000 sheep.


jpf s %
ft r
Hunt MANAGER’S HOUSE.
The number of sheep on the station has been greatly increased since Mr. Matheson
took possession, the total last shearing being upwards of 25,000. Booboorowie rams
have been largely used and the Nilpena merinos possess the usual characteristics of
North country sheep, being big in body, hardy in habit and carrying a good fleece of
strong dense wool of lengthy staple. Shearing is all done by machine, there being
eighteen stands in the shed. The Nilpena clip has a good reputation among buyers,
prices are consequently well up to the average for northern yields. Last season, on a
depressed market, the full clip averaged 7d.—a considerable falling off from the 9d. all
round, which was realized in the previous year.
During the last few years this country has benefited greatly by the good seasons
which have been experienced. Early feed has been abundant, and advantage of this has
been taken to enter somewhat largely into the export lamb trade.
Mr. Matheson is a lover of a good horse, and breeds a considerable number of the
handy station class, also a good medium draught type, consignments of which have met
with good demand when put up for sale. Cattle are also bred to some extent, the
stock being largely Shorthorn.
In addition to his Nilpena property, Mr. Matheson is interested in Myrtle Springs
and Leigh’s Creek stations, which he holds in partnership with his brothers. These runs
cover six hundred and thirty square miles, stocked with 30,000 sheep.
When not engaged on his northern properties, Mr. Matheson lives at “ Nilpena,” a
fine residence, surrounded by beautiful gardens, at Glenelg, which he purchased last year
from the late Mr. Rischbeth, and re-named “ Nilpena.” He married, in 1893, Mary
Elizabeth, the fourth daughter of Mr. James Grant, of Melbourne, and has a family of two
sons and two daughters.
Mr Matheson has had little time for public matters, but during his residence in the
North he has always taken a great interest in Church missionary work, for he has had
occasion to recognize the great need of such influence in life out back.


I
'
L_.. __ ’ _■
Zhe property of
. . jYtr . .
Frederick Qeorge
J)awson.
1 of less than 1,000 acres, situated about four miles from Mount Bryan
railway station, is the freehold property of Mr, Chas. Dawson, who resided there from 1871
to 1905, when he removed to Giles Corner, Mr. F. G. Dawson, born in 1874, who owns
and personally supervises the stud merinos, is his third son.
Merinos have been bred at Aldina since 1885, when rams and ewes bred at Mount
Bryan Station were procured. From that time forward Mr. Charles Dawson worked
steadily for the improvement of his sheep. The ewes were carefully culled, and further
improvement sought by the introduction of selected rams from time to time, and also a
draft of ewes direct from Cappeedee. In recent years the introduction of-fresh blood has
been confined to the Murray strain. Amongst the most successful sires in the past were
“ Burly,” by the Mount Crawford stud ram “ Renown,” and a ram by “ Young Monarch.”
Of those in present use “ Magnus,” by “Lion,” twice Champion at Adelaide, out of
" Fame” ewe, is probably the best ; whilst “Burly II.” by “Burly,” by “ Renown,” also
deserves special mention.
The ram by “ Lion ” cut 19 lbs, of wool as a 2-tooth in 1906, 29 lbs. in 1907, and
26J lbs. in 1908. Although carefully bred, the “ Aldina ” Merinos were not kept as a stud
until 1895, in which year a few ram lambs were saved from selected ewes. The results
were so satisfactory that the practice was continued and extended until all the breeding
ewes were included in the stud.


Jf i
/^>
f p* j#*'" • # 4 i> ;
A I ,.
pK *' Jjujf
■ ’? p
i. ** A‘
f m S|gF^ r
- - > *«*■'
'*<&$' -f'
Mr. FREDERICK GEORGE DAWSON
MR. CHARLES DAWSON.
PRIZE SHOW RAM “BURLY II” (3 years).
By “Burly,” by “Renown” (a Mt. Craw'ford Stud Ram). Grazed at large on natural grasses only.


1 - - ■ ■ ■ —
** .'*' * {$(■ • 4V ,••’■
.' t i s ‘ ,'S>
*'M JPp*' Jp‘v
*#SL%- H 1
STUD EWE.
Winner of Ist Prize -2-tooth Open Class at Burra, 1907. Ist Prize as 4-tooth in Open Class at Burra, 1908
and runner-up for Championship. By “Prince,” by “Portsea Prince.” Grazed at large on natural grasses only
Scolt. PRIZE STUD RAM, “FEDERAL III” (3 years).
By “ Federal II.,” a Ist Prize Ram by “ Federal,” a Stud Ram, Dam (a Special Prize Ewe) by “ Burly ’
by “ Renown/. Grazed at large on natural grasses only.


TWO=TOOTH STUD EWES. G razed at large on natural grasses only.
Mr. Dawson aims at producing an attractive and profitable wool, with plenty of
character, and as much density as can be secured with length of staple on large framed
robust sheep ; not too woolly about the face, but in other respects well and evenly covered.
A recent visitor from Queensland who was inspecting South Australian stud flocks,
and who has had many years experience with the Murray strain of sheep, stated that Mr.
Dawson’s sheep possessed in a remarkable degree the characteristics of the ‘‘Murray”
type, which is indeed a high encomium of merit. However, the best proof of merit is that
‘‘repeat” purchases are made by buyers of “ Aldina ” Merinos,
“ Aldina ” wool always brings a good price in the Adelaide market, and in 1907 made
the splendid price of 13-Jkl. per lb. for the hoggets and ewes’ fleece, excepting one bale only.
For the last three years the average weight of wool per sheep from the whole of the
flock, exclusive of lambs, was 12lbs. 120z,, the highest average weight in any one year
being just over 13lbs. The “Aldina” Merinos have in recent years been consistent
prize winners at the Burra. They have never competed elsewhere. In competition at
the last six Burra Shows, they have not only been conspicuously successful in the classes
for owners of less than 1,000 sheep, but have done remarkably well in classes open to all
comers, securing one championship and a number of first prizes against the large flock
owners. The list of prizes for six years concluding in 1908 is as under
One Championship, eight special prizes, 29 first prizes, and 26 second prizes--a
total of 64 prizes won at Burra Show in six years.
In 1907 fourteen prizes were secured with only thirteen exhibits, and in 1908 twelve
prizes were won with only fourteen exhibits,
STUD RAMS. Grazed at large on natural grasses only.


■
Jli
CHANDADA
I he late Samuel Mills, one of the very early colonists,
was a native of Roxburgh, Scotland, who came to South
Australia in 1839, landing at Glenelg on the 19th June
of that year. Mr. Mills was accompanied by his wife,
his two sons (Samuel and James), and by his brother,
Robert Mills. Soon after their arrival the brothers
took up land under lease from the agent of the late
Jacob Montefiore and others, the area being three sec-
tions, viz., 7, 8, and 9, where Goodwood now stands.
1 his land they farmed, and also carried on business
as building contractors together, under the style of
S. &R. Mills. One of the first buildings put up was
the row of houses known as Tavistock Buildings. These
buildings at the time of erection were considered rather
an ornament to the infant city of Adelaide, but were
pulled down some years ago to make way for more
MR. SAMUEL MILLS.
modern and commodious structures, lire firm built the first United Presbyterian Church
in Gouger-street, of which the Rev. R. Drummond was the first pastor. They also built
St. Peter’s College and many other large and important buildings in the city and suburbs.
Mr. Robert Mills died in 1855, when Mr. Samuel Mills took his two eldest sons,
Samuel and James, into partnership and carried on the farm at Goodwood, which was of
about 400 acres, known as Ravenswood.
this was continued till 1858, when the father and sons purchased the lease of Metinga
Station, which covered about 150 square miles on the Wakefield. 1 his property was
better known in those days as Fry’s Run. It was carried on by the Mills family for many
years as a sheep (Merino) and cattle station, and was, in fact, finally sold only a few years
ago, though before that the area had been very greatly reduced for purposes of settlement.
At this time the freehold of a large block of land around the homestead was, however,
purchased and devoted to wheat growing and the breeding of a few Merinos.
Mr. Samuel Mills, the elder, died in 1872, having survived his first wife by more than
twenty years, leaving a family of four sons and one daughter by his first wife, of whom
Mr. Samuel Mills is the sole survivor.
Mr. Mills has in his possession a letter written by his father to friends in England in
1842, from which very interesting glimpses of colonial conditions in those days may be
gathered. Wages at that time appear to have been very much the same as they are now,
for he writes of paying ten shillings to fourteen shillings per day to men in his employ in his
building operations, with six to eight shillings for unskilled labor. Rents, however, were
very high for he mentions having built a house at a cost of £9OO, for which he received £l4O
as rent for the first year.
Business appears to have prospered during the two or three years of his colonial ex-
perience, for at that time his weekly pay sheet amounted to from £6O to £lOO. Of the
scenery and surroundings of Adelaide, Mr. Mills writes enthusiastically, especially of the
abundant herbage, the giant gums, and the park-like appearance of the plains, on which
emus and kangaroos grazed in great numbers. Building contracts were taken at consider-
able distances from Adelaide, for Mr. Mills refers to one for building a dairy for the late R.
Rankine, and records that on one occasion he got bushed walking from his home to Mount
Crawford on a blazing hot summer day, when the temperature was between 110 and 115,
but fortunately reached the camp at nightfall. Another time he was riding back to town
when he came across a traveller who, but for his opportune arrival, would probably have
made his last journey that day. Mr. Mills, however, managed to convey him to one of the
out stations belonging to the South Australian Company. At the time of writing Mr. Mills
speaks of trade as being dull, but expresses the utmost confidence in the ultimate prosperity
of the new colony, an opinion which its early progress abundantly justified.


The present Mr. Samuel Mills was born at Earlston, Berwickshire, on the 19th July,
1835, and was therefore only four years old when his parents landed at Glenelg from the
ship Hoogley, of 500 tons, Captain Bayley being in command, in 1839. He has, however,
many recollections of those early days, amongst others of being taken by his uncle and
others “ towards South-terrace from King William-street (then a forest) kangaroo shoot-
ing.” On this expedition the party, so Mr. Mills relates, were charged by a bullock from
an “ overland ” mob, and recollects that their escape from serious danger was probably
due to the courage of the late John Harkness who, Mr. Mills says, was considered by the
colonists in those days to be a man absolutely without fear, and he has himself vivid recol-
lections of his methods of handling wild overland cattle. Mr. Harkness afterwards lost
his life through a gun accident on some property he owned near Strathalbyn. whilst watch-
ing for natives who, he believed, were making too free with his goods.
Farming was not without its drawbacks in those days, for Mr. Mills mentions that
one of his first recollections of life at the farm at Goodwood was the purchase of two wild
steers from a mob just over from Sydney, for £4O. As there were no “ tame ” bullocks
to yoke them up with, the best had to be made of breaking them in. 1 his experience
appears, from Mr. Mills’ account, to have been as lively for the participants as it certainly
was amusing for the spectators. Looking back to those days Mr. Mills admits the hard-
ships of life in the young country. Work was hard and continuous, progress sometimes
slow. “ But if,” he adds, “we did not have much money, good feeling and hearty fellow-
ship ran through and united the whole of the small population. The stump orator and
labor agitator had not made their much to be deplored appearance, and there was no body
of men who, too tired to earn their own living, made it by playing on the jealousies and
passions of others.”
Mr. Mills was certainly not one who idled, for as soon as he was able, he had to help
cart timber from the upper Sturt and Mount Lofty range to Goodwood, and from that
time onward was kept busily employed on the home farm. Following this came experi-
ence on Metinga, during which he gained knowledge of sheep and station management
generally. In 1865, being then thirty years of age, Mr. Mills decided upon taking up
pastoral work on his own account. His hrst venture being the purchase, in conjunction
with the late G. Coulls and Win. Hamilton, of 200 miles of leasehold country to the east
and north of Fowler’s Bay, from the late B. P. Coglin.
In the beginning of 1867 the partnership in which Mr. Mills was interested bought
150 square miles known as Chandada, with 4,000 sheep from the late Dr. Foster, situated
about 30 miles east of Streaky Bay. A few years after this Messrs. Mills and Hamilton bought
out Mr. Coull’s interest and entered a partnership together, which has lasted to the present
time. Paraba, Parla Peak, Chilpenda, and Walloola, all adjoining Chandada, were from
time to time purchased, making a total holding of over 500 square miles, on which many
thousands of pounds were spent in well sinking, fencing, and other necessary improvements.
The next purchase was the Lake Everard country, of about 500 square miles, from the
late Mr. Joseph Compton. On this property also a large sum of money was spent in im-
provements. In a few years a very large increase took place in the number of sheep on
these two runs, the total shorn in one year being 60,000. The good years, however, did
not last, and with the advent of the rabbit, the wild dog, and the dry years, the numbers
dropped rapidly, so that when the partners sold Chandada (Lake Everard having been
disposed of some years previously), there were less than 4,000 sheep on the run. striking
instance this of the enormous losses sustained by pastoralists in outback country.
In 1882 the partners bought Beetaloo Run from Mr. John Reed, containing 30,000
acres of leasehold, which carried from 15 to 20 thousand sheep. This they held till it was
cut up for settlement. In 1889 they purchased the Teetulpa Run, on which they
shore from 10 to 15 thousand sheep. This remained in their possession till 1905, when,
owing to advancing years and the great amount of travelling to and from the different
stations, the pa tners disposed of this fine property, together with most of their other hold-
ings.
Mr. Mills was educated at Pulteney-street school under the Rev. E. K. Millan. He
married the youngest daughter of the late Francis Armstrong, of Fowler’s Bay, there being
one daughter of the marriage. He has led a busy life, for sixteen years of which he lived
on Chandada, Fowler’s Bay, managing that and the adjacent country. He now resides at
Ward-street, North Adelaide.


I*-— ■■ - ~ - - ' " i
Cfye property of J/ir. £.
Kooyong, the proper!}/ of Mr. Albert Basil McLean, is charmingly situated about
three miles from Gawler. It was not acquired by Mr. McLean until 1908, but already
many improvements have been made. A handsome residence has been erected, which
commands a beautiful view of some of the finest scenery around Gawler, and extensive
gardens have been laid out, which will help to beautify the property.
The name “Kooyong” is a native word, meaning “ Blackfellow’s Camp.” The
country is extremely pretty, and is of hilly description. It is lightly timbered with red
gum, the majority of the trees having been destroyed in the early days of settlement.
The natural grasses grow in abundance, and clover also thrives. Water is obtained by
means of dams and a well, from which a windmill pumps the water to the homestead
and the paddocks.
The name of McLean is well-known. The late Hugh McLean, the first of the
family to come to Australia, was a native of Scotland, Edinburgh being his birthplace. In
the year 1839 he left the Old Country, and, on arriving in South Australia, took up land
on the Gawler plains, near One Tree Hill, where he commenced dairying and farming
operations. A few years later he decided upon adding sheep-raising to his other occupa-
tions, and purchased a number from different sources. In 1867 he sold the land at One
Tree Hill and purchased Sunnybank, an estate of 2,000 acres, situated near Mt. Pleasant.
It was on this property that Mr. McLean met with the accident which caused his death.
He married, in 1858, Miss E. Scott, who was born in South Australia in 1840, and is one of
the oldest surviving colonists of this State.
The owner of Kooyong is the third son, and was born at Sunnybank in 1873.
On completing his education he worked on that property, where his first practical ex-
perience was obtained. After his father’s death he managed the estate for his mother,
but eventually rented it from her and worked it on his own account. In 1902 he terminated
his tenancy there, and bought a property of 640 acres known as Aldersyde, situated near
Eden Valley, but after three years he sold out and became proprietor of Kooyong, near
Crystal Brook. Finding this country more suited for agriculture than for sheep-breeding,
he disposed of it, and bought the Gawler property, which he named after his northern
home.


The Sheep.
Mr. McLean first formed a Merino Stud at Aldersyde, with ewes purchased from
Mr. Giles, and “ Murray” rams, and was quickly successful, for a ram, “ Alarm,” bred by
him, secured the championship prize at Laura, and was runner-up on two occasions, whilst
for some years his sheep were extremely successful at Crystal Brook and Laura shows.
On leaving Crystal Brook all the flock were disposed of with the exception of the
ram, “ Alarm,” and a new beginning is being made. “ Rockbrook ” ewes and “ Murray ”
rams are being used, together with the ram retained, and Mr. McLean is building
up a fine flock. The sheep are large, with well-folded necks and dense fleeces.
The wool is of long staple, being very dense and fine in character, the price
obtained at last season’s wool sales was B|d. unclassed, but, in previous years, 1/- per lb.
has been realised for the clip. The sheep are fairly heavy cutters, the ram “ Alarm,”
cutting 241b5., whilst another ram, “Kooyong,” yielded 19lbs. Seventy-five ewes at
Kooyong averaged 14lb.
FLOCK OF EWES AT THE DAM.
Peake Flat.
Peake Flat, which also belongs to the owner of Kooyong, is situated 16 miles
from Orroroo, and comprises an area of 3,000 acres. On this estate cattle-raising and
dairying are successfully carried on. The cattle are all pure Shorthorns, a Keyneton
stud bull being at the head of the herd.
The country is eminently suited for cattle raising. About 2,000 acres is typical
salt-bush country, but the remainder is good, open grass land, where the natural grasses,
especially spear, grow in abundance. It is very flat and carries a great quantity of
mallee.
The dairy herd at present numbers some 30 cows, but the number is being con-
stantly increased. At Kooyong also, a few Shorthorns are bred, the bull in use being
from the Point Sturt Stud.


Marchunt. GROUP OF STUD EWES. (Kooyong)
Mr. McLean is a keen sportsman and enthusiastic Jiorsernan. He is well-known as
a successful amateur jockey in both hurdle and steeplechase events. He has, on several
occasions, had a mount in the Amateur Steeplechase at the Oakbank meeting, and
has frequently ridden at the Annual Hunt Club Races.
Marchant. STUD RAMS. (Kooyong).


1 1 JS«x
* » » U2m^^
,
' ~ ' >i ' >*»i'' '■-'■■■
•MtkSSmM ’'X’^Bg
ilfflll tBmw’ % , v
w/fw ? s : mBrwM^«JfeSHP
wR I ' *®b» ' * fe Jn ' ”"' ‘i'lT ’ ,"|
M v "'/T' 4.>A ,m if
35*7" v
STUD RAM “ ALARM.”
For some years he was a member of the Adelaide Hunt Club, and his services have
been in great request in the city and country show rings.
Mr. McLean is also an owner, Carlton and Lord Staffa being two good horses
that have carried his colors. The Broken Hill Cup and the Silver City Cup were both
won by the former in 1908, and Mr. McLean is proud of the massive Cups which
commemorate these victories. In addition to these more important events, many minor
races have been won by his horses.
Mr. McLean is a member of several agricultural societies in South Australia, and
is on the committee of the Gawler Agricultural Society, in which he takes a great
interest.
Marchant. “CARLTON” (Carlyon—Brown Alice), 5 years.


Clje property of J)/lr. Robert 7{oss
Bonnie Scotland, as her sons love to call that far Northern land, has been well
represented in the building up of the pastoral industry of South Australia, and Air. Robert
Ross of Glen Gillian, Mt. Crawford, though himself born in England, is another whose
forbears hail from the sister Kingdom. Mr Ross is the only surviving son of the late
Robert Ross, who in turn was the son of Colin Ross, who resided in Edinburgh in the early
days of last century, and there followed his calling as a master mason. Though living in
the Lowlands, Colin Ross, came from beyond the Highland line, and claimed descent from
the family of Ross of Balnagowan, head of Ihe Highland Clan Ross, and wore their
“ breacon‘” which we mav mention, for the benefit of those “who have not the Gaelic,”
is “ tartan ”in the Saxon tongue It is interesting in this connection to record that a Sir
John Lockhart Ross, of Balnagowan, was the first to introduce sheep farming into Ross-
shire. This was in about the year 1775, and it is stated (Report of the Highland Society
1887) that he was for seven years thereafter the only sheepfarmer in the County of Ross,
if not indeed in the whole range of country North of Aberdeen It is also mentioned that
“ the efforts of the Laird of Balnagowan and others, who in different counties adopted the
same policy, met with strong opposition.” It was vain opposition, however, for the few
hundreds, or perhaps even less, which were owned by Sir John Ross have, we gather from
the same source, risen to over a quarter of a million in Ross and Cromarty, and to
probably over two and a half millions in the Counties where, before his time, no sheep were
grazed. No doubt those early sheep were the hardy Mountain Blackfaces, which to this
day are the only breed which can thrive on the bleak hills and in the deep corries of
Northern Scotland. Possibly the earnestness with which the owner of Glen Gillian took to
work amongst sheep when quite a lad, and his later success, is an instance of the instinctive
following of an hereditary instinct.


A
THE LATE ROBERT ROSS.
ME, ROBERT ROSS.


Scott. View on Victoria Creek. Scene on the Estate, about miles from Williamstown,
, , , m „ , _ showing old Homestead and Orchard.
Elock of Ewes and Lambs under Typical Red Gum.
Another View on the Creek.


“ M, ““ *««| .
Flock of Ewes and Lambs on tbe way to the Homestead. Ewes and Lambs Grazing on Victoria Creek.
Stud Ewes, with a few ram lambs by “Purser.” Flock Ewes and Lambs.


• -4 i
Draught Mare (Mr. Ross’s sou. Colin, at the Head). Draught Mare, in Foal to St. Elmo.
Some Working Horses. Milch Cows near the Homestead.


The late Robert Ross appears to have been of a somewhat adventurous disposition
for soon after the death of his father (Colin Ross) he did what so many lads have done
before and will again, for he took his future in his own hands by running away from the
Edinburgh Academy at which he was being educated, and enlisting in the splendid
regiment which is now known the world over as the Seaforth Highlanders. When Robert
Ross enlisted, however, it was still the 78th Highland Regiment, and had previously been
called the Rossshire Buffs. The present name is derived from the fact that it was raised
by Lord Seaforth “ To help the King,” and it was originally known by the Gaelic render-
ing of that phrase.
Robert Ross remained in the army for twenty-four years, serving in England,
Ireland, Scotland, South Africa and India. Subsequently he took his discharge and
en]oyed a well merited pension for over thirty years. In 1840 he married Ann Finlayson
a grandaughter of a Donald Ross who had owned extensive weaving mills in the town of
BRIDGE OVER VICTORIA CREEK.
Elgin, Scotland. Soon after the marriage his regiment was ordered to India, and it was
there that most of the children were born. Two daughters alone survived to return to
England with the regiment, which was first quartered at Chatham, where the owner of
Glen Gillian was born, in the year 1855. Shortly afterwards a move was made to Scot-
land, where the family remained for about seven years.
Mr. Ross remembers when he was about five he went with his sisters to the
Normal School in Edinburgh, a distance of three miles from the ancient village of
Restlerigg, about a mile beyond Portobeilo where they lived. Another change soon
came, for in 1862 Robert Ross, who was then Captain of the Edinburgh Militia, brought
his family to South Australia by the sailing ship “ The Orient.” This was done at the
invitation of‘his wife’s sister, who, as the widow of one of the early pioneers, held some
property called Glen Gull an, near Williamstown, and also with the intention of settling
himself in the same district. Communication was slow in those days and on arrival Mr.
Ross found that Glen Gullan had been leased to Messrs. John Warren and the late Joseph


: ' ' &S
Scott. FRONT VIEW OF HOMESTEAD. faw


s , t GENERAL VIEW OF ORCHARD AND VINEYARD. (Glen Gillian).


rc——.—■ ' - - ■
Barritt. On the expiration of the term, however, Mr. Ross took up the leases, 600 acres,
and purchased about 600 ewes which had been running on the property from Mr. Warren,
and commenced the occupation which he continued for the remainder of his life. From
t e time of his first coming to the district the late Robert Ross took a great interest in
public affans. He was a Justice of the Peace, and was for many years on the Mt. Crawford
District Council, of which he was chairman for some time. He died in July, 1901, having
survived his wife only about six months. When first the family settled at Williamstown
the piesent owner of Glen Gillian attended the school in that township, but on his father
taking up the Glen Gullan leases, he left to look after the sheep. This he continued to do
till he was 16, when, as he says, “ he thought he had earned enough to deserve a couple of
yeais at St. Peter s College. This he did and afterwards “ went back to hard graft ” and has
continued ever since. Fortunately this period of hard graft has not been unrewarded, for,
beginning in 1881, Mr. Ross began the purchase from the Government.and private owners,
Scott. GENERAL VIEW, WOOLSHED IN FOREGROUND. (Glen Gillian)
of sections of land surrounding the old property of Glen Gullan, which now forms the
Glen Gillian estate. In 1893 he commenced to build the present homestead, which is
substantially constructed and is commodious and comfortable in its appointments. It
is admirably situated on a hilltop and commands very beautiful panoramic views from
the wide verandah which surrounds the house.
The nature of the country, of which the 3,000 acres of Glen Gillian is comprised
may be gathered from the photographs reproduced. It is, in fact, some of the steepest
in the district, there is some good garden land on the flats, but though the hillsides are
well clothed with splendid grazing pasture, the general he of the land is too rough to
make profitable farming a possibility. It is, in fact, like so much of the district,
splendid wool growing country, and under sheep it is being put to its best possible use.
There is an excellent water supply, for the Victoria Creek passes through the property
and carries good water throughout the year. There are also a number of dams and
springs. It is, of course, well timbered, red and blue gum predominating with stringy
bark. There is also a good deal of wattle growth and a much larger area might be
planted.


WOOLSHED AND OUTBUILDINGS. (Glen Gillian).


— *•—- —I—-—- ■ ...
M\ -c^
' f f : ■ ■’ ' $ V ._Y M
ijjf *. ' ■- *
Scott. FIVE-YEAR-OLD RAM “ DENSITY,” (Glen Gillian).
A descendant of “Wool Prince.” Cut 221hs. bright wool of good quality as a 6-tooth
One of the features of Glen Gillian is the fine orchard of 20 acres, and evidence of
the suitability of the soil and climate for the production of fruit may be found in the
vigour and healthfulness of the variety of trees and vines which have been planted.
Apples, pears, peaches, plums, walnuts, lemons, oranges, etc , are all to be found thriving
with equal luxuriance. Mr. Ross finds much interest in his orchard and garden, for he
“ROCKBROOK” RAM “PURSER.” Cut 241hs wool at 5 years old.


.I I
' ' ' t ’ * * f I
i s ► f / || I
' idHr »
Srp ' . , .»■'•''■■ .*’’ ■
himself designed, made and planted them. It is, however, amongst the sheep that Mr
Ross finds his chief work and interest. This can be well understood when it is remem
bered that it is 43 years since he first had to do with Merinoes.
The first flock was purchased, as already mentioned, in 1867, Mr., now the
Hon. John Warren. In this connection it is interesting to record another instance of the
generosity with which the late John Murray was ever readv to assist those interested in
Owner Dipping Rams with. Cooper’s Dipping Powde
The Dip is 40 feet long.
sheep breeding, for Mr. Ross remembers that this gentleman lent Mr. Ross’s father some
of his good ranis for the first season’s breeding. Following this, rams were hired from
the late James Forbes, also of the Mt. Crawford District, whose Merinos were at that
time (the late sixties) amongst the best in the State. Mr. Forbes was then, as will be
remembered, a considerable and successful exhibitor in Adelaide,
Since those days but few purchases have been made ; the buying has, in fact, been
confined to some rams from the Murray flocks, and of these none have been bought for


y,4; jj^’^^'^Sj *’’* ‘ *
m M-£k -> ’■'" **
Jtk ■. , #
°~wt j mMM ■
Scott. SHOWING WOOL. (Glen Gillian).
the last *2O years, so that Glen Gillian sheep are practically home made. Mr. Ross is not
a believer in the wrinkly heavy folded sheep, for he finds that on his rough country
such sheep are heavily handicapped and are not good doers, wanting far more care than
the more active class he now favors, which is a very plain bodied type, with only a
little wrinkle under the neck and front. At one time Mr. Ross was a frequent exhibitor
at Gawler, where many prizes were won, including Gold Medal for Champion Ram, and
the same award for Champion Ewe, also several Silver Medals and Certificates. He has
also been a winner in the wool classes at the same show. Glen Gillian sheep have never
been exhibited at Adelaide, as that country is much too late to condition the sheep in
time for the September fixture, but now that Mr. Ross has added Rockbrook to his hold-
ing it is quite possible that he may become an exhibitor in the early future.
Glen Gillian wool is fairly fine in texture, bright and lustrous, and possessing good
staple. The fleeces are fairly dense and cut good weights. Rams have cut up to 251b5.,
with an average of 18lbs. Ewes up to 21 lbs. An average of 17lbs. has been cut from
100 4-tooth ewes. The wool is generally sold in Adelaide, but is sometimes shipped direct
Scott. SHOWING WOOL EAM “PURSER” AND STUD EWE. (Glen Gillian).


to London. Last shearing the full flock average, including lambs, was 9lbs. The highest
price obtained in London has been 16d. per lb., whilst in 1899 it realized at Adelaide
idfd. for all the fleece wool. The full flock at Glen Gillian numbers 2,600, of which 100
ewes and 50 rams are selected for stud use and sale.
At Rockbrook, a property of 2,000 acres near Kapunda, which Mr. Ross purchased
in 1908, the flock numbers 2,000, which have been drafted from Glen Gillian, as no sheep
were purchased with the property, with the exception of one pedigree ram, “Purser,”
bought for experimental mating with the home sheep. Last season the Rockbrook
fleece wool brought 10|d. per lb., but though Mr. Ross finds this country gives weight,
it is not so clean as Mt. Crawford wool, and the native clover seed prejudices it in the
sale room. On the other hand the open Rockbrook country gives bigger framed sheep,
for lambs raised here are much larger than Glen Gillian lambs of the same age, though
bred from ewes of precisely the same breeding. An interesting instance this of how
quickly a change of country will influence the development of the Merino, and consequent-
ly their wonderful adaptability to varying conditions.
Scott. SOME OF THE DRAUGHT STOCK. (Glen Gillian).
Following his father’s example, Mr. Ross has kept himself fully in touch with the
needs and progress of the district in which he has for so long resided. He has been a
Justice of the Peace for many years. A member of the District Council for 26 years,
during which he has been several times Chairman, a position he now occupies. He is also
President of the Williamstown Institute. Like his neighbour, the Hon. John Warren, he
takes a great interest in all military matters, district volunteers, etc., for he heartily believes
in the citizen soldier and has been Captain of the Williamstown Rifle Club since its
inception,
In 1891 Mr. Ross married a daughter of the late Walter Manser of Mt. Crawford,
one of the very early colonists who came to the State in 1839. There are five children oi
the marriage, Robert Finlayson and Walter Anstruther (who are still at St. Peters), Colin
Campbell and two daughters.


■ ■Hr " » '*Zr ‘ ' ' ' * ' ' •* ' • * »*«•■ .... . v ' jg.,.-| - .,•••. ' ;; •/’ ' ' ■ '
I . |k | j| £■-*.♦ <■ A-j it, i-iib,** *» Jlb f\
■ v 2b iiUrfi *. &K> « irtL, * H& y V-Jfr* M.>*„w ., . ?*& f>. e , ... .f^,.pl # <|« S;
S ■ t ** »* fdP t*. , ' . T -
bJR®fiN^^ir*- # '4tt ; J|P ««»
B KiwIMf f *■* * iMF'ffwif it «« ! m# , ¥iJ ■* F JjW mg-m ? % * JL aJawHWai f » % «*# - Mi
BBWnS **_♦ jf rffiif^ir F ■ «>, 5 &» «.■ mif *m£Map**, JEteJ yi m .. ■ ■**& *1W» r litaKm&mMr > m. J* *«- i ■■ , 't f , nJ mBi | ■ -
I #• " * * • ’ if' J
Glen-Gillian Homestead, with Garden and 20-Acre Orchard. Highest point seen in hills at back 1,700 feet above sea level.
View on Victoria Creek, about one mile from Williamstown.




A; ■j|i . -d*iL- *..'k.-.
J"tje property of Jtfr. J. J. 3{appartj
Mr. Tertius James Hannam, who owns Murray View at Mount Torrens, Meaford, at
Harrogate, and Spring Bank, at Callington, came to~this state in the year 1852, the 14th
day of February of that year being the date he landed from the “ Walvish,” a Dutch
vessel engaged in the Australian trade in those clays.
Shortly after his arrival he entered the employment of the late Hon. John Baker,
with whom he remained as overseer up to the time' of that gentleman’s death. During
these years Mr. Hannam was engaged at various times at Morialta, Lake Albert and
Terlinga.
On leaving this employment Mr. Hannam decided to engage in sheep breeding on
his own account, and purchased Murray View, near Mt. Torrens Murray View comprises
2,000 acres of good, but somewhat hilly land. Timber is plentiful, the rainfall good, and
the country is well grassed. Mr. Hannam at once commenced his operations by the
purchase of merino ewes from various sources in the Blumberg district, which he mated
to rams from Terlinga. Since the establishment of the flock he has, from time to time,
purchased and used good class rams. Several were acquired from the late T. Hope Murray!
one of the best animals being a ram called "Sir John,” a sire which very considerably im-
proved the flock. Another ram which had a marked influence on the sheep at Murray
View, was one purchased from Mr. A. J. Murray, of Mount Crawford.


Kk \ f ' I
I v. jii. ■ / a
I ’ £& ; * - ■■;'%V' v y m V - V 0 I
V \r jM* , I
,' ■ p* >j : -
MR. T. J. HANNAM.
MR. HANNAM’S RESIDENCE AT MALVERN.


!—" " MUIW . JM—
% ISP 3
“MEAFORD,” HARROGATE.


W ' ■ ~~
“MURRAY VIEW,’’ MOUNT TORRENS.


,
“SPRING BANK,’’ CALLINGTON.


i
' _.J .:. k ,1
-- —ii^3Pw«fc^T^ 9
|. .. _■„.. 4 .* ,- . **' ■ vl
I ' '' 'p$?* "'■ ' ‘ •":•"* • • ■ •■'^%; :? ' : -J'ipj
i .; ’ f * .■ . " -'- : ■ 'i
§ . , ( ** “ > ■* ' !■; I
i ■'« -»
i -:- hi
I » . 1 • ■ - - ■ . - • ' - , i
SCENES AT “SPRING BANK.”


JUs . ft l K
. tSS&yt& ' ' "■' jN
I TMSy' 5f*r | a- utMw^mW
,.. * ' -4.i *;WWm&fm»t &k„ -WMI
’ S* £•♦.> ■.>■■ -■• ;*V IBM aKysfKBM
mmmmm ■ -Mi9H
it*. . p , *• ? i!lr
SCENES AT MEAFORD.


EWES AND LAMBS AT “SEEING BANK.”
Mr. Hannam bad thus every reasen to be satisfied with his prospects as a wool
grower, and as his flock had largely increased he next purchased "Meaford,” near Harro-
gate, a property of about 1.300 acres in the Braemar Hills, near Messrs. J. & A. Hay's
well-known estate, '“The Glen.” This estate he stocked with sheep from Murray View.
Since then Mr. Hannam has still further increased his holding by buying 1,000 acres near
Callington, which is known as " Spring Bank.” This property was also originally stocked
from Murray View, but is now used for breeding and fattening lambs for export, whilst
wool is the chief consideration at "Murray View” and “ Meaford.” The flocks aggregate
about 4,000 and may be characterised as an extremely useful fype of Merino. They are
strong and hardy in constitution, of medium size, and good producers of lengthy stapled
wool with good density of fleece. Mr. Hannam has been married twice, and there is one
daughter of the first marriage, and three sons aud two daughters of the second. Mr. Han-
nam has now, after a long and successful career, refired from active life, and resides at
Malvern, his three sons beine in charge of his properties, Mr. T. J Hannam at Murray
View, Mr. W. J. Hannam at Meaford, and Mr. C. F. Hannam at Springbank.
DRILLING WHEAT AT “SPRING BANK.’’


•v __
0 **;'• . .. • - / ' , i
fafe a i | *‘~ , A ” I . ' *.
flP faff? Vttj
Jhe properties of ttje 3{on. j. J)uncarj
The founder of the pastoral properties now held by the Duncan family was the
late Sir W. W. Hughes, whose memory is perpetuated as an original patron of the Ade-
laide University by a handsome bronze statue erected in front of that edifice and
presented by his nephews (the Hon. J. J. Duncan and the late Mr. W. H. Duncan, M.P.)
In 1854 he became associated in pastoral matters with his brother-indaw, the late Capt.
Duncan. These gentlemen occupied country in the locality of Hoyles Plains and on
Yorkes Peninsula, which included the now famous Copper producing centres of Wallaroo
and Moonta, and it was during their occupation that these mines were discovered.
The Hon. John James Duncan, the present representative of the family, was born
at Anstruther, Fifeshire, Scotland, in 1845, coming with his parents to South xdustralia in
1854. Mr. Duncan’s earlier years were spent amidst the pioneer pastoral settlement of
the country and his education was acquired first privately, then at St. Peter’s College, at
Bentley (near Gawler), and afterwards at the Watervale Grammar School. However,
before going to school, news of the copper discoveries made at Wallaroo was
received, and Mr. Duncan was the bearer of the news to his uncle, Sir Walter, who
then resided at “ The Peak,” near Watervale. He drove the first four miners, who had
been engaged at the Burra, to the Wallaroo mines, and when Moonta opened out he
drove the first miners there also, and his share in the early development of the mines
was in carting water for the men from Tickera and Tipara. On leaving school Mr. Dun-


Tim Lain Lapiain Duncan.
The Late Sir W. W. Hughes.


The Hon. John J. Duncan.
48111 WmSl^W
: l
fc ■ JSL,
'•^IfR'... $&& tM%.' t- ..
PpPP^
■ • ,-; va^L^ ■ * "• ~ ' |
\|9HroM *» KuH&iHPL.


vhTLjj[ jBBfr '%jt *\ * < ■^ r, !S'- -.•»*.
* ’ flte '■'"' ; »J&t% - .
C ’ W' • • -jtfP* .; t .__ V- ,-- ;•■• -jIHUfc ■ ■
-—•-. - - 4 » iril n ...... Va.
£*# /**&»***?/ jfMM, jS| *■’**• > *- •’ ■ 4 "^.f&
li/'S . *
"' ■; , ' - . '
HUGHES PARK.


139HHB^ ; :•• -A'‘ *::'. $k ;■*<•.%•' • **M% M 4 * MKm-a-'
*■' "■!'<'/•’ .*" "i
c UHIHE ■
can entered the counting house of Messrs. Elder Smith & Co., remaining there three years,
after which he joined the financial staff, as accountant, at the Wallaroo Smelting Works,
and, later, acted in the same capacity at the Wallaroo Mines. The latter position he gave
up to visit the Old Country, and on his return he assumed the management of his uncle's
pastoral properties. On the death of his uncle, in 1887, he became proprietor of the
“Gum Creek ” Estate, near the Bmra, and “ Hughes Park,” near Watervale. On the
latter property is Mr. Duncan’s country house, originally built in 1870, and since enlarged.
1 his property, held originally by his uncle as a leasehold, and subsequently purchased,
is situated near to and to the west of Watervale. Both these properties have been con-
siderably curtailed of late years, in consequence of Mr. Duncan forming one of the large
proprietors who have yielded to the exigencies of the situation requiring reduction of
areas, they have been worked mainly as sheep runs, although portions have been, and
are utilised for agricultural purposes. A special feature at Gum Creek is its] successful
lucerne paddocks, where the*flat adjacent to the creek has been proved to be admirably
adapted for the purpose.
SCENE ON HUGHES PARK.
At Hughes Park there is a currant vineyard on a picked 10 acres, which is pro-
lific and successful.
The sheep on both properties are mostly merinos, bred with care for many years
and into which has been introduced from time to time fresh blood from the Bungaree and
Murray’s breeds, and lately from Wanganella, in New South Wales. There is also a small
flock of pure Shropshires, bred mostly from sheep imported from England on two
occasions.
Cattle of the Milking Shorthorn breed have twice been imported from noted
English breeders, and among the horses is to be found a Clydesdale Stallion, imported
from Scotland.


I
*v v ' A/ ■'• . ' ’ ' ' r ' ! -. ..:> #- AA A ; V.- A*Ar \ V' A A A A ' I
I
WOOLSHED AND BUILDINGS AT HUGHES PARK.


;
CURRANT VINEYARD AT HUGHES PARK.


MERINO STUD RAM “ WALLAROO ” AT HUGHES PARK.


■. ' l ~\ BHPt *8* j j# >i *‘" k
*'mBrff y* f? 4- T y ■ ,*’ *■ £ . -- '*if\mJi;.
A If** .aP**® m 4 f ■ . t I
MERINO STUD RAMS AT HUGHES PARK.


,* t £r | ,/* 3g£|| f •' t ' ' ’$ >; , t | p iillilp I /V, \/ r ?X</
V ' ! # jJM ■ ■
1 J& ' *%jJEpL *
r m. * % jjJSPjjP*
®Xl4®fjt|l ; £- ‘ 5* K ■ \ S»X ' fV ifl “ * * . '*'*<•/
> x. & . 1 '"k*
'-'* .& * ■:,.,/ *'* jbjk ■ ■* V- ,< I’ ' r Jg f - - ,'*
♦ -> I > jTO*. ’ ? ', ” ? "X!"XX Jl- •■.:■■■;■ ,■■•- -.:w
:i w . - S' “ ■■■ PQIF ■ ’
HUGHES’ PARK STUD SHROPSHIRE RAM (First Prize, under years, Adelaide, 19C9).


••
*9h' * *- r ,{• f
S' - ■ . W , ' • ■, BBlLvir,M f.‘fiMCT
f :■ f '# i mMwnlSHD
-^•'■ • 'jfe Sfc Av J '. ' ■: J &: > 1 )^>-'
* -,-' - .;, _ ,; ■■•Vv.Jp-M ■ - ■• |* /*V, ■ V .? . T ./« J, JHS>t> T- -f* M «. V ■, * ■-• ■ ,;' i |]
'> T ■,.g:• gasSE-]PiM&».%nir • *araKr *\ s » *.%/v \ ! - * * * Sfi? ■ * .-» , I
* ' *■■ • 4 ■ ■' <4 j /■ I
SHROPSHIRE RAMS AT HUGHES PARK.


VIEW ON GUM CREEK.


■ ■ - ■ -—— --
GUM CREEK HOUSE IN TREES, WITH IMPORTED MILKING SHORTHORNS.


DRAUGHT ENTIRE, MARE AND FOAL AT GUM CREEK.


CLYDESDALE ENTIRE AND BROOD MARES AT GUM CREEK.


' N
YEARLINGS AT GUM CREEK.


I
MILKING-SHORTHORNS IN LUCERNE AT GUM CREEK.


I
WOOL TEAM AT GUM CREEK.


«
SHORN SHEEP AT GUM CREEK.


The clips of wool are well known in England and Adelaide, and in conjunction with
the properties mentioned is worked the leased sheep run of Manunda, in the North East,,
whence come the fat sheep well known in the Adelaide market.
The owner has associated with him in the management of his properties his second
and third sons, Walter and Keith.
Mr. Duncan has always taken a keen interest in pastoral and agricultural matters.
He was President of the Pastoralists’ Association of South Australia and West Darling
in 1905-6 and 1906-7 , when he was one of the representatives at meetings of the Federal
Pastoral Council in Melbourne and Sydney, and for years he has been President of the
Northern Agricultural Society. Among his other public offices have been those of Captain
of Volunteers, Chairman of the Upper Wakefield District Council, and President of the
WOOLSHED (with hack view of House and Outbuildings) AT GUM CREEK.
National Defence League (now the Australasian National League). Mr. Duncan’s promi-
nent public service, however, has been that of politician, he having identified himself
with public life from a very early age. In 1871, when 26 years of age, he was
returned as a member for Port Adelaide in the House of Assembly, In the general
elections of 1875 he was elected for that portion of the same district which was named
Wallaroo. He was not a candidate at the following election, as he shortly afterwards
visited Europe, and whilst there acted as a Commissioner for South Australia at the Paris
Exhibition in 1878. In 1884 he was elected for Wooroora, which electorate he represented
till 1890, when he withdrew from politics until the following year, when he was elected
for the North Eastern District in the Upper House, which he represented until 1896, when
he again retired voluntarily. A vacancy having occurred in the Legislative Council in
1900, he was again returned, without opposition, for his old constituency, which, at a
general election in 1902, again re-elected him, and which (now known as the Midland
District) has this year again elected him unopposed. On the appointment, in 1901, of
the Hon. (now Sir) J. L. Stirling to the Presidentship of the Legislative Council, Mr,
Duncan was appointed leader of this party, which position he has held continuously since.


The name of Riggs has been associated with the agricultural and pastoral history
of the Gawler district for rather more than half a century, for it was in the fifties that
the first member of the family commenced farming on the wide and fertile stretch of
country which extends almost from the town boundaries to the capital city of the State.
The town of Gawler, in or near which members of the family have resided since coming
to South Australia, was one of the first settlements of the State, for it was early in 1839
that the late Henry Dundas Murray and the late John Reid, on their own account and as
trustees for a number of other gentlemen, purchased, on the recommendation of no less
an authority than Colonel Tight, 4,000 acres from the Crown, which was known as the
Gawler Special Survey.
The town was small, and the inhabitants of the surrounding district were few and
scattered even in 1853, when Mr. John Riggs first took up land, but it had already made
some progress towards its present importance. It had, at all events, passed the stage at
which it was officially reported in 1840 to contain f ‘ one very good inn, one public house,
police barracks, two smith’s shops, six dwelling houses, and thirty-four inhabitants.”
Probably, however, his experience of the journey from Adelaide to Gawler was very
similar to that of a traveller who has left this record in connection with the old
coaching days: "We can well recall the bustle of the arrival of the coach in the
evening, and the throng of townspeople and passengers exchanging greetings before its
doors, as if the latter had performed some daring exploit in venturing life and limb so
far in such vehicles; we can well recall the deep sound of the gong sending forth its peal
before the dawn to rouse the inmates from their peaceful dreams to the perils of the
coming day, whilst one mail cart after another drew up before the lengthy front of the


THE LATE ANDREW RIGGS.


I \ V?^v\
/*oJP&\ \sy* / \<\0 \*> o 1 ii' L, rVf <V \ JrvO 0\\
THE LATE H. J. KIGGS.


* \' *i£fh t
.*., / &* ' .^ v,^,iJHIhH
lip ' Tt yg^Hi^:- - ;
Hy^^^Bfe'"’' <gy?J%ffipg, g?|| ?,
“BENTLEY,” GAWLER (For many years the residence of the late Mr, H. J. Riggs).


' y 45^*
Old Spot to take its departure, laden with brave and adventurous spirits to dare the
perils and dangers of the road—for peril and danger were not unfrequent from the bad
roads, swollen streams, jibbing horses, and reckless drivers. Who amongst the dwellers
in Gawler of those glorious days of inconvenient travelling does not remember one wet,
drizzly night, about seven years ago, when the omnibus then conveying the mails from
Adelaide, driven by one Bill Lewis, was lost on the Gawler Plains after exchanging horses
at a station north of Salisbury, and, after wandering about for hours, passengers, horses
and driver had to camp out the whole night within eight miles of Gawler, and, on the
day dawning through the damp, dismal night, found themselves within a mile of the
station where they had changed horses the previous evening ? How often, in wet
weather, have passengers had to walk a great portion of the way, looking at their less
fortunate four-footed companions dragging the clumsy mailcart through slush and mire
for miles together, and not unfrequently having to put their own shoulders to the wheel
to help them along.”
CORNER OF THE GARDEN.
(Gf-H • Mr. John Riggs, who was followed two years later by Mr. Henry John Riggs,
arrived at an auspicious period in the history of the Gawler district, for it was at this
time that many Gawlerites, who had met with success on the Victorian goldfields, re-
turned to their homes with the money won in the mines of the neighboring State, and this
led to the rapid extension of agricultural settlement and the foundation of a permanent
prosperity. Shortly afterwaids —that is, in the year 1857—the railway from Adelaide Jo
Gawler was opened, thus giving additional impetus to the trade and progress of a district
which was already known as a go-ahead centre which had attracted to itself a class of
colonist remarkable for their intelligence and public spirit. It has, in fact, been written
of the Gawler people of those days that “ they possessed a dash, a skill, a comradeship,
which conceived large and worthy projects, and carried them out successfully in spite of
great difficulties.” It was thus a kindly fortune which guided the Messrs. Riggs from
Dorsetshire to make their home in a locality which possessed so'; many of the elements
which go to make for permanent success, and, judged by the record of the long and useful


A '
MR. A. H. RIGGS.


lives they spent in the district, they were themselves well-qualified to do their part for the
public weal and personal success.
The late John Riggs was born in Dorsetshire, England, on October 22, 1814, and
came to South Australia in 1853. A year or two later he started farming on the Gawler
Plains, where he was one of the pioneers of agriculture. Mr. Riggs was no doubt a
farmer by instinct as well as by profession, for he appears to have quickly adapted
himself to the changed conditions of the new land, and to have taken and retained a
leading position amongst his brother agriculturists. That this was so, is shown by the
fact that in a book published in the middle seventies, several illustrations appear depicting
scenes on his farm which afford evidence of the extent and up-to-dateness of his operations
at that time. Further testimony to the success of his undertaking is found in the record
of his frequent exhibitions of wheat at various agricultural shows, and the winning of
several prizes at the annual fixtures of the Royal Agricultural Society. He was one
HARVEST TIME.
who evidently believed in the wisdom of advertising the possibilities of his adopted state
in other lands, for his name is to be found as the winner of a medal at the Paris Exhibi-
tion. The late Mr. Riggs was spared to enjoy a long life, for his death did not take place
till August 26, 1902, at the age of eighty-eight years.
Mr. Henry John Riggs, son of Andrew Riggs, was also bcrn in Dorsetshire, the
date of his birth being the year 1832. He came to South Australia in 1855, being then
twenty-three years of age, and went at once to the district which Mr. John Riggs had
already settled in. For some time he carried on butchering, but afterwards developed
an extensive grazing and pastoral business. Gawler continued to be the centre of his
operations, and his association with the town and its interests was close and long
continued. He was a member of the Munno Para East District Council, of which he
occupied the position of Chairman in the year 1886, and at all times took an interest in
agricultural matters and in the doings and progress of the Agricultural Society. He was
also a keen student of political affairs. By his death on September 12, 1908, as the
result of a railway accident, Gawler lost yet another useful citizen and old identity.


#F% wumm p : - - - 9
)
RESIDENCE OF MR. A. H. RIGGS.


LOOKING OVER THE PLAINS TOWARDS ADELAIDE.


* r&i - 'v*.
SCENE ON THE SOUTH PARA RIVER.


ANOTHER SCENE ON THE SOUTH PARA RIVER.


* %x **** s \ ' f
TYPICAL TIMBER ON THE ESTATE.


SHEEP ON THE ESTATE.


PLOUGHING.


• /.. ' ,;„ • ,- ■ * A
f-i | tt Ufa., j ,m „ «£&* Up**~rf t '**~*. y aL* 0t*- *
• ■ -.»'■■ ■• v;v■>.->■ ■- . • . ,: ** -■•
ONE OF THE DAMS.


Mr. A. H. Riggs, who was born at Bentley in 1873, is the only son of the late
H. J. Riggs. He commenced his education at St. George’s Grammar School and after-
wards attended Prince Alfred College. Prior to joining his father in the working and
management of his various farming and grazing estates, he was for two years in the
service of the Bank of Adelaide, being stationed at the Gawler branch of that splendid
financial institution. Mr. Riggs is one who has many interests. He has taken a
prominent part in athletic circles, and is Hon. Secretary of the local branch of the
Australian Defence League and a Trustee of the Gawler Methodist Church.
Mr. Riggs’s home is situated on the outskirts of Gawler on the flank of the
hilly Barossa country which backs the township. It is, as shown in the views depicted in
these pages, hilly and broken in contour and fairly timbered, except where cleared for
SCENE ON THE RIVER
agricultural pm poses. The deep gorge through which the South Para river flows, before
its junction with the sister stream, to form the Gawler River, passes through the property
The residence is well placed, and commands a wide and varied prospect, for the highlands
°f, the Barossa Ranges lie to the East on the one hand, whilst on the other an
uninterrupted view across the plains and over the orange groves of Salisbury towards
Adelaide is obtained. On a clear day, and with the aid of a good glass, the shipping on
the Gulf and the Outer Harbour, over twenty miles away, may be plainly seen.
Estate is principally devoted to wool-growing, the number of Merinos shorn annually
being in the neighborhood of 10,000. Mr. Riggs is a believer in machine-shearing and
the shed which lies about a mile from the homestead is equipped for the purpose ’ The
South Para provides permanent water, but there several dams in the paddocks
A considerable area is under cultivation, from which the average yield is very satisfactory




Jhe fowlers’ Tsay T)istrict
On June 18, 1840, Edward John Eyre started from Adelaide upon his adventurous
journey to King George’s Sound.
Passing through the Port Lincoln country he reached Fowler’s Bay, November 22,
1840, and established a camp at Port Fowler. Here he obtained an ample supply of fresh
water in the sand hills at a very shallow depth, and from that point he proceeded to make
such explorations as he found possible in a wholly unknown country, destitute of all surface
water, with nothing in any way to guide him, nor any sufficient elevation from which obser-
vations could be made.
Eyre remained in camp at Port Fowler 95 days, and did not succeed in penetrating
further from the coast than “ fully 20 miles.”
His report of his journey to Fowler’s Bay is as follows :
“ Report to Mr. George Hall, Private Secretary to Governor Gawler, December 17,
1840.”
“ In traversing the country along the coast from Streaky Bay to the limits of our
present exploration within 12 miles of the head of the Great Bight, we have found the
country of a very uniform description-low flat lands and succession of sandy ridges densely
covered with a brush of Eucalyptus (dumosa), saltwater, tea-tree, and other shrubs, whilst
here and there appear a few isolated patches of open grassy plains scattered at intervals
among the scrub The whole of this extent of country is totally destitute of
surface water. We have never met with a watercourse or pool of aiw description, and
all the water we have obtained since we left Streaky Bay has been by digging, generallv
in the large drift of pure white sand close to coast.”
“ On one occasion I attempted with one of my native boys to explore the country due
north of Fowler’s Bay, but the weather turned out unfavorable, the wind being from the
north-east and scorchingly hot. I succeeded, however, in penetrating fully 20 miles in
the direction I had taken, the first 10 of which was dense heavy scrub of the eucalyptus
(dumosa) or the tea-tree. Emerging from this we entered an open pretty looking country
consisting of grassy plains of great extent, divided by belts of shrubs and bush ; as we ad-
vanced these shrubs became less numerous, the country more open, and salsolaceous plants
began to occupy the place of the grass. Had we been able to continue our exploration for
another day’s journey, I have no doubt from the change which appeared gradually to be
taking place as we advanced north, that the whole country around would have been one
vast level open waste without bush or shrub of any kind and covered with salsolae.”


In the Journal of his Explorations, Eyre records that it was about midway between
Fowler’s Bay and King George’s Sound that his overseer, John Baxter, was murdered on
the evening of April 29, 1841, by two of the natives, who plundered the camp, Eyre being
absent at the time watching the horses. Eyre took the first watch of from 6to 11 that
evening, and Baxter was to have taken the second of from 11 to 4 the next morning.
Wylie, the King George’s Sound native, and eldest of the three blacks travelling with the
party, said he had been asleep and woke up at the report of the gun. Eyre doubted this.
He thought Wylie had been in the plot to rob the camp of its provisions to take the three
natives back to Fowler’s Bay, that the overseer awoke during the robberv and was shot,
and that Wylie, becoming scared at the deed and its possible consequences, fled to find Eyre.
The other two natives cleared out with the provisions and part of the camp outfit, but
followed Eyre and Wylie the whole of next day They continually called unavailingly
to Wylie to go with them, and Eyre, by travelling on throughout the night, eluded them,
and in three days reached a watering place—lso miles from their last water.
For many years after this perilous journey by Eyre, no one followed him or thought
of settlement in a country apparently so uninviting, but in 1858 Mr. W. R. Swan, who
was General Manager for Mr. Price Maurice over his Pekina and Port Lincoln sheep sta-
tions, made up his mind to have a look at the “ open pretty looking country with extensive
grass plains ” described by Eyre.
Swan started out from Port Lincoln. He did not get into Eyre’s Fowler’s Bay country,
but he sighted a stretch of grassy plains somewhat short of it, and reached what no doubt
was the eastern limit of Eyre’s country.
Mr. Swan reported to Mr. Maurice, and suggested taking up some of the country.
Mr. Maurice, however, refused to have anything to do with the risky venture, and a little
later a speculative claim for exploration purposes was made by Mr. Swan in conjunction
with Mr, Barr Smith. The area claimed was defined on the map by Eyre’s Port Fowler
Depot as a starting point, and the limits of it were fixed by the general description given
by Eyre,
The novelty of the proposal to occupy a country so wholly unknown, when disclosed
by the plotting of the claim of Barr Smith & Swan on the Government maps, at once at-
tracted the attention of others seeking fresh runs, and at once other extensive claims were
made surrounding the original claim by Smith & Swan, and there seemed a promise ap-
parently of very extensive settlement for sheep farms by many well-known colonists, not
one of whom had ever seen the country which they proposed to occupy, nor had any know-
ledge of it except that supplied by Eyre.
Such men as Messrs. W. J. Browne, J. Harris Browne, John Baker, P. B. Coglin, Jeffer-
son Stow, Mather, Hirst, R. Love, and William DeGraves, of Melbourne, and others
became speculative claimants of a large tract of adjoining country.
At once Messrs. Browne sent a party to examine their claims, and Messrs. Smith & Swan,
having a certainty of ample fresh water in the sandhills at Port Fowler, sent down well
sinkers and assistants in charge of Mr. E. C. Wollaston to test the grass country for usable
stock water.
Establishing themselves at Port Fowler, the party proceeded with their well sinking
tools to commence operations some 10 or 12 miles inland at the border of the grassland.
The natives gathered at the camp, and were not at first troublesome. An attempt was
made to encourage them to stay, and to utilise their services by employing them to carry
water, two natives carrying a small barrel swung on a mallee stick. They were accom-
panied by a young man named Thomas Shepherd, who had charge of the party.


The arrangement to utilise the services of the natives, however, did not prove a happy
one, as after a few successful journeys two natives laid down their burden, and deserted
Shepherd ; then in company with other natives from the scrub, they returned, knocked
Shepherd down with their waddies, and pierced his neck with a spear (fortunately not
barbed) which entered under one ear and came out under the other. They left him sup-
posing him dead, but happily the spear had missed the most vital parts. He was got into
camp, brought up by schooner for medical treatment, and ultimately regained full
strength.
In connection with this incident and as illustrating the character of the natives and
their wonderful faculty for bush travelling, it may be worth recording the following cir-
cumstances ;
A few years after the attack upon Shepherd the Government sent down a police trooper
for the protection of the whites and blacks alike, and later the police officer (Trooper Morris)
when returning to Adelaide on other business, suggested and volunteered to take up to
town for trial the two natives who had been mainly concerned in the attempted murder
of Shepherd.
The trooper chained the natives up and started with them, but before reaching Streaky
Bay they made a combined attack upon him, and got possession of his sword. In self-
defence he shot one of them, and brought the other to Adelaide.
The surviving native was duly charged at the Police Court before Mr. Beddome with
attempted murder, but there was a miscarriage of justice.
There was no doubt whatever of the identity of the man ; in fact, he admitted it and
the crime. But Shepherd, either being opposed to all capital punishment on general
principles, or recognising that a native with his superstitions and ignorance was not as re-
sponsible and should not be dealt with as if he were a white fellow, unwilling to cause the
death of any fellow mortal, or perhaps considering the lapse of time since the perpetration
of the crime, seeing no other way out of the difficulty, absolutely swore that the man was
not the person who attacked him.
The native was therefore discharged as innocent, Mr. Beddome apologising to him
for the inconvenience caused him by mistaken identity, and hinting at compensation being
paid by Government, if he applied. This the wild black fellow, however, failed to com-
prehend.
Although this native had never been further away from the Fowler’s Bay country than
the Gawler Ranges, was brought by steamer from Port Lincoln to Adelaide, and was allowed
to pass out into King William-street alone, he shortly found his way back to Fowler’s Bay,
and was not reported to have been seen or helped by any one on the return journey.
Evidently he must have known to go west, have struck St. Vincent’s Gulf somewhere below
Virginia, followed the coast line until he rounded that Gulf, pertinaciously proceeded west
again, coming out about the neighborhood of Wallaroo, gone along the Spencer’s Gulf coast
line to Port Augusta, and again struck west, no doubt reaching the Gawler Ranges where
he would be comparatively at home.
In all this long journey he must have provided his own food from grubs, lizards, snakes,
and other bush delicacies.
In after life he was a useful, peaceable shepherd and knockabout hand on the Fowler’s
Bay run.
There was some, but at no time was there much, outrage or violence between black and
white at Fowler’s Bay.
It was not considered possible at first to travel sheep up the coast from Port Lincoln,
although this was afterwards done after some preliminary failures.
The first sheep taken up to F owler’s Bay were by the ship “ Violet,” which loaded two
cargoes of young ewes from Guichen Bay for Smith & Swan in the beginning of 1860.


The preliminary difficulty in sheep farming at Fowler’s Bay was that the water and
grass were not together. There was an abundance of good water in the white sand hills
on the coast, but inland where the good grass was there was no usable water.
Therefore the attempt to work the country as a sheep station had to be made by keeping
the whole of the sheep for the summer months on the coast, and trusting to sufficient rain
to shift the sheep to the grass country for the winter, so as to spell the coast and allow
the sparse herbage and edible bushes on the sand hills to recover.
But as the sand hills had little food for sheep at any time, although all the sand hills
as far as Yacumba Cowie (a native well on the West Australian border) were occupied,
they were all slowly and surely being eaten out, and it was evident the occupation by sheep
could not be a lasting one. The great problem therefore was to find stock water in the
grass country by sinking ; water was not at a great depth, but was usually salt.
During the management ol the late Mr. H. C. Swan (who had become a partner) no
stock water was found on the grass country, although a number of trial shafts were sunk.
Mr. James Armstrong, who succeeded Mr. Swan in the management and partnership,
was more lucky, however, and obtained several wells of usable water, and the sheep farm
began to assume an appearance of stability and permanency.
There were in those early days no mails, and little communication with the outside
world. Captain Hay, and afterwards Captain Tulloch, in the schooner ‘ Daphne,” took
down the year’s stores, and brought up the year’s wool, taken off in boats from the beach
at Fowler’s Bay to the schooner. There was no jetty anywhere along the coast.
But people tired of the struggle against such adverse circumstances in an out of the
way region, laboring under so many disadvantages, and separated from any market for
fat or surplus stock.
Mr. R. Love, Mr. Dutton, Mr. DeGraves, Mr. Baker, and Mr. Coglin, who had sent
down sheep to Fowler’s Bay and partially stocked their holdings, Mr. Hirst, Mr. Niall, Mr.
Brodie, and others, who had made pastoral claims with a view of stocking, one by one,
either sold out or abandoned their claims ; until, in 1871, the whole of the country leased
from the Crown formed the Fowler’s Bay run under the care of Mr. James Armstrong.
Notwithstanding all drawbacks, the sheep in course of time multiplied, and by and by
it was found possible to travel the surplus stock to Adelaide, through the Gawler Ranges by
way of Port Augusta.
In 1882 Mr. G. W. Murray took charge for Messrs. Smith & Swan, and in 1885 the
Fowler’s Bay flock reached its maximum. That year 122,318 sheep were shorn, giving 2,064
bales of greasy wool. Some six years prior to this the Wookata and Nanwoora country, to
west of Fowler’s Bay, was taken up by Mr. Lloyd, and others began to settle in the district.
In 1890 the Government resumed, for closer settlement purposes, the best half of the
Fowler’s Bay run, and in 1892 and 1893 further resumptions were made.
For many years, those who took up for agriculture the small blocks, into which the
resumed country was cut up, were not very successful. The advent of artificial manures
has, however, considerably improved the crops, and the wheat yield each year increases.
An average of about eight bushels wheat per acre is said to be about that grown in the
immediate Fowler’s Bay district, while as one goes east into the better country and heavier
rainfall, the average increases. At Charra, one year, 17 bushels wheat to the acre was
obtained on new land.
Several bores were sunk by the South Australian Government between Yalata and
W.A.-S.A. border. One was sunk at the White Well, north of the head of the Great Bight,
by the Government for, and at the cost of, Messrs. Smith & Swan. In this and several
others sub-artesian water suitable for stock was obtained, but the majority were failures.
In 1904 Mr. G. W. Murray purchased from Smith & Swan the remainder of the Fowler’s
Bay run and stock, and is still in possession with some 22,000 sheep.


Stud J/terino T(ams, Bred and -
8fgR«' •■ ; • '. • , • - ‘ _ . *\
SIX-TOOTH.
TWO-TOOTH.
Stoney Qap and piyger post =-


=-~ ~ Owned by JYir. /?. JY(. jYtcgride.
TOUR-TOOTH.
FOUR-TOOTH.
—= Stations, South Australia.


*« DANDIE I )I\.VI().\T.”
Purchased by Messrs. John Collins and Sons, Collinsville, S.A., from the Iladdon Rig (New South Wales) Stud
for 1,500 guineas, the highest price yet paid for a Merino imported into South Australia. Dandie Dinmont is
of Wanganella blood and is now (1910) two and a half years old. He was shorn on August 6. yie’ding
36 lbs. 7 oz. of greasy wool, believed to be the heaviest cut known. Mr. Spencer Williams, S. A. Government
Wool Instructor, reports as follows. “ I hereby certify that I scoured the fleece shorn from “ Dandie Dinmont,”
the Haddon Rig Stud Ram, which was bought by Messrs. John Collins and Sons, Collinsville, and that the
greasy weight was 36 lbs. 7 ozs., and that the scoured weight was 17 lbs. 5 ozs. I estimate that the amount of
foreign matter (burr and grease) left in the wool to be 12 per cent, leaving a clean weight of 15 lbs. 4 ozs.
and a yield of 41.85 per cent.


Photo. Engraving
r ftigjl-Glass Epgravers, Eesijpers
atjd Illustrators
Delmont’s Engraving Studio,
Universal Jduildipgs,
20, Grenfell Street = Adelaide.
Animal Photography
Specialty :
Stud Sljeep and Gattle.
6has. P. Scott,
Waymouth Street * = Adelaide.


SHEEP-SHEARING MACHINE
(Moffat-Virtue Hand-Piece)
For which the Federal Sheep Shearing Company, Limited, are Sole Agents.
Shearing by Contract.
_ One of the most important incidents of recent years in pastoral work has been the
initiation and growth of Contract Shearing, of which The Federal Sheep Shearing Co.,
Limited, whose offices are to be found in every Capital of the Commonwealth, are the
leading exponents. that the value of the idea and its great superiority in economy and
ab°i was very speedily recognised, is shown by the fact that during the last six years,
Federal Shearers Ready for the Road.
which cover the life of this Company, its employees have shorn the immense total of
25,000,000 sheep, whilst the value of the wool handled, sorted and packed by them amounts
to many millions of pounds sterling,
The principles upon which this great corporation have built up their wide-spread
business, is well typified by the illustration which heads this page, for it represents speed,
certainty and organisation, which are the three essential factors of economical work in
these high-pressure days. The machine has displaced the “ moke ” as a means of trans-
port from shed to shed, just as surely as mechanical ingenuity has conquered the old
hand shears by evolving the shearing machines of to-day, and, in so doing, doubling the
result both in the quality and quantity of a man’s work in any given time.
It is significant that amongst the mass of evidence to the value of their work
which the Company can produce for the information of any inquirer, are to be found
the names and testimony of those responsible for the control and management of many
of the stations which are acknowledged to be amongst the most successful within the
boundaries of Australia, as well as in Tasmania and the more distant Dominion of
New Zealand. This, of itself, is sufficient to lead to the suggestion that all those who
desire the efficient and economical handling of their clip would be wise to place them-
selves in communication with one of the branches or agencies through which the work
of the Company is conducted, so that they may be placed in possession of the fullest
information as to its scope and purpose.
It has sometimes been suggested that shearing by contract is a “big” man’s propo-
sition, so it undoubtedly is, but it by no means follows that it does not offer equal, if not
greater advantages to the man whose flocks are counted by the hundred instead of by the
tens of thousand, for it is a fact of which there can be no dispute, that the proportion of
profit lost by inefficient work, by lack of knowledge, and by absence of up-to-date appli-
ance is greater with the small man than with his bigger neighbour.


That this is largely unnecessary and may to a great extent be overcome by co-oper-
ation amongst the smaller sheep-men in any given district is one of the results of the work
of the Company, In this connection it is interesting to place before readers three propo-
sitions which show the scope and extent of the work which the Federal Sheep Shearing Co.
Ltd. are able to undertake either for single station owners or in such cases as where several
smaller holders are willing to combine for mutual advantage. They are as follows :—(No. 1)
To stations without sheep-shearing machinery—they deliver and erect complete an entirely
new plant of Moffatt-Virtue Machinery in your shed, and which, at completion of contract,
they hand over to the station in first-class order and condition, free of all further cost.
(No. 2) To stations with sheep-shearing machinery—they will do your shearing, using your
own machinery (it is immaterial to them what make it is, as they have qualified experts
for any class of machinery), or they will sell you a plant and erect it free of cost, and do
your shearing. (No. 3) To stations without sheep-shearing machinery, and who do not
wish to purchase—they will provide and erect complete plant of machinery to do your
shearing, the machinery remaining their property, and will be removed by them at com-
pletion of contract, unless arranged for by further agreement.
One or other of the above are calculated to meet any situation which may arise,
but the Company go further and say that there is no condition with which they are not
qualified to cope. All they ask is that wool raisers should communicate with them, when
they will at once make suggestions as to the best and cheapest method of carrying out any
given work.
A hen the very large number of hands employed by them is remembered, it is
evident that they have had opportunity of selecting the very best in each class of labour,
whether shearers, overseers, wool sorters, machinery experts, or classers, and so by gradual
elimination they have now come to control a staff which is unapproached in the same field
of labour.
The Company makes a boast of the fact that they do not select shearers for high
tallies alone but for general ability, whilst their practice of employing trained w’ool sorters
cannot but add materially to the value of any clip handled by them. The fact also that
experienced mechanical experts travel from shed to shed ensures immunity from any break-
down such as is liable to occur at a critical time, and which may lead to very serious loss
on the part of the sheep owner.
The question of speed is at all times an important one in the shearing shed, and
that in this matter the Federal Shearing Co. need fear no rival, is shown by the fact that
they hold the record tally of the Commonwealth, this being 173 sheep per day per stand
for 30 stands, on a four days’ run, made at Murnpeowie, a well-known South Australian
Station.
An Excellent Training School.
The Training School for machinery experts, wool classers, and steam and oil engine
drivers which the Company has established and is now carrying on, is doing a great and
very necessary work, which is proving of the greatest benefit to employers of labour. A
feature of this Training School will be the drafting of pupils as they reach the required
standard into the contract sheds, where they will be employed as rollers, piece sorters, etc.,
and so have the opportunity of gaining the necessary practical experience of 'general shed
work, and particularly the work in the wool room. They will thus receive a thorough
training in all that pertains to wool from the sheep’s back, shorn by machinery, rolled,
skirted, sorted, classed, and pressed ready for market. In this they are placing before
parents and others an opportunity of thoroughly equipping lads who have a bent in this
direction, to take any such position with the assurance of being able to cope successfully
with any situation in which they may find themselves.


yTustrcrliarj Stock Saddles.
Many countries have a distinct type of saddle, a type which in many cases has
been dictated by local requirements and conditions, and is in all the result of gradual
improvement. In a great stock country like Australia, where, in addition, horseflesh
has for more than a century been the chief means of transportation and intercommunica-
tion in inland and sparsely settled districts, it is but natural that this development
should have reached its highest point. Hundreds of thousands of miles are each year
covered by horsemen on our great cattle and sheep stations. It has, therefore, been
necessary, both in the interests of man and horse, that saddles, and, in fact, all horse
fittings, should be of the best. Necessity is, we know, the mother of invention, and
invention has in this case been very busy. The cumulative result of this constant
striving for improvement is well seen at the big saddlery establishments of the Common-
wealth. In South Australia Messrs. Holden & Frost are justly looked upon as the
leaders in all pastoralist requisites into the composition of which leather in any form
enters. An old and well-known firm, the exterior at least of their extensive premises in
Grenfell Street is known to all visitors to Adelaide, but to adequately grasp their ex-
tent, the great stock they contain, and the wealth of mechanic contrivance and
up-to-date machinery employed in the production of their immense output, one must
inspect the interior.
The Saddle Showroom is admittedly quite one of the best of its kind in Australia,
and, after seeing the splendid collection, differing somewhat in detail, but all showing
the same superiority of workmanship, one is quite able to understand the successful
result of the firm’s determined bid for the interstate saddle trade. So popular have
their patterns become that orders come from all parts of the Commonwealth. Large
orders and glowing encomiums were received from Queensland, whilst even far-off New
Zealand add its quota of trade.
The various styles of saddles manufactured number about 60 (most of which are
illustrated in their new catalogue, which is sent free on application), and may be
obtained from as low as 555., made in pig-skin or bullock-hide, either the smooth or
lough, and in a variety of color from a dark chocolate, or, to use the trade term
“Bismark Brown," to yellow and white.
Another Speciality is the Ladies’ Astride Saddles, constructed on hygienic lines.
Ihe comfort and healthfulness of the use of a saddle of this pattern has already con-
verted many ladies, who warmly praise these specially and scientifically constructed
models.
The Beaufort is a favorite station saddle, and has many advantages over the
ordinary saddle, advantages enjoyed by both horse and rider. A special feature is the
high placement of the knee pads, which permits of a grip with the thighs instead of the
knees. Ihe advantage of this will be apparent to any experienced rider. The absence
of skirts and placing of the stirrup leathers under the flaps prevent chafing or cutting
a most important consideration in long or hard riding. It is also made with girths to
lace, which have the same effect as surcingles, and the seat has the rough side out.
The panel is short, and the saddle altogether is cooler, lighter and will not cut so that
the comfort of the horse, as well as the rider, has been studied.


4 j Pattern.
The Duke of Beaufort, K.C., after whom the saddle is named, speaking of it for
polo purposes, says : f< They give the player a ‘ sympathetic ’ hold upon the pony, and
for hunting and racing this quality is invaluable.” They weigh from 18lbs. down to
13 lbs., and prices range from 120s. to 105s. Large sales, approximating 1,100, have
been made in the two or three years that this pattern has been on the market.
The cc Winnecke ” is another saddle for which there is a great demand. It is a
fairly heavy saddle, and is made in two weights, 19 lbs. and 21 lbs. It is equipped with
roll cantle, giving a springing, floating seat, high solid leather knee pads and Queensland
panel. One striking feature which is not seen by the purchaser, but is nevertheless
there, is a tree strengthened by galvanised steel plates, which renders the saddle par -
ticularly desirable for moist or tropical climates, which in the ordinary saddle would lead
to corrosion of plates and subsequent rotting of the leather.
Those peculiarly-constructed articles, camel saddles and harness, are also specialities.
The riding saddles are constructed with leather-covered steel bridges, which add con-
Another room is devoted to hames, of which
1,500 to 2,000 pairs are in stock of various
designs and qualities. Water bags, water carriers
for horse or camel, and water buckets are also
lines to which special attention is given and
nothing but the best of materials used, the firm
being conscientiously alive to the fact that lives
might easily be lost in our arid country through
inferior workmanship in such important items of
a traveller’s outfit. In this connection it may
be remarked that horse and camel packs of great
strength and durability are made.
A visit of inspection to the leather depart-
ment reveals thousands of sides of hide of all
qualities and colors. The firm thoroughly mature
under their own supervision all leather before
passing it into manufacture, and carry a stock
of about 5,000 hides thus maturing.
siderably to general strength and
durability. They range in price from
755. to 120s.
The harness show case, in reality
a fair-sized room, is fully furnished
with stock patterns in various designs.
Station and Farm Buggy Harness, for
singles, pairs, tandems and fours, are
shown in numerous colours, designs
and qualities, whilst heavier harness
for wool teams, drays, plough teams,
etc., are all stocked.
A novelty likely to become pop-
ular is electrically-welded plough, lead,
body and back chains, for they are
practically unbreakable. The same
principle is also applied to heavy cart
fittings, buckles, tug chains, plough
hooks and all other lines requiring
strength at the joints or welds.


. i ■ lH I illiiiiK
mL > ; }
The Export of Frozen Lambs and Mutton by Pastoralists and Farmers.
MR. WALTER BARRITT,
of Lyndoch.
Director of Co-Operative Export
Company, of S. A., Ltd.
MR. F. W. RALPH,
of Adelaide.
Chairman of Directors, Co-Operative
Export Company, of S.A. , Ltd.
MR. W. H. B. PATERSON,
ot Willamulka.
Director of Co-Operative Export
Company, of S. A., Ltd.
THE CO-OPERATIVE EXPORT COMPANY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, LIMITED.
A review of the Pastoral Industry in South Australia would be incomplete without
a reference to the steps that have been taken of recent years by progressive Producers
of Fat Lambs with a view to reducing the intermediary expenses, commissions and
profits, which are generally inseparable from the Export of Produce from Australia.
The Lamb Producer has, in the past, been compelled as a rule to content himself
with making the best bargain possible with local buyers, having the choice of either
sending his Lambs to the Adelaide sheep yards or selling them on the paddocks to a
travelling Lamb buyer. The heavy travelling and other expenses incurred by these
methods, added to the multiplicity of commissions and profits, both in Australia and
London, have, of course, the effect of materially reducing the price which can be
offered to the Primary Producer, and, with a view to bettering this state of affairs, Mr.
F. W. Ralph visited London and the English Provinces in the early part of 1906, and,
after making the necessary arrangements direct with Meat Salesmen there, he was able,
on his return to Australia later in the same year, to successfully float what is now
known as “ The Co-Operative Export Company of South Australia, Limited.”
The methods adopted by this Company are simple and direct. They make a
reasonable consolidated charge for their services to Lamb Growers desirous of shipping
their Produce to England. For this charge the Company undertake the engaging of
trucks and all arrangements with respect to Slaughtering, Grading, Freezing, Shipping,
Insurance, Storage and Sale of the by-products in Australia and of the carcases in
England. The Company also make liberal advances free of interest as soon as each
shipment is complete. On the completion of each season’s transactions, the margin
of profit made on the consolidated charge is returned to the Shippers (being Share-
holders) in proportion to the total value of Lambs shipped by each. Needless to say,
this method has <c caught on ” very extensively, as it has enabled Producers of first-class
Lambs to secure very high nett results for their stock, and, although occasional reverses
are suffered when the English market is adverse, the balance, over a series of years, is
overwhelmingly in favor of the shipment of Lambs on Growers’ own account right
through to the Meat Salesmen in England.
A great advantage is gained by the Company’s method of pooling individual con-
signments of Lambs. Each consignment is separately killed and strictly graded (the
bye-products being disposed of separately on account of the individual owners). The
Carcases are then pooled, each owner being credited with the weight of his Lambs in
each individual quality grade, and on the sale of the shipment he gets his proportion
of the average price obtained for each grade. This method avoids the necessity of
innumerable countermarks indicating separate ownerships and, by avoiding confusion in
England, materially assists the English Meat Salesmen in obtaining the most satisfactory
nett results.
Both Pastoralists and Farmers are represented on the Board of Management, and
the operations of the Company up to date have been so successful that they have
attracted considerable attention among Lamb Growers in the other States, with the
result that steps are now being taken to organise similar Companies in other centres of
the Commonwealth.


:c
:.h
III
Jtfoderrj Economic fencirjg.
lime brings many changes. In nothing in connection with pastoral work is this
more noticeable, perhaps, than in the gradual evolution of the old-time post and rail
fence to the scientific arrangement of steel and iron, some form of which is growing into
universal use to-day. Axe and adze have given way to the spanner and brace, and
the splitters’ camps to the factories of big manufacturing centres. It is an age of
progress. Ihe machine has beaten the man, and the costly, cumbersome, yet often
inefficient, red-gum post is inevitably going down before the light, durable and
economical Tee post of steel, which is now considered the acme of perfection for its
purpose. Neither has invention lagged behind in the other items which go to the
making of a thoroughly satisfactory fence. The “ Neptune ” Unrivalled Steel
Fencing Wire marks the limit of excellence attained in the manufacture of fencing
wires, for it combines in the highest degree the essentials of Strength, which is,
of course, the most important factor ; its pre-eminence in this respect being demonstrated
by its high breaking strain under measured test. Its Lightness ensures economy in
construction and transportation. Its Durability assures its longer effective use. Its
Non-Elasticity reduces sagging and stretching to a minimum, and obviates the necessity
for periodic tightening.
We quote the following as showing the comparative Breaking Strain, Length per
Cwt, and Cost per Mile, as between the ordinary black steel fencing wire and the
“ Neptune.” Taking the No. 8 gauge of the former, which is the standard size, we
find that in breaking-strain it is approximately equal to the 12£ gauge of the “ Neptune.”
In length per cwt. the figures are 528 yards of 8-gauge ordinary as against 1430 yards
to the same weight of “ Neptune.” An immense advantage this. Again, the relative
costs per mile are even more strikingly in favor of the “Neptune,” for they are:
£l 13s. 4d. for ordinary, as compared with £l Is. 6d. for the lighter, but equally
strong, “ Neptune.” Therefore, strength for strength, the essential gauge of com-
parison, the ordinary black steel fencing wire is, on an average, 50 per cent, more costly
than its newer rival. A galvanized sample of the same wire is also supplied of the
same strength ; naturally, this is somewhat higher in first cost, but this is off-set by
the fact that it is absolutely impervious to weather wear, and is practically ever-
lasting. Even this is quoted at Bs. Id. per mile less than the at present more largely
used, but less durable, ordinary black wire, reckoning at current market rates.
To complete a description of the modern economic fence it is necessary to
refer to the Dropper, an innovation in fence-making of somewhat recent
origin, but one which secures for any fence the maximum of rigidity
and security. Of the various makes now offered the McNally
Patent Steel “Grip” Dropper takes a leading place. This is a
simple, effective and durable patent. Amongst other advantages
claimed for the “ Grip ” are the fact that no wedges or staples are
required, thus assuring a great economy of time in fixing and of money in
repairs and renovations. It is also secure, for it cannot be removed
without cutting the tie wires. Other advantages are that, when
necessary, wires can be strained without removing the droppers, and
that they stay tight on even a loose fence. They are also equally
as suitable for barbed or for plain wire, besides being perfectly effective
for wire-netting. We have already referred to the speed with which
they can be adjusted, and this is well borne out by the statement
that one man can put on no less than one-and-a-half miles a day.
Messrs. Harris Scarfe & Co., of Gawler Place, Adelaide, hold the agency
for these valuable lines, and they will no doubt be pleased to forward
illustrated literature and any desired information. The same firm
make a speciality of the “ McFarlane ” wool press, invented by the
late Allan McFarlane, Esq., but it is, we are aware, not necessary to
describe a machine which is already well-known to all pastoralists.
McNally “ Grip ”
Dropper.


]}agot, S/ja/(es <£ Xewis, JOinjited.
This Company has its head office in King William Street, Adelaide, and by means
of branch establishments and agencies has extended its operations throughout the whole
of South Australia.
The Company was formed and registered in October, 1888, under the title of
Bagot, Shakes, & Lewis, Limited, the intention of its promoters being to unite in one the
two concerns represented by the names of the founders.
In May, 1906, an agreement was entered into with the Directors of Luxmoore
Dowling and Jeffrey, Limited, for the amalgamation of the two companies, under the name
of Bagot Shakes & Lewis, Limited. It is only proper to remark that, being connected
with the pastoral industry, the operations of these companies might occasionally overlap,
but their chief interests were not by any means identical. Bagot, Shakes & Lewis made
stock and station agency their special line, whereas Luxmoore, Dowling & Jeffrey, Ltd.,
advertised themselves as Wool, Hide, Skins, and Grain Brokers. Amalgamation in this
case, therefore, was the unifying of kindred departments under a single management,
thereby facilitating the expansion of both. The agreement entered into by the Directors
was in due course ratified by the shareholders of both companies, who have reason
to be satisfied with the success that has been achieved as a result of the amalgamation.
The capital of the Company now consists of 250,000 of 15s. each. The present
directors are Edward Howard Bakewell (chairman), Herbert White Hughes, Charles
Howard Angas, William Lawes Ware, George Wallwall Bagot, and Hon. John Lewis,
the last named two being managing Directors, Messrs. George Dowling and George
Jeffrey being managers of the wool and produce Department ; Mr. James Wilkinson, of
Jamestown, inspector of branches ; Mr. Alfred Clifford Catt, manager of the land depart-
ment ; and Mr. John Jacob, secretary. The Company has established branches at
Burra, Balaklava, Blumberg, Crystal Brook, Gladstone, Jamestown, Kadina, Mount
Pleasant, Minlaton, Orroroo, Owen, Paskeville, Riverton, Strathalbyn, Willunga, Yankalilla,
Blyth, Cowell, Tumby Bay, Petersburg, and also at Broken Hill (New South Wales).
Besides this, it has agencies in all the principal towns in the State, the bnsiness of which
is conducted by a staff of energetic and efficient men who are eager to advance the inter-
ests of the Company and its clients in every possible way. It is recognised that the
interest of the Company and those of the State are so closely interwoven that they cannot
be separated. The shareholders of Bagot, Shakes & Lewis, Limited, are to be found through-
out the length and breadth of the land, and as the business depends upon the prosperity of the
primary industries that have already done so much for the welfare of the community,
they cannot fail to participate in the general prosperity or the reverse. The growing
requirements of the increasing wool business have necessitated the provision of larger and
improved accommodation for handling and exhibiting wool at Port Adelaide, and
accordingly spacious buildings have been erected at Port Adelaide, on the land previously
purchased for that purpose. These premises are commodious and well appointed, capable
of receiving large consignments, which can be expeditiously dealt with, and furnished
with every requisite for the convenience of buyers, which will be to the advantage of
producers also.
Bagot’s Executor and Trustee Company, Limited.
Under the auspices of the parent Company, has been formed Bagot’s Executor and
Trustee Company, Limited. Capital, £250,000 ; subscribed, £50,000. Directors : —Messrs.
C. H. Angas (chairman), Geo. W. Bagot, E. H. Bakewell, W. G. Duncan, H. W. Hughes,
W. L. Ware and Hon. J. Lewis. This company undertakes to act as Executor, Trustee,
Administrator, Attorney, Guardian, or in any other fiduciary capacity, either alone or
in conjunction with others. As agent, it will manage estates and busineses of any kind,
collect rent, dividends and incomes generally. Registered office : No. 18 King William
Street, Adelaide. Secretary, Mr. John Jacob.


s.
X m -* „ «. mmmmwm 4 *
iljin - ]l|-||-|ili-|i-fiiiir niM:<<nfi inT-nlUlf-ni %.P|Rr# 1111 ll| ll |ll| l |l| W |11111
18 ' ■ *
» •» ,v *:.•„• / JL’ . .
-*l .. «• »• m y« if...*. j , J- : % j ' »i • ... , * i .. . ,,v * ♦ *
*&*£** ;fki jp/4 lM>jSwL> > * >• '• <•'. V 1 *•*•»** . ... i • , ; 3 A ♦ * . .
U-. f -> ' ■ . .... *■'■'«>" .■> i
. ■ :M0~ »»**'*> tk Jfc * * V ,’ %■■ ■- m ’ ' » ' ' ; * *»■» j *.P . » 1 . . 1 ♦*■" • ,• . if*f . •
*7 KT V. ■ 'V.&vSfc■*•,..■■ . ' > . . f- t > .1 , . /
jcm V' t • r ; :;?*..- -*■* ~ ■•\--v.. ■& v i r* — w
- ’ ... / ■ - ■' . ■ ■ ' K’ ■ ’ ..
WOOL ■ STORES, BAQOT, SHAKES & LEWIS, LIMITED, PORT ADELAIDE (Show Floor Area, 460 x 180 leet).














