

m
' u , ;-l
Tjw'lfjsJ)/ n<2 ,,p r» Wi iSS I <pf>e *de >c e
OUR CAMPAIGN FOR
INDEPENDENCE
FROM TAFT TO HARRISON
(1901-1921)
BY ■
Rafael Palma
Ex-Secret ary of the Interior and Ex-Senator from the Fourth District
WITH ANNOTATIONS
Teodoro M. Kalaw
Executive Secretary of the Commission of Independence
MANILA
BUREAU OF PRINTING
1923
195149
s ■!> Vi
-—** i-* np t V' v f


_ \* i >r ." 'Jf® :' £>: " * ' < $
-• • • ■ ■•: '■ ■ “ •.- ■■• - v ' \
%


OUR CAMPAIGN FOR
INDEPENDENCE
FROM TAFT TO HARRISON
(1901-1921)
Rafael Palma
Ex-Secret ary of the Interior and Ex-Senator from the Fourth District
WITH ANNOTATIONS
Teodoro M. Kalaw
Executive Secretary of the Commission of Independence
MANILA
BUREAU OF PRINTING
198149


C&o£i4jl 3t>
8-1 ■Vo
American Occupation 5
The Uncertainties of the Situation 5
The Civil Commission 8
The First Moves 10
The Federal Party Is Organized 15
Mr. Taft’s Popularity 17
The Nacionalists Appear on the Scene 19
The Assembly and Its Speaker 23
Times of Struggles and Difficulties 25
The Campaign in America 30
The New Era 36
Harrison and the Jones Bill 40
The First Mission to the United States 42
Looking Towards the Future 44
3


OUR CAMPAIGN FOR INDEPENDENCE
FROM TAFT TO HARRISON
(1901—1902)
When in 1901, amidst the dying embers of a declining war,
the first foundations of American civil government in the Islands
were laid, the advocates of independence became convinced that
fate had decreed that the task of attaining the national aspira-
tions of the people was to be a long and arduous one. Altho the
rigors of the military regime were greatly allayed by the estab-
lishment of civil government, nevertheless it was felt that the
civil government itself intrenched the new sovereignty in the
Islands, and all hopes for the triumph of armed reason vanished
just as the desire to live abandons a dying man. The civil
regime may be said to be the culmination and the crowning event
of the military campaign of subjugation of the Islands. Far,
therefore, from giving the fervent advocates of independence
happy auguries for the cause they championed, it was the signal
for them to withdraw, and they withdrew, grieving and dejected,
dissimulating the shame they felt over the defeat of their armies
and lamenting in silence the weaknesses of those who, under
such critical circumstances, chose to lose faith in the cause of
the people.
THE UNCERTAINTIES OF THE SITUATION
What could be expected from the American government?
What rights would it recognize in the natives? Would the
Americans recognize the rights of the Filipinos to work peace-
fully for their independence? And if such right was conceded
them, would they be allowed to have independence at any time
in the future? All these questions were on everybody’s lips,
and the Filipinos, divided into political groups, gave answers in
accordance with their individual prejudices or their party’s ideas.
The truth was that neither of the two groups could give a
satisfactory reply, because the motives actuating the American
policy at the time were not entirely clear even to the Americans
themselves.
The debates in Congress on the occasion of the ratification
of the treaty of Paris, revealed the great cleavage that divided


American public opinion. The Treaty was almost at the point of
floundering in the Senate. For a long time, so balanced were the
forces of those who were loathed to abandon the traditional
policy of the nation and of those who would have it venture into
new channels, that it was only after prolonged delay, and thanks
to the unexpected jolt in the situation caused by the rupture
of hostilities here between Americans and Filipinos that, in the
patriotic excitement of the moment, the two-thirds vote needed
for ratification was obtained, and the acquisition of these Islands
became an accomplished fact. 1
The dispute did not stop there, however; it went on when
the question of what to do with the territory so acquired came up.
While the administration forces, desirous of favoring the current
of change, demanded the annexation of the Islands at all hazards
for the purpose of benevolent assimilation and the promotion
of America’s commerce, Senator Bacon, leading those who desired
to subdue the rising tide of imperialism, invoked for himself
the stem voice of tradition and the wholesome dictates of pru-
dence, and introduced a resolution providing that the Govern-
ment of the United States would withdraw all claims of
sovereignty over the archipelago as soon as there was established
here an independent government worthy of recognition as such.
The vote on the Bacon resolution resulted in a tie that was
decided in the negative by the vote of the Presiding Officer.
1 Some people are of the opinion that the ratification of the treaty of
Paris was due to the influence of Mr. Bryan who championed the theory
that the Senate should ratify it in order that the determination of the Phil-
ippine question might be in the hands of the Congress of the United States
exclusively. But there are many others who state that the ratification was
really due to the rupture of hostilities between the American and Filipino
forces, a rupture that was provoked by the Americans on secret instruc-
tions from the Government at Washington. Two Senators, at least, of the
opposition—Jones of Nevada and McLawrin of South Carolina—stated
that they had to vote in favor of the ratification because of the breaking
out of hostilities. Had these two votes been cast against the ratification,
there would have been sufficient votes for the rejection of the treaty.
On this point, Mabini had the following to say: “The ratification of the
treaty was postponed and delayed in the Senate because of the determined
opposition of the Democrats, which made Mr, McKinley decide upon
a coup d’ etat. On the evening of February 4th, the American forces began
to advance. This precipitated the rupture of hostilities and was imme-
diately reported to Washington. The probability of a new conflict with
Spain and perhaps with other powers, weakened all opposition, and the
Treaty was ratified.”
—T. M. Kalaw


This result made it evident that the decision to frustrate the
independence of the Philippines rested solely on the feeble
support of one vote, and that hence, it was not improbable that
it would bring about an immediate reaction in the state of mind
of the American people. It was because of this that the fight
was carried out of the session halls of Congress into the electoral
arena, where the two political forces contended with unusual
fury. While in the Philippines, the plan of subjugation collided
seriously with the tenacious resistence of the Filipinos, in the
United States the elections of 1900 were featured by vigorous
denunciations of imperialism undertaken by eminent political
figures of that country and by others no less influential, who saw
in the acquisition of the Islands and in their disposition in the
future, a desecration of the immortal principles that had given
life to the American nation and a positive menace to the stability
of her institutions of liberty and democracy. 2
McKinley came out victorious in that electoral struggle, but
his victory was attributed more to the unpopularity of the plat-
form and theories of Bryan, the democratic candidate, than to
the recollection of the victories of Santiago de Cuba and of
Manila which naturally evoked the sympathy and pride of the
American people. But altho the reelection of McKinley seemed
to have encouraged the venture in colonial expansion in the
Tropics, many were the doubts that arose as to the wisdom and
success of such an experiment. The very novelty of the matter,
the absence in the American Constitution of any provision for the
government of remote territories, the lack of colonial adminis-
trators at once competent and properly equipped for the task
as in the case of England, seemed to offer serious drawbacks to
the enterprise in which the Republican administration had for
the first time launched the American nation. The practical
talent of the latter would not be awed by the perils of this
new colonial venture, but, notwithstanding the constant invoca-
tions to Divine Providence, which was believed responsible
for bringing the Americans into the Islands, there was that
secret feeling of unpleasant regret, akin to- remorse, in the very
fact that the Filipinos would be governed against their will and
consent.
5 Imperialism was the paramount issue in that presidential campaign.
The most important speech against it was delivered by Mr. Bryan in India-
napolis on August 8, 1900, on his acceptance of the presidential nomination
for the Democratic Party.
—T. M, Kalaw


THE CIVIL COMMISSION
It was for this reason that, without losing time, antici-
pating his victory at the polls, President McKinley decided to
send a Civil Commission to these Islands charged with a double
mission: First, to appease the remorse of American public opin-
ion by holding out to the nation tempting prospects of enormous
commercial gain and of the hegemony of the United States on the
Pacific; and second, to assuage the resentment of the Filipino
people by making them gradually realize, thru the establishment
of a benevolent civil regime, the futility of further resistence and
the advantages that would be theirs if they submitted to the
designs of Providence which had placed them under the Amer-
ican flag by an unexpected chance of war. Between doubts
and hopes, the Civil Commission landed in the Islands on June
3, 1900, and set about to perform its dual mission boldly and
deligently.
It has been said, we know not with what degree of truth, that
when President McKinley called the chairman of the Commission,
Judge Taft, and offered the mission to the Philippines, Taft
refused it saying: “Mr. President, I am not the man for that;
I do not want the Philippines." To which the President was
said to have replied: “That is just it; I want a man there who
does not want them.”
If Taft had actually said he did not want the Philippines for
his country, as the story goes, it took him a very short time, after
a brief stay in the Islands, to change his mind. A glance over
the first reports of the Civil Commission gives the reader the
unmistakable impression that the men composing that body were
imbued with the idea that the Islands did and ought to belong
to the United States. They were reports penned by a master’s
hand, and with the object of winning over the American people
to the idea of retention and possession of the Philippine Islands.
They stated that the Filipinos were longing for peace and were
ready to accept American sovereignty; that a large majority
of the people would help put down the insurrection were it
not for their fear of the followers of Aguinaldo, who had formed
a circle of terror that conspired to assassinate all persons favor-
ing the cause of America; that no one was more relieved, no one
had received the news of the results of the last presidential
elections with more enthusiasm than the conservative element
among the Filipinos who had something to lose in the anarchy
that was sure to follow the abandonment of the Islands as advo-
cated by the defeated party in the last elections. All such


reports, read in and out of Congress, necessarily produced the
desired effect of making it appear that the establishment of
American sovereignty in the Islands was with the sanction, with
the consent of the Filipinos themselves. Not only was it repre-
sented that the Filipinos were willing to accept American sove-
reignty; it was asserted besides that owing to the system of
government to which they had become accustomed under the
Spanish rule, the Filipinos would not be able to maintain a
government of law and order, and that, therefore, it was in-
cumbent upon the American people to provide for the Filipinos
a government which would educate them in the art of properly
managing their own affairs. It was with relish, therefore, that
extensive dissertations were incorporated in the reports portray-
ing the vices and defects of the Spanish system of government;
it was alleged that the masses of the people were on the whole
ignorant, credulous, and childlike for which reason the electoral
franchise could be granted to but a limited number and the great
majority would be incapable of exercising it for a long time;
that the civil service, as taught to and practiced by the Filipinos,
was corrupt, and it was necessary to teach them a different
standard of integrity by means of increases in salaries and the
example of the Americans; that the courts of justice under the
Spanish rule were venal and ruinous to the litigants and, there-
fore, new codes were required which would give the people
simple and speedy administration of justice. And as if all
these were not enough, there was yet dealt a final blow—the
most skilful thrust against the cause of independence and in
favor of retention, consisting in a minute and extensive report
on the vast natural resources of the archipelago, its untouched
mines, its primeval forests, its idle lands, all offering new fields
of expansion for American enterprise, capital and trade. It
was predicted that American implements and machineries
would find a ready market in the archipelago. The passion
for riches and the mandates of the Dollar, no nation, whether
great or small, can resist or disobey.
From a reading of these reports, the conclusion is irresistible
that the Civil Commission came to these Islands, not with the
object of impartially studying conditions and determining the
capacity of the Filipinos to manage their own affairs, nor yet
to prepare the ground for the conversion of the military into
a civil regime, but it came with a mind already made up, deter-
mined to justify the retention of the Islands, and to lend solemn
sanction to the eloquent utterrances of Senator Lodge in the
Rupublican Convention that reelected McKinley;—“We make no


hypocritical pretense that we are interested in the Philippines
solely for the sake of others. We believe in trade expansion.”
THE FIRST MOVES
The Filipinos watched and scrutinized the work of the Com-
mission with rapt attention and the keenest interest. What
the Commission thought, what its plans and intentions were,
in what manner it would settle the differences existing between
the two peoples, were the points the Filipinos were most inter-
ested in knowing. The kindly and conciliatory attitude which
the Commission displayed from the very beginning had won it
many friends and awakened hopes in the hearts of the advocates
of independence and their followers. It was, at any rate, a
Commission composed of civilians, of lawyers and professors,
with whom any one may argue, not with weapons, but with the
law. The belief was that it was vested with ample and supreme
powers, that it could propose and enter into negotiations for
peace, that it was ready to hear or consider such propositions
as the Filipinos would want to make as regards the future of
the Islands. Given the unfamiliarity of the Filipinos with the
American system of government and the scanty knowledge they
had at the time of the instructions of the Commission, it was not
strange that, in the beginning, there should be error or
confusion concerning the Commission’s purpose in the Philip-
pines.
It was not long, however, before the error was realized and
the powers and duties of the Commission fully understood.
Soon after the arrival of the Commissions, the Military Governor,
General McArthur, in obedience to orders from Washington,
made public an amnesty proclamation in favor of all Filipinos still
under arms, with complete pardon for the past, and guarantees
for the present and future, provided they took the oath of alle-
giance to the American Government. Paterno, one of the most
distinguished Filipinos of the old generation, who was President
of the Congress at Malolos, and later Prime Minister of Aguinal-
do’s Government, attempted to take advantage of the proclama-
tion for political ends. He asked and was granted permission to
make arrangements to celebrate the event. Stately and magni-
ficent arches were erected in the streets of Manila, an imposing
parade was organized, and in the evening a big banquet was
given to which the Insular authorities and the members of the
Commission were invited. But then the arches bore such in-
scriptions as the following: “Independence under American


Protectorate,” and there were some in which the pictures of
McKinley and Aguinaldo were displayed side by side in a con-
spicuous place.
Accustomed as he was to Spanish ways, what Paterno had in
mind was none other than to take advantage of the promulgation
of the amnesty proclamation to lay before the Commission a
conciliatory plan which, in his opinion, would be acceptable to
the Filipinos in arms, thus putting an end to the hostilities. The
fact, however, that he made use of the permission given him to
further what, in the opinion of the Americans, was revolutionary
propaganda instead of an amnesty celebration, did not please the
Americans. Both the members of the Commission and the mili-
tary authorities were displeased over the incident, and orders
were given that Aguinaldo’s pictures and the inscriptions per-
taining to independence be removed from the arches. A message
was also sent to Paterno stating that no member of the Com-
mission would attend the banquet scheduled for the evening, it
having been learned that speeches would be delivered whose tenor
might place the Commission in a compromisng position, so that,
in order to avoid disputes at a time when harmony was imper-
ative, the members of the Commission asked to be excused from
the banquet. As ill luck would have it, the message arrived
when the banquet had already commenced, and in order to fore-
stall embarrassment, Paterno had to go to see the members of the
Commission who were nevertheless forced to attend the banquet,
because of Paterno’s pleas and insistence, but on the condition
that the speeches would be eliminated. 3 Paterno was undeni-
ably impelled by the best of intentions, but showed lack of
tact and foresight in not having counted beforehand with the
possible refusal of the Commission and in not having prepared
for that eventuality. His behavior on that occasion was to
the Americans an evidence of the insincerity of the Filipinos,
while to the Filipinos it was a very disappointing disillusionment.
It submerged them in grievous chagrin.
3 The following is a resume of some of the most important speeches
that were to be delivered that evening:
By Pedro A. Paterno: “At one end is the American people requiring
the recognition of their sovereignty in order to fulfill their international
obligations. At the other end is the Filipino people under the leadership
of Aguinaldo who demanded the recognition of their national Independence
even at the cost of their last drop of blood.
“Are there any means worthy of our honor for reconciling the two
extremes?
“The Filipino people unanimously answer—‘protectorate.’ ’


Mabini the irreconcilable, the philosopher, and the soul of the
Revolution believed that, like Paterno, he also was called upon
to express the sentiments of the Filipinos in arms and to propose
a solution that would usher peace. But being 'less pompous
than Paterno, and more cool and calculating, he contented him-
By Aurelio Tolentino: “I drink to the sincere spirit of brotherhood
between America and the Philippines, wishing prosperity for the former,
and eternal national life for the latter, my beloved country.
“I drink to the fact that there has arisen from the clouds of the present
conflict, the Goddess Reason, the wise counselor of the powerful, and the
fond protector of the weak at all times and in all places.
“I drink finally to the day, perhaps not far distant, when the Filipino
people instead of the grief that for four years now they have been carry-
ing in their bosoms, will place on their foreheads, the crown of their
own national rights, saying: ‘America, here are my sons; you have given
them eternal life. May God bless you.’ ”
By Aguedo Velarde: “In the bloody struggle in which the Filipinos now
are trying to reconquer their personality in the concert of nations, we
are confident that America will hear the voice of justice—her brilliant
history, her honorable tradition, and her wise and democratic constitution.
The names of Washington and of other illustrious Americans are to us
the sacred pledge which guarantees the triumph of the ideals to which
we aspire. Yesterday, Liberia; the next day, Cuba—these are two of the
greatest and most eloquent proofs which will be written in the history
of free and independent peoples as an imperishable monument to the mag-
nanimous sentiment of the great American nation. They are two events
which announce to the Filipino people that the day is not far distant
when in their radiant skies there will burst forth the resplendent rays
of their awaited liberty.”
By Leon Ma. Guerrero: “Magnanimous country, you who have raised
a hitherto unhappy Liberia to the rank of a happy and independent state;
you who have shed blood in order to redeem from slavery thousands and
thousands of men; you who illumine the world with the torch of liberty;
you, great nation that you are, become protector of the Filipino people;
shield their ideals of liberty and independence and you will merit their
fervent expressions of eternal gratitude; you will forever hear in the four
corners of the Malayan world, in their mountains as well as in their
forests, this cry of their soul, ‘Long live the North American Nation,
protector of a new nationality.’ ”
By Fernando Ma. Guerrero: “We Filipinos have come here in order to
express the desire of our country. Hear us, America, hear us, that
country of liberty and democracy. We have come hi order to ask that
we be declared independent, completely independent, under the protection
of North America. We have come with hearts anxious to hear the kiss
of peace resounding with vibrations of triumph above the din of combat
and the sorrows of destruction.
“I drink to a free Philippines under the protectorate of the United
States.”
—T. M. Kalaw.


self with asking for a private interview with the Commission,
which was granted him. It was a cordial and friendly inter-
view to be sure. But so irreconcilable were the opinions enter-
tained, so antagonistic the points of view, and so fundamentally
contradictory were the interests of both parties that, notwith-
standing the mutual respect and courtesy that prevailed during
the conference, no understanding or agreement was possible
between them. 4
4 Mabini’s later account of what accurred in this important conference
is the following:
“ Thursday , August 1, 1900. —At 4 o’clock in the afternoon, I was taken
to the Ayuntamiento and introduced to the North American Commission.
Chairman Taft, two other members of the Commission, an interpreter
and a stenographer were present. I have asked for this conference so
as not to be said of me that I have assumed a very arrogant attitude
without having sought the means of understanding in accordance with
the circumstances.
“When the conference was called to order, I stated the following: I
have been a prisoner since December last and have not been set free
without previous knowledge of American sovereignty. The word ‘sover-
eignty’ in international law does not have a fixed and exact definition;
so much so that in the South African question England even pretends
to claim sovereignty over the two republics, notwithstanding her having
recognized the complete independence of those Republics as regards in-
ternal affairs. My efforts in behalf of my country have no other motive
than that of procuring a most solid guaranty for the liberty and rights
of the Filipinos. If American sovereignty, therefore, offers the same
guaranty as that which self-government can offer, I see no inconvenience in
recognizing this sovereignty for the sake of peace. I ended by saying
that I had sought the conference in order to know to what extent American
sovereignty would limit what naturally belongs to the Filipino people.
“After listening to the remarks of his companions, Mr. Taft answered
me thus: ‘The American Government has for its object that of giving
to the Filipinos a good government. The sovereignty that the United
States of America proposes to give is the same that Russia or Turkey
would propose to give if they should occupy the Philippines, with the only
difference that the exercise of. this sovereignty will ever be inspired by
the spirit of the constitution of the United States, Following the man-
dates of this constitution, the Commission will endeavor to establish in
the Philippines a popular government within the limits recently approved
for Porto Rico.’
“To this I replied that the principles on which the American constitu-
tion rests declare that sovereignty resides in the people as a matter of
natural right: that the American Government in not having contented
itself with limiting the sovereignty of the Filipino people but instead
had nullified the same, clearly commits an injustice which sooner or
later will require reparation or expiation; and that there cannot be a
popular government where the people are not given real and effective
participation in the organization and direction of the government.


From that conference with Mabini, the Commission concluded
that the Filipinos had a very mistaken notion of the responsibili-
ties attendant upon the establishment of an independent govern-
ment. As an illustration, Mabini’s reply is cited when, after
having spoken of the general principles of independence and liber-
ty and of the right inherent in individuals and in races to carve
out their own destinies, he was asked by the Chairman of the Com-
mission this question: “But supposing that the Americans with-
draw and this independence you speak of is granted, what then ?
Your country is composed of many islands, some inhabited by
savages, and all by people speaking different dialects and without
any cohesion of ideas nor experience in governmental affairs.
You occupy a position in the commercial world totally exposed
and coveted by many, and without doubt you will very soon be
called upon to defend your nationality. You have many stran-
gers here living among you, whose lives and liberties you will
have to protect, not only against foreign interventions but also
against the ambitions and jealousies of your own people. In
order to protect your country from these dangers, you will need
an army of considerable strength and, at least, the nucleus of
a navy. All these things, together with the necessary expenses
of government, will require great sums of money. Your country
and people are poor, and your industries are paralyzed. With-
out pausing to consider the question of your capacity to govern
yourselves, I would ask you: ‘How would you proceed to pro-
“They made a counter reply, saying that they were not authorized to
discuss abstract questions because they have orders that they should insist
upon their opinion, even if force had to be used, after hearing the opinions
of the Filipinos.
“I then said that as far as I was concerned, the conference was ended
inasmuch as I thought it useless to discuss with force and to give my
opinions to those who would not listen to the voice of reason.
“Mr. Taft then asked whether I wanted to help them in their study
of the taxes that can be imposed on the people, to which I answered
that considering the fact that all taxes imposed without the consent of
the representatives of those required to pay the tax was an injustice,
I could not take part in the proposed study without the representation
and mandate of the people. I see that the Americans are decided in
dragging us to the bitter alternative of dishonor or death. Now that
this is so I shall procure to behave as an honorable man who puts his
duties and honor above everything else. Between dishonor and death,
it is our duty to prefer the latter.”—(Sgd.) Apolinario Mabini.
“Note. —I have limited myself to jotting down the substance; it is to be
remembered that in the conference, the expressions used were duly tem-
pered because of social courtesy and usage.”
—T. M. Kalaw.


vide yourselves with all the necessary means with which to
defend and administer such a government?’ ” To this question
Mabini is said to have simply shrugged his shoulders and replied
that “the question of resources and means was a mere detail.”
The feelings of the Commission thus ceased to be a secret to the
Filipinos; they were as an open book which all the world might
read. It did not come to the Islands in order to negotiate for
peace but to impose peace: The American government was deter-
mined to implant its sovereignty here, and submission to its
authority must be absolute and unconditional. All this delayed
the work of pacification, because the irreconcilable Filipinos
found a pretext in the attitude of the Commission to continue to
sow discontent and mistrust in the minds of a people already
distrustful and skeptical. The Commission was fully aware of
the situation it was in, but with infinite patience, and admirable
steadfastness, it went ahead to make ropes out of sand, as it
were, attempting to make proselytes out of the Filipinos them-
selves in favor of the cause of America.
THE FEDERAL PARTY IS ORGANIZED
Since the beginning of the Filipino-American War there had
been a small group of Filipinos who were opposed to it. These
remained in Manila since the commencement of hostilities and
did not take part in the risk of the campaign, some of them be-
lieving in good faith that it was a mistake and that it was
foolish to fight against forces a hundred times superior. From
among these Filipinos the Commission recruited its followers
and advisers. Later on, some of the politicians who had been
followers of Aguinaldo, and had taken refuge in the amnesty
proclamation, joined this small nucleus, perhaps because they
were convinced that to continue resistance would merely wea-
ken the country materially and economically, and that it was
more prudent because of pressure of circumstances, to tempora-
rily renounce the political ideal that they had espoused. With
the Filipino troops dispersed and the consequent surrender of
many of their generals; with the first acts of the Commission
that bore signs of democracy and the desire to count with
public opinion in the making of the laws; with the reelection
of McKinley that assured the continuance of his policy for
another four years, and, lastly, with the proclamation of
General McArthur threatening the Filipinos in arms with a
series of cruel and severe penalties—the group of conservative
Filipinos saw that the time had come to act, and they organized
a political party under the name of Federal Party. The prin-


cipal object of the party was to hasten general peace in all the
provinces and then to establish a territorial government which
in time would make possible the admission of the Islands as a
State of the North American Union. 6
It was with unfeigned satisfaction that the Commission wel-
comed the organization of this party. It was not only a clear
proof that their reassuring reports to Washington were founded
on fact; it made it easier for them besides to carry out their
plan of retaining the Islands indefinitely. The possibility of
making the Islands a state of the American union was a hand-
some pretext with which to drive away the idea of independence
so deeply imbedded in the minds of the Filipinos. It was for this
reason that the Commission lent most cordial and decided support
to the Federal Party and its dignitaries, and it placed at their
disposal all the facilities and means available under a state of
actual war with which to carry out their propaganda ends. In
the Commission’s phraseology, the Federal Party spread thru-
out the Islands with lightning-like rapidity; but it spread not
on account of the principles it stood for, but rather because of the
B The Federal Party was founded on December 23, 1900. The following
statements made by its most prominent leaders give an idea of the pur-
poses of the party:
By Dr. Pardo de Tavera: “The Federal Party is laboring constantly
in order to show to the Filipino people that nothing will be more beneficial
to the Filipinos as an unconditional adoption of American civilization to
the end that they may be able in due time to constitute themselves into
state similar to the other states of the Union.
“Inspired by the American spirit, speaking the English language, and
reading and thinking like Americans, it will be in them to show sooner
or later to the Republic of the United States that they are capable and
worthy of being a part of the great Federation.”
By Juan Sumulong: “For sometime the Federalists cherished the idea
of becoming a part of the American Union, believing in good faith that,
all hopes for independence being lost, the best thing for the Filipinos
would be to enjoy the same rights enjoyed by the citizens of the great
Republic in order to assume the sovereignty of the people.”
By Dr. Jose Albert: “Thanks to the Organic Act of July 1, 1902, the
Philippines found itself linked to the United States in an extra-constitu-
tional manner in open opposition to our previous demand for a constitu-
tional union. With this petition, we shield ourselves from the bitter and
painful experience of four centuries which an equivocal state of political
dualism might reproduce in these times, or to express it in a political
phrase today, to the end that the Philippines may become domestic for
some purpose and foreign for others in its political relations with the
United States.”
—T. M. Kalaw.


spoils and benefits that it might be able to divide among those
enlisting in its ranks. The hardships of the military rule under
which many families were groaning, coupled with the enticing
offers of honors and recompense from the government coffers,
was the magnificent combination that had the effect of greatly
weakening the resistance of the most valiant exponents of in-
dependence. The Federal Party was victorious all along the
lines and rightly could it boast at the time of its easy conquests.
It had with it the cream and the flower of plutocracy and the
country’s aristocracy of talent, at the same time that it enjoyed
unlimited power, confidence, and influence in the councils of the
new government.
Without losing time, the Commission organized the municipal
governments, and soon afterwards the provincial governments.
This furnished the occasion for a triumphal trip of the Commis-
sion from one province to another, familiarizing themselves with
men and things, mixing socially with the Filipinos, informing
them of the Commission’s benevolent mission and promising
them, like kindly guardians, a greater degree of popular govern-
ment if they would conduct themselves as became good wards. 6
The lesson, however, was not mastered so easily by such prov-
inces as Cavite, Batangas, Cebu, and Samar where the civil
governments had to be turned over to the military; but on the
whole it can be said that the rest of the provinces behaved in
the manner expected of them. Hence it was that the Com-
mission, complying with its mission of peace, organized the cen-
tral civil government on July 4, 1901, in spite of the intrigues
of the military who would not relinquish hold of the government
so easily in favor of others.
MR. TAFT’S POPULARITY
Simultaneously with the establishment of the central civil
government, Mr. Taft, chairman of the Commission, was ap-
pointed Civil Governor of the Islands. His many clashes with
the military because of the establishment of civil government
in the Islands gave him an excellent opportunity to be popular
* The provinces considered to be the last bulwarks of the revolution
were Cebu, Bohol, Samar, Laguna, and Batangas.
In neither of these was civil government established during the year
1901, but only in 1902, on the following dates; Cebu, January 1; Bohol,
April 1; Samar, June 17; Laguna, July 1; and Batangas, July 4, all
in 1902.
—T. M. Kalaw.
198149 2


among the Filipinos. Between the saber and the gown, public
opinion was decidedly for the latter. Moreover, Mr. Taft had
a very attractive and winning personality and he was able to
impart to the civil government an atmosphere that was agree-
ably different from the military. Naturally, the Filipinos, ac-
customed as they were, to seeing under the Spanish rule a
Governor-General constantly surrounded by bayonets, were quick
to show their approbation of the new civil government that was
simpler and less pompous, to which persons of all classes had
access. Mr. Taft was the most appropriate man to impress
upon all the far-reaching importance of the change. No one
could have inaugurated the civil government better than he. He
combined personal qualities of the highest order, so that even
the most distrustful and wily were won over and encouraged
by contact and conversation with him. A loud and frank laugh
characterized him always; he was accessible to everybody with-
out distinction and he treated them all alike. At a time when
the din of war was still ringing in the ears, and when everybody’s
pride was still wounded because of disappointment in the war,
the jovial personality of Mr. Taft was able to overcome the
misgivings with which the new foreign rule was naturally re-
ceived, and he won for it the acquiescence of many and the
submission of the most obstinate and rebellious. Even the Na-
tionalists, fresh from the field of battle, did not hesitate to
approach him and to maintain social and political relations with
him.
Mr. Taft’s popularity among the Filipinos increased all the
more when, during a visit to Iloilo, after assuming office as
Civil Governor, he delivered a memorable speech in which, with-
out any reservation whatever, he denounced the conduct of those
of his countrymen who, furtively or openly, were assailing the
liberal policy of the Commission, declaring in an emphatic
manner that those who were opposed to such a policy had the
perfect right to pack up and hurry back home.
Knowing how much it would please the Filipinos to have the
Friar Lands question, the principal cause of the insurrection,
settled in their favor, he made a trip to Rome and negotiated for
the purchase of said lands from the Vatican, and he succeeded,
altho he paid exhorbitant sums for them. He arranged next
that the government should acquire these estates to be sold to
their occupants in parcels on easy terms, and, thereby, he scored
another far-reaching achievement which added new laurels to
his already assured prestige. Later, however, experience showed


that the arrangement was to be costly to the tenants themselves
who were intended to be favored.
THE NATIONALISTS APPEAR ON THE SCENE
About the time, when Taft was absent in Rome, the Nationa-
lists, who had until then kept silent but had been observing
with grief the course that events had taken, began to feel the
first qualms of conscience and they decided to take soundings
to see whether the stream could be forded. A number of “con-
sistents,” 1 as they styled themselves, met, deliberated, and drew
up, without delay, a program containing the following bases:
7 This group of “consistents” constitutes the principal nucleus of what
was later to be the Nacionalista Party. The same group presented itself
on another occasion later on, namely, in February, 1902, before Governor
Taft, to see if they could at last organize the Independence Party. On
neither of the two occasions could they attain their object. Taft told
them that he would agree to the formation of the party if they would
eliminate the word “Independence” from their platform. The following
month, Paterno wanted to form a Liberal Party without mentioning any-
thing that directly referred to independence. The same was done by the
Conservative Party which was formed immediately after the Federal
Party. On the 15th of December, 1904, Isabelo de los Reyes, Gregorio
Aglipay, and others founded the Republican Party on the following basis:
“While the American Congress does not as yet believe us to be capable
of absolute independence, we espouse as our aspiration another kind of
independence, that limited by American protectorate, with the use of the
Filipino flag side by side with the American flag.”
In the meantime, the Nacionalistas continued to enlarge their party
in silence, thru frequent reunions and gatherings which were attended
by those who favored immediate independence from Manila as well as
from the provinces.
When the committee composed of Secretary Taft and various Congress-
men arrived in Manila, in August, 1905, the Nacionalistas altho not as
yet formally organized as a party, presented themselves to the Commis-
sion and submitted a memorial about immediate Philippine Independence.
After that the Nacionalistas were again divided into two groups—those
who favored the inclusion of the phrase “immediate independence” in their
platform ( inmediatas ) and those who did not accept the word “immediate”
(unionistas). Seeing that the first election for the Assembly of 1907
was approaching, the Nacionalistas of all kinds fused into one on March
12, 1907, in order to organize formally the Great Nacionalista Party, with
this platform: “The obtaining of the immediate independence of the Phil-
ippine Islands in order to organize the country into a free sovereign nation
under a democratic government, without prejudice to adopting in its
day any form of guaranty which will be convenient to the interests of
the Filipino people and which circumstances would require.” This platform
was preserved intact until 1922 when the Nacionalistas began to work for
“immediate, complete, and absolute independence.”
— T. M. Kalaw.


ESSENTIAL BASE
First'— The securing of the independence of the Islands thru
lawful means.
INCIDENTAL BASES
Second. —Modification of the present administration of the
Philippines so as to give the Filipinos a greater degree of self-
government, as an announcement of the capacity of the Filipino
people.
Third. —Modification of article seven of the Philippine Bill as
follows:
(a) Immediate establishment of two legislative chambers
upon the completion of the Census.
(6) Both these legislative chambers to be elected by popular
suffrage, to safeguard the interests of the Filipino people, and
to be patterned after the two Houses of Congress in America.
(c) The bills passed by the Philippine Legislature to become
laws subject to the same rules set forth in the American Con-
stitution.
Fourth. —Admission of Philippine products into the United
States customs free.
Fifth . —Protective legislation for the Philippine industries.
A committee of three was appointed to lay this program
before Governor Wright, who was acting in the absence of Mr.
Taft. It is said that Governor Wright, upon learning the pur-
pose of the committee, knitted his brow in displeasure and flatly
refused to give his assent to the program. Altho aggrieved by
Governor Wright’s reception, the Nacionalistas were not dis-
couraged, and when Mr. Taft arrived they named another com-
mittee to see him. Mr. Taft was more diplomatic as to form
than Mr. Wright, but was just as unyielding as to substance.
In his opinion, the propaganda of the Nacionalista party would
stir up the fires of the insurrection anew and would kill the
party itself. It would be impossible to prevent the authorities
from suspecting the Nationalists from within and confusing
them with the brigands out in the field. Along similar lines,
Mr. Taft addressed the committee. He took care to suggest,
however, that if the word “independence” were eliminated from
the program, he would have no objection to recognizing the new
party. Debates and doubts ensued among the organizers of the
party, but in the end the opinion prevailed that the grapes
were still green and must be allowed to ripen; they, therefore,
retreated to their original position of watchful waiting.


It was impossible, however, for the Federalists’ error to con-
tinue blindfolding the country for any length of time. The
Saint Louis Exposition of 1904 which induced many Filipinos
to visit the United States, gave the Federal Party a lesson which
it would not even admit when Mabini made them see the impos-
sibility of their platform. 8 i
"As soon as the organization of the Federal Party was announced,
Mabini wrote the following: “This attractive name (the Federal Party)
is the first to present itself before my surprised eyes. Its founders fore-
saw my questions, telling me that it had its origin from the aspiration of
the party, namely, that the Islands should in time become one of the
states of the North American Union. Perfectly so, I answered, but you
should take into consideration that a limited independence is more com-
patible with the preoccupations and habits of the North Americans than
the status of a state, because as Mr. Root said we are far from the Amer-
ican continent, and I add that we are of a different color and customs.
God grant that I am wrong; but I am afraid that you are arousing a hope
that cannot be fulfilled, and because of it, you will provoke impatience
first and despair afterwards. Above all, I fear that in calling others
idealists, you are the ones who fall into that very sin. Besides, since
you want nearness, you should shorten the distances. Who knows whether
those who desire Independence, in view of the circumstances, will content
themselves with attaining it after a fixed time?"
The first indication of a change of front on the part of the Federalists
was in an important article of Juan Sumulong written while he was in
the United States in 1904 and published in the magazine the “Review of
Reviews." Extracts from that article are the following:
“Taking then into consideration only those points in which the two
groups agree, the Nacionalista and the Federal group, it can be admitted
that the real aspiration of the great majority of the people is as follows:
1. The immediate establishment of a government of Filipinos, by Fili-
pinos, aided by Americans.
2. The immediate independence of the country as soon as it is possible,
according to the Nacionalistas, and after a probatory period, according
to the Evolutionists.
3. A protectorate by the United States over the Philippine Republic,
or if this is not possible, an international guaranty obtained with the
help of the United States guaranteeing the inviolability of Philippine
Independence.
From that time on Sumulong was the principal promoter of the change
of platform of the Federalists, and from the United States, he began send-
ing letters to his friends in the Philippines telling them of the necessity
of this change. In the Federal Assembly of 1905, the revision of their
platform was taken up and on May 21, among other things, the following
was agreed upon:
“As regards the final and definite political status of the country, the
party desires and hopes that in due time, the government of the Philip-
pines will be a Republican Independent Government, maintaining, if nec-


There was not a single American who seriously favored the
annexation of the Philippines. To them, such annexation was
precluded by the distance of the Islands and by the customs of
the Filipinos that were totally different. Many of the promi-
nent “Federalists” who had gone to the United States in the
honest belief that their platform had some merit to it, came
back confused and disheartened. The panacea they had admin-
istered on the country was a fatal one, and could not cure it,
so that the party found itself in a very embarrasing position
which not even the changes, subsequently adopted, were able
to remedy.
The Nacionalistas took advantage of the opportunity and came
out in the open. The state of war that had silenced them there-
tofore and prevented the carrying out of any propaganda for
the party, had ceased to exist. There was nothing in the organic
law prohibiting their working in a peaceful manner for the inde-
pendence of the country. The Census had been completed and
two years later the elections for the first Philippine Assembly
was to be held.
Herein we have to do justice to the American people. The
liberal spirt of their Constituion which allows no barriers to
free thought and its free expression, had made it possible for
the Filipinos to campaign peacefully for their independence and
to provide the ways and means necessary to obtain it. No other
people has permitted a similar liberty to the inhabitants of a
territory under its sway. Thus it was that the Nacionalistas,
in organizing their party, never lost sight of, nor have they
ever failed to recognize, this generosity on the part of the Amer-
ican people and their representatives in the Islands. Thus it
was also that the leaders of the Nacionalistas never have shown
an attitude of arrogance or of challenge even in the most trying
situations, but instead they have placed themselves in the posi-
tion of one merely complying with a duty dictated by the voice
of the people. They considered themselves as trustees of the
ideals of the Revolution, who were in duty bound to continue the
works of those who had fallen. In all their campaigns they
essary, with the government of the United States, those political ties
which by mutual consent the two countries wall agree upon.”
In January, 1907, the name of Federal Party was changed to Progres-
sive National Party.
In April, 1917, the Progressive National Party was merged with the
National Democratic Party.
— T. M, Kalaw


limited themselves to showing to the American people and their
representatives here that the cause of independence had not
ceased to have followers in the country, and that, in spite of the
personal liberties granted the Filipinos and the participation
given them in the different branches of the government, they still
cherished the ambition to have their own nationality and their
own government under their own laws. In no manner were
they impeded by the Government in their organization, but while
there were no impediments from that end, there were many
when the time arrived for the heads of the organization to come
to an understanding. Because of this lack of understanding the
Nacionalistas became divided into various groups, the dividing
line between each of which they themselves were unable to
delineate. They lost much time discussing the clauses and
planks of their respective platforms, until, on the eve of the
election, the apprehension of a common disaster made them re-
unite, but only temporarily, because after their victory at the
polls they fell to disputing again among themselves.
THE ASSEMBLY AND ITS SPEAKER
In the elections of 1907 for delegates to the Assembly, the
nationalists came out victorious with an overwhelming ma-
jority. 9 It was the first indication that the people had not
renounced their political creed since the war, and that they re-
posed confidence, not on those Filipinos who had associated with
the Americans in the establishment of the paternal type of gov-
ernment then existing, but on those others who wanted to de-
mand separation from the United States. In view of the out-
standing questions discussed during the campaign, the outcome
of the elections showed unmistakably that the Filipino people did
not agree with the situation forced upon them by recent develop-
* The following were the political affiliations of the members of the first
Philippine Assembly: Nacionalistas, 59; Independents, all of whom sided
with the Nacionalistas on all questions affecting Independence, 5; and
Progresistas, 16.
The press of the United States in reporting the constitution of the
first Assembly, said the following: “More than half of the total members
of the first Assembly are lawyers, 13 are newspapermen, 8 professors, 9
governors under American sovereignty about half having occupied places
in the revolutionary government, 36 Bachelors of Arts, and almost all
have studied in colleges. Six had had the privilege of travelling in the
United States, one of them being a graduate of the College of Law of
the University of Michigan, 2 have studied in Spain, and almost all are
proprietors.”
—T. M. Kalaw


merits. For the first time were belied those alluring reports
which the Commissioners had sent to Washington about the satis-
faction and the contentment prevailing among the Filipinos on
account of benefits brought to them by the government of the
Islands. The popular verdict did not surround the established
government with the halo of its consent, neither did it purge it of
its original vice—that of being based on violence. It must have
been so understood by Mr. Taft when, as Secretary of War, in a
special report of his trip to the Philippines sent to President
Roosevelt, in discussing this same matter, he sought to belittle
the importance of the results of those elections, saying that the
number of votes registered and cast did not exceed 104,000,
while in the previous election for governor, the total number of
votes cast was 150,000, and that the decrease was due to the
timidity of the conservative voters who, because of the heated
campaign, preferred to stand aloof and did not take any part.
The position of the nationalists was difficult and exceedingly
delicate. They were called upon to fight for the cause of sepa-
ration, but this same separation they had to wrest from those
elements themselves who of necessity would combat it. The dif-
ficulty was never more fully realized than when the elected natio-
nalists organized themselves within the Assembly. This body
was a part of the government and it had to function in harmony
with the government if it was to preserve its usefulness, but at
the same time, it represented the people whose ideas, insofar
at least as the fundamental features of the solution of the Phil-
ippine problem were concerned, ran counter to the ideas of the
established government.
It was realized immediately that there was need of selecting
a man who could be the chief and mentoh of the organization,
not so much to direct and preside over the sessions of the As-
sembly, but to assume control and direction of the' popular
movement for independence.
All peoples have had their guiding men in their stages of
genesis and transition. A just Providence has always extended
a helping hand to them. When a nation feels the call of destiny
summoning it to perform a given task, these leaders appear and
guide it on to success. The Filipino people have known how to
undertake the work for their country’s liberty. They are bent
on this, their sacred cause —a cause that is not theirs alone but
that also of all the other Malayan peoples in Oceania. Mabini
has said with prophetic certainty that the awakening of the Fi-
lipino is the awakening of all the other peoples of the Malayan


race. 10 It is, therefore, the duty of the Filipino people to go
ahead, to advance always, altho the torments and difficulties of
life obstruct their path.
It is fortunate that the Filipinos have known how to select
their leaders in any situation that has arisen in their history
Among the men of the generation that was then about to pass
away there were those of indisputable merit who had ren-
dered patriotic service to the cause of the country, and who as-
pired to be leaders. But the nacionalistas elected One from the
rising generation, who, in his brief political career, had shown
exceptional aptitude for leadership, superior to those of his
elders, and who gave still greater promise in the future. There
was no dispute about his election; Sergio Osmeha, Delegate
from Cebu, was chosen Speaker of the Asembly, by acclamation.
The wisdom of his election was shown by his achievements.
He measured up to circumstances at all times. In his frail and
slender physique which seems to bend to the slightest touch,
there resides, by the rarest of contrasts, the most formidable
physical and moral endurance. His vast knowledge, his persua-
sive eloquence, his quick and searching intuition about men and
things, reinforced by his incomparably winning ways, all com-
bine to make him a fine leader of the multitude. He is ever
ready to confront political battles of any description and does
not flinch in the face of the greatest dangers. But amidst it all,
he keeps before him the highest and most serene vision of the
ideals and the principles he faithfully follows and executes, re-
conciling them with the sternest realities, never losing that rare
equipoise and that exhaustless energy which are the secret of
success in many a contest.
TIMES OF STRUGGLES AND DIFFICULTIES
The difficulties of the situation soon began to be felt. The
legislative task turned out to be difficult and embarrassing, not
because the Filipinos were really novices in it, but because the
Civil Commission had taken possession of the whole legislative
field, and had left practically no important matter unlegislated
over, with the deliberate purpose of strengthening the founda-
tions of its policy and preventing the radical measures expected
10 The Mission of the Philippine Revolution, according to Mabini, was
“to maintain alive and resplendent in Oceania the torch of liberty and
civilization, so that in illuminating the dark and gloomy night in which
the Malayan race today is submerged it may show to it the way to its
social emancipation.”
—T. M. Kalaw


from the Assembly from interfering with the success of its
plans. The first question that arose was the question of appro-
priations. It was simply impossible to carry out the intention
of the Assembly to reduce the expenditures of the government
in order to affect economy in the insular finances. The changes
proposed in the municipal and provincial organizations, intended
to eliminate certain drawbacks resulting from excessive centrali-
zation, were also rejected by the Commission.
The Assembly gave in for several years, not because the dele-
gates shunned a conflict, but because they wanted to show that
their moderate use of the rights conferred upon the Filipinos
was evidence of the practical' intelligence of the people, as the
nacionalistas understood it, as well as of their readiness for still
greater concessions. If the Assembly had shown impatience
and aggressiveness during the first years of its existence, it
would have furnished a handy argument to those critics who
objected to the Filipinos being given a popular assembly, and it
would have justified the theory of those who did not believe
that the Filipinos had any sense of responsibility in the art of
government. Taft, himself, said in his above-mentioned report
to President Roosevelt that the prudent excercise by the people of
the legislative powers vested in them was not by any means
a sufficient proof that if they had not been under the superior
direction, guidance, and restriction of the representatives of the
United States in the Islands, they would be able to maintain the
same degree of prudence and conservatism. Subjected as they
were in their labors to the standards of judgment of the Amer-
icans, the nacionalistas, eager to make a name for themselves,
had to submit, in some cases, to the desires of the Commission.
It was only in this manner that during the first years they were
able to avoid the constant friction between the two houses of the
Legislature which would surely have ensued if the Assembly
had adopted an attitude of hostility and complete opposition to
the measures of the Commission, an attitude which might have
been construed as an argument against the legislative capacity
of the Filipinos justifying the abolition of the Assembly itself.
But it was not long before the Assembly, after making sure
that public opinion was with it, realized it to be its duty to come
out uncompromisingly for certain powers which in its judgment
belonged to it.
The election of the Resident Commissioners gave the first se-
rious cause for a break. In the beginning, the practice was for
the Assembly to elect one of the Commissioners and the Com-


mission the other. In view, however, of the fact that an election
so carried out almost always resulted,in the campaign for inde-
pendence in the United States not being jointly undertaken by
the two Commissioners, it was argued that in order to push the
campaign with greater vigor, the Assembly as an elective body
and therefore the popular representation of the country, was
entitled to elect both Commissioners. Naturally, the Commis-
sion did not surrender its privilege of electing one of the Com-
missioners and there was a long drawn-out dispute between the
two branches of the Legislature, which was finally decided by
mutual concession—the Commission agreeing that the Commis-
sioner elected by it should be one in favor of the independence
of the Islands. 11
Next arose the question of systematizing the expenses of
the Government. The preparation of the appropriations was
in such a manner that the heads of each office had the
absolute discretion over the funds appropriated for the office
not only as to the manner in which the sums were to be spent,
but also in the disposal of the income, if any, from the use of
said sums. The Assembly wanted to control the expenditures
11 The discussion between the Philippine Assembly and the Commission
over the election of Resident Commissioners began on November 18, 1910,
and ended on February 1, 1911 without having been able to arrive at any
satisfactory agreement. The Commission maintained that it had the right
to elect a Resident Commissioner who would represent the Commission and
the President of the United States. The Assembly contended that
the Resident Commissioners were representatives or delegates of the
Filipino people and that these were represented by the Assembly and not
by the Commission nor by the President of the United States. Later the
Commission argued that the Resident Commissioners in effect represented
the Filipino people, but that the Assembly alone did not represent the
Filipino people, but the Assembly jointly with- the Commission, that is
to say, the Legislature. The Assembly replied that the Commission could
not represent the Filipino people in any manner, and that the Assembly
because elected by the people was the only body that could represent the
people. After this instructive discussion, the Conference Committee
reported on February 1, 1911, that they were not able to arrive at any
agreement. The Assembly published in pamphlet form the stenographic
notes of the debates had.
On the part of the House, the members of the Conference Committee
were Osmena, Adriatico, Villanueva, Barreto, and Apacible; on the part
of the Commission, Governor-General Forbes, Vice-Governor Gilbert, Sec-
retary Araneta, and Commissioners Sumulong and Branagan.
The conflict was settled afterwards by the election of Manuel Earn-
shaw and the reelection of Manuel L. Quezon as Resident Commissioners
in November, 1912, both being advocates of immediate independence.
—T. M. Kalaw


of the Government in a more effective manner, and it presented
to the Commission a plan whereby, iflapproved, the chiefs of
any branch of the Government would not be able to spend more
than the amount appropriated for that branch, and the re-
mainder, if any, or the income derived from the operations of
those branches, were to revert back to the Insular Treasury at
the end of each fiscal year.
The Commission refused to approve the plan proposed, and for
the first time in 1911 the Appropriation Law failed to pass. In
view of this, the Governor-General made use of his privilege
granted by the Organic Law, by himself making the allotments
for each office in accordance with the appropriations of the
previous year. Governor Forbes not only made use of this priv-
ilege, but even exceeded it in the sense that he made different
allotments from those of the previous year, increasing those of
some offices, and decreasing those of others, according to what
he thought was necessary in each particular case.
The Assembly, however, did not abandon its plan, and the
following year, before the Appropriation Law was submitted for
consideration, they again presented it to the Commission. A
concurrent resolution was sent to the Commission which set
forth the basis on which, in its judgment, the Appropriation Law
should be drafted, this being the same basis that in the prece-
ding year brought about the failure to pass the Appropriation
Law. 12
13 Since October, 1911, the Special Committee of the Philippine As-
sembly appointed for the purpose of studying the matter of appropria-
tions, had fixed and adopted a new rule in the drafting of the law. The
Committee sought to limit the use of the money by each office or bureau
in such a manner that the allotment for salaries could not be used for
eventual expenses and vice versa. A limit was also fixed for each item
in the eventual expenses in a manner that the allotment for one definite
purpose could not be used for another. It was proposed, besides, that one
office should not be allowed to spend its own income, if it had any, but
that this would go to the the Insular Treasury. As the Philippine Com-
mission insisted upon adopting the old rule in the preparation of the appro-
priations, there was no appropriation law for the year 1912.
In December 1912, pending the preparation of the Appropriation Law
for the year 1913 and for the whole economic year 1914, the Assembly
with renewed courage insisted on its stand, transmitting to the Com-
mission for its approval the following plan of “Common Bases” for the
preparation and approval of the appropriations.
First base. —Every Appropriation Law should originate in the Philip-
pine Assembly.
Second base.—Suppression of all provisions of an organic or reorganic
character in an Appropriation «Law.


The Commission again refused to abandon its stand on the
matter, so that again the bill failed of passage. Things would
have continued thus, indefinitely, in view of the uncompromising
attitude of both the Assembly and the Commission, had it not
been for a sudden change in the administration in the United
States which brought with it a change of Governor-General in
the Islands. Governor-General Harrison who was the first Gov-
ernor sent here by the Democratic Party, recognizing that
the Assembly had the better reason, decided the case in its favor,
and approvd the plan proposed by it.
So that, in the brief period of its existence, the Assembly had
succeeded in having itself fully recognized as a beneficial and
useful political instrument in the hands of the Filipino people
for the purpose of legislating on the immediate needs of the
country. It is only now that the importance of this triumph
can be fully realized, now that a sufficient number of years had
Third base. —Inclusion in the Appropriation Law of all those Bureaus
and offices which have their own income. In preparing the appropriation
for the expenses of the latter, there should be included not only the
expenses for the maintenance of the said Bureaus but also the expenses
for the production of the services to which they are dedicated.
Fourth base. —Specification of the items of expenses for the salaries
of the personnel as well as for the materials used, provided that for the
salaries of th» personnel of each Bureau there should not be appropriated
more than the amount really necessary for the semester or for the fiscal
year, whichever may be the case.
Fifth base. —A complete separation of the total expenses for the per-
sonnel, materials, and other expenses of each office or bureau, provided
that the expenses so allotted cannot be destined for an object different
from that which appears in the Appropriation Law.
Sixth base. —All the income of each office and bureau should be depo-
sited in the Insular Treasury to form a part of the general funds.
Seventh base. —Suppression in the Appropriation Law of all allot-
ments of a permanent character.
Eighth base. —lnclusion in the Appropriation Law or complete exclu-
sion therefrom for a Special Law of all the items referring to pub-
lic works of a permanent character.
Ninth base. —Complete and separate specification of the amount nec-
essary for the Commutation and payment of accumulated licenses, ex-
penses for trips, transportation, etc., provided that the sum voted for
this purpose cannot be used for other purposes.
Tenth base. —All the amount not expended at the end of the fiscal year
to revert to the Insular Treasury to be a part of the general funds.
Neither was an agreement had on the above project and for the second
time, the Appropriation Law failed of passage.
—T. M. Kalaw


already elapsed, and the acrimonious criticisms hurled at the
Assembly from time to time, both by foreigners and by Filipinos,
in the heat of certain campaigns, have calmed down. Judging
the work of the Assembly from above all petty prejudices and
petty strife, now that its acts have become a matter of history,
we can, with justice, pride ourselves that it had known how to
fulfill its mission in a manner that was satisfactory to, and honor-
able for, our nation and our race.
THE CAMPAIGN IN AMERICA
Governor Forbes used to say that during his administration,
he would never bother himself about the question of Indepen-
dence; that this was a question with which he had nothing to
do because it was a matter that Congress alone could decide; and
that, hence, it was lost time to discuss about it in the Philippines.
The Philippine Assembly thought otherwise, and, invariably, at
the end of each session of the Legislature, the Assembly or its
Chairman would devote serious attention to the question of Inde-
pendence. 13 Naturally, the officials of the Government, as well
as the Americans and other foreigners in the Islands, became
13 The following are the declarations or resolutions about Independence:
1. Declaration of Speaker Osmena, approved on June 19, 1908.
2. Resolution of Speaker Osmena, approved on May 20, 1909.
3. Resolution of the Philippine Assembly on December l9lO.
4. Resolution of the Assembly on February 3, 1911.
5. Resolution of the Assembly on February 1, 1912.
6. Resolution of the Assembly on December 10, 1912.
7. Declaration of Speaker Osmena in his speech at the closing ses-
sion, February 11, 1913.
8. Resolution of the Assembly on October 16, 1913.
9. Resolution of the Assembly on January 14, 1914.
10. Declaration of the Assembly on February 28, 1914.
11. Resolution of the Philippine Legislature on October 16, 1914.
12. Resolution of the Philippine Assembly on February 5, 1915.
13. Declaration of Speaker Osmena in his closing speech of February
5, 1915.
14. Resolution of the Philippine Legislature on October 16, 1915.
15. Resolution of the Philippine Assembly on January 25, 1916.
16. Resolution of the Philippine Assembly on February 4, 1916.
17. Resolution of the Philippine Legislature, all elective according to
the Jones Law, approved on October 16, 1917.
18. Resolution of the Philippine Legislature sent to President Wilson,
approved on October 16, 1918.
19. Resolution of the Philippine Legislature on November 7, 1918,
organizing the Commission of Independence.
20, Resolution of the Philippine Legislature on November 11, 1918,
approving the sending to the United States of an extraordinary Mission.


accustomed to hearing talks about Independence as an ordinary
thing, and after some time ceased to give any importance to
the matter.
In reality, the nacionalistas, from the beginning of the organi-
zation of the Assembly, were seriously preoccupied over the
question, to the extent that, at times, in the discussion of the
methods to be employed for the successful termination of the
campaign, serious dissension ensued between them. In the
first session, the more radical members wanted to address a
petition direct to the Congress of the United States on the ques-
tion of Independence. But the more cautious and conservative
delegates believed that such a procedure was not practical, and
they valiantly faced the risk and the consequences of falling
into unpopularity by opposing it. However, an effective method
was found by which to make known the desire of the people to be
free. This was in the form of a declaration clear and unequiv-
ocal, from the lips of the Speaker of the Assembly, and ratified
by the majority. 14 In this manner, the Commission did not have
to act on the matter; all knew that it would have tenaciously
21. Joint resolution of March 8, 1919, confirming and ratifying the
creation of the Commission of Independence until the objects of the Com-
mission have been attained.
22. Resolution of the Philippine Legislature on March 8, 1919, an-
nouncing a Declaration of Purposes which was to serve as guide to
the Commission in the performance of its duties.
23. Presentation of the Philippine question by the Philippine Mission
to Secretary Baker in Washington on April 4, 1919.
24. Resolution of the Legislature on July 26, 1919.
25. Resolution of the Legislature on December 14, 1920.
26. Resolution of the Legislature on December 16, 1920.
27. Resolution of the Legislature on November 21, 1921, on the occasion
of the Disarmament Conference at Washington.
28. Resolution about the Parliamentary Mission of 1922, and me-
morials presented by said Mission to the Congress and President of the
United States.
29. Resolution of the Philippine Legislature of December 1, 1921, on
the occasion of the report of the Wood-Forbes special Mission.
30. Resolution of the Legislature of November 29, 1922, asking for the
calling of a Constitutional Assembly to vote on a Constitution for a Phil-
ippine Republic.
—T. M. Kaiaw
14 The most important paragraphs of this declaration follow:
‘Through all the vicissitudes, difficulties, and reverses, the ideal of the
Filipino people has remained unalterable. The adverse fortune of Fili-
pino arms has not shaken the aspirations of the people; neither has the
false hope so often held out in the midst of people’s misfortunes, of the


opposed any petition or resolution of the Assembly in favor of
Independence.
possibility of the Philippines being made a State of the Great American
Union, ever made them hesitate in the least. The Filipino people accepted
peace, principally because they expected justice from the American people.
Far from holding aloof from or making difficult the work of the govern-
ment in its implantation, they did everything they could to promote and
improve it. They went to the polls when the municipal government was
established; they also willingly took part in the government of the prov-
inces when, amid countless difficulties and when the ruins of the rev-
olution still loomed grim and terrible, they were called upon to do so; and
they chose their representatives when the solemn hour came for the most
difficult test of their capacity to manage their own destinies. But neither
before nor after did they yield to promise or fear; before and after they
aspired for their national independence, both when they cast their votes
in favor of a free and independent life, and when yesterday on the
battlefield they offered the lives of their best sons for the sake of
our country and of her ideals. We must thus speak clearly in this august
place, where fallacy does not lurk, where deceit has no place and where
truth finds its seat, and where justice presents itself with all of its lofty
attributes; we must speak thus in this place where we feel with full
sense of responsibility our love, our most legitimate veneration for the
Philippines.
“The Filipino people aspire today as before taking up arms for the
second time against Spain, as thereafter in the din of arms and then in
peace, for their National Independence. The phrase “immediate inde-
pendence” engraved in the banner of the majority is not new, it has not
been invented only today, nor does it signify a new idea; the phrase
“immediate independence,” the present slogan of the Filipino people, has
been their slogan always, and embodies and signifies their true aspiration,
that aspiration which has not suffered mutation nor change, which has
not even cooled, which has not been forgotten by the sons of the country
for even a moment thru all the adversities suffered and all the vicissitudes
that have arisen; it has not been forgotten, no, this ideal has not dimmed
not even at the moment of taking the oath of allegiance to the constituted
government, because that allegiance does not repudiate our ideals and
because we believe that fidelity to America permits us to be true to our
conscience as Filipinos, to our sacred desire for our National Independ-
ence.
“Allow me, gentlemen of the House, following the dictates of my con-
science as a delegate, as a representative of the country, under my re-
sponsibility as Speaker of the House, to declare solemnly as I do now
before God and before the world, that we believe that our people aspire
for their independence, that our people consider themselves capable of
leading an orderly life, efficient for themselves and for others, in the
concert of free and civilized nations, and that we believe that if the people
of the United States were to decide at this moment the Philippine cause
in favor of the Filipinos the latter could, in assuming the consequent re-
sponsibility, comply with their duties to themselves and to others, with-
out detriment to liberty, to justice, and to right.
—T. M. Kalaw


However, it was made to be understood all the time that the
real field of action for the movement in favor of Independence
was not the Philippines but the United States. The best man-
ner of undertaking this movement was to utilize the services of
the Resident Commissioners, and the first Resident Commissioner
on the part of the Assembly was given instructions to that effect.
Pablo Ocampo took advantage of the Annual Conference at
Lake Mohonk to present to the American people the first brief of
the Filipinos in favor of their Independence. ls When Mr. Ocam-
po’s term expired, the majority of the nacionalistas elected in his
place Mr. Manuel L. Quezon, delegate from Tayabas. As a leader
of the majority in the Assembly, Quezon had shown extraordi-
nary and many-sided aptitude for the most difficult of campaigns.
A better choice than this could not have been made, as was
shown by the subsequent results and events. Quezon has a
fighting and aggressive temperament combined with an admir-
able calmness of judgment and an unerring vision of the dif-
ficulties to be encountered and the manner of overcoming them.
His eloquence, eminently that of a parliamentarian, flowing, pas-
sionate and persuasive, quickly dominates and convinces every-
one. Frank, alert, and determined, he has an enviable personal
magnetism and he invariably attracks followers to the cause he
champions. He knows best the psychology of the masses and
possesses the secret of impressing them at his will. All these
qualities which Quezon possesses in marked degree are, without
doubt, the most suitable for the role that he was to play in
Washington.
His first task was to master the English language so as to be
able to deliver speeches in English. If he was to interest Ameri-
can public opinion in the cause of Independence, there was no
other way but to make the Congress of the United States his
field of action, the place where the currents of American political
life ebb and flow. After a year’s stay in the United States,
he was able to pronounce his first speech on the situation
1 This speech was delivered on October 22, 1908. Referring to the
Declaration of Independence’’ of Speaker Osmena in the closing session
of June 19, 1907, Resident Commissioner Pablo Ocampo said the following:
The manner in which he made it public, the solemn form in which it was
announced to the world shows his wisdom, tact and serene judgment. All
speak highly in favor of the capacity of my people who, serenely and hope-
fully, are confident that they will obtain from the United States, without
commotions, without impatience and without disturbances, the verdict
that will pronounce the cause of the Filipino people a legitimate cause in
all respects.”
198149 3


in the Philippines which attracted not a little attention and
aroused the sympathies of Congressmen towards the young
representative from the Islands. The speech was a magnificent
oration which even the most eminent leaders of the American
Congress would not have been ashamed of. In it was portrayed,
faithfully and in glowing colors, the thoughts and feelings of the
Filipino people regarding their Independence. No, the Filipino
people had no cause to fail to recognize the good intentions and
the benevolent work undertaken in the Philippines by the repre-
sentatives of the American Government; but there was some-
thing that impelled the Filipinos over and above their gratitude
for favors received, and that something was the sentiment for
their own liberty. In some such terms, the Resident Commis-
sioner expressed himself, paraphrasing that famous thought of
Webster in a speech: “No matter how easy may be the yoke of a
foreign power, no matter how lightly it sits upon the shoulders,
if it is not imposed by the voice of his own nation and of his
own country, he will not, he cannot, and he means not to be
happy under its burden. 10 ”
Quezon did not confine himself to speaking in Congress.
Endowed with an astounding activity, he traveled thru the
I# The first speech of Quezon in the House of Representatives was de-
livered on May 14, 1910. This speech defined the character of the new
campaign, to wit: conciliatory in form, but direct and determined as to
substance. The speech was not an impassioned harangue in favor of
independence, nor was it a furious condemnation of the abuses of the
American administration. Quezon recognized the work of the United
States in the Islands but at the same time said that the Filipinos preferred
to be free and independent.
“We are aware,” said Quezon, “that you have not gone to those Is-
lands for your own profit; we are aware that you have not gone there
to subjugate us, but to emancipate us. The lesson of your history the
most brilliant history of all the nations of the world—is inconsistent with
any other motive in your dealings with the Filipinos than that of making
them free. This great Republic, founded and reared by liberty-loving
people, cannot undertake any task not in keeping with right, justice, hap-
piness, and liberty for all mankind. We have an unshaken faith in the
future destiny of our beloved fatherland, since its fate was committed to
your care. We firmly believe and sincerely trust that the day will soon
come when this Congress, composed of the representatives of a God-fear-
ing people, will generously give to us the blessings of that freedom which
has made you so happy, so prosperous, and so great, and which is after
all the keynote of the happiness and prosperity of every people. When
that time comes, and let us hope that it may happen to-morrow, the day
when was raised in the Philippines the ever-glorious Stars and Stripes
will eternally be the best-celebrated day of our national life.”
— T. M. Kalaw


various states of the Union, taking advantage of every opportu-
nity to speak on conditions in the Philippines and the desires
of her inhabitants. He not only intervened in the work of the
several committees in Congress on proposed legislation for the
Islands, but he also extended his activities to the national con-
ventions of the American parties, endeavoring to have some-
thing inserted in their respective platforms favorable to Phil-
ippine Independence. He organized a committee of propaganda
and publicity about Philippine affairs and, not contented with
this, he edited a review designed to make known the opinion of
the Filipinos on matters that concerned them and in general
to defend the interests of the Archipelago and the rights of its
people to their freedom. He did not rest, nor falter, nor give
up until Congress at last made a specific and unequivocal de-
claration in the name of the American people that it is the
purpose of the United States to grant independence to the
Islands. 17
11 The activity shown by Commissioner Quezon from May, 1910, until the
passage of the Jones Law was really remarkable. Without mentioning
his conferences with the different public men nor the volume of official or
purely private correspondence which formed in themselves a goodly mass,
the list of speeches delivered by Quezon on different occasions and in dif-
lerent states of the United States, is very long. What follows is a very
incomplete list:
1. May 14, 1910, in the House of Representatives.
2. March 2, 1911, in the House of Representatives.
3. January 9, 1912, before the Anti-Imperialist League.
4. February 4, 1912, before the Beacon Society of Boston.
5. February 7, 1912, before the Board of Trade, Springfield.
6. February 21 to 25, 1912, before the Committee on Insular Affairs.
7. April 12, 1919, in the House of Representatives.
8. May 1, 1912, in the House of Representatives.
9. May 15, 1912, in the House of Representatives.
10. June 2, 1912, in Norwich University, Northfield.
11. June 3, 1912, in Brattleboro, Vermont.
12. June 4, 1912, in Tammany Hall.
13. June 3, 1913, before the Anti-Imperialist League.
14. June 20, 1913, before the Ohio Society of New York
15. June 27, 1913, in the House of Representatives.
16. June 28, 1913, in the House of Representatives.
17. February 13, 1913, in the House of Representatives
18. February 24, 1913, in Elmira, New York.
19. March 9, 1913, in Wisconsin (series).
20. April 22, 1913, before the Economic Club, Worcester, Massachusetts.
21. June 10, 1913, at a dinner of the Philippine Society in New York.
22. April 15, 1914, before the Cleveland Chamber of Industry, Cleve-
land, Ohio.
23. June 23, 1914, in the House of Representatives.


The elections of 1912 which gave victory to the Democrats
in the United States strengthened Quezon’s hopes and encouraged
him in his efforts to have the political situation of the Philippines
changed. Contrary to what was expected by those who did not
believe that there were going to be changes in the Philippines,
men who were accustomed to thinking that the Philippine ques-
tion was or should be outside of all party influence, the first
Governor-General of a Democratic administration made it clear
to all that the question of Independence had already gone beyond
the hazy realm of theoretical speculation and had become a
question of fact—a practical proposition. Governor-General
Harrison did not only introduce changes in the personnel and in
the institutions existing at the time, but with ability and pru-
dence, changed the fundamental theory on which rested the ad-
ministration of affairs of the Islands, adjusting it to the desires
and interests of the American people, and substituted a govern-
ment that responded to his mode of thinking and to the needs
and aspirations of the people of the Islands.
THE NEW ERA
Harrison’s government marked a new epoch in the adminis-
tration of the affairs of the Islands. It has been fittingly called
the New Era. Under the Republican regime, the Filipinos were
not able to assert their opinion in the formulation of the plans
of administration and in decisions over public affairs. In point
of fact the American majority in the Commission was the
24. June 29, 1914, in the House of Representatives.
25. September 26, 1914, in the House of Representatives.
26. September 28, 1914, in the House of Representatives.
27. October 1, 1914, in the House of Representatives.
28. October 2, 1914, in the House of Representatives.
29. October 6, 1914, in the House of Representatives.
30. October 9, 1914, in the House of Representatives.
31. October 10, 1914, in the House of Representatives.
32. October 12, 1914, in the House of Representatives.
33. October 13, 1914, in the House of Representatives.
34. October 14, 1914, in the House of Representatives.
35. October 15, 1914, before the Lake Mohonk Conference.
36. December 9, 1914, before the Cosmopolitan Club, New York.
37. December, 1914 and January, 1915, before the Senate Committee on
the Philippines.
38. March 4, 1915, in the House of Representatives.
39. May 1, 1916, in the House of Representatives.
40. February, 1916, in the Panama Exposition at San Francisco.
41. January 13, 1916, in the House of Representatives.
—T. M. Kalaw


supreme arbiter of the destinies of the country. With Har-
rison, the system was changed. On his arrival, he announced
a message from President Wilson to the Filipino people, giving
the latter as a first step of the new administration, a majority
in the higher branch of the legislature as well as in the exe-
cutive departments.
The change did not appear to be a big thing on paper; it
looked like a continuation of the traditional policy of the Re-
publican Party of giving to the Filipinos a gradual participa-
tion in the affairs .of the Government as fast as they showed
themselves capable of such participation. But the determination
and the rapidity with which Harrison executed the new policy, the
fearlessness and the tenacity with which he adhered to it, the
supreme loyalty he displayed, more to his own convictions than
to the letter itself of the message, made it evident to all that the
Democratic administration was desirous to open to the Filipinos
the way to their independence.
During the first year of his administration, Harrison fear-
lessly confronted a storm of anger and criticism on the part of
the Republicans on both sides of the water. A systematic and
persistent campaign was launched for the purpose of discredit-
ing his work and its results. While in the Philippines, the
elements affected by the change of personnel in the government
accused Harrison of disrupting the Civil Service, in the United
States Taft and his followers were tirelessly active in proclaim-
ing that the magnificent edifice of the material and moral wel-
fare of the Filipinos erected at the cost of untold efforts and
sacrifices, was disintegrating piece by piece as a result of the
unprecedented steps taken by the Governor-General. Harrison’s
unpopularity among his countrymen in the Islands greatly ham-
pered him in his work, but at the same time the encouragement
and support which he received from the Filipinos compensated
him sufficiently for the bitter experiences and displeasures at-
tendant upon his office.
Harrison soon became a popular hero to the Filipinos. His
ideas about Independence bordered on the most radical ideas of
the Filipinos themselves. He was no coward, and the difficulties
encountered by him, far from disheartening him, encouraged him.
Thus it was that in his messages to the legislature, he did not
resort to circumlocutions or euphemisms in his laudations of the
Filipinos for their ambition to be independent; and in his acts of
government, he never concealed his purpose to turn over to the
people the reigns of the Government as fast as they were able


to handle them to a degree compatible with the rights of so-
vereignty of the United States.
Harrison was a firm believer in liberty. He was a Democrat
thru and thru, not so much because of his political affiliation as
for his education and experience. His coming to the Philippines
was inspired by the highest of motives, and the circumstances
that preceded his appointment, which to him was unexpected,
freed him from any commitment of any sort. Hence, he could
truthfully say, as he did say on more than one occasion, that
“he was here to serve the Philippines, and believed that he could
serve the flag and his government better by serving the interests
and the aspirations of the Filipinos.” He, in fact, translated
into reality the theory fathered by Roosevelt, to make the gov-
ernment in the Philippines, which was at the time a government
of Americans aided by Filipinos, a government of Filipinos aided
by Americans.
Because of all these acts of Harrison, the Filipinos rose up in
the estimation of the public. Politically and socially they took
their proper place in their own country. They initiated the
plans of administration, controlled the government bureaus and
offices, established new services, reduced the salaries of public
officials and employees—in one word, they governed. 18 The no
18 The most important steps which gave the Filipinos real domestic auto-
nomy in accordance with the liberal spirit of the Jones Law were the
following:
1, The creation of the Council of State on October 16, 1918, in order
to help and advice the Governor-General on matters of public importance.
In this Council many prominent leaders of the Filipino people have played
a prominent part.
2. The creation of the Philippine Cabinet, supplemented and made more
effective by Executive Order No. 63, of October 3, 1919, the principal
provisions of which were incorporated in the Administrative Code by Act
No. 2803. This law is to the effect that the departments have been
created for the proper distribution of the work of the Executive, and for
the performance of the duties expressly assigned to them by law, and in
order that each branch of the administration may have a chief responsible
for the direction of its policy. Each Secretary of Department assumes
responsibility for all the activities of the government under his authority
and supervision. For this reason, he has the power to initiate, the power
to regulate, the power to direct and inspect, and the power to appoint and
dismiss.
3. The different laws which have given to the Council of State and to
the Chairmen of both Houses of the Legislature the power to supervise
and control the execution of the laws.


less important sequel was that in social circles, the Filipinos
received the recognition due them, mixing on an equal footing
with all the other nationalities on all occasions, and were ac-
corded equal treatment both in official and private receptions
and celebrations. For the first time the Filipinos began to be
considered, not as a subject race, inferior to others, but as a
decisive element to be reckoned with for all purposes.
Like Taft in the days of his greatest glory, Harrison enjoyed
in an unlimited degree the confidence and support of the Fili-
pinos of all classes and parties. This, in itself, rendered it pos-
sible for the United States, during the world war which broke
out within a year after the inauguration of Harrison’s govern-
ment, to withdraw without any risk at all, the white troops
that garrisoned the Islands; the Filipinos openly placing them-
selves on the side of the American people and standing by them
thru the entire ordeal—first in her attitude of neutrality and
later in her actual participation.
The attitude of the Filipinos during all the time that the
European war lasted was one of undivided loyalty and coopera-
tion. 19 It did not occur to them to obstruct the international
4. The liberal policy of Governor-General Harrison which was in perfect
accord with the spirit of the Jones Law, a policy truly preparatory for
the independence of the Philippines.
Governor-General Harrison ably formulated this policy when he said
in his speech of September 1, 1916, “I firmly believe that a Chief Execu-
tive should consult the people thru their representatives who are called
upon to serve them. This is the very life-blood, so to speak, of self-
government. It should never be possible for a Chief Executive—and it
will now never be so here—to ride ruthlessly over the people he is sent
here to govern without due regard for their sentiments and due con-
sideration of their wishes.”
— T. M. Kalaw.
10 The National Militia was created with the object of helping the United
States in the war, and an offer to organize an army of 25,000 men from
the youth of the country was made. Some 6,000 Filipinos volunteered in
the American Navy. About 4,000 Filipinos insisted upon joining the Army
at Hawaii when they could have very well claimed exemption. A sub-
marine and a destroyer were also offered to the United States. The
Filipinos subscribed for 1*40,000,000 to the Liberty Loans. The quota of
1*3,000,000 assigned to the Philippines in the Third Loan was oversub-
scribed, reaching the sum of 1*9,250,000. The quota for the Fourth Loan
was fixed at 1*12,000,000 but this also was oversubscribed, the subscrip-
tion reaching the sum of One million pesos was contributed
to the funds of the Red Cross.


policy of the United States with embarrassing demands; on the
contrary, they waited patiently and confidingly until all the
complications attending and following the war disappeared be-
fore they reiterated their petition for independence. This fine
disposition shown by the Filipinos towards the American Govern-
ment at that time, must be written down as one of the eminent
services rendered by Governor-General Harrison to his country
during a period of difficulty and stress. If Harrison had not
known how to win the confidence and friendship of the Filipino
people; if the signs of uneasiness and discontent that the Fili-
pinos began to show in the last years of Republican rule had not
been allayed in the face of a policy of liberalism and justice
followed by the Governor, the attitude of the Filipinos during
the intervention of the United States in the World war might
have been a different one.
HARRISON AND THE JONES BILL
The Filipinos believed in Harrison, and rightly so. After a
year of apprenticeship, more or less, when already familiar with
Philippine matters, his political honesty and uprightness of
character impelled him to work resolutely for changes in the
Organic Law of the Philippines. There was then pending in
Congress what was known as the Jones Bill which amended
the Organic Law of .1902, proposing to give to the Filipinos
greater autonomy and embodying a formal promise of inde-
pendence as soon as a stable government could be established in
the Islands. We need not review here the vicissitudes thru
which this bill passed in both houses of the Congress of the United
States. 20 Suffice it to say that the forces of retention resorted
to all sorts of stratagems to prevent the passage of the bill.
These campaigns for national subscriptions were pushed thru with the
enthusiastic and undivided cooperation of'the Filipino women and of the
children of the schools of both sexes.
With the object of reducing the importation of foodstuffs from the
United States and Europe, and to contribute indirectly to the triumph
of the allies, there were organized thruout the Islands, in the schools as
well as in private residences, a “food conservation campaign” which pro-
duced most excellent results.
—T. M. Kalaw.
:o ln 1912 Mr. Jones had introduced a bill providing for qualified inde-
pendence in the Philippines for eight years and complete independence
after that period. The bill failed to pass in the House. On June 11,
1914, the same Mr. Jones introduced the bill that is now our Organic
Law. It was passed by the House on October 14 of the same year but
was not even discussed in the Senate. In 1915, the same bill as approved
by the House was sent to the Senate. The Senate Committee introduced


Governor-General Harrison, however, gave to the Filipino
cause all the support, both official and private, which he was
capable of giving. He prepared reliable reports on the satis-
factory state of public affairs; he adduced proofs of the capacity
and integrity of his Filipino associates in the government; he
constantly appealed to the War Department urging it to exert
all efforts to prevent the bill from being defeated; he sent
letters and cablegrams to his friends in Congress requesting
them to take an active interest in the bill. He thus saved the
Filipinos a disappointment which without doubt would have
had detrimental effects on the relations existing between Amer-
icans and Filipinos in the Islands. Any governor other than
Harrison, or one less accommodating than he and not in sym-
pathy with the aspirations of the Filipinos as he was, could
have surely embarrassed any action that Congress might take,
and caused the total or partial failure of the Jones Bill.
So that, when finally the bill was approved in both houses
and was signed by President Wilson, Harrison personally felt
the immense satisfaction that the Filipinos felt over the glorious
event. On the occasion of a monster parade thru the streets of
Manila to commemorate the event and which went to Mala-
cahang Palace in recognition of his efforts, Harrison congra-
tulated the Filipinos with all sincerity, and in the broad smile
that was plainly visible on his countenance there could be
discerned the feeling of contentment that swelled within him for
that triumph in which he took no insignificant part.
The reforms that were introduced under the new Organic Law
were so many other important steps that assured to the Filipinos
an almost full enjoyment of their political franchises in the
management of their own affairs. Harrison did not only ac-
quiesce in them but he encouraged them besides in order to make
many amendments two of the most important of which were the follow-
ing: the Gronna Amendment, prohibiting the manufacture and sale of
intoxicating liquors in the Philippines, and the Clarke Amendment,
authorizing the President of the United States to recognize the indepen-
dence of the Philippines after two to four years. The bill was approved
in the Senate by the vote of the Vice-President on February 4, 1916,
and was sent to the House. In 1916 many other amendments were in-
troduced to the bill by the House Committee on Insular Affairs. The
latter finally approved it on May 1, 1916, suppressing the Gronna and
Clarke Amendments. A joint Conference Committee was then appointed.
On August 29, 1916, after a long discussion, the bill was approved by both
houses, practically in the original form in which it was introduced in
the Lower House in 1914.
—T. M. Kalaw.


secure the foundations of a stable government. So that when
his administration drew to a close, the entire machinery of gov-
ernment was in the hands of the Filipinos 21 who were able to
claim, with reason, that with the experience so gained, a change
in sovereignty would find them duly prepared to assume the
additional responsibilities of an independent government.
In the autumn of 1918, the Armistice was signed and all the
belligerent powers prepared for the negotiations for peace. The
decisive part which the United States played during the war
gave her that moral influence which made her counsels indispen-
sable in the negotiations at Versailles. President Wilson was
called to Europe and he hastened thither not only to put an end
to the most tragic catastrophe of the ages but also, with a vision
for a better future for humanity, in order to prevent the resur-
gence of the motives behind all wars, and to construct upon the
still smouldering embers left by the reign of violence and
imperialism, those new principles upon which could be reared a
lasting and permanent peace for the world.
THE FIRST MISSION TO THE UNITED STATES
The Filipinos thought that the time had come for renewing
their repeated demands for independence. They thought that
there was no better opportunity for appealing to the hearts of
the American people than on the occasion of the termination of
the war. The principles for which the United States entered
the struggle gave them a powerful argument with which to
reinforce their demands for freedom. So that they believed
S1 According to official records, the proportion of Americans and Fili-
pinos in the Civil Service of the Government in June 1, 1921 (the Demo-
cratic- administration in the Philippines ended in March, 1921), was as
follows:
Legislative Branch, including the permanent personnel: Americans, 0;
Filipinos, 302.
Executive Branch, which comprises the office of the Governor-General
and all other Executive Departments with their respective bureaus and
offices: Americans, 535; Filipinos, 8,208.
Judicial Branch: Americans, 9; Filipinos, 1,158.
Provincial Services: Americans, 9; Filipinos, 2,651
City of Manila: Americans, 65; Filipinos, 1,412.
In the above list the temporary personnel is not included, also the
soldiers of the Constabulary, the laborers, and those who receive pensions
from the Government, all of whom are Filipinos. Neither are the officers
and soldiers of the National Guard included, almost all of whom are
Filipinos.
— T. M. Kalaw.


themselves obliged to send a special mission, the first of its kind,
in order that, near President Wilson and the members of Con-
gress, steps could be taken for the concession of Philippine
Independence.
The sending of the Mission was announced in advance to the
Government of the United States, but due to the pressure of the
intricate problems incident upon the termination of the war,
the American Government intimated that postponement was
desirable, and the sailing was postponed until February 23, 1918.
When the Mission arrived at Washington, President Wilson was
already in Europe in connection with his work relative to the
Peace Treaty. This circumstance did not deter the members of
the Mission from continuing the work entrusted to them. They
called on the Secretary of War, and they laid before him the
resolutions of the Philippine Legislature. In reply, Secretary
Baker gave them reassuring encouragements in favor of their
petitions. The Secretary also read to them a letter which Pres-
ident Wilson had left for the Mission giving assurance that the
Philippine problem was not foreign to the purpose of his trip to
Europe. 22
22 The letter of President Wilson referred to is as follows:
My Dear Mr. Secretary:
Please express to the gentlemen of the Commission representing the
Philippine Legislature, my regret that I am not able to see them per-
sonally upon their arrival at Washington, as well as the hope I entertain
that the mission which brought them here will be a source of satisfaction
to them and will bring as a result, the attainment of those laudable ends
expressed in the joint resolution of the Philippine Legislature approving
the sending of the Commission to the United States. The constant help
and encouragement which I have received from the Filipino people and
the Philippine Legislature during this trying period which we are now
traversing have been a source of profound satisfaction to me. The people
of the United States have, with reason, felt great pride in the loyalty
and help extended by the Filipino people. Altho it is impossible for me
to see the Commission, yet, the Filipino people will not be absent from
my thoughts. It is not a work of small importance for the conference
that now requires my attention, that of making the path for the weak
peoples of the world less perilous, a labor that should be and undoubtedly
is of profound and constant interest to the Filipinos. I am sorry not to
be able to look into the faces of the gentlemen of the Mission from the
Philippines, and to tell them all that I have in mind and heart when I
think of the patient labor, with the end almost in sight, undertaken by
the Americans and the Filipinos for their permanent benefit. I know,
however, that on this point their sentiments are mine and that you will
interpret to them, faithfully, my own feelings.
I am Mr. Secretary, very sincerely yours,— (Sgd.) Woodrow Wilson.
—T. M. Kalaw.


The Mission tried hard to interest not only the politicians but
also the financiers, not only the authorities but the people as well.
Its members delivered speeches in different social functions, in
clubs and societies, urging that a final adjustment of the political
relation between the Philippines and the United States be had
with a view to Independence. Lastly, they asked Congress to
give the Mission a hearing which was courteously granted them,
and the members of the Mission were able to present facts and
figures about conditions in the Islands and to show why inde-
pendence should be granted to the Filipino people.
The Mission was well received and was shown generous hospi-
tality by all persons with whom it came into contact. Had it
not been for the fact that the new Congress that had just con-
vened, the majority of which were Republicans, had to take up
and pass upon the many matters that had arisen in connection
with the Treaty of Peace and the economic readjustment of the
country, the efforts of the Mission would perhaps have been
productive of something tangible and practical. Governor-Gen-
eral Harrison who was then in the United States on leave, again
did not fail to lend his unqualified support to the labors of the
Mission, accompanying its members on the most important occa-
sions and personally attesting at the hearing before the joint
committee of Congress that the time had come for the granting
of Independence to the Filipinos because a stable government had
already been established in the Islands.
In a subsequent message to Congress, President Wilson before
leaving office also made a formal recommendation in favor of the
concession of independence to the Filipinos. 23
LOOKING TOWARDS THE FUTURE
Many years have now elapsed since .the time when the advo-
cates of immediate independence who were at first in the back-
23 The message referred to, dated December 2, 1920, was couched in the
following language:
“Allow me to call your attention to the fact that the people of the
Philippine Islands have succeeded in maintaining a stable government since
the last action of the Congress in their behalf, and have thus fulfilled the
condition set by the Congress as precedent to a consideration of granting
independence to the islands.
“I respectfully submit that this condition precedent having been ful-
filled, it is now our liberty and our duty to keep our promise to the people
of those Islands by granting them the independence which they so hon-
orably covet,”
—T. M. Kalaw.


ground as a result of the Filipino-American war, took part in
the administration of the government and accepted from the
people the mandate of representing and taking care of the
country’s interests, both in the Philippines and in the United
States. How they had performed their work and had fulfilled
the hopes of their country, the results of all the elections since
suffrage was introduced in the Islands, will tell. After the first
elections for the Philippine Assembly in 1907, referring to the
victory of the nacionalistas, Mr. Taft expressed doubts as to
whether said victory could be considered a guaranty that a ma-
jority of the electors would in future years continue to favor
immediate independence. The facts have fully shown that he
was wrong. There is not now any political party in the Islands
that is not committed to the independence of the country and
which does not have this national ideal as an objective in its
platform. To do otherwise, would be to invite upon itself an
unpopularity equal to that into which the defunct Federal Party
had fallen in its days. 24
24 The three political parties existing,—the Democrata Party and the
two branches of the Nacionalista Party, namely, the Colectivista Party
and the Nacionalista Party purely—are all for immediate independence,
as the following provisions of their respective platforms show:
Democrata Party: “As Filipinos we consider it our imperative and un-
avoidable duty to work and exert all our efforts for the attainment of
the supreme ideal of emancipation for our country from all foreign rule,
and we shall ask from the American people—who are true to their tradi-
tions of liberty and who because of their idiosyncrasy are the propounders
of the principle of self-determination applied equally to all peoples, great
or small, strong or weak, —the recognition of our readiness to establish
and maintain an independent government, recognizing our right to our
national sovereignty.”
Nacionalista Party: “Immediate, absolute, and complete independence.
While our stand in this respect is clear and unequivocal, we have not
deemed it necessary until now to adopt a formula that defines our future
international relations, especially with the United States.
“We have left the matter open to be discussed and settled between the
representatives of the American Government and of the Filipino people.
If we had been willing to compromise in so far as posible with those
American interests whose apparent objection to Philippine Independence
is founded on the erroneous belief that their investments in our country
are not safe, and above all taking into account the possible strategical
and commercial necessities of America in the Far East, perhaps, we
would have been disposed to consider a formula for independence under
American protection. We know that this would have meant a limitation,
up to a certain point, of some of our powers as an independent nation,
but we would not have hesitated to accept it in consideration of the help


The campaign cannot yet be considered as ended; but now more
than ever we can look to the future with hopeful eyes. With
the passage of the Jones Law, the Filipinos have not secured the
realization of their ideals, but they have already traversed the
greater part of the necessary road, and we can now say with
reason that we will be able to attain the goal, provided no unfor-
seen developments deflect the course of events.
The campaign for independence has been persistent and deter-
mined, in the face of many discouragements and adversities and
in spite of the staunch opposition of those who would have the
Islands retained indefinitely. The perseverance and the zeal
with which the campaign was carried on shows how deeply rooted
in the minds of the Filipino people is the desire to lead an
independent life. In the political history of the years of
American tutelage, this campaign for freedom will rightly
occupy a prominent place and the ability displayed in the
direction of the campaign as well as the good fortune and pa-
triotism of those to whom was entrusted the principal part in
making it at least partially successful, will stand out in bold
relief. There is not an example in colonial history more inter-
esting than that presented by the Filipino people in having under-
taken with calmness, prudence, and self-control a movement
which we have received from the American people and of the liberal policy
pursued by their government in the Philippine Islands.
“It appears, however, according to the report of the Wood-Forbes Mis-
sion that our alternative is either absolute and complete independence or
to remain indefinitely under American control with the effective direction,
including over our domestic affairs, by a representative of American sover-
eignty in the Philippines. We congratulate ourselves for having known
in this manner the design which animates that portion of the American
people which is not in sympaty with the independence of our country,
and thus we are able to state, clearly, and unmistakably, what the attitude
of our party is. That attitude is the following; “We declare ourselves,
frankly, openly, and decidedly in favor of immediate, absolute, and com-
plete independence for the Philippines.”
Nacionalista Colectivista Party: “We believe in the inherent and in-
alienable right of all peoples to direct their own destinies. The Filipinos,
anxious to govern themselves, have sufficiently shown their full capacity
to do so. The establishment of a stable government, the only condition
imposed by the American people, previous to the recognition of our inde-
pendence, is already a reality. We declare, therefore, that there does not
exist any pretext for the delaying for a longer time of the restoration
of the Philippine Republic and we obligate ourselves to work in prefer-
ence to all other ends, for the immediate, absolute, and complete inde-
pendence of ouf country.”
—T. M. Kalaw.


which has for its object that of regaining thru peaceful means
and lawful methods the ground that they had lost in armed con-
flict. Nor can there be held up before the other colonizing
peoples of the world, a lesson of more sublime moral grandeur
than that represented by the magnanimous and righteous action
of the Congress of the United States in having formally gua-
ranteed to the Filipinos the ultimate enjoyment of their In-
dependence.


3 1508 00066359 8 |


m yy "i
Pi V I
i '
. -■ .. . \ • • ■». • • .
%
,
I
■IMH ,
i - -■ — -
