

“OUR DUTY.”
Sermon
(Preached in the Temperance Hall , Macrh 14, 1886.)
BY
REV CHARLES STRONG
(MINISTER OF THE AUSTRALIAN CHURCH).
(PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.)
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY A. J. AZZOPPARDI, 166 QUEEN STREET.
M.DCCC.LXXXVI.




“ I say not unto thee, Until seven times ; but until seventy
times seven.” — Matthew xviii.—22.
“ Thou art no longer a bond-servant, b ut a son.”— Epistle to
Galatiom, iv.—7.
“He who hath put on the life of Christ with the intent to
win or deserve aught thereby, hath taken it up as an hireling,
and not for love, and is altogather without it But
God rejoiceth more over one man who truly loveth than over a
thousand hirelings. ” — Theologies Germctnica.
“ Some men write and speak as if the difference between
the Christian and the worldly man was this, that in the one
conscience is a self-reproaching hell, and in the other a self-
congratulating heaven. Think you that the Christian goes
home at night counting up the noble deeds done during the
day, saying to himself, ‘ Well done, good and faithful servant ?’ ”
—Sermon by T. W. Robertson.
My brother, the brave man has to give his life away, .
• . . . Give it, like a royal heart; let the price be Nothing :
thou hast then, in a certain sense, got All for it.”— Carlyle,
Past and Present,


“OUR DUTY."
LUKE XVII. —10.
“We are unprofitable servants , we have done that which it
was our duty to do. ”
These words contain a great truth, which, though often
overlooked, and to many most unpalatable, contradicting
often church and world alike, yet lies at the root of
distinctively Christian faith and life, being part and
parcel of the Christian Idea of Religion.
The Gospel according to Luke is generally regarded
as a Pauline Gospel. That is to say, its author is sup-
posed to have been one imbued with the wider and more
cosmopolitan spirit of the Apostle Paul. Whatever truth
may be in the theory, we shall see, by looking closely
into this saying of Jesus, recorded by Luke only,
that the words are thoroughly in accord with what we
conceive to be the Pauline spirit and the Pauline
point of view—a spirit and a point of view which,


we take leave to think, have more in common with
the teaching of Jesus than many suppose who dwell
only on the form, often subtle and rabbinical, in which
the Pauline Idea is expressed. Our text speaks
of the infinitude of duty. If we rightly apprehend the
teaching of Jesus, this thought lies at the root of His
teaching; and if we rightly understand Paul, the same
thought is involved in his teaching. No such thing as
merit, says Jesus: No such thing as merit, says Paul.
Both Jesus and His Apostle thus strike, though in diffe-
rent ways, at the root-idea of much morality and religion
as expressed in the Jewish and the Christian synagogue,
with its Scribes and Rabbis, in the Jewish and the
Christian Temple, with its Priests and Levites; and in
the worship of the pagan world. Both the Master
and the Apostle were possessed with an Idea of Religion
which contradicts the conventional ideas of morality,
makes duty infinite, and renders it impossible to think of
any achievement as a merit demanding a reward. “ Son,
thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine,” ex-
claims the Father, in the gospel parable, to the elder son
murmuring that a kid even had never been given him in
recognition of his services. s Ye are all sons of God,
through faith in Messiah Jesus,” writes Paul to the Gala-
tians seeking religion in works done in fulfilment of an
external law. Carry out the sonship idea, and it shatters
merit and lifts duty into a higher plane of the spirit,
whence it cannot be brought down to be measured by
foot-rule, bottled and labelled, but floats above us as a
guiding star, a light in which we walk, an atmosphere in


which we breathe, but which we can never grasp or
exhaust.
“ We are unprofitable servants, we have done that
which it was our duty to do.”
L,et me endeavor to illustrate and enforce the truth
which seems here to be expressed in this pregnant saying
of Jesus, and which we have said lies wrapt up in the folds
of the Christian Idea of Religion.
We shall set out, then, by saying that Christianity
is an active, practical principle of life. Not a very
original observation, but one which, if we may judge by
Christian practice, needs to be reiterated and re-enforced,
familiarity in this, as in other cases, having apparently
bred contempt. And, if one may judge by the tone in
which people speak of a preacher as “a good practical
preacher,” and of a discourse as “ a good practical
sermon,” or by the false and unwholesome sentiment
which so often presents itself to us, claiming to monopo-
lise the right to be called the “ Gospel of Jesus, the full
meaning of the observation is still far from being appreci-
ated. Christianity, we repeat, is an active practical prin-
ciple, a “ spirit of life.” Its first aim is not to make you
happy and comfortable or safe for this life and the next,
though a certain happiness and comfort and safety no
doubt follow in its train, but to call you to be and do
something. “ Arise, and follow me,” it cries. “ Whosoever
will save his life shall lose it. Take my yoke upon
you and learn of me.”
Jesus’ test of a disciple was: “He that doeth the
will of my Father which is in heaven.” The Gospel of


the Kingdom, as it is called by the evangelist Mark, was a
very practical gospel—often not such as modern gospellers
preach in the name of Jesus, and which perhaps would be
said by many to have a ‘ want ’ about it such as might
warrant the faithful censors of religion to suspect and
‘inquire/ and label the preacher ‘dangerous.’ What
Jesus appears to have impressed the world with was not a
new philosophy, or a new theory, or a new dogma, but the
idea of a life in God, in Man—a life whose manifesta-
tion was humility, purity, sacrifice, righteousness, love.
His life became the Ideal of a new era. He was not
thought of as a mere wonder-worker, but as One “ who
went about doing good,” full of faith and love towards
God, goodness and charity towards man. Whatever else
the coming of Christianity was, it was this essentially, the
dawn of a new Ideal of a practical and earnest life. It was
thus that it presented itself to the Apostle Paul, who spent
himself in seeking to live over the life of Jesus, and in
self-denying effort to bring in the Kingdam of God and
its righteousness. And, as it was in the beginning, so is
it now. Christianity to-day means as of old, the dawn on
the soul of the Ideal Beauty, Truth and Love, which
shine more and more unto a perfect day. It is no mere
belief as to the form which the future is to assume. The
first Christians, so far as such belief was concerned, were in
error. Neither is it belief in a theory as to predestination
or atonement, or acceptance of my peculiar creed or
yours, but it is Jesus, the Ideal, the Spirit of the new man,
dwelling in us and we in him, breathing in the secret
depths of the individual soul, in the heart of the family


and of society, a new breath of life whose constituent
elements are faith, hope, love towards God and towards
Man. And such a breath of life, brethren, though, alas !
it seems at times but to sigh through the bare branches of
religious winter, or rustle feebly among the yellow fallen
leaves, we can readily perceive must make new heavens
and new earth wherever it comes in power. It must be a
“ rushing mighty wind,” sweeping away the germs of moral
death and waking the slumbering energies of the soul.
Let this faith, hope, love towards God and Man be in
men though as a grain of mustard seed, and they will feel
strong, as Jesus said, to remove mountains. It:? in an age
like the present, when the electric current of the Spirit
flows often so feebly, interrupted by our materialisms, our
church formalism, and our selfish lives, that we feel weak
as water, and sink to the earth paralyzed, crying, “ Vanity
of vanities—all is vanity.” Quench this Spirit, and you
will sooner or later discover that you have quenched the
engine fires of life. The big ship ploughing its way
majestically through the waves, its impetus from the last
beat of the propeller exhausted, will lie rolling helpless like
a log. What am I preaching for here, Sunday after Sunday ?
What are we meeting for here, and singing and praying ?
Is not our aim in doing so to wake in each other some breath
of Christian life, to strike some spark of unquenchable
fire which shall burst into a flame and burn up the rubbish
and chaff of individual and social life, and create among
us some glow of mind and feeling ? We seek not merely
the shadow of a great rock in which we may rest our
wearied souls, but the inspiration of fresh faith and hope


and love in which to live and act. The true bond of the
Church and of the Churches is an Ideal Life. Your
9
Church Governments and Creeds and Shibboleths, in
which you glory, are the marks of your childish differences
and distinctions, the signals of division and folly, too
often your grave-clothes, not the bond of life. That is
to be found in the practical sphere. Wherever two or
three are gathered together in the name of Jesus—in the
name of Humanity as child of God—there is the Church,
there is the sacrament, there are the temple, the priest, the
altar and the sacrifice. The true religion is an active,
practical principle of life. It is because we have got so
little inspiration, and, indeed, keep inspiration locked up
in a book which we open only once a week, because we
have made to ourselves an idol which we bring out of a
Sunday only to have a look at, putting it carefully back
into its shrine for the other six days, that we do not recog-
nise this truth that religion is not merely a past but a
present inspiration of life and conduct, alike in the indi-
vidual and in society.
There is a danger, however, that this fundamental
Idea of Religion as practical —as seeking to establish God’s
Kingdom and its righteousness, or, otherwise expressed,
as putting on Christ the new man, walking in the Spirit,
dwelling in love, living soberly, righteously, and godly,
fighting the good fight of faith—should be perverted,
taken out of its relation to other truth, and so hardened
into an irreligious and anti-Christian tenet. Take any
truth and isolate it from the rest of truth, and it becomes a
falsehood. It loses its proportions, and becomes like a


painting without perspective, or a figure out of focus on
the lens. The worst kind of falsehood is just distorted
truth—truth turned upside down—truth exaggerated, or
with legs or arms cut off, rousing in our minds the sense
of the ludicrous, or moral indignation at the distortion.
Take an illustration ; —The doctrine of justification by
faith is a very important one —a doctrine which has
played a conspicuous part in religious history. But it has
been exaggerated, taken out of its original relation,
divorced from the spiritual experience of a Paul or a
Luther, of which it formed but a part, and crystallized
into a doctrinal pill which you can carry about, so to
speak, in your waistcoat pocket, and administer right and
left. It has been taken out of its surroundings, like a
flower cut from its stem, carried out of the spring air and
sunshine, and pressed in a lady’s album. The doctrine
seems thus to stand often in about as much relation
to the real original as a glass of stale water to the
sparkling stream from which originally it was drawn.
Faith, instead of being regarded as a spiritual principle
of life, linking the soul to the ideal love and goodness
becomes a synonym for belief in a proposition or elabo-
rate “ scheme of salvavation,” and justification becomes
a branch of Roman law.
Think only, then, of works, of doing, of action,
of the practical, immediately the truth of which we
have been speaking becomes a falsehood. Fix your
eyes only on results, on deeds, and merits, and mechani-
cal measurements of worth, immediately practical Christi-
anity degenerates and stiffens into sales of indulgence,


works of supererogation, self-righteousness, spiritual death
under the external form of life.
%
Now, it is against such a perversion of the truth that
our text utters its warning. The disciples of Jesus were
to go and do much for him—much which in his sight
would be precious and useful work. They were to be
fellow-laborers with God. They were to lay the founda-
tions of a new Society, to be heralds of a new Era, con-
ferring upon mankind inestimable blessings. They were
to undergo much hardship and exercise much self-denial
in a great cause, following Jesus, as we read, in the
“ re g eneratl on ”of the world. The temptation was great
to think, How much is the world beholden to us! how
much does the Master owe us ! Surely we shall have
seats on the right hand and the left! Surely we who have
borne the heat and burden of the day shall receive more
than they who have been hired at the eleventh hour !
Yet they were, when all was done, to say : “We are
unprofitable servants. Our Master has nothing to thank
us for. Strive, labor, deny ourselves, give our lives up
in sacrifice for the Kingdom as we may, we only do that
which it is our duty to do.”
The calculating, commercial, bargaining spirit is the
destruction of all noble or religious life. does your
work with a single eye to the pay he is to get for it. The
relation between you becomes purely one of wages. The
result to both of you, so far as any higher social life is con-
cerned, will be disastrous. You, the employer, will come *
to regard the employed as a machine ; and you, the


employed, will come to regard yourself as a machine, and
to do your work mechanically, taking no pains or delight
in doing it well, or any interest in it save as it leads to
the transference of so much money from another’s
pocket to your own. Your work becomes then what the
Apostle Paul would have called “ dead works,” destitute
of any spirit of life. How much modern work is of this
description ! It’s motto is, “We are profitable servants,
give us our wages. We do nothing for nothing. We
turn out our 4 tale of bricks.’ What can we sell them
for? What shall we receive?” Now, we cannot get
along without payment in some shape or form. Society
implies an interchange of goods and labor. But when
this calculating and mercenary spirit becomes the master,
as at present it threatens to do, life becomes exceeding
mean, and Christianity a dead letter. When this becomes
the regulating principle of society, class jealousy and
hates are sure to flourish, brotherly sympathy must die
out, and, while the rich man will oppress the poor man,
the latter will grow hard and selfish, and make it his
chief aim not worthily to do worthy work, but to be paid.
No matter though the job is scamped, or the work is
flimsy, or the material is dishonest, or the goods are inferior,
the question comes to be, Can I palm them off and get
paid ?
When this principle is carried into religion—as it is
sure to be, for religion does not rise higher than the age,
any more than water rises higher than the height from
which you take it—we see it in its most repulsive form.
Religion becomes then a sort of bargain. There is a


verse in a very beautiful old paraphrase which always
seems to me to destroy the beauty of the other verses—
“ Such blessings from thy gracious hand.
Our humble prayers implore,
And Thou shalt be our chosen God
And portion evermore.”
That bargaining spirit of old Jacob spoils the whole
thing. But that is just the spirit of much so-called
religion. Its ruling thought is pay and merit. How
can it be otherwise, when the whole atmosphere of social
life is that of “ business ” and “ shops ?” Even the work
ot Jesus is conceived of as a merit, a wofk which he
need not have done ; a work, in short, of supererogation,
which can accordingly be put down to our credit in the
bank of heaven. Jesus is regarded as having been
“justified by the works of the law,” and men as partak-
ing in his legal merits. Protestantism thus falls back on
the old idea from which it professes to have emancipated
itself. The relation between God and man comes thus
to be regarded as that between debtor and creditor, or as
a matter of wages and reward. How to pay God, or
how to be ourselves paid, becomes the all-important
thing. And just as in business life the pure wages
notion leads to flimsy, slipshod, dishonest work on
the part of the employed, and to a mere mechani-
cal relation between payer and paid, so the same
principle carried into religion, produces all sorts of
hypocrisy. The halt and the blind are brought for- sacri-
fice, lip-worship is offered instead of the heart, and ritual


substituted for life. We get thus a flimsy, slipshod, dis-
honest religion —if may use such a phrase, a shoddy
religion. “ Dead works ” are substituted for the spirit
of life, and the fruits of the Spirit. To carry this wages
or merit-notion into life, brethren, as our ruling principle,
saps the foundations of society, poisons the springs of
friendship—making real friendship impossible —destroys
the family life, and renders religion a mockery.
The danger is not an imaginary one. How much
of modern life—domestic, social, national, religious—is
built up on this notion of merit, reward, wages! And
how mean, how unsatisfactory, how unhappy, how hollow
is much in the modern world accordingly ! Has it not be-
come to a great extent a world of what Thomas Carlyle
would have called “flunkeyism,” everyone hanging about as
though expecting to be tipped ! Politeness,civility, courtesy,
kindness, friendship, honesty, brotherly help, even love
and affection, can be had only, as Sii W alter makes the
old usurer say in the “ fortunes of Nigel , “ for a con-
sideration.” There can be users in regard to more things
than money, and we might largely extend the application
of the psalmist’s words, when he asks “ Who shall ascend
into the hill of the Lord ?” and answers,/* He that putteth
not forth his money unto usury.”
Against such mercenary and unworthy ideas of life
the spirit of humanity, the spirit of religion, is the
strongest protection. The philosopher Kant said that
there were two things which filled him with admiration
and wonder, the starry heavens above and the moral law


within. To him duty was, like the heavens, an infinite
thing. And where does this infinitude of duty appear more
strikingly than in the Religion of Jesus 1 That religion
consisted in friendship with God —friendship that is with
righteousness and love. I call you not servants, we read,
but friends. It was sonship towards God —sonship, that is,
towards righteousness and love. Ye are all sons of God,
we read. It was a reconciliation with God —reconcilia-
tion, that is, with righteousness and love —not an out-
ward, external reconciliation, but the reconciliation of
spirit with Spirit. “ God is Spirit,” we are told, “ and they
that worship Him must worship Him in Spirit.” It was
union with God—God dwelling in man and man in God
—union, that is, with righteousness and love. It was the
filling ot the soul with an inspiration of goodness which
bore it up above the mean and calculating. “Ye are the
temple of God,” says Paul.
No great or noble thing is otherwise practicable.
No high work can be acomplished in this world on the
mere mercenary plane. You can never paint a picture,
or write a poem, or design a thing of beauty, or do any-
thing worth doing—until you exchange the mercenary
for the spirit of the friend, and the son, the spirit of union
and reconciliation. You must be the son of beauty;
you must be one with truth and dwell in it and it in you,
before you can be or do anything worthy. And religion
is pre-eminently this harmony of the soul —harmony as
of spirit within with spirit without—harmony with the
will of Righteousness, Truth, Love.


When we learn to take this view of religion, it
becomes the most elevating and ennobling influence, and
all mercenary and mere legal notions of it fade away.
Duty is no longer a little constraining law, but a spirit of
life—an infinite, like the starry heavens.
Jesus left on men’s minds sueh an idea of religion.
He left the idea of it as the spirit of a son, as a spirit of
goodness and love, one with God and one with man.
And to such a religion Jesus’ followers are called —a
religion in which duty ceases to be a mere law, and
becomes an infinite spirit of life, so that we exclaim,
“ Whither shall I go from Thy Spirit ? It haunts me
everywhere—in the field, in the shop, in all my
dealings with others as a master, as a servant,
as a parent, as a friend.” In Jesus, to use the
language of Paul, men die tc the law and rise up
“the sons of God” through faith. The union of men
with Jesus, spoken of in Scripture, is the union of the
soul with a righteousness which is “not after the law,” but
after the spirit of a son, which knows no limitations but
those of right and love.
Those whom religion thus apprehends can never be
self-righteous, or fancy that they can exhaust their duty.
Never can they imagine that they lay others under obliga-
tion to them or merit payment by being honest, loving,
true. Never can they entertain the monstrous notion
that they might be honest, or loving, or true once or
twice too often, any more than a son or a friend could
feel that he might overdo his sonship or once too often


serve his friend. The traveller climbs the mountain.
Can he ever get beyond the clouds ? Can he ever reach
a point from which to look down upon the sun, moon,
and stars ? The spiritual traveller climbs the hill of duty
only to see rising above him another and yet another
height. He forgives, as Jesus forgave, seven times,
only to see that there are seventy times seven beyond.
He is just and honorable in one thing oniy to see justice
and honor spreading about him like a sea. He bears the
burden of one sin-laden or suffering fellow-creature, only
to feel the fountains of an unfailing charity springing up.
He fights against one injustice, one meanness, one selfish-
ness, only to see a wider idea of morality, of brotherhood,
and righteousness opening out. And never can he rest,
saying, “ I have done all,” or think that he has done more
than he ought to have done.
Each good thing men do or think, brethren, thus
opens another and yet another window into the infinite of
duty, as each new effort after wisdom, and knowledge,
and beauty opens out to the student or the artist the
boundless sea of thought and imagination which surges
around him.
Strive, my friends, to get a religion such as this of
Jesus. Cast away the mercenary, calculating spirit. Cast it
out of daily life, cast it out of the family, cast it out of your
friendship, cast it out of the church, and take upon you the
yoke of Him who never thought he could do too much for
His Father orHis fellows. Yield yourselves to righteous-
ness, to honesty, to unselfishness, to charity, to whatevej


is noble and true, and then what a field of duty will open
out to you as individuals, as Society, as the Church !
—duty of whose existence you are now ignorant.
Sons of love, and truth, and righteousness, not slaves;
friends, not servants and hirelings! What might not
Man accomplish in this spirit!
Feinted by A.. J. Azzoppardi, 166 Queen Street.


