

1710
OUR.
WESTERN
LAND :
A VANISHING.ASSET
SAMEL E. LEES, PRINTER AND STATIONER,
81 CLARENCE ST.
SYDNEY, N.S.W., JAN., 1900.


OUR WESTERN LAND.
HE ow * n B’ P a P ers from the pen of
T , the Hon. E. D. Mileex and the
yj. Sydney Morning Herald's Leaders
fl of the Bth and 26th January, 1900,
I are reprinted for free distribution,
by kind consent of the proprietors
of that journal.
A “Vanishing Asset,” taken from
The Worker of 13th January, 1900,
is reprinted by permission of the
proprietors.


BY E. D. MILLEN.
From “ Sydney Morning Herald," 18th November, 1899.
I.
More than the term of a generation has passed awaj T since New
South Wales required any service of the explorer. After Mitchell
had discovered and Kennedy explored, the Warrego, there re-
mained but little to do to fill in the gap left between the known
and accessible parts and the extreme north-west corner, wherein
a couple of years earlier Sturt found his dreary drought-locked
prison, and Poole his grave, the latter still marked by the beef-
wood tree that throws its scanty shadow to the western sim. The
details were gradually filled in b}* the advancing tide of settlers
which set towards the west from three different points. The
north, with Maitland as its commercial capital, sent its con-
tingent by way of the Namoi; representatives of the squatting
families who had occupied the lands around and beyond Bathurst
followed down the Macquarie and the Bogan ; while a third body
of settlers pushed up from the Murray. From these three main
points the settler followed in the track of the explorer, and
hastened to complete his work and profit by his discoveries. But
though it is many years since practically the whole of the remote
Western districts passed into occupation, by far the larger portion
of what is now departmentally the Western Division is still a
terra incognita to the great majority of the people of New South
Wales. Those who have paid it even a flying visit form but a
small percentage of the community ; those who have any close
acquaintance with it, a still smaller one. In a general way it is
known as the region of great sheep-runs and intense heat, of pro-
longed drought and occasionally prolific seasons. But beyond
that little is known. If an opinion may be formed upon the dis-
closures of casual conversation, quite a considerable number of
people regard Bourke if not as the colony’s “ Ultima Thule,” at
least as the centre of its remotest corner. Yet from the Western
railway terminus to the north-west corner, “ the place where
three empires meet,” is over 300 miles. Cobar, the terminus of
the spur line from Nyngan, is possibly 100 miles further. Con-
dobolin, the present head of the Molong-Forbes extension, is 480
miles by a map line drawn as a Russian czar is said to have
OUR WESTERN LANDS.


marked out the route of a projected railway, while he who would
journey from Hay (the south-west terminus) to the “ corner ”
must pass over probably 500 miles of roads. Between these
terminal points and the borders of Queensland and South Aus-
tralia respectively there is approximately an area of 50,000,000
acres, practically the whole of which is State property, but con-
cerning which there exists but a shadowy knowledge. Speaking
at Wilcannia the other day, after travelling only 100 miles from
the railway, Lord Beauchamp said he felt sure the people of
Sydney had no adequate idea of that part of the colony, and he
announced an intention of presenting some limelight views, in
order to bring before the metropolis some better idea of the
country and conditions he had witnessed. If his Excellency
should succeed in imparting a wider and clearer knowledge of
the Ear West, he will have rendered a service of no mean value.
For it is indeed desirable, if not imperative, that that better
knowledge should prevail, in order that the Crown tenants may
be placed in the most advantageous position to meet the rapidly
accumulating difficulties which have not only brought ruin to
numerous individuals, but now threaten to seriously disturb their
industry. I have no desire to figure as an alarmist, and, even if
I had, the facts would have to be consulted. But 'unfortunately
the facts, lately noted in course of an extended Western tour,
simply force the opinion that, between the difficulties of its own
inherent and still unsolved problems and the cumulative effects
of a series of disastrous droughts, the Far West is in a position
that can only adequately he described as critical. Familiar as I
am with much of the Western Division, with a tolerably close
knowledge of the evidence and effect of drought, and of the re-
cuperative property of the soil under the stimulus of returning
good seasons, I should hesitate to make that statement, only that
in my T trip, extending over 900 miles, I saw not only enough to
justify it, but enough to dismiss any less serious term as quite
out of place.
Starting from Bourke, my route went westerly across the
Paroo towards Milparinka, a little township not far from the old
Mount Browne alluvial diggings, and a long day’s ride, either
north to the Queensland or west to the South Australian border ;
thence south to Broken Hill, south-east to Menindie and Ivanhoe,
north-east to Cobar, and then almost due north to Bourke again.
This route forms an irregular circle, lying well within the area
which I propose to bring under review. To the eye and mind of
the traveller it is not interesting country to traverse, more
especially in time of drought. It is invariably monotonous, even
though it presents great contrasts, and not infrequently it is re-
pellent. It is the land of drifting desert sand and stone-strewn
ridges, of open treeless plains, and dense impenetrable scrubs. It
is the home of the treacherous mirage, of disappointing salt lakes


•and fleeting waterholes, of trying winds and exasperating dust
storms It is the stronghold of the rabbit, and the most frequent
victim of the drought. It is, too, just now a land of buried
yards and fences, of abandoned holdings and deserted home-
steads, of broad acres, but tragically shrunken flocks. Other
districts share these disabilities among them in some degree or
taste them in turns ; but the fate of the Far West is to diink
deep of them all simultaneously.
If my trip had merely revealed what may be regarded as the
■“ ordinary consequences ” of drought, there would have been no
necessity to write in this strain, or perhaps to write at all. The
ordinary consequences of drought would disappear with the re-
turn of a generous seasorr. But in the creation of the conditions
now observable in the Far West, the drought is but one of
several contributing causes. Its temporary disappearance alone
will not suffice to tide over the crisis at which I conceive the
Western grazing industry has arrived. Not that the drought has
been less virulent than is generally recognised. It is unquestion-
ably the severest visitation of its kind with which the settlers
have had to contend. Not in one district, but in several, there
is evidence that it has been the worst since the settled occupation
of the country. It is indeed hardly possible to exaggerate the
severity and effects of the prolonged and still unbroken drought.
It has been wide-spread, remorseless, prolonged. But no other
conclusion appears to be possible than that the normal condition
of the West is one of drought—drought punctuated with
occasional moist seasons. The fundamental error has been in re-
garding the nominal condition as one of the fair seasons punctu-
ated with occasional drought. Those who settled this country
held this error as an article of faith ; those who succeeded them
clung to it with the tenacity of despair. Its influence is manifest
through much of our legislation, and it has never failed to assert
itself in the Assessment Court jargon about “ fair average
seasons.’ Mathematically it is possible to demonstrate the
average strength of the links in an unevenly constructed chain,
but a proverb and common sense tell us that its strength is only
that of its weakest link, and that while you can always average
figures on paper, you can’t average facts in real life. By ignoring
or failing to understand this the Western pastoral industry has
been subjected to a strain that is causing its weaker links to
snap. That the position is serious goes without demonstration.
To rectify it, it will be necessary that Parliament should revise
the conditions under which the Western pastures are held, as an
essential preliminary necessary to enable those who occupy them
to alter their system of working. That it is too late to do any-
thing to save individuals is, I fear, too true. There is no use,
however, in disguising the fact that so far as many of the
pastoralists are concerned the position is hopeless. What has to


be considered, however, is whether anything can be done to put
the industry on a sound footing, to assist it to conform to con-
ditions which experience has proved to be permanent, and to-
bring the land to the highest form of production of which it is
capable. It is with the hope of directing attention to the de-
plorable condition to which this part of the country has been
reduced, and perhaps of contributing in some small way to the
solution of the problem thus presented that these articles are
written.
II
Ten days before commencing the trip outlined in the previous
article, the West had had some participation in a general rainfall.
So far as a greater portion of the Darling River districts were con-
cerned, it was (measured by figures) the best fall for very many
months. Bourke registered 3 - 68 points, the heaviest downpour
for over two years. It was a reasonable anticipation, therefore,
to expect that the country would look fresh and green, and that
some useful feed would be growing, more especially as the weather
had been genial and spring-like. It will but faintly suggest the
disappointment experienced when I state that it was inconceivable
in that part of the country and at that time of the year that such a
rainfall should have produced so poor a result. In places there
appeared absolutely no response on the part of the bare ground,
while the best effort consisted of a thin shoot of spinach and other
of the less-appreciated forms of herbage. It was one of many
signs of the deplorable condition to which the country is reduced.
Foui' miles before the Western train delivers its passengers
at the terminal station, it passes the extensive and very complete
works erected some few years ago by the Bourke Meat Preserving
Company. When in full swing they employ some 200 hands and
present a scene of considerable activity. But now, silent and
deserted, they serve to illustrate the strange vicissitudes of the
pastoral industry. Erected by a co-operative movement to enable
the district pastoralists to dispose of their surplus and unsaleable
stock, they were frequently kept going day and night. Now they
are closed sine die, there being no longer any stock to dispose
of, and no possibility of there being any for a long time to come.
With the flocks of the colony reduced to 36,000,000, the problem
is not how to dispose of the stock, but (where there is grass) how
to procure them, and many an owner would gladly call back the
sheep he was equally glad a little while since to condemn to the
tallow-cask and the preserving tin. That the activity or idleness
of the adjacent meat works has an important bearing upon the
trade of Bourke goes without saying.
From "Sydney morning Herald," 13rd November , 1899


Bourke to Wanaaring, a distance of 117 miles, constituted the
.first section of what may he regarded as the journey proper, the
railway being a necessary preliminary. Wanaaring is situated on
the Paroo, a river that has formed the habit, too prevalent with
many of our inland rivers, of spilling itself over a series of
irregular and scarce perceptible depressions, exhausting itself in
the process. A few words will describe this portion of the journey
—the fewer the better for the credit of the road. There may be
worse tracks in New South Wales, but, if so, I have no ambition
to travel them. Of the 117 miles, all measured and every one of
them there, 90 on a fair estimate are over loose rolling desert sand.
For a few miles from the Darling the road runs over open plains,
■ clearly formed and deposited by former floods, and still subject to
inundation. After that it is at once enveloped in the sand and
scrub that with relentless tenacity cling to it to the end. The
road has been cleared, and at right angles to the long avenue thus
formed, the sand has ranged itself in an excellent imitation of
Biscayan billows. These succeed each other in varying sizes, but
with unfailing regularity. Across them the track is as though it
had been ploughed, for, in spite of the now prevalent Gin. tires,
the wheels of the teamsters’ waggons cut into it to a depth of from
12in. to 15in. Occasionally it is intersected by a clay pan or cane
grass swamp, hard mulga ridge, or a box flat, providing a readily
availed of nursery for the shine3’-leafed box sucker, not the least
.noxious of the scrubby abominations that have of late years added
to the difficulties of western grazing. But always there is the
speedy return to the same heavy sand, severely testing the stamina
of the stoutest of horses and the temper of the most patient of
men. I never travel over these relentless sandhills without thinking,
with a suspicion of envy, of Christian working his way through the
Slough of Despond. If this description were that of the road only
it would be of little moment. But the road is a fair sample of the
country through which it runs. Strike off to the right, and the
heavy scrub stretches for miles in the direction of the Warrego.
Turn to the left, and there are the endless sand ridges circling
■round the plains that range all the way from utterly useless cane
grass swamps to fair grazing land. Here and there may be found
a plain that promises better things, or a mulga ridge that looks as
if it could grow grass ; but, taking it as a whole, the country inter-
sected by the Bourke-Wanaaring road is little better than a wilder-
■ness of sand and scrub.
From Wanaaring to Milparinka there is a straight road of
150 miles, along which the telegraph lines and the mile-posts keep
■each other silent company. After crossing the Paroo, the country
begins sensibly to alter. The scrub, though improving in quality,
becomes less and less in quantity, until by degrees the eye can
sweep over an open and almost treeless expanse. The loose shifting
sand gradually settles down into firm and stable soil, in sweeping


undulations and occasional gravelly ridges. Half wav from Wauaa-
ring to Milparinka the road skirts some of the Builoo overflow
country —vast grey-bottomed clay pans, carrying a coarse growth
of cane grass, and intersected with little knolls of shifting sand,
apparently owing what little stability they possess to the few
stunted bushes growing upon them. It is into these shallow recep-
tacles the Bulloo pours its flood waters. At such a time there is
a large area that must present the appearance of an inland sea.
Close here there is a station with an approximate area of 200,000
acres to be had for nothing. It was abandoned some years ago,
and since then the Lands Department has been vainly trying to
find one or more tenants to occupy it. The rent is £5 per 20,000
acres, the term of lease 28 years, and there is no residence condi-
tion. The only conditions are fencing and water conservation.
Twenty thousand acres for £5 a year, wool at fancy prices,
and still there is no wild rush to secure it. When occupied, this
land was assessed at seventeen times the rent now asked.
Pushing west, the scantily timbered country is an alternation
of clay pans and sand hummocks, of broad undulations and stony
ridges, the latter lightly covered with shrub-like bushes and
affording a view of similar ridges that, like petrified billows,
stretch away until their bare red tops are lost in the softer blue
of the horizon. In duo time the irregular back of the Grey Range
looms up in the western distance, while a dotted line of green trees
mark where the Warratta Creek threads its doubtful way across
the bare and intervening plain. Both the hills and the timber are
welcome, for they bring relief to the overpowering sense of soli-
tude, conjured up by that seemingly endless expanse of rolling
ridges over which the eye looked in vain for an} - sign of human
presence, and the ear strained in fruitless effort to catch some
sound of life breaking the lonely silence. The Grey Range, with
its distinct promise of mineral development, is an island of rock
set in an ocean of sand. For here begins the interminable sand-
hills that did so much to baffle Sturt, and which he declared even
his horses regarded with dismay. They extend to the border and
far bey T ond, for they form the south-western extremity of that
almost desert stretch of country that runs across the continent
until it meets the coastal influences of Western Australia. This
extreme corner of New South Wales ; s so saline that in places it
is impossible to conserve water in the ordinary surface excavations,
as it becomes as brine. There are numerous depressions in which,
water collects, occasionally of such dimensions as to be rightly
termed lakes. They are invariably salt, and, save in the few
instances where the water is both sweet and permanent, represent
so much waste country. At Yantara, going south from Milparinka,.
there are two of these salt lakes, covering an area of 17,000 acres.
The road to Broken Hill runs round the edge of one of them.
Coming over a sandy rise, the traveller sees in the near distance a


noble and delightful expanse of water. Its shimmering surface
reflects and deepens the blue of heaven, its edges mirror back the
trees of the surrounding hills, and look calm and refreshing in
their grateful shade. In that dry and arid land it is indeed a
pretty picture ; but its very beauty, its unclouded detail, proclaim
it a fraud. But still it is difficult to believe that it is so—that
that pleasant picture could have been conjured up out of the
dreary mud flat, with its saline efflorescence, that gradually reveals
itself as the treacherous mirage slowly fades away. Midway
across the waterless lake the surroundings are the very abomi-
nation of desolation. Over the purple-grey salt-encrusted bottom
the sun’s rays dance viciously, the pleasing tree-decked hills become
white sandy knolls, with a few stunted and almost leafless bushes
that proclaim rather than hide the unconquerable sterility of the
place. It only needs the Sodom apple to make it a miniature
replica of the Dead Sea. When full its waters are undrinkable,
when empty it is repulsiv e slime; full or empty it is an eye-searing
waste—the very air is tainted with its exudations. Curious that
only a sandhill separates it from the fresh water lake on the same
run.
A few runs along the route from the Paroo, and commencing
about 40 miles from that river, have during the past two years
been singularly fortunate. While all east and south of them have
been suffering the pains of severest drought, they have been kept
in fairly good heart by a succession of rain storms that were little
more than local in their area, and entirely so as to their benefits.
As a consequence, some drafts of fats have lately gone to Broken
Hill and Adelaide. But though stock are in fair condition, feed
is evidently giving out, and without an early fall the pressure of
hard times will soon make itself felt here also. The immediate
want is a tank-filling rain ; for though the previous rains kept the
feed going, they were not heavy enough to make water. The
rabbits indicated their appreciation of the improved pasture, for
while those seen between Bourke and the Paroo could be counted in
units, from the Paroo westwards they were skipping about in all
directions, their scarcity and abundance in each case testifying to
the condition of the country. The rabbit is indeed a very accurate
barometer. You may wage war against him as you will, but in a
good season he wdll get ahead of all the machinations set for his
destruction. But wfflen nature takes a hand in the business, and,
proceeding to wmrk on the grand scale, entraps him in the inesca-
pable toils of silent and remorseless drought, he disappears as
before a pestilence. The satisfaction of learning, therefore, that
the rabbits are scarce on any given area of country must always
be qualified by the knowledge that the blighting force that has
destroyed the rabbit has not left the sheep and cattle scathless.
And there is always a sufficient remnant left for a fresh start.


III
For a long stage beyond this, past Cobham Lake (fresh water),
the country is a jumble of sandhills, with occasional plains
between. It is scantily timbered, and everywhere can be seen
the damaging effects of the sandstorms upon improvements—
upon tanks, fences, and yards. Gradually, however, the loose
sand again hardens, the hummocks straighten and expand into
swelling ridges, linked together by gently sweeping undulations.
In almost any direction the skyline is broken by the misty grey
top of some seemingly T isolated peak, solitary citadels in the king-
dom of solitude. Even the thinly scattered trees hitherto noticed
disappear. A little light scrub—four feet of brittle sapless stick
surmounted with a pathetic attempt at a little scanty foliage—
occasionally sought to relieve the open barrenness of the land-
scape. Stones begin to scatter themselves about—red ironstone
and white quartz pebbles—and ultimately become as thick as if
they had been sprinkled from some giant pepper-castor. In places
where the latter variety predominates, the tops and slopes of the
hills look as if covered with patches of snow. Nearing Fowler’s
Gap, some 70 miles from Broken Hill, serrated rocky outcrops
score long lines across the face of the barren earth, huge boulders
cluster on the slopes and choke the storm channel along which
the road runs in its windings through the pass. The deep-cut
rents in the sides of the hills, the rocks denuded of every 7 particle
of soil, the waterworn boulders, all proclaim that, though it
rains rarely here, y r et it occasionally does so with cyclonic force.
Emerging from the Gap, the stony undulations reappear—
stretching as far as the eye can see—right on to Broken Hill and
beyond. It has been—probably it must still be regarded as
being—salt-bush country, but the salt-bush has disappeared, like
the grass. The only 7 timber to be seen is that fringing the water-
courses that carry off the storm water from the surrounding hills.
These channels seem to start on the slightest provocation, some-
times without any discernible excuse. They wander aimlessly
across a plain for awhile, and Just when they seem to be develop-
ing into promising proportions they annoyingly disappear—a
capricious termination to a capricious beginning. It is, perhaps,
unnecessary 7 to remark that the majority of these channels have
long since been as dry as the country 7 they 7 intersect. And as for
that country—mile after mile, stage after stage, but always the
same sun-scorched, wind-swept expanse of utter desolation. Over
ridges and across the intervening levels, by sand hummock and
dry 7 lake, and never a blade of grass. Little bunches of dry 7 twigs
remained to tell of salt and other bushes long since dead ; but not
a single shooting sprig or leaf offered sustenance for the present
or hope for the future. In this respect it was neither worse nor
From “Sydney morning Herald," 25th November, 1899.


better than the country previously traversed, or than that which
lay beyond. But the absence of trees brought so much of its
barrenness into view at the one time, and kept it there for days
together, that the effect is depressing in the extreme, and uncon-
sciously the conclusion is formed that after all Sturt’s description
was not the exaggeration it was once judged to be.
For a few miles past Broken Hill the hard ridgy country
continues : then it drops suddenly on to the plain that runs to the
Darling. There is some salt and blue bush here, but for the rest
the plain is as drought-stricken as the ridges. Passing over the
sandy edges of Lake Speculation, across the grey bottom of Lake
Menindie, with its forest of dead timber, both lakes being dry,
the road strikes the Darling near where Menindie sits—not too
contentedly—on its sandhill. For, like other Western townships,
Menindie feels and shows the effects of the pastoral collapse. It
looks back regretfully upon its past business activity. The hope
with which it has buoyed itself up, that the good times would
come again, is growing weak, and now mainly centres round the
prospect of a railway to connect Broken Hill with the river, and
the conversion of the latter into a permanently navigable stream.
Close by are the idle meatworks that, like those of Bourke, were
once the scene of bustle and activity. At the time of my visit a rise
in the river had terminated a period of short supplies, two steamers
having put in a welcome appearance. They carried heavy loads of
forage (indicative of the season) consigned to up-river stations.
Eighteen miles above Menindie (18 miles of typical broken
Darling River frontage) is Albemarle, a 700,000 acre property,
on which they were shearing 20,000 sheep. The rent is £2IOO,
fixed on the assumption, no doubt, that the run would carry a
sheep to six or seven acres. On the number shorn this year,
however, it exceeds 2s. per sheep. Last year 57,000 sheep were
shorn. Mr. Sadleir, the manager, who has known this district
since 1859, declares he has never previously experienced such a
disastrous time or seen the country in such a deplorable condition
He, like his neighbours, affirms that the surface is destroyed.
Ample confirmation of this statement is presented by every mile
travelled during the next few days. Wide, open, sandy plains
wind-swept and worried, churned up as though they had been
rich alluvial diggings worked by a myriad army of eager miners.
The roots of trees spread out like cobwebs, exposed by the de-
nudations of the wind. Where the butts of salt and other bushes
remained they served to keep a little soil around them, but
between the wind had cut down to the underlying cement-like
clay, leaving them elevated on precarious and gradually disappear-
ing” pedestals. Where even this frail hold was wanting, large
areas were swept as clear of surface-soil as ever was mountain-side
by torrential flow. And the disturbed sand ! —lt has been and
is being carried everywhere : it lies heaped up in hills and dunes


twisted into every fantastic shape, and shifting with every
capricious breeze. Created b}- the wind to-day, they are destroyed
by the wind to-morrow, for “ the wind bloweth where it listeth,"
and the sand is its sport and toy. You can see the process going-
on everywhere and always. Here a dense column of the wind-
borne sand moves leisurely across the plain ; there, red and angry,
it darts swiftly forward like the flame tongue of a fiercely-fanned
bush fire ; now it hangs heavy and yellow as a London fog, and
then it whirls heavenward in the contorted throes of a whirlwind.
Miles upon miles of it are in the condition I have attempted to
describe. In places the evil is not nearly so pronounced, but it
is everywhere apparent. Its ravages run over every note in the
gamut of destruction, from the merely perceptible deterioration
on the harder ridges and freely timbered country, to the absolute
ruin of the open sandy plains. It is, in my opinion, the most
serious of the many serious developments with which the Western
grazier is face to face. It is entitled to this post of dubious
honour, because it is due to causes that are permanent and in-
escapable. They are the presence of stock and of rabbits, aided
and abetted by drought. There is no reason to suppose the winds
have increased in energy or the droughts in intensity. This
drought may be worse than the last, or the wind of to-day stronger
than that of yesterday, but it would be idle to suppose that there
has been any change in the meteorological conditions viewed over
a series of years. Some other cause than that of drought or wind
must be looked for. In the pre-settlement days, though the
drought raged and the wind blew, there were bushes that defied
the one and checked the other, while the roots of the dead grass
remained to steady and hold the soil together. But with the
advent of stock and rabbits these counteracting forces have been
removed. The destruction of the bushes has left the wind with-
out check or break, the destruction of the roots (for which the
rabbits must be held principally responsible) has left the soil
hopelessly at its mercy, whilst the constant traffic of stock served
to still further loosen and disintegrate a soil, invariably friable
and frequently little more than pure sand. As these several
causes combined to bring about the result described, the mere
passing away of one of them will not suffice to undo the evil. In
other districts, such as those at the head of the Darling, the effect
of stocking has been to consolidate soil originally loose and ash-
like. But on soil such as I have described the effect is directly
opposite. On tens of thousands of acres the very roots have been
eaten, trodden, or blown out, and it would take an unusual run
of phenomenal seasons, with the lightest possible stocking, to
induce a fresh growth, even if the soil were in its original state.
But it is not only very far from that state—l can see no process
by w-hich under any possible treatment it can be brought back
even approximately to it. The soil is gone, and the exposed


clayey subsoil is about as productive as a paved courtyard. Even
where this full extent of damage has not been achieved, so much
of the surface soil, which at best is very shallow in this locality,
lias been carried away that the productivity of the remainder is
seriously diminished. In view of all the circumstances, it is
impossible to avoid the unpleasant conclusion that permanent
deterioration, amounting over large areas to practical destruction,
has taken place throughout this portion of the colony. This
opinion is held by some of the Government inspectors who have
lately given evidence before the Land Boards.
Nor does the damage caused by the erosion of the soil stop
there, for the wind-blown sand is everywhere and ceaselessly
moving to the destruction of improvements. At Salisbury Downs
it had been necessary to excavate the sheepyards before shearing
could start. At Cobham the manager advised against letting the
buggy horses go in the horse-paddock (in which there was a little
picking), as in places the fence was so sanded up that they might
get out. As hunting for lost horses in such a country is a weari-
ness to the Hesh and a vexation to the spirit, tire horses were kept
iir all night. Nearing Broken Hill there is a tine solid masonry
reservoir, with troughing for watering stock, all silted up, and
promising before long to become as completely buried as ancient
Pompeii. At Meuiudi the church picket fence, Ift. Gin. high, is
all but covered. At Wheeler’s Well —an out-station of Albemarle
—a big embankment of sand is only kept from swallowing up the
house by constant labour. At Victoria Lake the high stockyard
is useless, and after repeatedly digging it out it has been decided
to shift it in the hope of finding a site possessing less attraction
for the sand. At Kilfera shearing sheds the outer yards were
buried, and temporary fences for the purposes of the shearing
erected on the mounds formed over them. And so instances
could be multiplied ad injinituni, for half-buried fences and
wholly-buried tanks are to be met with everywhere. Not once,
but a dozen times, did the roads run through fences, the gates of
which were completely blocked by the accumulation of sand, the
traffic being diverted to a temporary opening made further' along
the fence. In places even this makeshift was unnecessary, for,
the fence being completely buried, the simpler expedient of
driving over it was resorted to. The owner of one run informed
me that there was not a single sheep-proof fence on the place.
Every fence at some point or other was so far buried that stock
c'Uikl go from paddock to paddock. This silting takes place most
readily 7 with the rabbit-netted fences, which present a greater
obstruction to the wind-borne sand. Consequently it is not
sin-prising that many pastoralists now bitterly lament the heavy
expenditure incurred in their erection. Not only does the netting
soon silt up sufficient to enable rabbits to pass over it, but it
involves in its ruin fences that might otherwise have escaped.


As for tanks, the constant process of silting up has thrown
upon the lessees a labour like that of Sisyphus, while it has
seriously reduced the water supply. The cost of keeping the
tanks cleaned out is a heavy one, and it is evident lessees have
been unable or unwilling to face it, for the great majority of
tanks met with were more or less silted up. Some were reduced
to the merest pot-holes, while so completely filled up were others
that it would take a Royal Commission to determine their sites.
There would seem to be a peculiar contrariness about the wind
out west. Its one indomitable purpose seems to be to shift soil
from places where it is of maximum benefit and deposit it where
it will do a maximum of damage. Stick a post upon a plain, and
the wind will be seized with a sudden passion to dig it up. Put
a row of them up, run a few wires between them, call it a fence,
and it reverses its tactics and showers tons of sand over it as if
to blot it out of sight.
But a worse trouble than the sand is affecting the improve-
ments. It is the dry-rot of impecuniosity. It is stamped upon
them all in plain and indelible signs, but it is more apparent—or
perhaps it appeals to one more—in the condition of the houses.
Homes that were once occupied bv owners and their families are
now in charge of married couples or bachelor overseers, while in
places even they have been entirely 1 , though it may be hoped onlv
temporarily, abandoned.
IV.
Some 40 miles from the Darling is Bulla Boolka, one of a
chain of lakes fed from the river through the Talywalka, best
described as an overflow channel. This lake still has water in it,
but it is terribly shrunken. The buildings of a very extensive
and comfortable homestead are here, evidently built in the palmy
days of 'Western squatting : but save for the presence of a solitary
boundary rider they are deserted. Lake Victoria, part of the
same system, is dry, for the third time in 26 years. It was filled
in 1886, and being subsequently replenished held out until Sep-
tember of last year. Water is now being obtained by a well sunk
at the edge of its wide-spreading basin. A proof of the extent
to which the wind is removing the surface of the soil is offered
by the post erected as a pedestal for the rain gauge at this station.
The well-marked stains at its butt show that some 15in. of soil
have been carried away, and so far as could be judged that repre-
sented the erosion for a considerable distance round. Here I
learned of the depredations of a little insect called the borer bee,
which sought to improve the shining hour by honey-combing the
pisa homestead. It is completely baffled by covering the walls
From “ sydney Morning Herald," 13th December, 1899.


with calico, though why an insect able to walk through cement
like pisa should hesitate about finding its way through a sheet of
Horrock’s unbleached is not quite obvious.
After leaving Lake Victoria, timber again begins to appear,
and the condition (which must not be confused with the quality)
of the country to manifest a decided improvement. Protected
by timber belts, it has escaped the worst of the terrible wind
thrashing, while some recent showers have induced a light—very
light—growth of herbage. Here and there a blade of grass, too,
timidly lifted his head among the broad-leaved spinach, as if
abashed at his owtr temerity. Scanty and transient though it
was, even the blush of green —for it was little more—was pecu-
liarly refreshing after the long stretch of utter and unbroken
barrenness. But although there was a little feed of doubtful
quality, water was as scarce as on any part of the track. At
German Tank, arr outstation of Manfred, the rainfall for the year
up to the end of September' aggregated the grand total of 272
points, the heaviest fall being 60 points. One large paddock orr
the same run has been unstocked for three years, there having
during that time beeir no rain heavy enough to till the tanks.
At Beilpajah, arr outstation of Kilfera, water was being 'carted
mot only for the Irouse but for the working horses. The big ex-
cavation close by the station was fissured and cracked as if rent
by some volcanic disturbance. The value of water was impressed
upon me by the answer given to my request for a drink for the
horses. It was readily enough granted, but was accompanied by
the almost pathetic adjuration, “ But do please be careful.” It
was half-plea, half a condition precedent; but it was easy to
understand it, and eas} T to sympathise with it. The rainfall for
the first nine months of the present year stood at 105 points, the
heaviest fall being 79 points, while the total for 22 months was
11.'51 points. Half an inch of rain per month goes a long way
to inducing carefulness in the matter of water. Is earing Kilfera
two entirely different classes of country meet —the northern
extremity of the Riverina, broad, open, and treeless, being skirted
by the timber already beginning to thicken into the dense scrub
that rolls south-east to the Willandra and north-east to the Bogan.
Kilfera has an area of 832,000 acres, and is this year shearing
50,000 sheep, against 95,000 last'year. It was assessed at eight
acres to the sheep, but Mr. Webb, the managing partner, assured
me it had never carried that number. Once or twice it had been
stocked up to it, but heavy losses had followed, showing the
estimate to be an inflated one. There has been an expenditure
here on improvements of £109,000, and the place was purchased
for £230,000. Western runs can hardly be said to have anv
definite value just now, but it is certainly not more than 15s. per
head. On this basis Kilfera is to-day worth £37,500, as it
stands. Deducting from this the market value of the sheep, say


7s. fid. per head, or £18,750, and which they would fetch if sold
irrespective of the run, and it leaves the value of the latter, with
its £109,000 worth of improvements, at £18,750. That this
estimate is not very wide of the mark is demonstrated by the
actual sale for £13,000 of a quarter-share of a well-known and
highly-improved Riverina property, together with 80,000 sheep,
the same property having previously changed hands at £210,000.
Kilfera possesses one of the finest shearing sheds, not merely in
the West, but in the colony, but its owner deeply regrets the ex-
penditure incurred in its construction, It has accommodation for
82 shearers, but 35 are now sufficient to shear the decimated flocks.
Ivanhoe, a bright little township, 15 miles from Kilfera,
must have many stories to tell of sharp fights with the demon of
aridity before the advent of the Government tank, to which it
can now look in times of distress. It is situated near the south-
west corner of a stretch of country running east and north, nearly
all of which is threatened and much of which is already ruined
by the rapid growth of scrub. A line drawn from 1 vanhoe south-
east to near Hillston, thence north-east to near Kyngan, thence
roughly parallel to but a little north of the Cobar line, to a point
a little north-west of that town, and thence to Ivanhoe again,
will form a rhomboid, approximately 120 miles on the short (east
to west) side and 150 on the long (north to south), and containing
roughly 11 million acres. In its north-east corner it embraces the
muchdiscussed Bogan scrub, and in the south-west large areas of
abandoned country, from which the settlers have been completely
driven. Throughout its expansive limits dismal and impenetrable
scrub has blotted out the once open plains, and reduced the
country to a worse than useless condition. There are many runs
on this area upon which the encroachments of the scrub have
not been of so serious a character, but it is doubtful if there is
a single holding that has not to an appreciable extent been
affected by this unwelcome and apparently irresistible growth.
The best summary of the position is afforded by these two sets
of facts, viz., those connected with the West Bogan scrub-clearing,
and those surrounding the abandoned land further south. Much
of the West Bogan country was but a few years ago open forest.
Within so brief a compass it was reduced to such a condition by
scrub that no terms the State could offer were deemed sufficient
to attract new settlers, until an expenditure of thousands of
pounds for clearing had been incurred. Special terms were
offered to many of the existing tenants to induce them to continue
the fight against the scrub, but by only a small percentage have
they been accepted. On much of the land that it has cleared
the State is, after allowing for interest on its outlay, now' getting
a smaller rental than it demanded and received a few years ago,
and necessarily before it had spent a single penny in scrubbing.
I am not in any way questioning or discussing the policy of the


clearing operations,—l only mention the facts as proving that
the scrub growth is a fearfully real scourge and not a mere bogey ;
and further to illustrate the expensive character of that peculiar
short-sightedness which, with regard to land matters, has always
failed to see that prevention is better than cure. The second set
of facts- those surrounding the abandonment of areas, scattered
over the country between the Willandra and the Lachlan on the
south and Cobar on the north—are equally eloquent. There is a
total of 3,500,000 acres, contained in SO holdings, the bulk being
within these points, and which, with all improvements, have been
abandoned. What these improvements were originally worth is
known only to the unfortunates who constructed them, but they
must have aggregated a very large sum indeed. Apart from
the loss to individuals, there is to the community the loss of rent
and of the production of which the land was once capable. The
Lands Department has made frequent attempts to find fresh
tenants for this land, which is all available under improvement
leases at terms that on paper appear ludicrously easy, but which
have failed to attract.
My route from Ivanhoe was by an inter-station track ulti-
mately running into the Mossgiel-Cobar road. For a few miles
after leaving the township the country is open, and, having shoots
of herbage, was almost picturesque, with its little plains broken by
belts and clumps of timber. But after passing Ticehurstit began
to change, the rapidly-increasing timber heralded the approach
of the scrub, in which the road soon buried itself. The mallee
put in an appearance, at first as single spies and then in battalions,
while the pine and belah wrestled strenuously with it and with
each other for the ever-diminishing space. At Kajuligah the
homestead buildings combined to tell a pathetic story. The com-
fortable house, with its double roof (designed to secure coolness),
the well laid-out garden, now a wilderness, the underground tank
falling in, the empty aviary (in which once flitted someone’s
feathered friends), the rusting horse-gear and chaff-cutter, the
idle mower and rake, all told of the early days of hopeful con-
fidence, when someone dreamed pleasantly of establishing a home
and surrounding the lares and penates with a reasonable measure
of comfort. But now over it all is written the verdict of failure,
the more bitter because the early hope was so bright.
After passing Kajuligah the scrub reigns in all its hideous
glory, mile after mile of it, dense and gloomy and weird, pine,
mallee and belah, belah, mallee and pine, shutting out the sun
from above and choking any growth from beneath, save the
kindred abomination of spinnifex. Through some miles of this,
with an occasional opening revealing a half-silted up and wholly
dry tank, or a broken fence, and the roads come upon Old Yallock
homestead—silent and deserted. The large house with its
defunct garden, the kitchen with the big range and attached


rooms, the extensive stables and buggy sheds, blacksmith’s shop
with its forge and fittings, the store and men’s huts, meat-house
and cellar, and fowlyards and houses, horse and milking yards —
they are all there—all speaking of a big establishment long ago.
From deserted Yallook, through more and, if possible, thicker
scrub, with more and thicker patches of spinnifex, in some
mysterious way drawing sustenance from the loose white sand,
past more dry and silted tanks, with out-of-gear pumps and
broken fences, and then by degrees the country begins to assume
the form and characteristics of the Cobar neighbourhood. It
hardens and becomes more ridgy and undulating, the dense
stunted scrub begins to die away, and to give place to open flats
and belts of grown timber. Here and there is a stony ridge
with quartz outcrops, along which the prospector has left his
plainly visible tracks. Now and again the road has been cut
through a belt of big pine, which makes a very pretty avenue,
but is ominous of danger to the surrounding country should cir-
cumstances favour its spreading. Some very useful and accept-
able showers in this neighbourhood, light though they were, have
served to relieve a very critical position. At Paddington station,
for the first time on record, there was a failure of the water
supply upon which the house and garden depended. The shearing
gave a total of 18,000 sheep, as against the 80,000 to 90,000 of
previous years. Further on, at the Double Gates Hotel, the
landlord stated that for the first time in 12 years he had been
obliged to cart water. Statements of similar effect are obtainable
on every hand. As a consequence, the tale of losses in the dis-
trict round Cobar is fully as heavy as that of any other portion
of the western country. Some of these losses I enumerate in an
article given over to figures.
V.
Turning from facts to figures, it will be seen the seriousness
of the position as set out in the preceding article finds the most
ample confirmation. There is a generally respected prejudice
against figures, but nevertheless they sometimes serve to represent
a position with a force and directness peculiarly their own. And
they are additional!} 7 useful in the case under review, as thev
enable something of a comparison to be instituted between the
pastoral losses in the far western and in the less seriously disturbed
districts. Some of the figures are official, the remainder taken for
the most part from the books of the different stations visited. No
special effort has been made to select what might be called awful
examples, they represent only ordinary cases, and as such thev
could be multiplied to a quite wearying extent. Nor are they
From “Sydney Morning Herald," 16th December, 1899.


sj:vj:n vi
•:aks period.
1891.
1898.
Deficiency
Per
millions.
millions.
millions.
eent.
Western Districts
... 12 ...
44
Rest of colony
... m, ...
341 -
1W
31
ONK VK.Mi PERIOD.
1897.
1898.
Deficiency
Per
millions.
millions.
millions.
cent.
West Districts
7i
4 ...
11
Rest of colony
... 36| ..
341 ...
2
6
SHERI*
.AT SHEARING.
1894.
1899.
Wentworth Holding
110,295
... 33,730
Broken Hill ,,
135,765
... 30,665
Cobar ,,
80,569 .
... 22,011
Cobar ,,
... 43,103
8,662
Wilcannia ,,
... 34,113
6,561
Wilcannia ,,
... 27,416
12,000
confined to any limited area that has been particularly hard hit.
They are the figures of stations scattered throughout the districts
visited on the course of a 900-mile journey. They are submitted not
because they are the figures of single runs, but because they reveal
the condition of many districts ; not because they show the losses
of individuals, but because they are typical of those of an industry.
From 61 millions of sheep depastured in 1891, the flocks of
the colony dropped to 11 millions on December 31 last—a shrink-
age, roundly, of one-third. This fall is the more serious as, since
1891, a very considerable amount of capital has been expended
with the intention or the hope of recovering the carrying capacity
of the country. Yet heavy as has been the shrinkage of the flocks
as a whole, it has been much more so with those of the far west.
Grouping the figures for the districts embraced in the area of
which I am treating under one heading, and those for the rest of
the colony under another, it will be seen that proportionately the
shortage in the former exceeded that of the latter by nearly 50 per
cent, for the period from 1891 to 1898, while for every thousand
sheep short in the rest of the colony in 1898 as compared with
1897, the Western districts in proportion to their numbers suffered
a loss of 1833, an excess of 83 per cent. The actual figures are :
Had the shrinkage in the rest of the colony been as heavy as that
in the Western districts, the former would have had another six
millions of sheep to the bad. But it is when the figures of the
present j 7 ear are studied that the full extent of the Western holo-
caust is made apparent. The stock returns being made as on
December 31 of each year, 1899 complete official figures are not
yet available ; but as shearing has been completed on some, and
had made considerable progress on others, I was able to procure
from the shearing tallies figures that, with an allowance for
stragglers, will in due course become the official statistics of the
Stock Department. I give the districts in which several runs are
situated, as showing that the heavier losses of the present year
have been as widespread as those preceding them ;


The sheep on these runs'have on an average 22 acres apiece,
and, as I had ample opportunity of observing, are dying, and this
notwithstanding that the present-day value of improvements aver-
ages £1 5s 4d pei- head of the sheep, the original cost being very
much greater. I could multiply figures such as these ad infinitum.
On three properties north of Broken Hill embracing a million
acres, 18,000 sheep were all they could muster for shearing. The
effort to get this emaciated remnant of flocks that once stood at
near 200,000 to the shearing shed must have been a pitiful and
sickening one. The lines of route to the sheds were strewn with
carcases ; hundreds reached the sheds to stiffen their skeleton
limbs there, and yet hundreds more emerged from the shearing-
relieved of their scanty yokeless fleeces, only to give up the
struggle on the journey back to their desert paddocks. On an
adjoining property that once ran over 100,000 sheep, 12,000 now
wander over its shadeless and grassless acres, feebly struggling to
prolong their flickering lives. On one station, possessing many
miles of Darling River frontage, and an area of over 700,000
acres, they have just shorn 20,000 sheep, the residue of 80,000
previously shorn. Afew years ago from 110,000 to 130,000 sheep was
the recognised tall v, and the owners then anticipated that with some
additional improvements they could safely maintain these numbers;
they incurred the expenditure, the improvements were made, but
only to intensify the disappointment of the subsequent years.
The next station going towards 1 vanhoe reported shearing
18,000 out of the 49,000 sheep that figured on the hooks. The
deficiency of 31,000 the manager “ hoped ” to reduce by mustering
2000 stragglers.
The next run, a holding of 832,000 acres, reported a shearing
of 47,000 and a loss of 48,000, and this in spite of an expenditure
of £2493 on scrub-cutting. A large number of hands are employed
gathering the dead wool, of which it is estimated there is enough
scattered about the run to fill 500 bales. Of this a third will
probably bo gathered. In this neighbourhood some of the losses
are startling, even when placed beside the appalling figures already
given. One property started the year with 60,000 sheep. Of
these 10,000 were sold, and of the remainder only 13,000 could
be mustered for shearing, a loss of 37,000 in nine months. On
another, in the same period, 19,000 had dwindled to 12,000, and
on yet another 18,000 had been mustered out of the 43,000 with
which the year commenced. A small holding collected 1600 out
of 4000, and on another—a 50,000-acre property—l7oo have, so
far, managed to survive. It is sometimes assumed that smaller
holdings emerge from a drought with less disastrous loss than
large ones. On decent country this may be so, hut if there is one
thing my inquiries demonstrated it is the remorseless impartiality
of the drought in this respect. Its withering blast falls on small
and large alike.


Dec., 1898.
July, 1899.
Jionrke
1,413,030
700,000
Cobar
1,002,248
440.000
Ray
1,284,950
830,950
Hillstou
720,096
275,000
Ivanhoe
017,7/5
303.600
Supporting this are the figures supplied by a homestead
lessee near Cobar. He started the year with 358 cattle and 14
horses, and after keeping two men employed for many weeks scrub-
cutting and spending nearly £lOO in the purehase'of forage, his
total has been reduced to 73 cattle and four horses.
On September last the Stock Department published an
interim report, in which it was estimated that the sheep in the
colony had dropped from 41,240,000 at the beginning of the year
to 35,209,000 at that date : a loss of a little over six millions, or
15 per cent. From the information obtained on my trip, lam
convinced that half that shortage occurred in the west. If this
estimate is correct, then it means that while the loss there has
been 44 per cent., that for the rest of the colony is less than 9
per cent.
Although, as stated, the stock returns are not made until
December, the stock inspectors furnish the department with
quarterly reports. Their estimates may be accepted as approxi-
mately correct. The appended figures, taken from the reports for
July last, leave little room for the hope that my estimate is an
exaggerated one :
The average deficiency shown here is nearly 50 per cent.
There is a slowly-dying notion that, great as are the losses
occasioned by drought, they are more than exceeded by the profits
of a good season, and that consequently on an average the balance
comes out on the right side of the ledger. This idea was once
held by the western graziers themselves, they clung to it with
tenacity- and surrendered in despair. If it were correct, as in spite
of man} 7 bitter experiences the} - strove to believe, they would, on
the whole, be in a solvent condition. Even if individual graziers
were in financial straits, the industry would be sound, and western
stations as investments would be regarded as favourably as hereto-
fore. There is no sentiment about money, sooner or later it will
flow wherever profit is to be gleaned. That capital is absolutely
shunning far western runs—as every banker, financier and pas-
toralist knows full well— is proof that under present conditions
they are not profitable. It is safe to assert that there is not a
run in the districts under review that would fetch the amount
expended in improving it, although the stock and plant were given
in. The few sales that have taken place confirm this statement.
Last year a well-known Wilcannia run was brought to the hammer
in Melbourne. The total area w 7 as 700,000 acres, and at the time
of sale it had 54,483 sheep (lambs given in), 496 cattle, and 282
horses, and £61,700 had been spent in improvements It brought


Years of
Years of
Insufficient
Sufficient
Rainfall.
Rainfall.
Bourke
... 11)
10
Urisino
... 14
o
Mount Poole
... 14
7
Mount Gipps
... 17
7
Menindie ...
... 18
4
Albemarle ...
... 11
4
Kilfera
•22
6
Roto
... 17
5
Cobar
... 13
6
£35,200. As the stock and plant were worth =£25,000, the price
given for the run was £10,200, or 16| per cent, of the value of
improvements. Another recent auction sale is that of a station
near Ivanhoe, for which £32,000 was given in 1889. The improve-
ments and plant cost £16,000, and yet £7OO was the bid at which
it lately changed hands. In the same neighbourhood is a run for
which £60,000 was once refused. Its original owners spent
£16,000 in improvements, and failing, the property fell to the
Mortgage Company. The company held it for six years, spending
a further sum of £10,500 in improvements, and then sold it,
together with 5000 acres of freehold and 5000 acres of C.P. and
C.L. land, for £3OOO, or less than half the amount the Crown had
received for the freehold land alone. When the present owner
bought there were 19,000 sheep on the place. He sold 1000, and
of the remaining 18,000 he has lost 10,000.
Some little time ago Mr. Carruthers expressed his opinion
that to give western grazing areas a chance it would be necessary
to reduce the interest charge. There does not appear much room
for economy in this respect in these cases.
VI.
In the opening article the opinion was expressed that the
normal condition of the West was drought relieved by occasional
good seasons, and that the acceptance of an opposite theory had
proved a costly mistake. A glance at a few rainfall records will
suffice to prove this. On more than one occasion Mr. Russell, in
his annual publication, has affirmed “ that in the western districts
a year in which an average quantity of rain falls is practically a
year of insufficient rainfall, and that the average must be ex-
ceeded by 20 per cent, before a good year is assured. ’ In the
appended table I have applied Mr. Russell’s theory to the records
of nine stations fairly spread over the western districts :
Roughly, these figures show that for every good year there
are two and a half bad ones. Even excluding the 20 per cent,
in excess of the average which in Mr. Russell’s opinion is neces-
sary to constitute a good year, and taking the average as being
From “ sydney morning Herald," 28th December, 1899.


sufficient, there will be still two dry years to one good one. But
even this does not show the full extent of the drought conditions
under which western grazing has to be carried on. If the one
good and the two bad years alternated with any approach to
regularity it might be possible to work in sympathy with them.
The very reverse is, however, the case, the good and the bad
having a plainly discernible tendency to group themselves as did
the lean and fat years of Pharaoh’s time. It is one thing to have
a bad j’ear sandwiched in between two good ones, but it is quite
another thing to have to face a run of bad years in succession.
In the extreme north-west corner the average rainfall is 9 inches.
But during the past five years there has been only 60 per cent, of
even that deficient total. The records are :—1895, 5 inches 54
points; 1896, 5 inches 64 points; 1897, 5 inches 28 points;
1898, 5 inches 87 points ; and, for the first nine months of 1899,
5 inches 15 points. At Mount Gipps, just north of Broken Hill,
the average rainfall is 8 inches 85 points, but not once during
the past nine years has that average been reached, the annual
fall having ranged from 5 inches 25 points to 7 inches 51 points.
At Albemarle only once in the same period was the average
exceeded. But even on that occasion it failed to reach Mr.
Bussell’s limit, while for the remaining eight years it fell short of
the average by 33 per cent. These are only typical cases. It is
these long stretches of drought that defy all calculations, upset
the most cautious management, and brush aside all efforts to
provide against them. It may be possible to tide over a six or
twelve months’ drought; water can be conserved for that period,
and a little, very little, can be done in providing food. But it is
not possible to bridge over a period of insufficient rainfall lasting
nine years. There is, indeed, but one way in which such country
can be permanently and profitably occupied, and that is by dis-
carding the long-cherished but utterly fallacious notion about
O Co *
average seasons, accept the inevitable, and recognise that the
normal condition is that of drought, and reduce our estimate of
its carrying capacity accordingly. Years ago, when it was first
settled, it was never more than half-stocked, according to the
ideas then prevailing as to its carrying capacity. This was due
to the fact that large areas were unwatered. In good seasons
stock would be moved back to places where the rain had made
temporary water. When this failed they were brought on to the
frontage, or to the other main water supply. In this way country
was being alternately spelled and stocked. Men were caught by
drought then as now, but the carrying capacity of the country
remained unimpaired. It was as good as ever as soon as the
drought ended. Such a rain as that which produced such a
disappointing result about Bourke would have sufficed to pror ide
abundant feed. But it was only natural that settlers, seeing
their stock cooped up and slowly starving on a frontage in a


drought, while out back there was fail' dry feed, should have set
to work to conserve water. They assumed that the country
would carry permanently the same number of stock that it had
previously carried intermittently. The mistake, perhaps, was
natural. The early settlers, and those who immediately succeeded
them, saw the country in its virgin state. Tire}' could not know
how seriously constant stocking would affect it, nor had they any
premonition of the rabbit plague, and so they eager!}’ went to
work, and multiplied tanks and wells and dams, and, later,
artesian boros, in all directions, until it was possible to stock the
whole country and to stock it all at once. This, perhaps, would
not har e mattered if there had not been a total, though quite
understandable, misconception as to the carrying capacity of the
country. Country that when occasionally stocked comfortably
carried a sheep to five acres, and which looked in good heart
when the failure of the water caused the removal of stock, was
expected to discharge the same duty permanently when given a
sufficient water supply. At first it appeared to fulfil these hopeful
expectations, and the ownership of a western squattage was
regarded as a certificate of unbounded wealth. But it soon began
to give way under the strain. The first uncomfortable indica-
tions being revealed by the drought were attributed to the
drought. dSTot suspecting any other cause, no other cause was
looked for, and, with the return of a good season, men hastened
to stock up again on the old basis. They had seen droughts
before, and had seen the country burst again into its wonted
fertility with the return of rain, and they looked for the process
to repeat itself. But by degrees it became evident that the
vitality, the recuperative power, of the country was lessening.
At first there was only an uncomfortable suspicion. Men tried
to persuade themselves and each other that it was only the result
of drought, and that with a run of good seasons the country
would build up to its original condition. They were slow to see
what was taking place, reluctant to admit, even to themselves,
that so great a catastrophe was threatening them ; for by tin’s
time the whole industry was resting on the assumption that the
country could permanently, and with reasonable safety, carry the
stock they were asking it to ('any. Buns had been bought and
heavily improved in this belief, money borrowed and lent, financial
responsibilities accepted, and rents fixed on this basis. But
each year made the unpalatable fact more and more evident. The
country collapsed more rapidly and more completely with each
succeeding drought, and it recovered less rapidly and less com-
pletely with each returning good season. Whatever lingering
chance there might otherwise have been of keeping even near the
old tallies, was finally dissipated by the appearance of the rabbits,
and it only required the present severely protracted drought to
emphasise the complete collapse that has taken place.


Two things follow from this statement of the case. 1. That
the original estimate of the carrying capacity of the country,
based upon the first few years of intermittent grazing, is shown
to be greatly in excess of its permanent capacity. 2. That the
attempt to work the country up to this misleading estimate,
coupled with the rabbits, has resulted in its serious deterioration.
Quite apart from the losses already endured, it is manifest
that methods of working producing such results cannot be in-
definitely pursued. Sooner or later they or the industry must be
abandoned, and that that critical point has been reached there
is, I fear, too much proof. The question is how to get the
industry back on to something like a sound footing. One of the
most enterprising of South Australia’s pastoralists (Mr. P. Waite),
dealing with country similar to much of the western land in this
colony, has adopted a system which is really a systematic and
scientific adaptation of early squatting methods. He constructs
a number of comparatively small paddocks, so far as circum-
stances will permit, in the form of oblong groups. In the centre
of each group is an enormous tank, presumed to conserve a per-
manent water supply, and so placed as to water the four central
paddocks. In each of the outlying paddocks there is a small
tank. The stock are first put into these outlying q>addo’oks, the
centre ones meanwhile spelling. When either feed or water-
fails in the former, the stock are shifted into the latter. Mi-,
Waite thus works his country as the early squatters worked
theirs. They used to take every opportunity of grazing their
stock on the back of their runs, and then, when the water failed
there, brought them on to the frontage. They had two lots of
country for- their stock, and as a consequence one lot was always
spelling. The idea as systematised by Mr. Waite involves a
large outlay of capital. Mr. Waite is, I understand, satisfied
with the venture, but other pastoralists cautiously express a
desire to learn more of the financial results over a longer period.
It is probable something might be done in this way. So many
theories have been formed, adopted, and then discarded, have
been proclaimed a success in one class of country and a failure
in another, that it is foolish to dogmatise. But of this lam
certain ; the system adopted by Mr. Waite is quite out of the
question under existing circumstances in New South Wales.
Not only is there a 40 years’ lease in South Australia as against
IK years here, but rents here have been fixed on the assumption
that the country possessed a certain carrying capacity. In pro-
portion as the number actually depastured fell below this esti-
mate, the rent charge per head would be increased. On dozens
of stations the carrying capacity to-day is fully 50 per cent,
below the assessment upon which they have been rated. Conse-
quently, the rent per sheep is doubled. Working expenses in-
crease in the same inverse ratio, and particularly is this the case


with the expenditure for rabbit destruction. The expense of
keeping the rabbits under will alwav's be greater on lightly-
stocked than on heavilj’-stoeked country, as naturally they breed
more freely where the feed is good than where it is otherwise.
It is therefore utterly impossible for western lessees to get back
to the light stocking of earh' days, or to adopt even an approxi-
mation of Mr. Waite’s system, unless the State, recognising the
altered conditions, is prepared to concede a re-adjustment of con-
ditions.
VII.
If in the foregoing articles I have correctly stated the facts,
it is evident the pastoral position in the West is serious, and calls
for prompt action on the part of the Legislature. It is, however,
one thing to be satisfied that something must be done, and quite
another thing to determine what that something should be. The
subject is so large and so many-sided, the interests involved, both
public and private, so great, the danger so real, that one may well
hesitate before advancing any particular proposal as a sufficient
remedy. At the same time, I should consider these articles some-
what incomplete unless they contained some suggestions for
counteracting the retrograde movement to which they invite
attention. Still, though venturing to make a few suggestions, I
have no great hope that anything that can now be done will bring
the Western pastoral industry back into anything like its former
degree of prosperity. As previously expressed, the country was
originally overrated, and it has since deteriorated. These are
matters not to be set right by Act of Parliament, nor can the
fortunes sunk out there ever be recovered. Up to the present
the Western settlers have been hopelessly worsted in their
encounter with the forces of Nature. All that can be done is to
put them in the best possible position for continuing the combat,
as to the final result of which lam not at all sanguine. Much
of the country contained within the abandoned areas I regard as
utterly hopeless, under present conditions, and so far as our
present knowledge of treating it goes. No conceivable terms that
the State can offer will, I am convinced, suffice to bring it again
into permanent occupation. More reasonable treatment at the
time might have induced the former occupiers, who had spent
their money in improving it, to continue their tenancy, but as
the country has steadily deteriorated since its abandonment, it is
not at all likely any fresh effort will be made to reclaim it. These
may be left out of consideration as simply hopeless. Their one
possible usefulness is that thev act as a warning, that abandon-
ment is no idle bogey, and that it must extend over a wider area
From sydney Morn ing Herald," January, 1900.


unless the lessees are placed in a better position than they now
occupy. The land in occupation, it is necessary to remember, is
held under leasehold and occupation license. The former has 18
years to run, while the latter (the resumed area) is practically a
weekly tenure, as it can be selected at any time. The suggestions
T venture to make are three in number ;
1. The attachment to the leaseholds of resumed areas not
required for settlement.
2. An extended lease for the whole area.
3. The amounts now paid as rent and license fee to be fixed
as the rent for 10 years.
No more serious blunder was ever committed than when
Parliament blindly resumed half of every run in the colony. This
all-round resumption in the West stands condemned by the fact
that some millions of acres remain unapplied for after a lapse of
15 years. Parliament, led by Mr. Carruthers, recognised this
mistake when it included in the Act of 1895 provision for the re-
attachment of these resumed areas to the leasehold. But so
strong were old prejudices that it surrounded the proposal with
conditions that reduced it to a nullity. Very few lessees have
applied for the re-attachment, and some have refused it when the
Crown suggested it. In a few cases the resumed areas have been
offered under improvement lease conditions, inevitably finding
their way back to the run from which they were carved 15 years
ago. But the majority of these areas remain under that most
shiftless of all tenures, the occupation license. While the fact
that the land was not required for other tenants is proved by its
remaining unseleoted, the liability to selection destroyed its value
to the existing occupiers. With a tenure likely to be disturbed
at any time, it was not conceivable that the runholder should
incur any but the most meagre expenditure either in the con-
struction of new or the upkeeping of existing improvements. The
wide difference in the two tenures—leasehold and resumed—is
shown by the fact that the number of the latter abandoned is far
and away in excess of the former. And I can see nothing short
of an entire reversal of the past policy that can prevent something
approaching a wholesale abandonment of these areas. This aban-
donment would not in all probability be a simultaneous or
immediate one. Lessees will hold the country until the improve-
ments are exhausted, and then throw it up. Or they may even
retain it after that point has been reached, using it at such
uncertain times as the rain sufficed to leave some surface water.
But whether it be abandoned, or whether it be retained under
these conditions, it is evident its capacity for production is
steadily running down, and that it is only a question of time
before much of it approximates to the useless and dangerous
condition of the already abandoned areas—useless because pro-
ducing nothing, dangerous because furnishing a breeding ground


for rabbits and vermin generally. The simple question presenting
itself, therefore, is, seeing that no fresh tenants seek to acquire it,
whether the present ones cannot be given such a tenure as will
enable them to occupy it to the advantage both of the State and
themselves. The provision in the existing Act for the re-attach-
ment of resumed areas is accompanied by stipulations for increased
rental and retention by the Crown of the right of resumption at
any time upon giving six months’ notice Practically this means
a six months’ tenure at a higher rental in place of a weekly one
at a lower rental. The advantage is quite visionary, but the dis-
advantage is immediate and real, and this part of the Act has
remained a dead letter in consequence. But the underlying idea
is correct. When Parliament adopted it, it had the experience
of 11 years to prove that the majority of these resumed areas
were not required for smaller settlement. Since then another
four years have passed, confirming, the experience of the previous
11, and proving also that the object Parliament aimed at has been
frustrated by unworkable conditions. Surety, with this longer
experience to guide it, Parliament may well be incited to remove
these hampering conditions, and so glee effect to its own evident
intention to substitute a sufficient and reasonable tenure for the
present precarious one. What that tenure should be is a matter
for discussion. If the leaseholds were in a satisfactory position,
then it would be sufficient to bring the resumed areas under
similar conditions. But manifestly they are not. All the evils
noticeable on the resumed portions are present on the leasehold,
though they are more pronounced, more advanced, in one case
than in the other. It is, however, only a matter of degree, and a
question of time. If, therefore, the terms and conditions sur-
rounding the leasehold halves of the runs are Insufficiently liberal,
it is manifestly useless applying them to the other halves. What
is wanted for "both leasehold and reserved areas is a lease sufficb
ently long and sufficiently liberal to afford a reasonable guarantee
of profitable occupation. The condition of the Western leases
to-day, the refusal of anyone to touch them at any price at all
commensurate with the cost of improving them, is evidence that
the existing leases are insufficient Eighteen years may appear a
long time, but when there is a liability to a drought extending
over four or five years, as the present one, and an absolute cer-
tainty that half the whole term will be droughty, it is seriously
discounted. Then, too, the expenditure in improvements is so
enormous that it is impossible to recover it within such a term.
South Australia has been obliged to issue 40 years’ leases to secure
the occupation of country very similar to much of that in our
Western Division. Our own Lands Department is offering large
areas on 28 years’ leases without finding tenants. These figures
serve as a guide as to the extension that might reasonably be
granted. A3O years’ lease is not, in my opinion, one day too


long for even the best of the land, nor is it more than is absolutely
necessary to give the industry a fresh start. Much of the country
might well be let for the longer South Australian period, for it is
well occupied under any conditions and upon anv terms. Let me
anticipate the objection that this would be locking the country
up. It would. But the injury that may result from locking it
up is not to be compared with the consequences of leaving it open.
Regarding it as a desert country, capable of but the lightest
stocking, upon which the labour of the individual settler can
count for little, and where capita! counts for much, it is not only
not likely to be wanted for small settlement, but it is not desirable
that small settlement should be invited to occupy its stern and
arid acres. There is a limited amount of settlement for which
provision must be made, blocks in the vicinity of towns for
teamsters, stock-dealers, and others. Ample provision could be
made for these without affecting the main contention. At the
same time, if it is not deemed advisable to grant such long leases as I
contend are necessary for the whole area, then an alternative
course might be to grant 30 years’ leases for the present lease-
holds, and shorter but still substantial leases, say 20 years,.for the
resumed areas. Anything less than this will be to trifle with the
subject, and to extend rather than to allay the long-drawn-out
tribulation of the West.
In view of the financial shipwreck that has overtaken
Western pastoralists, it might appear as if it were more important
to secure immediate direct relief in the way of reduced rent,
lather than an extension of tenure, the benefit of which might
appear to be in the future. This is true enough, and a good case
can be made out for such a reduction, for notwithstanding the
re-appraisements of two or three years ago, the rents are overburden-
some. But to open up the rent question is to bring in Treasury
considerations, and it may be that opposition which necessarily
arises from the very natural disinclination of any Government to
surrender much-needed revenue. If, therefore, it is possible to
give lessees adequate relief without affecting the Treasury —as I
believe it is—it is obviously expedient to do so. The concessions
suggested would, I think, afford that relief, and afford it immedi-
ately, and in almost as direct a fashion as would a reduction of
rent. They would so improve the position as to give renewed
financial vitality to the industry, and enable those engaged in it
to obtain what is above all things necessary—cheaper capital.
Money invested on leasehold properly, in addition to earning
current interest, must earn sufficient to return itself within the
period of the lease. The longer the lease, therefore, the smaller
the amount which it is necessary to provide each year as a sinking
fund, and the difference is a substantial one. That Western runs
have not hitherto earned either interest or sinking fund in no
wav 7 invalidates the argument. Until they do so, they will not


be in a sound position and accepted as safe investments. With
cheaper capital, and a larger period in which to repay it, they will
at least have a chance of rehabilitating themselves in this respect.
Although I have dealt more especially with the pastoral
lessees, I have not overlooked the homestead lessees. They are
in the same critical condition as their bigger neighbours, and are
entitled to—as they would undoubtedly receive—the same con-
sideration. Any extension of lease in the one case would mean
an extension in the other, while, without any very serious conse-
quences to the Treasury', the State might reasonably grant them
a reappraisement. They are, all round, rented considerably higher
than the runs, and probably a concession in this form would be
the most useful and acceptable to them.
Although in moving in the direction I have indicated, the
State would be promoting its own interests, it should be an ad-
ditional incentive to know that it would also be extending a
measure of help to men who have established a claim upon its
generous sympathy. The}’ have striven long and bravely, and
for their sake T wish I could take a more hopeful view 7 of the
Western country than I do. But if I read it aright, no more
pathetic story of colonisation has been written than that for
which it has provided the material. Its value and potentiality
have been greatly 7 overrated. It has received much and rendered
little. It drew men on with the witchery of its broad and virgin
acres, rich in promise of its hitherto unused and untaxed pastures.
It sang them a siren’s song of easy 7 and quick riches, and left
them stranded on the shoals and breakers of financial ruin, across
which no beacon of hope throws its inspiring rays, cheering them
to further effort. It has been the scene of a little known conflict
—not wanting in heroism—between enterprising, resolute, and
resourceful men and the imperfectly understood forces of nature
in their sterner mood. It has been the home of great and laudable
ambitions; it remains a perfect charnel-house of ruined hopes.
It has swallowed gold as its sand-strewn plains drink up water,
and it has eaten up the lives of our best. What it has cost no
mathematician can tell, for the value of human energy 7 , the worth
of a stout heart and resolute brain, are not expressible in the
columns of a ledger. But travel among the men whose fortunes
have been engulfed, and whose lives have been consumed by 7 the
rapacious West, and you will find the conclusion irresistible, that
New South Wales would be better off if its Western lands had been
left as Sturt found them, and the capital and energy devoted to
their redemption had been expended in the higher improvement
of more favoured districts. Slowly, painfully, they may be work-
ing towards the solution of the problems that have hitherto
proved as inexorable as the Sphinx. But to them the process
has been a silent tragedy, with as y 7 et no ray 7 of success lighting
up the dark horizon of failure. In nine cases out of ten the


Western pastoralists can point to a lifetime spent in this contest,
with ever-multiplying odds, and now the evening draws in.
Some years ago someone applied these lines to them and the
lands they seek to subdue :
They wait, and the years gather round them ;
They hope, and the hoping beguiles ;
But how few of the many have found them
The beautiful, fortunate isles.
But to-day even hope ceases to tell its flattering tale. Instead,
they have borne in on them the bitter heart-searing consciousness
of hopeless and irredeemable failure, the more crushing because
success was so bravely courted and so richly deserved.
A VANISHING ASSET.
No one can read the series of articles contributed by E. D.
Millen, M.L.C., to the Sydney Morning Herald, in reference to
the condition of the Western District of New South Wales, with-
out realizing that the Crown lands are much less valuable than
was hitherto believed. The rosy views taken in times pa«t as to
the illimitable nature of our pastoral resources were the product of
the imagination of boomsters anxious to unload station properties
on credulous buyers at tall figures. Now when the object has
been attained, and not only purchasers, but banks and
mortgage companies that made advances to them have been
badly taken in, the truth becomes apparent. Instead of droughts
being exceptional, they are the normal state of much of the back
country, and the occasional good season is incapable of restoring
the land to a fair condition. Seemingly, the nativ e grasses which
once flourished so fair in a moist season have been eaten down by
the greedy overstocking of the runs, and what the sheep left the
rabbits have devoured. Occupation of the land, instead of
making it better, has practically ruined it, for the destruction of
grass and the burrowing of rabbits have loosened the soil and
made it the sport of the wind, which has left tracts utterly
barren, where no vegetation could grow, however much rain fell.
In other parts scrub has spread rapidly and become a breeding-
place for vermin. Runhoklers after sinking large suras on im-
provements are giving up the ruinous contest with dry seasons.
More than half the Crown lands are in the Western Division, and
evidently the Government will be compelled in justice to the
actual conditions of affairs to concede a very large reduction in
rents to the lessees, which will mean a shortage in the income of
New South Wales and a palpable shrinkage in the value of its
great asset —the public estate. It is doubtful whether a consider-
able portion of the Division would pay to occupy at all, save
haps in a nomadic fashion during the exceptional moist years. —H.
Reprint from “ The Worker , 1-ilh Javuan/, Ptoi), irith the )ferm/r*lon,
ef the Proprietor s.


(Reprinted by kind permission of the proprietors of the S. M. Herald. )
The series of papers contributed to our columns by Mr.
Millen on the situation of the pastoral lands in the Western
Division should have set many thinking about the problem of
that large part of the colony. Mr. Millen, as a long resident of
the Bourke district and a lessee of Crown lands there, and as a
competent observer of the results of legislation and pastoral
occupation in that portion of the West, would speak with
authority on the question as it presents itself to a North-
westerner. But the papers under notice contain much besides
those general ideas which are current in pastoral circles and
those practical considerations which cannot but seem all-important
to men who have taken up the business of land improvement in
the West. Mr. Millen made a special tour of a big circle of the
West. Taking Bourke as his starting point, he covered a stretch
of country that may roughly be indicated as contained by the
townships of Milparinka, Broken Hill, Menindie, Ivanhoe, and
Cobar. That tour is quite recent. Familiar with the legislative
and official history’ of this region, and furnished on’his way with
abundant material from the accounts and experiences of the
station-holders or their representatives, Mr. Millen has been able
to fortify his conclusions with the evidence upon which they are
founded. Thus, in an impressive way, he brings home certain
strong convictions of his to the average city T reader and elector,
to whom the West is little more than a figure of speech—a
synonym for the big runs where the squatter depastures his
countless flocks and grows rich upon his wool and mutton. Those
convictions are that there have been great changes in the nature
of our pastoral settlement in the West, great losses of stock,
great depreciation of values, and that these unsatisfactory changes
are no ephemeral circumstances due to an unfavourable season or
even a series of bad years, but are parts of a continuing process
of deterioration. To arrest, if possible, this downward move-
ment, to relieve the case of Western settlers subject to it, and to
direct public notice to a menace to our prosperity, are the objects
of the able, if sombre, papers which we have published from time
to time recently’, and which are brought to a close by the sugges-
tions contained in the paper printed on Wednesday.
It is to be feared that nearly all those conversant with the
West will agree that in the purely pastoral portions, which are
nearly the whole, the mining areas around Cobar, Broken Hill,
White Cliffs, and Mount Browne excepted, the actual state of
the West is lamentable. After the era of lavish improvement,
which lasted into the eighties, came legislation aimed at securing
larger rents. But the country, loaded with interest on borrowed
From “ Sydney Morning Herald," Sth January . IUUO.


capital, was soon in difficulties. The rabbits spread in a. wave of
ruin from the Murray to the Culgoa and the Barwon, the series
of fat years gave place to droughts, and prices of pastoral products,
especially wool, which is the one staple of the West, began the
long fall that practically only ended in 1899. The lessees were
therefore in no position to meet new charges such as followed
the division of the runs, the limiting of tenures, and the mechani-
cal periodical raising of rents under the Act of 1884. Their
protests brought about the Act of 1889, the great feature of
which was roappraisement with an extended tenure of 21 years,
divided into three periods of seven years each. But though
under these new terms rents were largely reduced, and the
Western lessees were put in a safer position by the extension of
their leases, the leeway in the pastoral industry out West was
not yet checked. So when Mr. Carruthers was drafting the Act
of 1895 he gave a further term of seven years to all Western
leases, he permitted under conditions the abrogation of that
division of runs which was a cardinal feature of the legislation of
1894, so that where the local Land Board reported favourably
upon the application of the lessee, the resumed and the leasehold
areas might be amalgamated, and new appraisements were con-
ceded. There is no reason to suppose that these successive acts
of Parliamentary grace to the West were failures. On the con-
trary, though we do not observe all those consequences which the
advocates of these concessions relied upon, such as further im-
provements, employment of labour, and so forth, yet it is
undeniable that in easing the bargain with its tenants of the
Western run the State acted as a wise private landlord would
have done in time of stress, and by voluntarily surrendering part
of its revenues made the rest more secure. Mr. Reid has often
pointed to the relief which has been given by this legislation to
squatters, and of course the situation has been eased by the
surrender of revenue from pastoral leases. But, unfortunately,
as if Nature herself fought against those who had wrested the
W est from her ancient solitary reign, a series of perhaps the
worst seasons ever experienced immediately fell upon the pastoral
tenants of the Western Division. So terrible has been the visita-
tion of the last four or five years that millions of sheep have
perished, without the possibility of soon breeding up again to
past numbers, and thousands of pounds worth of improvements
in the shape of tanks, fences, homesteads, and stock and plant
for working the stations have absolutely vanished. The pastoral
population, both permanent and temporary, from station manager
to rouseabout, has diminished. Runs have been abandoned.
Thus, from 1897 to 1898, the resumed areas for which rent was
paid to the Crown decreased in the Western Division by seven,
of an area of 1,300,000 acres, and an annual rent of £2OOO.
Such has been the loss of sheep that the enhancement of prices


for wool, which is the saving factor in our pastoral affairs, offers
not even an immediate prospect of benefit to the West.
What makes the situation more grave is that men like Mr.
Milieu hold in all seriousness that the depreciation is going on at
an increasing rate. With the indisputable reports of heavy
losses in stock throughout the West consequent on the reduced
carrying capacity of the country, and with the gloomy estimates
of the future of that country entertained by its present tenants,
by capitalists, and investors, it seems that a crisis is near in the
West. We may not feel confident in recommending prompt new
legislation. The history of our legislation for the West since
1884 is simply strewn with disasters. But a case has certainly
been made out for inquiry. We have the immense business of
the Central leaseholds upon us, and in all likelihood it will exhaust
for the time being the interest of Parliament and people in its
settlement. It is to be hoped that time will be found—and the
men—for a full and fair inquiry into the present state and the
future prospects of the pastoral occupation of the Western
Division, both in large areas and in small. A Royal Commission,
few in number but composed of authorities not so much in land
laws as in pastoral affairs, would usefully prepare Parliament and
the public for such further relief as the West may really require.
No one need fear that the subject will be killed by a Commission
in this case. Indeed, it seems as if this question of how to keep
the bulk of the West under permanent occupation and capable of
paying a rent must steadily force itself upon the community.
Mr. Millen’s articles on Western land and policy have at-
tracted much attention in the larger portion of the colony to
which they refer, and in which for that reason they will best be
understood. That they will also appeal to the writer’s fellow-
legislators and others who concern themselves with the right use
of our great asset, the land, may be confidently expected. It may
be too much to hope that amid all the martial and other excite-
ment that prevails their importance will not be overlooked by city
electors who are the class that must feel the effects of wise or
unwise management of the pastoral estate, since the welfare or the
decline of the pastoral industry is directly involved. Mr. Millen’s
case is that, having made a recent tour of the northern half of the
Western Division, of which he has long personal acquaintance,
he finds a general and alarming depreciation of value. Immense
numbers of stock have perished, and the severe seasons of the
last three or four years continuously have prevented re-stocking.
Noxious scrub and noxious animals have, however, managed to
thrive. The extensive improvements by the aid of which these
From “ sydney Morning Herald," January, 1900.


districts are alone capable of being occupied, taking season with
season, have suffered to such a degree that in many cases they
must be renewed. Tanks and dams are filled with drifted sands ;
their water has gone, and none will remain be the rainfall ever so
great. Fencing is blown down or buried in sand. Cultivation
has had to be abandoned. The edible scrub has either been cut
to feed the starving sheep, or has been eaten off by wild animals.
All this process of depreciation, coupled with fixed rentals which
the Crown tenants say are beyond the productive capacity of the
land, and coupled with the low range of prices for pastoral pro-
ducts, has had the worst effects on the trade, the population, and
the prospects of the country concerned The fact, sometimes
employed by those hostile to the pastoralists, that there has been
a gradual transfer of ownership in these leases from individuals
to financial institutions, tells its own tale. It implies that the
strain of earning interest on the big expenditure for improvements
and of paying working expenses on these immense areas has been
too heavy for private purses, and only the men who can afford to
wait indefinitely for profits, or the financial bodies that have to
protect their advances, are now in possession of the country that
was opened up by so many of the good old pioneering families.
That this picture, though unsatisfactory, is not overdrawn,
must be apparent to those who know the country in question. Mr.
Millen’s papers have not called forth a contradiction or a challenge.
On the contrary, they have had the assent of men who in a peculiar
degree represent the pastoral industry out West. We have pub-
lished letters by Mr. George Maiden; Mr. Edward Quin, of
Tarella, Wilcannia ; Mr. David Brown, of Kallara, Bourke ; Mr.
Bacon ; Mr. Philip Oakden, of Lerida, Cobar ; and others, which
support Mr. Millen to the letter in his account of the West. These
gentlemen differ among themselves as to the remedies, but as to
the ills of the West which demand attention and cure they are
unanimous. Their intimate knowledge of the subject is beyond
doubt. Men like Mr Quin, who represented his district in Par-
liament, and has continuously resided on his station for many
years, or Mr. David Brown, who is the pioneer of artesian boring
in this country, are past masters of squatting. They have seen it
almost from the beginning, and they have lived through every
changing phase of our capricious western climate and our almost
as capricious legislation. We are glad to observe that the idea put
forth in these columns of full and independent inquiry by Royal
Commission into the actual state and the needs of Western Crown
tenants is adopted by each of these representative Western pas-
toralists. The profound importance of keeping our millions of
acres of pastoral country in beneficial use, so that the State may
reap its revenues and our people may benefit by the labour and
the returns of our dominant industry, ought to be realised by all.
Only the most short-sighted view will see in this question the


interests of a handful of squatters, and regard the matter in
dispute as no more than a difference of opinion between the land-
lord and the tenant as to the value of certain land. The men who
are hard at work in the west are one mainstay of our wool export,
and as such one of the great employers. If they are driven to the
wall we all share their loss in many ways. Production diminishes,
internal and external trade falls off, the railways suffer, the land
not only does not pay rent but goes from bad to worse, and the
incoming tenantwill have tostart improvement from the beginning.
These are the serious possibilities of the Western Division.
Mr. Millen advocates (1) attachment of resumed to leasehold
areas, (2) longer tenure, and (3) a fresh appraisement. Mr. Brown
thinks nothing less than a yearly rental, fixed on the basis of the
previous year’s stock, will do justice to the situation. He admits
the trouble that his system will give to the Treasury, but points
to the relief it will give the pastoralist, who instead of paying a
fixed and immutable rent, whether his station has depastured
50,000 or 10,000 sheep, will pay a rent calculated strictly on the
amount of stock actually run in the preceding year. However, it
is not very helpful to discuss the details of relief until it is fully
accepted by the Minister and the Parliament that relief is called
for. It is not a new question sprung upon us by Mr. Millen,
Though the metropolitan public may have overlooked it, the fact
is nevertheless, that for years past this matter of the future of the
West has exercised most of the men whose relations with that
portion of the colony are at all close. Last year, for example, Mr.
Carruthers and Mr. Maiden had a correspondence on restoring the
country out back to its former productiveness and keeping it in
full occupation. As Mr. Oakden shows, his association, representing
Cobar, had a sympathetic reply from the Minister when urging the
necessity of legislative consideration. In years past several local
bodies in the pastoral districts have pressed these questions upon
their members. But all this long time matters do not improve,
and it is the merit of Mr. Millen’s articles that they draw the
earnest attention of the community to the problem of our Western
lands. We have legislated too much on theory and in the dark
about the West hitherto, and we are called upon soon to legislate
once more if we would see the West revenue-producing and labour-
employing as of old. And as an indispensable preliminary we
should acquaint ourselves thoroughly with the facts—all the facts
—bearing on the matter. In this task the work of a Royal Com-
mission small enough to visit the Western districts thoroughly, and
expert enough to know the real significance of what it sees and
hears, would be of the greatest advantage.
S, E. Lees, Printer and Stationer, 81 Clarence Street, Sydney.
