

ODR PAPER MONEY.
A LETTER
THE HONORABLE THE TREASURER
OF VICTORIA.
VALENTINE HELLICAR.
MELBOURNE:
EVANS & FOSTER, 78 BOURKB STREET EAST.




TO THE HONORABLE
THE TREASURER OF VICTORIA.
h 535«r/ Pjoiso
As the present conjuncture seems to offer a favourable
opportunity for the consideration of the subject, I take the
liberty to address you as the Finance Minister of the Govern-
ment, for the purpose of endeavouring to arouse public attention
to the wisdom and propriety of the State itself undertaking, and
not delegating to others, its own peculiar duty of issuing the
paper money of the country.
In support of such a policy, I would refer you to well-known
opinions of Ricardo, and of the scarcely less celebrated Wilson,
who so lately sacrificed his valuable life in initiating the same
in India. Mr. Tooke, too, says: “ The privilege of issuing
paper money is a delegation of that which is universally
conceded as a privilege residing in the State.” And, again:
“ It strikes me to be a most extraordinary circumstance con-
nected with the country issue of paper money, that, whereas
Government invests with a number of sanctions the privilege of
issuing coin upon the intrinsic metal, by which nothing is to be
gained, it should allow individuals the privilege of coining it upon
a material which in itself is worth nothing, and consequently
upon which there is a very great gain by the substitution of it
for the other which is of intrinsic value.”
Sir Robert Peel applied, and carried into actual operation, the
principle, in his celebrated Bank Act of 1844. You will remember
that the main features of that Act are the entire and complete


separation of the issue from the banking department of the
establishment in Threadneedle-street, the limitation of the then
existing country banks to their then issue, and disallowance of
issue by new banks.
I have lately been favoured by a friend with a copy of the evi-
dence given by Lord Overstone before a Committee of the House
of Commons in 1857, revised by himself. His Lordship, being
under examination as to the principle and operation of the Act of
1844, is asked a question (3649) as to the amount of bullion in the
Bank of England, and thus replies: “ You will allow me to
“ remark at the very outset of that question, that I do not consider
“ the bullion as lying in the Bank of England. The bullion now
“ lies in the Issue Department, which is nothing more than a
“ department of the State worked mechanically and clerically by
“ the clerks of the Bank of England; hut it is essentially a
“ department of the State. The bullion in the Bank of England
“ I apprehend to he altogether a deceptive form of expression,
“ against the use of which I must at once, as preliminary to the
“ whole of this examination, enter my protest.”
And again, in reply to question 3665 : “I must again say that
“ I dislike the expression of the business of issue being in the
“ hands of the Governor and Company of the Bank of England.
“ I consider the business of issue to be in the hands of the Issue
“ Department, and in the hands of the law of the country. The
“ Governor and Company of the Bank of England have no power
“in the matter, of any sort or kind. They are merely the clerks
“ who have to do the business which the law has ordained.”
And to question 3664: “ I think it rather unfortunate
“ that we have the term ‘ hank ’ associated with the Issue Depart-
“ ment; and I think that some vague impressions arise in the
“ public mind from that form of expression. I certainly think
“ it quite essential that the issue of paper money should he kept
“ entirely separate and distinct from everything connected with
“ Banking business. The objection to putting it more avowedly
“ and distinctly in the hands of the Government than it is at


“ present, I think is of this nature, that, so long as there exists
“ in the public mind an impression that pressure upon the trading
“ world is associated with the management of the monetary
“ system of the country, it might he very inconvenient to place
“ that monetary system more avowedly in the hands of the
“ Government. And I must also observe that the interposi-
“ tion of some responsible body between the Government
“ and the management of paper issue might be exceedingly con-
“ venient in strengthening and assisting Government to meet
“ pressure which might occasion it at certain periods to do that
“ which it ought not to do.”
Question 3673. “ Would it, in your judgment, be desirable
“ to extinguish the right of issue by country banks, and to pro-
“ vide for the whole circulation of England by Bank of England
“ paper.
To which his Lordship replies: “ There can be no doubt that
“ that is a state of things which all principle would lead to.
“ The present system of country issues which exists in the
“ United Kingdom is undoubtedly a complete anomaly. We
“ have it, and we do not very well know how to get rid of it;
“ but, I apprehend, no intelligent person can say that he likes
“ the system, or that he approves it. At the time when the Act
“of 1844 was passed there were two modes of dealing with the
“ subject which might have been taken. One would have been
“by a sort of bold act at the time to eliminate the whole of that
“ anomalous system of country issues from the monetary system
“of the country; the other was to trust to the absorption of
“ them by the gradual process of natural causes. Sir Robert
“ Peel thought the latter the wise course to take, and I certainly
“ think that, as a practical statesman, he exercised a sound
“ discretion on the subject. I should myself be disposed to
“ follow out his policy. Of course, following out his policy
“ involves this, that nothing must be done in any degree to
“ extend or to strengthen the country issues, but that all the
“ tendencies of your laws must be to carry out that policy of


1853
was
1,645,980
1854
» *
2,940,089
1855
33
1,967,675
1856
33
2,210,743
1857
3 3 ......
2,347,077
1858
33 •*••••
2,043,752
1859
33 ••••••
1,951,868
“ gradually absorbing this system through the operation of
“ natural causes.
I well know how ready men are to denounce, as visionary,
theories (and especially financial theories) which are at variance
with pre-conceived and prejudiced ideas; but I think these
extracts, from the evidence of a nobleman —as well qualified by
his intellectual acquirements, and by the practical experience he
has had in financial affairs as perhaps any man living to form
an opinion—must silence objections to the proposed plan on the
grounds of its being speculative.
From the interesting statistics which Mr. Khull used to
publish annually, I find that the amount of notes in circulation
in the colony in
I regret that, as the publication has been discontinued, I am
unable to give the amount for 1860. The average of the seven
years gives 2,058,169. The amount, of course, fluctuates with
the activity or depresson of trade; it will increase with the
necessities of an increasing population; but, for the sake of
argument, I may take the amount of paper money required for
the purposes of trade at present to be two millions.
Assuming it to be admitted that it is the duty of the State to
supply this currency, I proceed to show what is the value of the
privilege attached to it.
The issuer of paper money borrows from the public, without
interest, an amount commensurate with the extent of his issues,
and for a term, the duration of which is only limited by
the period the notes remain in circulation: and the only
condition imposed is that the loan shall be repaid to the bearer


of the note on demand. Now, whilst we are applying to the
capitalists of Europe for a loan at six per cent, (and by all ac-
counts our securities are not eagerly sought for), it is certainly
worth considering if we cannot raise a large portion of it within
ourselves hy a scheme that shall liberate a large portion of capital
now lying unproductive in the coffers of our banks; and from it
raising an annual income that, re-invested annually, shall, at ma-
turity of our debentures, absorb a considerable portion of our debt,
and at the same time supply the public with paper money based
on a much surer foundation than they now have.
The condition that notes shall be convertible on demand
requires that a sufficient amount of specie should be kept in
reserve to meet all probable requirements. In the case of the
Bank of England under the law of 1844, it is assumed that the cir-
culation under any possible contraction of trade cannot fall below
fourteen millions (the lowest point in modern times was fifteen
millions, in December, 1839); and therefore, if the Issue Depart-
ment holds Government securities for that amount, and gold for
whatever sum it issues .beyond that amount, the public have not
only a guarantee for the immediate payment in coin of such part
of the paper circulation as is ever likely to be converted, but it
has also the guarantee of Government stock for the ultimate pay-
ment of the whole. (Wilson “ Capital Currency, and Banking.")
Now, except in the year 1853, when the demand can scarcely
be said to have been supplied, the circulation of Victoria has
never been so low as £1,900,000 ; and if we assume that under no
circumstances it can fall so low as £1,500,000, it would follow
to this extent the State could hold with safety Government se-
curities, with £500,000 in coin, against a circulation of two millions
of paper money. We should in this way raise, for the exigencies
of the State, a loan of one-and-a-half millions of money, and to
this extent, at least, be independent of London capitalists, whilst
the withdrawal of this amount of debentures from the market
would give additional value to those we should yet have to sell
there.


The interest on these-securities, at 6 per cent, per annum
(£90,000) less the expenses of conducting the business, would he
available for annual re-investment, and people who are not
accustomed to such calculations are scarcely aware of the rapidity
with which such investments increase. Assuming £70,000 per
annum to he annually invested in a 6 per cent, stock, the amount
at the end of 31 years would reach £3,800,000. To this extent,
therefore, at that period, would our Railway debt be redeemed
by the operation of a wise alteration of our monetary system.
It cannot be ignored that without the “ bold act of elimi-
“ nating the present bank issues from our monetary system,”
a State issue of notes “ will gradually absorb them by the
“ operation of natural causesbut the value of the privilege to
any one of an unlimited number of issuers is very much
diminished; and, when the fact is taken into consideration that
each is obliged to keep unproductive a part of his capital equal
to the full amount of his issue, I doubt much if it is worth the
conditions imposed. Lord Overstone is certainly of this opinion.
He is asked (Question 3700): “Is the paper money in circulation
“ in that part of the country (Lancashire) exclusively Bank of
“England paper?” Answer: “Exclusively Bank of England
paper.” And (Question 3701); “Is there anything in the law
“ which discourages or prevents the existence of country banks of
« issue in that district of England, more than in other parts of the
“ country?” And replies;—“ No. How it has originated Ido not
« know, but it has undoubtedly been continued by the good
“ sense of the community there. I remember one occasion,
“ many years ago, in which there prevailed an idea of the great
“ advantages to be derived from country issues, and a very strong
“ pressure was put upon us (Jones, Lloyd and Co.) to put forth
“ a paper issue of our own, and we were so pressed that we
“ W ere obliged to make preparations for doing so, very much
“ against our own will. However, on further discussion, we
“ found that that feeling subdued a little, and we gladly availed
“ ourselves of that circumstance to stop the whole thing, and I


The average deposits were
The notes we have seen were
£6,205,849
2,058,169
Showing total liabilities under these
heads of
£8,264,011
9
“ certainly have, from that time to this, always rejoiced that that
“ measure was stopped.”
But we have yet to consider the effect on the public of the
substitution of the pi’oposed for our present paper money; and
so important do I deem this that, unless I was fully persuaded
that the security offered for the convertibility of the notes on
demand was greater than at present —was indeed beyond the
possibility of doubt —no mere financial considerations would
have induced me to advocate its adoption.
The security offered for the convertibility of the present paper
money is the credit of the issuers for the amount of their circu-
lation. I am aware that some people are of opinion—l think I
may say it is general—that because their charters, or acts of
incorporation require bankers to retain in their coffers an
amount of specie equal to their circulation, that therefore this
specie is retained specifically for the purpose of meeting the
claims of noteholders on demand. This is a delusion. The
specie merely forms an asset, prudently reserved to meet the
claims of all their creditors.
I gather, from the statistics already referred to, that during
the seven years, 1853-1859,
The average amount of specie in reserve, at the same time, was
£2,580,945, being about 30 per cent, of the liabilities, a propor-
tion amply sufficient, and perhaps, indeed, more than sufficient,
when the liabilities are reduced solely to depositors; hut when
depositors and noteholders, in a case which must be supposed,
of a suspected or failing bank, are calling for their money, the
old adage of “ first come first served ” is realised. And, from
the very nature of the security held by each, it can scarcely be
disputed that the depositors get the lion’s share of the coin—
the immediately available effects.


I do not hesitate to express a very decided opinion that no
traders, whether individuals or companies, ought to enjoy the
privilege of issuing paper money. Not to allude to individuals,
we need not tax our memories much to call to mind instances
of Banking Companies possessing very large resources, supposed
to be conducted with great skill, and enjoying the most unlimited
confidence, being compelled to succumb to misadventure, and
from liability to which no trader can claim exemption. We
must all remember the occasion when a mere rumour, baseless as
it was base, caused a run upon the Union Bank of so grave a
character that the mercantile community assembled specially to
declare their unabated and unlimited confidence in the bank.
That distrust was ever felt by the depositors no one can for an
instant believe, but who shall tell the loss inflicted on confiding,
but ignorant and illiterate holders of their notes dispersed all
over the country. The unprincipled villain who originated the
report no doubt made his harvest by purchasing, at heavy
discounts from his dupes, the notes of the very bank he had,
and perhaps with this very object, decried.
Under the proposed scheme, the security for convertibility of
notes on demand is specie to the amount of 35 per cent., and the
public estate for the remainder; and that the specie is ample
there can, I think, be no doubt. Assuming, as I have before,
that the country requires two millions of paper money for the
purposes of its trade, it will be seen that when there is only one
source of issue, every note that comes in for conversion is so
much removed from the weight of liability, and so much with-
drawn, at the same time, from the wants of the public; and
supposing, for the sake of argument, the very improbable case of
a run upon the State issuers, the bane brings its own antidote;
long before they had exhausted their stock of gold (£500,000)
the run must cease from the fact of the amount of issues
outstanding being reduced so much beyond what is absolutely
necessary to carry on the trade of the country. Where there
are nine sources of issue, as at present, the case is altogether


different; the void caused by the removal of the notes of one
hank is instantly supplied by the other, so that the liability
as a whole is undiminished.
It remains for me, now, only to allude to the mode in which
the scheme should he earned out. As it is desirable that traders
should be precluded from the privilege of issue, neither should
the Government he allowed in any way to interfere with it. It
should be carried out by a Board of Commissioners, appointed
by the Governor and Council, and removable only by Parliament,
much in the way in which the Audit Commissioners hold their
offices.
Their accounts should be audited, published quarterly, and,
with a report of their proceedings, presented to Parliament at the
commencement of each session.
Their duties should be limited to taking measures efficiently
to supply the country with paper money; and, when we hear so
much of national hanks, I think it right to say that I at least
deprecate anything so contrary to sound principle being con-
fided to them. It is the duty of the State to provide the
paper money; it is the business of the bankers to trade in it.
The State is as unfit to conduct the trade as the banker is to be
the source of issue.
I trust that this important subject will engage the attention of
Parliament, and am,
Your obedient servant,
VALENTINE HELLICAR.
Hawthorne, 16 th August, 1861.
Clarson, Shallard, & Co., Printers, 85 Bourke Street East, Melbourne.


