

“OUR FATHER:”
A SERMON
PREACHED IN MELBOURNE, ON SUNDAY EVENING, JULY 26, 1874.
CUTHBERT FETHERSTONH AUGH,
MINISTER OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND AT URANA AND JERILDERIE,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
[.PUBLISHED BY REQUEST]
fn 2 - y
*
“ Let every man be persuaded in his own mind.”
Melbourne:
SAMUEL MULLEN, 55 & 57 COLLINS STREET EAST.




PREFACE.
HE sentiments expressed in the following sermon have led my
venerable and valued friend, the Dean of Melbourne, to
request me, in what I cannot but feel to be a really kind
note, not to preach again in any Church of England building in
Victoria. Notwithstanding that, the Dean in the same letter says
“he had not thought my infidelity had gone so far.” I call the letter
kind and I am sure it was so meant, for I know the Dean does mot
mince words, and calls a spade a spade, and thus anyone who does not
believe all he (the Dean) considers necessary to salvation he honestly
and conscientiously looks upon as an infidel, and he says so.
I am quite sure that my “ infidelity ” has been a cause of deep regret
to the Dean, as it is to me to think that I should in any way cause one
pain who has been kind enough to take so much interest in me as has
the Dean. I would not add to that pain by publishing this sermon at
the request of some of my friends who have heard it, were it not that I
believe the sentiments expressed in it convey moderately, yet pretty
definitely, the sentiments and thoughts of nine out of ten thinking men
in the Church of England, or, indeed, in any other Protestant Church ;
and that as several good and devout Christians, who formed a portion of
the congregation that evening, have told me they concurred with every
word I said, they too must be considered to be rowing in the same boat
with an infidel, and to be more or less tainted with his scepticism.
Moreover, although I consider that so long as a man is in doubt he
should confine himself to discussing his difficulties with doubters like
himself; yet when doubt has passed into conviction, I do also consider
that, especially in such an age as that in which our lot has been cast —a
transition age—it is the duty of every man who takes the trouble to
think to make an open and undisguised statement of his convictions
and of the “evidence which satisfies him of their truth.” As a Protestant
I claim the right of private judgment, and if the exercise of that right
brings me into conflict with the teaching of the Church, of which I am


an unworthy minister—the Dean will agree with me here at any rate —
there are but three courses open to me : —First, to go out; Second, to
remain in and hold my tongue, that is to say, having, as I believe, the
truth in my hand, I am to shut my hand and keep what I believe to be
the truth to myself; and, Third, I can remain in and protest. While
disagreeing with and openly protesting against many of the laws he has
to administer, a judge will retain his seat on the bench, but strenuously
exert himself, if he is a true man, to have those laws repealed. This is
almost exactly the stand taken by the clergy of that section of the
Church of England called “ broad.” lam not now going to enter on
how narrow, or how broad is the standing-ground afforded to this
section by the Church of England. I may be of Mr. Littledale’s
opinion, that it is so narrow as not to afford them standing-room at all
for. very long. Neither am I here going to discuss which of the three
courses that are open to me I intend to take ; perhaps I have not
decided, perhaps it will be decided for me ; in any case it cannot be
a matter of very much importance whether a deacon of the Church of
England go out or remain in—l suppose the world will go round
as usual in either case.
There is nothing original in this sermon, nothing new; while think-
ing for myself I am only too glad to be able to make use of “ other
minds of other brains.” Let no one think to overwhelm me by accusing
me of plagiarism; my friends know I openly profess to cull here a little
and there a little from the writings of thoughtful men of all creeds and
opinions, and that I gladly make use of anything that I think will help
me to impress the truth upon those to whom it is my privilege to
preach.
A large portion of this sermon is avowedly made up of quotations, for,
being of no repute myself, of no scholarship, making no claim to ability,
inexperienced as a clergyman, I ever like to appeal to men of note and
repute in confirmation of any opinions I express.
I wrote this sermon the same day I preached it, and shortly after I
had read the first volume of “ Present Day Papers,” edited by the late
Bishop Ewing, and it is very much, I have no doubt, a reproduction of
his interesting article on the “ Present Unbelief,” which forms part of
that volume. I cannot too strongly commend this volume to my
friends, especially to those who are “ thinking for themselves.” I take
this opportunity also of drawing attention to the most beautiful volume


of sermons ever given to the public; I allude to the sermons of the
same amiable and accomplished bishop, entitled, “ Revelation is Light,”
sermons which the author did not live to see in the hands of the public.
Nowhere have I met with so much Christ-like and healthy hopefulness
touching the future of the human race.
“ Hope on,” he says, “ hope always, for God is light, and in Him is
no darkness at all ; progress is the law, the Christ growing withirr us
till the perfect stature and vision be attained.” As has been said of
Ewing by a critic in the “ Spectator,” “ Luther gave us Justification by
Faith ; Wesley, the urgent love of God; Ewing has said to us ‘ Revelation
is light.’”
These exquisite and farewell sermons are the full expression of the
good Bishop’s own personal thoughts and experiences, and this is why
they come home so to anxious seekers after “ God and His truth.” Not
without “ strong crying and tears,” —not without midnight wrestling till
he, too, “ halted on his thigh” did the light break on him. The wrestling
of Jacob is constantly introduced by him—he had gone through it all,
but out of weakness he was made strong. The day broke for him, too,
as I trust it may for many who will read the history of his spiritual
struggle from darkness to light, told pathetically in these admirable ser-
mons in terms that must stir the coldest heart to its depths. The object of
these sermons, he tells us, is “ to justify the ways of God to men, and to
endeavour to realise the being of the ever-blessed God by that which is
best within ourselves ; the only satisfactory proof of His existence, as it
is the only sufficient explanation of our own.” So anxious am I to
commend these sermons to my friends that I cannot refrain from quoting
from his first sermon on “ the unknown God,” a passage showing that he,
for one, did not find cut and dry answers to such questions as “ What is
the character of the God of Christ? What relation does Christ sustain to
God and to man ? What is the meaning of human life, with ‘ its heavy
laws, its overpowering sorrows, its anxious forebodings, its carking care,
its quenchless aspiration, its noble delights, its terrible sins, its startling
contrasts.”’ That he, too, like Jacob, wrestled for the solution of these
difficulties is manifest from this passage —
Jacob demands the angel’s name, and he desires to know his fate, the meaning of
the struggle, but he gets no answer. How often has not the same happened to man-
kind—yea, to ourselves —and this not only at great crises of our lives, but at ever-
recurring and certain epochs, such as a birthday, or the beginning of a new year!


We tiy to see before us. The future may behold us crowned with laurels or dishonour.
Is our beloved then alive ? Is it a wedding-wreath or a widow’s cap I see upon my
child ? How high has the winding-sheet mounted upon my own bosom ? [a question,
as by a sort of second-sight, twice over asked in the pages before us.] Columhus-hke , I
climb the mast alone at night, to see if there is any twinkle of light, any sign of shore.
But all is dark ; the angel is silent, and I wrestle on. I hear indeed the voices of the
abyss, deep calling to deep, a relentless deep breaking upon an ever-crumbling shore,
the wail of the sea-bird, the cry of the solitary curlew. Come, O thou traveller
unknown by my side, who hast no name, tv ho will neither speak nor let me go , whose
name, if known, is written in letters too gigantic for me to read ! O traveller, or
watchman, or whatever thou art, what of the night ? Is there no day ? But the angel
answers not, nor letteth go, until the thigh of the wrestler is broken. Then it is that
Jacob becomes Israel or a Prince of God, and passes to the heavens. Yes, it is the
great question of life—What is our life ?—the question which life is given to answer;
until which be answered, life has no meaning for us It is true that
many suppose they have the answer by learning to repeat definite words and names.
But this is not the way of angel in our text. He gives no name . . . . It is
the thing which signifies. What I am, what you are, what life is, that is what you
have to learn. Go to, let us wrestle.
With great force and vividness, with an earnestness which deeply
impresses, Ewing sets forth the Fatherhood of God —the Gospel revelation.
The belief that God is our Father, is with him something far higher than
mere generation. It is nothing short of feeling, by our actual experience
that God dealeth with us as with sons. He has made us, and we are,
His j He daily feeds and clothes us ; He loves us with a father’s love ;
He can chasten us only for our good. He is a Father , and we are all
one universal family. Is it not dreadful—to me, indeed, blasphemous—
to talk of our Father condemning any of His children to eternal misery ?
He is our Father, therefore He will not leave us in our sins, but
will with us and in us strive even unto the death against sin; this He
did in Christ, and God was in Christ, reconciling us to Himself, not
Christ reconciling God to us. Finally, he writes in a sermon on the
character of God :—“ God is educating the world by the gift of con-
science, of the Scriptures, and of His Son for the inheritance of saints.”
We must keep to the Fatherly character of God, and believe that no
human logic can be right which, drawing inferences from passages of
Holy Writ, brings us into collision with moral consciousness. All infer-
ences which contradict this must be erroneous, as, when it is said, “ By
the decree of God, for the manifestation of His own glory, some men
are foreordained unto everlasting death,”


In this sermon I have quoted Archbishop Whately, when he says :
“ If we give way to a dread of danger from the inculcation of any truth,
physical, moral, or religious, we manifest a want of faith in God’s power,
or His will to maintain His own cause. There may be danger attendant
on every truth, but, in the case of anything which plainly appears to be
truth, every danger must be braved. We must maintain the truth as we
have received it, and trust to Him who is the truth to prosper and
defend it. The part of a lover of truth is to follow her at all seeming
hazards, after the example of Him who came into the world that He
might bear witness to the truth. ”
To follow this advice is not a course likely to bring peace or tran-
quility, so far as this life is concerned ; it may, indeed must confer the
“ answer of a good conscience towards God.” But it must be admitted
that for a clergyman “who thinks for himself” to make an open and
undisguised statement of his opinions is to expose himself to “the
charge of singularity, the smile of wonder, the sneer of derision, the
upraidings of bigotry, and, worse than all, to the true regrets, and, maybe,
even reproaches of those nearest and dearest to him.” Under these
circumstances it does, indeed, require a thorough love of truth to adhere
steadily to the straight course.
Is it to be wondered at that under these circumstances “ many are
straightened in their own hearts,” are silent when they feel they should
speak out, and are afraid to allow themselves to think, lest they should
be compelled to give up much they have hitherto held as truth.
In these matters no man can judge for another; let every man be
persuaded in his own mind. But let every man also remember that he
who fears not to test the whole truth, though his life may be stormy and
troubled, his motives misinterpreted, and his thoughts misunderstood;
yet that man
Will departing leave behind him
Footprints in the sands of time,
and will be remembered and appealed to long after his body has returned
to the dust from which it came.
To return to myself. Because I cannot force myself to see with the
eyes of the Fathers, to hear with the ears of the Reformers, to accept all
the so-called orthodox teaching of Evangelical Christianity, that is
Christianity as interpreted by one section of the Church, I am looked
upon as an infidel. Now, there are three kinds of infidelity; there is


the infidelity of scientific men who have sought but not found, who,
perhaps, would find if they sought in the right way, in the way they seek
to extract nature’s secrets, the way of submission—submission not to
creeds, but to the “ still small voice within them.” Then again, there is
the infidelity of men like myself, who cannot, not who will not , believe in
the popular acceptation of the doctrines of the Fall, Original Sin, the
Atonement, a Personal Devil, and Everlasting Torment; who exercise
their right as Protestants to apply the same principles to the creeds
and formulas of the Anglican Church that the Reformers applied to what
they considered the traditions and errors of the Roman Church, And
lastly, there is the infidelity of orthodoxy, of those who say they see but
do not see, and who are apparently unwilling to allow others to try and
see for themselves; who refer us not to the Bible as interpreted by reason
and conscience, but to the traditions of the Church, to creeds that are
contradictory one of the other, to confessions of faith, rigid indeed in
language, but, I believe, wide enough in terms of subscription ; or who
refer us to their own narrow interpretation, not of the spirit, but of the
letter of that book which is able to make us wise unto salvation.
These old creeds are questioned, discussed, and discarded by nine out
of ten thinking laymen because they find in them no answer at all to
those questions which are shaking society to its very foundations. lam
considered an infidel because, believing as I do in a “ God of infinite
wisdom, and goodness,” I cannot believe in doctrines wdiich
contradict these attributes, and are revolting to the moral sense. I, on
the contrary, consider that infidelity which doubts the power of that
God who “ wills that all shall be saved,” to effect His loving purpose.
I consider that infidelity which limits the love of God to any one
sect, church, or portion of humanity, or to any period of time either;
for I believe that, as “ He was in the beginning, so He is now, and so
He ever shall be.”
I consider that infidelity, which, while it calls God the “ moral and
intelligent governor of the world,” that term which so exasperates the
talented author of “Literature and Dogma,” declares that “this moral
and intelligent governor” having created a perfect man allowed a being
called the Devil to tempt him, and that this perfect man fell, and not
only ruined himself, but involved countless millions of unborn
descendants in his ruin, throwing the whole creation into a state of
disorder, and that ever since ‘ this moral and intelligent governor” has


been endeavouring, by the most complicated schemes or dispensations
(schemes so inexplicable that no two theologians agree on them) to
repair the disorder into which His work has been thrown by His own
creature —man.
I am looked upon as an infidel, because I believe that God created
not a perfect world, or a perfect race, but only a race, “ which in
the dispensation of the fulness of times ” shall become perfect,
and that our part is to be fellow-workers with God in the
accomplishment of this purpose; and because I believe that all
the sin and imperfection, all the pain, and sorrow, and suffering
we see around us, are not, as is popularly believed, and “ortho-
doxically ” taught, the fruits of Adam’s sin and the death-throes
of a fallen and doomed humanity, but that all sin and all suffer-
ing are the consequences of our yet imperfect state, and not
death-throes, but birth-pangs, the travail which God has ordained shall
ever accompany a new birth. Mankind is being born, the world is being
made, it is a birth that is going on, therefore “ doth the whole creation
groan and travail in pain together until now.” But the time must and
will come, when “ God shall wipe away all tears from all eyes.” “ The
night of sorrow shall be for ever ended, remembered truly, but only
remembered as are all sorrows and pains through which joy and good has
been born into the universe.” I believe firmly that “He who made will
bear ; ” that our Creator is both able and willing to accomplish this,
and much more that must lie beyond our finite comprehension, and I
believe that he has proved to us in Christ that His will is a good will of
peace to all men, that if we would only try to see, Christ is the explana-
tion of all mystery, of all that baffles us in nature and in ourselves, and
I further believe that our Father by allowing sinful and imperfect men
to beget sinful and imperfect children, thus accepting the responsibility
of perpetuating a sinful race in a world, where that race is surrounded
by ignorance, sin, and suffering, proves to us unmistakeably that He
is able to evolve perfection and final good out of all the imperfection
and seeming evil which we see in us and around us. If this is infidelity
I am not ashamed to own myself an infidel. What if orthodox
theology should be no other than an immense misunderstanding of
the spirit of the Bible; the product, not of the teaching of Christ,
but of the metaphysical reasoning of biassed and uncritical Bible
students !


And, after all, what is an infidel ? I regret to say there are many
who use the terms “ atheist ” and “ infidel ” interchangeably; to them
the terms mean the same thing, i.e., one who does not believe in God.
Such will misinterpret the Dean, and me too. An infidel is simply an
unbeliever —an unbeliever in what ? That is just the question. We all
know there is a class of persons who like to call themselves believers,
and who also have a habit of calling another class unbelievers. But the
names are only relative, and have no meaning in themselves. What is
that belief in which constitutes a believer, the doubting or denial of
which is dubbed infidelity ? Almost invariably it turns out to be some
human definition of a divine mystery. Frequently some mataphysical
puzzle, which no “believer” even could present in a definite and
intelligible form, and on the exact meaning of which no two “ believers”
would ever agree. Accordingly “ the so-called believer professes to
believe in his puzzle, which he does not understand, while the so-called
unbeliever or infidel, because he does not ufiderstand it, declines to commit
himself to a belief in it.” The Bible nowhere calls upon us to exercise
blind and unreasoning belief; on the contrary, Isaiah represents God as
saying, “ Come, let us reason together.” Solomon’s intellectual desires
were highly approved of by the Almighty; and one of our Lord s
greatest trials was that people who had ears to hear would not hear.
And when He told His disciples they must become like little children,
it was not “childishness” He taught but that childlike belief in goodness
which is the characteristic of little children, and that unsuspicious trust-
fulness with which they will go to any one who is good to them.
True childlike faith, it is evident, cannot mean faith in creeds, or dogmas,
or speculations, for a child could scarcely be expected to believe these
things, but faith in charity, and in brotherly kindness—in goodness, in
fact. St. Paul sums the matter up when he says, “Be not children in
understanding; howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding
be men.” “ Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.” “ Let
every man be persuaded in his own mind.”
And this is just what men are doing, and I for one am persuaded in
my own mind that Bishop Ewing spoke truly when he said, “ There is
a great difference between the Christianity of Christ and His Apostles
and that of all subsequent times.” My friends will bear witness that I
had barely forsaken the “ sheep-folds ” and entered on the duties of
a reader of the Church of England than I expressed my conviction that
popular Christianity was not the teaching of Christ. “If Christ was


right, then modern Christianity is wrong.” Is it a bond of union among
men ? Does it unite Christians (so : called) ? We know it does nothing
of the kind. A hundred years ago, Lessing said, “ Christianity has
failed, let us try Christ ” I believe that trial is coming fast, is even now
commenced. When the experiment is made, the terms orthodoxy and
infidelity will probably come to be rather differently applied than they
are now. I believe that the shaking which is going on betokens a
change; who can doubt a change for good ? Is it not our Father s hand
that guides and directs it ?
The Reformation has never been completed ] its completion will be the
freeing of Christian Churches from ancient and galling limitations, limita •
tions set by ignorance and fear.
To remedy the former of these two evils, is a work strenuously taken
up now by all nations. And with the advance of education, will vanish
superstition and an unreasoning adherence to traditional teaching. The
other evil, fear, has been “ the most effective motive power in nearly all
the religions of the world up to the present time. God is even still
represented as vindictive, arbitrary, implacable.” The doctrine of the
Atonement, as held by most, if not all of the orthodox party, is
represented as an effort to appease the divine displeasure; and the
divine favour of our “ Father,” who, as Goldsmith said, ‘ loved us into
being,” has to be purchased by the blood of Christ. Fear has always
restrained inquiry. The anathemas of the Church long held back
inquiry. In these days the Church’s ban is not so much dreaded as the
ban of public opinion and the reproaches of friends.
But “ perfect love casteth out fear,” and “ God has not given us
the spirit of fear but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind, that
spirit whereby we cry Abba Father —our own dear Father
The head of Christendom is sick with doubt,
Her heart faint with despair.
But let us exercise both faith and patience —courage God is, and
God is love. “ Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy cometh in
the morning.” The day will break, the day is even now breaking, the
night is far spent, the day is at hand, the clouds and mists are passing
away. God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all. May He send
us all light, and help, and peace from above.
There is, it is true, but little rest for those who earnestly and faithfully
embark upon the troubled waters of the quest for truth. It is all hard


work, for truth has ever to be won—there is no rest, as the world knows
rest for those who engage in this quest —for truth, like, God himself, is
above us, and before us, and beyond us, and must be in this life ever
ahead of us ; but ever underneath us are the everlasting arms of our
Father ; and if we wait upon Him —though the mind may crave for rest
and the heart be sick with hope deferred —if we wait upon Him He will
give us strength for the way, strength for the day, and in His own good
time those everlasting arms will bear us up with wings as eagles. “We
shall run and not be weary, we shall walk and not faint.”
Well has it been said “ It is needful that a man be true, not that he
live.” At the same time one of the truest souls this world has ever seen
has said “ Every man is not called upon to be a martyr to the truth.”
Let every man be true to his own convictions ; “ Let every man be per-
suaded in his own mind.”
At my ordination I made the solemn declaration that “ I feel moved
by the Holy Ghost to take on myself the ministry of the Word.” That
ordination was merely the human ratification of that higher call to which
I had long previously responded by consecrating my life to the service of
my fellow-men. As a minister I shall work while God gives me life. If
I am debarred from preaching in temples built of stones, I know that
God dwelleth not in temples made with hands, and that the work of a
minister and follower of Christ is to build up living stones, and lies not
in churches, but in the hearts and minds of His fellow-men —to them I
shall humbly, and, I trust, faithfully minister to the death, after the
example of Him who came not to be ministered to, but to minister to
others.
Do any ask, has your quest for truth brought you peace ? I answer —
peace of mind? No. Peace of conscience ? Yes, most assuredly, yes—
that peace of God which passeth all understanding—that peace which
ecclesiastical and popular Christianity can neither give nor take away —
We ask Thy peace, O Lord,
Through storm, and fear, and strife,
To light and guide us on,
Through a long struggling life ;
While no success or gain
Shall cheer the desperate fight,
Or nerve what the world calls
Our wasted might;
Yet, pressing through the darkness to the light.


Was Christ’s a life of peace ? If every Christian is not called on to
be a martyr or witness to the truth, at least every Christian minister is.
It is the bounden duty of every minister to do all he can for the truth,
and to fight against insincerity in all its forms; and if he in his heart
believes there is insincerity and falsehood in the creeds and teaching of
his own particular Church or sect, it is his duty to say so unreservedly
and openly, as did his Master. If this should involve his “ going out,”
it need not trouble him so long as he takes his conscience with him.
The disciple must not expect to be above his Master. Which is to be
preferred, ease and comfort, or the truth, and to live by it ? I have, at
any rate, decided ; I abide by the consequences. I shall preach and
speak what I believe to be truth “ whate’er betide.” “He who begins
by loving Christianity better than truth,” says Coleridge, “ will proceed
by loving his own sect or Church better than Christianity, and end in
loving himself better than either.” Some people have no idea of religion
apart from a name. Such are not of Schiller’s opinion :
What my religion ? Those thou namest ? None.
None ! why ? Because I have religion.
Let us take to heart the words with which Keshub Chunder Sen,
the great Indian reformer, concluded his_ famous lecture on Chris-
tianity: —“Believe me/’ he said, “believe me, my friends, England is not
yet a Christian nation.” Is the Christianity of the churches, of the
sects, meeting the universal cry for light ? Men are asking for bread :
do we offer them stones ? They thirst for the living Word: we treat
them to the Athanasian Creed ! They cry out for true religion : we
tell them to repeat the responses and join in the hymns ! They ask for
a rational and practical religion : we threaten them, as unbelievers, with
“ eternity of torment and the unconsuming flame ! ” People do say that
it is not God as Righteousness, and Christ as the way thereto, that is
preached, but systems of impossible metaphysics, and rituals that profit
nothing. People ask for, and will have a more scientific religion, as
also a more practical religion, but none the less a religion full of heart
and life j a religion that will commend itself because it will appeal to
the intellect as well as to the heart and conscience; never to the mere
authority of the living or the dead ; a religion which will bring its own
evidence to the soul, and which will not need to be enforced by
damnatory clauses and the threat of hell-fire.


If I appear to some presumptuous in thus freely expressing myself, I
beg of such to put it down to my being “ terribly in earnest ” in this
matter, it is simply life and death to me. If any of my spiritual pastors
and masters feel inclined to address me as Mr. Grand did poor Joshua
Davidson, and say : “My good fellow, let us have no more of this folly,
believe as you are taught, and do as you are told, and don t set yourself
up as an independent thinker in matters you do not understand I can
only reply, as did Joshua, “ I meant no harm; I meant only the truth
and to hear the things of God.”
Are we not all of us, all of us who are in earnest, fellow-labourers in
the one and great work, as Frederick Myers says, “ co-operators with the
silent and mysterious influences of the Creator.” And with the words
of the same writer whose death was to his friends
The passing of the sweetest soul
That ever looked with human eyes,
I will conclude this lengthy preface.
“ This,” he says, “ may we do, neither hasting nor resting, in the
full faith that there shall be—that there must be—a period in the
infinite future when evil shall be utterly abolished, and there shall be
no dark spot in the universe of God; when all the works of the
devil shall be destroyed, and love shall be all in all—yea an ultimate
restitution and regeneration of all things —a millenium of milleniums
and much more.”
C. F.
Urana, N.S.W.,
11 th Septem her , 1874.


“OUR FATHER.”
“ After this manner therefore pray ye : Our Father.”—Matthew vi, 9.
is a great difference,” says the late Bishop Ewing,
(ifi Spl “ between the Christianity of Christ and His Apostles and
that of all subsequent times.” In a sermon “On the
Evidence of the Law of God,” the eloquent French preacher,
Massillon, expresses the same opinion, and says: —“The mind of
man has been quibbling with the Spirit of God, and substituting human
doctrines in place of the doctrine which Christ brought from heaven.
All thoughtful students and honest critics of the New Testament must
admit that the Christianity of the present day and the Gospel now
preached bear but little resemblance to that Gospel of the kingdom of
God which was preached by Him who spake as never man spake ; and
further, that that Gospel has been but very imperfectly set forth, all but
immediately after its first propagation. It soon fell from its first high
ideal, and has never yet regained it. No doubt there was a partial
return to the teaching of Christ at the time of the Reformation, and
some of the crust of human error which concealed the truth of the
Gospel was then removed ; but the reformers, in their eagerness to free
the world from the swaddling bands of superstition and tradition, took
the readiest weapons that came to their hands, and when through these,
as instruments, they achieved their purpose, their followers unduly
exalted these weapons, until they in their turn came to be looked upon as
essential truths, instead of being merely instruments, means only to an
end, and good only in so far as by those means men have been brought
out into clearer light, into a purer atmosphere.
A slavish and unreasoning belief in these personal views of our great
reformers, which did such good service in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries, has imposed a grievous burden upon our shoulders, and led to
an uninquiring adherence to rigid creeds and dogmas of human inven-
tion, instead of a loving and filial trust in that living God and Father,
who is ever by His Spirit in our hearts, revealing to us more and more of
His righteousness, truth and love; ever by “irresistible viewless hands
drawing us His children out of ourselves to a Fathers loving heart.
But this burden is becoming intolerable, and of late years a reaction


has set in, the Reformational aspects of Christianity are giving place to
more fatherly conceptions of the character of God. Religious thought,
thank God, is not stagnant. Yielding to the pressure of the Spirit of
God, the human mind is struggling forward into more knowledge, and
turning from the traditions of men to the teaching and spirit of Christ,
and finding, too, that to turn from the jarrings and jargon of
popular and sectarian Christianity to His blessed words of life and light
is like escaping from the troubled and muddy waters of a turbid river
into the pure broad clear ocean tide.
Specially are men beginning to see that Christ was above all things a
Revealer, the coming of Christ a revelation; and revelation is light, a
folding back of the veil of ignorance, and superstition, and error, in order
that the light of truth may shine forth as the day. Christ unveiled,
revealed to the world that which had been from the beginning, but which
had been hid from generations. Christ revealed to man the Fatherhood
of God, and taught them to say, “ Our Father; ” and not only in His
words, but in His life, and above all things in His death, He manifested
forth the righteousness, truth, and love of that Father. Christ did not
come to destroy or to reverse, but to fulfil, to reveal, to make known—
to clear up mystery. He was, as says an old writer,* “No new mystery
superadded to the mysteries of nature and providence, but their explana-
tion and the means whereby they may be known. He came to reveal
the Father to the children, and to reconcile the children to the Father;
He came to take away that wrath which separated the children from the
Father —a wrath, be it remembered, having its place, not in God, but in
man, else how could it be removed ? For think, had that wrath, which
Christ came, and lived, and died to take away, any place in God —were
it, indeed, a quality of the divine mind —how hopeless would have been
our position; for we know that God cannot change, that He is not a
man that He could repent. As He was in the beginning He is now and
He ever shall be—the Everlasting and Universal Father, whose name is
love. He is the Lord; He changeth not. Scripture, philosophy, and
our own hearts alike unite in enforcing this truth upon us, and, therefore,
the Atonement of Christ is the taking away from us that evil heart of
unbelief which hides our Father’s face from us; the Atonement of
Christ is the overcoming in us all that of ignorance, sin, death, hell, and
misery which so burdens and holds down the sons of men. Let me try
to illustrate this. We know that water, which having descended in a
continuous stream from some pure mountain lake, has become
confined in the heart of the earth, will, if the superincumbent load of
earth be removed, or a way of escape opened, rise to its original level;
and he who thus liberates it will enable it to rise to its true height. Just
so with us. God in Christ has done this for us, His children.
As spirits, we have come from the Father of spirits, tied down by our
baser and natural affections to the things of time and sense, a load of
ignorance, error, superstition and earthly care pressing us down and
preventing us from rising to our true height, we could never attain the
# Rev. W. Law.


level from which we have come, except through help from above —that
help God has sent us in Christ—that help He is ever sending us, and
will ever send to those who seek it by arming our minds with the same
mind that was in Christ Jesus, and by putting into our hearts the Spirit
of Christ, whereby we cry Abba Father, our own dear Father. Christ
has lifted the load, and opened a way —a way from earth to heaven for
all who will believe and take that way. He has shown us that there is
nothing between us and that pure heavenly source from which we have
come—nothing but that wrath, hell, darkness, sin, misery, and death,
which in Scripture language ever means the same thing, and which can
only exist in ourselves, because it is something that has to be removed
and altered, and, therefore, cannot be anything in that God and Father
with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. I say Christ
has revealed to us that which had been hid from generations, but yet
had not been altogether unknown, for the words of St. Augustine still
hold true that “ what is now called the Christian religion has existed
among the ancients, and was not absent from the beginning of the
human race until Christ came in the flesh, from which time the true
religion began to be called Christian.”
Did not the prophets preach the Gospel of Christ, the Gospel of the
kingdom of heaven ? Are their writings not full of God’s revelations to
the Gentiles ? And if we go back to some of the ancient religions of
the world, such as the Brahman, we shall there find the Gospel too,
though hidden, as with us, by superstitions and traditions of mere human
invention. “And a careful study of ancient literature will bring us face
to face with many of whom Abraham was ignorant, and Israel did not
acknowledge; but who, having God for theirTather, have equal right to
the son’s birthright and the Father’s house” —that house of many
mansions.
But the revelation in Christ came to make all things plain. He came
to make the crooked straight, the rough smooth, to reconcile all things.
We, by our traditions and superstitions, have obscured His revelation,
“ Our teaching is not the teaching of the middle ages, nor is that teaching
that of the fathers, nor yet their teaching that of the Apostles; and
finally, that only which was done and said by Christ himself is the
true revelation.”
Day by day we are to rest upon Christ and His teaching.
It is said people are giving up Christ; that Christ is more than ever a
stumbling-block. What is repelling honest minds and true hearts, is not
the meek and lowly Saviour, the pure and sinless Jesus, but the God-
dishonouring and Christ-dishonouring dogmas and doctrines preached in
His name. Men are required to believe in and to subscribe to dogmas
that depict Him, whom Christ has taught us to call Father, as a blood-
thirsty and cruel Moloch. Men are told they must believe in the
never-ending torment of unbelievers, in the metaphysical disquisitions on
the nature of God, couched in scholastic language, or take their place
among the sceptics. Men are told that they must believe in doctrines
attributing to our Father such unjust and impossible action as the
pouring out the unrestrained measure of His wrathful fury upon the Son


of His love instead of upon us, or go out among the unorthodox. I ask
then, is it any wonder that men do stand out and say better no religion
at all than a religion which would call upon us to kneel down and
worship one who acts as no good man would act. I say men will
not worship this God of human invention, but will answer to the Spirit
of God within them, and worship Him whom Christ has revealed to us
as our Father , as His Father, and our Father; His God and our God.
Infidelity is making alarming progress, it is said. I believe it is.
Not only the reality of Revelation, but the being and providence of
God himself are called in question. There is no use in denying it
Here in this church are some, probably, who not only doubt the Chris-
tian Revelation, but who doubt the existence of a personal God. And
what are we giving such to keep them out of their difficulties; for, let
us remember, that no man deliberately wishes to be an infidel? In nine
cases out of ten infidelity is the result of honest doubt, of honest inquiry
unsatisfied ; and, though this is a time of doubt and unbelief, let no
one be rash enough to say it is a time of irreligion or want of desire for
the truth ; on the contrary, never in the history of the world was there
a time when men so cried out for light and for truth. It is true there is
a general upheaval of new thought and new theories, a general breaking
up of old and cherished beliefs, a general removal of ancient land-
marks, a general obliteration of well-trodden paths. Men’s feet have so
often paced these old paths that when they find them gone they hesitate
and doubt where to place their feet; few there are who care to strike
out a straight line for themselves, and some cry out in dread and dismay
on finding the old familiar groove gone, along which they had been
content to glide, thinking that all went well because all went smoothly,
and never noticing that they made no advance, but merely continued to
glide backwards and forwards on the same plane, for a groove will never
enable us to rise higher, and once we get into a groove it is no easy
matter to get out of it again.
But let us not be dismayed when we find some of those old grooves
broken up in which we have so long been content to run. They have
served their turn and done good service ; they can pass away. They
are being superseded by those things which are more real, and “ the
shaking up signifieth but the removing of those things that are shaken
as of things that are made, that these things which cannot be shaken
may remain/’ Men are thinking for themselves. They are determined
to be persuaded in their own mind, and we must think and believe for
ourselves ;we cannot think and believe for each other. It is better for
a man to believe ever so little for himself than to swallow the whole
1 hirty-nine Articles, the Three Creeds, and the Westminster Confession
of Faith, on the authority of any one else. Only by believing for
ourselves does the truth become part of ourselves.
Archbishop Whately says, “ The temptation to tamper with the truth
by adhering to some known error, because of the danger of abandoning
at the same time some truth we have been accustomed to connect with
that error, is very strong, and is the natural result of the pernicious
effects on the mind of any system of blind, uninquiring acquiescence.”


“ Such a system,” he says, “ is an evil spirit which we must expect will
cruelly rend and mangle the patient as it comes out of him, leaving him
half dead at its departure. There will often be,” he goes on to say, “or
oftener appear to be, danger in removing a mistake ; the danger that
those who have been so long used to act rightly on erroneous
principles may fail of the desired conclusion when undeceived. In
such cases it requires a thorough love of truth and a firm reliance on
Divine support to adhere steadily to the straight course. If we give way
to a dread of danger from the inculcation of any truth, physical, moral,
or religious, we manifest a want of faith in God s power, or His will to
maintain His own cause. There may be danger attendant on every
truth, but in the case of anything which plainly appears to be truth
every danger must be braved; we must maintain the truth as we have
received it, and trust to Him who is the truth to prosper and defend it.
The part of a lover of truth is to follow her at all seeming hazards,
after the example of Him who came into the world that He should beai
witness to the truth. This straightforward course may not, indeed,
obtain the praise of men, for the thoroughgoing love of truth is not
very much admired or liked, or, indeed, understood, except by those
who possess it. But truth, as Bacon says, only doth judge herself, and
the inquiry of truth, the knowledge of truth, and the believing of truth,
is the sovereign good of human nature.”
I believe it is this seeking for truth in religion, _ coupled with the
faithful and earnest labours of truth-seeking scientific men, that has
brought about this present state of unbelief, and the larger and more
enlightened views which, as a rule, are commending themselves to the
minds of thoughtful men. This to some the sign of the cloven-hoof,
and utter depravity of human nature, is to others, on the conti ary, a sign
that as once the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the great troubled
sea of waters that covered the face of the earth, so now the same Spirit
is moving upon the great troubled sea of human society, where deep
calleth unto deep, and whence tempest-tost and driven by the
waves and billows of doubt and scepticism men struggling in the dark
waters are crying out with a cry which must be heard, for God, for the
living God. “ For whom have we in heaven but Him ? and there is
none 3 on earth that we can desire in comparison with Him. My flesh
and my heart fainteth, but God is the strength of my life, and my portion
for ever.” . . .
From these troubled waters is ever ascending an unceasing cry tor
light, truth, and peace in tones of deep and persistent earnestness. _ Men
are crying out after God —the one and true God, the Father, with an
earnestness which cannot be mistaken, and an unanimity, I believe, nevei
before equalled in the world’s history. In tones and accents which must
cause “ God to rend the heavens and come down” cries are ascending fioni
all classes for light—more light; for light to dispel the darkness, and reveal
to a striving and struggling humanity, the brightness and fulness of that
Father who manifested Himself to the world in Jesus of Nazareth , t lat
Father who, having made us, will surely hear us; that Father who,
having allowed us to be born into this world, so full of ignorance and sin,


and suffering, will surely in His own good time redeem us from self-sin
and every evil, nay, making us like our fair Master, Christ, noble and
pure, and free. That which many earnest and devout souls brand as
scepticism and infidelity, is but the true human soul striving to shake
itself free from superstition and tradition, in order that it may come out
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God ; for God hath not given us
the spirit of fear, but of power and of love, and of a sound mind. This
spirit meets us on every side : newspapers, magazines, reviews teem with
the spirit of anxious inquiry —even in novels will be found these same
confessions of that inquiry for light which God has “ kindled in every
one of his rational creatures.” For who that has read the soul-stirring
and elevating novels of George M'Donald, but will admit that these too
breathe the earnest spirit of that search for truth which will not rest
till truth is found ? Men from all sides are calling out for truth—for
light; and that God shall be preached to them, not as once He was by
Moses at the mount that burned with fire, with blackness, and darkness,
and tempest, but as once He was manifested to the world in Jesus of
Nazareth, when the righteousness, truth, and love of God were incarnate
in Him who has taught us to say, “ Our Father.”
As men have advanced in scientific knowledge and in culture, so also
has the standard of morality advanced, and become more conformed to
the image of Him who, some 1900 years ago, lived out the one
perfect human life the world has ever witnessed. Year by year the
figure of Christ stands out clearer and brighter before men, and year by
year the Spirit of Christ more fully penetrates and warms the heart of
humanity; breathing, wherever it enters, the spirit of truth, enlargement
and liberty; and imparting to men a higher and truer ideal in their
conception of the God and Father of all mankind.
And it is by thinking for ourselves and believing for ourselves, with
prayer to God for help and guidance, that we come to that knowledge of
the Father and the Son which is life eternal. That unquestioning faith
witli which we receive the teaching of our beloved mothers, unhesitatingly
believing every word that comes from their dear lips, is lovely and beau-
tiful in the little child; but when we come to years of discretion, God
expects us, while we preserve the guileless heart of little children, in
understanding to be men, and to prove all things, while we hold fast
only to that which is good—good because, while it meets the
innate religious element laid down in the constitution of every man, it
also commends itself to the reason and the conscience. As little
children, we take all our parents teach us as simple truth, on the
authority of those who stand to us in the place of God; but when we
grow in years and in stature, we grow also in wisdom, and, like Jesus,
we too ask questions; we question our teachers—in fact, we doubt. We
do not doubt God or His truth, or His power, wisdom, and love; but
we do doubt those formulas through which men of like passions with our-
selves have, at sundry times and in various manners, endeavoured to
record their attempts to grasp God’s truth, and embody it in creeds, and
articles of religion, and confessions of faith. Now, doubt in itself is not
an evil thing at all, for it is through doubt, and by the overcoming of


doubt, that our faith is purified and strengthened, to become the basis
of all healthy and rational belief. All knowledge has been purified by
means of doubt, and in every age it is necessary that religious belief
should be investigated and examined by the light of that age, and not
by the light of those who lived in the fourth or fifth centuries, nor yet by
the light of those who reformed religious belief in the fifteenth and six-
teenth centuries, but by the light of that Spirit of Truth whom Christ
told us would abide with us for ever. If men were to receive, without
questioning, all they hear from their teachers, all that is required of them
and taught by the several Churches of which they are members, and
never have any doubts, all progress would at once cease, and all
branches of knowledge become hopelessly corrupt through stagnation.*
We should be in the position of our Chinese friends of the celestial
empire. But well has Tennyson said—
Better fifty years of Europe
Than a cycle of Cathay.
Let us then —to quote the words of the Bishop of Melbourne —let us be
prepared to concede to all men that which we claim for ourselves,
namely, the free exercise of that reason with which God has endowed
us; and when religious teachers, or commentators endeavour to force
upon us dogmas and theories entirely inconsistent with that Revelation
of Christ contained in the words “ Our Father,” let us, in all the might
and power of our better nature, the divine in us, the Christ in us, rise up
against all that would tend for a moment to dishonour and obscure our
Father’s love, and refuse to have imposed upon us as commandments of
God the traditions of men.
Is it not a matter of history that God teaclfes men by enabling them
to teach themselves ? Was not this Christ’s way ? We learn by
experience in fact, and much as we can and do learn by the experience of
others, we all learn far more by our own personal experience, and by
reasoning and reflecting upon God’s ways and dealings with us. God
helps those who help themselves. Unless we meet our teachers half-way
they can teach us but little. Wisdom comes to those who cry “ after
knowledge, and who lift up their voices for understanding.” “If any
man,” says James, “ lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth to all
men liberally, and upbraideth not.” Who does not upbraid us, because
we are ignorant and lacking in knowledge for the best of all reasons,
because it is He who hath made us, and He knoweth our frames and
remembereth we are but dust. Are we not the sheep of His hand, and
the people of His pasture? Has He not made us?—will not He hear us?
* Bishop Magee, in ‘ ‘ Pleadings for Christ, ” while preaching against scepticism,
says :—“ Very valuable and important is this first calling out of the instinct of doubt,
this first awakening of the sceptical part of man—of his understanding . . . The
sceptical inquiring mind is ever questioning of every apparent fact. . . . Doubt !
Precious and invaluable doubt is ever leading man on from question to question. .
Doubt is the cause of progress, the implement of discovery, the spur to reformation,
the motive power that is specially needed for the ever onward march of humanity in
knowledge and science. Doubt! Without this invaluable instinct of doubt humanity
would be stagnant; with it, and by its help, humanity progresses. We do not dis-
parage, we highly value the uses of doubt.”


We must face our difficulties and meet them boldly, and not shut
our eyes to the dangers that beset Christianity; dangers, I firmly
believe, that are the fruit of the Christian Churches having wandered far
away from the teaching of Him whom they profess to follow. What is
the state of Christianity- to-day ? Has it fulfilled its mission ? Is it
fulfilling its mission ? Is it not but too apparent that Christianity—
what I take leave to call the Christianity of the sects —popular
Christianity, instead of being the one great point of union, joining all
men together in one sacred brotherhood, is, on the contrary, the great
divider of mankind ?
Instead of being a help to all good work and national improvement,
Christianity, as it is, is an absolute hindrance. National education,
plans for the public good, benevolent institutions, so far from being
assisted by it, are much hindered and obstructed. Is it not true that while
we, who call ourselves Christians, can meet to eat and to drink together,
to legislate, to trade, to amuse ourselves, and thank God, too, for
charitable purposes—though here the shoe begins to pinch—is it not
but too true that we can rarely meet or unite for religious worship ; and
if we do manage to amalgamate a little in the country districts, it is as
individuals, and not with the sanction of the several Churches of which
we are members ? Lately, several ministers of the Presbyterian Church
and the Church of England have exchanged pulpits. The consequences
are known to all who read the newspapers, and it would be amusing
were it not sad to hear this spoken of in religious circles as quite an
unprecedented event. An event, indeed ! Is it not a terrible satire on
our Christianity that one Christian clergyman cannot preach in another
Christian clergyman’s pulpit but it is characterised as an event ?
To remedy all this we must go back to Christ himself; to His own
teaching, to His own blessed words of life and health ; we must receive
the kingdom of heaven as little children—as children of one Father.
“The Church must once more proclaim the everlasting Fatherhood
of God.” Nought but this can unite us and heal our unhappy divisions.
This rightly apprehended, must heal all wounds and unite us all in
one sacred brotherhood. We want a more simple faith in the Gospel of
Jesus. We want less of creeds, but more of simple trust; less of
ceremony and observance and profession of faith, more of doing the
will of our Father. We want less of temporalities and privileges, more
of self-renunciation and disinterested love for Christ and His brethren,
and our brethren. Creeds and confessions of faith, rites and observances,
temporalities and privileges, which hinder the kingdom of the righteous
Father, must all wither away, but those who do the will of God abide
like His word for ever. And that word was made flesh, and revealed to
us that God is not a Fate but a Father, who desires that we should
accept and do His will, not merely because it is His will, but because it
is good and a righteous and a loving will; good, even when leading us by
the path of sorrow and suffering and death. This is the revelation
of Christ, our Father, a Father ever raising us up to himself, ever
drawing us to Christ—to the one way, the royal road, the road of the
cross ; and when we come to Christ we are saved by walking in his foot-


steps, and Christ crucified for us means Christ formed in us the hope of
glory, and only in so far as we are like Christ and imbibe His spirit do we
have life, do we live. As we realise our relationship to Christ, the Son
of God, we are saved, for if we are truly His brethren then must not God
be our Father ? As we realise our sonship, we shrink from sin; how
can we wilfully do aught which we know must wound and grieve our
Father’s heart. Christ lived, Christ died to save us from sin, from self,
and we cease from sin, when we realise our heavenly birth, that we are
born from above.
As of old, when the purer faith of the prophets had been corrupted by
the sacerdotalism of a later day which laid heavy burdens upon men of
rites and ceremonies, and superstitious observances —burdens too heavy
to be borne —the word was made flesh, and Jesus, the author and finisher
of our faith, restored once more the old simple faith in the living God as
the Father of all men, so now the same word is working in the hearts of
men setting the human mind free from the thraldom of a superstitious
and traditionary religion into the glorious liberty of the sons of God,
“ for where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty.” And this Spirit is
revealing to us daily more of God, and His love revealing the Creator to
us, no longer as an avenging flame of fire fearful to fall into, but as our
Father, who chastens whom He loves, ever-welcoming, even while yet a
long way off, the wayward, and the prodigal who turn from the wicked-
ness they have committed and do that which is lawful and right. Our
vocation is to do the will of our Father, and by every means in our
power by watchfulness, by prayer, and study of the Scriptures to find out
what is that good and perfect will of that Father. Thus, if we do, we
shall inherit eternal life.
Let us not fear then, or be dismayed. We can do nothing against
the truth, but for the truth. Truth must prevail: let us have patience.
A Father’s loving will is seeking our wills to make them His; our
hearts, to fill them with His Spirit; our minds, to arm them with the
mind that was in Christ Jesus; His care is over the least of his
creatures, and He neither slumbers nor sleeps.
No doubt there is a shaking going on, but it is that these things
which cannot be shaken —the things which are true in all creeds —in
which all creeds are one—may stand and remain.
I cannot better conclude than in the words of Bishop Ewing, who thus
writes of the Fatherhood of God: —
“ God, seen as our Father, makes all things sweet, all paths straight,
reconciles all things. His Fatherhood, once truly accepted, solves all
perplexities, and makes the difficulties of life clear and plain. He is
our Father, and whatever is meant by that name that is He, and always
so. As He was in the beginning He is now, and ever shall be.
Life or death make no alteration in this relationship. In life after death
He is equally the same Father. Beyond the shores of death we
do not go into a strange country; it is still our Father’s house, where the
Father is dealing with His children as they require. No time, no space,
can destroy His eternal, uniform, and paternal relationship. It is life,
health, victory, to believe this; just as avc believe this do we have


victory and life ; as we fall out of this belief we perish
There is no other salvation but by believing this, but this is sure. God
is our Father, and ever acts as such.
“It is good to hear this from the pulpit; it is good to hear it from the
press ; but, above all, it is good to hear it from our own hearts, and to
know that it is true.
“No doubt, to see the Father, sufficeth us.”
Amen.
South Yarra, July , 1874.
Fergusson and Moore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.
