

Perm Pfw
U-tu t 7
Itelf
OURSELVES;
AN ADDRESS
DELIVERED TO THE MEMBERS OF THE
VICTORIAN CHEMISTS? ASSISTANTS
ASSOCIATION.
JOSEPH B. MUMMERY.
MELBOURNE:
FEROUSSON AND MOORE, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE EAST.
1874.


PREFACE.
To the Members of the Victorian Chemists' Assistants Association.
Gentlemen,
In handing over at your request, for publication, the manuscript
of the Address which I delivered at the last meeting of our Association,
I do so with a full sense of its shortcomings and imperfections, but as you
have been pleased to regard it so favourably as to deem it worthy of being
printed and placed in the hands of members, I can only say that my earnest
hope is that it may be useful; and if the advice therein contained he powerful
enough to induce but one member to refrain from an evil course, and to follow
a good one, my puny efforts will not have been in vain.
I remain, Gentlemen,
Yours fraternally,
JOSEPH B. MUMMERY.
M. U. F. Societies? Dispensary,
108 Lonsdale Street East.


OURSELVES.
Ms. President and Gentlemen, ?Whilst cheerfully risinir, in compliance
w,th your request to read a paper, or deliver an addrei whichever vou may
please to term it, I regret that the privilege has not been confided to abler
hands, for though I cannot say that this is the first time I have addressed an
audience, it is the first time I have been called upon to say anything to my
hiethien of the pestle and mortar; and simple matters in chemistry, which
would mystify and enlighten a non-professional audience, are no doubt as well
known to all present as they are to myself. as wen
I believe firmly that the introduction of lectures and discussions as a new
feature in our periodical meetings will have a good tendency, and be produc-
tive of good results, for two especial reasons. Ist, Because of tlie general
information which will be thereby conveyed, for it must be a poor effort indeed
iitdocs not carry from the reader's mind to that of his hearers one single
thought or new idea. 2nd, Because the habit of rising to express our
thoughtseitherby written or extemporaneous matter will tend to do away
with that diffidence so universally felt, especially by young men, and which
presents their being, in their day and generation, one tithe as useful as they
otherwise would. I hope, therefore, to see every member rise in his turn to
acid his mite of knowledge to the general stock, and I think I may venture on
behalf of all here associated to say that his efforts will be patiently listened to
and accepted in an appreciative spirit, however humble those efforts may be
there is one thing, however, of which I am fully impressed, that is, that our
papers must be made as interesting as it is possible for the nature of the sub-
ject treated of to permit.
Meeting as we do at a late hour, with bodies wearied by long and anxious
toil, and witli minds it may be often beclouded from the same cause, we are
hardly in a, fit state to give that attention to the dull details of science which
is essential to their full understanding; and however willing the spirit may
be, the flesh is too often weak. Under these impressions I have penned a few
remarks, entitled ?
"OURSELVES.?
And though they would undoubtedly have been fitter for the opening address
of our worthy President, I trust that in taking the effort for just what it is worth
you will give me credit at least for a good intention.
We learn from our printed rules and from the Eeport that this Association
was established with the threefold object of promoting unity and good feeling
amongst ourselves, assisting one another in sickness, and advancing our position
as Chemists? Assistants. r
Noble objects, truly; and those which must commend themselves to every
man whose heart is in the right place. Unity and good feeling have a o-l or i oua
sound, but they should have a tangible reality as well. There is too much in


the world of that petty jealousy which has given rise to the saying that ?two
of a trade can ne?er agree.? Why such is the case Ido not know; but this I
can aver, that however matters may stand in this respect amongst the ignorant
and low, we, as members of an honourable calling, and one which requires a
liberal education, should put aside all petty bickerings and detractions, and,
giving the right hand of fellowship to all worthy members, try by our example
to do away with that quarrelling, envy, and detraction which all rightly
disposed persons must deplore, and which has led a poet to exclaim ?
What need of all this fuss and strife ?
Each warring with his brother;
Why need we in the crowd of life
Keep trampling down each other ?
Is there no goal thatfcan be won,
Without a squeeze to gain it;
No other way of getting on,
Than scrambling to obtain it ?
Oh, fellow man ! hear wisdom then,
In friendly warning call;
Your claims divide; the world is wide?
There?s room enough for all.
There was a remark made by Mr. O?Kearny in the paper, which he read at
our last meeting, which much struck me; it was to the effect that Chemists?
Assistants of former days had no such privileges as those of the present enjoy.
I can safely say that I had none. Just the bare routine of the counter and
enough knowledge to read and compound a prescription were all that were
required for the most responsible position, and any further information that
the aspirant for chemical knowledge desired had to be picked up from such
uncertain sources as chance might throw in his way; and these opportunities
were few and far between indeed, for little was available for those whose duties
commenced at seven o?clock in the morning and continued up to eleven or even
twelve o?clock at night. lam speaking, of course, of the mother country, where
the irksome and incessant routine of a druggist?s shop led me, as it has done
hundreds of others, to quit the shores of Old England in disgust, and to fore-
swear connection with the business at once and for ever. But matters at home
have much changed since then. Employers have learned that their assistants
have not only bodies to keep and souls to save, but minds to improve; and
assistants have found that something more is required of them than the
mechanical routine of measuring and weighing out the ingredients of a pre-
scription, or dusting a shelf of bottles and washing a mortar. As the facilities
for gaining a knowledge of our profession?for profession it is, let who will say
to the contrary ?are gaining ground at home, so are they here, and I apprehend
that in the race for learning Victoria will not be left in the rear. But I need
hardly remind our young members that if greater advantages are provided for
them than their compeers of former days enjoyed, greater things will be
required of them ; but of this more anon.
As regards the second object of our Association, providing a fund for the
assistance of those whom sickness or disease has smitten, too much can hardly
be said.
Long, very long may it be before any of us require aid in such a case, but
it is cheering to know that if smitten by the hand of disease or chilled by the icy
touch of poverty we may look with confidence to amelioration from a fund to
which we are all contributing. Sickness and disease are trying under any
circumstances, but how heartrending when accompanied by an empty pocket,
and surrounded by those whose sympathy and humanity are roused only by
the clink of gold and silver; take the word of one who has witnessed again
and again the most terrible affliction to which humanity is heir?impecunity
and loss of health. Even the strongest amongst us know not how soon we


may be laid upon a bed of suffering, unable to follow the occupation by which
our bread is won, and where we might even die, as many have before us, from
our inability to obtain such things as the exigency of our case required. It is true
that our Association being young, and much of its funds having been expended
in setting it afloat and providing for its future usefulness, the amount of funds
available for the relief of sick members would not be very great for some time
to come ; but we may rest assured that we should not be allowed to perish for
want, and should have at least (if worthy) what all the riches in the world
could not purchase?the heartfelt sympathy of our brethren in the hour of
tribulation.
It may be that many of the members of our Association belong to one or
other of the Friendly Societies established expressly to provide for such con-
tingencies as these I have named, and those who do [not, I would strongly
advise to join one or other of the orders whose object is to provide funds for
relief in case of a protracted illness, or for decent and respectable burial in
case of death. On this point I need not enlarge, but on the last?? Advancing
our position as Chemists? Assistants??much indeed remains to be said. Our
position, I take it, is capable of great improvement in a social and intellectual
way; for, as regards the first, no one acquainted with the business will deny
that Chemists? Assistants are, as a class, harder worked and poorer paid than
any other men who occupy positions of trust and responsibility, where educa-
tion and gentlemanly bearing are a sine qua non for office; and the question
will naturally occur, how is this ? Is it that employers in our line are less
liberal or less able to pay than others? or is it that there are so many
scrubbers, setting themselves up as Druggists? Assistants, with little or no
qualification, knocking about, and who are glad to take any situation at a
nominal wage ? Probably a little of both ; and the chemists ?have yet to be
taught that a labourer is worthy of his hire, and that to employ competent
and efficient hands on the one part he must unloose his purse strings commen-
surately, and that to employ incompetent ones on the other, he will lay himself
open to punishment by the laws of the land; for I believe the dav is not far-
distant when such will be the case. The ? Pharmaceutical Bill ? looms in the
distance, and its passage through the Houses of Parliament will be hailed as a
boon by those already in the business, and will be productive of unmixed good
to those who may hereafter join it.
Another great point in our social position much needing reform, is the
unwarrantably and unnatural hours of labour; and sadly, indeed, do we learn
that the efforts of our Association to bring about a better state of things has
hitherto failed. But shall we be thereby discouraged from further action ?
Certainly not. There is much force in the saying, that ? Home was not built
in a day,? and we know that it takes many hearty blows to lay low a sturdy
giant of the forest. Let us take example by the vigorous and determined
efforts made by tradesmen and mechanics, and gain heart therefrom, when we
see how much has been accomplished by their persevering efforts. When the
drapers? assistants agitated a few years ago for early closing and a Saturday
hall-holiday, they were met by their employers with sneers and derision, and
were flatly told that they might as well propose some great change in the laws
of the universe as the reform they sought. But look at the result. How
many of the establishments in this city are closed at an early hour in the even-
ings of the first five days of the week and two o?clock on the sixth ? Thus
giving their hands that opportunity for mental and physical relaxation so
urgently needed by those who spend?so many weary hours in the monotonous
occupation of a retail business ; but if so much required by those whose labour
is purely of a physical kind, how much more so by us, who, in addition to the
actual work of the hands, have a constant strain upon the brain hour by hour,
day by day, and night by night. For how often after a day of wearisome toil,
when we cast ourselves upon our beds, fondly hoping to get relief for a few


hours at least, are we roused from our slumbers by that most dreadful of all
earthly sounds ? the night-bell,? called again to labour, often on the most
frivolous pretences by those who have about the same amount of consideration
for us, as the worst of the American slaveholders had for the niggers they
owned. Indeed I have heard the drug trade spoken of as the slave trade, and
that they are alike in some respects at least, who shall say me nay; but
There's a good time coming boys
Only wait a little longer.
This is a progressive age and an age of improvement, and people are begin-
ning to see that because a gigantic evil has existed for ages it is no reason why
it should abide for ever.
There are no doubt greater difficulties to be overcome in getting a shortened
day of labour in our calling than in any other, but they are not insurmountable;
and such pitiful and frivolous objections as ? people will be always getting ill,?
and that they cannot choose their time of being afflicted, with which we are
too often met when we talk of shortened hours of labour, will be scattered
hereafter as chaff before the wind, or be melted into* nothing as the morning
mist before the rays of the rising sun.
Now, as regards the second. If intellectual improvement is to follow the
associating of ourselves together, much, if not all, will depend upon ourselves.
Persons really desirous of advancement will find a way, and history is replete
with cases of men of gigantic minds and learning vast, who have made the
acquaintance of science under the most overwhelming difficulties.
And I doubt not that there are those amongst us who are determined to
make themselves a name in the world ; if there are, success to them, say I?so
say we all. There may be amongst the members of this Association listening
to me to-night, a Faraday, a Liebig, a Taylor, or a Brand in embryo; and, for
all we know, a future occupant of a professional chair at a university, and one
who may be called upon to decide as to the fitness of candidates to practise as
Pharmaceutical Chemists in days to come.
The lives of great men all remind us
We may make our own sublime,
And departing leave behind us
Footprints on the sands of time.
Nearly everything, as I stated, will depend upon ourselves, and as those
amongst us who have reached or passed the epoch of middle age can hardly
aspire to be bright or shining lights in our profession, my remarks from this
out must be considered as more especially referring to our younger brethren,
and these I would affectionately warn and exhort. I would warn them against
self-arrogance and pride; I would warn them against indolence and inactivity ;
I would warn them against fashionable vices, which have led so many from
the paths of rectitude and honour: but, above all, I would warn them against
that giant vice , which has not only dragged individuals from the highest
pinnacle of promise to the lowest depths of degradation and despair, and
plunged families into ruin, but seems almost as though it would exterminate
intelligence and prosperity throughout the length and breadth of the land; a
vice which, 1 am truly grieved to see, seems to be gaining an ascendency over
the members of our calling. I allude, of course, to that vice of vices,
?i Intemperance.? And when I tell you-ihat I have seen much and suffered
some of the many dreadful evils following in the wake of drunkenness, you
will pardon me, I am sure, for warning you of a rock on which so many other-
wise noble minds have made shipwreck. There has been much said of a
snake in the grass as a hidden enemy to be avoided, but there is a much
more insiduous and deadly foe lurking near us at all times, and in all places;
that is, the ?snake in the glass.? I am not a total abstainer myself, so I
cannot be thought to be giving a temperance lecture; but 1 have seen so many


promising young fellows, with a great and glorious future before them, turn
out mean, low, degraded sots, that I could not forbear making mention, with a
warning voice, of this most fatal barrier to future success.
I would exhort you to diligence in study, hut that I know is not necessary ;
for the very creditable manner in which our members come forward whenever
there is a chance of improving their minds by picking up a few crumbs from
the feast of learning, shows me that the Chemists? Assistants of Melbourne are
determined not to be behind their confreres in any part of the world. And
when we take into consideration the fact that only an hour or two per week is
at their disposal, we wonder at their giving a portion of this up for the too
often dull details of learning.
Ihe late hour, too, at which our meetings are held?a time when most people
are preparing for rest, must assuredly militate against the attendance; and all
honour to those who meet after ten o?clock at night to give and receive informa-
tion, or encourage others by their presence. But, as I said before, the day is
not far distant when employers, recognising the advantages of this Association
will give those under them more liberty that they may avail themselves more
fully of the benefits offered them.
. I would say, then, let us toil on with the advantages we have, and trust to
time and opportunity to give us better; great things have been accomplished
by master minds under the most overwhelming difficulties. Above all, I say
we must have self-reliance; determine to do, and the feat is all but accom-
plished. Let us not be discouraged in scientific research because others, not
seeing as we see, may laugh at our opinions and deride our efforts; this has
been the fate of great men in all ages. When Fulton built the first steamboat,
his friends were so ashamed of what they thought a mad-headed scheme, that
he could hardly get them to give their presence on board at the trial trip, and
when a trifling hitch to the machinery occurred, threatening for the moment
annihilation of his hopes, they joined in the laugh and the sneers of those by
whom he was surrounded ; but his voyage was made, and now we need not �-o
far to see the results of his perseverance and enterprise.
W hen Stephenson announced his plan for railway locomotion, was he not
derided and taunted, and regarded as a visionary enthusiast ? but now I need
not say how far his theory has become practice, and his vision a substantial
reality. Even the great Galileo, when he announced his ideas respecting
the revolution of the world, so far from getting praise or honour for himself
or converts to his opinions, was rewarded with imprisonment and chains; and,
indeed, as there has hardly been a discovery in science that the projector has
not had to fight out under contumely, if not actual persecution, let us learn
from this that by our own individual efforts we must stand or fall. Outside
influence will effect but little, friends? assistance will be in many cases
impotent, but in the inmost recesses of our own minds will be found the
germs of future failure or success.
There?s a game much in fashion, I think it?s called euchre,
But I never have played it for pleasure or lucre.
In which, when the cards are in certain condition,
The players appear to have changed their position,
And one of them cries in a confident tone,
? 1 think I may venture to go it alone!?
Whilst watching the game, ?tis a whim of the bards,
A moral to draw from this skirmish of cards ;
For he thinks that he sees in the trivial strife.
Some excellent hints for the battle of life;
For whether the prize be a ribbon or throne.
The victor is he who can go it alone.


When great Galileo proclaimed that the world
In a regular orbit was ceaselessly whirled.
And got not a convert for all of his pains.
But only derision, a prison, and chains,
?It moves for all that!? was his confident tone.
For he knew, like the earth, he could go it alone.
When Kepler, with intellect piercing afar.
Discovered the laws of each p'anet and star,
And doctors, who ought to have lauded his name.
Derided his learning and blaccened his fame,
? I can wait,? he replied, ? till the truth you shall own, ?
For he felt in his heart he cbuld go it alone.
Alas ! for the player who only depends
In the struggle for life upon kindred and friends.
For whatever the value of blessings like these,
They can never at6ne for inglorious ease,
Nor"comfort the coward when he finds with a groan,
That his crutches have left him to go it alone.
There is something, no doubt, in the hand you may hold?
Wit, family, culture, wealth, beauty and gold.
And the fortunate owner may fairly regard
Each in its way a most excellent card;
Yet the game may be lost wit i all these for your own,
Unless you?ve the courage to go it alone.
In battle, in business, whatever the game.
In law, or in love, it is ever the same,
In the struggle for power, in the scramble for pelf,
Let this be your motto, " Rely on yourself;?
For whether the prize be a ribbon or throne.
The victor is he who can go it alone.
*"'a\
?-v
Fergusson and Moore, Printers. 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne. . 1
