

OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY
■
ARRANGED ACCORDING TO
Cbe II do programme of Instruction
ADOPTED IN
VICTORIAN STATE SCHOOLS
BUCKLEY
HONOHMAN UNDER THE LATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
PART I
.
%#
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO.
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
1886


Australia ... ...- ...
21
Europe
27
Asia
32
Africa
37
North America
40
South America
• ••
43
Oceania ...
• ••
• ••
46
Counties and Towns of Victoria
47
BUCKLEY’S OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.
InSr.v to jJart f
Definitions .
Programme for 2 mi Class :
Continents, Oceans, and Lakoek Seas, with their
Relative Positions
Programme for 3rd Class :
Minor Sea’s, Chief Oulfs, Bays Peninsulas,
Capes, and Islands.
Australia
Europe
Africa
North America
South America
Oceania
Programme for 4:fh Class :
The Relative Positions of the Countries with
their Capitals ; the Principal Mountains,
Rivers, and Lakes.
}3an M,
CONTAINS
The Information required for the sth and 6th Classes, and
for the Pupil-Te‘cwwrs’ Examinations.


BUCKLEY'S
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.
DEFINITIONS.
Geography is a description of the Earth.
|he Earth is round like a hall. Anything- of this shape is
called a Sphere or Globe, and one-half of a sphere is called
a Hemisphere.
Although the Earth resembles a ball, it is not quite round
as a ball is, but slightly flattened at the top and bottom, some-
what like an orang-e.
T he top is called the North Pole, and the bottom the
South Pole.
A great circle passing- round the Earth, half-way between
the two poles is called the Equator, because it divides the
Earth into two equal parts. The length of the Equator is
about 25,000 miles.
imaginary line through the centre of the Earth from
the North to the South Pole is called its Axis. It is about
8,000 miles in length.
The Earth turns round on its axis from West to East once
in every 24 hours, producing day and night. This is called
its Diurnal (daity) Motion.


The Earth also moves round the Sun once in a year. This
is called its Annual (yearly) Motion.
Lines drawn from pole to pole across the equator are called
Meridians. When the sun is overhead at anv place on
a meridian it is 12 o’clock noon all along 1 that meridian.
The meridian passing’ through Greenwich, near London, is
called by the English the First Meridian.
The Longitude of any place is its distance east or west
from the first meridian.
Circles passing’ round the Earth parallel to the equator are
called Parallels of Latitude.
The Latitude of any place is its distance north or south from
the equator.
The principal parallels of latitude are the Tropic of Cancer
and the Arctic Circle north of the equator, and the Tropic of
Capricorn and the Antarctic Circle south of the equator.
The Earth is divided into five /ones or belts, namely :—The
Torrid, the North Temperate, the South Temperate, the
North Frigid, and the South Frigid Zones.
The Torrid Zone lies between the two tropics, and has the
equator passing along the middle of it. The sun is always
overhead at some point in it, and therefore it is the hottest
part of the globe. The northern part of Australia is in the
Torrid Zone.
The North Temperate Zone lies between the Tropic of
Cancer and the Arctic Circle. England is in it. The Tem-
perate Zones are neither ven- hot nor very cold.
The North Frigid Zone lies between the Arctic Circle and
the iNorth Pole. The Frigid Zones are extremely cold: in
most places the water is covered with ice, and the land with
snow throughout the year.
The South Temperate Zone lies between the Tropic of
Capricorn and the Antarctic Circle. Victoria and New South
Wales are in it.
The South Frigid Zone lies between the Antarctic Circle
and the South Pole.


The surface of the Earth consists of land and water; the
land occupies about one-fourth, and the water about three-
fourths of the whole. Most of the land is north of the
equator.
The divisions of the land are Continents, Islands, Penin-
sulas, Capes, and Isthmuses.
A Continent is a large portion of land containing many
countries.
An Island is a portion of land surrounded by water.
A Peninsula is a portion of land nearly surrounded by
water.
A Cape, Promontory, or Head, is a point of land stretch-
ing out into the sea.
All Isthmus is a narrow neck of land joining two larger
portions together.
A Coast or Shore is land bordering on the sea.
ITe divisions of the water are Oceans, Seas, Gulfs, Bays,
Straits, Firths, Lakes, and Rivers.
An Ocean is the largest division of water. The water of
the Ocean is salt.
A Sea is a smaller division of water, and is partly enclosed
by land
A Gulf, Bay, or Bight is generally smaller than a sea,
and is nearly surrounded by land.
A Strait or Channel is a narrow passage of water con-
necting two seas.
A Firth or Estuary is the mouth of a river gradually
widening into an arm of the sea.
A Lake is a body of water surrounded by land.
A River is a stream of water running into a sea, or lake, or
some other river.


(Class M.
There are six continents, namely : — Australia, Europe. Asia
Africa, North America, and South America.
There are five oceans, namely :— Arctic, Southern, Atlantic
Indian, and Pacific.
THE CONTINENTS.
Australia
S. E. of Asia
N. of the Southern Ocean
E. of the Indian Ocean
W. of the Pacific Ocean
N. of the Mediterranean
E. of the Atlantic Ocean
Europe
S. of the Arctic Ocean
W. of Asia
N. of the Indian Ocean
E. of Europe and Africa
S. of the Arctic Ocean
W. of the Pacific Ocean.
N. of the Southern Ocean
E. of the Atlantic Ocean
S. of the Mediterranean
W. of the Indian Ocean.
N. of the Gulf of Mexico
E. of the Pacific Ocean
Asia
Africa
North America
S. of the Arctic Ocean
W. of the Atlantic Ocean.
N. of the Southern Ocean
E. of the Pacific Ocean
S. of the Caribbean Sea
W. of the Atlantic Ocean
South America


LARGER SEAS.
White Sea, Baltic Sea, and
North Sea
N. of Europe
Bay of Biscay
W. of Europe
Black Sea and Archipelago
S. of Europe
Mediterranean Sea
S. bf Europe, and N. of Africa
Bed Sea
E. of Africa, and W. of Asia
Arabian Sea and Bay of
Bengal ...
S. of Asia
China Sea, Yellow Sea,
Japan Sea, Okhotsk Sea
E. of Asia
Behring' Sea
between Asia and IN. America
Gulf of Carpentaria
N. of Australia
Great Australian Bight
S. of Australia
Gulf of Guinea
W. of Africa
Gulf of Mexico
S. of N. America
Caribbean Sea
N. of S. America
THE OCEANS,
The Arctic Ocean ... N. of Europe, Asia, and North
America, and the Atlantic and
Pacific Oceans.
The Southern Ocean ... S. of South America, Africa,
Australia, and the Atlantic,
Indian, and Pacific Oceans.
The Atlantic Ocean ... N. of the Southern Ocean
E. of North and South America
N S. of the Arctic Ocean
t 1 W, of Europe and Africa.
The Indian Ocean ... N. of the Southern Ocean
' E. of Africa
S. of Asia
W. of Australia.
The Pacific Ocean
N. of the Southern Ocean
E. of Asia amLAustralia
S. oft the Arctic Ocean
W. oi-Nofth and South America
5
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.


Class Mh
AUSTRALIA.
MINOR SEAS, CHIEF GULFS, &c.
Discovery Bay, Portland Bay, Port
Fairy, and Wan na mbool Bay S.W. of Victoria
Port Phillip Bay. Western Port,
Corner Inlet, and Port Albert S. of Victoria
Corio Bay is in the W. A Hobson’s Bay is in the N. of
Port Phillip Bay.
Twofold Bay
in New South Wales,
near Cape Howe
E. of New South Wales
S. of Port Jackson
Port Jackson
Botany Bay
(Here the first settlers from England landed in 1788.)
Broken Bay and Port Hunter ... N. of Port Jackson
Moreton Bay, Hervey Bay, Keppel
„ and Broad Sound ... E. of Queensland
Halifax Bay, Princess Charlotte
Bay, & the Gulf of Carpentaria N. of Queensland
Arafura Sea, Van Diemen’s Gulf,
and Queen’s Channel ... N. of North Australia
Cambridge Gulf, Admiralty Gulf,
. .. - N. of Western Australia
SUmk s Bay and Geographe Bay W. of Western Australia
Great Australian Bight, Spencer
Gulf, St. Vincent Gulf, and
Encounter Bay 8. of South Australia
In Tasmania. Oyster Bay on the E. ; Storm Bay on the S •
Macquarie Harbor on the W.
In New Zealand. Plenty Bay on the N.; and Hawke Bay
on the E., of the North Island
Ttaman or Blind Bay on the N.j and Pegasus Bay on
the E., of the South Island J
6
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.


STRAITS.
between Victoria and Tasmania
between Tasmania and the Furneaux
Bass Strait
Banks Strait
Islands
Torres strait between Queensland and New Guinea
Investigator strait between Kangaroo Island and South
Australia
Cook Strait ••• between the North and South Islands
of New Zealand
foveaux strait ... between South Island and Stewart
Island, New Zealand.
ISLANDS.
Tasmania ... S. of Victoria
(Discovered in 1642, by Tasman, a Dutch navigator.)
King's i, 1 ... W. of Bass Strait
Furneaux Is. (largest l
Flinders ... - E. of Bass Strait
Phillip I. arid French I. in Western Port
fiuho I -I. 7 ••• near Capo Howe
Sandy I.f£d Curtis
j ’ ... E. of Queensland
Groote I. and Welles- ’
ley I. ... in the Gulf of Carpentaria
Melville I. and Ba-
thurst i y' . /■•••
N. of N. Australia
W. of Western Australia
S. of S. Australia
Dirk Hartog 1,
Kangaroo 1.
New Zealand.x
S.E. of Australia
(Discovered in 1642, by Tasman, and by him named after Zealand, his
native province in Holland.)
It consists of North island and South Island
Stewart I.
Chatham Isles
Auckland Isles
Norfolk I.
S. of South Island
E. of New Zealand
S. of New Zealand
E. of N. S. Wales
7
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.


PENINSULAS.
Cape York Peninsula
Coburg Peninsula ...
N. of Queensland
N. of N. Australia
Eyre Pen. and Yorke Pen. ... S. of S. Australia
Tasman Peninsula ... , ... S. of Tasmania
Hanks Peninsula ... E. of South Island, New Zealam
CAPES.
Bridgewater and Nelson
Otway, (the point first sighted by
vessels from England); Port
S.W. of Victoria
Phillip Heads, (Points *
Lonsdale and Nepean) ; / y
Schanck; Patterson, near/
which are coal seams ; Lip-
trap ; and Wilson’s Pro-
montory, the most southerly
point of Australia ... ydl S. of Victoria
Howe, on the border of N. S.
Wales
Sugarloaf Point
Byron and Point Danger
Sandy Cape
Flattery, Melville, and York ...
Arnheirn^^
Van
Londonderry and Leveque
North-West—
Naturaliste and Leeuwin
Catastrophe, Spencer, Jervis,
E. of Victoria
E. of New South Wales
N.E. of New South Wales
in Great Sandy Island
N. of Queensland
N. of North Australia
in Melville Island
N. of Western Australia
N.W. of Western Australia
S.W. of Western Australia
and Northumberland ... S. of South Australia
In Tasmania: — Grim, Circular Head, and Portland, in the
N.; Pillar and Tasman Head, in the S.
In New Zealand : — North Cape and Maria Van Diemen, in
theN.; Turnagain and Kidnapper, in the E.; Palliser.
in the S.; and Egmont, in the W. of the North Island.
Farewell, in the N.; Foul wind and Cascade Point, in
the W. ; and the Bluff, in the S. of the South Island.
8
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.


EUROPE.
MINOR SEAS. CHIEF GULFS, &c
Tlie frozen W hite Sea N -
The shallow Baltic Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulfs of Finland and Biga
Gulf of Dantzic
Cattegat
V .§
Skager Back n -
\orth Sea or German Ocean
Zuider Zee
Irish Sea
North Channel
St. George's Channel...
Bristol Channel
English Channel
The stormy Bay of Biscay
Gulf of Lions
Gulf of Genoa and the magnificent
Bay of Naples •••
Gulf of Taranto
N. of Russi*^^
between Sweden and Russia
N. of the Baltic Sea
W. of Russia
N.*of Prussia
between Sweden and
Denmark
between Norway and
Denmark
between Great Britain and
Denmark
in Holland, was once an.
inland lake
between Great Britain and
Ireland
N. of the Irish Sea
S. of the Irish Sea
W. of England
between England & France
W. of France and N. of
Spain
S. of France
W. of Italy
Gulf of Taranto ... • S. of Italy
Adriatic Sea ... ••• between Italy and iurkey
Archipelago and Sea of Marmora S. of Turkey
Black Sea and Sea nf Azov ... S. of Russia
'TRAITS.
between Sweden and Zea-
land I.
between Zealand I. and
The Sound
The Great Belt
Funen I.
9
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.


Strait of Hover
.. between England and France,
connecting the English
Channel and the North Sea
Strait of Gibraltar
.. between Spain and Africa,
connecting the Mediter-
ranean Sea and the Atlantic
Ocean
Strait of Bonifacio
.. between Corsica and Sardinia
Strait of Messina ...
.. between Italy and Sicily
Strait of Otranto ...
between Italy and Turkey,
connecting the Adriatic Sea
and the Mediterranean
Dardanelles or Hellespont .
.. connecting the Archipelago
and the Sea of Marmora
Bosporus
connecting the Sea of Mar-
mora and the Black Sea
The Little Belt ... ... between Funen I. and Jut-
(These three straits connect the Cattegat and the Baltic Sea.)
(The Dardanelles and the Bosporus are between Turkey-in-Europe ana
Turkey-in-Asia)
Strait of Rertch or leni kale... connecting the Black Sea
and the Sea of Azov
ISLANDS.
Spitsbergen and Nova Zembla, N. of Russia
Loffoden Isles and Iceland, W. of Norway
Iceland has numerous boiling springs, called Geysers.
Great Britain, consisting of England, Wales, and Scotland,
N. of Prance. Exports woollen and cotton goods, iron,
and coal.
Ireland, famed for linen, W. of Great Britain.
Isle of Man and Isle of Anglesea, in the Irish Sea
Isle of Wight, S. of England
Channel Isles, N. of France, in the English Channel
Orkney Isles and the Shetland Isles, noted for very small
ponies, N. of Scotland


Hebrides. W. of Scotland ,
Zealand and Fuuen, islands forming’ part of Denmark, at tne
entrance to the Baltic Sea
Gothland, a larg’e Swedish isle, in the Baltic Sea
Azores, frequently visited by earthquakes, W . of Portugal
Balearic Isles (largest, Majorca and Minorca), E. of Spain.
Produce wine and fruits
Corsica and Sardinia, W. of Italy. Napoleon 1., Emperor o.
France, was born in Corsica
Sicily, S. of Italy. Noted for fruits and sulphur
Malta, S. of Sicily. Strongly fortified ; belongs to England
Lipari Isles, N. of Sicily. Export pumice-stone
lonian Isles, W. and S of Greece. Export currants
Candia, S. of the Archipelago. Belongs to Turkey.
PENINSULAS.
Scandinavia (Sweden and Norway) ••• N. of Europe
Jutland (part of Denmark) ••• N. of Prussia
Spain and Portugal, often called 41 The
1 Peninsula” ... S. Wof Europe
Italy ••• ... ••• S, of Europe
The Morea ... ... ••• S. of Greece
The Crimea ... ••• ••• S. of Russia.
ISTHMUSES.
Isthmus of Corinth
connecting the Morea and the
mainland of Greece
Isthmus of Perekop
connecting the Crimen and the
mainland of Russia.
CAPES
North Cape, on an island
The Naze
N. of Norway
S of Norway
N. of Denmark
The Skaw
Duncanshy Head and C. Wrath ... N. of Scotland
Land’s End and Lizard Point S.W. of England
Malin Head ... ... •• N. of Ireland


Cape Clear, on an island
La Hogue
Ortegal and Finisterre ...
ISoca, the most western point of
Europe
St. Vincent ...
Trafalgar
S. of Ireland
N. of France
N W. of Spain
W. of Portugal
S.W. of Portugal
S. of Spain
<Nelsori defeated the French and Spanish off this Cap 3, but was killed iti
the battle, 1805.)
... S.E. of Spain
... S. of Sicily
... S. of Italy
... S. of Greece.
data and Palos
Passaro
Spartivento
Matapan
ASIA.
MINOR SEAS, CHIEF GULFS, &c.
Behring Sea ... between Asia and N America
Okhotsk Sea and Gulf of Tartary, E. of Siberia
Sea of Japan ... between Mongolia and Japan
Yellow Sea .... N.E. of China
China Sea and Gulf of Tonquiu, S. of China
Gulf of Siam ... S. of Siam
Java Sea ... between Java and Borneo
Celebes Sea ... between Celebes and the Philippine Islands
Gulf of Martaban S. of Pegu
Bay of Bengal ... between India and Further India
Gulf of Man aar... noted for pearls, between India and Ceylon
Arabian Sea ... between Arabia and India
Gulf Of Oman ... between Arabia and Biluchistan
Persian Gulf ... noted for pearls, between Arabia and Persia
Gulf of Aden cr Sea of Bahelinandel), S. of Arabia
Red Sea ... between Arabia and Africa. It abounds in
coral reefs, which render its navigation
extremely dangerous
Gulf of Suez ... N. of the Red Sea
The Levant is the eastern part of the Mediterranean
12
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.


STRAITS.
Belirill*** Strait, between Asia and N. America, connecting
the Arctic and Pacific Oceans
Strait of Corea, between Corea and Japan, connecting the
Yellow and Japan Seas
strait of Malacca, between Malaya and Sumatra, connecting
the Bay of Bengal and the China Sea.
Strait of Simula, between Sumatra and Java, connecting the
Indian Ocean and the Java Sea
Strait of Macassar, between Borneo and Celebes, connecting
the Java Sea and the Celebes Sea
Falk Strait, between India and Ceylon
■Strait of Ormuz, between Persia and Arabia, connecting the
Gulf of Oman and the Persian Gulf
strait of Babelraaudeb, between Arabia and Africa, con-
necting the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden.
ISLANDS.
The volcanic Kurile Isles, between Japan and Kamtchatka
Sa glia lien, a large island, E. of Siberia
Japan Isles, E. of Mongolia. Hurricanes and earthquakes
are frequent, and there are numerous volcanoes. Japan
produces excellent copper
Formosa, a beautiful island, E. of China
Hainan, a barren island, S. of China
Philippine Is., S.E. of China Noted for tobacco and cigars
Sumatra, S. of Malaya. Produces gutta-percha
Java, S.E. of Sumatra. Very fertile and volcanic. A tele-
graph cable now connects Java and N. Australia
Borneo, E. of Sumatra. Produces diamonds and coal
Celebes, E. of Borneo. Exports tortoise-shell
Spice Is. or Moluccas, E. of Celebes. Produce nutmegs and
cloves ,
Xew Guinea or Papua, a large, densely-wooded island, IN. of
Queensland, is the home of the beautiful birds of Paradise.
Ceylon, S. of India. Produces cinnamon
Cyprus, s. of Asia Minor. Copper and crape are named after
this island.
13
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.


Malaya
... S.of Further Indie*
India or Hindustan
... S. of Asia
Arabia
... S.W. of Asia
Asia Minor
... ... ... W. of Asia
ISTHMUSES.
Isthmus of Kraw
... connecting-Malaya and Siam
Isthmus of Suez
... ... connecting- Asia and Africa.
A ship canal crosses this
isthmus, uniting the Medi-
terranean and the Red
Sea.
CAPES.
Severn
... ... N. of Siberia
East Cape ...
... E. of Siberia, at Behring Strait
Lopatka
... S. of Kamtcharka
Cambodia ...
... ... S. of Further India
Romania ...
... ... S. of Malaya
Negrais
... ... S. of Pegu
Comorin
... ... S. of India
Dundra Head
... ... S. of Ceylon
lias al Had
... ... E. of Arabia
Baba
... ... W. of Asia Minor
PENINSULAS.
Kamtchatka
Corea
E. of Siberia
E. of Mongolia
Further India or the Eastern Peninsula S. E. of Asia


AFRICA.
MINOR SEAS, CHIEF GULFS, &c.
Gulf of Guinea ... ... W. of Africa
Bights of Benin and Biafra in the Gulf of Guinea
I able Bay ... ... S.W. of Cape Colony
St. Helena Bay ... ... W. of Cape Colony
Sofala and Delagoa Bays ... S.E. of Africa
Mozambique Channel
Gulf of Sidra
between Africa and Madagascar
N. of Tripoli
E. of Tunis.
Gulf of Cabes
ISLANDS
Madeira Is,* W. of Morocco. Noted for wine
Canary Is., W. of Morocco. Famous for canary birds
Cape Verd Is., W, of Senegambia. Produce amber
St. Helena, w. of Lower Guinea. Here Napoleon I. died in
1821
Fernando Po and St. Thomas, in Gulf of Guinea
Madagascar, E. of Africa. Produces iron and coal
Mauritius and Bourbon (or Reunion), E. of Madagascar.
Mauritius exports sugar and ebony. Bourbon is volcanic
Seychelles Is., N.E. of Madagascar.
CAPES.
Spartel
Cantin and IVnn
Bojador and Blanco
Verd ...
Palmas and Formosa
Lopez and Negro
N. of Tunis
N. of Morocco
W. of Morocco
W. of the Sahara
W. of Senegambia
S. of Upper Guinea
W. of Lower Guinea
Good Hope and Agulhas ... S. of Cape Colony
Comentes, Delgado, and Guardafui E. of Africa
Amber in the N., St. Mary in the S.,of Madagascar.
15
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.


NORTH AMERICA.
MINOR SEAS, CHIEF GULFS, &c.
Balliu Bay
Hudson Siuy
Gulf of St. Lawrence
W. of Greenland
N. of British North America
E. of Canada
Bay of Fundy ... ... between Nova Scotia and New
Brunswick
(The tide sometimes rises to the height of 60 ft. in this bay.)
Massachusetts Bay and
Chesapeake Bay
Gulf of Mexico ...
Bay of Canipeacliy
Gulf of Honduras
Gulf of California
Gulf of Tehuantepec
E. of the United States
S. of the United States
W. of Yucatan
N. of Central America
between Mexico and Low«r
California
S. of Mexico
STRAITS.
Davis St.. W. of Greenland, connecting- Baffin Bay and the
Atlantic
Hudson St., N. of Labrador, connecting- Hudson Bay and
the Atlantic
St. of Belle Isle, between Labrador and Newfoundland,
connecting- the G. of St. Lawrence and the Atlantic
St. of Florida,, between Florida and the West Indies, con-
necting- the G. of Mexico and the Atlantic.
The Gulf Stream, a current of warm water, flows from
the gulf through this strait, on past Newfoundland, and
then across the Atlantic. Furious storms rage along it«
course.
Yucatan Channel, between Yucatan and Cuba, connecting
the G. of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea
Windward Passage, between Cuba and Haiti, and Mona
Passage, between Haiti and Porto Rico, connect the
Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic.
16
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPH’S.


ISLANDS.
Parry Is., Ranks Land, Southampton 1,,
Fox Land, and many oilers only partially explored, N. of
British America
Greenland, belonging- to Denmark, N.E. of Labrador
Newfoundland, famous for its dogs, E. of Canada
(Two telegraph cables cross the Atlantic from Newfoundland to Ireland.)
Cape Breton I. and Prince Edward 1., in the G. of St.
Lawrence
Long Island, E. of U. States, near the coast
Bermudas, E. of U. States, out in the Atlantic
est Indies, extend from Florida to S. America, between the
Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic. They include :
(1) Bahamas, S.E. of Florida
(2) Greater Antilles (Cuba, Haiti or San Domingo, Porto
Rico, and Jamaica), S. of Florida
(Cuba is famed for cigars, Jamaica for sugar.)
(3) Lesser Antilles, N. of Venezuela
ancouver 1., W. of British Columbia. Produces coal, iron,
and copper
Aleutian Is., foggy and volcanic, S. of Behring Sea
PENINSULAS.
Labrador, E. of Canada. Very cold in winter
Nova Scotia, E. in the Dominion of Canada
Florida, S.E. of the U. States
Y ucatan, E., and Lower California, W. of Mexico
Alaska, W. of the territory of Alaska
Melville and Boothia, N. of British America
Isthmus of Panama
connecting North and South
America
CAPES.
Farewell
Chudleigh
Charles
S. of Greenland
N. of Labrador
E. of Labrador
17
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.


Race ... ... ... S. E. of Newfoundland
Sable ... ... ... S. of Nova Scotia
Cod and Hatteras ... ... E. of U. States.
The most extensive cod-fishery in the world is off the N. E. coast of
N. America. _
Sable
Catoche
Gracias a Dios
St. Lucas ...
Mendocino
Prince of Wales
Icy Cape and Point Barrow
Bathurst
S. of Florida
N. of Yucatan
E. of Central America
S. of Lower California
W. of United States
W. of Alaska, at Behring
Strait
N. of Alaska
N. of British America
SOUTH AMERICA.
MINOR SEAS, CHIEF GULFS, &c.
Gulf of Darien ... N. of United States of Colombia
Gulf of Venezuela ... N.W. of Venezuela
Mouth of the Amazon ... N. of Brazil
All Saints Bay
Rio de la Plata
Gulf of St. George
Gulf of Guayaquil
Bay of Panama
E. of Brazil
E. of La Plata
E. of Patagonia
W, of Ecuador
S. of the isthmus of Panama
Strait of Magellan, between Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego,,
was named after its discoverer, a Spanish navigator.
ISLANDS.
Falkland Isles ... E. of Patagonia
Tierra del Fuego (“ Land of Fire ”) S. of Patagonia
Galapagos ... W. of Ecuador, Abound in turtles
18
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.


CAPES
Gallinas ... . N. of Colombia
St. (toque and ISrauco ... E. of Brazil
Conientes
Horn ...
E. of La Plata
S. of Tierra del Fuego
W. of Peru
ISlaneo and Carina
Froward
S. of Patagonia
OCEANIA.
Oceania includes all the islands scattered throughout the
Pacific Ocean. The following are the principal groups:—
In the North Pacific.— Sandwich Is., W. of Mexico.
Principal island, Hawaii, on which Captain Cook was
killed
In the South Pacific.— New Hebrides and New Cale-
donia, N.E. of Australia
New Caledonia is a French convict colony
Fiji Is,, E. of the New Hebrides. Produce cotton
Friendly Is., Cook’s Is., Society Is., and Marquesas
Is., E. of the Fiji Islands
Tahiti, a beautiful island, is the largest of the
Society Is.
The islands in the South Pacific are often called the
“ South Sea Islands.” Most of the above groups
are of coral formation, being built up by the coral
insect, a small kind of seaworm.


OTlags fU.
EXPLANATION OF GEOGRAPHICAL TERMS
The Physical Features of a country are its mountains,
rivers, lakes, plains, forests, etc.
Volcano, a burning- mountain, throwing- out flames, smoke,
lava, ashes, mud, or water. Volcanoes which emit any of
these things now, or which did so not long since, are called
active : volcanoes which have shown no signs of activity for
a long time, are called extinct. J
Crater, a bowl-shaped hollow in, or near, the top of a
volcano, from which lava, ashes, etc., are emitted.
fn connection with rivers, the following terms are used :
Delta, an island or islands between the mouths of a river
formed by the mud carried down by the stream. This name
originated in the resemblance which the delta of the Nile bore
to the Greek letter delta, written A.
Source, the spring- or lake in which a river rises.
Basin, the country drained by it.
Bed, the channel in which it flows.
Mouth, the place where it enters the sea.
Confluence, the junction of two rivers.
Bight Bank, the bank on the rig-ht hand as you g-o dowx.
the stream. J °
Left Bank, the bank on the left hand.
LAKES
Lakes are either salt or fresh, and are usually divided into
four classes :
1. Those which receive no streams, and give none
out. —Lakes of this class are generally small, are supplied
by rains or springs, and are often formed in the crater or
hollow in the top of an extinct volcano. They are usually
very deep when so formed.


2. Those which receive streams, hut give none out, —
This class includes the Caspian Sea, the largest lake on the
earth’s surface, and many others of a great size. Lakes of this
class are almost always salt,
d. Those which both receive and give out streams. —
This class is very numerous, includes some of the largest lakes
in the world, such as Superior, Baikal, and Victoria Nyanza,
and is almost always fresh.
4. Those which do not receive, hut give out a stream.
—Lakes of this class are usually very small, and generally
occur in mountainous districts. They are generally fresh.
From the above it will be seen that lakes giving out a
stream are generally fresh, while lakes with no outlet are
almost invariably salt.
AUSTRALIA.
COLONIES AND CAPITALS-
Victoria is bounded on the N. by New South Wales ; E. by
New South Wales and the Pacific ; S. by Bass Strait and
the Southern Ocean ; W. by South Australia
Capital, MELBOURNE on the Yarra River, near Hobson’s
Bay
Mew South Wales, N. by Queensland; E, by Pacific; S. by
P Victoria; W. bv South Australia
SYDNEY on beautiful Port Jackson
Rueenslaud, N. by the Gulf of Carpentaria and Torres Strait;
E. by the Pacific; S. by New South Wales ; W. by North
Australia and South Australia
BRISBANE on the Brisbane River, near Moreton Bay
South Australia, N. by North Australia; E. by Queensland,
New South Wales and Victoria; S, by the Southern
Ocean ; W. by Western Australia
ADELAIDE on the Torrens River, near St. Vincent
Gulf


North Australia, N. by the Arafura Sea ; E. by Queensland ;
S. by South Australia; W. by Western Australia
PALMERSTON, a new settlement on Port Darwin
Western Australia, N. and W. by the Indian Ocean ; E. by
North Australia and South Australia; S. by the Southern
Ocean
PERTH on the Swan River
Tasmania, N. by Bass Strait; E. by the Pacific : S. and W.
by the Southern Ocean
HOBART on the Derwent River, near Storm
New Zealand is surrounded by the Pacific
WELLINGTON on Port Nicholson. Dunedin is the
largest city.
(1.) The boundary between Victoria and N. S. Wales is a
straight line from C. Howe to Forest Hill, and thence the
Murray River.
(2.) North Australia is often called the “ Northern Terri-
tory.” It is under the government of S. Australia.
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF AUSTRALIA.
Australia is, generally speaking, a flat country. Its prin-
cipal mountain ranges run parallel to the coast, and are of but
moderate elevation. Mt. Blanc in Europe is about twice as
high, and Mt. Everest in Asia about four times as high as
Mt, Kosciusko, the loftiest of the Australian mountains. The
interior of the country is as yet only partially explored ; hut,
so far as known, it consists of vast grassy plains, interspersed
with tracts of sandy or stony desert. The country between
the chief mountain ranges and the sea is generally fertile.
The Murray and its tributaries, the Darling and MuiTuni-
bidgee, are the only large rivers, and even these are navigable
during the winter and spring months only.
MOUNTAINS.
Peak Range, E. and W., and Expedition and Denham
Ranges, N. and S., through Queensland.
Liverpool Range, E. and W. through N. S. Wales. Mt,
W illgen, the only active volcano in Australia, is in this
range. It emits flames and gases, but no lava.


l ue MtS., N. and S., are west of Sydney. The Zig-Zag
Railway crosses them
ustraliail Alps, N. and S. through New South Wales.
Highest peak, Mt, Kosciusko, 7,300 ft., near the border
of Victoria
[’he Dividing Range in Victoria runs E. and W., and consists
of the following chains :
Australian Alps, Snowy tits., Yana and Plenty Ranges,
Blackwood Ranges, Bald Hills, and the Pyrenees.
Peaks— Botham and Forest Hill in the E.; Macedon
near the centre; Cole and Ararat, in the W.
Grampian, Serra, and Victoria Ranges, N. and 8., ip the W.
of Victoria. Mt. William is the highest peak of the
Grampians.
Bogoiig and Buffalo Ranges in the N.E. of Victoria, run N.
from the Dividing Range. Featlieitop is in the Bogong
Range
Mt. Alexander Range also runs N. from the Dividing Range
Baw-Baw MtS, in Gipps Land, run S. from the Dividing
Range
Cape Otway Ranges, near Cape Otway
Flinders Range, N. and S., and Gawler and Stuart’s Ranges,
E and W., in South Australia
Stirling Range, E. and W., and Darling, Herschel, and
Victoria Ranges, N. and S., in Western Australia
RIVERS.
Flinders and Mitchell, through Queensland into the Gulf of
Carpentaria
Bnrdekin, through Queensland, into the Pacific
Fitzroy, through Queensland, into Keppel Bay
Brisbane, through Queensland into More ton Bay
Cooper's Creek, through Queensland and South Australia into
Lake Eyre. Burke and Wills died near this creek,
1861
Clarence, through New South Wales into the Pacific
Hunter, through New South Wales into Port Hunter. Coal
is found in the basins of these two rivers
Hawkesbury, through New South Wales into Broken Bay,
Has magnificent scenery


Murray rises in Forest Hill, flows between New South Wales
and Victoria, through South Australia, into Lake
Victoria, and then over a bar into Encounter Bay. It
is over 2,000 miles long, and is navigable during part
of tbe year from Albury to its mouth
MurrumMtlgee and Darling, through New South Wales into
the Murray
Lachlan, a tributary of tbe Murrumbidgee; Peel, Macquarie,
and Doga 11, tributaries of the Darling y
MirraJllttayi Ovens, Broken 11., Goulbnrn, (ampasi**
and Loddon, through Victoria into the Murray
Ring joins the Ovens atJWangaratta
Avocaj through Victoria into the - " small lake Bael Bael, near
tjip Murray
Winunera, through Victoria, flows N. through Lake Hind-
and Lake Albacuyta, losing itself in the plains
Snowy, through New South Wales and Victoria into the
Pacific i/
Taillbo and MiMiell, through Gipps Land in Victoria, into
Lake King
La Trobe, named after the first governor of Victoria, flows
through,oipps Land into Lake Wellington
Thomson, with its tributary the M‘ A lister, flows into the
La Trobm
Yarra Yana, flows past, Melbourne into Hobson’s Bay.
Saltwater and Plentf are its tributaries
Barwon, passing Geelpng in Victoria, into Bass St.
Leigh or Yarrowee from Ballarat and the Moorabooi
flow into the -Barwon
I look ins, through Victoria into Warrnambool Bay
/ Glenelg, through Victoria into Discovery Bay
YVaunon is in its chief tributary
Blackwood, Swan, and Murchison, through Western Aus-
tralia into the Indian Ocean
Gascoyne, through W. Australia into Shark’s Bay
Ashburton, through W. Australia into Exmouth Gulf
Victoria, through N. Australia into Queen's Channel.
Alligator and Adelaide, through N. Australia into Van Die-
men Gulf
Roper, through N. Australia into the G. of Carpentaria


LAKES
In N.S. Wales.— Lake George, in the S.; beautiful Illawarra
(“ five islands ”) on the coast j
In Victoria.-- Rill" 1 , Victoria, tphd AVellington, salt lakes in
Gipps Land, coast 1/
Roranganiite and Cplac, w. of Geelong- i/'
Ilindniarsh. Alhactiyta, Rnloke, and Tyrrell, in the
Wimmera District
Omeo, among- the Alps, in the Murray District
In S. Australia— Gairdner, Torrens, and Eyre.
Victoria, at the mouth of the Murray
In N. Australia. — Amadeus
In W. Australia. — Austin and iloore. These lakes, like
those of South Australia, vary greatly in size with the
seasons.
TASMANIA
PHYSICAL FEATURES.
Tasmania is a beautiful, hilly country, with numerous rivers
and lakes. Although none of the mountains are very high,
many of them are covered with snow during the greater part
of the year.
MOUNTAINS.
Great Western Range, near the centre
Arthur Range, in the South
Mt. Wellington, over 4,000 feet high, is near Hobart ,
RIVERS.
Derwent, from L. St. Clair, passes Hobart into Storm Bay.
Tributaries, Ouse, Clyde, and Jordan
Huon, noted for Huon pine, flows into the Southern Ooean
Gordon and Ring flow into Macquarie Harbor
Arthur and Pieman flow W. into the Southern Ocean
Tamar, formed by the Worthy Esk and South Esk, flows intc
Bass St.


LAKES.
St. Clair, Great Lake, and Sorell, near the centre.
NEW ZEALAND
PHYSICAL FEATURES.
Ihe mountains far exceed those o t Australia in elevation,
Mount Cook being 13,000 feet, and Mount Franklin 10,000
<eet high, ihe INorth Island is highly volcanic, containing
I Ollgaril'O, an active volcano, and numerous hot springs. The
South Island abounds in rivers and lakes.
MOUNTAINS
In Alsland. Tararna and Ruahine Ranges, N. and S. ;
Eiglliont, an extinct volcano in the W.; Tongariro and
Ruapehu, lofty peaks near the centre; Fdgecumbe in
the N.
In S. Island. Tasman Mts. and Southern Alps, N. and S.
parallel to the W. coast. Mt. Cook is near the centre of
the latter range ; Franklin in the N. Umbrella and
Ounstan MtS,, N. and S. in the S. part of the island.
RIVERS
In N. Island. Waikato from L. Taupo into the Pacific-
Thames into the Firth of Thames. Gold is found in the
valley of the Thames. Wanganui flows S. into Cook
Strait.
In S. Island. Waitahi and Clutha, E. into the Pacific
Grey and Muller, W. into the Pacific.
LAKES
In N. Island, fanpo, near the centre; Rotorua. surrounded
by boiling springs, in the N.
In the S. Island — Te Anan, Wakatipu, and Wanaka. The
Clutha drains the last two lakes


EUROPE
COUNTRIES AND CAPITALS
England is bounded on the N. by Scotland ; E. by the North
” Sea ;S. by the English Channel; W. by the Atlantic
Ocean, St. George’s Channel, and the Irish Sea
LONDON on the R. Thames. The largest and most
populous city in the world. It has about 4 millions
of inhabitants
Scotland, N. and W by the Atlantic ; E. by the North Sea;
S. by England. EDINBURGH near the Firth of Forth.
Has many fine public buildings. GLASGOW on the Clyde
is the largest city.
Ireland, N., W., and S. by the Atlantic; E. by the North
Channel, Irish Sea, and St. George’s Channel
DUBLIN on the R. Liffey. One of the finest cities ir
Europe
France, N. by the English Channel and Belgium ; E. by Ger-
many, Switzerland, and Italy; S. by the Mediterranean
and Spain; W. by the Bay of Biscay
PARIS on the R. Seine. The most magnificent city in
Europe.
Spain, N. by the B. of Biscay and France; E. by the Medi-
terranean ; S. by the Mediterranean and the St. oi
Gibraltar; W. by Portugal and the Atlantic
MADRID on the R. Manzanares, a branch of the
Tagus. Very unhealthy
Portugal, IN. and E. by Spain ; S. and W. by the Atlantic
LISBON on the R. Tagus. Subject to severe shocks of
earthquakt
Italy, N. by Switzerland and Austria ; E. by the Adriatic Sea;
S. by the Mediterranean ; W. by the Mediterranean and
France
ROME on the R. Tiber. Once the most powerful city
in the world. NAPLES is the largest city.
Switzerland, N. by Germany; E. by Austria; S. by Italy;
W bv France
BEBNE on the R. Aar, a branch of the Rhine. GENEVA
on the Rhone is the largest city


Austria, N. by Prussia and Russia; E. by Russia and Turkey
S. by Turkey; W. by Italy, Switzerland, and Germany
VIENNA on the R. Danube. A large, beautiful city
Turkey, N. by Austria and Russia ; E. by the Black Sea ; S
by the S. of Marmara, the Archipelago, and Greece; W
by the Adriatic
CONSTANTINOPLE on the Bosporus. The city appears
splendid from the sea, but is extremely filthy inside
Greece, N. by Turkey; E. by the Archipelago; S. and W. bj
the Mediterranean
ATHENS near the G. of Egina. It contains magnifi-
cent ruins of its ancient splendour
Russia, N. by the Arctic Ocean; E. by Siberia and the
Caspian; S. by the Black Sea and’ Turkey; W. \->y
Austria, Prussia, the Baltic, and Sweden
SI. PETERSBURG on the R. Neva, founded by Peter
the Great in 1703. MOSCOW was formerly capital
Sweden, N. by Norway ; E. by Russia and the Baltic; S. by
the Baltic ; W. by the Cattegat and Norway
STOCKHOLM on L. Maelar. Built partly on islands
Norway, N. by the Arctic Ocean ; E. by Sweden; S. by the
Skagar Rack ; W. by the Atlantic
CHRISTIANIA on Christiania Bay
(Sweden and Norway are under one king, but each has its own laws)
Denmark, N. by the Skagar Rack; E. by the Cattegat and
the Sound ; S. by Prussia ; W. by the North Sea
COPENHAGEN (“Merchant’s Haven”) in Zealand 1.,
on the Sound. Strongly fortified
Holland, N. and W. by the North Sea; E. bv Prussia; S. by
Belgium
AMSTERDAM an important commercial city on the
R. Amstel and the Y. The Y is an arm of the
Zuider Zee
Belgium, N. by Holland; E. by Prussia; S. by France ; W.
by the North Sea
BRUSSELS on the R. Senne. Noted for lace and
carpets
The German Empire consists of—
(1) Prussia, N. by the Baltic, Denmark, and the North
Sea ; E. by Russia; S. by Austria and South Germany;
W. by Holland, Belgium, and France


BERLIN on the R. Spree. A large city, with a
famous university
(2) Saxony, S. of Prussia. DRESDEN on the Elbe
(3) Bavaria, S. of Prussia. MUNICH on the Iser.
(4) Wurtemberg, W. of Bavaria. STUTTGART near
the Neckar
(5) Baden, W. of Wurtemberg. CARLSRUIIE near the
Rhine
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF EUROPE.
The N. and E. of Europe consist chiefly of plains and low-
lyino' country 5 the N.W., W. ? aud S. ? of table lands and lofty
ranges of mountains, some of them covered with perpetual
snow. The rivers in the great northern and eastern plain are
lono- and slow ; in the mountainous portion shorter and more
rapid. Mt. Blanc (French word for white), a snow-clad peak
in the east of France, is 15,780 feet high, and Mt. Elburz,
among the Caucasus mountains, 18,500 feet. A considerable
portion of Holland is below the level of the sea, and Belgium,
Denmark, and the north of Prussia are hut little above it.
The south of Europe is frequently visited by earthquakes.
MOUNTAINS
In England —Cumbrian Mts., in the North; Pennine Ra.
runs S from the Cheviot Hills; Cainblian tits,, m
Wales. (Peak, Snowdon, 3,590 ft.) ; Devonian Range
is the 8. W. „ ,
In Scotland— Grampians in the IN., run E. and W. (Peak
Beil Nevis, 4,400 ft., the highest mountain in the British
Isles) * Cheviot Hills, between England and
In Ireland— Mourne tits., in the N. E.; Wicklow Mts., in
the E. ; Kerry Mts., in the S. W. (Peak, Cam Inal,
3,400 ft.)
Vosges, N. and S. between France and Germany
Cevennes, nearly N. and S. in the S. of trance.
Jura Mts., nearly N. and S. between France and Switzerland.
Pyrenees E and W. between France and Spain.
Cantabrian Chain, Mts. of Castile, Mts. of Toledo, Sierra
Moreua, and Sierra Nevada, all E. and W. in tpam.


Alps, nearly E. and W. through France, Switzerland, Italy,
and Austria. They comprise—
(1) Maritime, Cottian, Graian Alps, N. and S., between
France and Italy
(2) Bernese, Pennine, Lepontine, and Rhaetian Alps,
E. and W in Switzerland
(3) Carilic Alps, E. and W. between Italy and Austria.
(4) Noric Alps, N. E. through Austria
(5) .Julian and Dinaric Alps,. S.E. through Austria
Principal peaks of the Alps— Mt, BiailC in France,
15,780 ft.; Rosa, in Switzerland, 15,200 ft. ; Great
St. Bernard, and St. Gothard
Apennines, S. E. through Italy
Balkan MtS., E. and W. through Turkey
Pindus, N. and S. through Turkey
Carpathians, in a curve through the E. of Austria
Erz Gebirge. (“Ore Mountains”) and Riesen Gebirge,
(“ Giant Mountains”) E. and W. in the N. of Austria
Bohmer Wald, nearly N. and S. in the W. of Austria
Harz MtS., abounding in metals, are in the W. of Prussia
Valdai Hills, in the W. of Russia
Caucasus, E. and W. in the S. of Russia, between the Black
Sea and the Caspian. Peak, Mt. Elburz, 18,500 ft., the
highest summit in Europe
Ural Mts. containing gold, N. and S. between Russia and
Siberia
Riolen Mts,, N. and S. between Sweden and Norway, and
Bovrefeld Mts. and Hardangerfeld, in the S of Norway.
L on and copper are found in these three chains.
Volcanoes— Hekla and several others, in Iceland; Vesuvius,
near Naples in Italy ; Etna, in Sicily; and several of the
Lipari Is.
RIVERS
In England — Tyne, into the North Sea; Ouse, and Trent,
into the Humber Mouth; Great OIISC, into the Wash ;
Thames, into the Nore, all on the E. coast
Severn, into the Bristol Channel; Mersey, passing
Liverpool into the Irish Sea, on the W. coast


In Scotland —E. Coast. Tweed, partly between England and
Scotland, into the North Sea; Forth, into the Firth of
Forth ; Toy, into the Firth of Tay ; Dee, Don, and
Spey, into the North Sea
W. coast. Clyde, into the Firth of Clyde
In Ireland.—N. coast. Kami, from L. Neagh into the
Atlantic; E. coast. Boyne into the Irish Sea ; Liffey
into Dublin Bay
S. coast. Barrow, Suir, and Blackwater into the
Atlantic. W. coast. Shannon into the Atlantic.
Seine, through France into the English Channel
Loire and Garonne, through France into the B. of Biscay
Donro, Tagus, and Guadiana, through Spain and Portugal
into the Atlantic
Guadalquivir, through Spain into the Atlantic
Ehl'O, through Spain into the Mediterranean
Ithone, through Switzerland and France into the G. of Lyons
Tiber, through Italy into the Mediterranean
I*o, through Italy into the Adriatic Sea
Danube, from the Black Forest Mts. in Baden, through
Germany, Austria, and Turkey, into the Black Sea
Tributaries :—lser and Inn, in Bavaria; Drove, Save,
and Tlieiss, in Austria
Dnieper, through Russia, and Dniester, through Austria and
Russia, into the Black Sea.
Don. through Russia into the Sea of Azov
Volga, from a lake near the Valdai Hills, through Russia into
the Caspian Sea. Tributaries : — Kama and Oka.
The Volga is the largest river in Europe, being about the
same length as the Murray, but a much finer stream. The
Danube is next in size.
Ural, through Russia into the Caspian
Petcliora, through Russia into the Arctic Ocean
Dwina, through Russia into the White Sea
Neva, draining L. Ladoga, flows through Russia into the Gulf
of Finland
Duna, through Russia into the G. of Riga
Kiemen, through Russia and Prussia, into the Baltic Sea
Vistula, through Austria, Russia, and Prussia, into the G. of
Dantzic
Oder, through Austria and Prussia into the Baltic Sea


Elbe, through Austria and Prussia into the North Sea
Weser, through Prussia into the North Sea
Rhine, through Switzerland, Germany, and Holland into the
North Sea. The Rhine and Rhone rise in Mt St
Gothard in Switzerland. The Rhine is celebrated for its
beautiful scenery
Tributary from France.— Moselle, famous for the vine-
yards on its banks
Meuse or Maas and the Scheldt, through France, Ueloium
and Holland into the North Sea
LAKES.
In England.— Windermere and Derwent Water, beautiful
lakes in the N.
In Scotland Lochs Lomond, Awe, and Aess in the W.
In Ire and. Lough Aeagh, the largest lake in the British
Isles, and L(fugh Erne in the N.; Lough Corrib in the
w.; Loughs Uee and Derg, formed by the Shannon : the
beautiful Lakes of Killarney in the S.
In Switzerland. Constance in the N., formed by the Rhine;
Geneva in the S , formed by the Rhone; Aeufchatel in
, the w.; Lucerne and Zurich near the centre
In Italy.— Garda, Como, and Maggiore, beautiful lakes in
the N.
In Austria. Balaton Lake or Flatten See, and Aeusiedler
See, in Hungary
In Russia.— Ladoga, the largest lake in Europe, One<Gi
Sauna, and Peipus in the N.W. Euara in Lapland r ‘
In Sweden Wener and Wetter in the S. The Gotha Canal
passes through these lakes, connecting the Cattegat ami
the Baltic 5
Mielar, also in the S.
ASIA.
COUNTRIES AND CAPITALS.
Siberia is bounded on the N. by the Arctic Ocean ; E. by the
Pacific ; S. by Mongolia and Turkestan ; VV. by Russia
in Europe
LOBOLSK on the and Irtish


’estem Turkestan. N. by Siberia; E. by Eastern Turkestan;
S. by Afghanistan and Persia; W. by the Caspian Sea
BOKHARA, a large commercial city
Eastern Turkestan, N., E., and P. by the Chinese Empire;
W. by Western Turkestan
YARKAND, on the Yarkand, a large city possessing
an extensive commerce.
(Eastern Turkestan formerly belonged to China. It is now an inde-
pendent state )
he Chinese Empire consists of—
(1) China— N. by Mongolia; E. by the Pacific; S. by
Farther India and the China Sea; W. by Tibet
PEKIN, on the Pei-ho. Next to London the most
populous city in the world
(2) Mongolia, which includes Mongolia Proper, N. oi
China, and Mantchoona, E. of Mongolia
OIJRGA is in Mongolia; KIRI.VOIILA in Mantchooria
(3) Tibet, N. of India, and W. of China
LASS A, the capital, contains an immense Buddhist
temple, covering several acres
Japan—YEDDO, a large city in the Island Niphon
Further India or the Eastern Peninsula, N. by China and
Tibet; E. and S. by the China Sea; W. by the Bay of
Bengal and India. It includes —
(1) Burma— MANDELA Y, a small town on the Ira wadi,
is the capital. AVA is the largest town
(2) Siam—BANKOR on the Meinam, a very p pulous and
flourishing city
(3) Anam—HUE, near the E. coast, is perhaps the most
strongly fortified town in Asia
India or Hindustan— N. by Tibet; E. by Burma and the
Bay of Bengal; S. by the Indian Ocean; W. by the
Arabian Sea, Biluchistan, and Afghanistan
CALCUTTA— on the Hughli, one of the streams into
which the Ganges divides on approaching the sea.
Calcutta is the most magnificent city in Asia
Afghanistan, N. by Turkestan; E. by India; S. by Bilu-
chistan ; W. by Persia
CABUL, on'the Cabul celebrated for its fruits


Bilucliistan. N. by Afghanistan ; E. by India; S. by the
Arabian Sea; W. by Persia
KELAT, in the N., surrounded by mountains, and
strongly fortified
Persia, N. by Turkestan and the Caspian; E. by Afghanistan
and Biluchistan; S. by the Persian Gulf; W. by Turkey-
in-Asia
TEHERAN, in the N., consists of splendid palaces
intermingled with mud huts. It is exceedingly hot
in summer
Turkey-ill-Asia, IS. by Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea ; E.
by Persia; S by Arabia and the Levant; W. by the
Levant and the Archipelago
SMYRNA, a large seaport on the W. coast, is the
capital. DAMASCUS, which gives damask and damsons
their names, is in Syria. JERUSALEM is in Palestine
Arabia, N. by Turkey-in-Asia ; E. by the Persian Gulf, and
the G. of Oman; S. by the Arabian Sea and the G. of
Aden ; W. by the Bed Sea
MECCA, near the W. coast. Mohammed, whose
religion now prevails over a great part of Asia and
Africa, was born in Mecca
Java.—-BATAVIA, a large, flourishing city, capital of the
Dutch possessions in the Malay Archipelago.
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF ASIA.
Asia consists chiefly of two great slopes, with an immense
table-land between.
1. —The Northern Slope includes all Siberia, and drains
into the Arctic Ocean. It is extremely cold in winter, part of
it being the coldest tract on the earth’s surface. About the
mouths of the Obi and Yenisei, are immense marshes, called
Tundras, in winter frozen to a great depth, but in summer,
covered with mosses and interspersed with salt lakes. The
southern portion of this plain is generally well-wooded and
fertile.
2. —The Central Tableland, bordered and crossed by some
of the highest ranges on the globe, extends from the Pacific
to the Caspian. In its eastern portion is the desert of Gobi
34
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.


or Sllil 1110 (“ sea of sand ”), a rainless region; in its western
portion is the Salt Desert of Persia. The lakes in this table-
land are very numerous, and are generally salt.
3. —The Southern and Eastern Slope is generally very
fertile, abounding in forests of excellent timber, but containing
the Great Indian Desert, and the desert tableland of Arabia.
Asia possesses a great many large navigable rivers, most of
which rise in the Central Tableland; those flowing north are
almost useless, being generally frozen over; those flowing
south and east, water some of the most populous countries in
die world.
MOUNTAINS
fa urns tits,, E. and W. through Turkey in Asia
Ut. Ararat, a lofty peak on which Noah's Ark is said to have
rested, E. of Turkey in Asia
tit. Sinai in Arabia, near the head of the Red Sea
Lebanon tits., famous for cedars, N. and S. through Syria
Elburz tits., E. and W. in the N. of Persia
Paropamisua tits., E. and W. through Afghanistan
Hindu Ivush tits., E. and W. between India and Turkestan
U'dor Tag'll tits., N. and S through Turkestan
Himalaya (“ abode of snow”), the highest mountains jn the
world, nearly E. and W. between India and Tibet,
tit. Everest, 29,000 ft., is the loftiest summit on the
earth s surface. Runchinjunga, over 28,000 ft.
Karakorum and Ruen-Lun tits., E. and W. in libet
I'liian-Shan (“Celestial Mountains”), E and W. in Turkestan
In-Shan tits., E and W. and Rhinghan tits., N. and S.
through Mongolia
Peling and Nail ling tits., E. and W. through China
Altai and Yablonoi tits., E. and W. between Siberia and
Mongolia
Stanovoi tits., N.E. in the E. of Siberia
Eastern Ghats and Western Ghats, N. and S. in India.
They are parallel to the eastern and western coasts
respectively
Ailgiris, a cluster of hills in the S. of India, connecting the
Eastern and Western Ghats
Vindliva tits., E. and W. through India


In Islands— Adilius Peak, in Ceylon; o]>lilr, in Sumatra;
Killi 15a111, on the top of which g-row pitcher plants of a
peat size, is in Borneo; Slamat, a volcano in Java;
luiiiboio, in Sumbawa, E. of Java, one of the grandest
volcanoes known; Mahaye, a volcano in the Philippine
Is.
RIVERS.
Obi, Yenisei, and Lena, through Siberia into the Arctic Ocean
A moor, through Mongolia and Siberia into the S. of Okhotsk
Hoang-ho, through Tibet, Mongolia, and China, into the
Yellow Sea. It is often called the “ Yellow R.,” on
account of the muddiness of its waters
Yang-tse-kiailg, through Tibet and China into the Pacific
( anton I!,, in the S. of China, into the China Sea
Mekong or Cambodia, through China and Further India into
the China Sea
Meinam, through Siam into the G. of Siam
Irawadi, through Tibet, Burma, and Pegu into the G. of
Martaban
Brahmapootra, through Tibet and India into the B. of
Bengal
Canges, through the N. of India into the B. of Bengal
Jumna, a tributary of the Ganges
Mahanadi, Godaveri, and Krishna, through India into the
B. of Bengal
IVerbndda, through India into the Arabian Sea
Indus, through Tibet and India into the Arabian Sea. Sutlej,
a tributary of the Indus
Tigris and Euphrates, through Turkey-in-Asia, unite and
fall into the Persian Gulf
Jordan, through Palestine into the Dead Sea
Kizil Irmak, through Turkey-in-Asia into the Black Sea '
Amoo or Oxus and Syr Daria, through Turkestan into the
Sea of Aral
LAKES.
In Siberia— Balkash (salt), and Baikal, the “Holv Sea” of
the Russians, in the S


In Western Turkestan — Caspian Sea in the W. is salt, has
mud volcanoes on its shores, and is much helow the level
of the ocean
Aral Sea (salt), E. of the Caspian
In Eastern Turkestan — Lob Aor
In Mongolia — Roko Aor and Kosgol
In Tibet — Tengri Aor
In China — Tong-Ting and Poyang
In Afghanistan — Seistan or ILuiiOOil, in the W.
In Persia— Lrumiah (salt) in the W.
In Turkey in-Asia— Van (salt), in the E.; Dead Sea, in
Palestine. The Dead Sea is 1,300 feet below the level of
the Mediterranean. Its water is intensely salt.
AFRICA.
COUNTRIES AND CAPITALS
The Barbary States are —
(1) Morocco, N. by the Mediterranean; E. by Algeria; S.
by the Sahara; W. by the Atlantic
MOROCCO on the Tensift. Gives its name to
Morocco leather
(2) Algeria, N. by the Mediterranean ; E. by Tunis; S by
the Sahara ; W. bv Morocco
ALGIERS, on the Mediterranean. Strongly iortided
(3) Tunis, N. by the Mediterranean; E. by the Mediterra-
nean and Tripoli; S. by the Sahara; W. by Algeria
THAIS, on the Mediterranean. Has extensive
manufactures of linen and morocco leather
(4) Tripoli, N. by the Mediterranean ; E. by Egypt; S. by
the Sahara ; VV. bv Tunis
TRIPOLI, on the Mediterranean. Carnes on com-
merce with Soudan by means of caravans
Egypt, N. by the Mediterranean; E. by the Tied Sea ; S. bv
Nubia; W. by Tripoli and the Sahara
CAIRO on the Nile The largest city in Africa


SHlna, N. l.v Egypt; E. by the Red Sea; S. by Abvssinia :
W. by the Snharn find feoudan
JiHAR lOIJM at the junction of the White Nile and
lime Nile
Abyssinia, N.E, by the Rod Sea; N.W. by Nubia; S. by
Eastern Africa J
GONDA It near L. Dembea
ha Stern Africa includes all the states on or near the E. coast
between the G. of Aden and Natal
ZANZIBAR, on Zanzibar 1., is by far the largest town
Natal, N.E. of Cape Colony, on the E. Coast
I*l ETERM A U RITZB URG near the coast
Cape Colony, N. by the Orange R. ; E. by Kafirland ; S by
the Southern Ocean ; W. by the Atlantic J
CAPE TOWN on Table Bay. Built by the Dutch
(Cape Colony and Natal now belong to England)
Orange River Free State, N. of the Orange R., and South
African or Trans Vaal Republic, N. of the Vaai
Central Africa consists of a number of small states, of which
little is yet known
Lower Guinea, on the W. coast of Africa. E. by Central
Africa; W. by the Atlantic. It consists of several states
SAN SALVADOR near the Congo or Zaire is the most
important town
I pper Guinea, N. and E. by Soudan or Nigritia; S. by
Lower Guinea and the G. of Guinea; W. by the Atlantic.
It consists of several states, of which the following are
the principal:—
(1) Liberia, a free Negro republic. Capital, MONROVIA
(2) Asliailtee, recently at war with England. COOM ASSIE
(3) Dahomey. ABOMEY, a large town exporting- ivory
(4) Aariba, ABRLOKLTA, the largest town in Guinea
Sierra Leone, W. of U. Guinea. FREETOWN on the
Rokelle. This country is very unhealthy to Europeans
and has often been called “the White Man’s Grave.”
Senega in bia, W. of Soudan on the coast. St. LOUIS on the
Senegal, and BATHURST on the Gambia, are the chief
European settlements


Soudan or NiiiTitia, N. by the Sahara; E. by Nubia; S. by
Central Africa and Guinea; W. by Senegambia
TIMBCCTOO, near the Niger, a place of great trade
The Sahara. —Principal oasis, Fezzan. Capital, MOIJRZOI K.
The Sahara is about 2,500 miles long, and 1,500 miles
broad. It is bounded on the N. by the Barbary States;
E. by Egypt and Nubia; S. by Soudan; W. by the
Atlantic
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF AFRICA-
Africa resembles Australia in having its chief mountain
rana-es parallel to the coasts. The interior is occupied by an
immense tableland, varying in elevation in different parts, but.
so far as yet known, containing no mountains of importance.
In the northern portion of this tableland is the Sahara, tlie
largest desert on the globe, a dreary expanse of sand and rocks,
relieved only here and there by fertile spots called oases.
South of the Sahara the tableland is very productive, and gives
rise to some fine rivers, chief amongst which are the Mle.
Xi«'er, and Zambezi. The annual floods of the Nile render
Egypt extremely fertile, owing to the deposit of rich mud
which the river leaves on all the low land along its
banks. Large fresh-water lakes from which the IS lie issues,
have recently been discovered in Central Africa. Earthquakes
are rare in any part of the continent.
MOUNTAINS.
Atlas MtS., E. and W. through Morocco, Algeria, and I unis.
The cork-oak and date-palm grow on the slopes of these
mountains _ , , . tt n ■
Roil"- MtS., a long low range, E. and U Guinea
Cameroon MtS., a lofty group near the Bight of Biafra
*■+ near Cane Town, flat on top, and often covered
™ called
Xieuvehl and Sneemv Bergen (“Snowy Mountains ), E.
and W. through Cape Colony
Draheuherg MtS., N. and S. in Natal
Lupata MtS., N. and S. in Eastern Africa


Kilimanjaro and Kenia, each about 20,000 ft., are snow.
clful peaks near the jE, coast.
Abyssinian Hits., lofty ranges in Abyssinia
Peak O t leneriflfe, a volcano in the Canary Is.
, rivers.
Mile, from L. Victoria Nyanza, on the Equator, throuo-h
5 ia ’ S?, d Egypt > into Mediterranean,
tl e B upN 1 f Wh T e * lle ’ until is joined, in Nubia, by
vfptnl N ’ I P embea ' Tt rises far S. of
It ? , a % anza > and has a course of nearly 4,000 miles.
Blue A lie and Atbara, from Abyssinia, join it in Nubia
Kiffei^Jolih^nr 1 throU 4 ' Sen , e B' arnbia the Atlantic*
' " r V? 10111 '’ tbr ;; U p h Ni §’ ritia and U. Guinea
into the G. of Guinea. While going- down this river in a
ffomPhe F B B fn If klU f bj the natlves - Tributary
rom the E,, the Chadda, a fine river
Atlantic thr ° UBh Central Africa and L - Guinea into
orai Vaal N ‘ ° f ° ape C ° lony int ° the Atlantic - Tributary, the
Zambezi, through the S.E. of Africa into the Mozambique
Channel; in the course of the Zambezi are the magni-
ficent \ictona Falls, half a mile wide, and 100 ft deep
LAKES
In Central Africa— Victoria Nyanza and Albert Nyanza. on
the Equator; Tanganyika, S. of Albert Nyanza; Uan<>-
weolo Moero, Kamolondo, Lincoln, and other lakes
lie b.W. and W. of Tanganyika; Nyassa, near the E.
coast
In Soudan Tchad, said to be fresh, although it has no outlet,
in Abyssinia— Deillbea, the source of the Blue Nile
NORTH AMERICA.
COUNTRIES AND CAPITALS.
British North America, N. by the Arctic Ocean ; E. bv the
Alaska 0 ’ b ’ United States l W - b J the Pacific and' 1


It includes — . „
(1) Dominion of Canada, comprising the provinces ot
Ontario (formerly Upper Canada), Quebec (formerly
Lower Canada), New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia,
together with British Columbia, Rupert’s Land, and
Prince Edward 1., recently added to the Dominion
OTTAWA on the Ottawa, a branch of the St. Law-
rence ST. JOHN is in N. Brunswick, HALIFAX,
in Nova Scotia, and CHARLOTTE TOWN in
Prince Edward I.
(2) Newfoundland. ST. JOHN'S, a great fishing- port
United States, N. by British America; E by the Atlantic ;
S. by the G. of Mexico and Mexico; W . by the 1 acme
WASHINGTON on the Potomac. Contains some fine
public buildings. New York, on the Hudson, is the
largest city in America
Alaska N.VV. of British America. Formerly belonged to
Russia, but was sold to the U. States in 1807
NEW ARCHANGEL, a small town on Sitka I.
Mexico, Nby the U. States; E. by the G. of Mexico; S. and
W. by the Pacific
MEXICO, a fine city on a tableland near the centre
Central America, between Mexico and the Isthmus of Panama.
It consists of several states
NEW GUATEMALA is the largest town. Ihe houses
are built only one storey high on account of earth-
quakes, which are of frequent occurrence.
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF N. AMERICA.
The Rocky MtS., which run through N. America from N.
to S., divide it into two great slopes, the eastern and the
western.
(1) The Eastern Slope may itself be divided into two
portions, separated from each other by a very low ridge almost
on the boundary line between British America and the United
States. The northern portion abounds in lakes, some of them
the largest fresh water lakes in the world, and drains into the
Arctic Ocean and the Gulf of St. Lawrence; the southern
portion consists of the basin of the Mississippi and a narrow


strip along- tlie coast of the Atlantic. Between the Rock}-
Mts. and the Mississippi are the Prairies, extensive plains
covered with long grass, several feet high, and supporting vast
herds of the bison or North American buffalo
(2) The Western Slope is intersected hj mountain ranges,
is much smaller than the eastern, and drains into the Pacific.
No other continent equals America in the size of its rivers,
the Mississippi (“ father of waters”) being, with its tributary,
the Missouri, over 4,000 miles long, and navigable throughout
almost the whole of its course, while the Amazon, in S.
America, drains an extent of country nearly twice as great as
the basin of the Mississippi. Mexico and Central America
are very subject to earthquakes, and contain numerous
volcanoes.
MOUNTAINS.
Rocky Mts,, N. and S., through British America and United
States. Mt. Brown and Mt. Hooker, both in British
America, are the principal peaks
Sierra Madre, a continuation of the Rocky Mts., N. and S.,
through Mexico
Popocatepetl, 17,700 ft., the highest summit in N. America,
and Orizaba, both volcanoes, are in Mexico
Sfa Alps, N. and S., through British Columbia
Cascade Range and Sierra Nevada, N. and S., near the W
coast of the United States
Agna, a volcano, in Central America
Alleghany Mts,, N.E. and S.W., in the E. of the United
States
RIVERS.
Mackenzie, draining Athabasca, Great Slave Lake, and Great
Bear Lake, through British America into the Arctic
Ocean
Saskatchewan, through British America into Lake Winnipeg
Nelson, through British America, from Lake Winnipeg to
Hudson Bay
St. Lawrence, draining Superior, Michigan, Huron, Erie, and
Ontario, through the Dominion of Canada into the Gulf
of St. Lawrence. It receives different names in different


parts of its course : between Erie and Ontario it is called
the Niagara, and there forms the magnificent falls of the
same name. Ottawa is a tributary
Hudson, passing New York, and the Potomac, passing
Washington, flow through the U. States into the Atlantic
Mississippi, from L. Itasca, through the United States into
G. of Mexico
Tributaries : — lllinois and Ohio, on the E.; Missouri,
Arkansas, and Red River, on the W.
Rio Grande del Norte, between the U. States and Mexico,
into the G. of M exico
Columbia, through U. States into the Pacific
Fraser, through British Columbia into the Pacific
LAKES.
In British America.— Athabasca, (it. Bear L., and Gt. Slave
L., in the N.; Winnipeg and WillllipegOOS, near the
* centre
In the U. States. — Gt. Salt L., west of the Rocky Mts.;
Champlain, in the N.E. of the States
Lakes Superior, Huron, Eric, and Ontario, in the basin of
the St. Lawrence, are between the U. States and Canada ;
L. Michigan is altogether in the U. States
SOUTH AMERICA.
COUNTRIES AND CAPITALS
United States of Columbia (formerly New Granada), N. by
the Caribbean Sea; E. by Venezuela; S. by Ecuador ; W.
by the Pacific
BOGOTA, a fine city near the centre, surrounded by
beautiful scenery
Venezuela, N. by the Caribbean Sea; E. by Guiana; S. by
Brazil; W. by U. S. of Columbia
CARACAS, a large meanly built city near the coast


Guiana, N. and E. by thr, Atlantic • S. by Brazil; W. bv
Venezuela. It is divided into—
(1) English Guiana. GEORGETOWN on the Demerara
built of wood, and intersected by canals
(2) Dutch Guiana, E. of English Guiana. PARAMARIBO
on tae Surinam. The streets are lined with orange and
lemon trees
(3) French Guiana, E. of Dutch Guiana. CAYENNE on
an island. Noted for pepper
Brazii, N by Venezuela, Guiana, and the Atlantic ; E. and
S.E. by the Atlantic ; S. by Uruguay, La Plata, and
Paraguay; W. by Bolivia, Peru, and Ecuador
RIO JANEIRO on the Atlantic. The largest citv in
S. America, well built, and surrounded by magnificent
scenery °
Paraguay, N. and E. by Brazil; S. and W.byLa Plata
ASUNCION on the Paraguay. Trades in mate* or
Paraguay tea
Uruguay, N by Brazil; E. by the Atlantic; S. by Rio de la
Plata; W. by La Plata
MONTE VIDEO, a fine seaport on the Rio de la Plata
Ea I lata or the Argentine Confederation, N. bv Bolivia-
E. by Paraguay Brazil, Uruguay, and the Atlantic; s’
by Patagonia; W. by Chiii
BUENOS AYRES (“ good air”) on the La Plata \
large seaport, and very salubrious
N. by Chili and La Plata; E. by the Atlantic ; S
by the Southern Ocean ; W. by the Pacific
PUNTA ARENAS, a village on the St. of Magellan
(Patagonia is now claimed by Chili, and called the “Colonial
territory of Magellan ”)
Chili N by Bolivia; E. by La Plata; S. by Patagonia; W
by the Pacific ’
SAN 11AC0, inland. Has a university
Bolivia. N. and E. by Brazil; S. by La Plata and Chili; W
by the Pacihc and Peru
CHUQUISACA, near the Pilcomavo
Peru, N by Ecuador; E. by Brazil ami Bolivia; S and W
by the Pacific
LIMA, near the coast. In consequence of earthquakes,
tiie houses are usually built only one storey hi°-h and
have hat roofs n ’


Ecuador, N. by U. S. of Columbia; E. by Brazil; S. by Peru;
W. by the Pacific
QIITO, on an elevated table-land among the Andes.
Has a delightful climate.
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF S. AMERICA.
The Andes run through S. America from N. to S., parallel
to the W. coast, and generally at but a short distance from it.
Between the Andes and Atlantic the country is intersected by
magnificent rivers, affording a perfect system of inland naviga-
tion. The short western slope of the Andes is, in a great
measure, a rainless region, particularly the coast of Peru and
the Desert Of Atacama, in Bolivia. The Andes are volcanic
throughout their entire length ; violent eruptions and destruc
tive shocks of earthquake are frequent.
1. The Llanos of the Orinoco are very level, and, in conse-
quence, are every year flooded during the rainy season. After
the floods subside, luxuriant grasses spring up, affording rich
pasture until they are destroyed by the long season of drought
which follows. The Llanos then become arid and desert-like
in appearance.
2. The Selvas of the Amazon consist of vast plains, covered
with dense forests of giant trees, and include the greater part
of Brazil.
3. The Pampas are the plains of the Paraguay and Parana.
They are covered with coarse grasses and clover in the north;
but in the south, thistles of an enormous size take the place of
the more useful herbage during nine months of the year.
MOUNTAINS
The Amies comprise—
(l) Amies of Quito, in Columbia and Ecuador. Highest
peaks, Chimborazo, 21,400 ft., Antisaiia, Cotopaxi,
and Pichiiicha, the last three being volcanoes
(2) Andes of Peru
(3) Andes of Bolivia, containing Sorata, 24,800 feet, the
loftiest summit of the Andes, and Saliama, 22,000 feet
<4j Andes of Chili. Peak, Aconcagua, 23,300 feet, next
to Sorata the highest of the Andes


(5) Andes of Patagonia, rarely exceeding- 8,000 ft. The
glaciers of the Patagonian Andes in some places descend
to the sea shorn
Parime Mts., E. and W. in Brazil and Gniana.
RIVERS
Amazon, from the Andes, througn Peru, Ecuador, and Brazil,
into the Atlantic
Tributaries: — Japura and Rio Negro, on the N. ;
Ucayale, Purus, Madeira, Tapajos, and Aingu.
These rivers are navigable almost to their sources
Tocantins and San Francisco, through Brazil into the Atlantic
Parana, through Brazil, Paraguay, and La Plata, into the
Rio de la Plata
Tributary on the W. — Paraguay, forming the western
boundary of Paraguay
Tributary on the E.— Uruguay, forming the western
boundary of Uruguay
Colorado and Negro, through La Plata into the Atlantic
Magdalena, through U. S. of Columbia into the Caribbean Sea
Orinoco, through Venezuela into the Atlantic.
LAKES.
In Venezuela.— Maracaybo, in the N.W., connected with the
Gulf of Venezuela.
Between Peru and Bolivia. — Titicaca, 12,850 ft. above the
level of the sea.
OCEANIA.
Sandwich IsIes.—HONOLULU is the capital
Manna Loa, Manna Rea, and Rilaueah are volcanoes
South Victoria, near the South Pole. Erebus, 12,400 ft., and
Terror, are volcanoes


VICTORIA
Consists of thirty-seven Counties :
S. OF THE DIVIDING RANGE.
Six Central Counties.
Counties.
Towns
Melbourne (Yarra), founded in 1837,
the largest city in Australia. Popula-
tion, with suburbs, 290,000. The seat
of Government. The seaports Saild-
ridsre and Williamstown are both on
Hobson’s Bay. Principal Suburbs ;
St. Kilda, South Melbourne, Fitzroy,
Collingwood, Hawthorn, Richmond,
South Yarra, Prahran, Windsor, Foots-
cray, Hotham, Carlton, Brunswick, and
Coburg. Brighton and Mordialloc,
favourite watering places on Port Phillip
Bay. Lancefleld, Keilor, and Romsey,
farming towns on Saltwater R. Sun-
bury, Gisborne, Bacchus Marsh, Ballan,
Broadmeadows, Wallan Wallan, Oak-
leigh, and Dandenong are the principal
towns connected by railway.
BOURKE
Geelong (Corio Bay) exports wool and
has 'paper and tweed manufactories.
Suburbs :—Newtown, Chilwell, Corio,
and South Barwon. QueeilSCliff and
Portarlillgton. watering places on Port
Phillip Bay. Steiglitz, Meredith. Lai
lal, Warrenheip, Buiiiiiyoiiff, l-ffer-
-1011. and Ballarat East are the prin-
cipal towns.
GRANT
47
OUTLINES OP GEOGRAPHY.


GRENVILLE
Ballarat (Yarrowee), the second city
in Victoria, and the centre of a very
rich and extensive gold-field, has numer-
ous manufactures, and is connected by
rail with the metropolis. Sebastopol,
Smythesdale, Scarsdale, Lintons,
Rokewood, and Camilla 111 are the
principal towns.
POLWARTII
Colac (L. Colac) is surrounded by very
fertile land. Lome is a rising watering
place on the coast. Birregurra, a farm-
ing town on the Barwon.
MORMNGTON ... Morninjrton (or Schnapper Point) is an
agricultural town on Port Phillip Bay.
Frankstoii, Broinana, Sorrento
(watering places), €OWCS (on Phillip
Island), Berwick, and Pakenham.
EVELYN ... Whittlesea, Healesville, Eltliam, and
Lilydale are farming centres. The
Vail Yean reservoir is in this neigh-
bourhood.
Six Eastern Counties,
CROA JINCOLONG Agricultural district.
TAMBO
BARGO
TAMIL
Sarsfield (Nicholson).
Sale (Flooding Crk., an anabranch of
the Thomson) is the most important
town in Gippsland. Balrnsdale (Mit-
chell) is noted for hop-growing. Wal-
lialla (Stringer’s Crk.) has some of the
richest quartz reefs in the colony.
Jericho, Jffaffra, and Stratford,


Rosedale (R. Latrobe), Drouin, Port
Albert, Traralg'Oll are farming centres.
BELN BELN
WONNANGATTA... Partly in the Murray district. Mining
towns on the Dividing Range.
Seven Western Counties.
Ararat (Hopkins), the centre of a large
mining, farming, and wool-growing dis-
trict. Beaufort, Raglan, Skipton,
Streatliain, and VViekliffe.
RIPON
Camperdown, Terang, and Mortlake
are pastoral towns.
HAMPDEN
HEYTESBERY ... Allausford, Panmure, and Cobden
are pastoral towns.
Warrnambool (Hopkins) and Belfast
(Moyne) are seaports. Dllllkeld,
Roroit, and PeilSllUtSt are farming
centres. The district is noted for
potato-growing.
VILLI ERS
Portland (Portland Bay) was settled
by the Messrs. Henty in 1834. BrailX-
holme, Digby, Hey wood, and Merino
are pastoral towns.
NORMANBY
BENDAS
Hamilton (Grange Creek) is the centre
of a large squatting district; Cavendish
and Coleraine are agricultural centres.
Casterton (Glenelg) and Lindsay on
the border of South Australia.
POLLEXT
Four North-Eastern Counties.
BENAMBRA
Bethanga and Omeo.


BOGOAG
oelatite
MOIRA
Beechworth, beautifully situated on
granite hills, is the principal town in
the Ovens District ; Stanley and Yack-
aildandall are pretty townships near
Beechworth ; Cllilteril (a mining town),
Barnawartha, and Wodonga (the
terminus) are on the N.E. Railway ;
Wahgunyah, Butherglen, Myrtle-
ford, and Eldorado.
Wangaratta (Ovens) and Benalla
(Broken R.) are agricultural centres ;
Bright, Avenel, furoa, Long-wood,
Mansfield, and Violet Town.
Yaga mine (Goulbum), Shepparton,
Cashel, Aumurkah, and Yarrawonga.
Seven Northern Counties.
BOOAEY
Ecliuea (Murray), an important com-
mercial town, Murchison, Boeliester,
Bush worth, and Toolamba.
ANGLESEY
Seymour (Goulbum), Alexandra, Yea,
Gobur.
Kyneton (Campaspe), an important
farming centre, Rillliore, Ileathcote,
Woodend, Caflsruhe, Gray town,
Malmsbury, and Broadford. The
Coliban reservoir is near Malmsbury.
OALIIOLSIE
TALBOT
Castlemaine, the centre of the Mount
Alexander goldfield, Carisbrook, Mary-
borough, Talbot, Maldon, Baylesford,
Chines, and Creswick are mining
centres.
BKMHGO
Sandhurst (Bendigo Creek) is the
centre of the chief quartz-reefing district
in Victoria ; Fagleliawk, lllllltly,
Marong, Kavenswood, and Bay wood.
50
OUTLINES OF GEOGRAPHY.


Dunolly, Avoca, Moliajrul, Injrlf-
wood. Last Charlton, laniagulla, and
Wedderhurn.
GLADSTONE
Keianji 1 (Loddon) andTerrick Terrick,
farming centres.
GL\ ROWER
Seven North-Western Counties.
Swan Hill (Murray), a pastoral centre.
TATCHLKA
KARA KARA
St. A maud, noted for its silver mines 5
Donald, Laudsborou«h, Redbauk,and
Stuart Mill.
Stawell, a mining centre ; Glriiorcliy,
Horsham, and Murtoa.
BORUNG
Apsley and Edeuhope.
No town of importance.
LOWAN
AVEEAH
51
OUTLINES OP GEOGRAPHY.


GEORGE ROBERTSON AND CO
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE
AND BRISBANE


|uistralian Series
SCHOOL BOOKS
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY,
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, & ADELAIDE.
The following Works in their various departments
have been specially prepared for the use of schools
in Australia and New Zealand, and, besides being
locally adapted, they possess the additional advantage
of being at all times procurable in any quantity.
READING BOOKS.
The Royal Scries of Reading Books.
As adopted in the Victorian State Schools ;
Royal Reader, No. 1 3d Royal Reader, No. 4 Is 6d
„ No. 2 9d „ No. 5 2s
3 Is 6d „ No. 6 2s 6d
WRITING.
Australian Edition of Philips’ Progressive
Series of Copy Books,
15 Nos., large 4to ... each 4d, per doz. 2s 9d
Contents of the Series :
1 Initiatory Exercises 9 Small Hand
2 Alphabet in Progressive Order 10 Large, Round, and Small Hand
3 Short Words
4 Large Hand
11 Ladies’ Small Hand
12 Set of Commercial Sentences
13 Text Hand
5 Large and Round Hand
6 Round Hand
14 Large, Text, Round, and Small
7 Introduction to Small Hand
8 Round and Small Hand
16 Text, Round, and Angular Hand
Australian Edition of Philips’ Copy Books,
Small size, 15 Nos. ... each 3d, per dozen 2s


ENGLISH GRAMMAR.
English Grammar and the Analysis of
Sentences, for Beginners,
By R. 8. Bradley ... ... ... Is
The State School Grammar,
By J. J. Burston ... ... ... Is 6d
GEOGRAPHY AND ATLASES.
Outlines of General Geography,
By A. Buckley.—Part I. '... ... 8d
Ditto, ditto.
Part 11. ... ... ... ... 2s fid
Outlines of General Geography,
By James Smith ... ... ... Is fid
A New Geography,
By Alexander Sutherland. M.A. ... 3s fid
*** Or iu 4 parts, each Is.
Geography of Australia and New Zealand,
By George Sutherland. M.A. ... ... is
Physical Geography of Australia,
By H. B. De la P. Wall, M.A., with Charts 3s fid
State School Atlas,
For Australasian Children, 32 coin _ . maps, with
Index, 4to ... ... J... 2s fid
State School Junior Atlas,
24 coloured maps, 4to ... ... ... is
HISTORY.
The History of Australia, 1006-1876,
By A. and G. Sutherland ... ... 2s fid
ARITHMETIC ,
The State School Arithmetic,
By J. J. Burston ... ... ... 3 S gd
Ditto, with Supplement,
Containing Square and Cube Root, Examination
Papers, &c. ... ... ... ... gg
Australian Series of School Books.
