

OUTLINE
OF A
PLAN FOR EXPLORING THE INTERIOR
OF
AUSTRALIA:
DEDICATED TO
THE BRITISH NATION.
BY
ALLEN F. GARDINER, (COMMANDER R.N.)
LONDON:
JAMES DUNCAN, 37, PATERNOSTER-ROW.
MDCCCXXXIII.


LONDON:
Printed by William Clowes,
Duke-street, Lambeth.


PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.
The two great geographical problems which
have so long baffled the skill and enterprise of
man, the course of the Niger, and the practica-
bility of a North-West Passage into the Indian
seas, having at length been sufficiently deter-
mined by the talent and daring of our own
countrymen, it is not improbable that the atten-
tion of the public may, at length, be directed to
discovery in a quarter hitherto most unaccount-
ably disregarded. I allude to Australia, (New
Holland,) a continent, as it is now termed, nearly
equal in extent to Europe itself, and enjoying a
climate and soil comparable to some of its finest
portions, such as Spain and Sicily. It is with
this impression that the following plan is re-
spectfully suggested to the public, in the earnest
hope that it may at least be the means of awak-
ening that interest, and directing those energies - ,
which are requisite for the undertaking, and


without which, so desirable and important an
object must fail of success. But it may he
asked, why not leave such matters to the colo-
nists themselves, who are the most interested,
and Avould he the first benefited by the result ?
The reply is, that, circumstanced as they are,
they have neither leisure nor adequate means
for such an undertaking. So little was the
spirit of discovery evinced by the early settlers,
that the first impulse to seek a more extended
acquaintance with the surrounding districts
was given by the vague reports of some runaway
convicts, who set out from Sydney with the
strange notion of reaching China by an over-
land journey. But even at a period still more
recent, it was not until seventeen years had
elapsed from the founding of the colony, and
the pastures had become too scanty for the in-
creasing herds of cattle, that the Blue Moun-
tains, an insignificant range, * (hitherto regarded
as an insurmountable barrier,) were crossed, and
a route opened to one of the finest grazing coun-
* This the author speaks from personal observation, having
traversed the country for some distance beyond Bathurst; the
highest point of this range is not more than 4000 feet above the
level of the sea.


tries in the world, now known by appellation
of the Bathurst and Liverpool Plains. But, in
truth, what do we know of by far the greater
part of that vast continent? Some portion of
its eastern border, with the Island of Yan Die-
men’s Land, and a solitary settlement recently
established on the western coast, is all that has
as yet been occupied. We have, indeed, at
length, traced the sinuosities of its coast; but,
as to the interior, with the exception of some
districts of New South Wales, it is still as much
a terra incognita, as in the days of Abel Tasman
or Van Diemen!
For aught we know, the central parts of this
country may abound with veins of rich ore, or
beds of coal, or useful indigenous plants; while
many navigable rivers and lakes, with lands
capable of employing the energies of all our
surplus population, would, doubtless, repay any
attempt to examine the interior, and that with
one-tenth the expense which has already been
incurred in the fruitless search of a North West
Passage.
Are we, as a commercial nation, possessing
colonies on the very soil, satisfied, year after
year, to leave the problem of inland navigation


to the option and perseverance of any interested
foreigner who may be disposed to avail himself
of our supineness 1 Though long delayed, it is
not too late to be up and doing. Shall it be said
that Britain, the first of the nations in arts and
commerce, is contented to possess the margin
of a wilderness untrodden by civilized man,
without energy to penetrate the interior ? That
the same hands which so honourably and so de-
servedly fostered the talent and enterprise of a
Parry, a Franklin, a Denham, a Clapperton, a
Lander, and a Ross, still refuse to lend their aid
to those who would willingly offer themselves
for Australian research, the result of which
could not but tend materially to unfold the trea-
sures of Providence, and to extend the range of
science and civilization ?
What would be more worthy the attention of
government, or of some scientific society, than
to institute and encourage inland discovery in
that interesting portion of the world, and thus,
by their aid and influence, gradually to wipe
away the stigma which has so long attached to
this nation for its apathy in not developing the
resources of that fine country ?
Let a few responsible individuals come forward


and associate themselves for this purpose; let
the interior he forthwith explored from west to
east, and from south to north, and then, and
not till then, the hare outline of a “ vast un-
known” will cease to deform our modern atlases,
and to disgrace the intelligence and enterprise
of the nineteenth century; while a new and im-
portant mart for our manufactures will spring
up and flourish at our antipodes.
The wandering character of the natives, added
to the absence of edible productions, and the
difficulty of procuring game in many parts of
the interior, renders it absolutely necessary that
provisions sufficient for the whole period occu-
pied by the journey should be conveyed with
the exploring party. This peculiarity renders
the employment of beasts of burden indispen-
sable, and of consequence limits the extent of
journey to the amount of supplies that can con-
veniently be transported.
As navigable rivers and interior lakes would
be the primary objects of research, much dis-
crimination will be required in the selection of
that route, which, while it appears the most
practicable, affords at the same time the greatest
probability of success. The maximum period


for which supplies can be conveniently carried
appears to be eight or nine months, beyond
which it would not be prudent that any journey
should extend. Within these limits, three dis-
tinct routes offer themselves for our choice,
which I shall mention in the order of their rela-
tive lengths.
Ist. From the head of Spencer’s Gulph to
the nearest point of the Gulph of Carpentaria,
distance in a direct line, in round numbers,
1000 miles.
2nd. From Swan River in a direct line to
Cambridge Gulph, distance 1300 miles.
3rd. From Swan River to latitude 24° S. and
longitude 127° E., thence, either direct to Cam-
bridge Gulph on the north, or to Fowler’s Bay
on the south, distance 1400 miles.
With respect to the first route, although con-
siderably the shortest in point of actual over-
land distance, much difficulty and expense
would be incurred in transporting the horses
from Port Dalrymple, from whence the expedi-
tion would naturally proceed, to the point of
debarcation ; as well as great disadvantage in
commencing so long a journey from a spot
where no settlement has as yet been esta-


Wished, and, consequently, where proper means
for recruiting the animals previous to their start-
ing for the interior could not he procured.
Added to which, the route itself, nearly north
and south, would be the least likely to inter-
sect rivers running to either the east or west
coasts.
The second route would evidently detect any
stream running in a western direction, and
would possess the advantage of traversing a
line of country, watered, by popular report,
even from the days of Dampier, by some con-
siderable river, which interesting question it
could not fail to determine.
The last, though somewhat the longest route,
is that, however, which I am inclined to regard
as, upon the whole, the best that could be
adopted, and that for the following reasons :
Ist. It would, from its more central direc-
tion, in all probability, traverse a higher level,
opposing fewer obstacles from bogs and mo-
rasses.
2nd. The streams, being encountered nearer
their sources, would be more fordable.
3rd. There would be a choice of two opposite
climates and routes for half the journey, which,


in case of sickness or insuperable difficulties,
would be of the utmost consequence.
4th. A greater extent of country would be
examined, occupying but little more time than
the more direct route, No. 2.
sth. The probability would be increased of
meeting with interior lakes and crossing the
heads of rivers, tending as well to the southern
as to the western coast.
6th. Though the northern route should, on
many accounts, be preferred, still, were it even-
tually found necessary to change the course for
Fowler’s Bay, a track equally interesting and
unexplored would intervene.


PROPOSED PLAN.
The expedition to consist of twelve, viz.—
To command ------ 1
Second in command, and to assist in
taking observations, &c. - - - 1
Surgeon and botanist ----- 1
Non-commissioned officer of Marines 1
Private Marines* ------ 8
12
The baggage to be carried by sixteen horses or
mules, (the latter to be preferred if they can be
procured.) The journey to commence from the
settlement on Swan River, in a north-easterly direc-
tion, until arrived in latitude 24° S., and longi-
tude 127° E, when the party should make directly
for Cambridge Gulph. Should, however, the
southern route be found decidedly preferable, the
* The privates to be selected from their previous knowledge
of some trade, such as locksmith, farrier, carpenter, harness-
maker, &c.


track marked out to Fowler’s Bay should then be
followed. A small vessel with supplies to be
stationed both in Cambridge Gulph and in Fowler’s
Bay, in readiness to assist and receive the ex-
pedition on its reaching the coast in either direc-
tion.
The character of the first attempt to explore the
interior should be that of celerity and extent; the
general appearance of the country, the nature of
its soil and productions, with the true position as to
latitude and longitude, and the height from the sea
of some of the principal stations, being all that
could, under such circumstances, be required; as
every undue delay, (even for scientific research,)
until the nature and extent of the difficulties to be
encountered in traversing regions so utterly un-
known, either from natural obstacles or from the
hostility of the natives, are fully developed, might
prove, not only injurious, but fatal to the success of
the whole undertaking.
The following is a brief statement of the proposed
equipment, which, however small, I am induced to
regard as fully adequate to the undertaking. A
greater number of individuals would impede the
movements and require a corresponding increase in
baggage and beasts of burden, rendering the pas


sage of swamps and rivers more tedious and diffi-
cult, and making the daily supply of grass and
water a toilsome occupation.
The distance to be performed in a direct line by
the third route, which is that now under considera-
tion, is 1400 miles, which, taking into account the
necessary deviations, may be stated in round
numbers at 1900 miles; —this, at an average
advance of eight miles per diem, would occupy
eight months; so that, calculating upon an occa-
sional supply of game during the journey, it would
not be requisite to carry provisions for a longer
period than the above.
The allowance per diem for each person to be as
follows:
Biscuit ----- 10 oz.
Cocoa paste (sweetened) 2
Salt meat ----- 8
Rice 2
Spirits (concentrated) - If
Salt* - f
1 lb. 8 oz.
The total weight of provisions for the whole
party for eight months would be 4320 lbs.
* Used only with fresh provision and to salt it for keeping 1 .


Weight and probable cost of the various articles
composing the baggage :
lbs. £.
Ammunition - -- -- -90-15
Medicine chest ------15 - 17
Hatchets and other tools - - - 20 - 8
Cooking utensils - -- --15 - 6
Shoes and nails for horses - - 25 - 6
Astronomical instruments - - - 15 - 30
Books and sketching materials - 10 - 8
Arms ---------30- lent.
Tin cases for carrying provisions,
&c. 50-25
Pack saddles, rope, and fishing gear 50 - 30
Clothes, blankets, soap, &c. - - 80 - 80
Tent - -- -- -- --50-20
450 245
In the foregoing calculations, neither the arms
nor the provisions are valued, as the one could
doubtless be borrowed from government, and the
other would be below the regular navy allowance.
Neither is a chronometer included among the
astronomical instruments, as this also might pos-
sibly be supplied for the journey.
The whole weight, therefore, to be carried
would be—


4320 lbs. provisions.
450 „ baggage.
Total 4770
which, distributed among sixteen horses, would
leave about 300 lbs. as the burden of each.
The whole (with the exception of the men’s
clothes to be laid up in hammocks) should be
closely packed in strong tin cases, which, being
air-tight, might readily be employed as pontoons
when required for the passage of rivers.
The expedition to commence on foot, as they
could all be eventually mounted as the provisions
became expended—each person to carry on starting
a few days’ extra provisions in a knapsack; the
horses, likewise, to convey a small supply of oats
in addition to the prescribed burden.
From the above estimate, it appears that £250
would defray every expense attendant upon the
outfit of an exploring expedition into the interior.
There would besides this be the purchase or hire
of the horses, the passage out and home of at least
some of the party, and the hire of the two vessels
stationed on the coast during the latter part of the
journey; but as it is probable, for so national a
purpose, the government might not be unwilling to


defray some, if not the whole, of these charges,
it will not be necessary for me to enter further into
detail.
Should these brief suggestions, which are now
respectfully submitted to the British public, be the
means of benefiting our Australian Colonies, and
of accelerating the period when the light of civiliza-
tion shall dawn upon those southern wildernesses,
the Author will deem himself amply repaid.
London: Printed by William Clowes, Duke Street, Lambeth.


MAP
OF
NEW HOLLAND
Shewing the Proposed route
