

OUTLINES
OF
FAREWELL
SERMONS,
PREACHED AT
PETERSHAM CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH,
SUNDAY, MAY 20, 1877.
BY THE
REV. MORGAN WILLIAMS.
PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION.
2. COR. XIII. 14. —“ And the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ , and the
love of God, and the communion of the-Holy Ghost be with you all.”
RED. 1. 19. — "Things that shall be hereafter .”
SYDNEY:
S. GLASSOP, WEST CITY MACHINE PRINTING OFFICE,
92 CLARENCE STREET.
1877.




OUTLINES
OF
FAREWELL
SERMONS,
preached at
PETERSHAM CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH,
■ * ,
STJISrDA.Y, MAY SO, 1877,
printed for private circulation.
2. Cor. xiii. 14. —“ And the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all.”
Rev. i. 19. —“ Things that shall be hereafter
Sydney:
S. GLASSOP, West City Machine Printing Office,
92 Clarence Street.
1877.




PREFACE.
WORD or two in the way of preface. On the closing
J\ Sunday of a brief, but happy, pastorate, on the occa-
sion of taking leave of the church and congregation,
to whom I had had the privilege to minister, I preached
two sermons, the outlines of which appear in the following
pages. There had not been the remotest intention that
these rough notes should ever see the light. But at the
request of one or two friends, a copy of them having been
given, they expressed a desire that a limited number should
be printed at their own expense, and for private circulation
only, amongst a few of my hearers. Even on this condition
I most reluctantly yielded consent. This I did on the
ground that these are mere outlines, which were to be filled
in, in the delivery—notes of spoken discourses, not meant
to be read, but to guide the speaker in addressing his hearers.
The first proof was sent me on board the Northam , on
the eve of my departure for England. So far, therefore,
from having had time to expand, excise, or even to modify
them, I scarcely had time to correct the press; and to se-
cure this, the printer had to do his work hurriedly. Im-
perfect as I feel these discourses to have been in the de-
livery, these notes can give but an imperfect impression of
them. My aim in the preparation of them had been to give
a faithful presentation of the life-giving truths of the Gospel
to those to whom it had been my happiness to preach, on
perhaps the last occasion on which I should have to speak
to them. If these few last thoughts should be found to
minister to their spiritual good, and tend to awaken or con-
firm Christian faith and hope, when the living voice that
spoke them is heard no longer, I shall give God the thanks.
May the preacher and his hearers “ obtain mercy of the
Lord in that day.” May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be
with you all.
MORGAN WILLIAMS.
The Northam, Port Jackson,
July nth, 1877.




MORNING SERMON.
2 Cor. xiii., 14. —“ May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ , the love
of God , and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with
you all.”
WHEN friends part it is customary mutually to express their
wishes for one another’s welfare and prosperity. Such ex-
pressions as farewell! adieu ! God bless you ! however, at times
they may be used as a mere form, without sufficient thought of
their significance; were originally the language of earnest desire
and prayer that God would protect, preserve, and guide them,
and give them - happiness when removed from each other.
To such accidents is the life of man subject, to such perils ex-
posed, that even in the intervals of frequent meetings, we know not
what evils may befall it. How much more when the separation
is for life ; how ardent the wish and intense the desire will be on
the part of friends about to be separated, that God will speed
their course. In that case, the parting salutation will not be a
formal, one. Whatever is the true and genuine instinct of nature,
Christianity deepens, intensifies, and directs. We see this ex-
hibited in the salutations of the Apostle, of the Gentiles, conveyed
to those Christian disciples to whom his epistles were addressed.
No heart glowed with intenser love to man than his. . We have
the feelings of his heart, as well as the thoughts of his mind re-
vealed in his letters. He calls himself the servant of Jesus Christ
“ Ourselves, your servants, for Jesus sake.” Yet having obtained
mercy of the Lord to be faithful, he warns and reproves, painful
as this may be, but concludes with the expressions of our text,
which comprehends, in substance, all blessings which he could
properly desire for them. The words have been consecrated
through their long use in dismissing our religious assemblies.
They are most appropriate to the termination of my ministry
among you. My heart is full, and I cannot express my desire for
that which is conducive to your highest good, as well as in these
words. They refer to the three-fold relation which God assumes
in the redemption of the world, as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
—as Father, originating; as the Son, executing ; as the Spirit,
applying. The one the fountain of all blessings; the other the
channel by which it flows; the third the power by which it is dis-
tributed. .
/,—The Grace of our Lord Jesus Chttst>


1. The advent of Christ was a wondrous revelation of grace to
the world, lie came not to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved. Let us suppose for the sake
of illustration, that the subjects of a lawful sovereign have risen in
rebellion against him, and have attempted to overthrow his power,
but the attempt signally fails. This deed is likely to cost them their
lives; t\\ey are guilty of high treason, and the penalty is death.
The sentence is already past, but a respite is granted, and an ap-
peal to mercy is made on their behalf. Intimations have reached
them that the sovereign is disposed to pardon the offenders on
certain conditions, and that he will send a messenger to issue a
proclamation to that effect. Now when they see the messenger
approach, though as yet he has issued no proclamation, they are
encouraged to ho pe for mercy. His appearance is a pledge that
favour will be shown and that the penalty of death will be averted.
Before sentence was passed on man after the fall and he was
condemned to die, intimations of Divine mercy had reached him.
These were given in the words of the first promise, which came
like music on the ears of our first parents. This was the first ray
of light that illumined the darkness of their fallen condition. It
was the announcement of the coming of a deliverer in the person of a
descendant of the woman after the flesh, and who, while he him-
self would be a sufferer, would inflict a fatal blow on the power of
the enemy. This was repeated by the prophets in clearer and
more distinctive language as time advanced. It was shadowed
forth by sacrifices under the law. The world had hope and was
waiting for the accomplishment of this event. At length Christ
comes, but before he opens his commission. It is a pledge that God
has purposes of mercy towards our race. He comes to men with
messages of grace. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. There are
two ways only, conceivable to us, by which man as a sinner may
obtain that righteousness which will avail him before God it must
be either by something done to meet the demands of the law
which he has broken, or to have it procured lor him, and granted
to him without an equivalent—a matter of favour or grace.
2. To one situatedas man is, an offender subject to condemnation,
it is a matter of the first importance, of infinite moment, to inquire
how this is to be removed, and how deserved punishment is to be
averted.—On the first ground it is impossible-on the ground of
law and of something done. By the law is the knowledge of sin,
it wakens up the consciousness of sin, but it does not remove it.
It reveals the disease, but does not point to the remedy nor
effect the cure. By the deeds of the law shall no man living be
justified. By grace are ye saved through faith, not of yourselves,
it is the gift of God. But what the law could not do, Christ has
effected. He came in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin con


demncd sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in as. We are represented as saying—that Christ s grace
bought over the favour of God. The Father was unpropitious and
angry, but Christ turns away his anger; such is not the truth ; the
love of God is the cause, the work of Christ, the effect. _ God so loved
the world as to give his only begotten Son. The misery of man is
not the cause of Divine Love, but is the occasion to call it tor .
The mother watches by her sick child to the injury and peril of
her own life. This was the occasion to evince it. The love
existed before. , , ~
3. The effect of this is an eternal spiritual change, the sen-
tence on the sinner is not removed, and a title to heaven is not
given without a corresponing change within a new life now
springs up ; he is the subject of new desires, new aspirations,
and new hopes. He cherishes new purposes, has new asso-
ciations, and experiences, performs new actions, old things pass
away, and all things become new. He is conscious of hymg
for a high purpose and end, one worthy of the nature which God
has given him. He lives for Christ who loved him and shed
his precious blood for him, who died to redeem and is exalted
to save. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
ll.—The love of God. _ .
In tracing the course of a mighty river, you may begin at
its source, with the spring that wells out on the mountain side
and follow it as it flows on, a small rill, and then expands into
a broad and mighty river, and at length empties itself into the
ocean. . . . ~
Or, you may take the stream midway in its course, wheie the
river is most beautiful, where the scene is most picturesque or
grand, where smiling villages or hamlets rise on every side,
and trace it upwards to its source, and downwards to its out-
let into the sea. . .
The apostle takes the latter course. Instead of beginning
at the source, he surveys it midway. He views the river of life
as it vivifies and refreshes our world. The grace of Christ he
traces back to its source in the love of God, and then he follows
its course as it refreshes the hearts and purifies the lives of
Christian men. ,
1. Love is the source, and the work of Christ, the giound
of man’s pardon. This is sometimes misconceived. We have
redemption by his blood, even the forgiveness of sin, according
to the riches of his grace ; the gospel comes with the offer of
free and full forgiveness and justification to every one wno re-
ceives Christ by faith. God claims for himself the honour of
dispensing this without an equivalent. “ X even I, am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not


remember thy sins against thee. The Lord God merciful and
gracious,” &c.
2. The love of God assumes a particular and specific form to-
wards each individual believer. Love is the disposition in God
to make his creature happy. This leads him to delight in the
well-being of intelligent beings. There is a sense in which he
treats all men alike. The sun rises, the rain falls, and the earth
brings forth her fruit for the good of all. All have social in-
stincts and the means of gratifying them. All have spiritual
wants, and the gospel meets them; but every Christian be-
liever has entered into a new and intimate relation to God. He
is under Divine guardianship, under a special Providence, his
steps ordered of the Lord. There is to him strength according
to the day, at last—victory. For this God is our God, and
will be our guide even unto death.
111. —The communion of the Holy Ghost.
Communion means participation of good with another ; to
share blessings with him. Participation in views, thoughts,
feelings, and experiences, inspired by the Holy Ghost, the
Enlightener, Comforter, Guide, and Sanctifier of his people—
the fruit of His blessed influence on the mind and heart. The
fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. This is the cluster
of graces that ripens under his training. Though manifold,
they are one , and are the fruit of the spirit. When he prays that
the communion of the Holv Ghost might be with them, it is
the same as if he had prayed that the Spirit would enlighten,
purify, comfort, sanctify, and save them.
The result of this is not only communion with God, but com-
munion with each other. In the communion of Christians there
is the participation of blessings in common. They are sub-
jects of the same spiritual life, the spiritual children of the
same father, the servants of the same master, fellow travellers
towards the same heavenly home. As a visible expression of
this they often join in the same religious communities. They
sing and pray and work together and meet together around the
Lord’s table. They eat of the same loaf and drink of the same
cup, as a symbol of communion and fellowship.
1. This is a blessing that is within the reach of all. The.
Gospel, as the representation of God’s love, has in it nothing
of narrowness or exclusiveness. It has the widest universal-
ity. . It comprehends in it the noblest blessings, those which
are included in the Father’s love, the grace of Christ, and the
communion of the Spirit. These may become the possession
of all. They are free to all, like the light of the sun, like the
air we breathe. A man may shut himself in from the light of


day and live in darkness, so lie may resist the influence
of the Father’s love, disregard the grace of Christ, and
quench the light of the Spirit. He has only himself to blame.
2. They are permanent in their duration. That which de-
tracts from the value of all earthly things is their fleeting
character. They are possessed only for a time, pleasures cloy,
honours fade, and riches take to themselves wings and fly
away. Reputation may be won and lost again, the blessings of
this life, partake of its transitory and fleeting character, the
fashion of it is passing away ; the blessings which religion con-
fers—such as pardon, peace with God, the spirit of adoption,
purity of heart, a good hope, will remain,—the fruit of these
is permanent as God himself, lasting as eternity.
3. The religion of Christ inspires men with the spirit of
benevolence. “ The grace, &c., be with you all.” There is a
principle of benevolence in the heart of man. The gospel
deepens, intensifies, and directs it; under its influence it ex-
pands and becomes less a thing of impulse, and more a thing of
principle. It seeks the welfare of others, adopts means for al-
leviating human suffering, and augmenting the happiness of
our fellow men. It culminates in the desire for the spiritual
good and the salvation of others; there is in all who have
known Christ an intense longing to see others also brought to
know him. It is then a source of the greatest grief and deepest
sorrow that any should be uninterested in the salvation of
Christ. It would be to me and to others a source of the purest
and most exalted happiness to know you had yielded your-
selves to God. Our wish and prayer for you are—may the grace of
Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Spirit be
yours ! Araen.


EVENING SERMON.
Rev. l ig—“ Things that shall be hereafter
MAN looks before, as well as after. Memory is the link which
binds him to the past ; expectation and hope, guided by
Divine revelation, properly connect him with the future. Man
has a strong desire to know what is to be hereafter. This is
natural, and when restrained within proper limits, is not sinful.
But this desire has often been perverted and prostituted to evil
purposes. Men have pretended to know and read the future, and
on this pretended knowledge they have erected a system of super-
stition and falsehood. They have practised on the credulity of
their fellow men for sinister ends—to obtain power or get gain.
By his unaided powers he can know nothing of the future of
this life, to say nothing of the life hereafter. He knows not what
a day or even an hour may bring forth. The future is God’s
province, and He has erected a barrier around it which no mind
can surmount or break through. We know not what we shall be,
and yet there are things which shall be hereafter. There are the
uncertainties , and there are the certainties of the future. W ith re-
gard to the latter, God has condescended to instruct our ignor-
ance, and within certain limits, to show us things to come. _ This
revelation is adapted to meet our wants. It has nothing in it to
gratify curiosity, but all that is required to awaken the fears of
the ungodly, to direct the enquirer, guide the humble, and sus-
tain the faith and hope of Christian believers.
f' The uncertainties of the life of the future here.
i. We have no knowledge of the length of it. We cannot tell
how, according to our estimate of it, it may be shortened or pro-
longed, or over what period it will extend. God has spoken in
reference to the allotted period of human life—“ the days of our
years are three score years and ten, and if, by reason of strength,
they be four score years, yet is their strength, labor, and sorrow,
and we are soon cut off and fly away.” _ Some reach extreme old
age; more die in manhood; more still in infancy and childhood.
We Cannot calculate on any period of life before us. As for man,
his days are as grass, as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth,
the wind passeth over, and it is gone, &c.
2. We do not know what will be the condition of our life. We
know what the general conditions, the complexion and charac*


ter of man’s life are. In these are included joys and sorrows,
sunshine and shade, sickness and health. Here we suffer grief
and pain. Here we participate in the enjoyments of life. You
are now in affluent circumstances, but you may not always remain
so. You are now in health, sickness may come at any hour. We
know not what enjoyments, or what sorrows, what suffering, or
what happiness may await us.
3. We know not under what circumstances we may be called
to quit this earthly scene; on land or sea, at home or away;
among friends or among strangers; when conscious or unconscious
of the approach of death. These are uncertainties.
But thi s is not all. With the Bible in our hands we can trace
certain landmarks in the future. It speaks of great certainties—
death, judgment, heaven, and hell. The first two we shall all
witness ; of the latter, may we reach the one and be saved from
the other !
Let us not attempt to be wise above that which is written, but
under the guidance of God’s precious Word, let us consider sepa-
rately, these four things, the certainties , the things that shall be
hereafter.
/.— Death.
Men are sceptical on many subjects, but whatever doubts they
may have in reference to other matters, they have none as to the
reality of death. They have witnessed it in the case of others.
Others have died : generations of men have passed away like the
leaves of the forest, swept away by the blasts of Autumn. . The
living know that they must die. The day of your funeral the
case of most) will come, similar to that which you have witnessed
in the case of others. Friends will gather at the house ; the body,
pale and lifeless, laid in the coffin, and borne, accompanied by the
funeral procession, to the grave, there to mingle with its parent
dust. Your life’s history here will be brought to a close. But
after death, the judgment. While the body is c onsigned to the
earth, the spirit will return to God, and by a pri v ate, particular,
and personal judgment, will receive the sentence of life or death.
The Materialist says that the soul and body, as to their substance,
are one and the same, or that the soul sleeps with th e body. But
we read that while the dust returns to the eatth, the spirit returns
to God who gave it—of the spirits of just men made perfect of
being absent from the body, and present with th e Lord.
We are told that the righteous and wicked enter on a state
of happiness or misery immediateiy on leaving the body. Lazarus
“ was carried by angels into Abraham’s bosom, and when the rich
man was buried, in hell he lifted up his eyes being in torment.”
When our Lord addressed the dying thief, he said, io-day
thou shalt be with me in paradise.”


The Apostle desired to depart and be with Christ, which would
be far better, and this on the ground that his soul would be with
Christ. The Bible teaches that the souls of believers enter on
rest at death, and that the wicked will be driven away in his wicked-
ness. The resurrection, of the body will make the happiness or
misery complete.
ll—Judgment. Two or three particulars.
1. The second advent of Christ. 2 Thes. i., 7-10 —“ IheLord
himself shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.” He will appear
personally, in the clouds in like manner as the disciples saw him
depart. 1 Thes. iv., 16 —“ And the Lord himself shall descend
from heaven with a shout, the voice of the archangel, and the
trump of Goa.”
2. Preceding the judgment will be the resurrection. The hour
is coming when all who are in their graves shall hear the voice of
the Son of God and shall come forth, they that have done good unto
the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the
resurrection of condemnation John v., 28-29. And many (the mul-
titude) of those that sleep in the dust of the earth shall rise, some to
everlasting life and some to shame and everlasting contempt. There
will be a resurrection of both the just and of the unjust; but there is
a more copious reference to the one than the other; the bodies of his
people in all that is essential to their identity shall be raised from
the grave, or recovered from the depth of the sea, and being en-
dued with life incorruptible and immortal, shall be reunited to
their spirits, that participate in and increase their happiness—“ who
shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned and made
like unto His glorious body, according to the working whereby
He is able to subdue all things unto Himself.”
3. The glory and grandeur of it is not in the power of language
to express, or of mind to conceive. Read the solemn and
sublime description of it given by our Lord in Matt. 15 —“ The Son
of Man shall come in his glory, and all his holy angels with him.
Then shall he sit on the throne of his glory, and before him shall
be gathered all nations, and he shall separate them one from an-
other, as the shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats.” Rev.
xx.. j 1 . 1^ —“ And I saw a great white throne and him that sat on it,
from whose face the heaven and earth fled away, and there was
found no place for them. And I saw the dead, small and great,
stand before God, and the books were opened, and another
book was opened, which is the Book of Life, and the dead were
judged out of those things, which were written in the book, ac*
cording to their works,” &c.
There are two books. 1. The book of God’s remembrance. In
His mind there ia a record of all, of every sinful thought and


every sinful act, of every malicious and profane word, the oaths of
the swearer, the dealing language of the impure and unchaste ;
the most secret thoughts. He will bring to light the hidden things
of darkness and will make manifest the counsels of the heart. Good
will also be recorded.
2, Another book the book of life. -
Here will be found the names of those who are _ saved. They
were once guilty like others, but they repented, believed in Christ
and were justified, their sins put away and remembered no more
against them ; their faith became evidenced by their works, their
names are in the Book of Life, while those who neglected the
salvation of Christ are not found there.
I I I,—Heaven.
Christ will approve of his followers, and confess them before
the Father and before an assembled universe. Then shall he say
unto them on his right hand, “ Come, ye bussed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you before the foundation of
the world. For I was hungry, and ye gave me meat; thirsty, and
ye gave me drink.” Their faith evinced itself by works. They
shall be with Christ. “ They shall enter through the gates into the
city.” Their happiness complete, no enemy shall enter. Rev,
XXI*
4 ’’ Those on his left hand. Would it were not necessary to reverse
the picture. It is a solemn and awful subject j the last on which one
ought to dogmatize. We should refer to it with tender feelings,
as our Lord did. Let us cite his words, and leave them in their
solemn and terrible significance to produce their appropriate effect.
« Fear not them that kill the body, for they cannot kill the soul,
but rather fear him that destroys both body and soul in hell.’
“ If thy right hand offend thee cut it off, and cast it from thee, for
it is better for thee to enter into life maimed than with both hands
to be cast into hell fire.”
« These shall go away into everlasting punishment.” These are
the certainties of the future —“ the things that ?hall be.’ From the
last may God save us ! .
Hl.—The Gospel provides against the uncertainties , and against
the certainties of the future.
1. Against the uncertainties of the future, by providing for the
present. It sets man right towards God, and therefore right and
safe with regard to the future. Christianity is a remedial scheme,
a restorative power, it is healing for the spiritually diseased.
To feel this is the first step towards restoration. It gives out that
there is remedy for the diseased —that there is food for the hungry.
The healthy and the full will not come, only those who have a sense
of need. . '
2. You must feel that out of Christ you are a sinner condemned,


without hops and doomed to death. He thatbel ieveth not, the
wrath of God abideth on him.
3. Next lay hold of Christ, lean on him, commit your soul to
him by an act of trust, and thus you are forgiven, accepted, justi-
fied, and have peace with God.
4. The Saviour, by his Spirit, renews and sanctifies ; and this
comes through the very faith in him which justifies. This faith is
to be exercised every day.
5. There is included in this preparation for the uncertainties of
the future, the providential guidance of our heavenly Father.
The providence of God is all-comprehensive, and it has reference
to the minutest affairs in life’s history. A sparrow falleth not to
the ground without our Father, and the hairs of our head are all
numbered. He guides the steps of all who trust in him. Christ
will be with them, the spirit dwells in them, and thus they are
prepared tor whatever may come. It also provides for the great
certainties of the future,
I. —lt Prepares for Death,
There is comfort to all believers in the prospect of it. The
sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law, but thanks
be unto God who giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ. The law condemns the sinner, but Christ by his death
has removed this condemnation, the sentence is therefore reversed
when you believe on him. Death has no sting. A friend I knew hav-
ing heard a sermon on the words “And hath the keys of death,” &c.,
said “I fear death no longer.”
11. —Preparation for the Judgment.
It is with deep solemnity we think of the transactions of that
day, the gathering of the nations, the judgment seat, the sentence
of acquittal or condemnation. But let us not take a gloomy view
of it. We need not fear. Who is the judge ? The Lord Jesus Christ.
The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment to the
Son. He has power to execute judgment because he is the Son of
Man. It is one in man’s nature that will judge us. Magna Charta
was extorted by the Barons of England from King John. Among
the rights it guaranteed, was that no one should be condemned with-
out a fair trial, and only by the verdict of his Peers or equals. The
men in the jury box are men of like nature and circumstances with his
own. Christ the Son of Man who died for us, and in whom we
have believed will be our judge, and we who have received him
should look forward with hope and without fear.
“ IWd shall I stand on that great day.”
111. — Heaven.
“Ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Father’s house
are many mansions, Igo and prepare a place for you. Father I


will that those whom thou hast given me be with me where I am,
that they may behold my glory.”
IV. —Future punishment awaits the wicked only. _
Sin must not go unpunished. God has shown his displeasure
with it. It is necessary to the moral order of the world that evil
should meet with its just retribution. If we object to this, we
might at once object to judges, and magistrates, and ponce,, ana
'other securities for the protection of life and property. ahe sin
of the unbeliever is despising God’s love, slighting the message
of Divine mercy, and resisting the influence of the spirit of God.
If you perish it is not because you have been appointed to wrath,
but it is because you would not be saved. 1 urn at once to him
who can deliver. You need in order to this to feel you are a con-
demned sinner; next, to receive Christ for your Saviour; an
then to depend on the spirit of God through faith in Christ for
the carrying on the work of grace in your heart to fit you for ser-
vice on earth, and for the rest and blessedness of heaven.
S. GLASSOP, West City Machine Printing Office, 92 Clarence-street, Sydney.




