

意大氣怖來大
OUTLINES
OF
THE MAHAYANA
AS TAUGHT BY
BUDDHA.




OUTLINES OP THE MAHAYANA
AS TAUGHT BY BUDDHA.
BY
S. KURODA,
Superintendent of Education of the Jôdo-Sect.
CAREFULLY EXAMINED BY THE SCHOLARS OF THE
TENDAI, SHINGON, RINZAI, SoTo, AND SHIN
SECTS, AND TRANSLATED BY M. WAKU, CHIEF
INSTRUCTOR, AND Y. KANO AND M. NA-
RITA, TEACHERS OF ENGLISH, AT
THE JoDoSHUGAKU-HONKo.
FOR CIRCULATION AMONG THE MEMBERS OF THE PARLIAMENT OF
RELIGIONS TO BE HELD IN CHICAGO IN CONNECTION
WITH THE WORLD’S COLUMBIAN FAIR.
✓
Edited by
THE BUKKYO GAKKUWAI,
Asakusa, Tokyo, Japan.
26th Year of Meiji.
( r 593).


PRINTED AT THE “ SHUEISHA,” TOKYO, JAPAN.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Introductory Remarks i
Chapter I.
Principles of Buddha’s Teaching x
Chapter 11.
Moksha and Nirvana 4
Chapter 111.
Actions and Results, Cause and Effect 7
Chapter IV.
Pure and Impure Causes and Conditions 12
Chapter V.
All Things are Nothing but Mind 16
Chapter VI.
Sects in Buddhism 22




INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
-
Two thousand nine hundred and twenty years ago
(B.C. 1027), our Great Sage, the world-honored Sid-
dhartha was born in the palace of his father, Raja Sud-
dhodana, in the city of Kapilvastu, Magadha. Lament-
ing that men are inevitably subject to the sufferings of
sickness, old age, and death, he, in his nineteenth year,
forsook his heirship to the kingdom and all his preci-
ous possessions, and secretly stole out of the palace
into the mountains to seek the path by which he
should be able to escape from these sufferings and
to attain to the perfect emancipation. Six years he
spent in meditation and asceticism ; but finding that
ascetism was not the path he was seeking, he aban-
doned it, and retired to the shade of the Bodhi tree, to
meditate upon the truth of nature. At last, having
clearly perceived the true nature of mind, he attained
to the perfect enlightenment, and henceforward he
was Sakya-Muni. This was in his thirtieth year.
After that, for fifty years, he exerted himself teaching
and enlightening sentient beings till, at the age of
seventy-nine, he left this world.


The precepts and doctrines of Buddha are very ex-
tensive and numerous, but they are all included in the
“Mahayana” and “ Hinayana.” The doctrine of
“ Hinayana ” teaches us how to arrive at Nirvaz/a
by renouncing the miseries of birth and death, and is,
therefore, called the “ doctrine of attaining to en-
lightenment through the perception of misery.” In
the Mahayana, birth and death, as well as Nirvana
itself, are taken to be one and the same ; and to reap
the grand fruit of Buddhahood by cultivating the great
wisdom is its aim. Hence it is called the “ doctrine
of attaining to enlightenment by perceiving the non-
existence of all things.” Though these two doctrines
are not without differences, they were both taught by
one Buddha, and are one and the same in their aim of
removing the delusions of men and of leading them to
the true enlightenment. They are nothing but dif-
ferent aspects of the same principle, adapted to the
capacities of converts ; and thus the Mahayana doc-
trine comprehends the whole of the Hinayana.
One thousand and sixteen years after Buddha’s
departure from this world (A.D. 67), Buddhism was
introduced into China; and four hundred and eighty-
five years later (A.D. 552), it came over to Japan. The
doctrines thus propagated were those of the Mahayana
and Hinayana of course. But in Japan all sects that
arose were founded upon the former doctrine, while the
latter was and is being studied by the Buddhist schol-
ars only as secondary branch of religious knowledge.
In Southern India, Ceylon, Birmah, Siam, etc., only
ii
OUTLINES OF THE MAHAHANA.


the Hinayana Is taught. In Nepau (Northern India),
Thibet, China, and Corea, the Mahayana doctrine
prevails more or less. After the lapse of three thou-
sand years, during which Buddhism has been ex-
tensively spread over the East, the two doctrines of
Mahayana and Hinayana are found still well-defined
and flourishing in our country.
The sound of a large bell reaches far and wide, but
the bell must be rung ; the doctrines of a great sage
are by no means restricted to a small district, but
opportunities for their propagation must be utilized.
That Buddhism has been propagated over the East
only and never spread to the West, is to be regretted
indeed, but can not now be helped. The advancement
of science, however, seems to induce the Christian
people of the West to inquire into Buddhism. When
it was first made known to them, even the Hinayana
doctrine of Southern India was highly admired by
them. How much more, then, must they not glorify
the wonderful doctrine of Mahayana! Since the
Restoration of Meiji, the followers of Buddhism in our
country had always had in their mind the propagation
of Buddhism to the Western countries, and are only
waiting for an opportunity. The Parliament of Re-
ligions to be held this- year in connection with the
World s Columbian Fair, is a very good opportunity
to make known among the Christian countries the
doctrine of Mahayana. The “ Bukkyo-Gakkuwai,” a
society whose sole aim is the propagation of Bud-
dhism, resolved to take advantage of this opportunity
iii
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.


to impart to those Christians who are willing to
receive truth the light of Buddhism, and thus to
discharge their duty towards them as Buddhists and
as fellow-men. For this purpose they entrusted the
author with the preparation of a short treatise on
Buddhism. Strong sympathy induced the author to
undertake the task. First invoking the help of
Buddha, and then consulting the writings of ancient
sages, he has written, without prejudice to any of
the different sects, this epitome upon the Mahayana,
in which some attention is also given to the Hinayana
doctrine.
The doctrine of Mahayana is both wide and deep,
and can hardly be treated of exhaustively. But should
the readers carefully study the few chapters of this
treatise, they will be able to form clear ideas of the
doctrine itself. A few words upon the arrangements
and connections of the chapters in this treatise may
not, the author thinks, be altogether useless to the
readers.
The purpose of Buddha’s preaching was to bring into
light the permanent truth, to reveal the root of all
sufferings, and thus to lead all sentient beings into the
path of the perfect emancipation from all passions.
Harmony with this path, therefore, brings out every
beauty of virtue ; admits every true science ; enlightens
every class of men, monarchs and subjects, noble and
humble, rich and poor, strong and weak ; and makes
every country prosperous. Those who are not ac-
quainted with the purpose of Buddha, however, are
iv
OUTLINES OF THE MAHAYANA.


apt, in professing Buddhism, to stick to one corner
only in neglect of the other three, and to hold
perverted and heretical views contrary to the true
aspect of the perfect emancipation. This must be
first borne in mind by those who study Buddhism.
The author, therefore, sets forth the Principles of
Buddha’s Teaching in the first chapter.
The benefits which Buddhism bestows are very
numerous. In their substance and ultimate end, they
may be summed up as leading men to the perfect
emancipation by breaking through their delusions, and
as enabling them to benefit gods and men through their
achievements of great wisdom and felicity. A reli-
gion however excellent, virtue however praiseworthy,
learning however profound, wisdom however great,
are not in concord with the path of emancipation, if
they are colored by the least prejudice. Thus the
good sayings and the good conduct of those who have
not true view, are compared by the Bodhisattva Na-
garjuna to words accidentally formed on boards by the
wood-worm, for such sayings and such conduct are
not inspired by the light of wisdom. The aim of
Buddhism is to rouse men to the true view by break-
ing up delusions and to lead them to the path of per-
fect emancipation and Nirvana. So the author has
treated of Emancipation and Nirvana in the second
chapter.
To attain the perfect emancipation, the ultimate aim
of Buddhism, one must understand, and believe in, the
law of cause and effect. All occurrences in the world,
V
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.


the phenomena of birth and death, the states visible
and invisible, all are rigidly governed by the law of
cause and effect. It is only after the full understand-
ing of this principle that the truth of non-individuality
can be comprehended, that the perfect emancipation
can be attained ; by this alone, all good conduct and
all virtues, such as pity, benevolence, etc., are called
forth, and all bases of virtue, such as forbearance,
energy, etc., are perfected. The causal connection
between actions and effects, therefore, is the topic of
the third chapter.
Having understood the law of causation, one must
know that the states in which Buddhas, Bodhisattvas,
and gods are, and the results which appear in the
three worlds and six states, are all sprung up through
the force of this law, and that they are limitless.
The causal aspect of things pure and impure is, there-
fore, treated of in the fourth chapter.
But though the law of causation extends to all
things and is limitless in its dominion, all these things
are yet but waves raised on the sea of man’s mysteri-
ous mind. There are no natural Buddhas nor natural
gods. Let us, therefore, believe in the mysterious
nature of mind and try to unveil its true essence by
practicing all virtue forever and everywhere in infinite
time and space ; for in this way Sakya-muni and all
other Buddhas of the past ages have arrived at the
perfect enlightenment. Let us, therefore, follow the
holy track of Buddhas and achieve the perfect en-
lightenment, for the wonderful essence of our mind is
OUTLINES OF THE MAHAYANA.


not different from that of Buddhas. The fifth chapter
is, therefore, allotted to a discussion of the principle
that all things are nothing but mind.
The doctrines of Buddha are numbered at over
eighty-thousand, but they were only doctrines appli-
cable to special circumstances. Though the gates are
thus very numerous, yet they all lead to the palace of
the perfect emancipation, the goal of Buddhism. The
separation of the adherents of the Mahayana into vari-
ous sects after Buddha’s departure from this world is
also due adaptation to special circumstances. And
though different sects are not without their differences,
they have yet but one and the same aim. The
author, thus, concludes this treatise with a chapter on
Sects in Buddhism.
The doctrine of Mahayana, however, is both wide
and deep. It can hardly be communicated by words
nor understood by thinking, and it is certainly impos-
sible to give it the full significance it deserves in a
treatise so short as this. This is, therefore, only a very
rough sketch of the Mahayana. Moreover, the author
does not make any claim to literary ability, and there
may be many passages that are not sufficiently clear.
But should the readers read and re-read this treatise
and ponder over its contents, the help of Buddhas shall
come from without, the wonderful nature of their mind
shall reveal itself from within, and the doctrine of the
Mahayana shall be clearly understood.
vii
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.




CHAPTER I.
Principles of Buddha’s Teaching,—True
Nature of Buddhism.
All sentient beings, enwrapped by absurd covetous-
ness, are suffering from innumerable pains, without
being able to enjoy the highest and everlasting
happiness. Bhagavat sakya, taking pity on their
miserable condition, came to this world, and breaking
off their attachment to this covetousness, showed
them the path to the true “Moksha” (perfect em-
ancipation from all passions).
There is nothing in things themselves that enables
us to distinguish in them either good or evil, right or
wrong. It is but man’s fancy that weighs their
merits and causes him to choose one and to reject
the other. Buddha’s insight into things, his words, and
actions were in perfect accord with truth itself; and in
the teachings of his whole life, he never set forth
unchanging doctrine by establishing fixed dogmas.
Although “ Anatman ” (non-individuality) is the gene-
ral principle of Buddhism, yet his teaching this
principle was meant not so much to show the
true meaning of “Anatman” as to destroy man’s
erroneous attachment to ego. Thus Katyana, a


disciple of Buddha, was justly reproved by him for
insisting’ on the doctrine of “Anatman.” When he
said, “ Things exist,” he did not mean to show their
existence, nor to teach their non-existense
when he said, “Things do not exist.” He only
meant to discard the prejudiced attachment to
either of the doctrines, and to make men
follow the absolute truth of nature. As Con-
fucius, though he taught filial duty differently on
different occasions, never missed its essential prin-
ciple ; or as the means for governing states, however
various they may be, have the sole object of promoting
the welfare and securing the happiness of the people
so it is also with everything that Buddha has said or
done. Though from the words and sentences of his
teaching, different and diverse imports might be
collected, yet his sole end was to lead men to the
path of the true Moksha.
The doctrines of Buddhism are estimated to be
eighty-four thousand in number, yet they have no
xe orms ;so that in the teachings of Buddha
through his whole life, neither invariable doctrines nor
c r£nCe t 0 any ° f them can be found - In
r ” (dis Courses of Buddha) it is written that
uddha never uttered even one word since his attain-
ment to the perfect enlightenment; in the “ Abhid-
larma ” (discourses of Bodhisattva), the biased
ibservance of disciplines and precepts are blamed.
He who tries to find out the essence of Buddhism
rom the mere words of the Sutras, though he read
2
OUTLINES OF THE MAHAYANA.


through thousands of volumes, shall never be able to
comprehend it fully ; and what little he thinks
he has comprehended, may not be free from errone-
ous conceptions. Thus Mahadeva (who lived about
one hundred years after Buddha) perused the whole
Tripi/aka, but gained nothing ; while Suddhipamhaka,
a disciple of Buddha, read only a short piece from the
Sutra, and amid his menial duties of sweeping in a
monastery, he realized the essence of Buddhism.
The true meaning of Buddhism, therefore, can not be
sought in the mere words and sentences of the
Sutras. Those who study Buddhism without compre-
hending the true reason of Buddha’s teaching, and
see fixity in its doctrines, are not different from
heretics. They may be compared to blind men
standing on the brink of a precipice. As the pure
water that passes through the throat of a poisonous
reptile becomes itself poisonous, so in the ordinary
mind that seeks Buddhism in the words and sentences
of the Sutras, every word and every sentence becomes
impregnated with prejudices, and the true path to
Moksha can not be found.
3
principles of buddha’s teaching.


CHAPTER II.
“ Moksha ” and “ Nirvana ” —object
of Buddhism.
Sentient beings, roving within the two spheres of
pain and pleasure, are trying to seek the latter and to
shun the former. This desire is the manifestation in
them of the natural attributes of things ; but being
compelled, in consequence of their “ Karma ” (actions)
to enjoy pleasure or to suffer pain, and restrained by fa-
vorable or unfavorable circumstances, they have no
freedom. In ancient times there were in India ninety-
five schools of heretics, whose views, though different
in particulars, agreed in the belief that the “ Palace of
Heaven ” was the place of emancipation. This false
view came from their not understanding the principle
that effects depend upon causes, and from their think-
ing the world of man the region of pains and crimes,
and the Palace of Heaven ” the place of peaceful
enjoyment and emancipation.
Being ignorant of the causes of pain and pleasure,
and incapable of knowing the true nature of Moksha,
the ordinary minds, on account of their own false
discriminations and blind attachments, roam about
within the world of man, Heaven, and the worlds of
unmixed miseries. Of these, the worst are the three


worlds of miseries (of beasts, hungry ghost, and hell),
the best is Heaven, and the world of man is a place
where good and evil are mingled. Those who are in the
world of man are exempted from the worst evils ; and
those who are in Heaven, are freed from the evils found
in the world of man. But to be partly free from evil, is
not perfect emancipation ; nor is enjoying a part of ex-
cellent fruit, perfect happiness. There is no restraint in
things nor discrimination in mind. When one is freed
from these restraints and discriminations, mind be-
comes pure, and the true Moksha is attained, no
matter whether it be in Heaven or in the world of man.
There is no distinction between right and wrong in
things ; it is man’s own conjecture that makes the dis-
tinction. In any doctrine there is nothing either agree-
able or disagreeable ; it is man’s inclination that makes
it the one or the other. Men are given to joy and sor-
row ; their dispositions are capricious ; and blinded by
worldliness, they see not the true path. There are
some who think their learning the most profound,
and disparage that of others. There are others who,
addicted to the belief they were well taught, show
increasing respect for their own'blief and at the same
time increasing disgust for that of others. All this
originates from prejudice and over-confidence. Not
knowing that they are masters of their own mind, such
men take their mind to be their masters ; hence abun-
dance of trivial controversies. The delusion of at-
tachments, of distinctions between one’s own self and
that of others, interior and exterior, subject and object,
5
MOKSHA AND NIRVANA


rough and fine, shallow and deep, thick and thin, etc.,
is clearly explained in the “ Abhidharmaphaka.”
Rising above love and hatred, not seeing friend or
enemy, right or wrong, and abiding in the truth even
among worldly relations, passing the time peacefully
and thus attaining to perfect freedom from all res-
traints; this is the state of the true Moksha. To
be free from all pains of restraint and to reach the
state of the perfect and everlasting happiness ; this is
the highest Nirvana. For then all mental phenomena,
such as blind desires, etc., are annihilated. And as
such mental phenomena are annihilated, there appears
true nature of mind with all its innumerable functions
and miraculous actions. Nirvana, therefore, is by no
means a state of mere extinction. Nor is Moksha
necessarily very far off. It is said in the Sutras that a
Bodhisattva sees Moksha in the unenlightened mind
of living beings; again it is stated in the “Abhidharma”
that Moksha is open to all, to clergy and laity, to
high and low, to great and humble. In the Hinayana,
mind and body are considered as the sources of pain,
and, consequently, Moksha is equivalent to the leav-
ing of the six states of life, (deva, man, asura, beast,
hungry ghost, and hell) giving up mind and body,
and Nirvana is to attain to the eternal extinction of
them. This view comes from the doctrine called
“ seeking extinction,” and is only a partial exposition
of Buddhism. The true nature of Moksha and Nir-
vana, therefore, can not be understood from the point
of view of the Hinayana alone.
6
OUTLINES OF THE MAHAYANA.


CHAPTER III.
Actions and Results, Causes and Effects.—
The Law of Generation and Extinc-
tion of all Things.
The truth is one and the same in all times and is
universal. When the clouds gather and rain falls,
plants grow. The law of causation extends to all
things of the universe, and manifests itself unmistake-
ably wherever causes are accompanied by favorable
conditions. Where there is a cause, there is an effect,
as the echo follows the sound. Without sowing the
farmer will wait for a harvest in vain ; the monarch
who oppresses his subjects, can not expect peace ;
for the expectations of these two are against the law
of causation. A cause is invariably accompanied with
its corresponding effect, and an effect has, of necessity,
a corresponding cause that produced it. To produce
an effect, however, a cause requires adventitious aid
from without. These prerequisites are called condi-
tions. Seed, for example, is a cause, the plant is its
effect, and rain, dew, water, soil, light, heat, etc., are
favorable conditions. There is no reason why a cause
accompanied with favorable conditions, would not
produce its effect. Sa;«sara (ever-recurring births and
deaths among the six worlds), distinction between the


pure and impure, and the generation of all things, are
rigidly subject to the law of cause and condition.
Even Buddhas of the three ages (past, present, and
future) have not been and shall not be able to alter
this great law.
Among heretics, some forms of the theory of caus-
ation are also maintained ; but they dp not acknow-
ledge that birth and death are caused by the co-oper-
ation of causes and conditions. There is a school of
heretics that holds that the nature of all things is per-
manent. Before things take their forms they are con-
tained in “One”; when they take forms they appear
as mountains, rivers, men, etc.; and when they dis-
appear they arc again absorbed in the “ One.” This
One is called “Prakliti” (hidden element), and those
which, take forms are called the twenty-three “ Tat-
tvas (realities) ; the former being the root of the
latter. There is another school of heretics that main-
tains that the four great principles, earth, water, fire,
and air, are the elements from which all things were
and are being produced. From the combinations of
these principles, mind and body are formed ; so are
the heavens and the earth, the mountains and the
rivers. Again, there is another body of heretics who
hold that the universe and all things therein were
created by a creator. The forgoing opinions have
originated from the erroneous views called the Nasti-
ka-drfsh/i and the Astika-drfshd. These heritics con-
sider the nature of all things which are produced by
causes and conditions, as permanent or as created by
OUTLINES OF THE MAHAYANA.


an agent. This'is the fallacious view called Astika-
drishti, which invests the productions of fancy with
reality, and may be, likened to the effort of binding the
moon upon the water with the hair of tortoises.
Again, being unable to see the true origin of
misery they deny that all things owe their origin
to causes and conditions, and being ignorant of
the principle of ever-recurring births and deaths,
they acknowledge only the composition and decom-
position of things. This is the Nastika-dmlFi, which
diminishes the nature of things through their fancies,
and may be likened to the attempt of making a ship
sail on a plain. The conceited and proud cherish these
prejudices called “
drishii” and ignore the law of causes and conditions.
But were these heretics to comprehend this great law
rightly, their theories of “ Prakliti ” or of the existence
of a creator might be reconciled with Buddhism.
Wanderings in the six states of life depend upon the
law of causation only. There are neither creators nor
created ; nor are men real beings. It is actions and
causes that, under favorable conditions, give birth to
them. For men are nothing more than the temporary
combinations of five “ Skandhas,” or constituents
(matter, perception, conception, will, knowledge).
The beginning of this combination is their birth ; its
decomposition, their death. During the continuation of
this combined state, good and bad actions are done,
seeds of future happiness and pain are sown, and thus
the alternation of birth and death goes on without
9
ACTIONS AND RESULTS, CAUSES AND EFFECTS.


end. Men are no real beings that wander about
between birth and death by themselves, nor is there
any ruler that makes them do this, but it is their own
actions that bring about these results. The aggregate
actions of all sentient beings give birth to the varieties
of mountains, rivers, countries, etc. They are caused
by aggregate actions, and so they are called “ Adhi-
pati-phala” (aggregate fruits). As those who are
virtuous in their heart, are never wicked in their
countenance, and as in the countries where good
customs prevail, good omens appear, and where
people are wicked, calamities arise, so men’s aggregate
action bring forth their appropriate fruits. By the parti-
cular actions of individuals, each man receives mind
and body corresponding to the causes at work, internal
causes of actions being favored by external conditions.
And as these good and bad actions yield fruits, not
when they are done, but at some future time; so’they
are called “ Vipaka-phala ” (fruits that ripen at some
future time). The .period from birth to death in
which the body continues, is the life of man; and
that from formation to destruction, in which they
assume similar forms, is the duration of countries,
mountains, rivers, etc. The death of sentient beings
as well as the formation and destruction of countries,
mountains, rivers, etc., are endless in their operation.’
As the circle which has no end, they also have neither
beginning nor end. Though there exist neither real
men nor real things, yet effects appear and disappear
where actions are accompanied with conditions, just
10
OUTLINES OF THE MAHAYANA.


as the echo follows the sound ; and all things, rough
or fine, large or small, come and go every moment,
without any fixed forms. Men and things, therefore,
are mere names for durations in which similar forms
continue.
Our present life is the reflection of past actions.
Men consider these reflections as their real selves.
Their eyes, noses, ears, tongues, and bodies, as well
as their gardens, woods, farms, residences, servants,
and maids, men imagine to be their own posses-
sions ; but, in fact, they are but results end-
lessly produced by innumerable actions. In tracing
everything back to the ultimate limits of the
past, we cannot find a beginning ; hence it is said
that birth and death have no beginning. Again when
seeking the ultimate limit of the future, we can not
find the end. These facts caused Bodhisattvas to
make the strong and steady resolution to attain
Nirvawa and to save all beings. Those who, through
this resolution, forsake all vices and practice all vir-
tues and thus attain to the highest Moksha, are
called Buddhas.
11
ACTIONS AND RESULTS, CAUSES AND EFFECTS.


CHAPTER IV.
Pure and Impure Causes and Conditions—
Reason why there are Differences
between Confusion and
Enlightenment.
The attributes possessed by the “ Sravakas' ” and
Pratyeka-buddhas (these are two kinds of sages,
who strive after Nirvana as taught in the Hinayana)
“ Bodhisattvas ” (those who strive after Nirvana as
taught in the Mahayana) and “ Buddhas,” the actions
done by them, and the countries they live in, are
called “pure things.” The attributes, actions, and
countries of those who are in the worlds of gods,
hells, hungry ghosts, brutes, and men, are called
“impure things.” Pure things come from pure
actions, and impure things, from impure actions.
What are called pure actions, are those good actions
done, after the desire for Moksha has once been
awakened through the clear comprehension and the
sincere and strong belief in the causality of the
generation and extinction of all things. Those good
actions that are done without men being aware of
their doing good, without expectation of reward, and
without perceiving the magnitudes of good, are also
pure. Of pure actions there are two kinds, secular
and ecclesiastical. All worldly virtues, such as loyal-


ty, benevolence, etc., are secular good actions ; while
the practices which lead to Moksha and which are
observed by those of the “ Triyana,” or three vehicles
of “ s'ravaka,” “ Pratyeka-buddha,” and “ Bodhis-
attva,” who cultivate the three learnings of precepts,
meditation, and wisdom, are called ecclesiastical good
actions. On the other hand, impure actions are those
which cause the wanderings in the six worlds. In
these there are also two kinds of good and evil. Im-
pure good actions are loyalty, filial piety, benevolence,
charity, observance of precepts, meditation, etc. In
this case these actions originated in the promptings of
mind, and as the actions done by those who do not
strive for Moksha can yield excellent fruits only in
the worlds of gods and men, they can not save them
from the sufferings incidental to birth and death.
These actions are hence called impure. Killing,
stealing, hypocrasy, cheating, etc., are called bad ac-
tions. Those who do bad actions wander from darkness
to darkness, while those who practice good actions
pass from light to light. Pure actions bring forth
the Pure Lands of all the quarters of the universe
(lands produced by the pure mind) and the sages of
“Triyana”; while impure deeds produce the Im-
pure Lands everywhere (lands produced by impure
mind) and good or bad results. Where there
are actions there are corresponding results; and as
the varieties of actions are innumerable, so are the
fruits infinite.
After the heaven and the earth began to exist
13
PURE AND IMPURE CAUSES AND CONDITIONS.


(through the actions of pre-existing sentient beings)
there appeared human beings ; and after the appear-
ance of human beings, there sprang up the distinctions
etween high and low, noble and humble, and all the
re ations between monarch and subjects, father and
son, husband and wife, elder and younger brothers,
senior and junior, etc. When the monarch is benevo-
lent, and the subject loyal, when the father is affection-
ate and the son obedient, every one doing his duty,
hey are said to have attained to the perfect path.
Men, f d S) and Buddhas have paths of their own.
hough the true essence of mind has no distinctions,
the distinctions between purity and impurity caused by
actions are innumerable. All virtues appear in ac-
cordance with this essence of mind, all vices originate
against it; for the true essence of mind is originally
pure and has no distinctions between good and evil,
w ich conceptions areonly phenomena produced incon-
sequence of actions. Virtues are pure things, so they
are in harmoney with the essence of mind; vices are
confused things, so they are opposed to it. The law
of causation is as infallible and certain as the flame
ascends to the sky and as water flows to the sea. So
actions m harmony with the essence of mind become
the causes for indistinction, and at last produce cor-
responding fruits similar to those acquired by Bud-
dhas ; while actions opposed to the essence of mind
become the causes for distinction and finally bring
forth the fruit of the distinctions that are found in the
worlds of men, gods, and the three states of misery
14
OUTLINES OF THE MAHAYANA.


Even the least virtues must, therefore, be praised, and
the least vice must be blamed. Bodhisattvas teach
the path for men in the world of men, and practice the
*path of gods in that of gods, to protect senti-
ent beings, and to lead them to purity. But this
purity is unattainable to sceptics, unbelievers, and the
proud. Those who scorn the sages and scandalize the
pure state without attaining themselves to it, are not
to be considered noble-minded.
15
PURE AMD IMPURE CAUSES AND CONDITIONS.


CHAPTER V.
All Things are Nothing but Mind— The
true Nature of all Existence.
The distinctions between pure and impure is made
y t e mind ; so are also all the changes in all thino- s
around us. All things that are produced by causes and
conditions, are inevitably destined to extinction
There is nothing that has any reality; when con-
ditions come things begin to appear, when con-
itions cease these things likewise cease to exist.
Like the foam of the water, like the lightening flash
and like the floating, swiftly vanishing clouds they
are only of momentary duration. As all things
have no constant nature of their own, so there is no
actuality m pure and impure, rough and fine, large
and small, far and near, knowable and unknowable,
ec. n this account it is sometimes said that all
mgs are nothing. The apparent phenomena around
us are, however, produced by mental operations
within us, and thus distinctions are established.
These distinctions produced by mental operations
aie, lowever, caused by fallacious reasoning nurtured
by the habits of making distinctions between ego and
non ego, good and bad, and by ignorance of the fact


that things have no constant nature of their own
and are without distinctions (when things thought
of have no corresponding reality, such thinking is
called fallacious. It may be compared to the action
of the ignorant monkey that tries to catch the image
of the moon upon water). Owing to this fallacious
reasoning, a variety of phenomena constantly appear
and disappear, good and bad actions are done, and
the wanderings through the six ways or states of life
are thus caused and maintained.
All things are included under subject and object.
The subject is an entity in which mental operations
are awakened whenever there are objects, while the
object consists of all things, visible, and invisible,
knowable and unknowable, etc. The subject is not
something that occupies some space in the body
alone, nor does the object exist outside of the subject.
The innumerable phenomena of subject and object, of
ego and non-ego, are originated by the influence of
fallacious thinking, and consequently various prin-
ciples, sciences, and theories are produced.
To set forth the principle of “Vidyamatra” (all
things are nothing but phenomena in mind), pheno-
mena of mind are divided into two kinds: “ Gos-
shiki” and “ Fumbetsujishiki.” They are also divided
into eight kinds : —i. ./Takshur-vijwana (mental opera-
tions depending on the eye), 2. srotra-vij«ana (those
depending on the ear), 3. Ghra«a-vij«ana (those de-
pending on the olfactory organs), 4. Gihva-vijwana
(those depending on the taste), 5. Kaya-vijwana
17
ALL THINGS ARE NOTHING BUT MIND.


(those depending on the organs of touch), 6. Mano-
viplana (thinking operations), 7. Klish*a-mano-vij>&.
na (subtile and ceaseless operations), 8. Alaya-vima-
na (all things come from and are contained in this
operations; hence its name, meaning receptacle)
According to the former division, the various pheno-
mena which appear as subjects and objects are
divided into two kinds the perceptible and knowable
the imperceptible and unknowable. The imperceptible
and unknowable phenomena are called “ Gosshiki ”
while the perceptible and knowable phenomena are
called Fumbetsujishiki. Now what are the imper-
ceptible and unknowable phenomena ? Through the
influence of habitual delusions, boundless worlds
innumerable varieties of things spring up in the mind.’
This boundless universe and these subtile ideas are
not perceptible and knowable; only Bodhisattvas
beheve, understand, and become perfectly convinced
of these through the contemplation of “ Vidyamatra”-
hence they are called imperceptible and unknowable.’
What are the knowable and perceptible phenomena ?
Not knowing that these imperceptible and unknow-
able phenomena are the productions of their own
minds, men from their habitual delusions invest them
with an existence outside of mind, as perceptible
mental phenomena, as things visible, audible, etc
These phenomena are called perceptible and know-
Though there are thus two kinds, perceptible
and imperceptible phenomena, they occur upon the
same things, and are inseparably bound together
18
OUTLINES OF THE MAHAYANA.


even in the smallest particle. Their difference in
appearance is caused only by differences both in
mental phenomena, and in the depth of conviction.
Those who know only the perceptible things without
knowing the imperceptible, are called the unen-
lightened by Buddha. Of the eight mental opera-
tions, the eighth, Alaya-vijwana, has reference to
the imperceptible, while the first six refer to the
perceptible phenomena. All these, however, are
delusive mental phenomena.
In contra-distinction to the fallacious phenomena,
there is the true essence of mind. Underlying the
phenomena of mind, there is an unchanging principle
which we call the essence of mind ; the fire caused by
fagots dies when the fagots are gone, but the essence
of fire is never destroyed. The essence of mind is the
entity without ideas and without phenomena, and is
always the same. It pervades all things, and is pure
and unchanging. It is not untrue or changeable, so
it is also called “ Bhutatathata ” (permanent reality).
The essence and the phenomena of mind are
inseparable ; and as the former is all-pervading and
ever-existing, so the phenomena occur everywhere
and continually, wherever suitable conditions accom-
pany it. Thus the perceptible and imperceptible
phenomena are manifestations of the essence of mind
that, according to the number and nature of condi-
tions, develop without restraint. All things in
the universe, therefore, are mind itself. By this we
do not mean that all things combine into a mental
19
ALL THINGS ARE NOTHING BUT MIND.


unity called mind, nor that all things are emanation
rom it, but that without changing their places or ap
pearance, they are mind itself everywhere. Buddh;
saw this truth and said that the whole universe vva<
his own. Hence it is clear that where the essence o
mind is found and the necessary conditions accom-
pany it, the phenomena of mind never fail to appear,
So the essence of mind is compared to water, and its
phenomena to waves. The water is the essence the
waves are the phenomena ; for water produces w’aves
when a wind of sufficient strength blows over its sur-
face. The waves, then, are the phenomena, the water
is the essence ; but both are one and the same in reality.
Though there is a distinction between the essence
and the phenomena of mind, yet they are nothing
but one and the same substance, that is, mind. So
we say that there exists nothing but mind. Though
both the world of the pure and impure, and the
generation of all things, are very wide and deep yet
they owe their existence to our mind. Men, however
do not know what their own minds are ; they do not
clearly see the true essence, and, adhering to their
prejudices, they wander about between birth and death.
1 hey are like those who, possessing invaluable jewels
are nevertheless, suffering from poverty. Heaven and
* * re bUt WaVCS ' n the g*' e at sea of the universe :
Buddhas and demons are not different in their essence
Let us, therefore, abide in the true view and reach the'
rue comprehension of the causality of all things
Thus far we have briefly explained the principles of
20
OUTLINES OF THE MAHAYANA.


pure and impure, actions and results, and Vidya-
matra, from the standpoint of causation. The methods
and doctrines through which vice may be abandoned
and all excellent virtues cultivated, are fully detailed
in the Sutras and Abhidharmas of the Mahayana.
21
ALL THINGS ARE NOTHING BUT MIND.


CHAPTER VI.
Sects in Buddhism,
When Buddha came to this world, the time was ripe
for his teachings, and so those who heard him, at-
tained Moksha instantly. Those who are born after
Buddha are forever excluded from this benefit. After
Buddha’s departure from this world the higher class
of his disciples, Arya and others, who
had heard and seen him and were enlightened, as-
sembled at the Saptaparrca Cave of Magadha, in
Central India, to the number of one thousand, and in
ninety days, collected the TripiVaka which they
wrote upon the leaves of the Tala tree, to hand it
down to the posterity and to lead sentient beings to
the true enlightenment. After this, the Mahayana and
Hinayana doctrines were differently propagated. The
adherents of the latter doctrine divided into various
sects owing to differences in the interpretations of the
Hinayana Sutras preached by Buddha ; while among
the believers in the former doctrine, the same diver-
sity occurred, each sect taking as its standard a parti-
cular body of teaching as inculcated by Buddha at
a certain place and time, and explaining with it the
whole of the remaining Scriptures.
In India, two sects, those who adopted the Three


Gastras and those who made the Vidyamatra then-
standards, arose about 1100 years after Buddha, or
about 15 1 A.D. In China Kumarajiva first translated
and introduced the Three sastras, 1350 after Buddha
or 401 A.D. After him Dharma (or Bodhedharma)
founded the Dhyana sect and taught the doctrine of
the mental communication of thought without words,
1469 after Buddha, or 520 A.D. Child established the
the Tendai sect with its doctrines based on the Sad-
dharma-pu«Yarika-Sutra, 1524 after Buddha, or 575
A.D. Dosen formed the Vinaya sect with its teachings
derived from the Dharmagupta-Vinaya, about 1564
after Buddha, or about 615 A.D. Zendo founded the
Jodo sect based on the Amitayus-dhyana and
other Sutras, 1590 after Buddha, or 641 A.D. Genjo
and Jion originated the Hosso sect that adheres to the
Vidyamatra Sastra, etc., 1594 after Buddha, or 645
A.D. Genju instituted the Kegon sect with its teach-
ings resting on the Avata;«sake-Sutra, about 1625
after Buddha, or about 676 A.D. After all these had
been established, Amoghavajra and Keikwa organized
the Mantra sect, the doctrines of which are derived
from the mysteries of the Mahavairochanabhisam-
bodhi-Sutra, about 1669 after Buddha, or about 720
A.D. Besides these, there are many other sects which
need not be mentioned here. In Japan, Yekwan was
the introducer of the Three Sastras sect, 1574 after
Buddha, or 625 A.D.; Dosho, of the Hosso sect, about
1602 after Buddha, or about 653 A.D.; Doshun, of the
Kegon sect, 1685 after Buddha, or 736 A.D.; Ganjin, of
2 3
SECTS IN BUDDHISM.


the Ritsu sect, 1703 after Buddha, or 754 A.D.; Saicho,
of the Tendai sect, 1754 after Buddha, or 805 A.D.;
Kukai, of the Shingon sect, 1755 after Buddha, or 806
A.D.; Genku, of the Jodo sect, 2124 after Buddha,
or 117 S A.D.; and Yeisai, of the Rinzai sect, 2140
after Buddha, or 1191 A.D. Shinran founded the Shin
sect, 2173 after Buddha, or 1224 A.D.; Dogen intro-
duced the Soto sect, 2176 after Buddha, or 1227 A.D. ;
and Nichiren established the Hokke sect, 2201 after
Buddha, or 1252 A.D. Though these various sects
are not without differences in their views, yet they are
all founded upon the teachings of Buddha and are
alike in taking the true Moksha for their ultimate
end. For the principles of causation and of Anatman
are held both in the Mahayana and the Hinayana;
and the non-existence of both self (Atman) and of
things outside it (Dharma),” as well as the doctrine
that all things are nothing but mind, are the funda-
mental principles of all the sects adhering to the
Mahayana. Such being the fact, one may enter into
Buddhism through any of the above sects.
How these various sects interpret the doctrines of
Buddha, we will illustrate with an example from the
Jodo sect.
In this sect, the doctrines of Buddha are divided into
two the divisions, the “ Shodo-Mon ” and the “J6do-
Mon.” To understand what the former is, it is necess-
ary first to know the meaning of Shodo. The
Shodo, or true wisdom, is that by which one is enabled
to be enlightened and to attain Moksha. There
24
OUTLINES OF THE MAHAYANA.


are four kinds of wisdom; —i. inherent wisdom; 2.
wisdom acquired from learning ; 3. wisdom acquired
from meditation; 4. perfected wisdom. The first
kind of wisdom includes those natural capacities by
which men are enabled to comprehend science, liter-
ature, etc., and to read and understand the
though not so perfectly as to. wish for Moksha.
The second kind is that by which men, by
hearing worthy priests or learning sacred books,
are awakened to a deep belief and enter Bud-
dhism, and by which virtuous actions are prompted
in a mind yet disturbed and roaming. The third
kind is the wisdom in which the truth acquired through
meditation accords with that of the Sutras. The
fourth is that in which the meditative wisdom haying
been developed and become clearer, permanent truth
is seen by mental inspection and direct cognition
without learning or meditation. The true wisdom
which perfectly understands the principles of the
non-existence of self (Atman) and of things (Dharma),
as well as the fact that all things are nothing but
mind, through the influence of the last three kinds of
wisdom, is called Shodo, or true wisdom. That true
wisdom in which a part of these principles, that is, the
non-existence of the ego, (Atman), is perceived, is
called Hinayana. That wisdom in which the above
mentioned principles are all realized as a whole, is
called Mahayana. And that division of Buddhism
which teaches the way to acquire the true wisdom and
2 5
SECTS IN BUDDHISM.


to attain Moksha through men’s own actions done
in this world, whether it be Hmayana or Mahayana,
is called the Shodo-mon. The sects of Tendai,
Kegon, Sanron, Hosso, etc., belong to this division.
The Jodo-mon is that division in which those who
are unable to attain Moksha in this world, are
taught how to be first born in the Pure-Land through
the merit of believing in Buddhas and to acquire
the great fruit of Buddhahood by cultivating the
deeds and vows of Bodhisattva. The Jodo sect
of the present day belongs to this division. This
sect takes the Amitayus-dhyana-sutra, and the larger
and smaller Sukhavatioguha-sutras, etc., as its stand-
ards, and the chief aim of its adherents is to be born
in the Western Pure-Land of the Amitabha.
Though there are the two different passages of the
Shodo-mon and the Jodo-mon, Moksha is attained
equally through both. Nor is there any difference in
cultivating and practicing the deeds and vows of
Bodhisattvas : both aim at Buddhahood and can
attain true Moksha. Those who follow the former
division, though they attain Moksha in this world,
must still accomplish the excellent deeds and vows
of Bodhisattvas in the Pure-Land j while the followers
of the latter, though they are born in the Pure-Land,
must likewise cultivate and practice them, being
reborn into the impuredands. Thus from equal causes
equal effects are produced, and on this point there is no
difference. The only difference lies in the passages
26
OUTLINES OF THE MAHAYANA.


to Moksha and in the special aims taken at the
time when the first awakening occurs. We have no
space fully to dwell upon the various manners in
which the other sects analyze the principles of
Buddhism, but they may be inferred from the fore-
going.
27
SECTS IN BUDDHISM.


一丁目 十二 番地 (雹詁十 九番 〕
東京市牛迗 區市ヶ 谷加賀町
印刷所 秀英舍 工場
東京市芝圇 芝公園 地第二 十！ 號
印刷者 堀內辰之 介
東京 市淺草區 山谷 町六十 一番 地
發行者 伊達 靈堅
東京 市麻布 區笄町 四十一蝥地
著作者 黑 田眞涧
11ハ—^"—| 東京 市淺草區 吉野町 百廿六電
|施 本 1 發行所 佛敎學會
, 赞 1111 致
明治廿六年 八月 四日發行 I
明治廿六年 八月 一—日印 刷 (尽 權所有)




