

€F3ifpatfcß.^n : k^ } o®. 3.
OUTWARD BOUND;
HINTS TO’EMIGRANT FAMILIES.
LONDON:
THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY;
56 PATERNOSTER ROW, 65 ST. PAUL’S CHURCHYARD,
AND 164 PICCADILLY ;
AND SOLD BY THE BOOKSELLERS.
©GD6
I




ROBERT KERR


OUTWARD BOUND.


OUTWARD BOUND;
HINTS TO EMIGRANT FAMILIES.
LONDON:
THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY;
56, paternoster row; 65, st. Paul’s churchyard;
AND 164, PICCADILLY :
AND SOLD BY THE BOOKSELLERS.




yv / r
2 r jdf
.0, . N^/
BOUND ;
HINTS TO EMIGRANT FAMILIES.
Every day, in every part of the British islands,
the thoughts and hopes of hundreds are turned
towards distant homes, and they are not only think-
ing and hoping, but earnestly and actively getting
ready to leave the land of their birth, and to fol-
low the hundreds more who are already crowding
the decks of outward-bound emigrant ships.
The object of the following pages is to give
emigrants in humble circumstances some assist-
ance in their contemplated movements, especially
as regards preparation for the voyage ; the voyage
itself; and the future course, when the voyage
shall be over.
In two preceding works of this series, we have
referred to the subject of emigration generally,
and given some account of the Australian colo-
nies. We shall now suppose that our readers
have also considered the subject and made choice
of a future home, and that their ship is “ outward
bound ” for Australia. Our present remarks are
intended chiefly for fathers and mothers, heads of
emigrant families ; but the hints offered will not be
inapplicable to emigrants to any part of the world,
or to individual emigrants.
But before stepping on ship-board, there is
something to be done ; and our first chapter will
relate to some needful preparations fur the voyage.


CHAPTER I.
WHAT TO TAKE OUT, AND WHAT TO
LEAVE BEHIND.
Such of our readers as are going out in a govern-
ment ship, by government aid, will have received
instructions, among other matters, as to outfit;
but it will not be out of place here to repeat
some of those instructions, which will also be use-
ful to other emigrants, who, relying on their own
resources, may not be so well informed on this
subject.
Those assisted by government are told that
“ provisions, medical attendance, and cooking
utensils will be provided by the commissioners;
also new mattresses, bolsters, blankets, and coun-
terpanes, canvass bags to contain linen, etc., knives
and forks, spoons, metal plates, and drinking
mugs, which articles will be given to the emi-
grants after arrival in the colony, provided they
behave well on the voyage.”
But “ the emigrants must bring their own
clothing, which will be inspected at the port by
an officer of the commissioners ; and all parties
are particularly desired to observe that they will
not be allowed to embark unless they provide
themselves with a sufficient supply for the voyage.
The lowest quantity that can be admitted for each
person is as follows :
“For Males:—Six shirts; six pairs of stock-


ings; two pairs of shoes; two complete suits of
outer clothing.
“For Females :—Six shifts; two flannel petti-
coats ; six pairs of stockings ; two pairs of shoes ;
two gowns.
“ They must also bring their own sheets and
towels, and a supply of soap.”
Now this list will be a sort of guide to all
emigrants with regard to clothing; but we must
inform the reader that this is the smallest,
scantiest list, and that the same rules which give
that list, say also that “ the more abundant the
stock of clothing, the better it will be for the
health and comfort of the emigrant during the
passage and state that the length of the voyage
to Australia is about four months, and that as,
during the voyage, the emigrant will have to
pass through very hot and very cold weather, he
should be prepared for both.
Let us see, then, if we cannot enlarge and im-
prove this clothing outfit; supposing, for the time,
that our readers are not of the most destitute class
of emigrants.
First of all we will tell our friends, whether
male or female, that they need not be anxious to
take out fine clothes, nor ashamed to take out old
clothes. So long as they keep within bounds, as
regards bulk and weight, they should carry all
their old clothing with them, and their children’s
too. What they purchase for the occasion should
be strictly useful, and nothing beyond usefulness
should be much regarded.
For instance, to begin with the man : he ought
to provide himself with a couple of pairs of
thoroughly strong-nailed half-boots, such as will


stand the wear and tear of rough country work,
and will not want mending for months after he
has begun to wear them. It is an awkward thing
for a man in the Australian “ bush,” or anywhere
else, if a shoemaker or mender is not to be found
within dozens of miles of his home, to have un-
trusty shoe-leather. These new boots the emi-
grant should keep in store against he needs them,
and not on any account wear them during the
voyage. Any old shoes or boots will be good
enough to be spoiled by sea air and sea water;
and if he be so badly off’ in this respect as not to
have any old shoes or boots that he thinks even
sea-worthy, he should purchase a pair of lighter
shoes for the voyage.
Then, for outer clothing, the following are
advisable ; a pair or two of strong duck or can-
vass trousers, and a couple of pairs of fustian ; two
waistcoats, and two jackets, of the same material,
or something equally, or if possible, more lasting.
The jackets may be of the shooting-jacket order,
with plenty of pocket room, such as gamekeepers
wear at home.
A stout pea-jacket, or some other equally useful
sort of outer coat, will be found a necessary piece
of clothing on board ship during the cold part of
the voyage, and afterwards, in the Australian
rainy seasons: and two or three strong elastic
Guernsey shirts will be found very desirable for
working in.
As to head covering, a cloth cap or two, and a
broad-brimmed, low-crowned felt hat, such as at
present go by the name of “ wide-a-wakes,” will
be useful. When arrived at Ids destination, the
emigrant may employ some of his leisure time


in making straw hats for himself, if he knows how
to do it.
We do not think we shall be wrong in recom-
mending, in addition to this outer clothing, a pair
of leather leggins, or spatter-dashes, as such articles
are called in some parts of England. We are well
acquainted with their usefulness at home, in wet
dirty weather, and in pushing one’s way through
rough places ; and we fancy the same uses will be
found for them in Australia. We also venture to
recommend a blouse or two, made of stout strong
linen, something in the round frock style; and if
a broad leather belt to buckle round the waist
outside the blouse be provided, it would be found of
much use.
So much then, for outer garments : and perhaps
our readers may say, “Enough too; and more than
any poor emigrant is likely to be able to provide
for himself.” Certainly the articles mentioned
would cost some pounds ; and if in the enumeration
we have stretched beyond the emigrant’s means, he
must make his selection, and purchase only those
which seem most requisite, —doing as every one
must do in such affairs, as the wise saying teaches,
“ cutting the coat according to the cloth.”
As to under-clothing, if they can possibly be
afforded, an emigrant should have twelve strong
calico shirts; six pairs of worsted and six of
cotton stockings —if a larger number so much the
better ; two pairs of braces ; half a dozen or more
neck-kerchiefs; and three or four pairs of cotton
drawers. A few under-waistcoasts, also, of flan-
nel, or soft calico, will probably be very useful.
With regard to the clothing outfit of an emigrant
wife, we should say that if double the number of
b 3


each of the articles mentioned in the government
list we have quoted could be provided, there would
not be too many ; and in addition to these, she
will not forget such requisites as a bonnet or two,
neat and serviceable shawls, cloaks, kerchiefs for the
neck and pocket, caps for night and for day,
sleeping gear, and so forth. She will find the
need, both for herself and her children, of warm
wraps before the voyage is over, and afterwards
too. As to children’s clothing, their mother will
not be likely, we trust, to forget that, and she will
take care to provide them, as far as she can, with
what is most needful for them, according to their
ages and circumstances.
Then, in addition to personal clothing, emigrants
should not forget sheets and towels; and if they
are not going out with government aid, they must
add to these, blankets, coverlets, a mattress and
bolster or two,* according to the number of their
family, and two or three table-cloths; six pairs of
sheets, either of stout cotton or coarse linen ; and
two pairs of blankets with each mattress, will not
be too many for a good outfit. As to towels, the
more the better, that is, in reason; old wrappers
make good useful towels; and two or three dozen
of these for the whole family will be found none
too many.
Some of the articles mentioned, if purchased
* Our readers will bear in mind, that the berths, or
sleeping places in ships, are not very commodious; and
before they provide themselves with bedding, they should
learn the exact dimensions of their future berths. In
Government emigrant ships, mattresses and beds are alto-
gether and expressly prohibited, what is needful in that
way being supplied.


new for the occasion, may with advantage be
taken on ship-board unmade. There will be
plenty of time there, which will hang very heavy
on hand, if not well employed ; and an industrious
female —and remember, idle, listless women should
not emigrate—will be glad to have something to
do. Wherefore,female emigrants should not forget
to take plenty of needles, thread, cotton, tape, but-
tons, and all other sorts of common haberdashery,
to keep their hands and fingers occupied during
the voyage. Old clothes, too, except such as are
wanted to be worn on the voyage, may be left till
then, to be altered and mended.
So much for the clothing department of the
outfit :• —let us come to other necessaries. For
instance, there is dressing apparatus. Our emi-
grant reader is not one of those, we trust, who think
it a great trouble to keep themselves clean, and
fancy that once a week is about often enough to
comb the hair, and much too often to trim the
beard. He will not forget, therefore, a hairbrush
and comb, and razor, and the necessary shaving-
tackle. If he have learned in former days—which
any man may easily learn if he will—to shave him-
self in the dark, he will find his advantages in the
habit on ship-board. Not that he will be in the
dark, exactly, though there is not too much light
between decks; but he may not always be able to
find shaving-glass room, or to use a glass very com-
fortably when he does find room for it.
Then the wife will need a hairbrush and comb,
too; and there should be one for the children
besides. There is no harm, nor disgrace either,
in a working man, or a working man’s wife, or a
working man’s children using tooth-brushes. Let


our friends take the hint; tooth-brushes are not
very expensive articles, and the habit of using them
is very conducive to health and cleanliness.
In government ships, as the reader has been re-
minded, such utensils as knives and forks, drinking
vessels, spoons, and plates, are provided, and are
promised to the emigrant on arrival, supposing he
has behaved well. We will not insult such of our
readers as are assisted emigrants, by imagining that
they will forfeit these gifts ; nevertheless, it would
not be amiss for these to provide themselves—
and it is necessary that other emigrants provide
themselves, as part of their outfit—with such things
as knives and forks and spoons, metal plate and
mug, metal wash hand basin, a coffee pot, a tin pot,
and a kettle or saucepan for boiling water. They
must remember that when they are once on board,
there will be no stepping out just to get at the next
shop some little trifling convenience, the want of
which may possibly not be trifling. However, this
idea must not be carried out too far; but care
should be taken to have a few little handy matters,
such as we have mentioned, Teady for use.
Our friends must not forget to take a supply of
soap on board, especially marine soap, which
lathers tolerably well in sea water, while common
soap will notdo so.* As to washing clothes on board
an emigrant ship, though this is allowed on stated
occasions, the less the emigrant’s wife has need to
avail herself of the privilege the better. And
this is one reason why a good supply of clothing
is desirable for the voyage ; and why everything
should be taken on board perfectly clean.
* Marine soap.—The emigrant will most likely have to
purchase this at the port from which he sets sail.


We must say a word or two, now, about food
and physic.
With regard to food, emigrants will be in-
formed, in the ship papers they receive, of
the description and weekly allowance of pro-
visions with which they will be furnished on
board during the voyage ; and they will have no
reason to be dissatisfied with the victualling scale.
Whether or not it be worth while for them to
take an extra supply of provision will depend on
cirumstances. It is, in general, better to take
what comes, and not to burden one’s self in this
matter. Emigrants may, in general, feel pretty
certain of not starving on the voyage in conse-
quence of the ship’s provisions falling short, as all
Australian vessels are victualled for six months,
while the voyage rarely exceeds four.
As, however, at the commencement of a voyage,
the stomachs of land-folk are apt to be somewhat
dainty, there would be no great harm done if our
readers were to pack up a little tea and loaf sugar ;
a few pounds of biscuits, somewhat more delicate
than ship’s biscuits ; a ham, perhaps; a jar or two
of raspberry or black currant jam ; a pound or two
of arrow-root; and a few loaves cut up into thin
slices and baked in an oven till they are dry and
crisp. And if, in addition to these matters, they
can procure a small quantity of good concentrated
beef tea, it may be found of great use. If there
be young children it will be desirable to lay in a
little stock of these extra provisions, especially the
jams, biscuits, rusks, or baked slices of bread,
arrow-root, and beef tea ; or if there be no young
children, the husband will be glad to have a few
such delicacies for his wife. But, beyond this,


and for himself, we say again, the emigrant
should make up his mind to take what comes.
Then, as to medicines: there will, of course,
be a surgeon on board the ship, whose duty will
be to take care of the sick : and great mischief
often arises from people dosing themselves. On
the other hand, however, there are sundry small
ailments for which one would hardly care to
trouble a doctor, and the emigrant should re-
member that he is going where he may not be
within easy reach of a medical man. So, setting
one thing against another, we are inclined to say
that a few simple domestic medicines should be
included in “ what to take out.” We shall not
trouble the reader with a very long list.
Castor oil is a safe medicine. A pint or half-
pint bottle of this, securely corked, will be useful
during the voyage, and when the voyage is over.
A tea-spoonful is a good dose for a baby, a dessert-
spoonful for an older child, and from this up to
two table-spoonfuls for a man.
An ounce or two of compound rhubarb made
up into pills, can do no harm as a part of the
outfit, and may do good. When necessary, two
or three of these may be taken before breakfast.
When a child is feverish and disordered, a grain
of calomel, mixed with a little white sugar, may
be useful. A packet of these calomel powders
may form another part of the medical outfit.
Sometimes an emetic is desirable ; and a packet
of ipecacuanha powders will be useful to the
emigrant, each powder containing five grains.
Prepared chalk, mixed up with white sugar and
water, is a good and useful remedy for bowel-
complaints ; and a tea-spoonful of magnesia in a


glass of water often removes head-ache arising
from acidity of stomach. A small bottle of these
powders, carefully corked, may be valuable.
And so will a bottle of carbonate of soda and
another of tartaric acid, to make an effervescing
draught, in the proportion of a tea-spoonful of the
former to about half a tea-spoonful of the latter.
We may recommend these as a part of an outfit.
We shall not add anything further ; but we
should advise our friends to consult some kind
and respectable druggist, who will not only put
up for them, in a proper manner, any simple
remedies he may recommend, but will also give
them instructions how and when to use them.
We may say, however, that it is better to preserve
health by every means in our power, than to have
to take medicine to restore it. When we come
to the voyage, we shall say something on this
subject.
We may pass on now to say a word or two
about tools. Emigrants are told, in the govern-
ment papers they receive, that it is desirable for
them to take out the necessary tools of their
trades. At the same time, however, bulky agri-
cultural implements cannot be admitted on ac-
count of their inconvenient size and weight. And
this direction is suitable to all emigrants, whether
assisted by government, or not. An emigrant,
therefore, if he be a mechanic, will act accord-
ingly—taking care that he does not overload
himself with what is not necessary ; and whatever
he be, he will find it to his advantage to take with
him a few common tools—a saw, a hammer, a
stock of bradawls and gimlets, two or three chisels,
and a good lot of nails of different sorts and sizes.


Let him, by all means, have also a good .strong
pocket-knife, or two if he please, one in store and
the other in use; and if he make a hole in the
handle and secure it by a string passed round his
neck, like a watch-guard, he will be in less danger
of losing it, at a time, perhaps, when it will be
worth more than its weight in gold.
Books ;—Our emigrant friends should not forget
this part of their outfit. Many books, indeed,
they may not be able to take with them; but they
must rememberthat there will be much leisure time
for reading during the voyage; and that when
they reach, and are settled down in their new
home, they will be badly off if they have not
some sort of library to amuse and instruct them.
We advise our friends, therefore, not to leave
behind them any books they may happen to have,
except, indeed, these be really worthless ; in that
case we should say, get rid of them at all events,
and supply their places with better. With this
exception, do not discard old friends. An old
book which we have had for years is an old
friend; and its old familiar face in a far distant
land will constantly call up some fond and bene-
ficial remembrance of the old home. Especially
we say to our friends, take with you all your
children’s books—all their Sunday school reward
books, if they have any—all spelling books and
school books of any sort; or if your children be
too young to have had any of these, provide your-
selves with some for the time when you will need
them. If you can spare a few shillings in the
purchase of new books besides these, by all means
do so —taking care that they are good and in-
structive. Sometimes the friends of emigrants


make presents of a book or two, as parting gifts,
and tokens of their kind affection. We need
scarcely say that these should be valued accord-
ingly.*
Above all things, emigrants should not forget
that Book which is able to make wise unto sal-
vation through faith in Christ Jesus. Miserably
deficient will that emigrant’s outfit be, however
complete in all besides, in which the Bible has no
place ! Many emigrants, we trust, will look upon
it as their best and choicest treasure-; they will
not only take it with them, but keep it in daily
use, not as a charm, but as a sure and unerring
guide, provided by God’s love, and inspired by
the Holy Spirit, to direct the weary pilgrim on
earth to the “ better country,” the home beyond
the skies. We trust that our friends will not be
satisfied either with taking one Bible only for all
the family, but if there be not one a-piece already,
will get them one a-piece all round. Get one
even for the infant at its mother’s breast, dear
* The Religious Tract Society, with earnest concern
for the welfare of emigrants, has prepared emigrants’
libraries at various prices, from 10s. upwards, containing
instructive and valuable books which may be had in cases,
and it is suggested that friends would confer a great benefit
on emigrants in whom they are interested, by the presenta-
tion of one of these libraries, which would supply means
of religious improvement when probably far removed from
the public means of grace. Catalogues of these libraries
may be obtained at either of the Depositories, or will be
forwarded on application.
There is also just issued, by the above Society, a volume
entitled “ The Emigrant’s Friend,” being a collection of
useful tracts, bound together, and which will serve as a
token of remembrance to many, when separated from
those thev love.


friends; write its name in it before you leave
your country, so that in future years that infant,
when it becomes a man or woman, may have
learned to associate that blessed volume with the
land of its birth. Yes, let the tie which binds the
memories of your children, and their affections
too, to their native country, be their own Bibles.
We have now told our friends the principal
things desirable for them to take out, and if they
can provide such an outfit as has been hinted at,
and have a little stock of money to take with them
besides, they will, so far, do very well There
are many, however, who will not be able to do
this. In that case, they should not be down-
hearted, but having done the best they can, trust
themselves the more implicitly to the care of
their heavenly Father.
But this chapter was to tell also of “ what to
leave behind.” We have already said that bulky
tools cannot be taken, neither should furniture of
any description beyond a few cooking utensils, and
bedding for the voyage ; and in government ships,
it will be remembered that no bedding even, except
sheets, may be taken. Our friends must therefore
part with all their furniture, —bedsteads, chests of
drawers, everything ; and the money they get for
these will assist them in the needful outfit. Some
emigrants are loth to part with favourite furni-
ture, and plead with themselves for taking a chest
of drawers perhaps, which they think will do as
M r ell as a box to pack their clothes in. An ac-
quaintance of the writer, who a little while ago
emigrated to America, would do this, and the
consequence was an additional expense of two or
three pounds—more than the value of the piece


of furniture—for extra luggage. Furniture must
be left behind.
Nor may spirits be taken out by the emigrant.
This is one of the regulations of all emigrant
vessels: —“ No spirits nor gunpowder to be taken
on board by any passenger. Any that may be
discovered, to be taken into custody by the master,
till the expiration of the voyage.” We trust that
none will be disposed to evade or transgress this
very proper and necessary rule.


CHAPTER 11.
PACKING UP AND SETTING OUT.
Next to providing the emigrant’s outfit, conies
the trouble of packing it up ; and first, the
government regulations must be borne in mind,
that “the whole quantity of baggage for each
adult emigrant must not measure more than
twenty cubic or solid feet, nor exceed half a ton
in weight. It must be divided into two or three
boxes, the contents of which must be closely
packed, so as to save space in the ship. Large
packages and extra baggage will not be taken,
unless paid for, and then only in case there be
room in the ship.” These directions apply to
emigrants generally, and each family’s outfit
should not exceed the specified quantity, either
in bulk or weight.
Another regulation regarding emigrants’ lug-
gage is, that only one box or bag, sufficiently
large to contain a month’s clothing, and other
necessaries, is allowed to each passenger’s sleep-
ing-berth, and that all the rest of the luggage is
stowed in the hold of the ship, to which access can
be had only at stated times, generally at the end
of every three weeks or month, for the purpose of
exchanging dirty for clean clothing, and of taking
out anything else the passenger may need. It will
be necessary, therefore, that each emigrant be


provided with at least two chests,* one large and
one small, or else with a large chest and a canvass
bag.
The large chest should be stout and strongly-
made, with a good lock and hinges ; and if painted,
so much the better. It should have stout battens
or strips of wood nailed to the bottom to preserve
it as much as possible from wet; and the owner’s
name should be legibly marked on it in some way
or other. The smaller box, or the bag—for our
part we should prefer a box, because that can be
kept locked —but box or bag, whichever it is,
should be large enough to contain the month’s
supply of clothing; some books, the few extra
comforts of biscuits, tea, medicine, and so forth ;
and any other articles which may be needed before
the first opening of the boxes on board.
Then, before packing up, emigrants should take
care that their chests are quite dry ; and they will
do well to line them throughout with stout brown
paper, well dried before the fire, and fastened
with tacks, not with paste. Before packing, also,
every washable old garment should be washed
and well aired ; and all woollen clothes, at any
rate, well brushed and aired too.
Our friends should take great care in packing
that everything is dry and packed close. All iron
tools should be first well cleansed, then greased,
and then wrapped in dry thick brown paper. The
extra provisions, such as biscuits, rusks, arrow-
root, sugar and tea, and whatever medicines form
* Three will be better than two. The emigrant family-
should, if possible, have one extra package to contain
those articles which they are sure of not wanting till the
voyage is over.


part of the outfit, should be packed close in tin
cases, as far as these can be afforded. And if the
woollen clothes be well dusted with pepper, or
sprinkled with camphor, it will help to preserve
them from moths. Then, while packing up, an
exact and particular list of all the articles in the
outfit should be made as near as possible in the
order in which they are placed in the chests,
leaving room for such additions as they may have
to make at the port of embarkation ; lastly, each
chest should be well corded.
We come now to one of the stages of emigra-
tion which is generally painful, and which, at
least, is favourable to serious thoughtfulness; we
mean the setting out from home. We will suppose
that our friends have settled their affairs, paid
what debts they may have owed, or, if this un-
happily has been out of their power, that they
have made friendly arrangements with their cre-
ditors for payment as soon as ever it may be in
their power. Let it never be dishonourably and
dishonestly thought that emigration cancels debt;
and that, if a man can get away from his cre-
ditors, the trouble of being in debt is over. None
can expect God’s blessing on their movements if
they harbour even a wish to defraud a creditor in
this way; and we would urge upon every emi-
grant who leaves his country in debt, to work
hard, and save all he can, when he reaches his
destination, and not to look upon himself as a free
man till he has sent home every shilling he
justly owes.
Well, we may suppose that our readers have
done what is right in this matter ; that they have
prepared and packed up all their worldly goods;


and that, with bare walls around them in their
old home, they are ready to set forth on their
journey.
This is a good time for reflection and self-
examination, and our readers will do well to im-
prove it. They should think over afresh the
motives which led them, first of all, to decide
upon the important step they are taking. Why
become emigrants at all —self-banished from
native home and friends? Was it want of success
at home ? How much of that want of success was
fairly to be attributed to their own faults and
failings ? Was it the hope of improving the
worldly prospects of their children, and putting
them in a position in life which could not be
expected at home ? Have they been as anxious
for their children’s eternal, as for their temporal
interests? Have they ever been concerned at all
in this matter ? Have they ever been really con-
cerned about their own spiritual welfare, half so
much as about their worldly prospeiity ?
These are some of the thoughts which should
come into the mind at such a time as this ; and
let them not be driven away. They are good,
wholesome thoughts ; they may make sad for a
time, but there is hope in such sadness as they
will produce. It may be, dear friends, that such
reflections are intended, by God’s Holy Spirit, to
guide your soul to higher thoughts and desires,
though they may, for a time, lead you through
deeper sadness. In times past, it may be, you
thought more about religion than you do now;
but for years and years, perhaps, you have let the
cares of the world fill all your heart, so that there
has been no place there for better things ; or you


may, from other causes, have grown careless and
unconcerned about the things which make for
peace. Or, it may be, you have never willingly
admitted a thought about those things, but have
turned altogether away from the invitations of
God’s mercy to you in the gospel. In short, in
one way or other, it is possible that your heart is
not right with God.
If, then, your heart is softened by natural
sorrow, and reflection is forced upon you, do not
resist the onward course of this sorrow when it
leads you to think of your ingratitude and rebellion
—of God’s forbearance, and your past fool-hardy
presumption. Happy will it be for you, dear
reader, if this should prove a turning point in your
life, and lead you to resolve, in humble depend-
ence on God, to abandon former carelessness and
ungodliness, and to live no longer without God in
the world.
“ It may be that your former situation, by
its incessant demands upon your time and thought,
encroaching even on your sabbath hours, and by
the class of individuals with whom it brought you
into contact, has operated to prevent your bosom
from becoming the seat of devout thoughts and
holy tempers. Your mind has been kept barren
of the knowledge which brings salvation, and
your life held back from the performance of the
duties of practical godliness. Reflect on this state.
Ask if this is a fit condition of mind in which to
be exposed to the influence of new temptations, or
a recurrence of the former ones with even still
greater force by the absence of the restraints
which had been imposed upon their indulgence;
or one in which to encounter hitherto unknown


hardships and dangers; or even to make a wise
use of success itself, should prosperity crown your
endeavours in the land to which you are going.
The spell of the influence of associates in a wrong
course, and of the habits thus riveted upon you,
may now be broken, and another and better
circle of companions be chosen, who shall exert
upon you a counteracting influence to that of your
former state, and one of a happier kind than you
have hitherto known. By such means, in con-
nexion with serious thought and meditation, and
prayer for Divine help, a new character may be
forming and maturing while on the way to the
place of your destination; and thus the change
that is taking place may, by Divine grace, be one,
not only of an outward and temporal, but also of
an inward and moral nature, and productive of
incalculable advantage. Your removal will thus
be signalized with a blessing that will richly
compensate you for all the anxieties which have
attended it, and soothe you under whatever dis-
appointments may await your future prospects.
Dream not of a happiness denied you here, by any
change of place, if there be no proper foundation
laid for it in the formation of a right state of
mind, and the possession of holy and gracious
principles of action. ‘ What matter where, if you
be still the same?’ While the impurity' of the
source remains, the stream, into whatever land
it finds its way, will carry away with it the same
deleterious properties, to embitter and pollute, as
at the place of its first rising and flowing.”*
Do not begin your journey with God against you
—against you because you are against him. The
From “The Christian Emigrant.”


disappointments you may have experienced in
your past history, the deep trials you may have
passed through, the hopes you now cherish of
future brighter days, the dangers which may yet
hang over your future course,.and the certainty
that that course will eventually terminate in
death: all these considerations, while they press
upon your mind now, at the time of bidding fare-
well to old scenes and associations,' are calling
you to seek, by submission to God’s righteous
government, and in his own way of mercy, by
Jesus Christ, peace with him and rest.
But there are emigrants who know something
of these things; they are Christian emigrants ;
and while they feel very much this last parting
and setting out, they feel also that their God is
with them ; and they can adopt as their own the
beautiful language of the twenty-third Psalm—-
“ The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.”
May this confidence ever be theirs; and that
they may not lose it, we would urge them to
begin their journey by a renewed dedication of
heart and life to Him whom they own as their
master, and to seek solemnly and earnestly the
continued protection of Him whom they trust as
their guide.


CHAPTER 111.
AT PORT,
We would now speak of such emigrants as have
reached the port from which they intend
If they are assisted by government, their passage
will have been arranged without any trouble to
themselves, and all that they have to do will be
to go to the government depot , where they will
be lodged without charge until they are put on
board. If they are not assisted, we suppose they
will have fixed upon their ship, and engaged their
passage beforehand, and have only to provide a
few remaining articles of their outfit previously
to stepping on shipboard. It is well, at least,
where these arrangements can be made before
leaving home ; but if they have yet to be made, the
quicker they are set about the better.
Let them beware of strangers, who, with ap-
parent interest in their affairs, and plausible
address, may endeavour to make their acquaint-
ance, recommend them to lodging houses, and
persuade them to spend money. Some ports
swarm with sharpers who are always on the look-
out for emigrants, whom they generally know as
such at a glance. They offer their assistance for
the purpose of plundering in one way or other;
and our friends will have reason to repent if they
get into such hands. The best way is to avoid all
communication with strangers who introduce
c 2


themselves; and if the emigrants cannot go
straight from the railroad terminus to their ship,
they should use their own common sense and
prudence. With regard to temporary lodgings,
it may probably be found that a list of respectable
lodging houses is kept at the railway station of
the port.
Get on ship-board as soon as you can: this is
the best advice that can be given to emigrants.
They should not, if they can avoid it, trust to
getting a ship when they reach the port; all
should be previously arranged ; and they should
know exactly what they have to do, and in what
time to do it. They will have been informed of
the day on which their ship is to sail, and they
should time their movements accordingly. If
there is any delay, they should be aware that they
can claim compensation from the ship-owner ; but
it is better to avoid putting this to the test, by
having to do with honourable ship-owners and
brokers who have a character for punctuality.*
We need scarcely remind our friends that they
themselves must be punctual. The ship will not
wait for them when it is ready to sail.
* The following notice to passengers in emigrant ships
will be found on the contract ticketlf the ship do
not proceed to sea on the day specified, passengers, if
ready to go on board, are entitled to subsistence money at
the rate of one shilling a day for each adult. The money
may be recovered by summary process, before two magis-
trates. If, however, the delay arises from unavoidable
detention by wind or weather, and if the passengers be
maintained on board in the same manner as if the voyage
had commenced, no subsistence money is payable.”


CHAPTER IV.
THE VOYAGE.
A float and at sea ! Emigrants must expect to
undergo some little tossing and rocking—even
if they have fair wind and weather at first—befcre
they are shaken into their right places, and into
good orderly sea-going habits; and in the crowds
of fellow-passengers, and fellow-sufferers, there
will be so much that is strange and confusing, that
some little time will elapse before they will feel
themselves at home.
By the time they have been a week at sea,
however, and far away from their native land,
they will begin to feel somewhat more used to
the rolling motion and strange scenes of an emi-
grant ship, and will be able to study the follow-
ing among other rules to which they will be
expected to conform ;
“ Every passenger to rise at 7 a.m., unless
otherwise permitted by the surgeon; or, if no
surgeon, by the master.
“ Breakfast from 8 to 9 a.m. ; dinner at 1 p.m. ;
supper at 6 p.m.
“ The passengers to be in their beds at 10 p.m.
“ The master to determine the order in which
the passengers shall be entitled to the use of the
fires for cooking. The cook to take care that this
order is preserved.
“ No naked lights to be allowed at any time, or
on any account.
“ The passengers, when dressed, to roll ud
c 3


their beds, to sweep the decks (including the
space under the bottom of the berths), and to
throw the dirt overboard.
“ Breakfast not to commence till this is done.
“The sweepers for the day to be taken in
rotation from the males above 14, in the propor-
tion of 5 for every 100 passengers.
“ Duties of the sweepers to be to clean the
lackers, hospitals, and round houses, to sweep the
decks after every meal, and to dry holystone and
scrape them after breakfast.
“ But the occupant of each berth is to see that
Ids own berth is well brushed out; and single
women are to keep their own compartment clean
in ships where a separate compartment is allotted
to them.
“ The beds to be well shaken and aired on deck,
and the bottom boards, if not fixtures, to be re-
moved and dry scrubbed, and taken on deck at
least twice a-week.
“ Two days in the week to be appointed by the
master as washing days, but no clothes to be
washed or dried between decks.
“ On Sunday the passengers to be mustered at
10 a.m., when they will be expected to appear in
clean and decent apparel. The day to be ob-
served as religiously as circumstances will admit.
“ No spirits or gunpowder to be taken on board
by any passenger.
“ No loose hay or straw to be allowed below.
“ No smoking to be allowed between decks.
“ All gambling, fighting, riotous or quarrel-
some behaviour, swearing and violent language,
to be at once put a stop to.
“No passenger to go to the ship’s cook-house


without special permission from the master, nor
to remain in the forecastle among the sailors on
any account.”
Emigrants will see that such rules as these are
not only reasonable, but necessary. The safety
of the ship and the lives of all the passengers and
crew may depend upon their being properly ob-
served, to say nothing of comfort during the
voyage. And yet, comfort ought to be con-
sidered too; and such regulations as we have
mentioned are intended to promote it. Our
friends will feel this if they consider that an
emigrant ship may contain two or three hundred
persons of all ages and of each sex, perhaps
very closely crowded together;—that among
them may be some with disagreeable habits,
others with violent tempers, others with per-
verse dispositions; some very careless; others
very stupid; some very mischievously inclined;
and that emigrant life on ship-board is an idle
life—that is, it may and will be an idle life to
those who are idly disposed, and that where there
is idleness there will be the more time and the
greater opportunity for mischief. If there were
no rule and order in such a mixed community,
the better disposed would be at the mercy almost
of any that might unhappily be evil disposed;
and, in short, an emigrant ship would often be a
scene of riot and terrible confusion. Now this is
prevented by the ship’s rules, which have the au-
thority of law, and by the power which is placed
in the hands of the ship’s commander to enforce
obedience; and no right-minded person would
think of yielding any other than cheerful and


willing obedience. And not only should emi-
grants personally conform to all that is thus re-
quired of them, but should use their influence
with those around them to induce their obedience
also. There are perverse and refractory spirits
in an emigrant ship sometimes—rebelling against
anything like restraint or constraint; now, a little
good-humoured, kind persuasion, if coupled with
a good example, may do much to remove bad
feeling and prevent bad conduct; and it will be
doing well, on all occasions, to uphold, as far as
may be, the lawful authority which is properly
exercised by the ship’s officers.
Especially will our friends be doing great good
by exerting a kind and gentle influence over their
young, unmarried fellow-passengers. On board
a well-regulated emigrant ship, proper arrange-
ments are made and precautions taken to prevent
the evils which might be feared from the asso-
ciating together of young men and women. Their
berths are at different parts of the ship, and they
take their meals apart from each other; the young
women, too, are under the care of a matron,
whose duty is to watch over their conduct. But
for all this, there are many occasions when a word
spoken in season, and in a spirit of love, by a
respectable married man to a young man, or by a
motherly emigrant’s wife to an inexperienced
young woman, may do much good in preserving
honour and character—in keeping back from
impropriety. Will our married emigrant readers
think of this, and give the weight of their own
example and experience on the side of propriety
and virtue?
And, apart from this particular, there will be


constant opportunities for helpfulness and kindness
to all fellow-passengers. We will suppose, for
instance, that some have pretty good health and
spirits, and that others are sickly and despondent;
it may be that there are fathers and mothers on
board, with large families —troublesome children
perhaps, while some have but two or three little
ones, comparatively quiet and orderly; or that
others of their fellow passengers are solitary beings,
feeling alone in a crowd, and needing encouraging
words. Well, in all these cases, and many others
which may reasonably be supposed, and might be
mentioned, how many occasions will there be for
neighbourly assistance! A wife, for example,
may help to nurse the poor woman in the next
berth, take care of her fretful baby for an hour
or two at a time, and cheer her by friendly con-
versation ; while the husband is doing other kind
offices for the poor man in another part of the
ship who thinks he shall never reach the end of
the voyage, and wishes he had never left old
England ; or is amusing and instructing a small
party of boys in some way or other; or is reading
aloud to a group of fellow passengers who may
be too ignorant or idle to read to themselves ; or
is writing a letter for some poor fellow who wishes
to send home a word by the first homeward bound
ship which comes in sight, but who cannot write;
or is giving a few lessons in writing or arithmetic
to another who labours under the same disad-
vantage. There are a hundred ways, at the very
least, in which emigrants, without injury, but
with much good to themselves, may be doing good
to those around them during the four months’
voyage to their distant home.


And if our friends have those right and holy
principles implanted in their hearts by God’s Holy
Spirit which lead to right actions, if they possess
that grace which brings salvation, and teaches us
that, “ denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, w r e
should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this
present world what a blessing may they not be to
those around them in the emigrant ship ! “A word
spoken in due season, how good is it!” and bread,
the bread of Christian love for souls, and honour
for a Saviour’s name, this bread “ cast upon the
waters,” how often does it return “ after many
days !” We trust that such persons will not be
ashamed of their religion ; shame would it be for
a Christian to be ashamed of that anywhere, or at
any time. No doubt there will be persons of
different characters on board, and perhaps some
who scoff at holiness, and “ make a mock at sin.”
Let the Christian emigrant, then, take great heed
to himself, lest he give any cause for reproach, or
throw a stumbling-block in the way of any that
are what the Bible calls “ weak in faith,” or do
anything to make the enemies of the gospel
triumph. A.nd at all times he should be pre-
pared to show in every action of life, that real
religion not only brings men that were afar off by
wicked works near to God and heaven, but makes
them happier, better, kinder, more lovely and
amiable, more forgiving and unselfish than others
who have no religion. If gross sin of any kind
be witnessed, the Christian passenger should not
be backward in discountenancing it, not only
having no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reproving them, taking heed
to do this in a spirit of meekness and love, as well


as with boldness. And where, on the other hand,
a disposition is seen in some fellow-passenger to
seriousness and attention to religion, the Christian
emigrant should not only rejoice, but encourage
his hopeful fellow-passenger.
It will be strange as well as painful, if, among
the crowds to whom the emigrant ship is a tem-
porary home, there be not several who love the
Saviour ; and among these there will be many
opportunities of holding happy fellowship. It
always has been, and always will be* that “they
that fear the Lord speak often one to another
let such, however, take heed that their speech be
such asbecometh godliness, seasoned, as the Bible
says, with salt—the salt of true piety. It may be
that there will be differences of opinion on some
religious matters. Let care be taken that such
differences do not divide in affection, and cause
unholy wranglings and disputings, but rather
let all adopt the language of the apostle,
“ Grace be with all them that love our Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity.” The decks of an
emigrant ship should not be the scene of harsh
controversy respecting forms, and ceremonies, and
church government. Our friends will find enough
on which to agree most lovingly, and should, by
mutual consent, agree to differ where they do not
think exactly alike.
Then, such as are Christians indeed will be
glad of the opportunities for Divine service, which
are given on board an emigrant ship; and they
should be especially careful to spend the sabbath
piously and profitably. But it is to be hoped that
every day will be thus spent by them. The un-
avoidable leisure which they will have during the


voyage, should make them diligent in reading the
Scriptures, in prayer, and in the instruction ot
their children. If wisely improved, that leisure
may be of immense service to them through the
remainder of their lives ; if not wisely improved,
the results will be unhappy. We would, there-
fore, affectionately counsel Christian emigrants
on board to arrange matters and regulate their
personal habits and daily employments, so as to
have a set time for reading the Bible and family
prayer. Perhaps this may expose them to a few
foolish and wicked sneers, and to a little petty
persecution,though this is by no means certain; but
suppose it does, what then ? If they cannot take
up this cross daily, and follow the Saviour, —if
they fear to acknowledge him thus before men, it
will be high time for them to examine themselves
very closely and severely, whether indeed they
be Christians at all. Let them think of the
words of Christ with deep solemnity: “He that
taketh not his cross, and followeth after me,
is not worthy of me.”—“ Whosoever shall con-
fess me before men, him will I confess also before
my Father which is in heaven; but whosoever
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny
before my Father which is in heaven.” Solemn
words and warnings these, dear Christian friends !
Better to have to bear the ridicule of ten thousand
times ten thousand ungodly fellow creatures, than
risk being denied by Jesus. Think of this,
and you will not let the dread of a little raillery
from fellow-passengers keep you back from
family prayer while on board the emigrant
ship.


While it is well that emigrants on all occasions
be helpful and kind, they should be cautious of
interfering with the private affairs of their fellow'
passengers. A ship is a sort of little world,
in which every person has his own personal
and family concerns with which no other has a
right to intermeddle. The emigrant passenger
should be careful not to pry into the secrets of
those around him, nor to listen to gossip concern-
ing them, nor to mix himself up with petty squab-
bles, if there should be any. Our readers will do
well to bear in mind the proverb, “ He that passeth
by, and meddleth with strife belonging not to him,
is like one that taketh a dog by the ears.” It is
bad to make enemies anywhere, even on land,
where we can give our opponents a wide berth,
and so avoid them ; but it is worse —that is, worse
for daily comfort —where there is no getting away
from one whom we have offended. On all ac-
counts, therefore, we say, be very careful not to
give offence by meddling with your neighbour’s
business, or by impertinent intrusion upon them
of any kind. Even in offering assistance, great
caution will be requisite lest your motives be
wrongly interpreted, and advice should be very
charily given. Above all things, if there are
family disputes going on within hearing—and very
possibly there may be many during the four
months’ voyage —let them alone, do not be in-
duced to take the part of either disputant. In
nine cases out of ten, at least, your interference
will only make matters worse, and bring dislike
upon yourself.
Any thing for peace ; any thing, that, is but
the sacrifice of principle; and while avoiding


giving offence, all should be very slow in taking
it. If there be very disagreeable and quarrel-
some persons among fellow-passengers, the best
way will be to avoid intercourse with them as far
as possible ; at all events determine not to quarrel
with them. Our readers should remember that
the voyage is but a four months’ voyage, and that
a few trials of temper during its short period may
work for good ; supposing always that good temper
and forbearance come off victorious.
But much of the comfort or discomfort of the
voyage will depend upon the choice made of
daily associates. The population of an emigrant
ship will generally be broken up into little so-
cieties, much as the same number of persons
would form them on land. There is a sort of
instinct which draws together people who are
of the same way of thinking, and the same kind
of habits and principles. But it takes some little
time to draw out a person’s character, even on
board ship. Emigrants will do well, therefore,
not to form hasty friendships with fellow-pas-
sengers ; but to look about them and see where
friendship may be formed with advantage and
honour. We would be far from advising any to
keep aloof from companionship with those around
them; but they had better do even this than run
the risk of getting into the wrong set. “ Can
two walk together, except they be agreed ?”
A few words about employment during the
voyage. We have said that life on board an
emigrant ship is, to passengers, a life of leisure;
but it need not be a life of idleness. It probably
will be this, however, unless they are aware of
the desultory habits into which ship passengers


are liable to slide, and are determined to strive
against them.
As to carrying on the ordinary occupations of
life, this, of course, is out of the question ; at
least as regards the greater number of passengers.
A tailor or a shoemaker may perhaps find em-
ployment during the voyage, and may even earn
a little money by it: but mechanics generally,
and agricultural labourers especially, will not
expect this. Neither can landsmen expect to be
usefully employed in assisting the ship’s crew in
working the ship. They will rather find them-
selves in the way, and will perhaps be told that
the best thing they can do will be to keep out of
the way. As to the few services that are re-
quired of emigrant passengers, as set down in the
regulations, these will occupy but a very small
part of their time.
An emigrant passenger then will have to fall
back very much upon his own resources, and will
soon find the books he has provided for the voyage
of more value than ever. Now will be the time
for brightening up old and rusted, and almost
forgotten information, or for acquiring new stores
of knowledge. Probably there will be a library
on board for lending to the passengers. Let
them make good use of this. Possibly, however,
here and there one may have to confess himself to
be “a poor scholar,” scarcely able to read. The
little smattering of learning he acquired years
ago, may, from disuse, have almost departed from
him : a good time this four months’ voyage will
be for recovering lost ground in this particular.
Perhaps there will be classes for instruction formed
among the passengers under the direction of a
d 2


schoolmaster; if so, we advise our unlearned
friend not to keep back, by false shame, from
being taught, even if he have to be taught the
letters of the alphabet. Many persons who have
stepped on ship-board as emigrants, quite unable
to read, have left the ship, very much to the:r
own credit, able to read well, and with delight in
their new acquirement. The same may be said of
writing and arithmetic. A day or two ago the
writer met with a married man in tolerably good
circumstances —one likely enough to be an emi-
grant some day—who could not sign a receipt to
a bill with his name, but was obliged to do it
with a scratchy sort of a cross; and who could
not know whether the amount paid him corres-
ponded with that on the paper or not: in short,
he could not write, and his wife was his book-
keeper. Now, there are multitudes of such cases
at home; and if an emigrant should be thus
incompetent, he will find full and useful employ-
ment for much of his leisure time on ship-board
in learning to write and cipher. Or, if he have not
this to learn, what can he do better with a part
of his time, than to give his assistance in teach-
ing others who are thus ignorant?
We do not forget the case of an emigrant who
may be a husband and a father; and we will
suppose that such a one will do all he can, while
on the voyage, in assisting his wife, and taking
care of his children. With regard to the children,
he can, if they are old enough, let them go to
school. In government ships there is some pro-
vision made for this; and “if there be no school-
master on board, appointed by the Commissioners,
the surgeon superintendent will select a person


to act as teacher to the children.” A parent
should avail himself of this regulation, which will
give him more time for other purposes. But he
should not neglect his children either. They
will require watchful care lest they get into bad
habits; and the more he has them about him,
and the more pains he takes with them at this
period of their lives, the better will it be for them.
Perhaps instruction may be gained in some use-
ful handicraft. We need scarcely say that an emi-
grant ought to be handy, a sort of jack of all trades
in a small way. The more capable he is of turn-
ing time and rough materials to account when he
reaches his new home, the more comfort and enjoy-
ment of life, and, indeed, the more prosperity, he
will be likely to have. A man “ in the bush,” who
can mend his own clothes and shoes, make his
own head coverings, manufacture his own house-
hold furniture, repair his own tools, and do other
things of a like nature, will be better off, every
thing else being equal, than one who is almost
helpless in these matters. An emigrant may
learn much during his four months’ voyage,
if he have a mind to learn. Sometimes on board
emigrant ships there is a store of materials of
various kinds for the express purpose of giving
employment to passengers during the voyage ;
and instructions are given in the use of them.
Thus may be seen on the deck of a well regulated
emigrant ship, on fine days, groups of men at
different kinds of work,—some converting old
woollen cloth into serviceable mats, or making
rope mats, or net-making, or brush-making, or
manufacturing small articles of domestic use
in wood or bone. Whenever this mode of era-


ploying time during the voyage is practicable,
it should, by all means, be adopted.
As to the emigrant wife and mother, we need
not trouble ourselves to find daily and hourly
employment for her. It may be reasonably sup-
posed, at any rate, that the constant attention her
children will require, together with the needle-
work with which she is furnished, will prevent
time hanging very heavily upon her hands. Be-
sides these occupations, she will have a good deal
to talk about with her husband, and she, as well
as he, should devote some time to reading. We
have already said that she should make herself
useful, whenever she can be so, to her fellow'
passengers who may need her kindly help ; and,
in one way or other, there is no doubt that she
will be able to make very good use of her time on
board.
It is of great importance to emigrants to
preserve health during the voyage. It is not
very likely that a sickly working man will readily
find employment on landing ; and if he be healthy
and robust, it will be a sad addition to his cares,
and a drawback to his prosperity, if he be accom-
panied by a sickly wife or children.
In general, the means taken to secure health on
board a well regulated emigrant ship are success-
ful. The voyage itself is, in most cases, pro-
motive of health, so that many who left their
native home in bad health have been strong and
hearty at the close of the voyage. But this does
not do away with the necessity for care on the
part of outward-bound emigrants, who, in


common with all rational beings, are answerable
to their Maker and Preserver for the use or
abuse of all his gifts; among the most precious
and valuable of which, apart from spiritual
mercies, is good health.
Emigrants, both male and female, should take
as much exercise as possible during the voyage.
“ It is hardly possible to say anything too strong
in urging the importance of real muscular exer-
cise. No one deserves to be well, and certainly
no one can keep well, without it. Nothing so
perfectly secures the conditions on which health
depends; and if our daily duties do not oblige a
sufficient use of the muscular system, we must
make a duty of it.” Life on ship-board, that is,
passenger’s life, is not favourable to muscular
exercise. In a crowded emigrant vessel, espe-
cially, there is but little room for it, and there is
too often an indisposition to take it. The emigrant,
perhaps, feels that a good long rest after years of
hard toil is desirable; at all events, as he is cut
off for a time from his regular occupations, what-
ever they may have been, and has no direct
stimulus to exertion, he is apt to become indolent.
Against this feeling he should strive with might
and main, if only for the sake of preserving
health.
Passengers should be on deck as much as pos-
sible, and, without incommoding their fellow
passengers, they should very frequently walk
about the deck briskly, to quicken circulation,
and keep the muscles in full play. Beyond this,
the female emigrant will not be able to take much
exercise; but a man should endeavour to keep
himself in vigorous health by any kind of exercise


that may be permitted to the men, such as climbing
the rigging, hanging on a spar, swinging—any-
thing in fact which does not interfere with good
order, or interrupt the ship’s crew in their
duties. Provision is usually made for this kind
of exercise, and the surgeon of the ship is anxious
to promote it. It is hardly needful to add that
the young people should be not only permitted,
but encouraged to run about, and jump, and play,
and swing, and do anything else that is not dan-
gerous, care being taken by their parents that
they do not annoy older passengers, nor quarrel
with their companions.
A strict attention to cleanliness is necessary to
good health anywhere, and emigrants have no
right to expect to preserve theirs except by being
clean in person. It is to be expected, generally,
that the regulations concerning cleanliness and
ventilation of berths and between decks will be
strictly enforced upon all. But more than this is
required, and every one should take advantage of
every facility provided for personal cleanliness.
As often as possible, every emigrant, whether
male or female, ought to get a good salt-water
bath, and all should wash themselves every day as
thoroughly as they can with a due regard to
decency.
It is necessary also to be careful about their
diet. After the first attack of sea-sickness,
voyagers have generally very strong appetites,
and having but little to do, unless they make
work for themselves, begin to look forward to
meal-times as the most important parts of the day.
The supply of food is usually ample, and perhaps
of a more nutritious kind than many at least have


been accustomed to. In short, the passenger,
unless he keep a watch over himself, is in danger
of eating more than is good for him. This makes
him more than ever indisposed to take exercise,
and what with want of exercise and overfeeding,
he is but little fit for emigrant life when he
first lands. “ I have seen,” writes an observer,
11 emigrants land in Sydney in such a bloated
state from overfeeding and idleness, that they were
unfit for work for a considerable time after their
arrival.” Let our readers, especially if they be
“ given to appetite,” beware of thus injuring them-
selves, and neither eat nor drink immoderately.
They may think that two or three full meals a day
are doing them good; and if, in the meantime,
they were hard at work, hearty feeding might be
beneficial, but as the case will stand with them
during the voyage, they will assuredly find it to
be injurious in the long run.
With regard to sea-sickness, to which reference
has once or twice been made, we need not say
much. It is occasioned by the rolling, rocking
motion of the ship, and almost all persons on first
going to sea are liable to it till they get used to
that motion. It is truly a very miserable afflic-
tion for the time, but as it cannot be avoided, it
ought to be borne patiently. “When it first at-
tacks you, you had better go to your berth, lie
with your head low, and wrap up warmly. Pro-
bably the attack will be shortened if you take an
aperient pill, or dose of salts, so as to cleanse the
bowels just before you go on board. After the
first brunt of the attack, you must struggle against
it, and not give way to it if you can help it, there-
fore get up and take exercise, and tempt the sto-


mach with anything you can relish. The surgeon
will give you some essence of peppermint on a
lump of sugar, or a few drops of ether in some
water; if you are still tormented, or your case is
very bad, you had better leave it with him to give
you what he thinks •proper.”*
With these precautions, we trust that our
readers will reach their home beyond the sea as
well, at least, as they left their home on this side
of it. And having used the means in their power
for the preservation of health, let them calmly
leave the result with God. Happy will it be for
them if, by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, they
can adopt as their own such language as this :
Hast Thou not given thy word
To save my soul from death ?
And I can trust my Lord
To keep my mortal breath :
I’ll go and come, nor fear to die,
Till from on high thou call me home.”
So with regard to the dangers of the ocean ;
happy will it be for our friends if, with humble
but firm reliance upon God, through the Lord
Jesus Christ, they can commit themselves to his
kind care, certain that, through all the way, he is
watching over them with loving regard and tender
mercy ; and that, under his protection, whether
on land or on sea, they are safe; that, in fact,
nothing can really harm them, because God is
with them ; and should death, even in the fright-
ful form of pestilence, or storm, or fire at sea, be
allotted to them as their closing scene on earth,
death itself shall not separate them from his love,
but will be the harbinger of eternal glory.
* From “ Medical Hints for Emigrants.”


Dear reader, this is not written to alarm you
with needless fears about the safety of your voyage.
The danger of that voyage is comparatively small.
In a well-built and sea-worthy ship, with vigilant
officers, but little apprehension need be enter-
tained of your reaching the distant port in safety.
The length of the voyage does not add to the
danger. There is more danger to a coasting
vessel, which rarely loses sight of land, than to
your ship : the voyage to Australia is, in ordinary
cases, remarkably safe. Still the sea has its
peculiar perils ; and in the moment of fancied
security, sudden destruction may come. Are
you, then, prepared thus to meet your God ? If
not, embrace, we pray you, now , the offers of
his mercy. Employ the leisure of your out-
ward-bound voyage in the consideration of your
past sins, of God’s past forbearance, of his con-
tinued long suffering, and of the revelation of
his grace in Christ Jesus. Pray that the Holy
Spirit may lead you to repentance, implant faith
in your heart, inspire you with love, create anew
your heart, and make you fit to die or fit to
live, according to God’s good pleasure. Let the
time past of your life suffice to have been wasted
in the service of God’s enemy and yours. In
vain, or apparently in vain, the message of God’s
mercy may hitherto have resounded in your ears ;
but listen to it now. He still waits to be gra-
cious : Oh, then, be reconciled to God !


CHAPTER Y.
ARRIVAL.
However pleasant the voyage, we may very
safely take for granted that all emigrants will not
be sorry to reach port at last. They should not,
however, be too anxious to leave the ship, so as
to hurry from it at the first practicable moment;
but should avail themselves of the privilege of
remaining on board for a certain time, till employ-
ment is found. There are two good reasons for
this: in the first place, lodgings in the ports of
Australia are dear; and in the second place,
while labour is so much in demand there as it
now is, and for some time is likely to be, working
men will be sought for on board the emigrant
ship. They had better wait a while, therefore,
with the very great probability that employment
will be offered them before many hours are over.*
If, however, it should happen that they arrive
at a time when employment must be sought,
which will probably be because employers are
themselves too busy to be looking after work-
men, they must not be discouraged. Let the
husband beware of lingering unemployed at the
port; but after finding a temporary home for his
family, let him start off into the country in search
of work. He need not fear starving or suffering
of any sort on the road. There is scarcely a
* Government emigrants, on arrival at either of the
colonies, are provided with shelter and rations at the port,
for a short time, till they can obtain employment.


settler’s station throughout his whole route where
he will not find food, rest, and a hearty welcome.
In all probability he will not have to travel far
before he meets with, what he most wants, work.
It is not at all unlikely that he may fall in with
an employer who will be very willing to engage,
not only himself, but his wife and those of his
children wh<s are able to work. But, at all
events, the wages of a man in Australia are
amply sufficient to supply the wants of a large
family ; and no one need fear having a serviceable
boy or girl long upon his hands.
The next concern to an emigrant will be to get
his family to their new home. In this he will be
assisted by his new employer; and here he will
find the advantage of not being burdened with
much heavy baggage. The less of this, besides
clothing, that he has to convey from the port to
his future home, the pleasanter it will be.
We may now, as a closing scene, view an emi-
grant and his family, after their voyage, arrived
at their new home, some scores, or it may be a
hundred miles or two, “up the country.” There
is much that is strange to them, and some things
that they could wish were a little different. For
instance: the country will have a wild look
about it, the seasons will be quite different from
those in England—Christmas day, for example,
under a hot, burning, midsummer sun. They
will, perhaps, feel lonely, having no neighbour
within sight or hearing ; or, worse than this, they
may have neighbours with whom they would
willingly dispense. They will be far from a
place of public worship ; and their Sundays must


be passed at their own home. In illness, if that
should come, they will perhaps be at a loss for
medical help. The home itself may be a rough
shed made of bark from foundation to roof, with
no great conveniences within ; and their furniture
will be of a very rude description,—clumps of
wood, perhaps, for chairs, rough slabs for tables,
and their bedsteads made of posts driven into the
ground, with rails and sticks fastened across to
support the sleepers.
All this may be at first; and this is a part of
“roughing it in the bush,” for which we trust
our friends will have been prepared.
On the other hand, however, there will be much
to encourage and inspirit. There will be constant
work. Whatever employment may have been
found, there will be good wages—such as could
not have been hoped for in the old country. If
rations be supplied, they will be abundant; if the
emigrant have to buy provisions, they will probably
be so cheap as not to swallow up, as they used to
do at home, almost all his earnings. Instead of
this, he will be able to lay by a good part of those
earnings as a foundation of future prosperity. If
he be industrious and ingenious, the inconveniences
of his dwelling will one by one disappear: after a
few weeks or months, he will be able to look
around him with satisfaction at the work of his
own hands. Indeed, his bark hut, though ex-
ternally the same, will abound in good solid
domestic comfort and conveniences within. Mean-
while, he will not have the thought of rent-day
perpetually harassing him; nor a dread of a
destitute old age every now and then depressing
his mind. Around the hut or cottage we should


expect to find a well-cultivated garden of some
extent, producing vegetables in abundance, and
fruit of a sort and quality to make English mouths
water at the very sight. Looking around upon
his growing family, he will rejoice to think that
employment is ready for them as soon as they are
ready for it; that, in fact, with health and
strength, and industrious habits, competence will
most assuredly be theirs.
And health and strength may be hoped for in
a land where sickness is less frequent than in the
old country, and hearty old age more common.
Not that the climate is without its peculiar an-
noyances ; and these, in the shape of tormenting
insects especially, will no doubt soon be known by
experience. But in Australia, a man may look,
with God’s blessing, for a healthy family to grow
up around him ; and to set against the inconve-
nience of not having a doctor within easy reach,
will be the hope that a doctor’s visits will not often
be needed.
The want of society will possibly, before long,
be removed by an increase of population around;
and emigrants, setting their faces at first against
evil companionship, will find themselves free from
its influences. The serious want of public re-
ligious services in the house of God may, par
tially at least, be counteracted by remembering
that the spiritual worship God requires is not con-
fined to any locality or building, but that,
“ Where’er we seek him God is found,
And every place is holy ground.
For He, within no wails confined,
Inhabiteth the humble mind ;
Such ever bring him where they come.
And going take him to their home.”


But the disadvantage we speak of may not
exist; or if at first it does, ere long a temple to
God may be raised not far off, to make the wilder-
ness and the solitary place glad.
And now a parting farewell to our emigrant
readers.
Whatever may be the advantages of your new
home, we pray you to remember that it is not
your rest; it is polluted. God may give you
health, prosperity, every desirable outward good;
but these gifts will be sadly perverted from their
rightful end if you forget (he Giver. In the land
of your adoption do not forget God. He will not
forget you. His eye will be upon you. You
cannot flee from his presence. Your responsi-
bility to him can never be shaken off As his
creatures, he demands your adoration ; as sinners,
he urges you to embrace his offered mercy through
Jesus Christ: or, having done this, he demands
your constant hearty services. “Ye are not
your own.”
Remember to keep holy the sabbath.—lf you
cannot worship God in the public sanctuary, you
can worship him in your family, at home. Be
conscientiously alive to the importance of setting
apart his day for his immediate service. If you
fail in doing this, it will be a sad evidence that
the gospel has not been received by you “ in the
love of it.”
Teach your children.—Do not let them grow
up in ignorance, nor abandon them to the tuition
of chance associates. To you are the injunctions
most appropriately given, “ Train up a child in
the way he should go;”—“ Bring up your children


in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.” On
this will depend, under God’s over-ruling and
watchful care, whether you shall have introduced
blessings or curses into the land of your adoption.
On this may depend whether future generations
shall remember you as a benefactor or a malefactor
to your race.
Make the Bible your every day book.—Every
book in your small library will probably receive
a value in your eyes which, until you were in a
measure separated from the world, it did not
possess: but make the Bible your choicest trea-
sure of all. It is “able to make you wise unto
salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus,”
Strive to do good to all around you. —You may
not often have an opportunity, or you may have
frequent opportunities, of teaching the ignorant,
of warning the ungodly, of endeavouring to con-
vert a sinner from the error of his ways. If you
be Christians you will desire to do these things;
and if, overcoming the fear of man which bringeth
a snare, you attempt them, God will bless your
feeble efforts, and you will not have lived in vain :
God’s word shall not return unto him void.
Do not neglect prayer.—You will have need to
pray daily lest you be led into temptation. Keep
up a constant intercourse with your God and
Saviour, seeking constantly the aid of the Holy
Spirit, and it will be well with you : if you neglect
this intercourse, it will be ill with you. Your
souls will not, cannot prosper and be in health, if
you turn away from the appointed channel through
which soul prosperity and health are conveyed.
Be watchful against temptation.—This may
approach you in forms to which you have been


previously little accustomed. You may be enticed
to sin.—Watch.
Be kind to each other, and bear one another’s
burdens.—Husband, do not hastily reproach your
wife, if sometimes she casts a lingering fond re-
membrance towards the land of her birth. Wife,
do not, by unreasonable murmurings at the petty
inconveniences and drawbacks you may have to
endure, weaken your husband’s strength and de-
press his spirit.
Prepare for a better, brighter home.—How-
ever pleasant the new home may be, in com-
parison with the old, do not set your affections
on it, so as to weaken the ties which should be
drawing you heavenward. Be this the true lan-
guage of your soul:
“ There is our house : our portion fair,
Our treasure, and our hearts are there,
And our abiding home.”
Upon the careless, thoughtless, Christless emi-
grants, it is evident that such considerations as the
above cannot be urged ; but to such the voice of
heavenly mercy, in the gospel of the grace of God,
is yet addressed ; and while seeking the advance-
ment of his worldly interests and the increase of
his worldly wealth, may this question press heavily
on his soul till it compel him to seek the chief and
only abiding good—“ What shall it profit a man,
if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul ? or what shall a man give in exchange for
his soul ?”
PRINTED BY \V. CI.OVFES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET.


muo
illlllllllH"*»“
3 1508 01935347 8


PUBLICATIONS
OF THE
RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY.
THE CHRISTIAN EMIGRANT: containing Observa-
tions on different Countries, and various Natural Objects;
with short Essays, Discourses, Meditations, and Prayers.
By J. Leifchild, D.D. 18mo, 2s. cloth boards.
THE EMIGRANT’S FRIEND; a Selection of Tracts:
being A Companion for the Voyage, and a Manual of In-
struction in his New Horae. 12mo, Is. half bound.
JAMES’S ANXIOUS INQUIRER DIRECTED AND
ENCOURAGED. 18mo, Is. cloth boards.
THE YOUNG WORKING MAN. 18mo, Is. cloth
boards.
THE WORKING MAN’S WIFE. 18mo, Is. cloth
boards.
DOMESTIC LIFE ; or, Hints for Daily Use. 18mo,
2s. 6d. cloth; 3s. 6 d. half-bound.
THE FAMILY BOOK. 18mo, 2s. cloth boards ; 3s.
half-bound.
THE OLD TESTAMENT POCKET COMMENTARY :
being choice Passages from Henry, Scott, and other
Writers, on every chapter, with Illustrative Notes. In
two vols., Is. 4 d. each; together, 2s. 6 d. cloth boards.
THE NEW TESTAMENT POCKET COMMENT-
ARY : Is. 4 d. cloth boards.
EMIGRANTS’ LIBRARIES. Three Libraries have
been formed for the special use of Emigrants, both during
their voyage, and after their arrival in their new home.
They are enclosed in neat, substantial cases, and may be
had at the respective prices of 10s., 205., and 40s.
