

OUTWARD BOUND
FROM
PLYMOUTH
TO
MELBOURNE.








OUTWARD BOUND.
f Diarg of a Uflgage
FEOM
Plymouth to JA elboui\ne
IK THE
S. S. “SOMERSETSHIRE.”
Captain Holt.
£ontan: ,
PRINTED BX ROBERT BANKS, RACQUET COURT,
FLEET STREET, E.C.




INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
The following pages contain a Diary—or, to use a
nautical phrase, a “ Log Book ” —of a voyage from
England to Australia. It ought to be mentioned that
this “Log Book,” recording the circumstances of
two months spent on the “ briny ocean,” was never
written with any idea of its being “ laid open to the
public gaze.” It was penned by a loving daughter,
and transmitted home by her to her anxious and
affectionate parents, whom she had left behind in Old
England, to give them some idea of the joys and
sorrows—the lights and shades—the ups and downs—
experienced while spending sixty days in a steam-ship,
“ Biding on the deep, bine sea 1 ”
To gratify the wishes of many friends, who have


expressed a desire to possess a copy, the “ Log ” has
been put into print; and at its appearance in this
dress, none will be more surprised when it reaches
them, than “ Fred,” and the loving one that penned
it.
Brixton Road,
May, 1877.


OUTWARD BOUND.
PJjgE left London for Plymouth on Saturday,
December BOth, 1876. Father and Mr.
glyyil Heald accompanied us. We arrived there
about seven o’clock in the evening, and went straight
to the Royal Hotel. We expected the ship to arrive on
Monday evening, but, owing to the rough weather, it
was detained in the Channel, and did not reach
Plymouth till Wednesday morning. Father was on
the look out, and saw her coming into the harbour.
After breakfast, father, Mr. Heald, and Fred went out
to her in a boat; she was lying about two miles from
shore. They stayed there a little while, but finding she
would not start that day, they returned to the Hotel for
the night. The next morning, Thursday, we all went
on board about ten o’clock; the sea was very rough as we


crossed the harbour, and I was very sick, which upset
me for the day. Father and Mr. Heald stayed with us
till eight o’clock in the evening; and, finding that the
ship would start early the next morning, they then bid
us a final good-bye, going away amidst the pouring rain.
We watched the boat till it was lost in the darkness,
and felt very sad when we realised that we were left
alone amidst strangers in that big ship. We hope
they reached Plymouth in safety, which, of course, we
have not yet had any means of ascertaining.
Friday, January sth, 1877. —We weighed anchor
between ten and eleven ; the wind was very high, and
the sea rough. I managed to stay on deck till we had
passed the breakwater, and then had to' go to bed, feel-
ing dreadfully sick and ill. The next four or five days
I was very ill. The ship tossed about very badly
going through the Bay of Biscay; but as the weather
got calmer I began to feel better, and came on deck,
but it was a great trouble to me the first time, and
quite an effort to get up. The sight of the sea moving
up and down made me very dizzy, I could to
look at it for several days. I believe all the ladies
were ill for the first few days, in consequence of the
very rough weather we had, so I was no exception.
The first day I came on deck we passed a ship rather
closely, and I was told that we spoke to her by means


of signals, so she would no doubt report having met
us when she reached England. We also passed several
other ships, but they were a long way off; they looked
so pretty with the sun shining on their white sails.
Friday, 12th. —It is a glorious day to-day; there
seems to be scarcely any swell on the sea, and conse-
quently I feel very well. We have just sighted an
island called Porto Santo, which takes a very peculiar
shape, like the backs and heads of two camels, one
behind the other. I can hardly believe that it is really
land, being now quite accustomed to seeing nothing
but water all round me. I have been down to dinner
to-day for the first time, having previously been afraid
to venture, so Fred has brought it to me on deck. I
am very glad to be able to sit down to dinner, as, of
course, Fred likes to have me with him. We passed
Madeira between nine and ten to-night. We could
see the lights of the principal town, Funchal, distinctly,
being only two miles off; and the lighthouse appeared
to be quite close, its light made quite a reflection on
the water. We were all so disappointed that it was
not daylight, as we should all have liked a good view
of Madeira. A party of us went on deck to have a
look at the island, and we had quite a little concert of
part-songs; it sounded very pretty, and was a beautiful
starlight night. About a dozen of us met in the


Captain’s cabin during the day, to practise the chants
and hymns to be sung on Sunday during the service.
We have done 230 miles to-day. 34° 8' N. lat.
16° 50'W. long.
Saturday, 13th.—We have been going at a good
rate to-day, all the sails have been out, which gives
the vessel a very pretty appearance. We have been
expecting to see Teneriffe, but, unfortunately, the mist
has hidden it. We passed Parma, one of ths Canary
group, just at dusk, so we could only see it very in-
distinctly.
Run 255 miles. 30° 3' N. lat. 17° 38' W. long,
Sunday, 14th.—We had service in the saloon at
half-past ten. The bell rang for church, as on land,
which had a very home-like sound. We have two
clergymen on board, so they conducted the service
between them. In the evening we had service again
at eight o’clock, on account of the tea-hour being at
seven; and the sermon was preached by a Wesleyan
minister, Mr. Oram.
Run 250 miles. 25° 55' N. lat. 17° 40' W. long.
Monday, 15th. —It has been a glorious day to-day,
we are beginning to have quite summer weather. The
ladies have been on deck all day without hats, and the
awning is spread over part of the deck. We saw a
shoal of porpoises this morning, but they were too far


off for us to see anything but their heads above the
water. I should like to have had a nearer view of
them, but no doubt I shall have an opportunity before
the voyage is over, as I am told they often follow a
ship very closely. There was a glorious sunset this
evening; the sun appeared, to sink right into the sea;
it was a beautiful sight, and one that I never had the
pleasure of witnessing before. We are steaming away
at a great rate, having made 270 miles to-day. The
sails are all out. Fred has been very busy getting up
a concert which is to take place on Wednesday even-
ing, and also some private theatricals for the end of
next week.
21° 25' N. lat. 17° 43' W. long.
Tuesday, 16th.—Another summer’s day with a
cloudless blue sky; I have been using my fan vigour-
ously to get a little air. Just fancy, fanning one’s self
on the 16th of January! We remembered that it is
Clara’s birthday, and wished her many happy returns
of the day. , I have been wondering what presents she
has had. Although we are so far away we have been
thinking of her, and, in fact, of you all at home. We
often imagine what you are doing at certain times, and
picture you all; and it seems incredible that we are so
far away. We saw a shoal of porpoises again to-day,
but they were still too far off to see much of them.


We have been watching the phosphorous this evening
following the ship. It looks so pretty, and is, I believe,
caused by the rapid motion of the vessel through the
water. lam sitting writing this near the piano, in
the evening, while Fred is singing—there are only two
or three other gentlemen on board who sing, so that
he is much appreciated.
Run 247 miles. 17° 18' N. lat. 17° 59' W. long.
Wednesday, 17 th.—Fred had a bad toothache all
night which made him very poorly this morning, so
he did not get up till lunch time, but it has gone off
during the day lam glad to say. We passed the “ St.
Osefth,” a ship which left Melbourne thirty-eight days
ago, early this morning; I was not up in time to see
it, but I was told that it passed so close to ns that the
people on board could be plainly seen. The first con-
cert came off this evening at eight o’clock, and was a
decided success. Fred was encored, and every one
complimented him for his nice voice. It was held in
the saloon, and the second-class passengers were invited
to attend, which they did in large numbers. We
wanted to have it on deck, but the Captain rather
objected to the piano being moved. Fred had all the
arranging of it, and now he is very busy getting up
the pieces for the private theatricals. It is too hot to
do any work now in the morning and afternoon, so I


pass my time in reading and talking to a nice little
party that we generally sit with on deck, and Fred
plays chess with some of the gentlemen of the same
party. It is a clergyman and his family who are going
out to Adelaide, and here are two daughters and three
or four sons, and there are two other ladies who
generally join us. Fred has bought me a nice folding
chair from one of the passengers, so I can place it
wherever I please, which is very pleasant.
Run 288 miles. 13° 21' N. lat. 17° 17' W. long.
Thursday, 18th. —It has been almost unbearably
hot to-day, and the sea has been as calm as a lake.
We have seen a lot of sharks; they swim along with
their fins out of water. We also passed some
very pretty shell fish called nautilus; they are all sorts
of colours, and float along with part of their shell
out of the water; they are about the size of an apple.
We also saw some flying fish; they appear to dart in
and out of the water; I believe it is on account of their
being pursued by some other fish. The awning is
spread all over the deck now, which makes a nice shade
from the sun. The heat has been most oppressive to-
day, and this evening there has been quite a thunder-
storm, not much rain, but the lightning has been very
vivid. I never saw anything like it before; it appears
to break out of the sea, and lights it up all round for


miles; we hope it will cool the air a little. We both
got up early this morning, at half-past six, and went
and had a cold bath of sea-water ; it was very nice,
but the water was quite warm. There is no chance of
getting a bath without waiting a long time, unless one
gets up quite early, for there is a general rush towards
breakfast-time. We breakfast at nine, lunch at twelve,
dinner at four, and tea at 7. We stay on deck till tea-
time, and after then every one is in the saloon for the
evening, engaged in various amusements —some writing
diaries and letters, some playing a quiet game of cards,
besique, &c., some reading, and some singing. Fred
went and sat up in the rigging for a little while this
afternoon, to study his part for the performance
quietly.
Eun 226 miles. 49° 45' N. lat. 16° 34' W. long.
Friday, 19th.—This hot weather is intensely trying,
I hardly know what to do with myself. It is bad
enough in the day-time, but at night it is infinitely
worse; our small cabin is almost suffocating. Last
night Fred could not sleep, so he got up about two
o’clock, and boiled our little kettle with the spirit lamp,
and made some tea, which was very refreshing and
acceptable, accompanied by some wedding-cake and
biscuits, so we had quite a little feast in the middle of
the night, and after that we managed to get a little


sleep. It has been very showery to-day, heavy squalls
coming on all at once; the wind rises suddenly, and
then the rain comes pouring down; these are called
tropical showers, and they are no joke. I hoped they
would cool the air, but I think it was hotter than ever
afterwards. I ought to have mentioned before that we
entered the tropics on Monday, so of course we may
expect very hot weather; but I shall be very glad
indeed when it gets a little cooler. We have our meals
as quickly as we can, and then hurry back on deck as
soon as we can leave the table. Last night a party of
us were on deck till bed-time, singing, asking riddles,
&c.
No observation.
Saturday 20th.—I shall be truly thankful when we
get into cooler regions again, for this intense heat quite
overpowers me. Although, of course, there is a little
air stirring on deck through the motion of the ship, it
is very hot air, and brings with it the smell of the
engines and the cooking, which almost turns me sick.
The sea is like .glass to-day, and the flying fish are
darting in and out of the water in great numbers.
The temperature is eighty-four in the shade.
The run for the last two days is 458 miles. 2° 48'
N. lat. 13° 30' W. long.
Su iday 21st. —We crossed the line, or, rather, the


equator, between six and seven o’clock this morning,
so we are now in the Southern hemisphere. We seem
to be qnite separated from England now we have
entered the other half of the globe. I thought there
would be all sorts of sports when we crossed the line,
but I am told that is all done away with now r except
on some sailing ships. A gentleman asked me this
morning if I felt a jerk between six and seven. I did
not see his drift at first, but afterwards I saw that he
referred to the time when we were supposed to be
crossing the line, I thought it was rather a good
idea. We had service on deck this morning at half-
past ten. It was so much nicer than being down-
stairs in the saloon. We do not have a sermon in the
morning, as the service is rather long. In the evening
it was held again, at eight o’clock, in the saloon, and
the sermon was preached by the Rev. A. Sells. It was
a very good and suitable one, the text being, “ Who
shall separate us from the love of God? ” Of course
he referred to our being separated from all our friends
on land for the time being.
Run 206 miles. 0° 18' S. lat. 12° 8' W. long.
Monday, 22nd. —An uneventful day, still extremely
hot.
Run 187 miles. 3° 6' S. lat. 10° 40' W. long.
Tuesday, 23rd.—Avery unfortunate accident hap


pened to Fred to-day. Some acrobats from the second-
class gave a performance on onr deck; and after it
was over some of the gentlemen began playing leap-
frog, Fred amongst them, and in giving a spring he
sprained his leg at the knee, and hurt it very much.
The Doctor bandaged it up, and put a splint on to
keep it quite still, as he was afraid of inflammation in
the joint. Of course he had to go to bed. It was a,
very unfortunate ending to the amusements. We saw
a large shoal of flying fish this morning, they were all
out of the water together, hundreds of them, and all
seemed to dart into the water at the same time.
Eun 190 miles. 6° 3' S. lat. 9° 30' W. long.
Wednesday, 24th.—Fred’s knee is very painful to-
day, I have been sitting down-stairs with him all day,
and so do not know what has been going on upstairs.
Eun 197 miles.- 9° 9' S. lat. 8° 30' W. long.
Thursday, 25th. —Fred’s birthday, a very miserable
one for him to be obliged to spend it in bed with a
bad leg. I have been very sick and queer all day
through the ship pitching a great deal. Fred has been
pretty well amused by two gentlemen playing chess
with him. His knee is better to-day, but still painful.
Every one has been very kind in making inquiries
about Fred, and sending him various things. One of
the passengers, Mr. Gotthelf (the Jew who, was at


Plymouth), brought us down some claret cup, pre-
served fruits, and cake. It being his wife’s birthday
they were having a little party on deck, to which they
had intended to invite us if Fred had been well. There
is an auction sale on the main deck every Thursday.
The articles put up belong to the second and third-
class people; I suppose they have brought them on
board expecting to make a little profit out of them,
there are all sorts of things; soap, candles, lanterns,
books, chairs, coats, trousers, sheets, blankets, boots,
wine, &c., &c. It is very amusing to watch the pro-
gress of the sale from the poop-deck.
Run 195 miles. ll°sl'S. lat. 6° 40' W. long.
Friday, 26th.—I have been lying down nearly all
day to-day, being very sick and unwell. We expect
to be at St. Helena to-night about twelve o’clock, so
I have been finishing my letter home, but my head
was so dizzy that I could not write all I should have
liked. Fred’s knee is much better to-day; the doctor
says he may be carried on deck to-morrow. He will
be very delighted to get upstairs again; it is very
monotonous for him to be confined to the cabin,
although he manages to amuse himself pretty well
with playing chess, and learning his part for the piece,
which is “ The Bachelor of Arts.”
Run 164 miles. 14° 28' S. lat. 5° 50' W. long.


Saturday, 27th. —This has, indeed, been a red-
letter day in our voyage. We woke up in the middle
of the night and found that the screw had stopped,
so we knew that we must have reached St. Helena.
About four or five o’clock I looked out of the porthole
and found that we were at anchor, not more than a
quarter of a-mile from the island, and exactly opposite
the principal town, called James Town. The island
looked like a barren rock in the dim light; but later
on, between five and six, when it was broad daylight,
I could see that there were some patches of green on
it. I was looking through the portholes, and saw the
ship’s boat, with the three mates in it, going ashore
with the letters, and very soon a lot of boats came off
from the island to convey passengers on shore if they
wished to go. The natives are blacks, but not so
hideous as some of the negro tribe, and they speak
English. A lot of the black women came in the
boats, bringing fruit and curiosities, fans, necklaces,
bracelets, &c., made of seeds that grow on the island.
The fruit consisted of bananas, prickly pears, fruit of
the passion flower, and peaches, but they were very
small and inferior. They also brought some eggs on
board, but they were not much larger than bantam’s
eggs, and half-a-crown a-dozen. I bought two
photographs from a boy; one of them is a view of the
B


little town, and the other the house in which
Napoleon lived and died, called “Longwood.” St.
Helena is a very high, rocky island, and rises directly
out of the sea; the outside is very barren, but in the
interior there are some beautiful fruit gardens and
trees. It is between eight and nine miles long, five
broad, and about twenty-nine round. Nearly all the
gentlemen went on shore, and most of them visited
Napoleon’s tomb. One of them, Mr. Comins, showed
me a photograph of it—it is is flat slab, of a slate
colour, with no inscription whatever ; it is enclosed
with rails, and planted all round with scarlet
geraniums, A willow tree grows close by jt, and Mr.
Comins wanted to gather some leaves from it, but the
old Frenchman who was on guard would not allow it;
he said the English wanted to take away everything.
It is all in an enclosure, railed round, with a sentry-
box at one comer. The houses in the town looked
very pretty ; they were nearly all white, and we could
see the church very distinctly; it was close to the
shore, a brown-looking building, with a spire. I was
told it was very plain and bare inside. The steward
Went on shore, and bought some fresh vegetables—
cabbages, carrots, and turnips—which were a great
treat; also some fruit, but we were disappointed in
that; we had hoped to get some grapes and lemons.


but, unfortunately, there were none to be had, and
the peaches were very small, and hardly ripe. Fred
was so very disappointed that he was not able to go
ashore ; had he been all right, we should both have
gone. lam very glad, however, that he was able to
see the island; he managed to gef upstairs with the
help of two gentlemen, and sat on deck, with his leg
resting on a chair. There is no regular landing
place, only some steps, and people have to step out of
the boat just when a wave lifts it up, which must be
very awkward. I was told that the shops are very
inferior, and they sell all manner of things, and are
called “ shantys.” The chemists’ shops are the best
in the place, I believe. We could see Jacob’s Ladder
from the ship very plainly ; it is a straight flight of
steps, six hundred in number, and almost perpen-
dicular, leading from the town to the fort on the top
of the hill. The first mate, Mr. Ayles, very kindly
brought me two dozen tangerine oranges from the
island, as he knew that Fred would be unable to go
ashore to get me anything. This has been a very
eventful day altogether; to-night, the sailors came
round in procession, with a mock-horse, singing all
the while. After that was over, they sold it by
auction, and then hoisted it up to the yard-arm, with
a sailor on its back. He then cut the horse from


under him, and it fell into the sea, and he lighted a
lime-light on the mast, and then slipped down a rope
into the ship again. The meaning of all this is, the
sailors are paid a month in advance before they sail,
and when that time is over, they have to work for
what they call a “ dead horse.” We were all so sorry
to leave St. Helena, it was such a treat to see land
once more; we should have liked to stay there two or
three days, but the anchor was weighed between ten
and eleven, and we were soon off once more.
Run 95 miles.
Sunday, 28 th.—We got Fred up on deck directly
after breakfast, hoping that service would be held
there, but found it was to be down .in the saloon, so,
of course, we could not be present, as it would not do
for him to move about much, and I preferred to stay
and keep him company. He has all his meals on
deck, as he cannot get down-stairs. To-day he had
some cheese for lunch, and watercresses from St.
Helena; but he remarked that they were not so nice
as father’s celery, for which he longed greatly. This
afternoon we saw a lot of porpoises not far from the
ship; 1 never saw them so plainly before; they rose
right out of the water, and then dived in again. In
the evening, service was again held in the saloon, and


the Rev. Mr. Coming preached the sermon from the
text, “ The Lord is my Shepherd.”
Run 240 miles. 19° 49' S. lat. 5° 0' W. long.
Monday, 29 th.—We have left the tropics to-day,
so, I suppose, we may expect cooler weather now.
This evening there was a glorious sunset; and shortly
afterwards, the moon rose in great beauty; I think it
must be in the full.
Run 218 miles. 23° 8' S. lat. 4° 24' W. long.
Tuesday, 30th.—It has certainly been much cooler
to-day, and, consequently, much more pleasant. The
wind was dead against us this afternoon, which drove
the smoke from the funnel back on the ship, and
made me feel very sick, as it always does; it seems to
go right down my throat, which is anything but
agreeable. This evening a slight squall blew over us;
we could see the rain coming in the distance, but it was
soon over, and a beautiful rainbow appeared. Fred’s
knee was very painful this morning; he gave it a twist
in bed, forgetting that anything was the matter with
it; but he kept it very still all day, and it got easier.
The Captain has very kindly had a crutch made for him
to lean on, so he can manage to get about a little. He
has been very much occupied all day, playing chess
with several people, of which game he is very fond.
Run 223 miles. 26° 16'S, lat. 2° 13'W. long.


Wednesday, 31st. The concert was held this
evening, as usual, and was a very good one; most .of
the songs were encored; Fred sang a duet with Mrs.
Rosenberg, which was also encored; he did not do
any more on account of his leg.
Run 205 miles. 29° 11' S. lat. 0° 13' W. long.
Thursday, February Ist. —The commencement of
another month on the sea ; I wish it was the Ist of
March instead of February, we should then he look-
ing forward to our journey’s end. Four weeks to-day
we came on board at Plymouth; it seems ages ago,
and yet, after all, the time has passed quickly. We
expect, in about three days, to be off the Cape of
Hood Hope; of course, we shall not see anything of
it, as we shall pass it at a distance of about 250
miles. It is generally rough in that quarter, so, no
doubt, we shall feel something of it; in fact, the ship
is rolling a little to-day. This afternoon one of the
little acrobats gave a contortion performance on the
poop-deck, and he twisted himself about in a most
remarkable manner; he seems to have no bones at all.
He belongs to a troupe of four of them, who are
engaged by some man in Melbourne, for three years,
at £3O at week; at least, so I have been told.
Run 227 miles/ 32° 17' S. lat. 2° 16' E. long.
Friday, 2nd.—Last night the screw was taken up,


and we are now sailing without any steam at all; we
have got into the South-west trade winds. There is
a very great change in the weather; the sea is very
rough, and the wind boisterous. We have seen the
first albatross to-day; they say it is a sign of wind
when they appear; they are very large birds, some
white and some brown. The ship is all on one side
now we are under canvas, which is very miserable,
and it has been rolling dreadfully ; I have been very
sick all day.
No observation.
Saturday, 3rd. —This is my birthday; I never ex-
pected to spend one on sea. To-day I am twenty-
three, quite a mature age. It is singular that both
Fred and I should spend our birthdays at sea; 1 have
no doubt we have been remembered on land. The
ship has been rolling about very much to-day; we
expect to have a very rough and uncomfortable night.
Last night was the most miserable night we have
spent since we came on board; we could not keep still
for a minute together, although we tried all sorts of
ways. We are now abreast of the Cape of Good Hope,
and so must expect rough weather for a few days.
It is getting very much colder now ; I have got out
my winter things again to-day ; the wind is so cold, it
seems to go right through one. I felt very ill this


morning, but managed to get upon deck after lunch;
it was very uncomfortable sitting there with the ship
rolling about so much, so several of us laid our rugs
on the deck, and we laid down on them. It came on
to rain a little two or three times, so we covered our-
selves quite up in the rugs, and it was great fun. I
have not had dinner in the saloon for several days
now; I cannot sit there when the ship is moving
about so much, so the steward brings it to me in my
cabin.
Run, for two days, 490 miles. 36° 51' S. lat.
10° 30' E. long.
Sunday, 4th.—We have again had a most miserable
night, tossing and rolling about. We thought perhaps
we should be more comfortable on the floor, so we
made up our bed on the floor of the cabin, but it was
just as bad there as in the berth. I shall be truly
thankful when we get into calmer weather again, for
I am quite tired of this, and so weary of lying down
so much; but if I sit up, I am sick, and so there is
nothing for it but to lie down all day long; my head
has never ceased aching since the rough weather
came on. Several heavy seas broke over the ship this
morning; we could hear the water come rushing
down the hatchway, but it did not come near our
cabin, lam glad to say. We both felt very ill this


morning, so Fred did not get np till nearly dinner
time, but I did not get up at all, for I could not hold
up my head. It has been a very miserable Sunday,
and I have several times thought very longingly of
you all at home, in peace and comfort; but I suppose
I must have patience for a few days longer, and then
it will be all right again. When the ship gives a
great lurch, there seems to be such confusion—all the
plates, dishes, pots, pans, &c., go tumbling about.
We have had to make all the things in our cabin very
secure; if we had not done so, they would have been
slipping about all over the place, but Fred has been
very particular and careful. I ought to have
mentioned that we had a little mishap about a fort-
night ago, and that was, we unfortunately broke the
little teapot that father bought us at Plymouth. We
had been making some tea one evening, and, in re-
placing the things on the swing-tray, the cord slipped
round the hook, and everything was precipitated to
the ground, and the teapot broken. We felt so very
sorry, as it was a little present from father; but we
have a hot water jug, which we can use instead, I
do not seem to care for the tea somehow; it is very
good, but I fancy the water gives it a peculiar taste.
The oranges we brought from Plymouth lasted till a
short time ago; we said they were like the widow’s


cruse of oil—inexhaustible ; we could not understand
it, for we ate one or two nearly every day, and yet
they seemed to last out. There was no service this
morning, as the ship was rolling about so much; but
in the evening it was rather calmer, so it was held,
and Mr. Oram, the Wesleyan minister, preached the
sermon, which Fred said was a very good one.
Run 310 miles. 38° 70' S. lat. 16° 48 E. long.
Monday, sth.—The sea has been much calmer to-
day, and the ship steadier, which is a great treat, after
yesterday’s rolling. I went on deck soon after break-
fast, and stayed there till nearly dinner-time, but it
was very showery, sudden squalls kept blowing up;
however, I was well wrapped up with two or three
rugs and a cloak, so I did not mind. I saw a great
many albatrosses; they are large pretty birds, and
they fly very close to the water. Mr. Symonds has
been telling me that they measure from twelve to
fourteen feet from the tip of one wing to the other,
when stretched out; but they do not look nearly so
large as that when they are flying. Fred’s knee has
been rather painful again to-day ; I am afraid he has
been trying it too much, and I am quite determined
he shall rest it for the future, and keep quiet till it is
better. I had dinner in the saloon again to-day..
No observation.


Tuesday, 6th.—We have had a fine day, and a
comparatively warm one,- but towards night a squall
blew up, and the rain came down heavily. There
have been a great many birds flying about to-day—
albatrosses and some small black birds, called petrels,
or Mother Carey’s chickens. They look very pretty
skimming the waves. The albatrosses came very
close to the ship, and flew about the rigging, which
Fred said was a sign of stormy weather. I hope it
is not coming on again. We have had a comfortable
reprieve to-day. The first fine, calm day we have,
the theatrical performance is to come off. They have
had several rehearsals, and they all know their parts
very well.
Run, for two days, 384 miles, 39° 17' S. lat. 24°
48' E. long.
Wednesday, 7th.—There is very little to record for
to-day; I have been lying down nearly all day, feeling
sick, and Fred has not been very well either. After
tea he came down to me in the cabin and taught me
to play besique, which cheered me up a little; and
before we went to bed we boiled the kettle and made
some tea, which proved rather a troublesome task, for
the ship was rolling about a great deal, and all the
things persisted in moving too. The weekly concert has
been postponed in consequence of the rough weather.
Run 260 mile. 40° 49' S. lat. 30° 6' E. long.


Thursday, Bth.—The ship has been steadier to-day,
so the concert was held this evening. It was an
extra good one. One of the midshipmen sang “ John
Peel,” dressed in character, which was great fun.
Fred sang “The Vagabond,” and “Hearts of Oak,”
both of which were encored; and he gave them “The
British Lion,” and “The Sea is England’s Glory,”
which took immensely ; they are all delighted with his
singing. The Captain gave a song and a reading.
His readings are always very humorous and amusing.
The youngest midshipman, who always goes by the
name of “ Commodore,” on account of his being so
short, sang “ A Cup of Tea,” but he laughed so much
that he quite broke down. Mrs. Rosenberg sang
“ Non e Yer.” She has a splendid voice.
Run 295 miles. 41° 58' S. lat. 36° 26' E. long.
Friday, 9th.—Fred has not got up at all to-day,
being determined to give his leg a thorough rest; it
does not get well so quickly as we could wish; I am
afraid he tries it too much; when he is up he cannot
possibly sit still, so I mean to keep him in bed for a
few days, so that he cannot use it. I have been
sitting in the cabin with him all day, with the excep-
tion of just going up to the saloon for meals. I went
on deck for a few minutes after dinner; there were a
great number of birds flying about, albatrosses, Cape


hens, Mother Carey’s chickens—such dear little birds,
black and white. The Cape hens are black, with long
hooked beaks. Several of the gentlemen have been
trying to catch some of the birds, but have not suc-
ceeded —the ship is going too fast. This afternoon
Fred taught me to play cribbage, which is a nice
game, but Ido not like it so well as besique. We
had a turn at the latter again this evening, and it
passed the time away very pleasantly.
Eun 196 miles. 43° 11' S. lat. 40° 33' E. long.
Saturday, 10th.—Fred has been lying down in the
cabin all day, and I have been sitting with him. We
played besique all the evening; we are both very
fond of it, it is a very pretty and interesting game.
Of course, I cannot play it so well as Fred, but I
have got into it very well indeed. It was very
showery this morning, but the afternoon turned out
gloriously fine, though the wind was cold. They are
beginning to paint the outside of the ship to make it
look nice when we arrive at Melbourne; yesterday
we began to go due East, so we are now sailing
straight to Australia. We expect to be there about
a fortnight to-day, which is very delightful to look
forward to. I shall be only too delighted to set foot
on terra firma again. Mr. Ayles, the first mate, came
and sat talking with us this evening. He brought


his little dog to show us, such a dear little thing,
just like Hettie’s Tiny, and that is its name too. He
was telling us that he brought over a hundred pounds’
worth of birds from England to take to Australia,
but they have nearly all df them died, through some
disease; it is a great loss for him, for he says he
generally makes 300 per cent out of them. The
gentlemen are still fishing for birds, but none of them
have been fortunate enough to catch any; there are
scores of them following the ship.
Eun 220 miles. 44° 20' S. lat. 45° 23' E. long.
Sunday, 11th.—We had service this morning, as
usual, in the saloon, at 10.30, and also in the evening,
at 8 o’clock, when the Eev. Mr. Sells preached the
sermon. There was a shoal of whales seen this
morning about half-past seven, but I do not think
there were many people up in time to see them. Mr.
Ford, the chief engineer, was talking to Fred to-day,
and he was telling him that the Somersetshire carries
for a single voyage between eight and nine hundred
tons of coal, and consumes about twenty tons a-day.
It takes four tons to lay the fires for lighting, and
when under steam, there are eight fires going every
day.
Eun 181 miles. 44° 25' S. lat. 49° 37' E. long.
Monday, 12th.—We have had a lovely day to-day,


but the wind has been very cold. Mr. Gotthelf spied
a whale this afternoon, and called out for us to look
at it, but it was gone; I should very much like to see
one. Mr. Lindesay brought us down a book of
photographic views to look at this afternoon; he
thought they would interest and amuse Fred now he
is confined to the cabin. Some of them were Conti-
nental views, and some of Irish and Scotch scenery;
I recognised several of the latter. There were also
some good ones of places of interest in London.
Mr. Sells came down and had a game of chess with
Fred this afternoon, and all the evening we have
been playing besique; I like the game so much,
although Fred nearly always beats me.
Run 192 miles. 45° 20' S. lat. 58° 52' E. long.
Tuesday, 13th.—A most melancholy event happened
this morning. Mr. Watson, one of our saloon
passengers, died at five o’clock; it has cast a gloom
over us all, for it was very unexpected, although he
was known to be very ill. He was coming abroad for
his health; he had suffered from all manner of
diseases, and was tapped for dropsy just before he
came on board. No doubt father and Mr. Heald will
remember him; he was that gentleman with a thick
neck, and two lumps at the back of it. He was
rather addicted to drinking, but his system was so


enfeebled that he could not stand it, and this morning
the doctor told Fred that he died of delirium tremens,
but his constitution was thoroughly ruined. I
believe he was a very wealthy man, a partner in some
large iron works in Glasgow ; he had a man servant
with him. It is a singular thing that the last
passenger who died on this ship was also named
Watson ; that happened the voyage before last. He
was buried this evening, at sundown, which was six
o’clock. The body was stitched up in the usual way
in canvas, with the Union Jack for a pall, and was
laid on a broad plank and carried by six sailors
through the saloon; and, as it was raining very fast,
it was deposited at the end of the saloon while part
of the burial service was read, and the hymn sung,—
“ A few more years shall roll.”
It was then carried out on to the main deck, where
the service was concluded, after which Mr. Ayles, the
chief mate, raised the plank, and the body slid off
into the sea. It was a very mournful scene, and one
that I never expected to witness. To-day, being
Shrove Tuesday, we had pancakes for dinner.
No observation.
Wednesday, 14th. —It has been very wet again to-
day. This morning the ship was rolling a little,
which made me feel rather sick. Mr. Ford, the first


engineer, came in our cabin this afternoon and had a
long chat with us about the various places lie has
visited in his different voyages. He has been engineer
in the Spanish, Turkish, German, and English navies,
and, consequently, has seen a great many countries.
We have been making some soda water in the
gasogene this evening ; we find it very useful, we have
made some a great many times; we drink it now with
a very little brandy in it; we have been advised to
do so, nearly every one else does the same. This is
Valentine’s day, but the postman has not left a valen-
tine for me. It is also Mr. Heald’s birthday; we
drank his health at dinner-time; that is the fifth
birthday in the two families since we have been on
the sea. To-day, being Ash Wednesday, there was
service in the saloon at half-past ten. Since we
began to go East we are gaining time rapidly; we are
now four hours in advance of the English time. We
are still sailing, and when we are going very fast the
ship is all on one side, which makes it very awkward at
dinner, as the dishes are apt to slide off into one’s lap,
and everything develops a tendency to roll about. It is
also very uncomfortable to dress in a cabin that is tipped
up at one end and down at the other; I find it quite
a task to be able to stand at the glass and do my hair.
No observation.
c


When there is no sun appears, the Captain cannot
measure the distance we have come, as it is done by
an instrument through which he observes the sun.
Thursday, 15th.—A fine, bright, clear day, but
very cold. The weather has been very cloudy the
last two days, but to-day the sun has been shining, so
they have been able to take observations. The day
before yesterday we passed about a hundred miles
South of the Orozet Isles, and to-day we have been
passing Kerguelan’s Land, or the Isle of Desolation,
but, of course, at too great a distance to see anything
of them. They are uninhabited islands, in the Indian
Ocean. There have been some fresh sort of birds
flying about to-day, called “ Mollyhawks.” They are
black right across the body from wing to wing, and
the head and tail are white; also some little birds,
called “ Whale Birds.” In consequence of the
melancholy death that has happened this week, we
have not bad a secular concert to-day, but a little
sacred oratorio, called “John the Baptist,” was sung
to-night, but I did not go to hear it; I preferred
staying with Fred. He still keeps to the cabin, being
advised to do so by the doctor, the Captain, and every
one who knows anything about these sprains, as they
say perfect rest Is the necessary thing to make it all
right. Mr. Ford came in and had a chat with us


after tea ; his cabin is next to ours, so he is very fond
of popping in to see us.
Run, for three days, 716 miles. 47° 23' S. lat.
70° 54 E. long.
Friday, 16th.—Very little worth mentioning has
occurred to-day. It was very wet this morning, but
cleared up fine in the afternoon. While we were
sitting at lunch, we felt a sort of vibration, which
the Captain believed to be caused by an earthquake ;
he said there was nothing on the ship that would
occasion such a motion. We are now about 3000
miles from Melbourne. The doctor looked at Fred’s
knee to-day, and pronounced it to be going on so
satisfactorily that he said he might go up into the
saloon to dinner, which was a great treat after being
confined to the cabin for so many days.
No observation.
Saturday, 17th.—It has been very cold to-day;
there was snow falling early this morning, and quite
a hailstorm. The top globe of our gasogene was
frosted lightly on the inside. The run for the last
two days was only 448 miles, so we are not getting
on very fast. The birds are leaving us: there were
only two or three flying about this afternoon.
Run 448 miles. 47° 42' S. lat. 81° 56' E. long.
Sunday, 18th. —We had service this morning, as


usual, in the saloon, at half-past ten; also in the
evening, at eight, when the Rev. Mr. Comins preached
a very good sermon, in which he alluded to the death
which had occurred during the week, and the hymn—
“ A few more years shall roll,”
was again sung. Mrs. Holt, the Captain’s wife, is
very unwell; the sudden death was such a shock to
her that she has been very poorly ever since; she is
very delicate.
Run 223 miles. 48° 15' S. lat. 87° 20' E. long,
Monday, 19th.—It has been very cold to-day on
deck, the wind is so keen and searching. There have
been some fresh birds flying about to-day, called
“Mutton Birds;” I do not know why they are so
named. Mr. Johnson caught two of them this morn-
ing with a line; they fly over the lines and their
wings get entangled, and then they are hauled in. It
is a most singular way of catching birds, but, of
course, if they were to shoot them, they would fall
into the water and be lost. No hooks are employed,
but simply a line about twenty yards long, which is
thrown out from the stem of the ship. Mrs. Holt is
still very poorly; the Captain has not been into the
saloon all day, nor yet this evening, when he generally
makes ong of a select whist party of four; poor Mr.


Watson was also one of the players. I forgot to
mention before that we have enjoyed aunt Pinfold’s
jam very much indeed : it is delicious ; we often have
some of it with some biscuits before we go to bed, and
consider it a great treat.
Eun 215 miles. 47° 57' S. lat. 92° 40' E. long.
Tuesday, 20th.—Fred has been very much occupied
all day in trying to catch birds; he got up quite early
for that purpose, and kept to it all day, but without
success; they seem to be getting rather shy. We
had great fun this evening ; a party of us, Fred and
myself, Mr. Johnson, Miss Toung, Miss Symonds,
Miss Sells, and Mr. Ayles, all went into the ladies’
saloon and had a game at “ Napoleon,” not for money,
but for counters. It was great fun towards the last;
we all began to cheat, but the best of it was that we
all knew what the others were doing, and there was
such laughing over it. Mr. Johnson is a very nice
young fellow; he was extremely kind to Fred when
his leg was bad, he carried him up and down stairs,
and did all he could for us both. He is going to
Melbourne to his uncle, who is a very wealthy man
there. Fred knew his uncle when he was in Australia
before; it is very singular how one falls in with
people. His parents live at Lee, near Blackheath,
and are very nice people, I believe. We have


given him our cartes, and the people he has shown
them to, think mine is very good indeed, at which I
am surprised; of course, they like Fred’s, too, but
not so much as mine.
Run 223 miles. 48° 15' S. lat. 87° 20' E. long.
Wednesday 21st. —We have been doing scarcely
anything all night; there was no wind at all to speak
of, so this morning the screw was put down again, and
we. have been steaming all day. My head has been
very bad, I expect it is through the motion of the
screw, not being used to it lately. The Captain was
very reluctant to begin steaming again, for he has only
a week’s coal left. There are various conjectures as
to when we shall arrive in Melbourne; some say a
week to-day, but the majority are in favour of to-
morrow or Friday week. They have even got up a
sweepstake as to when the pilot will come on board.
We are all looking forward to being on land once more.
Fred has been fishing for birds all day again, bat has
not caught any. His face has got so red through
standing in the wind all day long, it is almost cardinal
colour, like Debbie’s was at Eastbourne. He is very
anxious to catch a bird for me to keep and have it
stuffed, as a remembrance of our voyage; I hope he
will get one at last. To-day has been a lovely day, it
is getting quite warm again. What changes of climate


we have passed through—cold, and then heat, then
cold, and now it is getting hot again. We expect
warm weather when we get to Melbourne, as it will be
towards the end of their summer.
Run 177 miles. 46° 51' S. lat. 102° 15' E. long,
Thursday, 22nd.—The screw was taken up this
morning, about ten o’clock; a breeze sprang up during
the night, and now we are sailing again. lam very
glad indeed that it is taken up again, for it seemed to
make such a noise and vibrate through the ship, but
of course that was caused by our being unaccustomed
to it for the last three weeks. I am very pleased to
say that Fred caught a bird this morning, a “ Mutton
Bird,” it has such a beautiful white breast, and grey
wings; of course he had it killed at once, and then he
took it to the butcher to skin, we intend to have it
stuffed some time. lam very glad he has caught one
at last, for he has been very persevering. It has been
raining fast all day, so I have not been on deck. The
concert was held this evening, as usual, and was a very
good one, although rather an uncomfortable one, for
the ship was very much on one side, and kept rolling
about a great deal, which made it very awkward for
the performers to stand. Fred sang “Come into the
Garden, Maud,” which was of course encored, and
then he sang “ The Village Blacksmith.” They were


both a decided success. He also sang the solo of
“ Come Where My Love Lies Dreaming,” and the
choir sang the chorus. I suppose it will be the last
concert on board ship, for we hope to be in Melbourne
by next Thursday.
No observation.
Friday, 23rd.—We have been sailing along very
fast to-day, and the ship has been very much on one
side. It is like walking up a steep hill to get from
one end of our cabin to the other, and of course we
have to be very careful in going up and down stairs.
The ship’s doctor, Doctor Hargood, met with a very
sad accident this afternoon. He was walking along
and the ship gave a lurch, and he was thrown violently
against the back of a seat, and broke two of his ribs.
Fortunately there is another doctor among the pas-
sengers, Dr. Turner, so he attended to him. lam so
sorry for him, he was so kind and attentive to Fred
when he hurt his knee. We have now passed .Cape
Lenwin, so we are now sailing along the coast of
Australia, but at a great distance South, in order to
eatch the wind. It is generally considered about five
and a-half days’ sail from Cape Lenwin to Melbourne ;
so if we have fair winds I expect we shall arrive at our
journey’s end about Wednesday or Thursday next. It
has been raining nearly all day again, so I have not
been on deck.


Run, for two days, 535 miles. 46° 14' S.lat. 115°
18' E. long.
Saturday, 24th.—We passed a very miserable night
last night; the ship being all on one side, we were
obliged to sleep one at the head, and one at the foot of
the berth, to avoid rolling about. We are going along
at a good rate, and are now about 1,000 miles from
Melbourne, and are beginning to think seriously of
packing up. Fred wanted to begin to-day, but I
thought it would be time enough on Monday. We
want to have everything quite ready by the time we
get in sight of land, so that we may be able to remain
on deck to see the coast as we go along. lam very
pleased to say that Fred’s leg is very much better—in
fact, I may say almost well; he has been very careful
the last few days, and rested it as much as possible, so
that I hope now he will not feel much inconvenience
from it when we arrive at Melbourne. We are looking
forward very joyfully to our journey’s end, for although
we have on the whole been very comfortable, and had
a fine voyage, there is nothing like being on land, after
all. I was very busy this afternoon mending our
music, stitching the leaves together. I have done very
little work since I have been on board; I have not
seemed able to settle to fancy work; reading is the
prevailing amusement. To-night Fred and I have


been playing besique, and I won the game for once.
Our store of wine is not yet exhausted, we have still
three bottles of Champagne, one of Hock, and one
brandy left; we have been very careful with it.
Run 292 miles. 45° 28' S. lat. 122° 5' E. long.
Sunday, 25th. Our last Sunday on board the
Somersetshire. It will seem very strange to go to a
regular place of worship again, after being accustomed
to attend service in the saloon for so long. We had
service this morning as usual, and again in the even-
ing, when the Rev. Mr. Oram preached the sermon.
He is a Wesleyan minister and a very nice man; he
has been to England for a change on account of his
health. He stayed with Mr. McArthur on Brixton-
hill a few days. Of course I told him that my parents
lived at Brixton. He asked me to write my name in
a birthday book that was given to him by Mrs,
McArthur. The screw was put down again this after-
noon, the wind has dropped again. I expect now we
shall continue to steam till we get *to Melbourne. I
suppose you will have received my letter from St.
Helena, a few days ago. It is strange to think that
by.the time you get it we shall be nearly at Melbourne.
I was very near having a great loss to-day; one of the
five diamonds came out of my ring, but fortunately it
fell on the table, while we were at tea, and one of the


stewards noticed it glittering and pointed it out to me,
and I immediately looked at my ring and found it was
minus a diamond. I remember catching it in my ear-
ring as I sat down to tea, and I expect that loosened it;
it was extremely fortunate that it fell on the table, or
I might have lost it. Fred is going to have the ring
examined when we get to Melbourne, to see if any of
the others are loose. There was a glorious sunset
to-night, one of the grandest I have ever seen; it
made me think of home, knowing that the same sun
shines and sets in England as here on the sea, but
when it is setting with us it is shining with you.
No observation.
Monday, 26th. —Fred and I were very busy this
morning packing. We have done all we can, but
there are so many things we cannot put away till quite
the end of the voyage. It is so delightful to think we
have only two more whole days to spend on board ship.
I am longing to be on land again, and getting rather
excited with the prospect of so soon seeing Mel-
bourne. The two months have passed very quickly
after all, and on the whole pleasantly, although we
have had a very slow voyage as regards amusements. .No
one but Fred seemed to care to trouble themselves to get
up anything of the sort, and yet they were very pleased
to have some little amusements when some one else


had the bother of it. The theatricals will not come
olf at all now; they have been postponed from time
in consequence of Fred’s knee being bad, and now, of
course, it is too late. It is a great pity, for I believe
they would have been very good.
Run, for two days, 480 miles. 43° 0' S. lat. 132°
40' E. long.
Tuesday, 27th.—We have been doing a little more
packing to-day, but I have been feeling rather sick
and queer, there has been such a disagreeable smell
from the engines, which always makes me feel ill. I
am afraid we shall not arriveiat Melbourne so early on
Thursday as we at first expected, for the run to-day
is not very good—only 220 miles. They have been
painting the ship, and making it look quite smart to
go into port; all the seats on deck have been scraped
and varnished, and the masts painted.
Run 220 miles.
Wednesday, 28th.—Our last entire day on board
ship, at least I hope so, but I think there is no doubt
we shall get into Melbourne to-morrow if everything
continues to go on all right. We were rather startled
last night when we were going to bed by the screw
suddenly stopping; I was afraid for the moment that
there was something wrong, but I suppose it was
nothing serious, for it soon began to work again. We


have been finishing our packing to-day; there did not
seem much to be done, but it took us all the afternoon.
Fred took down all the hooks and nails that we had
put up, and a little shelf that he made, and Various
other little conveniences. We are now quite ready to
go ashore to-morrow; we shall only take a little bag
each, containing necessaries for present use, till we get
settled somewhere. It has been raining heavily all
day, so I have not been on deck; but Fred saw land
this afternoon, and two ships, which is the greatest
sight we have had for a long time. Fred has been
exchanging cards with a great many of the passengers;
he has quite a little collection of them, which it will
be nice to keep as remembrances of the voyage.
Thursday, March Ist. —This has been a most event-
ful and exciting day. We have once more set foot on
land, to my great delight and satisfaction. Last night,
about eleven o’clock, we went upon deck to see the
light on Cape Otway; of course it was too dark to
distinguish anything but the light, but still it was a
satisfaction to know that the land was there. We
were too restless to sleep much, so we got up about
six o’clock, and went on deck, and found we were
nearing the Port Phillip Heads, which are two points
of land at the entrance to Hobson’s Bay. At a few
minutes to eight the pilot came on board, which caused


great excitement, as there were two sweepstakes con-
cerning him, one being as to what time he would
arrive, and the other what letter his name would begin
with. One of the midshipmen, Grave, won the former,
and Mrs. Lindesay the latter. At Queenscliff, a
pretty little town on the bay, a boat was put off, con-
taining the medical officer, who came on board to see
if there was any infectious disease on the ship; if there
had been I suppose we should have been detained in
quarantine. A little farther on we were met by a
small steamer, with the ship-agents on board, and some
of the passengers’ friends. It takes four hours to get
up the bay, and they have to steam at half speed, as
it is dangerous in some parts.
We reached Sandridge pier about three o’clock, but it
was past four before we landed, as there seemed to be
some difficulty in getting the ship alongside. The
passengers’ Mends, most of them, came off to meet
ns in little boats, and the ship was soon quite crowded.
We felt rather sad to think that we had no kind friends
to greet us, but we had not expected any one, so we
were not disappointed. It was unfortunate that both
Fred’s friends who intended to meet us were away in
the country, and did not hear that the Somersetshire
had arrived till too late. The pier was thronged with
people to see the ship come in. We soon started off,


and took the train to Melbourne, and went straight to
the Hotel, where we stayed one night; and the next
day I found some nice apartments, and we removed to
them at once. The next morning Fred went to the
Custom House, and got all our luggage, which for-
tunately was passed without the trouble of being
examined, through the influence of a gentleman whom
Fred knew.
I can hardly describe my first impressions of Mel-
bourne. It did not look at all foreign to me, but
everything had a brighter and more cheerful look than
in England, which is of course owing to the beautiful
climate.
So ends the little history of our two months’ voyage,
which was, after all, more like a pleasure trip, for we
did not have any really rough weather.
EMMA HEALD.
Melbourne, March, 1877.








