

ROYAL SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
50. „ „ On the Oven-mounds of Aborigines in Victoria. By
Rev. Peter MacPherson, M.A
VOLUME XVIII.
1884-85..


The Oven-mounds of the Aborigines in Victoria.
By the Bey. PETER MAcPHERSON, M.A.
[Read before the Royal Society of N.S.W., 2 July, 1884]
In the district of Meredith, midway between Geelong and Ballarat,
there is a considerable number of mounds, locally known as Black-
fellows’ ovens. In the landscape they appear as ordinary irregu-
larities on the surface of the ground, and in many cases would be
passed by without arresting the least attention. At times, how-
ever, the grass growing upon them presents a freshness of luxuri-
ance which shows that the soil in which that grass is growing is
richer than the soil around. In a field near Meredith two ovens
were ploughed up, and the ground was planted with potatoes.
The luxuriance of the growth which took place clearly marked out
the position of the ovens. The growth, however, was too rank,
and the luxuriant bunches gradually faded, leaving the crop of
potatoes at the roots far inferior to what prevailed generally in
the field. In another case, at Cargerie, a piece of land, on which
was an oven-mound, was ploughed up and sown with oats. There
was a vigorous growth of stalk, but the grain came to nothing.
On the uncultivated country the oven-mounds, in ordinary seasons,
are not easily distinguished from irregularities of the surface of the
earth. After severe droughts, however, they are much more easily
discerned. This was exemplified during the very dry season in the
early part of 1869. Owing to the drought which then prevailed,
the green mantle of grass had disappeared, leaving the black
patches of the oven-mounds very easily distinguishable from the
bare surface of the soil generally. Numbers of the mounds could
be distinguished from the carriage windows of the Geelong and
Ballarat Railway, at Bruce’s Creek, near Lethbridge, and also on
the slopes of the heights at the upper part of Cowie’s Greek. The
powdery black ashes of the primitive hearths and cooking-ovens of
the aborigines are distinguishable from the blackest soil, and can
be traced on the ploughed fields long after the subverting agency
of the ploughshare has been at work. Still it is obviously only a
question of time when the last traces of such hearths will disappear
for ever.


Sites op Oven-mounds.
As cooking was concerned, the necessity for ready access to
water explains at once why so many ovens are to be found along
the banks of creeks and rivers, as well as by the margin of lagoons
and lakes. In a hollow of the Woodbourne Creek, near Meredith,
there is an oven so near the channel of the creek that the ashes
fall over the bank into the water. Rising out of the ashes is the
stump of a tree four feet in diameter. About a quarter of a mile
from this oven, in the direction of Oargerie, there is another oven
perched on the very apex of a large mound of ironstone nodules,
and occupying the highest ground in the neighbourhood. Taking
one locality with another, ovens are to be found in all positions
between these two extremes —the lowest and highest points. They
are found, as just shown, on the very brink of a creek, or a few
yards from it, or in an angle, or on a gently rising slope, or on a
steep brow with volcanic rocks cropping out close by, and on the
flat ground or heights beyond. A point to be noted is that they
are to be found on the eastern bank of a creek as well as on the
western, exposed apparently to the full strength of the westerly
and north-westerly gales. The explanation why sites appear to
have been chosen exposed to so much inconvenience is probably
to be found in this, —that as the ovens are very numerous, suitable
ones could be used according to the season of the year when they
were required. A similar explanation applies to cases in which
ovens are found at considerable distances from permanent water.
They were used during the wet season, when water could be got
readily in what are locally called crab-holes and in small depressions
on the surface of the ground. Moreover, it is to be remembered
that ovens which appear now to be quite shelterless, were probably
not so when used by the aborigines. The destruction of trees by
the white settlers affects the question. Restore the hundreds or
thousands of trees which have been destroyed, and the oven, which
appears now to occupy a bleak and exposed position, will be well
sheltered behind a vast expanse of branches. There is an oven on
the outer slope leading to the lagoon near Woodbourne, well
sheltered at present owing to the thick growth of trees. Now this
oven would be in a very exposed position were the trees to be cut
down. Some of the trees, also, in this locality, are peculiarly
well adapted for camping purposes. They spread out their
branches to a great distance, forming a covering only 3 or 4 feet
overhead. Doubtless the dusky limbs of the poor wandering
aborigines have often reposed during hot winds under the branches
of these very trees which are so near the cooking-ovens. From
beneath the agreeable shade of the spreading eucalyptus, no doubt,
the aboriginal cooks watched the progress of the steaming process
by which large quantities of game were cooked at once. The native
bread or potato (. Mylitta australis) also prevailed in this locality ;


it is occasionally turned up yet in the district by the plough.
Altogether, the numerous ovens on the Woodbourne Creek and in
the neighbourhood, also the numerous traces of bark-stripping to
supply material for pegging boards for stretching out opossum
skins, also for erecting their temporary shelters, afford clear evidence
that the locality now in question was a favourite haunt of the
aborigines in former times. It remains only to be stated, in
regard to the sites of the oven-mounds, that they are to be seen
indiscriminately on the east and west side of a creek, hence there
could not have been in this locality any prevailing superstition
leading the aborigines to prefer either east side or west side for
their cooking-ovens.
Structure of Oven-mounds —External.
Let us now come to a closer scrutiny of the mound and its
oven. The collection of ashes, charcoal, and stones may be 20
or 30 feet in diameter, and lor 2 feet thick at the centre. But
the real oven, formed of stones, is much smaller than what the
foregoing figures indicate. The stone oven itself varies in size
from 4to 9 feet in diameter; 6 feet, however, may be taken
as a common size in the whole of the Meredith District. This
stone oven is usually slightly concave, or crater-like, with a central
stone larger than those otherwise employed in the oven. Such a
central stone, or occasionally two, may be commonly seen in those
ovens which have been formed with some regularity. Such central
stone was obviously convenient for the process of cooking by steam.
Kangaroo and other game were placed on the oven of heated
stones, grass and bark were placed over the game, and earth scraped
up from alongside the oven was placed on the grass and bark.
An opening was left or made for pouring water down upon the
heated central stone, and the operation of the steam was rendered
all the more effectual by the arrangement of grass, bark, and loose
earth. The places from which the earth was scooped up are quite
distinguishable many years after the aborigines have ceased to
use the ovens. In an oven at Cargerie the dimensions are 9 feet
by 5, but here the space of 9 feet is broken by the occurrence of
two stones at intervals, both of which would seem to have been
used for the purpose of producing steam. Moreover this oven is
a considerable distance from the Cargerie Creek, but there are flats
and depressions, within a hundred yards, where pools of water
collect in wet weather, as the writer has oftened witnessed.
Besides the ovens which gave evidence of some regularity of
formation, with central stone or stones, there are also those which
present the appearance of a mere promiscuous collection of stones.
These little heaps have sometimes been made so near each other
that, in course of time, the ashes of the different heaps have
51
THE OVEN-MOUNDS OF THE ABORIGINES IN VICTORIA.


co-mingled and formed one irregular oven-mound with some
approximation to the circular shape. The interior ovens vary in
size from three or four stones to a cart-load.
In dealing with the external shape of the oven-mounds we have
to consider the action of gravity, when the ovens are made on
slopes ; and also the action of the winds in drifting the loose ashes
of the mound. The stone oven, of course, will remain till dis-
turbed by the white man, but it is otherwise with the loose ashes
and charcoal. While the ovens were in use the constant trampling
of feet kept the ashes loose and all the more exposed to the trans-
porting agency of the winds; moreover, when the ovens were built
on inclinations more or less steep, the action of trampling would
urge the ashes downwards in the direction of gravity. Thus the
oven-mounds as well as the trees become records of the prevailing
direction of the winds. The inclination of the trees is from
north-west to south-east, and the drift of the ashes of the oven-
mounds is the same, modified, however, by the action of gravity.
When wind and gravity both acted in the same direction, the stones
of the oven formed a sort of nucleus from which a fan or comet-
shaped tail spread downwards.
Structure op Oven-mounds—lnternal.
Having surveyed the oven-mound externally, we have to take
pick and shovel to examine its internal structure. We select one
for our operations on the Woodbourne Station, near the dam on the
Meredith and Cargerie Road. The stones are larger than usual,
being, in some cases, larger than a man’s head. Patches of vari-
ously coloured ashes are turned up, sometimes red, sometimes
bluish-grey, but mostly black—sooty black. The colours seem to
indicate different kinds of wood used for fuel. The stones also
present the plainest evidences of having been subjected to the
action of fire. In many cases they exhibit a greasy appearance,
strongly reminding us that, no doubt, the fat of emu and
kangaroo, as well as of opossums and other creatures, had often
oozed out upon these stones. Moreover the cooking by steam
included putting hot stones in the inside of the larger animals, in
which cases pieces of porous bluestone, volcanic lava, would become
saturated with animal fat. Some of the stones also presented the
ghastly white appearance of having been subjected to great heat.
But continuing to use the pick, we remove all the stones connected
with the oven and come to a layer of ashes in which are no stones.
This would seem to indicate that quantities of ashes, in some cases
at least, were allowed to accumulate before the stone oven was
made. It is this layer of ashes which has become such a conveni-
ence for the rabbits. They burrow into it very easily, and the
covering of stones becomes a protecting barricade to them.


Moreover, some mounds contain ashes and charcoal without any
stones. This is sometimes accounted for by the fact that there are
no stones in the neighbourhood. But the anomaly also occurs of
two mounds being situated near each other, the one having
quantities of stones in it while the other has none. This the
writer noticed in regard to the mounds in the Meredith district, as
well as about Mortlake, localities which are 80 miles apart.
Along the Coolebarghurk and Cargerie Creeks, honeycomb, the
volcanic lava commonly called bluestone, is invariably found in
the ovens, because the country through which these creeks flow is
covered with lava. On the Moorabool, however, the Silurian
slaty shale, producing the picturesque scenery of the river just
named, naturally supplies the small fragments of stone used in the
ovens. In a locality between Meredith and the Moorabool a coarse
red conglomerate makes its appearance, and fragments of this are
accordingly found in the ovens. In parts of the Colony where
there is no stone available it is said that the aborigines were in
the habit of baking clay into a coarse kind of brick or pottery,
and of using it as a substitute for heating purposes in their ovens.
Baked clay of this description is said to have been used by the
Murray blacks.
Circles of Stones about Oven-mounds.
Besides the stones which are used for making the cooking oven,
there are sometimes others which present all the appearance
of having been designedly placed as circles about the mound. The
writer took note of two such specimens of oven-mound in wdiich
the circles were in one case quite complete, and in the other case
very nearly so. These two may be described. One was situated
on the Native Hut Creek, near Meredith, on the east bank, and
about 40 yards distant from the creek. Its longer diameter was 19|
feet by 18| feet shorter diameter, while the ashes and stones at
the centre were about 1| foot thick. The stone oven was about
6| feet in diameter, and was embedded in a layer of ashes which
extended quite distinctly below the stone oven; moreover there
were several of those shallow excavations around, from which no
doubt the earth had been scooped out to cover over the bark and
grass, as already described in regard to the cooking operations.
It may be noticed also that the basaltic rock cropped up
close by; and although the aborigines squat down in oriental
fashion, yet it is no unreasonable stretch of imagination to suppose
that the patriarchs of the tribe sat on these blocks, forming natural
seats, and held converse with one another, while the kangaroo and
other game were steaming in the oven close by. But it is the circle
of stones, extending very nearly round the whole oven-mound,
which here specially attracts our attention. The stones are there in
large numbers, and the question arises for what purpose were they


placed there 1 Now and again sharpening-stones are found about
the mounds, but these were not sharpening-stones, and the number
of them puts the supposition of sharpening-stones aside. The same
applies to the suggestion asto thestoneshavingbeenusedforcracking
the marrow-bones of the larger animals. The number of stones
is altogether too great, and above all there was no necessity to
arrange them so methodically in a circle around the oven. It must
not be omitted to take proper notice of the fact that the stones of
the circle have been somewhat disturbed. The treading of sheep
and cattle will easily account for that. The fact remains that,
notwithstanding some disturbance, the evidence of the circular
arrangement cannot be doubted.
Moreover these stones, seldom as large as a man’s head, are in
no way to be confounded with those built up into shelters or break-
winds in bleak localities on the great plains in the west of Victoria.
But the second case to be described presents us with an oven-
mound surrounded with a circle which may be regarded as com-
plete, although a few stones have been displaced. The object of
our attention in this case is situated on the Cargerie Creek, and
about 150 yards from the east bank. It is about 14 feet by 13 feet
in longer and shorter diameter, the stone oven in the centre being
5J feet, and the thickness of ashes, charcoal, and stones, being about
1 foot. The oven bedded in the ashes contains about sixty stones,
mostly small, not much larger than a man’s double fist. The ring of
stones is 18 feet in diameter, thus leaving a space of about 2 feet
between the outer edge of the mound and the circle of stones.
About 150 stones formed the circle, mostly small in size, very few
of them being as large as a man’s head. Although a few have got
displaced, yet the circle extends right round the oven-mound.
Here obviously the question of sharpening-stones and crackers for
breaking the marrow-bones of the larger animals used for game is
quite insufficient to explain the facts. The same applies to the
breakwinds already noticed. As a circumstantial point, it should
be mentioned that the oven-mound with this ring of stones is
situated in an angle, and not far from it the ends of basaltic rocks
crop out, as in the case already described.
While thus illustrating the fact of stone rings extending round
the oven-mounds of the aborigines, it may be noticed that the cir-
cular arrangement is also carried out in the case in which a whole
mound consists of about half a dozen stone ovens, formed in a
circle around a central oven.
Of course it is not our purpose here to enter upon the subject of
the mystic stone circles in Britain, India, and other countries, yet
in passing we may note the fact that there are such materials,
which, along with others, will one day help to throw light on the
origin and migration of the Australian race. Perhaps it should
be mentioned here, that the magnificent stonehenges, consisting of


monolithic blocks, 8 or 9 feet high, represented in the illus-
trated papers of Melbourne and Sydney a few years ago, as existing
in the west of Victoria, were works of imagination, except in so
far as they seemed to have been modelled on the plan of the
Druidical circles which are found in various places in Britain.
Contents of Oven-mounds.
The mass of the mound, in accordance with what has been
already said, obviously consists of ashes, charcoal, stones, and earth.
The stones, as already pointed out, vary according to the district.
But besides the materials which, one way or another, have come
before our notice, we may expect to find remains of the reptiles,
fishes, birds, and quadrupeds, as well as shells which were used as
food by the aborigines. No doubt the large number of miserable
dogs, which constantly kept about the encampments of the blacks,
would destroy a large quantity of the smaller bones of birds and
various animals ; still, an examination of the ashes brings to light
traces of the game used by the aborigines. In some mounds
about half a mile from the bay at Geelong there are fragments of
shells which no doubt were brought from the neighbouring sea-
shore. In the largest of the mounds examined, near Lake
Webster, at Mortlake, in the west of Victoria, the writer found
a considerable quantity of animal remains in the ashes. These
consisted of fresh-water shells, fragments of emu egg-shells, jaw-
bones and teeth of opossums, as well as bones of kangaroo. This
mound was 79 feet in diameter, with 5 feet of ashes at the centre.
Human Remains in Oven-mounds.
In the neighbourhood of Mortlake, in the west of Victoria, an
oven-mound was pointed out to the writer as one in which it was
said that the remains of an aboriginal had been placed. It was
said, moreover, that these remains had been removed from another
still larger mound. It is possible this removal of the remains
might be owing to the fact that a European dwelling was built
near the large mound, and the ashes of the mound were used to
improve the soil in a garden. Proceeding with a spade to make
excavation, the first important point was to decide where to begin,
as the quantity of ashes in a mound 60 feet in longer diameter,
and 4 feet thick in the centre, was very large. Scanning the
mass carefully with the eye to detect if there were inequalities,
the outline presented a beautiful curve. After continued examina-
tion, one spot was chosen for the purpose of making a beginning
in the operations, as it seemed to present a very slight flaw in
the regularity and symmetry of the curve representing the surface.
The first 6 or 8 inches were nearly as hard as brick, but
under this hard dome the ashes were quite loose and easily tossed
about. After prolonged work there was no sign of human
55
THE OVEN-MOUNDS OF THE ABORIGINES IN VICTORIA.


remains. Another portion of the mound was pierced and searched,
but still without success. Returning to the portion first tried, the
spade was driven into the open side, when several bones fell down
along with the loose dry ashes. In succession the leg and thigh
bones made their appearance, as also the arms and vertebrae, ribs
and skull, as well as a number of small bones, all being evidently
the remains of a human being. The skull was nearly erect, and
not many inches beneath the surface. The leg and thigh bones
were huddled together, and stuck out at right angles to the
vertebrae. The arm bones were found at the sides, the hands
having been doubled up so that the bones of the fingers were near
the neck and cheeks.
On surveying another of the large oven-mounds which are
numerous about Mortlake, the writer’s attention was arrested by
the presence of three rather large stones, so placed together upon
an oven-mound as to indicate that they must have been designedly
placed where they were. On removing these three stones another
was found under them and well bedded in the ashes. Upon
digging under these stones in the loose ashes a second entire
human skeleton was discovered. From the charred wood which
was found lying across the skeleton, as well as from the appearance
of some of the bones, it seemed that an attempt had been made to
consume the body with fire. In both cases the leading idea
seemed to be to huddle the remains into the smallest space;
hence the limbs were all doubled up at the knee and elbow
joints. In the first case the body was laid on the back, with the
arms at the sides and the legs pressed over to the right side; in
the second case the body was laid on the left side, so that the arm
bones were found like a bundle of sticks together.
Distribution of Oven-mounds.
The necessity for water accounts at once for so many oven-
mounds being situated near creeks, rivers, lagoons, and lakes.
Sometimes they occur at considerable distances from permanent
water, but, as already stated, in the winter time crab-holes and
small depressions on the surface of the ground would be supplied
with water for weeks together, or even longer. Where game and
water both were abundant, there would be the more numerous
encampments, and these would be continued the longer in use.
The forests afforded not only food and shelter, but also the impor-
tant element of fuel for the ordinary fires and the cooking ovens.
It is a curious fact, however, that large oven-mounds are in
existence on extensive plains where there is no forest wood within
many miles. Such oven-mounds are to be seen near the lakes on the
great bare expanse to the west of the Leigh River. The sugges-
tion might occur that forests once existing have disappeared, but
when the ashes are examined there is no appearance of charcoal
56
THE OVEN-MOUNDS OF THE ABORIGINES IN VICTORIA.


Upon making specific inquiry into the matter the writer ascer-
tained that the material used for fuel was the coarse kind of peat
or turf forming at the edge of lakes which are situated at some
places in the region called The Plains. Quantities of long
grass are also available. In the circumstances it is interesting to
find that to make the most of the materials to hand, the aborigines
on the western plains of Victoria hit upon the very same device
which was adopted by the inhabitants of the Faroe Islands in the
northern seas of Europe. The stormy petrel was used as fuel (as
well as a candle to give light) by the inhabitants of the north, and
so the fat of the game used by the aborigines of the west of
Victoria was used to feed the flame which cooked the animals
themselves intended for food.
In connection with the distribution of oven-mounds may be
taken the question of size, as distinguishing those in the Meredith
district from those in the neighbourhood of Mortlake. The mounds
in the latter district are often of great size; some of them are
described as upwards of 100 feet in diameter, with ashes about 10
feet thick at the centre. The writer paced one which was 7 9 feet
in diameter. The largest which he saw in the Meredith district
was only about 33 feet in diameter. Points which supply at least
some elements of explanation of this difference in size are such as
these:—Many of the Meredith ovens are on small creeks, whereas
the large accumulations of ashes in the Mortlake district are
alongside lakes which abound with water-fowl, fish, and eels. With
plenty of forest to supply fuel, the aborigines could thus remain
at the same camping places aU the year round; whereas in the less
favoured places about Meredith they would have to wander about
much more extensively. Another point is that the number of
aborigines in the Portland district, as the region including
Mortlake was called in the early times, was very much greater than
in the Meredith district.
But the most important point in connection with the distribution
of the oven-mounds is the limited area in which they are found in
Australia. They extend from the Murray to the sea, through
central Victoria; they are numerous and large on the Murray,
and extend for some distance into New South Wales on the banks
of the Lachlan, where Sir Thomas Mitchell’s attention was first
arrested by them. He had not seen such collections of ashes in
other parts of this Colony, although heaps of shells, the refuse of
aboriginal feasts, have been observed on the shores of Port
Jackson, and in other localities, as on one of the little islands in
Lake Macquarie. Other observers have noticed the absence of the
oven-mounds in Central Australia, and also in Western Australia
These facts raise broadly the question, how are the mounds
restricted to so small an area 1 The suggestion has been made that
the accumulation of ashes supplied a space elevated above the


cold wet soil, and more agreeable for the feet of the aborigines in
rainy weather. Allowing something for this suggestion, there
still remains the outstanding question, how were the stone ovens
not used in other parts of Australia? The point is every way
worthy of notice, as it may help to give a clue to the course of
migration in the original occupation of the country by the blacks.
Antiquity op Oven-mounds.
It has been noticed that trees are to be seen growing out of the
oven-mounds. None, however, have been seen by the writer
which would indicate an antiquity of more than half a century.
As to the materials, which may yet be carefully examined, in
the large accumulations in the Mortlake district, it remains to
be seen what evidence may come to light bearing on the question
whether aboriginal man in Australia was contemporaneous with
any species of our extinct fauna. We have also the evidence
which may be deduced from the size of the oven-mounds. But
here there are some elements calculated to perplex the problem.
We may indeed measure the existing accumulations, but the
question arises, how much larger would they have been but for
the quantity of ashes dissipated by the prevailing winds ?As to
the space occupied by the stones of the ovens, where such exist,
measurement can approximately determine how much deduction
is to be made on this score. There is, however, the more difficult
point to determine, namely, how much earth was pulverized to be
mixed up with the ashes, on account of the cooking arrangements
before noticed. While considering this question the writer ob-
served the common ash-heap which had been formed in a country
locality connected with a European dwelling. It was about the
size of one of the smaller oven-mounds to be seen in the Meredith
district. It had been formed in about ten years by a family of
about ten persons. There is this very important point, that the oper-
ation of the prevailing winds, in causing the ashes to be drifted away
and dissipated, would be nearly equalinboth cases, the aboriginal and
the European. Proceeding tentatively, are there any even general
conclusions to which we can come ? Let us put together such
materials as there are to bear upon the point. The oven-mounds
in the Meredith district may be regarded as varying in contents
between 100 cubic feet and 500. In a space of about 14
miles by 10 the writer counted forty oven-mounds. Then let us
suppose that an average mound of ashes and charcoal would be
produced in ten years by a family of ten aborigines. Then
200 would leave behind them twenty such mounds in ten years.
Now 200 is the actual number of aborigines who inhabited the
district in 1845, according to a census taken by the New South
Wales Government at the time. But the same 200 roamed over
the whole of what is now the county of Grant in Victoria, an


area about twenty times as large as that for which we have been
attempting to account. At the same rate the whole area would
include 800 oven-mounds, a number probably much greater than
the reality, as the area of special observation presented the mounds
in much greater numbers than were noticed elsewhere. Still,
taking the foregoing figures, the 200 of an aboriginal population
would cover the area in question with the 800 mounds in the space
of 400 years. But again, while wox’king out these figures, let it
be clearly understood there is no pretence of attempting to fix
a real approximation. On the other hand, it would seem that on
data of no extravagant or improbable character, we reach a general
conclusion that the materials under review do not compel us
helplessly to admit some great antiquity, such as 3,000 or 4,000
years, much less fabulous ages of hundreds of thousands of years,
to the time when palaeolithic or neolithic man first began to build
oven-mounds in the county of Grant in the colony of Yictoria.
It is true that the enormous mounds in the Mortlake district
would seem to drive us back into a much greater antiquity than
400 years, but several material points have to be kept in view.
If the mounds are so much larger, they seem to be proportionably
fewer. Moreover, according to the census already referred to, the
aboriginal population in the Mortlake district appears to have
been far more dense than in the Meredith district. Thus the
process of accumulation of ashes and charcoal would be all the
more rapid. But, again, if the unity of the Australian race, and
various considerations on the strength of which a great antiquity
is claimed for that race, are to be taken as resting on substantial
grounds, we shall have to regard the building of ovens and the
accumulation of the mounds of ashes as comparatively modern inno-
vations. In this aspect of the matter the inquiry arises, what
reasons can be discovered to explain why the innovation sprang up
in that part of all Australia in which it is found to prevail 1 ? And
the stone circles, too, are they to be regarded with the interest
which attaches to mystic ideas early implanted in the mind of the
human family, and carried perhaps by one division of mankind to
Britain, and by another or others to India and Australia, or are
they the mere spontaneous illustrations of aboriginal fancy and
playfulness, dating back but a few generations or centuries at the
most?
n




