

Peru Pwn
OVERLAND JOURNEY
or Tin:
GOVERNOR OP NEW ZEALAND
NOTES OF THE JOURNEY
SIR (i FORGE F. BOWEN, G.C.M.G
IN APRIL, 1872,
FROM
\v ELL I X ('.TO X T() AUCKI. AX D.
ACROSS THE CENT UK OF THE
XOK T i 1 rSL A X D O K NE W ZEAL A X D.
WITH AN APPENDIX,
Containing Letters from Maori Chiefs to the Agent-General.
LONDON:
(5. STK EE T, 30, COR X H ILL.


'
‘ V:


OVERLAND JOURNEY
OF THE
GOVERNOR OF NEW ZEALAND.
»o^<
NOTES OF THE JOURNEY
SIR GEORGE F. BOWEN, G.C.M.G.
IN APRIL, 1872,
WELLINGTON TO AUCKLAND,
ACROSS THE CENTRE OF THE
NORTH ISLAND OF NEW ZEALAND.
WITH AN APPENDIX,
Containing Letters from Maori Chiefs to the Agent-General .
LONDON:
G. STREET, 30, CORNHILL.
1872.




OYERLAND J GURNEY
OF TUB
GOVERNOR OF NEW ZEALAND.
pOVERNOR SIR GEORGE BOWEN had for
some time determined to travel overland across
the central and recently hostile districts of New
Zealand, for all those best qualified to judge were of
opinion that a visit from the representative of the
Queen to the Maori clans of the interior would be
productive of great public advantage to the colony.
In the first place it would powerfully help to confirm
in their loyalty the well-affected natives, and also to
bring back , to their allegiance those recently in arms
against the Queen; in the second place, the fact of the
Governor having himself traversed in safety and con-
fidence districts lately inaccessible to Europeans would
be considered in England a proof of the restored tran-
quillity of the country, and would thus exercise a
favourable influence in promoting immigration to New
Zealand.
The overland route between Wellington and Auck-
land is by Napier (the chief town of the province of
Hawke’s Bay) and by the great inland lake of Taupo.


The country between Wellington and Napier has now
for several years been occupied by pastoral and agri-
cultural settlers; and the few Maoris resident among
them, belonging chiefly to the clans of the Ngatiawa
and Ngatikahungunu, are well affected to the Govern-
ment, and live on the most friendly terms with their
white neighbours.
A good carriage road has already been completed
northwards from Wellington to Masterton, a distance
of some 70 miles, and from Napier southwards to Pora-
ngahau, about 80 miles, and coaches carrying mails and
passengers run regularly to and from those places.
The gap between Masterton and Porangahau does not
exceed 90 miles, and will be filled up ere long, as
roads are being pushed on steadily in all the settled
districts in accordance with a well- considered plan.
As the Governor had already seen much of the
country between Wellington and Napier, and as there
was no public object to be gained by travelling over-
land in this part of his journey, he proceeded by sea
in the Government steamer “ Luna,” leaving Welling-
ton on the 2nd April, and, after a stormy passage,
reaching Napier on the evening of the 3rd.
His Excellency remained here during the 4th and
sth, visiting the public institutions in the town and the
neighbouring “ kaingas,” or villages, of Pakowhai and
Waiohiki. The large sums paid to the natives as rents
by the pastoral settlers (amounting lately to £26,000
a year), as well as the produce of land sales (all
divided among about 200 Maori families) have enabled
the native chiefs near Napier to build good houses in


the English style, and to live in English comfort.
They have good carriages, horses, cattle, and well-
cultivated farms. One very interesting fact is the
establishment by the natives at Pakowhai of a school
where the children are now going through all the usual
course of an English education, and show remarkable
proficiency.
While on the subject of native schools it may be
observed that this branch of civilisation has been
warmly taken up by the Colonial Government; an
annual subsidy extending over a course of years has
been voted by Parliament, and devoted strictly to the
object it was intended to attain; and it is a pleasing
fact that a wide-spread disposition exists among the
natives to impart to their children the benefits of edu-
cation. It has been found by experience that the
readiest method of instilling European habits into the
natives is by teaching them the English language, and
enlarging their understandings by acquainting them
with the nature and geography of other countries in
addition to the usual routine of daily school life. In
many cases the result has exceeded all anticipation,
the children being excessively quick at picking up the
language of the pakeha, and very apt at figures and
penmanship.
Napier until lately was the outpost of colonisation
towards the interior. In 1866 a sharply contested
battle was fought by the colonial forces with the
insurgents at Omaranui, eight miles from the town;
and it is within only the last two years that the neigh-
bourhood has been safe from hostile incursions. The


Colonial Government are rapidly pushing on a road
from Napier to Taupo, the geographical and strategical
centre of the island. This road is being made chiefly
by native labour, and is protected by five small detach-
ments of the colonial forces, placed in stockaded posts,
connected together by the electric telegraph, at Te
Haroto, Tarawera, Runanga, Opepe, and Tapuaeharuru
(at the northern end of Lake Taupo).
On April 6th the Governor left Napier for Taupo,
accompanied by oneA.D.C; by Mr. Locke, the Civil
Commissioner of the district, and by the Master of
Rlantyre, who has been for some time travelling in the
Australasian colonies. The coach-road has already
been finished to the Mohaka river, about 30 miles
from Napier, and, now that permanent tranquillity has
been established, the country through which it passes
will soon be occupied by settlers. The Governor and
his party slept this night at the post at Te Haroto,
occupied by the Colonial forces, 35 miles from Napier.
It occupies a strong position, 2,200 feet above the sea,
on a summit of a high hill commanding a magnificent
view of the sea and of the coast, as well as of the wild
mountains and forests of the Urewera country to the
eastward.
On the 7th the Governor started on horseback at
7 a.m., and after a ride of 42 miles reached Opepe
at 7 p.m., another post of the colonial forces, where he
again slept. The party had been joined at Te Haroto
by Major Scannell, commanding the district, and had
stopped for breakfast and lunch respectively at the
posts of Tarawera and Runanga. The carriage road


has not yet been completed throughout the distance
travelled this day, but there is already a good bridle
track. Much of the land is rich, and the mountain and
forest scenery is very beautiful, reminding the European
traveller of the Italian slopes of the Alps. Contracts
for the completion of the road have been taken by the
Maoris of Taupo, and it will be finished in the course
of the present year, when a coach will run regularly
from Napier to the Lake, carrying mails and passen-
gers to the heart of the island. A tri-weekly coach
service already exists from Auckland to Cambridge, in
the Waikato, a distance of about 120 miles ; and the
break between Cambridge and Taupo is only some 70
miles. Of this gap a considerable portion has already
been filled up by native labour, and the carriage road
throughout will probably be completed in the course
of a twelvemonth ; when coaches will be able to travel
from Napier (and soon from Wellington also) to
Auckland in about four days, stopping each night at
the inns already finished, or in process of erection.
A statement asserting the possibility of such a fact
would have appeared incredible three years ago, when
the natives of the central districts were for the most
part in active or sullen hostility. On the Bth the
Governor left Opepe, at a distance from which of some
10 miles, an hour’s ride along a good road, lies the great
lake of Taupo, 1,250 feet above the sea, and resem-
bling in its extent (about 200 square miles of water)
and in scenery, the Lake of Geneva. On his arrival
at Tapuaeharuru, the native settlement at the north
end of the lake, and near the point where the river


Waikato issues from it, the Governor was enthu-
siastically received by the well-known chief Poihipi
Tukairangi, one of the signers of the Treaty of Waitangi,
and by his people, with whom was held a korero, or
conference. The following is a brief summary of the
speeches delivered:—
Poihipi Tukairaugi said; Welcome, 0 Governor,
to Taupo ! We have been long desiring to see you.
For many years past we have been in great trouble.
We were nearly destroyed; still a few of us have
always remained firm to the Queen, and like the
Horomatangi (sea god) that dwelt of yore in Lake
Taupo, and in former days swallowed the evil monsters
of the deep, we have now destroyed our enemies ; but
our joy at welcoming you to Taupo recompenses us for
the past troubles. Taupo is yours, the lake, and all
the lands around, and all the people. Take them all*
You come as the sign of peace. Welcome ! for you
are our father. We desire to commemorate your
arrival amongst us by naming some place after you.
We should like that the town to be founded here
should be called after you. We feel now as if new
life were given us, when we see the Governor in our
midst. We know that we are not forgotten. The
people now here represent the feeling of the whole
tribe. Welcome ! Welcome ! (Then followed a song
of welcome, in the chorus of which all joined).
Eeweti Tb Ktjme said: Welcome, 0 Governor,
to Taupo ! Come and instruct us in all the laws,
thoughts, and works of the Europeans. Taupo is
yours, the lake, the people, and the land; yours to


carry out the works of the Europeans—to make roads
and other works, and to have schools to teach eur
children English. There have been Hauhaus amongst
us, but all are yours now. Whatever your plans may
be respecting this country, we are waiting to carry
them out. (Another song of welcome followed.)
Paoka Ratihihi said : Welcome, O Governor, to
Taupo ! We have long been wishing to see you. We
have often heard of you by name, but we thought we
should never see your face here. Welcome to Taupo.
(Another song of welcome). I never saw a Governor
before. We are but a remnant of what we once were.
Welcome.
His Excellency then spoke nearly as follows : O
my friends, chiefs and people of Ngatituwharetoa,
salutations to you all. You in particular, O Poihipi
Tukairangi, I salute, for you have ever been loyal to,
the Queen and a firm friend to the English, nor is this
the first time that you have welcomed me. When I
first arrived in New Zealand, four years ago, you
wrote me a letter of welcome. That letter, together
with other letters from loyal Maori chiefs, was sent to
the Queen’s Ministers in England, and it was after-
wards printed with other documents respecting this
country, for the information of the great parliament of
the Empire at London ; so the name of Poihipi
Tukairangi is now spread far and wide. The English
naval officer. Lieutenant Meade, who came to Taupo
in 1866, and was so hospitably entertained by you here,
has also written a book in which your loyalty, and the
beauty of your lakes and mountains are celebrated.


In the wars and troubles of the last few years, Poihipi
has stood firm to the Queen, even as the rocky isle of
Motu Taiho, now before us, stands firm as ever amid
the winds and waves of the great lake. When evil
times came on, and the sky was dark and lowering,
the friends of law and order took refuge with him,
even as canoes caught by a storm take refuge under
the lee of Motu Paiko. Now the storm is passing
away; the sun shines forth again; and the tribes
lately disaffected are returning to their allegiance, and
are following his good example. In a word, the
influence of Poihipi (as he himself said just now) has
driven away the demons of war and murder which
were devastating this fair land, even as the sea-god
Horomatangi, celebrated in the old Maori legends,
destroyed the taniwhas (sea monsters) which once
infested the shores of the lake of Taupo. And now,
my friends, I rejoice that you are industrious in peace
as you have been brave in war. You were the first to-
join the Government in making the roads through
your district, those roads which confer such great
benefits on all alike—on the Maoris and on the
pakehas. I trust you will also join the Government
in founding schools, as your countrymen have already
done at Pakowhai, Maketu, and elsewhere. Thus
your children will grow up in good nurture, well-
educated, and able to cultivate the arts of peace, and
live in friendship and harmony with the English-
Then the two nations, the white skin and the brown,
which inhabit this island, will grow up into one people,
with common laws and institutions. O, my friends, I


pray that God, the Giver of all good, may pour his
choicest gifts upon you all. (The Governor’s speech
was greeted with loud cheers by the natives.)
The name Tapuaeharuru signifies ‘‘ resounding
footsteps,” and has reference to the hollow sound
of the earth from the volcanic action which extends
throughout the zone, reaching from the great burning
mountain of Tongariro south of Taupo to Whakari,
or White Island, also an active volcano, in the Bay of
Plenty, a distance of 120 miles. Hot springs and
geysers abound throughout this region, one of the
most interesting and wonderful in the whole world.
Good descriptions of it will be found in Hochstetter’s
“New Zealand,” and in “A Hide through New
Zealand,” by Lieutenant the Hon. H. Meade, 11. N.
Hitherto, these grand natural phenomena have re-
mained almost unknown; but now that tranquillity has
been established, and that access to them will soon be
rendered safe and easy by the completion of the roads,
good inns will doubtless be erected, and New Zealand
will become for the Australasian group of colonies
what Switzerland and the German Baths are for
Europe. The valuable medicinal qualities of these
hot lakes and springs are well-known to the Maoris,
who resort to them from all parts of the island for the
cure of various diseases.
At the “ koreros ” which the Governor held with
the natives in the interior, the chief requests were ;
first, for Queen’s flags, i.e., union jacks, to he hoisted
at their pas, instead of the old Hauhau or rebel flags,
which have been everywhere destroyed by themselves ;


secondl}’, that the Colonial Government should employ
them in making roads through their own territories.
It may here be mentioned that hundreds of Maoris
lately in rebellion are now so employed. In short, the
policy pursued for the pacification of the Highlands of
New Zealand is (as Sir G. Bowen has often pointed
out in his published despatches), the same with that
adopted in the last century for the pacification of
the Highlands of Scotland. The true weapons of
conquest have been in both cases the spade and the
pickaxe. The third request of the natives everywhere
was that the Government should assist them in
founding and endowing schools, where their children
might learn the language and arts of the English. As
has been above observed, liberal provision has been
made by the Colonial Parliament for this vital object.
The Taupo natives preferred an especial request to
the Governor that a European town should be founded
on the shores of the Great Lake, and named “Bowen,”
and that a steamer should be placed on the lake. The
Government will carry out all the above-mentioned
requests, which are themselves proofs of the great
change which has lately taken place in the sentiments
of the Maoris.
On the 9th the Governor started in a whale-boat,
manned by men of the Armed Constabulary, for
Tokano, the chief native settlement at the south end
of the lake. The distance by water is about 26 miles,
and by land, along the Eastern shore, about 36 miles.
The morning was clear and bright, and the great
volcano of Tongariro (6,200 feet high) with smoke and


steam ascending from its crater, and the lofty ridge of
Ruapehu (9,200 feet above the sea), covered with per-
petual snow, presented glorious features in the pano-
rama of the mountains surrounding the lake. About
noon a strong contrary gale set in, so the Governor
landed at Motutere, on the eastern shore, whither
horses had been sent in anticipation of one of these
sudden storms, and rode the rest of the way to Tokano,
a distance of about 16 miles; the boat did not reach
that place till the following morning. The Governor
was again received with great respect and regard by-
Hare Tauteka, Herekiekie, and the other chiefs and
people of the clan of the Ngatituwharetoas, to whom
belong Taupo and its neighbourhood. The party were
lodged in Maori whares, and food was liberally pro-
vided in the absence of the supplies shipped on board
the whaleboat.
Subjoined is the substance of the speeches at the
korero:—
Hake Tatjteka : Welcome, O Governor, to Taupo 1
It is with great joy we welcome you. We look upon
you as our father, the father of the Maori people. Our
number is now but few, but we welcome you with
none the less sincerity. You have often shown your
love to us during the past few years. We have often
been told that the Governor would always be our friend,
and we have found it so with you. We are rejoiced
to welcome you after the troubles we have gone
through, and we look to you to keep us from further
trouble. (A song of welcome followed.) It gives us
much pleasure, it rejoices us to have this opportunity


of welcoming you here, so that we may speak to you
as a father who takes care of us and gives us counsel
and instruction. Taupe is yours ; Tongariro is yours ;
they are in your hands. The Ngatituwharetoa, living
on the west shore of the lake, have come in to you.
They will require constant attention; it is only thus
you will keep those people right. Do not neglect
them. Do not neglect Taupo. Raise us up. The
country is yours ; open it up. Governor Grey told us
to take care that Taupo was properly managed. He
said, “ Keep Taupo together.” We are now waiting
to hear what this Governor will say.
Kingi Hebekiekie : Welcome, O Governor, to
Taupo. Be steadfast to lead us right. Matuahu has
not long surrendered to you. We require constant
guidance, for we have but just commenced to be
wholly in the hands of the Government. Be careful
about buying land at Taupo, so that all may hear
whose land is bought, so that all may get their fair
share of the price given. Welcome, O Governor.
Topia Txjeoa; Welcome, O Governor. I belong
to Taupo as well as to Whanganui. Men and land
have been the cause of my troubles—Tawhiao and the
boundaries of our land. I was a stray sheep that
went astray, and more joy was shown at my return
than for the ninety-and-nine that had remained in the
fold. I look upon Taupo wuth a jealous eye; I
observe all that has been done up to the present time,
and it is all good. All that has been done here has
tended to raise the people ; all has been done for the
good of the people.


Waaka Tamaiba ; Welcome, O Governor, to
Taupo. Come and visit Hare Tauteka and Te
Heuheu. Welcome. Taupo and Tongariro are yours.
Welcome, O friend of the people and of the country ;
the friend of the people of Taupo.
Hatakaka te Whetu : Welcome, O Governor,
to Taupo and Tongariro. You have come a long and
toilsome journey to visit us. Welcome to the sea of
Taupo. Go and visit your home and other places, but
hasten hack and visit us again at Taupo
Apeeahama te Whettj: Welcome, O my father.
We have only heard of you before; now we see you
with our eyes. Look around at the land and at the
lake ; they are yours. Open up the country ; assist
us to make roads; look around and see if you can
improve our condition; see what you can do to open
up the country. We look to you to give us proper
counsel.
Kbeei te Tanotjetj : Welcome, O Governor.
You will here see the result of what has been done of
late. Matuahu and the others are now with us.
Matuahu would have been here if we had known the
exact day you were coming. We all see the benefit
of this way of treating the people. You have allowed
all the people of the west shore of the lake to come
in. They are now firmly yours. We hope your
thoughts are still for the same way of acting; if so,
all are yours. We thank you for sending assistance
to us when troubles came over Taupo; we will not
forget your sending help when we needed it. We are
all now true to the Government.


His Excellency Sir G. Bowen then addressed the
meeting mainly as follows: O, my„ friends, Hare
Tauteha, Herekiekie, and all of you who have re-
mained staunch during the late troubles, salutations to
you all! I know that you have gone through great
trials, and have shown all the gallantry of your
ancestors in war. I, as the Governor and representa-
tive of the Queen, thank you, and have now come to
visit you at your own homes. The desire of the
Queen is that her Maori and pakeha children should
grow together into one people. The Queen also is
glad that the Maoris who were lately opposed to each
other are now friends, and that all are living in peace
and harmony with the Government and the colonists.
I rejoice also to salute Topia Turoa, the stray sheep
who has returned to the fold, and who lately fought so
bravely for the Queen. I rejoice that the Ngatitu-
wharetoa tribe is now again united, through Te
Heuheu, Matuahu, and others having submitted to the
Government. Thus all the Maoris who dwell round
the great lake of Taupo now understand the blessings
of peace, law, and order. You are already beginning
to reap the advantages of peace by selling the produce
of your labour, and thus procuring the clothes and the
other comforts of the Europeans. To carry these
benefits still further it will be well to make roads, like
your countrymen elsewhere, and as you propose to do
yourselves. The Government will assist you with
money and tools; but, mark well my words, the roads
are a benefit to the Maori as well as to the pakeha,
and the Government will not press the making of roads


through the native districts if the inhabitants of those
districts object. The laws protect the land and other
rights of the Maori and of the pakehas alike. No
man need lease or sell his land unless he wishes it
himself; the ownership (mana) of the land remains,
as it has always remained, with the Maoris themselves.
And now, my friends, I thank you for the hearty
welcome which you have given me, and for your loyal
speeches. Hare Tauteka has said that Governor Grey
told him “to keep Taupo together.” This is correct.
I say to you the same. Keep Taupo and the Ngatitu-
wharetoa in peace and harmony with the Government
and with the other Maori tribes. WhatTe Herekiekie
said on this point was very good. Before selling any
land, let the titles be well ascertained, so that no
disputes may arise afterwards. Do as the pakehas
do. When disputes arise among you about land or
any other matter, resort to the Courts, and not to
fighting. There was a time, while your ancestors
were living at Hawaiki, when the ancestors of the
English lived much as the Maoris now live ; but wise
and able men arose, and taught their countrymen the
arts of peace, to make roads and railways, to build
ships and to found schools. You can learn all these arts
from the English among you. I recommend you,
therefore, to co-operate with the Government in found-
ing schools for your children so that they may be
taught the language and the learning of English. In
this, as in all other matters, you can always apply with
confidence for the aid of the Government. And now,
my friends, farewell, and may all happiness attend


you. Be sober and industrious, and all will be well
with you.
After bathing in one of the hot-springs which
abound in and near Tokano, and in which the cooking
of the people is carried on, the parly 7 started on the
10th for Rotoaira, the beautiful lake at the foot of
Tongariro, about ten miles south of Taupo. Nothing
can be more romantic than the scenery of this part of
the island. From under Ruapehu and Tongariro
stretch away, east, west and south, rich and well-watered
valleys lying between mountain ridges, covered with
the luxuriant and semi-tropical foliage of the New
Zealand forests. There is no sign of human habita-
tion in this magnificent country, but the native chiefs
are already in treaty to lease large portions of it to
some of the great run-holders of the South Island ;
and, before many years have elapsed, it will probably
be covered, like the plains of Australia, with vast
herds of cattle and flocks of sheep. In 1869 and
1870 there was muck fighting near Tokano and
Rotoaira between the colonial forces and the loyal
clans on one side, and, on the other, the rebels under
Te Kooti. In the afternoon the Governor rode back
to Tokano, where he was again the guest of the
Maori chiefs, with whom he had another korero.
On the 11th the Governor started at 9 a.m. by the
boat on his return to the north end of the Lake.
A small river leads from the Lake to Tokano through
the alluvial plain surrounding the village, on which
the natives grow a large quantity of wheat, maize,
potatoes. &c. This creek must not be confounded


with the Waikato river, which, rising near the foot of
Ruapehu, not far from the sources of the Whanganui
river (which flows to the south), enters the Taupo
Lake at its southern extremity and issues from it again
at Tapuaeharuru on the northern shore: from this,
after a course of nearly two hundred miles, it falls into
the sea on the western coast of the North Island.
After entering the Lake from the Tokano creek, the
Governor passed Te Rapa, the kainga of Te Heuheu,
whose father, a great chief of the olden time, was, with
sixty of his clansmen, overwhelmed in 1847 by an
avalanche of boiling mud from the hot springs on the
mountain above. His son, the present chief, joined the
rebellion in 1869, but has now returned to his
allegiance. A little further to the west is the mission-
station of Pukawa, formerly the residence of the Rev.
T. S. Grace, who was obliged to fly during the
rebellion. The wind being contrary, the Governor
again landed near Motutere, and rode thence in three
hours to Tapuaeharuru, where there is already a small
inn near the post of the colonial forces, and the pa of
the loyal chief Poihipi.
On the morning of the 12th the Governor held
another korero with the natives, of which the following
is a summary:—
Poihipi Tukairangi : This is a welcome and a
farewell to you, O Governor. This is an occasion on
which all should speak out their minds, and I call on
all to speak out and hide nothing from the Governor.
Let the Governor go away with a full knowledge of
our thoughts and our wants. Salutations to you,


O Governor, who have come to cheer us after all our
troubles. I have desired to see Europeans settled at
Taupo ever since I first saw them in the Bay of Islands
when I signed the Treaty of Waitangi; hut five
Governors have come and gone, and it is only now
that my hopes are being realised. We look upon this
as a great blessing. Welcome, O Governor, to Taupo,
and return in peace to your home.
Kawibi Kahia: Welcome, O Governor, to Taupo.
Come and see for yourself the thoughts of your people,
and judge of them for yourself. We are all very
much rejoiced at your coming among us. I shall ever
remain steadfast. We will be the same behind your
back as before your face. Go home in peace. Fear
not for our loyalty.
Perenaha Tamahiki (Ngatiraukawa); Welcome,
0 father and Governor. Here are Ngatituwharetoa
and Ngatiraukawa. We are now for the Government.
The tribes from all parts came and troubled and
tempted us, and many left for a time, but verj few
remained with the Government through the troubles
that have passed, but those few have gained the
victory; the many are now returning. We will ever
remain loyal.
Maniheba ; Welcome, O Governor, come to Taupo.
Come and visit the people in the interior of the island ,
they are now all with you.
Host Tatjei; Welcome, O Governor, come and
see Ngatituwharetoa and Ngatiraukawa. Come to
Taupo. It cheers us up to see you at Taupo.
Hami : Come, O Governor, to Taupo and Tongariro.


Come and see Tongariro mountain, Taupo Lake, and
Ngatituwharetoa tribe. Heubeu in former times was
our chief, but he has long been dead. We look now
to you as our chief and Governor. All those chiefs of
former days that you may have heard of are dead.
Poihipi and Hare Tauteka are now our elder chiefs,
but you are our chief and father ; you now possess all
the mana.
Rxttene (Ngatiraukawa) : Come, O Governor, and
see your people living inland —Ngatituwharetoa and
Ngatiraukawa. We now all come to Taupo as a
centre, and so learn what to do, and we are now come
to Taupo to meet you, and to hear from you what we
should do.
Txiktjubhit Mamao : Come, O Governor. (Song
of welcome.) Come, O father, for you are our guide.
Come to Taupo. This tribe are now all with you.
Patjeini Kaeamti : Come to Taupo. We are but
few. During the past years nearly all left you : now all
have returned to you. Taupo and Tongariro are yours.
Poihipi Horomatangi : The Ngatituwharetoa
chiefs will take care of their people, and see that no mis-
chief arises within their boundaries. The boundaries of
Taupo district are these —commencing at Horohoro ;
thence to Arawhena (near Titiraupenga), Maraeroa
Tuhua, round by the back of the mountains to Ruapehu,
on to Ruahine and Titiokura; thence to Herewiwi,
and back to Horohoro. Let chiefs of other tribes be
responsible for the good conduct of their own people ;
they must not interfere with us.


His Excellency Sir G. F. Bowen then spoke to
the following effect:—o, my friends, chiefs and
people of the Ngatituwharetoa, I have already ad-
dressed you in the pa of that loyal subject of the
Queen, and firm friend of the pakeha, Poihipi Tukai-
rangi. He deserves the title of Horomatangi, because
he has been an enemy to all crime and evil in this
district, even as, in the legend, the Horomatangi
destroyed the cruel monsters (taniwhas) of the lake of
Taupo. Poihipi is one of the few survivors of the
chiefs who signed the Treaty of Waitangi, when the
sovereignty of these islands was ceded to the Queen,
who on her part engaged to protect the lands, the
fisheries, and all the other rights of the Maoris. This
treaty remains inviolate. The law protects the
property of the Maoris as it protects the property
of the pakehas. The Government fully recognise
the merits and services of Poihipi and of the other
loyal chiefs, and will assist them in making the roads,
building the mills, and in the other good works which
they contemplate. I am glad, also, to meet here to-day
so many of the great tribe of the Ngatiraukawas.
Matene Te Whiwhi, and many of that tribe, have
welcomed me at Otaki, and now Horl Ngawhare is
waiting to welcome me at Orakei-Korako. I rejoice
that so many of the chiefs of the old times—the old
trees of the forest —are still standing; and that a
noble growth of young trees is rising around them.
I trust that you will join with the Government in
founding schools here, such as those already established


at Pakowhai, Maketu, and elsewhere, in which the
youth of the Maori race learn the language and arts of
the English, As I said at Tokano the other day,
there was once a time when the ancestors of the
English were little more advanced in civilisation than
the Maoris now are; but wise and good men arose
among them, and taught them to make roads, and to
build ships and houses. About the time that Hongi,
the Ngapuhi chief, went to England, a Scotchman,
McAdam, discovered how best to make roads, and his
is the system now in use both in England and in New
Zealand. You have not to make new discoveries for
yourselves, but only to adopt the useful discoveries
of your pakeha friends. What Poihipi said in his
speech just now was correct. Each tribe can do what
it likes within its own boundaries. For example:
Whenever a tribe wishes to make roads, the Govern-
ment will assist with money and tools; and no other
tribe has any right to interfere. The Government has
no desire to make roads, or other useful works, except
in those districts where the Maoris willingly co-operate.
You already understand the advantage of roads. A
horse does not cost so much feed as a man, and yet it
is eight times as strong. When you have got roads,
one man with a horse and cart can carry as much corn
or potatoes as eight men could carry. As there are
no other points on which you wish to address me, I
will now conclude. I thank you once more for the
hearty welcome you have given me, and pray that
peace and prosperity may flourish among you, like the
everlasting green of your native forests.


At the conclusion of his Excellency’s speech, which
was received with cheers by the natives assembled, the
natives danced hakas and other Maori dances.
Afterwards his Excellency visited the falls of the
Waikato, situated amidst fine scenery, about four
miles from the point at which the river issues from the
northern end of the lake. There are fine rapids above
and below the falls; which resemble in height and
volume of water those of the Rhine at Schaffhausen.
After visiting the falls the party bathed in one of the
natural hot baths in the neighbourhood, where a
cascade of tepid water falls into a rocky basin.
April 13.—The Governor and suite, leaving with
regret the shores of the great lake, or sea (“ moana,” not
“roto,” as the natives call it) of Taupo, and, after four
hours’ easy riding over fern-clad hills for about 25 miles,
reached Orakei-Korako, a native kainga on the left
bank of the Waikato, belonging to the clan of the
Ngafiraukawa. Here the Governor was welcomed by
the influential chief Hori Ngawhare, who, though in
extreme old age and infirmity, had travelled more than
50 miles to meet his Excellency. This portion of the
IN’ gatiraukawa had been in former years engaged in the
rebellion. Several chiefs, however, had gone to meet
the Governor at Taupo, to invite him to their country;
and he was received by the assembled clan with the
most hearty respect. The substance of the speeches
delivered at Orakei-Korako is as follows ;
Hohepa Taupiei : Come, 0 Governor, come and
see us, your people. You are the father of the
people. (Song of welcome.) Salutations to you,


O Governor. We have been swimming, as it were, in
the ocean, and knew not where to go. We feel that
we are now touching the shore, and you have come to
help and guide us to land. Salutations to you,
O Governor.
Ttjiei Rangihoeo : Salutations, 0 Governor!
Come and see us. We hand over all the roads in this
district to you; they are in your hands. It is for you
to direct what should be done here. Salutations !
Haee Matenga : Salutations ! Come, O Governor,
and visit us. We rejoice to see you here. We shall
ever remain faithful to the Government. The people
and the pas are all yours ; we cannot say more.
Aeantji : Welcome, O Governor ! Come and clear
away the doubts and darkness that surround us. Come
and see Hori Ngawhare. We have long been search-
ing for a proper course to take, so as to save the
people. We are now beginning to think we have
found out the right way. You have now arrived, and
we will listen to you, in hope that our troubles may
now end. All the Ngatiraukawa, and the followers of
the King, will hear what you say to-day. Salutations
to you.
Hoei Ngawhaee: Come, O Governor, and search
for yourself what is required for us. We are searching,
we, the Maoris, for a proper course. We wish you,
O Governor, to point out to us what to do.
His Excellency Sir G. F. Bowen then addressed
the meeting to the following effect;—O my friends,
Hori Ngawhare and chiefs of Ngatiraukawa, saluta-
tions to you all. I thank you for your loyal speeches,


and am very glad to visit you in your own country,
I also rejoice to meet your celebrated chief Hori
Ngawhare, and am sorry to find him suffering in body,,
though his mind is as clear as ever. I thank him for
having travelled 50 miles to meet me here, and for his
invitation to escort me through your country from
Taupo to Cambridge, in the Waikato. lam glad that
the Ngatiraukawas desire to see the Governor crossing:
their district. I know that there are two roads from
here to Auckland, and that both are equally safe for
me. Next time I will go by your road, but this time
I will go by Rotorua and Tauranga, where I have
promised to meet your friend, Mr. McLean, to consult
with him how best to promote the interests of the
Maoris. One of your chiefs (Tuiri) said, in his speech,
that the Ngatiraukawas place the question of roads
entirely in the hands of the Governor ; but, my friends,,
this is a question principally for yourselves. Each
tribe should say whether it will assist the Government
in making roads in its own district, and no other tribe
has any right to interfere, as I have explained at
Taupo and elsewhere. The benefits of roads are
great, and affect the Maoris equally with the pakehas
indeed, there are as yet but few pakehas in these
inland districts. lam very glad to find that the
Ngatiraukawas wish for roads, and the Government
will assist you with money and tools, as it is assisting
other tribes. Remember that roads do not affect the
mana of the chiefs or the ownership of the land.
This is quite clear. Let no man deceive you on this
point. The telegraph is also of great use to the-


Maoris, Formerly, if a Maori wanted a bag of flour
from Napier or Tauranga he had to send a messenger
for it, and to incur much delay and expense. Now, he
can send for it by the wire, and it comes up by the
coach at once. In addition to the roads and the tele-
graph, I recommend to you the foundation of schools
for your children ; the Government will assist you
also in this matter. As there are no other points on
which you wish me to address you, I will conclude by
again thanking you for the hearty welcome which you
have given me.
After the korero was over, his Excellency bathed in
the warm baths on the bank of the Waikato river.
From this point two routes to Auckland were open
to the Governor. He could proceed in two days’ ride
to Cambridge, in the Waikato delta, whence there is
(as has already been said) a carriage road to Auckland,
which city could be reached in this way in three or
four days. The Ngatiraukawas urged his Excellency
to adopt this route, which lies for the most part through
their territory, and offered to escort him to Cambridge.
But the Governor preferred the other and longer,
though more interesting, road by the hot lakes and
Tauranga, at which latter place he had, before leaving
Napier, arranged to meet Mr. McLean, the Minister
for Native Affairs; who, while the Governor was
crossing the central districts, had been doing good
service by visiting, in the Government steamer, the
natives scattered along the East Coast of the island,
especially those of the loyal clan of the Ngatiporou.
Accordingly, on the 14th, at 8 a.m., the Governor


crossed the Waikato in a canoe, and visited the
magnificent alum cave on its right bank, together with
the neighbouring geysers. At 9.30 a.m., the party
started on horseback for Kaiterlria (25 miles), which
was reached at 5 p.m., after a halt of two hours at a
hot stream about halfway, where the entire party
enjoyed a delicious swim in the tepid water.
Kaiteriria is a small pa on the picturesque lake
Rotokakahi. and is one of the posts held by a detach-
ment of the native Militia, commanded here by Captain
Malr. The Arawas composing the force are fine young
men, well drilled according to English discipline, who
have done good service in the war against their rebel
countrymen. Kaiteriria is a convenient head-quarters
from which to visit Rotonrahana (the hot lake par
excellence ) and other parts of the wondrous lake
district, of which no description will be attempted
here. The reader of these notes is referred to the
books of Dr. Hochstetter and Lieutenant Meade, and
to several papers in the Transactions of the New
Zealand Institute. On the 15th the Governor started
at 8.30 a.m., and in three hours rode over the hills by
a rugged path of fourteen miles to Lake Rotomahana,
while others of the party proceeded thither by a canoe
across Lake Tarawera. As the Governor had on a
previous occasion, eighteen months ago, stayed for two
days at Rotomahana when accompanying thither
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, he now remained
there only a few hours, re-visiting the famous white
and pink terraces, and then returned on horseback to
Kaiteriria.


On the 16th the party started at 10 a.m., and, after
a delightful ride of 12 miles along the shores of the
beautiful lakes Rotokakahi and Tikitapu, and after-
wards along the margin of Lake Rotorua, reached
Ohinemutu, the principal inland settlement of the
great clan of the Arawa. The afternoon was spent in
swimming in the tepid waters of the Lake, and in
visiting the geysers of this wonderful place, so re-
nowned in Maori song and legend. A strong contrary
wind rendered impossible a visit to the island of
Mokoia, the scene of the story of Hine Moa, the Hero,
and of her lover Tutanekai, the Leander, of Polynesian
mythology. In the evening the Governor held a
korero with several of the Arawa chiefs, who, like
their countrymen elsewhere, were all eager for the
extension of roads and schools.
Having visited on former occasions Maketu, the
chief Arawa settlement on the sea coast, the Governor
on the 17th determined to proceed from Ohinemutu to
Tauranga by a new and direct road now nearly com-
pleted by native labour. It was a ride of 38 miles, of
which 18 were through the forest, and the road reflects
great credit on the officers in charge of this difficult
work. We may take the opportunity of mentioning
that, as we are informed, the Governor has expressed
much satisfaction at the tact and ability displayed by
the civil officers immediately charged with the manage-
ment of native affairs, and of public works in the
interior of New Zealand, and with the good discipline
and soldierlike appearance of the officers and men of
the colonial forces.


At Mangarewa, in the heart of the forest, the
Governor found triumphal arches erected in his honour
hy the Maoris employed on the road, who received
him with shouts and chants of welcome. The party
engaged in blasting rocks saluted his approach by
firing several charges, which echoed like cannon-shots
through the grand primeval forest. One of the work-
ing parties was headed by Ngatote, a brother of
Kereopa, who was executed in January last for murder
and rebellion.
Five miles from Tauranga the Governor was met hy
the Volunteer Cavalry of that town and district, who
escorted him past the famous Gate Pa to the wharf,
where the “ Luna ” lay at anchor, and where he was
received by Mr. McLean and a guard of honour of the
Rifle Volunteers. It may be remarked that the
Volunteers at Tauranga comprise one-fifth of the
entire population of the district —men, women, and
children. This is as if the Volunteers in the United
Kingdom numbered six millions instead of two hun-
dred thousand.
April 18. —The morning was spent in visiting the
cemetery, where the officers and men of the Imperial
forces killed at the Gate Pa in 1864 were interred, and
in transacting business with several Maori chiefs. The
Ngaiterangis, who fought so bravely against the
English in the late war, are now the firm friends and
allies of the Government. Two of their chiefs volun-
teered to escort the Governor overland to Ohinemuri
by the difficult Katikati pass, so long closed to Eu-
ropeans. Accordingly the “ Luna,” leaving Tauranga


at 2 p.m., landed the Governor and his native guides
at 4.30 p.m. at Katikati, where they passed the night
in a small house belonging to Mr. Faulkner.
On the following morning, the 19th, the party
started on horseback amid a deluge of rain, which
lasted the whole day. This was the first had weather
which the Governor had met with throughout the
whole journey from Napier. The streams and rivers
to be forded were very much swollen, and the path
through the forest, in the latter part of the ride of
■2B miles, was positively dangerous. However, the
Governor reached Ohinemuri safely before dark, and
•on the next morning, the 20th, was received by
Mr. McLean on board the “Luna,” which had come
round Cape Colville and up the river Thames. A
large meeting of natives was being held at Ohinemuri,
for a “ tangi ” on account of the death of the cele-
brated chief Taraia. Several leading chiefs from
various parts of the islandhad accompanied Mr. McLean
in the “ Luna,” and now joined in the “ tangi.” When
it was over, a “ korero ” was held, at which the
Governor and the Minister for Native Affairs addressed
the assembled tribes. We annex the substance of the
speeches delivered.
Wikieiwhi rose and welcomed the visitors as
follows : Welcome, Governor, welcome, Mr. McLean,
to the place of Taraia’s death. Come and see the
death of Taraia, and express your regret to the people
who last saw him. His soul has gone, taken hence by
the strong hand of Death. Welcome, 0 people.
Welcome, Ngatiraukawa and Ngatikahungunu. Come


and express your sorrow at the departure of the I araia
of New Zealand ; himself selected the day for his
departure. Welcome, Ngaiterangi. Had he been
bound with chains it had not been possible to detain
him. Though his spirit has fled, his voice still lives,
and bids you all welcome.
Mowati Kihaeoa : Farewell. The forms of death
are varied. Some fall from trees, and die ; others die
in their houses ; others again fall in battle ; but these
are all ways in which chiefs may die. It is a broad
and open road, and you can see them go and sorrow
at their departure. We come hither to show our
affection. The men of great name whom you knew,
Taraia, have gone. You have gone to them, and now
farewell. Other people of yours have, disappeared
whose canoes you commanded.
[Song] Farewell, farewell! I greet you, the people
who last saw his face.
Ropata te Aeakai : Welcome, Governor and
Mr. McLean. Come and see the death —the death of
Taraia. It is right to show grief on this occasion, to
come to the death of Taraia. What can we do ? Who
can avoid the stroke of death? Welcome, people
who have come in accordance with the usages of our
ancestors. Welcome to Hauraki. Bring hither those
griefs and lay them in the spot where Taraia died.
Nothing can be done now beyond bidding you wel-
Tabeha: Bid us welcome. Welcome your friends
the Governor and Mr. McLean, and bid us welcome
also according to our usual custom. The voices now


are not like the old voices ; it is a different voice now.
We come, we come, to see the death of Taraia. The
grief now displayed by the Governor is not only
now shown for the first time—it has been already
seen at the other deaths which have occurred in this
land. Taraia is dead, and here is the Governor come
to mingle his tears with yours, and to mourn with Te
Hira. Welcome your friend the Governor and your
man, Mr. McLean. These are the chiefs showing love
to the people of the land. Your old chief as well as
ours has gone, but here is your old friend come to see
you. Wherever grief is felt there are the Governor
and Mr. McLean to alleviate the distress. When
troubles arise there they are to put them down and
restore order and tranquillity. There is now only one
thing wanting: that is, a Maori chief to accompany
the Governor and your friend Mr. McLean wherever
they go. [Song.]
Apanui : Why is it you mention Ngatiraukawa, as if
that were the only tribe connected with Taraia? Bid
us welcome. Here we come. We are all related to
Taraia. Why do not you mention Ngaiterangi,
Ngatiawa, Ngatikahungunu, and other tribes, all of
whom are also related to Taraia ? We have come to
the spot where Taraia’s body lay. When the sun
comes near to setting, he sinks rapidly. What can
we do ? The road is broad and open; it has been
travelled by our ancestors from olden times. [Song]
Farewell, farewell, my father.
Moakanui : Welcome, welcome, people of the
land. Welcome. There are few to welcome you.


Come to Hauraki. Welcome to Jordan ; leave Egypt
behind you. Come to Jordan, my friends. Welcome
each and all of you. Welcome, you my friends who
nave come to the death of Taraia, come in order that
we may speak mouth-to-mouth at Jordan. Because
of others not holding similar views to those which we
hold, they fled away. However you will not he able
to reply to my remarks. I shall touch to-day upon all
those matters. I do not go to this place and that
place to collect my knowledge, but you will not be
able to reply to me. Welcome, my friends—come as
you have come, well disposed, to see my face; do not
think lam not glad to see you. Come and see your
brother Taraia. Whatever precautions people may
take they cannot avert death. Come to see the
foolishness of Hauraki; there is no knowledge in
Hauraki, come and see it. Welcome, my father, bring
the people of the land to see us ; they would not have
come had it not been for you. Welcome, my father:
bring hither your guests to see the foolishness of the
people of this place. Come hither, my father, from
the place where you have been laying down life-giving
principles of action.
Mr. McLean made a few remarks, which were
listened to attentively by the natives. We understood
him to refer to the visit of the Governor and the
several chiefs who accompanied him from different
parts of the island. In reference to Taraia he said
that he had departed in the usual course from old age
on the road from which no traveller ever returns. The
Hauhau prophets said that their dead would come to


life to re-people tire island; if they were able to bring
Taraia to life again he would believe them, but, if not,
they must see it was full time to cast off their silly
delusions. In no instance had they seen people who
had trodden the paths of death return again to re-
people the earth. Idle rumours were in circulation
that an attack was to be made on the Ohinemuri
natives by Major Ropata of Ngatiporou. Such a
report was without any foundation. The present visit
was merely paid to exchange friendly sentiments;
and, as the Governor was so seldom a visitor to
Ohinemuri, he expected to hear Te Hira, who was
present, give expression to his views and feelings.
The Goyeenob then spoke to the following
effect:—Salutations to you, my friends. I thank you
for the welcome you have given me. This is my
second visit to Ohinemuri, and I have received a
hearty welcome on each occasion. My first visit was
made four years ago; and your celebrated chief
Taraia then welcomed me in person. He was a great
chief in war, and a great friend to the pakeha in peace.
He was known to all the tribes throughout the island
as the principal chief of Hauraki. I heard with great
pain of his death, and am now come to join you in
lamenting him. I have arrived, accompanied by chiefs
from different parts of the island, who, like me, have
heard of his death and regret it. I have now been
through all the native districts from Wellington
northwards. I have seen the Ngatikahungunu at
Napier, the Ngatituwharetoa at Taupo, the Ngatirau-


kawa at Orakei-Korako, the Arawa at Ohinemutu, the
Ngaiterangi at Tauranga; and I have now come here
among you, the Ngatimaru and Ngatitamatera. Every-
where I have found the death of Taraia regretted.
However, if the old chiefs, the aged trees of the forest,
are falling, I am glad to see such a fine growth of
young men to take their place. I have not much to
say to you on this occasion, 'except to thank you for
the welcome you have given me, to tell you I shall
he glad to come again to see you, and to wish you all
happiness and prosperity.
Te Hiea: Welcome, Governor. All I can do is to
greet you. I cannot make myself one with you so
thoroughly as your friends around you have because
our thoughts are not yet the same ; hut when I find
that I can dwell quietly and without being disturbed
on my own place, then, perhaps, I shall see my way
clear to do as the others have done. Although your
friend Taraia is dead, he is hut one man. It were
better that the position of the land were made clear.
My hands are quite’ clean. As soon as I hear your
word that my land shall he mine, then I shall he clear.
Welcome, O people. I do not know your thoughts.
There is no course of action decided upon here. Come
when you like. Unite yourselves to us now to-day,
because it has been through you that this place is
wdiat it is.
It will he remembered that Ohinemuri has long been
one of the principal strongholds of Hauhauism and
rebellion. Yet it will be seen that the Governor was


heartily welcomed by all parties. It may be mentioned
that in honour of his arrival, Union Jacks were hoisted
in every place where formerly floated Hauhau flags.
April 21.—This day being Sunday, the “Luna”
remained quietly at anchor at Ohinemuri, and was
visited by large numbers of the natives.
On the 22nd, at 8 a.m., the Governor and
Mr. McLean proceeded up the river Thames (so
Captain Cook named the noble river called Waiho by
the Maoris) for about fifteen miles above the junction
of the Ohinemuri Creek; that is, to a point about
forty miles from the mouth of the river. For several
miles above Ohinemuri the river runs through the
forest; further on the open country begins. The
Governor and party here ascended the hill “ Te Rae o
te Papa,” that is, the brow of the plain, whence there
is one of the most extensive and interesting prospects
in all New Zealand. Below, the eye ranges over the
whole of the wide valley or plain watered by the rivers
Thames and Piako, with their numerous tributaries,
from the sea to the north as far as the mountains
round Lake Taupo to the south. On a clear day
Tongariro and the snowy ridge of Ruapehu are clearly
visible, as well as Tauhara, the remarkable mountain
at the north end of Lake Taupo. To the east is the
richly-wooded Aroha mountain, in which the gold-
bearing cordillera of the Cape Colville peninsula
appears to terminate. To the west are the bush-
covered ranges hanging over the Piako river, and
where these end there is an extensive prospect over"
the plains of the Waikato, bounded by the Pirongia


mountain, which is not far distant from the West
Coast of the North Island.
The great plain of the Thames is still almost
without cultivation or human habitation, with the
exception of a few Maori villages; yet, in all human
probability, the time is not far distant when it will be
covered with flourishing English farms and heids of
cattle and sheep. The Thames already supplies a
liquid highway, and the goldfields near its mouth
a ready market for pastoral and agricultural produce.
On his return to Ohinemuri the Governor was
present at the arrival of a large number of visitors
from various tribes, who had come, according to
Maori custom, to join in the lament (“tangi”) for
Taraia—a ceremony resembling the coronach of the
old Scottish Highlanders, and the “keen” of the
Irish peasantry. The wailing of the women, and the
chants celebrating the deeds of the departed chief,
were very striking. It is considered a fortunate thing
that the Governor visited Ohinemuri at a time when
so many of the leading chiefs of the principal Maori
clans were there assembled, and thus had an oppor-
tunity of paying their homage to the head of the
Government.
April 23.—The “ Luna,” the largest vessel which
had ever previously ascended the Thames, left Ohine-
muri at 7 a.m. with the ebbing tide. Owing to the
hitherto imperfect survey of the river, she grounded
about two miles from the mouth, but floated again with
the rising flood, and reached the wharf at Grahamstown
at 5 p.m. On the 24th a deluge of rain having set in.


the Governor was unable to visit the gold mines, but
held a reception, at which were present the principal
officers connected with the Thames and the leading
residents. At 6 p.m. the “ Luna ” left Grahamstown,
and, after landing some native chiefs at Taupo, arrived
at Auckland at 11 o’clock p.m.
So ended an important and memorable journey.


APPENDIX.
It has been considered desirable to supplement the
above interesting narrative with translations of several
letters from Maori chiefs to the Agent-General, re-
ceived by the last mail from New Zealand. These
letters are not only remarkable for their poetic senti-
ment, but, coming as they do from leading men, they
are a very significant index to the present state of the
native mind.
Dr. Featherston, during a residence in the country of
about thirty years, and during eighteen years’ continuous
tenure of office as Superintendent, was in constant
official communication with the native tribes of the
Wellington Province ; and it is well known that during
the disturbed period, from 1861 to 1865, the main-
tenance of peace in this portion of the Colony was in
a great measure due to his personal influence with the
Ngatiawa and Ngatiraukawa chiefs. It is satisfactory,
therefore, to find that he is still remembered among
them as their “ friend and father,” and that they
continue to look to him for guidance and advice.
Wi Tako, the writer of the first letter, is a man of
good birth and of considerable political influence. He
was one of the chief promoters of the Maori-king
Movement, and has always taken an active part in
native affairs. In 1862 he withdrew himself from all
communication with Europeans, fortified his pah at
Waikanae, raised the rebel flag, and moved from place
to place attended by a body guard of 100 armed men
in uniform. At this time Sir George Grey, who had


re-assumed the government of the Colony, visited the
west coast settlements, and invited Wi Tako to meet
him at Otaki. The rebel chief at first refused to
receive the Governor except in his own pah and under
the “ King’s ” flag ; hut through the personal influence
of Dr. Featherston, he was ultimately induced to come
out and meet his Excellency on neutral ground. Wi
Tako afterwards took the oath of allegiance, and is
now a valuable Government ally; hut for a consider-
able time both he and his tribe were on the verge of
open rebellion. In the Wellington Council Chamber
there is a fine painting—paid for by public subscrip-
tion—representing Dr. Featherston, as Superintendent
of the Province, with Wi Tako and the veteran chief
Epuni at his side, a picture full of historic interest to
those who remember the early struggles of this part of
the Colony.
Ihaia Poeuxtt is a young chief of a highly intelli-
gent type, who lives in European fashion and conducts
a small farm of his own in the valley of the Hutt. He
is the son of Te Kira Porutu, who was a staunch friend
of the Colonists in the early days of the Wellington
Settlement. He is a native magistrate, and one of the
assessors of the Native Lands Court.
Wi Paeaia and Wi Tamihana are chiefs of the
Ngatiawa tribe, the former being now one of the
Maori representatives in the General Assembly.
The writers of the other letters are representative
chiefs of the warlike clans of Wanganui. Aperaniko’s
letter recalls the tragic events of Moutoa. In the year
1863, a band of Hauhau fanatics were making a


descent on the town of Wanganui, but were met and
repulsed by a body of friendly natives from the lower
Wanganui district. The main fight took place on the
island of Moutoa, about fifty miles up the river, and a
number of Maoris were killed on both sides. Dr.
Featherston, as General Government Agent, was
immediately on the spot and took steps to prevent a
recurrence of hostilities. He armed the friendlies,
fortified the river against further attack, established
confidence among the settlers, and caused a handsome
marble monument to be erected in the town of
Wanganui to the memory of the brave men who
fell at Moutoa. But, as will presently appear, Dr.
Featherston has other claims to what one of his
correspondents terms the “ fidelity of the tribes to their
absent chief.” Major Kepa and Captain Aperaniko
served with the Native Contingent under Major-
General Chute in his celebrated Taranaki campaign ;
and the former of these chiefs received, as the gift of
the Queen, a handsome sword, in recognition of his
loyalty and valorous conduct in the field. This native
force, composed of the best men of the Lower Wan-
ganui, Ngatiapa and Rangitane tribes, was organised
and commanded by Major (now Lt.-Col.) McDonnell;
but this gallant officer was wounded at the commence-
ment of the campaign, and the responsibility and
control of the native allies then devolved on Dr.
Featherston, who had accompanied the expedition as a
Volunteer. The pen of the late Von Tempskey has
described in graphic terms how Dr. Featherston kept
the rival factions together and led them into action—


how he exposed his life on every occasion and stirred
the natives to enthusiasm by his presence —how one
pah after another fell before their assault, and how
finally, in spite of the mutinous spirit of the younger
chiefs, he succeeded in taking the Native Contingent
through the memorable bush march at the rear of
Mount Egmont.
It may readily be understood that such an example
was not without its effect upon a people who almost
adore personal courage, and that the expressions of
devotion to their “ fighting superintendent ” are
perfectly genuine and sincere. The benefit to the
Colony of the personal services briefly alluded to
above, may be inferred from the following passage in
one of the published despatches [Feb. \2th, of
Major-General Sir Trevor Chute, K.C.B.: —
“It is hardly possible for me to convey to your
Excellency howmuch I feel indebted to Dr. Featherston,
Superintendent of this Province, for his able advice on
all subjects connected with the Maoris. He accom-
panied me throughout the campaign, sharing all our
dangers and privations, and was present at each
engagement and assault. lam particularly obliged to
him for the zeal with which he has at all times laboured
to obtain information of the movements and positions
of the rebels, which it would have been almost impos-
sible for me to acquire without his assistance.”
1. Letter from Wi Tako Nqatata.
( Translation J
Tb Aro Pa,
Weluxgton, June 3rd, 1872.
To Dr. Featherstos.
O father'. Salutation* ! Long may you live 1 May


your life be spared beyond the usual term granted to man on
earth! May God preserve you and your children!
0 my loving friend Featherston, here is your letter of the
28th of March, which has reached me. Great has been our
emotion over your letter, full of kind words to us and sentiments
of regard for your Maori people. "We respond to your kind
words thus expressed, and we think mournfully of the wide sea
that now divides us. Many days and many nights must pass
before our bodies could reach each other, and our lips speak face
to face. But the heart can travel across at once and hold
communion with yours.
We shall never forget each other. Our regard for each
other will never grow cold.
0 father, I have nothing to tell you. There is only one
thing to say: the island is at rest. Men of bad hearts may
cause disturbance again, but now all is at peace. All I have to
say is, salutations to you and your family!
There is nothing in my letter, but yours was full; the return
I make is a poor one. But when you receive my letter you
must send us another, and continue your good advice to us.
Again, here is another word. I have told you that the
island is at peace. This is the result of the good policy of the
present Government. They are securing the confidence of the
people throughout the island. Ended.
I bid you farewell, 0 my father! Abide you and your
family in your new home. Farewell!
From your friend of long standing,
Wi Tako Ngatata,
And from all the Ngatiawa tribe.
Father, you are remembered by all the tribes with affection.
But, O father, many of the people that belonged to your tribes,
the Ngatiawa and Ngatiraukawa are dead, having been carried
off by fever.
Ended!


2. Letter from Ihaia Porutu.
( Translation .)
Wellington,
June B th, 1872.
To Dr. Featherston.
Friend, salutations ! Your letters of the 28th of March,
have arrived. I mean your letters to the native people of this
Island. Friend, I send greeting to you, to your family, and to
all your nation. Our love for you personally is very great. We
have not forgotten all the good maxims you taught us, and the
measures you proposed for our benefit. You are‘in a far-off
land now, but the hearts of men can follow you, and day and
night we remember your goodness. This is only a letter of
remembrance from me.
Your loving friend,
Ihaia Porutu,
(.Native Magistrate.')
3. Letter from Aperaniko Taiawhio.
( Translation.)
Wanganui Town,
May 30 th, 1872.
To Dr. Featherston,
Friend, salutations! I have received your letter.
Great was my delight to find that your affection was strong
enough to make its way across the wide sea and reach us here.
We are separated—you far off in one direction and we far off
in the other—but our regard for each other is as lasting and
enduring as ever!
Enough on that subject; here is another matter. On the
17th of this month there was a meeting at Putiki (a great and
important meeting), and Metekingi was the host. The object of
the meeting was to give a welcome to Pehi Turoa and Topine,*
• Late leaders of the rebel party.


on the occasion of their visit to Putiki. The meeting assembled
in the house known as “ Matapihi.” On this occasion the name
was changed to “Aomarama” {lit. the intelligent world as
distinguished from the benighted). The house of Pelhi and
Topine at Ohinemutu was “Te Aomarama,” and the symbol is
intended to embrace all New Zealand. Waikato came, a hundred
strong, with Rewi* at their head. Nothing but words of peace
and goodwill were heard within the walls of Te Aomarama.
Afterwards Topine returned our hospitalities. The house
was called “ Hikurangi,” and the meeting took place at
Taumarunui.
I went —so did Mete and Haimona and Pehi and Topia and
Te Tahana, in response to the invitation. Mete applied for the
child of Uenukutuwhatu. Topine gave the woman (in marriage).
The object of this gift was to cement this good understanding,
and secure a pledge of future peace between the Pakehas and
Maoris. The talk ended at Te Matapihi. The tribes who
assembled there were Ngatiraukawa, Ngatikahungunu, and
Waikato. Tahana Turoa spoke thus: “Listen, ye tribes
assembled in this house ! Mete now has the child of Uenuku-
tuwhatu, to be nursed by Wanganui. I call on all the tribes to
bear witness.” ThenrosePehi Turoa; “I agree,” said he, “that
there shall be peace on this river—from the mouth thereof even
to the source.”
Hip ! Hip ! Hurrah !! shouted the whole assembly present
at this meeting.
Pehi has arrived and is living in the town. This is all the
news from this place. Mr. Richard Woon, the native resident
magistrate, took part in these proceedings.
From your loving Son,
Aperaniko Taiawhio,
(Captain of Native Forces and Chief of
Lower Wanganui.)
* The' lighting general of the Waikato.


4. Letter prom Wi Parata, M.H.K.
( Translation .)
Waikanae,
New Zealand.
May 26th, 1872.
To Dr. Featherston.
Friend and father, salutations! Great is my affection
for you. Although your body is so far away, when your letters
reached us and we read them it was just as if you were present.
Although the ocean is so broad, the affection of the heart and
all affairs of importance will still go over to you.
I have received the letter which you addressed to us on the
28th March.
Friend, great was our rejoicing when we saw your letter
and read your words of greeting to the tribes whom you had left
behind. The fidelity of your native tribes to their absent chief
has not diminished.
Friend, good indeed are your words of congratulation about
the restoration of peace in this island.
Friend, during the month of March that is past I travelled
through the disturbed districts of Kgatiruanui and Taranaki, and
I saw all the people, both good and bad. I had interviews with
all the chiefs of these tribes. I saw Titoko-Waru and Wiremu
Kingi and Te Whiti also, and they all talked with me. The
burden of all their speeches was this, that they would give up
fighting and bring all their grievances to the General Assembly.
Wiremu Kingi also said that he would leave Waitara* in my
hands to be dealt with by the Assembly.
I tell you this in order that you may know the mind of your
former friends who have now returned to their allegiance. If
the landsf which have thus been placed in my hands to be dealt
with by the Assembly should be always held back, then your
good wishes for this island will be void.
Friend, it is right that you should bring this desire of the
Taranaki, Ngatiruanui and Ngatiawa tribes before the Parliament
• The land dispute which occasioned the Taranaki War.
+ Refers to the confiscated lands.


of England, because you have been appointed by our Queen to
bear the burdens of this island into her presence. For this
reason am I telling you of the burdens laid before me by the
tribes who have been punished.
Friend, these are the most important questions with the tribes
of this island—these relating to their lands. I have therefore
thought that it will be for you in England to set the minds of
the New Zealand people at rest on these questions. Ended.
From your loving Son,
Wi Parata, M. H. R.
Letter from Wr Tamihana.
[Translation.)
Wellington,
July Ist, 1872.
To Dr. Featherston.
Salutations to you and to your children! Salutations
also to the great men of the nation among whom you are now
living.
Friend, your letter of the 28th March, 1872, has reached me.
I read it aloud in the hearing of the elders of the Ngatitoa and
Ngatiawa tribes. All present at the meeting, men and women,
old and young, joined their voices in a “ mihi ” (lament) for you
as they thought of your face, and then of the broad sea in-
tervening.
Father, here am I still bearing you in remembrance, and your
name is of frequent mention among us. Friend, great is my
sorrow on account of the ravages of the present fever. Here are
three men lying dead! All the chiefs of Ngatiawa, Ngatitoa,
and Ngatiraukawa are dying off, and my grief on this account is
great.
Friend, I have nothing to write about from this place—simply
to express our great love for you.


I send greeting to you, and to your family, and to all your
people.
From your attached Friend,
Wiremu Tamihana Te Neke,
(Christian Teacher and Native
Magistrate.)
Letter from Major Keepa.
( Translation .)
Putiki Pa,
Wanganui,
July 3rd, 1872.
To Dr. Featherston.
0 sire, salutations! I send greeting to the greatest
of our benefactors—to one whose love has been felt by those
who are dead and gone, as well as by the living!
0 sire, salutations! Your letter has been received, and both
I and my tribe have seen it. Great is my satisfaction that you
should still remember us, residing, as you now are, in the midst
of the great world, and near the fountain of life!
0 sire, the reports of what you are doing have reached this
country. We are greatly rejoiced, because all your plans are clear
and comprehensive. Was it not through the clearness of your
plans that our troubles in this land were brought to an end ?
Did you not encourage and direct us, your Maori children,
in the days of fighting, and help us to put down the evil ?
Was it not through your work that peace was finally established
among us ?
O sire, continue to exert your influence on behalf of the
Maori tribes. You know me, and you know my works. Tou
know that I and my tribe strove to maintain the Queen s


authority in this land, when all was dark and threatening. You
know it all.
I shall continue to write to you often in the days that are
coming.
Long may you live, and may peace be with you !
From your loving friend,
Meiha Kepa Te Rangihiwinui,
(Head Chief of the Lower Wanganui tribes , and
Major of Native Militia.)
Letter from Metekingi Paetahi.
Putiki,
July , 3rd, 1872.
To Dr. Feathierston.
O, our Icoving father ! Salutations to you yonder, seek-
ing out the advamtage of this country. We have received your
letters, and greatlly pleased were we with your words.
You saved thiss island in its time of trouble. When you left,
peace had prevailled.
Friend Featheirston, salutations! Here am I still doing my
good work. I ami constantly calling to the “ Hauhaus 99 to come
in and unite witth us in devising some good measures for New
Zealand.
Friend Featherrston, salutations again! Often I remember all
your good counscels, and all your friendly acts ; how you came to
Wanganui, whem all was dark and evil, and continued your work
till all was quiett, and then went away to England. Although
that country is distant enough, the affection of the heart appears
to bring it near..
0 sire Featheerston, place this letter of mine before the
Government of England, in order that they may see how the
country has beem quieted under your management.


You have, perhaps, heard of my great meeting, known as
“ Te Matapihi,” when all the tribes assembled at Putiki.
This is all I have to say to you. My words are few, but they
are, nevertheless, full of love and affection for you.
From your true friend,
Metekingi Paetahi,
( Formerly Maori representative in the
General Assembly.)


,
