

OWNER'S and
DRIVER'S MANUAL
MOTOR TRUCKS
Models
AL-160 and AL-162
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER COMPANY
OF AUSTRALIA PTY. LTD.
(INCORPORATED IN VICTORIA)
DISTRICT SALES OFFICES IN ALL CAPITAL CITES
WORKS: GEELONG AND DANDENONG, VICTORIA


CONTENTS
Axles 38, 39
Before starting a new truck 8 to 10
Brakes 31 to 3°
Clutch pedal adjustment 36
Controls to 6
Cooling system * 16, 17
Driving the truck H > 13
Electrical system 22 to 30
Engine 13 to 15
Fuel system «... 18 to 21
Instruments 7
Introduction 2
Lubrication I+2 to
Maintenance 13 to MO
Operation to 12
Propeller shaft, universal Joints and centre bearing 37, 3?
Serial numbers • • 2
Specifications 3
Springs !*0
Steering gear **o
Unit refill capacities
Wheels and bearings 38, 39
Drive Safely
And Save A Life
It May Be Your Own
NATIONAL SAFETY COUNCIL


TO THE TRUCK OWNER
We feel sure you will obtain from this truck the economical and
superior performance it is designed and built to give.
Years of truck manufacturing experience and actual contact with
transportation problems have been combined with advancements in
engineering and metallurgical science to produce all the features
and refinements built into your truck. Properly lubricated,
adjusted, operated and maintained, this truck will respond to
every reasonable demand you make upon it and will give you reliable
service for years to come.
The purpose of this manual is to explain maintenance requirements
and routine adjustments which are necessary for most efficient
operation. To protect your investment, study your manual before
starting or operating your truck.
If you should need information not given in this manual, or
require the services of a trained mechanic, we urge you to use the
extensive facilities offered by the International motor truck
dealer or company owned Service Station in your locality. They
are kept Informed on the best methods of motor truck servicing and
are equipped to provide prompt first-class service in an up-to-date
Service Station. International motor truck district offices and
dealers carry ample stocks of essential International service parts.
When in need of parts, always mention the model and chassis
number as well as the serial number of the unit for which the
parts are required. We suggest that you write these serial numbers
in the spaces provided below for ready reference when parts are
required. Request the salesman to assist you in securing and
recording these serial numbers when the truck is delivered to you.
TRUCK MODEL;
(Stamped on capacity plate under hood on front
face of dash.)
ENGINE SERIAL NUMBER;
(Stamped on upper crankcase on right side,
front end,)
CHASSIS SERIAL NUMBER;
(Stamped on frame left side rail, front,)
TRANSMISSION SERIAL NUMBER;
(Stamped on rear face of transmission case,
below countershaft.)
REAR AXLE SERIAL NUMBER;
(Stamped on left side of rear housing.)


SPECIFICATIONS
ENGINE
IH Model Silver Diamond SD-2liO
Number of Cylinders 6
Bore 3-9/16 Inches
Stroke . *+-1/6*+ Inches
Piston Displacement 2kO Cubic Inches
Maximum Idle Range (No Load) 350 to *+oo r.p.m.
Maximum Speed Range 3 1 *00 r.p.m.
Engine Weight (Dry) 607 Pounds
Horsepower (A.M.A.) 30.
(A.M.A. horsepower rating is based on the bore of the engine and is
no index to actual engine power.)
Crankshaft
Main Bearings k
Connecting Rod Bearings 6
Lubrication (Drilled Shaft) Pressure System
Valves
Valve Tappet Clearance Intake (Hot) .018 to .020 Inch
Valve Tappet Clearance Exhaust (Hot) 02L- to .025 Inch
Valve Seat Inserts (Exhaust Valves) Hardened Alloy
For I&ilti-Stop or City Delivery Service
(Intake and Exhaust) 016 Inch
FUEL SYSTEM
Carburettor Downdraft
Fuel Filter At Fuel Pump
COOLING SYSTEM Sealed Type
ELECTRICAL
Electrical System Positive Ground
Spark Plug Gap .028 to .032 Inch
Distributor Contact Point Setting 018 to lnch
Battery Frame Mounted (Front Left)
Headlights Sealed-Beam
Windscreen Wiper Electric
BRAKES
Service Brakes
Hydraulic Two-Shoe, Self-Centering (Front and Rear)
Hydrovac Power-Brake Unit Third or "C" Series, Single Piston
Parking Brake Propeller Shaft Mounted Rear of Transmission
TRANSMISSION
Four-Speed Forward; One Reverse Synchro-mesh in all Forward Gears
REAR AXLE Hypo id Final Drive
Ratio
Single Reduction 6.66-1
Two-Speed 6.33-8.81-1
WHEELBASE and 172 Inches
TYRE SIZE 7.50 x 20-8 ply or 8.25 x 20-10 ply
Specifications subject to change without notice


OPERATION
CONTROLS
ILLUST. 1
CAB INTERIOR
4


IGNITION SWITCH
When the switch key is turned to the left, all accessories and gauges
are "ON" but the ignition is "OFF". When the switch key is turned all the
way to the right, the ignition also is "ON".
CHOKE CONTROL BUTTON
The choke control button is used to operate the carburettor choke valve
when starting a cold engine. Pulling the choke button out away from the
panel closes the choke valve. The choke valve will be open when the choke
button is again pushed all the way in against the panel,
THROTTLE CONTROL BUTTON
The throttle control button is used to open the throttle slightly when
starting the engine, or to set the throttle at any position to maintain a
constant engine speed. Operation of the throttle button actuates the
accelerator pedal, but the operation of the accelerator pedal has no effect
on the throttle button,
STARTING SWITCH BUTTON
Pressing the starting switch button completes the electrical circuit
between the battery and the starting motor so that the pinion engages the
flywheel ring gear and cranks the engine,
LIGHTING CONTROLS
The light control switch on the instrument panel controls the
headlights, parking lights and the instrument panel lights. When the
light control switch is pulled out half way the parking lights are lit.
When the light control switch is pulled out all the way the headlights are
lit. To light the instrument panel turn the light control switch to the
right. See Illust. 2. A built-in rheostat controls intensity of the
panel light from off to full power.
The tall light is operated Independently of the headlights by means of
a switch located near the rear end of the sidemember, right. Pull the
switch out to light the tail light,
DIMMER SWITCH
The foot-operated dimmer switch, convenient to the driver's foot, is
used to control upper and lower headlight beams. Use of this dimmer
switch permits the driver to lower the headlight beam when approaching or
passing oncoming vehicles, and to raise the headlight beam when again
needed.
CLUTCH PEDAL
The clutch pedal, operated by the driver's left foot, engages and
disengages the clutch. Depressing the clutch pedal disengages the engine
from the transmission so that the transmission gears may be shifted.
SERVICE BRAKE PEDAL
The service brake pedal, operated by the driver's right foot, controls
the application and release of the hydraulic brakes at the wheels. The
braking action at the wheels is in direct proportion to the pressure
applied to the brake pedal. Release of the brake pedal pressure releases
the brakes at the wheels.
5
OPERATION
CONTROLS


ACCELERATOR PEDAL
The accelerator pedal, operated by the driver's right foot, controls
the carburettor throttle valve. When the pedal is completely released,
the engine will operate at Idling speed.
REAR VIEW MIRROW
The rear-view mirror is adjustable for the position desired.
PARKING BRAKE CONTROL LEVER
The parking brake control lever at the left of the driver is operated
by the left hand. Do not use the parking brake to brake the vehicle
during normal road operation.
The primary purpose of this brake is to hold the vehicle in a parked
position.
GEARSHIFT LEVER
The gearshift lever, convenient to the driver's left hand, is used to
select the various gear ratios or speeds provided in the transmission.
The shifting pattern or diagram is SHOWN ON PAGE 12,
A safety rule followed by all good drivers when going downhill is to
use the same, or next lower, transmission gear as would be used in
climbing the same grade.
HOWEVER, CAUTION DEMANDS THAT THE ROAD SPEED BE CONTROLLED TO NOT
EXCEED THE ROAD SPEED POSSIBLE FOR THAT PARTICULAR GEAR RANGE ON A LEVEL
ROAD. OTHERWISE, WITH THE VEHICLE DRIVING THE ENGINE, IT IS POSSIBLE FOR
THE ENGINE SPEED TO REACH FAR IN EXCESS OF THE MAXIMUM RECOMMENDED SPEED
OF REVOLUTIONS PER MINUTE AND CAUSE SERIOUS ENGINE DAMAGE.
STEERING WHEEL
The front wheels are turned by the steering wheel at the top of the
steering gear assembly which is connected to the front axle steering
knuckles and tie rod by means of a drag link,
HORN BUTTON
The horn control button is located in the centre of the steering wheel.
Depressing the button operates the horn,
ELECTRIC WINDSCREEN WIPER
The windscreen wiper operating control switch controls the operation
of the windscreen wiper. There are two positions for the wiper control
switch, namely "OFF" and "ON".
CONTROLS


INSTRUMENTS
ILLUST. 2
INSRUMENT PANEL
01L PRESSURE GAUGE
The oil pressure gauge indicates the pressure of the engine oil, not
the amount of oil in the crankcase. The gauge is marked to indicate
idling range (MARKED "IDLE") and operating range (MARKED "RUN"). The
gauge is electrically operated and is connected to the crankcase sending
unit. Pressure is controlled by a nonadjustable relief valve located on
the distributor side of the crankcase. If the gauge fluctuates or fails
to register at any time while the engine is running, stop the engine
immediately and determine the cause,
AMMETER
The ammeter indicates the rate of charge or flow of electric current
being supplied to the battery by the generator, or the rate of discharge
from the battery. At low engine speeds the needle may show a negative
or discharge reading. When the battery is fully charged, a very slight
charge is indicated by the needle during normal vehicle operation,
TEMPERATURE GAUGE
The temperature gauge is of the electrical type and indicates the
temperature of the coolant in the cooling system, not the quantity of
coolant in the system. The gauge operates only when the ignition switch
is turned to "ON" position, or is turned to the LEFT to operate the
accessories. If the indicator suddenly rises to "HOT" position during the
warm up. or during operation, stop the engine and determine the cause of
overheating.
FUEL GAUGE
The fuel gauge is electrically operated and is connected to the fuel
tank sending unit. The gauge Indicates the level of petrol in the tank
and will only register after the ignition switch is turned on,
SPEEDOMETER
The speedometer indicates the road speed in miles per hour. The unit,
operated through a flexible cable from the transmission, also records the
total number of miles travelled.
7
OPERATION


BEFORE STARTING A NEW TRUCK
CAUTION; Do not start or run an engine in a closed garage. Exhaust
gas from all internal-combustion engines contains poisonous carbon
monoxide gas, which Is odorless, tasteless and colourless. Keep the
garage doors wide open when starting and keep your cab completely
ventilated at all times to avoid drowsiness,
LUBRICAT! ON
IMPORTANT: Be sure the truck has been properly lubricated according
to the lubrication chart. See pages L 2, L 3 and ¥+.
ILLUST. 3
ILLUST. 4
Be sure that the lubricating oil in the crankcase is up to the full mark
on the oil level gauge located on the left side of the crankcase, rear.
When testing the oil level, the gauge must be withdrawn and wiped clean,
then inserted all the way and withdrawn for a true reading.
Never test the oil level while the engine is running.
Use only a good grade of engine oil,
FUEL SYSTEM
Be sure the tank has sufficient fuel,
CAUTION: When filling, keep the filling spout or nozzle in contact
with the metal of the tank to avoid the possibility of an electric spark
Igniting the petrol.
COOLING SYSTEM
Be sure the radiator is filled with clean water. Use soft or rain
water if available.
8


ILLUST. 5 - ENGINE AIR CLEANER
AIR CLEANER
See that the oil in the air cleaner is up' to the indicated level and
use the same grade of oil as used in the engine crankcase.
STORAGE BATTERY
The water level must be 3/8 inch above the separator plates. Use clean
distilled water.
BRAKE MASTER CYLINDER
The brake master cylinder is located on the right frame rail just in
back of the service brake pedal and is accessible through an opening in
the floor board on the driver's side. The hydraulic brake fluid must be
maintained at a level 3/L inch below the top of the filler neck. Use
only a good grade of "automotive type" brake fluid. Do not fill the
master cylinder to the top of the filler neck.
ILLUST. 6 - SERVICE BRAKE ASSEMBLY
9
BEFORE STARTING A NEW TRUCK
OPERATION


TYRE SIZE
PLY
POUNDS PRESSURE
7.50 x 20
8
55 Maximum
8.25 x 20
10
60 Maximum
TYRES
Inspect the tyres periodically. Excessive speed is definitely one of
the most important factors in loss of tyre mileage. An increase of speed
from kO m.p.h. to 60 m.p.h. results in 33$ tyre mileage loss. Overloading
tyres beyond their rated capacity results in tyre waste, A 20$ overload
will give only 70$ normal tyre mileage.
Check Inflation pressures at regular and frequent intervals when tyres
are cool, and be sure to use an accurate air pressure gauge.
Bleeding the air from hot tyres is dangerous and must not be done.
While the pressure will be reduced, an increase in temperature of the tyre
will take place as soon as driving is resumed and tyre failure will result,
VALVE CAPS
Always see that the tyre valve caps are in place and screwed tight.
The caps assure positive sealing of air in the tyres. Besides preventing
loss of air through the valve core, they prevent loose soil, mud and
gravel from entering and damaging the valve core and air chamber in the
tyres.
ILLUST. 7 - PROPER INFLATION OF TYRE
UNDER!NFLATI ON
Too little air pressure increases deflection, causes the tread to wipe
and scuff over the road, results in extra strain on the tyre, and chances
for bruising are increased.
PROPER INFLATION
Provides maximum road contact and results in Increased tyre life.
OVERINFLATION
Reduces the tyre deflection and tyre contact area, causing the tyre to
ride on the crown and results in rapid wear in the centre of the tread.
MISALIGNMENT OF WHEELS
If the front wheels are not in proper alignment excessive tyre wear will
result. The cause of this condition is too much toe-in or toe-out. A
tyre on a wheel only 1/2 inch out of alignment is dragged sideways
approximately 8? feet in one mile of travel. This type of wear is easily
detected because it causes a feather-edge on the shoulder of the tyre.
WHEEL AND TYRE BALANCE
Front wheel shimmy, wandering and cupped tyres are caused by an out-of-
balance condition of one or both front tyres. If front tyres are changed
because of a flat tyre or to equalize wear, we recommend they be checked
for balance before operating the truck.
10
BEFORE STARTING A NEW TRUCK


DRIVING THE TRUCK
NOTE: Do not drive a new truck over 30 miles per hour for the first
500 miles. The engine mast not be raced or worked too hard until it has
warmed up and is running smoothly, with the carburettor choke button
pushed all the way in. Remember, the life of an engine depends on the
care it is given, especially during the breaking-in period,
HOW TO START THE ENGINE
1, Set the hand brake lever (pull back),
2, Place the transmission gearshift lever in the neutral position,
3, Pull the throttle control button open sufficiently to "crack" the
throttle; the engine when started will then run at "fast idle" speed,
h. Turn the ignition switch to the "ON" position.
5, Pull the choke control button out one-half the distance. Do not use
the choke when the engine is warm. In extremely cold weather, the
choke button may be pulled out the full distance but must be
immediately pushed part way in when the engine starts.
6, Push the clutch pedal forward and keep it there until the engine is
running,
7, Press on the starting switch button and release the instant the engine
starts,
CAUTION: Do not run the starting motor for more than approximately
30 seconds at any one time. If the engine fails to start or makes a
false start, DO NOT PRESS THE STARTING SWITCH BUTTON AGAIN UNTIL THE
ENGINE HAS COME TO A COMPLETE STOP.
8, When the engine starts, the choke control button must be pushed in to
its best running position, and all the way in as soon as the engine
is warm enough to permit it.
CAUTION: The frequent use of the choke control button dilutes the
crankcase oil by allowing the unburned petrol to leak down past the
pistons, thus washing away the lubricant from the pistons and cylinder
walls and thinning the oil to a degree where its value as a protecting
film between moving parts is destroyed. BECAUSE OF THIS, WE RECOMMEND
A MORE FREQUENT COMPLETE OIL CHANGE IN WINTER, USING NEW OIL OF GOOD
QUALITY.
BRAKES
Always test the hydraulic brake system by depressing the brake pedal
before attempting to move the truck.
ENGINE OIL PRESSURE
Maximum oil pressure is set at the factory by means of a nonadjustable
relief valve. The oil gauge must always register in the "IDLE" range when
the engine is idling, and in the "RUN" range when the engine is operating
at speeds above idle.
HOW TO DRIVE THE TRUCK
1. Push the clutch pedal down to disengage the clutch,
2. Move the transmission gearshift lever into the first gear position.
3. Release the hand brake lever.
4-. Depress the accelerator pedal to speed up the engine sufficiently to
pick up the load. Release the clutch pedal slowly and further depress
the accelerator pedal to prevent the engine from stalling while the
truck starts forward.
5. As the truck speed increases, release the accelerator and at the same
time depress the clutch pedal. Then move the gearshift lever through
the neutral position to the' next higher transmission gear. Release
the clutch slowly and step on the accelerator as described above.
Repeat this procedure as you shift progressively into the high speed
ranges.
11
OPERATION


CLUTCH
The clutch is the single dry-disc type and has been designed to give
long service. Nevertheless, steady abuse by “riding" the clutch pedal
will cause slippage and burned linings, so keep your foot off the clutch
pedal except to shift gears or when the truck is brought to a stop. Never
"ride" the clutch pedal.
Do not coast down grade, even for a very short distance, with the
transmission in gear (particularly in reverse or in the lower ranges) with
the clutch disengaged. To do so, permits the clutch to be driven by the
vehicle at an excessive rate of speed, and the resultant centrifugal force
may damage or even completely disintegrate the clutch.
TRANSMISSI ON
ILLUST. 8
SHIFTING DIAGRAM, SYNCHRO-MESH
TRANSMISSION
When shifting from high gear to a lower gear, it is advisable to
disengage the clutch and move the gearshift lever into the neutral position,
then re-engage the clutch and speed up the engine sufficiently to complete
the shift without clashing. A little practice will bring perfection. Stop
the truck completely before shifting into reverse.
DRIVING DOWNHILL
A safety rule followed by all good drivers is to use the same, or next
lower, transmission gear when going down hill as would be used in climbing
the same grade.
HOWEVER, CAUTION DEMANDS THAT THE ROAD SPEED BE CONTROLLED TO NOT
EXCEED THE ROAD SPEED POSSIBLE FOR THAT PARTICULAR GEAR RANGE ON A LEVEL
ROAD. OTHERWISE, WITH THE VEHICLE DRIVING THE ENGINE, IT IS POSSIBLE FOR
THE ENGINE SPEED TO REACH FAR IN EXCESS OF THE MAXIMUM RECOMMENDED SPEED OF
REVOLUTIONS PER MINUTE AND CAUSE SERIOUS ENGINE DAMAGE.
For example, a vehicle equipped with a rear axle gear ratio and tyre
size to permit a road speed of eight miles per hour on level terrain could,
with the vehicle going down hill in low gear at a speed of only twenty miles
per hour, cause the engine to revolve at more than eight thousand
revolutions per minute. The vehicle on which this example is, based must
not be allowed to descend the grade in low gear faster than eight miles per
hour. Even then, the engine speed is at its recommended maximum.
12
DRIVING THE TRUCK


MAINTENANCE
SILVER DIAMOND ENGINE
ILLUST. 9 - SECTIONAL VIEW
13


CAUTION: Because of the fire hazard, we do not recommend the use of
petrol when cleaning parts. Use less inflammable fluid such as kerosene
or any noninflammable commercial cleaning solvent.
OVERHAULING
Consult an International Service Station or an authorized dealer before
attempting a general overhauling.
CLEANING THE ENGINE
The importance of having an engine, or any dther unit In the truck,
clean and free from dirt, sludge, abrasives, etc., cannot be too strongly
stressed.
Remove the OIL FILLER OR BREATHER CAP and clean the wire mesh thoroughly
by submerging in kerosene or commercial solvent.
ILLUST. 11 - CUTAWAY VIEW OF FILTER
14
SILVER DIAMOND ENGINE


OIL FILTER
Proper maintenance will enable the oil filter to retard the engine oil
contamination and prevent damage to the engine by removing harmful
abrasives. Replace the element when the oil has darkened.
Be sure the sediment in the sump at the bottom of the filter element
is thoroughly cleaned before inserting the new element. Do not fail to
read the printed instructions on the box containing the new filter
element.
ILLUST. 12
DETAIL OF OIL FILTER
REPLACING FILTER ELEMENT
1. Stop the engine.
2. Remove the oil filter base drain plug and allow the oil filter to
drain completely*
3. Clean off the filter case to eliminate any possibility of dirt
dropping into the base.
if. Unscrew and remove the retaining bar "A".
5. Lift up and remove the case "B".
6. Remove the old element "C".
7. Wipe out the base and the case with a cloth dampened with kerosene.
8. See that the case gasket "D" is in position. Replace the drain plug
in the filter base and install the new filter element. Replace the
case and retaining bar "A" and draw the bar up tight. Lower the bar
CAREFULLY and screw it through the seal into the filter base and
tighten securely to prevent damage or leakage.
9. Check the oil level in crankcase to see that the new oil is up to the
proper level. See "LUBRICATION CHART", PAGE L 2. Now start the
engine, see that the oil pressure indicator is registering pressure
and inspect the filter for oil leaks,
NOTE: To avoid delays, keep extra elements on hand for replacement
at the proper time.
15
SILVER DIAMOND ENGINE
MAINTENANCE


COOLING SYSTEM
ILLUST. 13 - PROPER TENSION OF FAN BELT
FAN BELT
Examine the tension of the fan belt periodically. Proper tension is
obtained when the belt can be depressed approximately 1/2 inch on the
centre of the section between the fan pulley and the generator.
To adjust the belt, loosen the generator mounting cap screws and the
generator brace cap screw, then move the generator in or out as required.
After adjustment has been made, be sure to tighten the cap screws.
RADIATOR CAP
The radiator cap is of the pressure-sealing type. Its purpose is to
hold the cooling system under a slight pressure, increasing the boiling
point of the coolant and preventing loss of the coolant due to evaporation
and overflow.
The cap has a spring-loaded valve, the seat of which is below the
overflow pipe in the filler neck. This prevents the escape of air or
liquid while the cap is in position. When the cooling system pressure
reaches a predetermined point, the cap valve opens and will again close
when the pressure drops below the predetermined point.
When removing the pressure type
cap from the radiator, perform the
operation in two steps. Loosening
the cap to its first notch raises
the valve from the gasket and
releases the pressure through the
overflow pipe. In the first stage
position of the cap it should be
possible to depress the cap
approximately 1/8 inch. The prongs
on the cap can be bent to adjust
this condition. Care must be taken
that the cap is not too loose as
this would prevent proper sealing.
CAUTION: When removing the cap
loosen it slowly, and then pause
a moment. This will avoid possible
burning by hot water or steam.
Then continue to turn the cap to
the left until you can remove it.
ILLUST. 14
REMOVING RADIATOR CAP
16


CLEANING THE COOLING SYSTEM
Twice a year or more often, depending upon the kind of cooling water
used, drain the cooling system and thoroughly flush it out.
Unless the cooling water is treated with a corrosion preventive, rust
and scale will eventually clog up passages in the radiator and-water
jackets. This condition is aggravated in some localities by the formation
of insoluble salts from the water used.
Cleaning solutions are available which have proven very successful in
removing the accumulation of rust, scale, sludge and grease. Use this
solution according to the manufacturer's recommendation.
NOTE: Do not use chemical mixtures to stop radiator leaks except in an
emergency. Never use such solutions instead of needed radiator repair.
If no commercial cleaning solution is available, dissolve about four
pounds of ordinary washing soda in sufficient water to fill the 15 quart
cooling system. Leave the radiator filler cap off and run the engine for
about one-half hour or until the engine gets hot. Then drain and flush
thoroughly with clean water.
When draining the cleaning
solution, disconnect the radiator
outlet hose as large particles of
sediment will not pass through the
drain cock. Also unscrew drain
plug on the right side of the
crankcase at the rear of the
generator.
If the radiator is clogged with
insoluble salt formations, it must
be taken to a reputable concern
specializing in the removal of
such formations. Reliable radiator
service stations are familiar with
local conditions and are equipped
to apply the proper treatment.
ILLUST. 15
The condition of extreme rust ..clogging is convincing proof that the
practice of flushing the system by forcing water from a hose in the
radiator filler neck, without the use of cleaning solutions, may be only a
waste of time. Iron corrosion is greater than that of any other cooling
system metal, which accounts for the large quantities of rust found in
neglected water jackets. Heavy rust deposits in the water jacket hold in
heat and create local hot spots, especially around the exhaust valve seats.
Under these conditions, the metal may get so hot that the valves will stick
or burn, or the cylinder block or head may be damaged by heat cracking.
RUST PREVENTION
One of the common causes of engine overheating is a rust-clogged cooling
system. Rust interferes with circulation and cooling, causing overheating.
Rust and corrosion formation can be prevented by maintaining full
strength corrosion protection at all times.
Add rust preventive or inhibitor to the cooling system for protection
against corrosion.
THERMOSTAT
The thermostat is the nonadjustable type and is incorporated in the
cooling system for the purpose of retarding or restricting circulation of
water or coolant to achieve rapid engine warm-up. The thermostat is
mounted in the cylinder head water outlet, just above the water pump.
Engine overheating and loss of coolant is sometimes due to a defective
thermostat. When thorough inspection seems to indicate this condition
exists, check the thermostat with an accurate high temperature thermometer
by submerging in hot water.
17
COOLING SYSTEM
MAINTENANCE


FUEL SYSTEM
FUEL PUMP
The fuel pimp should be thoroughly-
cleaned. Periodically check the fuel
pump bowl for dirt, moisture and rust
accumulation. The sediment bowl and
filter element or screen are provided
to prevent the entry of these
troublesome elements into the
carburettor and thus cause engine
failure.
AC TYPE FUEL PUMP
To clean, loosen the thumb screw
at the top of the fuel pump bowl.
Remove the bowl and filter element
or screen, and wash the bowl in
kerosene. Loosen the two knurled
nuts on the fuel filter element, this
allows the individual discs to be
slightly separated from each other
so that all the dirt can be blown
from the element with a blast of air.
After cleaning the filter element,
tighten the knurled nuts finger
tight. Do not use a wrench or pliers.
When assembling, be sure the cork
gasket is in place and that the thumb
screw is tight. Before a new gasket
is used, soak it in light engine oil.
A leak at the gasket will cause
erratic action of the pump and thus
retard delivery of fuel to the
carburettor.
ILLUST. 16
CARTER TYPE FUEL PUMP
Remove the fuel pump cover re-
tainer screw and gasket and lift
off the cover. Remove the filter
screen and the felt washer from the
fuel pump bowl. Use cleaning fluid
to remove the rust and dirt.
ILLUST. 17
ILLUST. 18
CAUTION: Do not tighten the
cover retainer screw to prevent
leakage at the base of the fuel
bowl.
ILLUST. 20
ILLUST. 19
Remove the fuel bowl retainer
screw and lock washer, then lift
off the fuel bowl; observe the lip
on the fuel bowl and the notch on
the pump base for the correct
position of the fuel bowl. Do not
disturb the diaphragm except when
replacement is necessary.
NOTE; Always clean the parts to
be worked on so as to be sure no
dirt enters the fuel system. Use
cleaning solvent or kerosene. Do
not use petrol.
18
MAINTENANCE


FUEL SYSTEM
CARBURETTOR
When excessive petrol consumption
or inefficient engine performance is
encountered, exercise care in det-
ermining the exact cause before
assuming the carburettor to be at
fault. Engine compression, valve
clearance, ignition timing, defective
wiring, improperly spaced or fouled
plugs, distributor contact points,
condenser,coll and fuel pump are all
factors to be considered and must be
within the limits specified by the
manufacturer to secure maximum
petrol mileage.
Due to the technical knowledge
and skill required and the special
equipment needed to make the necess-
ary tests and corrections, we re-
commend the work be done by an
International Service Station or
authorized dealer.
I LLUST. 21
CARTER CARBURETTOR
CARTER CARBURETTOR
The Carter Carburettor for the
Silver Diamond Engine Incorporates
an accelerating pump, utilizing a
diaphragm in place of a piston as in
a conventional design. There is also
a metering rod that regulates the
flow of fuel into the high speed
circuit. The metering rod is
actuated by the throttle, thus the
fuel flow is greatest at full open
throttle and diminishes to a pre-
determined volume (through a fixed
orifice) at "off idle" throttle
position. In this manner the air and
fuel mixture is maintained at the
proper ratio at all speeds to assure
maximum power and economy.
I LLUST. 22
ZENITH CARBURETTON
ZENITH CARBURETTOR
REMOVE AND CLEAN THE FILTER EVERY
1000 MILES. To clean the filter,
remove the filter head and element.
The sump may then be cleaned with a
small clean cloth. Remove the ele-
ment from the head. This allows the
Individual washers to be slightly
separated from the element. Use only
moderate air pressure when blowing
dirt from the element. When tight-
ening the element to the head, use
finger pressure only. DO NOT USE A
WRENCH OR PLIERS.
I LLUST. 23
HOLLEY CARBURETTOR
19


HOLLEY CARBURETTOR
ILLUST. 24
The accelerating pump has an
adjustment for varying the quantity
of the accelerating charge. Adjust-
ment is made by changing the
position of the pump link in the
holes of the operating lever. The
No. 1 position is for SUMMER OR HOT
WEATHER setting; this delivers the
smallest quantity of fuel for accel-
eration. The No. 2 position is for
the AVERAGE setting. The No. 3
position is for WINTER OR COLD
WEATHER setting; this delivers the
greatest quantity of fuel for
acceleration.
IDLING SPEED ADJUSTMENT (CARTER,
HOLLEY AND ZENITH)
Start the engine and run it until
thoroughly warm.
Close the throttle and set the
throttle lever stop screw so that
the engine will run sufficiently
fast to keep it from stalling.
Turn in or. out on the Idling
needle valve until the engine fires
evenly and without galloping or
skipping.
Then back off on the stop screw
until the desired idling speed is
obtained.
NOTE; If a vacuum gauge is used
for adjustment, adjust the idling
needle valve to obtain the highest
steady vicuum reading.
THROTTLE LEVER CONTROL ROD (CARTER
HOLLEY AND ZENITH)
I LUIS T. 25
The throttle lever control rod
adjustment provides positive
return of the throttle lever stop
screw* to the cam. Adjust the
throttle lever swivel to obtain
positive return of the throttle
lever stop screw to the cam when
the accelerator is released to the
idle position.
CARBURETTOR CHOKE CONTROL (CARTER
HOLLEY AND ZENITH)
ILLUST. 26
ADJUSTMENT OR CHOKE LINKAGE
(CHOKE OPENED)
It is of the utmost Importance
that the carburettor choke control
be properly positioned on the
carburettor to prevent needless
waste of fuel. Observe carefully,
choke control in full open position
IN ILLDST. 26, and in completely
closed position IN ILLUST. 27, (note
clearance between choke lever and
the end of the choke wire housing).
20
FUEL SYSTEM


CARBURETTOR CHOKE CONTROL (CARTER,
HOLLEY AND ZENITH)
ILLUST. 27
ADJUSTMENT OR CHOKE LINKAGE
(CHOKE CLOSED)
AIR CLEANER
Change the oil in the air cleaner
to maintain cleaner efficiency when-
ever the chassis is lubricated.
Clean out the air cleaner cup and
refill with new oil. Make sure all
connections are tight so that dust
and dirt cannot enter.
ILLUST. 28
CLEANING AND REFILLING AIR CLEANER
(01L-BATH TYPE)
Remove the filter element and
wash In kerosene EVERY 5.000 MILES
OR OFTENBR UNDER SEVERS DUST
CONDITIONS. Never allow the dirt
level in the oil sump to reach
the underside of the baffle. Glean
the oil sump and refill to Indicated
level with clean engine oil.
Use the same grade oil in the
cleaner as used in the crankcase.
Be sure all kerosene has been
thoroughly drained from the filter
element before reassembling.
FUEL TANK
The fuel tank gives little or no
trouble and usually requires no
servicing other than an occasional
cleaning. However, if the tank is
punctured or develops a leak, it
must not be welded or repaired
with or near an open flame until all
traces of fuel and fuel vapors have
been completely removed. It is
advisable to have such work done by
a repair shop equipped to render
this type of service.
KEEP FUEL TANK FULL
As the fuel is consumed, air
is drawn into the tank through
the vent. Under certain climatic
conditions, moisture may be
condensed from this air when the
temperature drops, as when the
vehicle is parked at night. Thus,
the fuel tank may become the un-
suspected source of moisture con-
tamination in the fuel supply,
causing faulty engine performance
or complete failure. Therefore,
always fill the fuel tank at the
end of the day's run.
ILLUST. 29
When placing the truck in stor-
age, it is important to remove all
fuel from the system. If not en-
tirely removed, a gumlike substance
will be deposited on all parts con-
tacted by the fuel which will ser-
iously affect the operation of the
fuel pump and carburettor. Gum de-
posits can be dissolved with a mix-
ture of one part alcohol and one
part benzol, or with acetone. SEE
INSTRUCTIONS INSIDE OF BACK COVER.
CAUTION: Never light matches
near petrol because the air within
a radius of several feet is permeat-
ed with a highly explosive vapor.
Keep the filling spout or nozzle IN
CONTACT WITH THE METAL OF THE TANK
to avoid the possibility of an elec-
tric spark igniting the petrol.
21
FUEL SYSTEM
MAINTENANCE


ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
IMPORTANT
Any major overhauling or adjustment should be done by an International
Service Station or authorized dealer.
HOW TO CORRECT MINOR TROUBLES
There are times when minor troubles are encountered on the road, and
these are due generally to loose connections or defective terminals in the
wiring system. These can be easily detected by observing the following
1. If the engine runs but misses at times, look fors-
WIRING Battery terminals loose or corroded. High and
low tension cables grounded or loosely connected,
DISTRIBUTOR Contact points not set right.
SPARK PLUG Gap should be between .028 inch to .032 inch. If
misfiring is not confined to one cylinder, have
the coil tested, wiring checked and distributor
inspected. If the engine misses regularly on one
cylinder, the trouble is usually due to the spark
plug in that cylinder being dirty, broken or
improperly adjusted.
2. If the starting motor turns the engine, but no spark or a weak spark
is obtained at the spark plug, look for:-
WIRING High and low tension cables may be grounded or
loosely connected.
DISTRIBUTOR Contact points either do not open or do not close.
Gap should be between .018 inch to ,02h inch,
IGNITION SWITCH ... Does not make contact.
WEAK BATTERY Low voltage will give a weak spark.
STARTING MOTOR .... Examine all cable connections between the battery.
and the starting motor. Connections must be
clean and tight.
3. If the starting motor will not turn over or turns slowly when the
starting switch is closed, look for:-
BATTERY Weak or completely discharged.
WIRING Loose or dirty battery connections. See that all
cable connections between the battery and starting
motor are clean and tight.
STARTING SWITCH ... Contact points burned or cable loose on terminal
posts.
h. If the ammeter does not show that the generator is charging, look for:-
GENERATOR Commutator and brushes dirty or greasy. To clean,
use No. 00 sandpaper. Never use emery cloth.
WIRING Cable connections at the ammeter may be grounded
or loosely connected. Also check the cable
connections at starting switch and battery.
REGULATOR If the trouble is within the regulator unit, it
will not usually hinder an operator from reaching
a service station for a check of the unit. Check
the regulator to determine whether it is properly
connected to a good ground.
22


SPARK PLUGS
We recommend that a periodic examination be made of the spark plugs to
keep them free from carbon, also to sea that the gap between the points is
set at from .028 to .032 Inches. When changing the gap, always bend the
outer electrode, NEVER bend the centre electrode.
Be accurate - - use a round-wire feeler gauge.
The proper method to clean fouled spark plugs is
to use a reliable spark plug cleaner. See your
International Service Station or authorized dealer
for the best results.
028 to .032 inch
gap
ILLUST. 30
GENERATOR AND REGULATORS
A shunt-wound belt-driven generator is provideds it is current-and-
voltage controlled by regulators mounted on one base but operating
independently to maintain the output and voltage within specified limits.
Shunt-wound generator output can be changed only by adjustment of the
regulators. If the regulator or generator wires are disconnected, or
when changing the battery, observe the following instructions in order to
avoid the possibility of reversing the polarity of the generator, thus
vibrating and burning the cut-out relay contacts.
See that the positive side of the battery is grounded. The cable from
the "F" terminal on the generator must be connected to the "F" terminal on
the regulator. Cable from the "A" terminal on the generator must be
connected to the "GEN" terminal on the regulator. Cable from the "BAT* 1
terminal on the regulator must be connected to the ammeter. Then, before
starting the engine, momentarily touch a lead (or screwdriver) from the
"GEN" to the "BAT" terminals on the regulator. The surge of the battery
current to the generator will correctly polarize the generator.
When replacing a battery, a quick check can be made to determine that
the proper terminal (positive) is grounded before starting the engine, as
follows:-
After connecting the battery cables, turn on the headlights. If the
ammeter shows "discharge", the battery is properly connected. If the
ammeter indicates "charge" then disconnect the battery cables and reconnect
so that the ammeter will show "discharge" when the lights are on.
STARTING MOTOR
The starting motor is located at the right rear of the engine,
CAUTION: Do not run the starting motor more than approximately 30
seconds at any one time because it can be seriously damaged if held too
long in contact. It is a good policy to remove the cover band on the
starting motor and inspect the brushes and commutator at least once a year.
23
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
MAINTENANCE


STORAGE BATTERY
Examine the battery at least twice a month during warm weather operation
and once a month in cold weather to see that the solution is kept to the
proper level. It is advisable to keep the battery fully charged at all
times,
CAUTION; Hydrogen gas is produced in the normal operation of the
battery in the vehicle. Therefore. IT IS IMPERATIVE THAT FLAMES OR SPARKS
BE KEPT AWAY FROM THE VENT OPENINGS OF THE BATTERY. FAILURE TO DO SO MAY
RESULT IN DESTRUCTION OF THE BATTERY.
The electrolyte in each cell should be 3/8 inch above the separator
plates, or to the indicated level. When the electrolyte is below this
level, add clean distilled water using a clean syringe. Acid or electrolyte
must never be added except by a skilled battery man.
Under no circumstances add any special battery "dopes”, solutions or
powders.
Test the specific gravity of the electrolyte in each cell at least
once a month with a hydrometer. A hydrometer reading of 1.270 to 1,285
indicates a full charge. Never allow the battery to fall below 1.225,
which indicates half discharged.
Battery cable terminals must be clean and tight. Use hot water and
common soda for removing terminal corrosion and for cleaning the top of
the battery. Brighten the contact surface with steel wool, apply a light
coat of vaseline, and reassemble. Be sure the terminals are clamped
tightly, and that the battery is clamped securely in the battery box.
ENGINE TUNE-UP
In general, the operating efficiency of an engine decreases so gradually
that it escapes detection until good engine performance has been restored
by correct tune-up. Engine tune-up consists of making necessary
adjustments and possible replacement of minor parts and units to regain a
balanced condition of engine performance. It is advisable to check all
related units. Adjustments made and parts replaced must be checked with
testing equipment designed for the specific purpose. AVOID GUESS WORK.
A good engine tune-up should reveal and correct such faults as;-
Battery low on charge.
Spark plug insulator cracked.
Primary ignition cables loose.
Fan belt loose.
Coil or condenser defective.
Air filter dirty, choke partly closed.
Fuel pump erratic in operation.
Distributor timing incorrect, cap
cracked, rotor burned or cracked.
Carburettor float level too high.
Breaker points incorrectly gapped,
CONDENSER
A condenser should be proven defective before being replaced. It is
seldom that burned or oxidized contact points are due to a defective
condenser. High voltage, overcharged battery, an excessive oil vapor or
oil on the contact surface has the effect of increasing the normal rate
of wear on the contacts. A short-circuited condenser will cause complete
failure of the ignition system.
24
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM


IGNITION TIMING
The ignition timing mark and
the timing pointer located on the
left side of the engine at the bell
housing, will be visible when the
cover is placed in the position
shown in Illust, 31* To assure
efficient operation of the engine,
check the timing with a timing
light, and the timing mark and
pointer must be in register as
indicated for the best engine
performance.
NOTE: When the oil pump has
been removed from the engine, it
will be necessary to remove the
ignition distributor before re-
installing the pump assembly. This
is required to assure proper align-
ment of the distributor shaft with
the oil pump shaft. It will also
be necessary to retime the ignition.
IGNITION COIL TESTING
ILLUST. 31
If the coil does not fire the engine satisfactorily, remove the unit
from the truck and check.
DISTRIBUTOR CONTACT POINTS
ILLUST. 32 - TOP VIEW OF DISTRIBUTOR WITH CAP REMOVED
The proper gap between the distributor breaker points is between
.018 to .02h inch.
ELECTRIC WINDSCREEN WIPER
THE WINDSCREEN WIPER ARM AND BLADE MUST BE RAISED FROM THE GLASS AND NOT
MOVED FROM SIDE TO SIDE WHEN CLEANING THE WINDSCREEN. The wiper arm is
hinged near the wiper shaft to permit this operation. Observance of this
practice is necessary because the wiper motor does not have a clutch built
into the wiper motor mechanism. MOVING THE WIPER BLADE AND ARM MANUALLY
FROM SIDE TO SIDE WILL RESULT IN STRIPPING THE WIPER MOTOR GEARS.
25
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM


headlights
The headlights are the Sealed-Beam
type. The parts are so
constructed that the filament,
reflector, lens and gasket are all
assembled in one complete and
securely sealed unit. This unit is
permanently sealed against dirt,
moisture and corrosion. Sealed-Beam
headlights provide two separate and
distinct beams, namely, an upper
beam which is intended for use on
the open highway when other vehicles
are not approaching, and a lower
beam which is intended to be used in
traffic. Should a filament burn
out or a lens break, the complete
unit must be replaced. Replacement
can easily be made by referring to
the following illustrations.
ILLUST. 33
1. Remove the headlight rim retain-
ing screw at the bottom of the
headlight body, and remove the
rim.
ILLUST. 34
2. Remove the retaining ring by-
removing three screws.
ILLUST. 35
3. Remove the Sealed-Beam unit from
the headlight and disconnect the
three-way connector at the rear.
Hold the three-way connector
firmly when withdrawing the
Sealed-Beam unit to avoid damage
to the wiring.
26
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM


ASSEMBLING HEADLIGHTS
The assembly of a new Sealed-Beam unit is accomplished by reversing the
procedure, AS SHOWN ON PAGE 26,
HEADLIGHT ADJUSTMENT
NOTE: Headlight adjustment must always be made on a level floor and
with the truck empty.
ILLUST. 36
ILLUST. 37
THE LATERAL OR SIDE ADJUSTMENT is accomplished by turning the adjusting
screw as shown in Illust. 36.
THE VERTICAL OR UP-AND-DOWN ADJUSTMENT is accomplished by turning the
adjusting screw as shown in Illust. 37.
HEADLIGHT AIMING
All International dealers and Service Stations Include in their service
tools, equipment scientifically developed for aiming headlight beams. The
use of this equipment will result in maximum illumination for night
driving and assure that the headlight aiming does not conflict with
existing laws and regulations. It is a good practice to avail yourself of
this service when a Sealed-Beam unit has been replaced or the headlight
beam pattern does not give adequate illuminatlon o
PANEL LIGHTS
The two instrument lights, located at the top of the speedometer and
in the centre of the gauge group, are retained in a socket at the end of
their respective wire leads. This socket is held in place by a spring
clip. A slight pressure on the side of the socket will release it and
give easy access to the light bulb. To complete the installation after
the light bulb has been replaced, merely push the socket into the
receptacle until the spring clip snaps into position.
The headlight beam indicator, located at the bottom of the speedometer,
is constructed in the same manner as the instrument lights and is serviced
in a like manner.
27
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM


ILLUST. 39
ILLUST. 38
PARKING LIGHTS
The parking lights, located Just below the headlights, are equipped with
ordinary filament bulbs. Should it become necessary to replace either a
parking light lens or bulb, remove the rim retaining screws as shown,
replace the necessary parts and reassemble.
Carefully observe the condition of all wires and terminals to enjoy
trouble-free operation. Corroded, water soaked, oil soaked and cracked
wire insulation cause most electrical troubles. Loose and dirty terminals
set up high voltages and shorten the life of lights, distributor points
and other electrical units.
CIRCUIT BREAKERS
The headlight (high and low beam) parking light, tail-light, stop light,
and horn circuit are all protected by separate circuit breakers, incorpor-
ated in each circuit. Should a short circuit occur in any of the above-
mentioned circuits, it will cause severe fluctuations of the ammeter. If
a short circuit occurs in any of the light circuits, the lights will go on
and off at short intervals. If the headlights suddenly go out because of
a short, step on the dimmer switch to put the headlights on the other
circuit (either high or low beam), and continue until the vehicle can be
brought to a stop or until repairs can be made. Circuit breakers are
located on the engine side of the cowl dash (left side).
NOTE: GOOD ENGINE PERFORMANCE INVOLVES FIVE MAJOR ENGINE PROCESSES,
NAMELY; CARBURETTION, COMPRESSION, IGNITION, COOLING AND LUBRICATION. OF
THESE, IT MAY SAFELY BE SAID, THE IGNITION IS POTENTIALLY THE MOST FREQUENT
SOURCE OF TROUBLE BECAUSE OF THE MULTIPLICITY OF THE CONNECTIONS, TERMINALS,
SWITCHES, WIRES AND VARIOUS UNITS COMPRISING THE ELECTRICAL SYSTEM. A
SHORT CIRCUIT, OR HIGH RESISTANCE CAUSED BY A LOOSE CONNECTION OR A
DEFECTIVE SWITCH THOUGH NOT DIRECTLY IN THE IGNITION CIRCUIT CAN HAVE A
MARKED EFFECT UPON THE IGNITION PERFORMANCE. THE IMPORTANCE OF USING THE
PROPER TESTING EQUIPMENT IS READILY APPARENT AND THE NECESSITY OF AVOIDING
ALL GUESSWORK IS SELF-EVIDENT.
28
MAINTENANCE
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM


ILLUST. 40 - LOCATION OF ELECTRICAL UNITS
29
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
MAINTENANCE


ILLUST. 41 - WIRING CIRCUIT DIAGRAM
30
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM


BRAKES
ILLUST. 42
HYDROVAC POWER - BRAKE UNIT
The hydrovac power unit makes available to the driver a greater pressure
on the hydraulic brakes than could be exerted by foot pressure alone.
NOTE: Should the vacuum system become inoperative due to the damaged
lines or other accidental causes, the power cylinder piston will return to
the released position and the hydraulic system automatically returns to
the physical operation. Thus the foot pedal pressure would still act to
operate the brakes.
OPERATION
The third series ("C" series) single piston hydrovac is a combined
hydraulic-vacuum power unit, using the engine vacuum and atmospheric
pressure for its operation. It is self-contained, having no external rods
or levers exposed to dirt or moisture.
MANUAL BLEEDING
Manual bleeding requires filling the master cylinder reservoir and
pumping the brake pedal to force the fluid through the lines to expel the
air from the system. CAUTION: This operation must be done when the engine
is shut off and the vacuum released in the power brake system. When the
master cylinder reservoir is filled, open the NO. 1 bleeder valve on the
hydrovac and depress the brake pedal to expel the air. When the pedal has
reached the toe board, close the bleeder valve before returning the pedal
to the release position. Repeat this procedure until solid fluid comes
from the bleeder valve, checking the master cylinder reservoir frequently
to insure an ample supply of fluid. Using this method, bleed the NO. 1
and NO. 2 bleeder valves on the hydrovac and then proceed to the vehicle
wheel cylinders.
LUBRICATION
For service periods and lubrication instructions REFER TO PAGES *+3 and Mf.
HYDROVAC AIR INLET FILTER
On all hydrovac installations, a filter is provided to clean the air
entering the power chamber whenever the brakes are applied. This filter
is located on the inside of the cab below the driver's seat. Inspect the
air cleaner every 1000 miles. If the air passages are restricted, remove
the air cleaner, dismantle and thoroughly clean all the parts in a
cleaning solvent and allow to drip dry. Then saturate the air cleaning
element with a light oil, reassemble and install on the vehicle.
NOTE: On some hydrovac Installations the air inlet line is connected
to the engine air cleanei;. When servicing the air cleaner refer to page 21.
31
MAINTENANCE


VACUUM LINE OIL BATH AIR CLEANER
On trucks having a separate air cleaner for the vacuum line, this unit
is located on the engine side of the cowl at the upper right hand corner.
The vacuum line air cleaner prevents any dirt or foreign matter entering
the engine intake manifold when the brakes are applied. In normal
operation, service the air cleaner every 5000 miles by removing the oil
reservoir, and cleaning thoroughly in a suitable cleaning solution or
kerosene, then refilling with a clean engine oil to the indicated level
on the side of the reservoir. Use the same grade of oil as used in the
engine crankcase.
CAUTION: Be sure that the reservoir sets perfectly against the gasket
and that the clamp is correctly installed after completing the service
operation. Should a leak occur, the performance of the engine and the
hydrovac operation will be seriously affected.
HYDRAULIC BRAKES
International hydraulic brakes are safe, dependable, easily operated
and long lived.
The brakes are the two-shoe, double acting, self-centering type. The
brake shoes are held against the anchors by the retracting springs. This
design makes full use of each brake shoe, resulting in maximum braking
power and greater brake lining life.
The self-centering feature also simplifies adjustment and assures
smooth, straight-line stops when applying pressure to the brake pedal.
ILLUST. 43
The sectional view above is part of a brake and brake drum and shows:-
A. The reinforcing rib which reduces the possibility of drum distortion
and provides for heat dissipation.
B. The self-cleaning dirt slinger which prevents dirt and dust from
entering the brake,
C. Heavy section at back of the drum,
D. Drum mounting flange.
When new brake shoe linings are required, we recommend the use of
"Exchange" replacement shoes in sets assembled with proper lining.
This will assure a satisfactory Job at a cost comparable with that of
relining the shoes.
IMPORTANT: KEEP ALL LUBRICANT AND BRAKE FLUID AWAY FROM THE BRAKE
LINING WHEN WORKING ON THE BRAKE SHOES.
32
MAINTENANCE
BRAKES


ILLUST. 44
INTERNAL VIEW OF
FRONT BRAKES
ILLUST. 45
EXTERNAL VIEW OF
FRONT BRAKES
The above illustrations show the two-shoe, two-single piston wheel
cylinder, self-centering internal expanding brake which is used on the
front wheels.
ILLUST. 46
INTERNAL VIEW OF
REAR BRAKES
ILLUST. 47
EXTERNAL VIEW OF
REAR BRAKES
The above illustrations show the two-shoe, two-double piston wheel
cylinder, self-centering internal expanding brake which is used on the
rear wheels.
33
MAINTENANCE
BRAKES


BRAKE ADJUSTMENT
(To Compensate for Normal Lining Wear).
NOTE; It is impossible to adjust the brakes properly when the backing
plates are loose. Inspect these parts before attempting to adjust the
brakes. It is extremely important that the adjustment instructions be
followed in the given sequence.
Adjust the brakes when the linings have been worn to the extent that the
pedal pad travels to within two inches of the toe board on a hard brake
application. For high speed driving, adjust the brakes when the pedal pad
is within three inches of the toe board on a hard brake application. Check
the master cylinder fluid level before performing the brake adjustment.
Brake drums should be at approximately room temperature when making the
adjustment. If the brakes are adjusted when the drums are hot and expanded,
the shoes may drag when the drums cool and contract.
Perform the following operations at each wheel before proceeding to the
succeeding wheels
1. Jack up the wheel in a safe manner.
2. End play in the wheel bearings must be according to specifications
before attempting the brake adjustment.
3. Check the pedal adjustment to make sure that the pedal pad travels
approximately lA of an inch before the master cylinder link end play
has been taken up and the master cylinder piston starts to move.
k. TO ADJUST THE FRONT WHEEL BRAKES; place a 5/8 inch wrench on the
brake shoe cam adjusting screw and rotate the wrench in the direction
of the forward wheel rotation to decrease the lining to the drum
clearance. Reduce the clearance until the lining drags on the drum.
Move the wrench in the opposite direction, to increase the clearance
until drag is relieved. Then move the wrench slightly further to give
the proper working clearance. This additional movement is approximately
1 - 1-1/2 inch movement through the arc swung by an 8-lnch wrench.
Repeat this operation at the shoe cam adjusting screw to adjust the
second shoe.
Perform the following operations at each rea* wheel;-
ILLUST. 48
5. Be sure the parking brake is in the full release position before
attempting the adjustment of the REAR WHEEL BRAKES.
6. Remove the adjustment slot covers from the backing plate.
7. Insert the special adjusting tool or screwdriver into the adjustment
slot to contact the adjusting screw. Rotate the adjusting screw until
the lining drags on the drum.
8. Back off the adjusting screw two notches. This will provide sufficient
working clearance.
9. Repeat steps 7 and Bon the other braxe shoe at the adjustment slot,
10. Replace the adjustment slot covers.
34
BRAKES


ILLUST. 49
CORRECT FREE TRAVEL OF BRAKE PEDAL
BRAKE PEDAL
When the brake control system is in the release position, the foot brake
pedal must have lA inch free travel before the pressure stroke starts.
This free travel is required to prevent blocking of the bypass port in the
master cylinder. Should the bypass port become blocked, the brakes will
drag due to pressure building up in the system.
HYDRAULIC MASTER CYLINDER
IMPORTANT: When removing the master cylinder filler cap, extreme care
must be used to prevent dirt from entering the master cylinder.
Inspect the master cylinder EVERY 1000 MILES for the correct fluid
level. Maintain fluid at a level 3A inch below the top of the filler
neck. Do not fill the master cylinder to the top of the filler neck.
Always use a high grade "automotive type" brake fluid. The use of other
than genuine "automotive type" fluid or the introduction of mineral base
oil into the system will cause the rubber parts to swell and become
inoperative.
PARKING BRAKE
The parking brake, mounted on the drive shaft at the rear of the
transmission is very simple in design and is built to give long service.
Use the brake only to hold the vehicle in a parked position.
35
MAINTENANCE
BRAKES


BLEEDING BRAKE LINES
Any air inside the hydraulic system must be removed. Whenever a line
has been disconnected at the master cylinder, the entire system must be
bled at all four wheels until all the air is completely expelled. When a
line has been disconnected at any wheel cylinder, both wheel cylinders must
be bled.
Fill the master cylinder with high-grade "automotive-type" brake fluid,
and see that it is kept at least half full during the entire bleeding
operation.
Attach the bleeder hose to the end of the bleeder connection. Allow
the tube to hang in a clean container such as a pint glass jar. Unscrew
the bleeder connection three-quarters of a turn and depress the brake pedal
by hand, allowing the pedal to return slowly.
Pumping the brake pedal forces fluid out into the glass jar and carries
with it any air which might be present in the system. Watch the flow of
fluid from the tube, the end of which must be kept below the surface of
the fluid in the glass jar, and when all the air bubbles cease to appear
or when the stream is a solid fluid mass, close the bleeder connection.
Fluid withdrawn in the "bleeding" operation must not be used again.
Put new fluid in the master cylinder after each cylinder is bled to avoid
air entering the system. If the air is allowed to get into the system,
rebleeding will be necessary.
CLUTCH PEDAL ADJUSTMENT
ILLUST. 50
CORRECT FREE TRAVEL OF CLUTCH PEDAL
CLUTCH PEDAL
Inspect the clutch pedal periodically and adjust whenever free travel
has been reduced beyond the specified limit. The correct free travel of
the clutch pedal should be 1 to 1-1/2 inches when depressed before the
clutch starts to disengage. When adjustment is necessary it is extremely
important that the work be properly dona, otherwise early failure of the
clutch will result and a costly clutch overhaul becomes necessary. To avoid
needless delay and expense, allow only competent and experienced servicemen
to perform these operations. Keep your foot off the clutch pedal except to
shift gears or when the truck is brought to a stop.
BRAKES


PROPELLER SHAFTS AND UNIVERSAL JOINTS
ILLUST. 51
ILLUST. 52
The propeller shaft can be disconnected at the front end by removing the
four cap screws from the mounting flange. The four trunnion bearings are
locked in place by the snap rings AS SHOWN IN ILLUST. 51. The grease nipple
permits lubrication of the universal joint without disassembly.
The propeller shaft is mounted to the companion flange at the
differential by means of two U-bolts AS SHOWN IN ILLUST. 52. If it becomes
necessary to remove the propeller shaft to perform other service operations,
be sure that the trunnions are reassembled on the same journals from which
they were originally removed.
IMPORTANT: When reassembling the complete propeller shaft, be sure that
the splined stub enters the slip yoke so as to bring the trunnions of the
yoke on the rear end of the shaft parallel with the trunnions on the slip
yoke on the front joint. Alignment marks found on the stub shaft and slip
yoke will assure correct assembly. See Illust. 53.
ILLUST. 53
37
MAINTENANCE


ILLUST. 54
PROPELLER SHAFT CENTRE BEARING
The self-aligning propeller shaft centre bearing permits the use of short
propeller shaft sections. This avoids "whip" and assures accurate shaft
alignment under all conditions.
There are two rows of TAPERED ROLLER BEARINGS. They are effectively
protected from dirt by felt seals and by a slinger arrangement.
The flexibility of the mounting protects the bearing from all
misaligning forces caused by unevenness of the road and results in the
lowest possible bearing resistance, a minimum loss of power, and a distinct
reduction in the transmission of drive-line noises. The fixed relation of
bearing and the bearing housing keeps the seals functioning properly at all
times.
The bearing housing also has specially designed grooves to distribute
the lubricant effectively over the entire area of the bearing. These
grooves are shaped so that they overcome the natural tendency of the
lubricant to circulate in one direction—away from the lubricant supply.
This helps prevent the lubricant from being forced out of the bearing
housing and keeps it in the bearing.
AXLES, WHEELS AND BEARINGS
FRONT AXLE
Steering knuckle thrust bearings are located between the knuckles and
the lower faces of the front axle I-beam support the entire front-end load.
Draw keys hold the king pins rigidly in the ends of the I-beams.
Inspect the draw keys occasionally to see that they are tight. Loose
draw keys will cause needless wear at the king pin and axle I-beam, King
pins and bushings in sets are available at all International Service
Stations or authorized dealers. Adjustable stop screws in the steering
knuckles limit the movement of the front wheels when turning, thus
preventing the tyres from rubbing against the nearest point on the chassis.
Adjust these screws when the tyres rub or when the tyre size is changed.
FRONT WHEEL ALIGNMENT
To guard against excessive tyre wear, have the front wheel alignment
inspected occasionally for toe-in, camber and axle caster by a qualified
service station.
38
PROPELLER SHAFT CENTRE BEARINGS


TOE-1 N
Front wheel toe-in is necessary to assure that the front wheels will run
parallel to each other when the vehicle is in motion and under a load.
CAMBER
The purpose of the front wheel camber, is to distribute the load more
evenly between the inner and outer wheel bearings and to offset the wear
and deflection of the front axle parts.
CASTER
The axle caster (or backward tilt at the top of king pin) provides
steering stability to aid in holding the front wheels in a straight
position, and to assist in bringing the wheels out of a turn or curve.
The caster further helps to control front wheel shimmy by counteracting
vibration and the gyroscopic motion of the front wheels.
From the foregoing, the inter-relation of the steering adjustment
becomes self-evident. When irregular tyre wear, hard steering, or damage
from impact with some obstruction, indicates corrective measures are
needed, Insist on a thorough and complete alignment checkup. It is
recommended to check the front wheel alignment periodically based on type
of service and mileage.
FRONT WHEEL BEARINGS
Never allow the bearings to have either a loose or a tight adjustment.
The rollers and races must be in proper contact to avoid bearing trouble.
TO ADJUST THE FRONT WHEEL BEARINGS, PROCEED AS FOLLOWS;-
See that the truck is on level ground and the hand brake lever is pulled
all the way back. Jack up the front end and be positive it is securely
supported or blocked up. Then remove the hub cap and grease cap and pull
out the cotter pin. Now tighten the bearing adjustment nut ? using an
8-inch wrench with steady pressure until the wheel binds slightly, rotating
the wheel at the same time. Then back off the nut to the first castellation
from the cotter pin hole and install a new cotter pin. BE SURE TO FASTEN
THE COTTER PIN SECURELY.
REAR AXLE
Whenever it becomes necessary to replace the bevel drive gears and
pinions, we suggest obtaining a matched or mated set,
REAR WHEEL BEARINGS
Tapered roller bearings are used in the rear wheels. Never allow these
bearings to have either a loose or a tight adjustment. The rollers and
races must be in proper contact to avoid bearing trouble.
Rear wheel bearings should be adjusted by INTERNATIONAL SERVICE STATIONS
OR AUTHORIZED DEALERS.
WHEEL RIMS AND NUTS
Inspect wheel stud nuts and rim clamp nuts at regular intervals to see
that they are tight. Inspect the rim and tyre alignment, in relation to
the wheel, to be sure that the tyre is running true. DO NOT use excessive
leverage on the wrench when tightening the nuts.
AXLES, WHEELS AND BEARINGS


STEERING GEAR, AND SPRINGS
ILLUST. 55
STEERING GEAR
This truck has a semi-reversible cam and twin-lever steering gear.
The twin-lever construction is shown above.
Both studs of the twin-lever gear engage the cam for normal straight-
ahead driving. As the steering action moves away from the normal driving
position into the parking range, one of the studs disengages the cam.
The effective leverage of this single stud increases so rapidly, however,
that in full parking position the leverage is I+s per cent greater than
with a single-lever type of steering gear. This is due largely to the
fact that because of the twin levers the steering arm is shorter and
therefore has a full 100 degrees of travel compared to 76 degrees in a
single-lever unit.
Actually, the driver has at his disposal a dual-ratio gear which
automatically changes from one ratio to another to suit the requirements
of steering stability at high speeds and easy wheel turn for sharp turns
in parking.
A valuable safety factor is a lessening of the tendency to over-steer
on curves and when passing other vehicles at high speed. _
Always keep the steering gear and steering mechanism in good condition
and proper adjustment. Adjustments are provided to compensate for wear at
the worm bearings and at the lever arm and all related parts. Neglect of
the steering gear has contributed to many accidents. Steering gear
adjustments must be made in correct sequence. It is therefore advisable
to have adjustments made only by a skilled mechanic with the proper
equipment and knowledge of the correct procedure. Hard steering or
excessive wheel play usually indicates the need for attention. Do not
fail to keep the steering gear housing filled with gear oil.
CHASSIS SPRINGS
The springs are semi-elliptic type mounted on the front axle I-beam
and rear axle housing with "D" bolts. On both front and rear springs the
front end of the spring is pivoted while the rear is shackled. Spring
breakage can be materially reduced by proper loading and keeping the
spring "U" bolts and clips tight. Examine the spring "U" bolts and rebound
clips and PERIODICALLY tighten the nuts.
40


LUBRICATION
41


LUBRICATION CHART
ILLUST. 56
LUBRICATION PERIODS PROVIDE AN EXCELLENT OPPORTUNITY TO INSPECT AND
CHECK FOR MAINTENANCE SERVICE THAT MAY BE NEEDED. EARLY ATTENTION
TO MINOR SERVICE NEEDS AT THIS INSPECTION WILL USUALLY PREVENT
SERIOUS BREAKDOWN LATER.
42


DAILY
1. Keep the crankcase filled to the correct level with a high grade
engine oil. Changing the oil regularly will remove the dirt which has
accumulated. Cold weather operation requires frequent oil changes due
to the dilution which is caused by the increased usage of the choke
and condensation moisture. Use SAE-20 oil at temperatures 32 deg. F.
and below; SAE-30 oil at temperatures 32 deg. F. to 90 deg. Fj SAB-LO
oil at temperatures 90 deg. F, and up,
PERIODICALLY
2. OIL FILTER; Change the element when the oil becomes discoloured.
Remove the oil filter cover and element, then clean the inside of the
oil filter and Install the new element. After operating the engine a
few minutes, check the oil filter for leaks.
3. OIL FILLER; Remove the filler cap, clean the element, dip in engine
oil, drain and replace.
L. MASTER CYLINDER; Check the hydraulic master cylinder fluid level.
Fill to 3/L inch from top,
5. AIR FILTER; Remove the oil reservoir and dispose of the dirty oil.
Clean the filter. Refill to the oil level mark with clean engine oil
of the same grade used in the crankcase.
6. WATER PUMP; Lubricated when assembled at the factory; further
lubrication is not necessary.
EVERY 500 TO 1000 MILES
7. STEERING KNUCKLES, CLUTCH RELEASE FORK SHAFT AND CENTRE BEARING; Do
not lubricate excessively. It may cause failure of other functioning
parts such as the brake lining and the clutch facings.
8. PARKING HAND BRAKE; Lubricate linkage clevis pins, pivot pins and
sliding surfaces with engine oil,
9. DRAG LINK, TIE ROD ENDS, CLUTCH AND BRAKE PEDAIB, SPRING PINS; When
lubricating force the lubricant into the fitting until the old
lubricant, dirt and water are expelled. Use a viscous chassis
lubricant or SAE-ILO gear oil.
10. GENERATOR, STARTING MOTOR: Place ten to twenty drops of light engine
oil in each oil cup. Do not overlubrlcate,
11. DISTRIBUTOR; Apply one drop of light oil to the movable contact arm
pivot pin. Remove the rotor and apply two or three drops of light
engine oil on the felt wick. Apply a light coat of vaseline to the
distributor cam and contact arm fibre rubbing block. NOTE; Lubricate
distributor shaft at overhaul or at 25,000 mile intervals. Use SAE-20
engine oil. Use sealing compound when replacing lubricant plug.
12. DIFFERENTIAL (HYPOID), TRANSMISSION; Use SAB-90 EP oil at
temperatures 32 deg. F. and below: SAE-ILO EP oil at temperatures
32 deg. F, and above. See page M+ for transmission capacities.
STEERING GEARS; Use SAE-ILo EP oil. 16 ozs.
ALL UNITS; Inspect the lubricant level every 1,000 miles. Keep
filled to the filler plug level. Drain and flush twice yearly or
every 10,000 miles. Keep the breather fittings clean.
13. CARBURETTOR LINKAGE, DOOR HINGE, DOOR LATCH; Lubricate linkage clevis
pins, pivot pins and sliding surfaces with engine oil. Apply suitable
lubricant to door latches.
43
LUBRICATION


EVERY 3000 TO 5000 MILES
l*f, PROPELLER SHAFT SLIP JOINT; Remove the plug and Install a pressure-
gun fitting. Force a small amount of lubricant into the joint.
IMPORTANT; Too much pressure will damage the oil seal and retainer.
Remove the fitting and replace the plug.
EVERY 10 000 MILES
15. FRONT AND REAR WHEEL BEARINGS; Remove the wheels, clean and inspect
the bearings, races and wheel hubs. Then repack the bearings, replace
the wheels and adjust the bearings. Use a short fibre wheel bearing
grease.
EVERY 15 000 TO 20 000 MILES
16. HYDROVAC LUBRICATION; The hydrovac power brake unit is lubricated
when the installation is made and should be lubricated again every
20,000 miles or once a year thereafter (preferable before the cold
weather sets in). When lubricating remove the pipe plug (located in
the air inlet end of the cylinder) and add the oil up to the point
where it begins to run out of the plug opening. Use a vacuum
cylinder oil.
17. PROPELLER SHAFT UNIVERSAL JOINTS; Remove the plugs, insert a
pressure-gun fitting and fill (under low pressure). Use SAE-ILo GEAR
OIL. Remove the fitting and replace the plug.
18. WINDOW REGULATOR; Remove the door panel and lubricate the regulator
slide. Use a viscous chassis lubricant.
UNIT REFILL CAPACITIES
(IMPERIAL
MEASURE)
Engine Oil ||||||||||| lf|||l||||l 6 Quarts
With Oil Filter Change ..... /fffj 7 Quarts
TRANSMISSION I ||| 111 f 7 Pints
Single Reduction Illill II II 111 111 7 Pints
Two-Speed Illllllll(|||||(||||| ||||||)||(| 11 Pints
COOLING SYSTEM 3 1508 00371146 7 15 Quarts
FUEL TANK 17-1/2 Gallons
CARBURETTOR AIR FILTER 16-oz,
44


PRECAUTIONARY INSTRUCTIONS
STORING A TRUCK
When a truck is not to be used for a period o’f time, place it in a dry
and protected place and observe the following procedure:-
1. Wash the truck and completely lubricate the chassis (refer to
lubrication chart).
2. Drain the engine oil and flush with flushing oil. Refill with new
oil. Run the engine until the oil is thoroughly circulated.
3. CAUTION: Drain the fuel tank, fuel lines, fuel pump and carburettor
fuel bowl. Run the engine until carburettor is dry. Remove
carburettor fuel bowl and drain. If petrol is allowed to remain in
the fuel system a gummy substance will form in the carburettor Jets
and passages, causing serious trouble. Be sure to drain system
thoroughly. The gum deposits can be dissolved with a mixture of
1 part alcohol and 1 part benzol, or with acetone,
if. Remove the storage battery and put in a dry place.
5. Drain and flush the radiator and cooling system. BE SURE all drain
cocks are open.
6. After the engine has become cold, remove the spark plugs and pour a
small quantity of SAE-k) engine oil in each cylinder through the plug
holes. Then turn the engine over by hand a few times to thoroughly
distribute the heavy oil over the plstohs and cylinder walls,
BE SURE to replace spark plugs. Remove valve cover and flush the
valves, rocker arms and push rods with SAE- engine oil. Replace
valve cover.
7. Clean the air cleaner and refill to indicated level with new oil.
8. Block up the truck so that the weight is off the tyres.
SERVICING A TRUCK AFTER STORING
When a truck is returned to service follow the following procedure;-
1. Close drain, cocks and fill cooling system with clean water. Inspect
all hose and water pump connections for water leaks.
2. Fill the fuel tank and examine the condition of the fuel filter glass
bowl gasket. The gasket must form a good seal, otherwise the pump
will not supply fuel to the carburettor.
3. Test and install the storage battery. IMPORTANT; Before starting
the engine, see "generator Polarity" instructions shown on page 23,
*f. Examine the oil level in the air cleaner and refill if necessary.
5. Examine the oil level in engine. Remove the spark plugs and pour a
small quantity of light engine oil in each cylinder through spark
plug holes. Turn engine over by hand a few times and then replace
spark plugs. Remove valve cover and flush the valves, rocker arms
and push rods with SAE-*K) engine oil. Replace valve cover,
6. Inspect the oil level in the transmission, in the rear axle and in
any auxiliary unit.
7. Inspect the air pressure in all tyres and be sure to replace the
valve caps,
SHORT-PERIOD STORAGE
Because of the tendency toward accelerated gum formation in petrol
obtainable under present conditions, if this vehicle is to be stored or
remain inactive for a short period, prepare the fuel system of this
vehicle as follows as a preventive against gum formation:
1. Completely drain the fuel tank.
2. Run the engine until all fuel is consumed in the carburettor.
3. Remove the plug from the carburettor, under the main jet assembly, to
complete the draining.
Empty the sediment bowl at the fuel pump. •


PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA
1 027 110 R 2 23-10-51
