

OYSTER CULTURE.
A COMPILATION OF FACTS,
J. E. CALDER.
Caamania:
JAMES BARNARD, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, HOBART TOWN.
1868.






Yj
J
pumiiyQzp T






OYSTER CULTURE.
The frequent failures of the oyster beds of the south and
south-east coasts of this Colony during the last quarter
of a century or more has caused no little disappointment
throughout those quarters of Tasmania where there is
any traffic in this shell-fish, and, of course, proportionate
disaster has as frequently overtaken those engaged in the
trade ; and believing that if these inconvenient and some-
times prolonged, interruptions of traffic could be checked,
this branch of industry might be made a very profitable
one, both in home and foreign operations, I think that
p-ood may come from enquiring into the means by which
this may be done, so that more advantage may be derived
from our fisheries than we gain from them at present:
and with this view it is that I have written this pamphlet,
though with less expectation of doing much myself toward
the achievement of success as of starting a legitimate and
useful enquiry, in the humble hope that others may take
it up, not only for the advantage of this branch of trade,
but for the preservation from serious damage of the
natural beds of the Colony.
When, in 1866, I was a visitor to those places from
whence our chief supplies were then derived, namely,
Southport and Recherche Bay, —I took the opportunity of
enquiring of the resident oystermen there into the causes
of the decadence at irregular intervals of the oyster-beds.
The results of my enquiries, imperfect as they were (being
greatly interrupted by long spells of illness), I communi-
cated in a letter to the Government, under date of sth
August, 1867, of which I shall introduce some extracts
into this paper.
Imperfect and fragmentary as the information I con-
trived to collect necessarily was, it nevertheless gave me


a fair insight into the manner in which our beds are
worked, which is sufficiently defective to be very injurious
to them. This information was, however, limited to the
statement that the deterioration of the beds arose solely
from the manner in which the fish were wilfully wasted
(so to speak) by the fishermen themselves, along with,
of course, a good deal of intelligence about the produc-
tiveness of the beds and the profits of oyster-fishing, &c.;
and though, no doubt, this wastefulness of oyster life is
carried on to a most pernicious extent here, I have since
learned from other sources, —namely, recent English publi-
cations on this subject, which has been so greatly studied
of late years, —that though very great damage may be done
to the beds by over-working them, even where there is no
such wastefulness as here, there are ever at work on the
oyster-beds unseen, and until lately unsuspected, enemies,
both living and inanimate, that are more damaging of
them than even such fishermen as ours are.
The slight investigation that I undertook naturally pro-
duced a desire for further information; and a little reading
soon convinced me that my informants were themselves
possessed of only a limited knowledge of Ostreoculture,
as everything relating to the fishing, but more particularly
to the preservation of the oyster-beds from injury, is now
called. And it appears from what I can learn that the
uncultivated beds of Europe, like our own, are subject
to occasional great impoverishment, either from over-
working or from physical causes and living enemies that
are even more destructive than man, and which it is the
business of Ostreoculture either to counteract or destroy.
The following extracts from the letter above referred to
will show the manner in which the oyster-beds of Tasmania
are treated during the working season, which it will be
presently seen extends over eight months. During the
remaining four the fish are neither touched nor cared for,
but are left, when the fishermen have done with them,
to be devoured by submarine foes, more countless than
themselves, which I shall hereafter show, by quoting from
the highest authorities, destroy them, not always partially
but often literally en masse :


“ During a visit that I made to Southport (the principal place
of oyster supply at present) near the close of last year (1866), I
made it a part of my business to enquire into the working of the
beds there, having accidentally heard that they were suffering much
damage from the careless manner in force of taking the fish from
their beds; and beg now to trouble you with the result of my
investigation, that yourself and colleagues may, if you think fit,
take such steps as are best to repress the mischievous irregularities
going on there every season, whereby the beds must before long be
so injured as to render them valueless for years to come. * * *
•'‘The oyster season commences on the Ist of April of every
year, and lasts for seven months, that is to the last day of October ;
but as the fishermen are allowed to begin collecting a month earlier
than the Ist of April*, the season practically extends over eight
months.
“ The number of boats in the trade at Southport is nine or ten,
of which about half belong to personsf who own temporarily water-
reserves there that have been allotted them by the Government
whereupon to establish new beds from the young and unsaleable
oysters they capture unavoidably. The remaining boats are owned
by strangers to the place (all of Hobart Town, and all licensed
fishermen) but who possess no reserves for the cultivation of the
oyster, and who have therefore little interest in preserving the young
fish, the destruction of which is, I arn assured, so considerable as to
amount to one-third of a million every season in Southport alone.
o The damage which the natural beds sustain is done wholly by
stranger fishermen from Hobart Town, owning about five boats, and
not by those possessing the water reserves above alluded to, w'ho
replace in the sea, and in a proper manner, such of the ojsters as
they take that are too small for the market. The average daily
take of saleable oysters by each boat is about five hundred}:, along
with about three times this number of small unsaleable ones, the
latter being unavoidably dredged up along with the others. Of these
small oysters at least one-half, or seven hundred and fifty per boat,
are utterly destroyed every day from the practice which prevails
amongst those who possess no reserves of sorting their oysters
ashore, or (if below high water) over improper ground, such as
certain sandy shallows that at neap tides are often wholly dry for
long periods. These boats do not, as a general thing, work more
than ninety days of each season ; and if my information be correct,
*So at least say the fishermen, but I can find no authority for the
practice.
t There are four of these persons, namely, Messrs. James Elliott and John
Hazlewood, both residing at the Port, and Whitehouse and Joseph Bar-
nett, who do not.
t As many as three thousand a day are sometimes taken, but it happens
quite as often that a boat gets almost nothing.


that each boat destroys seven hundred and fifty fish a day it
follows that the annual loss sustained by the beds is very nearly
three hundred and forty thousand, the value of which would be
in about a couple of years hence several hundreds of pounds:
for it appears that these small oysters reach a marketable growth
m one or two years, that is, according to the size they had
attained when returned to the sea. Their wholesale value, when
of marketable size, is thirty shillings a thousand if sold at Southport,
and forty shillings if conveyed to Hobart Town*, —so that the loss
incurred by the wanton waste of a few reckless men is about £5OO
or £6OO a year, and this is ultimately raised to about £lOOO if
calculated by the retail price charged in Hobart Town, namely,
about fifty-five shillings a thousand.
“ The oystering business seems to be anything but an unprofitable
one. Mr. Elliott’s two boats, one being employed at Southport and
the other at Recherche Bay, sent one hundred and sixty-four
thousand oysters f to. Town in the season of 1866, working one
hundred and eighty days. Of these, eighty-four thousand°came
irom Recherche Bay. The season was, however, considered a
favourable one. The beds of Recherche were worked in 1866 for
the first time for many years,—their existence being in fact all but
forgotten. Directly, however, that it became known that new beds
had been found, they were invaded by no less than eleven new
boats from Hobart Town, whose waste probably raised the total
loss to a million for a single season, which waste would soon have
been worth, by retail, about three thousand pounds: and it is hard
to believe, considering the carelessness of the class of persons
employed in this trade, and who have no interest in any particular
bed, that the same waste is not going on at every place that contri-
butes to the oyster supply of the Colony.”
Taking the number of boats employed at Southport and
.Recherche Bay in 1866 (namely, five working the whole
season and fifteen half of it) as twelve boats, and reckon-
ing their take to be the same as Elliott’s, namely, eighty
two thousand each, then the total supplies that reached
Hobart Town from these two bays only in that year was
just about one million; and as half a million more
probably reached it from other quarters, the total supply
may have been a million and a half: but from the facility
that these shell-fish are disposed of by the fishermen to
fV. T r e D S °!! thl l 0rt T J fishin l g gr ° Und is about fifty miles from Hobart Town •
that of Recherche Bay about ten more.
of f° m £ , 2 ,° 0 t 0 £3O0 ’ and bein S the work of only two-thirds
heforoTho l n at IS h add ( ng . on bunda ys and the month allowed to collect
before the selling time begins to the number of days stated above.)


the Town vendors at good high prices, there is no difficulty
in believing that another million might be got rid of if
they could be obtained, and which before they reached the
consumer would be worth, at fifty-five shillings a thousand,
five thousand five hundred pounds.
If oyster-farming were practised here in anything like
the careful manner in which it is followed in either
England, France, or Italy (where it is by far the most
profitable of all industries), there might, I believe, be no
limit to our supplies. Then, most probably, another million
might be got rid of in Hobart Town for country consump-
tion ; for at present almost the entire catch is consumed
in and around Hobart Town amongst about twenty-six
thousand persons*, or very slightly more than a fourth
of our population.
If oysters could be more plentifully supplied to us than
they are at present, —and it will be soon seen that com-
bined industry and care might quickly make that supply
illimitable,—the demand would probably not be so ex-
clusively confined to Hobart Town as it is at present.
It is, indeed, irrational to suppose so. There are quick
conveyances to every town in the Colony that contains
five hundred inhabitants or even less; so that whatever
demand sprung up in the country it might be supplied
without difficulty. And as already some persons in Laun-
ceston are bestirring themselves to plant oyster farms on
the shallows of the Tamar, every considerable town in
the North might be easily supplied in a few years; so
that ere long not less than four or five millions would be
the possible yearly consumption of the Colony, which,
if sold at present rates, would be worth ten or twelve
thousand pounds.
The present export trade in oysters, hardly worth five
hundred pounds a year, might, I should hope, be largely
* When the census of April, 1861, was taken there were residing in Hobart
Town 19,449 persons; but as the population of the Golony has increased
one-ninth since then, it is probable that it now contains about 21 600 and
as four or five thousand more live within three or four miles of the City
boundaries, the Town and Suburban population must be about 26,000.


increased; for the oyster trade, all the world over, seems
to be one that has so peculiar a tendency to enlargement
that it is practically only limited by the supply. This
outward trade, such as it is at present, is almost wholly
done with Melbourne.
But whether we can increase this export trade (which
seems very probable) or not, it is quite necessary that we
should preserve from the deterioration they so often suffer
from, those beds that now supply us with this very
favourite article of diet. It seems also equally necessary
that a few new beds should be formed in some of the
river estuaries of the North, —such, for instance, as on the
shoals of the Tamar and elsewhere along that coast, —for
the supply of Launceston and those inland towns that lie
along the chief thoroughfares of the North, several of
which contain considerable populations*, presuming, of
course, that those shallows are suitable for the growth
of the oyster.
The Colonists of the North, whose coasts I think are
nearly oysterlessf, will doubtless remember, should any
*ln 1862, Garrick contained 423 inhabitants; Westbury, 1354; Delo-
raine, 800; Evandale, 484; Longford, 893; Perth, 428 ; Campbell Town,
750 ; Stanley (N.W. Coast), 445; Ross, 356 ; Launceston, in 1868, 11,100.
In Southern towns in 1862, Bellerive contained 252 inhabitants; Bolhwell,
539; Franklin, 675; Hamilton, 356; Kempton, 250; Kingston, 282; New
Norfolk, 901; New Town, 2015; Oatlands, 718; Richmond, 503; Sorell,
254; Swansea (East Coast), 220; Hobart Town (1868), 21,600.
t Since this was written I have received a letter from Malcolm L. Smith,
Esquire, on the present oysterless condition of the Tamar. This gentleman
is engaged in relaying the old beds with oysters. With his permission I
here introduce so much of his letter as relates to this subject; the excluded
portion being strictly official, relating only to an application for old oyster
ground. He writes as follows:
“ George Town, 25 th May, 1868.
“Sir ************
“ I regret to say I am informed by the fishermen here that no oysters
young or old are now to be found in the Tamar, so complete is the de-
struction of the natural beds. Consequently, the oyster farmer must depend
on getting his seed or materials to commence with elsewhere.
“ I have the honor, &c.,
MALCOLM L. SMITH.”
“ J, E Calder, Esquire, Surveyor-General


considerable trade with the Australian Colonies spring
up, that their geographical position gives them peculiar
advantages.
It has been truly said by a recent writer, “ that of all
molluscous animals the oyster is commercially the most
important;” and by another, that its culture “gives a
larger profit than any other branch of industry* : ” which,
judging from the wonderful accounts that reach us of the
results' 5 of oyster culture in England and France, are
facts that admit of no sort of doubt. Indeed, Bertram
illustrates his statement by referring to the success of the
small oyster parks (about thirty yards by twenty only)
of the French fishermen of the He de Re, whose construc-
tion, he says, cost about twelve pounds each of English
money, and which frequently return a thousand per cent,
(page 356). Some, he says, have been so successful as to
have sold one hundred pounds worth of brood oysters
alone, (that is, very small oysters, having a diameter vary-
ing from half an inch to an inch and a half), without
trenching on their stock of oysters fit for the table.
In the oyster business of both England and France far
more seems to be done with private farms than with the
public beds, which former are, of course, the exclusive
properties of individuals or of companies ; and the labour
they bestow on these beds that belong to themselves is
quite wonderful, and the money expended in labour in
attending to them is commensurate with the magnitude
of their sales, which are sometimes enormous. The
Whitstable and Faversham private companies spend in
labour annually about one hundred and sixty thousand
pounds, the value of their yearly sales reaching about
two hundred thousand pounds. These fisheries employ
an army of dredgers and other working hands numbering
three thousand persons. But the large outlay spoken of
above must include the cost of brood oysters, of which
very extensive purchases are made, to replace sales,
amounting for the Whitstable fisheries alone to about
£30,000 a year, and which it seems they do not breed
* “ Harvest of the Sea,” by James G. Bertram.


themselves in sufficient quantities to replace the loss oc-
casioned by their enormous sales, as the “spat” or
spawning of their own oysters is mostly carried away
from their grounds by currents, and deposited on ground
that does not belong to them; for it does not seem to be
the practice here to intercept the escape of spat or spawn,
which is so easily and cheaply done in the parks of Italy
and France, and they have, therefore, to disburse very
large sums to replace their losses of spawn. The Whit-
stable beds are of large proportions, and, as they lie
within the estuary of the Thames, they have close at
hand the immense market of London, that absorbs about
eight hundred millions oysters a year, to take off their
surplus stock.
Some of the Whitstable companies are said to be very
perfect organisations. The Whitstable Free Dredgers
Company is a model of management of its kind. Its
business is conducted by what is styled a “Jury” of
twelve. No one can enter it as a shareholder who was
not born in it, so to speak. When a shareholder dies
his interest in the fishery dies also, but if he were married
the company charges itself with the maintenance of his
family by pensioning his wife. It maintains a very
considerable fleet of boats, and gives employment to
numerous labourers. Bertram refers to it as “ a concern
of £70,000 a year or thereabout.”
I have before said that in the management of the
Whitstable beds about three thousand persons find em-
ployment, which is said to be of a very remunerative
nature. Their duties are to collect oysters for the market
during the season, to lay down new brood wherever the
giound is deficient of stock, and so completely to overhaul
the entire beds and examine the oysters every season that
hardly one of all the vast numbers that constitute the
Whitstable stock escapes inspection. About eight men
are employed to every acre (so I read at least),—but as
the Whitstable beds cover twenty-seven square miles, or
about seventeen thousand acres, of course eight men
cannot be constantly employed on any one acre; but,
probably, the whole of this large area is not oyster-


bearing ground. Every year the whole is gone over with
the dredge, and thus turned up in much the same manner
that the surface of a field is with the plough. By these
operations the beds are cleared of weeds and “ slub ” that
are said to be very destructive of the oyster. During
these never-ceasing operations all oyster enemies that are
taken by the dredgers, which are very numerous indeed,
are killed as fast as caught.
By these dredgings almost all the oysters are neces-
sarily brought to the surface during the season, scarcely
one, it is thought, escaping inspection. Dead oysters are
then carefully removed and double ones separated, and
such as are not required for the market or for “ trans-
planting” to other parts of the bed are returned to the
sea again; and as, after these removals, they necessarily
fall on the top of the recently stirred surface, they are
less liable to suffocation from submarine depositions that
are always falling on the beds than if they were never
removed, as is the case with our own beds, where, with
rare exceptions, none are dredged up except for market,
or to be wantonly destroyed by hundreds of thousands in
the manner already detailed.
I have said in an early part of this paper that the
oyster has many enemies besides man, and that some of
them are even more destructive than himself; and it may
surprise those who may not have read much about the
oyster to learn that its worst, most constant, and active
foes are to be found amongst creatures which to the
generality of us appear to be the most inoffensive of
living things; namely, the sea urchin, (or sea-egg), the
whelk, and above all the seemingly half-lifeless but most
voracious star-fish. The last-named animal lives, perhaps
exclusively, on the oyster, and instances are given of its
having so perfectly destroyed entire beds in a single
season, that not a solitary oyster, large or small, has been
left for the dredger.
Mr. F. Buckland, writing on this subject, says;—“ The
arch enemy of the poor harmless innocent oyster is the
‘five-finger,’ in ordinary language the ‘star-fish,’ this


creature which we pick up so frequently on the sea-shore,
and which looks so excessively stupid and harmless that
it is difficult to imagine that it is such a dire enemy to
the oyster proprietor. Five-fingers have a power of
locomotion, and they will come suddenly from no one
knows where, and settling down upon the oyster beds
devour them all, save the shells * * * #
I know at this moment (May 5, 1866) where an oyster
bed is situated on the north side of the Thames, and
when the happy owner goes to look at his property he
will find nothing but tons of five-fingers and ‘ clocks,’ or
empty oyster-shells, but no oysters for the market.”
The process whereby the mouthless star-fish destroys
its prey is curious enough. It is thus described by the
author of a work called “The Aquarian Naturalist:”
“ Its mode of proceeding is as follows; grasping its shell-
clad prey between its rays, and firmly fixing it by means
of its prehensile suckers, it proceeds deliberately to turn
its stomach inside out, embracing in its ample folds the
helpless bivalve, and perhaps at the same time instilling
some torpifying fluid, for the shells of the poor victim
seized soon open, and it then becomes an easy prey.”
The whelk, or dog-whelk, is also most destructive of
the oyster, which it kills by perforating its shell, Nature
having given it a proper apparatus for this purpose.
Some companies give a shilling a bucketful for all that
are brought them.
The sea urchin, or sea-egg, so often met with on our
coasts, is also a reputed oyster killer.
The above enemies, and also all mussels that are found
amongst the oysters, are destroyed wherever found; and
though the mussel is not an oyster consumer, it destroys
the fish by suffocating it.
Moving sand and mud also destroy the oysters whole-
sale, the first by wounding them when it gets between
their shells, and the latter, which accumulates over them
by imperceptible degrees, by suffocating them. Hence


the necessity for lifting the stock occasionally, and of
relaying it again. An example of this destruction from
suffocation occurred lately in the Derwent in the case of
a bed, about six miles north west of Hobart Town, which
was laid down by the Honorable Mr. Lowes of Glen-
arch y a very few years ago, and though it was produc-
tive enough at first, it is now nearly extinguished by mud
deposits having settled down upon it, dead shells only
being now found, and those a few inches under the mud.
A professional fisherman at home would have averted
this disaster by lifting and relaying his oysters occasionally
before the accumulation of river silt had covered them
too thickly to damage them.
But in some other bays of the Derwent nearer Hobart
Town than this artificial bed is, and on the same side
of the river, the beds are quite intact at this moment,
affording plenty of good oysters. From information now
before me, these beds, though numerous, are only extensive
in the aggregate.
The remarks in the last paragraph apply to the south-
west shores of the Derwent between Cornelian Bay, about
a mile and a half hence, and Mr. Brent’s land, or say
eight miles higher up the river.
It is quite worthy of remark that while all the beds in
the bays just above referred to are presently so fruitful,
those nearly opposite them in the bays of the north-eastern
side have suffered great deterioration in the past few
months. In Bellerive, Smelting Works, and Lindisfern
Bays plenty of good oysters were to be had last season
where hardly one is to be got at this moment (end
of May, 1868). My informant, Mr. Morrison of the
Survey Office, who resides in Bellerive Village, tells me
that such as are caught now are nearly all “ open-mouthed,
that is dead. His remarks, which were drawn from his
own observation, applied at first more particularly to the
two first-named bays ; but having reason to believe that
they held good in respect of beds lying northerly, he
caused the Lindisfern Bay to be thoroughly dredged
(26th May, 1868). The operation was continued without


intermission for about six hours, in all which time only
twenty-six oysters were caught. The men he employed
reported that they only brought up one living fish occasion-
ally, and that only after drawing the dredge several hundred
yards, though in one instance five were taken at once.
They brought up no end of empty and half-empty shells,
many of which were so recently dead that small fish were
found within, devouring (it may be believed) the still
unconsumed flesh: so it would appear that the work
of destruction is now actively going on. They caught
only one star-fish, but found mussels in plenty along with
the oysters.
From the above facts it may not be unreasonable to
suppose that the silt of the Derwent has lately drifted on
to its north-eastern bank only, perhaps influenced by the
tremendous gales of the last twelve months; but, whether
or not, the catastrophe is limited, and seemingly confined
to one side of the river only.
It is by care and constant attention persisted in during
the entire year that the private beds of England are
preserved from decay ; and though, notwithstanding all
this industry, they still suffer heavy losses from the ravages
of enemies that I have spoken of above, and from the
flowing away of spat, and something also from mud and
sand, yet they do not suffer impoverishment in anything
like the same degree that our own do, —which arises from
culpable inattention, backed by much injury that is
wantonly done them.
But the care and labour bestowed on the private
oyster-farms of England are not nearly so great as those
that are devoted to the oyster-parks of the French, even
though oyster-culture is quite a new study and industry in
France ; or, at least, oyster-farming was not practised
there as it now is earlier than 1858, and only in a limited
degree then,—for it is not more than about six or seven
years since that it began to expand itself into respectable
dimensions. It was then (1858) that two persons in very
different stations of life, and most certainly not acting in
concert, simultaneously devoted themselves to the study


of the oyster, with the view of establishing new fisheries
to replace the ancient oyster-beds of France, which were
utterly ruined by long neglect and over-working, very
much like our own are, only in a greater degree. Ihe
one was a man of note, acting with the Government
of France, and under the auspices and patronage of the
Emperor, namely, M. Coste ; the other, a poor obscure
artisan (a stonemason), who no one knew anythmg about,
with the somewhat English-sounding name of Beef, and
who, by the way, did rather the more service of the two,—
though both did well. It was the business of M. Co*te
to make a tour of the coasts of France, and particularly
of Italy, where oyster-culture had been successfully prac-
tised for about two thousand years, and to give to his
countrymen the benefit of the knowledge and instruction
he picked up during his journey. In the prosecution
of his task he fulfilled his mission most admirably, and
his industry and research are highly, and no doubt most
deservedly, extolled. His Report*, coupled with the most
successful practice of the untaught Beef, which began to
be noised abroad about this time, were not lost upon their
intelligent countrymen, ever ready as they are to be
taught whatever conduces to their advantage. While
M Coste instructed through the press, Beef showed the
peasantry (who flocked to the sea-coast in hundreds, and
even in thousands, when they heard how he was thriving)
how to construct an oyster-park, of which no less than
four thousand were formed in three or four years, princi-
pally on the shores of a small island called Re. Ihese
parks cover about four leagues of mud-banks hitherto
quite unproductive, but which are now a source of great
wealth, so much so indeed that within a few years of
Beef’s first success the value of the oysters of the lie
de Re was calculated at more than a hundred thousand
pounds; and when Bertram wrote soon afterwards, in
1865 they had so increased as to be worth six or eight
millions of francs, or much about three hundred thousand
pounds,—so rapidly do well managed oyster-works increase
in value .f
* Voyage d’Exploration sur le Littoral de la France, et de 1 Italic,
t Harvest of the Sea, page 365.


The number of oysters in the parks of the He de Re
was then estimated at three hundred and seventy-eight
millions, and lying on a surface of six hundred and thirty
thousand square metres, each metre* producing about six
hundred full-grown oysters.
The oyster-parks of .Re are very small, being only
twenty or thirty yards square : each is roughly walled in
with loose boulders (see Plate at end),‘f and other banks
or rows of stones are built within to which the oysters
attach themselves; but I presume these banks of stones
are only within such depths of water that they may be
easily reached by the hand at some time of the tide. The
cost of constructing each park is said to be about twelve
pounds. It is then stocked with a few boat-loads of
oysters, and in about two or three years begins to pay.
Then the farmer’s yearly returns are not less than ten or
twelve times his first outlay. There are indeed examples
of much greater profits than these; and what other trade,
it may be asked, is there that yields annually a return
of a thousand per cent, except the one I am writing
about ?
In these enclosures the spat or spawn is not liable to be
washed away and lost, as it is in the open unwalled beds.
The sea-water passes freely through these walls ; but not
so the oyster enemies,—which have so poor a chance
of entering these impregnable preserves, that they may be
safely said to be quite secure from invasion.
Where these banks of stone are not laid down for the
interception of spawn, a bottom should be formed as far
as practicable for the young oysters to adhere to ; and it
seems that nothing is better for this purpose than old
oyster shells or “ cultch” as they are collectively called.
Stones, such as I suppose could be easily dredged up, or
that might be reached at low tide, thrown in on the mud,
are also good for the young oysters to fasten on to.
* A metre is a measure of 3f. 3'37 in., (or more exactly 39'37079 inches):
a square metre is therefore equal to 10| square feet,
t Copied from a sketch in Bertram’s Harvest of the Sea.


It is constantly affirmed by present writers that eveiy
oyster is of both sexes, the roe and milt being, they say,
quite plainly discernible in the same individual. ihe
number of young oysters that are emitted from each adult
during the spawning season is estimated by some at halt a
million, and raised by others to a couple of millions.
These conjectures are put forthwith all the solemnity of
ascertained facts,—just as though there was any possibility
of counting the multitudinous atoms contained in me
milky fluid that flows from the oyster at breeding time.
This emission continues for a good many days.
In the open beds it is said that not one in a million
of the countless particles of spawn that are expelled from
the parent at this time survives to reach maturity, 1 h is
spawn is drifted about by the waves and currents of the
sea hither and thither, and all of it that does not find
suitable holding ground to attach itself to, which is thought
not to be more than what I have stated above, perishes in
a few hours after birth. In the English fisheries it seems
that not nearly so much is done as might be, to inter-
cept the flowing away of the spat, which has to be
replaced by large purchases of brood oysters at a feaitul
price. The Whitstable Company in some years pays
near thirty thousand pounds to replace the spawn that it
allows to drift away from its beds. This waste seems
inconsistent with its admirable management. In many
of the open beds of the Continent a considerable portion
of the spat is intercepted and matured ; and when it
reaches a certain stage of development, when it is called
broo d—that is when the fish has attained a diameter
between half an inch and an inch and a half—it is an
article from which large profit is derived, being sold
either for formation of new beds or to replace loss. Ins
interception is effected by a very simple and inexpensive
process :—A number of stout stakes are driven down
securely into the soil of the bed, the tops being at such
height above the water that they may be conveniently
reached. These are a few feet apart, or it may be yards.
A strong wire is then passed from stake to stake after the
fashion of the electric telegraph posts. The wire must be
strong enough to bear the heavy weights that are attached


to it, like fencing wire. From these wires are suspended
in the breeding season a number of long faggots, (which
it is the fashion to call by the un-English name of fascines ),
which must lie on the surface (or pretty near it) at low
These faggots intercept a good deal of the spat as it
is drifted about, and to which the fish, at present so
minute as to be invisible, at once attaches itself by a
natural apparatus with which it is furnished. In no other
condition but by attachment either to those pendulous
faggots or to boughs sunk on to the beds, or to stones or
old shells, or breeding-tiles placed on the bottom, has the
spawn any chance whatever of reaching maturity, or even
of surviving its emission from the parent more than a
few hours.
With regard to the growth of the oyster, Bertram says
that when a fortnight old it is about the size of a pin’s
head; it is as big as a pea at three months; and when
five months old it is as large as a three-penny piece : it
attains the size of a shilling at eight months ; and is very
nearly as large as a florin when a year old (see sketch
at beginning): it is full grown and marketable at four
years. Its duration of life is thought to be about ten
years, but this of course must be very uncertain.
During the breeding season the oyster continues throw-
ing out spawn for several weeks ; and if at this time the
weather be warm and fine it is very favourable to it; and it
would seem that all which is destined to reach maturity is
emitted during this condition of the atmosphere; but if the
season be bleak and cold it has no chance of existence
beyond a few hours : snow falling on the water when it is
drifting about kills it directly.
Through life the fish seems to be very susceptible of
cold, and it is thought not to be placed in a good condi-
tion when it has less than three or four feet of water on it
at high tide ; and those that are uncovered at low tides
are liable to injury from cold. This uncovering may
perhaps be of less consequence here than at home ; but it
is nevertheless bleak at times all along the south coast
during the storms of winter, and a good depth of water


■f-
'I
£>
/ 1
jTop; K u *7Vp' K M ’* A pVe £T, OT , T H E, $E a
3 *
P -5 wo^ty.
<» i ■ £ ’




can never be injurious to tlie oyster. Indeed in Europe
the oyster is found very plentifully not in shallow water
only, but at depths of a hundred or a hundred and fifty
feet; and I dare say that we also have our deep sea beds
if they were looked after. A very extensive trade is
carried on in deep sea oysters at home, - in which about
three hundred small craft of about tons each,
and employing nearly two thousand men in all, are
engaged.
The deep sea oyster is large, and is a little coarse also :
it sells for a much lesser price per bushel than the
smaller inshore oyster; but then there are not one-third as
many of the deep sea oysters in a bushel as of shallow
water ones. These deep beds, it is said, show no signs
of diminution like the shallower ones do. Perhaps they are
less incommoded by the growth of weed at the depth
of twenty or five and twenty fathoms than those in the
shallow beds are. Perhaps also the destructive star-fish
(which is said to attack the small oysters of the shallow
beds in preference to those that are full grown) may be
less able to grasp and destroy the huge oyster of deep
water than the common kind. The deep sea oyster is in
great demand by race and fair-going people, who are not
generally over fastidious in their tastes. The oysters are
caught at various places in the English channel; and a
very considerable bed of them is also found ofi the York-
shire coast, and again off the Irish shores.
The oystering season in England extends over a peiiod
of eight months, —that is from the Ist of September to
the 30th April, —the remaining months, which constitute
what at home is called “ the close season, being a period
of rest for the oyster, that is as far as man is concerned.
During this close season “no boat,” says the Convention
Act of 1839, “ shall have on board any dredge or other
implement whatever for catching oysters. It is at this
time that the oyster “ sickens” and emits its spawn.
But the experiences gained dining years of observation
go to prove that the oyster is not out of season during all


tlie four months of rest, though the law has hitherto
considered it to be so; and as close investigation has
shown that at no time during the breeding time is there
more than one oyster in five spawning at once, it is
contended by the advocates for abridging the period of
rest that eighty per cent, are always in season; and, on
an enquiry being made into all matters concerning “ The
Sea Fisheries of the United Kingdom” by a Parliamentary
Committee of 1865, the witnesses were generally in favour
of shortening the close season, particularly in respect
of the deep sea fisheries, by two months; thus throwing
May and June into the fishing season, as it was shown
that the oyster is never in better condition for the table
than it is in the two months specified above ; and finally,
on the recommendation of a mixed commission of French
and English Commissioners (1867), it was decided to
extend the fishing season from eight to nine and a half
months, —that is from the 31st of August to the 16th June,
which is to be the legal open season in future for the deep
sea beds in the English channel only,—that is to such as
lay outside the three-mile limit of both countries, and, as
such, are therefore common to the fishermen of both.
With regard to the inshore beds, it may be reasonably
supposed that some curtailment of the present duration
of their close season must ere long take place, as the
weight of testimony is much in favour of the change.
Indeed, on many beds fishing for brood oysters (to be sold
either for transplantation or for the formation of new beds)
all the year round is constantly practised, the Conven-
tion Act of 1839 notwithstanding.
The Parliamentary Committee of 1865 was greatly in
favour of working the beds during the entire year whether
the close season be abridged or not, to clean the bottom
of weeds, to destroy oyster enemies, and thus prepare it
for the reception of spat and brood, and also for the
transplanting of the latter from places where there may
be too much of it to where there is too little. They
say, “it is alleged by many of the witnesses examined by us
on this subject that the effect of discontinuing dredging
during the summer months has been to do far more injury


than good ; that it has allowed weeds and slab to accumu-
late on the ground, which under the old system were
prevented from settling on the ground to the same extent;
that the spat falling upon this foul ground has been
choked by weeds and mud, and that consequently tle
oyster-beds have almost disappeared;” and the foreman
of the Whitstable Company, Mr. Nicholls, who was one
of the witnesses examined, maintained that the summer
season was the most favourable time to dredge for clean-
ing the beds. He said that “ although one might think
that under water the weather could make no difference
to the ground, that is not really the case. It is only when
the weather is warm that the ground is loose ; and we can
then catch brood in a spot where we could not catch it at
all in the winter. In the winter time the ground gets
quite close and hard, and we cannot catch it at all.
In fine, almost the whole business of oyster culture
seems to consist in the performance of a few simple,
though often laborious, acts; such as the preventing by
artificial means of the disappearance or flowing away ot
the spawn, either by enclosing the grounds with wa s
of loose stones, as done in France, or by the sinking of
faggots, boughs, or other suitable substances to which it
can attach itself, as is the practice of Italy. The great
importance of intercepting as much of this spat as pos-
sible (when it is obtainable) will be very perceptible
indeed when we read the evidence of the experienced
foreman of the Whitstable Company on the subject of
spat supply; namely, that a good spatting season is not
to be looked for oftener than once in six years. And
when we remember the waste the beds must sufter—firstly,
from the operations of man; secondly, from the vast
devastation caused by other enemies, animate and in ‘
animate ; and, thirdly, from the natural tendency of the
spat itself to disappear, we must be convinced that there
is no other way of counteracting these damaging opera-
tions except by great attention to the beds, and the use
of every artificial means we can devise to prevent this
waste of life.
The other acts of oyster culture seem to be to stir the
beds considerably, even during the close season, rather


• than suffer them to remain, as our people do, for long
periods without disturbance. The close season of the
oyster, falling naturally in summer time, is particularly
favourable to the grow th of weed, which we are told is
so injurious both to the mature and immature fish. Again,
to capture and destroy oyster enemies; to remove and
relay the oysters, and thus prevent their being suffocated ;
to catch brood for transplanting, &c.; and to prepare the
ground for the reception of the spawn, are all works that
are not to be neglected by the oyster farmer.
There are also some other matters belonging to oyster
culture that must not be overlooked. For example, they
must not be caught for table use when spawning, nor
when they measure less than two inches and a half either
in length or breadth, —and all that are taken below this
size must be returned to the sea as speedily as possible
after capture. Furthermore the fish should be sorted in
the boats at the time of capture, and not ashore as our
fishermen do, whereby so very many are wantonly de-
stroyed.
Another matter to be remembered is, that new oyster
beds must not be laid on improper ground, as I very
much fear is being done in some places. At Southport,
for example, the oyster preserves of Messieurs Elliott,
Flazlewood, Whitehouse, and others are just outside of
a long sandbeach that is exposed to the lash of an ever-
lasting surf, which must so disturb the sand they are laid
on as to be very injurious to them. Here thousands of
brood oysters have been deposited, but with what results
I have never heard, though I fancy little good will come
of the enterprise. Mr. Frank Buckland gives a very
gloomy account of the effect of laying down oysters on
ground that is subject to what he calls “sand-storms.”
The ruinous failure that he recounts occurred amongst
the new oyster parks of the now famous He de Re, which
with all its advantages appears to have some spots about
it not at all suited for oyster-growth, and which seem to
me to bear no little resemblance to the private oyster
beds of my Southport friends. The catastrophe he records
he thus relates :


“Of all the inanimate objects which are inimical to the
there is nothing more fatal than sand. It we consider the highly
delicate and sensitive structure of the oyster, it will be easily seen
how very obnoxious sand would be to his welfare. The worst ot
sand is that it is very liable to shift about in the sea, and great
sand storms not unfrequently occur, just as they do m the deserts
of Arabia destroying suddenly whole caravans ot camels and men.
When I was at the lie of Re, Dr. Kemmerer gave me a famous
instance of a large number of oysters being destroyed by sand.
This event happened at a place called Morique. There were a
large number of oysters naturally adherent to the rock. Just
outside, however, there was a moving sand bank, ihe oyster spat
had taken well both on the tiles* and on the stones; but during a
storm the waves brought in a quantity ot sand, ruined the whole
bed, and killed every oyster. Although sand in large quantities is
very dangerous for oysters, yet a certain quantity is by no means
prejudicial to their welfare. The admixture should amount to what
my friends at Re call ‘sable vaseux' or mud sand. This sable
vaseux* is very good for oysters, but it requires an experienced eye
to know it when they see it.”
To give one other instance of a complete failure in
oyster planting from laying them on improper ground,
I may mention an attempt made by myself, m perfect
ignorance of the teachings of oyster culture, to establish
a bed, much about thirty-six years ago, by scattering a
boat load of fish on what Bertram calls a dry rocky
bottom in front of the late residence of Mr. Pybus, at
Barnes’ Bay, Brunet Island, which proved an entire
failure. Indeed, the first westerly storm that blew drove
them ashore all dead.
The great damage that our own fisheries sustain so
frequently from mismanagement and neglect, whereby
the public are debarred the use of this favourite article
of diet, often for considerable periods, % seems to demand
» Tiles so placed as to stop the spat.
t This island was named after Admiral Bruny D’Entrecasteaux, of the
French Navy, who surveyed it and thus discovered its insularity in lviJz.
It may not be out of place here to mention that its proper spelling is
Bruny (and not Bruni or Brune as we write it). At least so it is spellea
on the charts published by the French Government in 1793 from D Entre-
casteaux’ own surveys, where the name is, of course, correctly given.
Copies of these charts are preserved in the Survey Office.
X At this moment there is a considerable importation of Sydney oysteis,
some of our own principal beds having failed again.


the intervention of the Legislature. The Oyster Act of
September 29, 1853, requires looking into to ascertain
whether some parts of it may not be beneficially amended.
The fourth clause which fixes the duration of the close
season at five months should, I think, be enquired into, as
five months seems a period of unnecessary duration, as it
has been proved to be by reliable witnesses giving
evidence before a parliamentary committee in England,
which showed that the oyster is not spawning more than
half that time; and I think it would be well if it were
better known than I believe it is that the fifth clause of
that Act which prohibited the working of any bed what-
ever during the close season except for the removal of
brood was wisely amended during the last season so as
not to apply to private fisheries.
Long experience has proved, and recent instruction
taught us, that the establishment of a close season has not
produced the good effects that were expected of it either
here or elsewhere; for beyond doubt it has not prevented
the impoverishment of the fisheries. I believe that a
parliamentary enquiry into the working of our beds, and
the best means of remedying existing defects, with the
view of averting the periodical decay they seem liable to,
into their capacity for production, and into the best means
of encouraging private establishments, would be pro-
ductive of great good.
If such an enquiry were made, I would take leave to
suggest whether it would not be better to give attention
to the best modes of improving existing fishing grounds?
and of re-occupying any old ones there may be, originally
productive of oysters but now oysterless from neglect,
rather than give any encouragement to the formation of
new beds in places which Nature herself seems to have
avoided as unsuitable for the production of the oyster, as
I believe some of those at Southport are. The great
success of the French in oyster farming is attributable to
their having restored and repeopled with oysters, so to
speak, old beds that were ruined by long neglect and
mismanagement rather than to the planting of new ones ;
and where they have done this on unsuitable ground they


have paid dearly for their indiscretion, as I showed above
in a quotation from the writings of Mr. Frank Buckland.
Where we have such vast natural fields, with com-
paratively so few labourers in them, I think it would he
best rather to encourage the occupation of old beds than
force enterprise to shelter itself amongst new but perhaps
untenable lands. If portions of old beds were lotted off
and leased for long terms to bond fide workers having
exclusive rights so long as they worked them properly,
that is in the same way or nearly the same way as ife
done in England, France, and Italy, would not this
course be more beneficial than to throw everything open
to all who choose to enter, not to preserve and renovate,
but only to damage and destroy, which seems something
like letting the poacher into the game preserve to ex-
terminate all he can find ?
It would appear but right that persons who, either in
ignorance or through any governmental act, have taken
improper ground to lay down oysters on should be allowed
to change their present reserves for more suitable places,
say amongst existing beds ; and that all after comers who
desire to pursue oyster farming in a bond fide manner,
should be allowed private beds conditionally with their
working them properly, but to forfeit the same if they
failed doing so. And as all beds are now under mu-
nicipal or police protection, it may be fairly expected that
the wardens or others will cause whatever conditions may
be attached to a lease to be fairly complied with. It is
the interest of all that the oyster fisheries should be
honestly worked, —and no doubt the wardens will see to
this, and that all parliamentary conditions be fairly en-
forced. These private beds need not be very extensive,
perhaps two or three acres to each might be enough.
The private oyster beds of France are not a quarter of an
acre each, and yet from this small plot of ground a most
excellent living is made. But, perhaps, when we consider
the great difference there is in the economic habits of the
two people, in conjunction with the difference of labour
value in the two countries, both so much against us, it
may be allowed that the area I have suggested as enough
for an oyster farm may not be very greatly too much.


According to Bertram, oyster ground when under the
care of a Frenchman will support six hundred oysters on
the square metre, which may be equal to four or five
hundred to the square yard. But if this latter space only
contained one hundred, then the lessee of two or three
acres of oyster ground might be the proprietor of a million
of oysters in two or three years ; and if he could not make
an excellent living out of such a property, it might be
fairly believed he could make a living nowhere.
In leasing oyster ground some proof I think should be
required that the intending lessee is a person of at least
sufficient capital to carry on an oyster farm, that he is
able to purchase boats and all the gear necessary for his
work, and able to support himself and family, if he have
one, until his farm begins to return revenue.
For the benefit of those persons who have sometimes
more oysters than they can very conveniently dispose of
at once, I copy the following method of preparing arti-
ficial sea-water from the last number of the Edinburgh
Review, (January, 1866), which may be useful to pro-
fessional dealers, and to purchasers in both town and
country ;
“ It is customary with many people on the receipt of a Christmas
barrel ot oysters to empty them out into a vessel of salt and water,
and to supply them with a handful of oatmeal. On this subject we
are told very truly that salt and water is a very different thing
from sea-water, and that ‘on no account should oatmeal, flour, or
any such dead stuff be added, which only serves to make the water
foul and the oyster sick.’ The following receipt for the preparation
of artificial sea-water will keep the oysters alive and supply them
with natural food for some time:—
For ten gallons of water it requires—
Sulphate of magnesia, ounces.
Sulphate of lime, 2| ditto.
Chloride of sodium, 43£ ditto.
Chloride of magnesia, 6 ditto.
Bromide of magnesia, 21 grains.
Carbonate of lime, 21 ditto.*
“ This should he allowed to stand exposed to the air in a strong
sunlight for a fortnight before it is used, during which time a few
These ingredients, Dr. Smart tells me, would not cost half a crown.


growing plants of enteromorpha* or ulva* should be introduced to
throw off spores. The water then when under a microscope will
be found to contain a confervoid* vegetable growth, which forms as
nourishing a food for the oyster as the spores of sea-weed in its
ocean bed. Oysters laid down in a large trough and covered with
this water will continue to live and thrive for months.”
Another receipt, entitled “ How to make Sea-water, is
given in a work entitled “ Enquire within for everything.”
It is as follows ;
“ There cannot be a question that by far the simplest plan would
consist in the evaporation of the sea-water itself in large quantities,
preserving the resulting salt in closely stopped vessels to prevent
the absorption of moisture, and vending it in this form to the con-
sumer : the proportion of this dry saline matter being fatty-six
ounces to ten gallons of water, less three pints. This plan was
suggested bv Dr. E. Schweitzer for the extemporaneous formation
of sea-water for medicinal baths, * * * * *
proportion ordered to be used is six ounces to the gallon of water,
and stirred well until dissolved.”
I append an abstract of the Oyster Acts in force in
Tasmania.
• Mr. Morton Allport has kindly favoured me with the following defini-
tions of these hard words
“ Enteromorpha,” a genus of confervoid algae ; minute aquatic marine
plants “ Ulva,” another genus of the same plants. “ Confervoid,” the
minute growth which covers stones and timber under water, fresh or salt,
is known generally as confervas, whence the adjective.
27


ABSTRACT OF OYSTER FISHERY ACTS.
17 Vict. No. 10. 29th September, 1853.
The Oyster Fishery Act, 1853.
Section 1. —This Act came into operation on the Ist November,
1853.
Section 2.—Artificial oyster beds may be formed on the sea or
any estuary between high and lowest water mark of spring tides
by any person or body of persons, or by owner or occupier of any
lands bordering on the sea, with permission in writing of Lieu-
tenant-Governor. Such persons to exercise exclusive control over
such oyster beds, but not over any natural banks or beds that may
exist.
Section 3. —Penalty of not less than £2O nor more than £5O
against any person interfering with or taking away oysters without
consent of owners or occupiers of oyster beds, with any additional
sum awarded by magistrate for damage and injury done.
Section 4. —Any person catching, dredging for, or offering for
sale any oysters between Ist November and 31st March subject to
penalty not exceeding ten pounds.
Section s.—For purpose of supplying and replenishing artificial
oyster beds, persons referred to in Section 2, or those authorised by
them, may take oysters or oyster brood during such part of the
close season fixed by preceding section as notified by Lieutenant-
Governor in the Hobart Town Gazette.
Section 6. —Any person (except for his own consumption) catch-
ing or dredging for oysters without a licence liable to a penalty
not exceeding £5.
Section 7. —Chief Police Magistrate* shall, upon payment of 10s,,
grant licence to any one person to catch or dredge for oysters
between Ist April and 3lst October in any year.
Section 8. —Oyster brood, spat, cultch, and small oysters to be
returned to place whence taken within six hours, under a penalty
not exceeding £lO.
Section 9.—Offences heard and penalties levied in a summary
way before two Justices of the Peace.
Section 10.—Any person within 30 days preceding complaint
interfering with or taking away oysters from artificial bed without
* This power now conferred upon Inspector of Police by 20 Viet. No. 23.


consent of owner or occupier, or if any person has (except for
purpose of supplying or replenishing such bed) caught or dredged
for oysters or oyster brood, or used any oyster dredge or o lei
instrument without taking oysters, or dragged upon ground of any
natural oyster bed between Ist November in any year and 31st
March in the succeeding year, (except for personal consumption)
without having obtained licence, or if any person has raised or
caught any oyster brood, spat, cultch, or small oyster, and has not
within 6 hours returned the same to the bed, or has killed or de-
stroyed the same, he may be apprehended by warrant of magistrate,
and may be committed, or held to bail to appear before two ma-
gistrates.
Section 11.—Offenders in cases mentioned in the preceding section
(10) if found in the actual commission of offence may he appre-
hended without warrant.
Section 12.—Limitation of actions. General issue. Double costs.
Section 13. —Appropriation of licence fees.
Schedule.—Form of oyster licence to be signed by Chief Police
Magistrate.*
25 Yict. No. 10. 30th November, 1861.
An Act to vest in the Municipal Council of every Rural
Municipality the Control and Management of the Oyster
Beds and Fisheries, if any, situate upon or adjacent to the
Shores of such Municipality.
Section I.—Control of oyster beds so vested in Municipal Coun-
cils.
Sections 2 and 3.—Municipal Councils may make bye-laws not
repugnant to law, for regulation of fisheries, &c., to be laid before
Parliament, and published in Gazette.
Section 7.—Unlicensed persons fishing or dredging for oysters
may be apprehended.
Section B—The Act of Council 17 Viet. No. 10, not to apply to
fisheries under control of Municipal Councils.
Section 9. —Private oyster beds not to be affected.
* Now Inspector of Police.


31 Vict. No. 33. 11th October, 1867.
The Oyster Fishery Act, 1867,
Section 1. —Governor may by proclamation close oyster beds for
a time.
Section 2. —Punishment of certain offences.
Section 3. —In the Oyster Fishery Act, 1853, the term ‘‘sea-
shore” shall be deemed to apply not only to the sea-shore but also
to land below low-water mark.
Section 4.—Act not to affect private beds and layings, nor powers
of municipal councils.
Section s.—Section 4 of 17 Vict. No. 10, altered : “Ist day of
October” substituted for “Ist day of November and the last
day of February” substituted for “ the 31st day of March.
Section 6.—The word “ oysters” includes the brood, ware, half-
ware, spat, and spawn of oysters.
Section 7. —Procedure in respect of offences. 19 Vict. No. 8, and
19 Vict. No. 10.
Section B.—Section 9 of The Oyster Fishery Act, 1853, repealed.
Section 9.—Acts to be read together.
Section 10.—Section 5 of this Act shall come into force on the
last day of February, 1868, and the residue on the passing hereof.
JAMES BARNARD,
GOVERNMENT PRINTER, TASMANIA.


r sy«T'fi\f A.A K ‘f ; -
Ko]Pi f\U dVr. RT.R A Ha »/h§T o \ T '< f \ ftt[A .
Ru/fycy ,'d£p 7 'j
T/J) i/ajs'i: rr


