

m. m.
THE SaiAf AHRDAL
'4.
E * H,8, %
OF
AH’S! AIK I
WILL TAKK CLACK ON
1 tij ~ 53
Thursday, June 26, 1873, at 10 A. M.
This stupendous, world-renowned, wondrous, and aris-
tocratic combination, embraces more and better speci-
mens of the animal kingdom than any other show in
America —Barn urn’s not excepted.
Jt® 03 The circus performances, bands, and other in-
iquitous adjuncts of the common, every-day shows, are
not to be found in connection with this great moral
exhibition.
For particulars see inside.


entire unapproachable and inimitable collection, the like
of which has never before been seen, is divided into four
grand classes, which are confined in separate cages. The animals
will be found in their best condition, having been trained and
groomed with the greatest care, and will, by the various rich prizes
offered, be incited to great exertions, performing some of the most
astonishing feats, not with their pedal extremities, but with their
mouths, before the eyes, and more especially the ears, of the audi-
ence. The distribution of prizes, a most interesting and exciting
performance, will be accomplished with the utmost ease and skill
by a selected band of dice-players, procured at great trouble and
expense. We wish to inform *the ever credulous public that no
loaded dice are used by these experts.
cumin of sxgeeisss.
The Programme opens with the performances of the specimens in the fourth division
consisting of
The Wild Australian Children,
who are under the direct supervision of Noah’s youngest son, Japhet,
“Young and fair,
Yet a man; with crisped hair,
Cast in thousand snares and rings.”
This noble young gentleman has very skillfully taught the young ideas how to
shoot with the boomerang, something never before accomplished, and perform other
tricks, too numerous to mention. The different performers and their doings are
given below, the prize consisting in this class of a piece of molasses candy, warrant-
ed not to stick.
Lie whene’er you can Christian Motto.
Old Ironsides Pea Gardner.
Little Willie Somebody’s Dari.ing._x


Cage Number Three containing
Animals of the Cretaceous Period,
will next be exhibited in all their pristine glory and savageness, by Noah’s next son.
Ham,
“ Sober he seems and very sagely sad.
And to the ground his eyes are lowly bent,”
who has Eigg-ed them out In the latest style. Here the prize consists of a ham bone.
Squibs Job’s Comforter.
The Housebuilder’s Son.
In a Bed of Posies . . Eaceb!y
Bone Picker Mouth.
Pool selling on the King Row in tent No. 2.
Cage Number Two, henceforth known by all the world as the
WoodPECKers,
appear by special request, under the heir apparent of the Patriarch—Shem, who has
“A beard that would a razor shake,
Unless its nerves were strong.”
The prize consists of a Peck of peanuts.
Infection in the Cattle Line Kine Pox.
Lynch Law Moke Rope.*'
Spouting Cuss Stumpy.
Modoc Parade Shack Nasty Jim, Jr.
The first and last cage contains
The Elephants,
who are under the Immediate orders of the Patriarch Noah himself, at whom
“Still we gaze, and still the wonder grows.
That one small head can carry all he knows.”
Here will be seen the condensed excellence, eloquence and bravery, as well ae tho
most ferocious animals of the Ark. They are, however, under the complete control,
seemingly, of the great originator of the exhibition, and the audience may be per-
fectly assured that they will not be exposed to the slightest danger. But it is espe-
cially desirable that nothing of a Cool(ey)ing nature be exhibited to the first men-
tioned specimen, as he was once sorely grieved by a Peck of ice. The others may
be approached with impunity. The prize for this cage is a cradle (not a grain cradle)
of the moat improved pattern, warranted not to squeak—a most valuable acquisition
in view of the future.
Cupid’s Remedy for Pain Moonlight Walks.
Petticoat Government “Boss” B .
Turning out the (s)cow Weather Cock.
The Court House Bell(e) Susan B. Smith, Side Judge. V
RESULTS OF MIDNIGHT REVELRIES,
by Jack, the LADY Killer.
Prize.
Good for the Doctor, Bad for the Patience.
By a Stranger—and he took us in.
THE DIE IS CAST.
HO, FOR BARNU M ! / /


fljJfclS told,
<jCl|£ In a legend old,
How Noah's Ark, with its precious freight
Of animals, both small and great,
Sailed o'er the deep for many a day,
And, at last, upon Mount Ararat lay.
The animals found
That this great mound
Gave shelter and learning, with plenty to eat,
And by diligent use of their heads and their feet,
And with plentiful training by Noah the great,
Soon made themselves famous through all the. state.
Full soon. ,
One day at noon,
From the doors of the Ark came a furious blast.
Announcing to all, Uiat a moral show, vast
!n proportions anil morals, would gladden the eyes,
And strike all beholders with greatest surprise.
Now when,
At ten.
in contemplation
Of this conglomeration
Of animals, well trained lor this great moral show,
Let all the brave and fair their plaudits well bestow,
And to the trainers give the praise their honest due,
While longed-for prizes from the dice-lua all prove
true.
