

P & O
ONE CLASS ONLY
TO
AUSTALIA via THE CAPE


P. & O.
AUSTALIA via THE CAPE
Service.
ONE CLASS ONLY
F. WHITE,
Manager.
HANDBOOK OF
INFORMATION
PASSENGERS
BOOKED TO
LAS PALMAS,] FREMANTLE,
CAPE TOWN, BRISBANE,
*FREMANTLE, HOBART,
ADELAIDE, LAUNCESTON,
MELBOURNE, AUCKLAND, 1 Tranent.
SYDNEY, ' WELLINGTON,/ * T
* By certain Steamers.
HEAD OFFICE : 32, LIME STREET, LONDON, E.C. 3.
Telegraphic Address ; Telephones :
“ PENCAPIA, STOCK, LONDON.” Avenue 7142 (three lines).
9/10,000/1/24 January, ig2j.
Cancelling previous issues.


INDEX.
PAGE
Arrival, Advice of ... ... 18
Amusements ... ... 13
Baggage, Labels for ... 15
~ Advice of Arrival 15
~ Cabin Trunks ... 15
~ Free Allowance 15
~ Excess Freight 15
~ Calculation of ... 15
~ Despatch of ... 15/16
~ Non-Liability for 17
~ Insurance of ... 17
~ Dock Dues on ... 17
Bicycles ... ... ... 17
Booking Passage ... ... 6
Break of Journey ... ... 7
Cheques .. ... ... 6
Children .. ... ... 4
Combined Tickets ... ... 4
Conditions of Carriage .. 8
Correspondence ... ... 19
Certificate of Identity ... 11
Customs Tariffs (S. Africa,
Australia and New Zea-
land) ... ... ... 2 r/23
Dangerous Goods ... ... 19
Divine Service ... ... 13
Deck Chairs... ... ... 18
Dock Charges on Baggage 17
l3
Electric Current, Mls-use of 13
Embarkation .. ... 11
Excess Baggage ... ... 15
Failure to Embark ... ... 6
Fares, re ... ... ... 4
Fleet ... ... ... ... 3
Furniture, Shipment of ... 16
PAGE
Goods of a Dangerous
Nature ... ... ... 19
Household Goods ... ... 16
Health ... ... ... 7
Homeward Passages ... 21
Infants, Milk for ... ... 20
Invalids ... ... ... 8
Insurance of Baggage .. 17/18
Interchangeable Tickets ... 5
Labels for Baggage ... 15
Letters ... ... ... 19
Library ... ~ ... 12
Luggage (see Baggage) ...
Liquors ... ... ... 20
Map of Route ... ... 24
Menus .. ... ... ... 20
Motor Cycles ... ... 17
Non-Liability for Baggage 17
Passports ... ... ... to
Perambulators ... ... 17
P. &O. Banking Corpn. ... 12
Prepaid Passages ... ... 21
Regulations on Board ... 13
Rebooking Abatement ... 4
Return Tickets ... ... 4
Route ... ... ... ... 4
~ Map 24
Safe Arrival Telegrams ... 18
Sailing Dates, re ... ... 4
S. African Immig-ration Act 8
Strikes ... ... ... 23
Telephone, Telegrams, &c. 1
Through Passengers ... 9/10
Tobacco, &c. ... ... 20
Track Chart... ... ... 24
Valuables, &c. ... ... 12
Wireless Messages... ... 18


P. & O. SERVICE
To AUSTRALIA via THE CAPE.
FLEET.
Tons.
BALLARAT ... 13,100
BALRANALD ... 13,100
BARADINE 13,100
BARRABOOL ... 13,100
BENDIGO 13.100
T ons
BELTANA 11,100
BENALLA 11,100
BERRIMA 11,100
BORDA 11,100
All Steamers Fitted with Wireless Telegraphy.
THE above twin-screw steamers carry ONE CLASS of
passengers only to Australia via The Cape at rates of
passage money equivalent to third class fares, including
“ Assisted ” passengers for Australia.
The Cabins are situated on the principal passenger decks,
and some of the accommodation is amidships. It includes Large
Dining Saloon, Smoking Room, Ladies’ Lounge, &c., and
as there is but the one class, passengers are not restricted to a
certain portion of the vessel, but have the full run of the ship.


Route. The steamers take the route via the Cape of Good
Hope, which is becoming increasingly popular. The journey from
London to Australia occupies slightly longer than via Suez Canal,
but amongst the advantages the route affords are equable tempera-
tures and freedom from the heat of the Red Sea. As the course
is almost directly North and South, the steamers are in the Tropics
a few days only. These facts are of importance, especially when
children are travelling.
Fares and Dates of Sailing. Full particulars of fares
and sailing dates are printed in the separate leaflet, copies of which
can be obtained from the Head Office or any Agencies,
Children travelling with their parents, are charged for as
follows:—Half fare for children between 3 and 12 years of age ;
one child under 3 years (no berth provided) free of charge ; if
more than one child under 3 years, a quarter fare each will be
charged exclusive of the one carried free, but the Company
do not guarantee to provide a berth for less than half fare,
and they reserve the right to berth children according to
circumstances.
Return Tickets from London to South Africa, or London
to Australasia, are available for twelve months from date of
departure to date of arrival on return. This period can only be
extended on payment of the difference to make up two full single
fares at the rates current at time of travelling.
Re-booking Abatement. Passengers who do not take and
prepay for return tickets cannot afterwards be put upon the same
basis, as regards fare, as those who do so, but passengers who pay
the full single fare for the voyage out and return by the Service
will be granted a re-booking abatement of 10 per cent, off the
current single fare for the voyage back, provided they re-embark
within twelve months.
The abatement must be claimed at time of re-booking and the
passage ticket for the voyage out be surrendered.
Passengers who travel to England by Messrs. Thompson’s
Aberdeen Line are also allowed the above abatement if returning
by the P. & O. Australia via The Cape Service, provided the
other conditions are fulfilled.
Combined Tickets. Special tickets are issued available
for travelling one way (second class) by P. & O. Mail steamer via
Suez Canal, and the other way by the One Class Service via
The Cape, at fares which will be quoted on application. These
tickets are valid for two years from date of departure to date of
arrival on return.


Interchangeable Tickets. Return tickets are interchange-
able as between the following Lines, subject to any adjustment of
fare which may be necessary, and any refund due to a passenger will
be made on the basis of the difference in fares, less 5 per cent., viz. :
P. & O. Australia via The Cape Service.
Orient Line.
New Zealand Shipping Co.
Federal Line.
Aberdeen Line.
Single-Berth Cabin (“Z " Grade ).
During any period when through tickets to Out-Ports may
not be issued by the P. & O. Australia via the Cape Service,
return tickets issued by any other Line to an Out-Port can only
be honoured by this Service to the nearest Port of call, subject to
any fare adjustment which may be applicable.


To Book Passage. A deposit of half the passage-money
must be paid before a Berth can be reserved, and the balance three
clear days before the date of sailing, or, if by country cheque,
four clear days. All Cheques, Bank Drafts, or Post Office
Orders should be made payable to The P. & O. Australia via
The Cape Service, 32, Lime Street, London, E.C. 3., or to the
Local Agents. When reserving a Berth, it is necessary to give full
Christian and surnames, age, occupation, port of destination, and
address up to the date of embarkation, and to sign a special
“ Booking Form ” supplied.
Two-Berth Cabin (“X" Grade ).
Passengers who communicate with the Office after booking
are requested to mention the name of the steamer by which their
passage is secured, and the number of their passage ticket.
Failure to Embark. Passengers failing to embark forfeit
half fare.


Break of Journey. Passengers for Australia, other than those
booked by the Government, may break the journey at Cape Town for
not exceeding six months, provided they apply for permission at time
of hooking , and have special “ break of journey ” ticket issued to them.
There is usually room from Cape Town to Australia, but no
guarantee can be given that there will be vacant accommodation in
any particular steamer, nor that, if accommodation is vacant, it will
be the same grade as that occupied between London and Cape
Town ; passengers breaking the journey should give the Agents at
Cape Town the earliest possible intimation of the steamer by which
they wish to resume the voyage.
Four-Berth Cabin (“S” Grade).
Health. Any person who is not m ordinary good health
must state all the facts fully when applying for passage, and notice
is hereby given that any passenger not doing so, and afterwards
found to be suffering from any illness, disease, infirmity or disability
of any description, is liable to rejection by the Government
Immigration Officials at Port of Destination, as well as for the fare
back to starting point, and all other expenses incurred.


Invalids. The Company reserve the right to reject any
passenger who may be found, when embarking, to be mentally
afflicted, deaf, dumb, blind, maimed, or having apparent symptoms of
disease or infirmity, consumption or other infectious complaint, or any
person whose condition is such as to appear likely to endanger the
health or impair the comfort of other persons on board or to involve
the Company, Master, or Agents of the ship in any liability under,
or by virtue of any Colonial or other law or regulation.
Cape Town and Table Mountain .
Conditions of Carriage. Passengers’ attention is directed
to the conditions printed on the face and the back of the Contract
Ticket.
South African Immigration Act. The Immigration
regulations in force in South Africa are very stringent and are
rigidly adhered to. Passengers must be able to prove that (a) they
are domiciled in the Union ; or (b) they are proceeding to employ-
ment in a suitable trade at remunerative wages ; or (c) they possess
sufficient money to maintain themselves for twelve months.


Passengers who are not able to satisfy any of these conditions
will be required to deposit with the Company a Landing Deposit
of £3O per adult, which will be refunded by the Agents at
Cape Town when the passengers are allowed to land by the
Government officials, or in the event of any passenger being
rejected, the Landing Deposit will be retained by the Company
towards payment of the fare back to London end on account of
any other expenses incurred. The passenger would also be liable
for the balance, if any, of such expenses.
St George s Terrace, Perth.
Through passengers, when booked, to Ports in Australia or
New Zealand, other than Adelaide, Melbourne or Sydney, are for-
warded Third Class, and cannot be guaranteed similar accommodation
on the Inter-Colonial steamer to that provided on the Company’s
steamers. The higher rates quoted cover the superior accom-
modation named on the P. & O. steamer only, and through fares,
when quoted, are only good for the most direct and cheapest route.
The Company will not be liable for any Hotel Expenses,
Railway Fares, &c., if incurred by passengers awaiting the on-going
steamer.


Passengers holding Through Tickets will be allowed to live on
board the P, & O. steamer at port of transhipment, free of charge,
pending departure of the first connecting steamer, provided the
P. & O. steamer remains in port so long, but under no circumstances
may they remain on board longer than seven days.
Passengers proceeding by the first Inter-Colonial steamer can
have their baggage transferred free of charge, but baggage is at
passenger’s risk whilst awaiting, and during transhipment, unless
it is insured (see page 17).
Smoke Room.
Passports. The possession of an up-to-date Passport is
imperative in the case of every passenger who is not booked under
the auspices of the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Residents of the British Isles can obtain forms of application for
Passports at the Company’s Offices, or at H.M. Passport Office,
1, Queen Anne’s Gate Buildings, Dartmouth Street, Westminster,
London, S.W. 1, or at the Branch Passport Office, 36, Dale Street,
Liverpool.
Residents of Ireland should apply to the following officials for
.their Passports :— North. Minister for Home Affairs, Belfast.
South. Minister for Home Affairs, Dublin.


Passengers booked by the Commonwealth Government who
are resident m the British Isles must possess a Certificate of Identity,
for which application must be made to the Migration and Settlement
Department, Australia House, Strand, London, W.C. 2. Govern-
ment passengers who are resident in Ireland must apply as stated in
the preceding paragraph.
No passenger will be allowed to embark without producing a
Passport or Certificate of Identity, as the case may be.
Verandah.
Embarkation. Passengers are usually embarked in mid-
stream off Tilbury, and a special train is arranged to convey
them from St. Pancras Station (London, Midland and Scottish
Railway) to Tilbury. Full particulars for each steamer are supplied
to passengers, and if these are not ready at time of booking, a
notice will be posted to the address then registered. Any change
of address therefore should be Immediately notified.
No friends of passengers will be allowed to proceed by the
special train from St. Pancras Station, nor to embark on the tender
or steamer at Tilbury.


Valuables. Passengers are cautioned against leaving
jewellery, money, or valuables lying about in their cabins, and are
requested to look after all small packages in their cabins when the
vessel is in Port, as the Company cannot be responsible for any thefts
of such articles. Passengers may deposit their money and valuables
for safe keeping with the Captain, and a receipt for same will be
given, subject to the conditions printed thereon. A charge of £ 1 per
cent, on the declared value is made for the voyage from London
to Australia, or 10/- per cent, from London to Cape Town.
Main Dining Saloon.
P. & O. Banking Corporation. Passengers can obtain
South African, Australian or New Zealand Notes, and Bank Drafts
payable in South Africa, Australia or New Zealand, at current
rates of exchange, from the P. & O. Banking Corporation,
122, Leadenhall Street, E.C, 3, or 14-16, Cockspur Street, S.W. 1,
A representative of the Bank will also be on board each steamer
prior to departure from Tilbury for the purpose of issuing Drafts,
Colonial Notes, &c., to passengers in exchange for their English,
money, at current rates.
Library. A Library is available for the use of passengers,
without charge.


Dogs will be carried under certain conditions, when accom-
panied by a passenger. Freight and conditions will be quoted on
application.
Regulations. As the Rules and Regulations, which may
be adopted by the Captains of the vessels, will be such as are
calculated to promote the health and comfort of all on board,
passengers are requested to conform to them.
Ladies' Lounge.
Misuse of Ship’s Electric Current. The use by
passengers of the ship’s electric light connections, in cabins or
elsewhere, for the purpose of heating electric kettles, saucepans,
laundry irons, &c., is dangerous to the general safety and con-
venience, and is strictly prohibited.
Divine Service will be held every Sunday on board, as
arranged by the Captain, and weather and circumstances permitting.
Amusements. Pianos, Games, etc., are provided on board
the steamers. Concerts, Dances, Cricket Matches, Athletic
Sports, etc., are frequently organised on the voyage, and the
Captain and Officers will always give all reasonable assistance to
make these events successful.


Collins Street , Melbourne.
Federal Parliament House , Melbourne.


Length.
Breadth,
Height.
Cubic Feet.
2 ft. 0 ms.
2 ft. 6 ms.
3 ft. 0 ms.
3 ft. 0 ms.
2 ft. 0 ms.
2 ft. 0 ms.
2 ft. 0 ms.
2 ft. 6 ms.
1 ft. 3 ms.
2 ft. 0 ins.
1 ft. 2 ms.
1 ft. 6 ms.
5 ft. 0 ins.
10 ft. 0 ins.
7 ft. 0 ms.
1 1 ft. 3 ms.
Baggage. All baggage, except light packages which can be
carried by hand, should be forwarded in advance, carriage prepaid,
and delivered to the steamer in the King George V. Dock at least
<three clear working days before her departure. Passengers desirous
of being advised when their baggage arrives at the Docks should
notify the Company on the day they despatch same, stating number
of packages and route sent. Every package should have the
passenger’s Name, Destination, and Steamers name and
permanently marked on it, and be labelled CABIN, or
“ WANTED,” or “ NOT WANTED.”
Labels for this purpose, as well as address labels and Passenger s
initial and destination labels, may be had on application, free of
charge, at any of the Offices. It is advisable to remove all old labels.
Packages to go in the Cabin should not measure more than 3 feet
long by 2 feet broad by 1 foot 2 inches high, and one trunk of this
size can be taken in the cabin by each adult passenger and must be
labelled “CABIN.” Baggage marked “WANTED, is placed
in the Baggage Room (not in the Cabin), and passengers can,
if desired, have access to same at least once a week, circumstances
permitting. Baggage marked “ NOT WANTED is stowed in
the Hold and will be inaccessible until destination is reached.
Passengers are allowed 1 5 cubic feet of personal baggage each
adult, free of charge, including that taken in the Cabins ; children
in proportion to fare paid. The rate on excess luggage is
3/- per cubic foot, and must be paid to the Steward-m-Charge
on application.
To assist passengers in reckoning their liability for baggage, it
may be mentioned that the cubic measurement is arrived at by
multiplying the length, breadth and height of boxes together, as
shewn in the following examples :
The free allowance and rate for excess already mentioned
apply only to the voyage performed by the P. & 0., and when
Through Tickets to Out-Ports are issued, passengers so booked
must conform to the regulations of the on-carrying Company as
regards allowance of baggage, freight for excess, and otherwise.
Only personal effects are carried as baggage.


Furniture, etc. Merchandise, furniture, household goods, etc.,
for Australia should be shipped as cargo, and the
will, on application, quote rate of freight, and, if so requested,
will attend to shipment. Cargo is not carried by these steamers
to Cape Town.
Baggage from London. Arrangements have been made
whereby passengers can have their baggage collected from any part
of London or the Suburbs, and delivered to the steamer, by The
London Parcels Delivery Co., 128, Goswell Road, London, E.C. 1
at an inclusive charge for Cartage and Dock dues, which should be
prepaid. Full information as to rates, etc., may be had on application.
North Terrace, Adelaide.
Baggage from Provinces. Passengers forwarding baggage
from the Country are advised to send it by Passenger Train after
satisfying themselves that the baggage is despatched in time to
reach the steamer as stated on page 15, and to guard against
possible delay in transit, ample time should be allowed for the
journey. Whenever possible, the charge for carriage through to
the King George V. Dock should be prepaid, but if carriage is
paid to a Railway Terminus in London only, there will be another
charge for conveyance thence to the Docks, and this will be
collected on board.


Non- Liability for Baggage. Every attention is paid to
passengers’ luggage, and precautions are taken to prevent the same
going astray or being damaged, but the Company cannot
acknowledge responsibility or liability of any kind
whatever with regard to loss, damage, detention,
or mis-delivery of baggage, howsoever caused, and
passengers are recommended to insure. (See below).
Motor Cycles, Bicycles and Children’s Peram-
bulators, packed in strong crates or cases, and forwarded for
shipment with passenger’s baggage, will be carried at owner’s risk
at the following charges :
To Cape Town or Australia.
Measuring 25 cubic feet and under 45/- each.
~ over 25 cubic feet ... 3/- per cubic foot extra.
Unless, however, they are packed in the way mentioned, they will
not be accepted for shipment under any circumstances. They must
be labelled the same as passenger’s baggage. No “ mdia rubber
solution ” or other dangerous “ bicycle accessory ” will be received
under any circumstances, and in the case of motor cycles a certificate
is required stating that all petrol has been emptied out of the tank.
Dock Charges. Passengers are particularly requested to
notice that on each package the Port of London Authority levy
Dock Dues. These, if not previously paid, will be collected from
the Passenger, after embarkation, by the Steward-in-Charge.
These charges vary according to size and weight of the packages,
but 3/- may be taken as the approximate charge for an average
sized trunk.
Insurance. The Company have made arrangements with
the Marine and General Mutual Life Assurance Society whereby
passengers’ personal luggage can be insured against loss or damage
whilst on board at small cost, and full particulars, with proposal
forms, will be supplied on request. Insurance can also be effected
on goods shipped as cargo.
Full value of baggage should be insured, otherwise claims for
partial loss or damage will be met proportionately only.
In the event of a claim, a certificate must be obtained from
the Captain, showing the nature and extent of the damage or loss,
and the cause, and (a) in the case of passengers to Australia,
delivered, with the policy, to the Agents immediately on landing,
and the Agents have authority to settle claims which appear to
them to be m order ; or ( h ) in the case of passengers to South
Africa, forwarded, with the policy, to the P. & O. Service, London,
who will present the claim to the Assurance Society.


Insurance ( Cont .) Passengers are specially recommended
to effect insurance through the medium of the P. & O. Service,
in order that any claims which may arise may be dealt with
promptly, as above. Only passengers holding Marine and General
Insurance Policies can have their claims dealt with in the foregoing
manner.
Deck Chairs are not available on board these steamers, and
passengers requiring the use of same should provide their own.
Railway Square, Sydney.
Safe Arrival Telegrams. Passengers can, by payment of
7/6 at the time of booking, have their safe arrival at Cape Town,
Durban, Fremantle, Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, Launceston,
Hobart, New Zealand, or Queensland, telegraphed to their friends
in England. The full address of the person to whom the arrival
is to be announced must be registered when booking passage.
A ticket will then be given to the passenger, which, on arrival,
he will present to the nearest Agent of Reuters Ltd., who will
despatch the telegram. Passengers disembarking at Fremantle,
Adelaide, Launceston and Hobart must post their vouchers to
Reuters Ltd., Melbourne.
Wireless messages can be despatched by passengers at tariff
rates. Messages for transmission to the steamers are received at
any Postal Telegraph Office.


Correspondence for Passengers. All letters, telegrams,
or parcels sent to passengers at Ports of call must bear the
passenger’s full name and the name of the steamer by which he
is travelling, and should be addressed to the care of the Agents.
The Company will, on request, furnish dates for posting letters
to reach a steamer at any Port, and whilst every care will be taken
to ensure prompt delivery, neither the Company nor the Agents can
accept any responsibility for loss or non-delivery. It is advisable
that the name and address of the sender be written on the flap
of the envelope, or parcel, in order that packages missing the
steamer may be returned through the Post Office.
Goods of Dangerous Nature.— £5OO and £lOO
Penalties. —The Company hereby give notice that they will not
receive on board of their vessels any goods of a dangerous or
damaging nature. If any such goods be shipped without notice,
the shippers will not only be liable to the penalties imposed
by Statute, but also for all damages sustained in consequence of
such shipment.
The attention of shippers and passengers is specially directed
to the following clauses in the “ Merchant Shipping Acts,” relative
to articles of this description :
“ A person shall noi send or attempt to send by any vessel, British
“ or foreign and a person not being the master or owner of the vessel,
“ shall not carry or attempt to carry i7i any such vessel, any dangerous
“goods, without distinctly marking their nature 071 the outside of the
‘ ‘ package Co7itaini7ig the same, and giving written 7iotice of the nature
“ of these goods a?id of the >10771 e and address of the sender or carrier
“ thereof to the 77iaster or ow>ier of the vessel at or before the ti7ne op
“sending the sa7ne to he shipped or taking the same 071 board the
“ vessel.
“ If any perso7i fails witho7it reaso7iable cause to c0777p1y with this
“ section, he shall for each offence be liable to a fine 7iot exceeding
“ One Hundred Pounds ; or if he shows that he was 77ierely U7i
“ age 7l l i7i the shipment of any such goods as aforesaid, a 7l d was not
“ aware, and did not suspect, and had 710 reason to suspect, that the
“goods shipped by him were of a dangerous 7iature, then, not exceeding
“ Te7i Pounds.


“ For the purpose of this part of this Act the expression ‘Dangerous
“ Goods' means aquafortis, vitriol, naphtha, benzine, gunpowder,
“ lucifer matches, nitro-glycerine , petroleum, any explosives within
'■'■the meaning of the Explosives Act, iByg, and any other goods
“ which are of a dangerous nature.
“ A person shall not knowingly send or attempt to send by, or
11 carry or attempt to carry in, any vessel, British or foreign, any
“ dangerous goods under a false description a?id shall not falsely
“ describe the sender or carrier thereof, and if he acts in contravention
“of this section he shall for each offence be liable to a fine not
“ exceeding Five Hundred Pounds.”
Menus. It is the practice on board the steamers to provide an
ample and varied Bill of Fare, and the following are specimen
Menus :
Breakfast.
Oatmeal Porridge, Milk or Syrup,
Baked Fresh Haddock, Fine Herbs,
Scotch Collops, Mashed Potatoes,
Breakfast Rolls, Bread,
Butter, Preserves,
Tea, Coffee, Cocoa.
Children: Baked Fresh Haddock.
Dinner.
Pea Soup,
Roast Lamb, Mint Sauce,
Stewed Steak Jardiniere,
Boiled Potatoes, Green Peas,
Jam Pudding.
Children: Cottage Pie,
Rice Custard.
Tea.
Soused Herrings,
Savoury Croquettes,
Cold Roast Mutton,
Beetroot Salad, Pickles,
Seed Buns,
Bread and Butter, Preserves,
Tea, Coffee.
Children: Savoury Croquettes, Mashed Potatoes,
Tapioca Custard.
Biscuits and Cheese are provided at 8 p.m.
Infants. A reasonable supply of condensed milk is issued,
free of charge, for infants, but in the case of infants who are
accustomed to a particular brand of patent food, parents are
advised to take their own supplies, sufficient for the voyage.
Liquors, Tobacco, &c. The sale of liquors on board is
subject to the provisions of the Merchant Shipping Acts, and the
discretion of the Captain. Tobacco, Cigars, and Cigarettes can
be purchased on board at moderate prices.


Prepaid Passages. Persons wishing to provide passage for
friends from or to any port can pay the passage money to the
Company, or to any of the Agents, and a Passage Order will then
be issued in exchange, or, if desired, instructions can be sent by
cablegram, at small cost, by special codes provided for that purpose,
and remittances of money by cable can also be arranged when
desired at small expense, but the Company cannot be responsible
for any error which may occur in the despatch, delivery, coding or
decoding of such cables. Fares to or from all Ports will be
quoted on application.
Prepaid Passages Orders are available for any steamer of the
Line having room, at the fare paid, within twelve months from
date of issue, unless the purchaser wishes the validity restricted to
a shorter period.
Mount Wellington , Hobart.
South African Customs Tariff. Customs duty is levied
on ail articles other than worn personal clothing and personal
jewellery in quantities such as any traveller may reasonably be
supposed to possess and carry with him for his own use, or for the
use of such members of his family as may accompany him.
Articles belonging to another person taken by a passenger must
be declared and are liable to duty.


South African Customs Tariff (Cont.) Furniture and
household effects of passengers, whether new or second-hand, are
liable to duty ; if second hand and not for sale, their value for
assessment purposes is the price they would realise if offered for sale
in the open market in the Country whence exported.
Passengers must specially state if they have in their possession
any of the following :—Plants, bulbs, sugar cane, seeds, raw cotton,
or other vegetable matter and fruit of any description ; living
animals, bees, their larvae or eggs, honey, beeswax, used beehive
appliances, opium, cocaine, and other habit-forming drugs. These
articles are either prohibited from importation or allowed only under
restrictions, and non-declaration thereof' will render the passenger
liable to heavy penalties.
In the Monaro District (Snowy River ) N.S W.
Australian Customs Tariff. The Australian Customs
Tariff exempts from duty passengers personal effects, including
wearing apparel, jewellery, bicycles, motor cycles and side cars,
saddles, firearms, camp equipment of sportsmen, and other articles
for passengers’ own individual use ; also trophies won on board
(such as prizes in ship’s sports) prior to arrival in Australian waters.
The term “personal effects” does not cover such goods as motor cars,
carriages, boats or farming machinery.


The Tariff also exempts from duty passengers’ furniture and
household goods of a value not exceeding £ 100 per adult passenger
(two children ranking as one adult) provided the goods have been
in passenger’s actual use for at least one year. It is not a necessary
condition of exemption that the goods accompany the passenger, and
they will be admitted free of duty if arriving within twelve months
before or after the passenger.
New Zealand Customs Tariff. The New Zealand
Customs Tariff exempts passengers’ baggage and effects, including
only wearing apparel and
other personal effects that
have been worn or are in use
by persons arriving in the
Dominion ; also implements,
instruments, and tools of
trade, occupation or employ-
ment, of such persons, not
exceeding £lOO in value,
also household or other
effects which have been in
use for twelve months prior
to embarkation by the pas-
sengers and are intended for
their own personal use in
New Zealand, not exceeding
in value £ 100 per adult
passenger, provided the total
value of household or other
effects does not exceed £3OO
per family.
Library
Goods to which exemption applies may be admitted free if
imported within two years of the arrival in New Zealand of the
persons by whom they have been used.
Notices. Although every precaution has been taken in
compiling this Handbook, the Company cannot hold themselves
responsible for any errors or Inaccuracies that may be found herein :
the Company also reserve the right to alter any Fares, Regula-
tions, etc., as may be deemed desirable from time to time, without
notice.
The Company hereby give notice that they will not be
responsible for losses, delays, or any other consequences arising
from combinations of workmen, strikes, or civil commotion. The
Company also intimate that any advertised sailing is liable to
cancellation, alteration or deviation, with or without notice.




P. & O.
Service
TO
Australia via The Cape.
Head Office: 32, LIME STREET, LONDON, E.C.3.
Principal Agents:—
LAS PALMAS - - - - Miller & Co.
CAPE TOWN ... . Wm. Anderson & Co. Ltd
DURBAN (Natal) - - - Wm. Cotts & Co.
FREMANTLE & PERTH - George Wills & Co. Ltd
ALBANY Henry Wills & Co.
ADELAIDE George Wills & Co., Ltd
MELBOURNE - - - - John Sanderson & Co.
SYDNEY Gilchrist, Watt & Sanderson, Ltd
BRISBANE Wills, Gilchrist & Sanderson, Ltd
Sub-Agents in Tasmania:
HOBART C. Piesse & Co.
LAUNCESTON - - - - Ronald Gunn & Co.
Sub-Agents in New Zealand
WELLINGTON - - - -j
DUNEDIN I Murray, R° berts & Co.. Ltd.
GISBORNE '
AUCKLAND Henderson & Macfarlane.
LYTTeItoN RCH -- '} Kinsey & Co., Ltd.
NELSON J H. Cock & Co., Ltd
Passenger Agents Abroad :
Amsterdam - General Steam Transport Co New York - Tiros. Cook & Son.
~ - Hoyman & Schuurman, Ltd. ~ - Cunard S.S. Co.
Antwerp - John P. Best & Co. Paris - - Societe Francaise P. &O.
Bremen - General Steam Nav. Co.. Ltd. „ - Thos. Cook & Son.
Christiania - Chas. Bennett Rotterdam - General Steam Transport Co.
Copenhagen - Joachim Prahl. Stockholm - Nordisk Resebureau.
Dunkirk - - Gondrand Freres Toronto ' Melville Steamship and Touring
Gothenburg - Nordisk Resebureau Co.
Hamburg - General Steam Nav Co.. Ltd. „ ~ Cunard S.S. Co.
Local Agents:—
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
