

nn\ t tx
Paddy Long’s Budget
TOPICAL SONGS
(4UU& 2?# &£&£)>
INCLUDING
Georgie and Too-hilHous Toby,
OR THE
Together with other TOPICAL SONGS, this Budget contains
Paddy Long’s localisation of A LITTLE BIT OFF THE TOP,
which is the best yet published —no trouble to sing.
too-bill-ious OJ« * UIM
TO BV TUCKED KILL
** .


64U0
3*7
■ .1 L
George Dibbs you know’s a pal of mine.
He asked me to bis bank to dine,
And all the dudes from Potts’s Point were there.
The bleeding toffs they thought me great,
I was pinched and sent up by the beak
To a place where there was naught to sneak—
I had never been in Cockatoo before.
And all the joints of the family
\e Top ( localised ).
And whispered when I licked my plate,
“ He’s a blooming Coolgardie millionaire.”
The chap what waits came into the room with a prime colonial goose,
* A cup of gravy spilled right down his ribs.
I thought I’d like a sample of the stuffing and the saucee,
So, unbuttoning my vest, I said to Dibbs ;
Cut a little junk <sff the top for me, for me ; a crispy part off the top for me.
Stick the ladle in the juicy part—l’ll give the cue to stop ; I only want a
full tanuersworth off the top.
Cracked they were sorry to part with me,
Especially my mother-in-law —the bore.
They all lined up and asked me for a lock.of my golden hair—
I cut ’em from the back and at the side.
At last I asked the old dutch what partic lar tuft she fancied.
When she wiped her hose and feelingly replied ;
Pull a little bit out of the top for me, for me ; jera a little bit out of the top
for me ; I’ll tie it to my wooden leg and use it as a mop ; It will do in
place of Rough on Rats—a little biu off the top.
Behold a man who loves his wife—
I’ve ne’er been cruel in all my life ;
It’s my delight to squeeze and cuddle her.
Her eyes are of a funny kind—
The right one squints, the left is blind.
She’s got donkey ears just like her father.
She’s grown a huge carbuncle on the end of her Roamin’ nose,
So I took her to the hospital to-day.
I said to Dr. Crago : “ Sir, I want to kiss the missus,
But I can’t because her boko’s in the way—
So shave a bit off the top for me, for me ; File a little bit off the top for me.
Rasp away the pumpkin from Matilda’s mulberry drop ; All I want is
the ornament off the top.
While rambling in the fields one day
I saw a tidy pile of hay ;
I quickly started under it to creep,
I covered myself all over well :
What happened then to yon I’ll tell
When I had had a quarter-hour of sleep ;
I woke and found a bloke and his tart had come on top to spoon ;
Their cuddling fairly squashed my Darby Kell.
They didn’t twig that I was there—the nasty, funny, naughty pair—
I shouted out as hard as I could yell:
Shunt a little bit off the top for me ; Will you please to “ square the yards ”
for me ? The bloke can crack he’s going to tea and let the diner stop, &c.
Written, printed, and published by PAUL LONG, Sydney. ;f. v


An Exile from “ Workingman s
Paradise
Air : The Wearing of the Green.
Sung by PADDY LONG with unbounded approval.
There sits a man for Q,uean-be-yan whose doings are not known
Except by those who watched him close in all the tricks he’s shown,
He poses as a Democrat and Farmer’s Friend as well,
But to accomplish what he wants he cares not where they dwell.
A time-serving politician is he beyond a doubt,
Success to land monopoly in other words does shout,
And when he had true honest friends to use them was his plan ;
He styled them howlers and windbags—O’Sullivan’s the man.
O'Suliivau’s the man, O’Sullivan’s the man—
To bolster up monopolies he does what e’er he can.
He’s not the only man; they are all good men in Parliament —
staunch unionists ; that’s how they keep.up the current wages, £6
a week; and if ever a motion is tabled to “ take a little bit off
the top” you'll find it, like the attempt to rob New South Wales
of the Capital, “Postponed—rather !”
The reforms of Dan O’Connell to Irishmen were dear,
But those of the O’Sully are unquestionably queer,
By land laws most tyrannical poor Erin’s sons are thrown
From off the land and profit not by crops which they have sown.
And yet in Sunny New South Wales it suits his book to praise
The land monopolistic curse which keeps Ireland ahlaae.
If Pat his wits together put he’d extirpate each tool
Who carries on the same old game and blathers on Home Rule,
And blathers on Home Rule, and blathers on Home Rule,
’Tis through such men as Sullivan that landlords scoop the pool !
It's wonderful what a lot of sympathy some people have for
others when it doesn’t affect their own pockets. Some profess to
pity the Irish tenant farmer, but havn’t the slightest considera-
tion for the Australian farmer. Why ? Because they own land,
here and let it out to others who till it, and keep landlords (some
of whom are absentees) in idleness; in Ireland they don’t own a
sod —that’s why they sympathise.
Whi'e true Australians clamored for all to Federate,
Professional Politicians cried out retaliate !
Retaliate ! Retaliate ! they belched with all their might ;
Now, did they not urge farmers in Victoria on to fight ?
Yes, twas noted labor crushers who workmen’s pay would lower
And with a team of bullocks, too, drag better men fx'om power—


/A3&SS / f I ill
For a duty on oats and wheat and a stock-tax did prate.
But when they came to New South Wales cried out Retaliate !
Cried out Retaliate ! cried out Retaliate !
But if Melbourne’s made the Capital they’ll vote to federate.
They have changed front now, and instead of shouting
“Retaliate !” they cry out “ Federate !” because Melbourne, they
imagine, is to have the Capital, therefore a great deal of our
trade and commerce. If their hopes are realised they will go
back and accompany Georgie, who has a host of relations in Mel-
bourne. Ask yourselves this question : What is it that has made
George Eeid so popular in Melbourne ? Only a month or so
ago his name was hissed and hooted —that was when he analysed
Toby’s bill adversely; but now his praises are sung because they
think him a soft-snap and easily gulled. Every time a Con-
ference too*k place Victoria managed to diddle us. V by, up till a
few years ago it was of frequent occurrence to hear some member
of the Assembly remark,,in ridicule, “ Have another Conference !”
And the Aijgus used to “rub it in” by laughing at the way
Graham Berry had outwitted us, and they’ll do it again it we pass
a Commonwealth Bill in its present form. Bear this in mind,
the Melbourne papers have persistently agitated for the annexa-
tion of Riverina, not only for its geographical position, but for
the reason that the Melbourne dailies are read there generally.
They also boast that the Riverina wool is shipped at Melbourne,
but don’t mention the fact that their railways are run at a loss in
order to deprive Sydney of the trade. They went so far as to
urge on the residents of Riverina the great advantages that would
accrue if they succeeded in petitioning the Queen to grant a
separation from New South Wales. Remember, Victoria left us
w, en we were down, but now she is anxious to come back, allow
us to pay the giant share of taxation, and in return suckle the
Capital and never wean it; The Capital will enrich Melbourne
and force its refugees to return ; then imagine the preposterous
idea of asking her to disgorge—Peacock wdl laugh ! Once in
Melbourne, all the unemployed will be put on to rivet the Capital;
then, like Gibraltar, it will become impregnable.
Now, what made him leave Victoria is a question some will ask ;
He left the Workman’s Paradise, in Sydney’s sun to bask,
’Cause the wages were much higher, the matter not so lean,”
And man was treated as a man and not as a machine.
Then speak the nuth, O’Howler, do, if Melbourne’s what you say,
Give the reason why the bunnies, to Sydney come to stay ?
This should not now jour memory fail, for ’Si’s the year,
And you were called plain Sullivan, when last you settled here—
When last you settled here, when last you settled here ;
The O’s to catch the Irish vote—it can’t be bousrht with beer.


And all through Parr aching for Sweet Georg-ee Up to Date. Georgie and Too-bill-ious Toby;
Georgie.
An. sweet marie. Castlereaghs of To-day.
Sung by the Author to deafening laughter.
Air; All Through Sticking to a Soldier You’re a man of wriggling fame, sweet Georg-ee,
(without chorus). With a hu ? e Falstafflan frame—no symmetry; Air . TIT-WILLOW.
When you come a cropper down,
lf a circus is in town,
You mav get a job as clown, sweet Georg-ee. „ nrym , ~
Not yet sung by SYDNEY SMITH or ex-Justice Long before your watch was stolen, sweet Georg-ee, Slm ° b y the Modern IRON DUKE (Member for
And your waistcoat not so swollen, we did see, Wellington).
GOUED. Yoii refused a member’s pay.
Now you’re quite the other way,
As two thousand is 0.K., sweet Georgie. In Sydney there dwells two cute coves of the Bar,
I'm twenty shillings foolish and not a penny wise, Chorus Called Georgie and Toby Too-billJous ;
And all through barracking for Georgie. . And Commo*wealth Bills seem the light and the
The wife and kids keep howling—you should List to me, sweet Georg-ee, then you 11 see, star
listen to their cries If the Capital in Melbourne is to be, Of Georgie and Toby Too-bill-ious.
It’s all through barracking for Georgie. They’re so very fond of loot. New South Wales they are anxious we should
He said he was the very chap, the country he And George Turner is so cute, sacrifice,
would save ; ‘ There s a risk it may take root, sweet Georg-ee. Federation accept at almost any price,
They’d reach up to the Heavens all the promises With the prospect of getting them some billets
he <rave • Does it strike you, if we federate, Georg-ee, nice,
With°grief my hair will all turn grey—unless, of What a vei T small minority we’ll be ? Do Georgie and Toby Too-bill-ious.
course I shave E’en if Queensland does come in,
And all through barracking for Georgie. __ D “ doubtful if we’ll win _ When just leaving school, while the bumps were
When they’re counting out the “ tin, sweet being read
I have no income tax to pav—l only wish I had, Gecug-ee. . , n Of Toby Tobias Too-bill-ious,
And all through barracking for Georgie. et TO 6 to agree sweet Georg-ee, The d octor exclaimed, “ Oh, my eye, what a head
The dogs that mooch around my house the neigh- 0 re( rri? ie + ainer^P 0C e m §> 6 , ’ Has Toby Tobias Too-bill-ious !
hours say are mad That may prove a knock-out blow, Wkat a fierce, cunning eye ! what a thundering
■. .r-
-l I kv Georg-ee. That settled all doubts—he was sent to the law
aA ZlXu Ihm at Lome I got my wife to me Chome-Liet to me. ete. W». Tofey T.biae TocMll-i0,.,.
“YouTf have to go without your eggs—the hens Olq where are are those Treasury bills, sweet To take up a brief sure he never seems loth,
refuse to lav, ” ~A T ® or »' e 1 e : ~ ... , , » . This Toby Tobias Too-bill-ious ;
And all through barracking for Georgie. a A V- U , ,U. fiLpt four' mfilion'loan ’ ® e b f° r or a £> a i ns L be 'would collar them both,
° Yet thatgreat four-million loan, This Toby Tobias Too-bill-ious.
J acob Garrard lost on polling day the number of Were you travelling on your sweet Georg-ee ? orokerafolf- WM hC
his me.-s, Did you rise by your own brains, sweet Georg-ee, if fiL™ bad Upon nnf. more he’d have inavellod thp
And all through barracking for Georgie. Q r by those of Johnny Haynes, tell to me ? If thr ee 11 b hd b ayelled the
H mLfo C r k iel t 0 water -* ete “ i may rise much ‘higher still ’ Would Toby Tobias Too-bill-ious.
more or less, * By the Queen s Most Gracious Will, ,
And all through barracking for Georgie. Made the Duke of Tucker Hill, sweet Georg-ee! _ 7 . , ....
Though he got fairly taken in with “ atmospheric” For Jus Bill—nothing less—did he most fiercely
gas, Chorus—List to me, etc. fight
As Chairman of the Water Board he had the Inck Did Toby Tobias Too-bill-ious;
to pass, Encore Verse. But now by George Oust’im he’s hobbled all right
Which goes to show he can’t be styled a veritable When the bugle call is near, sweet Georg-ee, Is Toby Tobias Too-bill-ious,
ass And the war blasts reach your ear, sweet Georg-ee; Brought to mind when we heard of his boast giving
In going round barracking for Georgie. If the Russians and Chinese way
Are in millions in our seas, Was a comical saying of faithful Dog Tray—
Once I had no family, but now I’ve get a score, Will you snore at home at ease, sweet Georg-ee ; How that he could be faithful and also be-Tray,
And all through barracking for Georgie. 0r Y 1 ! 1 >' ou S? r mht to the fore, sweet Georg-ee. Like Georgie and Toby Too-bill-ious ?
They’ll have to sleep upon the roof if we get any With intent of spilling gore, sweet Gecrg-ee .
more, If Y ou do 111 name a man Through the City on poll-day on drags they all
And all through barracking for Georgie. That you 11 shove right in the van came
Some years ago my wife she looked as hungry as a That s the “ pest, O Sullivan, sweet Georg-ee. Did Toby, Smith, Wise, and O’Connor.
mouse; Original Chorus. At night at the Empire was shouted champagne
She’s just as fat as Georgie now—you ought to Come with me, sweet Georgie, then you’ll see ByToby(P) to all men of honor.
hear her rouse ! ‘ A state of things that’s due in part to thee ; Old Granny put up eighty thousand at nine ;
For family requirements we’ll soon want a larger While the workers of this land It was then that Too-bill-ious out such a shine ;
house, Are for tucker shifting sand At ten they went home—l suppose to recline—
And all through barracking for Georgie. Your dimensions do expand, sweet Geergie. Poor Toby, Smith, Wise, aud O’Connor.
Georgie-Porgie, you know, gawe a wriggling
Yes-No
To the Commonwealth Bill of poor Toby.
He wished it to well, a warm climate below,
And with it poor Too-bill-ious Toby.
Now to puff up his own Bill he thinks it good biz—
Gives an emphatic “ Yes ” just because it is his ;
It will croak like the fir St—in a sort of a fizz!
How Poor Pat Got Done In ”
by O' Flynn,
New and Original Irish Song and Dance,
, Poor Georgie and Too-bill-ious Toby.
Music will be ready in a few days.
0 . , .. , , , . Originally intended for Mr. John Coleman.
Strike out all such names when you go up to vote
As Georgie, Smith, Wise, and Too-bill-ious -RiD-bts reserved
Vote only for those who are worthy of note — ° ' '
Not Georgie, Smith,Wise, nor Too-bill-ious. I’ve cut turf in the bogs of Quid Erin,
Reckon up every man each action well weigh ; Pve d the spuds in Kilrud,
Think of Ireland when sold by that “wretch I’ve wheeled coal without smoke from Kilkenny,
Oastlereagh, And water I’ve fetched without mud.
And revmmber we ve men of his stamp here to-day IVe seen tricks in time, too,
In Georgie, Smith, Wise, and Too-bill-ious, But the one played on Paddy Townsend-
By the Holy Saint Patrick, just listen,
Encore Verses. It will make all your hair stand on end
The MacSharry cow has been milked very fast
By Toby, Bruce Smith,-and O'Connor. Chorus —
“Do the Government stroke, L that will make it to Paddy Townsend was nigh twenty stone, sure,
t as t, ’ . Quite a pigmy was little O’Flynn ;
Said Toby to Smith and O Connor. Between them a weighing match happened,
Two mugs have been sucked pretty well up to And j’ m d d if O’Fiynn didn’t win
date—
Some thousands MacSharry and much more the Said Pat, “ I’m the biggest man living
State. I’ll weigh any boy in the town !”
What a time there will be if we do federate Then O’Flynn sneaked away, slyly saying,
With Toby, Bruce Smith, and O’Connor ! “ Faix, begorra, 111 take Paddy down !”
Then he went, and Tim Murphy, the plumber.
Representing East Sydney a twist did perform Rilled his overcoat linings with lead,
This Toby Tobias Too-bill-ious. And when all leaden blocks got exhausted
Went to bed in freetrade, chucked it-over mom, He s hoved a few bricks in instead.
Did Toby Tobias Too-bill-ious.
Does he think for a moment we’re too blind to Chorus—Paddy Townsend, etc.
know
How funny he is in Macquarie-street Show ? Then back came O’Flynn with a challenge
Quite an adept at turning and jumping Jim Crow <* Jf wl fh all my clothes on, if you choose
Is Toby Tobias Too-bill-ious. j>jj weigh you for drinks round the corner,)
And the lightest man pays for the booze.
He’s always been partial to men of great wealth To a we ighing machine they all atarted,
Has Toby Tobias Too-bill-ious O’Flynn won by two stone and four;
No matter how gained, but of course not by stealth, p a ddy’s so fairly disgusted,
This Toby Tobias Too-bill-ious. jje Ba ys he’ll go weighing no more.
I remember the time, when his Chief was away,
Demonstrated was this in a very plain way, They stopped at the pub till “ close-up” time,
When the Broken Hill miners were clean put Drinking “ Long life to Phelim O’Flynn;
away Then they°startcd to fight with each other,
By Toby Tobias Too-bill-ious. And both . p at and O’Flynn get “ run in.
To Managers, Music Hall Singers,
Song-book Publishers, &c.—The author
of these songs is willing, on terms, to write
to order Comic, Serio-comic, National, and
Topical Songs, Parodies, Recitations, or
Gags ; also, Political Songs (provided they
are not contrary to his opinions).
Letters addressed Paul Long (Mr. R.
Leaver, Clothier), 371 Kent-st., Sydney,
will receive prompt attention.
Orders for Budget can be sent same
address.
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC.
Should the Author receive sufficient en-
couragement to enable him to do so, it is
his intention to write and publish Songs,
with new music, dealing with business and
social injustices in New South Wales.
These Songs are ir *J"2, Wfl, i v s 3
newsagents can selffij^raS^^^iy^tet^hor
tabes all respon
P. LONG,## Ken£-stij^jj^iey.
