

"Hitherto hath the Lord
helped us.”
fiftieth
Anniversary
1877
1927
Paddington
Methodist
Church
SOUVENIR




Paddington Methodist Church
REV. JOHN WESLEY.
“The best of all is God is
with us.”
Price. Is. 6d.
OXFOKD STKEET, PADDINGTON
Fiftieth Anniversary
1877 * 1927
Rev. J. EGAN MOULTON. B.A.
Superintendent Minister
Epivorth Press f 218 Castlercnah Street, Sydney,
REV. S. LEIGH.
“The Lord hath clone great
things for us, whereof we
are glad.”


A FOREWORD
Time lings its changes and its wheel moves forward
with astonishing rapidity, leaving its imprint, “for bet-
ter or worse,” in its wake. As regards the Padding-
ton locality, this is in strong evidence. The sandhills
of 1863 have disappeared; the pump that stood at the
corner of the present Church property is no more; its
mate is still on view near the Victoria Barracks. There
is no covered-in stream of water that eventually flowed
into the Botanical Gardens (so it is stated) ; or the
sign of the cascade in the present street of that name:
or the quarry at the icar of the present Memorial Hall.
These, and many other such landmarks, have all dis-
appeared in the march of Time, and we see, in their
stead, the evidences of a remaikable progress, civically
and socially. But with the remarkable commercial
advancement of the locality, the Church, to which we
belong has kept pace, and the property as a whole
holds no mean place by comparison with others in the
metropolitan area.
The Jubilee of the Church which faces Oxford Street
is to be commemorated in May of this year, and it is
the purport of this Souvenir to attempt to give the
salient features in connection with the life of this Church
from its inception. It will be at once evident that, in
the compressed limits of such an effort, there will be
no margin for any detail. Emphasis cannot, therefore,
be laid on the work and service of the devoted men
and women, who so richly deserve a lengthier recogni-
tion. The repression of some names, and the admis-
sion of others, is unavoidable, and we ask for the kind
indulgence of the reader in this connection. Can we
not remember that it is the efforts of the combined
whole, and not of the individual unit, that ever con-
tiibutes to the life and progress of any cause?
The compiler realizes that in this attempted record
there will be, probably, many imperfections, but trusts
that the reader will find much of interest, notwith-
standing, in its pages. He expresses his indebtedness to
the members of the Souvenir Committee for their
valued help.
At the end will be found an Appendix of interest-
ing memoranda, which will be an interesting link with


the memorable past, though strict chronology has not
always been found possible in the recorded lists. There
will be, also, the programme of the Jubilee Services
and Public Functions.
We trust that the Commemoration as a whole will
reach the high water-mark of intense spiritual fervour,
a fervour that will be a Heaven-sent inspiration for
the work that lies before us in the future.
As the trees in our Church grounds were once an
inspiration to one in the past to burst into song, let
the closing lines of one of her stanzas be the slogan
to us all for the future:
“O beautiful trees, with your waving boughs,
You are dumb—but a message new
You send to us from your tow’ring height — l
Be earnest, steadfast, true.”
Let us, therefore, praise God—
“for all that is past,
And trust Him for all that’s to come.”
THE SUPERINTENDENT.


THE PRESENT CHURCH AND PROPERTY.


REV. CHAS OLDEN.
1st Superintendent of Waverley-Paddington
Circuit, 1875.
REV. ADIN PARSONS
1st Superintendent of Paddington Circuit, 1888.
REV. J. EGAN MOULTON, B.A..
(Present Superintendent)




Paddington Methodist Church
1877 FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY 1927
Thou shalt remember all the way ... thy Cod hath led thee these fifty years.’
EARLY HISTORY
«N the limited space of a Souvenir it would
be impossible to attempt to give in detail
the rise and growth of the above Church.
The most that can be done is to strive to
condense into as small a space as possible the
most important features. The writer has before him
a “View of Paddington from the Sandhills,” and the
date is 1863. It would be hardly possible to visualize
the locality in which our Church had its rise when,
as we are told, “it dates back from 1848, when the
late Mr. Thomas Cowlishaw, senior, opened a Sun-
day School in a small house in Underwood Street.”
The building was altered so as “to accommodate the
School, and shortly afterwards a Church service was
established, being held every Sunday afternoon.” It
is believed that the Cause was “an offshoot of the
Bourke Street Sunday School.”
We may divide the development of our Cause in
Paddington into three (3) periods:—
1848-1875—when it was at first an “offshoot” of
the Bourke Street Cause, and
afterwards worked from the
Waverley Circuit.
1875-1887—when it was part of the Waverley-
Paddington Circuit.
1887-1927—when it became an independent
Circuit.
THE FIRST CHURCH
The foundation of the first Church was laid in
1850 by Mr. Thomas Cowlishaw, senior. An old docu-
ment of 1855, referring to Church work, contains the
following entry:—
“Paddington: an acre of land granted by Govern-
ment, on which is erected a weatherboard chapel,
45 X 25 feet, at a cost of £l,OOO. Debt, £250.”


This Church did duty for twenty-five years, and a
glance at the photo., inserted in this Souvenir, shows
that it was later enlarged. When it was superseded by
the present massive and commodious stone Church, it
was used as a Sunday School, until, on the same site,
the present “George Smith Memorial Hall” (1919)
took its place. The name of “Noah’s Ark” was applied
to the first and original building, and in it the Rev.
Adin Parsons preached his trial sermon (1863).
“THE NEW CHURCH.”
This is, as is seen, a quotation, and carries the mind
back fifty years. It refers to the present building,
which, to quote an extract from The Sydney Mail, June
27, 1877, is described as “a model of what a Wes-
leyan Church should be; the Church’s beauty attracts
the attention of the passers-by and improves the ap-
pearance of the neighbourhood.” And the consensus of
opinion with the passing years still subscribes to the
same eulogy as regards its exterior appearance. But
its internal aspect is none the less imposing. As one
enters this truly ecclesiastical sanctuary, one is at once
drawn to the spirit of worship.
The foundation stone was laid by the Hon. E. Vic-
kery, M.L.C., on February 3, 1877. The preliminary
service was conducted by the Rev. J. B. Waterhouse
(ex-President), and the sermon preached by Rev. J.
H. Fletcher (President of Newington College). Par-
ticulars of the opening and following Sunday services,
and the Public Meeting in connection, will appear in
the Appendix. “The total cost, including fittings, organ,
etc., ran well on to £6,000.” The financial difficulties
in such an ambitious enterprise were very materially
helped by the generosity of kind friends of the Waver-
ley Circuit, and those more intimately concerned,
“amongst whom were Mr. Vickery, Mrs. Cowlishaw,
Mrs. Schofield, Rev. G. Hurst, Mr. J. T. Neale and
many others, in conjunction with the Rev. Chas. Olden.”
“The debt, however, remained a heavy burden for
many years, until the Government resumed portion of
the land for Public School purposes, which freed the
Trustees from further anxiety, leaving the whole of
the property, consisting of Church, School Hall, Par-
sonage, and caretaker’s cottage free of debt.” This is
the sanctuary whose Jubilee we are now commemorating.
THE GEORGE SMITH MEMORIAL HALL
The present pretentious and handsome building under
the above appellation was erected in 1919 in the pas-
torate of the Rev. Jas. Green, C.M.G., V.D., and to
him is due the credit of carrying out to an effective
conclusion this imposing structure during a period of
great financial stress. It stands on the identical site




of the first Church, and graces the Church property
in no small degree. As its name indicates, it is an
in memorialn of the very devoted work and services
of Mr. George Smith, a name that is still held in
loving esteem by all who knew him. It has varying
degrees of usefulness, being utilized for Church and
outside social functions, as well as for the Sunday
School, and is registered as a rent-producing hall. The
levenue from these and other sources is a great help
financially, so that the Trust liabilities on this great
asset, which cost roughly about £3,000, is rapidly being
reduced. We tender here our sincere thanks to the
great Home Mission Executive, with its connexionally
wide and helpful Loan Fund, for its kindly assistance
in lightening the burden in this connection.
The foundation stones were laid by Mrs. J. H.
Burnet and Mr. H. S. Winning, and the building was
officially opened by the Governor, Sir Walter David-
son in 1920.
The inauguration of the Parsonage, a two-storied,
capacious and comfortable residence, dates back to the
last year of the Rev. K. A. Corner’s term. The Rev.
Adin Parsons, who is still with us, was the first occu-
pant of it, and has the honour of being the first Superin-
tendent Minister of the divided Circuit (1886).
Our Church property, as a whole, with its valuable
land and conspicuous buildings, reaching from Oxford
to Gordon Streets, is one of which we mat' justly be
proud.
AN HONOURED CIRCUIT
As has already been stated, the Trustees have
decreed that, apart from the Church buildings, old and
new, and a group of present-day officials, the photos,
only of Ministers who have laboured in this Circuit
should be included in this Souvenir. Those thus
honoured will be appreciative of such a mark of recog-
nition. At the same time they will sincerely regret the
exclusion of those of the interested band of laymen who
have so largely contributed to the life and growth of
the Church cause. And when one turns to review the
list of the ministerial brethren who have laboured in
this sphere for the past fifty years, how privileged the
Circuit seems to have been in its Conference appoint-
ments! Amongst them there have been two General
Presidents, two General Conference Secretaries, nine
Presidents and two Secretaries of the New South Wales
Conference, and all, or the large majority of them,
Chairmen of Districts. There have also been two
Bookroom Stewards, one Editor of “The Methodist.’’
The Foreign Mission Field is represented by two of
its Circuit Ministers, and one of its members is still a
Sister in the work. In the Appendix we have given a
tabulation of these for the interested reader’s perusal,
with the official positions that they respectively held and




the dates. Conspicuous among these Is the name of Dr.
J. E. Carruthers, who, among many other high con-
nexional positions, has been the outstanding protagonist
of the Supernumerary Fund, and is still virile with
tongue and pen. And in the same category we must
place the Revs. Dr. George Lane and W. H. Beale.
Who will forget the power and usefulness of their
services, connexionally and otherwise? The late Rev.
Harold Wheen, too, will live long in the memory of
the Church for his advocacy of the Child, as evinced
in the successful inauguration and development of the
Y.P.D. While these loom large in our present-day
vision, the appended list will show others who did yeo-
man service for God. But enough has been said to
sound the rallying cry note of joyous pride for the dis-
tinguished results attained by men upon whom the
Divine Spirit moved. But our thought in this con-
nection does not stop here. Among the laymen also the
names of Vickery, Cowlishaw, Neale, Leggo, Wilmott,
McKenny, Winning, Smith, Tuke, Cummins, Harper,
Nicholson, Small, Hodge, Newland and Mainwaring
are closely associated, and with honour, to Paddington
Methodism of the past; those of others, many others
who, in large or small measure, as divinely endowed,
gave of their best to the Church of their love. The
more we ponder over these things the higher our
optimism rises. How can failure attend an appeal
made with such a past? How can the apparently high
objective be considered as beyond the powers of present
realization ?
CAMERON STREET
Cameron Street was never a very helpful adjunct
to the Circuit, and, after repeated efforts on the part of
interested workers, it quietly passed out of existence.
In the attempts made to which we have referred, the
late Mr. George Smith and Mr. J. Watson took a
prominent part, and later, the late Mr. Ueth Edwards.
Associated with those mentioned were Messrs. Hugh
Allen, F. H. Hodge, George Watson and J. Nicholson,
junior.
REVIVAL
During the Rev. J. S. Austin’s term, in 1889, a
Revival broke out in the Circuit, which brought in a
rich harvest of souls, who, subsequently, have been very
useful assets to the Church life and organization. It
was then, we are told, that the seating capacity was
taxed to its uttermost capacity. Its effect was also felt
in Dr. George Lane’s time.
MISSION WORK
While the Paddington Circuit is not a Mission in
the usual sense of the term, a great deal of social
work is being effected by the deaconess, Sister Nellie, who
has done excellent service for seven years. Apart from
the great assistance that she is, and has been, to the


REV. J. S. AUSTIN.
REV. F. E. FLETCHER, M.A.


resident Minister in Circuit efforts and in visitation,
special emphasis must be laid on her systematic labours
amongst the poor, and especially at the Royal Hospital
for Women, every bed in which is regularly visited
once a week. At Christmas time also she is indefatigable
in her distribution of parcels of food to the needy. She
is a great asset in these and other respects to the
Circuit.
CHURCH ORGANIZATIONS
Sunday School.- —From what has been said, it would
seem as if the Paddington Cause owed its primary
existence to the Sunday School founded by T. Cowli-
shaw, senior. In this highly important branch of our
Church work, Paddington has been exceedingly for-
tunate in the past in its Sunday School executives, with
Superintendents and teachers, who have been truly
seized with the important task of moulding the young
life of the community. They toiled in the early days,
as since, and have not toiled in vain, as could be easily
illustrated did space permit. Numbers grew apace,
until the record of close upon 400 scholars on the roll
was reached. Those must have been halcyon days,
indeed, of Church life, when it was possible for a vigo-
rous Young Men’s Class, with a membership of 30,
to meet each Sunday in the Minister’s vestry at 4
o’clock, with Mr. Wotton as the “dear old leader,
kind and true.” His influence, evidently, was more
than temporary, when it could impel one of its mem-
bers to break into an eulogy of song of twenty-two
stanzas of four lines each, bearing the imprimatur of
“Geo. J. Watson,” and the date of “August 4, 1892.”
It had musical activities, too, with a choir which ren-
dered cantatas of “The River Singers” type (to men-
tion only one), not only at home, but abroad, at Manly
and other suburbs.
Since then, alas! Time has wrought its unkind
changes in this respect for some years past. The
altered conditions of the locality, whereby Paddington
has become a metropolitan, rather than a residential,
area, has affected the Sunday School life, as it has the
Church attendance. The number of Methodist child-
ren in the Public School is only very small to-day, and
hence our Sunday School roll shows a discouraging com-
parison with former years. The moving population, so
characteristic of this suburb, has now made itself felt
in the difficulty of providing superintendents of long
standing. The local Minister at present is in charge
awaiting the arrival of a much-needed man to step
into the breach. Nevertheless, amid the depressing
handicap of decreasing numbers, the staff is still worthily
loyal, and do their best in prayerful anticipation of the
turning of the tide. But, though numerically small,
yet the children give a very good account of themselves
in other channels of usefulness. For our Home and
Foreign Missions our collectors do magnificently, and


REV. K. A. CORNER.
REV. GEORGE LANE, D.D.


the honours gained in the Y.P.D. Artnual Examinations
of late years show excellent results.
Dorothy Sanderson’s passes have been consistently ex-
cellent, and she has obtained several prizes in her
Division for the School. Especially is this true for
1926, when, in addition to a prize, she gained the
silver medal for proficiency, with a mark of 99 per
cent. The School passed 22 (out of the 23 who sat),
with a very high aggregate percentage, and were beaten
for the much-coveted Bannerette in our Section by the
narrow margin of only .7. Mr. H. S. Winning and
Sister Nellie, who have for some years been the coaches
for this examination, are to be heartily congratulated
on such results, and deserve our hearty thanks.
YOUNG PEOPLE’S OR’GANIZATIONS
The Girls’ Club, which meets every Monday night,
has a good membership. Mrs. Moulton is the Presi-
dent, with Sister Nellie as a most efficient Director. The
latter is also in charge of the Juniors. The interest of
both Clubs is not on the wane, as is evident from the
sums that they both have raised for the Jubilee ,and
other Funds.'.
The shortage,of Young Men of our Church in late
years, which is to, be deplored, has rendered it very
difficult to run a club at all. That started two years
ago has ceased to be, though it has to its credit also the
raising of a considerable amount for the Jubilee
Fund.
With respect to the elder boys of the Sunday School,
a Junior Club has already been formed, and, through
the kindness of the Secretary of the Y.M.C.A., an ar-
rangement has been entered into whereby the extension
system of their work to our boys here has been inaugur-
ated, a system which still permits us to retain our own
identity. This already gives a rich promise of success.
It is still in its initial stages, however, and cannot yet
boast of large numbers.
CLASS MEETING AND C.E.
As in other Churches, the Class Meeting and Chris-
tian Endeavour have given place to other young people’s
organizations. While this is greatly to be regretted,
yet, in the altered conditions of the times, these impor-
tant weekly helps to the spiritual life, have, unfor-
tunately, but small attraction for the young life of our
community. In order, therefore, not to lose our hold
altogether upon the young manhood and womanhood of
our Church, there seems to be no other alternative but,
to strive to hold them by some other means. We are
in the throes of a dilemma, and are seeking still, in
this way, to save the rising generation from drifting.
The devotional element is not lost sight of while Ve
cater for the Intellectual, Physical and Social as well.


KEY. J. E. CARRUTHERS, D.D.
REV. W. H. BEALE


LADIES’ CHURCH AID
This important branch of our Church machinery had
its initiation during the Rev. W. H. Reale’s term of
office. We learn that Mrs. Furze was the first Secre-
tary and Mrs. Mark Lawler the first Treasurer. Since
then the L.C.A. have ever shown the greatest interest
in the financial welfare of the Church, and, by their
continuous devotion, have been the backbone of the Cir-
cuit and Trust needs. Annually they take charge and
organize the Reunion Tea (September) and the Fair
(December), and throughout the year, by Jumble Sales
and other functions, they render very valuable assistance
in this connection. In the Jubilee celebrations they will
not be found wanting. To their indefatigable energy
and sustained interest for so many years the Church
owes a deep debt of gratitude.
THE WOMEN’S F.M. AUXILIARY
A Branch of this important Society has been in opera-
tion for some time. Their monthly meetings are
coincident with that of the L.C.A., and the members of
the one are those of the other. They have done, and
are still doing, excellent work.
CHOIR
All through the exigencies of Church life, the Choir
has been responsible, in no small measure, for the
creating of an inspirational atmosphere at the Sunday
Services. Paddington, evidently, has been exceedingly
fortunate in its Choir Conductors and Organists. One
still hears of the wonderful work accomplished under
the baton of Mr. Cotterill, headmaster of the local
school. During Dr. George Lane’s term, especially,
there was a boom in this department. We read of
tests being required before admission, so great seems to
have been the numbers eligible. In this role the name
of Mr. George Smith is outstanding, for, apart from
his devoted service in almost every other official depart-
ment of the Church organization, he held the position
of both Organist and Choirmaster for a longer term
than any of his predecessors. The only break in the
continuity of that valued service being when, in his con-
cern for the welfare of the Cameron Street Cause, he
vacated his seat for a short period and laboured nobly
there. Choice tunes of his own composition are still
appreciatively sung. After his demise his mantle fell
on his (as gifted) son, Dr. Percy, who still fills the
twin positions, and, if the times have changed in the
diminution of the congregations of our depleted Cause,
every visitor will readily testify to the high watermark
quality of the music of the sanctuary under his con-
spicuously able leadership. Nor is the Circuit or Sun-
day School unmindful of his training of the children
for the Sunday School Anniversaries for many con-
secutive years, nor of the excellence of their singing,
Miss Carter for some years has been a very loyal morn-


REV. FRANK FIRTH.
REV. JAS. A. NOLAN.


ing organist. The present pipe organ was fully installed
in 1887, during the pastorate of the Rev. Adin Parsons,
replacing the American organ in requisition before that
time. The second of the old harmoniums, in use in
the earliest years of Church ministry, is still utilized
on occasions, and is sheltered in the room at the rear
of the Memorial Hall.
CONCLUSION
The Voice of the Past.
The retrospect of fifty years, over the course of
which our present Church has travelled, awakens surely
first and foremost the sense of the abiding goodness of
God. What a legacy to the present the noble spirit,
which characterised the grand type of men and women
who undauntedly wrestled hard with the perplexing
problems, financial and otherwise, of their day, and won
through! The pioneers of the Past should ever be held
in grateful remembrance. The very existence of the
Church of to-day we owe to them. The Power of God
overshadowed theirs, and their confidence in Him
wrought the unexpected. Let their spirit and trust be
ours, as we face the future with its difficulties. To those
who have thus served, the Church of to-day desires to
offer its grateful appreciation. God buries His work-
men, but still carries on His work. This is now our
task.
The present rising generation owes, too, a deep debt
to those who are still in the so-called “fighting-line,”
and who, for so many years, have worthily kept the
flag flying. To the younger members of this body the
spirit of the Past should speak with no uncertain voice.
To the urgent “Who will go for us?” theirs should be
the unhesitating reply, “Here am I, send me.”
The Voice of the Present.
"What shall I render unto the Lord for all His benefits
unto me?”
The Call is, assuredly, for Thanksgiving to God for
the mercies of the Past, so bountifully bestowed; for
the gift of devoted workers “who, though dead,” by
their effective work achieved, “still speak to us”; for
“grace to help” afforded “in the time” without number
“of need”; for the environment of privilege and oppor-
tunity, spiritually and materially, all calculated to
operate upon, and influence, the highest and best
within us.
THE APPEAL
"How Much Owest Thou?”
With the lapse of so long a period, ./it is not a matter
of surprise to find that the official custodians of the
Church Trust have found it necessary to send out an
urgent appeal for financial assistance to enable them to
effect necessary repairs and improvements to the pro-


REV. HAROLD WHEEN.
REV. CHAS. W. GRAHAM.
REV. B. J. MEEK.


perty as a whole, and to the Church building in par-
ticular. This, a Jubilee Commemoration, is a most
fitting opportunity. After careful inspection and deliber-
ation, it has been decided to make the objective £SOO,
as a minimum, for the satisfactory carrying out of such
a project. With depleted numbers and the constant
flux of icmovals, such an amount might be considered
a moral impossibility. Yet the need is imperative. Un-
aided, it is, no doubt, too great at task; but the Cir-
cuit (per medium of a printed circular) is sounding a
loud tocsin to all and sundry, to whom, in the past
and present, this special Church has brought, into the
focus of their lives, the Grace of God and all the other
indefinable emoluments of the Christian religion. It
urges on all such to remember the untiring ministries of
both Ministers and Laymen, who, labouring here, have
left an indelible impress of high ideals on their heart
and soul.
We are confident, therefore, that the response to the
promissory slips, enclosed and otherwise distributed for
this Jubilee Appeal, will not be devoid of a generous
response that will at once assure the realization of the
desired objective. Already, by preparatory efforts on
the part of the Ladies’ Church Aid, the young people of
the Church, and the repeated generosity of our kind
benefactress, Mrs. Fieldhouse, the sum of £l7O has
been raised, and the initial process of improvement and
renovation has been rendered possible thereby and a
commencement made.
In such a review of the past, Paddington can truly
say:
“Hitherto has the Lord helped us."
For the Future that lies unknown before her, she can
still cling to the gracious promise of her Lord and
Master:
“Lo, I am with you ahvny,"
and trustfully sing:
“O God, our Help in ages past,
Our Hope for years to come."
The spirit of the Past is not dead, and the sacri-
fice evinced in the lean years must surely find expression
in the strenuous demands of to-day. The aftermath of
such effort will bring a reward far beyond the power
of description, and the resultant, a wealth of restful
satisfaction of soul. With confidence, then, we await
the issue.
"/« the Lord Jehovah is Everlasting Strength.”


REV. GEORGE LAVERTY.
(Secretary of Conference)
REV. JAS. GREEN, C.M.G., V.D.
(Senior Chaplain)
REV. W. G. WILLARD.


Appendix of Interesting Memoranda.
History of Paddington Methodist Church.
“Bless the Lord and forget not all His benefits."
PADDINGTON METHODIST CHURCH.
1848—1927.
“The Wesleyan was the pioneer Church in Paddington,
being an off-shoot of Bourke Street.”*
1848. —The late Mr. Thomas Cowlishaw, senior, altered a
small house between Union and William Streets, for
the first Paddington Sunday School, and services were first
held on Sunday afternoons.
1849. —May: Afternoon services were changed to the even-
ing. August: Afternoon services recommended, in addi-
tion to evening. December: Evening services were discon-
tinued, but again resumed in May, 1850, and given up again
in August, 1850. Mr. Apps was the first Sunday School
Superintendent. Mr. Hardwick the first Secretary. July,
1849: Mr. Hillier was appointed Superintendent. Mr. Shep-
herd appointed Secretary.
1855.—A grant of land, having been made by the Govern-
ment, at the time of the gold fever, the old Chapel (and
present Sunday School) was built. Rev. John Watsford
*St David’s (Presbyterian) was erected in 1857.
was Pastor (Bourke Street Circuit), and Mr. Thomas Cow-
lishaw, senior, laid the foundation stone on the north-east
corner. Mr. Westaway, of Paddington, and Mr. Richard
Watkin, of Waverley, each provided a table at the open-
ing. Mr. George Smith, our Church Organist and Steward,
came to the Church shortly after the opening.*
1877 —The present Church was opened, the foundation stone
having been laid by the late Hon. Ebezener Vickery, M.L.C.
The opening services were held on Saturday, February 3,
1887, at 3 p.m.” (The above information was furnished by
the following;—The late Hon. Ebenezer Vickery, M.L.C.,
the late Mr. Thomas Light (Croydon), Mr. Westaway
(Paddington Street), Revs. John Watsford and J. W.
Collier.) From another record the date of the first Church
building is given at 1850. In Conference Minutes of 1855
the following entry appears:—“Paddington: An acre of
land granted by Government, on which is erected a weather-
board chapel, 45 x 25ft, at a cost of £l,OOO. Debt, £250.”
It was therefore standing in 1854. Exact date of erec-
tion, therefore, is not quite clear; but lies between 1850 and
1854.
* Actual date, 1869,


REV. HENRY WILES.
REV. W. J. WALKER.


1867. —Steps taken to erect a more substantial building, but
nothing of a practical nature done until 1876, when con-
tracts were accepted for a new Church.
1877, February 3. —Opening of present Church. Cost, with
extras, close on £6,000. Foundation stone laid by Hon. E.
Vickery, M.L.C. Opening sermon by Rev. J. H. Fletcher
(President of Newington College). Rev. J. B. Waterhouse
in charge of service.
In connection with the service the following notice ap-
peared in the issue of “S.M. Herald,” 2nd February, 1877:
“Sunday, 4th.—ll a.m., Rev. W. Curnow; 3 p.m. (Young
People’s Service), Rev. G. Woolnough, M.A.; 7 p.m., Rev.
W. B. Boyce (Secretary of Wesleyan Missionary Society).
“Tuesday, 6th.—Tea and Public Meeting at 6.30 and 7
p.m. Chairman, Mr. E. Vickery. Rev. Dr. Barry, Rev. G.
Frazer, M.A., and H. H. Gaud and others will deliver
addresses.
“Selections of sacred music by the York Street Choir,
under the management of J. S. Huthnance.
“Sunday, 9th.—The following Ministers: Rev. Dr. Steel
and Rev. W. Curnow.”
An extract from “The Christian Advocate,” in this con-
nection, reads as follows:
“Through the enterprise of our friends in the Waverley
Circuit, and the liberality cf those persons more intimately
concerned, together with many outside the Church, the
enterprise was brought to a successful issue, at a total
cost of £4,500. Financial difficulties, which were very great,
were nobly met by Mr. E. Vickery and the late Mr. Thomas
Cowlishaw, in conjunction with the Minister, the Rev'. Chas.
Olden.
“Architect, Thomas Rowe; contractor, for the mason work,
Mr. Sellers; carpentry and joinery, Mr. Leggo; gasfitter,
Mr. Turner; glazing, Falconer & Sherwln; upholstering,
David Jones.”
The first mention of the Paddington Circuit in Station
Sheet appears in “Minutes of New South Wales and Queens-
land Conference of 1875” (see below for entry).
PRESENT CHURCH built 1877.
PRESENT PARSONAGE built 1886.
FIRST RESIDENT SUPERINTENDENT, Rev. Adin Parsons,
1888.
WAVERLEY-PADDINGTON CIRCUIT.
1875 — Rev. Charles Oiden; one to be sent from England (Pad-
dington), (Supernumerary), Rev. W. Schofield.
1876 Rev. Chas. Olden; one to be sent.
1877 — Rev. Frank Firth.
Rev. W. Woolls Rutledge.
1878 — Rev. Frank Firth.
Rev. B. J. Meek.
1879 Rev. Frank Firth.
Rev. W. C. Thompson.
1880— —Rev. Jas. A. Nolan.
Rev. J. C. Warner.
1882 —Rev. Jas. A. Nolan.
Rev. F. E. Fletcher.
IGG3-5 —Rev. W. E. Bourne.
Rev. K. A. Corner.
1886-7 —Rev. Jas. Woclnough
Rev. Adin Parsons.
The indented names those of second Minister, who was
stationed at Paddington.
Revs. J. W. Winspear (1885) and Walter Lucas (1886-8)
seem to have been an additional Minister appointed to this
Circuit under special provisions.


PADDINGTON CIRCUIT.
1888 — Rev. Adin Parsons.
1889- Rev. J. S. Austin.
1892-4 —Rev. George Lane.
1895-7 —Rev. Chas. W. Graham.
1898-1900—Rev. Henry Wiles.
1901-2—Rev. George Lane, D.D.
1903-s—Rev. W. H. Beale.
1906-9—Rev. J. E. Carruthers, D.D.
1910-11 —Rev. Harold Wheen.
1912-14—Rev. W. G. Willard.
1915-17 —Rev. George Laverty.
1918-22 —Rev. Jas. Green, C.M.G.
1923-4—Rev. W. J. Walker.
1925 —-Rev. J. Egan Moulton, B.A.
(Blocks of W. C. Thompson, J. C. Warner, J. W. Winspcar
and W. Lucas are unavailable.)
The GEORGE SMITH MEMORIAL HALL, built 1919.
Foundation stone laid by Mrs. C. A. Burnet and Mr. H. S.
Winning, November 15, 1919. Opened by Sir Walter
Davidson, C.M.G., May 9, 1920. Minister, Rev. Jas.
Green, C.M.G., V.D. Cost .£2,852. Present debt, £l,OOO.
CIRCUIT STEWARDS.—George Smith, Jas. Nicholson
(senior), Herbert Tuke, F. Argali, W. J. Wotton, W. Date
W. D. Dunster, Horace Hills, W. J. Hodge, Jas. Nichol-
son (junior), J. Higgle, J. G. Sephton, E. Wheatley, W.
Stephenson, and W. L. Hind.
TRUSTEES. —E. Vickery (senior), T. Cowlishaw, George
Smith, Herbert Tuke, E. W. McKcnny. G. Leggo, Wilmot,
E. Vickery (junior), J. S. Small, J. Winning, J. Hodge,
W. Date, Jas. Nicholson (senior), R. Eyre, Jas. Nichol-
son (junior), Horace Hills, H. S. Winning, H. Walton
Smith, P. E. Walton Smith, W. J. Hodge, W. J. Hodges,
W. Jeffress, W. L. Hind, and H. P. Hollis.
5.5. SUPERINTENDENTS. Apps, Hillier, George
Smith, J. T. Neale, T. Cummings, R. Hammond, W. J. Wot-
ton, F. Harper, R. Eyre, G. H. Sands, E. B. Pudney, Fred.
Hawkins, Harry Mearing, (Rev.) George Laverty, J.
Diggle, (Rev.) J. Egan Moulton, B.A.
5.5. SECRETARIES.— Hardwick, Shepherd, J. K.
Small, R. Eyre, F. Downing, R. W. Winning, F. H. Hodge,
E. Pudney, F. H. Bonfield, H. Brookes, F. N. Nicholls, W.
J. Hodge, W. L. Hind, 11. Walton Smith.
ORGANISTS. —Miss Richardson, Mr. George Smith, Miss
Hodge, Mrs. F. Hodge, Miss Violet Small (Mrs. Rogers),
Miss Finnigan (Mrs. L. L. Bird), Dr. P. E. Walton Smith
(present), with Miss Carter as assistant. The late Mr. George
Smith was Organist and Choirmaster for 37 years, and
Dr. Percy E. Walton Smith has held the same dual posi-
tion for 14. The present organ was installed in 1887.
It cost, with the installation itself and necessary altera-
tions, £450.
LADIES’ CHURCH AlD.—lnaugurated during the superin-
tendency of Rev. W. H. Beale. The First Secretary was Mrs.
Furze, and the first Treasurer, Mrs. Mark Lawler. The
Presidents since have been the resident Ministers’ wives.
Mrs. J. Nicholson succeeded as Secretary and Treasurer
until relieved by Mrs. Dingwall (Secretary) and Mrs.
Fraser (Treasurer), who still continue in these positions.
The FIRST MINISTER was the Rev. Adin Parsons—the
first Superintendent of Paddington Circuit, and the oldest
Minister living in the New South Wales Conference. His
cenncxional status is 62 3'ears.
OLDEST MEMBER is Mrs. J. Winning, who was present
at the Opening of the Church (1877), and still a most
regular attendant at the services.
OLDEST LIVING TRUSTEE.—Mr. Jas. Nicholson.


OLDEST CHOIR MEMBERS.—Mr. H. S. Winning Misses
Hardy, A. Hodge and Shaw.
Ministers associated with the Paddington Circuit, who
have risen to Connexional prominence: —
(a) PRESIDENT-GENERAL (2)
George Lane, D.D., 1901.
J. E. Carruthers, 1917.
(b) SECRETARY OF GENERAL CONFERENCE (2)
George Lane, D.D., 1897-1901.
J. E. Carruthers, D.D., 1910-1917.
(c) PRESIDENT OF N.S.W. CONFERENCE (9J
Jas. A. Nolan, 1885.
Jas. Woolnough, 1897.
George Lane, 1888 and 1901.
W. 11. Beale, 1900.
J. E. Carruthers, 1895 and 1913.
Harold Wheen, 1925.
Jas Green, 1918.
W. Woclls Rutledge, 1902.
B. J. Meek, 1912.
(d) SECRETARY OF N.S.W. CONFERENCE (2)
Frank Firth, 1876-82.
George Laverty, 1926-7.
(c) H.M. SECRETARY (2)
George Lane, D.D., 1883-1888.
Jas. A. Nolan, 1890-1891.
(f) GENERAL TREASURER F.M. (1)
W. H. Beale, 1907-1913.
(g) CONFERENCE TREASURER, SUPERNUMERARY
FUND (1)
J. E. Carruthers, D.D., 1910-1914,
(h) BOOK STEWARD (2)
Frank Firth, 1879, 1886, 1889.
W. H. Beale, 1909-1914.
(i) EDITOR OF “METHODIST” (1)
J. E. Carruthers, D.D., 1894, 1906-1922.
(j) CONFERENCE PROPERTY SECRETARY (1)
W. 11. Willard, Assistant, 1906-1910; C.P.S., 1911-
1921.
(k) HOSPITALS (IE), GAOLS (G.), AND MILITARY
(M.), CHAPLAINS (C.), (6)
J. E. Carruthers, G.C. and 11. C., 1897-1900.
Henry Wiles, G.C. 1901-1903; M.C. 1900.
W. 11. Beale, M.C. 1903-1905.
Harold Whcen, G.C. 1905-1909; M.C. 1910-1914.
Jas. Green, C.M.G., V.D., M.C. 1905-1927.
W. G. Willard, H.C. 1905-1907.
The Rev. J. E. Carruthers, D.D., is also a member of the
Historical Society of Australia, and, for his war services,
the Rev. Jas. Green has received the distinctions of C.M.G.
and V.D.
STATISTICS, 1927.
Members. Adherents. S.S. Teachers. Scholars.
96 240 16 91
Also Girls’ Club, Seniors, 20; Juniors, 13; Junior Boys’
Club, 10.
And the Lord said , . . “Speak to the children of Israel that they go forward."


HONOR ROLL
H. H. Argali* H. Hartnell-Sinclair* F. Moss W. A. Harris
H. H. Craddock W. K. Turner F. R. Nicholls T. F. Hodge
F. Brookes A. Jeffress A. Rogers J. Jones
A. E. Corry* N. Jeffress H. R. Rush* R. J. Gian
H. George* P. E. Argali* J. Sutcliffe H. S. Newland*
A. Hall* H. Connell, M.C. J. R. Winning H. Nicholls
S. Hills C. Bryant W. Jeffress E. Rogers*
C. Holt. R. H. Fenwick R. Somerville* A. L. P. Ryder
A. Leggo R. George* C. Campbell* O. Tedd
H. Mearing* E. C. Harris* W. A. Green L. Medlicott
J. C. Nicholls H. Hiscocks S. J. W. Churchill* A. Tudehope
A. H. Preece W. Jarvis J. H. Fenwick S. C. Winning
R. Rollason F. Leggo N. George
Enlisted 51; Fallen* 15.
“Lest ive forget.”
PADDINGTON METHODIST CHURCH
The Great War, 1914-1918


SUPERINTENDENT MINISTER—Rev. J. Egan Moulton,
B.A.
CIRCUIT STEWARDS.—Messrs. W. Stephenson and W. L.
Hind.
LOCAL PREACHER. —Mr. J. J. Fleming.
COMMUNION STEWARDS.—Mrs. Fraser, Mr. Rex. Fraser.
CONGREGATIONAL REPRESENTATIVES—Sister Nellie,
Miss Hodge, and Mrs. Sanderson.
CHURCH STEWARDS.—Messrs. E. T. Cane, J. G. Sephton,
J. J. Fleming.
TRUSTEES. —Messrs. Jas. Nicholson, W. J. Hodge (Secre-
tary), Horace Hills, H. S. Winning, W. J. Hodges, W. L.
Hind (Treasurer), and H. P. Hollis.
SUNDAY SCHOOL. —Superintendent, Rev. J. Egan Moulton;
Secretary and Treasurer, Mr. W. L. Hind; Kindergarten
Superintendent, Mrs. Fraser.
Y.W.L.—Superintendent, Mrs. Sanderson.
CHOlR.—Organist and Conductor, Dr. P. E. Walton Smith;
Miss Carter, Assistant; Librarian, Miss Shaw; Secretary,
Miss Moulton.
LADIES’ CHURCH AlD—President, Mrs. Moulton; Vice-
Presidents, Sister Nellie and Mrs. Hodges; Secretary, Mrs.
Dingwall; Treasurer, Mrs. Frazer.
W.F.M. AUXlLlARY.—President, Mrs. Moulton; Secretary,
Mrs. Fraser; Treasurer, Mrs. Bloomfield.
SENIOR GIRLS’ CLUB.—President, Mrs. Moulton; Director,
Sister Nellie; Secretary, Miss Moulton.
JUNIOR GIRLS’ CLUB.—President, Sister Nellie; Assistant,
Miss D. Duncombe; Secretary, Miss F. Fleming.
JUNIOR BOYS’ CLUB.—President, Rev. J. Egan Moulton;
Secretary, Mason Shiels; Treasurer, Fred. Duncombe.
Paddington Methodist Church
PRESENT OFFICIALS.


CIRCUIT, TRUST, L.C.A. AND CHOIR OFFICIALS, AND S.S. TEACHERS.
Front Row (Left to Right)', Messrs. W. J. Hodge, H. P. Hollis, Jas. Nicholson. W. Stephenson, W. L. Hind, Rev. J. Egan Moulton,
8.A., Mrs. Moulton, Sister Nellie Fripp, Mrs. Dingwall, Mrs. Fraser.
Second Row; Mr. W, J. Hodges, Misses Dingwall, D. Lowe, Fraser, Dr. P. E. Walton Smith, Miss Carter, Miss Edna Cook. Miss
Hodge, Mrs. Bloomfield.
Back Row: Messrs. J. J. Fleming, H. S. Winning, Miss P. Moulton, Mr. F. Walton Smith and Miss Cook.
(Mrs. Hodges, Mrs. Sanderson, Misses Shaw, Middleton, Judge, Messrs. H. Hills, and £. T. Came absentees.)


Paddington Methodist Church Jubilee, 1877-1927
Programme of Services and Meetings
"Praist waiteth for Thee, O God, in Zion.”
SUNDAY, MAY d.
Preachers—ll a.m., Rev. J. E. Carruthers, D.D.
7.15 p.m., Rev. J. G. Wheen (President-General)
TUESDAY, MAY 3.
PUBLIC MEETING in CHURCH, at 8 p.m.
Chairman—Rev. Geo. 0 Laverly (Secretary of N.S.W. Conf.)
Addresses by Rev. Jas. Green, C.M.G., VD., and others
SUNDAY, MAY 8.
Preachers —11 am., Rev. W. G. Willard.
7.15 p.m., Rev. G. H, Hewitt (Pres. N.S.W. Conf.)
THURSDAY, MAY 12.
FAMILY REUNION in the GEORGE SMITH
MEMORIAL HALL.
Tea on Tables at 5.30 p.m.
Community Singing in Church, 7-7.40 p.m.
i Social at 8 p.m.—Chairman: Mr. Jas. Nicholson, J.P.
Speakers; Messrs. E. Frank Vickery, 8.A., LL.B., H. S. Winning
and F. Harper.
Special Music Throughout.
REV. W. WOOLLS RUTLEDGE.
REV. W. E. BOURNE.
