

COLONIAL OFFICE
PALESTINE
STATEMENT OF INFORMATION
RELATING TO
ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Presented to Parliament by the Secretary of State for the Colonies
by Command of His Majesty
July 1946
Cmd. 6873
LONDON
HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
TWOPENCE NET


EXPLANATORY NOTES.
The following notes on the three Jewish illegal para-military organisations
in Palestine are based on the *Report of the Anglo-American Committee
of Enquiry (pp. 40-41), His Majesty's Government have reason to believe
that the figures given are on the conservative side.
The Hagana and Palmach: —An illegal and well-armed military organisa-
tion, organised under a central command with subsidiary territorial commands,
in three branches, each of which includes women, viz.:—
a static force composed of settlers and townsfolk, with an estimated
strength of 40,000;
a field army, based on the Jewish Settlement Police and trained in
more mobile operations, with an estimated strength of 16,000;
a full-time force (Palmach), permanent mobilised and provided with
transport, with an estimated peace establishment of 2,000 and war establish-
ment of some 6,000.
Something in the nature of conscription is in force; a year’s service being
obligatory for senior schoolchildren, male and female, between the ages of
17 and 18. The Jewish publication, Haboker, stated that prior to nth
November, 1945, “ every Movement must submit to the Jewish Agency’s
Recruiting Department in Tel Aviv a roster of its members, male and female,
who must enlist.”
The Irgun Zvai Leumi (National Military Organisation):—formed in 1935
from dissident members of the Hagana. Operates under its secret command,
with a strength estimated between 3,000 and 5,000.
The Stern Group: —originated as a dissident faction within the Irgun
Zvai Leumi when the latter decided temporarily to suspend activities in 1939.
Its strength is said to be between 200 and 300 dangerous fanatics. They have
been for some time fully co-operating with the Irgun Zvai Leumi, since
both are equally committed to a policy of unrestrained extremism.
* Cmd. 6808.
2


PALESTINE
Statement of Information relating to Acts of Violence
The information which was in the possession of His Majesty’s Government
when they undertook their recent action in Palestine led them to draw'
the following conclusions:—
(1) That the Hagana and its associated force the Palmach (working
under the political control of prominent members of the Jewish Agency)
have been engaging in carefully planned movements of sabotage and violence
under the guise of “ the Jewish Resistance Movement
(2) that the Irgun Zvai Leumi and the Stern Group have worked since
last Autumn in co-operation with the Hagana High Command on certain
of these operations; and
(3) that the broadcasting station “ Kol Israel ”, which claims to be
“ the Voice of the Resistance Movement ” and which was working under
the general direction of the Jewish Agency has been supporting these
organisations.
The evidence on which these conclusions are based is derived in the main
from three sources—
(i) Information which has been obtained showing that between the
23rd September, 1945, and the 3rd November, 1945, seven telegrams
passed between London and Jerusalem, and a further telegram on 12th
May, 1946. Copies of these have been interpreted and are here set out;
(ii) various broadcasts by “ Kol Israel ” between 31st October, 1945,
and the 23rd June, 1946, referring to specific acts of violence and sabotage;
and
(hi) information on various dates derived from the pamphlet Hamaas
(the publication of the Stern Group), from Herut (the publication of the
Irgun Zvai Leumi) and from Eshnav (the publication of “ the Jewish
Resistance Movement ”). Examples from these pamphlets are set out
in this Paper.
This evidence relates to the three widespread sabotage operations of the
31st October/Ist November, 1945; 20th-25th February, 1946, and i6-ißth
June, 1946. All three para-military organisations participated in these actions
which not only caused very serious destruction but also loss of life.
L— ATTACK ON RAILWAYS, POLICE LAUNCHES AND HAIFA
REFINERY—3Ist OCTOBER-lst NOVEMBER, 1945.
Note. The Palmach carried out widespread attacks on the Palestinian Railway
system. The line was blown in 153 places in .all, completely disrupting it. Other
charges, though laid, did not explode. Three police launches were destroyed by
explosives, two at Haifa and one at Jaffa. The same night, the Irgun Zvai Leumi
attacked Lydda Station and Yards causing damage to three locomotives, the destruc-
tion of one signal box, and the burning of an engine shed. Several casualties were
inflicted, including the death of one British soldier. A further attempt was made on
the same night by the Stern Group to blow up the Oil Refinery at Haifa.
This incident was carefully planned in advance as part of a deliberate
policy. It was intended as a warning to His Majesty’s Government of the
consequences that would follow if they did not comply with the wishes of
the Yishuv (the Jewish Community in Palestine). The Jewish Agency


Executive was not prepared to wait for a declaration of Government policy,
but decided to cause “ one serious incident ” in order to influence that policy.
These facts can plainly be seen from the following telegrams.
Telegram No. i.
To London from Sneh in Jerusalem—23rd September, 1945.
“It is suggested that we do not wait for the official announcement but
call upon all Jewry to warn the authorities and to raise the morale of the
Yishuv. If you agree ask Zeev Sharif for statistical material about
the absorptive capacity and if you do not agree tell him that this material
is not yet required. It has also been suggested that we cause one serious
incident. We would then publish a declaration to the effect that it is only
a warning and an indication of much more serious incidents that would
threaten the safety of all British interests in the country, should the Govern-
ment decide against us. Wire your views with the reference as before but
referring to statistical material about immigration during the war years. The
Stern Group have expressed their willingness to join us completely on the
basis of our programme of activity. This time the intention seems serious.
If there is such a union we may assume that we can prevent independent
action even by the IZL. Wire your views on the question of the union refer-
ring to statistical material about Jewish recruitment to the Army. Sneh.”
N.B. —Sneh is Security member of the Jewish Agency Executive. IZL
is the Irgun Zvai Leumi.
That the Agency Executive agreed to the above action is clearly shown in
the following telegrams:—
Telegram No. 2.
To London from Bernard Joseph in Jerusalem—loth October, 1945.
“ Eliezer Kaplan basing himself on a word from Hayyim via Nwbw
says that we should undertake nothing before you give us instructions to do.
He is opposed to any real action on our part until we hear from you.
Other members, however, are of the opinion that it is necessary to back
your political effort with activities which do not bear the character of a general
conflict.
It is essential that we should know at once whether such actions are
likely to be useful or detrimental to your struggle.
Should you be opposed to any action whatever, wire that we should wait
for the arrival of Wlsly.
Should you agree to isolated actions, wire that you agree to sending a
deputation to the dominions.
If Hayyim meant us only avoid a general conflict not isolated cases, send
greetings to Chill for the birth of his daughter.
N.B. Bernard Joseph is legal adviser to the Jewish Agency and a member
of its Executive. He acts in Shertok’s absence as Head of the Political
Department. Eliezer Kaplan is Head of the Agency s Financial Department
and a member of its Executive.
Telegram No. 3.
From Moshe Shertok in London to Bernard Joseph in Jerusalem.
12th October, 1945.
“ David will not leave before fortnight. Meanwhile probably revisit
Paris. Regarding Dobkin written. David himself favoured delegate
dominions. Please congratulate Chill on birth of daughter. Signed Shertok.’


N.8.-(i) Moshe Shertok is Head of the Agency’s Political Department
and a member of the Executive.
ti ( 2 ) A reference to telegram No. 2 will show that the phrases about
delegate dominions and greetings to Chill ” meant that it was desired,
whilst avoiding a general conflict, to indulge in isolated actions.
Telegram No. 4.
To London from Jerusalem 2nd November, 1945.
The Executive refuses to give authority to the political department to act
within the limits of Ben Gurion’s instructions. Gsbr argues that he will
oppose this as soon as Ben Gurion and Shertok return. I declared that I
will act according to the instructions which I have received until an authorita-
tive message is received which cancels Ben Gurion’s instructions.
They did not dare to cancel the instructions but insisted that we inform the
Executive in advance of each action and that they should have the right of
veto. We received agreement for the police boats and for the railway. All
activities may thus be spoiled owing to pressure from the party on Bernard
Joseph and on Eliahu.”
N.B. —David Ben Gurion is Chairman of the Jewish Agency Executive.
For the operations of the 31st October-ist November the Agency sought
and obtained the co-operation of the “ dissident organisations ”.
Telegram No. 5.
To London from Jerusalem.—lst November, 1945.
“We have come to a working arrangement with the dissident organisations
according to which we shall assign certain tasks to them under our command.
They will act only according to our plan. Sneh, Shaul Meiroff, Kn’ny and
Bernard Joseph consider such an agreement as most desirable, but it is not
being put into effect because the Party is delaying it. Some of them are
opposed to any sort of activity and especially to any agreement with the
dissidents. Information on the operations follows:
The following activities were carried out on Wednesday night. Two
boats were sunk in the Haifa harbour and a third at Jaffa. The boats
had been used to chase immigrants. Railway lines were blown up in 50
centres, in all 500 explosions. Railway traffic was stopped from the Syrian
frontier to Gaza, from Haifa to Sarnakh, from Lydda to Jerusalem. In all
the activities no one was hurt, stopped or arrested.
The same night the Izl attacked the Lydda station causing serious
damage and some casualties. During the same night the Stern Group caused
serious sabotage at the refineries at Haifa and one man was killed. The
dissidents had previously informed us of this and we did not object to Lydda
but were opposed to the refinery job. Had the agreement come into effect
we could have avoided victims at Lydda and prevented the refinery opera-
tion. I regard the fact that the Party and the Executive are withholding
their approval as a crime.
The activities have made a great impression in the country. The authori-
ties are bewildered and have proclaimed a curfew on the roads at night.
They are waiting for instructions from London. We are apprehensive of
a general attack against the Hagana. We have taken the necessary securitj'
measures and are prepared for sacrifices. Confirm by telegram to Ada
enquiries about the health of her children.”
52000 A 2


“ Hamaas ”, the publication of the Stern Group in referring to the
above operation, stated:—
The events of ist November have given a striking expression of the
firm resolution of the Jews to fight for the freedom of their homeland. The
scope of the attack has proved that the Jews are capable of acting under
the most difficult conditions.
However, the most significant achievement on that night was that for
the first time the attack was co-ordinated and concentrated. The Jewish
Resistance Movement has embraced all the Jewish resistance forces with a
view to their being guided by a single authority which would control the
common fight (“ Hamaas ” Issue No. 2 of November, 1945.)
These operations were widely publicised by the Jewish illegal broadcasting
station, Kol Israel, as follows:
“ The paralysing of the Railways all over the country through cutting
the lines in 242 places serves as a warning to the Government of the White
Paper.
The nights of heroism since Athlit* are an expression of our strength
and decision. We lament the British, Arab and Jewish victims who fell in
the attacks on the railways and ports of Palestine. They are all victims
of the White Paper. All our men returned safely with their equipment.
None of our men is missing.” (2nd November, 1945.)
As proof of the fact that the Kol Israel station was working with the agree-
ment of the Jewish Agency, reference may be made to the following tele-
grams. (See also telegram No. Bon page 9): —
Telegram No. 6.
To London from Sneh in Jerusalem—l2th October, 1945.
“With effect from 4/10 the broadcasts of the 'Voice of Israel’ have
been renewed. Two broadcasts were successful. Eliezer Kaplan and Bernard
Joseph were invited to see the High Commissioner this morning.
The agreement for the renewal of the broadcasts and the Athlit* under-
takings have been obtained with difficulty. In future I shall not enquire but
decide in conjunction with Shaul Meiroff and Kn’ny.”
Telegram No. 7.
To London from Jerusalem—l4th October, 1945.
“ The Voice of Israel started to function as the broadcasting station of the
Jewish Resistance Movement three days before we received your letter and
your telegram.
We also have had the same doubts and we voiced them before the broad-
casts were started but the expert says that there are no grounds for anxiety
from the technical point of view.”
N.B. —The phrase “ grounds for anxiety from the technical point of view ”
probably refers to apprehension that the station, which is a mobile one, might
be located.
*On 10th October the Palmach released over 200 illegal immigrants from
Athlit Clearance Camp. A. British police tender was ambushed during the subsequent
search for the escaped persons and one British policeman and two Palestinians were
wounded.


lI.—ATTACKS ON HAIFA RADAR STATION, PALESTINE MOBILE
FORGE GAMPS, AND AIRFIELDS— 20th-25th FEBRUARY, 1946
TT N ? te '77 On 20 * h February, 1946, the Palmach attacked the R.A.F. Radar Station
or“x g othe“r P s . Sen ° USly W ° Unding tW ° RAF ' N ' C - 0s - “ d inflicting to
Fofce°Canrps
SU£fMed head injuries - Thrce British “ d
On 25th February the Irgun Zvai Leumi and Stern Group followed this up with
a a S^i„T“ S t T * kVah - aDd «“*“• seven
These incidents seem to have been intended as a “second warning ” as
the “first warning” on the 31st October/Ist November, 1945 had been
disregarded ” These incidents were described in a Kol Israel broadcast
ot the 3rd March, 1946,
“This last fortnight has seen a renewed intensity in the struggle of
the Jewish people against the forces which aim to throttle them and
their natural aspirations for normal nationhood in their National Home.
The attack on the Radar Station on Mount Carmel was aimed at
destroying one of the principal agents of the Government in its hunt for
Jewish refugees The sabotage of the airfields (i.e., by Irgun Zvai Leumi
and Stem Group) was the sabotage of a weapon which has been degraded
from its glorious fight against the evil forces of Nazism to the dishonourable
task of fighting against the victims of Nazism.
Those three attacks are symptomatic of our struggle. In all cases
the onslaught was made against the weapon used by the White Paper in its
despicable battle to repudiate its undertaking to the Jewish people and the
world, and not against the men who use this weapon. It is not our object
to cause the loss of life of any Briton in this country; we have nothing
against them because we realise that they are but instruments of a .policy
and m many cases unwilling instruments.”
In addition to the above broadcast, Herut, the publication of the Irgun
Zvai Leumi and Eshnav, the pamphlet published in the name of the
don? 11100 Movement ' made the following allusions to these extensive opera-
“ Heavy tasks were imposed on all the Forces of the nation The
soldiers of the Hagana were ordered to attack the forces in their lairs (i e
the Palestine Mobile Force). No less difficult was the task imposed on the
members of the National Military Organisation* who were sent to attack the
Military airfields at Qastma and the central airfield at Lydda; and on the
members of the Fighters for Freedom of Israel* who were ordered to attack
the aerodrome at Kfar Sirkin. The importance of this week’s events lies
m the fact that this was the first time that the military bases of the British
rulers were shaken ”. (“ Herut ”, Issue No. 55 of February, 1946.)
“ A Big Week.
The actions of this glorious week have been carried out with the support
of the entire, _ united Jewish youth. This is a political achievement.
The Palestine Mobile Force has been attacked by the Hagana; at two
camps considerable damage has been inflicted. At Sarona the fighters
Grfnp^ 0 ” 15 th 6 lm ' U L ' l ' mi Fibers for Freedom


retired after a continuation of the attack had proved useless. Here four
of them fell.
Lvdda and Qastina airfields have been attacked by Irgun Zvai Leumi
whilst Lohemei Herat Israel (Fighters for Freedom of Israel) men chose as
their aim the airfield at Kfar Sirkin ”. ( Herat , Issue No. 56 of
February, 1946.) .
“ The first warning on Ist November. 1945, by the Jewish Resistance
was disregarded, and the whole Yishuv was compelled to carry out a second
warning during the last fortnight expressed in the attacks on Palestme Motale
Force Stations and Airfields.” (“ Eshnav ”, Issue No. 116 of 4th March,
1946.)
tti ATT SCKS ON ROAD AND RAIL BRIDGES, RAILWAY
WORKSHOPS AND KIDNAPPING OF BRITISH OFFICBRS.-16th
to 18th JUNE, 1946.
Note —During the evening of 16th June, 1946, Hagana carnedoutattackson road
aTlfl rail bridees on the frontier of Palestine causing damage estimated at £250,000.
was killed by the explosion.
The following evening the Stern Group carried out attack on the Haifa Rai w y
Workshops. , . ,
On 18th Tune 1946 five British officers were kidnapped while lunching at an officers
club if Td Aviv and a sixth British officer was kidnapped in a mam street of Jerusalem.
Indication that a, further series of incidents might be imminent was given
on 12th May, 1946, when Kol Israel broadcast a warning which it con-
sidered “desirable ” to “lay before His Majesty’s Government . The
text of this broadcast was as follows:
“ The Jewish Resistance Movement thinks it desirable to publish the
warning it intends to lay before His Majesty's Government. Present Brthsh
nolicv is executing a dangerous manoeuvre and is based on an erroneous
Sptln Britain, in evacuating Syria. Lebanon and Egypt intends to
concentrate her military bases in Palestme and is therefore concerned to
strengthen her hold over the mandate, and is using her responsibility to
the Jewish people merely as a means to that end. But this double game
will not work. Britain cannot hold both ends of the rope; she cannot exploit
the tragic Jewish question for her own benefit as mandatory power, while
attempting to wriggle out of the various responsibilities which that mandate
confers the Zionist point of view, the tepid conclusions of the
bear no relation to the political claims .of the »
but even so, in the execution of these proposals, the British Government
is displaying a vacillation at once disappointing and discreditab e.
would therefore warn publicly His Majesty’s Government that if it does not
fulfil its responsibilities under the mandate—above all with regard to the
question (^immigration—the Jewish people will feel obligedto lay before
the nations of the world the request that the British leave Palestine The
Jewish Resistance Movement will make every effort to hinder the tra: s
of British Bases to Palestme and to prevent their establishment in the
country.”
This broadcast is, of particular significance by reason of the fact that it
was given at the express request of Moshe Shertok Head of the Jewish
Agency’s Political Department and a member of its Executive Committee,


and had also been passed to David Ben Gurion, Chairman of the Executive
Committee. This is made clear in the following telegram:
Telegram No. 8.
To “ Daniel ” in London from Sneh in Jerusalem—
12th May, 1946.
" Please pass on to Ben Gurion the text of the broadcast of Kol Israel
sent herewith; with a note that the broadcast was made at the request of
Shertoh.”
* The telegram then repeats textually the broadcast message of the same
date.
There followed on the night of the 16th June, 1946, the widespread and
carefully planned attacks on vital communications and on the following night
the attack on railway workshops. Kol Israel accepted full responsibility
on behalf of “ the Resistance Movement for the renewal of its activity as a
result of the delaying policy of the British Government ”.
Kol Israel Broadcast.
18th June, 1946.
“ The action of blowing up the bridges expressed the high morale and
courage of the Jewish fighters who carried out the attack. They had to
pass long distances and to carry a large quantity of material for that
purpose. The withdrawal was most difficult since all the police and army
were on their feet and aircraft were looking for the attackers; despite
all this the operation was executed and all objectives were reached according
to plan without causing any loss of life to the guards. There were some
casualties among the attackers in the North owing to an unfortunate accident
which was caused by the fall of a rocket directly on to a lorry loaded with
explosives and the whole load blew up and the persons there were killed.
Honour to their memory! The Army and Police became furious and started
to discharge their wrath on the peaceful people of the nearby settlements;
many settlers of Beth Haareva, Matzuva and Eilon were arrested and
taken to Acre.
Many messages of heartfelt appreciation were sent by various personalities
and journalists to the Resistance Movement for the renewal of its activity
as a residt of the delaying policy of the British Government, the recent
Bevin speech and the known announcement of Attlee. These objectives
were chosen to disturb British bases and communications, to prevent the
Arabs of the neighbouring countries who talked so much about coming to
fight the Jews in Palestine, and to mark the closing up of these frontiers'
before Jewish immigrants.”
23rd June, 1946.
“ This is the Voice of Israel, the voice of Jewish Resistance. Last week
we had to destroy the bridges —these bridges are just as much use to us
as the authorities but they had to be destroyed to show our feelings.”
CONCLUSION.
The evidence contained in the foregoing pages is not, and is not intended
to be, a complete statement of all the evidence in the possession of His
Majesty’s Government.
Nor are the specific instances herein referred to by any means a complete
list of all the incidents of violence and sabotage which have taken place
in recent months.
9


The fact is that in the first six months of 1946 there were nearly fifty
separate incidents involving violence, and in many cases loss of life: material
damage to a very great extent has been done to railway installations, police
and R.A.F. stations, and coastguard stations. Roads have been mined and
vehicles have been blown up.
The above operations were widespread in character and caused very
extensive damage. When they were almost immediately followed by the
kidnapping of British officers, it was no longer possible for His Majesty’s
Government to adopt a passive attitude. Unless the Government were pre-
pared to yield to threats of violence and to abandon all hope of establishing
law and order, they were bound to take active steps against any persons or
organisations who had made themselves responsible for the planning and
carrying out of the outrages which are dealt with in this Paper.
(7/4 6 ) (52000)
