

PALESTINE
“WE ARE BOUND TOGETHER ON
BY THE FAITH OF OUR FATHER
(Theodor Herzl in his “The Jewish State”).
Peace and Prosperity
or
War and Destruction?
POLITICAL ZIONISM
Undemocratic, Unjust, Dangerous
By
SIR ISAAC ALFRED ISAACS, K.C.,
P.C., G.C.B., G.C.M.G.
Associate Knight of St. John of Jerusalem




PALESTINE
“WE ARE BOUND TOGETHER ONLY
BY THE FAITH OF OUR FATHERS ”
(Theodor Herzl in his “The Jewish State”).
Peace and Prosperity
or
War and Destruction?
POLITICAL ZIONISM
Undemocratic, Unjust, Dangerous
By
SIR ISAAC ALFRED ISAACS, K.C.,
P.C., G.C.B., G.C.M.G.
Associate Knight of St. John of Jerusalem


ERRATA
Pap 8. Line 27, June 19 should read “June 3.”
22. Line 29, the first word should be “people ”
40. After line 25, read lines 26 and 27 from page
41 opposite.
49. Line 7 of paragraph marked “1”, first word
should be “character’'.
Page 6, Line 26 )
Page 7, Line 7 5
For “proportion” read
“majority.”


INTRODUCTION.
No more urgent and delicate task awaits the
statesmanship of the United Nations, and par-
ticularly of the British Empire and the United
btates of America, than the solution of the
problem of Palestine. The Anglo-American Com-
mission just appointed is an appreciation of its
complications and importance and the responsi-
bilities that attend it. I hope that this brochure
may help those who read it to understand the
difficulties, the dangers and the various relative
bearings of the problem.
That tiny spot of earth called Palestine presents
at this moment all the possibilities of an explosion
that might bring calamity to an immensely wider
area, and wound the spiritual susceptibilities of
countless millions of our fellow creatures of
varying faiths.
The problem is many sided. It concerns directly
and indirectly not alone the pressing necessities
of finding there and elsewhere peaceful and
humanitarian habitations for hundreds of
thousands of Jewish victims of unspeakable
atrocities at the hands of the Nazis and their
accomplices, but it extends to the present rights
of a still greater number of Arab inhabitants of
Palestine, who constitute a majority of the
population, and through them it touches the
integrity and safety of our Empire and the
preservation of peace. It is further, in some of
its phases, intimately connected with the funda-
mental principles of democracy, and it even raises
questions of retrogression to ancient and long
since abandoned systems of national structure.
Moreover, even viewing the matter from a purely
Jewish standpoint, it concerns as I regard it, the
honour of Judaism itself in respect of the basic
principle of justice to our fellow-men that in the
Scripture common to us all Jew and Christian
alike, is so insistently inculcated. Along with
these considerations, in themselves imperative,


the question involves spiritually the preservation
of some of the most precious associations of
three great faiths, Jewish, Christian, and
Moslem.
This complicated problem with its attendant
possibilities arises by reason of conflicting and
unjustifiable extreme demands of Political
Zionism on the one side and Arab nationalism
on the other. It is not strictly speaking in all
respects a contest between Jew and Arab. On
the one hand there are moderate Arabs, on the
other there is a very considerable portion of
responsible Jewish world opinion that, like my
own, is as opposed to the extreme demands of
Political Zionism as to the equally extreme Arab
claims. That is evidenced recently by the
scholarly address of Rabbi Lazaron on “Com-
promise in Palestine” at the American Academy
of Political and Social Science, in which were
represented the views of the American Council
for Judaism, a body of considerable strength.
The extreme demands of Political Zionism as a
movement amount to a claim for Jewish domi-
nance over all other inhabitants of Palestine now
and in the future. Naturally all Jewish opinion
is opposed to Arab dominance, but as it is in-
conceivable that the United Nations would permit
such dominance I dismiss it once for all as outside
all reasonable consideration.
Arab resistance to Jewish domination in
Palestine has the firm and powerful support of
the whole Moslem world, including 90 millions
in India. Any attempt to establish Jewish
dominance would inevitably lead to bloodshed and
threaten not merely the prestige but even the
integrity and safety of the Empire.
The conflicting claims to dominance are wholly
unsustainable on either side whether history,
official promises or morals be taken as the
standard of justice.
Hope for a peaceful solution of this disturbing
problem, consonant with justice, with humani


tarian succour to great numbers of Jewish
sufferers, with great material and social advan-
tage to Palestinian Arabs, and with prosperous
development of the country itself (as witness the
marvellous transformation under British protec-
tion and administration of much of that long-neg-
lected land by Jewish enterprise, capital, industry,
capacity, research and creative power) with conse-
quent benefit even to surrounding Arab countries,
and what is very. important to us in Australia,
with the preservation of the Empire’s communica-
tions, lies in the abandonment by each side of its
demands for dominance over the other. Neither
side can be expected to submit to dominance, in
other words to accept a permanent position of
inferiority in numbers or power, and no hope
can be reasonably entertained that the dominance
of either will be countenanced or peacefully
permitted by either. A most serious responsi-
bility therefore for affording a just and acceptable
basis for a peaceful and harmonious solution
rests primarily on the shoulders of Political
Zionism because it is actively pressing for political
measures intended to swamp the Arab population.
It is a responsibility for, among other things,
not imperilling by persistence in wholly unjusti-
fiable aims the excellent opportunity of opening
the way towards a humanitarian refuge for
unfortunate European Jews who do not desire to
return to the scenes of their oppression, or to
commence life again in other countries that may
be willing to receive them, and who could find
shelter in Palestine not only without injury but
even with material benefit to the Arab people
already there if their friendly acquiescence can
be secured.
To persist in its present demands would
naturally exasperate all Islam. It may not be
too late even now to allay the hostility they have
caused and to win the confidence and assent of
the Moslem world to the via media I have
indicated.


It is, however, the theme of all that follows
to make transparently clear both to those who
press for those demands without full apprehension
of their utter lack of sound foundation and to
those outside the Jewish faith who may have to
judge of the matter the evidence and the argu-
ments that establish their injustice, their fallacies,
their dangers to cherished interests, national and
personal, of Jews, Christians and Moslems alike.
A just and peaceful solution of the problem is
insistently necessary. I sincerely trust it may
be found within the terms of Article I of the
stated purposes of the United Nations in the
San Francisco Charter.
My brochure is accordingly addressed primarily
to the movement known as Political Zionism, to
the elucidation of the Balfour Declaration, inci-
dentally to religious and cultural Zionism, but
not at all to political Zionists personally. It is
impersonal and objective only. Individuals find
no place in it except to authenticate statements
illustrating the not always consistent activities
and declarations of the Movement as a Move-
ment.
Many political Zionists, and I believe a consider-
able proportion of them, are genuinely sincere in
their advocacy of the movement. But. their
sincerity and their ardour and belief in its
propriety does not relieve the movement itself
as an ideology from the serious objections that
attend it. These ardent supporters of the Move-
ment err from various causes, as from lack of
knowledge of relevant and inescapable facts,
inaccurate judgment, want of appreciation of
relative values, or concentration of vision solely
on the appalling and sadistic persecution of
European Jews by the Nazis and their accom-
plices to the mistaken exclusion of other material
and most serious considerations, thereby
obscuring the real character of Political Zionism.
Hence arises the inability to see and understand


the injustice, the imminent dangers public and
private, the moral obligation towards other
peoples and other faiths, and other objections
that when the facts are known and properly
appraised, are inseparable from the attempt to
attain the political aspirations of the movement.
Giving full credit to the proportion who are
sincere for their courage in pressing forward
demands they consider should be conceded, I am
constrained by a sense of duty to the Empire
which has done so much for Palestine and the
Jewish people and even to the sufferers them-
selves, as well as to a far wider circle of humanity,
to follow the Political Zionists on to the field of
public opinion on which they have entered and
have sought the support of the world in order
to correct the picture they have presented to the
United Nations.
The root fallacy of the Movement is that the
Jewish people of the world are in solidarity and
in the modern sense of the word a Nationality.
As a citizen of the British Commonwealth, as an
Australian of Jewish faith firmly believing that
at the same moment I can no more consistently
have, in any relevant sense two nationalities than
I can have two religions, as a lover of peace,
justice, and humanitarianism and especially as
one who owes immeasurable gratitude for the
trust that has in various ways been reposed in
me I feel bound in the present circumstances not
to remain silent but to record objectively why
I believe those demands to be unjustifiable.
“What is Political Zionism?” the reader may
ask. “Wherein does it differ from other
Zionism?” it may be further asked. The answer
is that Political Zionism to which I am irrevocably
opposed for reasons which will be found clearly
stated, must be sharply distinguished from the
religious and cultural Zionism to which I am
strongly attached. The first is to make of all
Palestine directly or indirectly a “Jewish State”


—or as it is sometimes termed, a “Jewish
Commonwealth” a distinction without a dif-
ference. The latter is the Zionism and the only
Zionism prefigured by the Balfour Declaration of
1917. This clearly appears from the history and
words of that historic Instrument when they are
fairly considered. It is established beyond ques-
tion in my opinion by the authoritative interpreta-
tion of the Declaration by the British Govern-
ment, including Lord Balfour himself, an inter-
pretation deliberately assented to by the Zionist
Organisation.
The political interpretation now insisted by
Political Zionism is utterly inconsistent with the
assurances given to the Arabs in 1918 by the
Zionist leader Dr. Weizmann and then accepted
by them. It is contrary to the assurance given
later to the world by Dr. Weizmann and by Lord
Balfour personally on two notable occasions, and
is definitely inconsistent with the present
Mandate, with the Compact between the British
Government and the Zionist Organisation in 1922
and with the repeated statements of British
Minister for 23 years as well as with the con-
clusions of two great Commissions. The Compact
which by Zionist acceptance of Mr. Churchill’s
White Paper of June 19, 1922, rejected the notion
of imposing a Jewish nationality on Palestine as
a whole and defined the term “a Jewish national
home in Palestine” has recently —in June, 1945
been openly admitted by the British Zionist
leader, Dr. Weizmann, as governing the situation.
It is, however, given by him a totally wrong
interpretation calculated by reason of its political
implications to stiffen Arab resistance to any
extensive Jewish immigration into Palestine.
These facts appear in this brochure, with com-
plete verification. Nevertheless, the Zionist
movement as a whole, passing by these recorded
facts, now places its own unwarranted interpreta-
tion on the Balfour Declaration, and makes


demands that are arousing the antagonism of
the Moslem world of nearly 400 millions, thereby
menacing the safety of our Empire, endangering
world peace and imperilling some of the most
sacred associations of the Jewish, Christian, and
Moslem faiths. Besides their inherent injustice
to others these demands would, I believe, seriously
and detrimentally affect the general position of
Jews throughout the world.
What are those demands? Political Zionism
demands as I have said that all Palestine shall
be constituted, either directly or indirectly, a
“Jewish State” or, as it is sometimes phrased,
a “Jewish Commonwealth”.
Directly, by an immediate constitutional
declaration that it is a “Jewish State”. The most
recent open reiteration of that demand by the
Movement itself, so far as I am aware, is by
the Manifesto recorded in the Melbourne “Herald”
of October 22, 1945. That would necessarily, if
any meaning at all is to be given to the name
“Jewish”, require all the inhabitants who desire
to be first-class citizens possessing political power
to be by origin Jews, or, if now Moslem or
Christian by origin, to become Jews. And the
power of permitting them to become Jews in any
sense for that purpose would undemocratically
rest in the hands of the Jewish authorities, even
if Jews were in a minority.
Indirectly, according to the specific demands,
either by uncontrolled Jewish immigration as by
the Manifesto just mentioned, or by placing in
the hands of the Jewish Agency, that is, the
Zionist Organisation, the exclusive power, over-
riding the British Government and every other
Government, of controlling immigration into
Palestine. By either of these means Jewish
immigrants could flood the country, swamp the
Moslem and Christian inhabitants, and condemn
them to perpetual minority. Then under the
camouflage of a nominally democratic Legislature,
the State would become entirely Jewish de facto.


To bring the position clearly home to the mind
of the general reader, one has only to apply such
demands to our Australian States. If one State
were constitutionally declared Catholic, another
Anglican, a third Presbyterian, a fourth Metho-
dist, a fifth Baptist, the. sixth Unitarian, and the
control of immigration in each case were placed
in the hands of the denomination named, could
such an arrangement be for a moment tolerated
as a democratic condition? Similarly with
American States, for instance. And yet Political
Zionism, along with its openly formulated demands
for a “Jewish State”, with startling inconsistency
asks political as well as social equality for Jews
everywhere outside Palestine, in which necessarily
Arab countries are included.
Summarising my objections, on behalf of not
only myself, but I am confident of a great though
unorganised multitude of my co-religionists in
the English-speaking world, the demands of
Political Zionism are:—
1. A negation of Democracy, and an attempt
to revert to the Church-State of bygone
ages.
2. Provocative of anti-Semitism.
3. Unwarranted by the Balfour Declaration,
the Mandate, or any other right; contrary
to Zionist assurances to Britain and to the
Arabs; and in present conditions unjust to
other Palestinians politically and to other
religions.
4. As regards unrestricted immigration, a
discriminatory and an undemocratic camou-
flage for a Jewish State.
5. An obstruction to the consent of the Arabs
to the peaceful and prosperous settlement in
Palestine of hundreds of thousands of
suffering European Jews, the victims of Nazi
atrocities; and provocative of Moslem
antagonism within and beyond the Empire,


and consequently a danger to its integrity
and safety.
6. Inconsistent in demanding on one hand, on
a basis of a separate Jewish nationality
everywhere Jews are found, Jewish domi-
nation in Palestine, and at the same time
claiming complete Jewish equality elsewhere
than in Palestine, on the basis of a
nationality common to citizens of every
faith.
Note.—The White Paper of 1939 will be
specially dealt with.
When, however, full effect is given to the above
stated objections by voluntary abandonment or
rejection of the extreme demands for dominance,
there still remains the true problem of Palestine
itself, in which the rights and interests of Jew,
Christian and Moslem are internationally con-
cerned and stand in need of adjustment.
That problem divides itself into two branches
which rest on distinct grounds. The first is the
due implementation of the Balfour Declaration
as interpreted in 1918 by Dr. Weizmann in
Jerusalem, with the expressed concurrence of the
Arab representatives, as agreed to by written
compact in 1922 between the British Government
and the Zionist Organisation, as personally stated
by Lord Balfour in 1922 and 1924, as adopted by
the Mandate in which the Balfour Declaration
was merged, and as determined by two British
Commissions in 1937 and 1938. So implemented
a Jewish State created directly or indirectly is
impossible.
The second branch rests on the moral duty of
the United Nations in the interests of world
pacification and relief from suffering so to act
consistently with the safety and integrity of our
Empire and with moral obligations to others, as
to afford refuge to probably some hundreds of
thousands of persecuted Jews who may consider
Palestine or some other country as their most


suitable home. This requires not only reconsidera-
tion of the White Paper of 1939 which only war
exigencies, or the menace of war, within perhaps
the Empire itself, could possibly justify either
as to creation or retention, but also humanitarian
consideration by various countries regarding
immigration if the San Francisco Charter is to
have reality.
Both these phases of the problem are explicitly
dealt with.
CHAPTER I.
POLITICAL ZIONISM IN ATTEMPTING TO
CREATE A CHURCH-STATE IS A NEGATION
OF DEMOCRACY.
A. Its Central Aims.
As formulated by Zionist demands in Sydney
as late as March 26, 1944, and representative of
Political Zionism everywhere its central aims
are:—
1. All Palestine to be constituted a Jewish
State, alias Commonwealth.
2. Palestine to be open to Jewish immigration
under the control of the Jewish Agency.
3. The right of every Jew who desires to settle
in Palestine from his former place of abode
and to take his possessions with him.
Those demands are substantially, and almost
verbally, a repetition of those of the American
Conference of Zionists of September, 1943.
The Jewish Agency (Zionist), by a recent
memorandum bearing Dr. Weizmann’s signature,
he being the acknowledged Zionist leader for
Britain and Australia, repeats those demands.
(“Australian Jewish News,” May 19, 1945.)


The Zionist Plenary Conference of July 14, 1945,
reaffirmed the demand for a Jewish State in
Palestine. (“Hebrew Standard,” July 19, 1945.)
That Political Zionism is a purely political
movement, whatever additional use might be
made of Palestine should the movement prove
successful, is made clear by the outspoken
declaration of Rabbi Silver, the present leader
of American Zionists, the largest section of
Zionism in the world. At a Zionist meeting at
Syracuse, New York, as reported in the Zionist
Canadian “Jewish Chronicle” of November 20,
1942, when Nazi persecution and extermination
of Jews was filling the world with horror, the
report stated:—“He emphasised that ZIONISM
IS A POLITICAL AND NOT A PHILAN-
THROPIC MOVEMENT, and that its aim is to
establish Palestine as a political State for the
JEWISH PEOPLE”.
Observe it is for “the Jewish people”, not for
the uprooted European Jews, but for the whole
Jewish people, in which, of course, all Jews in
this Empire are included.
Again, at the American Jewish Conference in
August and September, 1943, Rabbi Silver took
the leading part of moving the resolutions. His
speech is described by the special correspondent
of the Australian “Zionist” of October 20, 1943,
as one of “the highlights of the Conference”. He
there repeated his former statement. The Con-
ference followed his lead.
Rabbi Silver has been recently recalled to
leadership, and was a United States delegate to
the Zionist Conference lately held in London.
(London “Jewish Chronicle,” July 29, 1945;
August 3, 1945.) The nature and basis of a
general Jewish opposition to Political Zionism,
while supporting “practical” Zionism, are well
expounded and illustrated in the recent “Universal
Jewish Encyclopedia,” vol. 10, at pp. 664 ff.


B. Negation of Democracy.
That these demands are a plain negation of
Democracy and of modern nation-building seems
to me, in view of the San Francisco Charter, to
be beyond controversy.
Irrespective of Arab hostility or even
acquiescence, and of other formidable obstacles
that stand in the way, there exists one funda-
mental objection that meets us at the threshold.
The attempt to turn back the clock of history
nearly 2,000 years and to recreate with the
approval of the United Nations pledged to the
San Francisco Charter, the “Jewish State”,, is
an attempt to pursue a course of a retrogressive
and contradictory character, in fact “an
anachronism”. Professor Jastrow, in his notable
work, “Zionism and the Future of Palestine”
(1919), at pp. 20 if., has demonstrated that until
comparatively recent times the inherent feature
of political organisation was the close union of
Church and State where citizenship, religion, and
nationality were linked together. The ancient
Jewish State was so formed. To quote an
eminent authority: “Citizenship is of course
status”. In the national sense citizenship in
Israel was identified with religion. A member of
another race could only become an Israelite by
adopting the Israelite religion, so naturalisation
coincides with conversion. . . . There is added:
“The abstract noun ‘Yahuduth’, Jewishness, con-
trasted with ‘Goyuth’, the abstract of ‘Goy\
Gentile, comes very near our term ‘Citizenship’
as far as concerns the status of ‘Jew’. (Dr.
Herzog, in “The Main Institutions of Jewish
Law”, 1936-1939, published while he was Chief
Rabbi of the Free State Eire.) He is now
Chief Rabbi in Palestine.
That this is still the central aim of Political
Zionism is placed beyond question by the Report
of the Woodhead (Partition) Commission, 1938
(Cd. 5854). At page 163, paragraphs 340-342,
it is made perfectly clear that Political Zionism


contemplates the resurrection of those ancient
tests of full citizenship. It is worth noting that
that report is conspicuously left unnoticed by
most advocates of Political Zionism. But it is
one of the most informative and important docu-
ments that exist on the subject, particularly for
every British subject of whatsoever faith.
In the paragraphs referred to the following
passages, among others, are found:—
“We have received representations from
Orthodox Jewry, in which it has been impressed
upon us that Orthodox Jews
(a) regard the STATE and CHURCH as
indivisible, and
(b) consider it fundamental that the constitu-
tion of the Jewish State should contain
provisions which would ensure for all time
the law of the Torah shall be the law of
the State, or as it was expressed in one
representation which we received, The
State shall itself adhere to the cardinal
requirements of the Torah’ ”.
After referring (par. 341) to the Iraqi declara-
tion guaranteeing to all inhabitants of the State
free exercise of religion, whose practices are not
inconsistent with public order or morals, and
freedom of conscience and worship, and suggesting
similar provisions for Palestine worship, the
report in par. 342 says:—-“But these guarantees
... do not satisfy those Orthodox Jews who have
urged their views before us. They desire some-
thing more. What they desire is that the
constitution shall be so drafted as to ensure, not
only that the law of the Torah shall prevail, but
also that it shall never not prevail. In fact,
what they desire is in matters which they con-
sider vital to the Jewish religion, the will of the
majority, if it does not coincide with the views
of the Orthodox, shall not prevail”.
This was the Orthodox view regarding a
“Jewish State” in partition. There is no reason
to doubt that in an undivided Palestine as a


“Jewish State” which over and above all humani-
tarian relief is still insisted on by Political
Zionism in perfect accordance with Rabbi Silver
(“Australian Jewish News”, September 21, 1945),
there would be any alteration of view. The
“Jewish State” would be the only State in the
world where its very name indicated and con-
noted a particular faith.
C. The Necessary Implications of a “Jewish
State”.
If any sensible meaning is to be given to the
name “Jewish State” or its synonym “Jewish
Commonwealth”, and whether the law of the
Torah is or is not to be everybody’s law, it
necessarily connotes that its citizens possessing
power must be “Jewish”. Obviously no Christian,
Moslem or anyone else of non-Jewish faith would
be eligible for political citizenship, unless and
until converted to the Jewish faith. To speak of
that as “democratic” as the Zionist resolutions
inconsistently do, is a sheer profanation of the
word.
Whether the Movement bases itself on race,
religion or history, or all three, in its claim that
the Jews of the world are one “Nation” and are
“homeless” without Palestine as their exclusive
territory, its essence is not the modern ideal of
a “state”, which to-day democratically unites in
one political nationality men and women of various
races, religions and histories. Its essence as to
Palestine is SEGREGATION and DOMINATION.
Inconsistently it claims EQUALITY everywhere
else. That inconsistency is not reasonably toler-
able. Jews cannot fairly ask of the United
Nations equality irrespective of personal religion,
and at the same time insist on making Palestine
specifically “Jewish”. For if that country is, like
other countries, to be a State where a man or
woman may be an equal citizen politically as well
as socially and economically, why stamp it with
the exclusive name “Jewish” instead of the name


“Palestine”, which it bears in English and
Arabic ?
Professor Jastrow, in his masterly treatment
of the^ subject, pp. 107 ff., points out at p. 109
that: “Anyone can become a Palestinian, as any
person can become an American or an English-
man, by obtaining nationalisation papers and
swearing allegiance to the principles of the
country, but no one can become a Jew except
by a profession of an adherence to a certain faith.
Even the most ardent political Zionist will not
deny this contention, and since the Zionists also
claim that Zionism is not a religious movement,
they surely do not contemplate making converts
to Judaism in the proposed Jewish State. How,
then, is it possible to organise a State in this
democratic age, which by its name sets up a
barrier to citizenship that can only be overcome
by a religious test?”
At p. 110 the learned author quotes a great
leader in Judaism, the late Israel Abrahams: “If
it be Jewish, it cannot be a State; if it be a State
it cannot be Jewish”.
The quotation just referred to has the support
of a most distinguished international lawyer. Sir
T. E. Holland’s authority in this connection would
not, I believe, be questioned by any writer of
importance. In his Lectures on International
Law (1933), Lecture VI, after referring to a
school of recent writers who put forward the
thesis that a new international law is needed
substituting nations for States, the “nations”
being a natural aggregate of persons, what are
called peoples or volker, he expresses his own
opinion at p. 57. There he quotes M. Thiers:
“If the doctrine of nationalities has any serious
meaning, it is this that all States ought to be
composed of one sole race, of peoples of the same
origin, and speaking the same language. On these
conditions, no State would have the right to exist.
To desire the application of such a theory in
order to realise it we must retrograde for a


thousand years”. Jastrow, pp. 107 ff., is exactly
in line with Professor Holland.
Here as elsewhere, unless otherwise indicated,
emphasis in type is mine.
D. Political Exclusion of Non-Jews.
If Palestine were constitutionally declared a
“Jewish State”, no Arab, whether Moslem or
Christian, no Christian of whatsoever race or
denomination, could become a first-class citizen
having constitutionally political or civil or even
religious rights except by becoming in some way
a “Jew”. For these he would always be subject
to the will of those who constitutionally were
To repeat what has already been said in the
Introduction, if an Australian or American State
adopted a Constitution declaring itself Catholic,
Anglican, Presbyterian, Methodist, etc., how plain
it would be a negation of Democracy and of the
San Francisco Charter.
CHAPTER II.
PROVOCATIVE OF ANTI-SEMITISM.
A. A Policy of Segregation.
The fundamental and avowed doctrine of
Political Zionism is the “homelessness” of Jews
everywhere in the world, notwithstanding then
admission in all democratic countries to political
and civil equality before the law. That doctrine
is an assertion that the Jews of the world,
European, American, African, Australian, whether
white, black, or yellow, form*in solidarity one
united and distinct people. In short, it 1S an
assertion of SEGREGATION from all other
peoples on the face of the earth, and that then
true “home” is Palestine.


It will have been observed that in the
“demands” of Political Zionism formulated in
Sydney, Jews elsewhere than in Palestine are in
what is described as their “place of abode”. This
term must not be attributed to Jews generally.
B. The Rise of Modern Political Zionism.
Theodor Herzl, who died in 1904, founded in
1896 modern Political Zionism by his pamphlet,
“The Jewish State”. That pamphlet, of which
the revised edition was in 1934 published by the
Zionist Organisation in London, and reproduced
by it in Sydney, is still nominally the Koran of
the Movement, as its author is still nominally
its Prophet. It say “nominally” because, as the
Movement has developed today, there is an
essential departure in principle from the clear-cut
plan that Herzl devised.
His plan was to completely transplant the
Jewish people to a Jewish State and thereby
segregate them from the Gentiles.
To condense his plan in as few words as pos-
sible it was this. In 1895, having in the previous
year reported for a Viennese journal the Dreyfus
trial, he was convinced by that proceeding and
the ill-feeling that was exhibited in France, by
the Tsarist Russia pogroms, by the persecutions
in Roumania, Germany, Austria, and elsewhere,
that anti-Semitism was ineradicable and that
emancipation where that was accorded only
would aggravate it.
His remedy therefore was for the whole
Jewish people of the earth once more an Exodus
to some place they could call their own.
In the first place it was for the whole Jewish
people, the poor, the middle classes, the prosper-
ous, the wealthy, from every land, to the “Jewish
State”. In the next place, where that State
should be was a matter of secondary importance
so long as it could accommodate the new Jewish
nation, and was held by the Jews in sovereignty.
It might be in either Argentina or in Palestine.
He preferred Palestine if the Sultan of Turkey,


whose dominion it then was, would grant it. He
preferred Palestine because from its historic
associations it was more attractive to the Jewish
people For in his view one thing alone united
the Jewish people of the earth. His words were
64): “WE ARE BOUND TOGETHER
ONLY BY THE FAITH OF OUR FATHERS”.
This in full accord with the very distinct state-
ment by Dr. Adler, then Chief Rabbi (see
“Apella” at pp. 45 if.), and with the quotations
by Dr. Hertz (the late Chief Rabbi), from
“Saadyah Gaon”, and Dr. Schechter, in his “Jewish
Thoughts”, 1940 edition, p. 107.
By Herzl’s plan their “transmigration , as he
termed it, to the Jewish State, wherever it should
be, was to proceed gradually for all Jews who
supported the idea of a Jewish State. Lawyers,
doctors, technicians, business men, as he said,
were included.
Herzl preached SEGREGATION on the largest
scale. He acknowledged that as it was a volun-
tary movement there would be dissentients.
Caustically he said (pp. 27, 28): —“Dissentients
must remember that allegiance or opposition is
entirely voluntary. He who will not come with
us may remain behind. Let all who are willing
to join us FALL IN BEHIND OUR BANNER
and fight for our cause with voice and pen and
DEED”. It was to be full “allegiance” to the
doors of Palestine, or opposition.
The present phase of Political Zionism upholds
the banner so far as it inscribes the words the
Jewish State”, and connotes transmigration of
SOME of the Jewish people. But it shrinks, as
Herzl predicted some would do, from “following
the banner” where Jews, to quote his words, ieel
comfortable”. There are some who follow the
banner up to a point and then leave it. That is
quite in accordance with present-day Political
Zionism. Herzl’s plan has been altered so that
the choice is not, as he declared, between
“allegiance” and “opposition”, but between


“partial allegiance” and “opposition”. It now
permits partial segregation. It countenances the
segregation of a Church-State called a “Jewish
State” from all Gentile States. It sanctions those
who “feel comfortable” to prefer the example of
Orpah to that of Ruth. Ruth followed Naomi
the whole way and Orpah went part of the way,
but turned back to dwell in Moab. Jastrow terms
them “Zionists by proxy”. The same idea is
expressed more mildly but quite as effectively
by Professor Brodetsky, himself an ardent Zionist,
in Mr. Paul Goodman’s book, “The Jewish
National Home”, 1917-1942 (p. 259). He says:
“The best Zionist is obviously he who aims at
his own settlement in Palestine”.
But unlike Ruth, even the distance they go,
is in my firm opinion a mistaken undertaking.
It countenances segregation, or isolation in the
language of to-day, even though it be of others,
in the name of Jewish solidarity, not merely of
religion but of so-called nationality. And this in
addition to other objections that have been men-
tioned. I cannot help adding, it is not Herzlian.
C. Herzl’s Admission as to Anti-Semitism.
At p. 17 he candidly admits:—“lt might reason-
ably be objected that I am giving a handle to
anti-Semitism when I say we are a people
one people, that I am hindering the assimilation
of Jews where it is about to be consummated,
and endangering it where it is an accomplished
fact in so far as it is possible for a solitary writer
to hinder or endanger anything”.
D. What he did not foresee.
He did not foresee that Russia would turn from
the country of oppression and persecution of Jews
simply because they were Jews, to a country,
after the Tsarist regime, where Jews are treated
on a .basis of equality, where Jews might rise to
positions. of honour and distinction on a level
with their fellow-citizens, a country that while
forbidding Political Zionism as detracting from
the perfect allegiance it demands from all its


citizens, would enact a law making anti-Semitism
a crime. He did not foresee that the outcome
of the second World War would be an interna-
tional recognition of the freedom of religion and
worship, and a declaration of “universal lespect
for . . . human rights and fundamental freedom
for all without distinction as to race, sex,
language, or religion”.
Nor did he foresee that the events of the last
40 years would make his scheme unnecessary,
unjust, and open to the objections that have been
summarised in the Introduction, including
especially for the moment its provocation to
anti-Semitism.
The testimony of two distinguished and repre-
sentative men, one of the Christian, the other of
the Jewish faith, will suffice to elucidate the
proposition with which this section is concerned.
E. The Earl of Listowel.
This eminent statesman, now Postmaster-
General in the Atlee Ministry, in the course of
a speech in the House of Lords, in memorable
words warned Political Zionism of the dangei of
provoking anti-Semitism. He said: —“Curiously
enough —it does not seem to have been very
frequently pointed out anti-Semitism and
Jewish Nationalism have a certain point in
common. Both regard the Jews as a separate
peole from the Gentiles, and as strangers and
aliens in whatever country they may have settled,
over however long a period of time. They each
have therefore the effect, though not of couise
so strongly in the case of Jewish Nationalism,
of encouraging that unfair discrimination between
Jews and non-Jews in social life which one hopes
will disappear as completely as the artificial
barrier which for many centuries divided
Catholics and Protestants”.
It is only just to the noble earl to recognise
the kindliness which runs as a thread throughout
his speech.


F. Dr. Julian Morgenstern.
Dr. Morgenstern is a Rabbi, 8.A., Ph.D., and
LI.D. He is an acknowledged scholar, a Jewish
researcher, and the author of several works of
ancient character and of Biblical treatises. He
is the Principal of the Hebrew Union College in
Cincinnati, and he delivered a notable address
at the opening of the Redfern Jewish Theological
Seminary’s Academical Year. That address may
be read in the “Australian Jewish News” for
December 24, 1943. He traced the progress of
the old Zionistic hope and programme of Judaism
for over 1,800 years to what he termed accurately
“The complete reversion from the free and
almost unrestrained UNIVERSALISM in Judaism
of the first two-thirds of the 19th century to a
NATIONALISM, PARTICULARISM, AND
ISOLATIONISM in some respects more extreme
than the reforms of Ezra and Nehemiah”.
Then referring to present-day Zionism he says:
“It has run the entire gamut of RACIAL
NATIONALISM from the, as we now see, very
modest hope of restoration of Palestine as the
centre of a new, positive, and intensive Jewish
cultural life to the extreme theory of JEWISH
NATIONALISM practically identical with
NAZIST AND FASCIST THEORY, which holds
that the bonds of Jewish racial nationalism are
eternally indissoluble, that there can be ever
ONLY ONE Jewish HOMELAND, ONLY ONE
LAND IN WHICH THE JEW CAN EVER FEEL
HIMSELF COMPLETELY AT HOME, that
eternally he is a member of the Jewish racial
nation, however that term may be defined, that
he resides among the nations, as at present, only
as a temporary sojourner, that he is in Diaspora,
in ‘Galut’, in EXILE, and that Israel’s redemp-
tion from the sad fate of the last 1,500 or even
the last 2,500 years will be only when it will be
restored to the role of completely and pre-
dominantly JEWISH INDEPENDENT STATE-
HOOD IN PALESTINE, in whatever form and


however achieved this Statehood may take,
Commonwealth, Republic, or Dominion”.
He continues: “The fact incontestably estab-
lished by history still confronts us with brazen
truth, that the true genius and destiny of Israel
find expression ONLY IN ITS ROLE AS A
RELIGIOUS PEOPLE”. In this, as has been
seen, he is in accord with Herzl.
G. Official Statement Regarding Political
Zionism.
In 1941 there came to Australia Dr. Michael
Traub, the Official Delegate of the Jewish Agency
for Palestine. He frankly stated the principles
of Political Zionism at meetings of adults and
of Jewish youth. His addresses confirm the
opinions of Lord Listowel and Rabbi Morgenstern.
See, for instance, the Sydney “Hebrew Standard”
of November 27, 1941.
I wish emphatically to say with confidence that
the doctrines enunciated by Dr. Traub, the dele-
gate of the Jewish Agency abroad, are not the
sentiments of the majority of Australian Jews.
The majority would agree with what Professor
Jastrow has said about a “Divided Allegiance”.
H. A “Divided Allegiance”.
The reasoning of Professor Jastrow at p. 120
of his work already mentioned, is as follows: —
“Any political interest in a Jewish State estab-
lished elsewhere would have a taint of hyphena-
tion or of divided allegiance. Ido not speak here
from the point of view of policy, nor have I in
mind the fear of arousing a suspicion of hyphena-
tion, but from the feeling which every 100 per
cent. American, Englishman, or Frenchman would
naturally and spontaneously harbour that beyond
a sentimental and historical interest in any other
country but his own, whether because he formerly
belonged to that country, or had associations with
it that attached him to it. He must not yield to
the temptation to look upon such country as a
kind of second home. IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO
BELONG TO TWO COUNTRIES, and if one


makes the effort complete attachment to one
must necessarily be impaired”.
The learned author then quotes Felix Adler,
an American, as saying“ Allegiance must be
perfect cannot be divided; either a Pales-
tinian or an American”.
Under Article 4 of the existing Palestine
Mandate: “The Zionist Organisation, so long as
its organisation and constitution are in the opinion
of the Mandatory appropriate, shall be recognised
as such agency”. The “demands” practically
require the Government of Palestine as to immi-
gration, which will control its political future
to be placed in the hands of the Zionist Organisa-
tion. If the Australian Government, for instance
representing all Australians, take one view
regarding the peril of the Empire or to Australia
specifically, and the Zionist Organisation, includ-
ing members in Australia, take an opposite view,
would there not be a “divided allegiance” as
Jastrow has explained it? Australian Jews who
were members of that organisation might in that
case find themselves in a serious dilemma.
CHAPTER III.
DEMANDS OF POLITICAL ZIONISM ARE
UNWARRANTED BY THE MANDATE, THE
BALFOUR DECLARATION, OR ANY OTHER
RIGHT, ARE CONTRARY TO ZIONIST ASSUR-
ANCES TO BRITAIN AND THE ARABS, AND
IN PRESENT CONDITIONS UNJUST TO
OTHER PALESTINIANS POLITICALLY AND
TO OTHER RELIGIONS.
A. Illegal under the Mandate.
So _ long as the present Palestine Mandate
remains unaltered the British Government would
have no legal power to concede the demands made


by Political Zionism. That is really incontest-
able.
The Mandate is the supreme constitutional law
of Palestine. No legislation, and no administra-
tive action inconsistent with its provisions would
be upheld in a court of law.
Assuming the invalidity from a legal point of
view of the provision in the White Paper of 1939
creating a bar after five years of Jewish immigra-
tion except with the consent of the Arabs a
question to be considered later the demands
here dealt with are infinitely worse. The White
Paper bar had at least the excuse of the maxim
salus populi suprema lex and the avoidance of a
ghastly orgy of bloodshed, as will be shown. The
demands in question, however, on the contrary
are provocative of bloodshed as well as being
hopelessly unlawful.
In the Jerusalem Jaffa case (1926 Appeal Cases
321) the Privy Council, speaking of Article 2
of the Mandate, said “the purpose of the Article
is that in fulfilling the duty which is incumbent
upon every Government to safeguard the rights
from time to time belonging to the inhabitants
of the territory the Mandatory shall not discrimi-
nate in favour of any one religion or race”.
Article 6 deals with Jewish immigration. It
requires the Administration of Palestine that
is the Government itself acting for His Majesty
the King and not one of the rival religions or
races —to provide for this. First of all the
Article imposes a condition precedent. It is that
of “Ensuring that the rights and position of other
sections of the population are not prejudiced”.
With that condition in mind the Government
“shall facilitate Jewish immigration UNDER
SUITABLE CONDITIONS and shall encourage,
in co-operation with the Jewish Agency referred
to in Article 4, close settlement by Jews on the
land, etc.”
It is plain that the King cannot surrender to
the Jewish Agency the trust reposed in him by


the Mandate. Nor can Jewish immigration be
lawfully facilitated except subject to the ex-
pressed condition of ensuring the rights and
position of the other sections of the population,
Moslem and Christian.
The Jewish Agency mentioned is the Zionist
Organisation (Art. 4).
The British Government has rightly obtained
the consent of the United States to share some
responsibility in this respect for the consequences
are momentous.
B. The Responsibility of Political Zionism.
The demands of Political Zionism for Jewish
domination in Palestine, for condemning Christian
and Moslem population to a perpetual minority,
to submit to such measure of rights as the Jewish
majority, plainly voting as Jews (and not as
Palestinians, irrespective of race or religion, on
an equal constitutional footing), and therefore not
on grounds of common nationhood, are a standing
barrier to peace and justice in Palestine.
The Mandate prescribes “no discrimination”
between the inhabitants on the ground of race
or religion. Both Arabs and Jews sin against
that in their unfounded claims for domination.
By all means the Arab claim for dominance should
be disallowed. But by all means also let Political
Zionism within our Empire renounce its perilous
and unfounded claim for dominance in Palestine,
for the sake of our Empire, for the sake of peace,
for the sake of the sacred associations that
Palestine holds for three religions, for the sake
of truth and justice, for the sake of the humani-
tarian object of succouring large numbers of
suffering Jews.
C. The Mandate disregarded by Political
Zionism.
Although the Mandate is the trust deed by
which the British Government is guided, and the
rival parties Jew and Arab must be bound
so long as it lasts, it is seldom referred to by
the enthusiasts of Political Zionism. That is for


the obvious reasons already appearing. Generally
the Mandate is silently passed by and the Balfour
Declaration is called in aid to support by a forced
and long abandoned interpretation the claims and
demands that have been hereinbefore particu-
larised as the extreme demands of the Movement.
This use of the Balfour Declaration is con-
stantly made notwithstanding, as Mr. Hyamson
truly says in “Palestine: a Policy,” p. 130: —“The
Mandate in effect superseded the Balfour Declara-
tion, of which it was not only an elaboration but
also to some extent an interpretation. It also
had behind it a far greater moral and legal
force”.
As however it is often paraded before the
world as if it stood as the unqualified Charter of
Political Zionism, uninterpreted and untouched by
the assurances to the Arab population, and by the
trusts created and imposed on the British Govern-
ment for the protection of the sacred associations
of three faiths, it is in the highest degree desir-
able that its history and its agreed interpreta-
tion prior to its incorporation in the Mandate
should be clearly stated.
D. A Modern Title Necessary.
Political Zionism in some quarters, as at a
Melbourne Jewish gathering (see Melbourne
“Jewish News”, Oct. 19, 1945), _ feeling the
pressure of the history and agreed interpretation
of the Declaration, falls back on the statement:
“The Bible is our Mandate”. Britain is put aside,
2,000 years of history are treated as non-existent,
the world events of Christianity and Islam, and
what Palestine means to those great religions
regarded as naught, or at best only secondary,
and ancient prophecies long ago fulfilled brought
into action as if of yesterday and held up as the
complete warrant for shutting the eyes to all
that has happened and all the rights that have
accrued during twenty centuries. Without stop-
ping to state in detail the obvious inapplicability
of such a claim, it is useful in passing to point


out two necessary consequences of making the
Bible the Mandate, as is sometimes asserted. It
does by necessary inclusion of such important
portions of the Bible as Chapters 17-20 of
Leviticus, support the views of the Orthodox
Jewish representatives referred to in the Wood-
head Commission report, that all inhabitants of
Palestine in a Jewish State, of whatever race or
faith, would be under an obligation to obey the
Mosaic Law. Next, as one part of the Bible is
as authoritative as another, the claim, if good
at all, includes by Chapter 1 vv. 2 to 5 of Joshua
not merely Palestine, but Trans-Jordania, Leba-
non, Syria, and Iraq.
But suppose such a statement to be eagerly
accepted by an enthusiastic Zionistic Jewish
audience, what ground is there for hoping that
it would satisfy the Moslem or the Christian
world ?
As for the Moslems, they would manifestly
reject it. The Koran, not *Leviticus, is their
guide. The Dome of the Rock is too sacred to
them to be surrendered without a sanguinary
struggle to Jewish control. And as for Trans-
Jordania, Lebanon, Syria, and Iraq, it passes
imagination and would more than all else exasper-
ate the Arabs.
The Bible of the Christian world does not stop
at the Old Testament. The Christian world would
never forget the teaching of Jesus to give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and unto God
the things that are God’s. Political sovereignty
of Palestine to be sought by force was then as it
is to-day one thing: personal religion with peace-
ful citizenship was and is another. The intran-
sigent Zealots of that day disregarded his
wisdom, defied the Roman Empire, and destroyed
Jerusalem. There are some Political Zionists in
the world to-day who, like the Bourbons, learn
nothing and forget nothing. Their feet are in
the twentieth century, their heads are in the
first.


There is a sad and pressing need to save the
remnant of European Israel. There is, I believe,
a peaceful and at the same time a just way open
to do it. But Political Zionism is not that way.
We must remember that Mr. Churchill, on
November 17, 1944, when speaking on the subject
of Lord Moyne’s assassination, and mentioning
the Stern Gang, added the necessity of suppress-
ing also “the larger but hardly less dangerous
Irgun Zvai Leumi” (National Army) which we
see from the Press numbers about 80,000 armed
with modern weapons. A Jewish spokesman in
Palestine asserts that the recent bombing out-
rages are the work of that powerful organisation.
(The “Age” and “Argus”, December 28, 1945.)
We have to remember, too, what Colonel
Stanley, Colonial Secretary in Mr. Churchill’s
Government, stated. He said that Britain was
glad to see Palestine as a sanctuary where un-
fortunate Jews might find refuge. He added:
“However, the rights of the Arabs for whom
Palestine has been their country for many
centuries must also be recognised”. (Melbourne
“Jewish News”, Jan. 26, 1945.) The Melbourne
“Jewish Herald” of the same date adds the words:
“and respected”.
Impartial observers are in agreement with
Colonel Stanley. It is sufficient to cite one as it
is a representative opinion. The special corre-
spondent of “The Times” (December 4, 1943),
then lately in Jerusalem, concluded his despatch
with these words: “Palestine belongs as much
to the Arabs as to the Jews”.
The way of a just and humanitarian peace and
refuge is, I believe, still open if Political Zionism
will renounce its aim of Jewish domination. As
evidence of that I quote from the “Zionist” of
September, 1945, p. 17. “Jaffa.—A conference of
the Arab Socialist Workers’ Union held here
issued a manifesto declaring that there is suffi-
cient room in Palestine for both Arabs and Jews”.
So far the cable does not say the respective


numbers, but there is added what is extremely
valuable as a quotation from the manifesto: —
“If the country is properly developed, both peoples
can live here in peace and a Jewish National Home
can be built in co-operation with Arab workers
ON THE BASIS OF EQUALITY IN A COMMON
HOMELAND”.
There is the olive branch. Will Zionists accept
it?
The “Bible” will not suffice for the offered
co-operation. We must examine the “Modern
Title” of the Declaration.
E. History of the Balfour Declaration.
The history of the Declaration can well begin
by reference to the Seventh Jewish Congress in
1911. There, states Dr. Gottheil, the noted
Zionist, in his work, “Zionism” (1914), at p. 154,
Professor Warburg said:—“Their right to the
land by reason of their having possessed it 2,000
years ago is not a sufficient claim. They must
create a modern title which would consist in the
fact that Palestine depended economically upon
the Jews owing its progress to Jewish initiative
and resources”. He was founder and chairman
of the Palestine Commission, and in 1914, the
date of Dr. Gottheil’s work, we are told that the
Commission guided the Zionist movement (p.
153).
Dr. Warburg’s statement is in line with Herzl s
plan for securing a modern grant for Jewish
settlement somewhere, preferably in Palestine.
F. Negotiations with British Government.
In “The Truth about the Peace Treaties” (Lloyd
George, 1918) are some important historical
statements. The author was Prime Minister, and
Mr. (afterwards Earl Balfour) and Mr. Churchill
were Ministers.
At p. 1141 it is stated:—“ln January, 1916, the
British Government policy in regard to Palestine
Holy Places and Zionist colonisation” (note the
word “colonisation”; it is not “State”) “was
officially communicated to Hussein” (he was the


Arab leader), “that so far as Palestine is con-
cerned we are determined that no people shall be
subjected to another”. That was a di.-tinct pledge
to both Arabs and Jews that Palestine should not
be either a Moslem or a Jewish State.
Again speaking of the “Return of Jews to
Palestine” note it refers not to “uprooted”
Jews but Jews anywhere —it is stated “as this
Government views with favour the realisation of
this aspiration, His Majesty’s Government are
determined that in so far as is compatible with
the freedom of the existing population, both
economic and political, no obstacle should be put
in the way of the realisation of this ideal.
Mr. Lloyd George goes on to say:—“The Arab
leaders did not offer any objection to the declara-
tion so long as the rights of the Arabs were
recognised.
At p. 1193 Mr. Churchill is reported as saying
in 1919, that is two years after the Balfour
Declaration:— “We made a pledge that we would
not turn the Arab off his land or invade his
political and social rights”.
Mr. Montague, a Jewish member of the Cabinet,
said:—“Mr. Balfour’s speech guaranteed the
right of both”.
These extracts show beyond doubt the inten-
tion of the Government in making the Declara-
tion. We shall now see whether that intention
was carried out by its language, and the agreed
meaning of the Instrument.
G. The Balfour Declaration.
Lord Rothschild, President of the Zionist
Organisation, wrote to the British Government
a letter in which he asked for “The Reconstitu-
tion of Palestine as a National Home”.
If that request had been assented to that would
so far as Britain was concerned have committed
her to regard the whole of Palestine as devoted
to the purpose of being reconstituted as in days
of Jewish independence 2,000 or rather 2,500
years ago as a Jewish State, blotting out of the


pages of history all that had since transpired
in that country, ignoring the priceless spiritual
treasures of other faiths, and casting aside the
distinct pledges to the non-Jewish populations
already and for centuries established in Pales-
tine.
That request, however, was not acceded to.
The widely embracing phrase suggested in Lord
Rothschild’s letter does not appear in the Declara-
tion. It was replaced by a very different
expression. The words chosen were:—“His
Majesty’s Government view with favour the
establishment in Palestine of a national home
for the Jewish people, and will use their best
endeavours to facilitate the achievement of this
object”, then adding these all-important words:—
“It being clearly understood that nothing shall
be done which may prejudice the civil and
religious rights of existing non-Jewish communi-
ties in Palestine, or the rights and political status
enjoyed by Jews in any other country”.
H. The Alteration Decisive.
This decisive alteration has been recognised by
Professor Norman Bentwich and others. For
instance, Sir Ronald Storrs, who was for some
time Governor of Jerusalem, says in his “Zionism
and Palestine” (Penguin Series at p. 75): —
“Herzl’s original ‘Judenstaat’ was indeed abso-
lutely and permanently excluded by the British
Government as well as repudiated by Official
Zionism”.
The Zionist repudiation referred to by Sir
Ronald Storrs was part of the Compact deliber-
ately made between the Government and the
Zionist Organisation. But it had already been
repudiated openly long before by Dr. Weizmann
in a very solemn manner. And this repudiation
was the sequel to a very sensible attitude on the
part of Zionism. A passage from Dr. Gottheil’s
“Zionism” illustrates this.


I. Dr. Gottheil.
At p. 126 the following occurs, written in 1914:
“It is true that from time to time, some Zionists
of more stalwart than sober faith have spoken
of a Jewish State fully independent, with all the
accompaniments and appanages belonging
thereto. But the more sober and deliberate
judgment of those who spoke with authority have
never gone beyond the borders of reasonable-
ness. The ‘Basel Platform’ speaks of a home’’
(emphasis the author’s) “in which Jewish aspira-
tions may be realised. A home (again the
author’s emphasis) demands security and per-
manence; and under the aegis of a great and
liberal power and with a measurable amount of
autonomy such a home (emphasis the author’s)
could be more readily procured and preserved
than if independence were complete and un-
restricted”.
It was this idea of a “Home” that was incor-
porated into the Balfour Declaration, and that
has long been established under the Mandate.
In “The Laws of England” (Volume 11, p. 157)
we find it stated: “Under regulations of 1927 the
Jewish community is organised and recognised
enjoying autonomy in internal affairs, religious,
cultural, and communal, with power to levy rates
on its members. It has a Chief Rabbinate and
local rabbinical officers, an elected Assembly and
General Council elected by the Assembly which
represents the Community in relation with the
Government”. It is added that similar local
autonomy exists for Moslems since 1921.
So, Sir Ronald Storrs at p. 118: —“The National
Home is beyond question unshakably established.
In a note to that page he gives detailed evidence
of that fact in a striking quotation.
J. Dr. Weizmann in 1918.
Professor Norman Bentwich in his “England
in Palestine” at p. 27 says that Dr. Weizmann
in Jerusalem in 1918, the year after the Balfour
Declaration, “denied emphatically the allegation


which was already being spread that the Jews
intended to take the political domination of
Palestine into their hands at the end of the war,
in other words to create a Jewish State”.
With still greater detail this statement is
corroborated by Sir Ronald Storrs in the work
already referred to, “Zionism and Palestine”, at
p. 47. Sir Ronald, then Military Governor of
Jerusalem, arranged a dinner party at which
leading men representative of Britain, of Jewish
interests, and of the Christian and Moslem
faiths, were present. There, condensing what is
stated, Dr. Weizmann “let his hearers beware
of treacherous insinuations that Zionists were
seeking POLITICAL POWER rather let both
progress together until they were ready for a
JOINT AUTONOMY”. The Mufti of Jerusalem,
we were told further, “replied civilly thanking
Dr. Weizmann for allaying apprehensions which
but for his exposition might have been aroused”.
The Mufti concluded: —“Our rights are your
rights and your duties our duties”.
This was the interpretation of the Balfour
Declaration by both Zionists and Arabs in 1918.
If both had adhered to that interpretation there
would be peace and happiness in Palestine to-day.
There would be no difficulty in providing refuge
for suffering Jews in that country and Britain
would not be faced with the serious menace for
which Political Zionism and Arab nationalism are
jointly responsible.
K. Dr. Weizmann in 1921.
Professor Bentwich in his latest book, “Judea
Lives Again”, at pp. 140 ff., tells us that the
Zionist Congress of 1921, the first after the
granting of the Mandate (but it was before it
was finally settled and framed), declared the
desire of the Jewish people to live in fraternity
with the Arab people and “TO DEVELOP THE
HOMELAND COMMON TO BOTH PEOPLES”.
That was plainly a representation to the world
that Zionism did not desire under the forthcoming


Mandate to make any attempt to obtain a Jewish
States.
L. Dr. Weizmann in 1931.
In an address referred to at p. 141 of the
last-mentioned work we are told that Dr. Weiz-
mann said:—“The policy was still that of a
81-NATIONAL PALESTINE IN WHICH BOTH
JEWS AND ARABS WOULD BE NEITHER
DOMINATING NOR DOMINATED. The Arabs
must be made to feel by deed as well as by word
that whatever the future numerical relationship
of the two nations in Palestine, we on our part
contemplate NO POLITICAL DOMINATION.”
On the same page it is stated:— “Until 1936
Dr. Weizmann spoke of THE COMMON
FATHERLAND of the Arabs and Jews as the
ULTIMATE AIM.”
The term “Fatherland” there obviously refers
to those Arabs and Jews who under Article 6 of
the Mandate possessed Palestinian citizenship
either by birth or acquisition.
M. The Compact.
Though in 1920 it had been determined that
the Mandate over Palestine should be entrusted
to Britain, the Mandate was not issued until 1924.
That it should be granted to Britain was recog-
nised as appropriate from Britain’s position in
the Near East and her undertaking by the Balfour
Declaration. Arab fears had been allayed by Dr.
Weizmann’s assurances to the Arabs in 1918 and
1921.
In 1922 before deciding on the terms of the
Mandate it became necessary that a complete
understanding between the Government and the
Zionist Organisation should be arrived at. The
most urgent reasons of Empire security demanded
close scrutiny. A peaceful and contented
Palestine was then, as it is now, an essential link
in Empire communications. Egypt, the Suez
Canal, the Indian Ocean, India, Australia, New
Zealand, all had to be taken into consideration.
It was absolutely necessary to equate promises


to the Jewish people and to the Moslem popula-
tions.
The result of anxious discussion at the council
table at which we can picture Lord Balfour as
Lord President of the Council was embodied in
an historic letter of June 3, 1922, addressed by
Mr. Churchill for the Government to the Zionist
Organisation. It specifically and entirely rejected
the then recent demand, utterly inconsistent with
other statements by him, that “Palestine should
become as Jewish as England is English”. As
has been pointed out three years before in
“Jewish Opinion” for March 1, 1919 (p. 1),
“Neither race nor religion makes an Englishman.
But religion primarily, and secondarily and in a
minor degree race, constitute the Jew”.
Mr. Churchill’s letter stated explicitly that
“the terms of the Declaration do not contemplate
that Palestine as a whole should be converted into
a Jewish National Home, but that such a Home
should be founded in Palestine.”
The letter referred to the Zionist Congress
resolution of 1921 already mentioned. It was
made clear that “It is contemplated that the
status of all citizens of Palestine in the eyes of
the law shall be PALESTINIAN and it has
NEVER been intended that they, or any section
of them should possess any other juridical
status”.
The nature of the “Jewish National Home” is
distinguished from a “Jewish State”. That will
receive attention later.
The letter concluded: —“This then is the
INTERPRETATION which His Majesty’s
Government place upon the Declaration of 1917,
and it does not contain or imply anything which
can cause alarm to the Arab population of Pales-
tine, or disappointment to the Jews”.
On June 18 Dr. Weizmann for the Zionist
Organisation wrote accepting that interpretation.
On the faith of that Compact the British


Government proceeded with the framing of the
Mandate.
It is difficult to understand, in the face of that
distinct and unmistakable Compact, the present
attitude of the Political Zionist Movement. As
Mr. Bentwich says, until 1936 Dr. Weizmann
looked upon Palestine as the “common home” of
Jews and Arabs there. Indeed, in a work pub-
lished in 1936, “What Will Happen to the Jews,”
by Mr. Joseph Leftwich (at p. 121), Dr. Weiz-
mann is referred to as saying in opposition to a
“Jewish State”:—“What people mean when they
talk of a Jewish State in Palestine, I cannot
imagine”. “We recognise that Palestine is going
to be the common homeland of the Jews and
Arabs. Palestine could become a Jewish State
if it were an uninhabited country. But it is not
an uninhabited country”. So far Dr. Weizmann,
the acknowledged leader of Political Zionism, was
in accord with the Compact.
N. The Congressional Resolution of 1922.
On June 22, 1922, the American Congress
passed a resolution perfectly in line with the
two letters above-mentioned declaring that they
favoured “the establishment in Palestine of a
National Home for the Jewish peoples” and
added what is extremely important at the
moment to bear in mind:—“lt being clearly
understood that nothing should be done which
may prejudice the civil or religious rights of
Christian and all other non-Jewish Communities
in Palestine, and that the Holy Places and
religious buildings and sites in Palestine should
be adequately protected”.
That resolution was also before the nations
that granted the Mandate as it stands. It was
passed in President Harding’s term, and not only
supersedes earlier personal anticipations of
President Wilson, but is difficult to reconcile with
the more recent electioneering planks on Palestine
found in the platforms of rival parties in America.


It is in my opinion irreconcilable with the Con-
gressional Resolutions of December, 1945.
0. Lord Balfour’s Personal Interpretation.
Not only was Lord Balfour, as Minister, a
necessary party to Mr. Churchill’s letter of June
3, 1922, but on June 21, 1922, he gave expression
to his views in a speech in the House of Lords.
It was on a discussion upon the proposed Mandate
shortly before it was finally approved by the
League of Nations. (House of Lords Debates,
1922, Vol. 50). I refer to a passage at column
1011 where speaking of the Mandate Lord Balfour
sa id ; —“l cannot imagine any political interests
exercised under greater safeguards than the
POLITICAL INTERESTS of the ARAB POPU-
LATION of Palestine”.
Again on July 24, 1924, at the closing meeting
of the League of Nations after the Mandate was
granted and approved, Lord Balfour made what
I regard as his final official Declaration as to
the position of Palestine, in respect of Arabs and
the Jewish National Home. It can be found in
his collected “Speeches on Zionism,” p. 66, and
also in “The Times” of July 25, 1922. He said,
inter alia'. —“l know there have been representa-
tives of the Arab population who think that their
interests have not been sufficiently safeguarded.
I can most sincerely assure them that the most
anxious attention has been paid to their position,
and that the last that the British Government
have ever desired is that they should be sufferers
from injustice because we try to carry out the
policy of PROVIDING A JEWISH HOME IN
PALESTINE FOR THE JEWISH PEOPLE.
Believe me, the two policies are in no sense
antagonistic or inharmonious with each other.
I believe that EVERY LIBERTY will be preserved
to the Arab population”.
The conclusiveness of Lord Balfour’s assur-
ances cannot for a moment be doubted. I can
conceive of no words which could more fully
assure the Arabs and the world that the Arabs


would not suffer the injustice of being made the
subjects of a “Jewish State”. They were assur-
ances that they would not be governed by Jews,
that they would not be “swamped” as Mr.
Churchill first and Lord Samuel later (House of
Lords 1939, Vol. 113, col. 39) phrased it by
Jewish immigration, in order that as Dr. Weiz-
mann in his warlike message to the American
Conference and adopted by that Conference de-
clared:—“Thereby constituting the Jewish
Commonwealth foreshadowed by the Balfour
Declaration . Lord Balfour from his grave gives
his strict denial to such an assertion.
To attribute to him and through him to the
British Government what Political Zionism
demands” in his name is to attribute to him a
want of candour that is unthinkable.
P. Lord Moyne’s Testimony.
One of the most notable and most informative
as well as constructive speeches on the subject
is that delivered by the late Lord Moyne in the
House of Lords on June 8, 1942. It is sad to
reflect that to the candid, just and patriotic ex-
pression of the situation he owed his untimely
death at the hands of members of a group of
Lord Moyne (House of Lords Debates 1941-42,
Vol. 123, Col. 196 ff.) said inter alia:—“ The
Zionist claim has raised two burning issues.
Firstly, the demand for large-scale immigration
into an already overcrowded country, and
secondly, racial domination by these newcomers
over the original inhabitants”.
In 1922, when the present Prime Minister was
Colonial Secretary, he issued a statement on
British policy in Palestine which is very much to
the point in regard to the Jewish claim to political
domination and the swamping of the Arab
population to-day. Mr. Churchill stated that His
Majesty s Government had not at any time con-
templated the subordination of the Arabic popula-
tion, language, or culture in Palestine. Attention
was drawn to the fact that the terms of the


Balfour Declaration do not contemplate that
Palestine as a whole should be converted into a
Jewish National Home but that such a Home
should be founded in Palestine. It was laid down
that immigration cannot be so great in volume
as to exceed whatever may be the economic
capacity of the country at the time to absorb new
arrivals. . . .
“It was stated that up to that time immigra-
tion had fulfilled these conditions, the number of
immigrants since the British occupation having
been about 25,000.
“At the end of the last war, the Jewish Com-
munity numbered 80,000. It now numbers about
450,000”.
(I interpose that according to recent rough
estimation the present Jewish population is
600,000 and the Arab number 1,150,000. See
Sydney “Daily Mirror”, October, 1945.)
Continuing Lord Moyne, he said: —
“Over and over again Commissions and White
Papers have expressed the opinion that neither
the Mandate nor the Balfour Declaration intended
Palestine to be converted into a Jewish State
against the will of the Arab population,
gangsters whom all responsible Jewry throughout
the world disown and execrate.
“The tragedy of the Palestinian question is,
as was said by the Royal Commission, that it is
a conflict between two rights. When Jerusalem
was destroyed, its soil ploughed up in the year
135, the Jews had occupied the country for about
1,300 years. Since the Mahommedan invasion
of 632 the Arabs have occupied Palestine for
practically the same period.” ....
“ A far smaller measure of immigration”
(than that demanded by Zionist leaders) “led to
the Palestine disturbances which lasted from
1936 to 1939, and showed that the Arabs, who
had lived and buried their dead for fifty genera-
tions in Palestine, will not willingly surrender
their land and self-government to the Jews. We


may deplore it, but there is the stark naked fact,
and you cannot get away from it by sentimental
appeals to the hardship on the Jews” ....
. . . Surely it is time for the Zionists to
abandon this appeal to force, and to SEEK A
SETTLEMENT WITH THE ARABS BY CON-
SENT If the fear of JEWISH DOMINATION
COULD BE REMOVED they” (the Arabs)
“might indeed welcome the Jewish immigrants
with their well-known industry and intelligence
and with their capital”.
At col. 199 Lord Moyne advocated looking at
once “in all directions” to find means of re-
establishing “these martyrs to Nazi oppression
to a new life”. A memorable declaration.
Q. Peel Commission.
Lord Moyne’s reference to Commissions and
White Papers is amply borne out by evidence.
The White Paper of 1922 itself is decisive that
Political Zionism is destitute of any rightful
claim by reason of the Balfour Declaration, since
Mr. Churchill’s interpretation on behalf of, inter
alios Lord Balfour, was accepted. The Com-
missions referred to were notably the Peel
Commission, and the Woodhouse Commission.
Seldom if ever is the latter mentioned in Zionistic
literature. The former receives very inadequate
attention in Zionist propaganda so far as the
Conclusions of the Commission are concerned.
Some of the evidence is conspicuously displayed,
but the Judgment of the Tribunal to use a legal
analogy —is scarcely noticed. It is the considered
and reasoned set of conclusions rejecting the
Political Zionistic claims to which I shall draw
attention.
The Peel Commission, a Royal Commission
under the chairmanship of the late Lord Peel,
was appointed in August, 1936, as a result of
disturbances between Jews and Arabs in Palestine
earlier in the year. They were required to enquire
into the question of grievances and remedies.
Their General Conclusion as to the conflicting


claims of Jews and Arabs to dominate is found
at p. 375: —“The answer to the question, , Which
of them in the end will govern Palestine’, must
surely be ‘NEITHER’. We do not think any fair-
minded statesman would suppose, now that the
hope of harmony between the two races has
proved untenable, that Britain ought to hand ovei
to Arab rule 400,000” (now say nearly 600,000)
“Jews whose entry into Palestine has for the
most part been facilitated by the British Govern-
ment and approved by the League of
or that IF THE JEWS SHOULD BECOME A
MAJORITY, A MILLION OR SO (now about
1,150,000) “OF ARABS SHOULD BE HANDED
OVER TO THEIR RULE”.
1 would ask seriously in confirmation ot that
expression of opinion can any fair-minded Aus-
tralian, or indeed any fair-minded person, find
fault with the general conclusion of the Com-
mission?
Their Specific Conclusions bear on the question
of the Jewish State, the interpretation of the
Balfour Declaration, and the Mandate. They are
found at pp. 41 and 42 of the Report and are:—
1. “The recognition of Jewish rights „ was
linked with the recognition of Arab rights .
2 “If the Arab claims to Palestine were sub-
ject to the rights of others, so were Jewish
claims”.
3. “To foster Jewish immigration in the hope
that it might ultimately lead to the creation of
a Jewish majority and the establishment ot a
Jewish State with the consent or at least the
acquiescence of the Arabs was one thing. It was
quite another thing to contemplate, however
remotely, THE FORCIBLE CONVERSION o
Palestine into a Jewish State against the will ot
the Arabs”. , . ,
“For that would clearly violate the spirit and
intention of the Mandate system. It would mean
that national self-determination had been with-
held when the Arabs were a majority m Pales


tine, and only conceded when the Jews were in
a majority. It would mean that the Arabs had
been denied the opportunity of standing by them-
selves ; that they had in fact after an interval of
conflict been BARTERED ABOUT FROM
TURKISH SOVEREIGNTY TO JEWISH
SOVEREIGNTY. It is true that in the light of
history Jewish rule over Palestine could not be
regarded as foreign rule in the same sense as
Turkish, but the international recognition of the
Jews to return to their homeland did not involve
the recognition of the right of the Jews to govern
the Arabs against their will”.
The concluding words of the preceding sentence,
adverse as it is to Political Zionism, omits to
notice the fundamental objection to a “Jewish
State”, namely reversion to the obsolete “Church-
State” of a bygone age.
The remedy proposed was partition of Palestine
into three zones, a Jewish State, an Arab State,
and an enclave containing Jerusalem and various
Holy Places sacred to three religions and
separated from both these States. The scheme
has been rejected.
R. Woodhead Commission.
On January 4, 1938, the British Government
appointed a Commission under the chairmanship
of Sir John Woodhead. It is called the Partition
Commission, since its function was the demarca-
tion of the divisions suggested by the Peel Com-
mission.. Notwithstanding the importance of its
report, it is remarkable that almost Trappist
silence is preserved regarding it by Political
Zionism. That report is in Cd. 5854 of 1938.
It gives (p. 15) a short history of the disturb-
ances leading to. the Peel Commission, its con-
clusions, and their effect. It considers the rela-
tion of the Arab-Jewish conflict in Palestine in
relation to the Moslem world and also to the
Christian world. These are here placed in
order.


1. The Moslem World.
At p. 77 (par. 167) the Commission states: —
“The political and religious objections are . . •
in our opinion fatal to the proposal that any part
of Jerusalem should be included in the Jewish
State.”
After reference in par. 167 to the Mosque of
Omar as among the most treasured possessions
of the Moslem world for many centuries the
Commission accepts the assurances of “persons
well qualified to express an opinion that to include
a part of Jerusalem with the Jewish State”
would inevitably lead to disorders of the most
serious kind”. . , , ~,,,,
I may interpose the historical tact that the
Mosque of Omar the Dome of the Rock has
been in Moslem hands twice as long as Jerusalem
was possessed by Jews as an independent nation.
Substantial reasons are given for not dis-
regarding the Arab refusal to entrust the safety
of their sacred places to a Jewish authority.
2. The Christian World.
The effect of including Jerusalem in a Jewish
State in the conditions prevailing in Palestine is
graphically and to my mind touchingly as well as
convincingly told by the Commission. At par.
172 it is said: —“But it is not only Moslem
opinion which is to be considered in this matter.
Jerusalem is also sacred to the Christian faith,
and not only the Old City within which stands
the Church of the Holy Sepulchre itself and the
Way of the Cross, but also many places m the
surrounding area, such as the Mount of Olives,
and the Sanctuary of the Ascension, the Garden
of Gethsemane, Bethlehem, and the Church ot
the Nativity, the village of Bethany, the road
to Emmaus, all places hallowed to the Christian
by the most precious associations. It may be
that many Christians, especially in this country,
sympathise with the passionate longing of the
Jews for Jerusalem and would be willing to see
at least that part of the city which includes the


modern suburb and the Hebrew University in-
corporated in the Jewish State, if that could be
done by agreement and good will.
“But we are convinced that the dominant desire
of the whole body of Christians would be to
preserve the peace of Jerusalem and safeguard
the Holy City from any change which threatened
to provoke hatred and bloodshed within its walls
or in their neighbourhood. With this in mind,
we believe that CHRISTIAN OPINION
THROUGHOUT THE WORLD, realising that
such a step would provoke resentment and dis-
order, WOULD BE DEEPLY GRIEVED by a
proposal to entrust a part of the city precincts
to the control of the Jewish Community”.
How much more, the whole city, and the whole
country!
In. par. 174 the Commission declares:— “The
political and religious objections to the Jewish
claim” (this for Jerusalem) “must be held to be
decisive”. They add:—“We feel convinced that
the unique character of Jerusalem as the object
of the affection and veneration of three of the
great religions of mankind must be recognised
by ITS RETENTION IN TRUST FOR THE
WORLD UNDER MANDATORY GOVERN-
MENT”.
The Background of the Report.
The Commission (page 19, par. 29) sets out
an account of the disorders that had already
arisen and the danger to which Bethlehem and
other sacred places were exposed.
I am confident that I express the sentiments of
the majority of my Jewish brethren in agreeing
with the sympathetically frank conclusions of
the Commission.
The disorders are recurring, and- it is plain
to me that until Political Zionism abandons its
extreme claims there will be no peace in Pales-
tine.


CHAPTER IV.
THE ZIONIST DEMAND FOR UNRESTRICTED
IMMIGRATION OF JEWS A DISCRIMINATORY
AND UNDEMOCRATIC CAMOUFLAGE FOR A
JEWISH STATE.
A. The American Zionistic Conference of
September, 1943. .
In September, 1943, an American Jewish Con-
ference met. One of its resolutions was Un-
restricted Jewish Immigration into Palestine . It
also resolved that all immigration should be
controlled by the Jewish Agency, that is, by the
Zionist Organisation. .
The Conference was organised by Zionists.
There were really no democratic elections of the
delegates by the masses. (See the admission of
this fact in the “Australian Jewish Forum ,
December, 1943, Mr. Shemberg’s letter from
Toronto.) The affirmative vote was representa-
tive of only a minority of American Jewry. (See
also the “South Africa Jewish Chronicle of
September 10, 1943.)
Rabbi Silver, the present leader of American
Zionism, was, as stated in the Melbourne “Zionist
of October 29, 1943, one of the “highlights of
the Conference. He delivered a “powerful ora-
tion”. His address is conveniently to be read in
“New Palestine” for September, 1943. The fol-
lowing extracts lay bare the heart of Political
Zionism in relation to the claim for “Unrestricted
Immigration”. The Rabbi said: —
1. “On the basis of sheer philanthropy of
satisfying pressing immigration needs, PALES-
TINE HAS ALREADY DONE ITS FULL SHARE
FOR JEWISH REFUGEES. It has taken m
more than one-half of the total Jewish refugees
of the world; and the Palestine Arabs, their
sympathisers in England and here, have been
quick to point out that PALESTINE HAS
ALREADY DONE ALL THAT CAN BE EX-
PECTED FROM A SMALL COUNTRY, and far


more than most of the larger countries have
done”.
2. “It is because Palestine is the Jewish Home-
land that we have the right to insist upon UN-
RESTRICTED IMMIGRATION. It is on the
NATIONAL IDEA that the upbuilding of Pales-
tine as a place of largescale Jewish immigration
has always rested and CAN ALONE CONTINUE
TO REST. Our right to immigration in the last
analysis is predicted upon the right to build the
JEWISH COMMONWEALTH IN PALESTINE”.
He added:— “They are interlinked and insepar-
able”.
Rabbi Silver was chosen as the chief spokesman
for his well-known views. The Canadian “Jewish
Chronicle” of November 29, 1942, states that
at the Zionist meeting at Syracuse, New York,
he voiced the demand that Palestine be placed
under INTERNATIONAL CONTROL to enable
the rapid establishment of a JEWISH MAJORITY
or the immediate establishment of a COMMON-
WEALTH based on the possibility of a Jewish
majority”.
Further:—“The interference of the British
Colonial Office with the mandatory system under
which Palestine is governed must terminate”.
The Report added:—“Dr. Silver emphasised
that ZIONISM IS A POLITICAL AND NOT A
PHILANTHROPIC MOVEMENT, and that its
aim is to establish Palestine as a political State
tor the Jewish people”.
There we see Political Zionism unmasked.


CHAPTER V.
POLITICAL ZIONISM AN OBSTRUCTION TO
ARAB CONCILIATION, TO THE PEACEFUL
SETTLEMENT OF JEWS IN PALESTINE, AND
PROVOCATIVE OF MOSLEM ANTAGONISM
WITHIN AND BEYOND THE EMPIRE, AND
CONSEQUENTLY A DANGER TO ITS INTEG-
RITY AND SAFETY.
A. Dr. Weizmann’s Later Attitude.
Political Zionism regards Dr. Weizmann as the
leader par excellence of the Movement. Of late
years his utterances are in marked contrast with
the earlier assurances to the British Government
and to the Arabs that I have already quoted
from former years.
1. In “The Canadian Jewish Chronicle” of
May 15, 1942, Dr. Weizmann is reported to have
at the Zionist gathering held at the Biltmore
Hotel, New York, paraphrased Winston Churchill
by saying:—“Give us the political conditions and
we will finish the job”.. If language of that
charter is given publicity, it cannot be matter for
surprise that Arab antagonism is aroused.
2. “The New York Times” of August 31, 1943,
records that Dr. Weizmann cabled to the American
Conference in that month urging the American
Conference to claim what he termed “their full
status as free men, and the right to return to
Palestine and to take their fate into their own
hands, THEREBY ESTABLISHING THE
JEWISH COMMONWEALTH foreshadowed by
the Balfour Declaration”. The cable ended thus:
—“This time solemn declarations are not
enough”,
B. An Obstruction to Arab Conciliation.
The Peel Commission’s Report above quoted
irresistibly states the natural reaction of the
Arabs for cogent reasons against the now un-
disguised attempt to coerce Britain into permit-
ting Jewish political domination in Palestine.


The name “Jewish State” carries with it religious
domination also. A block Jewish vote, if once
the Jewish majority is established, means domi-
nation in all respects.
I repeat the valuable confirmation of this fact of
obstruction, contained in the “Zionist” of Mel-
bourne (September, 1945, at p. 17), appears:—
“If the country is properly developed both peoples
can live here in peace, and a Jewish National
Home can be built in co-operation with Arab
workers on the basis of EQUALITY IN A COM-
MON HOMELAND”.
There, I repeat, is the OLIVE BRANCH. Will
POLITICAL ZIONISM be wise in time? It is
only what Dr. Weizmann as reported gave as
Zionistic pledges for 1918 to 1931 and even to
1936.
C. Danger to the Peace and Integrity of our
Empire.
The daily Press contains repeated evidence of
this peril. The Moslem world will not permit
without a struggle the control of their sacred
places in Palestine to pass under Jewish control;
nor will it allow silently Jewish domination over
the persons and property of the Arab population
there.
I appeal to all of Jewish faith not to stir fire
with a sword.
D. The Remedy.
If but Political Zionism “Jewish State” and
its alias “Unrestricted Jewish Immigration”
were renounced and the olive branch accepted,
then an extensive Jewish immigration of Palestine
lovers could no doubt be assented to, with
guarantees that there should be no domination
by Jew or Arab. Whatever the relative popula-
tion might be, there could, as in the Australian
and American Senate, be parity of power. Britain
would be a just arbiter in case of difference and
a powerful protector.


The only certain bar to this can be the prefer-
ence of Political Zionistic aspirations in a changed
and different world from that of 2,000 years ago
to modern democratic institutions and humani-
tarian considerations. Which will prevail?


CHAPTER VI.
INCONSISTENCY OF DEMANDING ON ONE
HAND ON A BASIS OF A SEPARATE JEWISH
NATIONALITY FOR JEWS WHEREVER THEY
ARE FOUND, A JEWISH STATE IN PALES-
TINE WITH JEWISH DOMINATION THERE,
AND ON THE OTHER HAND OF CLAIMING
COMPLETE JEWISH EQUALITY IN EVERY
OTHER COUNTRY ON THE BASIS OF A
NATIONALITY COMMON TO THE CITIZENS
OF EACH COUNTRY IRRESPECTIVE OF
THEIR INDIVIDUAL RELIGIOUS FAITH.
This aspect has been sufficiently dealt with,
and it would be burning daylight to pursue further
so self-evident a proposition except to emphasise
the. danger of permitting the same result to be
indirectly attained by forcing a discriminatory
preference of unrestricted immigration to all
Jews from any part of the world as a right simply
because they are Jews. That is as indefensible
as discrimination against them simply because
they are Jews.
It also confuses the meaning of the word
“Nationality”, rests on a false basis, and obscures
the real virtue of the humanitarianism which
should prompt the regulation of Jewish immigra-
tion into Palestine.


CHAPTER VII.
THE WHITE PAPER OF 1939.
Properly with justice to Britain to understand
the much debated White Paper of 1939, which
the British Government in the interests of justice
is not willing, and in those of public safety does
not even now dare entirely to abrogate, but only
as far as consistent with those supreme con-
siderations is willing to ameliorate in present
circumstances (see the “Age”, November 1,
1945), we have to take into account several
important factors. These include its background,
the circumstances of its adoption, its provisions,
its relation to the world position of to-day, the
task of reconsidering how far its provisions
should in the interests of justice and humanity
be modified, and the possibility of Jewish immi-
gration elsewhere than in Palestine.
A mere political blanket resolution disregarding
such considerations can never satisfy the
independent conscience of an informed enquirer.
It may inflame, it can never salve the open
wound.
This White Paper of 1939 will probably be the
battleground on which the fate of Palestine, and
the future welfare of far beyond it will depend.
Each of the foregoing factors deserves a brief
notice.
1. The Background of the White Paper has
already to some extent been made evident by
what has been said regarding the disorders lead-
ing to the Peel Commission, the Woodhead Com-
mission, and the reports of those Commissions.
It need only be added, as was truly stated in
the Sydney “Hebrew Standard” of January 21,
1938, speaking a little over twelve months before
the White Paper was formulated and when the
situation was all too plainly perilous“ Palestine
is a cauldron where peace is maintained at the
point of the bayonet”.


It is unfortunately common knowledge that
German propaganda was then active for world
domination and was extended to create disaffec-
tion among the Arabs regarding Palestine.
Unfortunately also the statement just quoted
from the “Hebrew Standard” of 1938 could be
repeated to-day. (See Melbourne “Herald”,
December 27, 1945; “Age” and “Argus”, Decem-
ber 28, 1945.)
2. The Circumstances of its Adoption can be
found succinctly and impartially stated by Sir
Ronald Storrs, formerly Governor of Jerusalem,
in his “Zionism and Palestine” (Penguin), at pp.
127-128. This I abridge. Zionist illegal immi-
gration was then proceeding. Gestapo agents
arrived along with the unfortunate refugees. The
illegal immigration went on notwithstanding the
fact that under the Mandate the Jewish popula-
tion had in a little over 20 years multiplied
tenfold, from 50,000 to 500,000.
After endeavours to secure agreement between
Arabs and Jews the White Paper was issued. It
placed restrictions on Jewish immigration into
Palestine and on land transactions. These will
presently be mentioned. Protests against restric-
tions came in a steady stream from the United
States, as Sir Ronald Storrs says, in a
Presidential-election year much as now
looking slightly ahead.
The House of Commons, by a large majority,
rejected a censure vote upon the White Paper.
Sir Ronald sums up the position in these words:
“It was time. We could not afford another 1936
in 1940. The allegiance of our Near-Eastern
Allies and the good relationship of friendly
neutrals had already been tested by events in
Palestine and had hitherto not been found
wanting. The rulers of Egypt, Saudi Arabia,
and Iraq were no less embarrassed by the com-
plaints of their Palestinian co-religionists than
were our loyal Moslem fellow-subjects of India.
This was no moment to strain them further.


To reintroduce mistrust by even appearing to
wobble upon this decision would have been to
disconcert and unsettle the growing confidence
of Palestine moderates; to play gratuitously
into the hands of the ex-Mufti of Jerusalem and
his satellites, in cricket parlance to offer Dr.
Goebbels a half volley, to which he would open
his shoulders and which he could have hardly
have failed to lift over the pavilion”.
Sir Ronald adds:—“Zionists were from their
point of view doubtless justified in registering
their protest, for in Palestine unprotested
decisions were apt to be registered as accepted
and the case to have gone by default”.
I interpose the reminder that this refers only
to the new restrictions above mentioned. Even
so the author says:—“But the responsible man-
datory Government is not only justified, but”
(speaking in 1940), “is BOUND in duty and in
prudence to hold fast, and to see that BOTH
HALVES OF THE MANDATE ARE FAITH-
FULLY AND PRACTICALLY MAINTAINED”.
That is what the present British Government has
announced as its intention; it is what Political
Zionism and the resolutions of the Congress of
the United States would prevent.
To-day, as then, the integrity of the Empire
and the peace of the world are within the range
of the problem of Palestine.
3. The Provisions of the White Paper are too
often obscured by some of the propagandists of
the Movement. We constantly hear “demands”
for the total abrogation of that Paper, without
disclosing to those unaware of its contents that
practically only one of its provisions, out of
many, is open to animadversion, that is the
immigration bar.
Its official designation is the Palestine State-
ment of Policy (Command Paper 6019 of 1939).
It sets out with admirable clarity the history of
Palestine under British government in pursuance


of the Mandate, the obligations of that instru-
ment, the nature of the Constitution created by it,
the principles of justice to the two peoples, Arabs
and Jews, in Palestine that should be applied,
the nature of the “Jewish National Home” en-
visaged by the Balfour Declaration, and the
Mandate, the Churchill Declaration in the
Command Paper of 1922 to which Lord Balfour
as a then member of the British Government
was a party, negativing the intention of the
Balfour Declaration to create a Jewish State or
to subordinate the Arab population to the Jews.
It dealt with immigration and land transfer which
are bound up and really constitute one question.
The one point that cannot find literal justification
in the Mandate or Balfour Declaration is the
provision which (apart from a special provision
of further 25,000 refugees) limits Jewish immi-
gration to 10,000 a year for five years, after
which Arab consent would be needed. It is THAT
BAR that was declared by Mr. Churchill in a
distinct interjection during the debate in May,
1939, to be objectionable. That bar, on the strict
terms of constitutional documents, created a
discrimination in favour of the Arabs and dis-
crimination on the ground of race or religion is
forbidden by the Mandate.
But the circumstances of its adoption as above
related called into operation the fundamental
consideration “Salus populi suprema lex" . It was
adopted under the shadow of impending war,
amid the malignant influence of Nazi propaganda
threatening the very existence of our Empire
and that of the Jewish population of Palestine
and indeed of the world.
The intransigent “demands” of the Zionist
Movement, if acceded to as they stand to-day,
would constitute a still greater breach of the
Balfour Declaration and the Mandate; they seek
discrimination in favour of Jews alone; Arabs,
whether Moslem or Christian, and Christians


everywhere are disregarded. This has been fully
discussed.
Reference has been made to Mr. Churchill’s
Paper of 1922. This compels the question: What
of Mr. Churchill in this connection ? Some
Zionists, ultra-Zionists, the most extreme of the
Movement, present him as if he were wholly
opposed to the policy of the White Paper of 1939.
That is a picture both untrue in fact and in
reality an indictment of him as wanting either in
courage or honesty.
It is untrue, because his declared and repeated
policy, never departed from, has been quite
openly and definitely opposed to constituting
Palestine a Jewish State.
It is unjust, as an indirect and wholly unjusti-
fiable indictment for lack of courage or sincerity
because though Prime Minister for nearly six
years, and during the worst period of Jewish per-
secution, when by a stroke of the pen he could
have annulled the immigration bar of the White
Paper of 1939, he allowed it to remain, notwith-
standing vehement Zionist “demands.”
Why then did he not during this period strike
out that bar? Obviously to every thinking mind,
because he did not dare to imperil the general
safety; because it might have what he
termed the “liquidation of the Empire”; because
it would assuredly have aroused such a storm
of Moslem antagonism that might have involved
among other calamities the utter ruin of Jewish
hopes of Palestine.
This indirect impeachment, inescapable from
the extreme Zionist point of view, is on a level
with the same necessary and unjust imputation
of moral obliquity to Lord Balfour when it is as-
serted that he intended his Declaration to promise
a Jewish State regardless of Arab consent or
acquiescence, entirely ignoring his participation
as member of the Government in the Churchill
White Paper of 1922, and his personal assurances


in two recorded speeches that Arab political
rights were fully protected by the Mandate which
embodied the Declaration.
4. The Relation of the White Paper of 1939
to the position to-day needs little comment. The
insistent “demands” of the Movement for the
total abrogation of the White Paper of 1939,
their disregard of the Compact on the faith of
which the Mandate was granted and accepted,
their disregard of the undoubted rights of the
majority of the present population of Palestine,
the discrimination on the ground of race or
religion, the attempt to desecrate the name of
“Democracy” by first swamping the Arabs, and
then permitting their domination by those of
another specified religion, a process in blank
defiance of the San Francisco Charter, a contra-
diction of the Congressional Resolution of 1922,
a repudiation of the vital principles of the Man-
date, and an anachronistic reversion to the
Church-State Nationalism abandoned by civilised
peoples for many centuries.
Not least for Jews who find their liberties and
welfare guarded by British institutions it would
create a situation not only regrettable but one
which it is their solemn duty to avert.
5. Immigration elsewhere than in Palestine.
This question demands consideration for several
reasons. The first in order of importance is the
basic fact that the Political Zionist Movement
rests on an assumption from which there is no
escape that Jews all over the world are, have
ever been, and should remain an Asiatic nation
whose “homeland” not “was” but “is” and “will
be” Palestine. That they are nowhere assimilated
citizens of other lands, but merely “denizens”
with a “RIGHT” to return to their “homeland”.
I venture to affirm that that is not at this day
a “Jewish” but merely a “Political Zionist”
aspiration, and is opposed to the sentiments of
the great majority of world-wide Jewry. I say
this notwithstanding the admission of Professor


Brodetsky that the best Zionists desire to live
in Palestine.
Then there has to be considered the present
impossibility of providing a proper refuge in
Palestine for all the factually homeless Jews of
Europe. Even if the absorptive capacity of the
country were to be regarded as the single test
as some prominent leaders of the Movement
appear to regard it for Jewish immigration into
Palestine, it is not yet ready for them all. But
I have no hesitation in saying there is no
justification for claiming that absorptive capacity
is the single test. To so regard it would be a
manifest injustice and wholly improper.
It was stipulated as a maximum frontier beyond
which immigration should not go however other-
wise desirable. But the attempt to adopt it as
the sole criterion is a dangerous misinterpretation
of the Churchill Paper of 1922.
As to the danger, what has been already said
on this point I do not repeat.
But reference may with advantage to those
who desire information be made to two articles
in the “Empire Digest” for August, 1945, namely
“The Arab League”, by Mr. Robin Campbell (p.
19), and “Britain Plans a New Suez Canal”, by
Mr. Hugh Prior (p. 27).
The first article and particularly at pp. 22-23
is highly informative as to Britain’s danger
should there be any attempt to override Arab
opinion. I believe as I have said that abandon-
ment of extreme Zionist “demands” could help
to pave the way to an amicable and mutually
advantageous arrangement.
The second article is a convincing statement of
the impossibility, in view of the approaching
termination of the Suez Canal concession,. of
Britain relinquishing her control of Palestine.
The scheme foreshadowed by Mr. Lowdermilk
will have to be materially reconsidered by the
light of the new facts and features set forth in


the article. Certainly by all well-wishers of our
British Commonwealth.
Possibilities of immigration elsewhere must be
explored if the humanitarian principles put for-
ward for factually homeless Jews are genuinely
held and pursued. The Zionist political move-
ment must cease; the United Nations have no
more insistent duty than to provide, so far as
they can without detriment to their own peoples,
for sheltering those unfortunates among the
Jews of Europe who have been the scapegoats
of Nazi atrocity and have borne the greatest
burden of misery that history records.
President Truman has recently announced that
the United States is willing to help refugees to
find a home in that hospitable country. England
has done much in this direction and is doing
more. To both gratitude is due. Australia can
with benefit to herself and to the sufferers find
room for many. Already the present Govern-
ment has taken a praiseworthy first step in that
direction. I commend to all who wish to read
a truly Australian expression upon this subject
to consult an article just published in the first
number of “Challenge” (pp. 12-13), written by
its editor, Mr. W. J. Thomas.
Again I would emphasise the absolute necessity
of every Jewish immigrant as with every other
immigrant who desires Australian citizenship
to remember that Nationality is entirely distinct
from Religion or Race. They are separate con-
ceptions. The nationality must be Australian as
a member of the British Commonwealth. No such
nonsense as “Jewish Nationality” to bolster up
Political Zionism must be uttered or taught. No
such segregated group as was once contemplated
for Kimberley can be tolerated in Australia.
Assimilation, in the sense of complete absorption
in the political and social and civic life of the
Australian nation with but one “Homeland”, our
beloved Australia, and one undivided allegiance,
is a sine qua non. He is not required to abjure


his religion or to forget or cease to venerate the
history of his faith, or to surrender his love that
is replete with sacred associations precious to his
and kindred faiths.
'But as Political Zionism “demands” for every
Australian Jew, as for every Jew elsewhere, an
internationally guaranteed political right to for-
sake at will his adopted country and to enter
Palestine, a right not accorded to any other
country, the Jewish immigrant and indeed every
Jewish Australian must recognise the utter
inconsistency of Political Zionism with the well-
established principles of nationality at the present
day.
Those conditions, however, satisfied, and the
ordinary safeguards necessary for protection
from the standpoints of health, honesty and
industry impartially preserved, I believe Aus-
tralia can with great advantage to herself and
our Empire admit to our thinly populated country
a reasonable number of my co-religionists who
are looking eagerly, anxiously, for not only a
peaceful haven of safety for themselves and
their descendants, but also for the opportunity
of co-operating with their fellow-creatures in the
noble work of progressive humanity.


ADDENDUM.
A CHRISTIAN APPEAL.
One of the most important recent documents
on this question is the statement issued by the
Foreign Missions Conference of North America,
under the title “The Palestine Question A
Christian Problem”.
The Conference represents 121 Boards and
Societies in the United States and Canada, repre-
senting 66 Christian Churches and 30 million
Christians.
The statement is lengthy and is reproduced
in full in the Information Bulletin of the
American Council for Judaism for October 15,
1945.
The Palestine Problem is dealt with at length,
with sympathy to Jews but with justice to
Arabs, both Moslem and Christian.
I refer to only a very limited range of observa-
tions, which are indicative of the conclusions of
the Conference.
Reference is made to Dr. WeizmamTs moderate
interpretation of Zionism in 1931, in which he
said, inter alia :—“l have no sympathy or under-
standing with the demand for a Jewish majority
in Palestine Why should we raise a demand
which only makes a provocative impression?”
Again the statement proceeds:—“lt is upon
British solidarity with the Arabs that the Home-
land in the last analysis is built. With the
momentmum of change rapidly increasing
throughout the Near East it seems highly un-
likely that Britain or any other Power or com-
bination of Powers, will undertake to coerce the
Arabs in Palestine. And under the new Charter
of the United Nations it would be anomalous to
attempt to care for Jewish need at the cost of
a small and unwilling ward of its own self-
government”.


The whole statement is worthy of earnest con-
sideration. But its concluding paragraph is one
that calls for the generous recognition and deep
gratitude of every Jew who places justice, respect
for other faiths, and humanitarianism above mere
political aspirations, which at best are but the
dry bones of a long vanished past. That para-
graph I quote in full. It is as follows:—
“AND ANTI-SEMITISM?
A last question remains for Christians to
answer. We must remember that it was not
with the Arabs that anti-Semitism originated nor
in their culture that it rooted and flourished. Are
we Christians ready to confess that Christianity
has no more certain cure to offer than geo-
graphical concentration of the Jewish people, and
that questionable good, national sovereignty ? We
believe that the future of Christianity depends
upon the heart with which Christians now attack
this menace to all that we have put our faith in
for nineteen centuries. We believe that a
demonstration of Christian justice towards the
Arabs would do much to stem the anti-Jewish tide
in Moslem lands. We call upon Christian leaders
here and now to initiate a more positive and
vigorous programme to eradicate anti-Semitic
feeling in our own country. Can we ourselves
claim the name of Christian if we are not ready
to share suffering and to carry some of the weight
of the heavy cross that bears down upon Israel,
the people of whom Jesus was born?”
Is Political Zionism prepared to exhibit the
same nobility of soul?
14th January, 1946






