

PAM
PAYS HER DEBT


VERITY HEWITT
Bookseller






PAM
PAYS HER DEBT




PAM
PAYS HER DEBT
DORA JOAN POTTER
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LEIGHTON HOUSE, MELBOURNE
LONDON; HUMPHREY MILFORD


REGISTERED AT THE G.P.0., ADELAIDE,
FOR TRANSMISSION BY POST AS A BOOK
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
THE ADVERTISER PRINTING OFFICE
MARLBOROUGH PLACE, ADELAIDE, S.A.


21 WAR '948
To JMy <_




CONTENTS
CHAPTER
1. Captain Harvey’s Request ... 9
2. Janita 14
3. Judy or Janita 23
4. A Strange Resemblance 28
5. A Dreadful Night 44
6. Pam Bears the Consequences 54
7. Captain Harvey is Disappointed - - 63
8. A Miserable Evening with a Happy Ending 69
9. The Lost Child 74
10. Diana Speaks Impulsively 84
11. Captain Harvey’s Story 90
12. Lost Again! 100
13. Jan 106
14. A Brave Lassie 117
15. Jan’s Locket 121
16. Cathie-Janita 127
17. Pam Pays Her Debt - 132




CAPTAIN HARVEY’S REQUEST
” This is Major Harvey, Pam, who saved my life when
the ship was sinking in the Pacific! ”
Pamela Bryant’s expression as she gazed into the tanned,
strong face of the soldier before her, was not far short
of worshipful. It was some time before words would
come, for there was a great constricting lump in her
throat as she thought of all that had gone before this
meeting.
Pamela was fourteen and an only child. Her mother
had died when she was only four months old, and since
then, her father had meant everything to her. When
war broke out Mr. Bryant had been one of the first to
enlist, and after a period of training when he had gained
his commission as lieutenant, he had left Australia for
England in 1940.
Pam went to boarding school —to St. Cath s, spending
her holidays with an elderly aunt. Only a soldier’s
daughter can understand how she missed her father
during those first two years of war and what mental
agony she went through as she feared for his safety.
In 1942 Lieutenant Bryant came back on two weeks’
leave, and then once more he was off —this time to help
fight for Australia against the Japanese. After six
months’ fighting the blow fell. He was taken prisoner in
Malaya, and that was the last Pam heard of her father
for eighteen weary, tortured months. Then had come
news —at the time it had seemed the end of hope for
Pam —news that a Jap. ship carrying a large troop of
Australian prisoners of Lieutenant Bryant’s unit, had


" While I have been away Janita has been living with
her aunt,” went on Captain Harvey after a pause. " That
aunt — ” Again he hesitated. " That aunt —has —made
a fool of Janita.”
" Oh! ” said Pam again blankly. " Oh! ”
" Janita has been for the last two years entirely in the
wrong atmosphere.” Captain Harvey was speaking
quickly, reluctantly and almost nervously. " I want to
alter all that while she is still young enough to get the
benefit of a good school. In short, Pam, I am sending
her as a boarder to St. Cath’s, and I want you to help
her and, if possible, to ease her way a bit during her
first term.”
” Oh, I will! ” Pam’s promise came quickly and readily.
After all, though this Janita sounded queer, it was little
enough to do for the man who had saved her dear
daddy’s life.
Captain Harvey seemed relieved at her sincere accept-
ance of his wishes.
" Thank you.” He turned to Lieutenant Bryant.
” Bryant, if your daughter can help mine to become a
better girl you need never feel in my debt again. Janita,
you see, is my very special charge. But I know she has
not been hitherto the kind of daughter I would wish.
I look to St. Cath’s —and Pamela — to alter all that.”
" I don’t think you will be disappointed,” was Lieu-
tenant Bryant’s quiet reply. " St. Cath’s is a wonderful
school —and Pam has given you her promise.”
It was not until she was in bed that night that Pam
thought of Janita again. Then, frowning a little in the
darkness, she wondered how this strange new girl would


fit into the life at St. Cath’s and what Judy, her straight-
from-the-shoulder, stand-no-nonsense bosom friend,
would think of her.
" But,” said Pam to herself with a wriggle. " Even for
Judy I will not break my promise to Captain Harvey!
And Janita may be quite a decent sort really.”


CHAPTER TWO
JANITA
But the next week, when Pam, as arranged, met Captain
Harvey and his daughter at the station preliminary to
returning to St. Cath’s, Pam’s heart sank. She knew
immediately that Judy Jarrard, her pal, and Janita
Harvey would never attract each other. There was no
doubt that Judy and Janita were complete opposites.
Not that that was sufficient reason why they should not
be friends —many opposites attract each other, Pam
knew —but she just couldn’t imagine tall, straight,
sporty, bracing Judy taking to this new girl with her
fluffy fair hair done up in an intricate coiffure of tiny
curls and her obviously rouged cheeks and vivid lip-
sticked mouth.
Despite the regulation blue and grey school dress, Janita
managed, to Pam’s unaccustomed eyes, to look like a
chorus girl made up for an act on the stage. Her
voice as she acknowledged her introduction to Pam,
was the final detail that convinced Pam that she,
Judy and Janita would not make a harmonious trio.
Janita’s voice was affected to extremes. At times, unused
to such an accent, Pam found it hard to even understand
what she said. Her "i’s ” were pronounced like " a’s ”
and when she said " really ” Pam thought she said
" rarely ” and was nonplussed.
Not that Janita had a lot to say although also, she did
not seem shy. Rather she looked as bored as anyone
could be. Captain Harvey did most of the talking as they
waited for the train.


" Janita is not looking forward to St. Cath’s, but of
course that is only because she is new. I have been telling
her, however, that you have promised to show her the
ropes and generally look after her.”
" Of course! ” said Pam readily, and looking into his
strong, brown face, her heart smote her. Had she been
judging Janita too hardly? After all, she was Captain
Harvey’s daughter, and as such must have some of her
father’s splendid qualities. Captain Harvey had admitted
himself that Janita was not perfect, and had seemed to
think that it was due to her aunt’s influence while he
had been at the war.
Well, thought Pam, it was her job to help bring out
Janita’s good qualities —that was how she was to help
pay the debt she owed to Janita’s father —the debt that
had meant daddy’s life.
" Of course I can never fully repay him for that,” mused
Pam. " But I can try to help him with Janita. After all
she and I should have much in common even if Judy
doesn’t take to her at first. Haven’t we both been through
the same long weary, worrying months while our fathers
were prisoners-of-war? ”
So Pam, when the train drew in, gave Janita’s arm a
friendly squeeze as they made for a compartment.
" O w ' ” was Janita’s only response to this action, how-
ever. Ow! You are a rough girl! Daddy she pinched
me! ” she complained in a whining voice to her father.
Captain Harvey looked surprised and Pam flushed all
down her neck and to the tips of her ears in embarrass-
ment.
" I — l —that is—l’m sorry if I hurt you, Janita. It was
meant to give you encouragement. I thought you might


be miserable and nervous now that your father is leaving
9 9 •
US.
Janita still nursed her arm with the look of a small hurt
baby.
" Well pinching me won’t make me feel any better,”
she retorted venomously in her affected voice. " As a
matter of fact I am feeling miserable —not at leaving
daddy though. It is because I want to go back and live
with auntie as I always have —and go to Miss Petty’s
school, where there are nice, refined girls, not rough
creatures like you — ”
“Come! Come, Janita. You will soon get over your
homesickness —and there will be lots of nice girls at St.
Cath’s. Also I don’t think it was very nice of you to call
Pamela rough. She meant well when she squeezed your
arm.” Captain Harvey flashed a look of apology at
Pam and behind that look, Pam saw the hurt in his eyes.
Janita had said straight out that she wouldn’t miss him.
At that moment Pam really wished she had given Janita
a really hard pinch! Didn’t the girl value the wonderful
father that God had given back to her ?
Just before the train, with a warning shriek of its
whistle, drew out from the platform, Captain Harvey
took his daughter in his arms and kissed her.
“ Good luck, my darling! And, better than that —may
God bless you.”
But Janita, if she even heard his words, spoken in a voice
rough with emotion, paid no heed to them. She
wrenched herself from his arms and looking annoyed,
glanced in the mirror.
” You’ve smeared all my lipstick! I hate kissing!


Pam’s last glimpse of Captain Harvey, as the train
slowly gained momentum, showed her once more that
hurt, rebuffed, worried look. She turned furiously to
Janita.
" Why need you have said that? You’ll have to wipe
all that muck off anyway before you get to St. Cath’s! ”
Janita looked at her with animosity.
" I’ll do nothing of the sort! We were always allowed
to make up our faces at Miss Petty’s! ”
" Well it is against the rules at St. Cath’s! ” was Pam’s
blunt reply.
"It must be a perfectly odious place then,” replied
Janita with a sniff, and relaxed sulkily in a corner to
apply red varnish to her nails.
Pam watched her and sighed. Captain Harvey had pre-
pared her for a spoilt girl but —not this! It didn’t seem
possible that such a man could have such a daughter.
They didn’t even look alike, but Pam supposed Janita
must have resembled her mother.
A few stations further on, Pam aroused herself from
this gloomy reverie, and put her head out of the window.
This was Judy’s station.
” Shut the window. It disturbs my hair-style! ” com-
manded Janita crossly. But Pam did not heed her for
she had, just then, caught sight of Judy tearing along
the platform at full speed.
” Hi! Jud —ee! Here I am! ”
Judy, pig-tails flying, waved a hand and took a flying
leap on to the train just as it moved forward again. A
minute later she collapsed breathless on the seat beside
Pam.


" Oh! Gosh! When will I learn to be on time, as the
' Arrow ’ will be saying for the rest of the term? ” she
gasped, fanning herself with her hat.
Pam giggled at her friend’s excellent imitation of their
House-Mistress’ voice.
" Oh Judy! It is lovely to hear your nonsense again! ”
Judy put on her hat and smiled.
" How are you Pammy? You must have lots to tell me
about your father and everything.”
The mention of her father awoke Pam once more to her
responsibilities. She nodded to the girl still varnishing
her nails in the opposite seat.
" Oh Judy! This is Janita Harvey, a new girl.”
Judy swung round from the mirror in surprise.
” Where? Oh! — ” she giggled engagingly. "So .sorry.
I didn’t see you over there. I was too puffed to see any-
one but old Pammy here.”
As Janita made no answer to Judy’s friendly greeting,
Judy looked at Pam again, raising her brows ques-
tioningly.
" What did you say the new girl’s name was Pam ? ”
" Janita Harvey,” hesitatingly replied Pam. " She —it
was Janita’s father, Judy, who saved daddy when the
ship was torpedoed.”
" Oh! ” Judy gave the girl another beaming smile and
held out her hand. " Welcome, then Janita. Your father
is indeed a wonderful person.”
" He has his points! ” Janita, ignoring the outstretched
hand, spoke with her ridiculous accent and looked at
Judy superciliously.
Judy’s hand dropped limply to her side. She stared.


" Well! That’s pretty cool. You have a father who is
likely to get the V.C. for valour, and you say ' He has
his points.’ ”
Janita for reply, crossed her legs restlessly and threw
down her varnish, flapping her hands so that her nails
would dry.
" Don’t tell me you are all like this? ” she sighed
languidly. " Aren’t there any girls at this St. Cath’s place
who can talk of other things than this goody-goody
patriotic rubbish? ”
Judy stared harder so that her brown eyes seemed likely
to pop from her head. She looked at Pam in bewilder-
ment.
"Is she terribly modest or something about her
father? ”
" Perhaps she is— ” began Pam uncomfortably.
But Janita was not going to allow Judy any such
delusion.
"Modest! Me!” She burst into a shrill cascade of
laughter. "Modest! Oh that’s funny! No, I’m not
modest. They didn’t teach us to be modest at Miss
Petty’s! ”
" Miss Petty’s? ” said Judy faintly, and her lip curled
just a little. Miss Petty’s Private School had a reputation
—a bad reputation —in that part of Australia —a reputa-
tion for producing the most crashing snobs! And if there
was anything impulsive, sporty, common-sense Judy
loathed it was a snob. So now she surveyed Janita more
closely, noting her ridiculous perm., her rouge, her lip-
stick and her bright red finger nails. Help! She looked
at Pam sharply.


" You’ll have to see that she gets all that muck off before
we get to school, Pam. I suppose it is all right for Miss
Petty’s — ” Judy emphasised the name with scorn. " But
if the ' Arrow ’ sees her like that —she’ll poison her
with one bow! ” she finished humorously.
” Yes, Janita! ” pleaded Pam. " Do go into the toilet
there and wash it off.”
But Janita gave her only a supercilious stare and re-
marked with some heat, so that her accent was forgotten
for the moment.
" Look here, Pamela Bryant! My father may have
thought I was a little lost lamb and put me in your
charge, but understand I am not lamb-like, and I intend
to do as I wish at this loathesome school of yours —and
I’ll not be dictated to by you! ”
" But — ” began Pam.
"You little fire-brand — ” commenced Judy.
" Wait! ” went on Janita. " I’ve more to say to Pamela
Bryant, and it is this — ” Her voice was menacing. " See
here, Pamela. Your father owes his very life to
mine— ”
"Yes, I know — ” broke in Pam shakily.
" And,” continued Janita, it is up to you to do some-
thing for my family in return.”
" Oh, I want to! ” agreed Pam so fervently that Judy
stared. Old Pammy was quite cowed by this creature!
But Janita ignored the interruption.
"If you are anxious to repay what my father has done —
and you ought to be —then show it —by leaving me
alone! ”
" But, I want to help you! ” protested Pam. " I promised
your father I would.”


" Then leave me alone! ” reiterated Janita. " I’ll find
my own friends at St. Cath’s, don’t you worry, and I
promise you they won’t be amongst your goody-goody
set! ”
" We’re not goody-goody! ” protested Judy hotly. " We
get into all sorts of scrapes and have lots of fun! Why,
only last term I blacked my face and went into class
dressed as Topsy! ” She went into a peal of laughter as
she remembered it, and even Pam could not help smiling
despite her worries. But Janita looked horrified.
" Whatever was your skin like after it? ” she asked with
a visible shudder,
" Just like it is now! ” replied Judy innocently.
Janita looked at Judy’s freckled face.
" Well that’s bad enough! ” she said wrinkling her nose
delicately.
" Pam! ” Judy appealed to Pam furiously. ” We are not
going to stand that even from a new girl! Cheek! I’d
rather have my freckles than that rouge! ” She sprang
forward and grasped Janita in a firm grip. " Come on,
Pam! Let’s rub it off! ”
But to Judy’s surprise, for the first time in their school
career, Pam did not come to her aid. Instead she pulled
the half-curious, half-joking Judy back, so releasing
the already screaming Janita.
" No, Judy! Leave her alone! ”
Judy collapsed on the seat in wonder.
" But —Pam! ” she protested. ** Aren’t we to have any
larks this term? ”
" Of course.” Pam twisted her gloves nervously. " Of
course. But —well —Janita is new.”


" M-m. Well, she is certainly not shy! ” replied Judy
abruptly. But to Pam’s relief she did not return to the
attack.
Janita, greatly ruffled and inclined to be tearful, sank
into her corner from where Judy’s grip had dragged
her.
" I’ll write to my father about this, Pamela Bryant! I’ll
let him know the way you have allowed me to be treated
as soon as his back was turned! ”
*' That’s right! Write to papa and tell him all about the
naughty, rough girls you met in the big puff-puff! ”
taunted Judy, the tease.
But Pam turned white.
" Janita! ” she appealed. ” Don’t write to your father —
please! I —l should hate him to think badly of me after
all he has done for daddy.”
" Well — ” Janita drawled the word consideringly and
looked at Pam from under lowered lids. " Well —I won’t
—not this time —if you promise to let me alone.”
" I’ll do my best for you,” promised Pam reluctantly and
wondering how —just how —she was to keep two
promises? She had promised Captain Harvey to “ look
after ” Janita, and now Janita demanded that she be
" let alone.”
" Oh, Pam! Promise to let her alone. It will be easy, for
she will never fit into our crowd! ” broke in Judy at this
juncture.
Pam did not answer this impulsive remark, but she
noticed with alarm the look of hate which passed be-
tween Judy and Janita. So they had declared war upon
each other —the girl who was her friend and the girl
who was her charge. What would be the end of it all ?


JUDY OR JANITA ?
Despite her plea to be " let alone,” Janita was glad
enough of Pam’s help during her first week at St. Cath’s.
Unused to the ways of such a big school, that proved to
be very different from Miss Petty’s establishment of ten
" select ” pupils, even the confident Janita would have
felt at a loss without Pam’s guidance.
But Pam, determined in every way to keep her promise
to Captain Harvey, however distasteful that task might
be, smoothed over all Janita’s initial difficulties and
acted as a buffer for the new girl against the growing
dislike of many of her contemporaries.
For there was no doubt that Pam’s particular little
coterie disapproved of Janita,
How you can stand that voice all day I don’t know!
was one of Judy’s frequent candid remarks. " It is not
even what her ladyship calls " ultra-refined ” ! The way
she forgets the accent when she is excited or annoyed
goes to prove that it is not her natural way of speak-
ing.”
" 1 11 never forget Matron’s face that first day you hauled
her along! ” giggled Marilyn Mortimer.
I don’t wonder! ” put in Jean Mcßobertsly with a
frown. " All that Hppy and rouge! Ough! ”
Well, she hasn t used it since! ” defended Pam miser-
ably. No one knew how conscious she had been of
Janita s face and perm, that first night of term when she
had to introduce the new girl as her protegee.
I should think not! returned Jean, grinning with
Marilyn in remembrance of the occasion. ” After


Matron’s pointed remarks, not even Hitler, or Tojo him-
self, could have the nerve to repeat the performance! I
always say at home, that the best way to subdue the war
criminals when this scrap is over, would be to hand them
over to our House-Matron!
" If it hadn’t been for Pam’s pleading Matey would
most certainly have reported her to the ' Arrow ’! ’ pro-
phesied Judy drily. " But you have always some excuse
for Janita, haven’t you, Pam? ”
Pam did not answer any of these sallies, however. What
was there to say? She had to look after Janita even if it
meant the loss of Judy and Marilyn and Jean as it looked
as though it might.
It eventually did. Janita hung close to Pam’s side, and
Pam protected and championed her and missed the
usual happy atmosphere that had always prevailed in
her friendship with Judy and Co., and Judy in par-
ticular.
Judy and Janita had a terrific row one day when Janita
was caught in class actually cheating from Judy’s maths,
book. Miss Paterson, their maths, mistress, was furious
and would have turned Janita out of her class had she
not been a new girl. But after exposing her and scolding
her she decided to give her another chance. But Judy
was disgusted.
"You’ll have to choose between us, Pam! ’’ was her
ultimatum, but she never doubted who Pam would
choose. After all Pam was the straightest person going.
She w r as undoubtedly horrified over Janita s disgrace,
and then, of course, there was their friendship. They
had been close friends for four years now —she and Pam
and Marilyn and Jean.


Imagine therefore Judy’s surprise when Pam, very white,
replied after a long pause:
"Judy!” Pam stopped walking suddenly and faced
her friend. " Judy, I can’t neglect Janita if she wants
my help. I —oh! —I want to have fun with you and the
others, but I must look after Janita! ”
" But Pam! Why? She is—well you saw this morning
the sort of girl Janita is. It was a beastly thing to do, and
I should have thought you would be the first to con-
demn that sort of thing.”
" I do.” Pam frowned. " I do—and to be quite candid,
I can’t understand it, Judy. You see Janita’s father is
such a wonderful person — ”
'' He was the man who saved your father’s life, wasn’t
he, Pam? ” Judy’s voice was gentle. Poor old Pam, she
did look perplexed.
"Yes. And I have promised him that I would look after
Janita.”
” Well you have! All this week you’ve looked after her,”
said Judy easily. " But she ought to be all right now,
surely.”
" I don’t know. I think she needs me more now than
ever! ” said Pam, and pointed to where Janita stood, a
forlorn little figure, all On her own. " She looks awfully
lonely — ”
Well —so she should be alone! ” gasped Judy indig-
nantly. " She can’t expect us to fall all over her when
half an hour ago she was found to be a cheat! ”
" All the same,” said Pam determinedly, " I’m going
over to her now.”
Judy stared at her friend coldly, furiously.


" Pam, do you mean to say that you are going to leave
me for that —that —cheat? ”
" Her father saved my father’s life! ’’ said Pam dog-
gedly.
" And so, for the rest of your time at St. Cath’s you in-
tend to associate with his daughter who has proved her-
self to be an absolute outsider? ”
" I can only keep my promise, Judy! ” distressfully
pleaded Pam.
" Then, Pam, you must make your choice! ” Judy’s voice
was calmer now, but none the less cold. "You must
choose between my friendship or Janita’s.”
" Judy! ” Pam was aghast. " Judy, what are you saying?
Why need my duty towards Janita affect our friend-
ship? ”
" You must make your choice! ” Judy’s voice was firm.
Poor Pam. What a dilemma she was in. There on one
side was Janita, looking lonely and distressed, the girl
whom she had promised to help; and here by her side
Judy, whom she loved dearly. Judy had said she must
choose. What was her duty?
Judy waited as Pam looked from herself to Janita. And
Pam thought wistfully of last term when she and Judy
and Marilyn and Jean had been so happy. She also
thought how behind that happiness last term there
had been the worry about her father. She remembered
the wonderful feeling of relief when she had known that
her father was safe in Australia. And she remembered,
too, that it was Captain Harvey’s bravery that had made
this re-union possible. Captain Harvey had given her
back her father, and all he had asked in return was that
she, Pam, should " look after ” Janita at St. Cath’s.


Pam, squaring her shoulders, cast one appealing look
at Judy and crossed the playground to where Janita sat
under one of the old gum-trees.
Judy watched her go dumbly. Pam — Vammy — preferred
that cheat Janita to herself! The tears welled in Judy’s
eyes, but she brushed them away angrily.
/
" Pull yourself together Judith Jarrard! ” she ad-
monished herself fiercely. "What does it matter? If
Pam Bryant wants Janita Harvey, then you are well rid
of Pam Bryant! ”


CHAPTER FOUR
A STRANGE RESEMBLANCE
" Tomorrow night is the night of the Staff Ball! ” re-
marked Helena Martynger some weeks later, as she
strolled around the playground with Janita Harvey.
"What is the Staff Ball?” asked Janita, linking her
arm in Helena’s. It was nice, she thought, to be seen
strolling round in such a pally fashion with Helena,
whose father was Sir Hulbert Martynger. After a week
or two of Pam’s unadulterated company, Janita wel-
comed the fact that at last Helena seemed to have for-
gotten what she called her lack of " diplomacy ” over
the cheating affair, and seemed inclined to be friendly.
She had approached Janita as she had come out of the
classroom.
" Care to come for a stroll round the quadrangle,
Janita? ” she had drawled casually.
Janita had accepted with alacrity not knowing, perhaps,
that only that morning Helena had quarrelled with
Doreen Hay, her usual confrere, and was consequently
at a loss to find anyone to spend the recess with.
" Give Pam Bryant the slip for goodness sake! ” urged
Helena. " We don’t want that prig trailing after us.
What you can see in her to spend so much time in her
company I don’t know! ”
" I can’t see anything in her! ” retorted Janita dodging
behind a pedestal as Pam walked past. " There! She’s
gone now! We can go out the side door. I’m sick of
Pam’s company.”


Out in the quadrangle then, Helena had remarked that
the next night was the night of the Staff Ball.
" What is the Staff Ball ? ” Janita had asked.
" Oh, the Head gives a ball once a year for the teaching
staff, Matrons of Houses and Sick-room Nurses. It is
quite a big affair in Main Hall, and they all ask their
friends.”
" Sounds good —for the staff! ” remarked Janita. " The
girls don’t go I suppose? ”
" Not on your life! ” growled Helena. " We stay in our
Houses like good little girls. To be perfectly candid,
Janita, I think it is beastly unfair. Why should the staff
have all the fun? It is we girls for whom our parents
pay high fees, who keep this stupid school going. It is
we who should be given a ball —not the staff! ”
"Yes, of course,” Janita made a great show of agreeing
and looking as indignant as Helena. " I love dancing,”
she went on.
Helena looked at her consideringly.
" Do you, Janita? Can you dance? ”
” Oh, yes! ” said Janita enthusiastically
" Well? ” asked Helena.
" Well —fairly well.” Janita looked modest
" M-m — ” Helena seemed lost in thought and Janita
looked at her curiously.
” Why do you ask, Helena? ”
" Well— ” Helena looked considering. ” I was just
wondering, Janita, how much courage you had.”
" Courage? ” Janita stared.
" Have you enough courage to break bounds tomorrow
night and come to a Night Club ? ”


" Night Club! ” repeated Janita, taken aback. " But how
could we? be caught, and anyway, you have to
be over 21 to go to those places.”
"Elementary objections, my dear child!” Helena
laughed easily. " I told you it was the Staff Ball tomorrow
night, didn’t I? ”
" Yes.”
" Well, that leaves the coast perfectly clear for us to
get out. It is the one night in the year we are left alone
in the Houses. All the mistresses and Matron go across
to Main School, and so there is no one in charge except,
of course, the prefects. But we can easily hoodwink
them! ”
" But don’t you have to be over 21 to go to a Night
Club? ” asked Janita again.
Helena looked at her pityingly.
" My dear babe! I can see you are a babe so far as these
matters are concerned. Don’t you know that these days
it is quite easy for a girl of fifteen to look like one of
21? I suppose you have got an evening frock by the
way? ”
" I did have! ” remarked Janita darkly. " I slipped a
corker one in when auntie wasn’t looking. It is a black
velvet you know — ”
"Just the thing! ” approved Helena, showing a little
excitement. " Mine is black, too — ”
" But the Matron found mine! ” cut in Janita. " And she
has locked it up in her room —said it was too old for me
to wear at St. Cath’s — ”
" You silly ass! ” scolded Helena with vexation. " Why
didn’t you hide it ? I always keep mine behind the ward-


robe in a canvas bag. Matron would never think to look
there! ”
“ I’ll do that too next term,” promised Janita hastily.
" But how shall I get my dress for tomorrow night? ”
Helena suddenly had an idea.
" Ask Doreen Hay to help you. She always has to go to
Matron after tea for her medicine. If she would go a
bit early she could show you where the extra frocks are
kept. You can find yours and hang it behind your ward-
robe until tomorrow night.”
" I’ll ask Doreen if I can go with her then! ” agreed
Janita excitedly and squeezed Helena’s arm. ** It’ll be
fun, Helena! Tell me more about it.”
” Well,” drawled Helena smiling patronisingly at
Janita’s enthusiasm. " Well —it is a very fashionable
Night Club, and I have two men to squire us. That is
an achievement in war-time I can tell you.”
" O-ooh! ” gasped Janita, and a shade of fear crossed
her face. " Supposing we are caught? ”
We would probably be expelled! ” returned Helena
coolly. " But this time, Janita, we will be diplomatic.”
Janita flushed at this covert thrust at the mess she had
made of the cheating affair.
' Yes, of course! ” she agreed humbly.
” Doreen,” asked Janita brightly after school. ** Can I
come with you when you go for your mixture ? ”
Why? ” asked Doreen Hay suspiciously.
Janita whispered something in her ear.
" Can I come with you, Doreen? ”
Are you going with Helena ? ” asked Doreen jealously.
At Janita s nod she looked sourly at the new girl. That
had been the cause of her quarrel with Helena that


morning. Helena had asked Doreen to come to the Night
Club with her, and Doreen had been very keen to go
until she had heard the names of the two men who were
to go with them.
" I can’t bear that Miller man, Helena! ”
" I can’t help that. He is coming! ” Helena had
snapped.
"Well then I won’t come! ” Doreen had replied
huffily.
" Don’t then! ” snapped Helena again. " I’ll ask some-
one else.”
' Who else will come with you amongst all the prigs
at St. Cath’s?” asked Doreen sarcastically. ‘'You are
not exactly popular here, Helena! ”
But apparently, thought Doreen now, Helena had found
a very willing partner for her escapade. This new kid
Janita! Doreen was jealous. Helena was a pig to ask
someone else and she’d jolly well pay her out!
" I’ll show you where your frock is,” was all she said
to Janita now, however, and Janita thanked her
effusively.
" It would be lovely if you could come too, Doreen! ”
" Thanks. I have other things to do,” replied Doreen
shortly, and stumped off in the direction of Matron’s
room. Janita followed and five minutes later emerged
stealthily with her black frock. She got it safely to the
dormitory and hung it on a hanger at the back of the
wardrobe.
It was Doreen Hay who approached Pam the next morn-
ing at recess. Pam was alone today. Since her quarrel
with Judy she had had no companion but Janita, and


now that Janita seemed so thick with Helena Mar-
tynger Pam was left to herself. Nevertheless she did
not welcome Doreen’s company. Neither Helena nor
Doreen had ever appealed to her, representing as they
did the silly unscrupulous element at St. Cath’s. But
Pam did not know how to refuse Doreen when she said
quite nicely:
" Pam, do walk with me this recess.”
They wandered out into the sunshine and Doreen
steered Pam to where she could not help seeing Helena
and Janita arm in arm.
" Helena has fallen heavily for your little protege it
seems Pam! ”
" Yes,” replied Pam uneasily. She didn’t like Janita’s
attachment to either Helena or Doreen. Pam was afraid
lest these girls should lead Janita into trouble, for Pam
never forgot that Janita was her charge.
'* Has Janita told you about their arrangement for to-
night?” Doreen tried to look innocent. "They are
taking an awful risk going to that Night Club you know,
Pam! ” She spoke as though assuming that Pam knew
all about it.
'Night Club?” Pam stopped dead and stared at
Doreen.
Oh! —” Doreen pretended to be alarmed. "Oh!
Didn’t you know? I thought Janita had told you, of
course, as she is always with you. But—well I shan’t say
any more. I should hate to let the cat out of the bag.”
And having shot her arrow and made Pam suspicious,
Doreen walked quickly away. Now Pam would stop
Janita from going and then Helena would beg she,


Doreen, to go to the Night Club after all. She’d put up
with the awful Miller man if it meant a night out. She
had been a fool to quarrel with Helena, but that ass Pam
Bryant would make things right.
Pam stared after Doreen. What was she getting at?
What was this about Janita and a Night Club. Surely
she wouldn’t be such a fool as to risk expulsion so
hazardously. And how on earth did she propose getting
out of the House ? And then, Pam, too, remembered the
Staff Ball. Of course, all the mistresses would be over
at Main Hall. This was Helena’s doing, of course,
thought Pam and bit her lip. She must keep an eye on
Janita tonight, and if possible stop her from carrying
out this crazy scheme. She, Pam, would never be able
to face Captain Harvey, if after only a few weeks at St.
Cath’s, his daughter was expelled.
Pam made several attempts that afternoon to speak to
Janita on the subject, but always that girl avoided her.
Pam found it hard to watch Janita and Helena that
evening. There was a spirit of revelry throughout the
House, due to the fact that all the mistresses had de-
parted for the Staff Ball.
Vivien, the Captain of the House, was in charge with
two House Prefects to help her, but three girls found it
hard to keep a close eye on fifty of their juniors. Vivien
took Grace before and after the evening meal and re-
minded the girls that the House Mistress had put them
on their honour to behave in her absence. She then re-
tired to her study with her friends, and the girls were
left to their own devices until Prayers which Vivien
would conduct later.


There was very little prep, done that night. Even the
most law-abiding girls could not resist the opportunity
to slack a little, and various games were organised.
Pam sat near the sitting-room door on her own, and
watched Janita talking animatedly with Helena on the
other side of the room near the French doors. Occa-
sionally, her eyes wandered longingly to the group where
Judy and Marilyn and Jean were playing an uproarous
game of table-tennis.
The ball suddenly rolled under Pam’s chair and Judy,
coming to fetch it, met Pam’s eyes. Judy’s face softened.
Poor old Pammy, she looked so lonely, and that ass
Janita seemed to have gone in for " fresh fields and pas-
tures new ” in the shape of Helena Martynger.
" Pam, come and play ping-pong? ” she invited impul-
sively.
Pam’s eyes brightened. It was the first overture Judy had
made since their quarrel at the beginning of the term.
She half rose to join the old merry coterie, when she
saw Janita and Helen slip quietly through the French
doors.
" I —l’m sorry, Judy. I’d love to play, but —I have to go
after Janita! ” She fled suddenly, leaving Judy with
flaming face and angry heart to return to her game.
" I asked Pam to play! I tried to bury the hatchet —but,
as usual, she preferred to follow Janita! ”
" That girl has cast a spell over our Pam,” said Marilyn
hotly. " She is not the same girl! ”
" She’ll be kow-towing to Helena and Doreen next! ”
sniffed Jean in disgust.


Meanwhile Pam went hurriedly after Janita and Helena.
As she feared, they were making for the dormitory, no
doubt to dress for their night out. But before Pam could
follow out her plan and confront them there, Vivien,
the House Captain, hailed her.
" Pam Bryant! What are you doing up here at this
hour? It is against the rules to visit the dormitories
before bed-time.”
Pam paused in the passage.
" I —yes, I knew I was breaking rules, Vivien,” she
stammered.
"Then —scram! Downstairs quickly now!” ordered
Vivien sharply. " I’ll let you off this time, but remember,
Pam, it is mean to take advantage of the fact that the
mistresses are away.”
" Y-yes, Vivien!” replied Pam uneasily, and retraced
her steps reluctantly. Out of sight of the House-Captain
she wrinkled her brown in perplexity. What to do now ?
She was still standing there undecided, ten minutes later,
when she heard light footsteps tapping down the stairs.
Pam quickly drew back into the shadow of the landing,
thinking that this was Vivien again. Better not be caught
lurking here a second time.
But of the two figures who passed stealthily by her, Pam
knew that neither was Vivien. No, it was Janita and
Helena who passed by going lightly and swiftly down
the stairs, holding up their long black skirts.
At the bottom of the stairs, Pam saw them pause and
then:
*' Now! ” breathed Helena, and they both made a dash
for the front door.


Pam’s heart beat quickly. They had gone —Doreen had
said it was to a Night Club! Oh, thought Pam, suppos-
ing they are caught ? It might mean expulsion!
She shook her head.
” I must stop Janita! I promised her father — ” Pam in
turn, made a dash for the front door and once out, sped
quickly down the drive. Her shoes made little noise on
the bitumen, and soon her keen eyes detected the forms
of Janita and Helena in front of her. Then suddenly
they were lost to view as they cut around behind the
Chapel. Pam followed swiftly, but as she too skirted
the Chapel, she realised that her quarry were not alone.
Pam stopped dead and peered quickly round the wall.
Her heart gave a leap of dismay as she saw that a car
was drawn up there and Janita and Helena, talking in
low, excited voices to what seemed to be two men and
another girl, were getting in. The door was shut quietly
as the men, too, took their seats and the engine started.
" The fools! ” stamped Pam in the darkness and ran
forward as the car moved. With a swift jump learnt in
the gymnasium, she leapt on to the luggage carrier of
the car and gripped tight. If Janita was going out, well,
she, Pam, was going with her. Janita was her respon-
sibility.
It was the coldest, most precarious ride Pam had ever
endured. The car seemed to eat the miles, and Pam idly
wondered where, in war-time, these men had got the
petrol to run a car so far.
Later, as the car laboured and the wind grew colder,
Pam came to the conclusion that they were going further
into the hills. Clinging on the spare tyre, Pam hazarded


a guess. Doreen had said a Night Club. There was a
notorious one high up in the hills called the " Moun-
tain Eyrie.” Surely that was not the place the girls were
visiting ?
But Pam’s guess proved correct, for later the car turned
in at some gates and drew up before the brightly lit
entrance to the " Mountain Eyrie Night Club.”
Pam sat where she was, not knowing what course of
action to take and watched to her horror, Janita and
Elelena with the two men and the girl into the
building. As they disappeared Pam acted. If Janita had
gone in there she, Pam, must go also.
She walked boldly up to the entrance and attempted
to pass through, but her way was barred by the smiling
face of the door-keeper.
" Not so quickly, sister! Where do you think you are
going? ”
"In there — ” Pam motioned nervously to the ballroom.
" My friends are there and ”
The door-keeper put a kindly hand on her shoulder and
looked at her short school tunic with amusement.
"Run along home, kiddie!” he smiled. "We don’t
allow school-girls in here.”
" But I only want to see my friends! ” protested Pam.
She tried to push by but the door-keeper was firm.
" I said ' no ’ young lady! For one thing, it is against
the law to allow anyone in here who is under 21 years of
age, and another thing, this is not the place for a school-
girl. If there should be a raid — ”
" A raid! ” Pam’s eyes dilated in horror. " You mean
that the police may raid this place? ”


" It is always on the cards, missie! ” grinned the door-
keeper.
Pam did not wait for more. If there was going to be a
raid she must get Janita away. As the door-keeper turned
to take someone’s ticket, she made a quick side-step and
pushed past him, running into the crowded ballroom.
He attempted to follow with an angry exclamation, but
Pam disappeared into the crowd and people were
clamouring for him to take their tickets.
Luckily Pam espied Janita and Helena almost imme-
diately. They were standing near a corner table away
from the main crowd of people, looking very grown-up
in long black frocks with lots of make-up.
Pam dashed up to them breathlessly.
" Janita! Come away from here quickly! The place may
be raided — ”
Janita and Helena swung round in amazement at the
sound of her well-known voice.
" Pam Bryant! How on earth did you get here? ”
" On the luggage-carrier! ” Pam dragged at Janita’s
arm. " Oh, do come back to school, Janita! ”
Janita wrenched her arm away angrily.
" Let go you little fool! What right have you to follow
me around like this? ”
" But supposing there is a raid? ” beseeched Pam hys-
terically.
At this point one of the men, a short stocky, bloated-
faced man, stepped forward. His face was alarmed.
" Who is this, Janita? ”
" One of the girls from school! ” returned Janita in
vexation.
" Send her away! ” commanded the man abruptly.


Pam looked at him in disgust. What a loathesome
creature!
" I won't be sent away! If I go, Janita goes too! ” She
looked defiantly at the two men. Helena stood by look-
ing furious but not saying a word, and the strange girl
look amused.
" Sit her down in a corner, Miller! ” It was the second
man speaking now in a slow, amused voice. Pam liked
him better anyway.
" Sit her down in a corner and let her watch the fun,”
he suggested now.
" That’s right! ” The strange girl spoke for the first
time and considered Pam loftily if with amusement. She
was a tall girl and Pam guessed, much older than either
Helena or Janita. She held the man Miller’s arm posses-
sively.
” That’s right! Sit her in a corner and get her out of the
way. Goodness knows, you men have brought enough
simpering schoolgirls here tonight without inflicting
still another upon me! ”
It was Janita’s and Helena’s turn to flush.
" I didn’t know Helena was bringing a friend, Diana! ”
apologised the man, Miller.
" Janita asked to come! ” lied Helena.
Janita gave an indignant exclamation.
" Helena! I did not! You asked me I ”
Pam watched them all scornfully. What could they see
in coming to this place and invoking the jealousy of this
Diana person, who was obviously attached to the man,
Miller, and had no time for school-girls ? But apparently,
to Helena’s disgust, Diana had some time for Janita!
Indeed, after the first little brush, Diana seemed very


much attracted to Janita. She was asking that girl a lot
of questions. Pam heard her say:
" But have you always lived in South Australia? ”
Diana seemed very keen to know the answer to this
question, and sitting in her corner with her mind half
on the party and half wondering how on earth she was
going to persuade Janita to leave this place, Pam was
suddenly struck by the distinct resemblance between the
two! Diana seemed an almost identical, elder counter-
part of Janita.
Just then, however, the music started and before Pam
could stop her, Janita had swung off to the dancing floor
in the arms of one of the men. Helena, Diana and the
other man, who had found still a third male escort fol-
lowed suit.
"Sit there, child!” said the nicer of the men con-
descendingly to Pam. " When Janita and Helena have
danced enough we will all go back to school! ”
How long Pam sat in that corner of the " Mountain
Eyrie ” she did not know for there was not a clock
visible. But it seemed a very long time, unused as she
was to late hours and such a stuffy room, and feeling
so cold clad only in her tunic and blazer. Once, she saw
the door-keeper come in and look anxiously around, and
she shrank back into the shadow until he passed on. At
intervals the three men with Janita, Diana and Helena
came back to the table, and each time Pam begged
Janita to come away. But led by Helena, she refused
angrily.
Janita’s face was flushed and mottled with excitement
and something that she was drinking between dances.


The younger and nicer man of the three, offered Pam
some of this " something ” to drink but Pam refused.
And once more, she was fascinated by the likeness be-
tween Diana and Janita! Even the cadence of their voices
seemed familiar.
" Had I not known who they were,” thought Pam, " I
might have taken them for sisters. Perhaps they are
cousins. If so, I think I could safely shift the respon-
sibility of Janita upon Diana’s shoulders.” She caught
Janita’s sleeve as she was about to dance once more.
" Leave me alone! ” said Janita angrily.
" Just a moment then,” pleaded Pam. " I was wonder-
ing—you and Diana are so alike —the same fair hair
and eyes —the same shape face —are you related by any
chance? ”
Janita stared at her as though she were crazy.
"Related? Why! I’ve never seen Diana until to-
night — ”
"If you had had as much to drink as Janita — ” put in
the younger and nicest man of the three, addressing
Pam with a grin—" If you had had anything at all to
drink, I would say you were definitely ' shot ’ after that
remark my child! ” He held out a glass of amber fluid to
her. " Have a sherry? A glass won’t hurt you.”
Pam’s refusal was indignant, shocked and emphatic.
" No, thank you! And I don’t see why you should think
I am crazy because I remarked that Diana and Janita
are alike. They are alike —almost like two peas in a
pod— ”
" Well, they have never met until tonight,” cut in the
younger man. " Diana, as a matter of fact, has only


been in South Australia about a month. Her father is
a parson or something from New South Wales —the
whole family is here on a holiday —' Du Bois ’is their
name. Never think Diana was a parson’s daughter,
would you? ”
Pam shook her head and wrinkled her nose distaste-
fully.
" No, I would not! And I wish she wouldn’t take Janita
over to that drink counter. I— ” she looked at the young
man in dawning horror. " That is—Janita is not having
intoxicating drinks is she? ”
The man laughed heartily.
" She certainly is! ”
" Oh! ” Pam wrung her hands distractedly, " Oh, if the
Head ever gets to know of this they will be expelled! ”
The man shrugged his shoulders.
" That’s their affair. I never wanted to bring kids here.
Diana Du Bois is a different matter —she is of age —but
it was Miller who insisted on asking the kids. Helena
pestered him, I think — ”He broke off as suddenly there
was a commotion at the end of the room. " What’s
going on there —? By Jiminy —! ”He started to his feet
sending the light cane table over with a crash, as a
piercing whistle echoed through the room and the music
stopped suddenly. ”By jiminy! It’s a raid —! ”


CHAPTER FIVE
A DREADFUL NIGHT
Pam uttered a horrified cry at his words and leapt to
her feet.
" A raid! ” Her eyes swept the room for Janita, but she
was nowhere to be seen. " Janita —Helena! Where are
they? ” she asked pitifully.
The man shook his head, looking worried.
" Let’s hope Miller has got them out of it. He took them
over to have another drink. He — ” The man broke off
and Pam stepped closer to his side as suddenly the
uniformed figure of a policeman ranged alongside.
The policeman surveyed the upturned table and the
broken sherry bottle and glasses on the floor.
"You were occupying this table? ”
The man nodded nervously.
" Yes, officer. I — ”
" Name and address and identity card, please? ” inter-
rupted the policeman curtly.
The man produced his card resignedly.
" Taymen is the name, officer. Bruce Taymen.”
The policeman entered it in his small black notebook
and then, his eyes fell suddenly on Pam’s slight figure
standing there so tremulously in her blue and grey
school uniform. He stiffened in amazement.
"Is this —this child —your companion?” he asked in
amazement.
Pam shrunk back further as Bruce Taymen, looking con-
fused, stammered a reply.
" No —she is nothing to do with me! She broke in here
and attached herself to our party.”
The officer looked unbelieving.


" What is your name my child, and what are you doing
here?”
Pam licked her lips nervously.
" Pam —Pamela B-Bryant! ” she confessed stupidly and
felt as though she was taking part in a dream.
" What are you doing here? ”
" I —l came to look for someone — ”
" Your boy-friend here? ” The policeman looked grim
and he surveyed the badge on Pam’s blazer pocket.
"What is that school?”
As Pam did not answer, he pulled her blazer to him and
surveyed the crest. He gave a whistle.
" St. Catherine’s! The big girls’ school down in the
hills! Do you board there? ”
" Yes! ” gulped Pam in terror.
" Then what are you doing at the ' Mountain Eyrie
Night Club ’ drinking and dancing? ” asked the shocked
policeman.
" I wasn’t drinking and dancing! ” protested Pam in-
dignantly, but the officer looked unbelieving and caught
her firmly by the shoulder.
" I’ll escort your girl-friend back to school! ” he in-
formed Bruce Taymen grimly. " This will not help your
case either, young man! It is a serious offence to bring
minors to these places, and you should be thoroughly
ashamed bringing a child, in her school uniform to a club
like this —allowing her to indulge in illegal drink-
ing— ”
Pam found her voice at last. After all, this Bruce Tay-
men had tried to be nice and he had not deserted her
as Janita and the rest had done.


" This man did not bring me here officer! ” she broke
in. " I am not his responsibility and I did not even know
his name until he gave it to you just now! ”
" Then with whom did you come? ” asked the police-
man wonderingly.
" I came on my own! ” said Pam.
The policeman shrugged.
"It is beyond me. But if you say that this man is not
responsible — ”
"He is not! ” Pam received a look of gratitude from
Bruce Taymen.
" Thanks, Pam. You are a sport! And it is true, officer.
She came on the luggage carrier of the car — ”
" The luggage carrier! ” echoed the policeman staring.
" Yes! ” confirmed Pam.
The policeman shrugged his shoulders.
" It all seems very improbable, but the first thing young
lady, seems to be to get you back to your school. I’ll
escort you back myself.”
But Pam was not ready. Her mind was still on Janita.
Where was Janita? She looked wildly round, and as she
struggled and the policeman remonstrated angrily,
Bruce Taymen came to her aid. He appealed to the
policeman.
" Officer, will you give me a moment alone with this
little girl? ”
"What for?”
" Just one moment, officer! ” pleaded Taymen. " Then
I think Pamela will go quietly with you.”
Pam took his cue.
"Yes, officer. I promise! ”


The policeman, undecided, met her worried eyes and
flushed young face and his own face softened.
" One moment then! ” he assented gravely and with-
drew to one side.
Taymen spoke quietly in Pam’s ear.
" I’ll look for Miller and the girls and see that they get
back safely. I promise you this in return for speaking
up for me just now.”
Pam met his eyes wildly.
"You promise that you will get Janita back undis-
covered? ”
" I will do my best! ” promised Taymen, giving her such
a nice straight smile that Pam was satisfied. Now she
only need worry about herself. She knew then that it
was she who would bear the consequences of this night’s
events.
She bade good-bye to Bruce Taymen and went quietly
with the policeman.
It was a nightmare drive in his big police car down the
hills to St. Cath’s. What fate awaited her back at school ?
What explanation could she give of this night’s events?
Would she be expelled?
Half-way down the hills the policeman spoke to her
quite kindly.
" Look here, young lady! You don’t seem the sort to
frequent those places. What possessed you to do such a
thing? Surely this escapade will be viewed very gravely
at your school? ”
" It will probably mean expulsion for me! ” gulped
Pam,
" But why did you go ? ”
” I had a special reason! ” was all Pam could reply.


The policeman sighed and put his free hand gently on
her shoulder.
" Look here! You seem an honest sort of child. If I try
to smooth things over for you and request your Head to
be lenient, would you try to go straight in the future ? ”
Pam looked up at him with swimming, grateful eyes.
"Oh yes, officer! But please believe me —I never wanted
to go and I didn’t drink or dance.”
" Well —I can only believe the evidence of my own eyes
so far as that’s concerned,” replied the policeman, " and,
though I will try to persuade your Head to give you
another chance I must, nevertheless, tell her the truth
of what I have seen tonight, so that she can look after
you better in the future.”
A few minutes later they drew up at the door of the
Head Mistress’ private house at St. Cath’s.
* * * ♦
The school clock was just striking three and the Head
had only just returned from the Staff Ball in the Main
Hall, when there was a ring at her front door.
She answered it hurriedly, thinking that perhaps one of
the mistresses wished to see her about something. She
was amazed therefore to find on her doorstep the stal-
wart figure of a policeman, accompanied by one of her
middle school girls.
" This is a pupil of yours, I believe, madam? ”
The Head peered closer.
" Why —it’s Pamela Bryant! What are you doing out of
bed at this hour? ”
" I can explain that, madam! ” the policeman answered
for Pam.


The Head wonderingly held the door wider and invited
them in. She switched the lights on in her sitting-
room.
” Sit down, officer —and you, Pamela.”
The policeman sank into an easy chair and Pam seated
herself miserably on the edge of a hard one.
The Head’s eyes w'ere mystified.
" Officer—? ”
"I will tell you everything in a moment, madam!”
broke in the policeman. " But just at first, I want you to
promise me something.”
” Promise you something? ” The Head raised her brows
and looked askance. ” What promise do you require,
Mr. —er —er — ”
" Carter,” supplied the policeman and sat forward
earnestly.
" Miss —? ”
" Walton—
" Miss Walton, like you, I have had a lot of experience
with adolescents. Like you, I think I know something
of their ways — ”
" But what, Mr. Carter, has this to do with Pamela? ”
broke in the Head.
" Everything. But let me explain. As I have said, I am
accustomed in my duties as a former policeman attached
to the Child Welfare Department, to dealing with girls
and boys of teen age — ”
” Constable, tell me what Pamela has done! ” beseeched
the Head distractedly.
"In just one minute I will. Miss Walton, I have found
that in dealing with these girls and boys it is always


fair —and wise—to give offenders a second chance. Do
you agree with me? ”
" Yes! ” agreed the Head emphatically.
" Then, Miss Walton, if you believe that, you will have
no hesitation in giving me your promise not to expel
Pamela Bryant from your school, after I have told you
the reason for her presence here at this early hour of the
morning.”
" I think,” said the Head wearily and Worriedly, " you
had better tell me your story, Mr. Carter —or should I
say, Pamela’s story? ”
" Your pupil, Miss Walton, has spent the last few hours
at the ' Mountain Eyrie Night Club ’! ”
" What! ” The Head looked at Pamela in amazement.
" Is this true, Pamela? ”
" Y-yes, Miss Walton! ” gulped Pam miserably.
” But—?”
" I found her in the company of a man by the name of
Bruce Taymen — ”
” A — man! ” If the matter had not been so serious, Pam
could have laughed at the shocked emphasis the Head
gave to the word. " A — man! ”
" They were seated at a table upon which were the
remains of a bottle of sherry — ”
" Sherry! ” Miss Walton’s face was quite white. " One
of my girls —at a night club —with a man —drinking
sherry —! ”
" I did not see her actually drinking it,” modified Con-
stable Carter. "You see, Miss Walton, we raided the
' Mountain Eyrie ’ tonight. The Force has been sus-
picious that there has been a deal of illegal drinking


going on there. It was during this raid that I found your
pupil and Mr. Bruce Taymen. I had to take their names.
Mr. Taymen’s will go through the Court, but due to Miss
Pamela’s youth I have not entered her name on my list
of offenders. I don’t know whether I am quite doing my
duty to the law by this, but as the father of two young
daughters —and one adopted one —I have decided to let
you deal with this youthful offender. Punishment she
certainly deserves but — ”
"You ask me not to expel her? ”
" Yes,” replied the kindly policeman. " I beg you to give
Pamela a second chance, madam.”
" But —it is my duty to expel a girl for such an offence! ”
exclaimed the Head sternly.
" It was my duty to report her to the Court! ” adjoined
the policeman. " But don’t you think sometimes, Miss
Walton, we have to do our duty in another way? ”
" How?”
" Our duty towards God’s law is higher than our duty
towards any laws of school or country.”
" Of course.”
" I am sure that God, in His mercy, would wish you to
give such a young girl another chance.”
The Head’s face was very thoughtful as she answered
the policeman’s words.
" Constable you have taught me something tonight. I
thought I knew everything about the management of
girls. I have been amongst them all my life —but I repeat
—you have given me a fresh outlook by your outlook on
Pamela’s disgrace.”
" Then you will grant my request? You will not expel
this child? ”


The Head gave Pamela one straight look before she
answered very sternly.
" I will not expel her, Mr. Carter.”
" Thank you! ” The policeman sounded relieved, and
he rose to his feet. It is late —I will not keep you any
longer.”
” A cup of tea ? ” queried the Head.
" Thank you. I have a car and I am off duty now. It will
not take me long to get home to my supper.” He shook
hands courteously with the Head, and turning to Pam,
held out his hand to her also.
" Good night, Pamela. Let this be a lesson to you. In
four or five years you will be an adult, and then, no
doubt, you will be able to go to all the dances you wish.
But —I advise you —don’t pick places like the ” Moun-
tain Eyrie.’ ”
Pam, weak and tired with all the mental and physical
strain she had been through, took his hand limply but
gratefully. Her eyes were full of tears.
" Thank you, Mr. Carter.YYoyou—you —have been so
kind!”
"There! There! A few hours in bed and you’ll feel
better,” consoled the kind man and took his departure.
Pam, waiting in the sitting-room heard his car start, and
the next minute the Head returned looking strained and
grave. Her voice was a little bitter, too, as she spoke:
" A fine ending, Pamela, for our enjoyable Staff Ball
night. We —the staff and myself —were so happy over
there in Main Mall. We were happy because we thought
we could trust our girls while we had this one night in
the school year to ourselves — ”


Her bitter voice was the last straw for poor Pam. She
collapsed on the lounge crying as though her heart would
break.
" I never went for myself. I never had a drink! ” she
cried quite wildly.
The Head with a sigh raised her up gently.
" Come, child. We will talk about it in the morning.
Sleep is what you need now, and some hot milk and
aspirin. It is much too late for you to go back to the
House tonight. You must sleep here.”
She led the weeping hysterical girl to her own room and
undressed her as though she were a small child, and put
one of her own nightgowns upon her and tucked her
into bed. Then she went to get the milk and aspirin, but
when she returned with it, Pam, worn out with worry
and weeping, was fast asleep.
The Head looked down on her for a moment.
"Who would have believed it of Pam Bryant? And
what am I to do with her? ” she asked herself worriedly.


CHAPTER SIX
PAM BEARS THE CONSEQUENCES
Pam nearly slept the clock round, but it was not a sound
sleep, haunted as it was by dreams of policemen and
dance halls and twins whose names were Diana and
Janita. In her dreams, she tried to guess which was
which, so alike were they. She asked them, but they were
both so drunk with the wine they were drinking that
they had forgotten themselves.
It was two o’clock the next afternoon before she awoke
to find the Head standing by her bed. As Pam sat up she
put a pillow behind her head and placed a tray on her
lap.
" Here is your lunch, Pamela. After you have finished
you will get up and dress and come to me in my sitting-
room. We will have a lot to discuss.” Her voice was cool
and non-committal.
Pam struggled through the dainty meal of soup and
fish, and drank the hot tea gratefully. Then wearily, she
arose and made her toilet and went reluctantly to her
interview with the Head.
The Head’s sitting-room was aflood with the afternoon
sunlight. It touched Miss Walton’s hair and made it
look like gleaming silver. She was seated in a low chair
by the window, which looked out across the soft grey-
green Australian landscape to the distant sea. She signed
to Pam to sit opposite her, but it was some time before
she spoke.
Pam waited uneasily, looking out of the window at
the white gum-trees casting their shade over the lawns
planted over 70 years ago by this great school’s founder.


But Pam’s thoughts were not on the beauty of her sur-
roundings but on Janita and her own predicament. Had
Janita got back safely or had the purpose of her own
journey to the " Mountain Eyrie ” been defeated? And
what was to be her own fate ?
At last, into these frenzied questionings, came the
Head’s slow, cultured voice.
" Well, Pamela, I am waiting for your explanation of
last night’s incident. I presume you have an explanation
for I find it hard, having known you for four years, to
believe that you went to this Night Club merely for the
pleasure of breaking my rules.”
" No, I did not go there for my own pleasure! ” re-
turned Pam carefully. She must be careful, she told her-
self. Careful not to give Janita away. She had promised
to look after Janita, but even were she not bound by
Captain Harvey’s request she could not give either Janita
or Helena away.
" No, I did not go there for my own pleasure! ”
" For what reason then, did you deem it necessary to
break bounds and go to a Night Club with a man ? ”
" I did not go with a man! ” protested Pam.
" Who then is this Bruce Taymen? ” asked the Head.
She was knitting and kept her head bent over her work
so that Pam was unable to judge just how stern she
looked.
" I don’t know who Bruce Taymen is, Miss Walton —
and please believe me! ” she appealed. " I did not even
know his name until I heard him give it to Constable
Carter. He was with—with ” she broke off confusedly.


"With whom? ” prompted the Head, and looked up
now searchingly. " With whom, Pamela? ”
" With the people I went to see.”
" Who were the people you went to see? ”
Pam twisted her skirt in confusion.
" That I can’t tell you, Miss Walton.”
The Head gave her one sharp, stern look.
" I beg your pardon, Pamela? ”
" I can’t tell you who they were,” repeated Pam ner-
vously. "And —please don’t ask me, Miss Walton!
Only believe, if you can, that I was in honour bound to
visit the ' Mountain Eyrie ’ last night! ”
The Head turned to her knitting. It was some minutes
before she replied to this. Her voice then was not quite
so stern.
" If it was so important, Pamela, why did you not ask
your House Mistress’ advice before going? ”
" She was at the Staff Ball! ” answered Pam promptly.
" Then you decided to go after Miss Arrowsmith left
the House? ”
" Yes.”
" Did you receive a telephone message from the people
after whom you say you went in search? ”
Pamela grew more nervous and confused. If she wasn’t
careful the Head would find out that some other girls
had also been at the " Mountain Eyrie.”
" N-no, Miss Walton.”
Her stammering answer caused the Head to look up
searchingly into her pupil’s face.
" Pamela, did any of the other girls go to this place
last night? ”


Pamela did not answer. What could she say? She had
either to tell a deliberate lie or give the Head reason to
make further inquiries and eventually find out that
Janita had been involved. For, once having suspicions of
other offenders, Pam had no doubt that the Head would
not rest until she knew their names. And if Janita were
caught, what might it mean? It would certainly mean
that Captain Harvey would be told of the affair, and he
would think that Pam had failed to keep her promise.
But the Head was awaiting an answer to her question.
And Pam suddenly decided to bluff it out. Last term, she
had been a prominent member of the St. Cath’s dramatic
society, and now she brought all her acting ability into
action. She assumed a wondering, puzzled expression.
" Did you say that some other girls from St. Cath’s were
also at the ' Mountain Eyrie ’ last night, Miss Wal-
ton? ”
Miss Walton shook her head.
" No. I asked you if there were any other girls with
you,” she replied.
Pam’s look now was one of injured innocence.
Miss Walton! I know you must think the worst of me
just at this moment, but please do not think that I would
be so beastly as to encourage others to go to that awful
place! She sighed and added: " Anyway, they would
not have been admitted. I had enough bother myself.
You are supposed to be over 21 years of age to get into
those places. I tricked the door-keeper, but — ”
The Head interrupted, putting down her knitting im-
patiently.


" Very well, Pamela. It would have been sufficient to
answer my question by saying that you went alone. How
you got up there Ido not know — ’
" I went by car! ” supplied Pam, glad to tell the exact
truth at last.
" Whose car? This Bruce Taymen’s? ” asked the Head
briefly.
" I —l don’t know exactly — ”
The head rose in exasperation.
" Really, Pamela! I am tired of your prevarications! You
went in a car —but you don’t know to whom the car
belonged! Constable Carter found you in the company
of a Bruce Taymen —yet you say you don’t know him!
Really! I had no idea you were so untruthful.”
Her voice as she continued was disappointed.
" I thought I was a good judge of a school-girl character,
but apparently my judgment was far from correct in
your case. I had felt so sure that you were one of my
most honourable girls, despite your fits of mischief over
the past terms.”
Pam pleaded.
" Oh I am honourable! Really, I am, Miss Walton! ”
" If that is so, Pamela, you have made a bad deviation
from the path of honour in this instance, and it is, of
course, my duty, to impress upon you, very severely, the
enormity of that deviation.”
" You —you are not going to expel me? ” asked Pam in
alarm.
The Head shook her head grimly.
" No. Though you deserve even that. But, in a weak
moment, perhaps, I gave my promise to Constable Carter
not to expel you.”


Pam felt a surge of relief and the Head, noting her
expression, looked grimmer than ever.
" However, you must not imagine that I will let you
off completely. After I have punished you I assure you,
Pamela, that you will think twice before you again break
my rules so flagrantly.”
Pam waited miserably for her verdict, and when it came
her heart mis-gave her. Her only consolation was that
so far as she could gather, Janita was not involved, and
therefore whatever she suffered w r ould not be suffered
in vain.
But her punishment was to be severe.
" As severe as I can make it other than expelling you! ”
said Miss Walton. " I may seem to you to be unduly hard
in this matter, but I happen to view your offence as very
serious indeed.”
The Head’s voice as she continued was now more
thoughtful than grim.
" However, it is only fair Pamela, to tell you why I view
your conduct so gravely —so very gravely.”
" Once, before you came to this school, I had a girl here,
and for the purpose of my story I will call her Betty.
Betty was a high-spirited, wilful girl of sixteen. One
day, it was reported to me that she was somehow obtain-
ing bottles of wine and smuggling it to her dormitory.
Betty and her friends had been holding midnight drink-
ing parties until Matron caught them and reported the
matter to me. I let Betty off with a lecture and punish-
ment, thinking that she would not dare to do such a
thing again. A week later, the proprietor of our local
hotel, rang me to say that there was a girl in his lounge
very intoxicated. She had dressed so as to look quite


grown-up, but in her hazy state she had said that she
was from St. Cath’s. The girl was Betty. This time I
threatened expulsion, but she begged me to give her
another chance.”
" Now, the most miserable nioments of my long teach-
ing career have been those few when I have been forced
to effect an expulsion and when Betty promised to re-
form, I, unwilling to go through the ordeal of expelling
her, weakly decided to give her another chance. I repeat,
Pamela, I was weak and I failed to do my duty —for
Betty did not reform.”
The Head sighed, and Pam almost saw her shudder.
" Unknown to us all, Betty had, in various ways, been
drinking wine during the whole term, and it had got
a grip on her so that she felt she could not do without
it.”
" When you are a little older, Pamela, you will realise
that intoxicating drink is as much a drug as morphine
or opium. And you have heard of drug addicts? ”
"You mean, those people who get cravings for drugs
and cannot do without them? ” asked Pamela wonder-
ingly.
" That is right. Well, in a mild way, that was what
Betty had become. After my threat of expulsion she hid
her activities very cleverly, but during the holidays
Matron found traces of illicit drinking in her cubicle.
Empty wine and beer bottles were found, and before the
holidays were over Betty’s mother rang me to say that
her daughter could not return to school. She had dis-
covered that almost every afternoon for a week Betty
had been visiting an hotel with a friend. Each night she
had returned home quite intoxicated! ”


" What happened to her? ” asked Pam horrified by this
tale.
" She spent weeks in a hospital and very nearly lost
her mind as she craved for the liquor they would not
allow her. She is practically cured of that craving now,
but her health has been so badly undermined that the
last I heard of her she had contracted tuberculosis.”
The Head shuddered again.
" I will never forgive myself for not expelling Betty that
first time. Had I expelled her then, when she was in the
early stages of her —well her disease —her parents,
knowing the reason for her expulsion, may have had a
better opportunity to help her. But I admit —I was weak
—and Betty’s life is a broken one because of it! ”
Pam, seeing the Head’s distress, stretched forward a
timid hand and stroked her trembling one.
" Don’t blame yourself so, Miss Walton. You did your
best.”
The Head nodded and sighed.
' Well, Pamela, do you understand now why I view
your escapade so sternly? I do not want another drug
addict on my conscience. Indeed, had it not been for my
promise to Constable Carter, I would have expelled you
without hesitation. But I have made that promise and
I cannot break it. But your punishment must be so severe
that never again, whilst you are in my care, will you
drink wine again.”
Pamela sat up with a jerk.
” Miss Walton, I did not drink wine last night! ” Miss
Walton looked at her hopefully for a moment, then her
face clouded.


"I’d like to believe you, Pamela, but Constable Carter
said quite definitely that you were sitting at a table with
a bottle of sherry before you.”
" But — ” began Pam furiously.
" Pamela, that is enough! ” The Head’s voice was stern
again and not a little disgusted. " I had hoped that the
hearing of Betty’s story would help you to tell me the
truth.” She held up her hand as Pam attempted to
speak. "You had better hear the punishment I have
decided upon for you.”
Pamela listened miserably, resentfully, too.
" Next Monday is Visitors’ Day. Your father and aunt
will be coming to our ceremony in Main Hall. Before
that assembly of visitors and girls, I intend to tell them
all the story of your disgrace and how nearly you were
expelled from St. Cath’s — ”
" Before all the visitors and daddy? ” gasped Pam.
" Before them all. It will not only serve as a lesson to
you yourself but also be a warning to the rest of the
school. In addition, you will be debarred from entering
into the games and dancing which follows the assembly,
and you will forego all treats until half-term! ”
It was not until after the Head had dismissed her to
return to her House, that Pamela remembered that
Captain Harvey, Janita’s father, would be present at
the Visitors’ Day assembly. What would he think of the
girl into whose care he had put Janita?
" But I have done my duty to him as I promised I
would! ” cried Pam to herself. " I’ve done nothing to
be ashamed of. Oh! It is such a muddle! But I am glad
Janita got back safely! ”


CHAPTER SEVEN
CAPTAIN HARVEY IS DISAPPOINTED
" I am sorry that this happy gathering of parents and
girls should have had to be marred by the recital of
Pamela Bryant’s disgraceful conduct, but she knew that
this was the punishment I had decided upon. She is very
lucky not to have been expelled from St. Catherine’s! ”
There was a grave and awed silence as the Head, at the
Visitors’ Day assembly, finished carrying out her decision
to expose Pam before them all. Beside the Head on the
dais of Main Hall, stood Pam herself, cheeks aflame and
hands clenched, looking down on the up-turned faces of
the whole school and many of their relatives. If ever
a girl was tempted to tell tales, Pam was at that moment.
A wave of fury swept through her, that she should so
be disgraced when the only reason was that she had
tried to save another girl from a similar fate. Why
should she bear all the blame? Why hadn’t Janita and
Helena, too, got the decency to own up to the fact that
they had been equally involved?
But Janita and Helena were silent and safe within the
Fifth Form ranks. Helena’s only remark when Pam had
told them of her experiences were;
' Well, we didn’t ask you to come spying on us! ”
And Janita had tossed her head and laughed.
" This may teach you to leave me alone in the future,
Pam Bryant! And you needn’t think of sneaking about
us either or I’ll call you the most ungrateful girl ever!
Don’t forget that my father saved your father’s life! ”
" I will never forget that so long as I live! ” Pam had
replied quietly, but for the first time she felt a slight feel-


ing of bitterness that her father’s saviour should have
been Janita’s father. Indeed she could hardly believe
that such a wonderful person as Captain Harvey could
have such a wayward daughter. They were utterly unlike
in both looks and character. Whereas Captain Harvey
was dark almost to swarthiness, with dark eyes and
hair, Janita was quite fair. Still, Janita’s mother may
have been fair.
" I will never forget what your father did for mine,
Janita — ” she had continued. " But it is not only that
which protects you. At St. Cath’s we do not tell tales —
even under such disgusting circumstances as these. ”
Nevertheless, standing up there on the dais, so small
and slight and almost in tears, Pam was tempted for the
first time in her school career to sneak. But she resisted
the temptation nobly.
The school filed out of Main Hall, Pam with them,
cheeks still flaming and outside she met the bewildered
face of her father.
He took her aside gently to a deserted part of the
grounds.
" Pamela —it —it can’t be true? ”
Pam shook her head quickly and clutched his brown
hand hard.
" Daddy! ” she implored. " Please believe me! No one
else will! I went to the ' Mountain Eyrie ’ for the very
best of reasons —and —and I never even touched a drink
and —and —oh! daddy! Please —believe me! ” she
sobbed.
Lieutenant Bryant clasped his daughter fiercely to his
breast. There was relief in his voice as he spoke.


CAPTAIN HARVEY IS DISAPPOINTED 65
" Of course I believe you my darling! If no one else will
—I will! Aren’t you my little pal —aren’t you your
mother’s daughter? But darling—tell me how this mis-
understanding arose.”
Pam longed to do as he asked but—not even to her
father could she sneak about Janita. Who knew but that
daddy may think it necessary to inform the Head ? If that
happened Janita and Helena, too, would be expelled
and then w ell then it all came back to the same point
she must keep her promise to Captain Harvey —her
promise to look after Janita. Only thus, could she, Pam,
attempt to pay the debt she owed him—the debt which
had been the means by which she was enabled now to
clasp her own dear daddy’s brown hand.
He was looking down into her face, waiting for an ex-
planation of this affair.
" I may be able to straighten it out for you darling. Ap-
parently there has been a terrific mistake somewhere.”
There has, daddy,” agreed Pam in a subdued, almost
submissive voice. ” There has—but there is no wav
out.” 7
" But > darling—tell me! ” protested her father.
But Pam could not.
If I did tell you, daddy, I would be sort of—sort of—
breaking my parole.”
And after that Lieutenant Bryant would not press her
further. He had impressed the code of loyalty upon Pam
ever since she was a tiny tot, and he could not now ask
her to break that code. But he had his suspicions. It
seemed that his Pam was bearing the brunt of another’s
mis-doing. He sighed.


" Very well, Pammy. We will leave it at that. But re-
member, darling, in your suffering, that your old dad
believes in you and will stand by you to the end.”
"Oh, Daddy!” Pam hugged him gratefully. "What
would I have done if you hadn’t come back from the
war r
" You have Captain Harvey to thank for that, Pam! ”
was Lieutenant Bryant’s quiet answer.
At his words Pam knew that hard though this all was,
it was worth while. She fell into a reverie, reflecting
upon the goodness of the God Who had helped Captain
Harvey to deliver her father. Five minutes later the
father and daughter were disturbed by the very object
of her thoughts. Captain Harvey stood beside them.
" I have searched everywhere for you both. Bryant —I
can’t tell you how sorry lam that this should have oc-
curred.” He gave Pam a stern look.
" After all your father has been through, young lady,
it is hard that he should hear such an unfavourable
report of you. When we were on that raft —away out
in the Pacific —if you only knew how he sang your
praises —
" I still do, Harvey! ” Lieutenant Bryant’s voice rang
out loud and firm. " I still do, Harvey! My daughter has
been disgraced undeservedly! ”
" But —the Head Mistress said — ” commenced Captain
Harvey.
" I heard what Miss Walton said. But — repeat —she
has made a mistake this time. Pam has assured me of
this —and i believe my daughter! ”


CAPTAIN HARVEY IS DISAPPOINTED 67
Pam could have hugged him for his championship and
unswerving belief in her, but Captain Harvey merely
shrugged.
" I don’t think it does to close one’s eyes to facts, Bryant!
The Head of a school like this would surely be certain
of her facts before she punished a girl so very severely.
I admire your championship of Pamela, but —frankly,
I am disappointed in her! She seemed to be such a splen-
did child but after today s disclosures lam beginning
to wonder if I did a wise thing in entrusting my own
girl in her care. Janita is foolish —even feather-brained.
You see, I have no illusions about Janita —but at least
I think she would stop at such things as drinking and
visiting Night Clubs! ”
Pam felt her father s hands clench and his body stiffen
at Captain Harvey s words, but he held himself in con-
trol. He, too, owed a great debt to this man. Pam herself,
only looked at him with pleading eyes.
Captain Harvey, I am sorry you are so disappointed in
kuf please believe that I have kept my promise to
you. I have tried to look after Janita.”
The captain’s eyes softened at her pleading. He put a
gentle hand on her shoulder.
' All right, Pamela. Let this be a lesson to you. You have
a fine father. Try to be worthy of his belief in you in the
future and, my dear—go on looking after Janita. Try-
ing to keep another on the straight path will surely be
the means of helping yourself. Supposing you renew
your promise to me? Will you take care of Janita and
try to keep her out of mischief? ”
Pam drew herself up with a sigh. Her voice was quiet
and dignified.


" Captain Harvey, I have given you my promise to do
that. It does not need to be renewed for —a Bryant never
breaks a promise! ” She looked at her father for support,
and he ranged himself alongside of her like the Aus-
tralian soldier he was. ,
" I think that should be sufficient for you, Harvey! Pam
will look after Janita if she dies in the attempt —for you
see —a Bryant never breaks a promise! ”
If Lieutenant Bryant had only known how very nearly
Pam would die in her task of looking after Janita he
would not have spoken so calmly. But fortunately, we
are not allowed to look into the future, and in the mean-
time, Captain Harvey’s expression was admiring.
" The Bryants certainly stick together!” he laughed
and went to look for Janita, not quite sure whether to
be disappointed in, or to admire, Pam Bryant after all.


CHAPTER EIGHT
A MISERABLE EVENING WITH A
HAPPY ENDING
As Pam was not allowed to attend the Visitors’ Day
festivities in Main Hall, her father soon decided to take
his leave of the Head.
After he had gone, Pam wandered disconsolately back
to her House. As everyone was over at the Main School
the House presented a deserted appearance. Feeling
miserable, disgraced, and lonely, Pam went into the Mid-
dle School sitting-room, which looked quite unfamiliar
without its usual crowd of lively occupants. She sank
into a chair and wished that Daddy had stayed longer.
Thinking of him, she felt quite homesick —a malady
she had not until this moment, suffered before. Until this
term, despite her worry for her father, life had always
been too jolly at St. Gath’s to allow home-sickness. She
had been at the school for four years now, and from the
first day she and Judy Jarrard had been firm friends.
Marilyn and Jean had come later, and they had formed
the quartette which soon became renowned as the
brightest, naughtiest and yet the straightest and most
popular group in the school. But never had they dis-
graced themselves —not in the dishonourable meaning
of the word.
But this term it was different. Judy had cooled towards
Pam, and Marilyn and Jean not understanding, had fol-
lowed Judy’s example. All Pam had was—Janita, whom
against her will, she cordially disliked. Now she had
been disgraced before the whole school and their rela-
tives.


Pam shuddered at the memory of the ordeal through
which she had just passed. The humiliation of it had
been terrible —standing up there on the dais while the
Head had told the whole story of her supposed disgrace.
And then there had been the disapproval of Captain
Harvey —the man whose good opinion, next to that of
her own father, she prized more than any. Captain Har-
vey was disappointed in her.
The absolute injustice of it all suddenly overcome Pam
and secure in the knowledge that the House was de-
serted, she buried her face in a cushion and cried and
cried.
The tears fell like great drops of boiling water wrung
from the depths of her burning heart, and her sobs
shook her whole body with their intensity. It seemed
that all the subdued strain since her father’s capture
by the Japs had culminated and was boiling over. Miser-
able, alone and sobbing, Pam did not hear Judy run
lightly into the room.
Judy stopped short at the sight of the crumpled figure
in the big chair. Aai expression of surprise and concern
crossed her merry, freckled face. Pam crying ? Why, but
Pam was the bravest thing ever! She never blubbed.
But she was now, and Judy did not know whether to go
away or remain and try to comfort her friend. But as a
sob that sounded like the rending of Pam’s very heart
came, Judy made up her mind. She crossed the room and
put a tentative hand on her friend’s shoulder.
" Pammy! What is it, old pal? ”
At her touch Pam jumped up startled. She wiped her
eyes hastily with the back of her hand. The two girls
faced each other hesitantly —Pam half-ashamed to be


caught crying—and Judy, unused to such situations —
afraid that she was intruding on a display of private
grief.
" I —l came over Pam, because I —l thought you might
be feeling lonely all alone in the House —but if you
would rather be alone —well, just say the word and I’ll
scram! ”
Pam blew her nose and shook her head, her breath still
coming in short sobs.
" No —I mean —I’d like you to stay, Judy. But —you are
missing all the fun in Main Hall— ”
"Aw, rats! ” Judy turned up her nose and plomped
down in a chair, stretching her legs up on a small table.
"I’m not worrying about that —dad and mum couldn’t
come, anyway —and there is a shortage of ice cream,
thanks to this precious war, and no chocolates —so it is
as well to be here! ”
Judy spoke lightly to assure Pam, but Pam knew how
Judy loved the evenings in Main Hall —the dancing and
the games. She guessed that it would take more than a
shortage of ice cream and chocs., to make Judy give up
one such evening. Pam recognising the sacrifice, gave
Judy a watery smile.
" It’s decent of you, Judy—
" Aw, rats! ’’ said Judy again and changed the subject.
"You must be feeling beastly about that affair at
Assembly. The Head ought to be shot —making such
an ass of you —I don’t wonder you are blubbing! I’d
have done it right there in Main Hall —but you always
were a self-contained critter —and that brings me to
what I ve come to say —apart from keeping you com-
pany in this dear old mausoleum. I —l mean, Pam —


that is—well —l can’t get along without you —and that’s
a fact! Marilyn and Jean are the goods, of course, but
they need to be either a quartette or a pair. We’ve found
that trios aren’t our line and they —I —l want you to come
back into the gang! ”
Judy punctuated this, for her, long speech, with a kick
at the table upon which her feet rested. Woe betide her
if Matron found the culprit of those marks and
scratches on its polished surface!
Pam’s eyes were swimming again with each kick on
the table and a tear of joy rolled over on to her cheeks.
" Oh, Judy! I want to come back —into the —the g-gang
—so badly! I’ve missed you all so t-terribly —and —and
you most of all! ”
Judy took her feet down from the table and came across
to sit on the arm of Pam’s chair.
" Well, that’s all settled then! ” she said in her breezy,
abrupt way. She held out her hand like a boy. It was not
Judy’s way to kiss or fondle people.
" Shake, Pam! ”
Pam gripped her hand happily.
" And while we are on the subject,” went on Judy, flush-
ing rather uncomfortably, " I owe you an apology. I
should have understood about Janita Harvey. I should
have understood your feelings for her. After all, it is
a pretty big obligation you are under. Her father saving
yours and all that —I guess you do owe the Harvey
family something — ”
" Oh, I’m so glad you understand that! ” burst in Pam,
thankfully. " You see I promised Captain Harvey I
would look after Janita — ”


"Was that what you were doing when you went to the
' Mountain Eyrie ’ ? ” asked Judy shrewdly.
But not even to Judy would Pam sneak about Janita’s
part in that affair. She would have liked to tell Judy
about Diana Du Bois, however, and her queer resem-
blance to Janita. Judy would have scented a mystery and
they would have had some fun trying to work out the
solution. But under the circumstances this pleasure had
to be foregone. So Pam remained silent and Judy nodded
understandingly.
" Of course you wouldn’t give her away, but I guess I
am right, and perhaps one day I will be able to prove to
the Head that it was Janita who deserved that lecture
this afternoon instead of you — ”
But Pam was not to be drawn into giving Janita away,
so she changed the subject.
Soon, arm in arm, they decided to make some cocoa
and go to bed, and Pam could hardly realise that an
evening beginning so miserably could end so happily.
What mattered it now if Janita did prove difficult in
the future? From now on she knew she would have a
friend by her side to help her over the stony path of
duty.


CHAPTER NINE
THE LOST CHILD
The week following Pam’s reunion with Judy was un-
eventful, but the happiest she had experienced that term.
Janita gave her little trouble, although it worried Pam
to see her so friendly with the Helena-Doreen set.
" She has got in with the wrong crowd. I’ll still have to
keep my eye on her,” remarked Pam to Judy. " But it
will be easier now that I have your friendship again.”
It was lovely to be back in the gang. Marilyn and Jean
welcomed her back in delight.
" We were like a house without a roof without you,
Pam,” was Jean’s quaint way of putting it.
So for a week life was almost as it had been in previous
terms, except that there was no doubt that Pam was
most unpopular with the mistresses. Miss Arrowsmith
in particular was very curt. So far as she was concerned,
Pam had committed the unforgivable sin—she had let
down the House. As the House and its good name was
Miss Arrowsmith’s one great interest in life, she found
it hard to forgive Pam for her supposed slur upon it.
Her attitude hurt Pam dreadfully. She had admired and
adored Miss Arrowsmith since the time, when as a new
and very shy boarder, the House Mistress had comforted
her. Since that far-away time, Pam, in the company of
Judy, Marilyn and Jean, had often been " hauled over
the coals ” by Miss Arrowsmith when she had caught
them in some madcap scrape. But —never before, had
Pam encountered such coldjiess as the House Mistress
now showed her.


Miss Arrowsmith made an announcement the follow-
ing Saturday night after prayers.
" I want all my House to spruce itself up for Chapel
tomorrow morning. Tomorrow, as you all know, is the
feast day of our patron saint, St. Catherine. There will
be sung Eucharist in Chapel, and the Service is to be
conducted by a visiting clergyman. This minister is also
bringing his wife —and daughter, too, I believe —so I
want you to do me credit before these visitors. There
is a special reason for the presence of the clergyman’s
wife, which may interest you. This lady, although Aus-
tralian born, spent her childhood in Italy in the town
of Bologna — ”
A small junior interrupted Miss Arrowsmith at this
juncture by lifting an excited hand.
'Yes, Mary?”
" Isn’t Bologna the town where St. Catherine was
born? ” asked Mary excitedly.
Miss Arrowsmith nodded, smiling approvingly at the
little girl.
" That’s right. St. Catherine came from Bologna in
Italy, and she is the patron saint of that town. That, I
understand, is why our visitor of tomorrow is so in-
terested in this school.”
" A horrid Italian woman! ” Pam heard Janita sneer as
they all went up to bed. " I shan’t trouble to spruce
myself up for her ! Why, the Italians were our
enemies—”
" Don’t be silly, Janita! ” protested Judy Jarrard, who
also overheard this remark. " Miss Arrowsmith said she
was born in Australia. I suppose her people had some


official position in Bologna. Anyway, I think it will be
interesting if she can be persuaded to tell us all about the
town where our patron saint came from. I’d like to know
all about her shrine and everything — ”
Janita tossed her head scornfully.
" You would, Judy Jarrard! Any old fish-and-chip-shop
person would interest you — ”
" Well, why not? ” asked Judy, making a dash at Janita.
" What’s wrong with a fish-and-chip shop, anyway? It
is an honest way of making a living — ”
Pam plucked at Judy’s arm as she grappled with Janita.
" Don’t Judy! She’s not worth arguing with — ”
"Oh, aren’t I?” Janita now turned angrily to Pam.
" I’m not worth arguing with, aren’t I, Pam Bryant? Oh,
no! But you were pleased enough when my father saved
your father’s life! Some people have no sense of grati-
tude whatsoever! ”
Pam flushed.
" I’m sorry, Janita!” She apologised contritely and
sighed as she went into her cubicle. Once more she
wished with all her heart that it had been anyone other
than Janita’s father who had been daddy’s rescuer.
* * * *
The next day —the Sunday dedicated to the festival of
St. Catherine, dawned bright and sunny. Everyone was
up early, polishing shoes and getting their best attire
ready for Communion at ten o’clock. When, shortly
before that hour they marched across the grounds to
Chapel, Miss Arrowsmith felt well pleased.
" They look like a company of angels at the moment,”
she laughed to Miss Paterson, who walked with her be-


hind the crocodile of white-frocked girls each carrying
a Prayer Book and Bible.
Miss Paterson returned the laugh.
" They do, indeed! But I wonder what dark mischief is
being hatched within those demure, white-hatted
heads? ”
The girls filed quietly into the lovely old Chapel. To-
day many of them looked at it with conscious pride —
particularly those who were responsible for the arrange-
ment of the flowers. Overflowing the font, long-
stemmed salmon-pink carnations from the school gar-
den, intermingled happily with wildflow'ers from the
surrounding bush and tender early autumn gum-tips
and cultured ferns gave their touches of green. On the
altar itself were prize red carnations from the Head’s
garden and sprays of flowering gum. These last clus-
tered around the shining Cross looking as red as the
Precious Blood that had been shed on that Cross at
Calvary so many centuries before.
With these flowers in every conceivable corner and the
candles shimmering and flickering on the altar and the
crowds of white-clad young girls filling the pews, the
Chapel seemed like a heavenly court.
God could not fail to be with them this morning, thought
Pam, as she rose from her knees. She felt His Spirit
hovering there as never before. It filled her with a kind
of awe, but also an immense feeling of peace. Suddenly
she felt as though all her worries were over, and con-
vinced that everything would turn out all right.
As a rustle and a murmur proclaimed the arrival of the
Head with the visitors, the School rose to their feet.


Pam looked with interest at the tall, fair woman who fol-
lowed Miss Walton down the aisle.
"The Lady of Bologna, but not polony! ” whispered
Judy impishly in her ear.
Pam smiled absent-mindedly. She decided that she must
have a craze for thinking people were alike, for in the
tall, fair lady, she seemed to see a resemblance to some-
one —she couldn’t think who. And then, she gave a
gasp. And her gasp was echoed by two girls in the pew
behind. For following in the wake of the elder visitor,
looking intensely bored, was a girl of perhaps 21 years
of age —a girl whose face Pam had not forgotten —a
girl who supplied the clue as to whom the elder woman
was like.
In the pew behind, realisation was instant also:
" Diana Du Bois! ” gasped Janita to Helena.
At the sound of her name, Diana, for it was indeed their
companion of the Night Club, turned in astonishment.
Her eyes lighted up as she recognised Helena and
Janita, but she did not see Pam. There was no time,
however, for Diana to renew acquaintances just then
for her mother and Miss Walton had reached their seats
and the choir was about to enter the Chapel.
Diana’s father preached the sermon. Pam thought what
a sad face he had and looking at Mrs. Du Bois, she
detected the same expression there. Diana was very like
her mother, thought Pam as they filed out after the
Service and she saw the two together. Like her mother
and like —
Pam stood stock still in the middle of the aisle as a
thought struck her. Diana was also the image of Janita
Harvey! She remembered noticing it that night at the


Mountain Eyrie —had thought about it often and puzzled
over it.
The girls crowding behind Pam urged her forward.
"Get on Pam, you goof! You are holding up the
traffic! ”
Pam moved on automatically. A dreadful thought had
struck her —Diana must not recognise Janita in case she
inadvertently gave away the fact that they had met at
the " Mountain Eyrie.”
She pushed forward quickly. The visitors had reached
the porch now, and Pam looked round to warn Janita of
her danger. Generous Pam! Not for one moment did
she think how a meeting between Diana and Janita
might clear her. No, Pam’s one thought was to save
Janita from being found out.
But she was too late. Even as she reached the porch
Diana left her parents and the Head and pounced on
Janita and Helena as they tried to dodge away.
"Janita! Helena! I clean forgot you belonged to this
place. How the dickens are you? ”
" All —all right! ” Helena and Janita replied together
haltingly. Helena, drawing close tried to warn Diana not
to mention the " Mountain Eyrie.” But Diana was greet-
ing Janita enthusiastically and Pam, watching apprehen-
sively from the porch, was struck again by the amazing
likeness between the two girls. It puzzled her, even as
with a thumping heart she saw the Head, with the Rev.
and Mrs. Du Bois approach the trio.
" You have fourid some friends then, Diana? ” asked
the minister gently, beaming at Helena. And then he
turned suddenly as his wife with a little moan almost
sank to the ground.


" John! ” she half screamed while everyone, including
Janita, stared. " John! It is—it is—Catherine!” She
pointed wildly at Janita, her face drained of colour.
Mr. Du Bois’ face clouded, before he, too, looked at the
bewildered Janita.
" There, dear! There — ” His voice broke off on a hoarse
note as he looked into Janita’s eyes. The next minute he
had grasped her roughly by the shoulder.
" Who are you? Tell me your name, quickly! ”
"Jan —Janita Harvey! ” responded Janita tremblingly,
and cast a look of despair at Helena.
The minister looked at her closely, scanning her face
and then those of his wife and daughter.
" Diana — ”he said still staring. " Diana, where did you
meet this girl? ”
" At the ' Mountain Eyrie ’ Night Club a few weeks
ago!” replied Diana hesitantly. Pam and Janita and
Helena all caught their breath at her answer. So it was
out! But the Rev. Du Bois hardly heard Diana’s answer,
although Pam noticed that Miss Walton had, by the
stiffened expression on her face.
" Where were you born? ” persisted Mr. Du Bois.
Janita swallowed hard. She had no idea what this was
all about. All she knew was that Miss Walton was look-
ing at her with a very stern expression on her usually
kind face.
" I —l was born in New South Wales,” she answered
Mr. Du Bois’ question hesitantly.
At her answer, Mrs. Du Bois exclaimed triumphantly,
breathlessly, delightedly;
" It must be, John! It is—my own dear lost daughter! ”


At this stage, noticing the hush and the expectant in-
terest on the girls’ faces, Miss Walton intervened, look-
ing very astonished herself.
" Mrs. Du Bois, perhaps you would like to speak to
Janita in a more private place. You appear to recognise
her—”
" Recognise her! ” exclaimed Mrs. Du Bois, tearing her
eyes from Janita’s face with an effort. " Recognise her!
Why, Miss Walton. I am almost certain that this girlie
is my own daughter! She was lost when she was three
years old. John and I had taken Diana to Sydney at the
time to enrol her at school there. We left our younger
child, Catherine was her name —we called her after St.
Catherine of Bologna —we left Catherine with her aunt
at our home in Yarra-Yarra. It appears that one day,
during our absence my sister—Cathie’s aunt —was
called to the door on some pretext or other. When she
went back into the house Cathie was missing. It was
then about half-past two in the afternoon. My sister
searched for her until evening but could find no trace
of her. She then decided to enlist the help of the police.
They searched for her for days. Black-trackers combed
the bush —but all efforts to find even Cathie’s body were
unsuccessful. It seemed as though she had disappeared
into air.”
" When John and I returned from Sydney we enlisted
the aid of the cleverest men in the Police Force, and
for twelve months they scoured the country, but alas!
no clue was ever found as to Cathie’s whereabouts — ”
At this stage of her story, Mrs. Du Bois broke down,
overcome with emotion.


Mr. Du Bois patting her shoulder consolingly, took up
the tale.
" We did not give up the search for five years, but then
had to assume that the baby had died or been con-
sumed by some animal. It was a terrible conclusion to
have to come to, but what else could we think? My
wife s sister never got over it. She died three years ago.
The doctors said it was just the worry of Cathie’s dis-
appearance that killed her. But my wife has never given
up hope. Despite all she has always been convinced that
Cathie is alive and —and —” His voice broke as he looked
half fearfully at Janita.
" This girl whom you call Janita Harvey —well —you
can see, Miss Walton —that she is the image of my wife
and also of Diana. It is natural that my wife should
wonder if —if —if—”
It seemed that he dared not voice his thoughts, and Miss
Walton, looking half puzzled, half pitying, suggested
again:
" Let us all go across to my House, Mr. Du Bois. It is
a very sad story, but I am afraid you must be dis-
appointed. I fail to see how, despite the striking re-
semblance, Janita Harvey can also be —Catherine Du
Bois.”
Mr. Du Bois pulled himself together with an effort. He
nodded his head slowly and motioned gently to his
wife.
" Come, darling! Come, Diana! We will go with Miss
Walton.”
Miss Walton signed to Janita to follow also and feeling
like a figure in a play, Janita fell in beside Diana.


As she ranged herself by the side of the elder girl, the
thrilled girls and mistresses standing near, gave a
S as P-
" Why! They might be twins! Aren’t they alike? ”
"Do you think — ” asked Judy of Pam who stood by
looking as amazed as any of them. Do you think
that Janita could be Cathie Du Bois? ”
"No!” replied Pam definitely. "How can she be?
Janita is Captain Harvey’s daughter! Of course she is! ”


CHAPTER TEN
DIANA SPEAKS IMPULSIVELY
But nothing would persuade Mrs. Du Bois that Janita
was not Catherine. Although Miss Walton and Janita,
too, reiterated that she was Captain Harvey’s daughter,
Mrs. Du- Bois still clung to her and said again and
again:
" She is Cathie! I know it is Cathie! Cathie would have
been the same age as this girlie! She was always like
Diana and myself! I know this is my darling lost baby!
God has returned her to me after all these years!”
At last Mr. Du Bois begged Miss Walton to send for
Captain Harvey to clear up the matter.
" I don’t know what to think. The resemblance is amaz-
ing and yet — ”
" I’ll get in touch with Captain Harvey immediately,”
promised Miss Walton, and while they were all having
lunch in her sitting-room —Janita as well, for Mrs. Du
Bois would not allow her out of her sight —she put the
call through to the military barracks where Captain
Harvey had been stationed after his return from the
Pacific.
The captain, not knowing why he was required so
urgently at St. Cath’s, was amazed when Miss Walton
asked if he could come to the school that afternoon.
" If it is as urgent as you say, I must get leave! ” he
replied dubiously.
Miss Walton stressed the urgency of her request, and
Captain Harvey promised to catch the afternoon train to
St. Cath’s.


While they waited for him Miss Walton at last managed
to persuade the over-wrought Mrs. Du Bois to lie down
in her bedroom. Her husband went in with her to dis-
cuss the situation, leaving the Head with Diana and
Janita.
Both girls looked so puzzled and bewildered that Miss
Walton decided that the best thing was to get on to
some more practical matter than that of lost children
and amazing resemblances.
Her opening question certainly jolted Janita back to
reality.
" Miss Du Bois, when we were down at the Chapel I
think you told your father that you had met Janita
before? ”
"Yes, Miss Walton!” replied Diana, pulling herself
together and speaking quite frankly. "We met in the
company of some friends at the ' Mountain Eyrie ’
Night Club! ”
" How long ago was that? ” asked Miss Walton with
one eye on Janita’s white face.
" A few weeks! ” replied Diana airily unaware of the
sensation she was making by her answers. " Janita was
with another lass —a friend of my escort’s —Helena was
her name.”
" Helena Martynger? ” asked Miss Walton slowly.
"Yes, that’s right!” assented Diana cheerfully.
" Helena Martynger. And another girl — ” She giggled.
" Another kid gate-crashed in on the party, too, didn’t
she, Janita? Pam —something was her name. Said she
had come to look after Janita. She pestered Janita the


whole evening to come away —the kid was absolutely
horrified because Janita was there.”
" And what happened? ” asked the Head quietly.
" Oh,” said Diana with a grin. " We sat the kid down
in a corner —she looked awfully sweet really in her
school dress —we sat her down in a corner — ”
"And then?”
" Well,” confessed Diana. " I don’t know what hap-
pened after that. You see there was a raid —but don’t
tell dad —he hates me going to those places, but one
must do something for it is no fun being a parson’s
daughter — But as I was saying, there was a raid and
Janita, Helena, my boy-friend and myself did a bunk
before the police caught us. I have often wondered what
happened to that kid — ”
" I can tell you, Miss Du Bois, what happened to Pamela
Bryant,” replied the Head frigidly.
"Oh what?” asked Diana brightly. "Was she
copped? ”
"Yes, Miss Du Bois. Pamela was —as you put it —
' copped ’ —and almost expelled from this school as a
result.”
Diana’s lip dropped. Suddenly she realised that she had
not been altogether tactful in mentioning night clubs
to the Head Mistress of a boarding school. She had
spoken too impulsively; Diana, for all her flippancy, was
not a malicious girl. Now she hastily cast her mind back
to her own school-days and remembered what a crime
it had then been to break bounds.
" She —that kiddie —was not expelled was she? ” she
asked sombrely after an anxious pause.
Miss Walton shook her head.


*' No, due to the kindly intervention of the constable
who brought her back to school, Pamela fortunately did
not bear the extreme brunt of an act that was not com-
mitted, as I see now, by herself alone.”
" I’m glad of that! ” Diana was obviously relieved.
" But her punishment, nevertheless, was very severe,”
went on the Head. " I took the course of disgracing
Pamela publicly, not knowing that two other girls were
far more liable to punishment than she.” She turned a
cold, angry face to Janita.
” How you could stand in Main Hall that day and allow
your school-fellow to bear that punishment alone, know-
ing that you were equally to blame is beyond me. And
from what I can gather from Miss Du Bois, Pamela
endured all this for your sake, Janita Harvey! Ap-
parently it was to save you that she even went to the
' Mountain Eyrie ’in the first place — ”
"Well, I never asked her to come! ” burst in Janita
sulkily.
But her words only served to enhance the Head’s anger.
” We don’t always ask people to help us, Janita. But
when they do, the least we can do in return is to show
gratitude.” She rang the bell disgustedly.
" I shall send for Helena Martynger and Pamela Bryant
now. We must get this matter cleared up before your
father arrives, for I warn you he shall hear how his
daughter allowed another to be almost expelled from
school for a crime for which she herself was respon-
sible.”
Helena arrived looking far from her usual sophisticated
self. Ever since Diana’s greeting that morning she had


been expecting this summons and little by little the Head
extracted the whole story from the two girls.
Pam looked agitated.
" You —you are not going to expel them are you, Miss
Walton? ” Diana asked half fearfully at the end of it
all.
" That is a question which I must have time to consider,
Miss Du Bois, but frankly, I think my final answer may
have to be —' yes.’ ”
" Oh, but — ” pleaded Diana uncomfortably. " I feel so
dreadful about it all. It is all the fault of my silly
tongue — ”
The Head put a hand on the elder girl’s shoulder.
" I shouldn’t worry, Diana, for this time your tongue
has done another a great service. It has cleared away the
cloud that has hung over Pamela Bryant.” She smiled
happily at Pam. " This makes me glad, for it proves that
my first impression of Pamela was not wrong —the im-
pression that she is one of the straightest, most loyal
girls in my school.”
In spite of herself and her agitation for Janita, Pam
flushed with pleasure at these words.
But Diana privately thought this poor comfort for she
could not get over the fact that she had given Janita
and Helena away and that as a result, they might very
easily be expelled from St. Cath’s.
But she liked the feel of the Head’s hand on her shoulder
and half-wished that she could turn the years back and
go to school again—this time to St. Cath’s under a
person like Miss Walton.
Diana went to rejoin her parents in the Head’s bedroom,
and Miss Walton turned apologetically to Pam.


" I owe you a very great apology, my dear. Never, I
think, have I misjudged a girl as I did you. I shudder to
think of all the vile things I accused you of and how
near I came to expelling you.”
Pam went crimson.
" Thank you, Miss Walton, but how could you know the
truth ? Everything looked so black against me and —you
see —I couldn’t give Janita or Helena away —I couldn’t
sneak! And even if I could —you see, I promised Janita’s
father I would look after her. That is why I followed her
to the 'Mountain Eyrie.’ But now —oh! please, Miss
Walton —don’t expel Janita —or my effort will have
been in vain! ”
The Head considered.
" I can’t promise anything at the moment, Pam,” she
said gently. "You know how gravely I view their con-
duct — ”


CHAPTER ELEVEN
CAPTAIN HARVEY’S STORY
There was no time just then for further discussion of
the " Mountain Eyrie ” affair, for the ringing of the bell
proclaimed the arrival of Captain Harvey, looking very
worried and not a little annoyed at being so summarily
called from his duties at the barracks.
Miss Walton’s stern face, and Janita’s tearful one, did
nothing to allay his worry, as he was ushered into the
sitting-room. He raised his brows at the sight af Pamela
and Helena.
But the Head, though she privately thought the prob-
lem of Janita’s disgrace the more pressing one, did not
immediately broach that subject, preferring to explain
to Captain Harvey without delay the real reason she had
requested his presence.
" It seems quite ridiculous Captain Harvey,” she apolo-
gised, smiling a little dubiously, " but we have a lady
here who claims that Janita —well that your daughter —
is also her daughter! It appears her own child was lost
years ago — ” She was not prepared for the sudden
expression of fear that crossed the strong man’s face.
” Miss Walton, what are you saying? ” he burst out.
The Head noticed that as he rose he was white and
trembling.
" Who is this person who claims Janita? She is mine!
I tell you she is mine! I brought her up! No one —no one
can take her from me! ”
" Why, of course not, Captain! ” The Head was quite
startled at his menacing tone. " I don’t for a minute be-


lieve that there is anything in this story, but Mrs. Du
Bois— ”
" Du Bois! ” The captain sat down suddenly and covered
his face with his hands. His voice came hoarsely. " Then
-—then it has come! I knew it would some-time! My sin
has found me out! ”
The Head, shocked at the spectacle of such a strong man
bowed like this, could find no words for some minutes
and Janita, looking on, suddenly forgot that ten minutes
ago her one big worry had been the fear of expulsion.
That fear would predominate again, but at the moment
she could only stare in bewilderment at the bowed head
of the man she called her father.
" Daddy — ” she began. At her voice the captain looked
up piteously.
" Janita! ” He held out his hand to her and tried to pull
himself together.
"Are these —these people —here?” he asked Miss
Walton shakily.
Miss Walton nodded. She moved to the door.
" I will call them! ”
The sight of Mrs. Du Bois and Diana when they entered
caused Captain Harvey to tremble again, but he listened
to Mrs. Du Bois’ frenzied out-pouring of the tale of her
lost child with a sort of resignation.
When she had finished, he nodded dismally, though he
pulled himself straight like the soldier he was. Stiff as a
ramrod and standing at attention, Captain Harvey told
them another sad little story —a story which after twelve
years, supplied the sequel to the one Mrs. Du Bois had
told them of her lost child.


"You are quite right in your supposition, Mrs. Du Bois,
and now I must right the wrong that I did to you
twelve years ago. I believe that the girl I have called
Janita Harvey is—Cathie Du Bois! No— ”as Mrs. Du
Bois and her husband attempted to speak. " Let me tell
you my tale.”
The captain mastered himself with an effort while all
faces looked at him with varying expressions. Miss
Walton’s was as bewildered as were Janita’s, Helena’s
and Pam’s. Diana’s was amazed and incredulous. Mr.
Du Bois’ expression was gentle but shocked, and Mrs.
Du Bois, that usually gentle lady —her expression was
menacing and enraged!
" I married against my parents’ wishes,” began Captain
Harvey. " And I made a wrong choice. My wife, six
months after the ceremony discovered that she was in
love with another man, but I refused to divorce her. We
had one child and we called her Janita. I loved Janita
very dearly but when she was three years old my wife ran
away with her lover, taking our baby with her. I have
not seen either of them to this day. I never wanted to
see my wife, but I mourned my baby as though she were
dead. Unable to stand the life in Sydney after this
tragedy, I took a job droving in the country districts
of New South Wales. All the time I longed for my baby
daughter. One day, thinking of Janita and travelling
along a lonely bush track in the vicinity of the town of
Yarra-Yarra, I saw a young child toddling towards the
river which ran close to that track.”
" As the child ran she was crying. I called to her but she
apparently became frightened, and the next minute she
had toppled right over the steep bank into the river. I


lost no time in jumping from my horse and going in
after the baby. When I carried her out of the water she
was unconscious and a deep cut on her temple showed
that she had struck herself against some object when
she hurtled into the water.”
" I took her back to my tent and nursed her until she
became conscious. When I asked her name all she would
say was ' Cathie,’ and I could find no clue on her cloth-
ing to tell me her surname. I put her to bed and as she
slept I looked at her and thought of my own little
Janita. Their ages were about the same, and as I sat
thinking of this, a terrible temptation assailed me.”
" ' Why,’ I asked myself, ’ shouldn’t I keep this child to
take the place of Janita?’ Surely God had sent this
child to me for a purpose ? Could not that purpose be to
replace my own child for whom I had never ceased to
grieve? ”
" I was not proof against that temptation. I decided to
keep Cathie-Janita as I called her from that moment.
But commonsense told me that she must belong to some-
one, and that someone would soon begin an intensive
search for the child. I had plenty of money and I decided
to leave the country until the hue and cry had died
down. In short, I kidnapped Cathie-Janita. I took her to
live in New Guinea. But not before I had heard the
wireless broadcasts and read the news of the dis-
appearance of a child called Cathie Du Bois. I refused
to give her up. I pushed my conscience into the back-
ground by trying to assure myself that God had given
me this child.”
" We lived in New Guinea, little Cathie-Janita and I,
until she was five years old, when the climate proved too


severe for a young child, and I deemed that the time
had come when we could return to Australia. I was
careful not to return to New South Wales, but settled
in the South, near Adelaide. There I brought Janita up
as my own child —and almost persuaded myself that
she was my own child. I gradually dropped the ' Cathie ’
from her name and she was always with me until this
war broke out. When I enlisted I was forced to turn her
over to the care of my sister, who really believed that it
was my own daughter she was caring for. Why should
my sister have questioned it? She never knew my wife
and had never seen Janita. She accepted Cathie-Janita
quite naturally. I am earnestly asking you to remember
this for whatever happens now, my sister has had no
part in this affair. She merely took charge of Cathie-
Janita after I enlisted.”
There was dead silence as Captain Harvey finished his
story. Then there was a pitiful little sound from Janita,
who was sobbing from shock and bewilderment. That
sound seemed to loose Mrs. Du Bois’ tongue. She
rose slowly from her chair and crossed to where Captain
Harvey still stood at attention. Her eyes as she looked
up into his were glittering.
" I never knew wicked people like you existed! To take
a child from its mother when you knew that mother was
desperately searching for her! To think that you heard
all our broadcasts —read our advertisements —and paid
no heed! You have caused me to suffer, Captain Harvey
—as only a mother can suffer! Now! — ” She drew her
breath in sharply. " Now! It is your turn! You will pay


for this in prison! I don’t know what the sentence is
for kidnapping, but I should imagine it is very heavy!
Well —I say, the heavier the better and — ” But she got
no further for at that moment a small figure sprang
forward.
" No! Mrs. Du Bois! No! Not that! Not prison! Cap-
tain Harvey is a brave men — cried Pamela piteously.
"He saved my father — ”
"What is your father to me?” almost spat out Mrs.
Du Bois. She pushed Pam aside roughly and looked up
at the captain once more.
" You will be put where you cannot harm my Cathie
again ”
For the first time the captain looked down at her.
" I have never harmed Cathie-Janita, Mrs. Du Bois!
Please believe that.” He looked at Janita pleadingly.
" Tell —your —your mother —Janita! I have never
harmed you, have I? ”
But all Janita could do was to shrink further back in
the corner and continue to sob.
" You see! ” Mrs. Du Bois’ voice was almost triumphant.
” You see how you have terrified her. She daren’t even
speak.”
" She is over-wrought! ” Mr. Du Bois spoke now, put-
ting a gentle restraining hand on his wife’s shoulder.
" The child is bewildered, dear. She cannot answer ques-
tions just now. Come, sit down by her side while we get
this matter straight.” He led his sobbing wife to a chair
by Janita and turned his attention to Captain Harvey.
" My wife is right, Harvey, when she says she has suf-
fered. We have both suffered terribly since Cathie dis-


appeared It is only natural that we should feel enmity
towards you.”
Captain Harvey nodded dumbly.
" I know,” he said at last. " I know I have been wrong.
The knowledge of it has haunted me all these years, and
there has been no one to confide in. I tried once —on
board a raff in the Pacific —when it seemed that another
man and myself must surely die. But even then I stopped
myself. I was so nervous that Janita would be taken
from me —and —I loved her so much — ” His voice
broke and he sighed. " Well —hadn’t you better ring
for the police now? I am ready! ”
But Mr. Du Bois did not move. There was something
in this man’s voice which seemed to hold him back.
And yet why shouldn’t he ring the police? This man
had done his wife and himself the most grievous of
wrongs and yet — From somewhere there seemed to
come a Voice to the Rev. Du Bois as he stood there
hesitating —a Voice which seemed to say :
"You must be prepared to forgive, not only once but
seventy times seven . . .”
As Jesus’ words, once uttered to His disciple, forced
themselves upon Mr. Du Bois he bowed his head and
his lips moved in a whispered prayer.
" Dear God. I, too, profess to be a follower of Thy
dear Son. Guide me in this matter according to Thy
will.”
And the Voice seemed to say again:
" Seventy times seven must Thou forgive
When the Rev. Du Bois looked up into Captain Har-
vey’s face, his mind was made up. His eyes were full


of humility from the spiritual experience he had passed
through in those few minutes. To the surprise of his
wife and all present he held out his hand.
" Captain Harvey, you have done my wife and myself
a great service! Our daughter was lost. You found her
and cared for her and now —well now, you have restored
her to us.”
It was Captain Harvey’s turn to look bewildered.
" But Du Bois! Have you forgotten the suffering I have
caused you ? Surely you cannot forgive that ? ”
Mr. Du Bois beckoned to his wife before he answered.
As she stood by his side, he put a strong hand on her
arm and looked first into her face and then back again
to Captain Harvey. His face as he spoke seemed
illumined.
" The answer to your question, Harvey, is this: Christ
on the Cross could find it in His heart to make this
petition —' Father forgive them . , If Christ was able
to forgive surely it is up to me as a minister of His
Church to forgive also? ”
After these words what could anyone say? Not even
Mrs. Du Bois, who still eyed Captain Harvey with
animosity, could dispute the fact that her husband was
right in trying to follow the example of Jesus Christ.
And Pam —Pam Bryant —who after her one plea in
defence of Captain Harvey —had stood quietly by —
Pam gave a great sigh of relief and offered a silent prayer
of thanks to God when she knew that the captain would
not go to prison.
Then the girls were dismissed to return to their Houses,
while the grown-ups stayed to talk over the matter of


what was to be done about Cathie-Janita as they called
her.
" But what does it matter? ” cried that girl to Pam.
" For all this does not alter the fact that the Head in-
tends to expel Helena and me for that ' Mountain
Eyrie ’ affair.”
Pam looked at her compassionately.
" Perhaps she too will forgive! ” she said shyly.
” She won’t! I know she won’t! ”
" Well what does it matter? ” Helena spoke now and
her voice was angry. " School’s a bore, anyway! Ell be
glad to leave! ”
" But Helena to be expelled —! ” wailed Janita. She
shuddered. "I couldn’t bear that! Ed —Ed rather run
away than face expulsion.”
Pam gave her a little shake.
" Don’t be silly, Janita! Where would you run to? Even
if you are expelled you must think of your parents from
now on. You’ll have to make up to them for all the
years they have been parted from you.”
" Why should I? ” Janita looked rebellious. " It is not
my fault we have been parted. I hardly know them, and
I certainly do not feel under any obligation to them —
parents or no! ”
Pam was a little shocked at this frank confession but
she made no comment, understanding that at the
moment, Janita could hardly be capable of connected
thought. It was natural that after the amazing revela-
tions of this day she should be slightly hysterical. Pam
was glad when on arrival at their House, Matron
swooped Janita off to the sick-room.


" Miss Walton telephoned me that you have had a severe
shock and were to rest for the remainder of the day. I
must say you certainly look as though you had seen a
ghost.”
" She has seen two ghosts, Matron! ” whispered Pam
softly. " Look after her and be gentle with her —there’s
a dear! ”


CHAPTER TWELVE
LOST AGAIN!
" Have you heard the news, Pammy? ” Judy came rush-
ing over to Pam after lunch the next day.
Pam gave a smile.
"What news, Judy?” she asked, eyeing her friend’s
flushed face affectionately.
But Judy’s face, if flushed, was serious.
" Janita Harvey —I mean Cathie Du Bois —I mean —oh,
well, you know who I mean —she’s disappeared! ”
"Disappeared?” Pam stared unbelievingly at Judy.
" Disappeared! ”
" Yes,” Judy nodded. " And the girls say it is because
she doesn’t want to belong to her new parents! ”
Somehow the story of the Du Bois connection with
Janita had got around by the evening, and the whole
school had been agog with it ever since.
" She can’t have disappeared, Judy,” declared Pam.
" It is only a rumour. The girls are excited about Janita’s
story and — ”
" But I tell you, she has gone! ” maintained Judy, im-
patiently. " She’s been gone since some time last night.
They have been searching for her all the morning, but
they kept it quiet, thinking she may turn up — ”
"Who told you this?” demanded Pam anxiously.
Janita’s words: ' I’d sooner run away! ’ suddenly rang in
her ears. " Who told you Janita had disappeared? ”
"Matron! ” began Judy, but at that moment Matron
herself appeared and came straight up to Pam.
" Pamela Bryant, I want you! ”
Pam followed her anxiously into the House.


*' Matron, is it true that Janita has disappeared? ”
Matron gave a sigh.
" How do these things get around? We have tried to
keep it from the school.”
" Then —it is true? ”
Matron nodded gravely.
" Yes, Pamela, it is true. Janita has been missing since
about eleven o’clock last night. I was sitting up late to
finish some work I had on hand. About eleven o’clock
I decided to look in and see that Janita was all right.
She had been sobbing a lot in the afternoon, and I
thought I would give her a sedative. But when I got to
the sick-room Janita was missing. I waited, thinking she
might have gone to the bathroom for something, but
when an hour went by and she did not return, I grew
anxious. I searched the House and when I could not find
her I woke your House Mistress and she in turn, got in
touch with Miss Walton. Unknown to you girls, we
searched the grounds and bush all night, but when
morning came she was still missing. We got in touch
then with her parents and the police. Two private detec-
tives are with Miss Walton now. It is at their instiga-
tion that I came in search of you, Pamela.”
"We have questioned Helena Martynger and also
Doreen Hay as they have been her companions here, but
they assert that Janita had not confided her intentions
to them. And now we want to know if you can throw
any light on the matter. You, also, have been in Janita’s
company a good deal this term. Has she said anything
to you about her intention to perhaps —run away? ”
Pam nodded quickly, apprehensively.


" She did say something about it yesterday, Matron —
Matron clicked her lips.
' Why then, didn’t you tell someone? ”
" Well, I never thought she meant it,” Pam excused
herself. " It was after she heard that Mr. and Mrs. Du
Bois were her parents — ”
Matron nodded worriedly.
" Yes. I thought that might be the reason. The child
was terribly upset. If only she had waited until things
were explained to her. Yesterday afternoon, Mr. and
Mrs. Du Bois and Captain Harvey came to a most happy
settlement of the whole matter. It had been arranged
that although Mr. and Mrs. Du Bois were to have the
legal guardianship of Janita, Captain Harvey was to
have access to her at any time — ”
" But — ” Pam broke in, interesting though this all was.
'' But —I don’t think that is the reason Janita has run
away —if she has run away —Matron. You see —she was
in trouble with Miss Walton and there was a likelihood
that she might be expelled — ”
But Matron was really not interested in why Janita had
disappeared. Her one purpose was to find the missing
girl. She dismissed Pam hurriedly and went to inform
the Head and the detectives of Pam’s information.
Half an hour later the Head sent for Pam.
Mr. and Mrs. Du Bois, Captain Harvey and two strange
men were all present as she entered the study. Once
more Pam had to tell what she knew.
Janita was upset and said she would rather run away
than stand the disgrace of expulsion — ”
She was interrupted suddenly by Mrs. Du Bois, red-
eyed literally shouting:


" I don’t believe it! I don’t believe it! Cathie has not run
away at all! ” She pointed at Captain Harvey. " I repeat
it is this man who is responsible. He is at the bottom of
the whole affair. No, I won’t be quiet, John! I believe
that Captain Harvey has again kidnapped our child! ”
Apparently everyone that afternoon, except Pam, had
heard this insinuation before, for Captain Harvey
merely gave a sigh and said in a weary voice:
" I assure you, Mrs. Du Bois, I have not spoken to Janita
since she was last in this study — ”
" It is a lie! ” Mrs. Du ijois looked round angrily at the
two men who were sitting at Miss Walton s table listen-
ing attentively. I appeal to you two officers to arrest
this man on a second charge of kidnapping! ”
One of the detectives stood up.
" We cannot be sure that this is a second charge of kid-
napping, Mrs. Du Bois, but I agree that it is certainly
very suspicious, and we will most certainly have to ask
Captain Harvey to accompany us to the police station
for further inquiries.”
"No!” Pam suddenly forgot that she was in the
presence of her Head Mistress as she shouted this word.
" No! You can’t do that! You can’t arrest Captain Har-
vey. He is innocent —I’m sure he is! ”
One of the detectives looked at her questioningly.
" What reason, young lady, have you to be so sure that
Captain Harvey has not kidnapped Cathie Du Bois? ”
" Why? ” Pam looked at him wide-eyed, licked her dry
lips and searched for words. " Only, officer, that I know
Captain Harvey is a brave man. He has won a medal
for valour in this war —he saved my father’s life when


their ship was torpedoed in the Pacific. A man who could
do that cannot be put in prison! ”
" He can and he will if he is proved guilty of kidnapping
this child!” replied the detective grimly. "And it
seems very likely that this may be the case. Despite his
excellent war record, Captain Harvey has himself ad-
mitted to having kidnapped the child once. Due to the
magnaminity of Cathie’s parents, however, who have
decided not to charge him for the first offence, we can-
not imprison him unless we find proof that he is guilty
of kidnapping her a second time. But we can hold him
for questioning.”
Pam looked at Captain Harvey’s strained face and her
heart smote her. If only she could help him. If only she
could find Janita and so save him from prison. He was
too splendid a man to be shut up in a prison cell. She
clasped his brown hand shyly as the detectives signed
to him to precede them.
If I can help you, Captain Harvey, I will. Rest assured
of that. I haven’t forgotten my promise to look after
Janita for you! ”
The captain’s eyes softened. He stooped to kiss the top
of her brown head.
" Bless you, my dear. You have done your best and suf-
fered for it, too. Miss Walton has told me all about the
way Janita allowed you to take the blame over that
' Mountain Eyrie ’ affair. We both owe you a very great
apology, and I must take this opportunity of telling you
how very sorry I am that I once doubted you.”
When he had gone Mrs. Du Bois looked at Pam dis-
tastefully.


" Do you think this girl is responsible for helping Cap-
tain Harvey to kidnap our Cathie, Miss Walton?
" Oh, no! ” Miss Walton looked horrified.
" She seems very fond of him,” sniffed Mrs. Du Bois,
suspiciously. " Another thing, she already bears Cathie
a grudge — ”
" I don’t! ” burst out Pam so hotly that Miss Walton
hastened to dismiss her.
" Pamela, you must not shout at Mrs. Du Bois. Remem-
ber she is feeling very upset and worried. Run along now
to your classroom. We will let you know if you can help
us further.”


CHAPTER THIRTEEN
JAN
Judy, Marilyn and Jean could hardly wait until lessons
finished to question Pam.
" Has Janita —Cathie —has she run away? ”
" Why did Matron want you, Pam? ”
" Have they really got the police searching for her? ”
Pam nodded sombrely in answer to the last question.
" Yes, indeed, they have, Jean! But what worries me is
that they are trying to prove that Captain Harvey has
kidnapped Janita again! ”
" Kidnapped her! ” The eyes of the three girls goggled.
" Do you think he has, Pam? ”
Pam shook her head determinedly. Her head was aching
with the worry of it all, and she was in no mood for so
many questions.
" No, I’m quite sure he hasn’t.”
"He kidnapped her before though,” said Marilyn
hesitantly.
" Well, he didn’t this time! ” snapped Pam.
" You can’t be sure, though,” persisted Marilyn. " After
all— ”
"The circumstances are against him —yes! ” broke in
Pam. " But I still don’t believe what you all seem to
think. What is more I’m going to try to prove that this
time he is innocent. It is the least I can do for the man
who saved daddy’s life! ”
" But how can you prove it, Pam? ” asked Judy slowly
and practically, eyeing her friend admiringly.


" I don’t know, Judy,” Para said worriedly. " I don’t
know how just yet, but I intend to think out a plan of
action.”
"if I ca n help — ” Judy looked at Pam shyly, and Pam
smiled and squeezed her arm.
" If you can help I’ll let you know, Judy,” she promised.
" But first, I must think.”
And think she did all that evening and half-way through
the night. Where could Janita have gone? How could
she find her ?
It was four o’clock in the morning before she came to a
decision. She had fallen into a doze shortly after the
clock had struck one. When she awakened, the light
was just stealing into the sky and her idea flashed on
her all of a sudden. Rising and true to her promise she
woke Judy.
" Move over in the bed and let me get in with you.
Judy only half awake did as she was bid, and Pam
snuggled in under the bed-clothes and began talking in a
low voice.
" I’ve got an idea about Janita. I am going to ask Con-
stable Carter to help me.”
Judy rubbed her eyes.
" Who is Constable Carter? ” she asked sleepily.
" The policeman who brought me back to school from
the ' Mountain Eyrie.’ He is an awfully decent sort, and
I feel sure he would have some suggestion to make. I
must do something, Judy. I’m so worried about Captain
Harvey and Janita —as is everyone else, of course.”
" But do you know where he lives? ” Judy was wide
awake now and her practical self.


" No, but I’ll find out. If I ring the Department of Police
surely they would give me his address. And then I’ll go
out and see him.”
” I’ll come too.” Judy gave a wriggle of anticipation,
and hugged Pam closer. " Oh, it is so nice to be doing
things together again, Pam, and what adventures we
may have! ”
They talked the matter over until the rising bell rang,
and at lunch time Pam asked permission to use the
phone.
There was some difficulty about this for the House
Mistress wanted to know who they intended ringing.
Unwilling to scandalise the mistress and go into a long
rigmarole as to why she wanted to ring the Department
of Police, Pam evaded the question.
" It is in connection with a friend of my father’s, Miss
Arrowsmith,” she replied quite truthfully. For it was
in connection with Captain Harvey that she wished to
make the call.
And luckily Miss Arrowsmith was in a hurry to attend
a staff meeting, or she would have questioned Pam
further. As it was she gave her the key of the telephone
and hurried away. As she disappeared, Pam and Judy
did a jig of glee.
" The fates are with us! ” chortled Judy. " Difficulty
No. 1 is overcome.”
Difficulty No. 2 —finding Constable Carter’s address
was also more easily overcome than they thought it
would have been, and they were glad to find that the
policeman only lived a couple of stations down the
line.


After afternoon school they obtained a leave pass easily
enough, but they must be back in time for the evening
meal at 6 p.m.
" Aeons of time! ” said optimistic Judy as they hurried
down the drive. " And who knows but that we may
bring Cathie-Janita back in time for the evening meal,
too?”
But Pam was more pessimistic and felt doubly so when
after finding Constable Carter so luckily at home and
off duty, they put their case to him.
*' You little girls must not meddle in these affairs,” he
said kindly and gravely. " I know all about the case
as it happens, and I can assure you that everything is
being done to not only find your missing school-fellow
but also to clear Captain Harvey.”
So, mortified, they felt at a dead end and looked very
miserable about it. •
” Still,” said the kindly policeman cheerfully, " now
you are here, why not stay and have some tea with us?
My wife is not at home, but Jan and my daughters would
love to meet you.”
" Who is Jan? ” Judy wanted to know 1 , brightening at
the prospect of tea after the rush to get here.
" Jan is my adopted daughter,” the constable replied
gravely. " And not very happy, I am afraid.”
"Why?” Judy’s eyes opened wide and disregarded
Pam’s look of surprise at her questions.
Constable Carter hesitated a moment.
" Jan is, in a sense, a lost child, too.”
" O-ooh! ” Judy looked excited, and even Pam was for
the moment able to put her worries to the back of her
mind.


Constable Carter sat down and his eyes twinkled.
Jan’s story is common knowledge. She tells everyone
that she is lost, so I suppose I can forestall her this time
and tell the tale myself. Jan, you see, thinks that by tell-
ing people that she is lost may one day help to solve her
mystery. She says that you never know but that someone
may supply the missing link in her life.”
” What missing link? ” asked Judy, the impatient.
" Well, I adopted Jan five years ago through the Child
Welfare Society to which I was connected in the pur-
suance of my duties. Jan’s mother, who went under the
name of Mrs. Dean, was a gentlewoman who had fallen
into very bad habits. She had fallen so low that when
I got to know her she and Jan were living in a filthy
tenement in one of the worst parts of Adelaide. She
spent all her money on cheap wine and was continually
drunk and quite incapable of looking after Jan. We
warned her several times that unless she altered her
ways the State would have to remove Jan from her care,
but it appears drink had rotted even her love for her
child. At last, unable to stand the atmosphere of her
home any longer, Jan herself arrived at the police
station one morning and asked me to put her with the
Child Welfare people. She was a sensible child for nine.
Her unnatural home-life had developed her early and
that day we had a long talk. She told me of her mother’s
drunken bouts and how they had wandered from place
to place ever since mother had left daddy.”
" This last was news to me. I had presumed that her
father was dead. But Jan said ' No.’ She knew daddy
was alive but where he was she had no idea. I told this
to the people at the Child Welfare, and they tried to


find out from Jan’s mother where her husband could
be found. But Mrs. Dean was either too drunk to give
us any information or else she did not know. Two days
after, however, she died —of alcoholic poisoning.’’
" I don’t think Jan mourned her death for she had not
been either a very good or very kind mother to the child,
but Jan has always wondered about her father.”
" We advertised and did our best to get information
as to Mr. Dean’s whereabouts, but to no avail. No one
has ever claimed Jan.”
" I had taken a great liking to the child, and later my
wife and I decided to adopt her and bring her up with
our own girls, twins, the same age as Jan. She has been
like another daughter to us ever since, but although Jan
is happy enough living with us, she is always talking
about the day when her own father may turn up and claim
her. That is why, as I have told you, she tells everyone
she meets her story. She imagines that one day perhaps
she may tell it to her own father! ”
Constable Carter was interrupted at this point in Jan’s
story by the appearance of Jan herself, accompanied
by Verity and Viola, his own twin daughters. He intro-
duced them.
" Pamela Bryant and Judy Jarrard. These are my
daughters and Jan.”
Was it the effect of the story they had just heard, thought
Pam, or were her eyes playing tricks ? For looking at the
tall, dark, splendid girl whose name was Jan, Pam felt
sure she had seen her somewhere before.
When they were all gathered round the table there were
giggles from the nice-looking Carter twins.
" Go on, Jan! ” grinned Viola.


"Yes, tell your tale, Jan! ” chimed in Verity.
Jan smiled good naturedly.
"I’m certainly going to,” she said smiling at Pam and
Judy. But before she could start Constable Carter burst
in.
" I’ve forestalled you this time, Jan! Pam and Judy have
already heard your story.”
" Oh! • The twins’ faces fell in disappointment.
But Jan looked at Pam and Judy with a pathetically
hopeful expression.
" Have you any idea where my father might be ? ”
Judy shook her head.
" Sorry old thing,” she replied regretfully.
Jan looked at Pam.
' What about you? ”
Pam shook her head also.
" No, Jan—but— ”
" But? ” Jan swung round. It was pitiful the way she
hung on to every word. " But —what? ”
" It’s just that I feel I’ve seen your face before — ”
finished Pam hesitantly.
" Oh! ” Jan’s face fell. " Oh, is that all. I suppose you’ve
seen me on the train seeing we are on the same line as
St. Cath’s. That doesn’t help much! ”
Pam felt sorry she had mentioned it at the disappointed
look on Jan’s face.
After tea Pam and Judy thought it was time they returned
to school.
" And you leave the matter of Janita Harvey’s dis-
appearance to your teachers! ” warned Constable Carter


quite kindly. But Pam did not answer for she was still
determined to think out another scheme whereby she
might find Janita and clear Captain Harvey of the charge
of kidnapping.
" I’ll walk up to the.station with you,” offered Jan as
the twins announced that it was their turn to wash up
the tea-things.
On the way Jan told Judy and Pam all about her life
at the High School and how good Constable Carter and
his family were to her.
" He is every bit as much a father to me as he is to Verity
and Viola, but I can never bring myself to call him
daddy, for I feel so sure that my own father is alive.”
" Haven’t you anything to tell you what your own father
looks like? ” asked practical Judy.
Jan shook her head.
” Nothing. Mother never had a photo of him. All I have
is this locket — ” She fumbled in her dress and drew
forth an old-fashioned locket of a curious design. It was
suspended round her neck by a slender gold chain. She
clicked it open and Pam and Judy, drawing close, saw
the pictured face of an old lady.
" Who is it? ” asked Pam, as Jan undid the catch and
put the locket in her hands. " What a sweet face? ”
"Yes, isn’t it?” Jan looked at the locket longingly.
" But I don’t know who it is. I found it amongst
mother’s possessions after she died. It is my only
treasure.”
Apparently the subject was a painful one, for suddenly
Jan changed it.
" I’ve been meaning to ask you. Why did you come to
see Mr. Carter tonight? It is not often he has visitors


like you.” Her question was so frankly asked that
neither Judy or Pam felt that she was being inquisitive,
and it was Pam who told her the story of Janita
Harvey, or rather, Cathie Du Bois as she was really.
Jan was amazed.
" Gracious! It is almost as mysterious as my tale! ”
she declared excitedly. Then suddenly she stopped
dead.
" What’s the matter? ” asked Judy.
" This Cathie or Janita or whatever you call her —
what does she look like? ” she asked slowly.
Pam described her.
"Tall for her fifteen years and fair with blue eyes.”
" Would she be wearing the St. Cath’s uniform? ”
" I —l expect so,” answered Judy.
" I wonder — ” murmured Jan.
"What?” asked Pam impatiently. "What do you
wonder, Jan? ”
" It’s like this — ” Jan spoke quickly. " Last night Mr.
Carter asked me to go into the city on a message. I had
to go to the interstate booking office and return some
tickets. There was a girl there trying to obtain a priority
to travel to Sydney. Such a tale she was telling the clerk
—How her mother was dying and — ”
" But Janita’s mother —rather, Cathie’s mother —is here
in Adelaide! ” protested Judy.
" Shut up, Judy! ” said Pam unceremoniously. " Go on,
Jan —about this girl — ”
" She was about sixteen and dressed in your uniform.
Her hair was fair and curled up a lot — ”
*' It sounds like Cathie-Janita! ” cried Judy excitedly.


Shut up, Judy! said Pam again. Did she §ct her
priority to travel? ” she asked Jan, taking no notice of
Judy’s grimace.
Jan nodded.
" Yes. The booking-clerk seemed doubtful, but at last
he booked her. She gave him some money and he told
her the train left at 7 o’clock on Tuesday night— ”
" Why! That’s tonight! ” exclaimed Pam and looked at
her watch.
Judy looked at her in alarm.
" So what, Pam? ”
" I’m going down to Adelaide to see the Sydney Express
off. Cathie-Janita may be on it! ” answered Pam calmly.
" Instead of catching the train back to St. Cath’s I’m
going to catch the one to town! ”
" But won’t you be breaking bounds? ” stared Jan, who
knew the rules of boarding-school life.
" We will! ” responded Judy as calmly as Pam now that
her friend had announced her intentions. " We will be
breaking bounds, but all that will be forgiven if we
bring Cathie-Janita back to the fold.”
fr If,” said Pam cautiously. " If not —there will be plenty
of fireworks! ”
" Let’s get going,” said Judy with a sparkle in her eye.
" I was feeling flat —despite —or should I say —because
of Jan’s little tale. But now I’m feeling my old self.”
" And I’m coming with you! ” Jan suddenly announced
surprisingly.
” You —but won’t Constable Carter be worried? ” asked
Pam dubiously.


" No more worried than your school-marm! ” retorted
Jan, and fell in alongside them. " The only thing is—
Can you pay my fare. I haven’t brought any cash.”
"We can manage that between us! ” Judy beamed at
Jan. " What fun if you could come to St. Cath’s, Jan.
What fun we’d have.”
Fifteen minutes later they were in the train travelling
in the opposite direction to St. Cath’s!


CHAPTER FOURTEEN
A BRAVE LASSIE
They arrived at the Central Station shortly after six
and enquired from the " Man in Blue ’’ what time the
platform barriers opened for the Sydney Express.
" Not until about 6.30,” he told them, so they wandered
up the steps of the station to North Terrace to wile away
the time. Outside it was a busy scene.
Taxis were discharging passengers, people were hailing
porters to carry their luggage and the horse cabs, re-
installed since the petrol rationing, were doing a good
trade.
” This is quite a good place to watch for Janita,” ob-
served Judy sensibly. " Let’s stay here a while and watch
all the cabs and taxis and then, at half-past six we’ll buy
our platforms tickets and watch the train itself.”
The cabs and taxis continued to roll up and disgorge
their passengers at the station entrance, but there was
no sign of Cathie-Janita and at half-past six, bored with
watching, Pam suggested going down to the train.
" Let’s go down — ” she began and then broke off as a
horse cab rattled up to the kerb. " Look! ”
She pointed excitedly to its Occupant.
" There she is! In that cab! Hi! Hi! ”
She rushed forward, the others hot on her heels.
The cabby had got down from his seat and was about
to open the back door of the cab when Pam’s voice rang
out.
" Hi! Janita! ” She ran light-footed in front of the driver
and Wrenched open the door of the vehicle.


" Here! ” roared the cabby as she trod heavily on his
pet corn. " Here! —” He broke off as suddenly there
was a movement, and a whinny. Quickly he ran to grab
the horse’s reins, missed, and was left standing there
beside Judy and Jan as the animal suddenly left the kerb
and with the cab, containing Janita and Pam rattling
behind, bolted, tail flying, along the Terrace!
In the cab, Pam in the act of confronting Cathie-Janita,
suddenly felt herself hurled to the floor.
Janita gave a scream.
" The horse is bolting! Oh! Oh! Well be killed I Some-
one save us, quick! Oh! Oh! ”
The sound of her voice screaming these words again
and again seemed to make the horse go faster. On and
on he tore, narrowly missing cars, trams and pedestrians
in his mad, headlong rush.
Pam, however, when she realised what had happened
was amazingly quick to pull herself together. She rose
from the floor and pushing Janita back on her seat, she
scrambled through the aperture in the partition which
divided the main part of the cab from the driver’s seat.
As the horse suddenly swerved, turned and tore up Pul-
teney Street, the cab behind it almost capsized and Pam
was nearly thrown out.
But she grasped the reins in time and pulling on these,
she managed to regain her balance. But despite a
momentary slacking as he felt the pull of the bit, the
horse careered on again. Up Pulteney Street dodging a
tram, around the corner on one wheel into Bundle Street,
scattering pedestrians and cyclists and motorists in that
busy main thoroughfare —mane and tail flying and
swishing —while Pam pulled with all her might so that


the reins cut into her hands and the blood streamed from
them.
Then there was another turn to the right —down
King William Street —and a scream from Janita behind
as she was thrown to the floor —and on —on —bolted the
horse. Past the South African War Memorial where
the stone figure of horse and rider looked at this modern,
undisciplined horse in seeming amazement. Everywhere
cars and bikes were scattered. One or two men did at-
tempt to make a snatch at the horse’s head as it tore
past them, but he was too quick for any of them.
As he tore over the bridge, Pam knew with a beating
heart that she would have to do more than pull at the
reins. Sub-consciously she prayed for help.
" Tell me what to do, God, and help me to do it.
Almost immediately He must have answered her prayer,
for the next minute she knew what she was going to
attempt —was in fact attempting it —climbing over on to
the shaft and then —though the horse in its amazement
reared up —she climbed on to his back and hoped that
that would stop his headlong gallop.
But —no! After the first momentary rearing he was off
again. Up the hill past the Cathedral and the hospital,
with Pam on his back clinging to his mane. And then, as
his pace slackened a tiny bit by reason of the hill he was
climbing, she did the bravest thing of all.
Watched by the startled pedestrians and the pursuing
motorists, she edged herself forward, gripped the right-
hand side of his bridle in her bleeding hands —and
swung her legs from over his back. For quite a hundred
yards she dangled thus —right in front of the animal’s


plunging legs —dangling, and a dead weight on his
head, which was just what she meant to be.
This, after a further fifty yards had its effect. Gradually
the horse’s pace slackened, and topping the hill into
O’Connell Street he stopped dead, snorting and puffing
and plunging and trying to dislodge that weight from
his head.
Pam held on to his bridle just long enough for help, in
the form of the pursuing motorists, to take over her job.
Then the crowd gathered. Willing hands held the
exhausted horse, and one of the motorists carried first
Pam and then the unconscious Janita into his car.
" It is a good job this brave lassie did not faint like the
other one! ” he remarked as he set Pam on the seat.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
JAN’S LOCKET
Meanwhile, Judy and Jan, having seen the cab contain-
ing Pam and Cathie-Janita careering up the street were
nearly frantic.
" They’ll be killed! Oh! They’ll be killed! ” cried Judy
as she watched the vehicle drawn by the maddened horse
disappear into the distance.
They rushed up the street following the crowd who did
likewise, and were in time to see the cab pass by the
War Memorial. Several men rushed at the horse’s head,
but it was of no avail and Judy and Jan, watching it
go careering on with Pam now in the driver’s seat, wrung
their hands in despair.
" What shall we do? ” wailed Judy distractedly.
Jan shook her head in terror. She was too overwhelmed
with apprehension to answer. The cab-driver came up to
them white of face.
" There is a man here with a car who will follow the
cab! ”
Judy and Jan didn’t wait for an invitation. They jumped
in the car, thankful at least to be doing something more
than just stand and wring their hands.
They caught up with the cab just as Pam was perform-
ing her brave action, and when the horse had stopped
they saw the motorist lift the two unconscious girls into
his car.
Jan ran forward.
" Where are you taking them? And —oh! ” Jan drew
back fearfully. She had peered into the car and seen


Pam’s white motionless face. " Are they —dead? ” she
asked in a terrified voice.
The motorist reassured her.
" No —though it is a miracle they are not —especially
this brave lassie! ” He indicated Pam.
Judy, practical even in this emergency, repeated Jan’s
question.
" Where are you taking them, sir? You see, we are her
friends, and we will have to let them know at school.”
" In that case, young lady, you had better both come
down to the Children’s Hospital with me. The matron
will wish to question you.”
When Pam and Janita, looking so white and deathly,
were carried at last to a private ward, Judy told the
matron how worried the school authorities would be. So
matron rang Miss Walton, who also spoke to Judy and
told her to wait at the hospital until she arrived. Then
Jan asked permission to ring Constable Carter as he, too,
would be worried because she had not returned, and by
the time that the Head and Constable Carter arrived,
both looking very worried indeed, Judy and Jan had
heard the wonderful news that Pam and Janita had both
regained consciousness.
After the explanations they all went in to see the two
girls. Both were still very white, but the sister assured
Miss Walton that they were now quite all right to go
back to school.
" They had only fainted, but they should go to bed as
soon as they get home.”
" All’s well that ends well then,” remarked Constable
Carter with a smile at Pam. "You are a very naughty
child, Pamela, to disregard my advice about searching


for Janita, but you have found her. That, and the fact
that you have been severely punished by your experience
mitigates all your naughtiness.”
Then, after seeing the Head and her girls safely into
their car he and Jan went home.
The Head, intent upon driving her car, spoke little on
the way back to St. Cath’s and Cathie-Janita, worn out
with her experiences, lapsed into a deep sleep.
Judy looked at Pam almost worshippingly.
" I’ve never been more proud in my life, Pam! she
exclaimed.
"Proud?” Pam raised her brows and then laughed.
" Oh! Because we found Janita after all —?”
" No.” Judy shook her head hard. " No, that’s not the
reason for my pride! I’m proud, Pam, to be the friend of
such a brave person as yourself! Never have I seen any-
one do such a brave thing — ”
" Aw, rats! ” Pam flushed uncomfortably and dug into
the zipp pocket of her blazer for a handkerchief. She
fumbled with the zipp a. little because of her bandaged
hands, and as she brought out her handkerchief, she
gave a cry of surprise. For there, dangling from the scrap
of linen, was none other than the locket Jan had shown
them that afternoon!
" Goodness! ” Judy stared. " You must have put it in
your pocket without thinking when Jan was telling us
her story — ”
" What are you two getting excited about?” Miss
Walton’s voice called back from the front of the car.
Cathie-Janita, beside her, slept on.
So on the way home, Pam and Judy between them, told
the Head Jan’s story.


" She showed me this locket. It is a photo of an old lady
and Jan’s only possession,” explained Pam. " I must
have slipped it into my pocket, without thinking. We
were telling Jan about Cathie-Janita, and we were a
bit excited — ”
Miss Walton stretched out her free hand.
" Perhaps you had better give it to me. I’ll post it back
to Jan tomorrow.”
Pam surrendered the locket thankfully.
" It will be safer with you, Miss Walton. I should hate
to lose Jan’s only possession.”
A surprise awaited the girls when they arrived back at
school, for it transpired that Constable Carter had, after
he left the hospital, telephoned the detectives who were
engaged on investigating Cathie-Janita’s disappearance.
They, in turn, had got in touch with Captain Harvey
and Mr. and Mrs. Du Bois, telling them the news that
Cathie-Janita had been found.
So quite a little gathering awaited them when they got
to St. Cath’s. Captain Harvey and Mrs. Du Bois gave a
sigh of relief at sight of Cathie-Janita, but they did not
wake her. She and Pam were bundled straight off to the
sick-room to sleep off the effects of their adventure.
Miss Walton signed Judy, however, to follow the
visitors to her study and there, Judy told them the whole
story of Pam’s brave action.
" I got in at the tail end,” she said. " But I saw the
bravest part and the motorist who followed the cab told
me the rest. He thinks Pam ought to have a medal for
what she did! He said she was a brave lassie! ”
" She was certainly that ” Captain Harvey’s voice
was full of emotion, and Mrs. Du Bois was crying softly.


" She was certainly that— ” Then suddenly he sat for-
ward abruptly, staring at an object on Miss Walton’s
desk.
" Miss Walton—pardon me —but —but —where —just
where —did you get that locket? ”
Miss Walton looked at him in surprise.
"It belongs to Constable Carter’s daughter —or rather,
I should say—his adopted daughter! ” she amended
quickly. She passed it to Captain Harvey. " Would you
like to see it ? It is a photograph of an old lady —prob-
ably the child’s grandmother — ”
"It is the photograph of my own mother! Captain
Harvey broke in on her explanation. He rose from his
chair and looked quite wildly at the Head.
" I must see this child, Miss Walton! I am positive that
this is my own mother’s locket. If that is so — ”
Judy looked at him excitedly.
" Captain Harvey! You don’t think —that —that —Jan is
your own daughter? She has lost her father you know,
and her mother is dead and — ” Judy’s words tumbled
over themselves in her excitement.
"I think, Judy —” broke in Miss Walton, looking
almost as excited as her pupil, " I think you had better
tell Captain Harvey the story Jan told you.”
So Judy did. She told how Constable Carter had adopted
Jan when her mother died and how Jan felt sure that
her father was still alive.
Captain Harvey listened intently to every word, and
when Judy had finished he rose and faced the detectives
quietly.
" I suppose, now that I am cleared from the charge of
kidnapping Cathie Du Bois I am quite free? ”


" Yes, of course.” The detectives shook his hand
heartily, and Mr. Du Bois came forward with out-
stretched hand.
" I am sorry, Harvey, that my wife and myself were
inclined to misjudge you and —May God grant that this
child, Jan, is your rightful daughter! ”
Despite his obvious urgency to see Jan, Captain Harvey
found time to pause at the minister’s words. He gripped
Mr. Du Bois’ hand with gratitude and no little emotion.
" Whether I find my child tonight or not, sir, I will at
least find happiness in the thought of the Christian way
you found it in your heart to forgive me for the wilful
way I kept and held Cathie-Janita all these years.”
" I am a minister of God’s Church, Harvey! ” replied
Mr. Du Bois simply. " As such, I was only doing my
duty and observing God’s rules by practising forgive-
ness. Christ told us quite plainly that as we forgave, so
would He forgive us.”
"You have done more than forgive me, Du Bois. You
have given me the chance to start life afresh with a clear
conscience and a new Faith in God.”
” Then I am well rewarded,” smiled Mr. Du Bois hap-
pily, and looked even more happy when his wife came
forward shyly and somewhat timidly. She, too, took
Captain Harvey’s hand.
" We must share Cathie-Janita, Captain Harvey. She
shall have two fathers and one mother.”
" And, God willing, I will have two daughters! ” mur-
mured Captain Harvey as he set off to Constable Carter’s
home to see Jan.


CHAPTER SIXTEEN
CATHIE-] ANITA
Pam awoke next morning to find Janita Harvey, or
Cathie-Janita Du Bois as we must call her now, standing
bare-footed by her bed in the sick-room. She looked so
pale and ill that Pam sat up in alarm.
" Janita, ought you to be out of bed and standing on
that cold floor? ” she asked anxiously.
Cathie-Janita’s lips trembled as did her words when they
came.
" P-Pam! I —I —there’s something I want to tell you.”
Pam glanced at her watch, and wriggling over in her
bed, invited Cathie-Janita to climb in beside her.
" It’s only seven o’clock. Come in here and keep warm.”
Cathie-Janita, after a moment’s hesitation, did as she
was bid and snuggled down close to Pam.
" Pam, I have had such a nasty dream — ” she began
nervously.
Pam stroked her fair hair sympathetically with her own
bandaged hand. She felt a sudden overwhelming pity
for Cathie-Janita at that moment.
"You are over-wrought, old thing — ”
" I dreamt that you were dead,” went on Cathie-Janita
with a sob. " And Mr. Du Bois —that is my father —was
conducting the burial service and —and oh! Pam —you
can’t imagine how terrible I felt! There they were —
burying you, and I —l who had made your life here such
a misery—who had allowed you to bear all the blame
for that ' Mountain Eyrie ’ episode —I was left and —
what was worst of all —I felt that it was I who was re-
sponsible for your death! ”


Pam patted Cathie-Janita’s hand consolingly if a little
clumsily.
" There! There, old thing! It was only a dream. Here I
am as large as life and but for these awkward hands,
none the worse for wear! ”
" You saved my life, though,” replied Cathie-Janita
sombrely. " The sister at the hospital told me all about
it. It appears that it was about the bravest thing any
girl could do. You climbed on to the horse’s back
and — ”
" The sister had no right to worry you with all this! ”
protested Pam in embarrassment. ” Fancy worrying you
when you had only just become conscious.”
" I asked her. I made her tell me,” replied Cathie-Janita
soberly. " She told me to calm me, I think. But it didn’t
calm me— ”
" I should think not! ” snorted Pam indignantly. Sitting
up she looked into the other’s face, ” Look here, Cathie-
Janita! I did what I did, and if I saved your life, well, I
saved my own too, and I’m glad, for I think we are both
too young to die. But it is going to do neither of us any
good to dwell on the affair, and I vote we try to forget
there are such things as horse cabs and horses in
Adelaide! I shall never want to ride in one again. Of
that I’m certain. But, as I say, let’s forget it. What I
want to know is why on earth you ran away from
school and where you went and — ”
" I ran away because I was too much of a coward to face
expulsion,” said Cathie-Janita quietly.
" But who said you were to be expelled? ” asked Pam
abruptly.
" Well —the Head hinted at it,” said Cathie-Janita.


" Well, Helena is still here,” Pam replied brusquely.
” If they expelled you they would Helena, too. I don’t
believe the Head has any intention of doing it. After
all, she didn’t expel me — ”
" Well, that’s the reason I ran away,” went on Cathie-
Janita, looking brighter.
*' But where did you go? ” Pam wanted to know.
" I went to stay with one of the girls who used to be at
Miss Petty’s School. Eleanor is twx> years older than I
am. She left school last year and has a flat in Adelaide.
She agreed to let me stay with her until I could get a
permit to travel to Sydney. I had saved some money.
Father —that is—Captain Harvey —has always been very
generous where my allowance is concerned —and I had
ideas of going on the films.”
Pam looked at her a little scornfully.
" Really, Janita! You are an ass you know! Whatever
would you have done in a place like Sydney if they had
not wanted you on the films? ”
" I never thought of that,” admitted Cathie-Janita look-
ing rather foolish. "All I thought of was to get away
from here and the Du Bois’ and —yes, even Captain
Harvey, who has been so good to me.”
" He has been good to you then? ” asked Pam.
Cathie-Janita nodded, looking ashamed.
" He’s been wonderful, Pam. His only fault is that per-
haps he spoilt me. And I do appreciate him in my own
self-centred way —but —frankly, I’ve never felt any
really close bond with him.”
Perhaps, thought Pam to herself, that is the reason why
you have been so unmanageable. If you never loved any-
one very much you might become very selfish.


" How do you feel about having found your own mother
and father? ” she asked anxiously. " Do you think you
will learn to love Mr. and Mrs. Du Bois ? ”
Cathie-Janita hesitated.
"It sounds disloyal to —Captain Harvey —I know. But
as a matter of fact, Pam —I think I could feel something
like adoration for Mr. Du Bois —Father, I mean. And
as for —for mother —well she is sweet and will kill me
with love I should think.”
'' If that is how you feel about them, what an idiot you
were to think of running away! ” exclaimed Pam.
" Well —I can’t be sure about them —I hardly know
them,” said Cathie-Janita cautiously. " And —well, Pam
—I do feel disloyal to Captain Harvey! ”
Pam nodded understanding!)'.
” I do feel sony T for the Captain. He has cherished you
so, Cathie-Janita. How I wish he could find his own
little lost daughter to recompense him for the loss of
yourself.”
" I will see him often,” promised Cathie-Janita. ” My
parents won’t object to that.”
” But,” said Pam suddenly, eyeing the sick-room door.
" Matron will, object to you being in my bed in a minute,
for if I’m not mistaken here she comes —! ”
Matron came bustling in and was indeed shocked to
see Cathie-Janita in Pam’s bed. She scolded them
soundly.
” I was trying to thank Pam for saving my life, matron,”
defended Cathie-Janita.
" Ah, yes! ” Matron turned a smiling, rosy face to Pam.
I have heard all about it, and you are indeed a brave


girl. The school is proud of you. But you must both have
a wash and some breakfast now and then another sleep.
Then, when you wake up I will allow you some very
special visitors.”
** Who? ” asked the two girls in chorus.
"Wait and see! ” laughed matron tantalisingly. " If I
tell you now you’ll not go to sleep again. And sleep you
want —lots of it! ”


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
PAM PAYS HER DEBT
The two girls protested that they would never be able
to sleep again that morning, and clamoured to get up
after breakfast, but matron was adamant. Directly they
had finished their sumptuous breakfast of crisp corn-
flakes and beautifully browned light omelettes, she
lowered the blinds and forbade talking. Gradually, still
worn out with their experiences and thoughts, both Pam
and Cathie-Janita fell asleep.
When they awakened it was one o’clock, and matron
was standing there by their bedsides again with another
meal for them. They both felt very much refreshed, had
more colour in their cheeks and, as Pam put it, were
ready for hordes of visitors.
Well, it seemed very near to a horde of people who
about half-past two came into the sick-room.
First came Miss Walton, ushering in Mr. and Mrs. Du
Bois and their elder daughter Diana. They rushed
straight to Cathie-Janita’s bed and hugged her close
before turning to Pam and in tremulous, grateful tones
thanking her for saving and bringing back their newly-
found daughter.
No sooner had Pam got over this embarrassment when
the door opened again, and who should come in with a
skip and a jump (modified when she saw the stately
figure of her Head Mistress) than Judy Jarrad, upon
whose heels were none other than Captain Harvey
and —
"Jan!” cried Pam in amazement. "Where did you
spring from? ”


" Pam and Cathie-Janita — ” Captain Harvey put a hand
on Jan’s shoulder. " I want to introduce you to my own
daughter — ”
"Jan!” shrieked Pam again as Constable Carter’s
adopted girl came forward smiling.
” But —I don’t understand! Who is this girl? Why do
you introduce her as your daughter? ” Cathie-Janita
stared at Captain Harvey in bewilderment.
Captain Harvey bent to kiss, very tenderly, the girl who
all these years had taken Jan’s place. And then sitting
on the bed he very gently told her how he had recog-
nised the locket on Miss Walton’s desk the evening
before.
" The locket was of a shape and design that I could not
forget, for my mother gave it to me when she was dying.
When my wife left me, taking Jan with her, I was very
upset to find that she had taken two of my most
treasured possessions—my daughter and my mother’s
locket. When I saw this locket on Miss Walton’s desk
you can imagine my amazement —and convictions! I was
convinced that as Pam had the locket from Jan —Jan
must be my daughter. I was right. Last night I went to
Constable Carter’s home and heard Jan’s story.’’
" If you look at us, Cathie-Janita, you must, too, be con-
vinced that we are father and daughter.”
"Why —yes!” Cathie-Janita looked from Jan to her
father. They were almost as alike as she herself was like
Mrs. Du Bois and Diana.
" But —Jan’s mother’s name was Mrs. Dean! ” objected
Pam at this juncture.


" My wife’s maiden name was Dean,” explained Cap-
tain Harvey. " She must have reassumed that name when
she left me.”
Pam looked at Jan’s smiling, happy face.
" Then, by telling your story you did find your father,
Jan!”
"Yes,” said Jan, looking up adoringly, if a little shyly,
into her father’s face. " Yes —I always felt that if I
prayed enough and told my story enough I would find
him — ”
” And now I am one daughter short! ” said a cheery
voice at the door, and there stood Constable Carter.
" Everyone has gained a daughter but me — ”
Captain Harvey held out his hand to the policeman,
smiling.
"You shall share her, Carter. Just as Mr. and Mrs. Du
Bois will let me share my Cathie-Janita! ”
“ But no one shall share my daughter! ” interrupted a
quiet voice.
" Daddy! ” Pam’s voice rang out with joy and she
stretched out her bandaged hands to Lieutenant Bryant.
He hugged her to him.
" My darling! Thank God you are safe! ”
" Then you know all about it? ” asked Pam in surprise.
" I’ve been with Miss Walton all the morning,” he re-
plied. " And I’ve heard so many stories about lost
daughters and kidnapped daughters and, my darling—
brave daughter —that I feel as though being torpedoed
in the Pacific is less exciting —! ”
" And that reminds me — ” Captain Harvey took Pam’s
hand .gently and looked into her eyes. " You once said


you could never repay me for what I was able to do for
your father, Pam — ”
" And I never can, Captain! ” Pam’s face was serious
once more.
" You have repaid the debt a hundred-fold, my dear,”
he returned. " When I asked you to look after Cathie-
Janita for me I had no idea it would mean you risking
your life for her, but you have done more than that. It
is due to you and your willingness to help me that I have
found Jan —my own Jan! ”
" So you think I have paid my debt? ” asked Pam with
shining eyes.
"More than paid it, my dear!” returned Captain
Harvey with a smile of deep gratitude.
THE END










