

PAMPHLET
EXPLANATORY OF THE PROPOSED
Rosstown Junction, Sea Beach,
AND
Melbourne Extension Railway.




* PAJVVPH LET
EXPLANATORY OF THE PROPOSED
iossiowN Junction, Sea Beach,
AND MELBOURNE EXTENSION RAILWAY.
ADDRESSED TO THE MUNICIPALITIES, COUNCILS,
AND INHABITANTS IN AND AROUND MELBOURNE.
Mr. MURRAY ROSS,
PR OPRIE TOR AND PR OMO TER,
“THE GRANGE,” ROSSTON.
Messrs. MALLESON, ENGLAND & STEWART,
SOLICITORS,
24 QUEEN STREET. MELBOURNE.
F(f/P7
Messrs. MUNTZ & BAGE,
ENGINEERS,
46 COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.
MELBOURNE:
Sands & McDougall, Printers, Collins Street West.
mdccclxxxiv.




PLAN
showing the Toutc ot tl\e
JRosstown Junction, Sea teach iJVlelbourne, Extension Railway?
ir s
BRIGHTON


♦
, ■ ' ■’ >■ ■
■ .( . J
' • * ,"V V ’


THE ROSSTOWN JUNCTION,
SEA BEACH, AND
MELBOURNE EXTENSION RAILWAY.
•r~ V
preliminaries required by the Standing Application to
Orders of the Legislature have been taken mentfor
for applying to Parliament, in the ensuing Session,
for an Act to authorise the construction of the
above-named Railway.
The Plan attached to this shows the route, not Plan, showing
only of the Rosstown Junction Railway (already posed^aii^ry 0 ’
made) but also of the proposed extension to St.
Kilda. When the extension is completed, a new
railway entrance into the city will be supplied, with
a maximum gradient of i in too for - half its distance, Gradient i in 100
viz., from Oakleigh to the Arthur’s Seat Road ; and
practically a level way from that point into Flinders for the
Street. The gradient by any other route from
Oakleigh into town is iin 50. The meaning of this
is, that an engine which will draw 7 carriages and
the van on a gradient of 1 in 50, will draw 21
carriages and the van on a gradient of 1 in 100.
A steep gradient multiplies trains. An easy gradient
is worked with fewer but longer trains, and thus


avoids the overcrowding which is so dangerous on
the railway entrances into a great city. The least
experienced will thus see, that if an engine on a i in
50 line earns per trip, that same engine on a
1 in 100 line will earn
The gradient from the Arthur’s Seat Road skirting
the sea beach into St. Kilda being nearly level,
would enable the engine to draw more carriages
on that part of the line. As there will be a very
large excursion traffic from town along the sea
beach portion as far as Elsternwick, this increased
earning power means the possibility of carrying
Pleasure traffic at the excursion or pleasure traffic at a very cheap
very cheap far es. rate _probably for a return second-class
ticket from Flinders Street; or when the Govern-
ment Railways from Alphington and the northern
suburbs are finished into town, then 6d. for a
second return ticket from any of the suburbs
to Elsternwick and back. This would of course
imply an interchange of traffic between the Go-
vernment and Mr. Murray Ross’ lines. At pre-
sent this sea beach pleasure traffic, along by the
bay to Elwood and Elsternwick, does not exist;
Giving communi- in other words, the three miles of sea beach from,
miles of sea hree say, the Beaconsfield Hotel, to and beyond the
beach now jfj butts and Elsternwick, is almost sealed
almost macces- ,
sibie to the dis- afrainst t h e denizens of West Melbourne, Footscray,
tricts in and £>
around Mel- Flemington, Hotham, North Melbourne, bitzroy,
Carlton, Brunswick, Alphington, Clifton Hill, Heidel-
berg, Collingwood, Richmond, Melbourne proper,


Prahran, South Yarra, Caulfield, Moorabbin, Oak-
leigh, Mulgrave, Nunawadding, Hawthorn, Kew, in
fact all round the city of Melbourne.
The present St. Kilda station is “so near and yet Present St. Kiida
so far” from the stretch of beach referred to, that on from the beach.
a hot day the masses are deterred from a visit to the
seaside; even those who are well off consider
before they pay 6d. for a return ticket from Town,
is. for a cab down to the Esplanade, is. for a
cab back (or even 3d. there, and 3d. return by
the bus), and possibly 6d. for a dip. Probably
few things could contribute so much towards the
health of a great city in a hot climate as cheap
and frequent access to the invigorating and
cheerful breezes of the sea shore, and “ a dip in the
briny,” but it must be without fatigiLe. The sea The sea beach, the
. . sea and the sea
beach, with the waters that lave it, and the sea breezes, belong
i 1 r to every inhabi-
breezes, are the property of every resident in Mel- tant in and
, . . . , , 1,, around Mel-
bourne and its extensive suburbs, and they have a bourne, and are
right to enjoy them, and the popular participation in properfyof 151^
, 1 r mi • 1 those who live
these great blessings of nature will increase the close to them,
national health and happiness—local desires to keep
them exclusively to the few who live near them,
notwithstanding.
The populations of the places mentioned, after a The populations
r r > of the Munici-
hot day of toil, yearn for the cool and open air of the paiities, &c., in
, , ‘ and around Mel-
sea beach, but the cost and time of the present bourne yearn for
means of communication place them out of their dip after a hot
reach. Were the Alphington, and the other lines day ’


from the north of the city, brought in to Flinders
Street to connect with the St. Kilda rails, unin-
terrupted railway communication by means of
Murray Ross Mr. Murray Ross’ extension would be provided
appeals to these between all the suburbs and the sea beach ; and
to U hdp P him ie to Mr. Ross urgently appeals to the Municipalities and
Pariiamen? 11 m Councils of the places named above to aid him, by
every means in their power, to induce Parliament to
pass the Bill.
How theAlphing- The connection referred to might be effected
be* 1 brought 1 to by taking a line out to meet the Alphington
line at its present point of stoppage, thus :
TeTbeach. the Run off from the rails at the east of Spring
Street, cross the Richmond Road into the Treasury
Gardens, go between the new and old Treasury
Buildings under the roadway, on through a cutting
to St. Peter’s Schools, through the Gardens to the
north of Parliament Houses, under Nicholson Street,
across to the Old Model Schools, just between the
railings and the buildings, on still under the road
to the Carlton Gardens, keeping inside the railings
by a deep cutting down to Carlton Street, and along
at the back of the houses which front the west side
of Nicholson Street, across the Reilly Street drain,
and on to join the incompleted Alphington Railway.
The slopes, whether of cuttings or embankments,
can be made things of beauty by running Yan Yean
pipes along the top to irrigate the grass plats, flower
beds, and hanging lawns with which they could be
covered, and with the exception of the 25 feet width


required for the rails, the cuttings and embankments
would be just as much public pleasure grounds as
ever they were, with the difference that the thousands
who travelled by the railway would delightedly see
their beauties and smell their fragrance, who other-
wise would rarely if ever enjoy them. The vehicular
traffic on the roads would be as uninterrupted as
now; the Treasury, Public Offices, Parliament
Houses, and Exhibition Buildings, would be accom-
modated, and an amount of traffic be contributed that
would go far to make the line most remunerative.
From the north end of Carlton Gardens to the
Flinders Street Railway not an inch of land would
have to be bought, the whole route being Crown
Lands. It would invade nothing already beautiful,
but to make it more beautiful, and it would satisfy
public convenience.
To the inhabitants of St. Kilda Mr. Murray
Ross’ proposed extension railway will be of great
benefit. For the past six months he has been in Murray Ross
. . -11 . proposes to fill
negotiation with the Lands Department for filling up the Eiwood
up the 115 acres known as the Eiwood Swamp, by means of his
the St. Kilda abattoirs—a pestilential fever bed, at for
times almost wholly covered by the tide and drainage poses, I "andafter
water, and always more or less under water. At f e ave g the state
present it is worse than useless, and, for all practical
purposes, valueless. If filled up and a railway
station placed there, it would sell for a sum which,
after deducting the cost paid to Mr. Murray Ross
for filling it up, would leave the State at least


£70,000 to the good. In addition to this the
Crown still retains some 3,000 feet of building
frontages, being the old Elsternwick rifle range, on
which Mr. Ross purposes placing a station, which
would then sell for ,£9,000 more than now. Alto-
gether the State, through the instrumentality of Mr.
Murray Ross’ railway extension, would make a total
profit of some £BO,OOO.
Mr. Murray Ross first submitted a plan prepared
by Mr. Muntz, C.E., for the reclamation of the
Elwood Swamp, showing a lake of some twenty
acres, the soil from excavating which, would partially
The idea of a lake supply filling material. But the objection was taken
Swamp 8 Up the by the Lands Department that the lake would un-
abandoned. avo idably receive much of the drainage water of the
higher surrounding lands, and so make it noxious.
Also, that if the filling up and the new railway
made the land worth £1,500 an acre, the land for
the lake would cost £30,000, a sum that would go
far towards the cost of filling up the whole swamp.
How Murray The stations in Darkly Street, and at the south
wi°iitmp!o W ve y end of the Esplanade, would give accommodation
greatly needed to the residents in those parts of
St. Kilda. There would also be a station at the
north end of the Esplanade, at the bottom of Fitzroy
Street. The line would run along the present slope
between the upper and lower Esplanades, communi-
cation between which, would be by broad footbridges
over the railway. That part of the slope which


would be left between the upper Esplanade and the
retaining wall, is to be converted into green lawn,
carefully kept and irrigated from a Yan Yean pipe
along the top. Everything will be done to increase
the attractiveness of the Esplanade.
Messrs. Muntz and Bage, engineers to the line, Messrs. Muntz &
° _ Bage s proposal
suggest that the lower Esplanade shall be carried for making a
& , i T r i i i i r long beautiful
from the Beaconsfield Hotel direct along the lore- sea drive along
shore to the pier on the west of the railway, and
similarly at the south end of the Esplanade towards
El wood, and Mr. Murray Ross has sanctioned their
including in the estimates the cost of taking down
and re-erecting the sea-wall near Captain Kenny’s
baths, the filling up of the low land, and the
diversion and reconstruction of the road, —thus
making a continuous and beautiful sea drive.
The station at the old rifle range to the south of a station at the
old rifle range
Elsternwick Park will give accommodation to the at Eistemwick
° Park.
numerous residents in that locality.
The extension line, to be continued from the Proposed exten-
, , „ r • t -ii j sionto gounder
existing Rosstown Junction line, will pass under a the Brighton
bridge to be erected on the Brighton line. At this
Stations there.
point, if satisfactory arrangements can be concluded,
and the Commissioners concur, stations may be
placed, so that passengers from either line may
trans-ship.
Mr. Ross has reserved 4 y 2 acres at the inter-
section of the Rosstown Junction with the Frankston


a loop line to line to enable him to make a loop junction with the
connect the , .. . .
existing Ross- latter line, so that trams from r hnders Street, via
with the Franks-
St. Kilda, may pass right on to the Frankston line,
a facility which will be of the greatest public con-
venience when the Frankston Cemetery is in
operation.
Outer circle line When the Outer Circle Railway, also Mr. Murray
and proposed f ...
line circumyai- Ross extension line, and a line branching off from
lating the city.
near Kenny’s baths along the shore to Port Mel-
bourne, are made, Melbourne will be circumvallated,
or girdled by a railway circle.
This railway win The Rosstown Junction, Sea Beach, and Mel-
pay well. .... . .
bourne Extension Railway, will pay well, and it is a
line very much needed indeed.
Grave objection to There is a grave objection to no railways being
no railways ,
being made made unless made by the Government. It is
Government, destructive of self-help and national independence of
character. Let those make railways who wish. If
the lines fail, the makers have to find the money and
bear the loss, but the public are supplied with the
additional means of communication. If they succeed,
then the Government will buy, but not until the lines
are worth more than has to be paid for them. Thus
the gain on allowing private lines to be made seems
to be all on the side of the Government.
The principle of The principle that the Government shall own the
owning all the railway system will not be interfered with if the Acts
railways can be . . . . ... . , .
preserved. authorising private lines contain a clause similar to


that in “ The Rosstown JtLnction Act" No. 614,
empowering the Government to purchase the lines at
any time on payment of a sum not exceeding the sum
stated for their purchase in the Act.
As Parliament in a recent session refused its
sanction to the Government making the line to
Elwood, via St. Kilda, on the ground of expense,
Mr. Murray Ross entertains no doubt of Parliament
authorising the supply of a great public want by
private enterprise.
Moreover, Mr. Ross has no alternative but to go Murray Ross can
1 . . T T 1 . . . not g°' n g
to Parliament again. He has made his Rosstown to Parliament
Junction Railway, under the authority of the Act of powers.
Parliament No. 614, from Oakleigh to Elsternwick.
During the whole time of its construction he was in
constant communication with the authorities at the
Railway Department, who gave him permission to
enter on the Frankston line and remove the earth
down to his levels, which he did, in order to prepare
for crossing that line on the level. A quantity of
his material, sleepers and rails, were taken down the
Frankston line, and unloaded at this crossing, and
loaded on to Mr. Ross’ trollies for laying his line to
the east and west of the Frankston line. Mr.
Ross had frequent interviews with the Engineer-in-
Chief, whose authorisation was required by the Act
No. 614, and he saw no difficulty whatever in
crossing on the level. He said it was a thing
constantly done in England. On the nth of


Railway Depart-
ment have
stopped the
Rosstown
Junction line
crossing the
Frankston line
on the level.
Railway Depart-
ment propose
that the Ross-
town Junction
line shall go
under the
Frankston
line.
November, 1883, the department put in the junc-
tions between the Rosstown Junction line with
the Gippsland line at Oakleigh, and at Elstern-
wick with the Brighton line, so as to comply
with the provisions of “ The Rosstow?i Junction
Act,” No. 614, and the very next day, the 12th
November, wrote a letter to Messrs. Malleson,
England & Stewart, the solicitors for the Rosstown
Junction Line, interdicting Mr. Ross crossing the
Franston Line on the level. On the 14th November,
Mr. Ross completed the junction from end to end,
with the exception of the 5 feet j inches stopped in the
middle by the Railway Department. Not one word
had been said by the Railway authorities to Mr. Ross
in his frequent interviews, of such an intention. No
redress was offered, and after spending many
thousands of pounds in making his railway, it was
thus rendered useless, and it has been lying utterly
unproductive ever since, to Mr. Ross’ great loss in
more serious ways than can be mentioned here.
His undertaking has been kept at a standstill, for it
would have been folly to have spent more money
on work that might have to be undone. It was
intimated to him that he would be permitted to take
his line under the Frankston line by raising that line,
putting in a bridge, and lowering his own line by
cutting it down about 10 feet at his own cost, some
£ 2,500. Mr. Ross did not see it, as his own Act
passed long before that authorising the construction
of the Frankston line, gave him power to go from


Elsternwick to Oakleigh. His solicitors were per-
fectly clear that Mr. Ross had an inalienable right
of easement across the Frankston line. In view of
the danger to the public, Mr. Ross was restrained
from carrying out his legal right of taking his rails
across those of the Frankston line. But he trusts
hopefully that the sense of justice which is innate
in every British mind will influence Parliament in
its wisdom so to legislate, that while they preserve
the public safety, they may also protect legal rights.
The advantages of the Rosstown Junction, Sea
Beach, and Melbourne Extension Railway, may be
summarised as follows :
i. It gives the much-needed railway facilities to
that extensive district embracing South
St. Kilda and Elwood.
2. It places the sea beach between South Mel-
bourne and Elwood within easy reach and
direct communication, not only of Mel-
bourne, Fitzroy, Collingwood, Hotham,
West Melbourne, and generally the
northern suburbs, but also Caulfield, Oak-
leigh, Mulgrave, and Dandenong.
3. It gives a new entrance into the city at the
easiest gradient and by a short route, and
relieves the ever- increasing traffic on the
already gorged railway road between Rich-
mond and Melbourne.


4- Its
5- Its
construction includes the filling up and
utilisation of the Elwood swamp, which is
at present not only valueless but harmful
to health.
construction will be profitable to the
inhabitants of the district through which it
passes, beneficial to all the citizens of
Melbourne and its suburbs, profitable to
the promoter, and directly profitable to
the Colony of Victoria in the one
aspect alone of making available to
the Government a profit of £Bo,ooo.




ZTa^
muo
pis P 7
Kl £42^




