

Cavell House
Telephone U1057
PROSPECT ROAD,
SUMMER HILL,
SYDNEY.


Cavell House from
the Garden


CAVELL HOUSE
HE Home for Australian Army Nurses is now open
and is available to all Trained Nurses of Australia,
but Military Nurses have the first call, and are to
consider themselves the guests of the Edith CaVell Memorial
Association, no charge of any being made.
It is but a small return for those who have done
so much for us by nursing our fighting men.
Trained Nurses other than Army Nurses, desirous
of rest and change, can by arrangement be accommodated
so long as there is space, and they will be heartily Welcomed.
In order to avoid disappointment, it is asked that
those nurses who wish to stay at CaVell House will make
application as early as possible, either by letter or telegram,
or, if convenient, by telephone to the Matron.


One of the Bedrooms
A Sitting Room,
Cavell House


JOHN ANDREW &CO.
PRINT, o SYDNEY.


Edith Cavell House.
A S we all know, many movements have
been started in different parts of the
world to immortalise the memory of Nurse
Edith Cavell, and here, in Sydney, it was
suggested that a statue should be erected, so
that the present generation and the coming
generations, seeing it, would remember how
courageously this brave war nurse gave up
her life. Subsequently, while speaking at a
public meeting, Lady Cullen said she thought
if a Home for War Nurses could be estab-
lished, it might be a more fitting memorial
to Edith Cavell, and benefit her sisterhood
more than a statue would. Mr. and Mrs. W.
E. Shaw, of “Penlee,” Prospect-road, Sum-
mer Hill, agreeing with Lady Cullen’s senti-
ments, offered their home with its beautiful
grounds as a Rest Home for Returned War
Nurses, and secondly, as a Holiday House
for other nurses. This generous gift was ac-
cepted by the committee of the Edith Cavell
Memorial Association, and the movement,
once started, has gained ground wonderfully.
The Red Cross executive communicated with
all the Red Cross Branches, and asked their
help to raise a sufficient sum —£15,000 —to
equip and endow “Penlee”; so that, having
once raised that sum, there would not be any
need to appeal to the public for further
help. Generous responses have been coming
in from the Branches of the Red Cross, from
the Public Schools, from the municipalities
and shires, and large donations from private
individuals, for the object of recognising the
efforts of our brave nursing Sisters has
“caught fire” in the hearts of all those who
understand what noble work they are doing,
and that the lives of our husbands, sons, and
brothers, when wounded, depend upon the
war nurses. At “Penlee,” or Edith Cavell
House,” as it will be called, the war nurses
will remain as long as they wish, without
paying anything—we all think it is the least
we can do for them- Other nurses, privately
nursing, or from Hospitals, requiring a holi-
day, will have to pay a small charge, so as to
make them feel independent. Edith Cavell
House is not to be a charitable institution in
any way. It is a beautifully furnished
home, where our nurses will receive every
comfort after the strenuous time they have
gone through at the front.


“Faithful unto death"
Edith Cavell,
Britain’s Martyr Nurse.


TO EDITH CAVELL.
EXECITED AT BRUSSELS, PCTOBER 12TH, 1916.
" I am happy to die for my country ."
You did not fear to die ; you were bo stranger
To Death in varied guise,
In what you dared and did, you faced the danger
With calm and open eyes.
You sought to serve your country, and in serving
You did not grudge the price,
Nor let the sense of injury, unnerving,
Shadow the sacrifice.
No hatred of the enemies who killed you
Disturbed your steadfast soul.
The love of Christ your Dord possessed and filled you
With peace that maketh whole.
God's love makes love oj country nobler y stronger ,
Such was the message clear
You left the Umpire you could serve no longer
As men count service here.
So still you help the fight, as still you call us
To tread, as you have trod,
The path of sacrifice, whatever .befall us,
la love, through man, to God.
M. PORTER.


“Edith Cavell House.”
A Gift of Gratitude
To the Brave Nurses of Australia.
THIS is a brief, but earnest, APPEAL
To the Men and Women of the Mother
State of Australia we Appeal for a Gift in Cash,
no matter how small, as a token of gratitude to
Australia s Army Nurses, who have proved them-
selves worthy sisters of the Anzacs. They ask for
no reward, these brave Australian women, for their
noble work the thanks of our wounded and sick
soldiers is reward enough for them, and that they
have in full but at least we can do something to
help them to recover their health and strength


when they return to the country which they have
served so well.
So it is proposed to provide a Rest House for
them and a Fund from which grants may be made
in necessitous cases. This House will be named
“ Edith Cavell House,” in memory of the brave
British Nurse who gave her life for her country in
Brussels on October I 2th, 1915, a victim of Prussian
savagery. She lived a noble life, and died a noble
death. In the words of the Chaplain who was with
her at the last—“ She professed her Christian faith
and that she was glad to die for her country.
She died like a heroine.”
Australia has furnished many fine examples of
patriotism during the Great War, and one of the
finest instances of private generosity has been the
gift of “ Penlee,” the beautiful home of Mr. and Mrs.
W. E. Shaw, of Summer Hill, Sydney, to the
Edith Cavell Memorial Association, to be equipped
as a Rest House for our Nurses. The mother of
Nurse Cavell writes from Norwich: “No Memorial
to my dear child could be so appropriate. It was


always her desire from early childhood to render
help and service to those who needed it.
There is only one thing that counts in
life, and that is —SERVICE. There are many
ways in which we can serve our country; and here is
one way. Adequately to equip and endow “ Edith
Cavell House” “for the benefit of Army and
other trained nurses requiring recuperation and rest,
as the Constitution of the Association provides
means the raising of not less than £15,000.
On the roll of Life Members in this House will
be inscribed the names of all donors of £lO and
over. We ask you to become a Life Member
of the Association. We ask you to make your
daughter a Life Member who will continue to take
an active interest in the welfare of our Nurses. For
this is, above all, a Women s Movement.
If you cannot become a Life Member, will you
help us as far as you are able? In Victoria the sum
of £B,OOO has already been raised as a Fund for
the benefit of the Nurses of that State. We do not


believe that the people of New South Wales will
be found wanting.
“ Edith Cavell House/' will be at once a worthy
memorial to Britain’s heroine and a splendid tribute
to the heroic, self-sacrificing work performed by our
own Nurses —a work of which our Soldiers are
never tired of telling.
For all of us, men and women alike, there is
some useful work to do. Is not this a useful work
well worth the doing? If all who can will help,
it will be done. Let us take it up and make it a
work of gratitude and love. Onmia vincit amor .
On behalf of the Committee,
LADY CULLEN, President.
B. F. CARTER \
H. A. HOLDSHIP - Hon. Secretaries.
EILEEN TEECE )
J. RUSSELL FRENCH \
H. H. MASSIE - Hon. Treasurers.
EDWIN B. GILES 1
N.B. —Subscriptions should be sent to the last-named,
4 O’Connell Street, Sydney.


Under the Distinguished Patronage of
Their Excellencies The Governor General and
Lady Helen Munro-Ferguson.
Under the Distinguished Patronage and in the Presence of
Their Excellencies The State Governor and
Lady Davidson.
□ □
The Edith Cavell
Commemoration
Concert
Proceeds in aid of the
Edith Cavell Memorial Fund
(To Maintain a Rest Home for Army Nurses)
TOWN HALL. SYDNEY
Tuesday, May 21st, 1918
at 8 p. m.


The following Artists will kindly
assist with the Programme
THE CONSERVATORIUM STRING
ORCHESTRA
Conductor: M. HENRI VERBRUGGHEN.
THE MADRIGAL SOCIETY
Conductor: Mr. W. ARUNDEL ORCHARD.
Miss JENNY CULLEN and M. HENRI
VERBRUGGHEN (Violin Duets)
Madame VERBRUGGHEN (Soprano)
Mrs. ALEX H - GORDON (Contralto)
Mr. GEORGE WHITEHEAD (Baritone)
Mr. JOHN LEMMONE (Flute)
Mr. HOWARD HADLEY (Piano)
Mr. G. VERN BARNETT (Accompanist)
Reserved Seats, ss. and ss. (Free of Tax)
Plan will open at Paling’s on Monday, May 6th at 10 a.m. Seats may
be reserved by post on application to the Hon. Secretaries c/o Paling’s.
Unreserved Seats, 2s. (Free of Tax)
These may also be reserved at Paling’s on payment of a Booking
Fee of Sixpence.
Mrs. WATSON HOLDSHIP,
Mr. JAMES CHALMERS, Mr. W. FARMER WHYTE.
Mr. ARTHUR C. HULL, Mr. WM. JOHNSON,
Joint Hon. Treas. Joint Hon. Secs.
John Andrew & Co., print, Sydney


Row
Seat
GRAND
CONCERT
May 21st
Under the Distinguished Patronage of
Their Excellencies The Governor General and Lady Helen Munro-Ferguson.
Under the Distinguished Patronage and in the Presence of
Their Excellencies the State Governor and Lady Davidson.
TOWN HALL 1 7
Tuesday, May 21st at 8 p.m.
GRAND CONCERT
Proceeds in aid of
THE EDITH CAVELL MEMORIAL FUND
(To Maintain a Rest Home for Army Nurses)
The following Artists will kindly assist with the Programme :
The Conservatorium String Orchestra Mrs. Alex Gordon (Contralto)
Conductor —M. Henri Verbrugghcn Mr. George Whitehead(Baritone
The Madrigal Society Mr. John Lemmone (Flute)
Madame Verbrugghcn (Soprano) Mr. Howard Hadley (Piano)
Miss Jenny Cullen and M. Henri Verbrugghcn (Violin Duets)
Mr, Vern Barnett (Accompanist)
RGS6rVGd S@Et 5 j** an °P en at Paling’s on Monday, May 6th
Seats may be Reserved by Post on Application to the Hon. Secretaries c/o Paling’s
Mr. James
Mr. Arthur C. Hull j
Hon. Treas.
Mrs. Watson Holdship
Mr. Farmer Whyte
Mr. Wm. Johnson
Joint
Hon. Secs


Row
Seat
GRAND
CONCERT
May 21st
Under the Distinguished Patronage of
Their Excellencies The Governor General and Lady Helen Munro-Ferguson.
Under the Distinguished Patronage and in the Presence of
Their Excellencies the State Governor and Lady Davidson.
TOWN HALL 1 BIS
Tuesday, May 21st at 8 p.m.
GRAND CONCERT
Proceeds in aid of
THE EDITH CAVELL MEMORIAL FUND
(To Maintain a Rest Home for Army Nurses)
The following Artists will kindly assist with the Programme ;
The Conservatorium String Orchestra Mrs. Alex Gordon (Contralto)
Conductor—M. Henri Verbrugghen Mr. George Whiteh£ad(Baritone
The Madrigal Society Mr. John Lemmone (Flute)
Madame Verbrugghen (Soprano) Mr. Howard Hadley (Piano)
Miss Jenny Cullen and M. Henri Verbrugghen (Violin Duets)
Mr. Vern Barnett (Accompanist)
Reserved Se&t 5 /•* Plan wi - 1 open at Palings on M ° nda y> Ma y 6th
Seats may be Reserved by Post on Application to the Hon. Secretaries c/o Paling’i
Mr. James Chalmers! „ „ Mrs Watson Joint
Mn iPTimp r Wittt / Hon. Treas. Mr. Farmer Whyte fWnn
Mr. Arthur C. Hull f Mr. Wm. Johnson ) Hon ‘ becs


EDITH CAVELL MEMORIAL ASSOCIATION.
A.T.N.A. Office,
B.M.A, Biilding,
SO Elizabeth Street,
SIDNEY, 30/4/'lB.
Pear Sir,
Hie Garrard.tteo of this Association is holding a
Concert in the Town Hall in aid of the Endowment Fund for
Cavell House, on Tuesday, May 21st,
Hie programme, which has been arranged by
Madame Verbrugghen, is of a very high order. The prices
of the tickets are 5/-, 3/-, 2/-,
W© have been directed to ask you to be so good
as to take the enclosed tickets, and, if possible, to use
them, as the Committee is anxious to have a good attendance
as well as a financial success.
Should you be unable to take the tickets, may
w© ask you to oblige by returning them to this office not
later tbran May 12 th ?
We are,
Yours faithfully,
EIIZ3BN TEEOE.) Joint
) Hon. Secs.
ETHEL DAVEY. )
