

示畐




墙抓八仙會
Pang Tao
(Flat Peaches)
EIDHT FAIRIES FESTIVAL
a festival held on the 3d of the 3d lunar month in honor
of 〜e 〜 Goddess Hsi Wang mu


仿刊王本史記，封襌書，第
六，第十五買，紀老者，台
鬚節杖，係南極老人星>， 凡
民見之，裹宇以#，乃爲建
廟宇，俾得長生焉，
本節又云，尤角二宿，抵天
河神位時，(農歷三月或國
歷四月謂之壽星，每於季春
國歷西月見之 攸)是時也。
東風拂拂，^^遘勃，輿凡
動植，相繼而生，罔有興 傷
，是以足徵漫漫，冬刀一切
生機咸告潛伏而攸夂不息，
該壽星滿面春風，鬚頒台，
杖有節，蓋以示衆生之攸 A
無邊也
按，角爲天河衆星之一，而
於清明節候，約國歷四月五
六號午夜十二時廿四分見之
而亢則見於縠雨午夜十二 ~
十六分，約國歷四月廿或廿
一是也
老
壽
星
LAO SHOU HSING The Star of Longejity.
There are two stories in connection with Lao Shou Hsing, The 版仿刊
王本史記封襌書笫六秦十五版 Feng Kan Wang Pen Shih Cht Feng Shan Sq
Number 6 folio 15 states that the old gentlemen with white beard and gnsrled
staff represents the South Pole Old man Star, When people are able to get a
vision of this star tee whole world is at peace Temples have been built to this
stas in order to secnre long life and prosperity.
The same article about Lao Shoa Hsing says that when the two signs of
the C 角 Chiao K 亢 K，ang rerch thr position C 辰 Ch en in their
celestial journey (which is usually during the 3rd moon or in Apnle thev are
壽 壽 i Shou Hsing，or The Star of Longevity. The reason for tbis id
that these signs how up during the 3rd Moon (or nsuallv April) when the
Spring air brings forth renewed aetivity aineog al】ldnds of life， Ab the
Spring an advances ail living caeatures and plants groy in erder y sequence
and nsthing is hurnisd. Those facts show that altho ? lite lihs b€on borrnaiit
in some way® ouriiig l the long wintes tnontiis，in fuct life is never exfcivigiiishfd.
Teere fore, The star of Longevity is represeoted as an old man With White
beard carrying a gnarled staff He bas a smile on bis face as he is eveiule to
tell the world tlat life goes 〇〇 and on for eteroify,
Note. 角 (角 } Chiao sign of the Zodiac appears in the heavens at the
time of 明 清明 （Joing Ming Pare Brightness Festival, which usualy occurs
about THE STH or 6TH of April, at 12,24 raidaig bf.
K 亢 Kang sign of THE Z )piae may be seen at 12 ; l6:midoigbt during
K 榖雨 Ku Yu Grain Rain Festival，wmch usually occurs on or about the
20lbot 2ibt of April,




西王母姓楊名囘一名婉柃居
於陝廿西戎流沙之濒古之仙
人也昔有夏朝后羿皇帝 去t向
其請不死之藥被嫦娥竊金而
走奔月宮及周穆王好神仙 亦
謁見母於瑤池仙境之上母善
種蟠桃三千年一結子有人傳
說以四顆賜漢武帝味甚甘美
東方朔聞之卽往偷金漢朝東
方部後有獻短人至見朔曰此
子太不一艮三次偷母之桃商遂
避去
西王 母事實
HSI WHNG-MU (King's Mother of the West)
Hsi TTang-rmi is 致 致 ncient fairy princess. Her maiden surname is Yang
(楊） and her name ia ， (同 >， alias Wan 将 (婉将 ）• Sbe is sud to dwell
on the beach of Swift ）f 、流沙） in the Western 戎 (西戎 ），i to have
trooj)<s of fairies and genii under her command.
Once Emperor Hsie Hoi[i ( 夏后羿 }，of Hsia Dynasty (2205-1753 B，C，），
who was afamous aiclm asfced for elixir of immortality from Hsi Tf ang，nni，
bat Ch,ang E a beautlfullady, stole the elixir and fled wtth it to the
moon where she was changed into a frog.
Later ； 阉穆王； of Clmu Dynasty 1122 255 B，C，
waft very much interested in fairies； He paid call on Wang-mu at Yao Cb, iu
apooi in fairyland in the country of Hsi Wang mu.
Wang>mn is well-known in planting P,Bng flaa peaalies, that
bear fruits once every 3000 years. It is gaid that she bestoped four pieces
P，ang Tao en Emperor Han 漢 漢 of be Han Dynasty 306 C, 220
A ; D; Us taste was so sweet and deiiciots that Tuog Fang-sbuo; 朿方朔 a
minister of Wuti stoie and ate the peaches. Subes quentjy when the Easleru
Frontier Tribles presented dwarf to Wu ti. the dwarf, upon meeting Feng
shno iold the Empeor that Tucg was a bad egg having had three times stenol
wang mus peache.




相傳漢生於漢代，亦學仙，
山居，隱逸之列。面有鬚，
持魔扇，下附馬截以憑起死
囘生者也，一日四出，邂逅
少均，倚填哭夫，究以故，
答云，方侯墳乾，届時乃 復
嫁，漢因之立卽揮扇墓上，
而其夫忽復生云。
漢 鐘雜
HAN CHUNG LI is reputed to have lived in tbe Han dynasty He was
one of the S _her S for immorUlity and was a niomiUin recluse. H IS
characteristicß are a bearded face a D d a fan to which ia attached a tas B el of
horse hair. His fan is a i.agic fan with he c B b revive the dead. One
day in wanderining about he came upon a young woman weeping at the gruve
of her deceased husband. Upon inquiring the reason for her presence there
ehe seplied that she was waiting for the grave to dry, for as eoon asit became
dry she was to marry agiaD, Thereo l〇 a Han Chußg-li began to fan the gruve
and inst 费 tlie husb ard catne to life.
HAN CHUNG LI




mbbhhh
藍釆和，少艾也，提菓籃，
•^， • » • • •
鳴口笛，以別焉，至其性別
，衆議 # 。 ，或曰藍女也，
衣襤縷藍衫，繞以鳥木腰帶
，一足跣，夏衣夾，冬臥 雪
，吹氣成雲，耀若沸鼎之所
出，於是賨曲爲生，律以 三
尺之捧，辄以所得穿之成串
，歌時舞之，或散諸地。任
貧者拾之，一日成醉，人見
其羽化昇雲，而抛於下土者
，袍履、束帶牙鈴云。
藍
釆
和
LAN TSAI HO.
LAN TSAI HO. is alwayg represented as a youth bearing a basket of
fruits and playing a flate There has been much dispute as to the sex of thie
personage. Some state that Lan was a female. She wandered abroad in a
tatterd blue gown held by a black wooden belt, with one foot shoeless, weariog
in summer an undergarment of wadded material and in winter sleeping on
the snow, her breath rising in a brilliant cloud like steam from a boiling
cauldron, In this guise ahe earned her livelihood by singing in the streets.
keeping time with a wand three feet long. When given money she either
Btrung it on a cord and waved it to the liine of her song or scattered it on the
ground for the poor to pick up. One day she was fouad to become into-
r
xicated and while in that state disappeared on a cloud haviag thrown down
to earth her shoe, robe, belt and castanets. .




呂 見
，询未娶，其作閭山之行也
，遇火龍，龍受以魔劍，使
其任意居於天上，旋謁漢鐘
離，食許力助其伴，修依眞
道，後呂乃首受，試楔十事
，以示其能。旣成•遂獲超
人之力，治魔利器，俾能 周
遊國中，斬龍伏魔而使世，
i得脫 四百年 来之蘖 ，一日
#成油商，使凡沽油之不忘
求增量者，享長生焉。期年
，紙見 名l :s，爲不忘索者而
特訪之於其寓，又以金米一
撮。抛諸其中庭之井，統而
井水遂化爲酒，而婦因以 致
富焉，呂精劍術，佩魔刀，
執飛舞(劍名 徵)或掃雲(劍
名)狀類馬尾，蓋»道家飛
箜行雲之靠徵
洞
賨
LU TONG-PIN was five feet two inches tall and at twenty still UDmarried,
At this time be mede a journey te Lu Sbao. where be met tlje ißre dragon who
presented bim with a ma〇：ic sword which enabled him at will to hide himselt
in the heavens. lie met Han Chang-li and pro ised to do all he could to aid
in the work of converting his fellow creatures to the true octrine In order to
become worthy he was first exposed to a series of en tbmptations. These
being successfully overcome he was invested wits supernatural powers and
magic weapons, witli which be traversed empire, slaying dagoes and
ridding the earth of divers kinds of evils, duriug a period upwards of four
hundred years. One tiaie be was going about iu the guise of aD oil seller，
intending to immortralize all who did cot ask for addifional weight to the
qoahtity of oil purchased. During a whole year he met only one old
lady who alone did not ask for more than was bar. The So he went to her
bouse ami seeing a well in the courtyard threw a few grains of riee into it
%
The water miracnlously turned to wine form the sale of which the old ludy
amassed great wealth. He was skillful in fencing and is always repre ented
with his magicsabre. In one hand he bolds a u Hy whish 5? or <4 clond sweeper ?,
in the form of a horse ? s tail. This is the Taostisymbol of being able to fly
through the air ahd walk upon the clouds of heaven.
LU TONG-PIN




何，仙女也，執神蓮，亦曰
露心花，或#壽桃，生時，
有髮六根，長於頂，傳聞其
髮只此而已，然繪事，乃以
全髮表之，擇居珠母山，夢
見一仙，受命赴山，探石，
搗而金之俾獲，機智輿長生
，女如命行之，采矢貞操，
是以有主之日，遨游諸峯，
夜歸，乃以山菓奉母，旣而
食覺，生母須金，因之名揚
帝后，遂承招見，中道，忽
化爲仙云。
何
仙
姑
Ho HSIEN KU.
Ho HSIBN KU, An immortal represented as a maiden holding in her
hand a magic loins blosom, the flower of open heartedness or peach of
immortality At her birth six bairs were found gowirg on the crown of her
head and it is said that she never had any more, tlie pic ureg represeud her
with a full head of hair. She elected to live on "mother of pearl J? mountain.
In a dream she sew a Bpirit who ordered ber to powder and eat one of these
pearl stones from the n]om】ain by doing which she could acquire both agility
and immortality. She complied with this icjunctioD and also vowed herself
to a life of virginity. Her days were thenceforth passed in floating from peak
to peak bringing at night to her mother the fruits she collected on the
mountain. She gradually fonod thlt she had on need to eat in order to live.
Her fame having reached the ears of the empress. She was invited to court
but while journeying thither, suddenly disappeared i ron] mortal view and
became an 《 《




漢湘子，依叔而求學，以應
埸試，叔力拒魔術，但漢年
青，匪特方命宠學，且轉成
呂洞賓之徒-欲不用縠而釀
上曰酒，及不蕊之花，其乖 t
r '
il !.
然律也，叔方滋疑竇，漢遂
存彈九塊土於盆下，啓之忽
見好花雙開，葉有詩二行，
* .
書双金，行各七字，故其特
徵，爲捧滿貯壽桃之藍形葫
蘆，或捧花球云
漢
湘
子
HAN HSIANG TZU
HAN HSIANG TZU was entrusted to his rnicie to be educated and
prepared for public examinations. His uncle was a strenuous opponent of all
秦
r
forms of magic. Contrary to The wishes of his uncle, The yuth did not study
for The public examiaati oqs but instead became a convert of Ln Tncg Pin
He wished <;〇 be able to produce good wine without The use of any grain and
also to be able to cause flowers to bloom instantaneouslj. When The uncle
, . ? '
expressed doubt as to his being able to defy the laws of Mature. Han Hsiang
. . . r . ■ •
-■蜷
put a little earth under a basin and upon liftiog it disclosed two flowers on
the leaves of which were written in gold characters a poem, two lines of
• V
seven characters each The characteristic of Han Hsiang is a gourd shaped
»
basket full of The peaches of immortality and held in The two hands. Some-
times he is also represented holdiog a boquet of flowers.




曹國曰男，仁宗皇后之弟也，
性謹慈，端正，有务放» ，
勸其歸正甚力，語之曰， 「
刑律你可姚/，惟天網無形而
常昭，不可避也 相/II出金
以濟貧，入山歸隱，鐘雛偕
呂洞賓辄造訪之，相 * 交談
形而上事，曹曰，(我方學
道)，鐘呂詰之日， ：
何道耶，何在耶。)曹乃指
天以對，伊等又曰。天何在
，曹乃示以之心，二客莞葡
而告曰： 領(心卽天，天卽道
，而爾，已領 。
，)尋授以求全之方，俾居
完人之列，越數日，如所願
，得參八仙中，#其他七子
，居上空八洞，極欲使曹列
入第八之選，以其性近乎讪
也，故其案徵，落♦宦袍，
戴峨冠，右手執板，以和 宫
階，及其朝覲之特權云。
曹
男
TSAO KUO CHIU
TSAO KUO CHIU was a younger brother of the Empress Jen Tsnng.
He was a man of exemplary chiraeter who attempted to persuade his dissolute
brother to lead a good life He said to his hother, U %pu may escape the penatiy
of the law, bat yon eaa never elude the net of heaveo which is invisible but
always He gave all his money to the poor and retteated to the
mouQtaios where he lived as a recloe. He vras visiied by Chiicg Li and Lii
Tang Pin with whom he conversed about spiritual matters. He said, “I am
engaged ia stndjitag the Way. ?? u Waat Way aod where is they asked.
He pointed to the sky is the sky ?, they went on. He pointed to his
heart The two visitors smiled and said； The heart is the and the sky is
the Way, you understand the origin of things. Then they gave him a recipe
for pe fection to euobe him to take his place am )〇g the perfect ones. In a
lew deys he reached this (3〇ndit〇n； He blcnme one of the eight immortals
becauae fae other sevea who occupied the eight grottoes in upper spheres
wished to see the eighth inhabite aad nominated him because his disposition
resembled that of a genie. His characteristies are that he is dressed in of
ticial robes, wears an official hat； aad carries in his right iiaud a tablet
signifying his rank and his right te imperial audience.




張國老，老人之案徵也，先
爲隱者，帝王 毛
晋弗應，嗣双武后促之屢，
遂允雜居，但抵闕，反请 擊
，軀體双腐，爲蟲所咀，雖
然瞬又復生，見其健在山間
，乘会驢，日行數千里，程
畢，置驢於囊，而#摺之若
紙焉。復用時，乃嘖水於 所
襄，而使其畜復若原形云。
善行巫術，怪異百出，常乘
台驢，時面首，或面尾，教
凰毛 羽，其
款待帝王也，示以魔術，時
而羽 。
以墜鳥以落花，不I而足，
如張國老之騎驢逛子，人多
蘧之終婚閨云。
張國老
CHANG KUO LAO.
CIiANG KX T 0 LAO, The type or emblem 〇8 an old man, x\t firs tl)e wsg
a hermit He wag frequently invited to court by the emperors bu the perßis-
nertly refued to go At last, pressed once more by Empress Wu he consented
to leave his re treat, but was etruek down at the gate of the tample His body
began to dacay and to be eaten by worms ； when lo be was seen again, alive
aad well, on the mountains. He rode on a white mule which carried him
thousands of miles in h day and which when the jourDey was finished, he
folded up like a sheet of paper and put away in his walle« When he again re-
quired its services he had only to spurt weter upon the packet frc oa bis
mouth aod the animal at once assnmed its proper shape. At all timeg be
performed wonderful feats of necroraancy. He is usually seen mcuoted on
V •
white mule, sometimes facing its head sometimes its tail. He carries a
phoenix feather or a peach of immortality. He entertaioed the emperors
with a variety of magical tricks, such as reDdering bimsalf invigibie. driDkißg
a cup of aconite, aod fellicg birds or tlofiowers by poiDting at them Apicture
of Chang Euo L&〇 sitting on a donkey and offering a desceudant to a newly
married couple is of itn tound in the nuptial chamber.




李鐵拐軀幹素健，儀容亦美，早
歲從事修行，居山中，四十有餘
稔立-在，廢寢忘餐，以輿
卷子李_同宗故，遂懇此大師，
下降，投以人生之秘，因之，老
子時見教以俗事，皆空之理，且
召見之於天家焉，方其輿老子作
西遊諸國之行也。乃以其凡體，
付諸其徒：曰蘭陵(譯音 输)者，
而输 .t曰七日未歸，可火葬之，
越六日，其徒適應召，歸省母疾
，默决以. H 氣 ，付如 •
_李如擬，於约期之未日，囘食
天路以視其軀之火化，其體之烏
有，乃於四顧間，瞥見跛丐之初
亡，爱寄幽魂#其遺體，另聶 鐵
拐一根，以彌其跛因而得名焉。
世傳齡拐多# ! 行，甦其徒以母也
，-7-一耐足，植以老春之身份，
懸弧，壁上，驴藥以治疾，入衣
寢葫中，畫復事叛售焉。尤愛，
交貧困，行慈善，名益昭著，|故
是仙也，咸以乞丐殘軀，教鐵拐
背葫蘆，爲特徵云。
• V
李
鐵
拐
LI TIEN-KUAI was originally a man of good stature and fine appear-
ance From eariy youth he devoted himself to an ascetic hfe, liviog in the
mountains for mor £ lhan forty ye»rs. He sat on a reed mat and of ten
forgat to ent or sleep. Being of-the sarae surname，as L 我 o I’zii, he besought
the Great Master to descent to thr to teach hi?n the: mysteries of
From time to time Lao Tzu appeared to Li and him the vanity of all
eartliiy things. Sornetimes Lao Tzu also sumrnoned Li to interviews in
heavenly abode, It was when Li was on one of there trips with Lao Tzu to the
countries of Hai-yu that he left; his material body in charge of of his disciple,
Lang Ling wifeh instructions to crembte it if he did not return within feeven
days. On the sixth day the disciple was culie home to visit bis sick mother
and decided to cremate Li, b perishable body. According to his original plan
Li returned on the seventh day from his celestial journey, only to find that
his body had beea cremated and that he had no abode. On looking ar:onndl
he found the body of a lame beggar who had just died, and Li took this for
his own doable or astral body. He procured an iron staff (tieh knai) to
support the defoinaed 士 士 hicli lie ead rdopKed as his o 汉 n and from this
obtaine i the name of LI T,ieh-kuai* He is accredited with many be evolent
deeds, »uc!i as bringing to life the body of the mother of the disciple who
cremated his origioal body. In the from of an old men be sold drugs iu the
uarket place which coni cure any kind of disease, and while there he hung a
gou don the wall of the lnto this gcard he retired at night, going out
the following day to attend to his Bales. He preterred to associate with the
poor and needy thes aeqairißg a reputation for benevolence. The character-
i»iic of this Immortal is the adl shaped boay of a beggar, who carries antiron
staff in his hand, and a goa don hisback.
LI TIEN-KUAI








