

UNCATALOGUED
PANORAMA
OF THE
DEFENCE OF PARIS
AGAINST
THE GERMAN ARMIES
PAINTED BY F. PHILIPPOTEAUX
EXPLANATION
PRECEDED
BY AN HISTORICAL NOTICE
WITH A MAP OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE SEINE
PARIS
IMPRIMERIE ADMINISTRATIVE DE PAUL DUPONT
41, RUE JEAN-JACQUES-ROUSSEAU
1878




PANORAMA
OF THE
DEFENCE OF PARIS
AGAINST
THE GERMAN ARMIES
PAINTED BY F. PHILIPPOTEAUX
EXPLANATION
PRECEDED
BY AN HISTORICAL NOTICE
WITH A HAP OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE SEINE
PARIS
IMPRIMERIE ADMINISTRATIVE DE PAUL DUPONT
41, RUB J.-J.-ROUSSEAU (HÔTEL DES FERMES)
1878




NOTICE
OF THE
DEFENCE OF PARIS
AGAINST
THE GERMAN ARMIES
PREPARATIONS FOR THE DEFENCE. - MILITARY WORKS. - THE
ARMAMENT. - THE TROOPS.-THE VICTUALLING DEPARTMENT.
Paris, as a fortified place, is surrounded by an uninterrupted
inclosure extending for 33 kilometres, comprehending 94 bas-
tions, and protected by 15 detached forts, of which some would
constitute real fortresses. This forms a retrenched camp of vast,
extent intended not only to defend the Capital and the im-
mense riches it contains, but also to serve as a refuge to the
french armies which, after having combatted on the different
lines for the defence of the frontiers, might fall back to be reor-
ganized under the covert of the forts, would hold the grei*-
ter part of the enemy’s forces in check, and thus enable the pro-
vinces to levy fresh troops.
Thus its was that at the very commencement ef the war, the


existing fortifications were put into a state of defence, new
works were raised on the culminating points which might (if
taken possession of by the enemy), become dangerous for cer-
tain forts.
The improvements which had taken place in the artillery
and which rendered it possible to impel with great precision
and to a distance of at least 7 kilometres projectiles weighing
more than 100 kilograms, had rendered indispensable the occu-
pation of certain heights which, at the time of the construc-
tion of the fortifications, were beyond the zone of the at-
tacks.
On the 13 th of August, four important redoubts were under-
taken at Gennevilliers, at Montretout, on the flat of Ghatillon
and at the extremity of the counterfort of the Hautes-Bruyeres.
Tiiat of Gennevilliers was intended to secure the occupation of
the peninsula, those of Montretout and Ghatillon to prevent the
enemies from establishing themselves in positions whence they
might have done mischief to the Mont-Valerien, the forts of
Issy, Vanves and Montrouge; that of the Hautes-Bruyeres was
to cover the forts of Bicetre and Ivry.
Besides, different works and batteries of less importance
were raised at the Port-a-T Anglais, at the Moulin-Saquet, at
the Moulin-de-Pierre, at the Chateau de Meudon, at the Gapsu-
lerie and on the hillock of Brimborion, to sweep the banks of
the upper Seine, to search the ravines of Glamart, to sustain
the redoubt of Ghatillon and prepare the defence of the wood
of Meudon by connecting the latter redoubt to that of Mon-
tretout.
The military Engineers were occupied in the completion of
the defence of the forts by the inundations of Saint-Denis, by
the construction of exterior works, breast-works, and protec-
ting-masses on the remparts; the barracks and the powder-ma-
gazines were plated with iron, the covered ways were palisa-
doed, the courts and accessory defences on the points of attack
were provided with all necessary precautions, such as pare-
eclats, torpedoes, sloping-roofs, etc.
The quarries that might have served as a shelter to the enemy
were filled up or defended by mounds of earth, the catacombs
explored minutionsly, the houses hurtful to the defence demo-


Kshed, the villages standing in the neighbourhood of the for!.!*
fications prepared for defence, the bridges were undermined,
the woods of Boulogne and Vincennes were partly razed; these
were painful sacrifices, no doubt, but were borne heroically by
the population sustained by the thought that the saving of the
country might arise out of those ruins.
The putting the fortications into a state of defence required
labours not less important. It was necessary to provide for
the safety of 9 railways and of 59 gates communicating with the
open country, some of which were no less than 80 metres wid®,
to close up some of those openings, to cover others by elevations
of earth and to establish draw-bridges.
On the fortifications were to be constructed 40 powder-maga*
zines and receptacles for the munitions of the siege largo
enough to receive a stock of more than 1 million kilograms Of
powder, to raise up traverses to shelter the national guard from
the fragments of broken missiles, to prepare torpedoes on the
principal avenues of the city, and to place on the Seine, above
and below, stoccades in order to arrest the enemy’s fire
boats, etc.
If we add to this the interior intrenchment of the Pokit-dsl-
Jour, that of the park of the Muette, the marine batteries esta-
blished in the Chateau de Saint-Ouen, on the flats of Montmartre
and Chaumont, the wooden booths constructed by the service
of the military Engineers or by the City for barracks or hospi-
tals on the exterior bulwarks, the Esplanade des Invalides, the
Champ-de-Mars, at the camp of Saint-Maur, in the plain of
Gourcelles, at the Luxembourg, the Jardin des Plantes anil
Longchamps; the powder-magazines organized at the Luxem >
bourg, the Pantheon, the Invalides, etc.; we shall have gives!
an idea of the multiplicity and importance of the works under-
taken for the necessities of the defence, the execution of which
was facilitated by the inexhaustible resources of the Capital
and the patriotism of its population, without speaking of tht*
barricadoes and other works within the walls due to the sponta-
neous impulse of different services.
Indeed, there was no lack of self-devotion ; and the military
services found efficacious assistants in the corps of the ponts e£
chaussees, of the mines, and in the different municipal and depart


mental services, as well as in many private administrations.,
such as : those of the boats of the Seine, of the Omnibuses, find
especially in the great Railway Companies; the members of the
Academy, the learned men attached to the Museum of natural
islory, offered spontaneously their useful cooperation, while
companies were organized on a military footing to become the
auxiliaries of the corps of the military Engineers.
The works were carried qn with great activity, and continued
during the night, with the help of the electric light, by more than
20,000 workmen.
About the middle of September, the redoubts of Gennevilliers,
Montretout, Chatillon and the Hautes-Bruyeres, as well as the
other exterior works, were, if not quite terminated, at least in a
state which permitted our soldiers to find in them excellent,
points d'appui; the forts and the fortified enclosure had nothing
to fear from surprises or armed attacks on the part of the
enemy.
Meantime, the Artillery placed op the, parapets of the forts
and the walls of Paris 1824 guns, among which were 200 of
24, 200 marin guns 0.16, 50 of 0.19 and one gun 24, which,
placed in battery at the Mont-Valerien, was tQ. send its projec-
tiles weighing 100 kilograms to the foot of the terrace of the
Chateau de Saint-Germain. Moreover, there was a reserve of
800 cannons to be conveyed on the points threatened by the
enemy, 600 movable guns (1), 180,000 chassepots and 360,000
guns of diverse models lor the arming of the troops.
Paris had also its fleet consisting of 5 floating batteries,
9 gun-boats and 6 sloops carrying altogether 24 guns, 19 p t
which were of great magnitude.
The troops hastily called together for the defence of the ip-r
trenched camp included the 13 th and 14“ corps, under the or-
ders of general Ducrot, 94 battalions of mobiles, 18 of which
were of the department of the Seine, 7,000 marines, the re
serves of a great number of Infantry regiments, the gendarme- j
(1) We must say, however, that a great number of those guns, of an ancient model
and not fluted, could not strive against the new artillery of the enemy and were lit
only for near defence


rie, the firemen, the forest-guards, and more than 40 fro© corps.
Those troops formed an effective of more than §4,0,000 men to
which must he added 250,000 soldiers of the national guard,
charged with the defence of the walls.
But to put the Capital into a state, of defence was hot suf-.
ficient; it was as necessary to provide it with food enough H
keep alive a population of more then % million© of inhabitants.
These provisions were collected during the month of August
and the beginning of September- as rapidly a© was permitted,
by the, railways encumbered as, they were by the transport of
the troops and war materials., Paris possessed towards the
middle of September 30,000 oxen, 200,000 sheep, more, than
18,000quintals of com, §IO,OOO quintal© of flour,, 5,000 quin?
tals ol meat salted or preserved, besides the previsions heaped,
up by the inhabitants, 100,000 horses and a certain number of
mules.
Such was the situation when, on the, 15 tt of September, tbo
enemy appeared in, view-.
It was the advanced guard of the 8)“* german army whe pre-
sented themselves at. Cagey, Vifliers, and Bonneuil.
Two armies were destined to invest Paris : the. 3 rd (prince
royal; of Prussia), and the 4, tb (prince royal of Saxony).
The 3 rd had marched from Sedan towards the, Marne* Which
they had crossed at Epernay and Ghateau-Thierry; they ad-
vanced afterwards between the Seine and the Marne, to occupy
positions on the left bank of the Marne and of the Seine, south
of Paris. The 4 th army, destined to occupy positions on the
right bank, to the North, had marched to the right of the 3 rd ,
following three roads, by Creil and Ecouen, Compiegne and
Senlis, Soissons and Dammartin. The advanced guard rea-
ched the environs of Pontoise on the 16 tb of September, and
occupied the positions which were assigned to them, without
striking a blow.
The 3 rd army had to struggle for their positions. On the
17 th , they threw abridge over the Seine between Ablon and Vil-
leneuve-Saint-Georges; on the 18 th , they continued to extend on
the south of Paris, by a movement from East to West, and
passed beyond Palaiseau and Bievres. Up to this time, there
had been but few skirmishes of small importance.


On the 19*" of September, four divisions of the garrison
made an important sally, to reconnoitre, on the south of Paris,
and had for 24 hours taken up their position on the heights
before the forts of Issy and Vanves, at a short distance from
the road which the german columns were following, on their
march to Versailles.
The 15 th german corps having come upon the French bet-
ween the woods of Verrieres and Meudon, suspended their
march and faced them. Our right wing struck with a panic fell
rapidly back to the walls and paralysed the attack at the very
beginning. The enemies took up a strong position from Vil-
lacoublay to Petit-Bicetre, and the 2 nd bavarian corps, which
arrived from Lonjumeau to Chatenay, came to occupy Sceaux
and Bourg la-Reine, threatening to turn our centre if we advan-
ced. The corps even tried to break from Bourg-la-Reine in
the direction of Bagneux, but the fire of the fort of Montrouge
arrested the manoeuvre.
The defenders of the Capital resolved to abandon for the
moment the avanced positions, blew up a great number of brid-
ges, and retired behind the line of the forts. From that time
the enemies were able to establish themselves in strong defen-
sive positions and inclose the city in a circle of intrenchments,
embattled walls, and strong batteries.
The two german armies, at the end of September, were ran-
ged in the following manner :


DESIGNATION OF THE CORPS.
HPASTET.
CAVALRY.
a mow,
POSITION.
4th A
ii-my.
12‘k Corps
23,032
3,390
90
From Chelles to Aulnay.
Guard ....
23,991
4,361
90
From Aulnay to Montmagny
4 th Corps
21,772
1,174
84
From Montmagny to Croissy
3 rd Army.
»o> Corps
19,790
1,161
84
from Croissy to Sfcvres.
!!«• Corps
17,910
1,038
84
Prom Sevres to Meudon.
2nd bavarian Corps
20,248
2,759
102
From Meudon to the Bi&vre
l»t bavarian Corps
19,131
2,177
118
Between BontUrj and Palaisean.
6 th Corps
22,889
1,262
84
Landwehr of the guard. . . .
8,946
»
18
From Uie Bicvi u tv UiO Sttiliti.
17 th Division of the infantry .
9,9-20
1,189
36
i ..
Wurtemberg division. . . .
14,402
1,636
54
2nd Division of the cavalry. .
8
2,824
12
From Saclay to Chevreuse
6 th — —
»
2,719
12
From Chevreuse to Reanphle.
- -
»
4,647
12
From Neauphle to Poissy.
4 th _ -
»
3,469
12
In observation near Orleans.
Totals ....
202,031
33,806
898
Nevertheless, on the 23 rd of September, -the redoubts of the
Hautes-Bruyeres, Yillejuif and the Moulin-Saguet had been re-
taken by the besieged. All the month of October was employed
in finishing the defensive works of the forts and the walls, in
connecting the forts one with the other by lines of intrenchments,
in carrying out lines of counter-approach towards the enemy’s po-
sitions and in organizing troops intended to operate outside the
walls ; it is thus that on the flat of Yillejuif, in the peninsula of
Gennevilliers, around Saint-Denis and in the valley of the
Marne, intrenched camps were formed to the extent of more
than 80 kilometres of trenches. A great number of batteries
were put in position; redoubts were constructed at Gharlebourg,
the Moulin-des-Gibets, Bois-Colombes, in the peninsula of
Gennevilliers, and the work of the Petit-Parc in the bend of
the Marne.
At the same time, strong reconnoitring parties were set on
foot, and thus were brought about the battles of Ghevilly, oo


the 3,0 th of September, that of Bagneux, on the 13 th of October,
that of Malmaison on the 21 " 4 of October.
On the 28 th of October, some troops of the corps of Saint-
Denis took by surprise the village of the Bourget, kept thefr
positions in that place during two days, in spite of the conti-
nued lire of 40 of the enemy’s cannon, but were obliged to re-
tire on the 30 th before the attack of 15,000 men of the Prus-
sian guard.
That evacuation, coinciding with the news of the capitula-
tion of Metz and the negociations that Mr. Thiers was carrying
on, with Versailles in order to obtain an armistice, caused an
emotion in Paris of which some people took advantage to en-
deavour to overthrow by a popular revolution the Government
of the national Defence, who remained after all masters of
the situation.
At the beginning of the month of November, the troops of
the defence were divided into 3 armies, and 4 marching compa-
nies were levied in each of the 266 battalions of the national
gi^ard.
As this division announced, a phasis of active defence was
entered open. On the 28 th of November, the governor had the
flat of Avron, before Rosny, occupied by 76 pieces of artillery :
lhis place ; rises above the Marne and commands the passage
near the junction of that river with the Seine. An. energetic,
sally was to be attempted on the 29 th , whilst several secondary
attacks should beexecuted on, the North , South and West, thus
diverting the attention of the energy from the. principal at-
tempt.
That attempt, was delayed, by the il) success of the, establish-
ment of some bridges, of boats, on the Marne, which, were ready
only on the; 30 th of November, Thus on the 29 th the action was
conline.d to a violent cannonading from the forts against the
enemy’s positions and, the attack of the Gare-aux-B,teufs, at
Choisy-le-Roi,, and gf I’Hay, by the troops under the orders of
general Vinoy, On the 30 th ., the array of general, Duerot. cros-
sed the Marne on the bridges, thrown over between. Joinville
and Nogont. That army of 60,000 men easily drove back the
Prussian posts from Vill.iers to Champigny. But on our right, the
division Snsbiglle advancing from Charenton, after having oo


cupied Montmesly, where the Germans had only grand’gardes,
was vigorously attacked by the wurtemberg general Obernitz,
supported by the prussian reserves cantoned at Valenton. The
division Susbielle fell back as far as Creteil. General Ducrot,
at the end of the day, had occupied on the left only the line
from Brie-sur-Marne fo Champigny.
The demonstration? of the day before had been renewed on
the side of Vitry and Choisy-le-Roi, and, on the North, the
village of Epinay, on the road to Pontoise, had been taken and
kept during the whole day. Meantime, the great battery of
the flat of Avron was firing ip the direction of Chelles and
Gournay, in order to counteract the movements of the german
troops who might advance from North to South towards the
peninsula of the Marne, where, no doubt, the enemy felt the
necessity of calling for pe-inforcements.
The 1“ of December was employed by the besiegers in pre-
paring an offensive return against general Ducrot’s positions,
and by the latter in establishing himself strongly in those sapie
positions; he was pot disturbed in his works, the Germans
being not yet in force before him. The enemy, re-inforced on
the right and on the left, became during the night of the Ist1 st to
the 2 nd , 50,000 men in number in the peninsula of the Marne,
and early on the 2 nd of December, they surprised and over-
threw our avanced posts. But general Ducrot, on his side,
had been re-inforced by the corps d’Exea. The barricadoes of
the villages apd the possession of the heights from Brie to,
Champigny permitted him to arrest from 7 till 8 o’clock the
success obtained at first by the Germans. At 9. o’clock, the ger-
man reserves were epgaged on the brow of Villiers- Goeuilly.
The cornbat was violent on the whole line; \ye were effica-
ciously seconded by the grand artillery that was firing from
the right bank of the Marne. However, the Germans turned our
positions and their blows were more fatal and more certain than
ours. On the left, we retook from the Saxons
and repulsed their renewed attacks; we were gaining ground
on that side; the battle was turning to our advantage. The
enemies then received by Villeneuve the support of a brigade
and used all their efforts to, prevent ps from defiling from Gham-
pigny. Night ended the combat.


We had lost 6,000 men killed or wounded, of whom 414 of-
ficers. The losses of the enemy were nearly equal.
If the aim of the sally was to throw out an army beyond the
german lines in order to join that of the Loire on the road of
( deans, that end was not yet attained. On the 3 rd of Decem-
b3r, our troops were brought back to the right side of the
Marne, without being seriously disturbed during the passage of
the river.
On the 21“ of December, the same troops advanced in the
plain before the fort of Aubervilliers and tried, in concert with
the corps of Saint-Denis, to take the village of the Bourget,
but the strength of the enemy’s positions behind the inundations
of the Moree, their numerous artillery, and above all, the ex-
cessive cold, which during one night froze to death more than
900 men in the trenches, caused that attempt to fail.
Meantime, the enemy was preparing powerful means of ac-
tion against the forts and the city and thus to give satisfaction
by the bombardment to the public opinion of Germany, that so
long a resistance had irritated. They believed the famous
psychological moment predicted by the german press to be now
arrived. On the ST 11 of December, the powerful artillery, es-
tablished by the besiegers at the Rainey, at Gagny and Noisy-
le-Grand, ploughed up with their projectiles the flat of Avron,
rendered that position untenable, and cannonaded at the same
time the forts of Noisy, Rosny and Nogent; 3,000 shells fell on
the batteries of Avron and from 5 to 6,000 on the Eastern forts or
their neighbourhood.
This cannonading was but the prelude of a more intense
bombardment. On the morning of the sth5 th of January, the be-
siegers opened their batteries of the southern heights, impelled
more than 5,000 projectiles on the forts of Montrouge, Vanves
and Issy, and began on the following night, without any pre-
vious summons, the bombardment of the city, a bombardment
as cruel as useless, and which was not to advance the capitu-
lation by a single day.
i At that period, the enemy’s batteries were established at the
pavilion of Breteuil, near the station of Meudon, near the Cha- \
lets, on the hillock of the Moulin-de-Pierre, at the Platriere,}
on the flat of Ghatillon. above the village of Glamart, at the


Tour-des-Anglais, at the Tour-de-Crouy, at Fontenay, at Ba-
gneux, and comprehended 123 great guns.
The besiegers cannonaded also the redoubts of the Hautes-
Bruyeres, the Moulin-Saquet, and the village of Villejuif with
artillery put in position in the village of I’Hay and at Ghe-
villy. The forts of the south and the artillery of the walls often
returned vigorously the shots of those batteries, forcing them
some times to suspend their fire, and even blew up a powder-
magazine at the batteries of the Moulin-de-Pierre of the Pla-
triere de Chatillon. However, the enemy continued firing re-
gularly on the town and especially on the public buildings, the
prisons, the warehouses, the ambulances, the hospitals, and
even on the cemeteries; here, the numbers are eloquent ; the
hospital de la Pitie received 47 shells, the Val-de-Grace 75, the
ambulance of the Luxembourg 80, that of the Jardin des Plan-
tes 84, the Asile Sainte-Anne (an ambulance) 137, the cemetery
of Montparnasse a considerable number. We must add that
significant fact that the prison de la Sante received no more
projectiles from the time that the Prussian prisoners were shut
up in it.
It was then also that Paris began to suffer seriously from
hunger. Every one remembers those interminable trains at the
doors of the municipal butchers and bakers, in the rain or in
the snow, in the midst of shells, to obtain a few grams of meat
and 300 grams of bread containing at most 20 0/0 of corn-
flour.
At this last period of the siege, the defence made a supreme
effort; on the 19 th of January, all the troops (infantry of the line
and gardes mobiles) and the garde nationale mobilisee, atta-
cked, without any possible chance of success, the embattled
walls of the park of Buzenval.
On the 21“ of January, the enemy tried, but vainly, to send
into the quarters of the Villette projectiles intended, no doubt,
to raise the numerous and restless population of those suburbs.
At the same time, their batteries established at the Bourget, at
Stains, at Pierrefitte, on the Butte Pinson, at Montmagny, at
Deuil, at Montmorency, on the hillock of Orgemont, concentra-
ting their fires towards Saint-Denis, covered with great projec-
tiles the forts, the cathedral, the establishment of the Legion


d’honneur, ruining a great number of private houses, aiid rtirrtirtg
at the cemetery so that many inhabitants killed at that mo-
ment had to remain several days Unburied. At the same date,
the bombardment was extended to the redoubts of Saint-Maur
and the Petit-Parc, the village of Jolhvillo aiid evert the fort of
Vincennes, by meahs of batteries established at Ghampigny aiid
Villiers,
Mere we must recall the afflicting episode of a new insur-
rectional attempt, which took place on the 22 nd of January and
was as infructuous as that of the 31“ of October.
On the 26 tfl of January, at midnight, the basis of an armistice
having been agreed between the Government and the chief of
the german army, the fire ceased on both sides, and the follo-
wing day, the news of that cessation of the resistance surpri-
sed an army and a population filled with the delusive belief that
they might still have resisted.
Such were the principal events of that siege of 132 days,
borne with a constancy beyond all praise.
The number of projectiles impelled by the german batteries
during the last month may be estimated at more than 200,000,
of which one half fell on the forts of Issy, Yartves and Mont-
rouge. The fort alone of Issy received 60,000 of them. It was
one of the most interessirtg points of the defence. This and the
magnificent landscape that surrounds the fort of Issy Caused
that fort to be chosen for the central point of the Panorama.
THE PANORAMA
The spectator is placed in the fort of Issy, on a platform rai-
sed above the level of one of the bastions facing the attacks,
and whence there is an extensive view of the country. The
fortress of the IVlont-Valerlen, the forts of Vanves, Montrouge,
Bicetre, and the flat of the Hautes-Bruyeres are distinguishable;
even the watch tower of the Chateau de Vincennes may be
perceived, at the foot of the hills which run from Montreuil io
Fontenay-sous-Brtis. The villages of Chatillon, Clamart, Meu-
dort, Garches, Saint-Cloud, Boulogne, and the undulating
heights which surround them or Kse above them may be seen


at a short distance. It was on those heights that the Germans
had established their batteries for the siege.
On the North is represented Paris with its monuments, its
domes and its steeples. This view of Paris comprehending the
annexed villages of Montrouge, Vaugirard, Grenelle, Auteui!
and Passy, ill which are detached, on higher ground, the elevations
of Montmartre and Belleville , is surrounded by distant hills
Which form the Northern declivity of the basin of the Seine.
The fort of Issy, placed immediately under the eyes of the
spectator, is seen in all its details of buildings, fortifications
armament, etc.
The barracks and powder-magazines situated in the court
yard are oh fire or in ruins. The spectator assists at the re-
moval Of war-materials, Which numerous Workmen are execu-
ting. Sortie are dragging up, by main force, a cannon intended
to replace one out of service on the ramparts; Others are prop-
ping up a wall of support shaken and cracked by the falling of
a bdirtb. These are unloading Carts Filled With War-materials;
those, anrted with mattocks and shovels, and carrying On their
shoulders bags of earth, gabions or fascines, are going to repair
a parapet overturned by the enemy’s fire. Here, WOUnded sol-
diers are assisted by their comrades; there, men are rolling bar-
rels filled with powder and removing loaded projectiles. Du-
ring the preceding night, the garrison Was obliged to 'carry
away the ammunitions from A magazine perforated by the ene-
my’s missiles; in the precipitation of the removal, some barrels
and projectiles remained in the court-yard; they have been seen
in the morning : several energetic men are hastening to Convey
them into an untouched casemate.— This operation was accom-
plished under the bombardment, and terminated without any
accident ( historical ). The spectator sees shells bursting on
many points. On the ramparts, the cannoneers are at their guns
and answering the firO of the german batteries, the smoke of
which is distinguishable on the heights. The walls of Paris
and a gun-boat on the Seine are acting jointly with the forts
for the defence. One may recognize by the smoke rising from
all the fortified points that the resistance is in full activity.


THE DIORAMA
If the Panorama exhibits what Paris was outside the walls
during the bombardment, the Diorama shows what was pas-
sing within.
The spectator has before him the avenue d’Orleans in the
month of January. The street and the roofs of the houses are
covered with snow.
At the end of the avenue is seen the steeple of Montrouge; on
the right hand, on the first plan, people of every age and condi-
tion are awaiting their turn at the door of a municipal butcher;
on the left hand, a battalion of the national guard are repairing
to the ramparts, and hackney-coaches surmounted by the en-
sign of ambulances, are bringing back the wounded. In the
middle of the avenue is seen the removal of the household goods
of a family fleeing away frotn the quarter bombarded; a woun-
ded officier is being carried on a litter, and is accompanied by
the Freres des Ecoles Chretiennes; farther away, funeral pro-
cessions are going towards the cemetery of the South (Mont-
parnasse).
At that moment, a shell strikes the corner of the butcher’s
house and shatters the wall to pieces by which several persons
are killed or wounded; the people nearest to the wounded are
rushing to their assistance; others are looking at the spot where
the shell has burst and trying to get out of the way of the shi-
vers of stone which have been impelled in every direction.
The emotion is general and is reflected on every face.
On the left is observed the beginning of a conflagration which
some firemen that have climbed on to a roof are exerting them-
selves to extinguish, and, far above, in the clouds, a balloon is
seen on its way to carry news from Paris to the provinces.
MlrbO.FACLSDPCWHruJHn'JuxitwKiiaseexit. 3577..1078


MAP OF THE ENVIRONS OF PARIS
