

ONE PENNY
Patriotic Pamphlets.
No. 25.
Papal
Peace-Making
AND
Catholic
Money-Raising
BY
E. H. C. OLIPHANT.
Australian Statesman and Mining Standard Pty. Ltd
1917.


PAPAL PEACE-MAKING.
(Statesman and Mining Standard, Aug. 30, 1917.)
The “Catholic Press” of August 23 has a
big full-page heading entitled “Popes in all
Times have been the World’s Peace-Makers,”
and then there follows a mass of the class
of matter that is put forward in Roman
Catholic publications as history. It is as good
as one can expect when we consider how
sternly the Roman Catholic Church has ever
set its face against the dissemination of
truth. The Church has never dared to look
history in the face, and has manufactured a
distortion of its own, which is presented to
its victims in the schools it controls. That
being so, it is not to be expected that this
long article to prove the Popes to have been
the world’s peace-makers should be either com-
plete or accurate, and we therefore have much
pleasure in supplementing it with many other
examples of the way in which the papacy has
helped to bring “peace on earth,” Only re-
gretting that we cannot add “good will toward
men.”
One of the most magnificent instances was
the way in which Pope Innocent 111. brought
peace to Toulouse. One cannot, of course,
make an omelette without breaking eggs,


and therefore the good and worthy Pope was
obliged to effect an enormous amount of
bloodshed in order to bring about the peace
he so ardently desired. The people of Toulouse
w r ere heretics; and so a crusade was authorised
against them. One of the papal legates who
led the expedition gave orders, when the town
of Beziers was taken by storm, to massacre all
the inhabitants, Catholics as well as Protes-
tants, his excuse being that God would recog-
nise his own. The war was carried on by
Simon de Montfort, whose massacrings were
on a scale calculated to afford the greatest
satisfaction to his papal employers. So great
were the horrors perpetrated under his com-
mand that it is not altogether understandable
why he has not been canonised; but at least
he is icgarded as such an estimable figure
that in Roman Catholic seminaries in France
and Belgium his life (or what purports to be
his life) is-a favourite subject for school
prizes. The Pope issued indulgences whole-
sale to secure crusaders for the carrying on of
this war, and eventually the papal aims were
attained and the long-desired peace accom-
plished. By this time the heretics had been,
almost exterminated, and some of the finest
tracts of Provence and Languedoc had been
utterly devastated; but at least peace had
been secured. The few miserable remnants of
the Albigenses were handed over to the In-
quisition, and soon the pestilent sect ceased
to exist. Protestant writers may, of course,
say that the Pope “made a wilderness and
called it peace,” and historians may complain
that the finest civilisation in Europe was de-
PA PA L PEA CE-MA KING.


st roved and that mental progress was thrown
back a quarter of a millennium; but what
does that matter when the Church was trium-
phant? Have we not the word of Dr. Mannix
for it that “the best times of the world were in
the days in which there was only one Church,
with a Pope at the head of it”? Doubtless,
the Albigenses were of a different opinion;
but they were heretics. The Church even to
this dav glorifies her action in the extirpa-
tion of the Albigensian hetesy. May we
not join in that glorification by pointing out
that in this case, as in so many others, the
Church brought the world peace, even though-
it was through the medium of war.
Another magnificent effort in the cause of
peace was made by Pope Gregory XIII., when
a general massacre of the Huguenots was un-
dertaken throughout France. People who like
to distort history have sought to rob His
Holiness of the credit for this great blow on
behalf of the Church, when 30,000 Protes-
tants were massacred under circumstances of
the most frightful treachery and brutality;
but. unfortunately for these perverters of the
truth, there is extant a letter from the papal
nuncio to the Pope, in which occur the words:
“With your Holiness, I rejoice from my heart
that the King and the Queen Mother have been
able to exterminate these infected people with
so much prudence and at a moment so oppor-
tune.” and we also know that the Pope cele-
brated “the most happy tidings” with a religi-
ous ceremony, that he sent to the French
Court a legate who publicly dispensed indul-
gences to those who had helped in the massa-
FA FA L FEA CE-MA KING.


■cres, that he presented the golden rose (an
order instituted as a recognition of ardent zeal
in the cause of the Church) to Charles IX.,
the monarch who had authorised the massacre,
that he had frescoes representing the massacre
painted on the walls of a saloon in the Vati-
can, where they are still to be seen, and that he
had a medal struck in memory of the massacre,
with the legend upon it, “Ugonotorum
Strages” (the slaughter of the Huguenots).
Of this medal we give, on another page, a
reproduction, coupling with it a reproduction
of the German medal struck in honour of the
sinking of the “Lusitania.” The two are
fittingly seen together, because both Pope and
Kaiser had the same purpose of achieving
peace by the most bloody means. As the Kaiser
thought that the sinking of the “Lusitania” and
such other horrors wmuld induce England to
sue for mercy, and therefore bring peace to the
distracted world, his great prototype, Gregory
XIII., thought that, by the massacre of the
Huguenots, he would dispose of the forces of
heresy and disruption in France, and make it a
peaceful (and, incidentally, a strictly Roman
Catholic) country. His plan went astray, for
the result was many years of most bloodthirsty
fighting, but that, of course, His Holiness,
despite his infallibility, could not have an-
ticipated. He must be judged like any other
holy man, not by what he did, but by what
he had intended to do; and assuredly he had
intended to put an end to the religious wars
•in France (which, by the way, had already
ceased) by making an end of the party whose
'Cause was opposed to his own.
PAPA L PEA CE-MA KJXG.


About a century later, the Church made
another magnificent effort in the cause of
peace. The French troubles between Pro-
testants and Roman Catholics had been at an
end for more than a generation when the
Edict of Nantes, which had provided for toler-
ation, was revoked. Protestant places of wor-
ship were demolished, Protestant worship
suppressed, Protestant pastors banished on
pain of death, Protestant schools closed,
Protestant children held to be illegitimate,
and Protestants shut out from all the profes-
sions and many of the trades, and from all
public offices; and yet of these persecuted
people it was only the clergy who were per-
mitted to leave France. These are interesting
facts, showing what happens when that
Church, which, according to Archbishop Man-
nix, is so fearfully persecuted in this country,
secures the upper hand. What we have stated
as to the disabilities of Protestants constituted
only a small portion of the horrors they were
made to suffer. The authorities inflicted gar-
risons of dragoons upon the unfortunate
people, and these men were allowed to treat
Protestant men, women, and children in any
brutal and obscene way which seemed good
to them; children were flung into convents
for forcible conversion ; and, under the aus-
pices of the Church, the most frightful physi-
cal tortures were inflicted. The wicked here-
tics. not appreciating these splendid efforts of
the Church to bring them into a condition
which would definitely assure the peace of
France, broke out into revolt, and one of
the most hideous wars of which historv has-
PAPAL PEACE-MAKING.


to tell followed. Once again the attempt has
been made to deprive the papacy of the glory
of this great effort to bring peace to France,,
or rather, since France was already enjoying
peace, to guard against the possibility of war
(and of an extension of heretical doctrines) in
the future; but it is beyond historical con-
tradiction that the then Pope Innocent XL
gave “all praise to the King who has destroyed
so great a number of heretics and wishes to
exterminaate that unhappy sect entirely in his
kingdom,” while, in honour of the revocation,
St. Peter’s and the Vatican were illuminated
and plenary indulgences granted.
One might fill up pages with other efforts
in the cause of peace of a character such
as the writer for the “Catholic Press” does
not. and is not likely to, deal with, even if
he be aware of them, as is unlikely, if, as is to
be presumed, he has suffered from a strictly
Roman Catholic education. But one may per-
haps mention one other country which, thanks
to the Church, has enjoyed for many years the
blessings of peace. That country is Spain.
It may be well to mention Spain because to
the superficial observer it might seem that
there at least the Church had done nothing but
sow discord. So long as Islamic civilisation
obtained in that country, and the Moors were
in control, something like complete religious
toleration prevailed, Jews, Mohammedans, and
Christians living happily together. When,
however, the Christians got on top, the
Church succeeded in establishing the Inquisi-
tion. The most fearful persecutions fol-
lowed; Jews and Moors were expelled from
PAPAL PEACE-MAKING.


the country under the most brutal circum-
stances; and Spain was thus robbed of all its
most skilled mechanics, its finest intellects, and
its most enterprising spirits, and became what
it is now. It is sometimes said that the Papacy
did not approve of the doings of the Spanish
Inquisition; but any disapproval it may have
shown was not in the interests of heretics, but
only when it felt that it was not securing its
fair share from the spoliation that accom-
panied and was indeed not the least strong
motive for the persecutions. We have said
that at first sight the Church may seem to
have created discord in Spain, because at the
time when it instituted the Inquisition and
drove the Jews and Moors out of the country
peace already .reigned; but what sort of
peace was it? It was peace with possible
(though highly improbable) elements of dis-
cord existent within it. The Church made
peace definite and certain by removing those
possibilities of discord. It is true that in
doing so it has turned Spain into a wilderness,
has wiped out its civilisation, and has made
it one of the most backward and lethargic
and ignorant countries in Europe; but what
would you have? If one has peace, one
must have the disadvantages of peace; and
the sort of .peace that the Papacy loves is
always a peace that is based on the utter
subjection of civilisation to the Church, on
the subjection of the mind of man to the will
of the Papacy, and on the destruction of know-
ledge and truth. It is a heavy price perhaps
to pay for peace; but at least let us give the
Papacv the credit of being the world’s great
PAPAL PEACE-MAKING.


'pacificator. And let ns endorse heartily the
triumphant shout raised by the “Catholic Ad-
vocate,” of Brisbane, when it boasts: “The
Papal flag is the only flag to-day which can
sail the high seas immune from attack from
any quarter. Our late Apostolic Delegate
was unmolested on his voyage home to Rome,
and his successor, Archbishop Cattaneo, is
now sailing safely on his way to Sydney,
simply because it was a case of ‘Hands off
the Papal Flag !’ What a wonderful manifes-
tation of the power of the Papacy in this
cataclysmic year!” But it is more than that.
It means the recognition by the German Kaiser
of the fact that His Holiness the Pope is
ready to collaborate with him in the attempt
to bring the world peace at a moment when
such peace would have to be on terms ex-
tremely disadvantageous to Germany’s enemies.
This is why “the Papal flag is the only flag
to-day which can sail the high seas immune
from attack” by German submarines. Its
immunity from attack by the Allies signifies
nothing, for the Allies do not war on even the
weakest neutrals; but the other immunity
means much. It constitutes a recognition that
the Pope, in striving vigorously for peace, has
won the heart of the Kaiser, who also wants
peace now the Central European powers have
won the very, utmost’they can hope to win.
PA PAL PEA CR-MA KING.


Medal Struck by the Pope in 1572 to Celebrate the Massacre of the Huguenots in France.


Medal Struck in Germany in 1915 to Celebrate the Sinking of the s.s. “Lusitania "


DISLOYAL FUND-RAISING.
(Statesman and Mining Standard, Aug. 23, 1917.)
It was just about two years ago that we
attacked the Roman Catholic Church in Vic-
toria for its activities in the raising of funds
which we considered to be for the express
purpose of diverting money from use for war
purposes. Dr. Mannix replied then that the
activities of the Church must not cease. He
struck a different note this week in replying
to a similar charge from another quarter. He
then proclaimed a fact which, to say the least
of it, it is strange that he did. not proclaim
on the previous occasion, that the late Arch-
bishop Carr had, at the beginning of the war,
intimated to his clergy and to the Roman
Catholic people that no work should be un-
dertaken during the war unless it was of
urgent importance. This advice, said Dr.
Mannix. had been acted upon, and had been
repeated by himself since the death of Dr.
Carr. We musty of course, accept the good
man’s word for it; but it is not necessary,
even for the sake of politeness, to accept the
statement in both the letter and the spirit. We
know that it is possible for a priest to advise
his flock to attend recruiting meetings and at


the same time give them to understand that
they are not to enlist ; and so it is quite pos-
sible for an Archbishop to say that no money
is to be expended that is not absolutely neces-
sary, but to put all possible expenditure within
the realm of the necessary. This is a time
when building is so abnormally costly that
the building trade is almost at a standstill;
yet this is the time chosen by the Roman
Catholic Church in Victoria to push on with
the erection of innumerable churches, con-
vents, schools, and other institutions of that
peculiar mixture of charity and slavery which
characterises the so-called benevolent institu-
tions of the Church! If it were not for the
sacred word of the holy man, one would
really suppose that all this expenditure at so
inopportune a time was for the very definite
purpose which Dr. Mannix denies. Similarly,
we find that a memorial is to be erected to
the late Archbishop Carr, and we find that
Dr. Mannix is able to give £IOOO to it,
even though his predecessor died worth only
a little over £4oo—a sum from which the
State did not greatly benefit by probate
duty. ()ne would have supposed that the
raising of subscriptions for this. Memorial
Chapel Fund might- well have waited till
the war was over. It is not open to Dr.
Mannix to reply that the money would not
then have been obtainable, because the
people would have , “gone cold.” for that
would be to slander his flock; and, besides,
everv one knows the pressure that the Church
can and does bring to bear to squeeze money
out of its people to .meet its requirements.
DJSLO) AL FUND-RAISING.


However, we have Dr. Mannix’s word for it
that no money is being raised at the present
time for Church purposes that is not ab-
solutely necessary, and therefore there must
obviously be some very excellent reasons for
proceeding urgently with this matter, though
it must be confessed that those reasons are
not very plain to the unprejudiced non-
Catholic observer.
It is, of course, open to anyone who is in-
clined (as we are not) to be so rude as to
question the good man’s veracity, to point out
the fact that this time, which would naturally
seem so unsuitable for the raising of
memorial buildings, is chosen for the pro-
motion in Sydney of a “Cardinal Moran
Memorial Art Union and Fair.” Cardinal
Moran, who was a firebrand of the Mannix
type, has been dead for many years; and it
is remarkable that it is now, while we are
engaged in this gigantic war, into which all
patriots feel that their spare cash has to go,
that the Roman Catholic Church rushes to
raise a memorial to him. Dr. Mannix’s re-
ply to this is, of course, that that is in New
South Wales, and has nothing to do with
him, to which, 'of course, we might retort
that the Roman Catholic Chutch in that
State has shown itself twice as loyal as the
Roman Catholic Church in Victoria, and
that, if therefore we hnd such action on its
part, we are entitled to ask, What is the loyalty
of the Roman Catholic Church worth when
at its best ? But, in view of the assurances
of Dr. Mannix in regard to his own very
successful efforts to raise money, we know
DISLOYAL FUND-RAISING.


that there must be a very good excuse for
the Roman Church in the Archbishopric of
Sydney, even though we have not the faintest
idea what it can be.
All these things are understandable when
they are explained to us with the candour
characteristic of Maynooth. We only need
such an explanation to understand why in
Ballarat (which is in Dr. Mannix’s ' own
State), we have the Roman Catholics getting
up what is called an Empire Fair, to which
large contributions have been made by Pro-
testants under the assumption that it was for
patriotic purposes. One would be inclined to
agree with Dr. Mannix if he took the line,
which he doubtless would take, that it served
these people right for jumping to any such
absurd conclusion; and, of course, every good
Catholic will recognise that it was not'neces-
sary for those raising this money for strictly
Church purposes to point out that the only
Empire they recognised was the Empire of
the Pope. One need only ask the good Protes-
tants who subscribed, and who have now, in
their indignant annoyance, rushed into the
ranks of the newly-formed Protestant Federa-
tion with such enthusiasm and in such num-
bers that the Federation in the Ballarat dis-
trict alone is already numbered by its thou-
sands, if they can recall a single instance of
money being raised by the Roman Catholic
Church for Empire purposes, or indeed for
any purposes save its own. But perhaps that
is too sweeping an insinuation to make, for we
recall that Dr. Mannix raised a large sum
of money on behalf of the relatives of the
DISLOYAL FUND-RAISING.


Sinn Feiners who took part in. the rebellion
of Faster. 1916. Subscriptions for this cause
were invited on the pretence that Ireland
was in a state of deplorable poverty, whereas
it is known to be the most flourishing portion
of the United Kingdom at the present time.
This, of course, must not be taken any more
than the other matters to which we have
alluded as a proof of the bad faith of the
holy man who issued this appeal for funds.
It may be put down rather to that ignorance
which he so constantly displays on every sub-
ject concerning which he endeavours to en-
lighten the world. As he has never tried to
raise money for purposes not absolutely neces-
sarv, we may be quite sure that he believed
his own statements regarding the fearful con-
dition of Ireland. We can the more readily
take that charitable view when we consider
how entirely his mental kink leads him to
misinterpret and misrepresent the condition
of the Roman Catholic Church in Australia.
Whether as a man or as a priest, his word
must be accepted that no calls are made upon
“the faithful” save those that are absolutely
necessary ; and we must content ourselves with
expressing regret that those necessary calls are
so exceedingly numerous.
Who)IV Set-up iiml Printed in Australia by
Harold Smith, 370 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.
DISLOVAL FUND-RAISING.
