

PAPER READ BY MR. J. S. . LLOYD, ON TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 1869.
SUBJECT —“THE CAMEL IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.”
Before proceeding with the subject of my
paper, I should like, by way of introduction, to say
a few words on the general subject of acclimatiza-
tion, which in this colony and at the present time
ought to claim the special attention of the Ade-
laide Philosophical Society. It does not at all
follow that because we have here no Acclimatiza-
tion Society, we have therefore no acclimatization
going on. It goes on slowly, perhaps, in compari-
son with what it might or ought to do; but we
can see that still it does go on, silently, perhaps,
or if casually noticed in a newspaper local para-
graph, soon forgotten. It is sometimes laid to our
charge as a Society that we do not take up subjects
of sufficient public or practical interest, and that
this is the reason why our meetings are neglected,
and why general interest in our proceedings fails.
I do not think the charge is altogether fair or well
deserved; but here, at any rate, is a subject both
of public and practical interest, which we may well
take up, to the manifest advantage of the colony
and of the Society itself at the same time.
I do not know that I need do more than allude to
the efforts made from time to time to form here an
Acclimatization Society, on a basis similar to that
of the Society which flourishes so vigorously in
Melbourne. They originated with this Society,
and it was a Committee of this Society which took
the preliminary steps towards a scheme which at
one time promised success. The ultimate failure
of these endeavours naturally places the subject
under our cognizance again, and I for one should
be glad if a sufficient amount of interest were shown
in it by our members to enable us to furm a
Committee charged to report upon the subject
from time to time, or say at least once in the year.
Some time since, when in Melbourne, I called on
Mr. Spriggs, the Secretary of the Victorian Accli-
matization Society, and obtained from him the
annual reports of their Soc ; ety from the commence-
ment, which will, I feel sure, be found interesting
to any member who takes the trouble to look into
them. Mr. Spriggs showed me over the Eoyal
Park, where the animals are kept on arrival in the
colony, and it was pleasant to see the hares run-
ning about the enclosure, as well as many other
strange animals and birds which are thriving in
an Australian climate. He also mentioned that
they would be glad to assist us, and that
if any money was subscribed or voted, and
was handed to them for expenditure on any
particular objects, they would allow us to avail
ourselves of their machinery for the purpose
of ontaining and bringing such objects to the
colony, and it appears that they have an agent con-
stantly employed going backwards and forwards to
and from England in bringing out animals and
birds. I promised him to bring his kind offer,
when I returned, to the notice of the Society of
which I was Secretary, hoping that we should see
some way of making good use of it; and, although
I have mentioned the subject before, it may not be
out of place for me to call the attentf n of the
members of our Society to it on the present occasion.
To me it appears that the duty of beeping the
importance of the continual introduction of
new plants and animals into the country before
the public is the most important function of any
Acclimatization Society ; for, without any dis-
credit to these valuable Associations, wherever
established, it should alwaj r s be remembered that
the most important importations, whether of
plants or animals, have ever been due to private
enterprise. Their business is to point the road
sometimes to lead the way ; but to do
any real good or become of real importance,
the movement must be taken up by pri-
vate persons, and generally with some pros-
pect of commercial returns or advantage to
those who undertake the money advance,
.these remarks are true of all the animals at
present in common use for service or profit, and
therefore, without feeling it laid upon us as a
society to make amngaments for, or undertake the
charge of importations of useful animals from
other countries, we ought to endeavour to obtain
the best information of what is being done with
this object around us, and to place the history of
uU experiments and attempts of the kind upon our
records.
I am inclined to believe that even without
an Acclimatization Society we in South Aus-
tralia are in advance of our neighbours in Vic-
toria to the extent of the possession of larger num-
bers of three most important animals I mean
the camel, the ass, and the Angora goat. It is to
the first of these that I propose to call your atten-
tion this evening. I should have much liked
refer to the others also, but am not at present suf-
ficiently supplied with information. Of course,
what I have to say about the camel can only be in
the nature of compilation. I have no personal
acquaintance ,th the animal, having seen, I
think, only two living specimens; one I remember
being a Bactrian or two-humped camel, and the
other the young animal at present in the
Botanic Garden under Dr. Schomburgk’s care.
I have thought, however, that the few particulars
which I have obtained at first hand would prove
interesting, as enabling a comparison to be drawn
between the camel as he is in South Australia
and the camel as he is described in books of travel
and natural history in other countries; but it must
not be forgotten that the experiment is yet but
tentative, and that we cannot expect to obtain the
full value of his settlement amongst us until he
becomes as cheap, as widely dispersed, and
as common as the bullock or horse.
I have been informed by Mr. Henry Phillips, of
North Adelaide, that he and his brothers during
their voyage to this colony called at the Canary
Islands, and there purchased some (I believe nine)
camels, one only being landed alive. This one
afterwards became the property and travelling
companion of one of the early settlers—Mr.
Horrocks—who, I am given to understand, dis-
covered the pass still known by his name in the
North, near Mount Eemarkable, and whose death
by the accidental discharge of a gun was the
occasion of the death of the camel by his order
when dying. This was many years ago; but the
tradition of this animal's character, powers, and
capabilities was favourable to him; and ever since
I think people have been prepared to find in
the camel the beast of burden most suitable for the
generally difficult and at times desert country aud
climate of the interior.
. It is now more than three years since Mr. Elder
imported a cargo of camels and asses from
K.urrachee, the seaport of Scinde, to Pert Augusta,
and the experience {rained of the habits and
capability of these camels for labour in these three
years ought to be sufficient to enable a judgment
to be formed of their ultimate value to these
colonies. I may say that both their owner (Mr.
Elder) and those who have had the care and charge
of them since their arrival have formed a high
opinion of their value, of their capacity for work,
and of their suitability for many places and
purposes where, or for which, cattle and horses
could not be used. They have also been much
impressed by their docility, but it is also fully
understood that the persons who have to manage
them must be educated or trained to their proper
management. This is, however, only what tho>-e
who now find it most easy to drive or to control
horses or oxen have had to undergo, although often
unconsciously, but which is sufficiently apparent
when some new chum attempts for the first time to
put together a team of bullocks in the stockyards,
or, when they are put together, attempts to get
them out, or to guide them by voice and stockwhip.
So many hoises and bullocks are in use, and the
number of persons acquainted with their habits
and accustomed to their management is so large,
that the tyro has no difficulty in finding efficient
teachers ; but the camels, ever since their arrival
in this colony, have been in the care of Afighan
drivers, and to the bushmen of the North they
are still objects of fear and wonder, only one or
two of the white colonists having learnt to handle
or manage them. The most remarkable feature
in their treatment appears to me to be the absence
of punishment. Jam told the Arab drivers never
beat them, and they have inculcated a very great,
perhaps a wholesome apprehension of the dire
results which would follow the use of the stick, to
their English fellow-herdsmen and shepherds.
And yet there is no doubt that in other countries a
stimulus of some kind is applied, and Sir Samuel
Baker mentions the hippopotamus hide whips used
for the purpose upon the Upper Nile. An old
bushman and friend of mine, Mr. Stephen Hack,
now in England, writing about Mr. Elder’s camels,
says:—“lfeel much interest about them. Ido not
bejieve in Englishmen (if properly selected) not
being able to manage camels. Why, look back at
the early days of the colony, when Jem Chambers
tried to work the Cape working bullocks imported
by Government—bullocks broke in to Dutch talk,
and Dutch ways and gear. He could do little good
with them until they were, as you may say, trained
over again. I consider myself a first-class bullock
breaker and driver; but on the South Downs,
when staying at a friend’s farm where they work
oxen, I could do nothing with brutes trained to
go if poked with a long stick.”
I am chiefly indebted to the Messrs, Stuckey,
lately of Umberatana, for such particulars of this
important experiment as I have been able to gather
to lay before you on the present occasion. One of
these gentlemen, Mr. Samuel Stuckey, went to
India to purchase the camels, and bring them down
to South Australia. Outofl24, shipped at Kurratl e,
121 camels were landed in good condition; three
died,from cold, which pre duced inflammation of the
lungs. They bore the voyage exceedingly well, and,
fed upon native grass hay, and mong boosa, and
cannic boosa (the chafi' of rape and of wheat)
they became too fat, and had to be placed upon a


short allowance. They were supplied with between
two and three gallons of water daily each. No
bedding was used, but the decks were
covered with coir matting, to keep their
feet from slipping. No partitions were
used, either in the tween decks or the hold,
the camels being merely fastened by the heads.
Since their arrival in the colony the herd of 121
has been increased by births, in excess of deaths,
to 161) at the present time; but I mav here mention
that a large number, about 70. died of disease, a
kind of mange, to which they are subject in their
native country, but which the natives there are
able to cure by the use of vegetable oils, which
they extract from various common herbs. Here
much difficulty was found in ascertaining a
remedy. Luxuriant feed augmented the disease
from which they suffered. At length a cure was
found, in the use of Stockholm tar applied exter-
nally and tar and oil internally, and these
medicines are considered by the Arabs who attend
them the best remedies they have seen. Bushes
supplying the natural food of the camel, and his
height, long neck, and peculiar mouth enabling
him to reach and feed upon them at a height
from the ground far above the reach of the
horse and ox (both of which, too, prefer
grass to bushes), he is able to live and
flourish where these would infallibly starve. His
powers of digestion also being like those of the
ass, exceedingly strong, the character of his food
is of comparatively small consequence. He will
eat and enjoy saltbush, prickly acacia, bluebush,
sandalwood, mulga, sheaoik, and, if hungry, will
not flinch from mallee, wattle, or gum. or, so far
as I can make out, from anv tree that grows.
Indeed, the great point of advantage with the
camel seems to be that he can live, work, and do
well where almost any other animal would be sure
to starve.
I have not yet referred to that particular
merit for which the camel is most widely famed,
and which is its great recommendation to the
people of hot and dry, and perhaps even more
to those of uncertain climates—l mean its power
of endurance under thirst, for which characteristic it
is indebted to the peculiar foi mation of its stomach,
which supplies a reservoir for the storage of water.
In order to take advantage of this capability to
the utmost it is necessary to train the camel to
abstinence from drinking except at stated in-
tervals; but so trained he will go from seven to
eight days, or even more, without water and
without much distress. His rider is thus enabled
to travel with much more safety and confidence
than the horseman. The latter on the evening of
the second day after leaving water may well
become anxious, knowing that it will test the
strength of his beast to reach it again, and that
even if he does get back the distress suffered will
be such as to render his horse useless for weeks.
Air. Elder imported camels of three different
breeds, namely—The fast or Alekrana camel, for
riding purposes; the hill camel from Scinde,
suitable for riding or baggage, being the common
camel of Western India; the hairy camel from
Candahar—fine, strong, thick-set animals, eight,
n i ne, and ten feet high, the best kind for heavy loads.
The female breeds about four times in five years
The young are weakly for the first few days; but
on gaining strength are very pretty and active.
The dam gives a large quantity of beautiful milk,
and allows herself to be handled like a cow. At
the age of three years the camel has all its sucking
teeth. At four years it sheds two teeth, and after-
wards it sheds two teeth each year like sheep until
it is full-mouthed, with eight teeth, at seven years
old. At ten years it is in its prime - like a horse
at siy four years -and it lives to 40 or 50 years.
Camels are broken in with very little troub'e
and may be lightly loaded at three years old.
On enquiring respecting the capability of the
camel for burden I was informed that on one
occasion sixty odd camels travelled from IJnibera-
tana with an average load of 593 lbs. of wool each
They travelled comfortably 17 or 18 miles per diem
and endured four and five days’ thirst easily. For
every team of 20 camels four men are required or
say one man for eveiy ton of weight. I find, how-
ever, that camels may be made available for
harness and draught; that in India they are often
used in sugar-mills for drawing water, and they
also do the work of bullocks in working mortar-
mills I was told of one gentleman in India who
travelled with a pair of camels in his carnage,
driven by a postilion. In this colony a heavy
camel carried an Atfghan with the mail 350 miles
m seven days. Mr. S. rode a camel 80 miles, from
Puttapa to Umberatana, in one day, and thinks
that 400 miles might easily be accomplished
in five days on a riding camel. The
latter travel at from seven to ten miles
an hour for many hours together, but during hot
weather they do not travel so well in the heat of
the day as at night. At Port Augusta on one
occasion, and in consequence of a bet between the
men as to what one of the camels—a large one, seven
years old—could do, ten bags of flour, or 2,000
lbs., were placed upon its back when kneeling, and
it rose and carried this load without difficulty
round the camp. The same camel drew six dead
camels nearly a mile over sand, one at a time,
with only a rope round its neck, and it has fre-
quently drawn a 60-gallon bucket from a whip
well. These instances were mentioned to show the
P° v ’£ er of this camel both for burden and draught.
Mr. btuckey considers the camel the most docile
of animals. Nearly 4 years’ experience has shown
him that vice occurs more seldom with camels than
with ordinary stock, and that the only reason why
Europeans cannot manage camels is the want of
patience and experience on their part. They are
exceedingly sure of foot, will travel over the most
rugged places, and he has never known of a tender-
footed camel. The only difficulty in the rearing and
breeding of camels ad libitum inexpensively is the
need of paddocks. Without paddocks they must
Detailed, otherwise they will separate and wander
in every direction; and, unlike other stock,
they do not seem to attach themselves
to any particular place or part of the country.
It appears to be at the same time true that when
excited to anger by ill-treatment, or other cause,
the camel becomes a terrible antagonist. His
attack is likely enough to end fatally for any man
who is the object of it. His strength, long neck,
height, weight, and some tremendous teeth or
tusks, make it almost impossible for one man to
beat him ofl, and he has an ugly habit of suddenly
dropping on his knees upon the body of a prostrate
enemy, which tends very much to reduce the
chance of the latter’s escaping with life. Indeed,
I am assured that in an open plain escape from
an infuriated camel is hopeless. One incon-
venience in using camels in this colony is to be
found in the difficulty of familiariz ng horses and
bullocks to their presence or neighbourhood, and
in the terror which they always inspire at first. I
do not know whether our stock are naturally
wilder or more timid than those of other countries
inhabited by camels, but I am given to understand-
that, however long the time that a horse may have
worked or fed beside camels, he is ce.uain to make
a bolt if one of the latter fairly faces him, and will
often do so if only looked at unexpectedly. I
mention this, because I do not remember to have
seen such difficulty mentioned in tire references
oi travellers, either in India or Africa, where
they certainly work and travel in company.
ihe camels have made a number of trips from
Port Augusta, with stores for Northern-stations,
bringing down woo), which is packed in small
bales tor the purpose of easy handling and carriage,
and is slung one bale on each side of a pack-saddle.
During the early part of the year they carried
stores through the Barrier Kanges to Mount
Murchison on the Darling, to which point steamers
had been unable to reach for a long peiiod in
consequence of the low state of the river. They
made two journeys, and brought back a quantity
ot wool; but the river rising, their services were
not further required. I have not been able to
obtain any exact account of the weights carried,
but they were four and five days without water
at times, without injury or even distress.
In support of Mr. Stuckey’s information as to the
capacity of the camel for draught, I may refer to
a book recently published-Dilke’s “ Greater
Br.tam —where mention is made of a visit to
.Lahore when the author met the Commissioner
or Governor of the Punjaub driving out with a
pair of camels in his carriage. Another point in
favour cf the camel is that unlike the tread of the
horse, that of the camel does not destroy or dis-
turb the surface of the ground upon which he
travels. Its tendency is to improve the roads and
to leave behind a good level well-beaten track.
Captain McKay, who travelled in China, and went
some distance beyond the Great Wall as an agent
lor Mr. Eider to obtain information about the
camels in use there, with a view to their importa-
nt 11 ? | ou nd the camels of that country bore a
thick fleece of coarse hair, which, I believe, was
regularly pulled or shorn at times, and formed an
article of commercial value. The camels there are
accustomed to a severe climate, ice and snow
being usual at certain seasons; indeed, when he
was there, Captain McKay suffered considerably
from cold, and brought away a deafness, from
which he did not recover for years. He con-
sidered that the Chinese camels would have been
very suitable for this colony, hut their transport
was not quite so simple a matter as from India,
Ihe expeditions of Burke and Wills, of McKinlay,
and of Howitt were all accompanied hy camels,
and as they were not then attended by native
drivers it is evident that there cannot be much
real difficulty for white men in learning their
management, McKinlay’s expedition was accom-
panied by a flock of sheep, and the daily distance
travelled was scarcely sufficient to enable the
?? m el to compare to any great advantage beside
“he horse. The camels are also mentioned as
suffering from sore feet, and it was found neces-
sary to fit them with boots of hide or leather;
hut i believe M.cKinlay was favourably impressed
with their power of endurance when fed upon the
roughest or poorest scrub, and that his horses fell
away in condition alarmingly and rapidly on several
occasions, when the camels caused no anxiety on this
uceount The following extract is from ‘Tracks
of McKinlay Across Australia,’ pages 63, 61 •
Both Burke and Wills and McKinlay had the
novel addition of a troop of camels to the live
stock of their respective expeditions. The Vic-
toria Government, shortly before the departure of
the former, had imported a number of camels from
India ; and their merits were thus promptly put
on trial by the opportunity of the Victoria expedi-
tion. Of these Burke selected six with which to
push on from Cooper’s Creek, leaving the others,
together with the bulk of the expedition, behind
on the way. These camels, in fact, and but a
single horse, were the sole attendants of his small
party. McKinlay book four camels, in company
of a good quadrupedal assemblage, consisting be-
sides of 24 horses, 12 bullocks, and 100 sheep.
J he camel disputes with the horse the palm of
usefulness in the Australian expeditions. In
powers of endurance the camel seemed quite the
equal of his rival; but he was more unruly and
troublesome, and very uncompanionable with the
other animals, his fellow-travellers. McKinlay
found a decided convenience in the height of his
back, as compared with that of the horse, vn keep-
ing the supplies of the party out of the water on
the occasion of traversing the flooded parts of the
march. But both horse and camel alike proved use-
ful in other ways less premeditated. Necessity cures
many prejudices, and hunger is a sauce to reconcile
us to a very miscellaneous diet. As the stock
diminished, and as the appetite increased, even
horseflesh proved no unsavoury morsel, lean,
tough, and jaded as it too often was. Horse after
horse fell under the ‘jerking’ process, consisting of
cutting the flesh into long stripes to be dried in the
sun. The camel, too, took his turn under the
knife, and our travellers were ever far more anxious
to secure an adequate quantity than to differ about
the quality of their fare. Only once was the case
otherwise, when one of the camels, ‘old and worn
out with sores all over him,’was doomed to the
knife and the jerking, t efractery even in the
pot, the tough liver and kidneys defy
the teeth of the hungry travellers, and
the cook is enabled to boast for once on the
journey that there was superfluity on the board.’ ”
Some camels imported by the Victorian Govern-
ment were for a time stationed at the Royal Park,
hut they did not thrive. Many persons explained
this by attributing ic to the cold climate and
exposed situation of the Park; but I think a cause
is quite as likely to be found in the absence of the
rough bush diet, of which the camel is so fond.
When removed to the Wimmera District I under-
stand they did much better.
in order to compare the camel in South Aus-
tralia with the camel in those parts of the
world which are considered its home, and also
to supplement these few particulars upon points
which I have omitted, I will, if time permits,
read a few extracts from “Encyclopaedia Brit-
annica,” “Buffou’s .Natural History,” and also
from a small volume published by the Useful
Knowledge Society, containing along article on the


camel, which will enable us to form some opinion of
the value which may ultimately be placed on his
services for burden and travel in Central Australia.
The particulars I have gathered agree very closely
with the description given in the “ Encyclopaedia
Britannica,” which is to the following effect:—
“The camel attains its full strength at about the
age of six years; lives about 40 to 50 years; only
males usually employed for labour; females go
with young about 12 mouths, and usually bring
forth one -at a time; found wild in deserts of
Arabia, in Africa, and in most of the temperate
parts of Asia. They are when trained made to
go with apparent ease 300 leagues in eight
days; will often run for even nine or ten days
without water; can scent water at half a league;
on journeys requiring speed they are allowed but
one hour of the day for repose and for nourish-
ment. In caravan travelling the large camels
usually carry 10 or even 12 cwt; the smaller 6 or
7cwt, In these commercial journeys they never
hurry the camels in their march, but regulate
their day’s work say to 10 or 12 leagues every day;
every evening load taken off, so that they may
feed at liberty. If they are in a country abound-
ing with herbage they usually eat as much in one
hour as suffices for 24 hours, and during the rest
of the night they ruminate. Delicate nourishment
unnecessary. They prefer wormwood, thistles,
nettles, broom, cassia, and other prickly plants to
more pleasant herbage. So long as they find plants
to browse upon they easily go without drink.
During rutting season (say 40 days in spring) they
are subject to fits of rage, and at other times when
illtreated they seldom fail to show their resent-
m The following extracts are taken from the Library
of Entertaining Knowledge, published by the
Useful Knowledge Society, Vol. I. of ‘I he
M 'The*Foot and Noiseless Tread of the Camel.—
“The camel’s tread is perfectly noiseless. The foot,
composed of an elastic substance, and covered
with hair, falls on the pavement in a manner
very different from the rattling of the iron-
shod horse. The large creature moves along un-
der a heavy load with no greater noise than is made
by the deer that bounds over the mossy turf.” Mr.
MacFarlane thus describes this peculiarity:
“ What always struck me as something extremely
romantic and mysterious was the noiseless step of
the camel from the' spongy nature of his foot.
Whatever be the nature of the ground, sand or
rock, or turf, or paved stones, you hear no foot
fall; • "ee an immense animal approaching you
stilly “as a cloud floating on air, —J unless he wo
a bell your sense of hearing, acute as it - ay t
will give yod no intimation of his presence. ’
Antipathy of the Horse to the Camel.—“We have
noticed in the preceding chapter the terror which
the horses of Pisa that have been unaccustomed
to the camel feel at the unusual sight of this
animal in the quiet performance of his laborious
duties. This is not so in Smyrna and other parts
of Asia. The horse and the camel are there
constantly seen, each occupied in ts respective
labours ; and horses in many cases form part of
caravans—the horse carrying the traveller and the
camel his luggage. We apprehend that this in-
difference in the horses in the East to the presence
of the camel is an effect of hereditary habit. They
have been domesticated together for many centu-
ries while at Pisa the introduction of the camel
is ’comparatively of modern date. We are
strengthened in this opinion by a curious passage
in Herodotus, the Greek historian. He relates
that when under the walls of Sardis, Cyrus met
the Lydian army, commanded by Croesus, m order
of battle. Fearing the cavalry of his enemy, he
assembled all the camels which carried the baggage
and provisions, and having taken off their loads,
he put soldiers upon them, with orders thus to
march against the cavalry of Croesus. Cyrus also
ordered his infantry to follow the camels, and his
cavalry to march in the' roar of the infantry.
He did this, says the historian, because the
hsuse fears' the camel, and cannot bear
the sight or smell of him. Croesus
depended for his success upon his cavalry; but the
stratagem of Cyrus succeeded, for when the horses
had smelt and seen the camels they became unruly
and ran back. It may be inferred from this -re-
markable circumstance that the horse and the
camel had not become familiar in the time of
Cyrus; and, as we have sufficient testimony to the
fact of a like terror of the horsein our own ti mes
we may consider this peculiarity as one of the,
many curious examples of the influence of domes-
tication in changing or modifying the natural
instincts of every animal.'’
The Camel’s Load.—" Both ancient and modern
authors agree tolerably well in their accounts of
the load which a camel can carry. Sandys, in his
‘Travels in the Holy Land,’ says—|Six hundred-
weight is lus ordinary load, yet will he carry a
thousand.’ The caravans are distinguished as light
or heavy according to the load which the camels
bear. The average load of the heavy or slow-going
camel, as stated by Maj or Rennell, who investigated
the rate of travelling with great accuracy, is from
500 lbs. to 600 lbs. Burckhardt says that his lugage
and provisions weighing only 2 cwt., and his camel
being capable ofcarrying 6 cwt., he sold him, con-
tracting for the transport of his luggage across the
desert. Mr. Buckingham saw camels carrying mill-
stones to the large towns on the west of the Jordan,
each of which was nearly six feet in diameter; and
one being laid flat on the animal’s hack, in the very
centre of the hump, and resting on the high part
of the saddle, was secured by cords passing under
his belly. The camel sometimes carries large
panniers, filled with heavy goods; sometimes bales
are strapped on his back, fastened either with
cordage made of the palm-tree or leathern thongs:
and sometimes two or more will bear a sort of
litter, in which women and children ride with con-
siderable ease. The animal is so docile and steady,
so regular in his movements and precise in his
steps, and withal so capable of sustaining a very
large and unwieldy burthen, that his driver seldom
hesitates about the bulk or the awkwardness in
any other way of what he places on his back.’
But the patience of the camel in bearing every
sort of load, and his uncomplaining nature when
overburthened, sometimes lead to oppression. He
is occasionally too heavily weighted; and though
there prevails an opinion that he will not rise with
too great a load, he often sinks under his burthen and
expires.’’
Pace of swift Dromedary and Distance he can
Travel.—"Purchas, writing two centuries ago of
the three sorts of camel, says:—‘The third sort,
called Kagualiel, is meagre and small, able to travel
(tor they are not used to burdens) above 100 miles
in a day; and the King of Tombuctoo can send mes-
sengers on such camels to to Segelraesse or Darha,
900 miles distant, in seven or eight days, without
stay or change by the way.’ This is a statement
which we might conceive to be exaggerated if we
were to assume the speed and endurance of the
'-orse as points of comparison. But the creatures
u(e esselit' * different, anjJ the relation of thedd
geographer oorne 0.. mimpeachable testi-
mony. The Kagualiel of Jru.chas is the Heirci or
Maherry of the desert.”
Mounting the Camel.— " The first experiment
which a European makes in bestriding a dromedary
is generally a service of some little danger, from
the peculiarity of the animal’s movement in rising.
Denon has described this with his usual vivacity.
During the French invasion of Egypt, a part of Des-
saix's division, to which the scientific traveller was
attached, was sent with camels to a distant post
across the desert. The boute-selle (the mounting
at a signal) was very amusing. The camel, slow as
he generally is in his actions, lifts up his hind legs
very briskly at the instant his rider is in the saddle;
the man is thus thrown forward, a similar move-
ment of the fore leg throws him backward. Each
motion is repeated, and’it is not till the fourth
movement, wlien the camel is fairly on his feet,
that the rider can recover his balance. None of us
could resist the first impulse, and thus nobody
could laugh at his companions.” Mr. MacFarlane
tells us in his letter that upon his first camel adven-
ture he was so unprepared for the probable efiect
of the creature’s rising behind, that he was thrown
over his head, to the infinite amusement of the
Turks, who were laughing at his inexperience.
Camel Food.—‘‘The expense of maintaining
these valuable creatures is remarkably little; a cake
of barley, a few dates, a handful of heans, will suf-
ce, in addition to the hard and prickly shrubs which
they find in every district but the very wildest of
the desert. They are particularly fond of those
vegetable productions which other animals would
never touch, such as plants which are like spears
and daggers in comparison with the needles of
the thistle, and which often pierce the incautious
traveller’s boot. He might wish such thorns
eradicated from the earth, if he did not behold the
camel contentedly browsing upon them; for he
thus learns that Providence has made nothing in
vain. The sant-tree is amongst these substances,
and in this the camel especially delights. These
hard shrubs probably contain large quantities of
saline matter. In the Great Desert Kiley saw the
camels crop off the thornbushes as thick as a man’s
linger, ineir teeth are peculiarly adapted for such
a diet. Differing from all other ruminating tribes
they have two strong cutting teeth in the upper
jaw, and of the six grinding teeth, one on each side
in the same jaw has a crooked form; their canine
teeth, of which they have two in each jaw, are very
strong; and in the lower jaw, the two external
cutting teeth have a pointed form, and the
foremost of the grinders is also pointed and
crooked. They are thus provided with a
most formidable apparatus for cutting and
tearing the hardest vegetable substance.
But the camel is at the same time organized so as
to graze upon the finest herbage and browse upon
the most delicate leaves, for his upper lip being
divided he is enabled to nip off the tender shoots
and turn them into his mouth with the gieatest
facility. Whe.her the sustenance, therefore, which
he finds be of the coarsest or the softest kind, he
is equally prepared to be satisfied with and to
enjoy it.”
Abstinence from Water.— “Upon the subject
of the camel’s power of abstinence from water,
there have been many exaggerations, which Burck-
hardt ascribes to the credulity of those trav-
ellers who draw their information only from brag-
ging Arabians and Moors. This power, however,
is extraordinary enough to excite our wonder and
admiration without any assistance from fanciful
description. The camel often travels three and
four days without water, drinking 50, 60, or even
100 pounds weight, when he has an opportunity,
and the best camels for transport will sometimes
endure a thirst of 10 or 12 days, though many of
them perish under this privation. When we see
what the man and the horse require in those arid
countries, such a power in the camel must appear
one of the most remarkable provisions of nature.”
The Camel on Sand and Stones.—Whatever be
the nature of the road they toil over, they plod
steadily on. Burckhardt says:—“lt is an erroneous
opinion that the camel delights on sandy ground.
It is true that he crosses with less dilficulty than
any other animal; but wherever the sands are deep
the weight of himself and his load makes his foot
sink into the sand at every step, and he groans
and often sinks under his burden. It is the hard
gravelly ground of the desert which is most agree-
able to this animal.” Major Durham says that in
the Stony Desert ‘the sharp points bruise their
feet, and they totter and fall under theii heavy
burdens.” This is an apparent and not a real
contradiction between these two excellent autho-
rities. The foot of the camel is adapted to tread
upon a smooth surface, whether that surface be
hard or soft. The camel, having a very large
spreading and elastic foot, moves with ease over
any smooth surface, and does not sink into the
sand with his heavy lading and his large body in
the same way that he would if his foot were small
and hoofed as that of the horse.”
The Camel’s Peculiarities. Mr. Eussell, the
special correspondent of the Times , thus writes of
the camel, from India:—“The utile was never so
little mingled with the dulce as in the instance of
the camel. He is a horribly necessary animal,
ungainly in his gait, disagreeable in his disposition,
misanthropical and dyspeptic, and teetotal in his
habits, sharp and unrelenting in his bites, of unac-
countable fantasies in his likings and dislikings,
unreasonably susceptible of pressure and oppres-
sion—a sort of inborn animal democrat, of a queru-
lous and morose turn of mind, and possessed of
the power, which he delights to use, of making the
most horrible noises with his throat, his jaws, his
tongue, and his stomach. With loud protesta-
tions they submit to monstrous cruelties from
their keepers, and bite innocent and well-meaning
people who are like to take an interest in
They will allow, without anything more than a
grunt, their leader to tear open their nostrils with
a jerk of the string winch is passed through tlm
cartilage. Ten to one they will spit at you spite-
fully if you approach to otter them a piece of bread.
They will march for days, the nose of one fastened
to the tail of another in endless procession,
and never seek to escape from bondage; and yet


the same creatures will gnash their tusks awfully
at an ‘unhappy European who ventures to rub
their rugged sides. However, they form an insti-
tution of India—possibly a part of the traditional
policy—and they must be respected accordingly.”
Mr. Russell, however, does not attempt to depre-
ciate the services of the camel as a beast of burden
in an arid country, and its usefulness in this capa-
city can hardly be doubted in the face, of the
experience of centuries, and of that of thL inhabi-
tants of so many hot countries. Indeed, all ac-
counts seem to unite in attributing to the camel
everywhere the traditional characteristic of patient
endurance, as contrasted with the generous cou-
rage and impetuosity which are with equal una-
nimity attributed to the horse.
I think 1 have said enough to show that a time
may come when the camel will be in this colony
as numerous, as cheap, as common, and easily
managed as the ox or bullock, and when the ordi-
nary bushman will be able to explore with his as-
sistance, without difficulty or expense, every por-
tion of this island continent, and to travel with
ease, and alone, from east to west, and from south
to north. There is still a large portion of the N orch-
West which is utterly unknown, but which might
easily become known by the help of camels. Over-
land roads to Western Australia and to North Aus-
tralia are required, for although the latter has been
traversed, we know too little about the permanent
waters to make the journey safe for small
parties or rapid travelling. Indeed, something
in this direction will have to be undertaken on the
receipt of news from the Northern Territory, now
daily expected; and a few camels would greatly
facilitate any overland party. I understand that
some of Mr. Elder’s herd would be available for
this purpose, if required by the Government.
In conclusion T think that everyone who desires
that the English race may rapidly be dispersed
over, and may strongly grasp, the whole of this
great country, over so much of which hot and dry
and unaccustomed climates prevail, must feel satis-
faction in the thought that Mr. Elder’s experiment
of introducing the camel into South Australia has,
on the whole, prpved so successful, and that it has
been made upon a scale which premises, within
the term of a few years, to make the camel as a
beast of burden available for the use of the poorest
settlei in the most distant and most desolate of our
scrubs and deserts. In speaking of this success,
however, Ido not refer to financial -esults. These
are at present in nubibus. Under favourable cir-
cumstances it must be many years before there
can be any adequate return for the large and con-
tinued outlay involved in the adventure.
Andrews, Thomas, & Clark Printers, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.
