

PAPER
ON THE
SYSTEM OE TAXATION IN
FORCE IN FIJI.
Read before the Royal Colonial Institute ,
THE
DON. SIR ARTHUR GORDON, G.C.M.G.,
18</i March, 1879.
LONDON:
HARRISON AND SONS, ST. MARTIN’S LANE,
|) aiders in ©rbinarg io Dcr Hhijeslg.




P,U4.- I, a icbr
ON THE SYSTEM OF TAXATION IN FOECE
IN FIJI.
I have been requested to read before the Royal
Colonial Institute a paper containing an account of
the system of taxation which, with the consent and
approval of Her Majesty’s Government, has been
established among the native population of Fiji.
Having received permission from the Secretary of
State for the Colonies to accept this invitation, I
have not hesitated to do so. Whatever judgment
may be ultimately formed of the system in question,
I am desirous that it should be. based on authentic
information as to its true merits, and not on erroneous
impressions or partial reports. I therefore gladly
avail myself of the opportunity now afforded me to
explain its true nature. I venture to hope, moreover,
that an account of what is in fact an experiment
of a somewhat novel character, may not be in itself
altogether uninteresting. The stage on which that
experiment has been tried is, no doubt, distant and
obscure, but the trial itself involves principles of
considerable importance and, it may be, wide appli-
cation.
There may be some present who have come in
search of miscellaneous information of a wider scope,
and will hear with dissatisfaction the announcement
I have now made. I regret that any should meet with
disappointment; but it appears to me to be impos-
sible, in such an address as this, to treat with
advantage so large a subject as the foundation,


past history, present position, and future prospects
of the colony, I should have to choose between the
presentation of a sketch so general as to be destitute
of the slightest value, or the production of a paper
of a length unsuitable for a meeting of this descrip-
tion. I have, therefore, determined, to confine myself
to the single topic which I have chosen, to state
simply the objects which the legislation in question is
designed to effect, and to describe the plan and actual
working of the scheme; leaving argument as to its
merits or defects, for the most part, to others.
Before entering upon any description of the
system itself, however, it is essential, to render it
intelligible, that I should offer some explanation of
the circumstances which led to its adoption ; and, in
doing this, I am compelled to review, though briefly,
the condition of the colony at the period immediately
succeeding its foundation. Many of those present are,
no doubt, already familiar with much that I shall
repeat, but it is safer to assume that this is not the
case; and whilst I must apologize to those whom I
may weary by repetition of facts well known to them,
I shall, yet, for the sake of clearness, speak as if to
those who have no acquaintance with the subject.
Sovereignty over the Fiji Group was formally
assumed by Great Britain on the 10th October, 1874.
The archipelago contains seventy or eighty inhabited
islands, of which some are of considerable size ; the
largest being of about the same area as the counties
of Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Middlesex, Berkshire and
Hampshire, and the next in size somewhat smaller
than Cornwall, Devonshire and Somerset, Every
kind of tropical culture can be earned on in them


with advantage, and their climate is, for the tropics,
unusually healthy. At the time of their cession
they were inhabited by about 1,500 whites and
150,000 natives.
The government of the new dependency was in
the first instance conducted by an administrator,
acting under the direction of Sir Hercules Robinson,
the Governor of New South Wales, and I did not
myself reach the colony until June, 1875,
The state of things which disclosed itself to me
on my arrival was not encouraging. A terrible pesti-
lence, heedlessly admitted, had swept away one-third
of the entire native population. Though its violence
had diminished, its ravages had not wholly ceased.
Even where it had passed by, it had left behind it
terror and despair. The same cause had carried
off many of the imported labourers of the planters,
who, from a variety of causes, were themselves, for
the most part, reduced to the greatest straits. The
revenue had fallen short of even the modest estimate
of Sir H. Robinson, whilst the expenditure had
largely exceeded his anticipations. The introduction
of labour from other parts of the Pacific had almost
ceased. The season had been unfavourable for
agriculture, wet, and unhealthy, and gloom and
discontent pervaded all classes.
The white settlers had apparently imagined that
by some magical process the assumption of sovereignty
by Great Britain was to be followed by an immediate
change from poverty to wealth, from struggling
indigence to prosperity, that their claims to land
would be at once allowed, that an abundant supply
of labour would be at once found for them, and that


their claims to supremacy over the natives, which the
Government of Cakobau, —whatever its faults, —had
steadily refused to recognise, would be at once acknow-
ledged. They were, therefore, bitterly disappointed
to find their hopes not realised.
The natives were cowed and disheartened by the
pestilence, which they believed to have been intro-
duced purposely to destroy them ; —a belief en-
couraged, I am ashamed to say, by some of our own
countrymen, and which was probably the main cause
of the disturbances in the Highlands of Yiti Levu in
the following year. They were perplexed by reiterated
assurances from the whites living among them that by
the mere fact of annexation to Great Britain their
own laws and customs had been abolished ; that their
rules of succession, and for the transmission of pro-
perty, had no longer any existence, that many of
their cherished habits were illegal, that their lands
had become the property of the Crown, and that
they would themselves be expected, if not required,
to labour on white men’s plantations. They were
told, moreover, that all distinctions of rank among
them were at an end, a notification more perplexing
than pleasing, in its suddenness, to the people gene-
rally, and which naturally caused irritation and
distrust among the higher chiefs.
A third element in the population, the immi-
grant labourers from other parts of Polynesia, whose
contracts of service had long expired, but whose
employers had no means to send them back to their
homes, and who had remained in some cases for
many years in by no means voluntary servitude, were
exasperated by the bad faith they had experienced.


At the end of the year 1875, I found myself
with a revenue of XI 6,000, from which I had to
meet an expenditure of over X 70,000, and at the head
of a dissatisfied and impoverished white population
of some 1,500 persons, in the midst of a native
population nearly one hundred times as large, suspi-
cious, watchful and uneasy; while on but too many
estates, bands of wrongfully detained immigrants
formed a real, though apparently unrecognised, source
of danger.
It is not my object, in the present paper, to narrate
the steps taken'in the administration of the govern-
ment since that time. Suffice it to say, generally,
that the revenue of the colony has swelled rapidly
from £16,000 in 1875, to £38,000 in 1876 ; £47,000
in 1877, and over £61,000 in 1878,* while the
expenditure has been reduced to a level with the
income ; that the receipts from Customs, which were
in 1875 but £B,OOO, amounted in 1878, under practi-
cally the same tariff, to £20,000 ; that the imports
have nearly doubled in value, and the exports, (which
exceed the imports,) have quite done so ; that the
Polynesian labourers, whose term of service had
expired, have been conveyed home and replaced by
labour newly recruited ; that more than 800 land
titles have been settled after laborious and minute
investigation; that measures have been passed by
the Legislative Council which do honour to those
who framed them, and compare favourably with those
of many older colonies ; that the Government service
has been organized, Courts of Law established ; that
* The revenue for 1879 is estimated at £75,150.


a dangerous disturbance has been put down quickly,
cheaply, and effectually; that capital is being invested,
and that after a careful investigation, extending over
more than a year, it has been reported to me, by most
competent, and most cautious, scientific authority, that
the annual value of the agricultural exports of the
colony, when its powers of production have been fully
developed, will probably exceed <£10,000,000 sterling.
It is necessary, however, to an understanding of the
system of taxation, which I have undertaken to explain,
that I should dwell with somewhat more minuteness
on the measures adopted to secure the good will,
and promote the interests of the native race.
The mode in which subject races have been
dealt with by alien rulers has varied in every age
and place, but nearly all these varieties of treat-
ment are in fact governed by one or other of three
principles of action.
The doctrine, that a superior race may right-
fully oppress and utilize for its own benefit the
existence of a subject one, has been, in former times,
very general, and it is at this day not only very
far more widely spread than it ought to be, but far
more so than is perhaps commonly suspected. But
this is not a principle of policy which any civilized
government of the present day would avow, or, I
trust, on which it would, without avowing it, act.
A somewhat better sentiment has been that which
combines an acknowledgment, (though perhaps a
grudging acknowledgment,) that strict justice is
required from the dominant race to the inferior,
with a jealousy ever. on the watch not to ex-
tend that justice one hair’s breadth beyond the


narrowest limits within which it can be restrained,
and to take every opportunity, which can without
manifest bad faith be taken, of improving the position
of the conqueror at the expense of the conquered.
A third and higher principle of action is that
which recognizes the interests of all classes of the
population as equal objects of solicitude. But in
this case the really benevolent intentions of riders
are often frustrated. The most enlightened views
and the most liberal legislation can be neutralized
by the social aversion between discordant races
which may accompany a full concession of political
rights, and which renders their practical exercise
impossible. Even where no such conscious repulsion
exists, there is not unfrequently a want of imagina-
tion on the part of the dominant race which prevents
any conception by them of matters from a native
point of view, and produces a lack of tolerance for
laws or usages not in accordance with European
modes of thought, which is often not only as in-
jurious as real injustice, but frequently leads up to
it. Indeed it is probable that as much real wrong
has been inflicted by the conscientious but narrow
minded desire to act in accordance with maxims in
themselves generally sound, but not of universal
application, as by violence and consequent tyranny.
Where the governing power itself has not shaken
off such prejudices, it is probable that the harm
done by it will be in almost exact proportion to the
degree of activity with which it strives to effect good.
Under the influence of a desire to effect improve-
ment, a pressure is put upon the native to adopt
European habits, perhaps unsuitable, and almost


certainly distasteful. He is subjected to laws which
are strange to him, and which in some respects conflict
with his own ideas of justice, whilst he is aware that,
although on a footing of nominal equality before
them with his white fellow subjects, the advantage
in any contest under such laws is all on the side of
those who have long been familiar with their operation.
He is urged to simulate ideas which are unintelligible
to him. Impatience at the ignorance and levity, if
not misconduct, too frequently displayed by natives
in authority, leads to their services being set aside,
and all native agency is replaced by that of white
officials and magistrates. Something, —perhaps much,
perhaps little, —is done for the native ; nothing is left
to be done by him, or in his own way.
Such a mode of treatment I hold not only to be
rash and unwise, but, where a native population
greatly outnumbers the whites, to' be also attended
with no inconsiderable danger. Even where the
settlers are too strong to be resisted with success,
such a policy may lead to collisions; while at best
the natives, bewildered and depressed, deprived of
all interest and object in life, sink into indolence,
apathy, and vice, and exposed almost without any
safeguard to snares and temptations innumerable,
they, lose position, property, self respect, and health,
and perish from off the face of the earth.
It is manifest that the more the native polity is
retained, native agency employed, and changes
avoided, until naturally and spontaneously called for,
the less likely are these results to follow. But it is
not enough to abstain from seeking hastily to replace
native institutions by unreal imitations of European
models.


The moral sense of a semi-civilized race is often
very unlike our own, hut is not on that account
the less real; and it would be a great mistake
to suppose that it does not exercise a most
powerful influence upon thought and action. A
native may suffer very patiently what we should
deem a grievous wrong, because to him it may not
present the same intolerable appearance; but if rights
really cherished by him be touched, if his moral sense
be shocked, or his honour seriously wounded, it may
be doubted whether he will ever again entertain
any belief in the justice of those who have, as he
conceives, wronged him, respect those who have
shown, what seems to him, moral weakness, or
forgive the insult he has received. Severity he
can pardon, and perhaps admire ; some things which
an European could not forgive,—(blows, for instance,
or an imputation of falsehood), —he may take with
indifference and easily condone; but there are
offences which are indelible, and wherever white
and native races meet, such offences are sure to be
committed, partly in careless indifference, and as
frequently through well-meant blundering. It is
therefore of the utmost importance to seize, if possible,
the spirit in which native institutions have been,
framed, and endeavour so to work them as to develope
to the utmost possible extent the latent capacities of
the people for the management of their own affairs,
without exciting their suspicion or destroying their
self respect.
Of course the application of these principles
must vary greatly according to the capacities and
condition of the people with whom we are called


on to deal. No one would dream of placing on one
level the acute and cultivated Hindoo or Cingalese
and the wandering and naked savage of the Austra-
lian bush. The Fijian resembles neither; but he has
more affinity with the former than the latter.
He has not indeed the literature, the art, the
culture and luxury of eastern civilization, but he has
in many ways advanced beyond the ruder stages of
savage life, and possesses those receptive powers which
fit him for far higher social and intellectual advance-
ment.
The people are not nomadic ; they live a settled
life in towns of good and comfortable houses; they
respect and follow agriculture; their social and
political organization is complex; they amass property,
and have laws for its descent; their land tenures
are elaborate; they read, they write and cypher.
Women are respected, hold a high social position,
and are exempt from agricultural labour. There is
a school in almost every village. Their chiefs possess
accounts at the bank, conduct correspondence, and
generally exhibit capacities for a higher grade of
civilization. On the whole I should class them in
their present condition with the Hovas of Madagascar,
whom in many respects they much resemble. Like
them, the Fijians all profess ah at least nominal
allegiance to Christianity, and that it has largely
influenced the life and character of great masses of
the population, not the most incredulous can, I
think, deny. Like them too they have shown a
gradual progress, which is in my estimation of far
more hopeful augury than a rapid imitativeness of
unfamiliar habits.


The political unit is the village. In every one of
these is found a local chief, practically hereditary,
hut nominally appointed by the District Council, of
which I shall hereafter speak. He is assisted by a
council of elders and certain executive officers, a
magistrate, frequently the chief’s brother, one or more
constables to carry out his decisions, a town crier,
(an hereditary and important officer,) and a garden
overseer. The resemblance of this organization to
that of an Indian village will at once strike everyone ;
but as there is certainly no Aryan strain in the
Fijian race, I am inclined to conceive that this form
of organization is not essentially Aryan, but simply
the shape into which the first elements of society
when emerging from barbarism naturally crystalize.
An uncertain number of villages,—sometimes few,
sometimes many, —are grouped together under a
superior officer, the Buli Of the district, who once a
month assembles all his town chiefs, and discusses
with them, in the Bose ni Tikina or district council,
the affairs of his own district. These district councils
nominate the chiefs of towns, whom they may also
suspend from office. They discuss and regulate all
local matters, such as the cleansing and scavenging of
villages, the management of animals belonging to the
different communities as distinguished from individual
property, the keeping open and maintenance of roads
and bridges, the control of public bathing places.
The council also superintends the payment out of
local rates, of the village constables. In a similar
manner the Buli districts are grouped under the
headship of a greater chief, the Boko Tui, of whom
there are twelve, and each of whom twice a year


assembles the Bulls of his province in the Bose vaka
Yasana or provincial council, where the local affairs
of the province are discussed and settled, by which
local rates are imposed, and to which each Buli
makes a detailed report of the condition of his own
district.
This organization is purely native, and of spon-
taneous growth. To it has now been added a meeting
annually of the Boko Tuis with myself, thus
completing the chain from the village to the
Governor. This Bose vaka Turanga, or Great Council,
is also attended by tbe Native Stipendiary Magis-
trates, and by two Bulis from each province, chosen
by the Bose vaka Yasana. At it each Boko Tui in
turn makes a detailed report of the state of his
province, and suggestions are offered as to executive
and legislative measures which it is thought desirable
by those assembled that the Government should
adopt. The suggestions made by the Bose vaka
Turanga have received, and I think merited, the warm
commendation of Her Majesty’s Government, on
account of the good sense and practical capacity for
affairs therein displayed. There is a curious though
unconscious resemblance between them and some of
the short Acts of the ancient Scottish Parliaments
in the first years of the fifteenth century; and it
should always be borne in mind that the state of
society for which they are intended is not that of
England in the ■ present day, but more nearly
resembles that of the Highlands of Scotland some
three or four hundred years ago, or that of the
remote parts of Ireland in the days of Queen
Elizabeth; except, indeed, that property and life


enjoy in Fiji a security then unknown in either
Scotland or Ireland; that reading and writing are
far more widely known among Fijians than among
the Celtic population of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries; and that they are far better housed than
the Highland and Irish peasantry of either that or a
much later day. This council has, however, no legis-
lative power. Its resolutions are mere recommenda-
tions. If the Governor thinks it expedient to adopt
them, they are brought before a Board composed
partly of Europeans and partly of Natives, which
has the power of enacting regulations for the conduct
of the natives, which, when so enacted, possess,
subject to the approval or disapproval of the Legis-
lative Council, the force of law. In framing these
regulations it has been thought best to retain them
as far as possible in the same shape in which they
had been framed by their native authors, only alter-
ing them where they contained provisions manifestly
objectionable, or where some modification appeared
likely to give them greater practical effect, or render it
easier to bring them into operation. It was not sought
to alter them merely because it might appear to us that
better could have been devised when abstractly con-
sidered. It was always home in mind that these
regulations had, to a great extent, to be administered
by the natives themselves, and that a code which
they thoroughly understood and had taken part in
preparing, and which was in harmony with their own
ideas and modes of thought, would be far more easily
worked, and far more willingly and intelligently
obeyed, than much better regulations imposed by
external force, but which they might neither compre-


hend nor appreciate, and which would therefore he of
far less real utility.
The working of native self-government, native
courts, and native legislation, is, however, foreign to
the object of the present paper, though not itself
uninteresting. Briefly, I may say that I have no
reason to be dissatisfied with the results. I have no
doubt that the native magistrates make mistakes,
and sometimes grave mistakes ; I have no doubt
that in individual instances the Boko Tuis are harsh
and overbearing; but it is, I think, far better that
they should now and then be so than that all share
in the administration should be taken away from
them. The employment of natives in the adminis-
tration of the government was, indeed, a financial
necessity, for the means did not exist, and do not
yet exist, for the payment of such a staff of white
officials as would have been required had the services
of natives been dispensed with. But had no such
imperative cause existed to render their employment
inevitable, I should equally have deemed it to be
required by considerations of policy. Unless removed
from their habitual places of residence, and treated
with a harshness wholly incompatible with the under-
standing on which the islands had been ceded to
England, chiefs of intelligence, high rank, and great
social influence, would have become, if stripped of all
authority and deprived of all employment except that
of brooding over their own changed condition, very
dangerous elements in the colony. For, be it remem-
bered, the legal non-recognition of their position
would not have in any way deprived them of the
power they possessed over those who yielded to them


an instinctive and unquestioning obedience. As it
is, they are cheerful and willing assistants to the
Government in the performance of its duties.
The results of the system actually adopted
were apparent when the mountaineers of Yiti Levu
attacked the Christian villages of the Singatoka.
I appealed to the Hokos for help, and named
thirty men as the contingent each was to send. Had
the same state of mind existed that I found on my
arrival, sullen and reluctant submission would at best
have been given to the order, and more probably
excuses would have been made for the non-appear-
ance of the force ; the mischief would have spread,
and a long and costly war would have resulted.
What was in fact the answer to the appeal % From
almost every province came double the number of
men asked for, picked men out of a host of
volunteers, and the troubles were suppressed by
native forces alone, without delay and at a trifling
cost.
• I dwell on these things because I should be
sorry if it were supposed that taxation was the
only,—or the chief, —object to which attention had
been turned, but, as that is the topic which I have
chosen for my paper, I must now more directly
address myself to it.
Forming, as they do, ninety-nine hundredths of
the inhabitants of the colony; causing, as they do, a
large part of its expenditure on police, administra-
tion of justice, &c., it is only right that the native
population should contribute, and that in no incon-
siderable measure, to defray expenses incurred for
their protection and on them behalf. The mode in


which such contribution may best be made, is, how-
ever, by no means easy of determination. To the
ordinary sources of revenue the natives pay compara-
tively little. With the exception of cloth, and
cutlery, of which large quantities are bought by them,
they use few articles on which customs duties are
levied. They do not consume spirits, they do not
take out licences, and they have no need of stamps.
Any impost upon them must, therefore, to be pro-
ductive, be one of a special character.
The tax imposed on natives by Cakobau’s Govern-
ment was an uniform poll-tax of a £1 per man and
4s. per woman, throughout the Group. I, how-
ever, find it difficult, and indeed impossible, to
suppose that revenue was the object contemplated
in the imposition of this tax, or that its payment
was ever seriously looked for. If any such expecta-
tions existed, they were doomed to disappointment.
The largest sum ever obtained in any one year
from a population of, at that time, certainly not less
than 150,000, was £6,000, and of this sum a large
part, as I will presently explain, was not, in fact,
received from natives as payment of their tax, or
indeed from natives at all.
I believe that the main design of the native
poll-tax, when first imposed, and as it existed on the
arrival of the British Commissioners in Fiji in 1874,
was that of furnishing through its instrumentality a
large supply of labour to the plantations of the white
settlers. And in this respect it no doubt worked
successfully. The unknown consequences of dis-
obedience to the order of the “ Matanitu ” (the
equivalent of the Indian “Sircar”) exercised a


mysterious terror over the minds of the natives,
which induced them in many cases, in consideration
of the advance of their taxes on the part of a planter,
to contract with him for a year or more of gratuitous
service. These, however, were of course the excep-
tions. In the majority of cases, the tax was simply
not paid, and could not be paid. When this hap-
pened the legal penalty for default was six months’
imprisonment, which was spent in labour on the
plantation of any settler who would pay to the
Government the amount of the defaulter’s tax. But,
though six months was the limit allowed by law for
such assignment, the magistrates of that day were
not very scrupulous in their reading of the Act, and
sentences of a year, and even eighteen months,
seem to have been pronounced; while by the imposi-
tion of heavy costs, and the assumption that the default
of their payment might be similarly punished by “ im-
prisonment on a plantation,” even these periods
were almost indefinitely extended.
A faint glimpse, and but a faint glimpse, of the
working of this system is given by some of the in-
closures to Sir H. Robinson’s despatch of the 16th of
October, 1874, printed at page 6 of the Blue Book
laid before Parliament in 1875. The more search I
have made into the records of that time, and the
better I become acquainted with their contents, the
darker does that period appear to me. I have in vain
endeavoured to obtain accurate statistics of the
numbers torn from their homes, and consigned to
servitude under the operation of this law, but its
effects are sufficiently visible. Whole districts have
been well nigh depopulated, and the reckless depor-


tation of the male inhabitants, has left two formerly
fine provinces almost deprived of cultivators. The
memory of these times is terrible to the native
population, and any step which might seem to be in
the direction of renewing them is to be profoundly
deprecated.
I should add, that the amount paid by planters to
Government for these assignments of labour appear
under the head of native taxes, as do also, of course,
those to which I have previously referred, where the
payment was made by the native, though advanced
to him by the planter.
With these deductions, the amount of tax
actually paid by natives themselves becomes very
small; but even of this small amount a large portion
was in fact actually paid in kind, the articles taken
being estimated at a low valuation, or, as I was
particularly informed by the late Commodore Goode-
nougb, invariably at a third or fourth of their proper
value.
Sir H, Robinson felt strongly the impossibility
of maintaining such a system, which he rightly
described as one by which the services of the entire
male population of whole districts had been in effect
sold to European planters in other and distant
islands. He at once abolished it, and substituted an
arrangement by which all but adult males were
excused from taxation, and the tax of these men fixed
at twenty days’ labour in the year, redeemable by
money payments of various amounts, according to the
supposed wealth, or poverty, of the district in which
they lived.
Sir H. Robinson, I fancy, imagined that redemp-


tion in money of the obligation to labour would be
generally resorted to, and at first, while the population
remained under the impression that a money poll-tax
still continued to be exacted by the Government, this
was to some degree the case ; but, as a better know-
ledge of their liabilities spread, and especially after
it was found that the redemption payment could not,
as heretofore, be made in kind, there arose a disposi-
tion to claim the right of discharging the obligation
by three weeks’ labour.
This, therefore, was the problem which I had
presented to me:—Should I continue the labour-
tax of 1874; should I re-enact and attempt to
enforce the direct tax in money of the old Fijian
Government; or should I endeavour to provide some
substitute for the existing system which should bring
larger returns to the treasury, and yet be neither
oppressive, nor opposed to the traditionary habits and
feelings of the people ?
The labour-tax in its existing form was clearly
unsustainable. It is impossible to transport the
whole population for twenty days to those places
where public works are being carried on. Such
places are few, and in most districts of the colony
there are really no public works on which the
inhabitants can be employed. In such cases either
works have to be invented which are not needed, and
which lead to an employment —(or rather a waste) —
of labour in no way beneficial to the colony, as well
as an expense of supervision wholly thrown away, or
the tax must be quietly permitted to fall into disuse.
The practical alternative, therefore, was the
renewal of the poll-tax of the old Fijian Government,
or the substitution of some as yet untried system.


I have already mentioned some of the reasons
which rendered a return to the poll-tax of former
times impolitic and objectionable ; but even if it were
not associated in the minds of the natives with ideas
of tyranny and misrule, and were as efficient, as it
proved, in fact, an inefficient agent in the production
of revenue, I should still think it open to objections
which would be in my mind fatal to it. They
are :
(1.) Its literal equality, but substantial inequality
of incidence, the greatest Chief and the poorest
servant, the strongest youth and the feeblest elder,
all paying alike.
(2.) The facilities it affords for corruption. The
collectors were necessarily, for the most part, natives
of inferior rank—constables, or less —and the in-
stances of favouritism on the one hand, and oppres-
sion on the other, of which they were guilty, were,
I have every reason to believe, countless.
(3.) Its individuality ; which I think one of its
greatest faults as a system of native taxation. Among
natives, the individual invariably acts as part of a
family or village, and the traditional feeling of cen-
turies will only slowly change under the influence of
altered times and manners. As yet no alteration
has taken place in this respect, and it is necessary
to accept the fact, deal with it as we may.
(4.) The abuses to which it was liable as an
engine for forcing men into involuntary servitude,
to which some allusion has been already made.
(5.) The impossibility of practically enforcing it.
There are limits to the power of a government to
inflict punishment, and if, as would often have hap-


pened, whole districts had failed to pay, it would have
been impossible to commit the inhabitants en masse
to prison.
But, if the idea of re-enacting a poll-tax be aban-
doned, no other direct money-tax could be imposed.
In fact, there is a species of absurdity in the imposi-
tion of pecuniary taxation on a population, nine-tenths
of which possess no money. I know it has been
said that if they do not possess money, they, at least,
might all become possessed of it by engaging to work
for planters. I confess lam unable to see the force
of this assumption. The ordinary wages given by a
planter to an able-bodied man, were, in 1875, Is. a
week, or £2 12s. per annum. This is a small sum
from which to pay a tax ranging from £1 downwards,
even if the wages be paid in money, and not, as was
invariably the case, in “ trade,” of often questionable
value. Whether it is to the native’s advantage to
leave his taro patch and yam plantations, his own
village, his generally comfortable home and his
family, to work on some distant estate for 525. a year,
may be questioned, nor do I think he can reasonably
be expected to do so, except under strong compul-
sion.
But if a money-tax be not enforced, all that re-
mains is the alternative of contributions in produce,
or the performance of gratuitous services. Either of
these aids to Government would have been in accord-
ance with the habits and usages of the people, but
there are obvious reasons why the latter should, if
possible, be avoided.
The payment of taxes in money is of course
generally preferable to their payment in kind; but


payment in money being in Fiji impracticable, the
real question in this case was between payment in
kind and payment in labour, if any payment is to be
made at all. Payment in labour was a course open
to so many objections, that the idea of it was at
once and altogether set aside by me.
Although taxation in money is generally prefer-
able, and taxation in kind unusual, the latter is by
no means unknown or unprecedented in -a British
possession. The present Earl Grey, no mean autho-
rity (and one who, by the way, was perfectly aware
that, in semi-civilized communities, “ taxation may
be more easily and justly levied in the shape of
tribute from the tribe, than in that of taxes due
from individuals”), once wrote as follows to Sir
Harry Smith: “ The most convenient form of
imposing a land tax in a rude state of society,
I believe to be that of requiring from all who
cultivate the soil, a tithe, or some fixed propor-
tion of the produce, as their contribution towards
the public expenditure. This is a mode of raising a
revenue for public purposes, which seems to have
been the first adopted by mankind in the earliest
stages of civilization, and to have prevailed generally
among all nations in the remotest periods of which
we know anything from history, while in Asia it
continues to the present day to be almost universal.
It is also a mode of taxation which, in any early
stage of civilization, when money is scarce, and when
little capital has been invested in land, seems to be
the least burdensome that can be had recourse to,
though, in a more advanced state of society, it is the
reverse.”


In the soundness of the principle of these
lemarks, 1 entirely concur.
After much consideration, I came to the follow-
ing conclusions :
(1.) That the taxation of natives, to be effective,
must be of the nature of a land tax, or corn rent,
levied on the district or village, rather than on
individuals.
(2.) That while such a tax could not at present
be obtained in money without the exercise of gross
oppression, a tax of produce could be easily raised,
with the best possible pecuniary results, and with
the yet greater advantage of stimulating native
industry, and largely increasing the native trade in
the Group,
(3.) That it would be undesirable that the
Government should take part in any complicated
trading operations or commercial dealings.
To carry out these views, the Native Taxes
Ordinance of 1876, was passed by the unanimous
vote of the Legislative Council of Fiji,
This enactment had both a social and financial
object. That it has been financially successful may
easily be demonstrated, nor will it, I think, be more
difficult to prove that it has equally succeeded as a
social experiment.
Of course the productiveness of a tax is no
guarantee that it may not at the same time be
theoretically objectionable and practically oppressive.
But it is nevertheless of some importance to show
that a measure intended, among other things, to
augment the revenue of the colony, has not in that
respect been the failure which was by some con-
fidently predicted.


This, however, is not the aspect of the question to
which I attach, or which those present at this
meeting will attach, exclusive or indeed primary
importance; and I will, therefore, only say that the
receipts from the native taxes, which in 1875, under
the old system of collection, amounted to but £3,499
2s. 5d,, reached in 1876, (during only a part of which
year the new scheme was in operation,) the sum of
£9,342 16s. 3 d., in 1877 that of £15,149 14s. Bd.,
and in 1878 amounted to nearly £19,000. The
exact figures for this last year have not yet reached
me.
The expenses incurred, in 1877, in collecting
and shipping the produce to Levuka, and in pay-
ment of the eighteen persons engaged in these
duties, amounted to £1,341 11s. 9d. A further
expenditure was also incurred for the purchase
and gratuitous distribution of seed, tools, bags,
&c., amounting to £386 ss. 10 d. I have not yet
received the accounts for 1878, but if the expenses
be assumed as equal to those of 1877, there will be a
clear profit to the Treasury on this tax of over
£17,000, while the expenses of collection will not
have reached £2,000.
Let us turn, however, to the more important
question of the social influence of the new law.
To answer this question, the nature and working
of its machinery must be first described.
The amount of the tax to be paid by each pro-
vince, estimated in pounds sterling, is annually
assessed by the Legislative Council, the assessment
being based, as regards each province, on mixed
considerations of the amount of the population, the


nature and productiveness of the soil, and the degree
of civilization which the province has attained.
There are twelve such provinces, not including
the two highland districts of Yiti Levu.
Tenders are called for, for the purchase of the
articles of produce in which the tax may be paid.
These articles have hitherto been—
Copra,
Cotton,
Candlenuts,
Tobacco, and
Maize,
to these. Coffee, which the natives have now begun to
grow largely, will soon be added. Beche de mer has
also been accepted from some places.
The highest tender is accepted in the case of
each article, and to the successful tenderer all the
produce delivered or collected in discharge of the
tax is transferred on its receipt by Government.
The amount of the assessment fixed, and the
prices offered for various articles of produce by the
successful tenderer or tenderers, are intimated to
the Boko Tui or native governor of each province.
The apportionment of the shares to be borne by
each district in the province, and the selection of the
article or articles of produce to be contributed, are
then made, nominally and according to law, by a
Board appointed under the Ordinance, but prac-
tically by the Bose vaka Yasana, or Provincial
Council, which, as I have previously explained, con-
sists of chiefs of districts, styled “ Bulls,” under the
presidency of the Boko Tui, frequently, though not
always, aided by the presence of the Governor’s
Commissioner.


The next stage is the apportionment of the tax
of each district by the Bose ni Tikina, or District
Council, consisting of the town chiefs of the district,
under the presidency of the Buli. By this body the
share of each several township in the district is
determined.
Lastly, the individual share of produce to be
contributed or work done by each family in each
village is settled by the town chief, aided by the
elders of the township.
The mode in which the articles are raised is left
to the people themselves to determine, and the
methods adopted have been very various. In some
places each village has grown its own tax produce
along with what it grew for sale or domestic use;
in others, several villages have combined to grow
their produce in one large plantation. These latter
are what, by those who wish to discredit the scheme,
are called “ Government gardens,” but, in fact, no such
gardens exist. The soil and the produce both belong
to the people themselves.
This machinery recognizes the primitive commu-
nity system, on which all political and social institu-
tions in Fiji are based, and which, even in the matter
of taxation, I found to be still in use as regarded the
rates for local purposes, such as payment of school-
masters and village police, which, quite irrespectively
of the Government, (and, as some would say, illegally,)
were imposed by the Provincial Councils in a species
of voluntary assessment.
This species of taxation is, consequently, familiar
to the natives, and thoroughly understood by them;
a fact which causes the pressure of the impost to


be more lightly felt than it would be if demanded
directly from the individual by the Government. It,
moreover, renders the natives themselves, to a very
large extent, active and responsible agents in the
collection of revenue.
Both of these are, I need hardly say, points of
very considerable importance.
But these were not the only results which the
system was aimed to effect, nor are they the only
objects which have been attained by its adoption.
As was anticipated by the framers of the
Ordinance, the cultivation of articles of export by the
natives has been largely promoted.
Fijians are by no means habitually indolent, as
by many careless observers they are supposed to be ;
and they are passionately fond of agriculture ; but
their cultivation, though very neat and careful, is
chiefly that of food plantations and articles for
domestic use.
Sugar, tobacco, and the paper mulberry are, and
have long been, almost universally grown in addition
to root crops and plantains; but they are not, as a
rule, grown with a view to exportation; although
cocoanuts have been manufactured into copra, and
yams in large quantities have long been sold, or
rather bartered, by the natives, to the white traders.
Under the new system, the area of native culti-
vation is rapidly increasing, and the lesson which it
was desired to inculcate has been already more than
partially learnt.
Another consequence of the adoption of this law
has been that of giving to the people a juster idea of
the value of the produce which they raise.


When a money-tax was insisted on, it was neces-
sary that at certain fixed periods every man should
make a payment in cash to the tax collector.
Very few natives, (except perhaps in the province
of Lan,) hoard or possess coin. Their wealth consists
in the accumulation of masses of property, not in
money ; and as the day on which the coin had to be
produced came round, an unscrupulous itinerant trader,
(and such traders are not always remarkable for a
high tone of commercial morality,) could obtain almost
anything, and almost any amount of anything in the
possession or under the control of natives, in. exchange
for the coveted and indispensable piece of coin
necessary to pay the tax. That coin the trader sold
as an article of barter on his own terms, and those
terms were usually Hard ones.
Even at the best of times, when this pressure did
not exist, the native only received for his produce
about half the price which the very same traders,
with the knowledge they still will obtain a hand-
some profit by their purchase, are now ready to give
to the Government for a similar amount of produce.
This has opened the eyes of the natives, and in
their private trading transactions they now in many
cases ask and obtain prices more nearly resembling
the true market value of the article ; while for the
surplus produce raised by them of those articles in
which the tax is paid, beyond what is required to
meet it, the Government practically obtains for them
a price equal to that which it receives itself from the
contractor for the tax produce ; and that too paid in
cash, and not (as had previously been the case) in
goods which the trader valued at his own discretion.


As 1 have before observed, the details of last year’s
operations have not yet reached me, but I know
that several hundred pounds were in this manner
gained by one locality alone in 1877.
Since this paragraph was written, —indeed this
very morning,—l have received letters from Fiji
which inform me that the amount of tax produce
sent in during 1878 in payment of taxes, in excess
of the amount required to meet the demands of the
assessment, and which has been sold for the benefit
of those contributing it, has realized between £1,500
and £2,000.
It may seem strange, when thus speaking of
apparently large transactions between the natives
and white traders, that there should have been any
difficulty on the part of the former in finding money
to pay a money-tax ; but in point of fact hardly
any money was received by them. Objectionable as
it seems to be thought by some to receive produce
instead of money from the natives, these same parties
see no objection to forcing on the natives as payment
for their produce imported goods estimated at a
wholly fictitious value.
A native, we will suppose, makes and wishes to
dispose of copra, which he offers to the white trader
who “ works ” that district. Say he has got half-a-
ton. This, according to present prices paid to the
Government, would be worth £6 10s.
The trader probably offers about £3, (until,
perhaps, very lately, it certainly would not have
been more, and probably less,) and this he pays in
cloth, knives, &c., of which he estimates the value
at perhaps double the proper amount; so that he


obtains £6 10s. worth of produce from the native
for goods worth £1 10s.
The native was often aware that he was imposed
on ; but until the new system of taxation was intro-
duced he had no alternative but to take what was
offered, or leave his produce unsold.
He can now sell at the prices which have been
publicly tendered.
The system of making an unduly large profit is
so regularly recognized, that, in most of the shops in
Levuka itself, there was in 1875'a “native price” on
articles, which was usually double the amount which
would be asked of a European. There is still, lam
informed, a “ native price” ; but whether the dis-
proportion between it and that asked of white
customers is as great as formerly, I am not aware.
The action of the Government affords a most
valuable protection to the native producer, by
ensuring him a market where he will receive cash
for his produce at a fair rate; and, paradoxical as it
may seem, it is, nevertheless, strictly true, that the
reception by the Government of produce in pay-
ment of taxes has been an important step towards
the introduction of cash transactions in the dealings
between the traders and the natives.
Another evil which the new system of taxation
was designed to check, and in respect to which
its operation has been most salutary, is nearly con-
nected with that indicated in the preceding para-
graph. I refer to the entanglement of the natives
in debt to traders.
It is the policy of some of these traders to
encourage the chiefs and people to become involved


in debt to them, on account of the indirect advan-
tages they are able to exact through the control they
thus exercise.
The results of this are most pernicious, both
politically and socially. Politically, it is mischievous,
inasmuch as it tends to render the great chiefs,
holding office under the Government, far less servants
of the Crown than servants of the trader to whom
they are in debt. The Crown could but dismiss
them. The trader could both ruin and imprison
them; and they naturally feared and obeyed him
most who had the greatest power to injure them.
The threat of being “ brought to Court,” if the
trader’s wishes or caprices were not complied with,
has, I have no doubt, led not only to great neglect
of orders from the Government, but to much active
oppression.
Socially, the indebtedness of the common people,
throwing them completely under the control of the
trader, has produced, and still produces, great evils;
reducing them sometimes to a condition which really
does bear some analogy to slavery. I know one
village, the whole population of which, under the
burden of old debts to a trader, was compelled to
work for him gratuitously whenever and as he chose,
with an entire disregard of their own interests or
convenience, and who, to avoid legal proceedings
against them, were ready to take any steps and
make any compliance directed by the creditor. I
have no moral doubt that other similar cases exist.
This is an evil which is, of course, but partially
abated by the new system of taxation ; but its effects
in diminishing it have been not inconsiderable.


It may, therefore, I think, be said, that this
measure has been successful, not only in raising a
considerable revenue, but in stimulating production,
and in securing a fair price for his produce to the
native producer, while it has replaced a mode of
taxation perfectly odious to the native, by one as
little distasteful to him as any system of taxation
can be, and has done much to substitute a system of
cash transactions for barter, and to free the native
population from the incubus of debt, thereby re-
moving very serious obstacles in the way of attempts
on the part of the Government to benefit the native.
I scarcely can bring myself to treat seriously the
accusation that the Ordinance in question has legalized
a system of slavery. No doubt the word “ slavery ”
is often rhetorically employed with great laxity of
meaning, A people living under civil, military, or
social institutions, of which the speaker disapproves,
is often said by an excited orator to be “ enslaved ” ;
and there may be some who in this vague sense hold,
with Ancient Pistol, that “base is the slave who
pays ” taxes at all. But those who are not prepared
to maintain that the people of those States of the
American Union, and of those British Colonies where
statute labour is enforced are, without their knowing
it, slaves, and that the institution of slavery flourishes
in Scotland because old women there pay the rent of
their crofts in hens and bolls of meal, cannot gravely
assert that the system of native taxation in Fiji has
reduced the people to a condition of slavery, or that
it possesses any one of the peculiar distinctive features
of that odious state of servitude.
It may, however, be urged that the system


resembles in some respects that which formerly
existed, and which, though lately modified, is still
to some degree in force in the Island of Java.
There are those who have carefully studied the
Dutch culture system, and whose judgment cannot
be lightly disregarded, who are of opinion that it is
open to objection, rather on account of practical
abuses in its working than from any inherent fault of
principle ; and that, defective as it is, it has on the
whole acted beneficially as a protection to the native
population.
It is, however, useless, and wholly beside the
question, to discuss the merits or demerits of Javanese
taxation; for, excepting on one point, where there is
a certain superficial resemblance, the two systems are
essentially opposed in principle and in practice. The
point of resemblance is, that in both there is a pay-
ment in kind; but there the resemblance ends. The
essential principle of the Dutch system is, that the
whole produce of certain kinds of culture is con-
sidered the property of the Government, and a small
remuneration according to its amount paid to the
producers, the Government taking all the profits of
the subsequent sale of the produce.
The essential principle of the Fiji scheme is that
the produce raised remains the property of the indivi-
dual or family of him who raised it; that out of it
he pays his portion of the tax assessed on his pro-
vince or town, and that he then disposes of the
remainder exactly as he pleases, and with the power
of obtaining a fair price for it.
If a Fijian and a Javanese had each raised, say,
10 bags of maize, at a time when the price of maize


was 10s. a bag, and the share of the provincial tax
falling to the Fijian was 10s., he would pay one bag to
the Government and have nine bags left to dispose
of, which, at 10s. per bag, would equal £4 10s.
The Javanese,, on the other hand, would have to
give up the whole of his ten bags to the Government,
which would only return to him a small money pay-
ment, say 3s. for each bag, equal to £1 10s., reserving
to itself the remainder of the sale price, equal to
£3 10s.
Again, the profit arising from an increase in
value of the article cultivated would in the one case
accrue to the cultivator, and in the other to the Go-
vernment. If a Fijian village was assessed at £2O,
represented in value by 300 lbs. of coffee, and the
price of coffee were so to rise that 200 lbs. would fetch
£2O, it is manifest that the cultivators would gain
by the addition of 100 lbs. of coffee to the amount
which they had raised to dispose of on their own
account. But no such benefit would accrue to a
Javanese village from such a rise of prices. The
whole of the crop would still have to be surrendered
to the Government, which would appropriate the
entire profit arising therefrom, whilst the cultivators
would only receive the scanty payment originally
agreed on.
The two principles are utterly distinct.
Under the one system, the cultivator is simply a
paid agent who raises produce for the proprietor,—the
State, —which takes and uses such produce, paying
the cultivator scanty wages for his trouble in pro-
ducing it.
Under the other system, the cultivator possesses


and disposes of his produce at will, but pays from
it to the Government a moderate tax or tythe.
Such modes of payment are, I need not say,
known in countries of far more advanced civilization
than Fiji, and were at the beginning of the century
common throughout Europe. Rents are still partly
paid in oatmeal and fowls, and even in the carriage
of fuel and building materials, in some places in
Scotland, and the mere payment of a tax in money’s
worth, instead of cash, in no way resembles the Go-
vernment proprietorship of the Java system.
That the system is disliked by the European
traders has also been asserted. This is true, so far
at least as some of the petty traders are concerned;
for it has put a serious check on their opportunities
of making illegitimate profit out of the ignorance and
necessities of the natives, to which I have before re-
ferred. The native is no longer wholly unacquainted
with the value of the commodities he produces, neither
is he under the pressure of an obligation to produce a
certain number of shillings on a given day, to obtain
which he was ready to make the most rash and
inconsiderate bargains with those who knew he was
at their mercy, and that they could exact what
terms they pleased.
I believe, however, that the system is very diffe-
rently regarded by the few larger traders in the
Group ; and the observations made by the unofficial
members of the Legislative Council on the intro-
duction of the Ordinance, which will be found at
page 92 of the Blue Book on the Affairs of Fiji,
presented to Parliament in 1876, show a by no means
unjust appreciation of its objects and spirit.


It may be said, too, that the operation of the law
interferes with the supply of labour to the planters.
It is not true that it does so directly. Indirectly, it
may, but only by the operation of influences which
tend to insure the comfort and position of the native,
render it less necessary for him now than formerly
to seek work at a distance from his home and family.
It is true that the poll-tax in money, existing
before 1875, drove men to engage as labourers in
order to procure coin, and that this indirect aid to
the planter has been withdrawn by the substitution
of the present law; but though I have no doubt
that many of those who object to the present system
of native taxes, are more or less unconsciously under
an impression that, were it abolished, the old poll-
tax system would be restored, they are, on that
point, I think, altogether mistaken; nor without its
restoration would the abolition of the present system,
of itself, materially affect the labour market.
That the natives themselves dislike the system
may perhaps also be said ; but this, I am certain, is
untrue. It is, however, almost a wonder that it
should be so ; for no pains have been spared in some
quarters to prejudice the people against it and against
the Government, but for the most part this has been
attempted vainly.
A few days before I left Fiji, a native of great
intelligence spoke to me of the efforts of certain whites
to excite a prejudice against the Government. He
spoke bitterly of the mischief which might be done
by these intrigues, and added, “We Fijians are great
fools, and there are many of us who are likely to be
gulled ; but after all we are not such fools as to have


lost all memory of the time when these gentlemen,
who are now so solicitous for our welfare and our
rights, had all things in their own hands; and you
may take it for granted that most of the ignorant
villagers who answer ‘E dina saka,’ (‘Quite true,
Sir,’) when it is suggested to them that they are
oppressed, are perfectly aware that a money-tax
would cost them double labour, and laugh secretly,
though respect leads them to yield a seeming assent
to a white man’s assertion.”
The statement that the payment of a tax in cash
would require double labour is, though startling, per-
fectly true. Taking the article copra, for example,
it will be found that the mean or average price
offered by the traders to Government in 1877 was
£lO 10s. 6d. per ton (2,240 lbs.). The average prices
given by local traders to natives at the time was
£5 per ton : and, as payment was generally made in
trade sold at a large profit, even that value can only
be regarded as nominal.
It follows, therefore, that if the native under
the present system, had to pay. 10 shillings worth
of copra annually by way of taxes, he would have
to provide 106 lbs. weight of that article only; hut
if he had to pay 10 shillings in money, he would have
to sell 224 lbs. weight to the trader in order to raise
the amount of money required.
I do not suppose that the people of Fiji, more
than people in other parts of the world, like taxation
in any form ; but, as a general rule, they are quite
aware of the advantage to them of the present system,
as contrasted with that of which it takes the place;
and that they have at all events thriven under it, not


half an eye is required to perceive. Everywhere the
increased areas of cultivation, the enlarged towns,
the good new houses, the well kept roads, the
cheerful and healthy-looking population, present the
strongest possible contrast to the aspect of the country
in 1875. This was fully admitted to me, not long
before I left Fiji, by a leading planter, who said that
nobody who had eyes in his head could deny that the
natives were very much better off than they were
three years ago ; but he added, (and there was
much significance in the admission), that this was
by no means an advantage to the planter, whose
difficulties in obtaining labour were thereby mate-
rially increased.
Nevertheless, I am far from denying that there
may be cases in which the tax has pressed heavily,
on a village, or on individuals. Considering the
magnitude of the area from which the tax is collected,
the extent to which native agency and native
machinery are employed, and the necessarily small
amount of supervision exercised, it will not cause
me the least surprise to learn that, here and there, a
district council has made a foolish or unfair assess-
ment or that a Boko Tui or Buli has enforced with
undue harshness the cultivation or collection of the
required produce. These errors, if they have been
committed, will undoubtedly be detected, exposed,
and made the most of. But, after all, they are only
faults of detail and execution ; faults which, if they
exist, may, —and shall, —be remedied, but which in
no way affect the principle of the measure itself.
Nothing could be more discouraging than the
circumstances under which the system was initiated.


First of all, the season of the year at which the
Ordinance was passed—loth February, 1876, —was
far too late to enable the scheme to work satis-
factorily during that year, the proper planting season
having closed in September. Secondly; owing to
the almost total cessation of cotton planting by
settlers, no adequate supply of seed could be
obtained, and many months elapsed before it could
be procured from abroad. Unfortunately, when it did
arrive much of it was bad and failed to germinate.
A third drawback was the outbreak amongst the
hill tribes of Yiti Levu, which, though quickly sup-
pressed, had the effect of unsettling the coast people
upon the north, west, and south sides of that island,
and in return for their personal services, and as a
recognition of their loyalty, necessitated a remission
of nearly the whole of the amount of taxes at which
those districts had been assessed.
One advantage, and that no trifling one, the new
system of taxation has enjoyed. I refer to the ready
apprehension of its object and character, which has
been shown by both Her Majesty’s late, and present,
Secretary of State for the Colonies. But, neverthe-
less, it may be fairly said that few schemes have been
carried out under greater difficulties. With many
of the Europeans it was at first highly unpopular, its
objects being sometimes really and sometimes wilfully
misunderstood. No effort was spared to excite the
doubt and suspicion of the natives as to the effect of
its operations in respect to themselves". From too
many plantations, and from almost every itinerant
trader in the colony, they learned that they were
being made slaves, that the scheme was an un-


English and unlawful one, and that its real object
was spoliation and robbery.
The natives, indeed, were not unfrequently told
that it was their right, as British subjects, and would
be their only salvation, in refusing to pay taxes in
any other way than in money, which, of course,
they could easily obtain by pledging all their produce
to the traders instead of delivering a portion of it
to the Government.
To the above-mentioned difficulties may be added
those arising out of petty jealousies between chiefs,
and between villages, which at times have required
much patience to settle.
In spite of all these obstacles, the system has
been attended with marked success. In recommend-
ing to Her Majesty’s Government the policy of this
law, I wrote thus :
“If I have erred in my estimate of its work, it
may then more or less gradually be abandoned. If,
on the other hand, it secures, as I believe it will, an
abundant revenue, and one easily capable of further
augmentation ; if it stimulates the industry, and
doubles the produce of the colony; if under its
influence the mass of the population are content and
prosperous, it may then trust to its own merits for
its future maintenance, and will stand in no need of
of my feeble advocacy.”
Not three years have since passed by, and
already we see that it has secured an ample revenue,
that it has stimulated the industry and has doubled
the produce of the colony ; that under it the popula-
tion are more prosperous than they have been for
a long time, and are, notwithstanding the incessant


efforts of mischief-makers, content and trustful, as
they will, I firmly believe, continue to be.
Long as this paper is, I am painfully aware that
it contains hut a very incomplete account of the
varied causes which led to the enactment of which
I have attempted to describe the principles and
working. I am especially desirous that it should
not be forgotten that it is but one in a series of
measures which should be regarded together as a
whole, and which have for their objects the preser-
vation and social development of the native race.
These are objects which we cannot, I fear, as a
nation, boast that we have done more to promote
than others whom we are accustomed to regard as
less careful than ourselves of the interests of a
subject population. I am far from saying that the
instincts of the Englishman are not humane, just,
and even generous, but it is impossible to trust to
the influence of those instincts solely. Something
more is needed, and it will be found, on examination,
that while we have done little, beyond placing them
on a footing of equality with ourselves before the
law, to protect the native races from the influences
to which the contact with civilization exposes them,
or to diminish the inevitable results of friction
between the strong and the weak, other powers
have in no small degree succeeded in accomplishing
what we have left almost unattempted.
I cannot conclude without repeating the ex-
pression of my regret that the limitation of my
subject should have caused any of my hearers dis-
appointment, if it has done so, as I fear has been the
case, or without assuring them of my readiness, at


all times, privately, to give them any information
which it may be in my power to afford, and they
may wish to seek.
One has, perhaps, looked for a sketch of the
political and administrative growth of the new
colony. Another desires to learn something with
regard to eligible openings for the investment of
capital; a third is curious as to the mythology, tra-
ditions and poetry of the native race. Some wish
for statistical details of commercial progress, others
are anxious for an account of the geography,
meteorology, and natural history of the Group.
There will, again, be those who have expected to be
told something of the wonderfully successful work of
the Wesleyan Missionaries in the Group, a work of
which, even in thus cursorily mentioning it, I cannot
speak without honour. I regret that they should
remain unsatisfied, but the very enumeration of such
a multitude of subjects is in itself a sufficient apology
and reason for my not attempting now to deal with
them. I will only say one word on the future
prospects of the Colony; namely, that I believe Fiji
to be an admirable field for the investment of large
capital, whether in sugar or coffee estates. Sugar
grows spontaneously, is of the first quality, and has
a practically boundless market in Australia. As
regards coffee culture, Fiji is now in much the same
position as Ceylon thirty or forty years ago, and I
have no doubt that those who now found estates there
will find them in no long time amply remunerative.
I have never seen finer tobacco than that raised in
Fiji, and the cotton produced there is admitted to
be of the best description. But I will not attempt


to enter on these subjects at the end of an address
which has already, I fear, exceeded all moderate
dimensions.
My thanks are due to all who have done me the
honour to listen with such patience to this long
paper, but they are especially so to those who have
been drawn here by the influence and recollection of
old associations. It is not with indifference that I
find myself once more speaking in public in the
presence of those before whom, —(whatever private
relations have been kept up between us,) —I have
not so spoken, since, more than twenty years ago, we
sat together in Parliament. Among them are Secre-
taries of State, under whom I have since served,,
as, but for illness, would have been one yet more
distinguished, who, when yet a boy I learned to
regard with admiration and affection, which have but
deepened with the lapse of years.
Among them, too, is the friend* by whose side in
the House of Commons was my habitual seat, whose
conversation gave a charm to hours which, without
it, would have been hours of tedium, and by whose
unconscious teaching my own cast of thought has
been largely moulded. He has realized every expec-
tation which they who knew him in those days
formed. He has reached the foremost place in his
profession. He has filled the highest dignity which
a British subject, not an ecclesiastic, can attain;
and he now enjoys from men of all parties throughout
the country unmingled respect and honour.—My own
life has been passed in scenes altogether unlike
those of which we then dreamed, and under very
* Lord Selborne.


different conditions from those which we then
anticipated. When thus brought face to face with
the past, it is impossible to avoid asking whether
home and a home career -have been uselessly
sacrificed, and the years which yawn between that
time and this, wholly thrown away and wasted. I
venture to hope not.
It is true that much is given up by one who
undertakes the duties of Colonial Government; that
personal ambition finds little field for indulgence;
that the amount of time spent in each place he
governs is usually too small to enable him to leave a
mark there, and that the waste of power involved in
such removes is as wearing to his own energy, as
it is, I think, injurious to the public service. Never-
theless, he has in all cases much opportunity for
unobtrusive usefulness, and, if it be his good fortune,
as it has been mine, to take part in the organization
of a new colony—though no doubt he may have to
encounter the bitter disappointment of living to see
his work undone; —though, in any case, that work
will be unknown to, and unheeded by, the public
here ; —though absence and distance may exclude him
from the high places of even his own chosen walk in
life ; —yet, if he merits and obtains the confidence of
the Home Government; —if he has time to consolidate
his measures and watch their growth, he may do
much to establish upon righteous and lasting founda-
tion the relations between different races, and may
stamp a deeper impression on at least a small corner
of the world than is made by many a man who is
better known, and labours in a wider field. He will
be himself forgotten ; but he may benefit generations


subsequent to his own, and influence the lives
of men long after his bones have mouldered to dust
in their obscure, and, it may be, unmarked grave.
Eael Granville said it was settled by the Council, with the
consent of my right hon. friend, that Mr. Gladstone should pro-
pose a vote of thanks to Sir Arthur Gordon for the paper we have
just heard. But we all know that even Councils propose things
which do not sometimes come to pass. (A laugh.) Your Secre-
tary has had the pleasure of reading to you a letter from Mr.
Gladstone.* I have the still higher privilege of having received
a communication from the daughter of the right hon. gentleman
—(laughter)—and, with your permission, I shall proceed at once
to commit the gross indiscretion of confidentially imparting that
communication to you. (Laughter.) Miss Gladstone says:—
“ Dear Lord Granville, —My father desires me to write a line
to express the great disappointment which he feels in being unable
to attend the meeting to-night. It would have given him so much
pleasure to propose a vote of thanks to Sir A. Gordon; and, at
the same time, he would have been glad to have had the oppor-
tunity of expressing the regret which he cannot but feel that Sir
Arthur thinks it best to render his service to England at such a
distance as Fiji instead of giving us the more immediate benefit
* 76, Harley Street, March 17, 1879.
Sir, —It is with the utmost regret that I am obliged to excuse
myself from attending to-morrow the dinner of the Colonial In-
stitute and the delivery by Sir Arthur Gordon of an address
relating to the Fiji Islands. I was anxious in availing myself of
the courtesy of the Institute to testify my attachment to Sir
Arthur Gordon (whom I have known from his early boyhood
upwards) and my confidence in his administration. When he was
chosen for the government of the Islands, I considered the selec-
tion to be one which, with reference to the novel and peculiar
nature of the task, it would be difficult to match and impossible
to excel. All that has since passed, so far as my imperfect
knowledge goes, has tended to show how much honour is due to
those who advised the appointment, as well as to the person who
received it. A cold and hoarseness, from which 1 have but
partially recovered, unfortunately compel me to forego my share
of what, I do not doubt, will be on all sides a most happy celebra-
tion.—l have the honour to be, Sir, your very obedient servant,
W. E. Gladstone.


of his presence at home. My father looked forward to this even-
ing, and nothing short of the doctor’s orders would have prevented
him attending your meeting.” (Applause.) I know myself that
this disappointment to Mr. Gladstone is great and sincere.
He is very much affected by the associations of the past, to
which Sir Arthur Gordon has just now alluded with so much feel-
ing. Not only has Sir Arthur Gordon been his intimate friend,
but a son of the high-minded statesman to whom Mr. Gladstone
was devoted, and not only his son, but he also took an active and
important share in all the labours of Lord Aberdeen during the
latter and more important parts of his official life ; and I cannot
help thinking that the experience which Sir Arthur Gordon gained
at the fountain-head of administration of affairs at home has
greatly contributed to the remarkable success which has attended
his Colonial Governorship in different parts of the world. (Ap-
plause.) I think Mr. Gladstone would have had great pleasure in
hearing the remarkable paper just read —the full, clear, historical
statement of the results of the administration in Fiji, giving, it
appears to me, ample proofs of the business-like, practical,
common-sense with which Sir Arthur Gordon has applied those
great, sound, Liberal principles of Colonial administration, and
particularly effected that most difficult problem of dealing with
Colonies of which the populations are of different races, differing
not only in race, but in culture and civilization. (Cheers.) My
agreeable duty under ordinary circumstances would have been to
ask you to give the question a general discussion, which is one of
the characteristics of this Institution, and one of the most useful
attributes for ventilating subjects of Colonial interest; but I have
been requested by Sir Arthur Gordon to state that he hopes you
will remember that he is in a peculiar position before you. He is
a public servant, actually in harness, who, as he has stated, was
impressed to give us the explanations which he has given with
regard to the recently-acquired Colony, in which we all take the
greatest interest, and about which I believe some of us know
very little indeed. For that purpose he obtained the sanction of
the Secretary of State for the Colonies, whom we are so glad to
see has found time amidst all his avocations to be present. But
Sir Arthur Gordon feels that it would not be becoming in him to
enter into any detailed controversy with regard to details to which
he has generally alluded; and, on the other hand, with his know-
ledge of the subject, and the thought he has bestowed on it, it
would be painful to him to remain perfectly silent if much con-
troversy went on. My duty is, therefore, simply to call upon
Lord Cardwell to perform a part, which I am sure will be a real
pleasure to him, to move a vote of thanks to Sir Arthur Gordon.
(Cheers).
Lord Cardwell —l believe I am the oldest member of the
public service present who has had the advantage of knowing the
great services rendered by Sir Arthur Gordon as a Colonial


ministrator. It is now nearly twenty years ago since, when, in
Lord Palmerston’s Government, the Duke of Newcastle appointed
Sir Arthur Gordon to the Governorship of New Brunswick.
Nothing could be more difficult then than the Government of that
Colony, about which we have just heard so interesting account.
It was a government, a self-government of British subjects of a
Colony now, as you know, amalgamated in the great Canadian
Dominion. I refer to that chiefly for this purpose, because my
memory brings before me an anecdote which your heartiness to-
night has abundantly illustrated. Sir A. Gordon was then chiefly
employed, I remember, in assisting the then Government in pre-
paring that great union of the Canadian Dominion which was
afterwards completed in Parliament; through the hands of Lord
Carnarvon he rendered great service to the country, and his ser-
vice was fully appreciated by the people of New Brunswick; and
I well remember the quaint method in Avhich they expressed the
value of his services when they said to me, “ He is a gentleman
who does all his own thinking for himself.” I think you have had
abundant experience to-night that Sir A. Gordon requires no
prompting from anybody else, but that he does his own thinking
for himself. (Hear, hear.) I have great pleasure in calling upon
yon to give that reception to his interesting address, which Mr.
Gladstone would have moved if he had been present here to-night.
.(Cheers.) Sir A. Gordon has laid before us the principles of his
policy. They are broad and liberal. They recognise the native
race as entitled to their full share in the administration of the
Colony; and, more than that —they do what so few governments
have the ability and the good sense to do, viz., that when their
great object is to make people happy, they do not try to make
them happy in their own way, but they consider what their way
would be if they had their choice, and they endeavour so far as
circumstances permit to accommodate themselves to that, and
accomplish the object in the only way in which it really can be
done. (Applause.) We have heard not only the broad principles
of his policy, but we have heard details and statistics of the re-
sults of his policy; and those details, I think, have left us nothing
to desire, and we are quite certain that Sir A. Gordon’s principles
are manifestly right. They have received the approval of the
Government, and I am sure they have received yours, and hav-
ing received that approval the results speak for themselves, and
the conclusion follows as a matter of course. It would be, I see
by the clock, quite improper and impossible for me to prolong
any observations of mine, and I shall therefore content myself
with proposing the motion which Mr. Gladstone would have made;
and I shall call upon you heartily to thank Sir A. Gordon for the
interesting and powerful address which he has been good enough
to give us. (Loud cheers).
Mr. Feedeeick Yoekg—My lords, ladies, and gentlemen,—l
have the pleasure of seconding the motion which has just been


proposed to you by the noble lord who last addressed you. I
have asked permission to do so especially, because I feel myself,
as the official representative of the Royal Colonial Institute, in
rather a peculiar position this evening. I confess that it has been
a little embarrassing to me to hear the desire expressed that on
this occasion a departure should be made from the practice which
we are invariably accustomed to follow, viz., that a discussion,
and as full a one as possible, should take place after the reading
of papers. At the same time, I cannot help feeling that what the
noble lord in the chair has said has great force in it, and I, for
one, bow without hesitation to the ruling of his lordship. (Hear,
hear.) I think, for the reasons he has given, it would be manifestly
somewhat objectionable that a discussion such as we have been
accustomed to have hitherto should take place to-night. The
official position which Sir Arthur Gordon occupies, and the very
fact of our having the right hon. gentleman who is the Secretary
of State for the Colonies with us to-night, as well as other official
persons, would perhaps render it a little difficult for us to hold to
our old rule of speeches after papers. (Hear, hear.) I can only
say, in the name of the Institute, that I am quite sure that every-
body who is present this evening has heard with much interest
the masterly address we have listened to from Sir Arthur Gordon.
(Cheers.) I have read the paper myself with great satisfaction.
I think Sir Arthur Gordon has put before the world an admirable
defence of the policy which he has felt it his duty to carry out
in one of the newest dependencies of this great Empire. (Hear,
hear.) I congratulate him, and I congratulate the Fellows also,
that the Royal Colonial Institute has been the means of bringing
this paper before the public. With these few observations —for
I speak without any preparation, and had no intention of taking
part myself in the discussion this evening, if it had not appeared
to me to be necessary to say something in explanation of the
reason for the departure to-night from our usual course of pro-
ceeding—l gladly second the motion which has been proposed by
Lord Cardwell. (Applause.)
The noble Chairman put the motion to the meeting, and it was
carried with acclamation.
Lord Selborne —My lords, ladies, and gentlemen,— l address
you with some diffidence for two reasons, one because the hour is
certainly late, and if I were to say all that occurs to me, I should
certainly trespass inexcusably upon your indulgence; the other
is, that although I participate in that pride which all Englishmen
feel in our Colonies, and their anxious and hearty desire for their
welfare, and that the name of our country should be honoured by
good deeds in every part of the world, yet I feel I speak in the
presence of many persons who have a much more intimate know-
ledge of our Colonies than I can pretend to myself. I see near
me some who have filled the highest seats of justice in the Colony
of New Zealand. I see a prelate equally distinguished by his long


service, ability, and virtue (which could not be surpassed), from
the Colony of Victoria; and many others, both at home and abroad,
distinguished for their knowledge of Colonial life. In their pre-
sence I cannot but speak as one who ought rather to listen than
to be heard; and yet there is one other reason, which, perhaps,
tells both ways, which impells me to speak; while, on the other
hand it makes speaking difficult. Sir A. Gordon did not, indeed,
name me; but I could not but feel that some words which he uttered
were intended to be understood by me more, perhaps, than by any
one else. Sir A. Gordon has been for many years one of my
dearest and most intimate friends ; and there is, perhaps, no one
who has a greater right than myself to say that he thoroughly
understands the man, his ability, and his character. (Hear, hear.)
Well, you see, that makes it not easy for me to say all that I
think. Sometimes it does enable me, and it does entitle me, to
bear the testimony of intimate personal knowledge to the absolute
purity, high-mindedness, and disinterestedness of motives and
purpose with which Sir A. Gordon has undertaken all the duties
which he has had to discharge. (Cheers.) He has, in a manner
not very often found amongst statesmen, preferred to serve his
country in a position where he thought he would be able to do
the most good, rather than to receive the higher promotion and
the greater emoluments of home appointments : and wherever he
has gone his object has been to do the public most service, and to
promote the interests of those over whom he was set to govern
without respect to persons, without fear, and without regard to
favour. (Hear, hear.) That is the character which Englishmen
will appreciate, when in regard to details they may differ from the
policy of the man. At the same time, I think, after what we have
heard to-night, you will all be of opinion that Sir A. Gordon has
given reasons for his policy, and has stated facts, as to its motives
and as to its results, which every one ought most seriously and
most carefully to weigh before he would undertake to say that
the policy had been mistaken. For my part, I cannot disguise my
entire and complete conviction that it has been as wise a policy
in practical intention and result as it has been beyond all doubt
benevolent in its purpose. (Hear, hear.) lam sure I speak
the sentiments of all present when I say that the welfare of
native races must be an object of great interest and great anxiety
to all of us. No one could read the history of European coloniza-
tion in that part without blushing, to think that, while the
interests of European Colonies in many parts of the world have
been advanced, the native races who possess those parts of the
world previously had been the sufferers, and not gainers, by our
gain. (Hear, hear.) Well, I hope we have at last found out the
way in which that is to be avoided. Englishmen have distin-
guished themselves, I venture to say, above all others in the
philanthropy with which they have sought to do good in all parts
of the world. Those who were missionaries in Fiji, whom Sir


A. Gordon mentions, such as Bishop Patteson, and Bishop Selwyn
and his son, who have devoted their lives in labouring among the
natives of the islands scattered in the Pacific, and who are certainly
to be numbered amongst the benefactors of mankind; and sad it
would be if we could not, when taking the government of a new
country, inhabited by large populations of most interesting and
docile people, who have already made no slight advances towards
the arts of civilization, and the knowledge and practice of
Christianity, if we could not so establish our government among
them as to prove that we had their welfare at heart as well as
our own material prosperity; and that we can establish a system
of government really adapted to their circumstances and their
wants. If ever there was a Colony in which it was specially the
duty of this country to make the endeavour, surely it is the Colony
of Fiji, where, lam thankful to say, we are not intruders. We
have not taken possession of that which others thought to belong
to themselves. We have undertaken and accepted the duty of
giving them a better government than they had before, and they
have hitherto, with the exception of a slight outbreak, which the
population itself were the means of suppressing, not only cheer-
fully submitted to our dominion, but co-operated most usefully in
our government. (Hear, hear.) Well, I cannot but think that it
would be a terrible blot upon the good name of England were the
colonization of such a Colony as Fiji—after we had undertaken
and accepted the duty of giving them better government than
before —if the government was such as to end in the miserable
extermination and destruction of the native race, such as has
disgraced the name of Spain and so many other Christian countries.
(Hear, hear.) I could not help being struck by one particular
allusion which Sir A. Gordon made, when he compared the present
state of Fiji with the condition of Ireland and Scotland in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, and showed to us, as he certainly did,
that Fiji at the present time is much better off than the Irish, and
possibly even the Scotch, people here. Now, of the Scotch I can
say nothing, because it does so happen that in dealing with Scotland
we have learnt at times the lesson that we could not impose
English ideas upon them ; and learning to govern them according
to Scotch ideas, Scotland has become one of the happiest and
most prosperous parts of the British Empire. (Cheers.) Now,
compare Ireland. Looking back, is there an Englishman who
does not wish from the bottom of his heart that in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, and from those days downwards, we had
endeavoured to understand the way in which Irishmen looked at
Irish affairs, Irish habits, Irish ideas, and to govern them as far
as possible according to those, instead of trying to force upon
them English laws, English language, English systems, English
ideas? (Applause.) What is the result? why, there is not one
of us who would not give almost all he possessed in the world if
by so doing he could make Ireland at the present time, relatively


to England, and for its own sake, what Scotland now is. (Hear,
hear.) If there is one cause to which one can trace the miserable
series of misgovernment which took place in Ireland, and has
ended in its being so backward in that feeling of identity with
ourselves which we could wish, it is certainly attempting to
govern Ireland by English and not Irish ideas. Then, 1 deeply
rejoice to think that Sir A. Gordon is endeavouring to lay his
foundation in Fiji by taking up the existing state of civilization
among the natives, by understanding native institutions, by
making them the lever with which he is endeavouring to make
the natives take to a system of governing themselves, especially
by introducing a gradual system of taxation. And if there should
be more reasons than I can possibly see of doubting the abstract
expediency in such a state of society of that system which he
has described to us, I feel sure that the importance of that prin-
ciple of starting from the native institutions and using them is so
great that it would cover a multitude of errors—if errors had
been committed, which Ido not believe. (Hear, hear.) I will
detain you no longer; but will discharge the duty which I rose
to do, which is to ask you to give your most cordial thanks to
the noble Earl Granville for presiding—(great cheers) —a nobleman
whose qualities both in public and private life are much too well
known to everybody in this country to need one word of com-
mendation. (Applause.)
Sm Michael Hicks-Beach said—l rise for the purpose of
seconding the proposal which Lord Selborne has so eloquently
put before you. I have heard it said in the course of this evening’s
discussion, if it can be so called, that it has not been customary
hitherto for those who hold the office I have the honour to occupy
to attend at the meetings of the Royal Colonial Institute. I can
imagine on ordinary occasions good grounds for such a rule. The
place, and I think the only place, where it would appear to be
proper for Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for the Colonies to
discuss Colonial affairs is in the House of Commons. (Hear,
hear.) If anyone holding my office found himself present here at
one of your ordinary debates, he might naturally hear something
said with which he could not agree, and yet would find himself
in the awkward position of being unable to notice it. Therefore,
so far as my own personal feelings are concerned, I feel myself
deeply indebted to the kindness and courtesy of the members of
the Royal Colonial Institute for making this an exceptional
occasion. I have made it an exceptional occasion, because I felt
so deeply the interest of the subject which was to be brought
before you. I knew it would be brought before you with the
highest ability, and I was anxious to attend as a learner rather
than as a speaker. You must all feel deep interest—perhaps the
deepest interest of all—in those of our Colonies which are, so to
speak, the youngest children of our Empire; and, when we hear
so favourable an account as has been put before us this evening


of one of those youngest children, we cannot but appreciate the
energy and ability of the man to whom this is mainly due that
this account can be given. I feel that in our relative positions
it is difficult for me to say anything of Sir Arthur Gordon; but,
though I have not the privilege of being among those to whom
he so touchingly referred in his address as the friends of his
youth in England, yet I may venture to say this, that in the short
period of our official connection, I think it would be difficult —
perhaps impossible—to find anyone of greater ability and aptitude
for the task that he has to perform than the Governor of Fiji.
He is making, as Lord Selborne has told you, a great experiment,
an experiment which, if successful, will redound highly to the
honour and credit of this country in its dealings with native races.
In the experiment he may find it necessary to take measures, per-
haps, more or less at variance with certain doctrines and ideas
which may be held among us as applicable to our own circum-
stances ; but I think it should be remembered that in this matter
we are dealing with peculiar stages of civilization—that we must
adapt our measures to our ends, and that we must not attempt—
and if we attempt we shall fail —to try to drag persons in the
condition of society that the Fiji Islanders are in, to be measured
by procrustean rules, applicable to our civilization and the Anglo-
Saxon race. I have only to second the proposal which Lord
Selborne has made, and am confident of this, that Sir Arthur
Gordon will stamp his name on the history of Fiji, and although
his work is done at the other side of the globe, he will be remem-
bered in future as one of those who have rendered the highest
service to their country. (Cheers.)
Earl Granville —My lords, ladies and gentlemen, how was it
possible for me to know, after Lord Selborne speaking so touch-
ingly of Sir Arthur Gordon, and pointing out the exact merits
which Sir Arthur Gordon possesses, which he himself has passed
so lightly over, that there should have been the insidious proposal
made which Lord Selborne intended at the conclusion of his
speech, I have the greatest authority in this room for stating that
it is absolutely contrary to the order and precedents hitherto
observed by the Society to permit such a proposal as that made
by Lord Selborne, and seconded by Sir Michael Hicks-Beach, with
the urbanity which distinguishes political opponents whenever
they meet. (Applause.) He had been good enough to suggest
that he should propose this vote, and I informed him that it was
absolutely against the rules; but, as we have had the exceptional
incident of the Secretary of State being present, and some most
judicious remarks made by him, I must conform myself to this
exceptional state of things, and say, which I do most truly, that
I am deeply grateful to you for the kindness with which you
have proposed a vote of thanks to me. (Cheers.)


LONDON :
HAEBISON AND SONS, PEINTEE3 IN OEDINAEY TO HEE MAJESTY,
BT. MARTIN’S LANE.
