

B ELATING TO
f ' .
A FEDERAL UNION
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
' •
- • • . • ; \
■
BY AUTHORITY :
JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
/, ' ' *
-‘““ ' • • *




PAPERS
RELATING TO
A FEDERAL UNION
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
BY authority:
JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.


■


CONTENTS.
Preface
Proceedings in Victoria, 1856-7
Proceedings in New South Wales, 1857
Proceedings in South Australia, 1857-8
Tasmania—Letter from Chief Secretary
Letter from the Secretary of State for the Colonies
Proceedings of the General Association for Australian
Colonies, 1857 ...
Select Committee in Victoria, 1858
Select Committee in Victoria, 1860
South Australia, Tasmania, and Queensland—Letters from
the Chief Secretaries of, 1860...
Select Committee in New South Wales, 1860
Select Committee in Victoria, 1862




PREFACE.
A COMMITTEE of the Legislative Assembly of Victoria, which
reported in favor of inviting the neighboring Colonies to
extend the basis of an intended conference on the subject of
Australian Tariffs to the more important question of Federal
Union, ordered the past Reports of the Colonial Legislatures,
and the correspondence of the Colonial Governments, on the
subject of Federation, to be collected together for transmission
with its Report. These documents have been so collected in
the present volume. They are arranged according to date;
closing with the Report of the Committee which directed the
collection to be made.
Melbourne, 18th June, 1862,




1856-7,
PROCEEDINGS IN VICTORIA.
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE FEDERAL UNION
OP THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
Appointed by the Legislative Assembly, 16th January, 1857.
Mr. Gavan
Duffy,
Chairman.
Mr. O’Shanassy, Mr. Griffith,
Mr. Childers, Dr, Evans,
Mr. Moore, Mr. Barker,
Mr. Michie, Mr. Syme,
Mr. Foster, Mr. McCulloch.
Mr. Horne,
Met and deliberated on Tuesday, 10th February, Thursday, 26th February,
and Thursday, 9th July.
Tuesday, Bth September.
Chairman brought up Draft Report, which was considered, and on the
motion of Mr. McCulloch, adopted.
Chairman ordered to report.




REPORT.
The necessity of a Federal Union of the Australian Colonies
for legislative purposes, and the best means of accomplishing
such an union if necessary, having been referred to the present
Committee, they have given these questions of national polity
the prolonged and deliberate consideration which their im-
portance demanded.
On the ultimate necessity of a Federal Union, there is but
one opinion. Your Committee are unanimous in believing
that the interest and honor of these growing States would be
promoted by the establishment of a system of mutual action
and co-operation among them. Their interest suffers, and
must continue to suffer, while competing tariffs, naturalization
laws, and land systems, rival schemes of immigration, and of
ocean postage, a clumsy and inefficient method of communi-
cating with each other and with the Home Government on
public business, and a distant and expensive system of judicial
appeal exist; and the honor and importance which constitute
so essential an element of national prosperity, and the ab-
sence of which invites aggression from foreign enemies, cannot
perhaps in this generation belong to any single Colony of the
Southern Group; but may, and we are persuaded would, be
speedily attained by an Australian Federation representing
the entire.
Neighboring States of the second order inevitably become
confederates or enemies. By becoming confederates so early
in their career, the Australian Colonies would, we believe,
immensely economise their strength and resources. They
would substitute a common national interest for local and con-
flicting interests, and waste no more time in barren rivalry.
They would enhance the national credit, and attain much


earlier the power of undertaking works of serious cost and
importance. They would not only save time and money, but
attain increased vigor and accuracy, by treating the larger
questions of public policy at one time and place ; and in an
Assembly, which it may be presumed, would consist of the
wisest and most experienced statesmen of the Colonial Legis-
latures, they would set up a safeguard against violence or
disorder—holding it in check by the common sense and
common force of the Federation. They would possess the
power of more promptly calling new States into existence
throughout their immense territory, as the spread of population
required it, and of enabling each of the existing States to
apply itself, without conflict or jealousy, to the special industry
which its position and resources render most profitable.
The time for accomplishing such a Federation is naturally
a point upon which there are a variety of opinions; but we
are unanimous in believing that it is not too soon to invite a
mutual understanding on the subject throughout the Colonies.
Most of us conceive that the time for union is come. It is
now more than eight years since the Privy Council reported to
Her Majesty that “ the want of some such general authority
for the Australian Colonies began to be seriously felt.” At
present, a Federal Assembly would not only have the control
of a larger territory than any of the Great Powers possess in
Europe, but of a population exceeding that of several of the
smaller Sovereign States, and of a revenue which equals or
exceeds the revenue of the Kingdoms of Belgium, Sweden
and Norway, Hanover, Holland, Naples, Hungary, Turkey,
Bavaria, Saxony, or Greece. Some of the most renowned
Federations in history had less population or wealth, and
certainly possessed infinitely inferior agencies of Government
than belong to an age of telegraphs and railways.
On the best means of originating such an union we are
unanimous. No single Colony ought to take exclusive posses-
sion of a subject of such national importance, or venture to
dicta te the programme of union to the rest. The delicate and
important questions connected with the precise functions and
authority of the Federal Assembly, which present themselves


on the threshold of the inquiry, can be sblved only by a Con-
ference of Delegates from the respective Colonies. The course
we recommend, therefore, is, that such a Conference should be
immediately invited. To it will properly belong the duty of
determining whether the plan of union to be submitted to the
people shall propose merely a Consultative Council, authorized
to frame propositions for the sanction of the State Legislatures ;
or a Federal Executive and Assembly, with supreme power
on national and Inter-Colonial questions; or some compromise
between these extremes. And to it also must be referred
minor questions such as the following, which press for a
decision:—
If a Consultative Council be adopted—Can it act without
the aid of ministers charged to submit measures for its
consideration ? Is it desirable to constitute it a Court of
Impeachment for the Colonies ? Shall its deliberations
be restricted to certain specified questions; and if so,
to what questions ?
If the plan embrace a Federal Legislature and Executive
—ls the Legislature to consist of one or two branches ?
Must an absolute majority of its members, or the
representatives of a certain number of States concur,
to make its decisions law ? Are its laws to take effect
directly on the entire population of Australia, or only
after the assent of their respective States ? Are they
to be administered by the existing Colonial Judicatures,
or by Federal Courts ? If its orders are violated by
any State of the Federation, how are they to be
enforced? Shall it possess the power of taxation, or
only of assessment on the respective States ?
In either case—Where shall the Federal body sit; or
shall it be rotatory ? If the latter—shall the Governor
of the State where it sits for the time being exercise
the royal prerogative on its bills, or must they be sent
to the Governor General or Senior Governor ?
These, and similar questions, must be determined before a
coherent scheme of Federation can be framed ; but we do not
feel at liberty to offer an opinion upon any of them.


In order to invite a Conference of the Colonies it is necessary
to make some specific propositions, and we therefore recom-
mend :
1. That the Legislatures of New South Wales, South
Australia, and Tasmania, be requested to select three
Delegates each, two of whom might be members of
Assembly, and one a member of Council, to meet three
Delegates from this Colony.
2. That these Delegates assembled in Conference be em-
powered to frame a plan of Federation, to be afterwards
submitted for approval either to the Colonial Legis-
latures or directly to the people, or to both, as may be
determined; and to receive such further legislative
sanction as may appear necessary.
3, That the expenditure incident to the Conference shall
be borne by the respective Colonies, in whatever pro-
portions may be fixed by the Conference itself.
4, That the Conference shall hold its meetings in what-
ever place the majority of the Delegates may determine;
their decisions being interchanged in writing within a
month of their elections being completed.
If your Honorable House think fit to adopt these recom-
mendations, it will be necessary to present an address to His
Excellency the Governor, praying that he may communicate
with the Governors of the other Colonies named, requesting
them to submit the proposal to their respective Legislatures
for consideration.
And we would further recommend that this Report be
communicated by Message to the other House, inviting their
concurrence in the selection of Delegates for Victoria, in case
the project is accepted by the other Colonies.
In conclusion, your Committee are fully convinced that a
negotiation demanding so much caution and forbearance, so
much foresight and experience, must originate in the mutual
action of the Colonies, and cannot safely be relegated even to
the Imperial Legislature.
Committee Room,
Bth September, 1857.


Resolutions adopted by the Legislative Assembly of Victoria, on
the motion of Mr. Gavan Duffy, 3rd November, 1857.
1. That the Legislatures of New South Wales, South Australia,
and Tasmania, be requested to select three Delegates each, two of
whom might be Members of Assembly, and one a Member of
Council, to meet three Delegates from this Colony.
2. That these Delegates assembled in Conference be empowered
to frame a plan of Federation, to be afterwards submitted for
approval to the Colonial Legislatures, and to receive such further
Legislative sanction as may appear necessary.
3. That the expenditure incident to the Conference shall be
borne hy the respective Colonies in whatever proportions may he
fixed by the Conference itself.
4. That the Conference shall hold its meetings in whatever place
the majority of the Delegates may determine, their decisions being
interchanged in writing within a month of their elections being
completed.
[The Legislative Council subsequently concurred in these resolutions ]


• > ■
‘
.


1857.
PROCEEDINGS IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
EXTRACTS FROM THE MINUTES OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF
THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
WEDNESDAY, 19th AUGUST, 1857.
Establishment of a Federal Legislature. —Mr. Deas Thomson moved,
pursuant to notice—
(1.) That a Select Committee be appointed to consider and report on
the expediency of establishing a Federal Legislature, invested with
the necessary power to discuss and determine all questions of an
Inter-Colonial character arising in the Australian Colonies generally,
and to suggest the manner in which this object can be best attained.
(2.) That such Committee consist of the following members, viz.: —
Sir Alfred Stephen, Mr. Holden,
Sir William W. Burton, Mr. Isaacs,
Mr. Knox, Mr. Norton,
Captain Lamb, R.N., Mr. Warren,
Mr. Want, and the Mover.
Debate ensued.
Question —put and passed.
TUESDAY, 20th OCTOBER, 1857.
Australian Federation. —Mr. Deas Thomson laid upon the Table the
Report of the Committee to which this subject was referred on the
19th August last, and moved, That the Report be printed.
Question—put and passed.


PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE.
FRIDAY, 28th AUGUST, 1857.
Present ;
Mb. Deas Thomson, C. 8., Chairman.
nyj r Warren, Captain Lamb, R.N.,
Mr. Norton, S r " Holden.
Sir W. W. Burton, Knt.,
Motion made and question put —That it is expedient that a Federal
Legislature should be established, invested with the necessary power to
discuss and determine all questions of an Inter-Colonial character arising in
the Australian Colonies generally.— (Sir W. W. Burton.)
Carried.
Motion made and question put—That such Assembly shall consist of such
Delegates as shall be chosen by the Legislatures of the different Australian
Colonies, with power to elect their President from their own body.— (Sir
W. W. Burton.)
Carried.
Motion made and question put —That each colony be represented by an
equal number of Delegates,—that is to say, four for each of the Australian
Colonies. —(Sir IF. W. Burton.)
Carried.
Motion made and question put—That such Federal Assembly shall have
power to legislate on all Inter-Colonial subjects which shall be submitted to
it, pursuant to a resolution of any two or more of the Legislatures of the
Colonies having an interest therein, and on no other subject. —(Sir W. W.
Burton.)
Carried.
WEDNESDAY, 2nd SEPTEMBER, 1857.
The Chairman submitted to the Committee the following proposed
resolutions :
1. That the power of assenting to, or dissenting from* or reserving for
the signification of Her Majesty’s pleasure thereon, any Acts of the Federal
Assembly, should be vested in such authority as Her Majesty may appoint
for that purpose; and that such Acts should, nevertheless, be subject to the
disalftwance of Her Majesty in Council, at any time within one year after
such assent shall have been given.
2. That such Federal Assembly should be empowered to make rules and
orders for the conduct of its business, subject to disallowance by Her
Majesty.


3. That such Federal Assembly should have power to appoint a president
at the commencement of each -session thereof, and oftener, if a vacancy
should arise, and fix the amount of its own expenses, and salaries of its
officers.
4. That the expenses and salaries of such Federal Assembly should be
equally apportioned between the different Colonies represented in the same-
5. That the payment and expenses of the Delegates be left to be provided
for by the Legislatures of the Colonies they respectively represent.
6. That the time and place of holding each session of the Assembly
should be fixed by Her Majesty, or by such authority as she may appoint.
7. That the power of summoning, dissolving, and proroguing the Assembly
should be vested in the same authorities respectively, provided that the
Assembly be not summoned unless on the requisition of the Legislatures of
two or more of the Colonies interested in the questions to be submitted to it.
8. That the Delegates composing the Assembly should be chosen for each
session, and that their functions as such should cease at its termination.
Motion made and question put—That the foregoing resolutions be adopted
by this Committee.
Carried.
FRIDAY, 25th SEPTEMBER, 1857.
The Chairman submitted to the Committee the following proposed
resolutions, viz. :
1. That in the event of any one or more of the said Australian Colonies
not becoming members of this Federation in the first instance, such Colony
or Colonies, and any future Colony of the Australian group not now in exist-
ence, and not being a penal Colony or settlement for, or consenting to, the
reception of convicts or exiles from Great Britain or elsewhere, maj join
such Federation, and have the right of sending to the said Federal Assembly
the same number of representatives as shall be fixed for each of the other
Colonies represented in the said Federal Assembly; provided the respective
Legislatures of the Colony or Colonies, so desiring representation therein,
shall pass an Act submitting such Colony or Colonies to the Federal Juris-
diction of such Assembly.
2. That the best means of originating a Federal Assembly would be by
inviting a Conference of Delegates from the respective Colonies, to which will
properly belong the duty of determining upon a plan of union ; and tor this
purpose, that the Legislatures of Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania,
be requested to select three Delegates each, two of whom might be Members
of Assembly, and one a Member of Council, to meet three Delegates from
this Colony.
3. That these Delegates assembled in Conference be empowered to propose
a plan of Federation, to be afterwards submitted for approval to the Legis-
latures of the respective Colonies.
4. That the expenditure incident to the Conference shall be borne by the
respective Colonies, in whatever proportions may be fixed by theConfcrence
itself.


5. That the Conference shall hold its meetings in whatever place the
majority of the Delegates may determine; their decisions being interchanged
in writing within a month of their elections being completed.
Motion made and question put—That the foregoing resolutions be adopted
by this Committee.
Carried.
The Committee having deliberated on the subject of Federation generally,
instructed the Chairman to draw up the draft of a report for consideration
on a future day.
THURSDAY, 15th OCTOBER, 1857.
Committee deliberated, and agreed to a report.


REPORT.
The Select Committee of the Legislative Council
appointed on the 19th August, 1857, to consider and
report on the expediency of establishing a Federal
Legislature, invested with the necessary power to dis-
cuss and determine all questions of an Inter-Colonial
character arising in the Australian Colonies generally,
and to suggest the manner in which the object can be
best attained, have very carefully considered the im-
portant question referred to them, and have agreed to
the following Report:—
1. In the course of their inquiry your Committee have been
forcibly impressed with the expediency of adopting, at as early a
period as possible, some comprehensive measure for the purpose
contemplated in the resolution under which they were appointed.
The intricate questions of an Inter-Colonial character which
have arisen during the last few years and which are likely to
arise in the natural progress of settlement, and as the relations
between the different Colonies gradually extend, can scarcely,
it is conceived, be dealt with by the separate Colonial Legis-
latures (even if their powers were adequate to the purpose,
which they confessedly are not), in the manner best calculated
to promote the general interests. Local jealousies and local
views of particular subjects will, it is feared, frequently exert
an influence inconsistent with the determination' of the ques-
tions at issue according to principles of mutual advantage.
Independently, moreover, of considerations of a political, fiscal,
and commercial character, which can be satisfactorily decided
only by the joint authority of the States interested, there are
some of great importance connected with the Administration
of Justice, Such, for example, as the jurisdiction over crimes


committed on the borders of conterminous Colonies ; the power
of executing writs in more than one Colony ; and the like.
2. Your Committee are quite aware of the difficulties which
at present exist, in suggesting any measure for this purpose
acceptable to the several Colonies concerned, and the Legisla-
tures representing them. Your Committee, however, conceive
that these difficulties will rather increase than diminish by
delay, and they entertain a confident hope, that when the great
advantages to be gained by a liberal and enlightened settlement
of the question are duly considered, there may be such a gene-
ral concurrence of opinion on the subject as will lead to the
adoption of some safe and practical measure to which the
Legislatures of the respective Colonies will consent to give
their approval. This matter cannot, however, be definitely
settled without the aid of Imperial legislation, to which there
would, of course, be no objection, if the general principles of
the measure were previously agreed upon.
3. On referring to the history of the American Colonies, it
will be found that the necessity for Federal Union was felt at
an early period of their existence. In the year ] 643, a Con-
federation was formed, embracing the separate Governments
of Massachusetts, Connecticut, and New Haven. It may not
be uninstructive, in the consideration of this question, to refer
to the account given of this confederation in Bancroft's History
of the United States. The following extract from that work
shews the general principles upon which it was formed, and
the objects for which it was instituted :
Immediately after the victories over the Pequods, at a time when the
earliest synod had gathered in Boston the leading magistrates and elders of
Connecticut, the design of a Confederacy was proposed. Many of the Ameri-
can statesmen, familiar with the character of the government of Holland,
possessed sufficient experience and knowledge to frame the necessary plan,
but time was wanting ; the agents of Plymouth could not be seasonably
summoned, and the subject was deferred. The next year it came again into
discussion, but Connecticut, offended because some pre-eminence was yielded
to Massachusetts, insisted on reserving to each State a negative on the pro-
ceedings of the Confederacy. This reservation was refused ; “ for, in that
case,” said Massachusetts, “ all would have come to nothing.”
The vicinity of the Dutch, a powerful neighbor, whose claims Connec-
ticut could not, single handed, defeat, led the Colonies of the West to renew


tlie negociation, and with such success, that, within a few years, the United
Colonies of New England were made all as one. Protection against the
encroachments of the Dutch and the French ; security against the tribes of
savages ; the liberties of the Gospel in purity and in peace,—these were the
motives to the Confederacy, which did, itself, continue nearly half a century,
and which, even after it was cut down, left a hope that a new and a better
union would spring from its root.
Neither was the measure accomplished without a progress in political
science. If the Delegates from three of the States were empowered to frame
and definitely conclude a Union, the Colony of Plymouth now set the
example of requiring that the Act of their constituent representatives
should have no force till confirmed by a majority of the people.
The Union embraced the separate Governments of Massachusetts, Ply-
mouth, Connecticut, and New Haven ; but to each its respective local juris-
diction was carefully reserved. The question of State Fights is nearly two
hundred years old. The affairs of the Confederacy were entrusted to Com-
missioners consisting of two from each Colony. Church membership was
the only qualification required for the office.
The Commissioners who were to assemble annually, or oftener if exigen-
cies demanded, might deliberate on all things which are the proper concomi-
tants or consequents of a Confederation.
The affairs of peace and war, and especially Indian affairs, exclusively
belonged to them ; they were authorised to make internal improvements at
the common charge ; they, too, were the guardians to see equal and speedy
justice assured to all the Confederates in every jurisdiction. The common
expenses were to be assessed according to population. Thus remarkable
for unmixed simplicity was the form of the first Confederate Government in
America. It was a directory, apparently without any check. There was
no President, except as a moderator of its meetings ; and the larger State,
Massachusetts, superior to all the rest in territory, wealth, and population,
had no greater number of votes than New Haven. But the Commissioners
were, in reality, little more than a deliberative body; they possessed no
executive power, and, while they could decree a war and a levy of troops, it
remained for the States to carry their votes into effect.
Provision was made for the reception of new members into the League ;
but the provision was wholly without results. The people beyond the
Piscataqua were not admitted, because they ran a different course from the
Puritans, both in their ministry and their civil administration. The planta-
tions of Providence also desired in vain to participate in the benefits of the
Union ; and the request of the island of Rhode Island was equally rejected,
because it would not consent to form a part of the jurisdiction of Plymouth.
Yet this early Confederacy survived the jealousies of the Long Parliament,
met with favor from the Protector, and remained safe from censure on the
restoration of the Stuarts.
4. It is true that this Confederation lasted only for a period
of fifty years ; but it no doubt formed the basis of that more


permanent and extended system of Federation which is now
one of the fundamental principles of the Constitution of the
United States of America.
5. The Federal Union of the Australian Colonies has been
long felt to be highly desirable, if not absolutely necessary, for
their steady advancement and prosperity. In the Report of
the Committee of the Privy Council of the Ist May, 1849, the
expediency of “creating some authority competent to act for all
these Colonies jointly," is forcibly pointed out, as will appear
by the following extract from that very able document:—
For this purpose we propose that one of the Governors of the Australian
Colonies should always hold from your Majesty a commission constituting
him the Governor-General of Australia.
We think that he should be authorized to convene a body, to he called
the General Assembly of Australia, at any time and at any place within
your Majesty’s Australian dominions, which he might see fit to appoint for
the purpose. But we are of opinion that the first convocation of that body
should be postponed until the Governor-General should have received,
from two or more of the Australian Legislatures, addresses requesting him
to exercise that power.
We recommend that the'General Assembly should consist of the Governor-
General and of a single House, to be called the House of Delegates. The
House of Delegates should be composed of not less than twenty, nor of more
than thirty members. They should he elected by the Legislatures of the
different Australian Colonies. We subjoin a schedule explanatory of the
composition of this body, that is, of the total number of delegates, and of
the proportions which each colony should contribute to that number.
We think that your Majesty should be authorized to establish provi-
sionally, and, in the first instance, all the rules necessary for the election of
the Delegates, and for the conduct of the business of the General Assembly ;
but it should be competent to that body to supersede any such rules and to
substitute others, which substituted rules should not, however, take effect
until they had received your Majesty’s sanction.
We propose that the General Assembly should also have the power of
making laws for the alteration of the number of Delegates, or for the im-
provement in any other respect of its own constitution. But we think that
no such law should come into operation until it had actually been confirmed
by your Majesty.
We propose to limit the range of the legislative authority of the General
Assembly to the ten topics which we proceed to enumerate. These are—
1. The imposition of duties upon imports and exports,
2. The conveyance of letters.
3. 'lhe formation of roads, canals, or railways, traversing any two or
more of such Colonies.


4. The erection and maintenance of beacons and lighthouses.
5. The imposition of dues or other charges on shipping in every port or
harbor.
6. The establishment of a general Supreme Court, to be a court of
original jurisdiction, or a court of appeal for any of the inferior courts
of the separate provinces.
7. The determining of the extent of the jurisdiction, and the forms and
manner of proceeding of such Supreme Court.
8. The regulation of weights and measures.
9. The enactment of laws affecting all the colonies represented in the
General Assembly on any subject not specifically mentioned in the
preceding list, but on which the General Assembly should be desired
to legislate, by Addresses for that purpose presented to them from
the Legislatures of all those colonies.
10. The appropriation to any of the preceding objects of such sums as
may be necessary, by an equal percentage from the revenue received
in all the Australian Colonies, in virtue of any enactments of the
General Assembly of Australia.
By these means we apprehend that many important objects would be
accomplished which would otherwise be unattainable ; and by the qualifica-
tions which we have proposed, effectual security would, we think, be taken
against the otherwise danger of establishing a Central Legislature in oppo-
sition to the wishes of the separate Legislatures, or in such a manner as to
induce collisions of authority between them. The proceedings also of the
Legislative Council of New South Wales, with reference to the proposed
changes in the Constitution, lead us to infer that the necessity of creating
some such general authority for the Australian Colonies begins to be seriously
felt.
6. Again, in the year 1853, the Select Committee of the late
Legislative Council on the New Constitution for this Colony,
of which Mr. Wentworth was chairman, reported as follows,
viz.:—
One of the most prominent legislative measures required by this Colony,
and the Colonies of the Australian Group generally, is the establishment at
once of a General Assembly, to make laws in relation to the Inter-Colonial
questions that have arisen, or may hereafter arise, among them.
The questions which would claim the exercise of such a jurisdiction appear
to be as follow :
1. Inter-Colonial tariffs, and coasting trade.
2. Railways, roads, canals, &c., running through any two of the Colonics.
3. Beacons and lighthouses on the coast.
4. Inter-Colonial penal settlements. '
5. Inter-Colonial gold regulations.
6. Postage between the said Colonies.
7. A general court of appeal from the courts of such Colonies.


8. A power to legislate on all other subjects which may be submitted
to them by Addresses from the Legislative Councils and Assemblies
of the other Colonies ; and to appropriate to any of the above objects
the necessary sums of money, to be raised by a percentage on the
revenues of all the Colonies interested.
As it might excite jealousy, if a jurisdiction of this importance were to
be incorporated in the Act of Parliament which has unavoidably become a
necessary part of the measures for conferring a Constitution on this Colony,
in consequence of the defective powers given by Parliament to the Legis-
lative Council, your Committee confine themselves to a suggestion, that the
establishment of such a body has become indispensable, and ought no longer
to be delayed ; and to the expression of a hope that the Minister for the
Colonies will at once see the expediency of introducing into Parliament,
with as little delay as possible, a Bill for this express object.
7. Your Committee also find, that in the early part of the
present year, an important movement on this subject was
commenced in London, by the presentation of a Memorial from
the General Association for the Australian Colonies to the
Right Honorable Henry Labouchere, Her Majesty's Principal
Secretary of State for the Colonies, requesting that Minister
to introduce into Parliament a Bill—(of which they submitted
a draft) —“ to enabler any two or more of these Colonies to
depute an equal number of persons, to be selected by or from
each Legislature, to form a Convention, with power to create
a Federal Assembly, and to define, as far as possible, the
various subjects to which this federal action should extend.”
8. Your Committee refer to the above-mentioned Memorial
and its enclosures, as containing some very valuable sugges-
tions for the preparation of a suitable measure to give effect to
the object in view; and they invite attention to the reply of
Her Majesty's Government to that Memorial, as establishing
the fact, that no measure providing for Federal Union will be
adopted unless initiated and recommended by the Colonies
themselves.
9. It appears by the letter from Mr. Merivale, Under Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies, of date the 16th May, 1857,
that Mr. Labouchere declined to entertain the proposal of the
Australian Association. He states, however, that “ Mr. Labou-
chere proposes to send copies of this correspondence to the
Governors of the several Australian Colonies, for their infor-


mation; and he will readily give his best attention to any
suggestion which he may receive from those Colonies in reply,
with a view to providing a remedy for defects which experience
may have shewn to exist in their institutions, and which the
aid of Parliament is required to remove."
10. During the progress of their inquiry, your Committee
have been favored with a copy of the Report of a Select Com-
mittee of the Legislative Assembly of Victoria, appointed
during the present year to consider this subject. They appear
to have been unanimous in opinion as to “ the ultimate neces-
sity of a Federal Union, believing that the interests and honor
of these growing States would be promoted by the establish-
ment of mutual action and co-operation among them." The
Committee further observe, “ that the time for accomplishing
such a Federation is naturally a point upon which there are a
variety of opinions ; but they are unanimous in believing that
it is not too soon to invite a mutual understanding on the
subject throughout the Colonies."
The following additional extract from the Report of that
Committee shews the course of action which they recommend
for adoption by the Legislatures of the other Australian
Colonies :
On the best means of originating such an union we are unanimous. No
single Colony ought to take exclusive possession of a subject of such national
importance, or venture to dictate the programme of union to the rest. The
delicate and important questions connected with the precise functions and
authority of the Federal Assembly, which present themselves on the threshold
of the inquiry, can be solved only by a Conference of Delegates from the
respective Colonies. The course we recommend, therefore, is, that such a
conference should be immediately invited. To it will properly belong the
duty of determining whether the plan of union to be submitted to the people
shall propose merely a Consultative Council, authorized to frame propositions
for the sanction of the State Legislatures; or a Federal Executive and
Assembly, with supreme power on national and Inter-Colonial questions; or
some compromise between these extremes. And to it also must be referred
minor questions, such as the following, which press for a decision :
If a Consultative Council be adopted, can it act without the aid of Minis-
ters charged to submit measures for its consideration ? Is it desirable to
constitute it a Court of Impeachment for the Colonies ? Shall its delibera-
tions be restricted to certain specified questions; and if so, to what ques-
tions ?


If the plan embrace a Federal Legislature and Executive, is the Legislature
to consist of one or two branches ? Must an absolute majority of its Members
or the representatives of a certain number of States concur to make its de-
cisions law ? Are its laws to take effect directly on the entire population of
Australia, or only after the assent of their respective States ? Are they to
be administered by the existing Colonial Judicatures, or by Federal Courts ?
If its orders are violated by any State of the Federation, how are they to be
enforced ? Shall it possess the power of taxation, or only of assessment on
the respective States ?
In either case, where shall the Federal body sit, or shall it be rotatory ?
If the latter, shall the Governor of the State where it sits for the time-being
exercise the royal prerogative on its Bills, or must they be sent to the
Governor General or Senior Governor ?
These, and similar questions, must be determined before a coherent scheme
of Federation can be framed ; but we do not feel at liberty to offer any
opinion upon any of them.
In order to invite a Conference of the Colonies, it is necessary to make
some specific propositions, and we therefore recommend:—
1. That the Legislatures of New South Wales, South Australia, and
Tasmania, be requested to select three Delegates each, two of whom
might be Members of Assembly, and one a Member of Council, to
meet three Delegates from this Colony.
2. That these Delegates assembled in Conference be empowered to frame
a plan of Federation, to be afterwards submitted for approval either
to the Colonial Legislatures, or directly to the people, or to both, as
may be determined, and to receive such further legislative sanction
as may appear necessary.
3. That the expenditure incident to the Conference shall be borne by
the respective Colonies, in whatever proportions may be fixed by the
Conference itself.
4. That the Conference shall hold its meetings in whatever place the
majority of the Delegates may determine ; their decisions being inter-
changed in writing within a month of their election being completed.
11. Fortified by so many concurrent opinions of high au-
thority, your Committee feel no hesitation in recommending
the immediate initiation of measures calculated to carry out
the highly important object in view, in the firm belief that the
Federal Union of the Australian Colonies will contribute more
effectually to their general benefit and prosperity than any
other measure that can be devised.
12. Your Committee are fully alive to the importance of
securing, as far as possible, unanimity in deciding upon some
common scheme of Federation; and they are quite disposed to
think that this object will be best promoted by adopting the


course suggested in the above Extract from the Report of the
Victorian Committee. They have therefore unanimously re-
solved to recommend it for the consideration and approval of
your Honorable House.
13. Your Committee concur with the Committee of Victoria
in thinking it better that the precise mode of effecting the
object should be suggested, not by one Colony, but by the
combined wisdom of Delegates from all the Colonies. It is
only by mutual forbearence and concession that the question
can be determined in a manner satisfactory to all of them.
Before receiving the Report of the Committee of Victoria,
your Committee had made some progress in the way of
suggestion for placing the subject in a practical point of view
for legislation. They refer to their proceedings in this direction,
not with the intention of dictating any precise mode of dealing
with the subject, but in the hope that their labors may assist
the Delegates from the different Colonies, if ultimately ap-
pointed, in proposing some feasible plan by which the object
in view may be brought into operation. It will be perceived
that they availed themselves to a great extent in the provisions
they considered advisable for this purpose of the Draft Bill
prepared with so much ability by the Australian Association
in England.
14. If your Honorable House should coincide in the views
of your Committee, it will be necessary to invite the con-
currence of the Legislative Assembly in a joint Address from
both Houses to the Governor General, requesting that His
Excellency will be pleased to take the proper measures for
placing the subject before the Governments and Legislatures
of the other Australian Colonies, in order that the proposed
Conference of Delegates may be held with as little delay as
possible.
15, It is impossible to contemplate the rapidly increasing
population of the Australian Colonies, and the future develop-
ment of the unbounded resources which they undoubtedly
possess, in the great extent and diversified character of the
country which they embrace, from the tropical regions of the
northern districts to the more temperate climates of the south,


and their consequent adaptation to the production, in a high
degree of perfection, of almost every article suited to the wants
and luxuries of society, without entertaining the most confident
expectation that they are destined in the fullness of time to
rank amongst the most important communities founded by
the British nation. It becomes the more necessary therefore
in this early stage of their existence, that every means should
be adopted to render legislation, on matters affecting their
common interests, mutually advantageous and acceptable.
And your Committee are of opinion that a measure of this
kind cannot be longer postponed, without the danger of creating
serious grounds of antagonism and jealousy, which would tend
greatly to embarrass, if not entirely to prevent, its future
settlement, upon a satisfactory basis.
16. Your Committee, for these reasons, are induced to urge
the expediency of carrying out with the least possible delay
the recommendations which they have now the honor to submit
for the consideration and approval of your Honorable House,
E. DBAS THOMSON,
Council Chamber, Chairman.
Sydney, 15th October, 1857.


1857.
PROCEEDINGS IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
115 | 58.
Chief Secretary’s Office,
Sib, Adelaide, 4th February, 1858.
I have the honor, by direction of His Excellency Sir R. G.
Mac Donnell, and in the absence of the Chief Secretary, to enclose
for the information of the Government of Victoria, copies of the
Reports of the Committees ot the South Australian Parliament on
the question of Colonial Federation, together with copies of the
Addresses of the two Houses to His Excellency the Governor-in-
Chief, transmitting these Reports j and I am instructed to state that
the Government of South Australia will be glad to learn that the
Governments of the other Australian Colonies respectively have
taken action in the matter.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
OLIVER K. RICHARDSON,
The Honorable the Chief Secretary, Under Secretary.
Victoria.
SESSION 1857-8.
To His Excellency Sir Richard Graves Mac Donnell, Knight
Companion of the most Honorable Order of the Bath , Captain-
General and Governor-in-Chief of Her Majesty's Province of
South Australia, fyc., fc., dfc.
May it please your Excellency :
The Humble Address of the Legislative Council of South Australia,
sheweth:—
That at a Meeting of the said Council, holden on the 7th day
of January, 1858,
It was resolved—
That the Report of the Select Committee of the Legislative
Council on Federation be forwarded to His Excellency the


Governor-in-Chief for his information; and that His Excellent
be informed that Mr. George Hall had been appointed by the
Legislative Council as the Delegate to represent the Council at
any Federal Conference which may be held in the Australian
Colonies.
(Signed) J. H. FISHER,
Legislative Council Chamber,
O '
President.
11th January, 1858.


REPORT.
Report of the Select Committee of the Legislative Council on
Federation of the Australian Colonies.
Your Committee have to report that, having considered
the subject of the Federation of the Australian Colonies, as
remitted to them by your Honorable House, and having
conferred with the Select Committee of the House of Assembly
appointed for the same purpose, they now submit the resolu-
tions arrived at by the Committees in conference, and adopted
by themselves.
W. YOUNGHUSBAND,
Chairman.
Legislative Council Chamber,
10th November, 1857.
Resolutions of the Select Committees of the Legislative Council
and House of Assembly, met in conference to consider the
subject of the Federation of the A ustralian Colonies.
Resolved—
1. That although, under existing circumstances, the formation
of a Federal Legislature would, in the opinion of the Committees,
be premature, there are, nevertheless, so many topics in which the
Colonies have a common interest, and in which uniform legisla-
tion would be desirable, that the Committees consider it expedient
to adopt some measures to secure these objects ; and, in addition to
the topics referred to in the correspondence transmitted by the
Secretary of State for the Colonies to His Excellency the Governor,
and laid upon the Table of both Houses on the 23rd of September,
1857, the following have occurred to the Committees as fitting
subjects for consideration, viz.:—Patents and Copyrights, Law of
Insolvency, Professional Qualifications, Uniform Time of Meeting
of Parliaments.


2. With a view to the more general discussion of these various
subjects, and of others in which the Colonies are mutually interested,
the Committees recommend, in conformity with the suggestion
originating with the Legislature of Victoria, that three Delegates
be appointed—one by the Legislative Council, and two by the
House of Assembly—to meet Delegates to be appointed by the
other Colonies, at such places as may be agreed upon; the
expenses of such meeting to be borne by each of the Colonies
interested in proper proportion.
3. The Committees, moreover, recommend that the Delegates
appointed should not be authorized to bind the Legislature of
this Colony to adopt any decision or resolution which the united
conference may come to; but that their mission shall be, simply
to discuss such matters as may be brought before the conference,
and to report the result of such discussion to the Legislature.
House of Assembly,
Sir, 21st January, 1858.
The House of Assembly having this day resolved, “ That the
Report of the Select Committee on Federation, and the names of
the Delegates appointed by this House, be forwarded to His
Excellency the Governor-in-Chief for his information
I have the honor to enclose herewith, for the information of
your Excellency, copy of the Report of the Select Committee
appointed by the House of Assembly on 16th October, 1857, “to
inquire into and report on the subject of Federation of the
Australian Colonies.”
I have also the honor to inform your Excellency that, on 23rd
December last, the Hon. R. D. Hanson and R, R. Torrens, Esq.,
were elected by the House of Assembly, “as Delegates to meet
Delegates to be appointed by the other Australian Colonies, in
accordance with the Report of the Federation Committee.”
I have, Ac.,
(Signed) G. S. KINGSTON,
His Excellency the Governor-in-Chief. Speaker.


REPOET.
Your Committee beg to report that, in accordance with the
resolution by which it was appointed, it proceeded to confer
with the Committee appointed for a similar purpose by
the Legislative Council, and that resolutions were agreed to
concurrently by each Committee, which resolutions your
Committee now beg to report to your Honorable House, as
follows:
Resolutions of the Select Committees of the Legislative Council
and House of Assembly , met in conference to consider the
subject of the Federation of the Australian Colonies.
Resolved —
1. That although, under existing circumstances, the formation
of a Federal Legislature would, in the opinion of the Committees,
be premature, there are, nevertheless, so many topics in which the
Colonies have a common interest, and in which uniform legislation
would be desirable, that the Committees consider it expedient to
adopt some measures to secure these objects ; and, in addition to
the topics referred to in the correspondence transmitted by the
Secretary of State for the Colonies to His Excellency the Governor,
and laid upon the Table of both Houses on the 23rd of September,
185?, the following have occurred to the Committees as fitting
subjects for consideration, viz.:—Patents and Copyrights, Law
of ' Insolvency, Professional Qualifications, Uniform Time of
Meeting of Parliaments.
2. With a view to a more general discussion of these various
subjects, and of others in which the Colonies are mutually inte-
rested, the Committees recommend, in conformity with the sugges-
tion originating with the Legislature of Victoria, that three
Delegates be appointed—one by the Legislative Council, and two
by the House of Assembly—to meet Delegates to be appointed by
the other Colonies, at such places as may be agreed upon j the
expenses of such meeting to be borne by each of the Colonies
interested in proper proportions.


3. The Committees, moreover, recommend that the Delegates
appointed should not he authorized to bind the Legislature ol this
Colony to adopt any decision or resolution which the united con-
ference may come to j but that their mission should be, simply to
discuss such matters as may be brought before the conference, and
to report the result of such discussion to the Legislature.
R. D. HANSON,
10th November, 1857.
Chairman.


TASMANIA.
Copy Letter from the Government of Tasmania.
Y. 4557.
Tasmania, Colonial Secretary’s Office,
6th March, 1858.
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter ol
the 9th October last, forwarded a copy of an Address which had
been presented to His Excellency Sir Henry Barkly, by the
Legislative Assembly of Victoria, accompanied by the Report ol
a Select Committee appointed to inquire into the subject of a
Eederal Union of the Australian Colonies, and requesting me to
bring the Address with the Report under the notice of His Excel-
lency the Governor.
Your communication would not have remained so long unan-
swered, but that from the great pressure ol important public mea-
sures it was not in the power of the Legislature to give that early
attention to the questions involved in the consideration ol a
Federal Union of the Australian Colonies, which their importance
demanded.
I have now the honor to inform you that the subject having been
brought before the House of Assembly, it was resolved, u That in
the event of the Conference of Delegates from the Australian
Colonies assembling previously to the next meeting of the Parlia-
ment, it will be expedient that this Colony should be represented
at such Conference ; that the House do therefore nominate two ol
its Members to act in conjunction with a Member of the Legisla-
tive Council, as Delegates from the Colony ol Tasmania, to act in
such capacity only until the next meeting of the Parliament.”


In this resolution the Legislative Council concurred; and
Messrs. Butler and Gibson were appointed by the House of
Assembly, and the Honorable W. E. Nairn, Esquire, by the
Legislative Council, as Delegates from this Colony.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) WM. HENTY.
The Honorable the Chief Secretary,
Melbourne, Victoria.


1857.
PROCEEDINGS IN LONDON.
Despatch from the Secretary of State enclosing
Correspondence on the Establishment of Insti-
tutions of a Federal Character.
Downing-street,
Sir, 17th June, 1857.
I transmit to you copies of correspondence which has passed
between this Department and a number of gentlemen of interest
and influence in the Australian Colonies, on the subject of the
establishment of institutions of a federal character for the Colonies.
The correspondence in question so fully explains itself that I do
not feel it incumbent on me to do more than to express to you the
strong sense entertained by Her Majesty’s Government of the
importance of the subject to which it relates, and to direct your
attention in particular to the closing suggestion of Mr. Went-
worth’s letter of the 30th ultimo.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) H. LABOUCHERE.
Governor Sir Henry Barkly, K.C.B.
To the Right Honorable Henry Labouchere, Her Majesty's
Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies.
The Memorial of the General Association for the
Australian Colonies, adopted at a Meeting held in the
City of London, on the 31st day of March, 1857, William
Charles Wentworth, Esquire, late Member of the
Legislature of New South Wales, for the City of Sydney,
in the Chair.
Respectfully sheweth,
That at the time the Constitution now in force for the Govern-
ment of New South Wales was presented by its framers to the
Legislature of that Colony, it was foreseen that a Federal Assembl} r


would soon be an indispensable bond of union for all the Colonies
forming 1 the Australian group, as the subjoined extract marked (A)
from the Report of the Committee appointed to prepare the Bill
which resulted in that Constitution, will prove.
That the same conviction was strongly impressed upon Earl
Grey, as Secretary of State for the Colonies, at a much earlier
period, as clauses for the establishment of a Federal Assembly were
introduced by him into the previous Bill for the government of the
Australian Colonies, though these clauses were subsequently
abandoned by his lordship from difficulties which occurred, or were
suggested, in the progress of that measure through the House of
Commons.
That the want of a federal authority has been already felt in
regard to the establishment of lighthouses in Bass’s Straits, to the
collection of custom duties on the River Murray, which intersects
the three Colonies of South Australia, Victoria, and New South
Wales, and to the construction of an electric telegraph between
Adelaide and Melbourne.
That although the lighthouses so indispensable for the safety
of the numerous vessels that are constantly navigating’ Bass’s
Straits have, it is believed, at last been undertaken, under arrange-
ments made after considerable delay, expense, and difficulty,
among the Colonies bound in justice to contribute to their erection
and support, and although the electric telegraph between Adelaide
and Melbourne is about to proceed, under a similar arrangement,
it is evident that all such arrangements must be uncertain and
unsatisfactory, so long as the federal sanction necessary for their
legalization is wanting.
That although by a similar arrangement between the Govern-
ments of South Australia, Victoria, and New South Wales, the
customs duties payable on commodities conveyed to those Colonies
by the River Murray are collected in South Australia, and divided
among the Governments of those three Colonies, the result of this
clumsy contrivance is, that the duties only which are payable by
law in the Colony of South Australia can be levied there, and that
hence the colonists of Victoria and New South Wales, consumers
of those commodities, pay a greater or less amount of duty than
are leviable by law in the Colonies to which they respectively
belong, and in some instances pay duties on commodities not
subject in their own Colonies to any duty at all.


That under these circumstances, it is not to be wondered
at that a strong 1 feeling 1 of discontent should be growing up among
the inhabitants of these Colonies, from their being compelled to
resort to such indirect, tedious, and illegal expedients in substitu-
tion of that federal authority without which their several consti-
tutions must continue incomplete, as regards all measures and
undertakings which require the joint action and co-operation of
any two or more of them.
That the amount of inconvenience arising from this want of a
federal authority may be collected from the speech of the Hon.
Mr. E. Deas Thomson, delivered by him on the 29th of October
last, in the Legislative Council of New South Wales, in his capacity
of Vice-president of the Executive Council, and as representing in
that house the opinions of the Parker ministry; in which speech
there is an enumeration of seven matters requiring immediate
federal action. Vide extract B.
That in the subjoined extract from the Melbourne Argus * of
the 4th November last, an influential and widely-circulated paper
in Victoria, the necessity for establishing at once a Federal
Assembly is strongly insisted upon.
That it is understood that this necessity has been strongly
represented by the Government of South Australia; and it may
be presumed, although responsible Government is only just be-
ginning to take effect in the Australian Colonies, that such
representations have been general from the Governors of the
Colonies composing the Australian group, to Her Majesty’s Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies.
That your Memorialists humbly conceive that it is the duty of
the Imperial Government to anticipate the wants of its Colonies;
to see that their institutions keep pace with their wants ; and not
to defer an indispensable enactment like this until grave incon-
veniences arise, and produce, as they assuredly must, universal
dissatisfaction and complaint.
That a Federal Assembly can only originate in an Act of Parlia-
ment directly constituting such a body, or giving the Legislatures
of the different Colonies, now or hereafter composing the Australian
group, or any two or more of them, a permissive power to form or
join such a federation, when, and as they may think fft.
• The article quoted appears to have been erroneously attributed to the Melbourne Argus, being
claimed by the Sydney Morning Herald.


That the latter course is that which your Memorialists would
press upon your attention as the most desirable, if not the only
practical course which can now be adopted; but that, in their
opinion, a complete equality of representation, as between all the
Australian Colonies, should be insisted upon, without reference to
the extent of their population, in any Federal Assembly that may
be formed.
That this principle of equality is quite as indispensable to the
fair representation of these Colonies in a Federal Assembly, as it is
to the fair representation of the several States of America in the
Senate of that country; and that the adoption of any other prin-
ciple would tend to the undue debasement and detriment of the
weaker Colonies, and to the unfair exaltation and advancement of
the stronger.
That in the opinion of your Memorialists a permissive Act of
Parliament, which would enable any two or more of these Colonies
to depute an equal number of persons to be selected by or from
each legislature to form a convention, with power to create a
Federal Assembly, and to define, as far as possible, the various
subjects to which this federal action should extend, is all the par-
liamentary interference that is required; and that, in our opinion,
this object would be accomplished, by the passing of some such
Bill as is subjoined (marked D).
That in the event of any jealousy arising in the Colonies, in
respect to the place for holding the Federal Assembly, or the power
of any Governor to assent to or dissent from its acts, these jealousies,
we submit, might be got rid of in the first instance by making the
Assembly perambulatory (as suggested in the article from the
Argus), and giving the veto to its acts only to the Queen ; but as
the Bill subjoined does not contemplate or allow any federal
revenue, properly so called, to be at the immediate disposal of the
Federal Assembly, and as it will be little more, under these circum-
stances, than a Court of Registry for its own acts, it is not conceived
that the Colonies generally will feel much interest in its locality.
The subjects it has to legislate upon are few, and its sessions will
be short. Each Colony represented in this Assembly ought to bear
a quota of the expense necessarily attendant upon it, as well as a
just apportionment of the expenses attendant on those acts or
measures in which such Cfllony may be interested.
lhat in the event of any supposed encroachments of authority


by the Federal Assembly being' resisted by any of the Colonies
submitted to its jurisdiction, the Privy Council might be resorted
to in order to settle any such difference, until the creation of a
Court of Appeal for these Colonies generally, or in the last instance
after the creation of such a court.
That your Memorialists do not consider it necessary to go into
further details, as they do not desire that Parliament should legis-
late directly on this subject, and the necessary details connected
with the proper creation of a Federal Assembly will rest with the
convention to whom this power may be delegated by the Colonial
Legislatures, which doubtless will select the most competent men
they possess for the discharge of this very important function
The perfection, too, of such details, in the first instance, will be
of less importance, if that permissive Act of Parliament, which
your Memorialists request you to bring in and pass with all con-
venient speed, shall contain a power enabling the Federal Assembly
itself, after it shall be created, to supply any necessary details
which may be omitted in its original constitution.
Signed, by order of the meeting,
W. C. WENTWORTH,
Chairman.
APPENDIX TO MEMORIAL.
“ One of the most prominent legislative measures required by this Colony,
and the Colonies of the Australian group generally, is the establishment at
once of a General Assembly to make laws in relation to the Inter-Colonial
questions that have arisen, or may hereafter arise, in them. The questions
which would claim the exercise of such a jurisdiction appear to be as
follow :
“ Ist Inter-Colonial tariffs and coasting trade,


“ 2nd. Railways, roads, canals, &c., running through any two of the
Colonies.
“ 3rd. Beacons and lighthouses on the coast.
“ 4th. Inter-Colonial penal settlements.
“ sth. Inter-Colonial gold regulations.
“ 6th. Postage between the said Colonies,
“ 7th. A general court of appeal from the courts of such Colonies.
“ Bth. A power to legislate on all other subjects which may be submitted
to them by Addresses from the Legislative Councils and Assemblies of the
other Colonies ; and to appropriate to any of the above objects the necessary
sums of money, to be raised by a percentage on the revenues of all the
Colonies interested.
“ As it might excite jealousy if a jurisdiction of this importance were to
be incorporated in the Act of Parliament, which has unavoidably become a
necessary part of the measures for conferring a Constitution on this Colony,
in consequence of the defective powers given by Parliament to the Legis-
lative Council, your Committee confine themselves to a suggestion that the
establishment of such a body has become indispensable, and ought no longer
to be delayed; and to the expression of a hope that the Minister for the
Colonies will at once see the expediency of introducing into Parliament,
with as little delay as possible, a Bill for this express object.
“W. C. WENTWORTH,
“ Chairman.
“ Legislative Council Chamber, Sydney,
28th July, 1853.”
Extract from the Honorable Mr. E. Deas Thomson's Speech in the Legislative
Council of New South Wales, on the 20 th of October, 1856.
“ The time, I look upon it, is not far distant when the Colonies will adopt
some federal arrangement, and by this means a tariff congenial to all may
be agreed upon. The land system may in the same manner be settled upon
a good and sound basis, so that the different Colonies may not be found
endeavoring, as it were, to outbid each other. Another matter which ought
also to be settled with Victoria is the management of the gold fields ; and
I will here observe, that it is the intention of the present Government, so
far as it is concerned, to adopt the policy of Victoria, which was found to
work so beneficially. The question of postal communication could also be
settled upon a federal basis, as could also the subject of international
railways. With reference to these, it is important that some settlement
should be come to as to the gauge to be adopted. In cases where the
electric telegraph passes through various Colonies it might prove a subject
for federal arrangement; but there is one still more important object, in
which already some progress has been made in obtaining the concurrence of
the adjoining Colonics, that is, the settlement of lighthouses on the coast.


Therefore, there arc seven great questions which ought to be submitted to
some general Federal Assembly representing all the Australian Colonies.”
Bill to empower the Legislatures of the Australian Colonies to form a Federal
Assembly.
Whereas it is expedient to empower the several legislatures of New South
Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania, to form a Federal Assembly;
Be it therefore enacted, &c., as follows:
1. Any two or more of the above-named Legislatures are hereby re-
spectively empowered to select and depute any [/bur] persons, being
members of either of their Houses of Legislature, or not members thereof, to
form a Convention for the purpose of creating a Federal Assembly, with all
necessary powers and incidents, and such Federal Assembly, when so created,
shall have power, from time to time, to amend its Constitution, as occasion
shall require.
2. Such Federal Assembly shall have full power and authority to make
laws for such Federal Colonies on the following subjects, viz., tariffs, light-
houses, gauges of connecting railways, navigation of connecting rivers,
telegraphs communicating with any two or more Colonies, postage between
such Colonies, the upset or minimum price of land, management of the gold
fields, a common coinage, weights and measures, general defence, a court of
appeal, penal settlements, and upon any other subject which shall be
lawfully submitted to such Federal Assembly by an Address from the Legis-
latures of the said Federal Colonies having an interest in the question so
submitted.
3. The time and place of holding such Federal Assembly shall be fixed by
the Governor-General [or senior Governor of the said Federal Colonies, ] and
the said Governor-General [or senior Governor,'] shall also have the power to
assent to or dissent from the Acts of the said Federal Assembly; and such
Acts, notwithstanding such assent, shall be subject to the disallowance of
Her Majesty in Council, at any time within one year after such assent
therto shall have been given.
4. The said Federal Assembly shall have power to appoint a president at
the commencement of each session thereof, and oftener, if a vacancy shall
arise ; and to fix the amount of its own expenses, and the salaries of its
officers, by Acts to be passed from time to time and assented to as aforesaid.
And all such expenses and salaries, and all other expenses incident to any
Act or Acts of the said Federal Assembly, shall be apportioned by such
Assembly among the respective Colonies represented in such Federal Assem-
bly, in such proportions as such Assembly shall direct; and all such expenses
shall be provided for by the respective Legislatures thereof accordingly.
5. In the event of any one or more of the said Australian Colonies not
becoming members of this Federation in the first instance, such Colony or


Colonies, and any future Colony of the Australian group not now in exist-
ence, and not being a penal Colony or settlement for, or consenting to, the
reception of convicts or exiles from Great Britain or elsewhere, may join
such Federation, and have the right of sending to the said Federal Assembly
the same number of representatives as shall be fixed for all the other Colonies
represented in the said Federal Assembly : Provided the respective Legis-
latures of the Colony or Colonies so desiring representation therein shall
pass an Act submitting such Colony or Colonies to the federal jurisdiction
of such Assembly.
The following is a Copy of a Letter received from the Right Honorable Henry
Labouchere, Secretary of State for the Colonies, in reply to the Memorial
from the “ General Association to the Australian Colonies, requesting him
to bring a Bill into Parliament, empowering those Colonies to form a Federal
Assembly.
g IR) Downing-street, 1857.
I am directed by Mr. Secretary Labouchere to acknowledge a Memorial
presented by you, as Chairman of the General Association for the Australian
Colonies, urging on Her Majesty’s Government the importance of intro-
ducing into Parliament a Bill for the purpose of enabling the Colonies now
composing the Australian group to form a lederal Assembly for legislating
on subjects of common interest to them,jipon the principle of equality of
the number of Delegates from each Province.
2. Mr. Labouchere has considered the statements and arguments of this
Memorial with that attention which the great importance of the subject
and the character of the signatures attached to it demanded.
3. He is fully sensible of the inconvenience which has already been felt
in some instances in Australia, from the want of any means of joint action
by the several Colonies ; and he is aware that inconvenience of this kind is
likely to be experienced still more strongly in future, unless some remedy
be found for it.
4. Nevertheless, after weighing, to the best of his ability, the reasons for
and against the scheme submitted to him, he has arrived at the decided
opinion that Her Majesty’s Government would not in reality promote the
object of the Memorialists by introducing such a measure as that of which
the outlines are given in the Memorial, notwithstanding its purely permis-
sive character.
5. Without entering into all the objections to which it appears to him
exposed, it may be sufficient to say that he cannot think it at all probable
that the several Colonies would consent to entrust such large powers to an
Assembly thus constituted, or to be bound by laws imposing taxation (such
as is involved, for instance, in tariff arrangements), or in the appropriation
of money, which is involved in several of the subjects of legislation suggested


by the Memorialists ; and, even if they were to consent in the first instance
to the establishment of such a system, the further result would, in his
opinion, very probably be dissention and discontent. He does not, therefore,
think that Her Majesty’s Government ought to introduce a measure of this
character, although merely permissive in its provisions, unless they are
convinced that there is a reasonable prospect of its working in a satisfac-
tory manner. Mr. Labouchere would not consider himself warranted in
making such a proposal, unless he was both himself satisfied that it was
founded on just and constitutional principles, and also that there was reason
to believe that it was likely to be acceptable to the Colonies which were
concerned in it.
6, Mr Labouchere proposes to send copies of this correspondence to the
Governors of the several Australian Colonies for their information, and he
will readily give his best attention to any suggestion which he may receive
from those Colonies in reply, with a view to providing a remedy for defects
which experience may have shown to exist in their institutions, and which
the aid of Parliament is required to remove. In the meantime, he cannot
but hope that even if any attempt to provide for their joint action in a
regular and binding manner, by the establishment of some general control-
ling authority, should be found impracticable or premature, yet that much
may be done by negotiation between the accredited Agents of the several
Local Governments, the results agreed upon between such Agents being
embodied in legislative measures, passed uniformly and in concert by the
several Legislatures.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
W. C. Wentworth, Esq. HERMAN MERIYALE.
Copy of a Letter from the “ General Association for the Australian Colonies ,”
to the Right Honorable Mr. Labouchere.
General Association for the Australian Colonies,
London, 30th May, 1857,
In reply to your letter of the 16th instant, conveying to me, as Chairman
of the General Association for the Australian Colonies, Mr. Labouchere’s
decision on the memorial presented to him some time since by a deputation
from that body, urging upon him the importance of at once introducing a
Bill into Parliament to enable the Colonies of the Australian group to form
a Federal Assembly, with power to legislate upon subjects of common interest
to them, —I have the honor to state, that I have been directed to express the
regret of the Association at the delay which Mr Labouchere’s proposed
reference to the Governors of those various Colonies will unavoidably occa-


sion, and their hope that this reference will be made as speedily as possible
so that the opinion and suggestions of the several Colonial Legislatures on
the important matters which the memorial involves may be obtained pre-
viously to the next meeting of Parliament.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
Herman Merivale, Esq. W. C. WENTWORTH.


1857-8,
VICTORIA.
SELECT COMMITTEE, Appointed 14th December, 1857.
Mr. Gayan Duffy, Chairman;
Mr. Ebden,
Mr. O’Shanassy,
Mr. McCulloch,
Mr. Michie,
Mr. Griffith,
Mr. Ireland,
Mr. Moore,
Dr. Evans,
Mr, Horne,
Mr. Syme,
Mr. Harker.
PROGRESS REPORT.
SINCE the first Report of your Committee, and its transmis-
sion to the other Colonies by His Excellency the Governor, we
have had the satisfaction to observe that New South Wales
and South Australia have taken measures to carry the pro-
posed Conference into speedy effect.
In South Australia the two Houses adopted a resolution
accepting the proposal, and recommending the appointment
of Delegates, in pursuance of it. They subsequently proceeded
to select two Delegates from the Assembly, and one from
the Council, to represent that Colony at the Conference.
In New South Wales the Legislative Council adopted
a report embodying a similar recommendation; and the
consideration of the subject was an order of the day in the
Assembly at the time of its dissolution. We have reason to


believe that the question will be immediately resumed on the
meeting of the new Parliament next month.
Under these circumstances, we are of opinion that the
Parliament of Victoria, which invited the Conference, ought
to postpone no longer the nomination of its Delegates, It
would be desirable, perhaps, that your Honorable House,
which is about tp be dissolved, could remit this duty to its
successor, but as the other Colonies have acted upon your
invitation it would scarcely be courteous to do so. And it
must not be forgotten that the business of the Conference
being merely to recommend a plan of Federation to the local
Legislatures, the future Parliament will have absolute control
over the terms and conditions on which Victoria will consent
to enter into such an union.
It will probably be an additional motive with your
Honorable House for naming Delegates at present, that the
Members selected may have adequate notice of so important
and onerous a duty.
In South Australia the Assembly have taken one of their
Delegates from the Members of the Government, and one from
the Opposition, in order that the opinions of the House may
be effectually represented in the Conference, and that its
decisions may be regarded without jealousy or distrust by any
party —an arrangement of which we cannot but approve.
As the place where the Conference will meet is to be fixed
by the Delegates, and they may possibly fix on Melbourne,
your Committee recommend your Honorable House to direct
that, should this city be chosen, a suitable building may be
placed at the disposal of the Conference, and all necessary
measures taken to convenience and facilitate their labors.
Committee Room,
9th February, 1858.
[This Report was adopted in the Legislative Assembly on the 19th of
February, 1858, and subsequently in the Legislative Council.]


18 60.
VICTORIA.
SELECT COMMITTEE OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY,
Appointed 26th January, 1860.
Mr. Gavan Duffy, Chairman.
Mr. Nicholson,
Mr, Michie,
Mr. O’Shanassy,
Mr. McCulloch,
Mr. Anderson,
Mr. Mollison.
Mr. Caldwell,
Mr. Brooke,
Dr. Evans.
R EPORT.
The Question remitted to your Committee for consideration
admits in their opinion of but one solution. Any plan of
Federal action, likely to command the sympathy and con-
fidence of the entire Colonies, must originate in a manner
which will place it beyond suspicion of local influence. And
they concur with the Committee of 1857, in believing that
this object will be best attained by entrusting, in the first
instance, the construction of such a plan to a Conference of
Delegates selected and empowered for this duty by the
Colonial Legislatures.
With this view they recommend that the negotiations
formerly held on the subject with New South Wales, South
Australia, and Tasmania, be renewed. The tw r o latter colonies,


when the project of a Conference was first proposed, promptly
acceded to it; and though an objection originated with New
South Wales which retarded any joint action, they have
reason to believe that it was of a temporary nature, and has
disappeared before the urgency with which the question is
invested, by the necessity of a united defence of the territory
of Australia in case of war.
Your Committee recommend that the renewal of these
negotiations be entrusted to the Chief Secretary, and that the
Report of the Federal Committee of 1857 (adopted by the
Assembly on the 11th of September, and by the Council on
the 17th of November, in that year) be transmitted with the
present Report to the Governments of the other Colonies, as
containing the necessary details of the arrangement in which
they are invited to concur. And that Queensland be now
requested to send Delegates to the proposed Conference.
Committee Room,
7th February, 1860.


SOUTH AUSTRALIA, TASMANIA, AND
QUEENSLAND.
Correspondence with the adjacent Colonies, consequent upon
Resolutions of the Legislative Assembly, dated respectively
15 th February and 3 rd May, 1860, in pursuance of the
foregoing Report.
VICTORIA.
G.B.
Chief Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 25th February, 1860.
No. 1248.
Sir,
In accordance with a Resolution of the Legislative Assembly of
this Colony, I have the honor to transmit herewith a Progress
Report of a Select Committee of that House upon the Federal
Union of the Australian Colonies, together with the Report of
a former Committee, therein alluded to; and lam to request that
you will move His Excellency the Governor-General to bring the
subject before the Legislature of New South Wales, with a view
to obtain its sanction to the proposed Conference of Delegates
from each of the Australian Colonies.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) WM. NICHOLSON.
The Honorable the Colonial Secretary,
New South Wales.
Similar letters to the foregoing, bearing the same date, addressed
to the Honorable the Colonial Secretary, Tasmania, and the
Honorable the Chief Secretary, South Australia; also to the
Honorable the Colonial Secretary, Queensland, dated 18th May,
1860.


TASMANIA.
Y | 567.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
sth March, 1860.
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 25th ultimo, accompanied by a Progress Report of the Select
Committee appointed by the Legislative Assembly of Victoria,
upon the Federal Union of the Australian Colonies; together
with the Report of a former Committee, on the same subject.
According to your request, the documents have been laid before
His Excellency the Governor, and I beg to assure you that the
subject will receive the earnest consideration of this Government.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) WM. HENTY.
To the Honorable the Chief Secretary,
Melbourne, Victoria.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
183 | 60. > Chief Secretary’s Office,
Adelaide, March 14th, 1860.
Sir,
In reply to your letter of the 26th ultimo, transmitting copy
of the Report of the Committee of the Legislature of Victoria
on the Federal Union of the Australian Colonies, I have the
honor, by desire of his Excellency Sir R. G. Mac Donnell, to
inform you that it is the intention of the present Government to
introduce this subject again to the notice of the Parliament of
South Australia at its next meeting.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) W. YOUNG HUSBAND,
Chief Secretary.
To the Honorable the Chief Secretary,
Victoria.


QUEENSLAND.
60 1 267. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Brisbane, 9th July, 1860.
I am directed to inform you that His Excellency the Governor
has submitted to the Executive Council your letter of the 18th
May, transmitting a, Progress Report of a Select Committee of the
Legislative Assembly upon the Federal Union of the Australian
Colonies, together with the Report of a former Committee therein
alluded to, and requesting that steps might be taken to obtain the
assent of the Legislature of Queensland to a proposed Conference
of the Delegates from each of the Australian Colonies.
2. The Council recommended that the proposal he submitted for
the favorable consideration of the Queensland Parliament.
I have the honor, &c.,
(Signed) ROBERT G. N. HERBERT.
The Honorable the Chief Secretary,
Victoria.
60 | 347. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Brisbane, 31st July, 1860,
Sir,
I am directed to inform you that His Excellency the Governor
has submitted to the Executive Council your letter of the 18th
May, transmitting a Progress Report of a Select Committee of the
Legislative upon the Federal Union of the Australian
Colonies, together with the Report of a former Committee therein
alluded to, and requesting that steps might be taken to obtain the
assent of the Legislature of Queensland to a proposed Conference
of Delegates from each of the Australian Colonies. His Excellency
at the same time invites the attention of the Council to a corres-
pondence from the Government of South Australia to that of New
South Wales, forwarding copies of the Report of the Committees
of the South Australian Parliament on the same subject, and of
Addresses relating to them, of the two Houses of Legislature of
that Colony.
2. The Council have perused with much interest the Reports
placed before them, exhibiting the view of the Legislatures of two
of the principal Australian Colonies on a subject of so great
importance to them all, whether viewed in connection with their
present relations or with their future destinies; and it seemed to


the Council that it would be advisable, without loss of time, to
place this correspondence on the Tables of both Houses of the
Queensland Parliament.
3. For their own part the Council having- given to the question
the consideration which it merits, were disposed to the belief that
a Conference of the character suggested would be attended with
many important results; as enabling the respective Legislatures
to gather from the Reports of their Delegates, the view and re-
quirements of the other Colonies concerned with respect to all
topics bearing upon their mutual interests; and to determine to
what extent a Federal Union of the whole group would be prac-
ticable or expedient.
4. Upon both of these points, the Council, with the information
before them, could not fail to entertain serious doubts; and, without
desiring to prejudge the question, they perceived obstacles of a
serious character to any project which might by the creation of a
central authority tend to limit the complete independence of the
scattered communities peopling this continent one of the other, or
to interfere in however remote a degree with their present direct
and happy relations with the mother-country.
5. At the same time, the Council were alive to the importance
of the various matters in which -it is desirable that, as far as
possible, the Legislation of the Colonies should be uniform and
their action united; among which maybe enumerated the Customs
and Postal Tariffs, Communication, postal and telegraphic, between
themselves and the mother-country, and the local arrangements
necessary for defence in case of war; upon all these matters —upon
all matters in fact such as are managed under treaty by the German
Zollverein, the labors of a Conference might, in their opinion, be
advantageously employed, it being understood that the Delegates
should be confined to discussing and reporting- on the several
questions without power to take any action binding upon the
Colonies which they may respectively represent, and it is principally
with these views that the Council have recommended that the
proposal before them should be submitted for the favorable con-
sideration of the Queensland Parliament, before whom the cor-
respondence has accordingly been placed.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
The Honorable the Chief Secretary,
Victoria.


I 860.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
SELECT COMMITTEE OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
Dr. Lang moved, pursuant to notice: That a Select Committee be ap-
pointed to take into consideration the subject of the Federation of the
Australian Colonies, with a view to ascertain what are the specific
objects which it would be desirable to attain through such Federation,
and whether in the existing circumstances of these Colonies Federation
is at all practicable.
Debate ensued—and Mr. Windeyer requiring that the proposed Committee
be appointed by ballot—whereupon
and the Deputy Speaker declared
Committee duly appointed :
Mr. Windeyer,
Mr. Parkes,
Mr. Hay,
Mr. Jones,
Mr. Arnold,
the House proceeded to the ballot,
the following Members to be the
Mr. Black,
Dr. Lang,
Mr. Robertson,
Mr. J. Campbell,
Mr. Darvall.
This Committee sat and deliberated, but brought up no Report.




1862.
VICTORIA.
SELECT COMMITTEE OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY,
Appointed 23rd Mat, 1862.
FRIDAY, 6th JUNE, 1862.
Members present:
Mr. Gavan Duffy, Mr. Anderson,
Mr, O’Shanassy, Mr. McCulloch,
Mr. Sullivan, Mr. Heales.
Mr. Nicholson,
Upon the motion of Mr. Anderson, Mr. Gavan Duffy was called to the
Chair.
Committee deliberated.
TUESDAY, 17th JUNE, 1862.
Members present;
Mr. Gavan Duffy in the Chair ;
Mr. Sullivan, j Dr. Evans,
Mr. Anderson, I Mr. McCulloch.
The Chairman brought up a Draft Report, and the same having been
read paragraph by paragraph, was considered and agreed to.
Chairman ordered to report.




EEPOET,
The Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly
appointed to consider and report upon the subject of
a Federal Union of the Australian Colonies have the
honor to report as follows :
Your Committee having learned that the Australian Govern-
ments are desirous of obtaining a Conference of Colonial Dele-
gates at Melbourne during the present year on the question of'
an uniform tariff, we are of opinion that such a Conference
would afford a suitable opportunity to consider the larger
question of Australian Federation.
For the past five years negotiations on this project, initiated
by the Parliament of Victoria, have been pending between
the Colonies, awaiting apparently only such an occasion as
the present to proceed from negotiation to action.
Your Committee therefore recommend to your Honorable
House that communications may be opened with the Austra-
lian Governments, requesting that the Delegates about to
be appointed may be empowered to take this subject into
consideration, and be clothed by their respective Legislatures
with the necessary authority for this purpose.
The number of Delegates formerly adopted was two from
the Assembly and one from the Council of each Colony, and
this arrangement seems still to be in all respects a suitable
one.
The only duty such a Conference could be expected to
undertake would be to deliberate and report—leaving the
Colonial Parliaments to deal ultimately with its recom-
mendations as they might deem fit.
If the suggestions of your Committee should be adopted by
your Honorable House, we further recommend that it may be


immediately communicated to the Legislative Council, and if
it should receive their assent, that the Chief Secretary be
requested to convey the decision of the Victorian Parliament
to the Australian Governments for their consideration.
Your Committee urgently advise that the present opportu-
nity may not be lost. The condition of the world, the danger
of war, which, to be successfully met, must be met by united
action ; the hope of a large immigration, which external cir-
cumstances so singularly favor ; the desire to develop in each
Colony the industry for which nature has best fitted it, without
wasteful rivalry; and the legitimate ambition to open a wider
and nobler field for the labors of public life, combine to make
the present a fitting time for reviving this project.
It is the next step in Australian development. In the eyes of
Europe and America, what was a few years ago known to them
only as an obscure penal settlement, in some uncertain position
in the Southern Ocean, begins to be recognized as a fraternity
of wealthy and important States, capable of immense develop-
ment ; and if our current history and national character are
in many respects misunderstood, we shall, perhaps, best set
ourselves right with the world by uniting our strength and
capacity in a common centre, and for common purposes of
undoubted public utility.
Committee Room,
17th June, 1862,
Resolutions embodying the recommendations contained in this report
were adopted by the Legislative Assembly on 17th June, 1862, and in the
Legislative Council on the same day.
By Authority : John Ferres, Government Printer, Melbourne


ADDENDUM.
VICTORIA, 1553.
The Legislative Council of Victoria appointed a Select Committee on
the Ist of September, 1853, to consider and report on the best form of
Constitution for the Colony. The Committee consisted of: —
Mr. J. V. L. Foster, Mr. Greeves,
Mr. W. F. Stawell, Mr. Miller,
Mr. H. C. E. Childers, Mr. Goodman,
Mr. J. F. Palmer, Mr. W. Nicholson,
Mr. Haines, i Mr, Smith,
Mr. O’Shanassy, Dr, Thomson.
The report of the Committee contains the following important
recommendation: —
“From the great extent of Australia, and the widely differing
circumstances of its several Colonies, your Committee do not think it
essential for local legislation that uniformity of Institutions should
prevail. They have followed, as far as principle permitted, the Bills
proposed in New South Wales and South Australia. If, therefore, in
the various Constitutional Acts about to be transmitted to England,
any variance may appear, they would earnestly deprecate that it should
furnish any reason for delay in the enactment of the proposed Bill.
“ But they do feel most strongly that there are questions of such vital
intercolonial interest that provision should be made for occasionally
convoking a General Assembly for legislating on such questions as may
be submitted to it by the Act of any Legislature of one of the
Australian Colonies.”
Lord John Bussell, the Secretary for the Colonies, in the despatch
which accompanied the New Constitution, after it had received Her
Majesty’s assent, refers to this recommendation in the following
terms: —
“ I need scarcely say, that the question of introducing into the
measures lately before Parliament clauses to establish a Federal Union
of the Australian Colonies for purposes of common interests lias been
very seriously weighed by Her Majesty’s Government; but they have
been led to the conclusion that the present is not a proper opportunity
for such enactment, although they will give the fullest consideration to
propositions on the subject which may emanate in concurrence from
the respective Legislatures.”
By Authority: John Ferres, Government Printer. Melbourne.


7m
muo
mite


; ■


