

PAPERS READ
BEFORE THE
ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY.
I,' —‘State of tlw Colony of Swan Minor, Ist January, 1830.
Chiefly extracted from Captain Stirling’s Report. By Jolm
Burrow, Esq., F.R.S. Read 2‘3d Nov,, 1830,
I n the infancy of the Royal Geographical Society of London,
and in thin early stage of our proceedings, the Council may per-
haps not be indisposed to receive such communications as may
convey useful information, though not possessing that degree of
minute accuracy which may he expected from the proceedings of
the Society in its more, mature state, when the higher objects for
which it was instituted shall claim more marked attention, and
when a more extended knowledge of its views shall have been
diffused at home and abroad.
With this feeling I have been induced to submit to the Society
a. paper, drawn up from an authentic source, on the actual state
of the Swan River Colony, at the commencement of the year
1830, about six months after its establishment. The subject may
fairly be considered as not altogether unimportant at this mo-
ment, when so many conflicting statements and opinions have
been promulgated, by which persons disposed to emigrate to that
quarter arc. left in suspense as to the steps it may be advisable for
them to take.
It would seem desirable, for other reasons, to collect and dis-
tribute information regarding New Holland, or, as it is now more
generally called, Australia. Hitherto, a country as large as
Europe lias been represented on our maps as a blank.
Yet, as this extensive territory will, in all probability, in process of
time, support a numerous population, the progeny of .Britons, and
may bo the means of spreading the English language, laws, and
B


institutions, over a great part of the Eastern Archipelago, it is
presumed that every accession to our knowledge of its geographical
features, however limited, will be acceptable to the Society.
Some strange opinions were at one time held regarding the
formation of this extensive country. When the Blue Mountains
behind Sydney were first passed, which was not till many years
after the earliest establishment of the colony, and the waters there
were found to take a westerly course, it was concluded that this
new country a recent creation according to some had an
inclination, or dip, on every side towards its centre, and that
all the waters from the surrounding ridge fell, as from the
rim of a basin, into a Mediterranean Sea, or a succession of
swamps or marshes. And the loose surveys made of its coasts
having afforded no discovery of any river of magnitude, tended
to confirm this notion. Recent researches, however, and par-
ticularly those of Captain Sturt, have proved that, as in most
other countries, the land dips from the central parts towards the
coasts, and that the waters, as most waters do, drain off into the
sea. On this subject I may quote a letter from Lieutenant-
Colonel Dumaresq, Secretary to the Governor of New South
Wales:—
‘ It will not perhaps be uninteresting to you,’ says that officer,
‘ to be informed, that, simultaneously with Captain Sturt’s dis-
‘ coveries, which have solved the problem respecting the con-
‘ struction of this Continent, it has been ascertained that the hypo-
‘ thesis, with regard to its post-diluvian formation, is as ground-
‘ less as that of its absorbent interior marshes.
‘ Some caverns in the neighbourhood of Wellington Valley
‘have lately been examined, and found to contain innumerable
‘ specimens of fossil bones, deeply imbedded in stalagmite, or in
‘ indurated day. I have seen some of these bones, which must
‘ have belonged to animals that do not now exist here, and are
‘ larger than those of the rhinoceros or buffalo. Teeth, appa-
‘ rently similar to those described by Buckland, have likewise
‘ been collected; and we have now many other proofs that this
* country was once inhabited by beasts of prey, and that it is coeval
‘ with the rest of the world.
‘ The country in the neighbourhood of Wellington Valley is of
‘ limestone formation, and the ridges are perforated by mnneron
‘ subterraneous caverns, which branch off' in various directions.
‘Others exist in the Shear Haven gullies, (the most remarkably
‘ formed country, perhaps, in the world,) and which will probably
‘ be found to contain similar diluviau remains.
‘ To the above physiological facts I may add, that Captain
( Sturt does not appear to think it at all improbable that there is
2
State of the Swan River Colony, Ist Jan., 1830.


c an opening from “ Lake Alexandria ” into the Gulf of St.
‘ Vincent; and ho is of opinion that the whole of that,country is
1 formed by alluvial deposit from the vast interior, through which
‘ flow the rivers Murray, .Darling, Casllereagh, and Peel; as also
* that the 'Darling will bo found to be one of the longest rivers of
‘ the world.
‘ Wo have recently ascertained that the finest tract of land exists
f to the smith, immediately beyond our present boundary, which is
1 abundantly watered by streams said to take their rise from snow-
‘ clad mountains. Those tacts induce me to think we should
‘ abandon the idea of pushing our settlements, at present, further
* into the interior, and that wo ought to form a bell of cokmiza-
‘ tiou along the north and south coasts. The water commuuica-
‘ tiou would give employment to seamen, and be the means of
‘ converting the Colonial youth into sailors, who, in case of need,
‘ might contribute to the manning of the navies of the mother
c country.’
Thus far Colonel Dumaresq. With regard to the discovery of
hones, Major Mitchell, the Surveyor-General in New South
Wales, thus writes to Mr. Hay ;—At length an immense quail-
‘ tity of the remains of antediluvian animals has been discovered,
e precisely in a situation such as that described by Professor
‘ Ihicklund. What is most singular is, that there appears no
* affinity, as far as I can discover, between these bones and those
* of. the caves of Europe, although some are very large. A bone,
* the nlm of some huge, animal, is somewhat like that of an ox,
‘ but it is four times as large.’
Colonel .Dumaresq’s observation, that the finest tracts of laud
arc found towards the south coast of tins great continent, is
fully confirmed, as to the western part of the same south coast,
by the discoveries made by Dr, Wilson of the navy, to the distance
of eighty or ninety miles northerly, from King - George’s Bound,
recently annexed to the settlement of Swan River. Of this jour-
ney a brief account is contained in the following paper, and it is
also sketched on the map. Our acquaintance, however, is yet
fur from being minute with this south coast, from Cape Leu win
to Port Philip,-—an extent of at least fifteen hundred geogra-
phical miles,' —otherwise an estuary of sixty miles in length, by
thirty or forty in breadth, could not have escaped observation
until discovered from the interior; and our knowledge of other
parts of the coast is even still more defective. Tor instance, on
the western side, from JSI orth-west Cape, ju hit. Q(2°, to Clarence
Strait, in lat. a distance of more than one thousand miles,
there are numerous large openings, not yet examined, in which no
laud is visible to the eye of the spectator in the interior, and through
n £3


which rivers of the first magnitude might discharge their waters
unseen and unknown. The whole of this coast is fronted with
innumerable islands, with deep channels between them, through
winch, according to Captain King’s expression, ‘ the tide rushes
with frightful rapidity.’ He suspects the great mass of land
called Dampier’s Land, extending from Cape Levique to Pointe
Gantheaume, to be an island, behind which there is an opening
of at least eight miles in width; and here, as well as in the
Buccaneers’ Archipelago, he found the rise and fall of the tides
six and thirty feet, which on other parts of the coast did not exceed
eight or nine feet. From these phenomena Captain King conies
to the same conclusion with that excellent old navigator Dampier.
‘ From all that is at present known,’ he observes, ‘ of this remark-
' able opening, there is enough to excite the greatest interest;
‘ since, from the extent of the opening, the rapidity of the stream,
' and the great rise and fall of the tides, there must be a very ex-
‘ tensive gulf or opening, totally different from everything that has
1 been before seen.’ But in parts of the coast so dangerous, no
survey can be made, except in boats, or by land, along the shore.
* * * * * *
‘ It will not be necessary for me,’ says Captain Stirling, in his
official despatches to Government, ‘ to recapitulate the inconve-
‘ niences we had to encounter on our first arrival. The winter
‘ season, the loneliness of our situation, and ignorance of the
' country, and of the navigation of the coast, and our anxiety as to
‘ whether we should succeed or fail, were sources of uneasiness
‘ which are happily passed away. It is our present condition that
‘ will interest you most, and to that I shall confine myself.’
The first operation, on arriving at Swan River, was to mark
out the site of two towns, to one of which was given the name of
Freemantle, close to the entrance of the river; to the other that
of Perth, about nine miles higher up, on its right or northern
bank. In August, 1829, the settlers began to crowd in ; and hav-
ing received their respective allotments, commenced the erection
of temporary buildings. In November, the country on the banks
of the Swan and Canning Rivers, extending between the sea and
the mountains, and to the distance of fifty miles to the southward
of Perth, was thrown open to them. And many at once esta-
blished themselves on their lands, regardless of any danger from
the natives, who indeed were found to be so harmless, that single
individuals even, who had traversed the country, and particularly
among the mountains, had never met with any interruption, nor
sustained any insult or injury at their hands.
As settlers continued to flock in, towards the end of the year


Captain Stirling found it necessary to explore the, country to a
greater extent than had hitherto been done, by which he ob-
tained a knowledge relative to the coast seventy miles to the
northward of RoUenest, and ninety miles to the southward of it.
In this extent, the only discoveries of any note were six rivers, of
no great magnitude, and a bar harbour, capable only of receiving
boats. To the northward, the land seen was of indifferent qua-
lity, while that to the. southward was found to improve in fertility,
the farther it was explored in that direction. One of the settlers
was so much struck with the fertility of tlio soil about Port
.Lesehenaidt, that he determined at once to fix his abode there,
lie describes this estuary to exceed Unit of Melville Water in the
Swan River, in point of size, ami superior in the beauty of its
hanks, it receives two rivers flowing down from the Darling
range, which is hero about the same distance from the coast as at
Swan River. Across the mouth of the Colley is a bar, but to the
distance of sixteen or eighteen miles within it maintains a depth
of water from six to two fathoms, and here it becomes perfectly
fresh. The plains are well wooded with large timber trees, and
the whole country wears the appearance of an English park.
'Port Leschenault is lit only for the reception of small craft, having
a bar with no more than from three to lour feet, and two fathoms
water within.
The nature of the soil in the extent of country here mentioned
is of various descriptions. On the sea coast, where a continued
calcareous ridge exists, no gramineous plants arc to bo found, hut
several species of shrubby or herbaceous plants rise out of the
sandy surface, affording good nutriment for sheep and cattle at all.
seasons of the year. Next to this calcareous formation is a
parallel breadth of a superficial soil, still somewhat sandy, bearing
large timber trees, and affording good but rather scanty feeding
for sheep and cattle. Adjoining lids district of light, sandy soil,
is a considerable breadth of red land, extending to the base of the
Darling mountains, the soil of which varies from red sandy loam
to the richest red marl and day, apparently tit for sill.agricultural
purposes. 'Flic fourth variety of country is the uneven surface of
the mountainous range, which is of granite and trap formation.
The valleys of this range are exceedingly rich and verdant, and
the hills themselves, although occasionally rugged by the protru-
sion of die rocks, afford magnificent timber, and very excellent
sheep lands. 'Flic whole breadth of this range of mountains had
not been crossed*, though examined to the distance of twenty-five
miles from the western edge. Straggling parties of natives were
occasionally mot with; and in one or two places were hovels of
* Sou, however, on this bend x>. Id, wlioro sirtweijuout discoveries wo noticed,


grass and twigs, very small, and resembling in shape the half of
a bee-hive cut vertically, The men and children were naked: their
women did not appear. They seemed to be a good-humoured,
inoffensive people. In several of the valleys are pools and rills of
water. The fifth and last variety of soil is that which is found on
the banks of the rivers and streamlets. It is alluvial, and gene-
rally very rich, bearing spontaneously good native flax, many edible
roots, and thirty or forty species of grasses. This description of
the country applies more particularly to the extent of about forty
miles to the southward of Swan River. Farther south, the sandy
tract disappears, and the rocky ground is less protruding; the
climate is cooler, and the surface seems to indicate the fall of
more frequent showers,
I'rom the little inconvenience which a large portion of the
settlers suffered from want of dwellings, and exposure to the night
air for weeks together, the opinion is universal that the climate is
favourable to health in a very uncommon degree. Captain Stir-
ling says, that for two or three of the summer months it was
deemed prudent that the workmen should not work exposed to
the sun between the hours of ten and three; but that great exer-
tion at other times produced no consequent lassitude : and he adds
that, with the exception of ten or eleven days, the summer heat
had been tempered by southern breezes, and thereby rendered very
agreeable. Rain had not fallen for about three months; but this
drought fortunately occurs at the season proper for harvest. And
though the grasses and other herbage are at this time much in-
jured by the great and glowing heat of the sun, it is worthy of
remark, that on sandy soils the plants sustain the heat much
better than on the clay. None of those whose roots are near the
surface can escape from the effects of the baking which this latter-
kind of soil sustains.
Captain Stirling speaks with great caution on the productive
power of the soils, and how far they may be modified by climate.
4 The most skilful of the farmers who have come from .England, 5
he observes, 4 profess themselves at a loss to form a judgment
4 here, as processes in vegetation are going forward before their
4 eyes, even on mere sands, which are wholly irreconcileable to
4 their pre-existing notions and modes of judging. I think, how-
-4 ever-,’ he continues, 4 I am safe in stating that the sandy soils on
4 the coast produce a shrubby herbage, on which homed cattle,
4 horses, and sheep have lived now throughout the hottest and the
4 coldest parts of the year; that there is, between the hills and the
4 sea, a breadth of red loamy soil, on which grain and artificial
4 grasses may be produced; that the banks of the rivers and nu-
‘ merous streams offer the richest alluvial loam ; and that the hills
4 themselves, although occasionally very rugged, are capable of


‘ becoming good sheep pasture, as the soil on their sides, where
‘ it exists at all, is invariably excellent, resting on granite and
* wbinstone.’ He states that the supply of water for the use of
the people and for cattle is abundant everywhere. Though the
rivers are not of great magnitude, they arc of value, by serving as
so many canals for boat navigation. Lakes,, streams, and springs
are found in every direction; and oven on the sea-shore wells have
been rarely sunk in vain. From this abundance, and from the
considerable provision of food for live stock which the territory
seems to possess, he thinks the pastoral life will be found more
profitable than the agricultural, and will bo chosen by the bulk of
the settlers.
It is too early yet to form any estimate as to the number of
cattle, horses, ami sheep which may bo kept on an average of any
given extent of laud ; but that very considerable numbers may be
sustained is evident from the fact, that, at the very driest season
of the year, when no ruin had fallen for three months, there were
both food and water in abundance. This is an important fact, as
the power of supporting these animals without artificial food will
secure not only a dear profit to their owners, but a supply here-
after of animal food for the use of the settlement. The live stock
which has been introduced is described as being, in several in-
stances, of the very best quality, and, with very few exceptions,
arising chiefly from neglect, all kinds of it have done well The
bullocks and sheep, even in the dry season, fatten upon the natural
grasses and herbage. Horses from England have not prospered so
well, but even these have maintained themselves without any food
beyond the natural herbage. In short, he observes, 1 lam happy
1 to say, with reference to grazing, that there is every reason to be
‘ satisfied with the result of our experience up to the present time.’
The views of those, settlers who look forward to tillage arc us
yet confined to gardening and farming for their own consumption.
Grain is not likely to be cultivated to any great extent, as it can
be imported from Java and the surrounding colonies of New
South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land at a cheaper rate than it
can be produced in the new settlement, at least for some time to
come. Captain Stirling thinks, however, that ilax of a very su-
perior kind, and a species of hemp, both growing spontaneously,
may probably be. cultivated to advantage ; that timber, which is
abundant, may find a profitable market; that wines, olives, figs,
opium, and tobacco may be looked to as future sources of export,
but that these and other articles must await the time when the
present subsistence and comfort of the settlers shall have been
provided for, and a stock of the necessaries ol life permanently
secured.
Many of the settlers of Perth and Freemantle have employed


themselves in the construction of boats for the conveyance of their
goods on the rivers. The number of these in the settlement were
not less than forty. Some of the settlers employ themselves pro-
fitably in fishing; and Captain Stirling has reason to believe that
the settlement will be able speedily to export cured fish to Java.
Whales are abundant on the coast, and attention has been drawn
to the establishment of a whale-fishery, that can hardly fail of
success. Cockburn Sound is a safe and extensive anchorage :it
has been made easy of access now by buoying off the channel
leading into it; and no place could be better situated for a marine
establishment than the eastern shore of Buache or Garden Island,
where careening wharfs may be constructed at a trifling expense.
The favourable position which this part of the coast of New
Holland occupies, with reference to the trade of the Eastern seas;
Captain Stirling observes, has been shown in some measure by
the arrival of ships from various parts of the world, to the number
of more than thirty, in the seven months of the first year of the
establishment of the colony. Some of those from England landed
all their cargoes there; but the greater part merely called, and
after landing passengers and part of their cargoes, proceeded on
their routes. Two vessels had been sent to the Malay islands; and
Captain Stirling understood that four small vessels were intended
to be employed in that and other lines of trade, diverging from
Swan River as a centre. By means of these, it will soon be de-
termined whether this position will prove favourable for the dis-
posal of British manufactures among the easternmost of the Malay
islands.
In the formation of all new colonies, there will necessarily be
found a large portion of the early adventurers giving vent to feel-
ings of discontent and disappointment. It always happens that
many of such adventurers are men unsettled in their views, inor-
dinate in their expectations, and wholly unfitted to encounter the
difficulties which are inevitable in the infancy of a colony ; and
that such persons should be disappointed, discontented, and their
ruin completed, is quite in the nature of things. Accordingly,
among the numerous settlers who have flocked to Swan River
were not a few whose minds and bodies were but ill-suited to en-
counter the struggles and distresses which are the unavoidable
concomitants of a new settlement. ‘ Many, if not all,’ says
Captain Stirling, ‘ have accordingly been more or less disap-
‘ pointed on their arrival, either with the state of things here, or
‘ their own want of energy to surmount the difficulties pressing
‘ around them—not greater, however, than such as must neces-
-1 sarily be experienced in the beginning of every new colony; ’
and, it may be added, far less severe than those which the Ame-
rican colonists had to encounter, or those who first established


themselves on the opposite, side of Australia. Captain Stirling,
however, observes, that ‘ from this state of depression the active
‘ and stout-hearted have now recovered; and ten or twelve of
‘ the leading men having occupied their lands, and having de-
‘ dared themselves fully satisfied with the quality of the soil and
‘ the condition of their cattle, I consider the undertaking to be
‘ now safe from the effects of a general despondency, which at
1 one time threatened to defeat the views of his Majesty’s govern-
‘ meat in this quarter.’
Among the heads of families there is a great majority of highly
respectable and independent persons; in the working class a great
variety. Some masters have been careful in the selection of their
servants and workmen; but the greater part have either engaged
the outcasts of parishes, or have brought out men without refer-
ence to character—men who, incapable of succeeding at home,
are not likely to prosper in a new settlement to the extent of their
groundless and inconsiderate expectations. ‘lfit be possible,’
says Captain Stirling, ‘ to discourage one set of people and to
1 encourage another, I would earnestly request that, for a few
‘ years, the helpless and inefficient may be kept from the settle-
‘ meat, whilst to the active, industrious, and intelligent, there may
‘ be a confident assurance of a fair reward for their labours.’
The state of the colony, abstracted from the official returns, at
the end of the year 1829, and of six months from the first arrivals,
was as follows:
Number of residents, 850. Non-residents, 440. Value of
property giving claim to grants of land, 41,550 Z. Lands actually
allotted, 525,000 acres. Locations actually effected, 3Q. Num-
ber of cattle, 204; of horses, 67 ; of sheep, 10Q(j; of hogs, 106.
Number of ships arrived between June and December, 23.
Though, strictly speaking, there is no harbour atpr near Swan
River, this deficiency is, to a certain degree, compensated by the
capacious anchorage in Cockbum Sound, capable, as Captain
Stirling informs us, of containing in safety a thousand ships. By
the entrance being buoyed off, it is rendered of easy access for
largo ships ; but being strewed over with rocks, it becomes wholly
impracticable when the buoys are removed. Any number of
vessels would lie in perfect safety in this large sound from an
enemy’s squadron on the outside, us the middle part of it is out
of mortar range, cither from the sea or the land side. Such a
port, situated as this is, in the hands of an enemy, might become,
in any future war, ten times more destructive to British trade than
even the Isle of France was in the last. _ :
No other port or harbour exists on this line of coast, with the
exception of Port Leschenault, accessible only, as Iras been ob-
served, to boats. The great Bale Geographe, whose shape and


position, with regard to the points of the compass, is precisely that
of the Table Bay of the Cape of Good Hope, has safe anchorage
only when the winds are to the eastward, southward, and south-
west. But on the southern coast of Australia, about one hundred
and fifty miles to the eastward of Cape Leuwin, is the safe and
excellent roadstead of King George’s Sound, with which are con-
nected two harbours, sheltered from all winds, and completely
land-locked Princess Royal harbour to the north-east, and
Oyster harbour to the north-west; the former having an entrance
and anchorage within for the largest ships ; but the entrance of
the latter has not more than fourteen or fifteen fpet at high water.
Plenty of wood and good water are to be had in either of the har-
bours, and also in the sound. The position, close to tiie tracks of
all ships proceeding to New South Wales, and the inviting con-
veniences of these two harbours, induced the government, some
few years ago, to take possession of them, and to establish a small
military post there, under the direction of General Darling. It
has now, however, very properly been placed under the authority
of Captain Stirling, as a part of the Swan River colony, and will
probably become, at no great distance of time, the head-quarters
of the settlement. Dr. Wilson, of the navy, an intelligent and
enterprising traveller, who has visited every part of Australia, from
Raffles Bay in the north to King George’s Sound in the south,
has given some account of the country contiguous to the latter,
In company with one or two others, and a civilised and intelligent
native belonging to the post, he travelled about eighty miles in the
interior to the northward, and returned by a more, westerly course,
traversing in the whole about two hundred miles over a country
hitherto unexplored. Each of the party being obliged to carry his
own blanket, provisions, and water, (the latter, however, being
found unnecessary,) the excursion occupied eleven days ; but such
is the excellence of the climate of this country at all seasons of
the year, but more especially agreeable in the summer months,
that they felt no inconvenience by sleeping on the ground in the
open air, nor did they suffer any privation worthy of notice. Dr.
Wilson being furnished with no other instrument than a compass,
the points marked down in the sketch of a chart which accom-
panies this notice, are the result only of the bearings and estimated
distances traversed, and must therefore be considered only as con-
veying a very general description of the nature of the surface tra-
velled over.
It will be evident, from the inspection of this sketch, and
still more so from the journal out of which this notice is extracted,
that, although in the immediate neighbourhood of King George’s
Sound the surface is sandy and wears an unpromising appearance,
yet in the interior there is no want of good grassy plains, large
10
State of the Swan River Colony, Ist Jan., 1830,


orcst-trees, rivers, lakes, and ponds of good fresh water, in almost
every part of the country traversed by Dr. Wilson. He says,
indeed, ‘ that the country is so well supplied with water, that
‘ those of his party who wished it enjoyed the luxury of a cold
* bath, at least once a day, one only excepted.’ The surface tra-
velled over consisted chielly of line plains and rich valleys, alter-
nating with ridges clothed with shrubby plants, a great proportion
of the former being capable of tillage, and the rest affording good
pasturage for sheep and cattle. On the ranges of the loftier hills
were chimps of forest-trees of large dimensions. On the most
barren lauds were various species of Bmlcsia, stunted swamp oak,
the grass-tree, and other plants similar to those on the same kind
of soil in New youth Wales. On the alluvial tints along the banks
of the rivers and streamlets, the vegetation was most luxuriant.
In the glens of the mountains, the blue- gum, the turpentine, the
box, and the apple-trees predominated, many of them measuring
from twenty to thirty feet in girth, and from fifty to sixty of trunk,
free from branches. The prevailing genua here, as in most parts
of New South Wales, is the. Eucalyptus, of which but few of the
species afford useful timber. The green wattle was but occa-
sionally observed: it nourished most luxuriantly on the hills in the
neighbourhood of Mount .Lindsey. This mountain is described
as a peak rising out of a ridge to the height of live or six thousand
feet, terminated in a square of about thirty yards each side, per-
fectly level, paved with minute particles of quartz, and having at
each angle an immense block of granite. The extensive view
from this mountain gave Dr. Wilson an excellent opportunity of
crossing bis former bearings round the whole horizon.
Out of the same range of hills, running nearly north and south,
rise three other peaks, which he named Mounts Hoc, Mitchell,
and Tranklaml. Between this and a more easterly parallel range,
Dr. Wilson is satisfied, from his own observation and from the
accounts of the natives they fell in with,, that a tract of good laud
will be found extending into the original intended limits, and
now a part, of the. Swan .River Settlement; and he observes,
‘ crediting the report of the natives, which, from the correctness
‘ of their description of the nature of the laud to the eastward, and
‘ from their general intelligence, 1 am justified in doing, much
* excellent land may bo found to the north-east, beyond the
‘ second range of lulls. Ido not,' he adds, ‘ hesitate to say,
‘ without fear of future contradiction, that the area passed over
* by ns contained as much, if not more, land, fit for all rural pur-
-1 poses, as any portion of equal extent, at least as lar as .!, know,
‘ in Now South Wales.’
Numerous lagoons or lakes of fresh water occurred, to one of
which they gave the name of Loch Katrine ; it was from seven


to eight miles in circumference, mid frequented by vast flocks of
black swans, wild ducks, and various kinds of aquatic birds.
The streams issuing from the two ridges, east and west of their
route, were equally numerous ; and three of them, named the
Denmark, the Hay, and the Sleeman, were of considerable mag-
nitude, being in several parts not less than a hundred yards in
width, and deep enough in parts to float a vessel of two or three
hundred tons. All the streams had a southerly direction, and the
three above named fell into an extensive inlet, which communi-
cated with the sea by a channel composed of loose calcareous
sandstone, about seven hundred yards in width, but which, as
was afterwards found, is contracted occasionally to thirty or forty
yards; even then it has a sufficient depth of water to admit of
boats. On a subsequent visit to Mount Lindsey, by Captain
Barker, the resident, accompanied by the intelligent native be-
longing to the establishment at the post of Fredericton, another
large inlet was seen about thirty miles more westerly, lying be-
tween Cape Chatham and Point Nuyts ; and the opinion of the
natives they met with was, on comparing it with the former inlet,
that vessels of very considerable size might pass into it through the
entrance. Captain Barker, as well as Dr. Wilson, bears testimony
to jthe general accuracy of the descriptions given by these ab-
origines ; he, observes, however, as they cannot swim, and possess
no kind of floating vessel, they have no means of speaking cor-
rectly as'to the depth of waters that are not fordable.
As no survey has been made of that part of the southern coast
lying between .Cape Leuwiu and King George’s Sound, except
that of ascertaining the positions, in sailing along it, of a lew
inlets, rocks, and projecting headlands, it is not improbable that,
on a closer inquiry, many inlets of a similar kind will be found on
this line of coast, towards which the internal waters pursue their
courses to the ocean. Indeed, there is every appearance of the
mouth of a river existing in the large opening which is left
in the charts, a little to the eastward of Cape Leuwiu, at the
bottom of an open bay named ‘ Dangerous Bightand when it
is considered, that the late expedition of Captain Sturt has been
the means of bringing to light the existence of a river, whose
course cannot be less than fifteen hundred miles, and may bo
much more ; that it forms an estuary or lake of sixty miles in
length, and from thirty to forty in width, through which its waters
are discharged into the sea in Encounter Bay; that Flinders sur-
veyed the western point of this bay, which he called Cape Jervis;
that Baudin, who sailed round it, has laid down an uninterrupted
line of coast; and that both were unconscious of any such river
or estuary,—it is not assuming too much to conclude, that many
rivers and inlets still remain to be discovered on this, and, indeed,


on every other, coast of Australia, which measures in the whole
extent from six to seven thousand geographical miles.
Since the date of the preceding remarks another report has been
received from Captain Stirling, brought down to the end of Oc-
tober, 1830. In this report he observes, that ‘ the progress of
‘ the settlement during the present year, although not unopposed
‘ by many adverse circumstances, has been as rapid as could have
‘been expected or desired.’ He says, indeed, ‘that a greater
‘ increase than that which has taken place of ships, persons, and
‘ property would probably have been disadvantageous to the wel-
‘ fare of the settlement while struggling in its infancy and he adds,
‘ that although individuals may have suffered in the undertaking,
‘ the settlement is now securely established, and its future prosperity
‘no longer doubtful. Much has yet to be accomplished for its
‘ advancement, and there will probably be much individual, disap-
* point incut and distress; but with a healthy climate, abundance of
‘ good laud, an advantageous position for trade, and some valuable
‘ indigenous products, I. trust the issue of the undertaking will
‘ not disappoint public expectation.’
In order to make himself acquainted with the nature of the
country to the. southward, the Lieutenant-Governor embarked,
with the Surveyor-General and some others, on board a schooner;
examined Geography Bay throughout its whole extent, and ex-
plored the interior to some little distance ; the surface was uneven,
rising into high granitic hills, most of them nigged or sandy on
their summits, but the valleys contained a considerable quantity
of excellent land.
The Vasse River was the next point examined, to the distance
of three or four miles from the coast, but the result was not satis-
factory, the soil being 100 light and sandy ; but the straight and
vigorous growth of the trees seemed to contradict the apparent
poverty of the soil. Fresh water was abundant in this district.
They next anchored off the bar of Port Lcschemuilt, where the
country presented so favourable an appearance, that a detachment
of theVixty-lhird regiment was landed, together with stores and
provisions for the better support of the settlors; and such were
the facilities for these troops housing themselves, from the abund-
ance of building materials, that in a very few days the party was
comfortably lodged, and were protected against the approaching
winter.
From lienee a party set out and explored the country in every
direction, as far as the summits of the Hafling range. The whole
of this range, consisting of well-wooded hills and fertile valleys,
continued to bear the character of great productiveness as far as
the eye could reach to the eastward. , The general result of these


explorations may thus be briefly stated. The water which forms
the little harbour of Leschenault receives three rivers, one flowing
from the south east, called the Preston ; one from the east named
the Collie ; and one from the north-east, joining the Collie, to which
no name appears to have been given. The banks of all these are
composed of rich alluvial soil. The Preston is navigable for the
largest boats about five miles from its mouth, and is at that point
a running stream of good fresh water. The adjoining country is
well clothed with timber trees. The Collie is navigable ten or
twelve miles, nearly up to the first range of the hilly country. At
first the banks are sandy, but from the junction of the northern
stream it improves greatly, and becomes of an excellent descrip-
tion. On the whole, the district around Port Leschenault ap-
peared so favourable for settlers, that Captain Stirling left the
detachment above-mentioned for the protection of those already
there, and such others as might be induced to avail themselves of
the grants of land which the Lieutenant-Governor was prepared
to make. The climate is stated to be decidedly cooler than at
Swan River, and judging from the quantity of grass and the ver-
dure of the foliage, it appeared to the party that this district was
capable of sustaining a dry season better than the country farther
to the northward, and that the duration of drought was not so
long. It was thought remarkable, that in the whole of their ex-
cursions no natives were seen, though traces of them were evident
and numerous in several places.
On a second excursion to the southward by the Lieutenant-
Governor, accompanied by Captain Currie of the navy, and
Lieutenant Roe, the Surveyor-General, they doubled Cape
Leuwin, and anchored off the mouth of an inlet communicating
with the sea in the north-west corner of the great bay, com-
mencing with the Cape, and extending easterly as far as the Thick
Point of Flinders. In the charts it is called ‘ Dangerous Bight/
but canonlybe said to be dangerous when the southerly winds
prevail. This discovery of an inlet and river in this particular
spot is just what is anticipated in the former part of this
report. Here it was determined to establish a town, to be
called ‘ Augusta/ where a river, which was named the ' Black-
wood,’ fell into the inlet; and several settlers to the number of
fifty persons, including three heads of families, their servants, and
children, disembarked together, with a detachment of troops for
their protection. The following is the substance of the Surveyor-
General’s report:
' The portion of the southern coast seen during the excursion,
f taken in connexion with our previous knowledge, leads to the
‘ belief, that there are three distinct parallel r anges of primitive
‘ mountains, traversing that part of the territory of Western Aus


‘ tralia which borders on the sea coast, in the direction of north
‘ and south. The highest and easternmost of these has its southern
( termination near to King George’s Sound. Tire second termi-
‘ nates at Cape Chatham, and is that of which General Darling’s
‘ range behind Swan River is a portion. Cape Leuwin is the
‘ southern termination of the third range, which is inferior in
‘ altitude as well as in extent to the other two, disappearing at
‘ Cape Naturalisto, and only showing itself again at “ Moresby’s
‘ Flat-topped Range,” about half-way between Swan River and
‘ Shark’s Bay, or three hundred miles to the northward of, and
‘ on the same meridian with, Cape Leuwin.
‘ On these ranges and their intervening valleys the soil varies
‘ according to position and altitude. On the mountains and
‘ higher hills the surface is rugged and stony; in the lower sides
‘of both the soil is excellent; but in the principal valleys and
£ the lower grounds, where the sandstone formation prevails, it is
‘ of a very inferior description, except where the alluvial deposit
‘of the rivers gives it a different character. These general rules
‘ are exemplified in the neighbourhood of the newly established
‘ town of Augusta, and may be taken as applicable generally to
‘ all other parts of the territory, except on the sca-coast, where
* the regular formations have been invaded and modified by ex-
‘ trancous substances, generally of a calcareous nature.
< The position chosen for the new town possesses the advau-
*' tages of excellent soil, plenty of good water, a pleasant aspect,
* and easy access in moderate weather to the anchorage, and to
‘ the interior country. The inlet is of considerable extent, and
‘ leads to the river we called “ Blackwood,” and which has a
‘ southerly direction for fifteen miles, and a westerly one ten
‘ miles, before it ceases to be navigable by boats. Its banks are
‘ covered with good timber of the stringy bark and red gum; but
‘ the soil is a light sandy loam, which is seldom sufficiently strong
< for successful cultivation, The best soil, the finest blue-gum
‘ timber, and sonic good grass, are mostly to be found on hilly
< land; but on the general surface there is usually found food for
< cattle, and very good sheep pasture on the downs skirting the
« coast, The anchorage is sheltered from the usual winter winds,
‘ but is open,to those which blow between south and east-south-
‘ cast. The position of Augusta, with reference to the navigation
‘ of these seas, and the quality of the surrounding country, will
‘ make it a convenient place for vessels to stop at, on their
‘ way to the eastern colonies from England, India, and the Cape ;
< and on these grounds there is great reason to hope, that it will
* soon rise to a considerable degree of commercial prosperity.’
Another discovery has been made by Ensign Dale and a small
party on the eastern side of Darling’s range, and at the distance of


fifty miles due east from Perth. Having reached the eastern base
of tliis range, they found the waters taking an easterly direction,
and discharging themselves into a river of considerable magnitude,
running north-west, about sixty yards in width, very deep, and hav-
ing a strong current. This river, in all probability, will be found
to discharge itself into some inlet on the coast; perhaps in some
part of the unexamiued coast of Shark’s Bay,—though Captain
King is inclined to think its mouth will rather be found somewhere
about ‘ Moresby’s Flat-topped Range,’ where, in passing, he ob-
served clefts in the hills, and a finely wooded country down to the
sandy beach. The hills of the Darling range were generally covered
with a red loamy soil, producing good grass and wild vetches.
The trees were chiefly of mahogany, of a very vigorous growth,
the blue and red gum, and a few Banksias. Where the waters
first began to take an easterly course, the trees were chiefly of
blue gum, casuarina, and black wattle, and a tree which is stated
to be similar in its growth to an apple, bearing a fruit resembling
in form, but exceeding in size, an unripe hawthorn berry. The
wood of this tree had a remarkably sweet scent, and the bark a
delicate pink colour. Mr. Dale says, ‘ a specimen which we
‘ brought home with us has been pronounced by some professed
‘judges to be a species of sandal-wood.’
They met with no natives except three men on their return,
who were very civil, and desirous of making themselves useful;
but they observed many traces of them; and in ascending the great
river, about twenty-four miles to a spot where the hills assumed
a rugged and romantic character, they discovered, under a great
mass of granite, a large cavern, the interior of which was arched,
and had all the appearance of an ancient ruin. ‘On one side,’
says Mr. Dale, ‘ was rudely carved what was evidently intended
‘ to represent an image of the sun ; it being a circular figure about
‘ eighteen inches in diameter, emitting rays from its left side, and
‘ having within the circle lines meeting each other nearly at right
‘ angles. Close to this representation of the sun were the im-
‘ pressions of an arm and several hands.’ It is stated, that from
these heights the view to the eastward, for twenty to thirty miles,
exhibited an undulating surface and a well-wooded country.


ll. —General View of the Botany of the Vicinity of S wan River.
By R. Brown, Esq., F.R.S. Read 22d Nov., 1830.
The vegetation of the banks of Swan River, and of the adjoining
country to the southward, is at present known chiefly from the
report of Mr. Charles Fraser, the Botanical Collector, who ac-
companied Captain Stirling in his examination of that district
in 1827, and from collections of specimens which were then
formed.
I have inspected, and in part examined, two of these collections;
one of which I received from Mr. Fraser himself, through my
friend Alexander Madeay, Esq., the Secretary of the Colony of
New South Wales; for the second I am indebted to Captain
Mangles.
The number of species in both collections does not exceed one
hundred and forty; and some dicotyledonous herbaceous tribes, as
well as grasses, Cyperacem and Orchideai, are entirely wanting.
From materials so limited in extent, but few general observa-
tions can be hazarded on the vegetation of this portion of the
south-west coast of New Holland.
The principal families'of plants contained in the collections are
Proteacew; Myrtaceai; Leguminosa, such especially as belong to
Decandrous Papilionaceee, and to the Leafless Acacias; Epacri-
dcce ; Goodenovia:; and Composite;. And the more conspicuous
plants, not belonging to any of these families, and which greatly
contribute to give a character to the landscape, are, Kinyia Aus-
tralis, a. species of Xanthorrkoea ; a Zamia, nearly allied to, and
perhaps not distinct from, Z. spiralis of the east coast, although
it is said frequently to attain the height of thirty feet ; a species of
Gallitris ; one or two of Casuarina ; an Exocarpus, probably not
different from E. cuprcssiformis ; and Nuytsia floribunda*, a plant
hitherto referred to Loranthus, but sufficiently distinct in the
texture and form of its fruit, and now named in memory of the
discoverer of that part of the coast to which this very singular tree
is nearly limited.
If an opinion were to be formed of the nature of the country
merely from the inspection of these collections, it certainly would
be extremely unfavourable as to the quality of the soil; for not
only do the prevailing families already enumerated, but the whole
of the genera of those families, and even many of the species,
agree with those found on the shores of King George’s Sound,
which, with the exception of a few patches of very small extent,
seem absolutely incapable of cultivation.
The opinion so formed, however, would be necessarily modified
in noticing the entire want in the collections of tribes, all of which
* Loranthua floribundus.-— LabUi, Nov, Holt, i. p, 87j t, 113.
c


must be supposed to exist, and some even in considerable propor-
tion, in tlie tract examined ; in allowing for tire unfavourable
season when tbe herbarium was collected; in admitting the state-
ments in Mr. Eraser’s report, respecting the abundance and luxu-
riance of Anthistiria australis —the kangaroo-grass of New South
Wales ; from the account given in the same report of the extraor-
dinary size of some arborescent species of Banlcsia, which, in the
neighbourhood of King George’s Sound, generally form small
trees only ; and lastly, in adverting to the important fact stated by
Captain Stirling in his despatch to Government—namely, that the
stock had not only been supported through nearly the whole of
the dry season, but that most descriptions of it had even fattened
on the natural herbage of the country.
From these more general observations I proceed to make a
very few .remarks, chiefly relating to the geographical distribution
of some of the families or more interesting species, either contained
in the herbarium, or distinctly noticed in Mr, Eraser’s report.
The striking resemblance in general character, and the identity
of many of the species with those of King George’s Sound, have
been already mentioned. But this portion of the shores of New
Holland, extending from Swan River on the west coast to Middle
Island, in 123° 10' east long., on the south coast, may be said to
contain the greatest proportion of those genera which form the
chief peculiarities of New Holland vegetation.
In comparing the Flora of the district of Swan River with
more distant regions of the same continent, it may be remarked,
that probably not more than four or five species are common to
this part of the west coast, and to the same parallel of the east
coast of New Holland; and that even the existence of some of
these species at Swan River is not altogether certain.
In the collections which I have examined there is no specimen
of Anthistiria australis, or kangaroo-grass of New South Wales ;
but as this valuable grass must have been well known to the Bo-
tanical Collector, and as it is perhaps the most general plant in
New Holland, I have no hesitation in admitting its existence on
the authority of Mr. Eraser’s report.
Mesembryanthemum eequilaterale is neither contained in the her-
barium, nor mentioned by the collector. I find, however, in one
of the letters from Swan River, published by Mr. Cross, a plant
noticed as a pot-herb, that, from the account of the writer, is pro-
bably this plant, which, next to Anthistiria australis , is perhaps
the most widely-diffused species in the Flora of New Holland.
The third species is Pteris esculenta, the only fern found by
Mr. Fraser, and which is botlj general and abundant beyond the
tropic in New Holland and in "Van Diemen’s Land.


The Zaniiu, already noticed, if not specifically different from
spiralis, would furnish another example of a plant peculiar to
New Holland, and very generally found in the extra-tropical
parts of that continent, I. had, however, myself observed on the
south coast a Zinnia ol at least ten feet in height, which I sus-
pected might he distinct from Z. spiralis of the neighbourhood
of Fort Jackson, and which is probably the same with that of
Swan ,River.
The JSxomrpus of the Swan River may possibly differ from
mprimijimnis, though there is nothing in the specimens to make
it probable that it is specifically distinct. But Exncarpus cuprcs-
siformis is found very generally, not only in the southern parts of
New Holland and Van Diemen’s Laud, but also within the
tropic.
The last plant in the collection whose range is very extensive
remaining to be noticed, 1 have not been able to distinguish from
Armaria marina of the shores of Europe.
Of the families existing in the vicinity of Swan River, the most
striking, as well as the most extensive, is Frnteame, a tribe which,
from its general dispersion, and the remarkable forms of its nu-
merous genera and species, includes many of the chief peculiarities
of the vegetation of New Holland,
In Mr. Fraser’s collection, the principal genera of this order
are PdrophUa, Isnpoyon, llakea , and Banksia ; and these are
also the most abundant in the districts of King George’s Hound
and of Lucky Bay. The number of species of the two first-
mentioned genera confirms the remark made in the Botanical
Appendix to Captain Flinders’s Voyage—namely, that in New
Holland, at the western extremity of the parallel of latitude in which
the great mass of this order of plants is found, a closer resemblance
is observable to the South African portion of the order than on
the east coast, where those allied to the American part chiefly
occur.
This is not the place to enter into a particular account of the
new species of this family existing in the collections from Swan
River. I may observe, however, that the number is considerable,
and that their specific characters have been recently published*.
The Myrlacm of Swan River belong chiefly to Melaleuca,
Beanforlia, Calnthamnus, Calyihrix, Billotticef, and Eucalyptus.
Of Eucalyptus , the only species in the collection had been first
found in Captain Flinders’s voyage at King George’s Sound, on
* Snin'l. T- Prndi'. Flor, Nov. Hull,
f A goims itlsliuct from Luplospermum, to which thu few species hitherto published,
namely, I), imiMmcarifotia, have been referred.
c Q


the shores of which it was the only useful timber-tree, though there
of very moderate size. I have named it Eucalyptus calophylla.
Mr. .Fraser describes it as forming, on the banks of the Swan, a
large forest-tree, and erroneously refers it to Angophora, a genus
which is limited to the east coast of New Holland. Other species
of Eucalyptus, forming the timber of the country, are mentioned
in the report, and considered to be some of the common gum-
trees of Port Jackson, from which, however, I have no doubt they
will prove to be distinct; for 1 am acquainted with no species of
this genus common even to the east and south coasts of New
Holland.
I shall conclude with a remark relating equally to the genus
Eucalyptus and to the leafless Acacice, several species of which are
found in the collection. This observation I have formerly made in
the Appendix to Captain Flinders’s Voyage in the following terms :
' These two genera are not only the most widely diffused, but by
‘ far the most extensive in Terra Australis, about one hundred of
‘ each having already been observed; and if taken together, and
‘ considered with respect to the mass of vegetable matter theycon-
‘ tain, calculated from the size as well as the number of individuals,
‘ are perhaps nearly equal to all the other plants of that continent.
‘ They agree very generally also, though belonging to very different
e families, in a part of their economy, which contributes somewhat
c to the peculiar character of the Australian forests—namely, in
{ their leaves, or the parts performing the functions of leaves, being
f vertical, or presenting their margin, and not the surface, towards
‘ the stem, both surfaces having consequently the same relation to
‘ light.
This economy, which uniformly takes place in the Acacice, is
‘ in them the consequence of the vertical dilatation of the folia-
‘ ceous petiole; while in Eucalyptus, where, though very ge-
‘ neral, it is by no means universal, it proceeds from the twisting
‘ of the footstalk of the leaf,’
To this quotation it may be added that these two genera still
more uniformly agree in the similarity of the opposite surfaces of
their leaves. But this similarity is the indication of a more im-
portant fact—namely, the existence equally on both surfaces of
the leaf of those organs, for which, as I believe them to be in
general imperforated, 1 have adopted the name of cutaneous
glands, but which by most authors are denominated pores, or
stomata of the Epidermis.
In leaves especially of trees and shrubs, these glands are ge-
nerally found on the under surface only; while among arbora-
cent plants in a very few instances, as in several Conifercs, they
are confined to the upper surface.


la addition to the two extensive New Holland tribes here men-
tioned, there are many other cases in which these organs occupy
hath paginal; and lam inclined to think such cases more fre-
quently occur on that continent than in any other part of the world.
It is at least certain that on this microscopic character of the
equal existence of cutaneous glands on both surfaces of the leaf,
depends that, want of lustre which is so remarkable in the forests
of New Holland.
Hl.— Dcsmjtiion of the Natives- of King George's Sound {Swan
River Colony) and adjoining Conning , Written by Mr. Scott
Nind, and communicated by R. Brown, Esq., F.R.S. Read
IdlhEeb., 1831.
[The following __ observations on the Aborigines inhabiting the
vicinity of King George’s Sound, and which probably apply to all
those in immediate contact with our new colony, have been commu-,
ideated to me by Mr. Nind, the medical officer who accompanied a
small settlement or post established, in 1897, on the shore of that
harbour, and who remained with it till October, 1899.
Prom the friendly disposition and frequent visits of the natives
during the greater part of that period, opportunities, such as but
seldom occur, were afforded of collecting interesting information
respecting their customs and manner of life, particularly from some of
the more intelligent individuals, who at length became generally resi-
dent in the settlement.
Of these opportunities Mr. Nind diligently availed himself, and the
following result of his observations appears to me to form an impor-
tant contribution to the history of the race. A short account of the
settlement to which he was thus attached, and of the adjoining country,
is prefixed,—R. Biiowk.]
King Ckouuk’s Soun d, the entrance of which is in latitude 35°
()' 20" south, and longitude 118° F cast of Greenwich, is situated
on the south coast, hut very near the south-west extremity of New
Holland.
It is very conveniently placed for the purposes of refreshment
and relit for vessels bound to Now South Wales or Van .Diemen’s
Laud; and, from the circumstance of the recent establishment of
the Swan River Colony, particularly useful, as it affords an excel-
lent harbour—perhaps, indeed, the only really good one in the
neighbourhood of this new colony.
It was discovered by Captain Vancouver, in the year 1792 ; was
subsequently visited by Captain Flinders and the French expedi-
tion of discovery under Commodore Baudiii; more recently by
Captain King ; and since that period has been frequently resorted
to by scaling vessels, for the neighbouring coast to the eastward
is fringed with a multitude of rocks and islands, upon which
many seals of the black furred species have been found.


The port has been carefully and sufficiently described by Captain
Flinders, and a correct plan of the Sound is given by that navi-
gator in the atlas of his voyage.
The situation and excellence of the harbour, together with the
sanguine expectation of finding a good country in the interior,
induced the government of New South Wales to form a settlement
there ; and, accordingly, at the latter end of the year 1826, a
party, consisting in all of fifty-two persons, was dispatched under
the command of Major Lockyer, of His Majesty’s 57th regiment,
for that purpose. 'The little expedition sailed on the 7th No-
vember, 1826; and, after a tedious'passage, arrived at its des-
tination on the 25th December following.
From Captain Flinders’ account of the place, it will be seen
that, besides the outer sound, there are two inner basins or har-
bours which are perfectly land locked, and offering every security
for ships. The northern one, Oyster Harbour, is fronted by a
bar of sand, on which there is not more than thirteen feet and a
half at high water ; and within it is so full of shoals—excepting at
the entrance, and near Green Island, where small vessels may ride
securely at their anchors or be moored to the shore —that there is
scarcely water enough for a boat to approach the beach ; the
greater part being a bank that dries, or nearly so, at low water,
excepting in the drains of two small rivers that fall into the head of
the harbour, which are navigable for a few miles by small boats.
In the centre of Oyster Harbour is Green Island, a small islet,
upon which Vancouver sowed many garden seeds ; but if they
prospered they were probably destroyed by vermin, for future
visiters could discover no traces of them.
The shoal character of the shores of this harbour therefore offer-
ing no inducement to the new colonists to establish themselves in
its neighbourhood, they determined upon occupying the shore of
Princess Royal Harbour, situated at the back or west side of the
sound, into which vessels of a considerable size might enter, and
ride at their anchors, very close to the shore, in perfect security,
The party therefore encamped at the base of what they after-
wards called Mount Melville. It is on the north side of the har-
bour, about a mile within the entrance, and close to the spot occu-
pied by Captain Flinders in the year 1801*. In many respects
* The 11111111)61' of-tho colonists, being at first only fifty-two persons, up to the pe-
rioil of the dopiirturo of the author of this paper in October, 1829, had very little
increased. The settlement consisted only of eight or ton buildings, some of which
were brick nogged, others of turf, and others of wattle and plaster. The roofs wore
thatched with rushes or coarse grass. At the commencement it received the n arao of
Frederick Town; but as the appellation has not been adopted in the official docu-
ments, it remains uncertain whether it will be continued. At one period, the settle-
ment was expected to be abandoned, but the recent discovery of good land at G6u.
graphs Bay. and the favourable account of the interior afforded by Dr, Wilson, new
render this improbable.


the situation proved eligible ; but in the most essential thing, good
water, it was very deficient. Neither was there any timber found
near the place that was serviceable for erecting buildings. And
the want of those two important articles was a great drawback to
the settlement, particularly in its early days.
The soil in the immediate neighbourhood of the encampment
proved to be very unproductive, for on turning it up a few
inches beneath the surface, it was nothing but a pure white sand.
In the bogs or swamp, however, the subsoil was found to be of a
peaty nature. The poverty of the soil, therefore, offering great
difficulties for the cultivation of a sufficient supply of vegetables,
various spots were selected for the purpose, among which the little
islet in Oyster Harbour, Green Island, small as it is, turned
out to bo the most productive.
So favourable, however, is the climate to vegetation, that
where a small supply of manure could be obtained, the crops
were not only certain but luxuriant. The vegetables that were
raised consisted of peas, potatoes, cauliflowers, cabbage, cucum-
bers, Bcc.; melons, pompious, water melons, and maize also suc-
ceeded without forcing when the season was warm, but these
latter vegetables could not bo depended upon.
The island in the sound produced sowthistles, mallow, and
wild celery, which were used by the colonists during an attack of
scurvy, and proved to be very serviceable in removing the disease.
The sowthistles and celery grew also on the sea beach*.
The general appearance of the country, although of a barren
nature, is very picturesque. The hills behind the settlement are
studded and capped by immense blocks of granite, and are strewed
with a profusion of beautiful shrubs, among which the splendid
.Bauksiai grow to a large size, and the Kingia and Xanthorrhoea
or grass-tree are abundant:.
In some parts the soil has a reddish hue, and here the trees are
more, abundant and of larger size. They consist of various kinds
of eucalyptus and casnuriua (like the swamp oak of Tort Jackson).
Generally, however, the trees arc decayed at the heart, and are
therefore unserviceable for building.
The view to the north is over a country in appearance flat, but
in reality formed by wooded banks, separated by swampy plains.
On the banks, the houey-sucklo (a colonial name for a small species
of Banksia) predominates.
The plains are covered with a coarse herbage, but no grass
* A species of parsley (upium proslrntiim), and anotliov of orach (ainplea Imhnuis,
Brown, rvod.), wuro used by my people*. Tho bitter, particularly, afforded us a very
goudtmbstitiitu for vegetables. Wo found no ccltny; and it scoma probable, that tho
wild colory mentioned above is tho plant hero described. P. P. K.


grows upon them, At about twenty miles distance, there is a
range of hills called by the natives Borringorrup, which are
covered with wood, and the timber is of good quality. The
ground is rather rocky, but the soil deep and good, producing
grass. About twenty miles beyond the Borringorrup range is
another, Corjernurruf, which seems to be of a very rugged cha-
racter. The country is described by the natives as very barren
and covered with salt water lagoons.
To the west and north-west the country seems to be of a more
undulating character and better wooded. The natives also describe
it to be more abundant in kangaroo, and that the Banksia and
grass-tree are less prevalent. The soil also is stated to be red,
and the surface of the country to be covered with short grass.
Between Princess Royal and Eclipse Harbours, the country is
formed by undulating downs, interspersed with occasional clusters
of trees. The soil is either shallow and red, but not adhesive, or
is composed of black vegetable matter, mixed with pure white sand.
Here and there upon it is found a kind of couch grass, but in
general the herbage is rushy or heathy.
In all parts of the country there are stagnant pools of water, and
some of them are of considerable extent. The water is always of
a dark colour, and strongly impregnated with a disagreeable vege-
table flavour. Some of these lakes are brackish, but ducks, teal,
and swans are found upon them.
The prevailing rock in the neighbourhood of the settlement is
granite ; —the ranges of hills to the northward—Borringorrup and
Corjernurruf—are also supposed to be of the same formation.
Calcareous rock is found on the sea coast; and on the low banks,
particularly westward, a hard, rugged, and ferruginous stone pre-
dominates, on which, where found, the soil is generally of a red
colour, but very shallow. The calcareous district consists chiefly
of downs'.
It is difficult to give any account of the winds or seasons, for
they are by no means uniform. The easterly winds generally com-
mence in December, and continue to prevail through the months
ol January, February, and March: this maybe considered the
summer. At the commencement of the easterly winds, they are
frequently strong, and the weather is showery : as the season ad-
vances, northerly winds or calms with line warm weather may be
expected, the thermometer rising to 98°. This will usually con-
tinue through March and April, and then the westerly become the
prevailing winds, and during June and July are very constant. In
August and September south-east winds are often experienced.
The months of October and November are generally line, with
occasional showers.
The hot north wind which prevails at Sydney is also occasion


ally experienced at King George’s Sound ; and, during the sum-
mer, there is much thunder and lightning. Taking it generally,
the climate certainly is line, and with a sufficiency of rain for all
the purposes of assisting vegetation.
The natives of King George’s Sound differ little in their general
appearance from the Aborigines of the neighbourhood of Sydney.
They are of middle stature, slender in their limbs, and many
of them with a protuberant abdomen.
The only article of dress used by them is a cloak of kangaroo
skin, reaching nearly to the knee; it is worn as a mantle over the
shoulders, and is fastened at the right shoulder with a rush, by
which the right arm is left free and disencumbered. They
are seldom seen without their cloaks, which in rainy weather are
worn with the fur outwards ; some of them, however, are so scanty,
that the wearer may be almost considered in a state of nudity, par-
ticularly the children, for their cloak is but a mere strip of skin.
The larger skins, which are procured from the male kangaroos,
an; appropriated to the women.
The mode of preparing the mantles is as follows: —the skins
are pegged out upon the ground to dry, and are then cut into the
proper .shape with a sharpened stone; with the same instrument
the inner surface is scraped away until the skin becomes soft and
pliable; it is afterwards rubbed over with grease and a sort of red
ochreous earth, which they also use to paint the body. The skins
thus prepared are stitched together with the sinews of the animal,
which are drawn from the tail.
The other articles of dress arc the noodiv-hul, or waistband,
armlets, and head-dress. The noodle-bul is a long yarn of
worsted spun from the fur of the opossum, wound round the waist
several hundred limes. A similar baud is also worn occasionally
round the left arm and the head.
The single men, who are called muu-jah-lies, ornament their
heads with feathers, dogs’ tails, and other similar articles, and
sometimes have the hair tong, and hound round the head. The
women use no ornaments, or twotlk-huls, and wear their hair
quite short; but the girls have sometimes a Jillet of worsted yarn
round the neck, which is called a ivoorLilL Both sexes smear their
faces and the upper part of the body with red pigment (pahit),
mixed with grease, which gives them a disagreeable odour. This
they do, as they say, for the purpose of keeping themselves
clean, and as a defence from the sun or rain. Their hair is fre-
quently matted with the same pigment. When fresh painted, they
are all over of a brickdust colour, which gives them a most singular
appearance.
When they arc in mourning they paint a white streak (Jcaingin)


across the forehead and down the cheek bones. The women put
on the white colour in large blotches.
Painting the body, with the natives of this part of the country,
is not, as in New South Wales, a sign of war, It is considered by
them merely as an ornament, and is never neglected at their
dances, or when they visit neighbouring tribes. It is a very
general practice at those seasons of the year when they can pro-
cure fat from fish or animals; but there are some individuals, we
have remarked, who very seldom use it.
They have the same practice amongst them as at Sydney of
cutting gashes on their body, and raising an elevated cicatrix. It
is done chiefly on the shoulders and chest; and is both a dis-
tinguishing mark for different tribes, and an honorary distinction.
The septum of the nose is also perforated, through which a
feather or other substance is worn. Ornaments of dress, how-
ever, are not considered as marking the man of authority, for they
are only worn by the young single men. The cicatrized wounds
on the body are the-marks of distinction, and even these are tribual
more than personal.
Every individual of the tribe, when travelling or going to a dis-
tance from their encampment, carries a fire-stick, for the purpose
of kindling fires, and in winter they are scarcely ever without one
trader their cloaks, for the sake of heat. It is generally a cone of
JBanksia grandis, which has the property of keeping ignited for
a considerable time. Rotten bark, or touchwood, is also used for
the same purpose. They are very careful to preserve this, and will
even kindle a fire (by friction, or.otherwise) expressly to revive it.
Their weapons consist of spears of two or three kinds, which are
propelled with a throwing-stick (mectra). They have also a knife,
stone-hammer, and a curl , or curved flat weapon similar to the
boomerang of the New South Wales natives*.
The spears (Iceit) are made of a long slender stick about the
thickness of a finger, of a heavy tough quality. They are
scraped down to a very fine point, and are hardened and straight-
ened by the assistance of fire. Those intended for hunting and
fishing, called maungull, are barbed with a piece of wood fastened
on very neatly and firmly with kangaroo sinew {peat), and the
ligature covered with gum obtained from the grass treef, They are
about eight feet in length. The war spears are longer and heavier,
and are armed, for five or six inches from the point, with pieces of
sharp stones fixed in gum, resembling the teeth of a saw, the
stones increasing in size, the smallest being at the point. Each
man carries from two to five spears.
■ * 1?or a further descriptio n and representations of the above-mentioned weapons, sgo
King’s Australia, vol.i.p. 355, vol.ii. p, 138, etsej,
t jCanthorriicea.


The throwing-stick ( meant) differs considerably in shape from
those used at Sydney, being much broader. It is about two feet
long and four indies wide, narrowing at each extremity. At the
handle is fixed a piece of gum (wank), in which is inserted a sharp
edged stone (iockil), which is used to scrape the point of the spear
when blunted by use, At the outer end of the meara is a small
wooden peg (merl), which is inserted into a hole at the end of the
spear, and by which it is propelled. The meara is also used
at close quarters in their lights.
The hammer (ho it,) is made with a lump of gum, having two
stones imbedded in it, stuck on to the extremity of a short stick.
It is used in climbing trees, in throwing at and killing animals, in
breaking down grass trees, and for the common purposes of the
axe or hammer.
The knife (tmp) is a stick with sharp-edged stones fixed in a
bed of gum at the end, and for two or three inches down the side,
forming a serrated instrument.
A short stick, which they call tnwk, is also used for throwing at
or striking small animals, such as the quornde and tamur, the former
resembling the bandicoot, and the latter the walloby, or brush
kangaroo of New South Wales.
The curl, or hoomeriug, is seldom used as a weapon, nor are
they so expert in the use of it as the New South Wales blacks.
The natives, however, say, these instruments are more common in
the interior. They are used for skinning the kangaroo, and also
for amusement.
Their wigwams* ( iimrlnih ) are merely composed of a few small
twigs stuck in the ground, and bent over in the form of a bower,
about four feet high, and live or six wide. Sometimes two are
united, They also thatch them slightly with the leaves of the
grass tree. In rainy weather they are roofed with pieces of bark,
upon which stones are placed, to secure them from being blown
away; but they afford a miserable protection from the weather.
They arc generally erected in a sheltered spot near water, with the
hack towards the prevailing wind, and a lire is kept burning con-
stantly in the front. One of the huts contains several individuals,
* The huts uf the New Hollanders differ very materially among different tribes.
Generally they are of very null) ami simple construction. At Port Jackson they are
inuruly formed of a strip of bark bunt over like the roof of a house, and are scarcely
largo enough to cover the holly. At Port Macquarie, however, they are of similar
form to those above described, Imt of larger size, ami, perhaps, neater construction. The
form of thu huts most depend very much upon the productions of the country. Where
the stringy hark, the best suited for this purpose, is easily procured, ns is the case at
XVirt Jackson and the south-east coast, it is by far the best material for the purpose,
for it. affords shelter and warmth, and is impervious to rain. Tire settlers of the colony
of Now South Wales have found thu utility of it, for all their cottages are roofed, and
many aro uutirely covered in with it, 11,I 1 , P. ]£,


M'lio lie covered in their mantles, huddled together, in a crowded
stale ; the dogs also are admitted to a share of their bed.
An encampment rarely consists of more than seven or eight
huts; for, except during the fishing and burning seasons,
at which times large parties assemble together, their numbers are
generally small, and two or three huts suffice. The number of iu-
dividuals, however, seldom exceed fifty. The huts are so arranged
as not to overlook each other. The single men have one to them-
selves—the children sleep with the women in a large hut near the
husbands. These encampments generally consist of near relatives,
and deserve the name of families rather than of tribes.
Those families who have locations on the sea coast quit it during
the winter for the interior ; and the natives of the interior, in like
maimer, pay visits to the coast during the fishing season. Ex-
cepting at these times, those natives who live together have the ex-
clusive right of fishing or hunting upon the neighbouring grounds,
which are, in fact, divided into individual properties ; the quantity
of land owned by each individual being very considerable. Yet it
is not so exclusively his, but others of his family have certain rights
over it; so that it may be considered as partly belonging to the
tribe. Thus all of them have a right to break down grass trees,
kill bandicoots, lizards, and other animals, and dig up roots ; but
the presence of the owner of the ground is considered necessary
when they fire the country for game. As the country does not
abound in food, they are seldom stationary, removing, according
to the time of the year, to those parts which produce the articles
of provision that may be in season. During the winter and early
spring they are very much scattered ; bat as summer advances they
assemble in greater numbers.
It is at this season that they procure the greatest abundance of
game. It is done by setting fire to the underwood and grass,
which, being dry, is rapidly burnt. The manner in which these
burnings are performed is as follows ;
With a kind of torch made of the dry leaves of the grass tree,
they set fire to the sides of the cover by which the game is enclosed
and cannot escape. The hunters, concealed by the smoke, stand
in the paths most frequented by the animals, and with facility spear
them as they pass by. On these occasions vast numbers of animals
are destroyed. The violence of the fire is frequently very great,
and extends over many miles of country; but this is generally
guarded against by their burning it in.consecutive portions. The
women also kindle fires, but only for the purpose of taking bandi-
coots ; they sometimes, however, accompany the men at the larger
firings for kangaroos, or walloby.
As soon as the fire has passed over the ground, they walk over
the ashes in search of lizards and snakes, which are thus destroyed


in great numbers, and those which have escaped in their holes are
easily discovered.
In the chase the hunters are assisted by dogs, which they take
when young and domesticate; but they take little pains to train
them to any particular mode of hunting. These dogs appear to
have a very line scent, and draw upon their game like a pointer ;
after which they spring upon or chase it. They are particularly
useful in catching bandicoots, the small brush kangaroo, and the
opossum, but for the emu and large kangaroo they are not suffi-
ciently fleet. r l he owner of a dog is said to be ioort-a-din,
and is entitled to an extra proportion of the game killed. They
are also frequently lent out upon consideration of the owner receiv-
ing a share of the produce.
'The food of the clogs consists of a considerable portion of vege-
tables, roots roasted and pounded, the entrails of animals, and such
hones as are too hard for the teeth of the natives. At some periods
it is so scanty as to compel the dog to leave his master and provide
for himself; but after a lew clays he generally returns.
When the owner does not wish the dog to follow, he ties the fore-
leg to the neck with a hand of rushes, and leaves him in a shady
place. He frequently carries the dog upon his shoulders. When
they are puppies, between six and twelve months old, they are
called jimrnung, —they are then used to hunt lizards and bandi-
coots ; and previous to this they are consigned to the care of
the women. They seldom bark, but bite very sharply, snapping
like a fox. They are excellent watch dogs, and will attack
strangers.
In the wild state they are sometimes killed by the natives, who
eat their flesh, but of the skin no use is made*. Upon finding a
litter of young, the natives generally carry away one or two to rear.
In this case it often occurs that the mother will trace and attack
them ; and being of a large size, and very strong, they are rather
formidable. But, in general, they will stand and look for a few
moments, and leisurely retire.
The mode in which they hunt the kangaroo is in small parties,
or singly. They select a time when the rain is pouring heavily, or
the wind blowing hard, to prevent the noise of their approach
from being heard, for the kangaroo is very quick of hearing, and
always on the alert. The hunter creeps upon them with the
greatest caution, and generally succeeds in approaching them un-
observed. They always, if possible, keep the wind in their face,
and when one is observed, they take off their cloak, and watching
< * The tail is froqmmtly used as an ornament for tho.arm or wrist, &c.—See King’s
Australia, vol. ii.jr. 143.


when the animal stoops or turns his back upon them, they hastily
advance, keeping a bush between them for concealment. As
they approach their prey they move very lightly in a stooping pos-
ture, and only at the time when the noise of the wind prevents their
footsteps being heard. Should the kangaroo turn round and ob-
serve them, they instantly stop and remain perfectly motionless
until he resumes his feeding - . In this way they approach within
a few yards of their prey, and then pierce him with their spears.
The instant he falls they run up and dispatch him with their ham-
mers by blows on the head. The first operation is to extract the
two front teeth of the lower jaw, which they use to sharpen the
spear points ; then they seize the tail, and taking the end in the
mouth, bite off the tip, and, by pulling, extract the sinews which
are inserted in it: these are bound round a stick and dried for
use, either for the purpose of stitching the mantles, or tying the
barbs on the spears.
Another mode of hunting the kangaroo, when the huntsmen are
numerous, is by surrounding and gradually approaching the game
until they get sufficiently near to spear them.
They are also sometimes killed in woils, but this plan is more
used for the small or brush kangaroo. In this case a portion of
the brush is surrounded, and each person begins breaking it down
and treading over it, so as to make a complete road all round,
carefully stopping the runs of the animals. One or two of the
hunters then go in with their dogs, and as the game attempts to
pass the clear spot, they are entangled in the brush and knocked on
the head. In this way they sometimes kill a great many; it is
practised almost entirely in the spring before the burning season
commences, but it requires a number of people, and the whole of
the males of the tribe are generally present.
Both the large and small kangaroo are caught in pit-falls, set in
wet places. These pit-falls are described by the natives to be co-
vered over with bushes and lightly sprinkled with soil. This
method is mostly used in the interior.
The emu is speared chiefly in the winter, at which time they lay
their eggs. When a nest is found, the hunters conceal themselves
behind a bush near it, and endeavour to secure the male bird first.
The female they are pretty certain of, unless she has been dis-
turbed, when she will forsake the nest. Emus, however, are not
very often procured by the natives, but, with the kangaroo,
are highly esteemed aS articles of food. Lizards, also, afford a
favourite repast; and, at some seasons, form a considerable portion
of their food. There are three species that are eaten —the largest,
called munnaar, appears to resemble an iguana found at Sydney;
it is long, and generally very lean and lank. At one season, how


ever, it is fat, and very good eating. It makes a hole in the nest of
a species of ant, which is a mound of earth four or five feet high,
the inner parts consisting of cells constructed of a gummy substance
mixed with earth, and is very hard ; yet the munnaar burrows from
the top nearly to the bottom, and there deposits its eggs, which are
the size of a large pigeon’s egg, covered with a thick pellicle
as tough as parchment. The eggs are about ten or twelve in num-
ber, and adhere together. The ants soon repair the hole made
by the munnaar, and the warmth of the nest is sufficient to hatch
the eggs. These eggs have an oily taste, and will not easily mix
with either warm or cold water, but nevertheless they are very good
eating.
The second species of lizard, called ivandie, is of a very dark
colour, and has a long round tail. It is generally found among
rocks, and conceals itself under them; it also inhabits hollow
trees or hides in the ground; and is a very lively animal, and quick
in its motions.
The third species, or short-tailed ynucm, has a large head and
an enormous mouth, which, when attacked, it immediately opens,
and exhibits a purplish coloured tongue; its body is covered with
large scales of a grey colour, but having transverse patches of
brown. It is very sluggish, and does not burrow in holes, but
conceals itself in long grass. They are frequently found in pairs.
The female, when pregnant, has two large eggs in her, but 1 have
never seen them when deposited. .According to the natives she
buries them in the ground very near the surface, and they are
hatched by the warmth of the sun. These youerm are frequently
found in ants’ nests, constructed of straw or leaves, with minute
portions of sand. Ido not, however, know if they lay their eggs
there, or whether they feed upon the ants.
The snakes which are eaten by the natives are of several kinds,
viz. the luackid , name, docat, &c. The wackul is the common
diamond snake of New South Wales, and is not venomous.
The noma and docat are much alike, of very dark colour, six
and seven feet in length, and their bite generally fatal. There is
another species, of a smaller size, and sienna colour, of which
although the bite is venomous it seldom occasions death, Other
small species occur which are not eaten.
When the natives kill a snake, they are careful to beat its head
to pieces before they take it up; they then examine if it has
recently eaten, and if it has undigested food in its stomach, they
reject it, for, if eaten, they say it would cause violent vomiting.
At the spring time of the year, they live principally upon the
eggs and young of birds, chiefly of the parrot tribe, but also of
hawks, ducks, swans, pigeons, &c, They are extremely expert at
climbing trees, which they do by notching the bark with their


hammers, in the same manner as is practised at Port Jackson.
Tims they procure opossums, which they trace to their holes by the
marks of their claws upon the bark. There are two species, one,
the common ring-tail ( Nworra ), and the other, comal. They are
not often found in the same districts, the comal living chiefly in
lofty and thick woods, whilst the ring-tail is frequently found in
swamps and the low brush which surrounds them. The comal is
of larger size, and much lighter colour, with a brownish bushy
tail; it is also fatter ; the fur is longer, of a whitish colour, and
is used by the natives to spin into a kind of worsted called by them
Peferoe, of which the noodle-buls are made. The fur of the
ring-tailed opossum is not used. Of both species it is easily
detached from the skin.
The comal is frequently hunted with dogs by moonlight, when
it is either speared in its flight, or driven into its haunt in some
hollow tree. The natives then make a hole and extract it; but
should this he too difficult or troublesome, they kindle a torch of
grass-tree leaves, and push it into the hole, when, in attempting to
escape, the animal is easily taken.
The natives describe other animals which are found in trees,
and are very abundant in the interior, one of which may pro-
bably be a species of the flying fox, or vampyre bat; but this
animal is not found in the neighbourhood of the settlement.
During the summer and autumn months, the natives derive a
large proportion of their food from fish. They have no canoes*,
neither can they swim, in both of which points they differ materially
from all other parts of the Australian continent with which we are
acquainted. They can, therefore, only catcli those fish which ap-
♦ The want of proper material for the construction of canoes may possibly he the
cause of the natives of King George’s Sound not possessing the moans of navigating.
From the shoat nature of Princess Royal Harbour and Oyster Harbour, it is not of so
much consequence, since, for thu greater part, they can be waded across; still, from
the scarcity of food, visits to the islands in the sound, on which seal abound, would ho
of great advantage, and from thu navigating disposition of the Australian Indian, it
seems extraordinary that they have not some mode of conveying themselves across the
water. The trees of King George’s Sound are not at all adapted to be made into
canoes, for they afford no bark that could be used, and are too hard and heavy to he
burnt or hollowed out. The natives of tiro west coast have no canoes, and in a
northerly direction from Cape Leuwin none have been noticed, until at Dampier’s
Archipelago, on the north-west coast, where the mangrove affords the Indians of that
part the means of crossing the sea. It is merely a log, which is sufficiently buoyant
to carry two or more people. (See King’s Australia, vol. i., p. 43, and the wood-cut
in the title-page of the first volume.) Farther to the eastward, at Hanover Bay, the
mangrove is the only material used, (see vol. 11., p. 09.) in the shape of a raft. But
on the north and east and south-east coasts, the canoes are made of the bark of the
eucalyptus, but are of very different construction. On the north-east coast, between
Cape Flinders and the Cumberland Islands, fhe canoes are a hollowed log of a soft
pulpy-wooded tree (Erythrina Indian ), and are furnished with aa out-rigger. This
canoe is described in vol. i., pp. 220 and 225. Other canoes are described in the first
volume, at pages 90, 200, and 202.


proach the shores, or come into shoal water. They have neither
nets, nor hook and line, and the only weapon they use is the spear,
with which they are very dexterous. In the mouths of streams or
rivers, they take large quantities, by weirs made of bushes, but
the most common method is pursuing the fish into shoal water,
and spearing them, or as they lie basking on the surface. During
calms, they walk over the mud and sand-banks, in search of flat
flsh, which are easily detected while lying at the bottom. At
night, too, they light torches of grass-tree, and thus see the
fish at the bottom, apparently asleep, when they very readily
spear them. By these methods, vast quantities arc taken, but
it can only he clone in dead calms. Another common method
is to sit on a rock, motionless, and occasionally throw into the
water pieces of limpet, or other shell-fish, keeping the spear under
water until the bait is seized by a fish, when they are almost cer-
tain of striking it.
In the autumn, when the smaller species of fish approach the
shores in largo shoals, they surround them, and keep them in
shallow -water upon the flats until the tide falls and leaves them,
when they arc easily speared, and very few escape. Tor this
purpose they use a very small spear, without a barb, and throw it
by hand ; should it so happen that the tide does not sufficiently
fall to enable them to take the fish, they gather bushes, and plant
them round so thickly, as to enclose them, when they arc speared
at leisure.
Tish being very plentiful, they often kill more than is sufficient
for present use ; in this case, they roast them, and separating the
flesh in large flakes from the bones, pack it carefully up in soft-
bark, in which way it will keep good for several days.
Immediately on killing a large fish, they make a small opening
just below the gills, through which they extract the inside. If
there he any fat, it is carefully separated: the bowels, liver, &c.
they-cook and eat.
Although sharks are very numerous, the natives are not at all
alarmed at them, and say that they are never attacked by them*.
Sometimes they will spear them, but never cat any part of the
body. Sting rays and maiden rays are also common, but not
eaten, though sometimes killed for amusement. On some part of
the coast the sting is used to point their spears.
Oysters, and other edible kinds of shell-fish, are to be obtained
in large quantities. .N one of them were eaten by the natives pre-
vious to the formation of the settlement; but since its establish-
* Though not afraid of sharks in the shallow water of either of the harbours, yet
in the rivur connecting the lakes with Kcliyse Bay, they are extremely timid, and will
not venture on the trees overhanging the hanks,
I)


■ment they eat them, after being cooked, and consider them very
good food.
It not uufreqneutly happens that a sickly whale is thrown on
shore ; upon this they greedily feed, and lay up a large quantity of
fat. They also occasionally kill a seal, the flesh of which they
esteem highly, and, indeed, when young, it is by no means un-
palatable.
The fresh-water swamps abound with a species of cray-fish,
called challows , very like those found in rivulets in England.
The procuring of these is the employment of the women. In
the summer months, when the water is partly dried up, they find
them in holes in the ground, a foot or more deep, the entrance
being small, but sufficiently wide within for the arm to be thrust to
the bottom ; they are very abundant, and when boiled with salt,
are good eating. The natives roast them in the ashes, and eat
them in large quantities.
They also procure and eat the fresh-water tortoise (Jetton), and
in the season take large quantities of their eggs, which are laid on
shore generally on a bank about twenty or one hundred yards from
the water, buried in a small hole, and carefully covered up.
Frogs ( cooynh ), of two or three species, are eaten chiefly at the
season of their spawning.
At one season of the year, the natives push or break down the
grass-trees, on which, when fallen, a species of cockchafer (paaluck)
deposits its ova, which become large milk-white grubs ; and these
they eat raw, or slightly roasted. There are also other kinds
(changut), some of much larger size, that are procured from
rotten trees, bull-rushes, Bcc.: all of them are white.
Of their paaluoks they are extremely tenacious ; the person who
breaks down the tree being entitled to its produce. And if rob-
beries of this nature are detected, the thief is always punished.
They believe also that stolen paalucks occasion sickness and
eruptions. Yet, when hungry, a friend will not scruple to have
recourse to the grass-tree of another who is not present; but in
this case he peels a small branch or twig, and sticks it in the
ground, near the tree. This is called heit a borringerra, and is
intended to prevent anger or other ill consequences.
The eggs of ants also form an article of food.
Of the vegetable substances on which they feed, a few kinds
only are known. The following, however, are more used than
any other, and may be said to form the staple article of diet: they
are. named by them meernes , tuboo, chocket, and tunedong, The
incomes*, which is the chief article, are scarlet roots, not unlike, in
shape and size, tulip-roots. They are mealy when roasted, but
» Hsomodoi-um spicatum, Br, Prodr,, p, 300.


of an acrid and unpleasant taste. They roast them in the ashes,
and then pound them between two flat stones, rubbing the stones
with a ball of earth, to prevent the root adhering to it. When
thus prepared, they are mucilaginous, and of a glossy black colour.
They may be considered the bread of the natives who live in the
neighbourhood of the sound, but are not found in the interior.
The iuhoc is of the tribe Orchidem*: it is very pleasant eating,
when roasted. In the early part of spring it throws up a single
stem, hollow, and similar in appearance to that of the onion, but
is mucilaginous, and sweetish to the taste. This also is eaten.
Before the young root comes to maturity it is called choke.ru, and
is eaten raw : the old one is called naank -fa
The chooket is the small bulbous root of a rush; it is very
fibrous, and only edible at one season.
Tire roots of fern, sedge, and other plants, are also used as
articles of food j also mushrooms, of two species, and another
kind of fungus.
When the different species of Bunksia first come into bloom,
they collect from the flowers a considerable quantity of honey, of
which the natives are particularly fond, and gather large quantities
of the flowers ( monoat ) to suck. It is not, however, always to
be procured ; the best time is in the morning when much dew is
deposited on the ground ; also in cloudy, but not wet weather.
They describe various kinds of roots in the interior that are
eaten by them. One species they call yoke, and say that it resem-
bles our potato, being as large and as well tasted ; but it has only
ohe tuber to a stein, and is altogether different in its leaf and ap-
pearance.
Another root is carrot-shaped. Rice they call kirn;, and say
there is plenty; that it grows on a small shrub, and is of a red-
dish colour; that they shake it out into their cloak, and eat it
uncooked.
Bread they call quamerf , or marrin, both which names I
Conceive to denote substances eaten by them that are only to be
found in the interior,
A bee is found at King George’s Sound. I have never known
a hive near the settlement; but the natives say they sometimes
take them, and eat the honey.
I have been thus particular in describing their food, because
1 conceive that in savage tribes it gives rise to most of the
peculiarities of their habits and custoflw. At King George’s
Sound they live upon the productions of nature, unassisted by
art, varying at different seasons and in different districts, poor in
quality, often scanty, and therefore compelling the natives to a
* Probably a species of Tholymitrn.
f Natok signifies her, or /male.
D 3


vagrant life. The population is consequently far from numerous*
and varies in appearance and habits according to the nature of tire
food in their district. This will naturally occasion numerous sub-
divisions into tribes and classes, which we find to be the case m
an uncommon degree; and there appears to be little bond of union
amongst them—they have the same name and district, but nothing
else ; for, when on friendly terms, they seldom associate together,
and their wars appear to be more between individuals or families,
than between tribes or districts. They have no general camp or
rendezvous, acknowledge no general chief, and associate or dis-
perse as season or inclination leads them. What their meetings in
the interior may be, I know not: sometimes, perhaps, they may
be large, but I believe that during the winter (when the sea coast
tribes go into the interior) they are in small parties, and much
scattered, living upon opossums, bandicoots, and kangaroos, BCC.
They begin to return to the coast about September or October,
and at this season they chiefly subsist on roots. In calm weather,
however, they procure a few fish.
As the season advances, they procure young birds and eggs,
and their numbers inprease. About Christmas they commence
■firing the country for game, and the families who through the
winter have been dispersed over the country, reassemble. The
greatest assemblages, however, are in the autumn ( pourner), when
fish are to be procured in the greatest abundance. Towards the
end of autumn, also, they kill kangaroos, by surrounding them.
At the dry seasons of the year large districts are aban-
doned for want of water. They speak much of climbing trees to
satisfy their thirst, but I have no knowledge whether it be to
procure water from the hollows in the tree or to extract the sap.
I believe they cut a hole with their hammers and drink, or collect
drink in their cloaks, and then carefully close the aperture. In
these districts the women climb trees, which is not the case on tho
coast.
This scarcity of food has occasioned some other customs, which
are curious and characteristic. The men and women go out in
separate parties, on their respective duties, generally at an early
hour in the morning, in companies of two or three together ; the
women to collect roots or crayfish'( challows ), and the men
with their spears, to procure fish or game. The women carry a
waun, a long pointed stick, with which they dig up roots, and
which is occasionally used as a weapon. On their backs they
carry a bag {cote), made of a kangaroo’s skin, in which they de-
posit the food they procure : they also carry a fire-stick,
A portion of the roots, or whatever they may collect, they cook
and eat, but reserve part for the children and men, to be eaten
on their return to their huts. They also get lizards, snakes, and


bandicoots, and, in the burning season, set fire to the ground by
themselves.'
The whole party cook and eat conjointly. They generally go
on the open, downy, or swampy land.
The men also go two or three together, unless they have some
particular object in view. They are more frequently found on
the shores fishing, or iu the woods seeking nests, opossums, ban-
dicoots, or kangaroos. When they are successful, they instantly
make a fire, and eat a portion of their game. The married men
generally reserve a share for their wives. They are extremely
jealous of their food, concealing and eating it silently and se-
cretly ; yet if others arc present they usually give a small portion :
they tell me that one half of what they procure they eat and divide
with their companions, and the remainder they keep for the night.
The men also collect roots, and sometimes challoivs, but for these
they chiefly rely upon their wives. I have .imagined that the classes
called Erniung and Taa-man keep themselves more separate,
They have some superstitious notions in regard to peculiar food
for different ages and sexes. Thus girls, after eleven or twelve
years of age, seldom eat bandicoots, such food being considered a
preventive to breeding; young men .will not eat nailoiLs or war-
lits (black eagle), wdf ndlflnwe a fine beard : such food
will also influence their success in the chacc ; and although kan-
garoos may abound, they will seldom see them, and always miss
them when they attempt to spear them. I believe that it is not
until the age of thirty that they may eat indiscriminately.
Quails {pourrinck or pourrha) are old men’s diet. Plenty of
kangaroo is supposed to occasion the women to breed.
Of their children they appear to be very fond, and rarely chastise
them ; but their treatment of the women is not always gentle,
and many of them have spear-wounds iu the legs or thighs, inflicted
by their husbands.
The women are very useful to them, not only in procuring food,
but also in preparing their cloaks, building their huts, and other
menial offices. They possess few utensils, and those are of the
rudest construction : a piece of soft bark, lied at each end, serves
for a drinking-cup ; the claw of a kangaroo they use for a needle ;
and through a hollow rush, or the wing-bone of a bird ( mveil),
they suck the water, when it cannot conveniently be reached with
their mouths.
Polygamy is a general practice amongst them, one man some-
times having many wives, Their customs, however, as regards
their women, are not only very curious, but also so intricate,
and involved in so many apparent contradictions and singulari-
ties, that it is probable we have been mistaken in some of them.
The whole body of the natives ate divided into two classes,


Erniung and Tern or Tmmah j alid the chief regulation is, that
these classes must intermarry, that is, an Erniung with a Tdamaii.
Those who infringe this rule are called Yuredangers, and are
subject to very severe punishment. The childrelr always follow
the denomination of the mother. Thus, a mail who is Erniung
will have all his children Tddrrian; but his sister’s children will be
Erniungs. This practice is common to all the tribes in the
neighbourhood, with the exception of the Murrant.
The girls appear to be at the disposal of their father, and are
generally bespoke in their infancy; even before they are born we
have been told to whom they were betrothed, if they prove to be
females.
There appear to be some peculiar regulations here, but what
they are we could not ascertain. In some instances it happens
that the exchange is mutual. The persons to whom the girls are
betrothed are not unfrequently ineii of the middle or an advanced
age, and possessing already several wives. They are, however,
often more equally matched.
Another custom amongst them is called cotertie: it is confined
to hoys, and I would compare it to our godfathers; for it seems
to be a promise of protection and assistance, and also adopting
the boy as a 1 son-in-law.
I do not think they have any nuptial ceremony. At a very early
age the girl is brought to her future husband. Attentions and
presents are paid more to her father than herself; and, indeed, the
trifles she receives are generally transferred to him : these chiefly
consist of game, or other articles of food; the father, perhaps,
receives a cloak, spears, or other implements, At the age of
eleven or twelve years the girl is delivered over to her husband.
Wheh a girl is thus; as it Were, purchased froin her father, the
husband is said to be Pam Yoclcar. Those who steal their wives
—a common practice amongst them—are compelled to pay more
attention to the feniale. Sometimes violence is Used, and the
girl is carried Off against her consent ; generally, however, in
these cases the female is the wife of some old man, and the young
couple elope by mutual inclination; even the tribe sbmetilnes are
privy to the circumstance. For some time the patties keep aloof,
and in the first instance go as far away as possible, and continually
change their residence, not daring to show themselves amongst the
friends of the injured husband, who makes use of every exertion
to recover his wife and revenge the insult. Should the parties
evade pursuit, and live together until the female becomes preg-
nant, mutual friends intercede, presents are itlade to the husband,
and she is released from lier first engagement. Thus, running
awfay with a wife is called marr-in-colaia. It most frequently
happens, however, that tile lady is recovered, when she is punished


by a severe beating, of more frequently by spearing her through
the thigh.
Infidelity is by no means uncommon. Tlie husband keeps a
jealous bye on his Wife, and on the least excuse for suspicion she
is severely punished. The majority of the inert are single until
past thirty years of age; sonle much longer. The old melt have
not only several wives, but of all ages.
This state of things is in some measure cOtnpensated by what
is called tarrarnandccaraclc; it is, ill fact, courting a wife whilst
her husband is living, upon tlie understanding with both parties
that she is to be the wife of the lover after the death of the hus-
band. Tlie presents lit this case are made to the husband, as well
as to the woman; but what she receives she generally divides with
him. This practice is done openly, and permitted; but it must
he carried oil in so decorous a martiler as not to occasion scandal
to the parties, dr jealousy to the husbaiid.
When a mail dies, it is usual for his yotlnger wives to reside
with their fathers’ tribe during the period of mourning, at which
time they receive little attention from the men to whoiti they are
subsequently to belong, and would meet with severe punishment
were they to go and live with theiri immediately. Should the parties,
however, subsequently run away, not much notice would be taken.
It is not unfrequent for the wife to descend among the nearest
relatives-of her husband; arid this arrangement is well ririderstood
during his life.
Like other savage tribes, tlie women suffer little from child-
bearing, arid even the next day walk out to seek their food as
usual. The period of infancy is divided by them into many
stages, the names of which Ido not recollect. Tor the first few
weeks the child is carried on the left arm ill a fold of the cloak,
hut subsequently is suspended on the shoulders. Until they can
rim alone they are not clothed. In cases of twins, one of the
children is killed; (if of different sexes, the female being pre-
served;) the reasons assigned for which irieasure are, that a woman
has not sufficient milk for two children, and cannot carry them
and seek her food. They suckle them until they are four or five
years of age; but long before they are weaned they are instructed
in procuring a portion of their food.
A girl of nine or ten years of age has the superintendence of
all the little ones who can walk; and she takes them out each with
its stick to dig roots in the neighbourhood of their encampment.
Should they espy a stranger, they instantly conceal themselves in
lire herbage, lying as close as a hare in its form. they get
older they accompany the women, and are generally carried astride
on their shoulders.
Their dances have been frequently exhibited to us in the settle


merit for our amusement. They usually strip themselves entirely;
but when before us they had their cloak fastened round their loins,
leaving only the upper part of the body exposed. The face was
painted red; and on the arms and body were various figures, painted
with a white colour. White pigment is usually an emblem of
mourning, but it is used in the dances, from its being the most
conspicuous colour at night. Their mulgarmdocks (doctors) and
old men never dance.
A fire is kindled on a clear spot, behind which is seated an old
man, and in front the dance is performed, as if towards him. They
keep the same step, which is varied from time to time ; sometimes
stooping and grunting, and moving their heads sideways, in most
grotesque altitudes,
I think their dances vary, and are in some instances intended to
represent the chace and killing of animals; for at times during
the dance they cry out warn, wait, toort, &c. Whilst they are
dancing they have green boughs in their hands, which they in turn
advance and deposit with the old man behind the fire. At some of
their dances they have their spears, and at a certain part represent
killing one of their party; after which the spears are, like the
green houghs, delivered to the old man, who the whole time is
seated on the ground, looking very serious, and turning his head
about as if to inspect and give directions to the dancers, and pulling
or stroking his beard with either hand alternately.
There is neither elegance nor activity displayed in their dancing;
on the contrary, it is ludicrous, and may be symbolical. Ido
not think the women dance with the men, nor am I certain that
they ever dance, although some of the natives have informed me
they do at their own fires. The noise made by them whilst danc-
ing cannot he considered as musical, or intended as such. Each
man repeats at every jump the words wow wow, the meaning of
which I cannot explain. When they chive game from a covert
with sticks and a noise, they call it wow-e-nia-tur, the word wow
being also then used. At intervals they stop to rest, at the time
setting up a loud shout.
These dances only take place when many are congregated
together and at peace. During war it would subject them to an
attack from their enemy, by exposing the situation of their en-
campment.
Upon the first formation of the settlement we endeavoured to
discover whether they had any chiefs, and for a long time believed
they had ; indeed, we hud fixed upon two or three individuals to
whom we supposed that rank belonged. The natives whom
we had selected were fine, tall, active men, much painted and
ornamented. Their names were Naikennon, Gneivitt, Ward, and
EHngool ; but we subsequently discovered that they were all single


men, which accounted for their constantly ornamented appearance.
The influence they held over the rest of the natives might have
arisen from other circumstances ; and we could not discover any in-
dividual to whom they gave the supremacy. Naikennnn, however,
gave out for some time that he was king and captain of the black
men. It was a long time before he could be persuaded to visit
us, and when he came lie was formally introduced by his compa-
nions, who talked much about him, and seemed to consider him
as superior to them. He was one of the finest looking and best
limbed men amongst them, wore his hair tied up in a knob behind,
bound tightly round with a string, and his head ornamented on
the top with a tuft of white feathers, and a similar badge round
Iris left arm. His chest and shoulders were very much marked
with gashes ( umhin ), and there was much peculiarity in his man-
ners. He talked little, very rarely asked for anything, and, for a
great length of time, would neither accompany us on our sporting
excursions, nor otherwise render us the little assistance that w'e
were in the habit of receiving from others of his tribe. After a
little time, however, both he and his brother, Mawcurrie, became
more sociable; and, at last, so partial to our people, as seldom to
leave the camp. We had, therefore, a fair opportunity of satisfying
ourselves that neither of them possessed any authority over their
countrymen. ,
The individuals who possess most influence are the mulgarra-
docks, or doctors. Of these they have several grades, differing
very materially in the nature and extent of their power, which, like
other savages, they attribute to supernatural agency.
A, mulgarruduek is considered to possess the power of driving
away wind or rain, as well as bringing down lightning or disease
upon any object of their or others’ hatred. In attempting to drive
away a storm of rain, they stand out in the open air, tossing
their arms, shaking their clothes, and making violent gesticula-
tions, which they continue for a long time, with intervals, if they
arc not successful. Almost the same process is used to remove
disease; but in this case they are less noisy, and make use of
friction, sometimes with green twigs, previously warmed at the
fire, frequently making a short puff as if to, blow away the pain.
The baud of the mulgarradock is also supposed to confer strength
or dexterity, and the natives frequently apply to them for that pur-
pose, The operation consists in simply drawing his hand repeat-
edly, with a firm pressure, from the shoulder downwards to the
lingers, which he afterwards extends until the joints crack.
They do not, however, use friction indiscriminately. In cases
of dysentery, for example, to which they are very subject, they ad-
minister to the patient the gum of the grass-tree, and sometimes
the green stems of the racemes (the red root before mentioned).


They have probably xnahy ether remedies, for they seem partial to
medicines, and will swallow the most nauseous dose to the dregs.
The complaints to which they are most subject are those arising
from cold, sore throat, and bowel complaints) which ate frequently
terminated by death, particularly with children.
A young man Standing one day by my lire, apparently in good
health, fell suddenly on his face senseless, with convulsive twitch-
ings of the face, neck, ahd ai ms. 1 raised him up, and after a few
minutes he recovered, and requested 1 would give him medicine.
He told me that sltch attacks were not uncommon, and wished
nitich to know if We were subject to them. I have seen very few
cases bf eruptions Or boils, instances of deafness and blindness
sometimes Occur, but are not common. On the whole they
appear to have few ailments. The practice of the nmtgarra-
docks is principally confined to the cure of spear wounds, to
which, indeed, comparatively little attention is paid by them.
They are very skilful ill extracting the weapon, after which they
apply a little dlist, similar to wliat is used for pigment, and then
bind the Wound up tightly with soft bark. In the diet of the sick,
however, they ate very particular, and the stages of convalescence
are marked by the food which they are permitted to eat, At first,
roots only are allowed, afterwards lizards, then fish, Bcc. No cases
of deformity have been observed amongst them. Fainting occa-
sions no alarm. They once saw sOme of oiir people in a state of
inebriety, oiie of them quite unable to stand; upon which they
came to me in great alarm, Under strong apprehension that he
would certainly die befoie tile following clay; adding that black
men were sometimes taken so and died. I endeavoured to ascer-
tain tile nature of the disease, and think they must have meant a
coup de soldi.
The treatment they adopt for the bite of a snake is simple and
rational. They tie a ligature of rushes above the part, enlarge
the wound With the claw of the kangaroo or the point of a spear,
and theii slick it, washing it and their mouths frequently with
Water. Whete water cannot be procured, it is considered danger-
ous to suck the wound. One-of the natives ( Wannua) was bitten
on the linger, and lay ill for a day or two, and some time after-
Wards appeared thin and unhealthy.
With respect to the divisions and subdivisions of tribes, there
exists so much intricacy, that it will be long before it can be un-
derstood. The classes Erniung and Tern are universal near the
Sound ; but the distinctions are general, not tribual. Another
division, almost as general, is into Moncalon and Torndirrup ; yet
there are a few who are neither. These can scarcely be distin-
guished as tribes, and are very much intermingled. The Moncalon,
however, is more prevalent to the eastward of our establishment,


and tile Torndirmp to the westward. They intermarry, and have
each again their subcliviaiolml distinctions, some of which are
peculiar, and some general ; of these are the Omerheip, Camhieti ,
Mahnur, Bcc.
What I, however, consider more correctly as tribes, are those
which have a general name and a general district, although they may
consist of Torndirmp mMonmlon , separate or commingled. These
are, I believe, in some measure named by tire kind of game
or food found most abundant in the district. The inhabitants of
the Sound and its immediate vicinity are called Meananger , pro-
bably derived from mourn, the red root above mentioned (p. 36)
and anger, to eat. It is In this district that the mearn is the most
abundantly found j but distant tribes will not eat the mearn, atld
complain much of the brushy nature of the country* that it
scratches their legs. Kangaroos of die larger sort are scarce here,
but the small brush kangaroo is plentiful, and grass-trees and
Banksia are abundant, as is also, in the proper season, fish.
The natives residing on the right, and extending to the coast
about North-West Cape, are culled Marram. This country, or
district, is said to be more fertile, and produces different kinds of
edible roots. It affords also more ponds of water, more wild
fowl, and more emus.
These tribes are also not universally divided into Broking
and Tern, and frequently infringe the rule. Adjoining them, inland,
is the Yuhhmm. This country appears more hilly and better
wooded; but we have hud very little intercourse with the natives
who belong to it. Next to them is the Will or Weil district,
which is a very favourite country, and may probably be named
from Weil or Writ (ants’eggs). In this country they mention the
existence of a river which is large and deep, extends beyond
their knowledge, and is only to be crossed at one. spot, over a
large fallen tree.
Nest to the Weil district is that of Wdrranglo or Warranger ,
from warn (kangaroo), and seems to be of the same character
as the Weil, which is chiefly open forest laud, with a little short
grass, and abounding in kangaroos, opossums, and other animals,
as well as many birds, which arc riot found near the coast.
The Corine district—the name of which may be derived from
quur, (which I believe to be the bush kangaroo,) flit animal 1 have
never seen—is said to be very open and nearly free from wood, to
have much fern growing about it, mid several large salt-water
lakes. Beyond the. Corine is a river which, however, is fordable;
it falls into the sea.
* It may bn inferred, thurufurc, that the interior is move open and the land of hotter
quality; tor poor soils are always covered with a scrubby brush, and (pita useless lor
the purpose either of dupasluragc or cultivation.—-I’. I’. K.


Although every individual would immediately announce to us his
tribual name and country, yet we have not been enabled to trace
any regular order of descent. The son follows his mother as
Erniung or Tern, and his father as Torndirrup or Moncalon. Be-
yond this we have not been able to penetrate, for half brothers are
not unfrequently different. This would probably be caused by
cross marriages. From the same cause also their divisions of
relationship are very numerous. Dicker, mother ; cuinlcur, father;
moiirert, brother or sister; honk or conk , uncle, &c. &c.
In their marriage, they have no restriction as to tribe; but it is
considered best to procure a wife from the greatest distance,
possible. The sons will have a right to hunt in the country from
whence the mother is brought.
They are very jealous as to encroachments on their property, and
the land is divided into districts, which is the property of families
or individuals. At some particular seasons of the year, however,
the young men visit their neighbours in parties, and sometimes
travel forty or fifty miles for that purpose. Their stay, which is
generally short, is a period of rejoicing and feasting.
The visiting, of course, only takes place between friendly par-
ties, yet it is attended with a ceremony denoting peace ; and they
generally approach their friends a little previous, or subsequent to
noonday.
It once occurred to me to be out shooting, accompanied by
Mawcurrie, the native before spoken of, and five or six of his
tribe, when we heard the cry coo-whie, God-ivhie-ca ca, upon which
my companion stopped short, and said that strange black men
were coming, and were 'no good/ and wished me to accompany
him to attack them. Very soon afterwards, however, he disco-
vered that they were friends, and we walked towards them. They
were five or six of the Murrain tribe, and were dancing along the
path towards us,
Their spears and mearas, or throwing-sticks, were carried by
one man; the rest were unarmed. They were painted and
greased all over, and each had a band round his forehead, in
which was stuck grass-tree leaves, hanging downwards over the
face. Each also carried in his hand a green bough.
On meeting, they made several turns in a circular direction, and
then severally embraced, by encircling the waist of their friend
with their arms, and lifting him from the ground, kissing hands,
fee,, all of which was invariably returned. The dancing was then
renewed, and continued at intervals, after which I left them to
themselves. The green twig appears always to be an indication
of peace, and is much used at their dances.
• When individuals quarrel with each other, it is taken up by the
respective families.


When a man is killed, his tribe instantly sets about revenging
his death ; but they are not particular whether they kill the prin-
cipal offender or any other ot his tribe. This feeling of retalia-
tion is, however, extended much farther, for if a man be killed by
accident, by falling from a tree, drowned in the sea, or any other
way, the friends ot the deceased will impute his death to some
mulc/arradook ot an adverse tribe, and kill an individual belong-
ing to it in retaliation. Also, when a man is seriously ill, and
fancies he shall not recover, he will attempt to kill somebody, in
hopes thereby of recovering.
In their personal conflicts they use their hammers, throwing
sticks and towks to strike with, and the blows therewith inflicted
would doubtless frequently be fatal; but they seem incapable of
giving a heavy blow, and strike more like women. They do not
use shields, but are extremely dexterous in avoiding the spear.
Their quarrels most frequently arise about their women. For
depredations on each other’s grounds, or any slight cause, they
are contented with spearing through the legs or thighs, and do not
attempt to kill each other; and the moment one of the party is
wounded, the engagement ceases.
In some parts of Australia they have regular war meetings for
the purpose of fighting, but this is not the case at King George’s
Sound. Their attacks, when intended to be fatal, are most fre-
quently made at night, and always by stealth. We have more than
once witnessed their common rencontres. As soon as the enemy is
seen approaching, a shout or scream is set up, and all hasten,
armed with their spears, to the spot, approaching them with loud
noise, thrusting their beards in their mouths, and making the most
hideous grimaces, so that they look as if they were frantic. It
seldom happens that more than one or two of each party engages ;
and during the conflict, the rest frequently endeavour to separate
the combatants, so that there is much running about. They throw
their spears, standing only a few paces from each other; and then-
dexterity in avoiding them is really wonderful, although they sel-
dom move from the spot, so that many spears are frequently
thrown before one of either party is injured.
During the time of war they either quit their locations and go
to distant places, for the safety of the women and children, or
else assemble together in great numbers for mutual protection.
At these times they seldom kindle a lire, except to cook then-
food, and very frequently remove their encampment, and use every
other precaution for concealment. The single men are most fre-
quently the warriors or the attacking parties. They travel in
small detachments of three or four together, and endeavour to
leave as little trace of their march as possible, avoiding the regular


paths, lest their footsteps be discovered; for, like other savages,
the Australians are wonderfully sagacious in tracking by the im-
pressions of the foot. Upon discovering the encampment of their
enemies, they wait till night, and then cautiously approach, by
creeping on their hands and knees, until they have selected the
person they are in search of, and immediately spear him through
the body. The party who are thus surprised will instantly fly,
without attempting resistance; for during the darkness of the
night they cannot discern their friends from a foe, and the light of
their flies serves to expose them to the spears of their enemies.
Women and children are alike sacrificed, but we seldom heard
of more than one individual being killed at an attack. They are,
however, so constantly at war that their numbers must be consi-
derably diminished by it. When an individual falls, there are
always some who take upon themselves to revenge his death.
Immediately after the burial, the encampment is broken up,
and they quit the neighbourhood for a period, during which time
they are cautious not to utter the name of the deceased j and in
relating the occurrence, the names of the survivors are alone men-
tioned, and by the omission of that of the dead his fate is told.
Upon inquiring into the cause of this custom, they say it is not
good to speak his name, lest they should see his gnoit or ghost.
Their funeral solemnities are accompanied by loud lamenta-
tions. A grave is dug about four feet long and three wide, and
perhaps a yard in depth. The earth that is removed is arranged on
one side of the grave in the form of a crescent; at the bottom is
placed some bark, and then small green boughs, and upon this
the body, ornamented and enveloped in its cloak, with the knees
bent up to the breast, and the arms crossed. Over the body
is heaped more green boughs, and bark, and the hole is then
filled with earth. Green boughs are placed over the earth, and
upon them are deposited the spears, knife, and hammer of the
deceased, together with the ornaments that belonged to him ; his
throwing-stick on one side, and the curl or towk on the other
side of the mound. The mourners then carve circles in the bark
of the trees that grow near the grave, at the height of six or seven
feet from the ground; and lastly, making a small fire in front, they
gather small boughs, and carefully brush away any portions of the
earth that may adhere to them. The face is coloured black or
white, laid on in blotches across the forehead, round the temples,
and down the cheek-bones, and these marks of mourning are worn
for a considerable time. They also cut the end of the nose, and
scratch it, for the purpose of producing tears. During the period
of the mourning they wear no ornaments or feathers. It frequently
occurs that two individuals bear the same name, and in this case,


should one of them die, the other changes his name for a certain
period, in order that the name of the deceased should not he
uttered.
When a female is interred, her implements are, in like manner,
deposited in her grave.
From this trait it would be natural to suppose that they have a
belief of a future state ; and I think it cannot be doubted that
they have. They have very readily adopted an idea which was
held out to them, that after death they would go to the moon; but
I do not think this was their prior opinion, for in reply to my in-
quiry, ‘ Where their fathers had gone V they pointed westward.
They believe in ghosts, and some will assert that they have seen
them. I once showed a boy an anatomical drawing of a full
figure, upon which he immediately exclaimed that it was a gnoit;
and some of them who bad once obtained a glimpse of the draw-
ing, could not bo persuaded to look upon it again. They are
also very superstitious as regards omensj the noise of the night-
cuckoo is supposed by them to portend death.
Of their language we have, as yet, little knowledge : the voca-
bulary will show that it abounds in vowels, and is by no means
wanting in harmony. It differs entirely from that of the natives of
the eastern coast; and even tribes very nearly situated differ so
considerably, that I do not think at two hundred miles they would
at all understand each other. They generally speak rapidly; and
when in conversation, not unfrequently break out into a kind of
chant, in which they relate such occurrences as at the moment
interest them. They have, however, singing, if not songs, among
them, perhaps entirely extempore. Their women more frequently
sing while by themselves, and their songs are not always decent:
they are also said by the men to be very fluent in abuse ; and then-
oratory, as interpreted to -us, was sufficiently j piquanta. At their
camps there was always a great noise, but it instantly ceased on
the approach of a stranger, till it was ascertained who he was.
They seemed at times very merry and good-tempered; had much
fawning and flattery : at first they commenced pilfering, but for a
length of time depredations were very rare, and numerous articles
stolen by strangers were returned.
VOCABULARY.
Head Kaat
Eyes Meal
Nose Chungulet
Mouth Taa
Teeth Orlock
Tongue Tarlin
Throat Woort
Ear Twank
Beard Narnac
Breast Peep
Belly Corpul
Hand Man*


Foot Maat, or Chen
Thigh Towl
Hair Chow
Skin Mawp
Liver Maierr
Body, or Flesh Yarlin
Bones Queet
Smell Taamil
Fat Cheerung
Cloak Poaak
Girdle Noodlebull
Tuft of feathers'),,, „
~ W allowmny, or
worn on the > rt , J ’
, , (Jaccalon
head J
Knife Taap
Hunting spear Keit
Throwing stick Mear
Short stick Towk
Curled stick, orl
Bomerang of>Curl
Sydney J
Hammer Koit
Wing-hone of al
bird, used tolKnweel, or
suck water! Nweel
through J
String Peteroe
Yes Hoo, Ky, Quaco
No Poort
Don’t Pal-Pal
I cannot Un Wan mb
I’ll go away Un Bourloo
Come Ca
Come here Ca wa, U-alla
Go away, be off Bulloco
Yours Nuneloc
Me or mine Un
lam hungry Un Urelip
I am full Un Mourert
I want Un Geo
f Qminnerk un
I want bread gee, or Mar-
I. rin un gee
I want badly Urelihup un gee
Water to drink Kaip un aan
To eat Anger, Taa
Bread fQuimnert, or
I Marrm
Rice Kioc
Potato Yoke *
Absent, At air,.
distance | Booun
T , fßocun oola, or
Let us go away | Wat . ook
Path Maat
Long Woorie
Short Korert
Much or large Orpern
Little Nehp, Nehbitur
What, What do| ENaaw
you say? J
What is your]-,,
name? jEnoc eean
Bad, Unfit to eat Wockun
Good Quaup
This Nd
To steal Quypul
Thief Quypungur
Like this, In tins') rr
’ f-lvy unera
way J J
Night Karliac
Day Ben, Bennan
Star Chindy
Moon Meuc
Sun Chaat
Thunder Condernore
Lightning Yerdivernan
Morning Mania
To-morrow Maniana
Yesterday Kartiac kain
By-and-bye Poordel
Just now Yibbal
Some time since Corram
• The above names, strictly, indicate vegetable substances resembling the articles
of food expressed, and thence applied to them as they became known. The root
quannert, or martin, (broad,) is probably a gigantic truffle.


Long while since Corram quatchet
Evening . Corrainellon
Cold Mulgkn
Hot or warm ITT1 TT i
weather | Ureler
Young Eenlung,Tooting
Sleep Copil
Sleep together Copil nahluc
Listen Yuccan
Hut Toorloit
Wood Poorne
Honeysuckle Moncat
Grass-tree Paaluo
G t” e e° f gl ' aSS '} P^
Land Moorile
Earth Yahl
Sand Til
Large Ant-hill Weet,o}-Weetuch
Stone Pwoy
Sea Mammord
River Peerle
Lake Penger
Feathers Keardit
Bird Keard
Macaw Noorlark
Black Cockatoo Curraak
White ditto Munnit
Bronze Pigeon Moorhait
Emu Wait
Tr fWarre, fern.
Kangaroo . | Y ungur, male
fNailoit
™ Wahl
Other varieties Ta „
Quakur
Bandicoot Quernd
Dog -Toort
Opossum Comal
Ring.-tail ditto Nworra
t-. , fWackerren
Duak jwainern
Musk Duck Coatchuck
Black Swan Marlie
Eagle Warlit
Tiajip
Parrots Bernanore
X owern
Teer
Hawk Corriore
Night Cuckoo Combine
Snakes i£ orne
[Docat
Diamond _ Wackul
Lizards, Short Youern
Long-tailedWandy
Guana Munnaar
Meerne
Roots eaten ■ T! lko , c
Chocket
[Caumuck
Rush Paat
Crass Ciiallup
Crawfish , Challow
Fresh-water
Tortoise | Kllon
Eggs Pooye
Hen, laying Pooyiore
Hens of Birds Nuank
Males Maam
Cry or call of!,, .
Birds | Mai
Seal Barlard
Whale Mammang
Shark Martiat
Fish Wallah
Quail Pooriock
Noisy, Scoldlngj Wanker wanker,
J ° ( Yanger yatiger
Serious Mennem
Falsehood Purtup
Hurt or Sore Baruck
111 Mendeit
Well Toortock
Laugh Cowker
Playful, Joking Wimberner
One who talks! ~ . ,
, >Mai a node
much j 1
Deaf Twank a toot
Tail Neent
Sinews Peet
Dead and buried Keepiuc chaanuc
Buried Yahluc
E


Fire Carle
Cooked Tokenor
Hot Carloc
Plenty Carle nent
Wild Dog Yaccan toort
A Ghost Noit
. „ (Yungur. Also a
A Man | ma i e j £an g aroo
Woman Yock
Young and pretty Yock prindy
Old man Narnaccarack
Middle aged
~ INarnactowaller-
Youngman j beard growing
Youth fNarnac poort
YoutJl t 110 heard
Boy Coolon
Girl Wainernung
Infant at breast Peep anger
Pregnant Corpullel
Married naan Yock a duck
Single naan Manjahly
Doctor Mulgarradock
Blacks Moburn
(Torndiller, or
Whites < Maupern ner-
[ ran nerran
Father Cuinkur
Mother Eecher
Mother of many Eecher poole
Barren [Eecher poort,
wernung
Moonshine Meuc cong
Full moon Coppern
("Wern a warra
Other stages -iKuitawoet
(Moreuc
Seasons, beginning with June and
July, or Winter.
Mawkur
Meerningal
Maungernan
Berne
Meertilluc
Pourner
Winds.
S.W. Bernang
N. Cheeriung
E. Yerlimher
S. Meernan
N.W. Woortit
One Kain
Two Cojine
Three Taan
Four' Orre
Five Poole
A few Kain kain
Many Poole, or Orpefn
Names of Tribes.
Meern-anger Warrangle
Murrain Weil
Yohberore Corine
Classes.
Erniung Taa man, or Tem
Moncalon Torndirrup
Obberup Cambien
Mahnur
Names of Men.
Weeburn Naikennon
Meindert Mawcurrie
Wongar Eringool
Murrinan Ninderowl
Cowerole Toolingat Wally
Wallingool Taaton
Manquenar Nourtuckeen
Wong Woorungoorit
Tarragan Mongiore
Wowenur Parteit
Yuredill Dalwin
Colburn Corapan
Yettit Wannua
Wernton Nandobert
Mobun Pandure


Names of Women.
Pseknia Courtingait
Nockolock Neerwangle
1 ittipan Yinovert
Nandewait Chockobert
Ptealol Mongarwort
Quannettin Peipinhert
Kartovert
Names of Places.
Corjarnurruf , Chungernup
Toecillirrup Yangiuc
Morrillup Yaccim Yattap
Obar Borringorrup
Marliore Warlit Mai
Yaowerilly Peehirt
IV.— On the Vigia called the Aitldns' 1 Roch. By Captain A. T. E.
Vidal, Iti N. Read the 13 th of December, 1830.
Of the numerous vigias dispersed over the North Atlantic Ocean,
not one has perhaps excited so much apprehension, or been the sub-
ject of such frequent inquiry, as that denominated Aitldns’ Rock.
It is said to lie off the north-west coast of Ireland, immediately in
the track of vessels trading from the westward to our northern
ports ; and the various positions assigned to it range from the lati-
tude of 55° to 55° IS' N., and from longitude 9° 38' to 14° W.
The first notice of this supposed danger was communicated from
Whitehaven on the 12th September, 1740. It states, ‘ that on
‘ the 15th July last, at seven o’clock at night, on our passage from
* Virginia, in the Friendship of Ayr, John Aitldns, master, J ames
‘ Lockhart, mate, saw, by the weather leech of our foresail, a rock
‘ about four feet under water, distant, to the best of our judgment,
‘ forty or fifty yards. Our ship was running E. by S., under a
‘ reefed foresail, at the rate of six knots per hour. The wind was
‘ N.N.W., with a heavy swell from the N.W. All hands were
i on deck, and saw it plainly. Next morning, we made the land
‘ between Inishterhol and Tory Island, at about eight o’clock;
‘ and at noon the Mouth of Derry Loch bore S.W. by S. ten
* leagues, Isla at the same time being E. by S. six leagues. From
‘ these bearings, I find the rock lies in latitude 65° 18' N., and
‘ longitude, from the meridian' of London, 11° 14'W. At the
‘ time we saw the said rock it was an hour’s ebb.’
Secondly.—ln Weir’s History of Greenock, amongst the occur-
rences of the year, we read— ‘ September 4th, 1766. —The acdounts
< we had formerly from Captain Aitldns are confirmed by Captain
1 Dunlop of the Bogle, who arrived this day from Virginia, and
c gives the following account: —
c On the 29th ult., about four P.M., we fell in with a small
‘ rock, bearing north one quarter of a mile distant. We were
‘ then sixty leagues west of Tilling Head, on the north-west coast
‘of Ireland. Its top was rugged, and about the length of the
‘ ship’s keel, and appeared seven or eight feet above water. By
e 2


‘ an observation that day at noon we made its latitude exactly-55°.
‘ The wind was blowing a brisk gale at W.N.W., and the vessel
‘ going at the rate of seven knots. When we lost sight of the
‘ rock, which was in twenty minutes, it bore N.W. by W. about
c two miles and a half,’
Thirdly.— ‘ The ship Nestor of Greenock, returning from New
‘ York in 1793, being in latitude 55“ 19' N., and longitude; per
‘ account, 9° 53' W. of London, the officers, passengers, and ship’s
‘ company who were then on deck, perceived a rock about four
' feet below the surface of the water, and not five fathoms from
‘ the weather beam of the ship. It was in the form of a horse
‘ shoe, with one side longer than the other. The mate instantly
‘ threw an empty barrel overboard. The yawl was got out as
‘ soon as possible, and the mate, four of the crew, and two
‘ passengers, went in the boat, and were absent nearly two hours
‘ i« search of the rock; but owing to the ship’s drift, and a dark
‘ cloud which then obscured the atmosphere, they could neither
' find rock nor barrel. The Rev. Mr. Stewart was then a pas-
‘ senger in the Nestor, and saw the rock plainly, with the tangle
‘ growing on it.’
Fourthly. l —ln the Greenock Advertiser was given an extract
from a letter of Mr. Hugh Faulkuor, master of the ship Mary of
London, stating that, on his passage from Seville to Bergen in
Norway, he perceived close by him the appearance of a rock to
leeward, and, from light winds, had some difficulty in weathering
it. When past it, he hoisted out his boat, put some hands into
her, with a deep-sea lead and line ; and it being then calm,
sounded all round it. At the distance of four fathoms from it, he
had from thirty-five to forty feet, and at thirty fathoms’ distance, no
bottom, with a hundred and fifty fathoms. It was of a pyramidal
form, nowise rugged, but perfectly smooth as far as could be
seen below water, and not exceeding four or five feet round at the
top, then appearing like a boat three or four feet above water. He
had at the same time a good observation close by the said rock,
and proved it to be in latitude 55° 15' N., and longitude 11° 40'
W. From the landfall made (being the north of Lewis) exactly
corresponding with his reckoning, he lias no doubt but his longi-
tude given is correct. Mr. Faulknor adds —‘ In 1772 I sailed
‘ with Captain Hugh Moody, and heard him sa}', that in 1770 or
‘ 71, in the brig Nancy of Greenock, he fell in with Aitkins’
‘ Rock, and went with a boat and sounded it. At the distance of
' a boat’s length, had from thirty to forty fathoms; that it was
‘ small above, and rather below the level of the sea, as near as he
‘ could judge from the water washing over it.’
Fifthly.—An extract from the log-book of the True Briton, James
Reid, master, informs us, 1 that on Wednesday, 27th September,


At&W Ar the JiWwfc&iaf Mbtn*u& 'sflondon SfptViSji.
