

THE BIGGEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
®K ®iaifs.
1 Bvc vwjP> qV jTm i 4
Port Hedjaiul -S& &ST *■ C* j*f
pTSwMTIs
fiIHCULATION
Carnarvon (!gSj~Y} I J~*r
tp l N I ft
rWE STERN io /-J,
flßl Mgt{{oofU<i U)
a j
Bunburv J| ALJ
Capt Lcrawin
Espcranc*
Carnegie’s advice “After a life-long experience 1 find that advertising in the morning papers is simply throwing so
TO BUSINESS MEN. mall y million dollars over Niagara. Most people are too busy to read the Advertisements in the
tnornin a papers ;in fact it takes them all their time to read the briefest wires ... To my mind the best newspapers for
obtaining good results are the Sunday Papers, When a busy man gets hold of a Sunday Paper he has plenty op leisure to
read it through from start to finish, —Advertisements and all. And he invariably does it."






THE BIGGEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
tL\)e SmiiUtD tEkme*. .
a life-long experience 1 find ilia I advertising in the morning papers is simply throwing so
to business men. maU y niillion dollars over Niagara. Most people are 100 busy to read the Advertisements in the
morning papers ; in fact it takes them all their time to read the briefest wires ... To my mind the best newspapers for
obtaining good results are the Sunday Papers. When a busy man gets hold of a Sunday Paper he has plenty of leisure to
read it through from start to finish, —Advertisements and all. And he invariably does it.”


THE BIGGEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED BN THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
advice “After a life-long experience 1 find that advertising in th
s men. man y m iiii on dollars over Niagara. Most people are too
■rs ; in fact it takes them all their time to read the briefest wires .
writing papers is simply throwing so
sy to read the Advertisements in the
morning papers, in fact it takes them all their time to read the briefest wires ... To my mind the best newspapers for
obtaining good results are the Sunday Papers. When a busy man gets hold of a Sunday Paper he has plenty of leisure to
read it through from start to finish,-Advertisements and all. And he invariably does it.”




"BULLY HAYES”
Collected by A. T. Saunders, “Sim*
rimes,” Perth, Western
Australia.
(From “Adventure,” New York, Feb-
ruary, 1916, pages 217 and 218 )
t was from Captain E. F. Allen, of
the Ellece Islands, and gives some in-
teresting tacts concerning our old
inend Bully Hayes, who in his time
vvas famous—or notorious—throughout
tie South Seas. Also it corroborates
in all essential details the story of the
death of Hayes as worked out by us
or the Camp-Fire when wc were run-
ning down that mystery of the Pac}-
During August last year, while tra-
velling , n the American steamer Ven-
turer from Pago-Pago to Sydney. f
saw a copy of your magazine in which
appeared an article relating to Cap-
p' n .„ Ha '™ death. I have Been in the
I acific since kebruary. 1882, and have
niet members of Captain Hayes’ fam-
Un ,n - v >l rg t trip :r was shipmate
with a man who had sailed with Hayes
shortly before his death, and at vari-
ous times have come across many
who have either sailed, traded
v an, and been taken down by Haves
or they took him down. On a receht
v isit t,, the Gilbert Islands I met two
old traders who were at Jaluit in the
A.aishall Islands when Hayes was
bided, and from notes kept by them f
g.ean the following, which bears out
IJSB2• * ear cl iToin my shipmates in
Haves vvas at Jaluit in the schooner
yacht Lotus in March, 1877. A man
known as Dutch Peter, who shipped at
teamoa as cock and deck-hand, ran
away and went among the natives.
Hayes-paid Kabua, the chief of Jaluit,
a box of tobacco to capture Peter and
return him to the ship. Kabua hand-
ed I bter over - to Hayes in front of
Cupelies store. Peter said to Hayes:
captain. I cannot get on With you.
you had-better let me go. If you take
me to sea, and continue to abuse me
l will do you some injury.” Hayes
replied that h e v would and could look-
after himself, and. despite the protest
tw several bystanders, Peter was taken
forcibly on board.
The Lotus sailed on March 6 for Po-
uope, and returned to Jaluit on Marchi
in charge of the mate. An inquiry
was held at Jaluit by Captains Henry
and Oliver, American citizens, one of*
v\ bom was master of the schooner
Maggie Johnston, which trrrivea nt
Jaluit at the end of March, at which
the following tacts were elicited;
Peter, the cook, was at the tiller.,
Hayes was lying in his bunk with a
tell-tale compass overhead. Noticing-
that the vessel was steering wildly, he
put his head up through the com-
panion-way and remonstrated withi
Peter, who replied that he was not a
sailor, and if Hayes could do better'
himself he had better eorne and do so.i
Hayes said something about shooting,
and turned round to go down the'
stairs again, evidently with the inten-
tion of getting a gun. Peter drew the;
irori crutch, used for supporting the-
main boom, across the deck with his;
foot, and, seizing it, struck Hayes oft
the back of the head with it, causingr
instant death.
The care of the schooner was
«ver to Messrs. Capelle and Co., pend-
ing advice from interested parties in-
San Francisco. The Maggie Johnston
sailed for San Francisco on May 15.
1877.
Brom an old tile of the Samoa
’limes” I learn that Hayes left Sa-
moa in the “Lotus” on October 9, 1876.
That was his last visit to Samoa. Both
of my informants are perfectly clear
about the above, and most of it is
taken from a diary. So 1 do not think
there is the slightest doubt about ilo-
dates, etc., being correct.
One tale of Hayes that I never saw
in print was told me many years ago
by an old trader in Fiji known as
Harry the Jew.
In the 70’s Hayes bought Harry’s co-
coanut-oii and paid him, as vvas the
custom, partly: in goods and the bal-
ance in Chile dollars. While the goods
were being packed up, Harry put his
bag of dollars on the table, and with
Hayes and others drank a considerable
quantity of gin. When he went to
count the dollars next day he found
they had been replaced by iron wash-
ers.
On Harry’s next visit he was smiling
as usual, and was very sorry that
someone on the ship had done such a
dirty trick, but," of course, it was not
his fault. Harry, who had a. much
larger quantity of oil than usual, again
sold it to Hayes, but took care to avoid
the gin, and got his dollars and trade
safely on shore. The traders were all
coopers, and made their own casks,
and on this occasion Harry had fitted
a large bamboo from the back of the
cask to the bung-hole. The bamboo
was tilled with oil and the balance of
the cask with salt water, so he got
more-than his own back. When Hayes:
next returned, he was just as happy as
over, and admitted changing the dol-
lars. also m/>do Uurr.y “ picscui, ui a.
watch which the old chap (70 when I
saw him) was very proud of showing.
There are many other old Island tales
that 1 have heard, or experiences gone
through, that I may send you if they
are of any interest.
[The account of Hayes’ death is as",
published many times, and is included
in my publications. In some account*
the “boom crutch” is “a boat’s tiller •
made of iron.” The boom crutch..
would be a large and heavy article.
The statement- that the Lotus left}
►Samoa on October 9, 1876, is wrong;
that is the date the. Lotus left Sari
Francisco fur Samoa. The Lotus was
at Samoa on January 1, 1877, and
sailed next day. As I write (May,
1916) a Mr. Flinders is a tobacconist
in Hay-street, Perth. For many years
he was in the North-West of West
Australia, and met a Mr. M’Lean, who
kept a hotel in Derby, W.A. This Mr.
M’Lean was a son of Captain M Lean,
of the ship Bandoleer, who was drown-
ed in Port Adelaide about 18(6. Mr.
M’Lean was in Fjji about 1884, and
when there he married, about 1884.
Leonora Hayes, one of Hayes girl
twins, the divorced wife of Dr. Ber-
nard Funk, of Samoa, to whom she
had a son. This is eonflrjned Py Cor-
poral Kingston, of the Highgate till
(Perth) police, who way ill Mji at the
time of the marriage, and leXt in lBbb. ■
T understand the marriage was the re- (
suit of, or followed on, a lawsuit m
Fiji/ M’Lean being defendant, and that
Ivt’Lean and his wife soon parted*. J»
: I


i fr/ib
9M.1
. "BULLY HAYES’"
Collected by A. T. Saunders, “Sun-
day Times,” Perth, Western
Australia.
March 24. 1916.
Mr. A. T. Saunders, Hill-street,
North Adelaide.
Dear Sir, —I thank you for your
letter and the two numbers of the 1
“Wide World,” the story in which os-
very interesting. Unfortunately, I
Avas unable -to give . Mr, Trood your-
compliments, because-the very day I
, received your letter Mr. Troddhits
been brought to the Government Hos-
pital, and yesterday afternoon his -
funeral took place at Fugalei. I
shall * send you a report of his
death and funeral by the next mail.
Again one of the old stock has gone.
Enclosed I forward to you “Black Tom,
Relic of Bully Hayes,” and “Death of
an Old Trader.” The two latter were
not more available, and therefore I
have made a copy of each. I shall hope
they will satisfy you. Meanwhite
you will have received mj 7 registered
lettex', together with the stamps, and
I will try to get some more. Has the
Post Office of Australia not issued
some war stamps, like New Zealand
and Fiji? I have heard that “Crooked
Neck” is A 7 ery ill, and also going to
sfettle his account with Heaven. Do
you not knoAv Avhere a photo of Bully
Hayes is obtainable? As Mr. West-
brook said, he looked like the man
shown on the coA 7 er of Louis Becke’s
“Bully Hayes, Buccaneer.” 1 remem-
ber, once, just after my arrival here a
gentleman showed me a photo of Bully
Hayes, but I have forgotten who the
man Avas, and despite thorough ques-
tioning and search I cannot make out
the r name. Perhaps Mrs. Bentley,
Uevuka, might have a photo. 1 shall
ask her, and see Avhat she will answer.
I have not yet received answer from
Wellington. Hoping to hear soon from
you, I remain, yours sincerely, H.
NEFFGEN, Government Interpreter.
FollOAving is the story of Black Tom
mentioned in the foregoing:
BLACK TOM (TOMASI ULIULI),
(By G'B.L.W.)
Of the many laAvless characters avlio
formerly resided in Samoa Black Tom
Avas one of the AA'orst. Many were the
tricks he played upon the residents,
both whites and natWes. In the early
days, years before the advent of the
steamers, the harbor of Apia used to
be full of sailing vessels, both traders
and Avhaleships, AA r ho used to make
Apia a regular port of call.
Tom, Avho was a good cook, kept a
sailors’ boarding house at Matautu,
where the German Firm’s coal shed
now stands, to Avhich was attached a
drinking saloon and a small store and
bakery. In those days fresh meat
was not so plentiful as it is at present,
but, in spite of the scarcity of fresh
. meat, Tom Avas never at a loss how to
feed his boarders. He kept a few
poultry, half a dozen rabbits, and a
few pigs. Strange to say, Tom’s poul-
try, pigs, and rabbits never decreased:
the rabbits always remained half a
dozen, the pigs were on the increase,
although Tom Avas feeding his board-
ers far better than Charley the Rus-
sian, Avho kept a more pretentious
house, and catered for captains and
officers, and not common sailors. Char-
ley was quite satisfied if lie could give
his boarders fresh meat twice a week,
whereas Tom was able to give bis
boarders fresh meat every day. He
was noted for his rabbit stews, rabbit
pies, and mutton and pork chops,,
which were considered delicious, until
the cats and dogs became so scarce
that there was a possibility of Apia
being OA 7 errun with rats, which, no
doubt, Tom would ha ve economised in
the same way if his boarders had not
left in a body and taken up their quar-
ters Avith Bill Henry, another darkey,
Avho also catered for sailors. Tom’s
boarders Avere always delighted when
they heard the pig squeal, generally in
the evening, as they Avere certain of
pork chops for breakfast. However,
all they really had of the pig was the
squeal. Although the chops were deli-
cious, and up with a very rich
gravy, the only one Avho was really
suspicious AA’as Elisha Hamilton, the
pilot, AA 7 ho had lost his tine retriever
dog, Avhich he had just obtained from
a Sydney trader. Tom regulated his
bill of fare and fresh meat days, but
for all that he neA 7 er regained his for-
mer patronage.
Tom, Avho could neither read not
write, managed to keep a kind of day
book and ledger written in hierogly-
phics, an invention of his own, Avhich
resembled a slice out of a plum pud-
ding Avith Avhich the toys of a Noah’s
Ark had been mixed Avith the ingredi-
ents. For instance, if he sold a pair
of pants on credit, he would draw a
pair of trousers and then a figurehead
Of his customer. If the purchaser had
one eye, he would draw a kind of full
moon, and put in three dots in place
of four to represent the facial organs,
or, for instance, a customer might be
graced by a very long and prominent
nose, bald head, a crooked leg, or any
other peculiarity; these would always
be grossly exaggerated in Tom’s pe-
culiar graphic style, together with a
drawing of the article purchased. The
price of the goods Avas always describ-
ed by strokes and crosses. As Tom
bad no idea of drawing, his book pre-
sented a very peculiar appearance.
He was deported from Samoa about
1875, for a robbery committed at Ruge’s
store, and left in Mrs. Mary M’Far-
land’s ketch Mary Williams for the
Marshall Islands; Captain Westpha-
lian (Tarpaulin). Louis Becke AA 7 as
mate; Bill Hicks and two others were
the crcAA- 7 . Tom landed in Jaluit, and
was engaged by Mr. Capella as cook.
In 1876 he settled down in Arnho, in
the Marshall Islands, as a trader, and
would have done Avell if it had not
been for his rascality. It Avas on Arn-
ho that the writer first met him, and
lived with him for eight months, the
most adventurous eight month’s of his
life. The story of Tom’s early days
are from his OAvn iips as giA 7 cn to the
writer.
THE HISTORY OF BLACK TOM.
Thomas Tilden, or Black Tom. as he
was usually called, Avas a full-blooded
negro, and he had been born, a sla\ 7 e
in the Southern State of DelaAA are. His
master, Mr. Tilden, from Avhom Tom
took his name, Avas a gentleman of
means, Avell respected, and held the
proud position of Governor of the
State.
Tom, as soon as old enough, Avas ap-
pointed boy in Availing and coachman
to two young ladies, Avho were of a gay-
disposition and very fond of practical
jokes. Many Avere the tricks they played
upon him, but he, being a slave, dared
not retaliate. HoAvevor, they treated
him Kindly, and many Avere the gifts
and presents he rocei\ 7 ed from them,
besides tips from their sweethearts
and friends.
When Tom Avas 17 years of age his
master apprenticed him to an iron-
moulder. Being a spoilt slave, he was
indolent and lazy, and would not work.
The moulder, finding he was useless
and unreliable, avoulU not have him at
any price, returned him to his master,
who, according to the custom of the
slave states, ordered him a severe
flogging. All the slaves Avere assem-
bled together to witness the punish -
merit, (font Avas then stripped and
tied up to a triangle, and Avas flogged
jxj public, as an example to other in-
although a slave this
was the first time he had suffered such


B.H,
. ~ - T - ...
an indignity. The young man, whd
was very strong and powerful, never
as much as winced while the cruel lash
was being laid on by the overseer, who
delighted in administering punishment
to the slaves. Tom cursed the over-
seer, and swore vengeance, which he
was able to execute a few days after.
The flogging overseer was found in-
sensible and almost dead, at the back
of an old cotton shed; his body was
one mass of bruises, and was almost
unrecognisable. It was easy to be seen
that he had received a very severe
chastisement with his own instrument
of torture, as that weapon was lying
broken in two parts a few feet away
To add insult to injury, he had strip-
ped the clothes off the overseer and
smeared him with grease and soot, so
that he was as black as Tom himself.
Of course the hue and cry was im-
mediately raised, and Tom was hotly
pursued, but he, having got a good
start, managed, after a good many
adventures and hairbreadth escapes, to
reach one of the Eastern States.
For some time he worked with some
fishermen, who treated him well, and
for the first time in his life he was
paid for his services. He managed to
accumulate quite a few dollars during
the 12 months he remained with them.
He next shipped on board a whaleship
sailing out of Boston, and made a trip
to the Arctic Ocean, where he nearly
got frozen to death. His next voyage
was to the tropics, where, after cruis-
ing for some time around the Gilbert,
Ellice, and Tongan Islands, Tom found
himself in Samoa, where, like many a
good sailor before him, he was attrac-
ted by the beauty and! insinuating
ways of the dusky Samoan maidens,
who are noted for their beauty above
all other islanders.
The night before the ship sailed Tom
passed his few belongings into a native
canoe, and was pulled ashore. The
captain of his ship was very wrath
when he found out that his cook and
steward had deserted. This was in
the ’fifties. Black Tom, on account of
his fine proportions, was looked upon
by the natives as a chief. He married
the Taupou of Manono, a lady of rank,,
which gave him considerable import-
ance among the natives. He com-
menced a life of rascality, and was
looked upon as the smartest thief on
the beach. It was very hard to get
him convicted when caught, as be
could always bring natives to bear
false witness on his behalf. Some of
the tricks he played on others were
very amusing, and are worth relating.
In 187—- Black Tom, or Tomasi Uli-
uli, as the natives called him was
keeping a sailors’ boarding house. He
might have done well, but having no
education there is no doubt that he
was often cheated in the same way as
he cheated others.
BULLY HAYES AND BLACK TOM.-
Mr. Alvord, who was well acquainted
with both Captain Hayes and Tom,-
used to tell a story of a row he once-
witnessed between the two.
Bully Hayes was a near neighbor of
Black Tom. Hayes himself was gen-
erally away, but his wife remained in
Samoa. She was not a big woman, but
used her tongue pretty freely when-
excited. One morning she missed some
fowls, and strongly suspected her
neighbor of being the thief. On going
to Tom’s house her suspicions were
more than confirmed when she found
that individual stuffing fowl feathers
into a pillow-slip. She rounded on him
in her best style, calling him all the
names she could think of. Torn, of
course, denied all knowledge of the
missing poultry,, and said, “Eberyt’ing
dat is missed on dis beach is always-
blamed to Black Tom. What will you
do when Black Tom is dead ? ,Who will
you blame then?”
"You thieving nigger, there will be
no stealing on this beach when you are
gone where all the black niggers go!”
This was too much for Tom, who
now lost his temper, and retaliated by
using a very ungentlemanly expression
indeed—an expression far from com-
plimentary to the white race. This
made Mrs. Hayes go home even faster
than she came, shaking with indigna-
tion, her parting words being, “Cap-
tain Hayes is expected in a few days.
He 11 let you know who you’ve been
insulting, you ugly black thief!”
Sure enough, that very afternoon
Captain Bully Hayes’s famous brig
Leonora was seen coming round Ma-
tautu Point, and making for the har-
bor. He had just returned from one
of his filibustering expeditions in the
Western Pacific. Not being very suc-
cessful, he was not iii a very good
humor.
Mrs. Hayes that evening told her
husband of her quarrel with Black
Tom. Hayes went jumping mad. “Tfte
damned nigger!’' he ejaculated. “I’ll
teach him to use insulting language to
my wife.” He then hurriedlv seized d
big Marshall island club and‘went over
to interview Tom, who was standing
behind his bar when the infuriated
captain entered.
"Welcome hack to Apia, Captain
Hayes! Glad to see you looking so
well,” said Tom, who was beaming all
over with pleasure, as Hayes and his
crew were generally good customers of
his. He held out his hand as if he
would shake hands with the captain.
“Keep your dirty paws off me, you
old scoundrel! What do you mean by
insulting my wife?” Hayes then con-
tinued to curse and swear for quite ten
minutes without stopping. He was
noted for his profane vocabulary and
choice expressions when aroused.
Black Tom stood smiling, but said
nothing. This certainly did not mend:
matters, hut had quite the opposite ef-
fect. It is most annoying to quarrel
with a man who just smiles at you and
on whom your choicest and best pro-
fanity is lost. It is like throwing
“pearls and precious stones before
swine.”'
Bully Hayes, losing all control over
himself in a paroxysm of rage, raised
his club. Crash went a row of bottles;
smash went another lot, and so on.
All Tom did was to smile and rub
his hands together as it Captain Hayes
was doing this for his sole amusement.
From the appearance of the shelves
Tom had a good stock of liquor in his
bar; rows of bottles, labelled rum,,
brandy, whisky, gin, wine, and in fact
everything that a thirsty sailor might
call for; but of Hamburg gin comfriotiv
ly called “blue ruin,” being the most lb
request, he always kept a large stock
on hand, the balance being mostly
dummies.
When Hayes had wreaked his ven-
geance on the bottles, he smashed the
clock, then, looking round, he saw the
deca-nters and glasses, which he clear-
ed off the counter with one sweep of
his club; again looking round, and this
time upwards, he espied Tom’s newly-
imported chandelier, lit up with four
hanging lamps, of which he was very
proud. It had only been landed and de-
livered by the big German firm of
John Cesar Godeffroy and Co. a. few
days previously, and cost him 60 Chili
dollars. He again raised his weapon;
Crash went the lamps, which came
tumbling down, smashed to atoms, orP
the floor, leaving the place in utter
darkness. Tom’s voice not being-
heard, and Bully Hayes now feeling-
much better left for his home, ate a
very hearty supper, went to bed, had
a nightmare, and dreamt that the old
nigger was sitting oil his chest, grin-
ning, and trying to suffocate him. He
was trying to free himself, made one
tremendous effort, and suddenly woke
to find Mrs: Hayes lying bruised on the
floor, and the mosquito net torn to rib-
bons.
The next day Captain Hayes, through
the Consul’s office, got a nice little bill
from Black Tom. All the items were
there —so much for stock, clock,
glasses, decanters, lamps, and loss of
business. It was all there.
“What! Do you think lam going to
pay that bill? Not a cent does the old
scoundrel get,out of me!”
“But/’ said the Consul, “you admit
destroying the property'?”
“Ycs> I did; under great provocation,
with, that ugly, nigger grinning at iner’


B u <3
fJTIU
“No matter. You must pay, and the
sooner you pay the less it will be.
Tom’s business is at a standstill.”
Hayes said he “would see Tom in
Tartarus first.”
Hayes then went to consul! the only
lawyer on the beach, a lanky, hatchet-
faced American, who had doubtless
seen better days, and who Hayes found
in Bill Henry’s squalid saloon, bracing
the bar as was his custom. This dis-
tinguished ornament of the legal pro-
fession, after swallowing his fee in the
shape of a bottle of lukewarm beer, as-
sured the irritated captain that the
Consul’s order was not to be defied,
and that his brig was liable to deten-
tion unless immediate payment was
made. In the hopes of getting more
favorable advice, Bully again feed,
him with another bottle of Norwegian,
pale ale, which was wasted, as the
only reply he could get out of the law -
yer, who was doing his best to steady
himself, was, “Take my advice—hie—
hie—Capt’n, You see the old nigger*
and try to —hie—hie—come to terms
with him.” Bully Hayes again Hew
into one of his violent tempers, abused
the lawyer, accused him of being in;
league with the Consul and Tom, and,
in a fit of passion, suddenly picked up
the unfortunate exponent of the law,
carried fiim outside, and dung him
down on a stack of empty and broken,
bottles.
A few days later, being ready for sea,
and finding the Consul could not by-
bluffed, he paid the money with as
good a grace as could be expected from
a man of Bully Hayes’s temperament
under the circumstances. Hayes left
the harbor, cursing Black Tom, the
Consul, Samoa, and everybody in the
place.
As to Tom, he reopened in grand-
style. The rows of bright bottles on
the shelves were more numerous than
ever, and were certainly not dummies
this time.
The Hamburg- “blue ruin” had been-
rechristened, and, under the name of
the “Bully” brand,, was ih; greater de-
mand than ever.
Captain Hayes, some time after,
tried to get square with Black Tom,,
but he was again bested by the old
nigger.
RELIC OF BULLY HAYES
The schooner Concord arrived this
rooming (says the semi-weekly “Star,”
Honolulu, of April 21, 1909) after a;
long and tiresome trip of 14 days from
Fanning Island. She would have been
here some time ago, but when but 120
miles from land Captain Piltz’s little
craft was becalmed for five, days* The
Concord,, brought in eight, tons of
guano and 21,000 cocoanuts from Fan-
ning Island. The most interesting part
of the Concord’s cargo, however, is a.
curio brought back by Eben Bow of
this city, who was in Command of the
expedition. This is a brass swivel gun,
which was part of the equipment of
Bully Hayes, the famous pirate of the
South Seas, it is blown open at the
breech, evidently by a charge which
was too heavy for the metal. It was.
used on the schooner with which
Hayes performed so many feats of al-
most incredible character, and which
have been written of by many au-
thors. In addition to tHis, Eben Low
brought several old swords,
al.so part of Hayes’ equipment.
In speaking of this trip Mr. Low
said: “We had very heavy weather go-
ing down. We landed first at Palmyra
Island, where we found everything in
fine condition, the. trees growing well
and all O.K. From there we went to
Fanning, where we expected to pick up
guano and cocoanuts, but these were
not ready for us. On this account we
took a cruise to Christmas Island,
where the wreck is in bad shape, as
described by the captain of the British
cruiser. The shore is strewn with .at
least a million feet of lumber, but the
bulwarks of the Aeon alone could be
seen. It was ..so rough that we could
not get near the Aeon in our gasoline
schooner. We.stayed there a couple of
days, the only sign of life being a nan-
ny goat and a black eat, which had
evidently been left ..from the wrecked
steamer. The camp where the pas-
sengers lived is still there. After this
we returned to Fanning Island, where
we picked up our cargo and were very'
nicely treated by. the cable company
people. The Bully Hayes curios which
I secured there are of a great deal of
interest, I believe. Coming back we
made a long trip on account of the
calm we struck.just off Hawaii.
(Copy made from the:“'Samoanische
Zeitung,” June, 19.09.).,
H. Neffgen, Apia, 1916.
DEATH OF AN OLD TRADES. ,
APIA, December 27, 1911.
The Samoan Shipping and Trading
Co.’s steamer Dawn returned from a.
trip to the Ellice and Tokelau Islands
on . Saturday, the 24th ..inst., ..with Him
•news that Alfred Restieaux, one of the
oldest traders in the South Seas, and a
long time resident of Nukufetau, in the
Ellice Group, had passd in his checks
and joined the great majority. He died
in November. Alfred Restieaux was •
born at Sommers Town, London. His
grandfather was a French grandee,
who had to clear out of France during
the. French Revolution. He settled in
England, where he married a lady far
beneath him in social standing. When
Alfred was 12 years of age he was ap-
prenticed to the master and- owner of
a.- brig, a relation of his mother.
While serving on board he was subjec-
ted to all kinds of tyranny and ill-
usage- from the captain, who abused'
and thrashed him on every occasion.
So much so that the crew, who took
pity on the young lad, mutinied and
nearly killed the brutal captain. While
still a lad he emigrated to Australia,
landing in Adelaide. He joined com-
pany with a man who advised him to
go up country with him, where plenty
of work could he found, and where lie,
also a lad, would receive men’s wages.
The few pounds that Restieaux land-
ed with was to be shared in common.
They started for the North with
their swags on their back. Restieaux
soon found out that his companion was
nothing more than a “sundowner,” one
of those fellows always looking for
work and praying not to find any. ,
After tramping some 70 miles they ar-i.'-
r ivied, at; a- .large sheep station, where
Restieaux signed on. as a hutkeeper for r
32/ per month. His companion disap- -
peared, together with the few pounds
he had landed in the colony with. A few
months later he gave up hut-keeping,
and made for Kapunda, a mining town,
where he was engaged by a Mr. Whit-
aker, a publican, who ran a peddling-
business as well. It was while he was
out with his pack on one of these
peddling expeditions that he was rush-
ed by the blacks, and would have been
speared to death if it had not been for -
a company of three bushrangers, who
came to his rescue. One of the blacks .
was shot dead. The others managed
to get away, taking a wounded com-
panion with them. The bushrangers ..
decamped, taking Restieaux as their
unwilling, but not ungrateful, guest.
He was placed on a spare horse, and
rode with them at a very fast pace for
some 20 miles, where two of their
company joined them. After another
long; ride they arrived at their hiding
place. The hue and cry was out after
them, tlie whole country being patrol -
led by mounted police, as they were
suspected of having waylaid and rob-
bed a mounted gold escort some few
weeks previously. Restieaux was so -
pleased with his new companions, who,
he said were not a bad lot of fellows :
in spite of their profession, that he
felt as if he would like to join them.
Two- of them were undoubtedly old
lags, and thought nothing of shooting
on the least provocation.
One of the bushf-angers was a gen-
tleman by birth and breeding, an I
showed it upon every occasion. ’ Rr s-
tieaux remained with them some
weeks, when he .was allowed' to depart,


8.H.4
they having made up their minds, to
proceed to another colony. One of
them was afterwards hanged at Mel-
bourne Gaol; another he saw three
years later, mortally wounded, brought
into Ballarat for identification After
wandering about the Australian gold-
helds, attending every new rush, he
got some money together, and left for
South America, where he remained for
two years, serving in the battery at
Bern during one of the revolutions
i'rom thence he went to San Francisco
and joined a party of teamsters going
across the plains to Salt Lake City
(this was some years before the cross-
continent railway was built)-—a verv
long journey indeed, full of adventure,
as the Indians were always out on
the warpath, looking for scalps. Woe
betide any stragglers from the main
party, as they were always sure to be
found dead and scalpless. On one oc-
casion the team of which he had
charge lost more than half of its num-
ber in a brush with the Indians, he
himself being wounded. He lived at
Salt Lake for some time, and spoke
very well of the Mormons, who used
to call him brother. He never let on
that he was a Gentile if he could help
it. He knew Brigham Young and some
other of the apostles intimately, and
looked upon them as a very nice people
indeed. In those days polygamy was
in full swing. The man he stayed
with was a tanner and a native of
London who had four wives. They all
appeared to get on in unity together.
After knocking around Nevada City
and (he silver country he joined a ves-
sel at San Francisco, bound for Hono-
lulu. He left Honolulu under engage-
ment to a firm that was trading in
the South Seas, and was landed to
trade on the island of Milli, in the
Marshall group, where he remained
some nine months, when the firm he
was doing business with sold out to
a firm at Shanghai. Captain Ben
-Peese (nearly as notorious as Bully
Hayes) was their representative.
Restieaux was transferred from Milli
to Ponape in the Carolines, and would
have done well if the firm had not
failed. Captain Bully Hayes arrived
at Ponape with letters of administra-
tion (forged or otherwise) and orders
to wind the business up. Hestieaux
was taken on board of the brig Leo-
nora together with a worthless pro-
missory note that the captain, had
given him for wages due. A few days
afterwards Captain Hayes landed him
on M'Askills Island- with the excuse
that he was going to Samoa to see his
wife, and promised to call for him
upon his return and take him on to
China. All he left him was a small
box of tobacco arid a bag of very
weevlly rice. Hayes w 7 as away for 18
months. When lie returned he up-
braided Restieaux for not buying more
cocoanut oil from the natives, and
also for having bought a few neces-
saries from a passing whaleboat.
Restieaux found himself again a pas-
senger on board Bully Hayes’ famous
brig bound for Samoa, as Captain
Hayes said it was no good going to
China, where he hoped to get a pass-
age in a vessel sailing for Honolulu.
The crew 7 of the brig consisted of Cap-
tain Hayes, Eldrige of Ponape, who
Was mate; Johnny Kummerfield, sec-
ond mate; Kai Sau, otherwise Ah Ho,
well known to all Apia residents, cook
and steward; Frank Benson, inter-
preter; Bill Hicks (grandfather of the
present Willie Hicks), boatswain;
Aleck Strickland, Johnny Cole,, and
some Manila men. Traders on board
were William Lowdon (Billy the stew -
ard), Jim Garstang, Harry Mallono,
the three Jack Smiths, viz., Scanda-
lous Jack, Whistling Jack, and Lying
Jack. Mr. Alvord, of Apia, was also
a passenger. Most of the traders had
their waves and concubines with them.
There was nothing to eat on board ex-
cept bad rice, coeoanuts, or any other
native provisions the captain could get.
hold of. Captain Hayes, although
bound for Samoa, had neither trade
nor cargo on board, and, being home-
ward bound, he started at once to get
some cargo and provisions from the
natives ■ free of expense. He seized a
couple of native chiefs belonging to
the island on some very frivolous,
charge, and told the islanders that he
would not let the chiefs go until they
filled his vessel with coeoanuts. This
they did. He then let one of the chiefs
go, the other he took with him to
Strong’s Island, where he had all
hands making copra. He then re-
turned to M’Askill’s Island and let
the other chief go after the native's
had again given him a lot of coeoa-
nuts and provisions for his voyage.
After this he cruised about some time
looking for Providence Island, a place
not then marked on the charts, and
Which Captain. Ben Peese had discov-
ered some two years ago. He entered
the lagoon, w r here lie found a very fine
harbor surrounded by a number of
Islands. The islands were loaded with
cocoanut trees, nuts being strewn all
over the ground and rotting. No tra-
ders had ever done business with the
natives, who did not understand the
commercial value of any of their pro-
ducts. The first thing that was done
was a man hunt. All the islanders,
men or women, w 7 ere caught and
brought on board the ship. They were
then divided among the passengers
and crew, who formed themselves into
shore parties, each gang wmrking a
different island; everybody w'orking
except Captain Hayes and his friend
Mr. Alvord, who remained on board
the brig. Nearly 50 tons of copra were
made in six weeks. Hayes then sent
out fishing parties to collect together
a sea stock. In addition to the fish
caught and dried, some hundreds of
robber crabs were taken aboard and
let loose among the copra. During
his return trip to Samoa he called at
several of the Line Islands and man-
aged to get rid of Benson, Billy Low-
den, and the three Jacks, to each of
whom he gave promissory notes, pay-
able three months after date. Res-
tieaux used to say that every sin ex-
cept murder was done on that ship,
and if the native had died whom
Hayes had struck with a belaying pin
and broken his jaw, then murder would
have been added to the list. In eom :
ing through the Ellice Group he called
at the island where C. Howard, of
Rotuma, had a trader. He made the
trader drunk, showed him a forged
letter from Howard, in which he was
told to hand his copra over to Captain
Hayes to carry to Samoa as, freight.
There was a Catholic teacher on Fu-
nafuti, who did not get on well with
the king. Captain Hayes very gener-
ously offered him and his family a free
passage to Samoa. The native was
very grateful, and brought a lot of
taro and other native provisions on
board.
On Vaitupu the L.M.S. native teach-
er’s wife was sick. Hayes told her she
would surely die if she stayed on
the “island; he also offered her and
her husband a passage to Samoa. And
it was quite a large item that the
Catholic and London Mission had to
pay for the few days’ passages of their
teachers’ families for the saloon ac-
commodation. and first-class food pro-
vided.
Restieaiix Left the Leonora at Apia;
he never got his p.n. cashed. He
afterwards saw 7 the manager of John
Cesar Godefroy and Co., and was en-
gaged by that firm to trade in the
Ellice Group. He waa married to a
native of Nukufetau and left ,a large
family. For the last five years oT his
life he was blind, -and died at the ripe
age of 79. This obituary on the first
of the old school of traders was writ-
ten by one who knew him well arid
waa well able to appreciate his good
qualities—G.E.L.Vl, ■ '
; , (C'jopy from tho "Samoanische Zei-
tungv’ Jan., 1912.5 r H. Neffgen,.)




THE BIGGEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE,
ffljr Suntag fthttis.
- a^p^^F-y tyu _ SL^:?
yys c t<F ¥- r<tyytcjyflp; y ,
-w *-o -&L.
Carnegie’s advice ''■After a life-long experiem^fl^find inai advertising ijfJ^^tmnndghaJ^rsi/simply throwing so
to business men. many million dollars over mo in t
morning papers ; in fact it takes them all their tinfejn read thjydaxjefes4~*»ij*)6^ ■ rh . Cf. Ifnij^UJjiJld^^
obtaining good, results are the Sunday Papers. When a Imdymhn gets hold mmylZ'iper IlpQ'iasitffWty of lyiswr
read it through from start to finish,—Advertisements and all. And he /nvWnbdtt&'dfoi it J


' MATADOR CIGARS NEVER VARf.
ALD. * TUESDAY
EVENING,
JANUARY 9. 1906.
AGENTS IN THE EAST
MR SINCLAIR'S APPOINTMENT.
PREMIER’S JUSTIFICATION.
Surprise was expressed by State mem-
bers about town to-day at the announce-
ment that Mr J. M. Sinclair had been
appointed a commercial agent to repre-
sent Victoria in the East in addition to
Mr R. B. Levien, who was appointed
only a few days ago- The general re-
mark was that the extra appointment
would require a lot of justification-
OPPOSITION LEADER’S CRITICISM.
“I would not,” said Mr Prendergast,
Opposition Leader, “see much objection
to Mr Sinclair, if he only had been ap-
pointed. Before Mr Levien was selected
we were told that only one commercial
agent was required. Mr Levien was se-
lected, and now we get the intimation
that two are wanted, and Mr Sinclair is
picked. This second appointment seems
to indicate that the Cabinet was not sure
that it had chosen the right man in the
first place.”
PREMIER’S JUSTIFICATION.
“Is the appointment justifiable?” said
the Premier, repeating a question put to
him. “Yes, it has been represented
to the Government that if we
appointed several agents instead of two,
that they could all do good work in the
East, and bring us trade. Mr Sinclair’s
qualifications? He bad experience in
London as the State’s commercial agent-
I inquired into the manner in which he
performed his duties in London. I found
that he was recalled when his term was
up for economical reasons. Economy
was then the order of the day.
“Of course, as everybody knows, he
had some friction with Mr Taverner,
when the present Agent-General was
Minister of Agriculture, and there was
an inquiry by Mr Justice A’Beckett. The
Cabinet referred the question of a se-
cond appointment to a committee of
three Ministers. There were some ob-
jections to Mr Sinclair, as it
was thought that * he did not
treat Mr Taverner fairly, but there were
faults on both sides. The committee of
the Cabinet thought that it would be
justified in availing itself of Mr Sin-
clair’s services for three years. Because
he did not get on well with Mr Taverner-
that wias no reason why he should not
be appointed.
“There has been no clique behind the
Government urging it to act as is-sug-
gested by a morning paper. We ex-
amined Mr Sinclair as to his qualifica-
tions, and were satisfied. Mr Langdon
(Honorary Minister) says he is a good
man, and so do others who know him,
and are qualified to judge. It was at
first intended to send one of the two
selected agents to South Africa, but it
was thought better after further con-
sideration, that they should both go to
the East and work together.
“There will be a local advisory board,
the constitution of which we have not
yet determined, which will be kept in
communication with the two agents.”
The two agents, Messrs Levien and
Sinclair, had an interview this after-
noon with Mr Murray, Acting Minister
of Agriculture, with regard to their
spheres of duty in Japan and the East.
AUSTRALIAN TRADE.
HALF-YEAR’S ADJUSTMENTS.
VICTORIA GOING AHEAD.
The table of Inter-State trade adjust-
ments for December, compiled by the
Customs department, was forwarded to
the Federal Treasury to-day. With the
December returns to hand, the Treasury
officials have been able to make some
interesting comparisons.
A RESPONSIBLE OCCUPATION. 5
BEAUTIES OF OUR COASTS.
(By RANDOLPH BEDFORD!)
During December, 1904, New South
Wales was debited with LB9Ol, repre-
senting duties collected on imported
goods subsequently exported to other
Stales. Last month the amount was
(All Rights Reserved.
wales was ciemtea witn lswi, repre- Australia-the country of great I
sen ting duties collected on imported j things, the greatest mines of gold s
goods subsequently exported to other | tin> and silver i ead _ has pro bably the n
States. Last month the amount was greatest coastline of any country in a
L 12.586, showing a substantial increase the world; and aloug ifcs eastern t
in the distribution of goods. In Victoria slope has the greatest continuous t
goods on which L 24,338 nad been paid length of pilotage in all the seas a
were sent to other States in December, For the thirteen hundred miles of v
1904. Last month the total was L 29,287. coral> raffle , mu d-slioal, and intricacy I
Thus Victoria still maintains her posl- of and island that spur the a
tion as chief distributing State of the j coast from Brisbane to Capo York
Commonwealth. Bach of the remaining j th , e pilots G f Torres take the ships of
States imported from other States more I the overseas—B.l. horse-boat, Japa- t
than they exported to them. They were j neSO mailj Hongkong mail—ships of I
accordingly credited with amounts as j a n fl ags and cargoes. s
follow : —Queensland December, 1904, j They are all picked men; men who C
L 13.739; December, 1905, L 19,313. South j have 'to know the 1800 miles of t
Australia: December, 1904, L 2040; De- j coast, and more especially the sea t
cember, 1905, L 1842. West Australia; , between Cooktown and Cape York,
December, 1904, L 8497; December, 1905, jas a clerk knows the day-book and a
L 10,909. Tasmania: December, 1904, ; the ledger. The strictest science has c
L 8963; December, 1905, L 9809. to be their daily mentor; in even 1
The adjustments for the first six I" nore dangerous waters, but of I
months of the financial year 1905-6, com- j smaller extent, the sense of responsi-
pared with those for the corresponding | bility is easily relaxed; here the
period of 1904-5, are set out below. The continuous watchfulness for danger is
minus sign means that duties to the so prolonged that it becomes a
amounts stated have been debited to the habit. And there must be no chances
States named, the goods on which such taken —a bad stranding means the
duties were charged having been ox- breaking of a pilot,
ported to other States The plus sign REWARDS OF DARING,
indicates that payments have been made The Torres Straits man is counted
to the States named in respect to goods the more successful the shorter his
imported by them from other States:— | t of detentions of ships by an-
_ choring at night; so the temptation
New South Wales.. .. —£59,462 .. —£64,155 ° , , ,
Victoria -£150,220 .. -£183,213 i to steam on during darkness is
Queensland." 1! L’ +£B2,’boo .” +£lO5J5l strong, although in places proceed-
South Australia .. .. +£12,966 .. +£19,717 j ing in the darkness is full of peril. In
West Australia .. .. +£61,344 .. +£58,334 ; these circumstances the braver, cooler
Tasmania .. .. ~ .. +£52,872 .. +£63,566 j m an may shave jeopardy and escape,
It will be observed that during the pasi | while the timid blunders into trouble,
six months Victoria must have increased | There have been men who ran in the
her trade with other States by a very | intricacies of the reefs a twenty-mile
large amount, as she was debited with ; course with a three-quarters of a
over L 33,000 more ip duties. | mile margin; but, generally speaking,
“Lighter on the stawbid bow, faw-
ther! ’ ’
“Ay! Ay! Awlbert!’’
“Lighter on the stawbid bow, law-
ther!’’
“Ay! Ay! Awlbert!’’
Lighter dead ahead, fawther!
“Which looks the cheapest ’un
Awlbert?”
There can be none of this crude-
ness for the sea pilot, and especially
the pilots of the Straits. Catnapping
in the chart-room for five days and
nights, or longer if the weather be
thick; setting twenty-minute and
half-hour courses, and snatching a
few winks in between, so that he
sleeping by the time ho reaches the
land; his brain responding to the
memory of the idiosyncracies of this
shoal and the especial cussedness of
that current; with such commonplace
facts as the two-knot tides which
cross tne course from east to west
from Broadsound to outside Whitsun-
day Pass, stereotyped and ready for
reference always.
RULES AND REGULATIONS.
At present the pilot is governed by
the Marine Board of Queensland, al-
though sometimes he joins his ship
for pilotage at Melbourne, and the
constitutions of the Marine Boards
of the States excepting that of
New South Wales are, according to
all cap thins, cumbersome and un-
just. In South Australia the owners
and the crews are represented on the
boards, but the captains are repre-
sented by Lloyd’s agent, which
means that they are not represented
at all, as it is the nature and inte-
rest of a Lloyd’s agent to slate
everybody concerned in a disaster he
may have to pay for.
On the Marine Boards the assessors
[ act as a jury without the power of
1 saying how far a captain or pilot is
I guilty, or of fixing the punishment;
I and the system of appointing, as in
I Queensland, laymen—merchants and
I others —to find out in a week’s in-
I quir v what a captain or pilot had to
decide on in thirty seconds is foolish
in the extreme, seeing that they must
be ignorant of the technical condi-
tions governing any particular case.
When the Federal Government takes
over the navigation administration
of Australia it will probably appoint
in each State two assessors—one for
sail and one for steam —the assessors
of any one State to be available for
jise in another. This would be the
right move.
The incidence of the arrival and de-
parture of ships for pilotage gravely
affects the earnings of the Torres
pilots, and this circumstance is the
more regrettable because as a body
of men they would be very difficult
to replace. If the service is properly
manned for efficiency, it is over-
manned for salary results, and abso-
lutely complete manning Avquid re-
duce the earnings to vanishing point.
With fixed Government salaries, and
the Government collecting the pilot-
age, a slightly increased rate would
give just treatment to the pilots
without loss to the Government.
AN ENCHANTED SEA.
The loveliness of scene and climate
on the North Coast, especially in the
winter season, makes me wonder why
the Australian is content to know so
little of his own country. From
Broadsound to Cape York the days
and nights, the sea and sky, the
hazy land and the millpond motion
that bears you past it all are days
and nights of enchantment. The sea
is full of old romance of the history
of Australian discovery, of which
the average Australian knows little,
and for which he cares less. Men
whose names in the song of explora-
tion are as trumpets sailed these
shores, climbed the long sandy dunes
to the wooded hills looking seaward
for a passage in the Barrier that
coral reef of wondrous length; and
persistency.
Even the names hint at the rom-
ance of the stupendous work of dis-
covery so lightly and cheerfully nn-
dertaked little British gunboats
completing the hydrography of Flin-
ders the captain of a coughing little
coasting steamer supplementing Cap-
tain Cook.
The Cornishman has been here. You
PILOTS OF THE REEF.
TRACKS OF NORTHERN SEAS, t
the margins are more than big.
enough for all contingencies. There
is a story told of the hap py-go-1 ucki-
ness of a Thames pilot, who has his
own tugbqat, and is very proud
thereof, trusting only his son as
lookout on the fo’c’slo head. Albert,
the son, saw three lighters, and gave
due notice of them.
DESCRIPTIVE PROSE.
see his mark in St. Bees Island and
Penrith Head; these are the memo-
ries of old wrecks and long-forgobten
death agonies studding the coast
from Bell Cay to Quetta Rock.
FINEST PIECE IN THE LANGUAGE.
The Man-andr-Wife Rocks, and the . . .
Ihild, east of Great Keppell Island; ‘ -A- Worshipper of Dickens gives the
Herald’s Prong and Thirsty Sound; following description of a railway jour-
nal f-tide Rock and Guardfish Clus- ney, from Charles Dickens’ Dombey and
ter. each has its story of effort, g on; ,
achievement, and failure. And where . . TATTTSXn ?v ■
. i. A RAILWAY JOURNEY,
known stones fail the eye supplies ... . . , , „ -
~ , *( ; f Away, with a shriek, and a roar, and
the romance lor every point of this ... „ .. , , . _
m , , rn , ' . , . a rattle, from the town, burrowing
wonderful coast. The lion shape ot „ , . . °
Pentecost, and Jesuit Point just among the dwellings of men and making
showing south-west of it; the saw- the streets hum, dashing out into the
mill on the Old west of Whitsunday meadows for a moment mining n
and direct on the starboard beam; through the damp earth, booming on in.
the isles of Pel or us, Orpheus, Fan- darkness and heavy air, bursting out
tome and Curacoa; Cairns crouching again into the sunny day so bright ami
and sweating a foot above high w ide. Away, with a shriek and a roar
water- the Endeavor River and Cape and a rattle through the fields, through
Bedford, broad and high and lofty the woods, through the corn, through the
and aggressive, as it ought to be. hay, through the chalk, through ( the
STORY OF A BRAVE WOMAN. mould; through the clay, through the
There is Lizard Island, sacred to rock, among objects close at hand and
the memory of Lizzie Watson, the almost in the grasp, ever flying from the
brave woman who, threatened by the traveller, and a deceitful distance evel
savages who had speared two of her moving slowly with them; like as in the
Chinese servants, put to sea with her track of the remorseless monster. Death?
baby and a wounded Chinaman in Through the hollow, on the height, by the
the half of a square iron water-tank, heath, by the orchard, by the park, bs
She rowed for hours across the hot the garden, over the canal, across the
and quiet sea to an island near Co- river, where the sheep are feeding, where
quette, and was found seven days the mill is going, where the barge is
later dead of thirst, her dead baby floating-,' where the dead «re lying, wberrf
beside her, and the Cmuaman, dead [he factory is smoking, where the stream
also, some distance away. With a '} s running, where the village clusters!,
rare fortitude, or a rare egotism, where the great cathedral rises, where
she kept her diary almost until the the bleak moor lies, and the wild breeze
end, relating the drying up of her ruffles or smooths it at its inconstant will,
milk, the effort to keep life in her Away with a shriek, and a roar, and a
baby by giving it rags to suck, the rattle, a,n|i no trace to leave behind but
wailing of the infant ere it died. And dus j- and vapor, like as in the track of the
due east is Cormorant Pass a break remorseless monster, Death!
in the reef toward the Coral Sea. Breasting the wind and light, the.
From here northward there are grower and sunshine, away, and still
three names always present, and one aW ay, it rolls, and roars fierce and rapid,
name on a passage in the reef abeam and certain, and great works and
of Cape Direction. Through thus pas- iinassPvre bridges crossing up above, fall
sage sailed Bligh s boat in 1 on pkg a beam of shadow an inch broad
his long voyage north, after the mu- upQn the eye> and then
are lost. Away,
tiny of the oun y. e name o an< j stip aW ay. Onward and onward.
Flinders is everyw ere on sioa an Fver glimpses of cottage-homes, of
an( I s an ’. an ‘ • ? houses, mansions, rich ©states, of hus-
that grea , armg, . brandry and handicraft, of people, of old
nate, imaginative man, James Cook and paths that look deSer ted.
of Dumbarton, turns a new leaf every insigniflcam M they are, left
° OT CAPTAIN COOK’S WORK behind. And so they do. And what else
Peter Botte lifts his 3300 ft., like * there but such glimpses in the track
bis sponsor mountain of Mauritius. the indomitable monster, Death?
over Cape Tribulation. Cook named Away with a shriek and a rear and a
it so after his ship had been first in rattle, plunging down into the earth
trouble on Endeavor Reef, and then again, and working on in such a storm of
imprisoned by gales, strong easier- energy and perseverance, that amidst
lies for five weeks in Weary Bay. A the darkness and whirlwind the motion
view of the reef from a high promon- seems reversed, and to tend furiously
tory seemed to give him a way of backward until a ray of light upon Las
escape through the reef, and when he wet wall shows its surface flying past
found the hope nipped in the bud he like a fierce stream. Away once more
called the promontory Cape Flattery, into the day, and through the day, with
It is to be hoped that we wlio as a a shrill yell of exultation, roaring,
new nation have been charged with rattling, tearing on, spuming everything
irreverence will never permit the with its dark breath, sometimes pausing
early nomenclature to be changed 1 , for a minute where a crowd of faces are.
The" Americans have changed the old that in a minute more are not. Some-*
and historical name of Cape Disap- times lapping water greedily, and before
pointment, at the entrance to the the spout at which it drinks has ceased
Colombia Riper, to Cape Hancock; to drip upon the ground, shrieking, roar-
and on the West coast of Tasmania, ing, rattling through the purple distance.
Mount Heemskirk, so named by Abel Louder and louder yet, it shleks and
Tasman, is now locally known as cries as it comes tearing on resistless to
Mount Agnew, because a doctor of the goal: and now its way, still like the
that name once lost £20,000 in a W ay of Death, is strewn with ashes
tin mine there. - _ ■■ thickly. Everything around is blackened.
, pirn- CLarfs pools of water, muddy
was little sor <> mai c , ' lanes, arm miserable habitations far be-
the time the Endeavor was neaped on i OW- There are jii+iv »-■ and fallen
the reef in 1770 his position of Cape houses close at band, and thro as.-
Direction remained until 1898, when battered roofs and broken windows
it was altered to its correct longi- wretched rooms are seen, where want and. l
tude, Cook’s reading being three- fever hide themselves in many wretched
quarters of a mile out. Restoration shapes, while smoke and crowded gabies.
Island was only two and a-half miles and distorted chimneys and deformity oi
out of the Greenwich meridian by brick and mortar penning up deformity
Cook’s calculation, and he almost mind and body choke the murky dis<
correctly fixed his own position tance, Mr Domhey looks out of his care
through the reefs. It was great sure r iage window. It is never in his thoughts
veying from first to last. that the monster who has brought hint
Edging in and out among the coral t here has let the light of day in on these
and! the cays go the pilots o e things: not made or caused them. It wa4
reef; past Diamond Reign Reef and £he joumey>s attlng endj and might have
Throne Shoal; altering the course been the end of everything, it was Bs-
- as the narrow straits
open out their paths. Further north m—»
a well-known man of Cape York an-
chored his Ingger one day in a|
horseshoe reef and found the anchor'
of a Spanish galleon. He sent a
diver down and recovered £6OOO
worth of Spanish silver dollars, oxi-
dised and black, but with their value
still good.
A VIVID MEMORY.
The last day and night of the reef
pilotage stay in the memory with all
the vividness of the happenings of
childhood, although at time of writ-
ing they are but three days old. In
the day the rice white sand on main-
land, beach, and bay; the reef closing-
in and six white gulls resting flat-
footed on the jumper stay, so steady
the ship that the web-footed birds
stood up easily. The last night, the
moonlight falling on the bridge in
bands outside the awnings, a beam of
light in the binnacle, and another
lighting the engine-room telegraph,
which happily we shall not use; the
thin apathetic Bengali at the wheel;
the pilot and the officer of the watch
gazing ahead; the shadows that were
reefs sitting in the warm water; the
bold capes and hazy mountains of
the mainland. A squealing horse
kicking in his stall; the sound of
shovels on the flat plates in the
stokehole, and the cries of the Las-
car firemen coming shrilly up the
ventilators; the ship driving her
steady ten knots through the wave-
less sea.
And next morning the road-wide
narrow-gut of Albany Pass, the
house at Somerset with its foreign
cocoa palms making a running fight
with the indigenous ti-tree, and col-
lections of termite nests, which look
like cemeteries of children’s tomb-
stones. Here is the white man’s last
outpost on the continent, and we dip
our flag to him as is our duty. An-
other half-hour and Cape York—the
last of our continent, but not the
last of our territory. Past Prince of
Wales Island, Horn, Tuesday, Wed-
nesday, and Thursday Islands to
where the pilot boat waits, and there
the ship stops a moment, drops the
pilot, goes astern, and swings out-
ward again—for the tides run like
millraces and skippers are nervous of
waiting—due west to open sea.
TO-MORROW’S AUCTIONS.
Messrs Beauchamp Brothers, at 319 Collins
street, at 10 o’clock ; Household furnishings.
Mr Jno. Gabon, at corner Albert street and
Sompson’s road, at 3 o’clock : Building site.
oJo owr ajAcnm/ra
wc tlwrrv jfXAmo
(jh ovd Ucu R® BUR


"MATADOR CIGARS SEVER VARY.
THE HERALD. TUESDAY EVENING.
JANUARY
TO-DAY’S SPORTING NEWS.
WHAT IS GOING ON.
LIST OF FIXTURES.
DIARY FOR THIS WEEK.
THE TURF.
TO-MORROW.—Ascot races, Majorca races,
Morrisons and Blaine entries, Richmond en-
THURSDAY.—Kirkstall races, Condah races.
FRIDAY.—Avenel entries, Richmond races.
SATURDAY.—GeeIong races, Warrnambool
handicaps, Rosehill (N.S.W.) races.
CRICKET.
TO-MORROW.—New South Wales v. South
Australia, at Sydney.
THURSDAY. —New South Wales v. South
Australia, at Sydney.
SATURDAY.—Pennant matches.
SWIMMING.
SATURDAY.—Melbourne Club’s races, Heg-
arty’s baths, St. Kilda.
ANSWER TO CORRESPONDENT^
CARDS.
Colling wood asks;—A, B, C, and D are play-
ing a four-handed ga&e of euchre. A deals
five cards to each, and turns up the eight of
spades, C holds the Jacks of Hearts, Dia-
monds and Spades, and before anyone has
passed he bets B he has got a bower. When
asked to show a bower could be do so ? Who
wins?—C wins.
THE TURF.
TO-DAY’S NEWS AND NOTES.
The Majorca races take place to-mor-
tow.
Entries close to-morrow for the
Elaine and Morrisons races.
Owners and trainers of ponies are re-
minded that entries close to-morrow
evening for the Richmond races to be
held on Friday. *
On three occasions at the Ascot races
yesterday, competitors exhibiting No. 1
on their saddle-cloths, managed to catch
Judge Row's eye first.
Messrs M. C. Hocking and W. A.
Blackler, who attended the Perth Cup
meeting, returned to Adelaide by the
Kanawno last Sunday eevning.
Mr C. L. Macdonald is at present
using Elderslie as a hack at Caulfield.
The Wallace gelding will, in all prob-
ability, be put into work again shortly.
Phaedra,. Avalon, Goldfinch, and an-
other horse, who were engaged at the
recent Perth Cup meeting, arrived at
Port Adelaide on Sunday by the steamer
Kyarra. Phaedra was in charge of S-
Brock. < .
♦ • •
At the races,
. —-“Saturday, the Cup was won by
Katoomba, by Niagara, from Bonnette,
a horse well-known in this State. Toora
won the Flying Handicap at the same
meeting, and Bullion the Welter Han-
dicap.
M. Whelan, ..rider of York, who has
been on a visit to Western Australia,
returned to Adelaide on Sunday evening
by the steamer Kyarra. He rode Ex-
ploit when that horse was beaten by
Listnaghar in the Club Hurdle Race at
the Perth Cup meeting.
* • • •
The Ascot Race Club will hold an-
-morrow. A first-class
Hr J- Parker’s b. g. Royalist, 6y .. .. 5
1 ?■ Cambridge’s bg I Want It, a 6
iHr J. Packer's br m Silvertoes, 6y .. 6
I 7, Woodham s ch m Neva, a .. 31
iH r J- Devereaus’s b g Harold B, a.. 16
|HrG. W. Varley’s ch g Lord Harold, a 18
I f.r G. Harrison’s b g Bonny Boy, 4y .. 25
| Allendale Stud Farm’s b g Chance, a 25
13.1 HANDICAP.
Of 20 sovs. Four Furlongs.
1 XT' n ( T ° Start a t 4.15).
I Conway s br m Granny, 13.1, a 9
! ,T r Helven’s b m Lady Jewel,. 13.1, 5y 9 S
I Mr b , m Gnideilene, 13.1, 4y 9 6
Mr B °nny Belle, 13.1 3y 8 4
Mr A. Marshall’s br m Hannah Bond
lo .1, a., 'so
Mr J. Connor’s r g Goldfinder.’lil. ‘a 713
Mr R. Mercer s br m Miss General, l?.l
.... 7 a
Mr T. Patterson’s b m’RubydeVl, 13.i‘ 6y 7 3
JANUARY HANDICAP.
Of 50 -sots. Five Furlongs.
i ~ T _ (To Start at 4.50)
j Br °wn; s br g Vocalist, 14.3, 6v .. 10 5
I : v | r J- Kogan;a ch m Swallow, 14.3 6y o ?
!H p f Terry sbr g Sandringham, a .' g 3
I Hr J. Bailhe’s br g Paddy a I V
I Hr J. Raleigh’s br g Spot, 4y " c n
s b 8 Safn Deposit, 5y .. 7 13
Mr G. Simpson’s br g Main Royal, 4 y 7 7
Mr F. Garland’s b g Haut BVldt, 6y . 70
Mr A. Reed’s br g P.K., 14.2, 6y ” 6 7
TRAINS for Newmarket from Flinders street
Station. Faros:—First Return, U/ 2 d; Second,
3d.
SPECIAL WAGGONETTES every 3 Minutes
from Bourke street will Convey Visitors Direct
to Racecourse Gates.
SOL. GREEN,
BOWES’ TATTERSALL’S CLUB.
LEVIATHAN OF AUSTRALASIA.
Letters and Telegrams Answered Promptly.
TROTTING.
jumper. The present champion hurdle- M r Wren’s disposal for the promotion of
racer of Tasmania, Touchwood, is high-class trotting, and considers that
also by Light Artillery. He was picked the possibilities of light harness horse
up a rare bargain - for L 25 -by Mr racing are unlimited The assoc i a tion di-
Griffiths, who was acting for his present rects atte ntion to the immense amount
owner. Mr Southerwood. and it is said of money Australiah bree der S have in-
that L2OO was recently refused for vested - n standard bred
trotters, and
Touchwood, , * , these gentlemen are only waiting a fa-
, voraWe opportunity to give any move-
. dissatisfaction has ***** manifested ment in the right direction the { v hearty
itse E in Sydney unregistered racing support and co . operation . Mr Wren
circles Some 200 owners have taken an fu]ly intendg to identify himself with the
important step in the direction of guard- sport> and h to create much public
mg against the possibility of being de- interest , n trotti as h has j / and
prived of their rights. A new racecourse galk)wa racin „ as in p y a
area has been purchased in close prox- b '
imity to the Kensington course, and mr nm ■> „
. .7 , . ~ _ . .... 'I'ML PILOT, The People’s Favorite.—
when completed Will be called Ascot. At X Another Great Victory. Mentone: Chic
the request of these owners, Mr Wren (6 to 4), Speculation (4 to l), English Rose (2
paid a flying visit to Sydney last Satur- !°. lb Asc ? t To ' morro Y ;
, 4. , , f , List ot Starters: Jockeys mounts, etc., ready
day, and returned by yesterdays ex- at 10.30 a.m. Usual depots: Price, 2s. City
press train. While in the mother State Agency: 62 Swanston st. (just below Queen’s
IMr Wren inspected the new site, and Walk). Respectfully yours, “THE PILOT,”
had an interview with the dissatisfied “. ... „ . ,
naa an interview wun uie uissausucu -m .i-itd-d *v i , , , . , x ~
. v . . . . IY/fURRAY backed at Ascot Clarahelle, Bto 1J
owners, who ha Ye taken up shares m the iU Mora, 6to 1; Swallow, 7to 4. OpeW
new racecourse to the value of L2OOO. morning 10.30.
The Melbourne visitor was very favor-
ably impressed with the prospects of the 'VTHWMARKET and Australian Cup visitors
new Ascot, and, in addition to becom- caps. oFinest 0 Finest
ing a big shareholder, Mr Wren may ac- 25 Swanston street, opp. Cathedral.
cede to the request of the Sydney owners
to take an active part in the manage- T F T° u require a Carriage, Drag, Waggon-
monf curdnov venture A ette or Buggy Turnout, we can supply
ment of the Sydney venture you. Cali or ’phone No. 2211. Fiske Bros.’
New Hors© Bazaar, corner Queen and Lons-
dale streets.
MOTOR CYCLES ONLY.—B. WL Brown, 212
Swanston st, agent for “Griffon” Motors,
winner all competitions this season. Minerva
Motor, 2% h.p.. £45.
VICTORIAN PONY & GALLOWAY
RACING CLUBS.
HAMPTON CYCLES, unbreakable, silver,
steel frames. The world’s finest, pro-
duction. Manufacturer; A. G. Hampton, Cycle
and Motor Works, Glen Huntly road, Elstern-
wick.
J. WREN, General Manager.
ASCOT. ASCOT. ASCOT.
TO-MORROW. TO-MORROW.
MONDAY’S ENCORE MEETING,
WEDNESDAY,
Admission
6s GRAND STAND 6s.
2s 6d LADIES’, 2s 6d,
2s LEGBR RESERVE 2s
CDEEN-EYEI MUSTEK.
PROGRAMME:—
£5O HORSE RACE £5O. i A PIEMAN AND HIS WIFE.
£3O TIME HANDICAP TROT £3O. I HUSBAND FINED FOR ASSAULT.
£l4O FULL PROGRAMME £l4O. | .'if I? ' tzro Y Court this morning,
James Norris was charged with unlaw-
fully assaulting his wife.
The Management originally intended to run Prosecutrix stated that about a quar-
tbte mSBi, o. Saturday next, but it.'Star- £ » S£
ence to the earnest representations of a num- Michael street, North Fitsroy, pre-
ber of enthusiastic Geelong gentlemen, with hot ni UP ’ kusband, a
not pie man, T\ho was generally out all
their club’s interests at heart, it has been de- night at his work, suddenly made his
cided to forego the grand possibilities of a made a dash at her.
He chased witness along the street, beat
Saturday afternoon at Ascot. her across the head with his hands, and
Ascot patrons familiar with the recent dragged down. Her head was
slightly marked where he had struck
plucky struggles of the Geclongites, will, the her. Accused had been in a very bad
management feels assured, heartily endorse mood for several days past, and on
. . _ 1 several previous occasions witness had
the Victorian Pony and Galloway Club’s ac- been beaten by him. She was his ac-
tion in this matter. cond wife.
TO-MORROW’S PROGRAMME AND ORDER mSffiSfhe ab ° Ut
midnight he heard a terrible noise when
OF RUNNING. he was standing at the corner of St
|j 14.1 HANDICAP, of 20 sovs. e , on ®’.® roacl and Park street, half a
ft mile distant from Mrs Norris's shop
■ furlongs. When he arrived on the scene he saw
(To start at 2.30) ?? orr ! s ’ who said his a fit. Mrs
IMr W. Smith's b m Mora, 14.0, 6y .. .. io 4 Norris was on a sofa, and told witness
I £ 11 her fc ”'
IMr S. Jones’ br m Mullette, 14.1, a.. 7is the 4 ° nr th time, and that he was jealous
IHr P. Moon’s br m Queen of the West’ of her - Mrs Norris had a swollen eye,
Mr W. Jackson’s b g The Point, 14.0.' 4y. 7 0 “g 1 Defen Dm °5 bl ° o<J CR her |
uc.ee. Defendant then informed witness!
14.3 HANDICAP, of 20 sovs. tnat he had just dragged his wife in]
4 y, Furlongs from the lane, when she must have!
bumped her head against something. I
(To start at 3.5). In answer to the bench Norris soirl
, J f that he had nothing to say, as he dil
JMr R. Moore’s b g Vladivostock, 14.3, 5y s 3 nOL ■ -ptdok to make things worse than!
Mr T. Smith’s br h Portable. 14.3, 5y ....s 0 they were. “If I liked,” he added “M
Mr S. Hopper’s b m Bonnie Maud, 14.3, 4y 7 7 couhl amr ” ’ %
Mr A. Reed’s br g P.K., 14.2, 6y .. .... 5 Loaia sa Y a lot. I
Mr F. Woodbard’B eh m Sultana, 14.2, 5y 7 0 Pne Mayor (Cr Jeffries) remarked!
that if the bench imposed a heavy pen- 1
TIME HANDICAP TROT.
made to suffei* as we las the husband. I
Of a) sovs. One Mile. Sub-Inspector Cahill hoped that this I
(To Start at 3.40) circumstance would not be taken into I
Secs Bhd consideraton when dealing with a man I
vir T h' S - c * ove ™ r - *■■■■■ 2 who was in the habit of beating his wife
| ii -i I A »' I" ««*»« » days' im-
I Hr J v Parker’s br m Silvertoes, 6y .. 6 pnsonment, was imposed.
JUDGE Gf NATAL
SUPREME COURT
¥
fVlr. Justice Finneraore Tells of Re-
markable Cure of Distressing
Eczema by Cuticura—Grew Worse
Under Professional Treatment.
OTHER SUFFERERS
CURED BY CUTICURA
“I suffered a severe attack of ec-
zema on the scalp, face, ears, and
neck, and was for several months
under professional treatment, but be-
came worse. My face was dreadfully
disfigured, and I lost nearly all my
hair. My wife prevailed upon me. to
tty the Cuticura Remedies, which. 1
did with most satisfactory results,, the
disease disappearing and my hail
growing thicker and glossieTthan be-
fore my illness. My wife has pur-
chased Cuticura for other sufferers,
with good results in each case.—’
Robert Isaac Finnemoxe ( J udge of the
Natal Supreme Court), Pietermaritz-
burg, Natal.”
AGORIMG ECZEMA
And Itching, Burning Eruptions,
with Loss of Hair, Cured
by Cuticura,
A lengthy letter was received by Mr
Wren, yesterday from the breeders’ and
Owners’ Trotting Association of Victoria.
The communication opens with a hope
that the popular manager of our pony
and galloway racing clubs will exhibit
an interest in trotting by infusing a little
of his enterprising spirit into this much
neglected class of sport- The letter also
points out the rare opportunities now at
I AWN TENNIS Rackets re-strung, 6s 6d,
A 8s 6d, 10s 6d, 12s 6d. Boxing Gloves, 7s
6d to 21s set. Spiked Running Shoes, 8s 6d,
10s 6d to 21s. Get catalogue. J. K. Smith, 136
Elizabeth street.
QMOKE None but O’BRIEN’S CORNER
ko TOBACCO, 1/3 Block. C/o. Swanston and
L. Collins street, same side as Town Hall.
Depot for L. and Co.’s Pipes.
BURLINGTON STUDIOS, for Artistic Por-
traiture, 394 Bourke street, opposite Cole’s
Book Arcade. ’Phone 3261.
GO to Ogden” for everything, Brunswick.
In fact, soup plates will be supplied for
cricket, and mugs to hold the catches.
GO to WM. LUTTGENS for choice French
Calf, Glace Kid, or Box Calf Boots, 1.6 s
6d; hand sewn, 21s; enamelled kid, 22s 6d.
264 Lygon street, Carlton.
MARITIME NEWS.
TO-DAY’S SHIPPING RECORD.
ARRIVALS AND DEPARTURES.
MOVEMENTS OF VESSELS.
High water at Williamstown. —To-morrow, at
2.1 a.m, and 3.34 p.m.
GENERAL NOTES.
Among this morning’s arrivals were
the steamers Hobart, New Guinea, Moo-
rabool, and Ouraka, from Newcastle.
The P. and O. Co.’s R.M.S. Macedonia,
Which left Melbourne for London on
12th ult., arrived at Suez on last Satur-
day afternoon.
Early this morning the R.M.S. So-
noma arrived at Sydney from San Fran-
cisco. .Her American mails will prob-
ably be delivered in Melbourne to-mor-
row afternoon.
Expected arrivals to-morrow are the
Loongana, from Launceston, the Wille-
had, from China and Japan, and the Syd-
ney from Western Australia. They will
all berth in the river.
Direct from London the Tyser line
steamer, Star of Australia, arrived here
late to-day. She berthed in the Victoria
Dock to discharge the Melbourne portion
of a general cargo. Her voyage occu-
pied 43 days. The Star of Australia goes
on to Sydney and New Zealand.
The Kanowna ivill return to Melbourne
from Western Australia, on Thursday.
She is due at 12 Australian Wharf dur-
ing the morning as the vessel leaves for
Sydney later on in the day. Another
member 0 f the A.U.S.N- Co.’s fleet, the
Wyandra. is expected here from Cook-
town on Thursday.
The Moravian, of the ' Aberdeen line,
arrived in Hobson’s Bay late this after-
noon, from London. Her passage was
commenced on November 29th, and the
vessel made a call at Cape Town, which
port she left direct for Melbourne IS
days ago. The Moravian occupies a
berth in the river at the North Wharf.
Shortly after advertised time this af-
rnoon the P. and O. Co.’s R.M.S.
fresh; weather misty, fine; sea moderate. Bar,,
30.10; ther., G 2.
(The above were thfi conditions prevailing at
9 a.m.) '
VESSELS TO LEAVE.
To-morrow’s projected departures are;—
Grosser Kurfuerst, G.M.S., for Bremen, via
ports, from the Port Melbourne Railway Pier,
at 4 p.m. Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Rom-
paey, agents.
AVakool, s.s,, for London, via Capetown,from
the Port Melbourne Railway Pier, at 1 p.m.
John Sanderson and Co., agents.
Maheno, s.s., for New Zealand, via Hobart,
from 6 Queen’s Wharf, at 4 p.m. Union
Steamship Co. Ltd,, agents.
Buninyong, s.s., for Sydney and Queensland
ports, from 9 Australian Wharf, at noon.
Howard Smith Co. Ltd., agents.
Loongana, s.s., for Launceston, from 4
Queen’s Wharf, at 4 p.m. Union Steamship
Co., and Huddart, Parker and Co., agents.
Wyrallah, s.s., for Gippslaud Lakes, from 5
South Wharf, at 4 p.m. J. B. Eilerker, agent.
Bombala, s.s., for Adelaide, Albany and Pre-
mantle, from 9 Australian Wharf, at 4 p.m.
Howard Smith Co. Ltd., agents.
Manawatu, s.s,, for Westernport, from 5
South Wharf, at 5 p.m. J. B. Eilerker, agent.
CHARGE OF DESERTION.
THE CASE DISMISSED.
At the Carlton Court to-day, before
Messrs Munro and Sutherland, J’s.P.,
Joseph Pickett was charged with hav-
ing deserted his wife, Virginia Pickett.
Mr W. J. Tucker appeared for the
complainant, and Mr Shannon for the
defence.
Complainant, a resident of Church
street, stated that she had been mar-
ried to defendant for four years. He
left her on 9th June last, and since then
had not given her a penny towards her
support. Defendant was a butcher,
earning L 2 5s per week.
To Mr Shannon: Defendant was her
second husband. There were two child-
ren by the first husband. Defendant
had been brought before Mr Panton,
but the case was adjourned. He was ‘
supposed to allow her Ll a week, but
had not given her anything. She met
him in Flinders street on one occasion
and thumped him in the face. He had
throw’ll jugs of milk over her boy. Wit-
ness would not take him back. She did
not tell him to clear our.
Defendant said that after the case had
been adjourned at the City Court it was
dismissed. When Witness went hopae,
complainant said, “You are no use
to me. Get out.” She also said that
her son and daughter were more wel-
come to the home than lie was. Let-
ters had been written to his employers
about him on several occasions', and he
had lost his employment.
The case was dismissed.
WANTED TOBACCO.
FOUND THE LOCK-UP INSTEAD.
The lack of discrimination shown by
Thomas Watson in his quest for a pipe
of tobacco, yesterday . accounted for his
appearance before the City Bench this
morning on a charge of; insulting be-
havior. He admitted the offence.
Constable Judd slated that yesterday
afternoon he noticed the accused stop-
ping gentlemen in Queen street, and ges-
ticulating wildly. Witness warned him
go home, bu


it t \Ksji y 1 j t£\
r> **" 1 - '/' S*/ “ / V/ /
‘•THE GERMAN HOSPITAL.
Jlv. A. T. Saunders, referring ro a re-
cent mention of a '“German Hospital” in
Adelaide's comparatively ear’y days,
writes, in tea* alia;— ‘ ‘Worsnop's, Adelaide.
1880 (on page 58) say.- ;--‘T he Orphans’
Home occupies the large and commodious
buildings erected for the purpose of an
hospital by the German colonists/ This
astonished me, although surely Worsnon
could not be wrong! I decided, however,
to look up this ‘German Hospital/ and
found that it_ was not ‘erected by the
German colonists.' ’Hie first mention I
have of the ‘German Hospital’ is on March
29, 1850, when there was a row between
two Germans over the proposed German
Hospital. On June 21, 1850, it is an-
nounced that Mr. Osmond Gdles had given
town acre No, 433, on the north side of
Carrington street, about 500 ft. from East
terrace, for the ‘German Hospital.’ Mr.
Gilles did not pay for a transfer, and the
I Germans did not do so; therefore the acre
I was only occupied. In the subscription
list this acre, given by Mr. Gilles, is
valued at £5OO. On June 14, 1850, a peti-
tion was presented to the Legislative
Council, and £l,OOO was promptly voted to
the ‘German Hospital’ 'The name was
then altered from the ‘German’ Hospital
to the ‘German and British’ Hospital -
Germany over all! In July, 1850, a list
of subscribers- was published', and £5OO is
put down to come from some unknown
Germans. In July, 1850 a concert was
held .and produced £125. In the same
month tjie German paper says that the
German ‘hausc towns’ may endow the hos-
pital or contribute to it. and about £6OO
a year may be expected from German im-
migrants. By August 12. 1850, €6OO had
been paid in cash as contributions; and on
Saturday,. May 24, 1851, the foundation
stone was laid. Dr. Bayer and Mr. C. E.
W. Eggers were the moving German
spirits. A bazaar was held to provide
funds, and the tables- were in charge of
the following British ladies;--Lady Young,
Mrs. Sturt, Mrs. Torrens, Miss Cooper,
Mrs. Farrell, the Misses Howard, Mrs.
Archer, the Misses Mon-tefioro. Mrs. Bayer,
Mrs. Weston. Mrs. Handed, Mrs. and Alisa
Hector, Mrs. Moorhouse, and Mrs.
Maguire. -There -was not a single German
woman in charge. In September, ISSI,
another concert was held, and produced
over £lOO to the funds. From this very
little is on record. The building was j
erected, and still stands, but is showing its
age. The hospital is mentioned in the
Director for 1855; but it was a failure,
and shut up after the BisiMi c-u i-ibu-
■ unis ceased. The records of the General
Registry and Lands Titles Office show
that in 1856 to 1859 the following persons
were trustees or .something of-the kin dr-*-'
E. C. Bayer, Rev. 11. Ba.ckhnns, Joseph
Stilling, Henry Jickling, W._ V. Hesfard,
d. M. Amsberg, and John Hector. By
IS6I it seemed to have come into posses-
sion of Julia Warren Karr, and others--.n
trust probably. Fre.anson’s man of .Ade-
laide says it was a ‘Female reformatory.’
Ultibateiy a real property title in virtue of
43 years’ possession was granted to Julia
Warren Farr. It had become the Orphan
Home, a Church of England institution,
and finally it was sold on July 1, 1910, to
A. & W. D. Thomas for £1,800.”


V'' \|
NOTES
QUERIES.
—~—o—
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
1. Even the longest letter should not exceed
too words, and all should be written in ink on
cnfy one side of .the paper only. Only a selection
of the matter sent in can be\published.
2. Every communication must) be accompanied
*>y. the writer’s full name and; address for the
Editor’s information. AnynomfUs correspondents
we not permitted to make personal attacks upor
those who sign their names,
3. Excepting in relation .jo Government noti-
Bcations, criticism of advertisements is not al-
lowed in the correspondent columns.
4. Correspondents must State whether they have
•ent their leh»s to other papers also.
5. Only in special circumstances can comments
Bpou communications |h any other paper be pub-
lished in The Register.
s 6. The Editor accepts no responsibility for th»
fcturii oi any manuscript.
|
THE LIQUQR QUESTION.
From Penfold & Uo.: —“Mr. Delehanty
has confused our correspondence with that
of Mr. H. L. Penfold-Hyland, 'as we have
not contributed anything to the press
under the heading of ‘Holiest Employment
for Two.’ That Mr. Penfold.-Hyland’s
letter should cause Mr. Delehanty discom-
fort- we are not surprised. If Mr. Dele-
hanty _ could, only be persuaded to take
part in ‘the peculiar performance’ of
‘Honest Employment for Two,’ the play
should be a success. Mr. Delehanty, with
his ‘sincere enthusiasm,’ would make a
fine draw, and we would indeed be sur-
prised if the management did not nave to
display the card ‘house full’ long before
the rise of the curtain. To ask Mr. Dele-
hanty to accept our version of true tem-
perance is as hopeless as to stand on a
bowling green and , ask the bowls not to
run against the,, bias. If Sir. Delehanty
would only, look at the map be would see
that the south, of Russia is . the only God-
given vineland in the country, and would
not write such absurdity as ‘the insignifi-
cant area of land under grapes in Russia.’
Mr. Delehanty will next be ‘pointing out’
with triumph that vines do not grow on
the north pole.”
From H. L. Penf old-Hy land (Sydney):
—‘“l have no desire to be drawn into
long correspondence with Mr. A. E. Gay
on any other .subject than temperance.
True temperance is not prohibition. Mr.
Gay. ‘lf two or three paid prohibition ad-
vocates in South Australia are destroying
the pernicious drink traffic, they are de-
serving of every compliment;’ You are in-
deed right, Mr. Gay. If these two or
three gentlemen would ruin the ’'.per-
nicious drink traffic’—but, unfortunately,
those ‘two or three’ gentlemen are not
against the ‘pernicious drink,’ It is the
light nourishing beverages' that they desire
to eliminate. To pursue Mr. Gay’s argu-
ment to a logical conclusion, we should
not build houses, because at times law-
breaking burglars break into them. The
‘hogshead in the cellar to which Mr. Gay
refers is for distribution through honestly
conducted licensed house* in a moderate
and temperate manner. To go to the ex-
treme of totally destroying an industry be-
nf nf h is as rfdaison-
i ■. • | / {rm
I I ,
From Mrs. Skipworth Rodcla: —“Break-
ing of tire law has become so common,,
and the clever devices adopted to defy
detection are almost enough to deceive the
elect. When offenders are brought to jus-
tice the fine is sp small that they heed it
not. The violation of the Sabbath caused
by lawbreakers is shameful. Therefore we
as a nation are disinclined to tolerate it
any longer, and have decided to claim re-
dress through prohibition.”
From “W. C. T,> U.”:—“Newfoundland
is now under absolute prohibition law.
Through a referendum the sale, manufac-
ture, importation,| or . gift of intoxicants
is forbidden. This great victory for the tem-
perance cause i« ma>nly due to the fact
that the bulk of tfae present electors have
grown np under local option conditions,
and have been educated in temperance prin-
iciples. These have noy' demanded the
banishment of alcohol as a beverage from
the whole island.”
HISTORICAL INACCURACIES.
From A. T. Saunders:—“lt is a great
pity that a good and accurate detailed his-
tory of the early days of this State does
not exist. To read the Bibliography of
Mr. Gill, printed 80 years ago, makes one
wish that most, if not all, of the books he
mentions on the early days are not in our
Public Library. The Mitchell Library in
Sydney, and perchance the Petherick in
the Parliament House, Melbourne, have
more information regarding early South
Australia than the Adelaide Public Li-
brary. The York Gate Library in the In-
stitute Building might as well be in the
moon so far as the public are concerned; it
is just about as accessible. It is vexing
to read such books as Sutherland’s, which
glorifies the South Australian Company,
and contains inaccuracies. ' On page 117,
for instance, the writer says: —‘Pastor
Kavel, who with his "wife (both over 70
years) had been among the pilgrims.’ As
a matter of fact Pastor Kavel’s father and
mother were among the emigrants, and the
author has mixed them up with their son.
Pastor Kavel was .not 62 when he died on
February 11,1860 —see The Register. Febru-
ary 16, 1880, “pages 2 and 3; also Register
birth notices December 24, 1841:—Anne
Catherine, wife of Rev. A. Kavel, of a son,
stilborn; and death on Saturday, Decem-
ber 25, 1841, Anne Catherine, wife of Rev.
A. Kavel, of Kleimzig. Mrs. Kavel was
English, and he married here apparently.
Again, page 113 of Dutton’s ‘South Aus-
tralia’ relates how, when the Queen’s
Wharf was being first built, the piles were
fraudulently sawn off about 5 ft. instead of
being driven the full depth; and this was
found out by the sawn-off pieces being
afterwards fished up from the water in
front of the wharf, where they had been
thrown. Mr. Sutherland read this, and
ou page 152 says it occurred at the Old
Port; but there never was a wharf there
in the old days. By-the-way, the Go-
vernment of South Australia began early
to let works out privately instead of cal-
ling for tenders. In one ■ of the early
copies of The Register it is _ complained
that Mr. Hack was given the job of mak-
ing the canal, even now to be seen, at the
Old Port, instead of tenders having been
called for it.” .


■fSl'l I"*
I .
'*v.
Apia, 8/7/15.
Mr. A. T. Saunders, “Omagh,” Hill-
street, North Adelaide.
Dear Sir, —To-day the editor of tl)e
Samoa “Times” showed me your book
“Bully Hayes,” etc., which I found very
attractive. I myself have gathered
some relics of the said pirate, and I
should be very glad if you would be so
kind and send me also a copy for my
collection. At time I am unable to
send the money for this booklet, be-
cause I don’t know the price of it. In
one of the next appearing numbers of
the “S.T,” you will And a review about
it.
For your better information I beg to
tell you that the other one of the
0 , / . twins of Bully Hayes was married to
s (/A' ■ Dr. Finck (deceased), of Apia. Dr. F.
• 1 at that time did not know that his wife
was the daughter of this pirate, and
%vhen he heard so, and for other rea-
sons, he made an application for di-
vorce. The latter has been performed,
and the wife went to Sydney (if I am
not mistaken). Dr. Finck had one son
with this wife, whom he sent to Ger-
many for education. But this failed;
the boy ran away, and after a venture-
some, life as a sailor, etc., he came to
Apia some years ago. His father gave
him some hundred shillings, a good
hiding, and sent him away. I met that
fellow in 1913 at Honolulu, where he is
now in gaol because of burglary! Like
grandfather, like grandson!
An old mate of “Bully” Hayes stayed
here as a resident for many years, a
Mr. Netzler, a Swede. “He was not bet-
ter than the other people at that time,”
he said, “only he forgot at any time
to pay his bills, and just are plenty
people running along the beach, they
are worse than 'B.H. was.” An-
other one is also living here
“Crooked- Neck Bill.” He is said
to have be&i hanged as an accom-
plice of B.H. but the rope broke,
and therefore he has been released ac-
cording to the laws. That’s all I know
about this man. Thanking you in an-
ticipation,—l have the honor to be.
yours very sincerely, H. Neffgen, Asst.
Govt. Interpreter, Apia, Samoa.
Apia, Samoa, 23/9/T5.
Dear Mr. Saunders, —Thank you
for the over-sending of the copy of
your “Bully Hayes.” I beg to in-
form you that I have tried to
get some other information about Dr.
Finck and his marriage. Here in the
Courthouse are documents about this
matter, but it is very hard to find
them out from about 4000' big files!
The informations I have gather are the
following:—Dr, F. same to Samoa in
1880, was married to Miss Hayes in
1881 and divorced (as old Netzler says)
in 1882. His wife had un-education,
was very unpolite and offensive in her
behavior, and last, but not least, B.H.’s
daughter.. After having been divorced
she went off to Fiji with her mother
and sister, and from there to Sydney.
She is said to have been a nice-looking,
stout woman. My statements about
the grandson are true. Finck was a
German—a U.S. navy man in Hono-
lulu, and after that I got informa-
tion about his imprisonment; also
Finck, the now Mrs. Dr. Finck, a
Samoan native and honest wife. -P.
could not get a room here for me, and
the stay in the hotels is too expensive;
therefore I asked her for a room. Well,
she had one there, but I could not step
in, because it was sealed by order of
the Government, because the property
of the grandson of B.H. was
in the said room. I saw that
Mrs. Finck did not like a yarn
about that fellow, and so I went away
and did not call in again. I will try
again to find out the exact date of the
a yolx
a review of your book, which I have
written for the German part of the
Samoan “Times.” Another one in
English will be printed in one of the
next issues. Also, I’ll try to forward
to you some old copies of the
“Samoanische Zeitung” concerning
“Bully” Hayes, and one story I wrote
myself. The latter is more story than
truth, but characteristic feature of
his behavior. I could not see old Netz-
ler, because he also is sick; but he is
a funny old man, who wants also no
examination. Perhaps I can fix him up
by a bottle of ’whisky, which he never
refuses.
By time I’ll send you all informations
about B.H. T can obtain.
Mr. K. Trood, British vice-consul, is;
still In Apia, sitting at present next
door of mine. He-is now acting-judge
in the Native Department, and an old
man (born 1833!). Once he told me;
"B.H. was a demoniacal man, but he
was no coward.”
I beg to excuse me, sir, that for the
present I cannot give you more infor-
mations, and I am yours sincerely, H.
Neffgen, V.M.Dr., Govt. Interpreter.
Apia, 22/10/H5.
Mr. A. T. Saunders, Adelaide.
Dear Sir, -Herewith I send you some
further informations about Dr. Finck
(deceased). His son (from the daugh-
ter of 8.H.) was born on the 18/10/’Bl.
His name is Conrad. Fink was mar-
ried to Leonora Hayes in 188 D (end of
November), as far as I am informed.
I could not find out the date of the
divorce. I met also “Crooked Neck”
here in my office, and on my examina-
tion he told me that he w r as five years
in B.H.’s service as mate. “That I
were hanged is a bloody lie.” He also
told me that B.H. had not been so bad,
only his temper caused many troubles.
He was very hot-tempered. Excuse,
please sir, that I am unable to send
you more information, but I am still
sick and could not acquire any dates
ox stories about that man.—l am yours
ihost respectfully, H. Neffgen, Govt, In-
terpreter.


BULLY HAYES • ...
Apia, Samoa,
July 20, 1915.
A. T. Saunders, Esq., c/o “Sunday
Times,’’ Perth, "Wfestern Australia.
Dear Sir,—l have been reading with
great interest the copy of your book
on “Bully” Hayes, lent me by Mr.
Thomas Trood, our British Vice-Con-
sul. Mr. Trood is one of the oldest
living British residents in the South
Seas, and arrived first in Samoa in
1857. I have always been deeply in-
terested in any literature appertaining
to the life and adventures of the buc •
caneer and pirate. I was a resident
of the Marshall Islands about the time
he was killed, and of course knew a
good many of those who l had had
dealings or sailed with him. The Lotus
was afterwards owned by the notorious
Black Torn, who was then keeping a
pub and shanty in Jaluit.
In 18.79 I v/as the only European re-
sident on Pingalap in the Carolines,
,and remained oh that island about 16
months. During my stay on the island
—Sunday, not Toby—the boy that
Hayes bad taken with him in his brig
was my cook boy, and interpreter, and
it was from him that I heard a lot of
the life on board the Leonora. I also
was well acquainted with the Chief
Narabusha and the other chief whom
Hay es detained on board his brig, and
would not let them go, till the natives
-half filled the vessel with cocoanuts
and other native provisions. The little
girl that Hayes treated so badly told
me all about her misfortune. When I
met her in ,1879 she was just budding
into wojjpj,nhood, and 1 should say that
she could not have been more than ten
years old when the offence was com- • .
mittqd. v, ■ ■
j lkyes was at first kind to the girl,
•pretending that he had adopted her.
Upon arriving at Strong’s Island —not
Providence Island. One day he took the
girl for a walk in the bush. When they
returned she was in a very feeble
state, and bleeding very badly. “Bully”
Hayes said that she had stumbled over
a stick and staked herself. This the
girl denied, and said that he not only
forced her but used some sharp instru-
ment besides (probably a penknife) to
assist him in his assault. When I saw
~her she was very good looking and at-
tractive, but for all that none of the
young natives were inclined to marry
her, the reason being (to use a native,
expressions, that Bully Hayes had
spoilt and badly broken the girl. From
this I understood that her organs,- on
account of being forced so* young, were
greatly distorted. There was another
native woman on the. island, who also
had been forced by Up: same indivi-
dual, but she must 1 have been more
mature, as she was then married, and
I thinK the i.iuiiw of a child.
Peter Raddek —I think his name
was—the man who ; murdered Hayes,
was a Hollander, and a most inoffen-
sive man. Some time after the murder
he was living Ponape, and after-
wards for some ears trading, on the
island of Nukora, either for Messrs.
Hernsheim or Capella and Co., of Ja-
luit. I remember the natives of Pin- ,
galap telling me that the woman who
, was on board the Lotus when Hayes
was Isillied went ashore on that island
smoking a clay pipe. So T dp not
think she could have been much chop.
The missionary ship Morning Star
used to call at the island once a year.
This vessel —a snug little brigantine—
was under the command of Captain
Bray, who generally had a visiting
missionary' - on board from their head-
quarters, the Island of Ponape. I re-
member receiving from them some
magazines, and also some copies of
torious . “Bully” Hayes '!iV c ul av ? vc a “
Snow. If you could get extracts from
the magazines of that date I think
you would find them interesting. I
think the headquarters of the mission-
ary society are in Philadelphia, and
the Morning Star used to sail "out of
Honolulu. This conversion is sup-
posed to have taken place about the
time Hayes was a resident on Strong’s
Island, shortly after he was ship-
wrecked.
I was on the Island of Rotuma when
that Island was annexed to Great Bri-
tain by Governor des Yceux of Fiji. In
.1882 I was a trader on the island of
Funafuti, in the Ellice Group. It was
•■■on this island that I met Mr, Alfred
Restiaux, who was then trading for
the big German firm of Samoa and
Hamburg. He was a near neighbor of
mine, and we generally spent our
evenings together. This was quite
natural, as for the greater part of the
five years I was on the island we were
he was on board the brig Leonora
with “Bully” Hayes. The , captain
never treated him . like the rest; l al -
though he was practically a passenger
against his will, and found out after-
wards he had been grossly swindled by
Hayes. During the two voyages he
w - as with him Hayes told him a lot of
his history and adventures, which
Restiaux had every reason to believe
w - as correct. As related by Hayes to
Restiaux, he was born, as stated by
you, in Cleveland, Ohio. His father
was a well-to-do farmer, who, when
his mother died, married one of the
servants. She immediately commenced
to put on airs. This young Hayes
could, not stand. He ran away from
home with only a few dollars in his
pocket. When this was spent he took
a contract to clear a piece of land and
cut firewood. The man who engaged
him gave him as an advance an order
on a storekeeper to buy some clothing
and purchase the necessary tools. Af-
ter he obtained the goods mentioned in
the order he re-soldv'them to another
storekeeper at the other end of the
town, and decamped. Some time after-
wards he obtained employment on one
of the great lake and river boats, and
worked his way up till lie became
mate. It was then that- he . and the
captain started stealing bales of cot-
ton, which they re-marked on board
and sold at other ports. Detectives
were engaged, and Hayes- was caught
red-handed re-marking-some' bales. To
save the caotain, the mate bolted, tak-
ing all the'blame. Hayes afterwards
found himself in New York, and for
some time he was sailing in the pac-
ket ships trading between New York
and Liverpool, etc., etc. It was on board
of these hard liners that he was first
christened “Bully.”
Restiaux died in 1911, a very old
man. and nearly blind. For many years
he was out of employment, living with
his native family on the Island of
Nukufetau in the Ellice Group. For
the last 15 years of his life- I always
took the opportunity, whenever a ves-
sel was bound to that island, generally
the missionary yacht John Williams,
to send him something. The late cap-
tain of the John Williams (Captain W.
H. Steele), who was a firm friend of
mine, who died last January, also did
what he could to assist the old man.
A few years before Restiaux died he,
out of gratitude, handed to Captain
Steele for me a parcel of manuscript,
giving some details of his life and also
of “Bully” Hcyes, Jim Garstang, Louis
Becke, and others that he formerly,
knew. The writing is almost a scrawl,
and badly spelt, being written by a
practically blind man, but for all that
it has the appearance of being true
without exaggeration, and has been
valuable to me in writing “The Story
of Monsieur Durrant” and his adven-
tures with “Bully” Hayes and Ben
Pease. This -story was published by
my permission only in the “Samoan-
ische Zcitung,” so that I could, get a
clean copy. “The King of Lapalap ’
was published in “Cassell’s Magazine
in 1906. I also have quite a series of
sketches which I would offer for pub-
lication, providing I am paid for my
services, and would have the right to
publish in book form later on. For
some years I have been adding a little
to iny income by writing to various


BULLY HAYES TWO /.. /.. /
papers on topical events in Samoa, and
Lave been on the free list of several
papers.
After reading your “Life of ‘Bully’
Hayes” I thought possibly that stories
about the islands would be of interest
to you, and that you would be the
best one to apply to to assist me by
seeing,, that they are properly publish-
ed and edited; also articles of topical
events in Samoa. At present we are
under very strict censorship, and very
little that is written about Samoa is
allowed to be published. I am regis-
tering this letter, and putting on a full
set of the present issue of Samoan
stamps.
CAPTAIN JOSHUA SLOCOM OF
THE YACHT SPRAY.
At the time Captain Slocom visited
Samoa I was a tidewaiter, employed by
the Customs. I was the first to board
his ship when at Apia, after a 62-days’
run from Juan Fernandez. Captain
Slocom did not look his best by a long
way. He had on a dirty red shirt out-
side his pants, his hair was long, and
ins beard certainly wanted trimming.
He certainly .looked a very suspicious
character, especially when I found
that he w r as the only man on board. In
the cabin of his ship he had some large
lumps—several hundred weight—-of
sperm whale fat, which he said he had
picked up in the Magellan Straits. Wie
afterwards became very chummy He
told me that he visited Strong’s Is-
land in a large sailing vessel— -I think
it was the Northern Light—at the
time that “Bully” Hayes was living on
the island after being shipwrecked. He
changed some ship provisions for is-
land fresh provisions, and invited
Hayes and those that were with him
to dinner. Before eating, Hayes in-
sisted upon asking a blessing with a
most solemn face. Hayes’s companions
commenced to, grin. No doubt this is
about the time that he pretended to
the Rev. Snow that he had seen the
error of his ways, and intended leading
a better life in future. Slocom, after
was called to testify as to Hayes’s
character when prisoner at either
Guam or Manila. Slocom mentioned the
incident of. meeting Hayes at dinner on
board the Northern Light at Strong’s
Island, and said that he thought Hayes
was a most religious man. Soon after
a letter arrived from Brother Snow to
Brother Hayes, which did a lot to as-
sist Hayes in getting free.
Expecting to hear from you soon,
and an acknowledgment of the stories
forwarded with this letter —“Monsieur
Durrani,” “Moon or the Devil,” “King
of Lapalap.”—Yours faithfully, G. E. L.
WESSBROOK,


254
"|T[ast"\/[elbourne.
. /t/ ' S < / /^
a ,
W &L**-t/-4y / V*


When married And where. Uame asd sraatne.
Church » /
Married in h to the
of England and Ireland, after r ,byme / //^y'//
/ X/ ✓ XT
This Marriage was solemnized \ '&>*> -''/fa*
between us / V/
\ ~~<SjrXrt * XT t
In the presence
of us ) /
18/)' 'MARRIAGES IN ,'TfiE DISTRICT OF


THE BIGGEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
ffljr ©nit’s.
Carnegie'S Advice ''A fter a life-tong experience 1 pm! that advertising in the morning papers is simply throwing so
to business men. many million dollars over Niagara. Most people are too busy to read the Advertisements in the
morning papers ; in fact it takes them all their time to read the briefest wires ... To my mind the best newspapers for
obtaining good results are the Sunday Papers. When a busy man gets hold of a Sunday Paper he has plenty of leisure to
read it through from start to finish, —Advertisements and all. And he invariably does it


THE BIGGEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
morning papers ; in pact it takes them all their time ' to read the briefest wires. ... To my mjjld the best newspapers for
obtaining good results are the Sunday Papers. When a busy man gets hold
read it through from start to finish, —Advertisements and all. And he invciriaWfalfa^x^^


THE MITCHELL LIBRARY,
3rd February, 191
Sydney,
Dear Sir,
In reply to your letter of 17th ult. , I have much pleasure
in forwarding two typewritten copies of the article on the death of
"Bully Hayes" which appeared in the Samoa Times Saturday, Dec. 1,1877
page 3, Column 3.
I would have replied earlier but the files were at the Reference
Library and were not accessible.
Dor bibliographical purposes I am giving you details of the
newspaper and I am informed on good authority that we have the only
complete copy extant.
THE SAMOA TIMES, NAVIGATOR’S ISLANDS. Vol.l No.l, Sat., 0ct.,6,
1877 - V01.1,N0.212, Sat. Aug. 27,1881. Sise22iinches in height by
in width, 4 vols. Apia, Same a, 1877-1881. [published at l/~a copy.]
[Note. The paper consisted of 4 pages, 6 columns to the page and at
the ena of the last column appears the following:-
Printed and published weekly for the proprietors(Messrs Griffith & Go
by W.E.Agar, at the Samoa Times general printing Office Apia, Samoa.
Mr. W.E.Agar the late editor of the journal died 23rd October 1880 a:
from the 30 th Oct. following till the paper ceased publication on Aug-
-27 th 1881 it was published by Andrew Speirs,
Yours faithfully,
ng-Librarian,
E.A.Petherick Esq..,
Parliamentary Library,Melbourne


r/?MrHE BIGGEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
©[)(? Bunftaj) HUmr®
CARNEGIE’S ADVICE u After a life-long experience I find that advertising
to business men. many million dollars over Niagara. Most people are too busy i\rcad the Advertisements in the
morning papers ; in fact it takes them all their time to read the briefest wires ... To ryy mind the best newspapers for
obtaining good results are the Sunday Papers. When a busy man gets hold of a Sunday Paper he has plenty of leisure to
read it through from start to finish, —Advertisements and all. And he invariably does it."




THE BIGGEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
carnegie’S advice “After a life-long experience I find that advertising in the morning papers is simply throwing so
TO BUSINESS MEN. ma ny million dollars over Niagara. Most people are too busy to read the Advertisements in the
morning papers ; in fact it takes them all their time to read the briefest wires. . . .To my mind the best newspapers for
obtaining good results are the Sunday Papers. When a busy man gets hold of a Sunday Paper he has plenty of leisure to
read it through from start to finish,—Advertisements and all. And he invariably does it."


BULLY HAYES
Letter from H. Neffgen, June 38
1916, Apia, Samoa: —
I have gotten some little information
from Mr. Netzler. the old assistant
pirate of Bully Hayes. He told me
that he was about six months on board
the Kona in 1867 before he came to
Apia. , The first mate was Mr. Hall,
the supercargo Mr. Flockton; the latter
is said to live at Papeete, Tahiti. The
first mate of the Leonora was Mr.
Hussey, already dead; second mate-was
Mr. Hicks, lived here in Apia. His son
is still here as captain of a small trad-
ing vessel, but he does not know any-
thing. The old man Netzler told me
that the wife of Bully Hayes was a
bully Irishwoman, and had always rows
with her husband and the' crew, and
caused always his bad temper. He
himself was not so bad as he has been
told to be. The following report Netzler
told to me:—Once Bully Hayes had
been sent by the London Missionary
Society to the Line Islands to carry ail
the valuables from the there wrecked
missionary ship. Well, he did so, and
the other day Mr. Netzler, then an
A. 8., was fixing the top-mast sail.
Bully Hayes was as usual in white
pyjamas walking on the deck. Mr.
Netzler was in need- of help, sung out,
but nobody come. Then he began
cursing. ‘'The devil is in living being
here on board, you damned buggers.”
Bully Hayes heard that, and pointing
towards the missionary flag—the Bethel
flag—he, carried, he said most quietly
to him: “Charley, look here, as long as
,1 carry this flag- nobody- is-allowed to
swear except myself,” and Charley told
me “he understood swearing.” He did
not see anything about 'abductions, etc.,
,but ; another one here, Mr. F. Ah Sue,
the son of Bully Hayes’s cook, editor
of the Samoa “Times,” told me that his
father often had told him, when he was
a boy, that Bully Hayes was a scoun-
drel, and that he could not keep away
his fingers from the native girls, and
that the statement in your (A. T,
Saunders’s) pamphlet is right con-
cerning this matter. Also he said that
after the i wreckage of the Leonora,
Bully Hayes borrowed from him 300
dollars, and never saw that money
again. Then Ah Sue (or Kai San)
came in the Rosario to Sydney, met
there Mr. Netzler, who was mate
of , a schooner bound to Apia;
,the latter engaged him as cook,
and brought him by this way to
Samoa. He (Ah Sue) died three years
ago and was a well-respected man.
That is what I have to tell you about
Bully Hayes. The old crooked neck
Bill 'is a damned liar, and Mr. Netzler
told me not to waste ahy time and
whisky with him. The Samoa “Times”
is now in the hands of Mr. Ah Sue.
The German part has been abolished,
and now I have to write my stories in
English. (I have not altered Mr.
Neff gen’s phraseology.)
H. H. Romilly, in the “Western
Pacific,’’ 1886, tells the story given by
Mr. Neff gen of Hayes rebuking the
sailor for swearing on the missionary
ship and saying he could do all the
swearing required.
In the Queensland “Government
Gazette,” August 28, 1875, pages 1674
and 1676. the Chinese cook of the
Leonora is called Ah Ho and Ah So,
but there is no doubt the man who died
in Aria was the cook and steward of
the Leonora when she was wrecked.


THE BIGGEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
Carnegie’S advice “After a life-long experience I find that advertising in the morning papers is simply throwing so
to business men. many million dollars over Niagara. Most people are 100 busy to read the Advertisements in the
morning papers ;in fact it takes them all their time to read the briefest wires ... To my mind the best newspapers for
obtaining good results are the Sunday Papers. When a busy man gets hold, of a Sunday Paper he has plenty of leisure to
read it through from start to finish, —Advertisements and all. And he invariably does it.”


I | /
<U (K / jb
CO' Y.
25tn January, 1916,
From H, Heffgen,
To Mr. A, T, Saunders,
Govt, Interpreter,
NORTH ADELAIDE.
Apia, SAMOA,
Dear Sir,
Thanking for your letter dated the 20.12.15
I hereby try to give the best inforotations
I can do;
I asked Mr, Trood yesterday if I know anything about Lt, Sterndale,
and he told me that the latter had been employed by th e ' Ocv e r mnen t -
(tracing ?) but whether he had written some articles or not
he cannot say. As far as he remembers he made once a small trip
with Hayes, that’s all.
Concerning J. G» Alvord: Troon says he was a good
friend of him and therefore he knew him very well* He came
in 1853 to Sydney, was an actor at that time; went from there to
Frisco, and came from there in 54 or 55 to Samoa where he was
employed as clerk by Mr. McFarland. He became a somewhat well off
man, and went back in the seventhiest to Frisco; when he came back
from there he was on board the "Rona" when she sunk, and came
together with Bully Hayes again to Samoa. After that he was an
auctioneer and died in the time of the war between Taniasese and
aaafa, he is buried here at He was a good friend
of Hayes, but wrote nothing of him, as far as Trood knows.
He Dr. Funk? I made no mistake in my statement about
Dr. Funk; Trood told me also that he married about 1880; his
wife was at that time a young girl. The following is the extract


,1 , - 2 -
in
from the German Consul Governor f s register made in 1898 as substitute
for the burnt one.
No. 1. Bernhard Ernest Funk,
. • eon: Conrad,
The mother, Leonore, former Hayes, has been
born the 18.10.8 a
divorced from Dr. Punk.
Trood says that this divorce did happen in 1882 or 83.
After that Mrs. Funk was marriea to a ships owner, but Trood has
forgotten the name and residence of the latter.
We talked of your book and Trood told me that he knew
Kayes very well, but
no friend of him, but neighbour only;
he said: "He was a bad man, an evil-doer, but not as bad as the
world makes him; that he had committed murder - I dont believe;
his hot temper was his fete," And re Becks, I said: "Becke was
bloody liarl" "Well, but he was a novelist like yourself, and
you know what that means, (II) Hayes treated him very well and
was very fond of him and Becke made this good through his stories."
I have not yet met" Crooked Neck", the weather is to
bad, and therefore no communication with Savaii.
. „ I was very glad to see from your letter that the
ht
novelist McArthur H, Browne is living at Aitutaki, because in the
last "Wild World" I read a story written by him: "Princess H
I like such stories and shall try to get more of them; the
romance of the £outh-
is not yet gone, may people say and think
what they like I Will you do me a favour and try to supply me with
the story mentioned by your letter (Wild World 1914-16) and that
story of old Mr. Browne you met at Perth? Of course I pay all
expenses and shall be very thankful. It is very hard here to get


5 l;-l|
' X
- 3 -
good books. By the December mail I ordered books from Sydney,
Melbourne and Auckland, sent the money together with the order, but
up to-day nothing came. So I like to have the works of L. Becke;
I tried to get them from Wellington, but failed; ditto from
Auckland. The same I like to have Stevensons: "The Wrecker,"
Will you kindly procure them for me?
and "A footnote to history.
Cash immediately after receipt. Together with this letter I
forward to you some Hrs . of the "Samoa Times” containing articles
written by me. If you like to copy them, please, I have no
objections; but copyright only for you.
Hoping that this letter will satisfy your wishes
someway.
I remain with my thanks and greetings,
Yours sincerely,
(Signed)
H. NEPPQEN.
?. Do you like stamps from Samoa?


THE BIGGEST NEWSPAPER PRINTED IN THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
CHE BIGGEST NEWSPAPER jPI
r
Carnegie’S advice Aftei ci life-long experience I find that advertising in the morning papers is simply throwing so
TO business MEN. many million dollars over Niagara. Most people arc too busy to read the Advertisements in the
moi nntg papei s ; in fact it takes them all their tune to read the briefest wires. . . . lo my mind the best newspapers fior
obtaining good results are the Sunday Papers. When a busy man gets hold of a Sunday Paper he has plenty of leisure to
read it through from start to pnish, —Advertisements and all. And he invariably does it.”


MURDER OR BULLY HAYES.
KILLED BY HIS COOK WHILE CRUISING
IN THE SOUTH SEAS.
Some short cime ago we extracted a paragraph from the "Fiji Times”
to the effect that the notorious Captain Hayes had Been killed "by the
chiefi mate of the vessel in which ha had "been cruising.As accounts of
his death have before been published, and ha has mysteriously turned up
in the enjoyment of good health in some other part of the world, doubts
are still held by some people, as to whether this ; was not another sim-
-ilar false report. However the following remarks from the "San Francisc
Post" not only confirms the "Fiji Times” statment as to Hayes being ki3
•ed but we think leaves no doubt as to the truth oi it;-
"Captain Hayes, of the schooner-yacht Lotus, which sailed from thi
port October 9,1876, for the Samoan Islands, w.j,s murdered in March last
by the cook, a Dutchman, who shipped in Samoa,as cook and seaman. The
Lotus left Bonham Island, one of the Marshall group, about 120 miles
south-west. Six days afterwards she came back and the following inform-
-ation was obtained from the man acting as mats:- The second day out tA<
captain spoke to the man at the wheel- who was cook and seaman- a out
his steering. Some altercation followed and the captain went below.
When he came up the companion-way, some tin* after, the man let go the
tiller, and struck Captain Hayes on the head with the crutch belonging
to the main boom. He fell and immediately expired. No firearms of any
kind were found on him. The acting mate at ihe time was below sleeping
The vessel returned to Bonham Island as soon as possible* The captain
was buried at sea. The Maggie Johnston arrived at Bonham the latter p
part of March. The matter was explained to Captains Bliven and Henry,and
it was found that the mate ( not having signed any articles or pape s
of agreement of any kind to bind himself to the vessel) had no control
over her at all. Rumors of her going away to other islands in other hand
got about, which induced Messrs. Capelie & Go., a large German firm
there, to ask Captains Bliven and Henry, as American citizens to do some-
-thing in th e Matter. The only thing they could do, was to deliver the


vessel*s papers to Gapelle k Go., for safe keeping, until her owners in
San Francisco could communicate instructions.
The acting mate was left in charge, and aid every tiling possible
to fix things u.,. An inventory of all goods on hoard was taken, and all
were stored in Cap§lle k Go's warehouse. The vessel was to he moored to
1,600 pound anchor, sails unbent, and put on shore in the,warehouse. All
was not completed when the Maggie Johnston left on May 15, hut it was
expected that everything would be fixed on that day.
Captain Hayes will he remembered as the gentleman whose strange
life and adventures were published in October last under he caption of
"A South Sea Pirate". He had many friyids, who contend that his errors
were those of the head, and not of the heart, and it is said of him, even
by his enemies, that he was a man who never counted the cost when he
could render assistance to a fellow sailor in distress. He was equally
well known in San Francisco,Melbourne Sydney, and the groups of the South
Pacific where years of his life had been spent.
21






\V\ ,T 7 vi


jt -
7 o
