

PAPER
READ AT THE ADELAIDE MEETING OF
THE AUSTRALASIAN
Associaton for the Aduancement of Science
Held September, 1893.
EXPLAINING
The Construction and Use of
WEIR’S AZIMUTH DIAGRAM
BY PATRICK WEIR, MASTER MARINER.


[Read at the Adelaide Meeting of the Australasian Association for th-
Advancement of Science, held September, 1893. ]
EXPLAINING THE CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF WEIR’S
AZIMUTH DIAGRAM.
By PATRICK WEIR, Master Mariner.
Before proceeding to the principal business of this paper it may
be well for me to say a few words regarding the importance to
navigators of possessing some simple and inexpensive means of
readily ascertaining the true bearing of a celestial body at any
time, certain necessary data being available.
It may seem superfluous for me to enlarge on the vital impor-
tance of knowing exactly in what direction a vessel is being steered ;
but I may point out that in these days of record-breaking, when
fast steamers, to render the distance as short as possible, cut close
to dangerous corners at full speed and in spite of fog or darkness,
accuracy in the adjustment of the compass is of far more impor-
tance than was the case a few years ago, and is at the same time
more difficult of attainment on account of the universal employ-
ment of iron or steel in modern shipbuilding.
As an example of the influence of a steel ship on the magnetic
needle, I may mention that in a new vessel the compass has been
deflected as much as thirteen points. When we consider that six-
teen points is a semicircle, and would be a complete reversal of the
needle, it becomes rather rough on the old proverb which says
something about the needle pointing true to the pole. This, I
admit, is an extreme case, but very few iron ship’s compasses are
less than four or even five points out on some courses.
I need scarcely mention that vessels are not allowed to proceed
to sea with their compasses in this condition. The Board of Trade
insists on their being compensated, within manageable limits, by
means of magnets suitably placed; and the ability to properly and
intelligently manipulate these correcting magnets constitutes a
very important clement in the qualification of a shipmaster or
• Captain Weir’s Azimuth Diagram is published with the Admiralty Charts by J. D.
Potter, 11, King-street, Tower Hill, London,


officer. But it is almost impossible to so adjust a compass that it
will be correct under all circumstances; the varying influence of
the earth’s magnetism, the heeling of the vessel, shifting of masses
of iron on hoard, and various other causes, combine to interfere
with its correct action, and the only safeguards are constant watch-
fulness and frequent correction.
As an instance of the numerous and unexpected dangers which
threaten the compass, I may mention the case of a vessel which
came under my notice. The iron mainyard of this vessel was
simply an enormous magnet, and according to whether the port or
starboard yardarm was nearer the standard compass, distant
perhaps 60ft., the north pole of the needle was attracted or
repelled about half a point, making a total error on swinging the
yard of a full point.
The usual method of ascertaining the error of a compass is by
comparison of the true bearing of an object with its bearing by
compass, and the difference between these two bearings will be the
error of the compass for that position of the ship’s head. In port
or when near the land it is generally possible to work by the true
bearing of a fixed object on shore, such as a chimney, tower, flag-
staff, &c., and this is the method adopted by professional adjusters.
At sea, however, with no land in sight, the only available method
is by comparison of the true bearing of a celestial body with its
bearing by compass, and the object of my diagram is to facilitate
the computation of the true bearing of such bodies as are generally
used for this purpose.
In all well-regulated ships the sun’s bearing by compass is
noted every time that he can he observed rising or setting, and
this, compared with his true amplitude by calculation, gives a very-
handy and correct method of ascertaining the error of the com-
pass. Few parts of the world arc, however, blessed with such a
clear atmosphere as we have in South Australia, and in many
places it is seldom that the exact moment of the sun’s rising or
setting can be observed. It is also very often desirable to ascertain
the error of the compass at other times than when the sun is on
the horizon, and during the day the only available means is by
by comparison of the sun’s true azimuth with his bearing by-
compass.
I may here say, though in future I will only mention the sun,
that all statements apply equally- to any celestial body whose
declination is not more than 60°.


The sun’s true azimuth or bearing may be computed from cither
of two sets of data, which can bo readily obtained at sea—•
first, from the latitude of the ship and the declination and altitude
of the sun ; or, second, from the latitude, declination, and hour
angle of the sun, or time from noon (apparent time). In the first
case, when the sun's compass bearing is taken, his altitude must
be observed simultaneously by sextant or other means; while, in
the second case, it is only necessary to note the time at which the
bearing was taken, as shown on the ship’s clock, which is always
kept at apparent lime, making allowance, of course, for any dif-
ference of longitude in the ship's position since the clock was set.
This second case (known amongst navigators as a time azimuth) is
generally employed on account of its convenience, and it is to
facilitate the computation of the sun’s true azimuth by this method
that the diagram is especially intended, although both eases can
with equal ease be solved by it.
I will now proceed to explain, as clearly and briefly as I am
able, the (rain of reasoning by which T succeeded in constructing
the diagram, and trust that I may succeed in making my explana-
tion intelligible to the members.
In the natural projection. Fig. 1., suppose the observer to be
placed at C in the centre of the sphere i then let li II represent
the horizon, N 8 a line passing through the poles, E Q, the equator,
Z the zenith, and Y
the nadir, E T) the de-
clination, D L a small
circle parallel to the
equator, O the posi-
tion of a. celestial ob-
ject, N O Sameridian,
and Z O Y a vertical
or azimuth circle.
In computing a
time azimuth, we have-
given in the spherical
triangle 0 Z N the
side O N=the polar
distance or comple-
ment of declination,
the side Z N— the
complement of the la-
titude, and the angle
ZN O = the hour
Fig. 1.
;injilo, to find (lie angle () Z N (he azimuth, which, it will he
evident to anyone acquainted with trigonometry, can be done.
The general principles on which I have worked in constructing
a diagram to solve this problem were to project the great circle
E ti vertically into the plane of the horizon, and, as this is a
circle projected obliquely, the resulting projection will be an ellipse.


the semi-major axis of which will be equal to the radius of the
circle H R, and the semi-minor axis to the radius X sine Z C E,
which is the sine of the latitude. In the same manner it may be
shown that, with any latitude, if the circle representing the
equator be projected vertically into the plane of the horizon, its
projection will be an ellipse which will have its major and minor
axes in the proportion of 1 ; sine latitude.
I will now ask the members to imagine two extreme cases.
Suppose, in the first place, that an observer is situated at, say, the
north pole. From this point of view the sun’s path would evidently
be a circle, which it would also be according to Fig. 1, because an
ellipse whose semi-minor axis is equal to semi-major axis X sine
90° would be a circle ; and, again, his bearing at any particular-
time would not be affected by his declination, the altitude only
being altered, that is to say, his bearing would be exactly the
same at the same hour, say, Greenwich time, all the year round,
and of course with any declination.
Suppose, again, that the observer is on the equator and the sun
is in declination 0, or also on the equator, it is self evident that he
would rise due cast, pass directly overhead, and set due west, so
that his path projected on the plane of the horizon would be repre-
sented by a straight line, which it would be according to Fig. 1,
because with lat. 0 the circle E Q would be projected edgewise.
If the observer were still on the equator and the sun’s declination
were, say, 20° N., his rising amplitude would be E. 20° N. (Fig. 2),
meridian zenith distance 20° N., and setting amplitude W. 20° N.,
so that his path might still be represented by a straight line, but
distant from the equator by the sine of 20°.
As the sun’s path when off the equator is a small circle it would
be represented (Fig. 2) by the line D L, which is shorter than the
diameter W K, and
distant from it by r
X sine declination.
If, however, it were
required to represent
the sun’s path in dif-
ferent declinations by
a line of constant
length, as D' L', which
is the same length as
W E, it would have to
be removed from the
equator by a distance
equal to r X the tan-
gent of the declination
in order to make the
rising and setting am-
plitudes work out as
by calculation, as can
Fig. 2.


be seen on Fig. 2 without any explanation. If, therefore, it were
necessary, instead of moving the line, to imagine the position of the
observer to be shifted in the opposite direction, it is evident that he
Fig. 3.
would have to be re-
moved to a distance
equal to r X the tan-
gent of the declina-
tion. A scale of tan-
gents laid down above
and below the equator,
as Fig. 3, would there-
fore represent the
position of an observer
at the equator for each
degree of declination,
and if the line C E
were divided into a
scale of sines repre-
senting the sun’s posi-
tion on it for, say
every fourth minute of
time, we would have
a diagram by which
the sun’s bearing might be calculated at any time, and with any
declination, as seen by an observer at the equator.
As I before showed, with the help of Fig. 1, that an ellipse
representing the sun’s path in any latitude would have its major
and minor axes of the same relative dimensions as 1 ; sine latitude.
I have constructed a
diagram on this prin-
ciple (Fig. 4). the
ellipses being drawn
for every tenth degree
of latitude, and the
position of the sun on
them shown for every
twenty minutes by the
vertical lines. The
sun’s true azimuth
may be taken from
this diagram for any
latitude and any time
as long as his declina-
tion is o°, but if de-
clination be intro-
duced into the pro-
blem it becomes more
difficult to solve, as
Fig. 4.


shall presently endeavor to show. Referring again to I‘ig. 1 ; if it
were desired to represent the sun’s path in any declination by a great
circle, that is, a circle of the same size as the equator, instead of a
small circle, as shown by D I-. it would have to lie distant from the
equator by r X tangent declination, as shown by the dotted line
IV 1/. instead of the sine as 1) L. as is also shown in I'ig. 2.
If, however, K (1 and D'L' were both projected vertically into
the plant of the horizon II 11. it is evident that they would not he
distant from each other by K D, the tangent of declination, but by
KF. Rut FF is the result of multiplying r tangent declin ition into
cosine latitude. equal ellipses representing the sun’s path on the
equator, and his path in any other declination when projected
vertically into the plane of the horizon would have their centres
distant from each other by the following quantity —(r tangent decli-
nation X cosine latitude). As, however, it is impossible to slide the
ellipses along the paper, or even to draw a separate ellipse for each
degree of declination, wo are reduced to the expedient of supposing
the position of the observer to be moved in the opposite direction to
an equal distance, that is to say, with north declination he would
have to be moved south and vice rrrsii, a distance equal to (>• tangent
declination X cosine latitude). As this quantity varies with the
latitude, a separate scale of declinations would have to he made
for each degree of latitude, and though the sun’s true bearing in
any latitude and with any declination might be taken from a
diagram constructed on the principle of Fig. 4, it would be a
comparatively complicated operation.
Fig. 4, I may state, was the form in which my first diagram was
constructed, and, while experimenting with it, the idea occurred to
me that it might be possible, instead of varying the scale of
declination for each degree of latitude, to vary the size of the
ellipses in. of course, the inverse ratio. I therefore decided, instead
of multiplying tangent declinations by cosine latitude, to A vide the
major and minor axes of each ellipse by that quantity (cosine
latitude). This gives for
semi - major axis r secant
latitude and for semi-minor
sine latitude
axis r r - ——y i'
cosine latitude
tangent latitude. It will
easily be seen that this pre-
serves (lie relative lengths
of the major and minor axes
for any degree of latitude,
because 1 : sine = secant :
tangent (Fig. 5).
II ere occurred a very happy
coincidence. In increasing
the size of the ellipses the
Fig. 5.


semi-minor axes, as I have shown, become = tangent latitude, and
a scale through which to draw the ellipses will be a scale of
tangents laid down on the meridian, but the declination scale is
also a scale of tangents along the meridian : therefore both
declination and latitude can be measured on the same scale.
Another advantage of this particular proportion of axes (secant
and tangent) is that it locates the foci of all the ellipses in the same
two points, which was of great assistance to me in constructing
my original diagrams with pins and threads.
Having calculated the dimensions of the ellipses and laid them
down, the next step is to fix the position of the sun on them for
each particular period as minutely as may be r. quired. It is evident
that the noon line in all latitudes, and no matter what the declina-
tion may be, will correspond with the meridian or minor axes of
the ellipses ; and it is also equally certain that the six-hour line will
be at right angles to the meridian and will correspond with the
major axes of all the ellipses, as tiro sun will just have performed
one quarter of his diurnal revolution at this time. The positions of
the intermediate hours, &e , will he simply their positions on a
circumscribing circle projected into the ellipse, and may be arrived
at as follows : —Take any ellipse of latitude, and with centre O
(Fig. <i) and half
the major axis of
the ellipse as radius,
describe a circle
about the ellipse ;
divide this circle
into hours, &c., as
minutely ns may
be required, and
through these divi-
sions draw linos
parallel to the me-
ridian and cutting
the ellipse. The
point where each
cuts the ellipse will
indicate the same
time as where it
cuts the circle. This
routine must be
gone through for,
say, every fifth or
tenth degree of
Fig. 6.
latitude, and when the points so found on the ellipses for each
paiticular period have been joined in n regular sweep they will
be found to form a curve which it can he proved is a hyperbola,
whose focus is also the foci of all the ellipses.


These hyperbolae, or time curves, may, however, be described in
another and more convenient way by means of a ruler, thread, and
pencil, which is, in fact, the usual method of describing a hyperbola.
()ne end of the thread must be fixed in the focus of the hyperbola
to be drawn, and one end of the ruler pivoted in the opposite focus ;
the free end of the thread is made fast to the free end of the ruler.
'1 he radius line, that is, the line between the centre of the diagram
and the focus of the hyperbola, being laid out in a scale of sines,
the length of the thread must be such that the pencil will just be
able to touch the sine of the hour for which the hyperbola is to be
described. If the ruler be then swung round its pivoted end, the
pencil kept close to its edge and the thread extended, the curve
described will be a hyperbola, and the point at which it intersects
each ellipse of latitude will indicate the position of the sun on that
ellipse at the time for which the curve is drawn.
For convenience in measuring off the azimuth I have put a
graduated horizon round the margin of the diagram, but any other
mechanical means may be substituted.
This completes the diagram as published; and, before compli-
cating it any further, I will explain how it is used for computing a
time azimuth by reading the description and instructions printed
thereon, which description and instructions, I may mention, were
written by Sir W. Thomson (now Lord Kelvin), who has taken
great interest in the diagram:—“ To find the true bearing of a
celestial object, the latitude, declination, and time from crossing
the meridian (hour angle) being given—
“ Hide. —Change the signs of both latitude and declination ; then
from the latitude (on the meridian) follow the ellipse to its point of
intersection with the hyperbola of the required hour angle, and
mark it; this may be called the position of the object. (If the
hour angle is less than six hours, this intersection will be on the
same side of the equator as the latitude as used on the diagram;
if more than six hours, it will be on the opposite side, as the amount
over six hours must be measured beyond the equator to obtain the
position of the required hour-angle hyperbola). Mark the declina-
tion on the meridian; this may be called the position of the observer.
With the parallel ruler transfer the line joining these positions to
the centre 0 of the meridian ; the point where the edge of the
parallel ruler cuts the graduated horizon is the true bearing, to be
reckoned north or south, according as the place where the horizon
is cut is north or south of the equator, and east or west, according
as the heavenly body- is east or west of the meridian.”
Although the principal purpose for which the diagram is in-
tended is the computation of a time azimuth, it may be used to
solve a variety of other problems, a few of which I now propose to
bring under your notice.
Having given the latitude, declination, and hour angle, the true
azimuth may be found as I have been endeavoring to explain, but


it is just as simple with any three out of these four elements given
to find the fourth. Thus, given latitude, declination, and azimuth,
the time may be obtained, and so on.
The diagram may be used as a sundial, which will give the
correct apparent time at all places on the earth’s surface, the
latitude being not more than 60°, by placing it horizontally, with
its meridian exactly north and south, and erecting a shadow-pin
vertically over the declination. Where the shadow thrown by this
pin cuts the ellipse corresponding to the latitude of the place
will show the apparent time; and, given any three of the four
elements mentioned, the fourth may be found by varying the
position of the pin, the direction of the meridian, or the ellipse of
latitude.
The diagram may also be used to calculate the sun’s semi-diurnal
arc or time of rising and setting, and, at the same time, his ampli-
tude or bearing when on the horizon, the latitude and declination
being given.
Referring to Fig. 1 ; In the triangle NA R we have given
N R=latitude, N A=polar distance, and the right angle N R A,
to find A R the cosine amplitude, which, it will at once be evident,
can be done. With the same data we can also find the angle
AN R, which is the semi-nocturnal arc. I may state that both
of these problems can be solved by the diagram in four different
ways, but I will not encroach on the time of the meeting by
attempting to explain each method, and shall simply try to give an
idea of the general principles involved. Find the position of the
observer, as explained on the diagram, and, with this point as a
centre, describe a circle about the ellipse of latitude and just
touching it. This circle will represent the circle of the horizon,
and the point where it touches the ellipse of latitude will be the
position of the sun when on the horizon. Reference to the nearest
time curve will give the semi-diurnal arc ; and the bearing from
the position of the observer to the position of the sun, taken off in
the usual way, will give us his true amplitude or bearing when
rising or setting.
As each hyperbola on the diagram intersects each ellipse at
right angles, this point (the position of the sun when rising or
setting) may be found by using a pair of parallel rulers.
Place the edge of the ruler over the position of the observer,
and note which time curve it just touches at the ellipse of latitude ;
this will be the same point as was previously found, namely 7 , the
position of the sun when on the horizon.
In some of my earlier diagrams I laid down another set of
lines, which, for want of a better name, I called rising and setting
circles. They were drawn for each degree of declination up to, say,
30°, and where each curve cut each ellipse of latitude showed the
position of the sun when on the horizon at the latitude of the


ellipse, and with the declination of the circle. The method of
using them is simply to note where they cut the proper ellipse of
latitude, and this will he the position of the body when on the
horizon.
The centres of these circles may be found by the following
rule:—Subtract twice the declination from 90, and the remainder
will be the centre of a circle on the meridian, using the declination
scale, radius being equal to the distance from this point to the
focus of the diagram. The reasoning by which I arrived at this
rule I am not at present prepared to give, but its correctness may
be proved in several ways, and it gives the same results as are
obtained by calculation. An illustration of its correctness at one
point may, however, be given on the diagram itself. If an observer
were in latitude 60° S., and a celestial body were in declination 30°
S., the body would not set at all, but would simply touch the south
point of the horizon and again commence to rise, and similarly at
any place where the declination of the body is the complement of
the latitude and of the same name it would simply touch the horizon
as described ; and this, it will be observed, is exactly what happens
on the diagram.
In the preceding problems we have again four elements to work
with, viz., latitude, declination, time, and bearing; and, given any
tivo of these, the other two can be found by the diagram, provided
that one of the known quantities is either latitude or declina-
tion.
So far it may be observed that I have said nothing about
altitude , although it plays a very important part in nautical
astronomy. The diagram may, however, be used for working out
problems in which altitude is one of the elements, by the help of
a pair of compasses and scales of cosines, laid down separately.
Having found the radius of the circle representing the horizon,
with a given latitude and declination, as previously explained,
apply it to the scales of cosines, and find with which cosine of 0°
it corresponds. The altitude of any point within this circle may he
found by measuring its distance from the centre, and this distance
applied to the proper scale will give its altitude.
Here we have five elements to work with, viz., latitude, declina-
tion, altitude, hour angle, and azimuth ; and, given three of these,
the other two can be found, provided that either latitude or declina-
tion is included amongst the known quantities.
I will not further intrude on the time of the meeting by going
into the variety of ways in which the diagram may be used, but
will content myself with laying before you a list of problems
which I have succeeded in solving by the use of the diagram; and
I may mention that there are a few which I have failed to solve,
although I have no doubt they can be solved, and probably there
are a good many which I have not thought of, but which can be
worked out by its use.


No.
May be Found.
Data Required.
In the
Triangle
We have
given
To
find
Which is
1
Azimuth
Lat, decl., H A.
OZN
Z N, O N,
ZN 0
OZN
Azimuth
2
“ “ alt..
OZN
Z N,0 N,OZ
OZN
<
3
Hour angle
< (
“ “ alt..
OZN
ZN.ON.OZ
N
Hour angle
4
“ “ az. .
OZN
Z N, 0 N, Z
N
6
Latitude
Decl., H A, az.
OZN
0 N, N, Z
Z N
Co. lat.
7
a
“ amp
If AE
N A, A E, E
N R
Lat.
8
< (
“ SD.arc.
SAE
N A, N, E
N R
9
Declination
Lat., H A, az..
OZN
Z N, N, Z
0 N
P. distance
10
“
“ amp
N AE
NE.AE.E
N A
11
i (
“ SD,arc..
SAE
N R, N, E
N A
12
Amplitude
“ decl
SAE
NE, NA, R
AR
Co. amp.
13
“ SD,arc..
N AE
N R, N, R
A R
<
14
Decl., S D, arc .
Lat., decl
N AE
N A, N, R
A R
u
15
Semi-diurnal
arc
N AE
N R, N A, R
N
S N arc
16
“ amp
N AE
N R, A R, R
N
ii
17
< i
Decl., amp
N AE
N A, A R, R
Z N, 0 N, N
N
“
18
Altitude
Lat., decl., HA.
OZN
Z 0
Zen. dist.
19
“ “ az. .
OZN
Z N, 0 N, Z
Z 0
a
CAPTAIN WEIR’S AZIMUTH- DIAGRAM.
A List of Problems which can be Solved by its use.
