

THE COAL QUESTION.
1891.


ftt-
• o /y * vc—
THE COAL QUESTION.




PAPER ON
THE COAL QUESTION
READ BY
T. FORSTER BROWN, M. INST. OF C.E.,
BEFORE THE
ECONOMIC SCIENCE AND STATISTICS SECTION OF THE BRITISH
ASSOCIATION, CARDIFF, 1891.
CARDIFF;
WILLIAM LEWIS, PRINTER AND STATIONER, 22, DUKE STREET.
1891.




PAPER ON
THE COAL QUESTION,
Read by T. FORSTER BROWN, M. Inst. C.E.,
before the
Economic Science and Statistics Section of the British
Association , Cardiff, 1891.
heading of this Paper will have a
familiar sound to members of the
British Association. From the date when
Lord Armstrong first directed public
attention to the subject, and Professor
Jevons published his exhaustive Book on
the question, down to the present year, in
some form or another, either as the result
of an enquiry, as in the Report of the
Coal Commission in 1871, or in notices
such as those by Professor Hull and others,
the Coal Question has again and again
recurred.
And at the Meeting of the British
Association at Cardiff—which may be now
B


considered one of the greatest centres of
the coal industry, it will not be inopportune
to revert to a subject so intimately
associated with the progress and well-being
of Great Britain—and, in doing so, to direct
some special notice to a phase of the
subject, which does not appear to be
securing that amount of public and legis-
lative attention which its importance
justifies.*
The subject may be conveniently
introduced by a few passing observations
upon the probable duration of our total
coal resources, and upon this part of the
question much will depend upon the annual
increase in the production of coal. Will
that increase continue at an increasing or
diminishing rate, or will it arrive at a
maximum output, remaining stationary for
* Since the writer first considered the subject, he has noticed an
able and instructive paper by Professor Lupton, in “Nature,”
published in the year 1885, bearing upon this part of the question.
Mr. Price Williams and others have also dealt with some features
of the rapid exhaustion of our coal.


a period of long or short duration, and
then gradually decrease; and lastly, is the
quantity of coal estimated by the Royal
Commission of 1871 a reliable estimate ?
It may, the writer suggests, be accepted
that the rate of annual increase in the
production of coal will have a tendency to
decrease, not only because the rate of
increase in the population is gradually
decreasing, but also because the earlier
developed coal fields of the country, where
the bulk of the best coal lands has been let
and occupied, are, as compared with the
newer developed coal fields, already show-
ing a retarded rate of increase of output.
And as the Midlands and South Wales
unoccupied coal lands become acquired for
working, the rate of increase must gradually
lessen, and in time the working of thinner
seams will further reduce the output
capacity of the collieries, so that the writer
is of opinion that it may be assumed that
the operation will probably be as follows :


a continued gradually increasing annual
output of coal in the country, with a rate of
increase that is itself gradually decreasing,
until nearly the whole of the Coal lands are
let and occupied, followed by a more or less
stationary condition for a considerable
period, to be followed, as the thick and
easily worked’ coal is exhausted, by a
gradually diminishing annual output. If
this indication of the probable course of
events is approximately correct, the estimate
of the Royal Commission of 1871, of the
total coal resources existing at that period
of 140,000 million tons (allowing a wide
margin for that statement being possibly a
considerable over estimate of the actual
workable resources) still leaves an ample
supply to meet the country’s requirements
for several centuries, and therefore the
actual exhaustion of our coal supplies is
neither imminent, or a matter for immediate
consideration; but the immediate pertinent
enquiry is, how long will what may be
described as the cream of our coal resources,


namely, the thickest and most cheaply
worked seams existing at a moderate depth
below the surface, last; and what will be
the effect of the subsequent increased
expense of working upon the national
finances and income ?
When the depth below the surface
exceeds 2,000 feet, or the thickness of a
seam becomes much less than three feet of
clean coal—or even a greater thickness of
coal where bands of stone intervene —it
may be assumed that the cost of working
becomes greater when compared with a
shallower depth below the surface than
2,000 feet; or thicker seams than three feet
of clean coal. We have unfortunately,
however, no information which would be
a reliable guide, by which to estimate the
proportion which the thickest and best of
our coal seams in the principal coal fields
existing at a less depth than 2,000 feet
below the surface originally bore to the
total coal resources.


To begin with, the minor coal fields—as
not affecting the question of our commercial
status materially one way or the other
may be excluded from consideration, and
the estimate may be fairly narrowed to the
proportion of best coal originally existing in
the Scottish, Durham and Northumberland,
Lancashire, Midlands, including Stafford-
shire, and South Wales Coal Fields.
In many parts of these coal fields the
best and thickest seams do not amount to
more than from 6 feet to 20 feet in total
aggregate thickness. Now our annual out-
put is equal to the exhaustion of a coal
seam six feet in thickness extending over
30,000 acres ; but dealing with the question
very broadly the writer is disposed to
estimate the total original resources of our
best and cheapest seams, upon the work-
ing of which our commercial position has
hitherto depended, at approximately 20,000
million tons.


Of this quantity it may be further
estimated that about one-fifth has been
already worked.
The duration of what remains is of
course contingent upon the future rate of
output, and upon this point there exists
room for a wide diversity of opinion. It
appears to have been assumed by several
writers that our output of coal would
continue to increase at possibly a somewhat
decreasing rate, until the cost of working
becomes so excessive as to permanently
check the progress of the coal industry, and
that our annual output of coal, having
regard to the total coal resources of the
country, may probably reach an enormous
figure. As has been already hinted, the
writer holds this view only in a modified
degree.
The continuous and rapid development
of our coal fields during the past 40 years,


has been due partially to causes which will
not continue to operate for any long period
in the future.
The enormous trade development which
followed the discovery of the use of steam
as applied to industrial purposes, associated
with our comparatively virgin coal fields,
led to an exceptionally rapid development
of our Coal resources. That cause still
continues to operate, but in a modified
form, and probably sufficient consideration
has not been given to the retarding effect of
the occupation of the available surface of
the coal area by collieries. In addition to
this, upon the complete occupation or
letting of the available area of coal, the area
may be broken up into very large blocks for
working purposes, containing from 20,000
to 40,000 tons per acre, and in blocks of
from 1,000 to 3,000 acres in extent, and
under such circumstances, although the
actual coal resources may be very large, yet
the power of increasing the output so


occupied, will be very much restricted,
because fewer new pits will be sunk than is
practicable where a virgin coal field exists
unoccupied. Hence, the annual increase in
X '
the development stages of the coal output
of this country may therefore be very
rapid, even in some cases as much as
five per cent, per annum, yet, as each of
our principal coal fields becomes occupied,
the power of progressive increase must
inevitably decline.
This result may be already observed to
prevail in the earlier developed coalfields
—as compared with the more newly de-
veloped districts; Northumberland, Durham,
South Staffordshire and Lancashire, may
be accepted as examples of the earlier
developed fields, where the available coal
ground has been more fully let out and
apportioned for working than in either the
Midland, South Wales, Scotch or North
Staffordshire fields —and the effect of this
check to the development of new collieries
c


by the coal ground being already occupied,
may, the writer suggests, be observed in the
respective rates of increase in the output
within the ten years ending with last year.
Northumberland and Durham, for the
10 years, increased 11 per cent.
South Staffordshire, 2 per cent.
Lancashire, 16 per cent.
Whilst on the other hand the Midlands
showed an increase of about 34 per cent.;
South Wales, nearly 40 per cent.; Scot-
land, 30 per cent.; North Staffordshire,
20 per cent., and therefore the rapid annual
increase of the output in the past will not
be a safe guide to gauge the rate of progress
of the output in future years.
Further, it is well-known that under
ordinary circumstances, a larger output
from particular collieries is obtainable
where thick and easily worked seams are


in course of working, as compared with
the output from the same collieries when
thinner or harder seams are in course of
working.
On the whole, the writer considers that
another quarter of a century of progress, at
the rate of 2 to 3 per cent, per annum, will
probably complete the occupation of the
best of our coal fields, and attain probably
the maximum of our national output of
coal.
This maximum output may probably be
maintained for another quarter of a cen-
tury, to be followed by a slow but gradual
reduction in the annual output, the annual
rate of this production depending upon
many conditions, which it is of course
impossible at the present time to predicate.
The operation will, doubtless, be very
gradual, commencing in the earlier developed
coal fields, and gradually extending to the


larger coal fields of the Midlands and
South Wales, and in the end increasing
permanently the cost of producing coal.
Upon a small scale the effect may
already be observed in more than one of
the older coal districts, where the working
of thinner seams at an increased cost, has
both increased the cost of working and
checked the increase of the rate of output,
owing to the competition of coal produced
from the newer coal districts at a cheaper
rate.
Then again, the proportion which the
cost of labour will in future bear to the
total cost of production, the rates of
carriage paid and other circumstances, will
influence not only the period, but the actual
resources of cheap coal.
And it has been further suggested to the
writer, that he has in the foregoing views
not given sufficient importance to the
competition in the foreign coal trade of the


large American and other deposits which,
as yet, are not fully developed, and that we
are already meeting this competition, and (as
coal is a thing which has a tendency to raise
and carry itself) the area over which we
have the command will, before fifty years,
contract more rapidly than the demand in it
increases, so that this will increase the
tendency of the annual output to increase
more slowly; and that the past development
represents the effect of the stimulus of the
whole world’s market; but in future the
market will grow more circumscribed, at the
same time that our responsiveness to its
stimulus diminishes. This view the writer
agrees with to a limited extent only. The
development of Foreign coal fields has
hitherto stimulated and not retarded our
development, but when our coal area has
become occupied, a higher rate of develop-
ment in the Foreign coal fields will probably
ensue, and this may be the means of
extending the duration of our best coals
for a little longer than half a century.


Assuming the foregoing observations to
be an approximate indication of the probable
course of future development, the writer
would be disposed to estimate the maximum
coal output of Great Britain at from 250 to
300 million tons per annum, and that this
rate of output may be attained in 25 years
from the present time, and continued for a
further period of 25 years.
Taking 250 million tons as the average
annual output from the best of our coal
resources, we should have within the next
fifty years a total extraction of nearly 12
thousand million tons, out of a total of 16
thousand million tons estimated as now
remaining un worked of our best and thickest
coal seams existing at a moderate depth
below the surface, and it is, therefore,
reasonable to assume, in the absence of
more definite data and information, that
within fifty years or thereabouts from the
present time, will commence a new element
in the commercial position of this nation,


namely, the operation of an increase in the
cost of producing the raw material of coal.
This increase in the cost of producing
coal due to natural causes will, year by year,
have a tendency to increase until before the
whole of our coal resources can be worked,
it will probably nearly double the cost at
which coal can, with wages at a minimum
rate, now be produced, or in figures, this
increased tax upon the industrial position
of this nation, may ultimately attain a figure
of sixty million pounds per annum.
This will arise in an increasing cost in
the production due to natural causes,
namely, increase in the labour required
to work thinner seams, or, in working
thicker seams lying at a great depth. In
the latter case not only will the labour be
increased, but also the cost of materials and
maintenance of the heavy plant required for
raising coal from great depths below the
surface.


This increased cost, considered relatively
to our recurring seasons of high rates of
wages and high range of prices for materials
during the present decade, will for a time
be more or less neutralized by reductions in
the wages rate, and in the range of prices
for materials, in royalties and other charges;
but as considered relatively to our periods
of depression, the effect must at once result
in an inability to reduce the cost of produc-
tion to the previous low limits—this inability
will become intensified year by year, until
the cost of production, with wages and other
charges at their lowest level, will equal and
exceed the cost of production in our existing
seasons of great expansion in the coal trade,
although no profit may then accrue to the
adventurers.
This point requires probably a little
fuller elucidation. The general trade move-
ments of this country are divided into
cycles, each of more or less duration, of
what may be generally described as good


and bad times. Sometimes these cycles
apply irregularly and to certain products
only, occasionally the operation is uniform
and widespread, applying to most of the
products of the country at the same time.
The cycles of good times are, it is sug-
gested, brought about by a demand for one
or more of the chief products of Great
Britain in excess, for the time being, of the
existing powers for the production of such
raw or manufactured articles, and this
causes an artificial scarcity, and the imme-
diate result follows: the article increases
in value, the profits of the capitalist, the
wages of the workmen, and all associated in
the production or manufacture of the article,
share in the benefit derived from the
enhanced selling value, and, for a time, so
long as the demand continues in excess of
the supply, the increased income to the
producers has a tendency to further check
production : but Nemesis ultimately arrives
in the form of new investments of capital
p


in the profitable industry, more labour
employed, larger outputs obtained, and
also a lessened demand, due to various
causes, high prices intensifying foreign
competition, deficient purchasing power
abroad, financial irregularities, or other-
wise. Then, with a fall in the aggregate
of the demand below the powers of produc-
tion, keen competition sets in, prices go
down, also profits and wages, and the
competition is continued until the cost of
producing the particular article in question,
whether it is coal, iron, steel, cotton fabrics,
woollen goods, or any other large product,
is reduced to about, or below, the rate at
which the cheapest and most economically
worked mines or manufactories can be
carried on, with profits at zero, and wages
and other charges at the lowest possible
limit. Then if that cost of production is
sufficiently low to admit of the article being
sold and exported to recover ground lost
during high prices and defy foreign com-
petition, and if the output be reduced to


some extent by irregular working, the
demand begins to again increase, owing to
the low prices promoting the acquisition
of more wide and extensive markets for the
article, and, the pressure of foreign competi-
tion in distant markets being relieved, and
the markets extended, in time this operation,
if the cost of production is sufficiently low,
has the effect of again increasing the
demand, and paving the way for a return
of the high prices and profits. It is the
amount of profits averaged over the good
and bad cycles which is necessary to justify
the application of capital to the particular
industry in question.
It would appear, therefore, that, without
a period during which the products of
Great Britain can be produced at rates
which defy competition, we should have
no periods of recurring prosperity, which
enable the community not only to replace
past losses, but to lay by and accumulate
capital readily applicable to further develop


ment. And if this be so, a condition of
things may arise which, from natural and
unalterable causes, will add to the cost of
production of coal, a contingency from
every point of view alarming, whether from
the point of view of its use for our steam
navigation, or for foreign export, and, as
such, cheapening the cost of the importation
of raw material for our manufactures; or
from the aspect of its widespread use in
our manufacturing industries ; because such
an increased cost, operating so widely in
enhancing the cost of our raw and manu-
factured cheap products, will undoubtedly
damage our power of holding so largely the
markets of the world, and will still more
prevent our extension of these markets.
We may therefore consider that it is the
low range of the selling price of coal which
supports and fosters the expansion of the
industries of the nation, and that the short
periods of expansion in the Coal Trade, due
to the demand overtaking the supply, are


only possible in consequence of the fostering
effect on our other industries of an habitual
low price. And the effect of the ephemeral
periods of high prices which now prevail,
from time to time, for our raw material of
coal, is to curtail, check and hamper our
general industries and steam shipping trade,
and therefore indicates in some degree, what
would be the disastrous effect of a continu-
ous high price, and this leads us to a
consideration of the industrial and com-
mercial interests which are bound up with,
and are dependent on, coal.
We have the advantage, as a nation, of
inhabiting islands near a large and populous
continent, with most valuable coal fields
situate near our seaboards, good harbours,
and a great and energetic, enterprising, and
industrious population.
We have, owing to these advantages,
and the discovery of steam navigation, be-
come the pioneers in the heavier industries,


which the discovery of the use to which
steam can be applied have either originated
or developed, and our cheap and rich coal
fields have supplied us with a valuable com-
modity for use and for exportation—in the
latter case taking the place of ballast, and
facilitating the importation of raw material
in the shape of cotton, jute, wool, flax, and
iron ore, which form the staple of our manu-
facturing industries, and the importation of
food and luxuries for the use of our large
population.
What must be the effect of a continuous
high cost of coal upon all these industries ?
To begin with, it will permanently in-
crease the cost of importing the raw
material, and will give younger commu-
nities a direct advantage in that direction.
It will further increase the cost of manu-
facture by making steam power more costly
—and the only compensation which our


manufacturers can then hope to secure is
cheaper capital and labour.
The result of such a competition with
younger countries, in which this country is
year by year handicapped at a heavier rate,
must —unless some other solution or com-
pensation is found—first show itself in
continuous bad trade with no recurring
periods of prosperity, to be succeeded by
the flow of all available capital abroad—
the loss of capital permanently invested in
this country —the lowering of wages to the
bare cost of living—the emigration of the
bulk of our able-bodied working classes,
and the pauperization of those who remain.
It must be clear, with our present and
future obligations, if not relieved, that such
a result, assuming a continuous check to our
industries, is inevitable.
It is difficult, and probably unnecessary
for the argument, to set forth very deeply


the extent and importance of the capital
employed, and the commerce which has
been set afloat by means of the cheap fuel
associated with our other natural and
artificial advantages. A few leading figures
(in round numbers) may be quoted :
We raise annually—2oo,ooo,ooo tons of
minerals, including ;
181,000,000 tons of coal.
14,000,000 tons of iron-stone and iron-ore,
2.200.000 tons of oil shale. And
2.150.000 tons of salt.
We manufacture annually 8,322,000 tons
of pig iron.
We export annually—4,ooo,ooo tons of
steel and iron.
We build annually —1,000,000 tons of
shipping.


Our Total Imports for 1889 were valued at ... ... £427,637,000
„ Exports „ „ „ ... ... 314,705,000
Our National Debt amounts to ... ... ... ... 689,944,000
Our Capital expended in Railways amounts to ... ... 876,595,000
Our Capital expended in Canals and Navigation, not includ-
ing those owned by Railway Companies, is estimated at 24,285,000
Our Capital in Tramways do. do. do. ... 13,700,000
The value of our Capital in Water and Gas Works is pro-
bably about ... ... ... ... ... ... 200,000,000
“ And Capital expended in Docks is approximately ... 40,000,000


Besides the above, Mr. Giffen in his
“ Growth of Wealth,” published in 1889,
estimates that in 1885, the capital value of
the houses, lauds, mines, quarries, iron
works, other public companies, farmers’
profits, etc., in Great Britain (but exclusive
of the value of our railway, gas, water, and
dock capital and foreign and colonial secu-
rities, income of trades and professions, and
other classes, etc.), at some £5,485,000,000.
Of the large capital invested in the
various industrial operations, it may be
assumed that, with the exception of such
outlay as will with a permanent depression
in trade become a permanent tax upon the
nation, such capital may be left to take care
of itself. Its owners ought, and probably
will, have provided against its depreciation
by proper reserves and allowances from
time to time, and the loss of this, although
very severe and disastrous for the time
being, may be regarded by future genera-
tions with equanimity. But outlay, for the


redemption of the capital of which no
provision has been made, and the interest
upon which will have to be provided for in
some form or another, when the means and
capacity for meeting that interest has ceased
to exist, either wholly or in part, stands on
a very different footing. To neglect to
provide against this, is simply to gradually
accumulate a weight around the neck of the
nation, which must drown it when the
commerce of the country begins to per-
manently flag and go down, due to the
exhaustion of the most valuable part of our
coal resources.
This will apply especially
to our National Debt of about £689,944,000
Our Railways which have
cost 876,595,000
Canals, Docks, and River
Improvements, estimated at... 64,000,000
Gas and Water Works ... 200,000,000


Loans to Public Bodies
(after deducting amounts in-
cluded with Gas and Water
Works above)... ... ... 173,000,000
If the interest upon these enormous
amounts is to be paid and our army and
navy maintained, the conclusion can hardly
be avoided, and if no steps are taken in time
to prevent it, that with failing trade, we
shall soon drift into complete bankruptcy.
It may be argued that the shareholders
in the railways, docks, water, lighting works,
etc., will simply lose their money; even if
that were the only contingency, it would be
disastrous enough, for it would lessen the
capital resources of the nation, but that is
by no means the end of it.
It would be impossible to induce the
shareholders thus to give up their property,
until it could be demonstrated that it would
bring no return. Meanwhile railway rates,


dock dues, water and gas rates, and all the
other charges would be maintained at the
maximum, and probably in some cases these
rates would be advanced to meet the loss of
traffic. This would put the nation in a still
worse plight, and loss of capital and collapse
of credit, followed by insufficient employ-
ment for the labouring classes, must ensue.
This would be coupled with the extremely
onerous nature of the taxes of all kinds,
especially the poor rates, and must end in
the result before mentioned, although vari-
ous circumstances may retard the operation,
and the result will be associated, the writer
thinks, with fundamental social changes of
a serious and destructive character.
Are we justified, as a nation, in heaping
up capital outlay in such works as Railways,
Docks, Water and Drainage, and Lighting,
and in Municipal and County charges, which
outlay has only been rendered necessary for
the accommodation of the numerous popula-
tion and extensive manufacturing industries


made possible by the rapid development of
our national resources of cheap and good
fuel, without making any substantial pro-
vision for the repayment of the Capital
within the period in which this wonderful
gold mine to the nation of cheap fuel will
last %
It is clear, that, if we possessed no
valuable coal fields, and were simply a
pastoral country, the great bulk of the
capital in Railways, Docks, etc., would
never have been required or created. The
argument may be carried further, if we, as a
nation, had commenced first to work the
thinnest and most expensive of our Coal
Seams instead of commencing with the best
and thickest, it can hardly be denied that
only a tithe of the capital outlay now
invested in their present works would have
been required or expended, and it seems
clear to the writer that the enormous outlay
already incurred, and to which additions will
yet have to be made during the next quarter


of a century, has only been rendered
necessary and possible because the nation
has very rapidly developed by working the
very best of its coal resources.
And, notwithstanding that these best
resources are, so far as the life of a nation
is concerned, of the most limited duration,
we are, nationally, that is all classes, from
the working classes to the highest in the
land, pocketing all the comfort and wealth
and enjoyment due to the very large annual
national profits which accrue from the
Industrial work of the nation, and are
actually leaving to future generations the
repayment of the capital outlay created for
the purpose of enabling the nation to utilise
those passing and exceptional advantages.
Is this course honest, patriotic, or even
immediately expedient or profitable ? The
writer has in an earlier part of this paper
indicated the inevitable results to the nation
in the not very remote future, if no remedy


is adopted. If the nation persistently
ignores the provision of a remedy, whilst
it can do so, in order to protect the nation
against what will otherwise be serious
disaster, we shall have before many years
are over, a persistent flow of British capital
abroad, an indisposition on the part of
Capitalists to make permanent investments
in this country, and a general curtailment
in the employment of Capital, which will,
in the immediate future, so check trade,
and lessen the employment for labour, as to
cost far more to the nation than would be
involved in the annual provision required to
protect the nation against such disastrous
results.
Is there no remedy for the loss to the
nation due to the exhaustion of our best
coal resources 1 Can no policy be indicated
by which our national obligations and the
cost of internal means of communication
may be relieved as rapidly as our national
disadvantages, due to the increasing cost of
providing our coal supplies, may accrue ?


The writer suggests that the repayment
of the capital invested in Railways, Canals,
Docks, Water and Lighting Works,
Municipal and other Loans, with the repay-
ment of the National Debt, would give the
relief required, and would leave the nation
so much richer in many and important
respects, and better able to deal, during
the working of the inferior coal resources,
and after the exhaustion of the workable
coal, when the country has to depend upon
other resources than coal, with all the
numerous contingencies which may arise,
than if the coal period had never arisen.
Obviously one of the most important
reliefs, which will be necessary to the
Industrial difficulties looming in the future,
will be some relief in the rate of Public
Taxation, and this has been more or less
admitted by succeeding Chancellors of the
Exchequer, in the various and substantial
efforts which have been made towards
reducing both the Capital and annual charge
of the National Debt; but, if the views


expressed by the writer are approximately
correct, the only opportunity which the
nation will ever have of repaying the whole
capital of this debt will be during the next
fifty years or thereabouts. After that
period has elapsed, if the debt is not then
repaid, not only will it be impossible to pay
it afterwards, but the interest upon the
debt which remains will become year by
year increasingly onerous, and ultimately go
a long way to strangle the finances of the
country.
On the broad question, therefore, of
relief to all classes of the nation, it is the
public duty of the present generation, and
that which immediately follows, to make
such permanent and fixed financial arrange-
ments as will absolutely secure the entire
liquidation of the National Debt, within
whatever period further enquiry may esti-
mate as the limit of the duration of the best
of our coal resources. Unless this is effected,
the further remedial measure suggested
would be insufficient and incomplete.


A very similar argument applies to the
repayment of all public loans, and upon this
point the writer desires to direct special
attention to the annual increase in this form
of indebtedness beyond the capital repay-
ments, at the rate of from four to five
millions per annum, which is rapidly assum-
ing, therefore, gigantic proportions.
It would appear to be the duty of the
Legislature to prevent any of this debt
remaining outstanding beyond the period
when its repayment with interest would be
in jeopardy.
This would be doubtless a most sub-
stantial relief to all interests and classes, but
much more than this is required, if we are
to maintain our manufacturing powers at
such a level, as will enable us, as a nation, to
continue to command the markets essential
to a profitable continuance of these indus-
tries in this country.
What is required is not only a reduction
in internal taxation, but special relief to the


manufacturing industries of the country, to
compensate for the increased cost of fuel,
and the increased cost of raw material, due
to permanently higher freights, and the
solution of this part of the difficulty can, in
the writer’s opinion, be in a very great
degree supplied by the gradual reduction
from the period of the exhaustion of the
best coal resources, of the cost of the whole
of the charges of our internal means of
communication, both in regard to railway
communication, docks, and also canal and
river carriage, to the bare cost of working.
This would have the effect of lessening
the future cost, as compared with the pre-
sent cost, of delivering coal to the consumer
in this country by one half ; it would help
to maintain a certain amount of coal export,
and assist in preventing the freight upon
imported produce attaining the high level,
which an absence of outward cargo might
otherwise lead to. It would lessen by one
half the cost of docking and inland convey-
ance of imported raw produce to the


manufacturer, and similarly lessen by one
half the cost of delivering the manufactured
article to the inland consumer and to the
seaboard.
Besides all this, by reducing the cost of
internal communication one half, it will so
lessen the cost of food and clothing to the
working classes, and relieve the cost of
travelling, as to become one of the greatest
boons to the working classes, and go very
far to maintain, and probably would actually
enable the nation to maintain, the industrial
position attained at the time when the
increase in the purchasing price of coal
begins to operate.
The writer further advocates the relief
of the nation after fifty years from the very
large annual payments which have to be
made by the people for gas and water.
The amount of capital invested in our rail-
ways is at present estimated at £876,595,000,
and the net returns upon the outlay is about
4 21 per cent.


The amount of capital in
canals, river improvements,
docks, etc., is estimated at ... £64,000,000
The income in this case is
probably about 4 per cent,
upon the original capital, but
the selling value is also, pro-
bably, proportionately less, as
compared with the railways.
The annual net income
from railways is ... ... £36,930,901
Canals, docks, etc., esti-
mated at ... ... ... 2,560,000
Total £39,490,901
Say £40,000,000.
On the assumption, therefore, that the
whole of this capital in these undertakings
is repaid within fifty years, or thereabouts,
from the present time, and the rates of
carriage from that date reduced to the bare
cost of working and maintenance, there


would be a relief to the population engaged
in the industrial, commercial, and agri-
cultural interests of this country, based
on the existing income from these sources
of £40,000,000 per annum, but inasmuch
as the country is likely to continue to
progress for, it is suggested, a quarter of
a century at least, and maintain the position
then attained for at least another quarter of
a century, the actual results to the nation in
the shape of relief would probably far ex-
ceed £40,000,000 per annum at the end of
fifty years, as the result of the reduction
of the charges for carriage to the bare cost
of working and maintenance.
The enquiry will naturally arise, How
is this enormous sum required, in addition
to the repayment of the National Debt,
to be accomplished without impoverishing
the nation? The writer’s reply is, that
three alternatives occur to him as prac-
ticable, namely:—(l). The nation could
purchase the railways, etc., and receive
the income, setting aside a sinking fund


out of the income; or, (2) purchase by an
annual payment the reversion of the rail-
ways, &c., after a certain number of years ;
or, (3) adopt the precedent followed,
altered to meet the special circumstances,
in regard to the railways originally built
by private enterprise in our East Indian
possessions.
Upon the first alternative in buying
up the railways, we have to reckon with
the present value of the capital invested,
and the annual cost to us of the purchase
must be taken to be at least 3 per cent,
on this present value, and the immediate
advantage of purchasing depends for its
effect on the difference between this an-
nual charge and the present return of
the railways. It becomes very important
to ascertain exactly what that margin will
be, and in how many years it may be
expected to reduce the capital to zero,
and I have investigated the question so
far as railways are concerned to this
extent; —


British Railways (extracted from a Current Share List).
Amount.
Dividend paid
in 1890.
Market Value,
1891.
Ordinary Shares and)
Stocks J
Lines Leased at Fixed)
Rentals J
Guaranteed Shares and)
Stocks J
Preference Shares and)
Stocks J
Debenture Stocks ...
287,319,810
7,157,802
94,991,534
183,506,244
193,722,890
13,118,052
31,061
4,155,525
7,720,839
7,560,003
340,085,204
9,724,493
129,236,975
234,127,646
239,497,639
£766,698,280
£32,585,480
£952,671,957
Average Dividend 4 - 25 per cent. Yield per cent, on the present
value 3'42 per cent.


The foregoing may probably be taken
as a type of the £876,595,166 invested in
railways, and the £64,000,000 in docks,
etc., because I find the whole of our
railways are returned for 1889, as return-
ing 4 - 21 per cent, upon the capital
expended. If these railways, therefore,
which cost 766 millions odd, and are
worth at the present market value 952
odd millions, can be dealt with, the whole
could also be probably purchased. I
assume that the nation could borrow at 3
per cent., leaving a surplus of - 42 per
cent., which would be equal to £4,001,222
per annum.
The present income cannot, however,
be considered as the net income over the
next fifty years. As the development of
the country proceeds (less the interest upon
further capital outlay), the net income must
largely increase, and in lieu of '42 per cent.,
the probable average margin, after the next
five or ten years, may be at least one per
cent,


But, taking 42 per cent., or say
£4,000,000 per annum, invested at 3 per
cent, compound interest, will amount to
£954,339,061 in about 71 years. One per
cent., or £9,526,719 per annum, would pro-
duce practically the same amount of capital
in 47 years, so that we have reasonable
grounds for estimating that if the railways,
&c., were now purchased by the nation, and
all surplus income beyond the 3 per cent,
applied to a sinking fund, the whole of the
capital could be repaid, without cost to the
nation, in less than fifty years, and all our
communications made free, except the ex-
pense of working.
That it would be of immense benefit to
the nation to have its railroads free of interest
charges cannot be denied. For the deve-
loped inter-communication, which is essential
to the social and industrial life of a commu-
nity like our modern nations, the railroads
must be looked upon as the true roads for
the major part of the traffic of the nation,


both for goods and passengers. The ques-
tion, therefore, may be put thus, “ What
chance would a nation have of competing
with others, if its roads were private pro-
perty, and the traffic thereon could be
(within limits) mulcted in tolls to private
persons ? ” If it is answered that its com-
petitors will be in like evil case, it is not so.
Both France and Germany will probably
own the bulk of their own railways (as
national property) at no very distant date.
But the true answer is, that it is not a
question of whether our competitors will be
no better off in this particular point, but
how much difference it would make to us to
have this favourable position. And, if we
look at it in this light, we see at once that
the whole of our commercial existence may
depend upon the decision Great Britain
takes on this matter.
And upon the second alternative, the
proposition to insure the continuance of
our commercial prosperity, by freeing the


railways during the period of our richest
coal harvest, is so important, that I should
like to represent the cost in another way,
which is independent of the question
whether State management of railways is
likely to be more economical than their
present management.
Assuming that the present value of
railways, docks, canals, gas and water
works, is 1,350 millions in round num-
bers, and on the assumption that the
National Debt and Public loans are paid
off in fifty years from the present time,
the entire freeing of the means of com-
munication etc., may probably be safely
deferred to 75 years. Now, to purchase
the reversion of 1,350 millions in 75
years, with money at three per cent., would
cost under five millions per annum, which
would be the maximum cost, therefore,
to the nation under any circumstances to
secure the reversion of all these properties,
and free the means of communication, and


gas and water. For the reason before
given, the writer considers this the most
expensive mode of freeing these charges,
for, by purchasing these properties now,
the nation would secure as a set-off against
the five millions per annum, not only the
margin due to the lower rate of per-centage
at which the Government can obtain
capital, but the extra increment in the
income in the future.
And there remains the third alternative
course, which may be adopted by the nation
for the purpose of acquiring the railways,
and that is by following the precedent of
the purchase by the Secretary of State of
the East Indian Railways, the conditions
being modified to meet the somewhat
different circumstances. The Eastern Bengal
Railway Company Purchase Act, 1834,
47 and 48 Viet., Cap. CCIV., may be
quoted as typical of the course followed in
the purchase of the Indian Railways, and to
the preamble of that Act, with Clauses 9,


20, and 22, the writer directs special
attention.
Many and obvious objections may be
reasonably advanced to the handing over of
such large interests to the control and
management of a Government Department,
but a little consideration will show many of
these objections to be not so serious as, at
the first blush, they would appear to be.
To begin with, during the development
period of our internal communications,
great advantages accrued from the fact of
these works being carried out by private
enterprise, and by this means competitive
railways and docks were established ; but
now, with the exception of the extensions
and additions to our railways and docks in
the Midlands, in the Scottish Coal Field,
and South Wales, to accommodate the
additional developments which have yet to
arise, and the additions and further
accommodation upon existing railways, to


accommodate a larger volume of traffic, the
country has been supplied with railways
and docks, and a finality in this direction is
rapidly being arrived at.
Then again, the railway experience of
the last quarter of a century has educated
a large class of persons who are thoroughly
conversant with the economical working
and management of the railways and docks
in this country, and there should be no
great difficulty in so organising the control
of the working, as to secure fair and liberal
treatment to all who use them.
Then again, the objections which the
inhabitants of this country may reasonably
have to the handing over of the enormous
patronage, which the control of so large an
interest involves, to a public department,
could probably be guarded against by some
special provision.
Already one of the public departments,
the Board of Trade, is beginning to exercise


a somewhat paternal control in the manage-
ment and working of our railways, which is
a step in the direction the writer has
advocated.
If the course suggested in this paper, or
such other policy as an exhaustive legisla-
tive enquiry may indicate, by which the
exhaustion of the best of our coal resources
need not necessarily mean the gradual
decay of our national position, is adopted,
the nation would materially benefit in the
immediate future by the permanency which
would be secured to our industrial and
commercial position.
The United Kingdom is so populous
and wealthy, because she is the metropolis of
a vast empire, and the centre of an immense
commerce; and our existence as a wealthy
nation depends upon our being able to
maintain and extend our commerce, and
continue our pre-eminence, and whatever


may be the cost of maintaining that pre-
eminence, as the late Mr. Dudley Baxter
stated some years ago, must be cheerfully
paid as the truest National Economy.
The writer has endeavoured to show that
the maintenance of that commerce for
centuries is within the grasp of a moderate
annual outlay during the ensuing half-
century or thereabouts; but it would be
impossible to measure the disastrous results
to all classes of the rapid decline of the
National Income.
There is one further question, that of a
market for our manufactures in the future.
We observe the United States of America
becoming self-contained, and rapidly ceasing
to purchase our manufactures. On the
European continent, again, tariffs are in
force which unfairly tax our products, and
the necessity of binding more closely our
colonies and possessions with the mother
country, is probably rapidly maturing, with


the object of securing to our colonies a
large and special market for their raw
products, and to the mother country, a
special and extending market for her
manufactured products.
Some such co-operation would appear to
be in all probability a mutual necessity in
the early future, binding the whole Empire
in closer alliance and mutual interest; but
unless we adopt a better principle of
national economy at home, and shew to our
colonies that we are making such provi-
sions to meet the increased cost of importing
into Great Britain and manufacturing our
products, as will compensate for the natural
disadvantages due to more costly fuel in the
future, and thus maintain our population,
commerce, national power and influence.
Any proposal either of making a closer
alliance with our Possessions, or even of
retaining our colonies for any lengthened
period, must be dismissed from considera-
tion as the idle dream of the enthusiast.


In conclusion, the writer desires to
express his acknowledgements to Mr.
Fletcher Moulton, Q.C., Mr. Russell Sowray,
of the Woods and Forests Department, and
Mr. Oswald Walmesley, of Stone Buildings,
Temple, for the kind and material assistance
they have rendered the writer in the
preparation of this Paper; and it must not
be omitted to point out that the writer is a
Mining Engineer, and not a Political
Economist, and that the remedies he pro-
poses to the rapid decline, which must
otherwise follow the exhaustion of the best
of our coal resources, must be accepted as
more or less of a perfunctory nature, and as
a part of a question which will require the
most mature consideration of those most
capable of dealing with it. Whether the
remedies suggested are those best adapted
to meet the exigencies which will arise will
be ascertained by such investigation. He
has only to again point out that the
momentous difficulty exists. Are we, as a
nation, within a comparatively limited period


from the present time, to allow our enormous
National Income to rapidly decline to half
or even a third of even its present amount,
bringing incalculable misery to all classes,
and reducing this great nation with its
glorious past, and its probably, otherwise
still greater future, to the condition of a
second or third-rate power, because we
decline to set aside, during a period when
provision is possible, a moderate insurance
fund, which will enable the nation to main-
tain its position and continue to extend its
beneficial influence for centuries to come ?
He would appeal to all classes not to allow
political exigencies, temporary objects, or
selfish motives to prevent the carrying out
of such an object, and by careful investiga-
tion adopt such a course as will be most in
unison with the best traditions of the
Anglo-Saxon race.


CARDIFF :
WILLIAM LEWIS, PRINTER, DUKE STREET.




