

f<s 2
Tho 6hut*ch Suciuty; fur tiro BiacD.sc uf Si]xliU)if.
P A P E FI S
READ AT
THE CONFERENCE
Held August 2711* and 28th, A.D.1885,
IN THE
CHUECH SOCIETY’S HOUSE,
TOG-ETHER WITH THE
ADDRESSES DELIVERED ON THE OCCASION
BY THE MOST KEYEEEND THE LOEH BISHOP,
(PRESIDENT of the society.)
Subjects,
FIRST DAY.
Address by the President.
“ The History and Principles of The Church Society, 15 by The Very Reverend
The Dean of Sydney.
“The Future of The Church Society,” by The Rev. Canon King, M.A., and
Mr. Valentine Blornfield.
SECOND DAY.
“ Sustentation and Endowment,” by Mr. VV. J. Foster.
“ Endowment by Insurance,” by Mr. J. Plummer.
“ Auxiliaries and How Best to Work them,” by the Rev. Canon Gunther, M.A.
Address by The President.
jßjjfcW
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 490, KENT STREET,
Close to St. Andrew's Cathedral.


[MATE will
explain tlie objects of the Conference.
Church Society’s House
171, Phillip Street,
13th August, ISBS.
My Deal Sir,
It has been felt by many friends of Tlie Church
Society that the time is now come for considering- how the
standard of its resources and its operations may be so raised as
to become more thoroughly adequate to the present needs of the
Church.
With this view, the Committee have resolved to hold a
Conference in these Booms on the afternoons and evenings of
Thursday, 27th August, and Friday, 28th August, beginning
at 4 p.m.; and to invite the attendance of all who are interested
in this very important subject.
The accompanying paper Avill show you the subjects to be
submitted for discussion ; and, as I am anxious that they should
be widely known and considered, I earnestly hope that you will
be able to favour us on the occasion with your presence.
I am, my dear Sir,
Your faithful Servant in Christ,
ALFEED SYDNEY.


FIB,ST DAY, AUGUST 27.
The Proceedings having been commenced by the singing of “ Yeni,
Creator Spiritns,” which was followed by prayer,
The President said that, in opening the conference, he did not desire
to anticipate in any sense the discussion on the many interesting points,
which would be brought before the meeting in the various papers to be
read. His object was rather to suggest to them —perhaps he might
say to recall to them—the very great importance of their meeting,
and the absolute necessity that they should draw from it something of
practical and substantial fruit. He understood that the meeting was
not a large popular meeting of those who came together simply to be
interested or amused. It was a quiet and serious conference of those
who were already interested in the work of the society, and who were
desirous of considering how that work might be extended and improved.
Let him at once remind them they did not assemble, because
their society was in either a stagnant or retrogressive condition. On
the contrary, they acknowledged with thankfulness that during last
year they had made a very great and cheering step in advance. They
would probably remember that the free fund of the Church Society had
risen in that year from T 3600 to .£SBOO. But, as usual in all religious
and charitable works, the progress they had made only opened and
disclosed the presence of far larger opportunities ; the work of the
future grew always with the performances of the past and of the
present. Moreover, that very progress encouraged them with the hope
that they might push it under God’s blessing very much further, so as
to rise to the opportunities of this present time.
He thought that the measure of support accorded to the Church
Society was a tolerably correct test of two things as existing in the
Church —in the first place, of interest in the Church itself and of
willingness to make some sacrifice for it; in the second, of care for the
work of the Church as a whole —not of the work of this or that district,
of this or that parish, but in the diocese at large. Now, those two
principles—interest in Church work and care for Church unity—which
appeared to him to be, in a rough but not ineffective way, measured
by the support given to their Church Society—were the principles
especially needed for progress at this present moment. They stood, he
believed, in respect to the progress of their Church in this land, at a
very critical time—a critical time being always a time, no doubt, of
danger and anxiety, but also a time of hope and opportunity. There
were many signs which showed them that the power they exercised
in the future must be greater than the power they had exercised in the
past, or unquestionably it would be less. They could not stand where
they were; they must either advance, or they must positively and
comparatively recede. The question, which pressed upon the Church


of England at the present moment, was whether she should or should
not hold that position of spiritual leadership in the battle against
secularism and sin and unbelief, which seemed to be laid upon her
by her numbers, by her resources, and by her inheritance of the old
traditions of the mother country. They desired, of course, no rivalry,
except the honourable rivalry of doing good, with any other Christian
bodies : but they could not consent to fall below their resources and
their responsibilities in the great battle for their Lord and Master.
They stood in some degree between two extremes of Christian
thought and Church polity. On the one side there was the great
system of absolutism which they saw in the Roman Catholic Church ;
and on the other side there was what he might call the theory of Con-
gregational disintegration—though this could not be followed to ex-
treme completeness—in that which was now called the Congregational
Church. He noticed that both those bodies—the Roman Catholic on
the one hand, and the Congregationalist on the other—were at this
moment showing an example of self-sacrifice and liberality, which
might encourage members of the Church of England to the greater
exercise of those principles, and, in default of such exertion, would put
them to shame. Without any desire to bring in sectarian rivalry, he
desired that the members of the Church of England should ask them-
selves whether they were, or were not, prepared to fall behind the right
standard of self-sacrifice in the battle of Christianity in the future, and
so leave the chief burden in other hands than those on which it ought
to rest.
Let them look for a moment at the remarkable and most
praiseworthy exertions now being made by the Roman Catholic
Church in this colony. On all sides could be seen rising convenient
and sometimes splendid buildings for church purposes; and, what was
even more to the purpose, they saw an almost unexampled sacrifice
made for the maintenance of schools of their own form of religious
teaching. They saw erected not only elementary schools, but higher
schools and colleges ; and some of those institutions educated many of
the children of the Church of England herself. All those exertions,
for which all honour should be done to them, would unquestionably
tell on the religious history of the future, and so on the leadership of the
great Christian warfare.
Now, if they glanced at the Continent of Europe—if they looked at
France, at Germany, at Italy—they would find that the condition of
things was briefly and roughly this, that the great battle there was
between the Roman Catholic system, weighted with all the usurpations
and corruptions which had unhappily been stereotyped by the last
Vatican Council, and the power of Secularism, and sometimes of
aggressive and violent Infidelity. In those countries the intermediate
power of Protestantism, as a religious force, was of very inferior
account in the great warfare. Accordingly if one studied the history
of European Christianity at the present time he would find that the
great and sacred cause of Christianity was mainly represented by a
Church burdened and hindered by those perversions against which the
Church of England had felt it to be their solemn duty to protest;
while the French and German forms of Protestantism were powerful
systems of religious thought, but—what would have been thought
incredible in the 16th century —were not exercising a strong, vital
religious influence over the minds of the great mass of the people.


Hence, in contemplating the conflict between Christianity and
Unbelief in Europe, they found that the side which, on the whole,
called out their sympathies very deeply, was nevertheless one to which
they could not give those sympathies unreservedly. In England and
the colonies it was not so; and he believed that one chief reason why
that condition of things did not exist there was—without any disrespect
to other Christian churches —very largely due to the peculiar and, with all
its anomalies and defects, unexampled influence, which the Church of
England had exercised on the development of English history.
But why was it that the Church of England had exercised that
influence ? Was it not because she had so remarkably united the old
and the new —the principle of authority and principle of liberty—
because she had been at once Catholic in positive faith, and yet
Protestant in negation of error ? But if this had been the case in the
mother country, how far could it be the case here ? Their condition
was still the same in respect of faith, of system, of traditions ; and the
mere accident of disestablishment, important as it was, did not, he
thought, affect the essence of the matter. Hence, without any deprecia-
tion of the efforts of other religious bodies, whose liberality and sacrifice
often put the Church of England to shame, he could not but think that
here also very much of the future of Christianity, and especially the
question whether it should be, not a rival or enemy, but an ally of the
civil power, largely depended upon the exertion, under the principles at
which he had already glanced, of the old Church of England. Nor
could he omit noticing in passing that, by the confession of all, it was
in the strength and breadth of comprehensiveness of the Church of
England that there rested all the hope—if hope there were—of reunion
in the future of those who were separated by no irreconcilable differences.
But however this might be, if what he had said was in any sense
true, it was certain that it laid upon them a very great responsibility.
No man could doubt that on all sides this was a critical age, an age of
deep and essential conflict of first principles. They were witnessing the
conflict between the old civilisation which was impregnated with the
principles of Christianity, and the new civilisations, on secularist bases,
which were offered in its room. He believed that we were approaching
very rapidly to an extremely critical period in that great conflict ; and
that, this being so, they, as members of the Church of England, must
awake—might he say, must awake more than they had yet done ?—to
their great privileges and high responsibility.
He did not exaggerate the importance of their present meeting. He
knew that the essential welfare of the Church did not depend upon
anything that a society like the Church Society could do. It depended
upon the indwelling presence of Our Lord and Master, by the power of
the Holy Spirit; it was by this that the life, energy, and vigour of the
Church must be inspired. But what the Church Society could do was
to give to spiritual forces the necessary external scope and opportunity.
Therefore it was he could not but regard the progress and the prosperity
of that Church Society as a very fair test of the question how far there
were amongst them those two great needful principles—on the one
hand, universal interest in the work of the Church and willingness for
individual sacrifice; on the other hand, the sense of duty and loyalty
to the Church as a whole, or rather to the Divine Head of the Church
Himself—not to this or that parish, not to this or that minister, not to


this or that peculiar form or ritual in worship. In that belief they were
met to-day to consider how they might promote the work and strength
of the Society. He hated to have to cry out continually in spiritual
matters for the resources of money ; but, as he had said before, money
was dormant power; and for power, whether dormant or energetic,
there was a heavy responsibility. He hoped that the result of their
conference would be largely to improve the resources of the Church
Society ; but even more to bring home to their minds the critical nature of
the time, and the responsibility which it entailed ; and so to cause them
to resolve that by individual exertion, and by every influence they could
use upon others, they would endeavour to sustain that responsibility,
and to rise under God’s blessing to what he believed to be a great and
glorious opportunity, (The delivery of the address was frequently
interrupted by applause, and at its close the Primate was loudly
cheered.)
HISTORY AND PRINCIPLES OF THE CHURCH SOCIETY,
By the Very Rev. The Dean of Sydney.
I wish to preface the observations which I am about to offer to the
Conference, upon the subject which has been assigned to me, by stating
that my paper has been prepared under some special disadvantages.
It has been written during an unavoidable absence from Sydney, and
without the means of access to papers and documents which would
have afforded me much help, and would have enabled me to verify by
reference to them the statements which are advanced. I might thus
also have obtained further information upon some points for which
I must trust mainly to memory alone. Under these circumstances I
must throw myself upon the indulgence of the members of the Con-
ference, and ask them not to criticise too severely any defects which
may betray themselves in my paper.
A word or two also with reference to the subject which has been
assigned to me by the Committee; viz. —the History and Principles of
the Society. The history may be taken as meaning either the history
of its origin and formation or as including with these the story of its
operations and their results. As however the latter would occupy a
much larger space of time than could reasonably be given to it on such
an occasion, with a variety of details and illustrations, I assume that
the former view must have been in the mind of the Committee and to
this I shall now turn.
The Origin.
The Society arose out of the spiritual necessities of the diocese-
At the time of Bishop Barker’s arrival in the diocese, thirty years ago,
those necessities were very serious and urgent. A careful survey of the
whole field and an examination of its circumstances, revealed a large
extent of spiritual destitution. The population had been growing
rapidly, and extending itself more and more widely in the interior,
while in the more settled parts and especially in Sydney and the
suburbs, it had far outgrown the means of grace which were available.


The diocese, it will be remembered, then embraced the whole of the
Territory which is now divided into the four Dioceses of Sydney, Goul-
burn, Bathurst and Riverina. “ The number of the clergy then in the
diocese licensed and holding a Cure of souls was 48.” Twenty more
were required to supply immediate wants. Others were
required for the country districts, and Catechists to assist them, or in
some instances to act as substitutes carrying on evangelistic work, until
the districts should be ripe for the location of Ordained Ministers of
Christ. And as soon as it became known that there was a prospect, or
a possibility of their wants being supplied, requests for help began to
come in from various quarters.
Churches and school-churches were also urgently demanded for the
celebration of the worship of God, and the gathering together of His
people, to hear the Gospel of salvation, and to be instructed in the duties
which they owed to Him and to one another.
As an illustration of the extent of these wants, I may observe by the
way, that within seven years from the Bishop’s arrival, no less than 84
such buildings were opened for Divine Service, or at the rate of one in
each month during that period (Vide Appendix to Bishop’s charge
1863.)
The view then which presented itself to the eye of the Chief Pastor
of the Diocese, as he surveyed the field of labour, was painfully dis-
tressing. From the centre to the circumference these were, in nu-
merous localities, souls lying in spiritual ignorance, and in danger of
perishing for lack of that knowledge which is life eternal. Though the
discovery of gold and the anxious desire of numbers to become pos-
sessed of it there had been for several ye rs an unsettlement of the
population, and this added to the difficulties of the position. What
then was to be done ? It was evident that the remedy must come
from the Church itself. The extent of State Aid to Religion was
limited, and no increase of it could be hoped for. The only means then
of securing the funds which would be required was to enlist the
sympathy and contributions of the Church’s own members, and to
combine them in a united effort for carrying out what was so
urgently required for their own spiritual welfare. Gathering around
him therefore the principal Laity and Clergy in the Metropolis, the
Bishop laid before them the facts already referred to, invited their counsel
and solicited their help. The result was, that after much consultation
and deliberation, a resolution w'as arrived at to establish a Church
Society whose design should be to provide for the following objects
1. The support in part or wholly of Clergymen, Missionaries to the
Aborigines, and Catechists who might also act as Schoolmasters ; 2.
The endowment of Churches; 3. The erection of Churches and
Parsonages; 4. The circulation of the Holy Scriptures, the Book of
Common Prayer, and other religious and useful publications. It was
at the time supposed that the Diocesan Committee of the Society for
the _ Propagation of the Gospel and the Society for the Promotion of
Christian Knowledge could be merged in the Church Society : but ob-
jections were taken by several influential members of the Church to
such a course, and the idea was therefore abandoned. A wide diversity
of opinion prevailed also upon the subject of National Education, and
it was on this account determined to omit the question of Education
from the Society’s objects. On the sth May, 1856, the Society was


formed, and I may be permitted to quote a short paragraph from the
first Annual Report, to shew the spirit and work which it was in-
strumental in evoking.
The Report says—“ The impulse given to various objects, all tending
to the advancement of true religion, by means of the Church Society’s
grants is a subject of much thankfulness. There cannot be, at this
time fewer than 38 projects for Church building, exclusive of the
Cathedral, in various stages of advancement, involving an expendi-
ture of not less than T 37,000 in amount. In addition to this a further
sum will be expended in the erection of Parsonage-houses and the
purchase of lands, the total amount being P'40,000. (Report 1856 page
20.)
The Principles of the Society.
I now proceed to point out the principles which underlie the constitu-
tion, are incorporated with its existence, and are essential to its life.
There are two, which I regard as the essential principles. The first
is the obligation which rests upon the Church of Christ to provide for
the support of the Christian ministry and the Ordinances of the Gospel.
The second is, the necessity of the voluntary efforts of the members oi
the Church individually, in effecting this object.
These two principles are the basis and life of the Society. It was
the recognition of them which led to its formation ; and it is by their
practical operation that it is held together.
Let me endeavour to illustrate their importance, and to shew their
binding nature.
It is a remarkable fact in our Lord’s earthly history, that when He
entered upon His public ministry, He allowed Himself to be dependent
upon His faithful followers for His temporal support. He appears to
have expected them to supply what was necessary. He worked no
longer at the trade He had followed at Nazareth; and He never wrought
a miracle to supply His worldly requirements. He accepted the shelter
of Peter’s house at Capernaum, and the comfort of the home at Bethany,
He allowed the women who followed Him from Galilee to minister to
Him of their substance, and He refused not the hospitality either of
Pharisees or of Publicans.
Again, when he sent forth the Twelve to proclaim His kingdom, and
afterwards the seventy, He charged them to depend for the supply of
their temporal necessities upon those who should receive their message;
laying it down as a principle, that ‘ the labourer is worthy of his hire ’ :
and therefore that those who were ministered unto were bound to
provide those who minister with a suitable maintenance.
It seems to me that these facts in Christ’s own history, and in His
instructions to his first ministers, plainly declare His mind as to the
obligation which lies upon His followers to provide for the support of
those who minister in His name, and of what is requisite for the
Church’s welfare.
If we look for further proof in the history of the Church after His
Ascension, we find it in the New Testament.
The claim which St. Paul made to the right of himself and his
fellow-labourers in the Corinthian Church to such a provision will be
remembered by those whom I am addressing. True it was that he
waived that right and wrought at his trade as a tent-maker, lest he


should lay himself open to the charge of seeking worldly advantages.
But he nevertheless insisted upon it as a right Divinely ordained, and
no less binding on the Christian Church than a similar law had been on
the Jewish. ‘Do ye not know,’ he asks, ‘ that they who minister about
holy things live of the things of the Temple ? and they which wait at
the Altar are partakers with the Altar ? Even so hath the Lord ordained
that they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel,’ (1 Cor. ix.
13, 14.)
It will be observed that the obligation is laid by the Apostle upon the
whole Church as a body, and not upon a few select individuals in it.
His argument applies to all to whom his epistle was addressed —‘ the
saints in Corinth, with all that in every place call upon the name of
Jesus Christ our Lord.’
These principles, which are thus incorporated in our Church Society,
ought never to be lost sight of, and need to be kept steadily in view in
fulfilling the work which the Society was formed to accomplish.
What is that we aim at ? The establishment of Christ’s holy Eeligion
in every part of the Diocese : the supply of Christian ordinances, the
support of the Christian ministry, the evangelization of those who
know not God; the bringing back of the wanderers from the fold, and
surrounding them with all needful safeguards to preserve them from
the paths of error and sin. To build up the Church in faith and
holiness, and as it increases in numbers to fortify it with spiritual help
and supports.
But is there not reason to fear that with such aims before us, we fall
far short of their realization, for want of that deep sense of our obliga-
tions which we ought ever to cherish ? Is it not a fact that many
claim to be followers of Christ, and to have a right to all the privileges
of His Church, who never think of the part they ought to take in
fulfilling the great commission which He gave to His Church ? Is it
not a fact that vast numbers of Christians never make it a matter of
conscience to give regularly and systematically to the support of His
cause ? When asked to contribute occasionally, do they not regard the
trifling sums which they contribute as charity or almsgiving, which
they have a right to withhold or bestow, at their own pleasure ? Not
as an offering due to the Giver of All, nor a thank-offering for the
mercies which they have received from Him ?
These are false notions which we must endeavour to get rid of, to
ignore, to disdain, and to renounce ; and instead thereof to adopt the
high, pure, noble, and Christlike principle of giving freely of our best to
God, and in some fair proportion to the means which we possess
through His bounty.
May I be allowed to suggest to my brethren in the Ministry that
they should never take any lower ground in pleading for the Church
Society than these two great principles which are its very life and soul *
training their people up to the true and high standard of Christian giving
and Christian effort which the Gospel teaches ; and showing them that
giving and working for God and for the extension and building up of
His Church are as much a part of our vocation as Christians, as to do
justly and to act with integrity in our daily conduct.
And I would ask my brethren of the laity to use their efforts to
spread these principles amongst their fellow-churchmen and in their
families : to talk them over and discxxss them one with another;“and


to carry them into more extended and vigorous action. Our Church
Society wants but their general adoption to endow it with new and far
greater powers of usefulness to enable it to extend its operations, and
fulfil all its objects, and to prosecute a career more worthy of the
Church to which we belong, and of the Sacred Name which as members
of Christ we bear.
THE FUTURE OF THE CHURCH SOCIETY,
By the Rev. Canon King, M.A.
In endeavouring to forecaste the future work of the Church Society,
it will be well to consider the principle on which it was founded, the
objects for which it was instituted. If the lapse of well nigh thirty
years has effected any change in the general principle on which the
Society was founded, we must recognise the fact as destined, sooner or
later, to lead to radical changes in its organisation,-—and if the lapse
of time has plainly altered the relative importance of the objects which
it was originally constituted to carry out, it will be easy to foretell
that, in the near future, changes more or less important in the work of
the Society must be expected to take place.
It is evident that the great principle on which the Society was founded
was the need and the power of Church combination to effect Church work
alike parochial and general—and the work proposed to be accomplished
may be set forth as providing for the due administration of the ordin-
ances of religion, and for educational and missionary work by the
Church. To promote combination among Churchmen for such pur-
poses was at the time the Church Society was called into existence
long needed. The Church in the Colony had been so nursed and cher-
ished in its infancy and youth by the Church in the mother-country,
and by grants in aid of religion by the State, that it needed to be roused
to common effort to supply the demands arising at once from the dim-
inution of assistance long accorded, and the imperative demands of
a suddenly-increased and rapidly-increasing population.
As indicating the extent to which the Church in its earlier stage
hi this Colony was indebted to the kindly support of the Mother-
Church in England, I may mention that Bishop Broughton stated
on one occasion that only one of all the Churches, and par-
sonage houses then erected was built or could have been built with-
out assistance from the Mother-Country. The clergy were, with
one exception, supported by grants from the State, with a traditional
claim on their congregations for a further amount, a claim which
I once heard recognized in words, but which was seldom if ever
recognized by deeds. The dependance on the State was, just pre-
vious to the formation of the Church Society, so great, that I well
remember the Yen. Archdeacon Cowper, at that time administering the
Diocese, expressing his fear that the newly erected church of St. Paul’s,
Redfern, could not be opened for divine service as there was no govern-
ment stipend available for its minister. The founders of the Church


Society were equal to the occasion they recognized the principle of self
help, they saw that the nursing days of the church having passed away
the time had come for her members to be up and doing—the strong
helping the weak—all combining for the common good.
It was a matter of great consideration in what way this could best be
done. It was possible to raise a sum of money by means of which the
more immediately pressing wants of the Church could be met, but the
founders of the Church Society took a larger view of what the Church
required. Regarding it as in a transition state looking forward to the
calling together of a general Representation Church Body as matter of
necessity to the near future, and forecasting that such a body would
not, and could not, be satisfied with any organisation so feeble and so
precarious as an ordinary charitable fund it was determined to con-
stitute a society which, with power of expansion from time to time,
might embrace all branches of Church work. Not attempting to dictate
to the future legislative body in what way the Church wants are to be
met, it was carefully provided that this existing Church Organisation
should merge in the Synod, on its establishment. The large and dis-
tinctive name of Church Society was considered properly to mark the
assisted efforts of churchmen in carrying out Church work. The organ-
isation and management of the Society were carefully framed to secure
the confidence and co-operation of all members of the Church, interfer-
ing as little as possible with parochial susceptibilities, yet stimulating
local effort, teaching in action brotherly sympathy whilst promoting the
common faith. So wisely was that organisation framed, and so well
did it work, that the legislative body, when called into existence, at
once adopted it with a very few changes—extending its sphere of opera-
tion of meeting the wants of the Church in enabling poor parishes to
comply with the demands of the Synod, especially in the duty of pro-
viding for the superannuation of ministers, and provision for their
widows and orphans. The Synod arranged for representation of the
Church on the board of management of the Society by the appointment
of twelve members of its own body chosen from year to year, and
having formally adopted it, earnestly enjoined upon the members of the
Synod its support,
We may, 1 think, recognise two broad principles of action exhibited
to view in the Church Society from its earliest days, and endorsed with
the deliberate approval of the Church Assembly. By the uniting
churchmen in working together to supply local parochial wants, and
the seeking to obtain from all a substantial and practical recognition of
common faith and common brotherhood, by general offerings poured
into a common treasury to be disbursed by a carefully-chosen and fairly
representative body.
I cannot see that time has weakened the necessity for still proclaim-
ing and still acting upon these principles. Still do churchmen need to
be united in heart and hand in carrying on local parochial work, still
do the weak require strengthening—still does the apostolic precept
apply to all, “ Be not weary in well doing.” But it may be asked, Has
the lapse of time varied the degree in which the objects of the Church
Society demand the attention and support of the Church ? Those objects
we may sum up as providing and sustaining the clergy and missionaries
and catechists to the heathen—the erection and repairing churches
and residences for the clergy—the endowment of churches. Now


as regards the providing of clergy. The chief mode of such supply
originally contemplated was, no doubt, assisting clergymen to come
to this colony from the Mother country and I suppose that not less
than between 3 or 4,000 pounds have been expended by the Society in
direction. Without venturing to predict that this branch of the
Society’s operation will altogether cease in the future, I venture to think
that it will soon be reduced to very small limits indeed. The difficulty
ol obtaining suitable men from the Mother-Church which requires so
large a supply lor her own increasing wants and for urgent missionary
calls is more and more felt—but I venture to think that a very important
work may be done in the future by the Church Society by assisting to
maintain during their University or Collegiate course, young men
preparing for the ministry.
The mission work of the Church specially noticed amongst the
objects of the Church Society by missions to the Aborigines—-time alas!
is fast rendering nugatory—still however there is a remnant left, which
must not be neglected. It is evident that the Church Society recognizes
as part of her wnrk, the listening to the cry of the perishing heathen
“ Come over and help us " —missions to the heathen in our midst as to
the Chinese, and such aid as we can give to the efforts of those noble
societies seeking to make the light of the Gospel shine in the dark places
ol the earth may well claim as in the past so in the future the hearty
support ol the Church Society. I come now to the sustentation of the
clergy. How much the Church Society has been permitted to accom-
plish in this direction in the past is well seen and has been ably
presented to you this day. I venture to think that in this direction lies
its most useful work in the future. The organization provides the
means in many cases ol sustaining the independence and maintaining
tlie comfort ol the ministers of our Church, while at the same time
enabling every member of the Church to contribute his measure of
support, be it little or much to the maintenance of her ordinances of
religion in our midst. In the increasing and much to be desired
multiplication of parishes and parochial districts it requires no prognos-
tication to discern no likelihood of diminution in this branch of the
Society’s operations. Had it been possible to have carried out the
endowment ol Churches the sustentation work of the Church Society
might indeed have been lessened in the future.
I venture to think that the important branch of the Society’s
woik will occupy the thoughts ol the Committee, as it may well tax
the resources ol the Society in the future. Of the fifty parishes now
receiving more from the funds of the Society than they contributed,
some must for a very long time indeed be regarded as likely to need
assistance. Now supposing the Society were in a position, in any one
year, to say even a levy such parishes—“lnstead of assisting you
yeai by year with a precarious and fluctuating grant, we will provide a
sum ol money on the condition that by special effort you raise a similar
interest of the whole to be yours lor all time to come.”
Or, the Society might set apart a certain sum to be obtained by certain
paiishes on well defined conditions. In many cases, advantage would
be taken of such offers, and the Society’s annual income would be relieved
horn a constantly recurring change. Our Society having in its past
recognised the benefit to the Church of a system of superannuation of
the Cleigy, it will be only natural that with more ample means placed


at its disposal it will be able to give a larger measure of support to this
glowing need of our Church. For the last twenty-three years neces-
sity for some sound provision of this kind has not pressed heavily on
the Church. In the year 1862, by the State Aid Abolition Act, all the
clergy then in receipt of State aid became, under certain conditions,
annuitants for life ; this has given some breathing time, as it were, to the
Church ; but within no long period the youngest of the clergy still in
receipt of State aid will have passed away, and a demand will have
to be met. The Church, if its work is to extend and prosper
must provide for aged and infirm clergy, in the interests of all alike
ministers, congregations and the Churches at large. It is possible that
in the building of Churches and the erection and repairing of parsonages,
the funds of the Church Society may not be so largely called upon in
the future as in the past. The formation of a special fund through the
exertions of our late President, and with the cordial co-operation of the
Committee of the Society, known as the Church-Building Loan
Fund, has relieved the Society from some demands of this kind.
Still there must remain for many years to come a constant claim
on the resources of the Society to encourage and stimulate by
judicious assistance the erection of temporary places of worship and
residences for the clergy in new parishes and parochial districts, and
it will also be necessary by timely grants in aid of repairs to preserve
from ruin the residences of the clergy in many of the poorer districts.
Lastly I would notice that circumstances over which the Church has
had no control seem largely to determine for the future both the kind
of religious instruction to be aided by the Church Society, and the
channel through which that assistance shall be given. It is true that
with respect to some of these objects it is contended by excellent friends
of our Society that they would be better left to separate society and
district funds. It is said that experience has shewn that separate
societies are more successful in raising funds than any single society
embracing the same objects. The experience referred to is nonsense.
I take largely Home experience and the freedom of the Church at Home
from the necessity of providing for the sustentation of her ministry,
constitute such a far reaching difference that we might well pause and
consider whether this alone would not be sufficient to invalidate any
such conclusion drawn from Home experience. In many of our parishes
all local energy will be needed to provide for this paramount claim.
The combination of parochial and common Church effort carried out
by the Church Society naturally secures, as ought naturally to secure,
for it the first place in the affections of churchmen. It may well be
doubted whether a member of district societies could be more than
temporarily successful, or if permanently successful, whether they would
not be so in great measure, at least, by draining and devoting the
resources of the Church Society. Our common and natural source of
revenue arises from Church collections—it is obvious that independent
collections for different societies must press too heavily in many in-
stances on parochial resources. Even admitting some possible gain
from _ the more enthusiastic support given to district societies, there
remains the grave consideration whether that possible gain would not
be dearly purchased by the want of control of a fairly representative
body of the Church, having a distant view of Church needs and of then-
relative importance. lam far from saying that it may not be wise


from time to time to organise special efforts for special Church funds
—but this could be done-done in a better way and on more suitable
occasions—by the whole Church as represented by the managing body
of the Church Society, than if left to the precarious and uncertain act of
voluntaries, no matter how zealous, outside the influences and
independent of the control of the only body responsible to and possess-
ing the confidence of the Synod of the Church.
THE FUTURE OF THE CHURCH SOCIETY,
By Me. Valentine Blomfield.
The present subject differs from the others which have been provided
for discussion by the conference—in that they have for their object
the review of the past history of the Society, and the consideration of
what seemed to be the best means of carrying on the work which the
Society has in hand at the present time. The object of this paper will be
to glance into the future and to examine whether it will not be possible,
by a more complete organisation, and by a further realization of the
principles upon which the Society is founded, to ensure better results in
the future.
By a glance at the objects (both present and proposed) of the Society
it will be seen that they are properly divisable into two heads, viz. :
Ist. The payment of the clergy; and—
2nd. The extension of the work of the Church either in the way of
helping poorer districts or in establishing fresh centres.
One of the fundamental principles which the Society desired to
emphasize by its establishing a central fund from which the stipends of
the clergy may be paid, is that the clergyman is the servant of the
Church and not of a particular congregation. It maintains in theory,
if not in practice, the necessity of the “needful independence of the
clergy” ot which the Primate spoke so warmly in his first address to
the Society, and upon which the late revered Bishop of Newcastle dwelt
so earnestly in his masterly Pastoral Letter, addressed to the Laity in
the year 1854. He says : —“ The ministers of the Church are appointed
to their office, not for their sakes, but for yours ; not for their own
honor or gain, but for your spiritual good. When I take counsel with
your clergy concerning their duties, my chief advice and exhortation is
that of St. Paul to Timothy ‘ Meditate on these things, give thyself
wholly to them.’ Let your whole time and thoughts be given to build
up and perfect in the faith the souls committed to your care. But how
can your clergy do this if, from the utter insufficiency of their stipends,
their minds are filled with anxious fears of debt and destitution ? . .
. , . To make a clergyman dependent for the necessities of life
upon uncertain offerings, would be to make him the slave instead of
the pastor of his flock. But (he adds further on) such a system as this
of supporting your clergy ( i.e a general Diocesan Stipend fund) is the


best which could be devised for their maintenance It is
important that general regulations should be laid down, and brought
into operation throughout the whole diocese.”
Now, although this is one of the principles of the Society, although
most of the stipends are paid through the Society, yet 'practically the
clergyman is paid by the parish in which he works ; for, exactly the
same sum which is sent in by the parochial officers is returned to the
clergyman without any inquiry by the diocesan authorities as to
whether it is the proper amount of stipend or not. Now the result of
this financial Congregationalism is that every parochial nerve is strained
to raise Mr. A.’s or Canon B.’s stipend, and the great majority of Church
people decline to give to the General Fund of the Church Society on
the ground that they have given all they are able to give to the Stipend
Fund. Objection is also taken by many to the great number of objects
collected for. It is often said, “No sooner have we got rid of one set
of collectors, than another lot come ; you are always collecting.” The
present plan, therefore, produces two evils : Ist. Clerical dependence
upon personal popularity ; 2nd. Parochial selfishness—which the
Society’s report for 1882 says is only another and more plausible phase
of individual selfishness.
The remedy for these evils seems to me to be the amalgamation of
the two funds, or in other words, the abolition of the Parochial Stipend
Fund, and the payment of all stipends from the one General Diocesan
Fund. At first sight this seems to be out of the question, but I think
if something like the following scheme (which is the Presbyterian
Sustentation Fund Scheme adapted to the circumstances of the Pfiocese)
were adopted, not only would the clergy be paid from a central Diocesan
Fund, and would be guaranteed a minimum stipend of .£2OO per annum,
but there would be a margin of from £B5OO to £4OOO (which would
annually increase as the number of clergy increased) for the remaining,
objects of the Society.
Scheme for Improved Working of the Society.
1. The Stipend to be paid by each parish to the Diocese for the
privilege of having its clergyman or clergymen, is to be fixed every (say)
five years by a Board consisting of the Bishop, two Diocesan and three
Parochial members, and the Parish is to be required to send in such
Stipend plus 15 per cent, in four quarterly payments to the Diocesan
Treasurer.
2. The local Stipend Fund Committee and the local Church Society
Committee will therefore be amalgamated under the name of the
Parochial Auxiliary to the Diocesan Fund.
3. The Diocesan authorities are to pay the Stipends fixed by the
Board to the clergymen licensed by the Bishop so long as the required
amount is received from the Parish, and for two quarters after the
amount received falls below the amount fixed. After that period they
will only be obliged to pay the amount received less 15 per cent, but in
all cases they are to guarantee a minimum stipend of £2OO per annum
so long as the clergyman or clergymen can prove that the deficiency
does not arise from their neglect of duty.


4. If the amount raised falls below the fixed amount settled by the
Board, the Diocesan authorities shall report the matter to the Bishop
who shall hold an inquiry into the causes, and take such steps (to be
settled hereafter) as the esse may justify.
5. If the amount remitted falls below £‘2oo, then the Bishop may, at
his discretion, withdraw the clergyman, who shall in that case, be
employed elsewhere, and shall either merge the parish into an adjoining
one, or shall take such steps to supply the weekly services as may seem
expedient. Provided that in cases where the amount of stipend to be
raised in the parish, has been fixed by the Board at less than T2OO, this
clause shall only apply if three-fourths of the fixed amount has not been
sent in.
6. In cases where the clergyman is withdrawn, the rents from unuse'd
Parsonages, Glebes, &c., should be paid into the Diocesan Fund.
7. Wherever it is possible, the fixed amount should be exceeded, and
to this end the Auxiliaries should use every effort by means of meetings,
(at which Deputations from Sydney might attend) lectures, canvassing,
&c., to induce every member of the Church to become a subscriber
according to his means —not at the rate of 12s. per annum —to this
Central Diocesan Fund, and rich parishioners should be encouraged to
pay direct to the Diocesan Treasurer (as some now do to the present
General Fund of the Church Society).
8. The offertories at Advent and Trinity to be given as heretofore to
the General Fund.
9. The Diocesan authorities, after paying the stipends of the clergy,
are to devote the remainder of the fund to general Church purposes,
such as sending clergyman or catechists to missionary districts, or by
increasing the stipends of clergy in the poorer parishes, or generally
carrying out the work of the present Church Society.
l(i. All parishes to be cordially invited to join in the scheme, and in
case of refusal by any parish, the privileges conferred by Ordinance of
Synod upon that parish to be taken away, and when a vacancy in the
incumbency occurs, no new appointment to be made until the parish
shall have agreed to join in the Diocesan Scheme, and pay its clergy
solely thereby.
Of course the foregoing is merely a skeleton requiring to be clothed
after careful consideration. There are no doubt difficulties to be over-
come, interests to be provided for, and rights to be guarded, but I do
not think the difficulties are insuperable, nor that the different interests
and rights may not be conserved and provided for if the matter is care-
fully thought out by those at the head of the Diocese, whose position,
learning, and experience enable them to look at the matter in an im-
partial light.
There cannot, I think, be any two opinions as to the advantages
which a carefully-considered scheme for the Diocesan payment of the
clergy will have over the present system. First, it will ensure the
rightful independence of the clergy, and will therefore conduce to the
introduction into the Diocese of men holding high-class qualifications.
Secondly, it will abolish to a larger extent parochial selfishness, or, as
the Bishop of Newcastle expresses it, Episcopalian Congregationalism.
Thirdly, it will give a larger fixed income for Church extension than
there is at present, and this will not interfere in any way with contri-
butions to the General Fund, as at present, thereby raising the resources


of the Diocese for it.s Home Mission work, far above its present capacity.
Let me prove this in few words. The stipends of the clergy (as given
in the Ecclesiastical Statistics for 1884) amount to .£27,701. If we
deduct the amount granted by the General Fund of the Church Society,
viz., £2976, we have left the respectable sum of £24,725 raised from
local sources. Additional clergy have since been added, so that we
may safely say that the clerical stipends amount to something like
£25,000. 15 per cent on this sum will give £3750. To this must be
added the Advent and Trinity collections, as well as the subscriptions
and donations which would still be paid as formerly. The adoption of
this scheme would therefore considerably increase the amount avail-
able for such purposes as the present General Fund provides for.
In these days the truth of the saying “ unity is strength ” is being
proved in a hundred ways —not only in matters secular, but in things
ecclesiastical. Those religious bodies, which in the old country have
been taught by the force of circumstances to rely upon their own
organization, teach us by their experience that if we Churchmen do not
beware v. e shall be left behind in the race. Both the Presbyterians and
Wesleyans have made their General Fund realities not shadows, and
even the halvation Army, which is but of yesterday, is a model to us in
the matter of organization and discipline. I think that the Church of
England and the Congregationalists are the only bodies not so organized.
“ My brethren these things ought not so to be.”


SECOND DAY, AUG-UST 38.
SUSTENTATION AND ENDOWMENT,
By Mr. W. J. Foster.
[The original MS. having been mislaid by the writer the following is a digest only of the
paper read.]
Mr. W. J. Foster read a paper on “ Sustentation and Endowment,”
in which endowment was defined in a general way as the subsidising,
from whatever source, of the stipends of ministers of religion—that
was, increasing them beyond the amounts contributed by the parishi-
oners as the price which each was ready to pay for the benefit which he
personally received from their religious ministration. For the intel-
lectual and spiritual improvement of the masses of mankind, endow-
ment, wdiether by the State or by philanthropic and private persons, was a
proved necessity. When the two terms “ endowment ” and “ susteuta-
tion ” were severally considered, it would be found that sustentation
meant the supply of stipend to the clergyman personally, and “ endow-
ment ” the vesting of property for the use of the clergyman in the
parish or district locally. Sustentation partook of the nature of salary
or remuneration to the clergyman for time employed, and services per-
formed, in regard to which St. Paul said the labourer is worthy of his
hire. Endowment, although to some extent answering the like purpose,
was really the creating a property or estate for the parish, which the
clergyman acquired by virtue of his incumbency, and could not, he
thought, be traced back to apostolic times. Practically, he supposed sus-
tentation would mean the raising of a common fund from the
several congregations, or from the Church in the diocese as a whole,
out of which the stipend, or part of the stipend, of the clergyman of
each parish might be paid, and is thus to some extent already in exis-
tence, through the operations of the Church Society ; while endowment
was the permanent appropriation of property to the several parishes,
for buildings, churches, schools, &c., and generally, at least in part, for
the maintenance of the incumbent. That also was in existence in the
form of lands, houses, and places of worship or education, belonging to
the Church in many of the parishes. The direct and entire dependence
of the clergyman upon his parishioners or congregation for his means
of subsistence was fraught with so much that was trying to his feelings
as a gentleman, dangerous to the interests of bold and outspoken truth,
and in many other ways objectionable, that he believed few members of
the Church would advocate it, unless it were shown to be absolutely
necessary. The sole point which could be urged in its favour was that
it made it possible to get rid of a clergyman who would otherwise be a
complete incubus upon the parish. But when they considered at what
a cost to the best interests of the Church that very exceptional advan-
tage would be thus purchased, they were led to inquire : Is it at all


necessary ? Cannot all that is desirable be attained by far less objec-
tionable means ? The resource of starving out an objectionable
incumbent was the meanest that could be adopted; and, even if neces-
sary, could not be used without abhorrence by generous natures. For
the maintenance of a proper and reasonable independence in the
clergyman, he must have a proper and reasonable security of tenure of
his incumbency; and this could best be provided for by endow-
ments, or a sustentation fund, or by a wise combination of the
two. But it should always be borne in mind that sustenta-
tion or endowment had two special objects—or rather had a two-
fold object, for the interests ought to be so inseparable that they should
be looked upon rather as double than as distinct. He meant the well-
being of the incumbent, and the well-being of the parishioners. To
give so much undue prominence to the one of these as to exclude the
other, unless the interest of the Church clearly required it, would, he
thought, be a mistake; and whilst, as he had already said, to place the
pastor unprotected at the mercy of his flock would be subversive of the
interests of the Church; so lie thought that to place the flock unprotected
at the mercy of the pastor would also be objectionable, and might be
injurious. That a few prejudiced and troublesome people should have
the power to compel the minister to conform to their caprice or leave
his position as pastor, would be a disgrace to any system under which
such an abuse could exist; but would it not also Ire a sin and a shame,
at which piety, humanity, and common sense, would alike revolt, that
an incumbent, who would neither do his duty to the souls of his parish-
ioners, nor allow any one else to do it for him, should be enabled to
maintain his position against all comers, and to enjoy at the same time
an income contributed to advance the spiritual welfare of the people ?
If the precarious tenure of office without any security is objectionable,
is not the absolute tenure of an estate for life, without any power of
removal, also objectionable ? Can no middle course be found ? Can no
arbiter be found or constituted in whom both clergyman and people can
confide ? Or was the office of an incumbent the only one in which no
such authority could be submitted to ? He believed the members
of their Church—not only the wealthy, but even those of narrow means
—would be prepared to do their part in providing a sustentation or an
endowment fund for the support, in a reasonable condition of inde-
pendence, of their honoured and valued clergy. It was true the cases
in which pastors grievously failed in the performance of their duties
are, through rare exceptions, but he did not hesitate to say that
the providing of estates for life for incumbents, without any con-
dition for the faithful and effective discharge of their duties, was not the
way to make these exceptions more rare; and if parishes under the Church
Act were now fully endowed upon the same footing as the glebes are held,
they would be estates for life without any such condition, and every step
towards their endowment upon this footing under the present church
economy would be placing another difficulty in the way of reform in
this respect. Even now the existing incumbents, so far as related to
the endowment of their parishes, could not be brought under any
conditions without their own consent. The noble, self-sacrificing
devotion of the very large majority of their clergy left no room to doubt
that they would freely consent to any reasonable alterations in their
condition which the real welfare of the Church might demand; but,


unfortunately, it was not in the cases of these worthy and devoted men
that the reform would be of real importance; and, once fully endowed,
each parish would be for the life of the incumbent beyond the reach of
any legislative reformation which the Church could make. A sustenta-
tion fund might be constituted free from these objections, but in doing
so the other extreme ought to be avoided, and a reasonable security
ought to be provided for the clergyman’s tenure of his emoluments. It
should always be remembered that the minister had devoted himself to
what is generally considered a profession involving a life-long ministry
for his Master, and one which usually unfits him for obtaining a liveli-
hood by other means. To complete such a reform as he had rather
crudely hinted at, a fairly and really effective system of superannuation
would be required for clergymen who from ill-health or other innocent
cause might be unable longer to perform their duties with benefit to
their people.
ENDOWMENT BY MEANS OF INSURANCE,
By Mr. James Plummer.
I make no apology for introducing this apparently untried, scheme
in this diocese, as a mode of Endowment of Churches, Colleges, and
kindred Institutions. I have been informed, that it has been effected
elswhere, but I am not in possession of actual facts, and am therefore
unable to give examples, but whether the scheme be novel or not, there
are no valid reasons, why some attention should not be directed to it,
with the view of ultimately benefiting our church. I propose, there-
fore, to consider this subject of Insurance briefly :
Ist.—By the Church generally; 2nd.—By parishes; and 3rd. —By
individual members of our church.
By the Church generally. Let me explain why, and how
For many years the _ Church Society has been supplementing the
stipends of Clergymen in needy country parishes, and there seems no
present prospect of grants being discontinued to the parishes referred
to. If we take.the reports for the last ten years we shall find the same
country parishes receiving almost invariably the same amount year
after j'ear,— notwithstanding the rule passed some time since to reduce
amount of grants 10 per cent, each year, and this simply because the need
of these parishes made a legitimate claim on the funds of the Society for
the full amount of grants.
Now during, and after the next ten years, it may reasonably be
hoped that Church extension will steadily advance in a larger measure
tharr in the past, because our population is increasing in a greater
ratio. I believe the increase in this diocese will be doubled before 20
years. Of this increase the Church of England in this diocese must
strive to maintain her position. What then, in the probable altered
state of affairs (I mean that of supplying the wants of so many new
parishes) is to become of these needy country parishes to which i have
referred ? We cannot withhold our hands and see these deprived of
the ministrations of our church.


It may fairly be urged, that the funds of the Society will be ample
in the future, as much as in the past, to provide for prospective claims.
My reply is, that it is not always that increased population brings a
corresponding increase of means; our present apparent prosperity
should be taken advantage of, to prepare for future need. One of the
objects of the Church Society is 'Endowment , and I propose to show
how this may be done by means of Insurance, if funds will permit ,
somewhat after the following,—Let three (3) gentlemen be selected of
a suitable age, say, from 35 to 40, and their lives be insured for the
benefit of the Church Society. The Society paying the premiums.
For example, Insure each life for 12000 for 15 years, the yearly premium
for each would be .£145 10s., and the available sum at the end of the
term of 15 years would be about £3370, or putting it in another form
the yearly premiums for the three lives would be £430 10s., and the
available' sum in round figures £lO,OOO. In the event of the death of
either of the insured, before the expiration of the 15 years, the sum of
£2OOO would be available at once. Another life could then be Insured
and premiums paid as before. With such an amount as named, it
would be possible to endow with the interest say 8 parishes, this would
relieve the Society’s funds, and so enable it to take up more aggressive
work of stimulating missions in Sydney and Suburbs and where needed,
but that if the church is true’ to her mission this must be done
earnestly and vigorously. I would, however, remark, in passing, if this
scheme were carried out, that it would be well to endow for a term of
say 10 years only, and deal with each on its merits at the expiration of
that term.
2nd.—By Parishes.—The changing character of city parishes, in con-
sequence of the migration of residents to the outskirts of the city,
which may in time become absorbed for business purposes, and so alter
the financial position of such parishes as Darlinghurst, St. Michael’s,
and others that could be named, that it may be wise to take these
possibilities into consideration, and provide by insurance as pointed
out, for the partial endowment of their future clergy. Ascheme was
suggested to me by a Presbyterian friend, not at present in Australia,
combining Endowment and a means of Superannuation of its minister,
which I will allude to briefly somewhat after this manner For the
congregation and minister jointly to insure and pay the premiums on
the life of the minister for a term of years, to be agreed upon, at the
expiration of that term the minister to receive a retiring allowance from
the interest of the available capital, and after his decease his widow, if
any, —the same allowance for life. After that the capital to form an
endowment for the church. The proportion of premium payable by
the minister, to be subject to arrangement with the congregation.
3rd.— By Individual members of our church. This part of the scheme
lam most hopeful will bear fruit. There are the various agencies of
the church for promoting the cause of religion in this diocese, all of
which should be dear to us all, but one or other of these, may have
some special attraction to some of our body. Such an one may feel
his inability to compass the desired end at once, from want of means,
but keeping the object in view, he may by insurance for a term of
years, as explained before, accomplish much in the way of Endowment,
in part, or wholly of some branch of the Master’s work. For example,
an annual payment of £6B for 15 years would secure at the end of that
term nearly £l7OO.


My remarks were to be limited to Insurance as a means of Endow-
ment and although open to objections they will yet, I trust, be fruitful
in one or other of the directions I have named.
Some doubts having been expressed at the Conference, by one or two
speakers, as to whether the first and second of these schemes would be
possible further inquiries have been made, which serve to confirm
the view which the writer of this paper has taken.
Extract from a letter by an American Bishop :
“ I can speak of ‘ the benefits of life insurance ’ from my own ex-
perience, the kindness of a parish in my early ministry insured my life,
, . . I could wish our parishes would provide life insurance for their
rectors.”
AUXILIARIES AND HOW BEST TO WORK THEM,
By the Rev. Canon Gunther, M.A.
“I believe in the Holy Catholic Church.”
Such is the sublime confession of those who accept the Holy Scrip-
tures as the standard of faith.
The Church is of Divine institution, and her work is to 'preserve, mani-
fest and propagate the truth of God. She is a living organism. She
is designed to be aggressive, and to plant the standard of the cross,
wherever the strongholds of ignorance and sin are found. She renews
and preserves her own life by propagating it.
To fulfil her mission, she needs the offerings of her members—their
prayers, their personal labours of love, and their alms—The last is the
lowest office, but rightly exercised may be a means of grace. Ac-
ceptable offerings of money, as well as those of service and prayer are
fruits of spiritual life.
The Auxiliaries of our Church Society are the feeders, the channels
■—the rivulets which swell the mighty streams—the streams of the
river that make glad the city of God.
My subject is how best to work these Auxiliaries. The popular view
and the management of the Auxiliary needs, I believe, to be raised. It
should be recognised as th e most important agency of the Diocese—not
an appendage to, but an integral part, of our parish work. Make
much of it. If an Auxiliary has not been formed, in any parish,
it is the duty of the Clergy at least as officers of the Church to see that
one is organized, and energetically worked. There are in every parish
some who are able to give. The futherance of local works experience
shows will not be hindered, but rather promoted by our offerings. In-
stead of lessening the local resources, they will be multiplied, and also
a sense of responsibility and privilege fostered.
To form an Auxiliary first call a meeting of the Parishioners, so that
the formation may be their deliberate act. If the meeting is to be
well attended and influential for good, care should be taken to make it
well known . This may be effectively done through the different
parish agencies, and through the press. On the Sunday previous to
the meeting, the congregation should be earnestly invited to attend, and
the elder scholars of the Sunday School. The Children, if there is a
juvenile association, should have their own meeting.


Let the programme be carefully arranged—the singing bright, and
the speaking effective. —Let the Committee chosen be representative
ol all classes, and of men who have obtained their position in the
Church —not merely because they belong to the aristocracy of wealth,
or social status, but the aristocracy of work —work done and interest
shown in work undertaken for Christ and the Church.
The first duty of the Committee will be to make known the objects
and designs of the Society to every member of the Church , and to
enlist their support. They obtain from the Clergyman his speculum
gregis, and I may here remark, that such a Register, notwithstanding
the constant migration of parishioners, and the size of some of our
parishes, can, and ought to be kept. Provision is made in the Diocese
of Brisbane for keeping a Roll Book. In the Diocesan Synod of Nova
Scotia held in 1876, it was resolved—■“ That the Clergyman of each
parish be required to keep a Register of the number of the adherents of
the Church of England in their several parishes, specifying the names
and number of Church families, Baptisms, Confirmations, Communi-
cants, etc., in a book with printed headings according co a form
prepared by the Executive Committee —such Book to be kept among
the permanent records of the parish. Such records are of great value,
and should be accessible to the Collectors as well as the Churchwardens
of a parish and the Bishop of the Diocese. Information likely to ex-
cite and sustain an interest in the work is circulated. A band of
earnest collectors— men and heads of families (if possible to obtain
them) as well as women—is secured. The Parish is properly divided
into districts—each of a manageable size—not too large to be burden-
some to the collector, and not too small to discourage earnest and
enthusiastic workers.
If the number of collectors admits of it, let them work in couples.
The Divine Saviour sent forth his Apostles on their mission two and
two—each the complement of the other—able to afford each the other
mutual help and counsel. The elder might direct, train, and encourage
the younger. Each needs help, and assistance. There are different
powers in the Divine family, and should be combined for service.
“ Two heads are better than one.”
Any subscription is worth having; and, at the commencement of
work, the collector should care more for the number of subscribers than
the amount. It is very gratifying to know, that we have parishes send-
ing very handsome contributions, but we must all be struck with the
paucity of subscribers. We need large subscriptions, but our strength
lies in having as large a number of persons contributing, as it is pos-
sible to obtain. Here we have the elements of real permanence and
stability, and see “ the power of the littles.”
My suggestions to collectors are these :
1. Endeavour to obtain a subscription, or donation, from all the
members of the Church in the district entrusted to you, collecting from
employees, and domestic servants, by permission of their masters, or
mistresses.
2. Collect regularly, and, if possible, on the same day of each week.
Be systematic in your work, patient, persevering, and hopeful.
3. Call occasionally on those who have hitherto declined to subscribe.
4. Seek the assistance of the local Committee in your work, and
report special circumstances and the names of likely collectors.


5. Seek to interest subscribers in the work of the Society, and
remember in prayer its objects and your work for God.
A collector —whose work had been very successful—ascribed it to
regularity in collecting and commencing her work always with prayer
—the one it has been well observed marking the mechanism, the other
forming the living principle of the system—The collector will seek to
interest the young, to reach their hearts, and to secure their influence.
They may also be able to get the heads of families to take boxes, as
well as the young,
A well managed Auxiliary will have its army of youthful collectors
—A juvenile association —worked as much as possible by the young.
Children who are sufficiently old to understand what they are doing
make admirable collectors. The Church should teach them the duty
of cultivating a missionary spirit, and the principles of self-denial. Let
them be taught to save their own pennies—to earn them —to part with
them gladly, and to collect from others. It will have a good effect on
their lives, their future work for God, and will be the means of bring-
ing much golden honey to the hive. Collections of a penny a week or
even a penny a month soon swell Church Funds. Any one who will
take a glance at the operations of some of the great Societies of Eng-
land will be surprised to find how much is raised by the young,
collecting from friends, in the schools attend, and from the general
public. In England there is what is known as the Universities and
Public School Missions, and you find masters and boys uniting to make
themselves responsible for the support of Missionary Clergy. Win-
chester College finds annually, LTSO ; Eton, L'4oo; Marlborough, L 15 0;
Harrow. 4200 ; Clifton College, L3OO ; and other schools large
amounts.
Such workers in a parish as our collectors are may fairly expect
encouragement, recognition and help from all loyal churchmen.
The Clergyman of the Parish will assist them to keep high ideals
before them in their work,—and why should there not be an annual
devotional meeting of Collectors and a special celebration of Holy
Communion ?
The Church authorities will see that there are half-yearly collections
in the Church, and wherever Divine Service is held, special
sermons for the young, and collections. The Bible classes, the choir,
the association for young women, and for young men, and for working
men, will probably be glad to share in the privilege of contributing their
special offerings.
The annual local report will be carefully prepared and distributed as
early as possible after the annual meeting. At every such meeting,
let new blood be introduced into the system. An annual workers’
friendly tea and the parochial picnic will have their uses. If the
Churchwardens, the Parochial Visitors, The Sunday School Teachers,
the Choir, and others have words of kindly advice and encouragement
given them at our workers’ meetings, let not the collectors be forgotten.
“ Kindness will always conquer.”
The Committee will meet regularly, and be ready to assist the
collectors not only with advice, but, in special cases calling on those
who may have refused to give, and others on whom the collectors may
be unwilling to call.


I believe a paper issued at the beginning of each year, setting forth
the objects of the Society, and a card notifying that, on a particular
day, collectors would call, would strengthen their hands. One paper
might take some such form as this :
CHURCH SOCIETY.
“ Freely ye have received , freely give.
You are earnestly requested to subscribe to some or all of the follow-
ing objects, and to state the amount you propose giving under the
heading of the particular object.
The amount may be given at once, or if you prefer it, called for
weekly or monthly. If this paper is not applied for within a month
by the collector, kindly return it to the Incumbent or
Churchwardens.
Yours very faithfully,
4. Erection or
' EndoWment - Church' and ,
Parsonage,
sum per annum, or every m
<t applicable.)
Signature
Assistance to
poor parishes
in dischai’ging
obligations im-
posed on them
by the Synod.
1. Support of
Clergy and
Catechists.
2. Missions to
Aborigines.
I tuill subscribe the above sum per annum , or every month , or every
'iveek. (Erase the words not applicable.)
Signature..
Residence.
N.B. —Church Society. —The chief work of this valuable Society is to
assist members of the Church of England in poor, and newly-settled
districts, to make provision for the due ministration of the ordin-
ances of religion.
A monthly meeting of collectors in town parishes and a quarterly
one in country districts, should be held regularly. At such meetings
information ought to be given of the work done at the General
Committee Meetings. Occasionally papers might be read ( e.g .) on the
measure and rule of Christian Liberality, Church Finance, Wants of the
Church, Endowments, the use of the Offertory, Responsibilities of
property, the history and principles of the Church of England,
Missionary work, or any subject of general interest of Church thought
and Church work.
The Parent Society must be ready to stimulate effort, and render
help by sending Deputations experienced clergymen and laymen—and,
ever and anon, to make efforts for special work—an emergency fund.
The organising secretary should have a scheme of visitation for the
whole Diocese and hold collectors’ meetings, and should be invited to


give information, from time to time, to the Ruri-Decanal Chapter, Why
should there not be an assistant secretary in each Rural Deanery?
If nothing else, he could confer with his brethren, and send to the
Parent Society accounts of work done in the Rural Deanery of general
interest, and work which has been done because the Society has had
its agents in the field. St. Paul and St. Barnabas made known what
God had wrought-rehearsed all things that God had done by them.
The Church at large has a right to know what is being planned and
accomplished, and thus fresh interest is excited.
Tou have here, Gentlemen, the best picture I can sketch of fairly
well-managed Auxiliaries—their organisation, and working, the duties
of Committees, and collectors—their position—the recognition, and
encouragement they deserve. If it is faithfully copied, we need not
fear results. There must be high ideals kept before us, and order, not
disorder in our work. The best managed Auxiliary is that where
system and vitality assist one another most effectually. Our Aux-
iliaries need, I believe, not reconstruction so much as reinvigorating—
to be renewed, as are the surface of the earth in the spring time, and
the plumage of the birds, by the infusion of new life and fresh vigour.
Shall I be told that the matters I have spent my time on are very
small, and that I have not dealt with great principles. I readily admit
it, but I remind my critic than inattention to details is often most
disastrous in its consequences. “Better,” says the proverb, “are
small fish than an empty dish.” “He that‘despiseth small things
shall fall by little and little.” My desire is, that, while w T e give
attention to small things, we should not neglect great principles.
Let us each be enthusiastic, and earnest, in our work and seek (1) to
keep before our people a sense of their privileges, as members of the
great historic Church of England—its faith, civilisation, and traditions
—and the consequent duty of extending her influence and usefulness ;
and, (2) to enlist by our invitations, and example, a personal interest in
fhe work. A sense of the greatness of the work of the Church Society
must be deepened, and the popular view elevated. The management
at head quarters must be as careful and perfect as possible, and all
workers filled with increasing devotion. Self-sacrifice, is the keynote
of Christianity. Our people need to be educated to understand, that,
since we are members of one body, the strong must help the weak—that
there must be no wastes of sin and irreligion unreclaimed—that
congregational selfishness, and localism, are eminently mischievous—
that we must work for the whole Church, and that ours is the honour
and dignity of being workers together with God.
If true to our mission, success is assured—as certain as the promises
of God. We must go forward. Extension means fresh demands—
fresh ventures of faith, and fresh labours of love. Our golden age is
before us.
If success is wanting, let us (Ist) examine ourselves—our motives,
methods of work, &c.; (2nd) let us ask God for fresh power, and zeal,
to go forth at his bidding. Let there be a holy ambition to succeed.
If success is not granted, walk in the path of duty. There is nothing
to cause despondency. Victory is assured in God’s good time.
The outlook of our Church is, I believe, bright, and brightening—Let us be
true to our mission—models of work, united, loyal and self-sacrificing.
Let our motto as Churchmen ever be—“ In necessariis, in unitas, non-
necessariis libertas, in omnibus prudentia et earitas.”


THE PRESIDENT’S CONCLUDING ADDRESS.
The President reviewed some of the more prominent points which
had come out in the discussions of the Conference.
He considered, first, that their Church Society would be untrue to its
original principles if it was not distinctly founded upon a broad, popular
basis ; in other words, if it did not appeal, not to one class or one
section, but to all classes of the members of their Church. But he
would remind them that populus meant the community in its grada-
tion of classes and powers; and that according to this gradation support
should be proportionately given.
Next, if the Church Society had any real vitality about it, it ought to
show that vitality by constant growth. On the question of suggeted
■enlargement of the scope of their work, he was one of those who believed
that to attempt great things was the way to achieve great things. He
was profoundly convinced that, if the Church Society received anything,
like the amount of support it should receive, the somewhat ambitious
programme which had been sketched could be efficiently carried
out. Yet, even with its present scope of operation, he appealed to those
who were the workers of the Society whether it was not true that at
almost every meeting they were obliged to hold their hands from under-
takings with which they deeply sympathised, simply because as honest
men they did not dare to go beyond the resources they had a right to
anticipate. Year after year the calls on the society would continually
increase. Since he had been here about 10 new parishes had been
formed, and there had been the erection or enlargement of between
15 and 20 churches. Now every one of those marked a certain step in
church extension, and every one involved a new call upon the resources
■of their Church Society. They must recognise that as their resources
increased, and as their calls increased, the efficiency and power of that
society must increase also ; otherwise they would not stand still
in the great battle that they had to fight, but would retrograde from
the position they ought to occupy.
Thirdly, as to the question of sustentation and endowment, there
had been a general feeling that parochial endowment, at least on
■the scale that they would be able to attempt, was not one of
the chief wants of the Church, With this view he entirely agreed.
He should like to see some endowment of the diocese, not for works
■of a local character, but for the general needs of the Church—
for those central agencies which belonged to its better organi-
sation and completer unity. But, besides this, he desired to see
■the Church Society provide something like a general sustentation
fund for the support of the clergy of the diocese. He was glad to hear
the many expressions which had been used of the desire that their
■clergy should not be subjected to the degrading and paralysing depend-
ence upon the particular fancies and caprices of a parish. It had been
said with perfect truth that there were men who would always be able
under any circumstances to triumph over that difficulty ; but it was
also true that there were occasions when clergymen did suffer severely
from it, and their suffering in that respect did not always arise
from any fault of theirs. There were times when the voluntary system


did press upon the independence of the clergy, and he thought it was
no use shutting their eyes to this unmistakable fact. He was therefore
glad to hear the conviction expressed that something should be attemp-
ted in regard to the formation of a sustentation fund. To establish
this it would not be necessary to depart from the true constitution of
the Church Society, but rather to carry it out with somewhat greater
completeness and a larger measure of success, than had hitherto been
done. The committee were desirous of doing something more in that
all-important direction, and he thought that the general expression of
opinion given from that conference would do a great deal to strengthen
their hands in that matter.
The question had at the same time been touched upon, but with;
some timidity, of accompanying provision for securing the rightful
independence of the clergy with another which should enable the Church
to deal with cases of clerical incapacity or inefficiency. Nothing
could be worse than the rude and oppressive manner of starving-
out a minister. That was the basest exercise of the lowest power
—the power of the purse. But yet some protection to a parish was
necessary ; and for it there was need of some power to strengthen the
hands of the central authority—he did not mean the autocratic power
of the Bishop, but the Bishop acting according to ancient precedent
and the law of the Church, with the concurrence and under the authority
of the Synod. When the hands of the central authority were thus
strengthened, then the clergy would have a right independence,
conditioned and limited not by an oppressive power without, but
by a constituted and well-ordered power within. That power belonged
to the Synod, not to the Church Society. Nevertheless the two pro-
visions must come together, and each would make the other possible
to work.
One thing again had been shown to be perfectly certain, that the
society could never be an imperium in imperio, The society was the
creature of the Synod. Its laws were framed by the Synod, and it
could not alter them without the consent of the Synod. He would like
to see a change in the constitution of the committee, which would make
it even more distinctly the creation of the Synod, than it was already.
There was not the slightest danger of the Church Society trenching
upon the true representative power; it was to the synod,,
and a handmaid it must always remain.
For that Conference they might be exceedingly thankful. They had
gained, especially that night, a good many practical and valuable sug-
gestions. He trusted that the mere fact of their gathering together
must kindle or re-kindle an increased interest in the work of the society.
There was one point which he thought was peculiarly cheering to them,.
- and that was the almost unanimous conclusion that they wanted no
fundamental alterations in the principles or constitution of the society,,
but simply a larger amount of interest, a larger amount of support,
He had said that the society ought to grow, but the growth was not to
be in the form of revolution or disruption. They had only to advance
along the old lines with greater force and greater confidence ; and the
work would prosper continually under God’s blessing. (Loud cheers.)
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 490, Kent-strefet. close to Cathedral.
