

NEW SOUTH WATLES
LOCAL OPTION LEAGUE,
ESTABLISHED 1883.
President:
REV JOSEPH BARNIER.
Vice-Presidents
THE DEAN OF SYDNEY.
REV. J. JEFFERIS, L.L.B.
LORD BISHOP OF GOULBURN.
REV. ROBERT STEEL, D D., PH. D
O. O. DANGAR, ESQ., J.P.
D. CASSIN, ESQ., Mudgee.
REV. W. MOORE.
REV. W. KELYNACK, D.D.
P. L. C. SHEPHERD, ESQ., J.P
JOSEPH CREER, ESQ., M.L.A.
HON. DR. A. RENWICK, M.L.A.
JOHN ROSEBY, ESQ.
THE DEAN OF BATHURST.
GEORGE LUCAS, ESQ.
REV. J. F. CULLEN.
DR. GEORGE MARSHALL.
A. S. BROWN, ESQ,, J.P.
WILLIAM RUSSELL, ESQ.
HON. E. WEBB, M.L.C.
REV. GEORGE SUTHERLAND.
OFFICE-Temperance Hall, Pitt Street, Sydney.
HON. SECRETARY, EDWARD J. H. KNAPP.
PAPER ON
Compensation to Publicans:
READ BY THE
REV. W. TAYLOR
AT A SPECIAL CONFERENCE OF THE FRIENDS OF
LOCAL OPTION
HELD AT THE
TEMPERANCE HALL, SYDNEY, N. S. WALES,
18TH JUNE, 1886


New South Wales Local Option League.
[ESTABLISHED 1883.]
COMPENSATION TO PUBLICANS.
[ Taper read by Rev. W. Taylor at a Special Conference of the Friends of Local
Option, in the Temperance Hall, Sydney, June 15, 1886.]
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —
The main object for which this League has been formed is to
secure for the people of this colony an efficient measure of local option
—to obtain for them, that is, the legal power of restraining and pro-
hibiting the issuing and renewal of licenses for the sale of intoxicating
drinks in the localities in which they reside. The principle involved
in such a measure is now widely accepted, and in not a few instances
has already been embodied in legislation. In this colony many of our
leading public men have announced their adhesion to the principle;
though with few exceptions they show a disposition to link it with
another—that, namely, of compensation to those whom the proposed
reform may involve loss or injury. It is observable, however,
that as yet no very specific statement of the claims to be put forward
has been laid before us. It has been dealt with in vague generalities,
such as that, there ought to be fair and just compensation to those
who are engaged in a legal business, if it is suppressed; but we are
never told what would be fair and just compensation. It is much to
be wished that our friends would be more specific—that they would
lay before us, if not a detailed plan, at least the general principles on
which such plan would be based. If I might do so without presump-
tion I would respectfully suggest to the Eight Eev. the Primate that
as he has expressed himself strongly in favour of compensation, it might
be well for him to give to the public a clear statement of the grounds
on which he bases the claim. There is no man better able to do justice
to any cause which he takes in hand, and there is no man whose
words would be more respectfully considered. lam sure there is no
desire on the part of this league to inflict an injustice on anybody ;
and if it could be shown that the claim for compensation is fair and
just, they would be willing to concede it. The mischiefs wrought by
the liquor traffic are so manifold and so appalling that we should be
thankful to see them removed at any cost. The expenditure of millions
for such a purpose, if it were necessary, would in our judgment be
more than justified, it would be imperatively demanded. At the same
time it would be a serious bar to the desired reform if it could be had
only on these terms. Many who see the evils of the drink traffic, and


would be glad to be rid of them, would be surely tempted to
tolerate them rather than pay heavily for their removal. The advo-
cates of the traffic know this, and therefore they insist so strongly on
compensation—not, probably, because they expect their claim will be re-
cognized, but because they hope in this way to delay legislation. They use
the claim to compensation as a sort of red rag wherewith to frighten the
tax-payers. Some of us, however, are not so easily frightened. Before
we concede compensation we want to be as sure that the claim is just,
we want to know who is to be compensated, what they are to be com-
pensated for, and on what ground the compensation is demanded.
It is usual to say that if a license to sell drink is not renewed, the
publican must be compensated. But there are others to be considered
as well as the publican. There is for instance the owner of the house
whose property he tells us is depreciated. He will lose so much
annually in the shape of rent, and for this he claims compensation.
Is the claim a just one ? A writer in the “ Pall Mall Gazette”
answers the question as follows: Here is a street consisting, say, of
fifty houses of equal value. The owner of one of them had sufficient
influence to obtain a license for his house. The effect is twofold. The
value of his house is doubled : and the value of all the other houses in
the street is depreciated, on account of the nuisance created by the
proximity of the public house. In course of time the license is ex-
tinguished. Who now has the best claim to compensation ? The
man who has already profited largely by a fictitious value given to his
house in preference to those of his neighbours ; or should it not rather
be given to those whose houses have suffered depreciation, by reason of
a disturbance created by [an unpleasant neighbour. Clearly if any-
body is to be compensated, it is the latter, not the former.
But if the owner is not entitled to compensation, perhaps the
occupier is. Let us see ? And first let us clearly understand what
the compensation is for. What has he lost ? His house—liis furni-
ture —his glasses, &c., remain just as before. He can keep boarders—
can provide accommodation for travellers—can supply all kinds of re-
freshments, with the exception of intoxicating drinks. His business with
that exception remains exactly as before; nor is it by any means certain
that his profit would be materially lessened. He would lose one class of
customers, but he would gain others. At a meeting of the Exeter Con-
servative Association held on the 26th February, 1884, Mr. J. P.
Heath is reported to have said : It must not be thought that licensed
victuallers liked to see drunkards on their premises, for such men
were the greatest nuisances they had to contend with. Neither must
it be thought that inn-keepers derived greater advantages from selling
alcoholic, than non-alcoholic, beverages ; for he knew that more profit
was made over the sale of a bottle of sodawater than a glass of grog ;
and over the sale of gingerbeer than brewer’s beer, made from malt
and hops. Sir C. P. Owen, addressing publicans, spoke to the same
purpose. “If, said he, my friends—and lam not ashamed to call them
friends—would allow one of their own set to advise them, I would say


—Why not have wholesome refreshments —the best of everything that
can be got ? Don’t you think that the publicans have the means of
providing good food, and good tea and coffee, at more moderate rates
than others who undertake to supply these articles; and don t you
think their profits would be larger?” Some licensed victuallers, it is
said, are acting on this advice, and it seems probable that if they
ceased to deal in intoxicants they might become almost wholly dealers
in non-alcoholic drinks. On the whole it is clear that the publicans’
business would by no means be destroyed if his license were withheld ;
it is even doubtful if his profit would be materially lessened. And if
there were no loss, of course there could be no claim to compensation.
But suppose there were loss, does it follow that the loss must be
made good by the public ? Certainly not. To establish a claim for
compensation it is necessary to show —not only that loss has been
incurred, but that wrong has been done—that some right has been
violated. But what right is violated in the case supposed. A license
to sell intoxicating drinks is not a right but a privilege. All the
rights in the case belong to the State —the privileges only belong to
the publican. “ When the privilege has been once granted, says one,
the manwho receives it usually makes money more rapidly, and
more easily, perhaps, than he could in any other business. He does so,
not because of his business ability, but simply because he is permitted to
carry on a trade which those around him may not. He is relieved from the
pressure of open competition. He is engaged in a protected business. If J
the privilege which allows him to do this is withdrawn, what injustice
is done to him ? He is allowed to retain the money he has made, and
the property he has accumulated ; he is simply told that he must not
make any more in that way. And then, forsooth, he is to be compen-
sated. And for what? For the money he would have made! JNot
compensation for actual loss, but compensation for loss in prospective.”
“It will readily be conceded,” says the same writer, “ that the liquor
traffic derives its special value from the fact of its being a monopoly.
It is this which makes men so anxious to get into it, and to pay so
much more than the actual value for the premises, good-will, &c.
This is not a value which has been created by the publicans’ industry,
or capital; it is altogether outside, and independent, of any action of his
own ;itis a fictitious value, created for him by the State. What the
State has created, it can destroy. There is one method of doing so
which no one would dispute, the right of the State to employ. It
might destroy the monopoly by making the trade free; then, this
special fictitious value would be entirely gone ; and no one would have
the audacity to ask for compensation. It is perfectly reasonable to
sav that if the State has a right to destroy the monopoly by legis-
lating in one direction, it has just the same right to destroy it by
legislating in another.”
What then are the grounds on which the advocates of compensation
base their claim ? Some of them, I believe, base it on the law of the
land. Are they justified in doing so ? What are the facts ? It is


admitted that when the license is granted it is granted for one year
and no longer. It is admitted further that there is no promise to
renew the license at the expiration of that period. On what ground
then is it alleged that the State is bound to renew the license ? or, in
case of refusal, to compensate the publican ? The State never entered
into any such agreement. All it engaged to do was to allow him to
sell liquor for twelve months. This he has been allowed to do; the
time is now expired ; the contract is at an end ; the publican has got
all he bargained for, and of course is entitled to nothing more. Suppose
he had taken his house as he took his license—for twelve months only.
He makes use of it for that time ; and pays the rent according to agree-
ment. He now wishes to renew the lease ; but the landlord, having
come to see the evils of the liquor traffic, refuses to let his house any
more for that purpose. The tenant must therefore discontinue the
sale of intoxicants, or quit the house. That may be inconvenient to
him, but is there any injustice in it—anything on which he can found
a claim for compensation ? Certainly not. He engaged the house
for twelve months; he has had what he bargained for, and he can
claim no more. And it is the same with his license. The two things
so far as I can see are exactly parallel.
There are some I know who deny the parallel. They say
that although the license is granted only for twelve months,
the Licensing Board is bound to renew it on application, pro-
vided the applicant has not been convicted of any breach of the
law. Now if this is the true interpretation of the law—of
which, however, I take the liberty to doubt—it must be admitted
that so far as the present law is concerned it gives some colour
to the claim for compensation. But this law is not like those
of the Medes and Persians. The Parliament which made the
law may alter, amend, and even abolish it. It is admitted that under
certain circumstances Magistrates are not obliged to renew a license,
even now. Suppose the law were so far amended as to make it a
condition of granting or renewing a license in any district, that
the majority of the ratepayers in that district should be in favour of
it, that would simply be exercising a right which the State has always
claimed : to impose fresh conditions. And Sir, what are we agitating
for ? If Ave are content with the law as it i 3 why are we here to-day ?
We are not content with it. We want to supersede it by a better.
We want not only to relieve the Magistrates of the necessity of granting
licenses, but to take away their power to grant them without the con-
sent of the people. Suppose we are successful, where then will be the
publican’s right to a renewal of his license ? If it were based on equity,
nothing could abolish it; but if it rests simply on a technicality of the
law, you have only to change the law and the right ceases.
But it is said, that having so long recognised the legality of the traffic,
the State has no right to change its policy with regard to it, without giving
compensation to those who have been induced by previous legislation,
to invest capital in the trade. The answer to this is twofold. Pirst,


the legality of a trade does not depend on special Legislation. Every
trade is legal which is not expressly prohibited. Secondly, the fact that
a trade is legal, does not prevent the Legislature from interfering with
it to any extent it may deem necessary, if that trade becomes a
nuisance or in any way inimical to the public welfare. When special
Legislation is resorted* to, in commencing with any trade, it is hot for
the benefit of the trade, but for the protection of the public. Hence
it generally goes in the direction of restriction and repression. This has
been the case in connection with the liquor traffic. The trade was
found to be of so dangerous a character, that it could not be allowed
to regulate itself as other trades do. To prevent it from doing mis-
chief, it was necessary to hedge it round with restrictions and limita-
tions. That is the only way, so far as I know, in which the State has
specially recognized the liquor traffic. Whether that recognition is
specially honourable, or entitles the publicans to any special privileges,
I will leave others to say. To be sure the restriction carries with it a
privilege. The effect of it is to confer on the publican a valuable
monopoly; but though this was the effect, it was not the design of the
Legislature—the design was to protect the public, not to enrich the
publicans. True he has benefited by the arrangement, but that in no
way entitles him to a continuance of the benefit, nor to compensation
if it is withdrawn. Others benefit as well as he, a host of policeman,
magistrates, jailors, &c., many of whom it is likely would lose their
employment if the liquor traffic were abolished; but whoever thinks of
compensation in their case. They are employed to check the evils
which the publican has caused. And yet, forsooth, he is to be com-
pensated, and they are not.
Oh! but he has invested capital in the trade. Yes. And when he did
so he knew perfectly well; (1) That he could carry on his trade only
under conditions prescribed by law ; (2) That these conditions were
liable to be altered from time to time; (3) That they had already been
altered over and over again ; (4) That almost every alteration was in
the direction of greater stringency and such as were calculated to
curtail the privileges and profits of’his business ; (5) He knew that a
large and influential section of the community was utterly opposed to
his traffic; that these people were determined to leave no stone
unturned to bring about the legislative repression of the traffic—if not
by direct prohibition, at least by the exercise of Local Option; (6)
He knew that in many places this agitation had been successful, and
that it was more than possible it might be successful here. In other
words he knew perfectly well that in investing capital in this particular
trade, he did so at considerable risk. However, he saw a chance of
making great profits, and he deliberately accepted the risks, with which
such profits are usually associated. And he must do as others do in
such cases, abide the consequence. If his speculation turns out
badly, he may perhaps have a claim on the nation’s pity, but not on its
purse.
Compensation to publicans, it has been well said, is without
precedent. Prior to the passing of the present Act, publicans


were allowed to open their houses on Sundays, and to keep them
open till midnight on other days. This Act forbids them to open
on Sundays, and repuires them to close at eleven o’clock on other
days, besides subjecting them to a variety of other restrictions.
This certainly curtailed their privileges, it probably diminished their
revenues, and yet no compensation was given or demanded. The
Act also required a larger number of rooms than was necessary
under the old Act, as a condition of obtaining a license. The
effect of .this was, that some two or three hundred houses were
closed on account of insufficient accommodation. And yet no com-
pensation was given, or even asked.
Some years ago, the Committee of Convocation in the Province of
Canterbury, England, published the names of more than fourteen
hundred parishes and townships in that Province alone, in which the
liquor traffic had been completely extiuguished. This was done, not
by Act of Parliament, nor by popular veto, butbythe will and power ofthe
landowners. And yet neither publicans nor brewers demanded com-
pensation, for this high handed procedure. They submitted to it with-
out the least resistance or complaint; can it be pretended, that if the
people vote down the traffic, a claim for compensation arises, which
did not exist against Landlords and Magistrates,when they extinguished
the shops at their own private will, and simply for their own gain and
comfort ?
What was done in England by the power of the landowners, has been
done elsewhere by the Legislature, or by the popular vote. In Canada,
and the United States of America, many thousands of houses have been
closedand not a single penny has beenparid for compensation: In fact,
there is not in all the world, so far as I can remember, a single case
in which the claim for compensation has been recognised.
And to my mind the claim is manifestly unjust. If the publicans are to
be compensated, who is to compensate them.' Clearly the money must be
taken out of the pockets ofthe people. And for what ? Eor services
rendered? What services ? Ask your Superintendents of Police, your
Magistrates, and Judges, and Jailors ; and they will tell you that the
service consists in the production of poverty, of insanity, of every form
of wickedness and misery. Ask your medical men, your ministers of
religion, your philanthropists, and they will tell you that the Drink
Traffic is the fruitful parent of disease, and immorality, and irreligion,
while it is the most formidable obstacle to every kind of improvement.
Ask the millions of injured women and degraded children, and while
they point you to their wretched homes and bruised bodies, they will
entreat with tears and bitter cries, that the services of the publicans
may be brought to a speedy close. Ask the multitudes who through
drink have come to an untimely end, who met their death by
premature decay, by accident, by suicide, by murder, or by the public
executioner, ask all these what service was rendered by the publican
to them; and will they not make answer from their dishonoured
graves, that that service is recorded in tears, and groans, and blood?
This, Sir, is the service for which compensation is demanded, these


gentlemen through their accursed traffic, have wasted our resources,
corrupted our youth, desolated our homes, filled the land with jails,
and asylums, saddled us with millions of taxation ; and now they tell
us, that unless they are permitted to continue this deadly work, they
must be compensated. Compensated, forsooth, not for any good they
have done, or will do, but simply because they are to lose their power of
doing mischief. Such a claim to my mind is simply monstrous, and
ought to be met with an emphatic and universal —No !
Two suggestions have been made which I think deserve consideration.
One is that the trade itself should compensate its exiled members.
The other is, that if there are persons who conceive that they have
received benefit from the publican, and are therefore under obligation
to him, such persons in dispensing with his services might well enough
give him compensation. To these I will venture to add another. It
is that if there should be cases of special hardship, an appeal might be
made to the generosity of the benevolent. In all probabilitj'- such an
appeal would be liberally responded to. Compensation, if such it could
be called, on these lines would be wholly unobjectionable. I at any
rate have nothing to say against it.
GEO, LOXTON AND CO., PRINTERS, SYDNEY
