

PAPER
11 OS PIT A I, ACCOMMOMTI ON,
ALFRED ROBERTS, Esq., M.R.C.S.
SYDNEY : THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




R 4 W
PAPER
HOSPITAL ACCOMMODATION,
ALFRED ROBERTS, Esa., M.R.C.S.
SYDNEY : THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERXMEXT PRINTER.


r
/
4
*
i ii"
/ \^f
1 |;
J "
U
>
1 j i
hi
.$ 4
r I
''m
'* '
/o
-s %
1 '
1 3K
Itl
t*
|il ),
<
1'
:
N
k 1
i;
N
r
J '
}
$
\
y|\s
1;
1 >vj
i '|^
| 5 1
4® N
.
%A
4 -
'
l '
iitj
■'I
K
N
j + X
s'
<$'
%


HOSPITAL ACCOMMODATION.
By Alfred Egberts, Esq., M.E.C.S.
[Read before the Royal Society , Ist July, 1874.]
j ttL+'i Cf o
I am again indebted to tbe kindness of the Committee of this
Society for permission to bring under your consideration a subject
which belongs more strictly to the sphere of social than of general
science.
I have, however, always entertained an opinion, which increases
with experience, that such topics are of vital importance to all
Committees, and more especially so to those of young Countries,
where as the seed is sown will the harvest follow.
The present position of the hospital question in Sydney is both
critical and important, demanding the earnest consideration of
all who take an interest in this branch of charity, and calculated
to induce those possessing special opportunities for observation to
offer their experience for the review of others.
The subject has, moreover, an additional interest at the present
time, when a week hardly passes in England without the publica-
tion of anxiously thoughtful pamphlets and reviews founded upon
the startling disclosures made through the labours of the newly
established “ Charity Organization Society,” and the reports of
the Committee of the Hospital Sunday Eund, &c.
The inquiries of these useful Associations have proved, beyond
doubt, that the present system of administering “ medical charity”
has resulted in its rapid and inconsistent increase in the most
wealthy cities of England, and in an extravagant expenditure.
Eor instance, we find that in Manchester, during the year 1836,
the recipients of medical charity were in the proportion of one to
every eight of the population, but in 1872 the proportion had risen
to “ one ”to “ five.” In London, at the present date, no less than
30 per cent, of the population are recipients of gratuitous medical
aid, the funds for which are raised by voluntary subscription. In
Manchester the amount thus raised would, if distributed among
the recipients, give to each four shillings and fourpence-halfpenny.
In London it would yield ten shillings to each of the more
numerous recipients.
I must, however, refer those who feel interested in the instruc-
tive details of this important inquiry to two admirable articles in
the Westminster Review for January and April, and the Quarterly
Review for April of this year. I will only now quote one additional
fact in support of the conclusions above mentioned, and as
affording evidence of a demoralizing spirit similar to that which.


I regret to feel, already exists among certain classes of our young
and otherwise prosperous community.
“ Four years ago an attempt was made to induce the men of a
large manufacturing firm in the metropolis to add something from
themselves to a subscription of fifteen guineas per annum already
given by the firm to a neighbouring dispensary; the whole of the
letters given for this amount being constantly in use, and many
more being required. It was found that a penny a month, from
little more than half the men at work, would raise the subscrip-
tion to forty guineas per annum, which would entitle them,
according to the published scale, not only to as many tickets as
they could require for themselves and families, but also to a
certain number for their friends.
“Notwithstanding these advantages, the subscription was started
with considerable difficulty, and the collection of pennies became
gradually so irregular and unsatisfactory that at the end of two
years and a half it had to be entirely dropped, a small balance of
the subscription for 1871 and ’72 still remaining unpaid. It thus
appears that a farthing a week was considered too heavy a charge
for medical attendance and medicine, not because they were
not wanted, for the full complement of letters was in constant
requisition, nor because a penny a month could not be afforded
by each man, but simply because every trace of the principle of
independent self-help had been undermined and abolished by the
facility presented to the men of getting what they needed at other
people’s expense.”
I take the following, as one of many similar examples which
might be quoted, from the Second Eeport of the New South Wales
Charity Commission recently issued, page 73. Speaking of out-
door relief as administered at the Benevolent Asylum, it says :
“ The imposition which is practised on the institution arises not
so much from persons applying who are not entitled to relief in
the first instance, but chiefly in cases wffiere a husband is sick in
the Infirmary, and the family require relief and get it, and then
the husband gets well and goes to work, and the family still con-
tinue to receive the relief, and after a time the circumstances are
discovered. The evidence is that in such cases there is scarcely
one in a hundred who has the honesty to say I do not require
the relief any longer.”
Thus it appears that the results of wholesale and indiscrimi-
nate medical charity tend to increase the number of its recipients
and the cost per head, as well as to induce general pauperism.
If such evils have accrued in a Country like England, during a
period when money was more scarce than it now is, from a dis-
regard of the true principles which should guide the distribution
of charitable funds, surely it is important in a young Country,
where wages are high, the necessaries of life cheap, and the climate


genial, that we should consider well if it is not possible, on the
one hand, to afford full relief to the truly necessitous, and, on the
other, to avoid offering temptation to any to forfeit their inde-
pendence. Blind charity—that which is shown by the pecuniary
gift, rather than the hearty desire to co-operate with the distressed
and assist them to retain their self-respect —discourages thrift and
helpfulness, and generates the spirit of dependence, which is the
chief source of pauperism.
With these preliminary remarks, I will proceed to the imme-
diate subject of this paper, and in doing so will confine myself as
much as possible to general hospital accommodation, assuming that
hospitals for special diseases are as a rule undesirable, as e qually
injurious to the cause of charity and the science of medicine.
In approaching our subject, it is necessary to bear in mind the
difference between the position of London and Sydney in relation to
medical charity ; otherwise, in our endeavour to gain information
from the experience of our Parent Country, we may be led astray.
The differences are these; In Sydney we have no organized
Poor Law relief; in Sydney wages are much higher ; in Sydney
the various Benefit Clubs have assumed a more healthy tone and
form, and are far more numerous.
In the full (and in many respects excellent) Report of the
Charity Commission, there is an earnestly expressed opinion
that the main front and outbuildings of the Sydney Infirmary
should be taken down —a recommendation, it is but fair to add,
which was made by a Committee of the Directors of that institu-
tion, and adopted by them, as long back as March, 1868.
The Directors of the Prince Alfred Hospital, after much anxious
deliberation, entered upon with a firm desire to utilize the fund
in strict accordance with the intentions of the subscribers, as
expi’essed in the original resolutions, have determined to plan a
large and complete Hospital and Medical School, and to erect a
portion of it at once. This scheme has been sanctioned by the
Government, which has devoted by Act of Parliament eleven
acres of the University ground to the purposes of the future
hospital. The plans of two ward pavilions, each of which will
contain sixty-three beds, are nearly complete ; and it is in con-
templation to commence them as soon as possible.
Taking it for granted, therefore, that the Infirmary buildings
must be presently removed, it is evident we are about to re-orga-
nize and construct anew the hospital accommodation of Sydney,
except that provided by St. Vincent’s Hospital.
What shall be the form, position, and extent of the accommo-
dation, and how shall it be organized, how supported F These are
the questions which demand inquiry and the prompt decision of
Government, in order that each may w r ork in harmony with the
rest, to one centre of good.


The principle upon which our hospital accommodation should be
established may be described as that by which it can be provided
of the most complete form, of the required extent to meet
existing demands, and be capable of systematic progressive
increase to fulfil the requirements of the future. It ought not,
however, at any period to be much in excess of the demand,
neither should the cost of its original construction or annual
support exceed the smallest amount for which these can be effi-
ciently provided.
With these principles for our guide we have to consider—
Istly. What is the character, extent, and current expenditure
of our existing hospital accommodation ?
2ndly. What are the present and probable future require-
ments of the community in respect to this ?
3rdly. What are the best means of dealing with the existing
accommodation, with a view to removing its defects, and
supplementing it to meet the demands of the future ?
In the course of this inquiry it will be necessary to speak of
some of the benevolent asylums, but only to such an extent as
they bear upon the subject of hospital accommodation.
Tor a full description of these establishments I must refer you
to the excellent Eeport of the Charity Commission, It will be
sufficient for our present purpose if I briefly mention those at
Liverpool, Parramatta, and Hyde Park.
The Liverpool Asylum is in many respects a good and substan-
tial institution, and in all, a model of good management; but,
with the exception of the new wing, it possesses no special
accommodation for hospital cases. I should like to add another
word in praise of an institution which appears to me an example
to most others which I have seen in the Colony. Having recently
visited several of the best establishments in Europe of a similar
character, it affords me pleasure to say that I cannot call to mind
any in which more was accomplished with the means at the
disposal of the officers.
The Asylum at Parramatta consists of several buildings, all of
which are very old and many in very bad repair. It was never
adapted to the purposes for which it is now used, more especially
as a home for aged invalids or hospital cases. The mangement is
the converse of that of Liverpool, though both establishments
are under the same Board.
Hyde Park Asylum is clean and well ordered, “ but is very
much too confined for the purpose to which it is devoted, and its
position within the city is unsuitable. No room exists for the
reception of cancer and other cases, often received from the Infirm-
ary, the presence of which is distressing to the other inmates.” *


The accommodation provided in these Asylums is devoted to the
reception of cases of destitution arising from advanced age, im-
paired constitution, or illness of a confirmed, chronic, or incurable
nature.
On the 31st December, 1873, they contained the following
accommodation: —Liverpool Asylum, for 650 men; Parramatta
Asylum, for 240 men ; Hyde Park Asylum, for 230 women. Total,
for 890 men and 230 women.
The number of inmates remaining in the respective Asylums on
31st December, 1873, was as follows: —Liverpool.—Greneralin-
mates, 423 ; hospital cases, 193. Parramatta.-—Greneral inmates,
229 ; hospital cases, 45. Total men, 890. Hyde Park. —General
inmates, 190; hospital cases, 28. Total women, 218.
In calculating this accommodation the amount of cubic space
allowed to each inmate has been put as low as possible compatible
with health, and considerably below what is thought necessary
in England. Probably in this climate a space of about 650 cubic
feet may be considered enough for the general inmates, who do
not occupy the rooms during the day, but the hospital wards
should undoubtedly have from 900 to 1,000 feet. Yet it has been
no uncommon thing for these institutions at times to contain
a much larger number of inmates than above stated, and thus,
of course, to have been overcrowded.
To the figures above given it is necessary to add those for
accommodation provided during the present year. This consists
of a new wing at Liverpool, intended for 170 hospital beds, and
a building at Hyde Park, not new, to receive 35 inmates.
There is, therefore, total accommodation at the present time for
1,060 men and 265 women.
The number of inmates at the present time is about 900 men
and 230 women, showing a surplus of 95 beds to meet future
demands, if the wretched buildings at Parramatta are retained as
an Asylum.
We possess two Hospitals—St. Vincent’s, and the Sydney
Infirmary,
St. Vincent’s is a good modern and substantial structure, under
the management of a lady superior. It has building accom-
modation for about ninety beds, of which a part only is occupied
at present, containing thirty-six beds. Hopes are entertained
that before the end of this year the fund will be sufficient to fur-
nish and occupy twenty-four more.
In addition to the above, there are six private wards, which are
generally full, and the occupants of which pay three guineas a
week.
This hospital is devoted to cases of serious disease and accident.
The Sydney Infirmary contains 228 beds, of which seventy-seven
are in the back south wing, and 151 in the main building, which


faces Macquarie-street. The south wing is an excellent, substan-
tial hospital pavilion, but unfavourably situated, in its close
proximity to the high wall which separates the grounds of the
Mint from those of the Infirmary; the two floors are isolated by
means of an outside detached staircase, and the bath-rooms, lava-
tories, &c., are well arranged. The ground in front of this build-
ing and opposite the back of the main front building is often
swampy and unwholesome, but this latter point could easily be
rectified. A very large average of erysipelas occurs in this
wing. The main front building is very old, very much out of
repair, and undoubtedly very unhealthy. The latter characteristic
has I fear caused the loss of many valuable lives, and cannot, in
my opinion, be got rid of without taking down the building and
exposing the foundation soil to the wind and sun.
The rules of the Infirmary are good, and it is most desirable
they should be strictly carried out. It is evident from the nature
of those regulating the admission and discharge of patients that
the institution is devoted to the treatment of serious disease and
accidents. Moreover, no patient can remain for more than eight
weeks, unless it is certified at a consultation of the honorary
physicians and surgeons that the disease demands longer treat-
ment in an institution of this character.
Until last March this rule had, from various reasons, remained
a dead letter, and an average of from fifty to eighty beds have
always been occupied by patients to whom justice could have
been done in a hospital of a far less expensive character. In
March it was found possible to act upon this rule, and fifty patients
were discharged. Monthly consultations of the staff are now
held, at which all patients whose residence in the institution has
exceeded eight weeks are examined, and such only are retained
as appear to require the special facilities of treatment afforded by
the institution.
The result of carrying out this rule has had a very marked
effect upon the accommodation available for the daily admission
of patients, as we shall find hereafter.
Thinking it possible that the discharge of so many cases at one
time from a hospital might have been attended with possible
suffering and hardship, I made inquires into the question, and
ascertained from the Manager of the Infirmary that no complaints
of any kind had come to his knowledge, but that one of the
patients so dischargd had been re-admitted. From the Secretary
of the Asylum Board I learned that the average admissions for
the three weeks following the consultation alluded to, at which
fifty patients were discharged, had only been very slightly ex-
ceeded, perhaps by two or three.
On this occasion, therefore, nearly fifty patients who had occu-
pied beds, some of them for many months, were able to find homes


and support, and preferred to do so to entering the Liverpool
Asylum. Medical treatment they could obtain from the Dis-
pensary. .
We have now to ascertain whether the small proportion of those
discharged and who elect to go to the Liverpool Asylum suffer or
benefit by the change from an institution in which the cost of
each bed is £45 per annum, to another in which it is £l2 14s.
To ascertain this point, Mr. Frederic King was kind enough to
write to Dr. Strong, the able Superintendent of the Liverpool
Asylum, and submit to him the following questions from me.
The questions, with Dr. Strong’s reply, are as follows: —
“ Questions.
6. “ Number of persons who, having been recently discharged
from the Infirmary *at the time of their admission into the Asylum,
and suffered in consequence from the change from the one insti-
tution to the other, during (say) the two and a half years ending
June 1, 1874 ?
7. “ Number of persons who, having been recently discharged
from the Infirmary at the time of their admission into the Asylum,
and benefited in health from the change from the one institution
to the other, during (say) the two and a half years ending June 1,
1874?”
“Reply.
“ Liverpool Asylum,
“ 14th June, 1874.
“In reference to the questions (Nos. 6 and 7) asked by Dr.
Roberts, I may remark that I cannot speak positively to either.
6. “ I think I am correct in stating that during the last two
years and a half ending June 1, 1874, the average number of
patients received from the Sydney Infirmary has been two per
week, and I am certain that I am within the average. I have
at present in hospital some twenty or more, direct from the
Infirmary. The number of those discharged from the Infirmary,
and for some reason have remained in Sydney for a day or two,
and then have been sent here, far exceed the above average.
7. “ My answer to this must be amalgamated with the above ;
for, not taking any particular interest in the place from which the
several patients may come, unless the case may present some
particular features of interest, my memory will not bear me out
as to the exact benefit each Infirmary patient may have received ;
but I should say that quite a third have been benefited by the
change, and have been discharged cured, or in a position to earn
their living outside, or have taken different places in the institu-
tion, whereby they make themselves useful and earn a few
shillings.
“ Almost in every case a temporary beneficial change takes
place from the removal from one institution to the other, the


permanency of which, of course, depends upon the nature of
the disease: malignant disease —phthisis and such like —do not
improve permanently. I may say that I have never known any
immediate injury incurred by the removal from Sydney to this
place of any sick person.
“W. E. Strong, M.D.,
“ Fred. King, Esq.” “ Surgical Superintendent.”
Thus it appears that from fifty to eighty beds have until recently
been occupied by patients who either possessed homes where they
could have been treated as out-patients, or were received into
one of the Asylums where they were treated and lodged without
suffering in health from the change—some, indeed, benefiting by it.
Let us take the medium number of sixty-five of such patients
as a fair average; probably ten of these, certainly not more than
fifteen, would enter one of the Asylums; the saving, therefore, in
one year would amount to £2,925, calculated at £45 each; but
from this we have to deduct the cost of the fifteen patients who
go to the Asylum at £l2 14s. each—say £2OO, leaving a balance
of saving of £2,725 for one year, • If we carry this back only ten
years, we have an approximate estimate of no less than £27,250
that might have been saved; or, to speak perhaps more correctly,
that would have been available for the treatment of patients to
whom justice cannot be done at a less cost than £45 per annum.
The following table, prepared from statistics kindly furnished
to me by the Committee of the Infirmary, may be found useful:—
J?
c 6
2
d
c 8
►"3
t?
c 3
I
-g
rd
c
ri
a
$ i
a 4
Total number of vacant beds each month 200
218 297
794 790
Total number of vacant beds each month
Total number of patients admitted each
month
Total number of patients admitted eachl
month ... ... ... ... ... :
Monthly surplus of vacant beds
Monthly surplus of vacant beds
Average number of beds vacant daily in
each month
Average number of beds vacant daily in
each month
6*
2i
51
3i
10 1873
26* 1874
Average number of patients admitted daily
for each month ...
Average number of patients admitted daily
for each month ...
5
6
4* 1873
6 1874


Eeference to this table shows that from January Ist to July Ist,
1873, there was a total of 1,526 vacant beds and 956 admissions,
showing an excess of vacant beds over admissions of 570, or about
3 l-7th daily.
Taking the same period of the present year, we find a total of
2,878 vacant beds against 1,098 admissions, showing an excess of
1,780 vacant beds, or about 9f daily.
But if we take the number of vacant beds and admissions from
the Ist of March to the Ist of July in each of the same two years,
that is, during those months in which, this year, all patients were
discharged whose further detention in the hospital was considered
undesirable, we shall find the figures more disproportionate still: —
Vacant beds from Ist March to Ist July, 1873... 1,165
Admissions, ditto ditto, 1873 ... ... ... 609
Surplus of vacant beds, ditto ditto, 1873 ... ... 556
Vacant beds from Ist March to Ist July, 1874 ... 2,715
Admissions, ditto ditto, 1874 ... ... ... 732
Surplus of vacant beds, ditto ditto, 1874 ... ... 1,983
Daily average of surplus vacant beds, 1873 ... 4|
Ditto ditto ditto, 1874 ... ... ... ... 16i
Another point that deserves attention is the great similarity
between the numbers of the admissions during each month of the
two years, a feature which is more evident on looking at the
monthly daily average.
The proportion of vacancies to accommodation appears to be
rather more than 10 per cent, in the two hospitals, and this aver-
age would undoubtedly be increased by the establishment of a
chronic hospital. We will however take it at 10 per cent.
There are 228 beds in the Infirmary, and thirty-six (to be in-
creased this year to sixty) in St. Vincent’s Hospital, making a total
of 288. These would yield a daily average of nearly twenty-nine
beds, to meet a demand which the statistics prove has not hitherto
exceeded an average of seven (and during 1873 was under six),
judging by the test of admissions.
It must, however, be borne in mind that a margin of empty beds
to the extent of about 5 per cent, should be allowed for cleans-
ing and disinfecting —for bed spaces to be left vacant a certain
time after cases of fever, for unavailable beds arising from the
necessary classification of patients, &c.
A summary of the last-mentioned facts would stand thus:—
Daily average of vacant beds at ten per cent, on 288 beds, say 28
Deduct five per cent, for administrative purposes, say ... 14
Deduct also for the average supply of suitable cases for admis-
sion, say ... ... ... ... ... ?
Total 21


Giving a daily surplus of empty beds to meet emergencies
and increased demand of seven, a number equal to the total num-
ber of the present admissions.
It further appears that with a fewer number of occupied beds
a larger number of patients were admitted and discharged during
the first six months of 1874 than 1873, proving that the retention
of the chronic and incurable cases has been prejudicial to the
interests both of the sick portion of the necessitous class and to
the valuable working of the institution.
To ascertain whether the health of the poor had been materially
different in these two years, I inquired at St. Vincent’s Hospital
what the admission had been in the first five months of 1873 and
1874 respectively. I was informed that exactly 135 patients had
been received in both years, and further, that they did not hesitate
to put up extra beds if much required.
The conclusions to which these investigations lead are —
1. That the amount of accommodation at present contained in
the hospitals already existing in Sydney would, if strictly
devoted to cases of serious disease and accident, be suffi-
cient to meet the present demands of the community, but
(as will be shown hereafter) is incapable of that progressive
expansion demanded by a rapidly increasing community.
2. That accommodation for persons suffering from chronic and
incurable disease and for convalescing patients only exists
to a very limited extent, and that of an objectionable
character as being in a poor-house.
3. That the accommodation contained in the main front building
of the Infirmary, amounting to 151 beds, is proved by the
evidence taken before the Charity Commission to be so
unhealthy and unsatisfactory in character as to demand its
immediate removal.
I have now to state what I believe would be the cost for original
construction and subsequent annual support of the two forms of
hospitals, and of the different schemes open to our selection.
Having recently been compelled to go carefully into the cost of
hospital construction in Sydney at the present time, I feel justified
in giving the following figures as approximately correct: —
1. Tor a large hospital efficient in all respects for the treatment
of serious cases of all kinds, and for the purposes of a medical
school, £250 to £350 per bed, irrespective of the cost of site.
2. Tor a large hospital suitable for chronic cases, &c., £6O to
£9O per bed, irrespective of site.
After a careful examination of the question of hospital current
expenditure in Europe, and a rather long experience in Sydney,
I am satisfied that this will not amount to less than from £45 to
£5O per bed in hospitals devoted to serious cases and in which
justice is done to them.


At St Vincent’s the cost is much less than this, but this case
is exceptional, and much to the credit of the benevolent lady at
the head of it.
A hospital for chronic and incurable patients, &c., ought
certainly to be managed at an annual cost per bed of from £l6
to £lB.
The last figures given are somewhat higher than some of my
most experienced friends consider necessary ; but I am anxious
not to understate the probable cost, and feel also it will be true
economy to render such an institution capable of receiving the
largest possible proportion of cases, if only to relieve the central
general hospitals.
A consideration of these statistics and general experience
naturally leads to the conclusion that the character of our present
and probable future requirements in respect to hospital accom-
modation may be described as follows :
1. To provide accommodation of a suitable character for the
reception, as in-patients, of all cases of serious disease and
accident, and to afford clinical instruction to the pupils
of a University School of Medicine.
2. To provide suitable accommodation for the reception, as
in-patients, of all cases of confirmed chronic and incurable
disease, and for a certain number of convalescing patients.
Humanity and reason equally demand that the accommodation
for the first class should be provided in a hospital possessing all
the appliances suggested by modern science, and therefore com-
paratively expensive ; and that for the second class, in one, simple
and economical both in its construction and current expenditure —
calculated also to prepare its inmates to resume, without detri-
ment, the habits of their home life. The more perfect the first,
the more rapid will be the recovery of the patients, and the
smaller the mortality ; the more simple the latter in structure
and management, the more will the habits and health of its
inmates approximate to what is required to fit them for a life of
industry, &c.
The first or general hospital should, when possible, be placed
in a suburban position, but easy of access. The site should be
healthy, and free from all possible encroachments of neighbouring
buildings, and adapted to the purposes of a medical school.
It should, further, possess a branch, in the form of a small
receiving hospital, situated in the centre of population, for the
reception of bad accidents and other serious cases such as could
not safely be removed at once to the 'general hospital. This
branch establishment should be limited in accommodation to the
smallest number of beds required for the purpose.
The arguments in favour of these have been so often put for-
ward that I need not refer to them further now.


The necessity for the immediate establishment of a hospital
for chronic cases, &c., may be recognized upon the following
grounds: —
Firstly. That an asylum or poor-house is only suited for the
reception of a certain proportion of the patients who do not
require to be treated in a general hospital; and that to send the
others to a poor-house, even if they are willing to go, has a
demoralizing influence.
Secondly. That it is in the highest degree desirable to make
the proportion of patients to be treated in the general hospital
as small as possible; and that it is impossible to attain this end
unless a suitable institution exists to which they can have the
option of going, and where.it can be felt they will have the care
and treatment required,
Thirdly. That the present surplus accommodation at the Liver-
pool Asylum will it is evident be soon required to meet the
demands of the steady increase of paupers, and that a certain
proportion of temporary invalids will always exist in such an
establishment, for whom the hospital wards will be required.
Fourthly. That experience shows it is undesirable to establish
convalescent wards in a general hospital, where a certain number
of men will always be found to remain who would return home to
work rather than be sent away from Sydney.
A Chronic Hospital should be placed upon a healthy site, at a
certain distance from town. If upon the line of railway, it
should not be nearer than Homebush or more distant than Pros-
pect. If upon the high ground of the North Shore, it need not
be so distant. If too far away, it would be beyond effective
supervision, and the distance would be inconvenient to the
patients ; if too near, the beneficial influence of change would
be less upon the invalids.
It should possess ample grounds, and be built in pavilions of
simple construction. A small amount of administrative accomo-
dation would be required, and it should be conducted upon the
most economical principles.
Accommodation would in the first instance be required for 300
beds for men and 100 for women, of whom I imagine the Asylums
would at once contribute at this time about 230 men and thirty
women.
Such a hospital could be enlarged from time to time as further
accommodation was required ; but whatever scheme is adopted in
regard to the central General Hospitals, this, the Chronic
Hospital, should be erected at once.
In 1870,1 drew the attention of Government to the fact
that the Victoria Barracks were unoccupied, that a hospital for
chronic cases was much required, and that the barracks were
suited to the purpose. If these buildings were still unemployed,


SCHEME A.
Beds.
Cr.
Dr.
Rebuilding the front and outbuildings, &c., of Sydney
177
£
£
Infirmary
30,000
Building two pavilions of the Prince Alfred Hospital
128
24,000
Ditto administrative block
... *
20,000
St. Vincent’s Hospital ...
60
Prince Alfred Hospital Fund ...
24,000
Required from Grovernxnent
50,000
Total beds...
365
£74,000
£74,000
I should, for economical reasons, suggest that they might be thus
utilized at the present time; But as they are now occupied, and
contemplating a general scheme as we are now doing, it is our
duty to consider which is the best, and as such, we can have
no hesitation in acknowledging that the Chronic Hospital should
be placed out of Sydney.
We have next to consider how these principles can be carried
out in the most efficient manner under existing circumstances,
and in doing so we have to bear in mind that the demand for
beds during the last two years has been met by the daily average
of vacant beds arising from a total of 264, and that in future St.
Vincent’s Hospital will supply at least sixty.
The following schemes are open for our selection: —
Ist. That towards which we appeared to be drifting, and the
serious evils of which have inducedmeto trouble you with this paper.
The front Infirmary buildings to be rebuilt, and the Directors
of the Prince Alfred Hospital to be left to put up a couple of
pavilions, without information as to the manner in which our
hospitals are to be arranged, organized and supported.
This plan would afford, in the first instance, about sixty beds —
more than would be required; and the two hospitals would be
rivals in the competition for patients and funds.
The Medical School being at the University, great inconvenience
would arise from the students having to attend two hospitals, the
most distant of which from the University would, from its central
position in the city, possess the most serious cases of disease and
accident.
Two Boards of management would be in existence, and two I
administrative establishments, with their respective officers, would
be required for a number of patients which could be managed
with more efficiency and economy by one.
The current expenditure of hospitals is proportionately greater
in the small than in the large, but this would probably be counter-
balanced in some degree by the distance of the Prince Alfred
Hospital from town, and by the much greater perfection of its
arrangements.
The following table shows the cost, accommodation, &c,
Surplus beds over present demand, about 85.


SCHEME B.
Beds.
Cr.
Dr.
Building a new kitchen, mortuary, &c., laying out
£
£
grounds of Infirmary for south wing to serve as
a Receiving Hospital, &c.
77
7,000
Building two pavilions of the Prince Alfred Hos-
pital
128
24,000
Building administration block
60
20,000
St. Yineent’s Hospital
24,000
Prince Alfred Fund
Required from Government
27,000
Total beds ... ...
265
£51,000
£51,000
2nd. The Directors of the Prince Alfred Hospital might obtain
from the Government a sufficient sum to enable them to put up
the administration block of the hospital at the same time that
they erect the two front pavilions —these would constitute a
working establishment for 128 beds, into which, when finished,
the patients could be removed from the front building of the
Sydney Infirmary. That structure would then be taken down, a
new kitchen, mortuary, &c., be erected, and the centre space
drained, laid out, and planted, down to the Domain wall.
Under this plan the south wing would serve as the receiving
hospital, one floor being devoted to men and the other to women;
it is larger than is necessary for this purpose, and the proportion
between the sexes is unsuitable. A large and very valuable piece
of ground would be devoted to a purpose for which a smaller
piece in another position would answer.
This plan would yield 207 beds, which with sixty in St. Vincent’s
would meet present requirements, and the Prince Alfred Hospital
would be capable of enlargement from time to time, but it would
be open to the before-mentioned fault of having two establish-
ments.
The Nightingale wing, being larger than is necessary for the
purposes of such an amount of ward accommodation, should be
converted into a training-school for supernumerary nurses, to go
out on hire, or for employment in country hospitals ; indeed, the
training of such persons should be provided for in any scheme
that is adopted.
The following table shows the cost, accommodation, &c.: —
3rd. Sufficient pavilions of the Prince Alfred Hospital to
contain 200 beds with the administration block might be built at
once, and at the same time a [Receiving Hospital to contain thirty
beds might be erected on the Flagstaff Hill, or other convenient
site, to accommodate twenty men and ten women. AVhen these
were complete, all the patients could be removed from the
Infirmary, and the Government resume the land and buildings,
the latter of which would make reasonably good Public Offices,
though unhealthy for hospital purposes.


SCHEME C.
Beds.
Cr.
Dr.
Price Alfred Hospital administrative block and
pavilions complete for ...
200
£61,000
Receiving Hospital complete for
30
9,000
Including value of site
5,000
Amount of Prince Alfred Hospital Eund ...
£24,000
Value of land in Macquarie-street —Infirmary site
36,000
Value of Infirmary buildings
13,780
£73,780
£75,000
St. Vincent’s Hospital
60
Total beds ...
290
This plan offers the following advantages : —All the money
would be expended in the erection of new substantial buildings of
modern arrangement, and on good sites. The management would
be central, there would be no rivalry, and thus it would be easy
to render one officer responsible that no really necessitous person
whose disease required hospital treatment was refused, and that
all who could afford to pay should, if admitted, be compelled to
do so in proportion to their means.
The accommodation would be capable of systematic and economi-
cal increase from time to time, and would be of the kind most
favourable for the students of a medical school.
It would thus, and only thus, be possible to erect a noble and
complete hospital, in which the patients could be properly classi-
fied, and of which the metropolis could be proud.
The receiving hospital would occupy its correct position as a
branch institution under the same management.
The following is an approximate estimate of the original cost: —
N.B.—The estimate of the value of the Infirmary site has been most kindly
furnished to me by Messrs. Richardson and Wrench. The estimate of the
buildings is taken at the original cost of the Nightingale Wing and South
Wing only.
Balance required from Grovernment,-for which value
is not received ... ... ... ... '
1,220
£75,000
This paper has already far exceeded the limits to which I had
originally designed it, and it will be impossible for me to deal with
the important questions of organization and support.
I will, however, close my remarks by enumerating some of the
points which occur to me as requiring full consideration and
prompt decision.
1. "Whether our hospitals should not be open to every sick per-
sonin necessitous circumstances, subject only to the fitness of his
case for treatment P


Sydney; Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lB74.
TAf F
kiiiio
2. Should not our hospitals —the general, the receiving, and
that for chronic disease, &c. —be under one organization and
management ?
3. What proportionate voice in the management should the
Government possess ?
4. Upon what principle and to what extent will it be desirable
that the Government should contribute to the funds for original
construction and current expenditure ?
5. Should not the provident spirit and system be fostered and
adopted to the fullest extent P
6, May or may not medical clubs be made to pay for members
in hospital ?
7. Should not the dispensary system be much extended, and
separated from the hospitals, in management, &c., the latter reserv-
ing the right of having an independent out-patient department
when required for students, &c. ?
Other points will develop themselves as the subject is discussed;
in the meantime, the above suggestions will indicate how much
remains to be done in a subject of great social importance.
ALFRED EGBERTS.




