





PARABLES
AN ESSAY
H. K. RUSDEN
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY


V .


PARABLES:
AN ESSAY.
BY H. K. RUSDEN.
p |S2S
m-n -~n
The subject of parables is one which I long suspected would
prove a most interesting one, and my slight investigation of it
has confirmed my opinion that its study would be well worth
prosecuting much more thoroughly and systematically. I
find it a wide one. I take the liberty—if it is one—of includ-
ing under the convenient name of parable—which means a
comparison—both fable, or apologue, and allegory, as well as
the parable itself. A rather arbitrary distinction has, I think,
been drawn between the fable, or apologue, and the parable,
but the wide etymological meaning of the word parable makes
it the fittest to cover all the class of writings which, under the
guise of tales, are made the vehicle of didactic ethics, or of
some esoteric or hidden meaning. Allegory has often been
used for either purpose. Allegory, if well sustained, possesses
a notable and peculiar charm, particularly for the untrained
human mind, which delights in the easy exercise involved in
the recognition of the correspondences between related trains
of ideas presented to it. It is, besides, so much easier and
more agreeable to follow and identify a few suggested points
of similarity than to undertake the more laborious and less
pleasing task of distinguishing those of difference. Each
successive parallel arouses an agreeable kind of surprise and
self-satisfaction in its detection. It is likewise to be remem-
bered that an analogous duplication of ideas, in accord or
contrast, is a main constituent of true wit. This method is
also rightly valued as furnishing the most interesting means
of conveying instruction, particularly when embodied in
rhythmical language, which notoriously assists the memory to


retain or recover what it might otherwise lose. It is, besides,
strikingly effective, because it presents an illustrative example
in demonstration or support of the truth or apparent truth
intended to be conveyed. We need not wonder, then, that
this method has always in historical times been a favourite
with both the teachers and the taught, more especially with
uncultivated persons, who are unaware that analogy is an
inferior kind of logic, and will not always bear analysis, even
when it appears most plausible and satisfactory.
The immense popularity of some allegories is beyond
dispute. The fables of JEsop form the most admirable in-
stance. Their brevity and simplicity make them as easy to
understand as to learn or remember, and they, besides, convey
a vast amount of practical wisdom more, I think, than
almost any other similar collection of ancient writings. Their
great antiquity has been demonstrated by the fact that they
have been unmistakably identified in widely separated parts
of the world in various languages, proving that they originated
long before the pre-historic separation of the Aryan race.
Aisop was therefore apparently more the collector than the
author of the fables attributed to him. But he deserves unique
credit for having made the collection, whencesoever may have
come the materials. To him, and partly, perhaps, to their
great age, is to be attributed one great and excellent feature
in them —namely, the conspicuous absence of any irrelevant or
speculative alloy which detracts from the value of other ancient
didactic writings. But their superiority mainly consists in the
fact that they appeal directly and strongly to the logical appre-
hension of the hearer, and thereby cultivate it in the best
possible manner. They depend upon no questionable authority
or sentimentalism, and allege no irrelevant reasons, but simply
exhibit the natural evil consequences of foolish acts, and the
good of wise ones, as flowing, not from an extraneous source,
but necessarily from the acts themselves, and, therefore, find
in them the only logical and valid reasons why they should
or should not be done. This, I take it, is the perfection of
moral teaching ; and mainly for this reason I consider that
yEsop’s fables offer a striking contrast to other ancient
writings. How many of them are constantly and almost
universally quoted to-day, with as complete point and rele-
vancy as when they were promulgated twenty, if not forty or
more, centuries ago? Does not this prove their eternal
wisdom? “The dog and his shadow ”is of everlasting and
the widest application, and perfectly illustrates the essential


superiority of wisdom over folly, in duly distinguishing
between realities and shadows. The “ lion and the mouse ”
well inculcates the truth—that men seem, unfortunately, so
eager to forget—that friends are so much more valuable than
enemies. The “ wolf and the lamb ”is a stinging satire on the
invariable system pursued by the strong towards the weak
nations as well as individuals, and which is certainly not less
remarkable to-day than in iEsop’s time. For the basis of it
—the idea of property —has undoubtedly grown and intensi-
fied since, and it may now be safely affirmed that morality is
possible solely between equals. The sublime obliviousness of
justice with which civilized nations appropriate the lands and
property of their inferiors in power, and vilify arid destroy those
who presume to resist, was probably never so complete as at
the present time. That it is done with such superlative uncon-
sciousness is all that can be pleaded in evasion of the charge
of consummate hypocrisy. The “ bundle of sticks ” still fur-
nishes the most perfect maxim, “ Union is strength of our
co-operative societies and assurance companies. There is no
more exact or significant illustration of the evil of lying, and
the logical reason of it, than the story of the boy who cried
“ Wolf I" The mild, but pungent, sarcasm on all super-
stition in that of “ Hercules and the waggoner,” has never
been excelled for comprehensiveness as well as truth. “ Put
your own shoulder to the wheel ” is advice that everybody
repeats in magnificent insensibility to its self-application.
The simple words, “ The dog in the manger ,” convey more
reproach than the most elaborate treatise on selfishness ; and
yet it falls short of many cases daily before us. The dog in
the parable did want the straw to lie upon, though not to eat.
But those who here prevent others from using the Public
Library on Sunday do so because they do not want to use it
themselves. Of the two I prefer the*dog. The practical, self-
evident wisdom embodied in these and many others is, how-
ever, too universally recognized for it to be necessary to
particularize further. I am not aware whether yEsop’s fables
are used as a school book in our Education Department.
A friend has suggested to me that there could not be a more
perfect and unexceptionable book for the purpose, and I
entirely endorse his proposal. It is admittedly a child’s book.
It is rarely read by anyone else ; yet it is axiomatic in the
mouths of all.
I must confess with regret that I have not been able to
ascertain satisfactorily what fables should properly be included


among those of Aisop. I believe that the other most ancient
collection of fables is that of the Indian Bidpai, sometimes
called Pilpay, but that there is room to doubt whether both
have not a common source, many of the fables of Bidpai being
identical with those of and their reputed ages being
about the same. Babrius and Phaedrus, about 2,000 years ago,
published—the first in Greek, and the second in Latin, verse
excellent Aesopian fables ; but though many of them are
uncontestedly Aisop’s, many of them are evidently not his ;
and, in the fourteenth century, Planudes’ collection, which
I believe included 144 fables, is only partly Yet
there are about 300 fables ascribed to Aisop, many having
been added to the list without any plausible or attempted
guarantee of their authenticity. My edition, dated 1863, by
Mr. Thomas James, M.A., Canon of Peterborough, comprises
203. It appears to me to be a good one, with a capital pre-
liminary essay. But Mr. James confesses that he has selected
the fables from different collections as he judged best. And
perhaps he has acted judiciously, especially as he has not,
like other editors, spoilt the fables by adding copious notes
and commentaries. Still, beyond the general confession and
unanimous agreement that the best fables are most certainly
Aisop’s, there is room for much doubt about others, several
of which are of inferior quality. Aisop has the credit of
the best, and evidently deserves it. The fact that Socrates
employed some of his last hours in versifying them ; and the
testimony of Plato, and many other of the best Greek authors,
form a sufficient guarantee without the general estimate of
Aisop’s wisdom and proverbial wit shown by the Athenians
in placing his statue, by Lysippus, in front of those of the
seven sages.
There are many excellent metrical as well as prose versions
of the same and similar fables, of which, I believe, the best
and the best known are La Fontaine's in French, and Gay’s in
English ; besides very many others, too numerous to particu-
larize. In most cases the fables decidedly lose by amplifica-
tion and superfluous applications. I do not wish to include
under the designation of parable the satirical writings, which
are plentiful, I think, in all languages, because their main
object is scarcely strictly didactic. But there are several
remarkable instances of the great popularity of allegorical
tales, of which Bunyan’s “ Pilgrim’s Progress ” is, perhaps, the
best known and admired. That, and his “ Holy War,” still
interest many more readers than appreciate the allegory, or


the lessons inculcated in it. I imagine that few books have
passed through more editions ; but they lose immensely by
expansion, and are not, I think, comparable to yEsop’s fables,
either for form, wisdom, or utility.
But parables have been widely used by other religious
teachers, and with great effect, particularly in India and
Arabia, as well as Palestine. In those countries the enter-
tainment of story-telling, in the style of the Arabian 1,001
Nights, is exceedingly popular, simply for the sake of the
gentle stimulant given by it to the imagination, though the
practical moral lessons are lacking, which were the special
object of Aisop. An example of the apologue or fable of
“ The Trees and the Bramble” will be remembered in the
ninth chapter of Judges, and another of the parable in
the pointed self-conviction, by Nathan the prophet, of David
for Uriah’s murder. But it is extremely difficult to say to
what extent the bulk of the Old Testament does not consist
of a continuous series of parables, or fragmentary exoteric
writings, concealing a hidden or esoteric meaning. I recognize
in the story of the Fall of Adam and Eve an imperfect
version of the story (also a parable) of Prometheus, of which
two lost plays of yEschylus would presumably, judging by
what has come to us of a third, have completed the noblest
presentment of the subject. In Genesis the serpent represents
Prometheus or Wisdom, and suffers, at the hands of
the mysterious being who vainly forbade to humanity the
knowledge of good and evil, for his philanthropy in giving it
to mankind ; just as Prometheus was impaled, at the command
of Jupiter the Thunderer, for a parallel offence. But even
the prophetic insight of yEschylus himself could scarcely
have foreshadowed, in the lost “ Prometheus Unbound,” the
completeness of the Nemesis which has already so reversed
the conditions that, although the martyrdom of man is an
eternal process, the voluble thunder of Jupiter is even now
reduced, by human science, to whisper its most trifling
messages, from one side of the globe to the other, along the
übiquitous telegraphic wire, annihilating in a measure both
time and space. In my apprehension, this Syrian version of
the same parable represents the terrible penalties visited by
the priesthood, who then preserved a monopoly of knowledge,
on anyone who ventured to divulge any of their sacred
mysteries. I cannot but regard the whole history, or nearly
so, as similarly parabolic. Most of it is astronomical, some
of it unmistakably so to those who have examined the


matter. Take, as an example of a numerous class of
obscure passages, the story —which has, I believe, defied
commentators —of the creation of the woman from Adam’s
rib. Why a rib ? Who has given or can give a plausible
rational explanation of this mystery? Had it been the
heart, the spine, the tongue , or even the tail which some
have supposed that man may once have had, there might
be some fanciful anatomical propriety, or poetical justice,
in the restoration of a missing link. But a rib, of all
things! Why? The explanation is surprisingly simple. It
is well known that in Egypt, for instance (elsewhere under
other names), the sun-god Osiris represented the male, and
Isis the moon and the female ; and that their fabled adventures,
just like those of Jason, Theseus, Hercules, Bacchus, and others,
correspond accurately with their periodical passages through
the Zodiacal signs and the adjacent constellations, but with an
even more than usually marked sexual meaning in them.
Now we all know that the sun and moon pass each other
monthly. The moon fulfils her phases, increases to glorious
fulness of beauty, and then gradually wanes, decreasing in
size and brilliancy, rising later and later night by night, till
we lose sight of her entirely. She is then in monthly conjunc-
tion with the sun. After which—what is it that we first see
again of this representative of the female ? In the fading light
of the western sky, just parted from the side of the sun , which
has just dropped below the horizon, we see a beautiful, fine
virgin-white semicircle, or crescent, or new moon, like to
nothing in the Arabian desert so much as to a plain, bleached,
white RIB ! —which in less than a fortnight blooms again into a
lovely full moon ! Of this parable of the rib, and the perpetual
monthlycreation of woman, this is the only attempt at a rational
interpretation that I can see; and the very obscurity of
the metaphor outside the local familiar imagery of the desert
has, by reason of its simplicity, protected it from alteration in
translation from language to language, and comes to us to-dayas
plainly and obviously as when first adopted by the Egyptian or
Arabian poet.
Again, there has been much dispute here and elsewhere as
to the meaning of the extraordinarily great ages attributed
to many of the patriarchs in the book of Genesis. Some,
with the late Dr. Bromby, held that months were meant
instead of years, but that theory was easily shown to be inad-
missible. There was a prevalent idea or suspicion in India
and Egypt, as well as in Greece, that there was a cycle of years,


if it could be found, after which the motions of the planets,
and perhaps natural, political, and other events, would recur
or happen over again in the same or similar order. The life
of the fabulous Phoenix, supposed to be 608 years, when the
bird was supposed to burn itself, and its successor to rise from
its ashes, was an attempt of this kind, but less successful than
the Metonic Cycle of 6,940 days discovered by Meton 430 years
before our era—in which, after 19 years, eclipses fall on the
same days of the year in nearly the same order. The Brahmins
in India, or before they immigrated there, extended these
attempts into billions of years, without, of course, serving any
known useful purpose. But many ancient philosophers worked
industriously at this cycle problem, and I cannot but think
that the great ages of these patriarchs esoterically symbolize
various attempts to regulate the calendar. P'or it was long
before the number of days in the year was accurately known.
But it is remarkable that among all these old patriarchs Enoch
is the only one who is said to have lived exactly 365 years , the
actual number of days in a year ; and that though some are
said to have lived nearly three times as long, he was the only
one accepted and approved. I consider it an esoteric record
of the numerous failures, as well as of the final successful
attempt, to find the true number of days in the year; and I
think this interpretation on the whole the most reasonable
and accordant with what we know of the then state of know-
ledge, and of the prevalent methods of disguising it in the
parabolic form. It seems also the only one that is free from
the contradictions that discredit and invalidate every other of
which I am aware.
So in the thirty-third chapter of Exodus, verses 18 to 23,
when Moses says to the Lord, “ I beseech thee shew me thy
glory and the Lord says, “I will put thee in a clift of the
rock, and I will cover thee with my hand as I pass by; and
I will take away my hand, and thou mayest see my back
parts, but my face shall not be seen,” “ for there shall no
man see me and live;” —the exsteric, or literal meaning, is
far too gross, if not unmeaning, to be admissible. But
accepting the tale as an esoteric record of a total solar eclipse,
it becomes reasonably intelligible and plain. People who are
not aware of the approach of an eclipse do not perceive its
initial stages ; but when it becomes nearly complete their
attention is arrested by the increasing darkness, and they are
unlikely—in the case of a total solar eclipse—to see anything
of it until the totality is past. They then may see the circular


disk of the moon moving off the face of the sun, which they
cannot otherwise steadfastly regard with safety to their eye-
sight ; and the shape of the dark body of the moon bears
certainly a plain resemblance, in outline, to that part of the
person which the Lord mentions as possible to be seen as He
passed by. Certainly, no man can look directly at the
unobscured face of the sun without injuring his sight, as I too
well know to my cost, by foolishly trying it, watching an
eclipse, nearly forty years ago.
It is well known, and generally accepted now, that the
story of Jephthah (a combination of the names of Jehovah
and the great Egyptian god Phthah, both being sun-gods)
and his daughter, whom he sacrificed, in accordance with
a rash vow to do so should he return successful from his
expedition, is only one of the numerous exoterical myths
descriptive of the manner in which the lovely Dawn , the
loveliest part of Arabian days, is every morning extinguished
and annihilated by her metaphorical parent the Sun.
It is also well known that in ancient times the privileged
priestly class was really the governing class, and that it was
their consistent policy to monopolize and preserve secretly as
holy mysteries the knowledge which they sedulously cultivated
as the source of the enormous power by means of which
they exploitered and tyrannized over the ignorant masses.
Astronomy was no doubt of infinite use to them in maintain-
ing their ascendancy, by predicting eclipses, and thus and
otherwise establishing the credit of their oracles. We know
that it was an accepted principle with them that religion was
useful solely as an engine of government, and they employed
it accordingly. It was not an impiety, but a recognized
necessity, for Julius Caesar to make himself “ pontifex maxi-
mus ” before he could exercise supreme power. The priest-
hood used astronomy for astrological purposes, believing in it
themselves mainly as a source and means of power. They
preserved their knowledge in esoteric parabolic records or
fables, which they promulgated exoterically as truth. Thus
the ancient priests and poets preserved in their popular
mythology secret records of astronomical and physical pheno-
mena, and the popular stories and poems which only pro-
moted superstition and fear among the vulgar, served but to
conceal their own sacred knowledge. Herodotus, Diodorus
Siculus, Plutarch, and other authors sometimes approach the
subject of these mysteries, but apologize for stopping short,
saying that it is forbidden to proceed.


The origin of the signs of the zodiac and the names of the
constellations, stars, and planets is entirely pre-historic and
unknown. Their immense age is proved by the close cor-
respondence of the zodiacs anciently in use in the most widely
separated parts of our globe, so that we find nearly the same
signs for the zodiac in Egypt, Persia, India, China, and even
Mexico, demonstrating a common source and vastly remote
antiquity. But they were not only more studied but far better
understood before our era than for 1,000 years after it. That
the heliocentric system was the received scientific theory then
we know from unwilling witnesses —St, Augustine and Lactan-
tius _ w ho found it so prevalent as to demand their special
and too successful condemnation of it as false ;* so that it had
to be re-discovered after the lapse of about twelve centuries of
nearly universal European lunacy by Copernicus and Galileo.
In Greece the mythological stories of the amours of the
gods and goddesses esoterically represent the motions and
periodical conjunctions of the planets and the sun and moon
through the zodiacal signs and constellations. Those of the
planets with the moon are frequent enough, as she meets them
as well as the sun in her monthly revolution round the earth.
The superior planets—Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn—meet the
sun and the inferior planets, Venus and Mercury, but once
in the year; but as they pass at vastly different intervals
through the zodiacal signs, the Ram, the Bull, the Twins, the
Crab, the Lion, the Virgin, the Scales, the Scorpion, the
Archer, the Goat, the Waterbearer, and the Fishes, and the
numerous adjacent constellations representing the same and
also a series of other physical objects, there was abundance of
scope and opportunity for the poets and priests, who were not
slow to avail themselves of them, to invent all sorts of tales
and adventures to fill them, of the gods and goddesses, whom
the planets represented, whose names they bore and still bear,
and who, with the sun and moon,pass through them all,monthly,
yearly, or at longer intervals. Careful records were kept from
pre-historic times in India, China, Egypt, and Chaldaea, as well
as Greece, of observed periodical motions and conjunctions of
all the planets through all the signs, and the priests and poets
multiplied their exoteric fanciful descriptions of them to
amuse or intimidate the uninitiated, always perfectly dis-
guising the esoteric meaning. The antiquary and the
* “De Civitate Dei,” lib. 16, ch. 9, vol. vii. (Paris, 1685); “ Institutiones
Divinse,” lib. 3, ch. 24, yol. i. (Deux Fonts, 1786).


astronomer have succeeded to the poet and the priest; and
by the help of the precession or movement of the equinoctial
points of intersection of the equatorial and ecliptic planes,
which slowly displaces the zodiacal signs from the constella-
tions whose names they bear, and makes them retrograde
round the whole circle of the ecliptic in 25,800 years, or 1
degree in yv6 years, they obtain a new, though imperfect,
measure of time. Not that the movement is irregular or
doubtful, but that we have no means of judging how often
the circuit may have been-completed since the zodiac was
invented. It may be only 3,000 years, but it may be 28,000 or
54,000, or any larger multiple of 25,800. Dupuis and Laplace
considered it probable that one revolution at least had been
completed, but that is quite probably an under, rather than
over, estimate. The antiquary finds that most of the great
mythological poems of antiquity are unmistakably exoteric
tales, esoterically descriptive of astronomical phenomena;
and that Nonnus’s poem of Jason’s expedition to Colchis
for the golden fleece, the twelve labours of Hercules and
those of Samson, the exploits of Theseus, the adventures of
Bacchus, the traditions of Osiris and Isis, and the Ramayana
and Mahabarata of India, all represent in various disguises
the passage of the sun annually through the zodiacal signs and
constellations ; the distinctive forms and characters of which
arc too well marked and are met with in too regular succes-
sion for accidental coincidence, or for doubt as to the esoteric
meaning which they all convey to those who hold the key.
I have no time to follow the exploits of Hercules and Samson.
They commence in Leo and end in Virgo, and it will be easily
remembered that both heroes begin by killing a lion, and
finish their yearly course, at last, one by Medea’s and the
other by Delilah’s means. These parables are of infinite
interest and importance, and the elucidation of some of them
is yet incomplete, Dupuis’ analysis of several of them is plain
enough. The complete failure of the curious attempts to find
the supposed lost ten Jewish tribes in different places on the
earth is not to be wondered at. They are to be seen with the
other two tribes to-day in the heavenly zodiacal signs, where,
and nowhere else, they have always been.
I have thought that it might be interesting to offer some
observations upon some of the parables of the great religious
teachers. Generally, I have no hesitation in estimating them '
as inferior in practical wisdom to those of Hisop, upon which
I have already commented. Many of Boodha’s are, unfor-


tunately, devoted to the exposition of his fanciful doctrine of
re-incarnation, or transmigration of souls ; but some are
beautiful, and I think I cannot do better than repeat one
which I believe is little known. It is the Burmese version, in
which Boodha appears under the name of Para Taken.
Para Taken, while he was staying in the Getavani country,
preached the following discourse on the subject of Kisago-
tami :
In the Savatthi country was a Thuthe, who was worth 400
millions. One day all the wealth in his house turned into
•charcoal. The Thuthe, seeing this, was so wretched that he
refused food and took to his bed. A friend paying him a
visit, and seeing the miserable expression of his face, asked
him why he was so wretched ; and he told him that he was
miserable because all his wealth had changed into charcoal.
His friend, who was also a Thuthe, seeing that this had
happened to him because he was not worthy of his wealth,
said to him, “ My friend Thuthe, have no anxiety about this.
I know a plan. Will you do as I direct ?” The Thuthe
said, “ I will.” “ Then,” said his friend, “spread some mats
in the bazaar, and pile up upon them all your wealth that has
turned into charcoal, and pretend to be trafficking in it.
People, seeing the heap, will say to you, ‘ O you Thuthe,
everyone else sells clothes, drugs, oil, honey, and treacle;
why do you sell charcoal?’ Then you reply, ‘I am selling
my goods !’ If anyone say to you, ‘ Why do you sell so much
gold and silver?’ say to them, ‘ Bring it to me.’ Then take
what they bring in their hand, and in your hand it will
become gold and silver. If the person be a woman, marry
her to your son ; and making over to her the 400 millions of
your property, make use of whatever she shall give you. If
it be a man, marry your daughter to him, and making over the
property to him, make use of what he shall give you.”
The Thuthe, following his friend’s instructions, spread some
mats in the bazaar, and piling upon them a large heap of his
property, pretended to be selling it. Some people seeing it
said, “ Why does he sell charcoal?” Just at this time a young
girl, named Kisagotami, who zvas worthy to be the owner of the
property , and who, having lost both her parents, was in a
wretched condition, happened to come into the bazaar on
some business. When she saw the heap, she said, “My lord
Thuthe, all the people sell clothes, drugs, oil, honey, and
treacle. How is it that you pile up gold and silver for
sale?” The Thuthe said, “Madam, give me some of that


gold and silver.” Kisagotami, taking a handful of the char-
coal, brought it to him. What the young girl had in her
hand no sooner touched the Thuthe’s hand than it became
gold and silver. The Thuthe married the girl to his son, and
having delivered over to her the whole of the 400 millions
of his property, made use daily of the gold and silver which
she gave him.
Some time after this Kisagotami gave birth to a son.
When the boy was able to walk by himself he died. The
young girl, in her love for it, carried the dead child clasped to
her bosom, and went about from house to house, asking if
anyone would give her some medicine for it. When the
neighbours saw this they said, “Is the young girl mad that
she carries about on her breast the dead body of her son ? ”
But a wise man, thinking to himself, “ Alas ! this Kisagotami
does not understand the law of death, I must comfort her,”
said to her, “ My good girl, I cannot myself give medicine
for it, but I know of a doctor who can attend to it.” The
young girl said, “If so, tell me who it is ? ” The wise man
continued, “Para Taken can give medicine ; you must go to-
him.”
Kisagotami went to Para Taken, and, doing homage ta
him, said, “ Lord and master, do you know any medicine that
will be good for my boy?” Pai'a Taken said, “ I know of
some.” She asked “ What medicine do you require?” He
said, “ I want a handful of mustard seed.” The girl promised
to procure it for him, but Para Taken continued, “I require
some mustard seed from a house where no son, or husband,
or parent, or slave has died.” The girl said, “ Very good,”
and went to ask for some at the different houses, carrying the
dead body of her son astride on her hip. The people said,
“ Here is some mustard seed ; take it.” Then she asked, “In
my friends’ house has there died a son, a husband, a parent,
or a slave ?” They replied, “ Lady! what is this that you
say ? The living are few, but the dead are many.” Then she
went to other houses, but one said, “ I have lost a son
another, “ I have lost my parentsanother, “ I have lost my
slave.” At last, not being able to find a single house where
no one had died, from which to procure the mustard seed,
she began to think, “ This is a heavy task that I am engaged
in. lam not the only one whose son is dead. In the whole
of the Savatthi country everywhere children are dying,
parents are dying.” Thinking thus she acquired wisdom, and
putting away her affection for her child, she summoned up


resolution, and left the dead body in a forest. Then she
went to Para Taken and paid him homage. He said to her,
“ Have you procured the mustard seed ? ” “ I have not,” she
replied. “ The people of the village told me, ‘ The living are
few, but the dead are many.’ ” Para Taken said to her, “ You
thought that you alone had lost a son. The law of death is
that among all living creatures there is no permanence.”
When Para Taken had finished preaching the law, Kisagotami
was established in the reward of Sotapatti, and all the
assembly who heard the law were also established in the
reward of Sotapatti.
Some time afterwards, when Kisagotami was one day
engaged in the performance of her religious duties, she
observed the lights in the houses at a distance, now shining,
now extinguished, and began to reflect, “ My state is like
these lamps.” Para Taken, who was then in the Gandhakuti
building, sent his sacred appearance to her, which said to her,
“ All living beings resemble the flame of these lamps, one
moment lighted, the next extinguished ; those only who have
arrived at Nirvana are at rest.” Kisagotami, on hearing this,
reached the stage of a Rahanda possessed of intuitive know-
ledge.
In this parable there is no pretence to anything but fiction,
but I think that Kisagotami—having lost both her parents —
ought not to have been entirely ignorant of the law of death.
The representation that the wealth of the Thuthe turned into
charcoal seems to me a happy one for effect, and besides is
not inaptly descriptive of the fact. It is not said that anyone
turned it into charcoal, but that it became so—became practi-
cally worthless to him by reason of his unworthiness to use it,
by his putting it to unwise purposes. Thus the evil effect
arose from his error alone, just as explains the neigh-
bours’ disbelief of the boy who cried “ Wolf!" as ensuing
naturally from his previous deception of them. The main
lesson as to the evanescence and insignificance of human life
and aspirations is very impressively given. Our state is like
those lamps, now shining, now extinguished. Only those
who have arrived at Nirvana, or this knowledge, are at rest.
It is to be noted also that all the point of the story hinges
upon the iworthiness or virtue of Kisagotami herself. I think
it displays the hand of a master of the art of touching the
sympathetic chords of the human heart, and a not inaccurate
estimate of man’s place in nature.


I propose to conclude with a few critical observations upon
some very curious features hitherto unnoticed, so far as I know,
in two or three of the Gospel parables. Perhaps it may have
been expected from the title of this paper that I would have
devoted more time to that object. I simply chose the title
as the most.concise and comprehensive. I shall confine my-
self to logical criticism as much as possible.
No one can question that the parables ascribed to Jesus are
very unequal. Those of the unjust judge and the unjust
steward, for instance, are, as they have come to us, such
apparent justifications of dishonesty as to cast grave doubt
upon their authenticity. Those of the prodigal son, and of
the Pharisee and the Publican, are, I think, among the most
esteemed, and they certainly illustrate one of the most distinc-
tive principles of the great and revered Teacher—namely, His
sympathy with sinners. I venture to suggest that that principle
is at least not adapted to the present age, and that the supreme
function and duty of a moral being is now the pronouncing,
rather than ignoring, of the broad distinction between moral
good and evil, and marking approval or disapproval thereof
respectively upon every opportunity. Should not a moral
being sympathize with the good rather than with the bad? And
were that the general rule of action, and public opinion thus
more pronounced, would there not probably be more righteous
and fewer sinners? I profess no sympathy with crime or
criminals, and believe that we cannot touch pitch without being
defiled. And I claim that Nature, if it has any opinion, is of
mine. It never forgives, not even for a first offence. I confess
that, unlike Nature, I am lamentably incompetent to adhere
in action to my principle.
But the parable of Dives and Lazarus* is the first to which
I ask your particular attention. “There was a certain rich
man which was clothed in purple and fine linen and fared
sumptuously every day. And there was a certain beggar
named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate, full of sores, and
desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich
man’s table ; moreover, the dogs came and licked his sores.
And it came to pass that the beggar died, and was carried by
the angels into Abraham’s bosom. The rich man also died
and was buried; and in hell he lift up his eyes, being
in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus
in his bosom. And he cried and said, Father Abraham,
* Luke xvi. 19-31.


have mercy on me, and send Lazarus that he may dip
the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue ; for I am
tormented in this flame. But Abraham said, Son, remem-
ber that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things,
and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted and
thou art tormented. And beside all this, between us and you
there is a great gulf fixed: so that they which would pass from
hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would
come from thence. Then he said, I pray thee therefore,
father, that thou wouldest send him to my father’s house; for I
have five brethren ; that he may testify unto them, lest they
also come into this place of torment. Abraham said unto
him, They have Moses and the prophets, let them hear them.
And he said, Nay, Father Abraham, but if one went unto
them from the dead they will repent. And he said unto him,
If they hear not Moses and the prophets , neither will they be
persuaded tJiough one rose from the dead. ”
This parable and the use made of it seem to me most extra-
ordinary. It has been, I think, mainly referred to as significant,
if not authoritative, on the subject of the post-mortem conditions
of men, as showing not only that they will be rewarded, or the
reverse, according to their deeds, but that they will possess
organized bodies, susceptible of the same feelings and functions
as on earth. They see and converse at a distance, and feel
the burning of thirst as well as of fire. I shall show that on
the contrary it does not even pretend to any moral significance
whatever, and that whoever may have been the author, it is
logically incredible that Jesus even repeated it. One remark-
able feature in it is the conspicuous position that Abraham
occupies as more than a mere master of the ceremonies.
Grounds have been advanced for believing that Abraham
was an ancient Arabian deity. Mahomet professed to simply
restore a primitive Arabian worship, and at the Caaba at
Mecca, which is held to have been originally built by Adam,
and renewed by Seth and also by Abraham himself, are
Abraham’s sacred well, Zem Zem, and the sacred stone bear-
ing the footmarks of the patriarch. But it is scarcely possible
to overlook the close resemblance between A-Brahm and
Brahm-a of India, and though their identity or connection has
not yet been traced, late researches have shown that Arabia
had for ages been the scene of the labours of Indian mis-
sionaries. These circumstances, taken in connection with what
I have next to observe as to the general tenor of the story,
which seems more appropriate to the time of Mazdak than of


Jesus, lead me to judge that it is of an immensely older date
than is commonly supposed.
But I wish to examine the characters of the persons as
described in the parable. It is a salient fact that Dives is
nowhere in it said to have been either good or bad. We arc
left entirely to infer his character from data which appear
amply significant. In the first place Lazarus was laid at his
gate. Now, it is wholly contrary to experience and pro-
bability to suppose that this selection was made without
reason. It is not at the gates of the penurious or the hard-
hearted that the poor and the miserable ask to be laid, but
rather at those of the most compassionate and generous. Nor
is there a hint throughout that the latter was not the character
of Dives. It is neither stated nor implied that Lazarus did
not receive not only crumbs but also a liberal share of the
bounty of Dives ; and the circumstance that he was not taken
elsewhere to seek more liberal benefactors makes it all the more
probable. What remarkably confirms this view is, that when
Dives is informed that relief for himself is impossible, his
thoughts, with ready affectionate solicitude, fly to those dear
ones whom he left on earth. Forgetful of his own acute suffer-
ings, his anxious thought is for his five brethren, and he begs
that Lazarus may at least be sent to warn them to avoid a
similar fate. Everything, in fact, is calculated to lead to the
impression that Dives was exceptionally benevolent and
charitable rather than the reverse.
On the other hand, there is not one word to induce us to
believe that Lazarus was virtuous, but rather the contrary.
We hear not that he added his request to that of Dives to be
permitted to relieve his sufferings, or to warn his brethren—
not a single symptom of sympathy, commiseration, or grati-
tude, Though comfortably esconced in Abraham’s bosom, he
had not a thought to bestow upon the pitiable state of him
whose gratuitous charity he had once been glad to implore
and accept. But if there seems strong reason to suspect from
negative evidence that the change in their relative positions
was not due to their moral characters, the positive assurance
of this is furnished by Abraham himself. In the 25th verse
the reason is given without the slightest disguise. Dives was
tormented because he was rich , not because he was uncharitable ,
and Lazarus was comforted because he was poor, not because
he was virtuous; he had received his evil things. The sup-
posed moral lesson, therefore, does not exist in this parable,
which is the expression of an envious, vindictive disposition,


incapable of rising to the modern conception of virtue and
vice or of moral good and evil.
I do not rely upon this circumstance in proof of my
conclusion that Jesus could have been neither the author nor
even the repeater of the parable. For, in the sermon on the
mount, one version particularly, there are many texts to the
same effect, promising heaven and happiness—not to the
virtuous, but to the miserable. Blessed are ye poor (not ye
honest and charitable), for yours is the kingdom of heaven.
But woe unto you that are rich (irrespective of virtue), for ye
have received your consolation. In spite of this coincidence
of precept, my argument should nevertheless, I think, be
conclusive. Abraham tells Dives that his brothers “ have
Moses and the prophets, let them hear them.” “ Nay, father
Abraham,” says Dives, “but if one went unto them from
the dead, they will repent. And he said unto him, If they
hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead I" How can this possibly have
proceeded from the mouth of Jesus? How could He —who
professedly came, according to the Scriptures, to rise from
the dead for the express purpose of persuading those who
heard not Moses and the prophets—thus deliberately and
explicitly assert the utter futility of such a mission ? Is it not
utterly incredible ?
I have, lastly, to consider a parable which is really thought
to have the greatest moral significance ; one, of which Mr.
John Stuart Mill wrote that it alone would entitle Jesus to
the credit of having carried some kinds of moral goodness to
a greater height than had ever been attained before. On a
par with it he puts “ the new commandment,” to love one
another (though he admits that that was certainly not a nevo
commandment, which surely vitiates the claim in that
instance), which constrains me to ask again : Is it not rather
the supreme duty of a moral being to love—not without
moral discrimination —not the bad, but the good only? To
love good and bad indiscriminately is surely to ignore the
paramount distinction between good and evil, which would
surely be immoral in a moral being. But the parable for
which Mr. Mill professed such unqualified admiration is that
of the Good Samaritan (Luke x. 25-37). A certain lawyer
stood up and tempted him, saying—“ Master, what shall Ido
to inherit eternal life ?” He said, “ What is written in the
law; how readest thou?” and he answering, said, “Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul, strength,


and mind, and thy neighbour as thyself and he said unto
him, “ Thou hast answered right. This do, and thou shalt
live.” But he, willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus,
“And who is my neighbour ?” and Jesus, after relating how a
certain wayfarer on the road to Jericho was robbed and left
half dead by thieves—was neglected by a passing priest, and
by a Levite, but was succoured by a Samaritan, asks the
lawyer, “ Which now of these three thinkest thou was
neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves ?” and he
said “He that showed mercy on him.” Then said Jesus,
“ Go and do thou likewise.”
Now, it is a very curious and remarkable thing how every-
body, including Mr. Mill, the author of the “ System of Logic,”
has overlooked the fact that this is an entirely irrelevant
conclusion. The lawyer had said, and it was agreed, that
“ thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” The only ques-
tion then was, WHO IS the neighbour that you are to love as
yourself? At the conclusion of the parable Jesus asks the
lawyer which of the three was neighbour tinto him that fell
among the thieves—the neighbour that he (the wayfarer) was
to love as himself? The lawyer said “He that showed mercy
on him ;” that is, the Samaritan was the neighbour whom the
other was to love as himself This was as much as to say,
that “the neighbour whom you are to love as yourself is he
who treats you as the Samaritan treated the wayfarer, and no
one else .” The wayfarer would find no difficulty in regarding
the Samaritan as his neighbour, and perhaps in loving him
as himself. He would have been stupid, as well as ungrateful,
to do otherwise. But that was not the lesson intended to be
conveyed ; which was, on the contrary, that anyone in need
is entitled, as a neighbour, to help,—from anyone in a position
to give it. The question, as stated, applied the neighbourship
to the wrong person. The lawyer might fairly have rejoined,
“ But you have not shown me the neighbour that I am to love
as myself (unless it be the Samaritan), but rather what to do
to him when found, which was already settled.” The question
should have been—not, who was neighbour to the wayfarer ?
but, was not the wayfarer equally neighbour to all three
passers-by, of whom one only did his duty, while the others
neglected theirs ? The conclusion drawn is the opposite, not
only of the logical one, but also of the one intended, and no
doubt has detracted much from the effectiveness of the
parable.
I propose now to draw my own conclusions from this


parable. I do not find the same internal disproof of its
authenticity that I produced in the case of the parable of
Dives and Lazarus, though some might consider the defect
that I have exposed sufficient in itself to disprove it. But I
have another to add of greater importance.
I can find no reason why Mr. J. S. Mill failed to notice the
irrelevant conclusion to which I have referred, except that he
evidently had a strong natural sympathy with, and tendency
towards, sentimentalism, or perhaps a religious sentiment,
which his rationalistic education was insufficient to counter-
act. If he, who never had a religion, and whose logical
acumen has rarely been equalled, was thus prevented by his
veneration for the character of Jesus from discerning this
incontestably false conclusion, it is not wonderful that others,
who have been taught to regard the record as sacred, have
not done so; and it proves, I think, the great evil of regarding
anything as above or too sacred for criticism. It is the more
to be regretted, because he also failed to observe what I have
now to point out, namely, the same lack in this parable of the
moral discrimination which I showed was absent in that of
Dives and Lazarus, and which I hold to be the supreme and
constant duty of every moral being. I have already said that
I consider, and I suppose that no one will contest, that the
evident object of the teacher was to show that physical need,
not moral worth, constituted neighbourship, and a title to
help from anyone in a position to give it. But the moral
character of the wayfarer is ignored entirely, and in the
instance given does not seem to be called for. But upon
that instance is based the universal rule, which in practice
would generally be affected by moral considerations. For,
suppose that the wayfarer had beaten the thieves, and that
they had needed assistance, would it have been the duty of
the Samaritan to succour them ? Certainly not. But why ?
Because the wayfarer was presumably an honest man, and
they were robbers. It would have been interesting if the
lawyer had asked the question. For the general instruction
in the parable is unfortunately without any moral qualifica-
tion, without which can the rule be perfect or correct ? The
rule was —“ Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” Now,
I ask, is it right to love a neighbour, or anyone else, unless
worthy of love ? I say no. Our supreme duty as moral
beings forbids it. Otherwise, as Confucius perceived, and
said, when asked his opinion about recompensing injury with
kindness, “ With what then will you recompense kindness ?


Recompense injury with justice ; recompense kindness with
kindness.” Confucius here accurately recognized that what-
ever a moral being does should be done with logical discrim-
ination and moral judgment, and I think this saying of his
has never been equalled, not to say surpassed, though not put
in the form of a parable. I give it as the true moral to the
parable of the good Samaritan.
I have now only to observe that I think that parables, when
addressed, like those of Esop, to the critical and moral judg-
ment, are of immense force and value. But whenever they
are made to depend upon authority, or appeal to sentiment,
instead of the simple logic of facts, which connects actions
with their good or evil effects by natural causation, and thus
furnishes the sole valid and effective reason why they should
or should not be done, they lose at once their special value,
and must yield the palm to plain logic, when used with dis-
criminative moral insight, like that of Esop and Confucius.






\
\
X'
■,
■


