

fI *
PARKES FOR KING DIVISION!
BRUCE SMITH OH REID!
ANOTHER SCANDALOUS ATTEMPT AT BRIBERY.
Extract from Sydney
Morning
Herald , 23rd July , 1895.
READ THIS BEFORE YOU VOTE!
Now, let me ask, what method of selec-
tion of members does Mr. Eeid propose to
substitute for the present one ?
This is a most pertinent inquiry, for by
the answer we shall be able to judge whether
it is likely to secure a more trustworthy
and wiser check on hasty and ill-digested
legislative proposals. The answer is to be
found in the resolutions embodying the
Government scheme of reform. By it the
number of the Legislative Council is to be
reduced forthwith to 60, and as soon as the
bill passes 12 of that number are to retire,
leaving 48. By the end of December a
further 12 are to retire, leaving 36. In the
meantime these 24 are to be replaced by the
Governor-in-Council?by Ministerial nom-
ination?practically by Mr. Reid himself.
By this means 24 out of 60 members?
nearly half the Rouse will be just what
Mr. Reid likes to make them ; and we
must take it that Mr. Reid contends
that citizens so chosen by him will
be more impartial, more keenly alive
to the public good, irrespective of
party feeling, and more independent of class
considerations than those who would be
elected by the large and small property-
owners of the colony. Let it be conceeded
that this might be so, provided the Minister
at the head of affairs, having regard to the
high trust placed in his hand and remember-
ing that the interests of all classes were re-
presented in him, exercised a wise discrim-
ination in choosing only those who knew no
party, regarded no class, and could be
generally trusted to act for the greatest
good of the greatest number. But can we
rely on always having such a man at the
head of affairs ? Have we such a man at the
head of affairs now ? Would Mr. Reid, if
now called upon to select members of the
Legislative Council, make the choice ir-
respective of party, irrespective of political
creed, irrespective of class feeling, or would
he merely seek to stuff that Chamber with
what he himself terms ? puppets,? w r ho
would dance to his music, and march to the
tune beaten by him ? ?By their works ye
shall know them.? Six months ago Mr.
Reid sought an interview with me, and,
when we at last met, he explained that he
and his colleagues were about to nominate
some half-dozen citizens to the Legislative
Council. He informed me that my name
stood among the first on the list, for
reasons which I need not enumerate, and he
ended by asking me whether I would ac-
cept a seat in that Chamber. I replied
that, as I could not at present afford the
time to do justice to any constituency as a
member of the Assembly, I should, in the
meantime, be glad to render any assistance
I could in the deliberations of the Council
if he thought fit to appoint me.
Mr. Reid then said that before finally deal-
ing with the matter he desired co have a
word or two with me regarding the Govern-
ment policy ; that they had certain bills to
send np to the Council, and wished to ascer-
tain how I felt upon the questions involved
in those bills. lat once informed Mr. Reid
that I declined to discuss any policy or any
bills ; that if I were to be appointed to the
Legislative Council it would have to be in
such a way that I was politically free to
think and act as my judgement dictated,
irrespective of his or any other Government
policy. I added that my views on the
questions referred to were fully set forth in
Hansard and in the newspaper reports of
my speeches out of Parliament, and that,
as he must know what these views were, I
could only interpret his offer as a conditional
one, and as an attempt to secure my support
and advocacy in the Council as the quid pro
quo for the appointment. Mr. Reid did not
attempt to controvert this ; and the inter-
view ended by my telling Mr. Reid that I
must decline his conditional offer. From
that day to this-?many months ago?l have
never heard any more of the proposal, and I
can only draw one conclusion from the in-
cident?that Mr. Reid did not see fit to
appoint a new member to the Council in
such a w r ay that he would, when appointed,
enjoy the privileges of a free man. Such is
liberalism, or, at least, such is Mr. Reid?s
liberalism ! 1 repeat, ?By their works ye
shall know them.? I leave to the public of
New South Wales to form their own opinion
as to the value of a scheme of reform by
which 24 new members of so important a
branch of our Legislature would be ap-
pointed under conditions at once so humiliat-
ing and degrading, and as to the patriotism
of a man who proposes such a scheme for
adoption bv the people.
I am well aware that in making public
the above facts I lay myself open at first
sight to a charge of breach of confidence; but a
moment?s reflection will convince any right-
thinking person that an offer of so politically
immoral a character is not entitled so any
such secrecy. Moreover, I regard Mr.
Reid?s reform proposals as so dangerous to
the welfare and good government of the
community that I have after the fullest
consideration, resolved to risk the odium of
such a charge, rather than lose the oppor-
tunity of, in some measure, frustrating that
danger. I must, likewise, crave the indul-
gence of your readers for the introduction of
the personal element, which is quite un-
avoidable, unless I were prepared to sacrifice
so forcible an illustration of my contention.
I am, &c.,
BRUCE SMITH.
Denman Chambers, July 22.
VOTE
FOE
Sir Henry Parkes!!
Robt. Doig, General Printer, 271 Pitt-street, Sydney.
