

V]> —• —
V|v
... 3
lar(| ...
•
presbgter
iai|
f((«wl|
1S49. r®*)> 1899.
, x %v^|¥g/y
Ut T@ T? f c5 jy fgjf
■\
('t' J-L j l
A 1*1 V
!uls
4-
<f> 'i
■sb 4^
MORETON PRINTING COMPANY.


- v4
f
«*V


VXTSdIt 01 Intvcll


jr*


History of the
First Presbyterian Church of Queensland.
In October, 1849, at a meeting held in Brisbane, under the presidency of
the late D. C. McConnel, Esq., of Cressbrook, steps were taken for the
founding of a Christian Church. On 12th December, at a meeting in the
residence of the late Rev. Thomas Mowbray, Kangaroo Point, with the same
Chairman, a Minute was adopted, declaring that those present adhered “to
the great doctrines set forth in the Westminister Confession of Faith, and
other Standards.” Declaring further, “ that as they saw no advantage from
State connection they resolved to confide in the Christian liberality of
Presbyterian and other fellow Christians.”
Messrs. Boyland, Cairncross, Graham, Gray, Inglis, McAdam, Mclntyre,
McLean, McNaught, and Stewart, with Mr. D. C. McConnel as Chairman,
and Rev. Thomas Mowbray as Secretary, were appointed a Committee “to
collect names of adherents and to ascertain amount of support.” Five days
later the Committee met and appointed five of their number Trustees for New
Church (Messrs. Cairncross, Gray, McConnel, Mclntyre, and Mowbray).
These were instructed to purchase site in Grey street, South Brisbane.
On Ist February, 1850, site was reported as bought and specifications of
Church were adopted. On 19th March, the tender of Mr. Graham was
accepted, and on 25th March, Rev, J. Tait, Parramatta, was called. He
declined the call, and steps were then taken to secure a Catechist. The new
Church was not officially opened until 25th May, 1851, by the Rev. Thomas
Mowbray, who, although in infirm health, had generously conducted Services
from the commencement as his health permitted. In August following, the
Rev. Walter Ross McLeod, brother of Mrs. D. C. McConnel arrived as first
minister, and steps were immediately taken to secure a place on the north
side where services might also be conducted. In less than two years Rev. Mr.
McLeod’s health compelled him to resign and he was followed by the Rev.
Mr. Sinclair who came to the colony in December, 1853. In February, 1854,
the three allotments on which the Ann Street Church and Manse now stand
were purchased for £194. In May of that year a Session and Deacons’
Court were formed and the Committee which had inaugurated the Presby-
terian Church in Queensland was dissolved.


(First Queensland Presbyterian Minister),
REV. WALTER ROSS McLEOD.




Looking back to the work those men did in the face of many obstacles
-we are constrained to honour them as faithful and devoted men whose zeal
for God’s glory and the welfare of His Kingdom should never be forgotten,
either by their descendants, many of whom are still with us, or by their
successors in the Church for which they did so much.
The Rev. Mr. Sinclair having left the Colony, was succeeded in 1856 by
the Rev. Charles Ogg, who in the following year endeavoured to induce the
South Brisbane people to go to the new Church on the north side, but the
people here objected and gave £l5O to be allowed to retain the old Church
for themselves.
In 1864, the Rev. John Wilson from the Irish Presbyterian Church
became Minister, but shortly afterwards resigned from failing health. Mr.
Hooker then for a period of 4J years gave pulpit suppy until 1871 when the
Rev. Dr. Hay (now of Rockhampton) arrived and took up the duties of the
pastorate. In beginning of 1876, Dr. Hay was called to Rockhampton, and
the present pastor succeeded, being inducted in April 1876, after having
supplied the vacancy for some months. In 1880 the present site of Church
and Manse in Glenelg street was purchased, and in July 1881 the Manse
was occupied. In 1884 the foundation stone of new Church was laid by Mr.
D. C. McConnel, and £B5O 9s. Bd. was placed upon it as an offering on the
occasion. On 11th October, 1885, the late Rev. Dr. Steel, Sydney, opened
the present Church and at those services and the lectures then delivered
£292 2s. 4d. was contributed.


MO.NDJIY, 23rd October:
J>cture:
REV. J. MEIKLEJOHN, M.A.,
MELBOURNE.
Chairman :
DR. J. THOMPSON.
‘W'W
TDESDJIY, 24tb October:
Concert
Chairman ;
REV. W. 5. McQUEEN.
“ ©ljrmtglj Jktieatme,”


( First Chairman of Committee),
D. C. McCONNEL, Esq.




WEDJ4BSDJIY, 25th; October;
©mtm't'&itjiotte
ip?
Chairman :
RIGHT HON. SIR HUGH MUIR NELSON.
TJiDRSDJIY. 26tb October;
Qectxxvc :
“ ©lje |omes of . .
♦ . tije OToomonteo©.”
SJfliti) fiimcligljt HUnotvationa.
REV. T. NISBET.
Chairman :
HONOURABLE ROBERT PHILP.


FRIDAY, 27tf? October:
©ijilbren’s ji^ertrice.’
Address :
REV. PETER ROBERTSON.
Chairman :
DUNCAN SINCLAIR, Esq.
Seats Reserved at all meetings for holders of
Booklets until 7.45 p.m.


rr.- &JSr
(Pie sen tM in ister) ,
REV. D. F. MITCHELL.


i nrp
616L10
F&%
W/^'xX
r- f(/ IMI
mj it ML
3 1508 02236889 3


Uiv»t ©ijwvcJj (gtowtlj sri*bam)
in (QneenManb.
*~* '^£>ps5 —


