

157
O'-
PARLIAMENTARY GOVERNMENT;
RESPONSIBLE MINISTRIES
THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
H. S. CHAPMAN.
TASMANIA:
BEtNTED AND PUBLISHED BY PRATT AND SON, ELIZABETH STREET, HOBART TOWN.
1854;




'h gogf
S-S
CHAPTEE I.
The Subject Stated and Illustrated.
The Subject which the following pages are designed to bring before
the notice of the reader, is that which has somewhat loosely been
called Responsible Government.
This term was first adopted in Canada, and has since been very
generally used in our colonies, as well as in all discussions relative
to the government of colonies, to designate that species of execu-
tive government which has, for upwards of a century and a half,
existed in England, and has within the last fourteen years been ex-
tended to Canada and the rest of the British North American colo-
nies with the most marked success ; —namely, a ministry responsible
to the lower branch of the legislature.
Taking Government to consist of three branches, the legislative,
the administrative, and the judicial, it has become an axiom of all
free states, and especially of the English and American constitu-
tions, that the three departments should be kept distinct; but of
course without impairing the constitutional controul of the legisla-
ture over every department of the state.
This salutary principle of the separation of powers being acknow-
ledged alike by the constitutions of Great Britain and the United
States, the two countries have adopted very different methods of
carrying it out in practice.
In America, not only are the three functions and the collective
bodies administering those functions kept distinct; but no individual
can belong to any two of the bodies, or in any way interfere in any
two of the functions at one and the same time ; the constitution
providing that “ no person holding any office under the United States
shall be a member of either house during its continuance.”
The British constitution, on the other hand, not only does not
forbid office to a member of either House of Parliament, but it


absolutely requires that the highest officers of the executive govern-
ment should secure seats in the House of Commons or have seats
in the House of Lords. Nor are all our judges excluded from Par-
liament. The Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, is Speaker of the
House of Lords ; the three Chief Justices are generally Peers ;
whilst the Master of the Rolls and many of the inferior judges may
be elected members of the lower house.
The executive power of the United States of America is vested
in the President alone; unity of the executive being the avowed
principle of the constitution. The expedient resorted to, in order
to secure due responsibility on the part of that high officer is fre-
quency of election. That is deemed constitutionally and practically
sufficient. All below the President are responsible to him, and not
to Congress, or to the people. He is assisted by a cabinet of
heads of departments, appointed by himself, the members of which
are bound by the letter of the constitution to give him their advice
in writing if required. Not having seats in the legislature, and
not being responsible thereto, they can scarcely be deemed a minis-
try in our sense of the word. Thus, what we call, and what we so
highly prize, as Parliamentary Government —that is, a ministry
responsible to, and virtually removable by a parliamentary majority—
is unknown to the constitution of the United States.
This peculiar condition of the executive may not be ill suited to
the American constitution. The Americans themselves must per-
ceive some important advantages in it, or they would not have per-
mitted it to continue as part of their constitution for so long a
period. But the English reader will perceive that it is quite un-
suited to an hereditary limited and constitutional Monarchy. The
election of the head of the executive every four years is their sole
expedient to secure responsibility. We secure the same advantage,
not by electing the head of the executive, not even by electing the
chief officers of the government, but simply by requiring the latter
to have seats in the legislature, and then by withholding parlia-
mentary support from those whose administrative policy is not ap-
proved of. Thus, under the British constitution, a ministry which
cannot retain the confidence of a majority of the House of Com-
mons, cannot, for any length of time, carry on the Government.
But no ministry is expected to abandon office at the first defeat.
If ministers have x’eason to believe that the majority of the Com-
mons, which is hostile to them, has not the support of the country,
they may advise the Crown to dissolve Parliament. If the elec-
tion's, upon such dissolution, are in their favour, they retain power—
if against them, they quietly make way for their opponents. In-
stances are not wanting of a really vigorous ministry succeeding in
converting a minority into a majority, without a dissolution as well
as with one. Lord Liverpool's ministry—the longest ever known
in England since that of Sir Robert Walpole—received and sue-


vived a very formidable shock at the very outset. Mr. Stuart
Wortley (the late Lord Wharncliffe) moved an address to the Prince
Regent “to form a strong and efficient ministry” in place of the
new ministry, to whom all sorts of weaknesses were imputed; but
as the address was earned by a bare majority, composed of all sorts
of incongruous elements, there seemed no prospect that any other
ministry would enjoy a much better fate. Lord Liverpool there-
fore advised the Prince Regent not to comply with the address ; and
as he succeeded, according to his anticipation, in gaining over some
of the materials of the majority against him, he soon converted a
weak into a strong and lasting Government. In 1784 Mr. Pitt
sustained repeated defeats, but he felt that he was popular out of
doors, and instead of retiring, he advised the not unwilling Monarch
to maintain him in office for some months ; and, on a dissolution, he
subsequently obtained a majority. Sir Robert Peel also in 1835 did
not retire upon the first defeat—(a majority of 10 against him on the
election of Speaker)—but retained office until several hostile votes
of the House of Commons convinced him that he could not carry on
the Government. Thus, although a ministry need not —and indeed
ought not on all occasions to abandon office on one defeat —although
an appeal to the people may often be advisable and ultimately
successful, yet, under the principle of the English constitution, no
set of men can possibly carry on the Government against a decidedly
hostile House of Commons.
So in these colonies, when the constitutional principle of the
responsibility of the official members to the Councils shall have
been adopted, though it may often be wise and proper to retire upon a
single defeat, yet it may sometimes savour of administrative pusil-
lanimity to do so. The moment or occasion for retiring cannot be
fixed by rule or precedent. It must be settled in the colonies, as in
the Mother Country, by the mutual strength, determination, and pru-
dence of the parties in the Councils or Assemblies, and above all,
by the support which the party in power is conscious of enjoying
among the constituencies—the ultimate court of appeal on all vital
questions.
Under the constitution of the United States several instances
have occurred in which the Government has been administered for a
considerable period on principles diametrically opposed to the views
of the majority of Congress, This of course might, and in fact did
on one occasion last four years—whereas in England it could
scarcely last as many months. So long as It did last it rendered
the executive government nearly similar to those of the Australian
Colonies, or rather to what they would be without nominated mem-
bers. No doubt Congress might have put a stop to this by refusing
supplies. But this, as will be shown in a subsequent chapter, is a
remedy not to be resorted to on light grounds ; and Congress, on
such occasions, has wisely determined to wait for the recurrence of


the presidential election. In the colonies the executive may per-
sist in measures and in a general line of policy opposed to the views
of the majority without either the American or the English check.*
What we desire to recommend is the English constitutional check
of a responsible ministry. It has the recommendation of being in
perfect accordance with the British constitution, with which we hope
the Australian constitutions will shortly be made to coincide as
nearly as our peculiar circumstances and condition will allow.
The subject of Responsible Government in Canada has been al-
ready slightly alluded to in a preceding page, and perhaps it may
be useful, by way of illustration, to enter somewhat more into detail.
Most persons whose recollection goes fourteen or fifteen years back
(for complaint has since been effectually silenced by Responsible
Government) have heard something of Canadian grievances, discon-
tent, and finally rebellion ; but few are aware of the happy contrast
furnished by that great, prosperous, and loyal colony since the intro-
duction of a Parliamentary ministry.
The Provincial Parliaments of Upper and Lower Canada con-
sisted each of two chambers. The Houses of Assembly were elected
by the people ; the upper chambers, called Legislative Councils,
were nominated by the Crown, that is, by the respective Governors.
For upwards of a quarter of a century before the unhappy dis-
turbances in the two Canadas there was a perpetual conflict between
the Representative Assemblies of both provinces and the executive
governments on almost every question that can possibly interest or
engage a free people. On the part of the Assemblies it was a
struggle for constitutional controul. On the part of the executive
it was a determination to resist all responsibility to the local legis-
lature, This element of strife in some way or other, directly or in-
directly, found its way into nearly every question of public interest.
Information respecting the proceedings of the executive Govern-
ment was refused to the Assemblies on the most paltry subter-
fuges—information of such a nature as to afford presumption that
there was no other motive for withholding it except the established
practice of resisting the Assemblies. Correspondence with the Co-
lonial Department on matters of purely local interest never saw the
light, unless the Secretary of State ordered it to be communicated.
The ample Blue Books of the present day, defective as they some-
times are in affording full information—obsolete as they almost al-
wa} r s are in point of time—had no existence whatever twenty years
ago. The only method of obtaining information as to the acts
and policy of the local Government then was to enlist the sympa-
thies and secure the aid of some libei'al member of Parliament, who
* In New Zealand, by the new constitution, the people of the provinces elect
the. head of the executive; and, as the principle of a responsible ministry has
been adopted, they enjoy in that colony the double check. The New Zealand
Constitution is worthy of the watchful eye of the statesman,


moved for the information required. To the present Earl of Derby,
to Mr. Hume, to the present Earl Grejv and others, and at a sub-
sequent date to Mr. Roebuck and Sir William Moleswortb, the Ca-
nadians were indebted for such information as could be extorted from
the ministries of that day, and the whole collection of ten or a dozen
years scarcely equalled the information now voluntarily laid before
Parliament by the Secretary of State during a single session.
Moreover, if the information now published as a matter of course, be
incomplete on any subject, a word to the Secretary or Under-Secre-
tary is generally enough to secure all that is required. And
this candour on the part of ministers has its reward.* It gives
them the power to say no ! when disclosure is inconvenient; and
such refusal is taken as well founded from its mere infrequency;
whereas when concealment was the rule, a motion for papers
often involved a long and angry debate.
In these colonies it seems hitherto to have been a favourite
doctrine that the legislature has nothing whatever to do with
executive matters, and papers and despatches analagous to such as
would readily be communicated in England, or in Canada, are
refused on the above ground. But this is not the doctrine or prac-
tice of the British constitution. It is quite true that the legisla-
ture has nothing to do with executive action; but it has every
thing to do with controul. The executive is accountable to the
legislature for its acts, and until that accountability is placed upon
the same footing as that which exists in the Imperial Government,
by securing the responsibility of some of the officers of the Government
to the legislature—these colonies have but the shadow' of a con-
stitution.
The proper moment for making communications must ahvays be
left to the discretion of the executive. There are many matters
which ought not to be disclosed, while in progress, but they are
few'er in number in a colony, which has no foreign I'elations and no
diplomacy, than in the Mother Country. But where the internal
affairs and interests of the colony are alone concerned, there can be
very few subjects which ought to be withheld from the legislature.
With a responsible ministry in these colonies the practice of the
British ministry and Imperial Parliament w r o«id come at once to be
followed. The executive would avoid that worst of weaknesses—
resistance to the reasonable desires of the Assemblies for the mere
sake of being thought firm, and would by a conciliatoiy tone and by
a disposition to concede where concession is not improper, purchase
the right to make a stand wdiere circumstances should require it.
The Assemblies or Councils also, accustomed to conduct of this
kind on the part of the executive, w r ould in most cases take
* The Duke of Newcastle’s evidence before the Stonor Committee is a
model of official c. in dour which had no parallel twenty years ago.


a first refusal as conclusive, except of course upon questions on which
the ministry and the opposition—the constitutional opposition it
may in such case he called—may differ, and think it worth while
to measure strength.
Before the introduction of a responsible ministry into Canada the
greatest inconvenience was continually felt from the fact that the
executive Government had no influence whatever within the walls
of the Assemblies. The irresponsible officers of the Government
could seldom obtain seats, so that all communications between the
executive and the legislature was by message, and address in
answer, as in the United States of America. To any one accus-
tomed to the Avorking of the English constitution this must seem a
very great defect, and yet it is quite certain that if the official
bodies in the Australian colonies depended on the popular suffrage
it would only be in especial cases that a public officer would obtain
a seat. Since the adoption of a responsible ministry the members
of the Government have had no difficulty in obtaining seats in the
United Parliament of Canada. Some of the very men who would
have been rejected under the old system of irresponsibility are now
even asked to allow themseUes to be put in nomination. It may
fairly be inferred that it would be so in these colonies. There are
happily some public officers whose long and faithful services Avould
secure them seats, and once in the assemblies their official aptitude
would secure them office. It is a great mistake to suppose that the
introduction of a responsible ministry necessarily involves a com-
plete change of men. This subject Avill be more completely referred
to in a subsequent chapter.
The evil of a lower house without any representative of the
Government therein, Avas by no means compensated by a nominated
upper chamber Avhere the dominant party in each province was all
powerful. Indeed nothing tends so much to impart to a Govern-
ment a partizan character as the necessity for relying upon the
party of the minority for support.
The dominant pUrty in Canada Avas of a character very different
from the official bodies in the Australian colonies. It Avas
really an important and powerful party, closely connected Avith
the A r ery soil of the colony, and bearing some resemblance to a
European aristocracy. The reader will judge, therefore, how
great was the difficulty of introducing responsibility into the Govern-
ment of a colony Avhere such a party had long had possession of
power. In both the Canadas a species of oligarchy had grown up,
consisting of the principal and oldest families in the colony, the
most Avealthy merchants interested in the prohibitory commercial
system which then prevailed, and the great official families, many of
whom dated their own or their father’s connexion with office from a
period antecedent to the American revolution. These families
were not only connected together to an extent to acquire the name


of the “ Family compacts,” but they had also powerful family and
commercial connexions in England. These persons assumed the
airs, and had in fact some of the attributes, of an aristocracy.
They had the prestige of antiquity in their favour, for some of them
were noble before the conquest of Canada. They formed an exclusive
society. They treated every one not within their narrow pale as be-
longing to an inferior class. Even within the walls of Parliament their
power and influence were not inconsiderable. One of the greatest of
the Canadian seigneurs or feudal lords was a member of the House
of Commons, and a Cabinet Minister, when the troubles broke out,
and it is just to add influenced his colleagues on the side of liber-
ality. At that time every colony had its own peculiar commer-
cial monopoly, and if any one dominant faction were attacked in or
out of Parliament all united against the common enemy. Nothing
has tended to break in upon the power of the Canadian oligarchies
so much as the adoption of the principle of free trade, and nothing
consequently has produced so great an influence on the progress of
constitutional reform ; but at the period to which we refer, when the
so called Family compacts were in full power, they had quite suf-
ficient influence to get rid of any Governor who did not place him-
self in their hands.
This powerful party, it is but just to say, had some conspicuous
merits which even increased its strength. With rare exceptions the
moral character of its members was unimpeachable. It numbered
within its ranks men of high education and general information, and
above all it had the wisdom to secure any rising ability that ap-
peared in the political field. But the best proof of its sagacity was
its ready acceptance of Responsible Government the moment it per-
ceived that reform to be inevitable.
In resisting the popular demand for reform, this party always
claimed to be alone endowed with capacity to govern, and they de-
nounced their opponents as totally destitute of official aptitude.
Though this was a double exaggeration, the assumption, arrogant as
it was, to say the truth, was not wholly destitute of foundation.
The party had so long enjoyed an hereditary monopoly of power,
that they had become skilful in all the details of Government, ac-
cording to the principles upon which colonial government was then
conducted ; whilst exclusion from power, united with the hopeless-
ness of acquiring it, had to some extent incapacitated their opponents
for office. The lower branch of the two legislatures was in fact
alone open to the honourable ambition of the rising men of the
popular party.
It is not a little curious that the party denounced as destitute of
official aptitude, before Lord Durham's mission, has since con-
structed several strong and efficient ministries, strengthened perhaps
by some of the old public servants and of course by new and rising
men. The surprising manner in which Canada has advanced in


population, wealth, and general resources since the introduction of a
responsible ministry, is such as would have been impossible under
a feeble Government.
When the disputes between the Assemblies and the dominant
oligarchies had reached their height, and neither party was disposed
to give way;—when the Upper Houses systematically rejected
every measure of the Assemblies, and the Assemblies as systemati-
cally refused all supplies ; when party acrimony reached the most
fearful height, and even men of moderate views found themselves
drawn into the vortex of one party or the other, two definite pro-
positions were put forward —one by the reformers of Upper Canada,
and the other by the Assembly of Lower Canada. The remedy
proposed by Lower Canada was an elective legislative council;
that of Upper Canada was—Responsible Government.
These plans were both strongly urged on the Home Government
in the year 1835, but were not adopted. It is just possible, that if
the two Canadas had made a united demand for elective upper
chambers and a responsible ministry, it would have been success-
ful, and the unfortunate rebellion might have been prevented ; but
the mere fact of a separate scheme from each province indicated want
of union, and the strong influence of the dominant party succeeded
in stopping for a time the adoption of either measure.
The progressive steps by which a fierce popular opposition to a
dominant faction partly degenerated, and was partly driven into rebel-
lion, need not here be traced. It may easily be supposed that all
measures of constitutional improvement yielded to the necessity of
putting down rebellion. It was when that indispensable object
was accomplished, that Lord Durham -was sent to Canada with very
extensive powers.
Lord Durham’s justly celebrated Report was laid before Parlia-
ment in the early part of 1839, It contained a very searching in-
vestigation into the evils and anomalies of the local Government.
Its recommcndations were very numerous ; but as many of them ap-
plied to local and special evils and abuses, they are of no interest
here. It is sufficient to say that Lord Durham very strongly re-
commended the immediate adoption of Responsible Government;
and, on the restoration of the constitution, which had been sus-
pended during the rebellion, his Lordship’s recommendation was
most wisely adopted. There can be no doubt that this great con-
stitutional reform, -which has been very faithfully carried out by a
succession of able G overnors,* has been the principal means of con-
verting an oppressed and discontented people, disposed to loyalty,
but yet often on the verge of, and once in actual rebellion, into a con-
tented, happy, and most loyal and well-governed people. Previous
* Lord Sydenham (Poulett Thomson), Sir C. Eagot, Sir C., afterwards Lord
Metcalfe, and Lord Elgin.


to the year 1840 Canadian grievances formed an annual subject of
parliamentary discussion. Members only regarded the subject as
one of inevitable annoyance and difficulty. It was an impenetrable
maze which no ordinary industry would enable even the most sagacious
statesman to penetrate. Since that time Parliament has never been
troubled with the disputes of parties in Canada; they are settled as
English party disputes are disposed of—by a parliamentary debate
and division on the spot; the Governor, instead of being an anti ■
popular partizan, occupying what Lord Elgin very happily character-
ized as a position of dignified neutrality.
The reader will, it is hoped, pardon the extent to which it has
been thought advisable to refer to the history of the introduction of a
responsible ministry into Canada. As to the other North American
colonies the same reform has followed solely because of its remark-
able success in the most important colony of the group. The same
reason would justify its introduction into the Australian colonies.
Australian and New Zealand complaints still occupy a considerable
portion of the time and attention of Parliament; with the same power
of settling them, or rather of preventing their occurrence on the spot,
Parliament would be as little troubled with Australian affairs as it
is with the affairs of Canada. Earl Grey in his most interesting
account of his administration of the affairs of the colonies* admits
the perfect success of Responsible Government in Canada. Why
should the same remedy fail to produce the same beneficial results
in these colonies ? Every presumption is in favour of its immediate
introduction. Indeed, with the almost universal opinion of English
statesmen in its favour, there seems reason to believe that it would
have accompanied the Australian Act had not the existence of trans-
portation interposed a difficulty now happily removed. Even the
introduction of a representative legislature was, in the opinion of
Lord Derby, incompatible with the maintenance of transportation ;
and although Lord Grey did not share in that opinion, he could not
fail to perceive that a responsible ministry could not have main-
tained itself for a single day against a majority opposed to trans-
portation.
Lord Durham suggested that legislation was quite unnecessary on
the subject; “an instruction from the Crown to the Governor to make a
practice of selecting the public servants from among those who possess
the confidence of the legislature” being sufficient. “The change”
Lord Durham in his report, “would simply amount to this, that the
Crown would henceforth consult the wishes of the people in the
choice of its servants.” “ The responsibility to the United-}- Legisla-
ture”—he continues—“of all the officers of the Government except
f One of his Lordship's recommendations was, that the two Canadas should bo
united under one Legislature, which was also adopted.


tlie Governor or his Secretary, should be secured by every means
known to the British Constitution. The Governor, as the represen-
tative of the Crown, should be instructed that he must carry on his
G overnment by heads of departments, in whom the United Legisla-
ture shall repose confidence, and that he must look for no support
from home in any contest with the Legislature, except on points
involving strictly Imperial interests.”
Here we have expressed in a few words the whole theory of a
responsible or parliamentary ministry. The Governor now, al-
most from the necessity of his position, a partizan—for if he did
not put himself at the head of the minority he would have no sup-
porters at all out of the ranks of the officials—would no longer have
any inducement to show preference to one set of men over another.
In the apt words of Lord Elgin, already cited, he .would occupy a
position of dignified neutrality. Tie would seldom ixave occasion to
call for the interference of the Secretary of State—never in fact
except in case the local legislature should over-step its lawful
jurisdiction and encroach upon Imperial interests. Even in such
cases the necessity for interference would seldom reach the Secre-
tary of State, as the Governor’s constitutional power would bo
sufficient to stop the mischief.
Even before we had the successful and happy example of Canada
to refer to, it might have been inferred from English constitutional
experience alone that the mutual influence of the executive and
legislature upon each other would cause the business of Government
to proceed satisfactorily, without those collisions which must arise
between an irresponsible executive and a representative legisla-
ture. There is no reason—there could appear no reason why a
Governor—standing precisely in the position of the Crown at home—
should not, by a fair and legitimate exercise of the prerogative en-
trusted to him, he as able to carry on the Government by means of
a Parliamentary majority as the Prime Minister is in England.
The reader is now in a condition to understand what is meant by
the term Responsible Government. In the next chapter will be
exhibited the state of the principal governments of the Australian
colonics under the present irresponsible system.


CHAPTER 11.
The Executive Council and the Official Bench under the
Old and New Constitutions.
The introduction of partially elective legislatures into the Austra-
lian colonies under the Act for the better Government of the same,
created, or rather disclosed an anomaly in the existing executive bo-
dies which lias tended greatly to weaken the influence of the several
Governments in the Legislative Councils, and in the eyes of the
people of the several colonies.
In describing this anomaly, the state of the several Governments
will be reviewed, from the introduction of the new constitution in
1851 to the close of the second session of the legislatures of the
several colonies in the early part of 1853. If it he desired to de-
scend to a more recent period, the reader, in each colony, will have no
difficulty in making the application for himself.
In all the Australian colonies the Governors have from the first
been assisted by a sort of cabinet, called the Executive Council,
whose advice they are instructed to take on important occasions, but
are not required blindly and implicitly to follow.
These councils—unlike the English cabinet which grew out of
the inconvenient number of the Privy Council*—have an existence
authorised by law. In some colonies they owe their existence to
an Act of Parliament; in others to the charter of the colony. By
the Royal instructions minutes are directed to be kept and trans-
mitted periodically to the Secretary of State.
These executive councils have almost invariably consisted of the
highest and most responsible officers of the Government, but the
selection of the individuals to compose them has not been uniform. In
all cases the Colonial Secretary and Treasurer have been members,
but the incumbents of the other seats, to make up the usual number
of four or five, have varied. In some colonies the senior military
officer commanding the troops has been of the executive; in others
that officer has not been deemed essential. The mere accident
* For a very interesting account of the origin of the English Cabinet see
Macaulay’s History of England, vol. i. p. 211,


of real or supposed danger—as, for instance, from the natives in New
Zealand or the prisoners of the crown in Van Diemen’s Land, —•
may have been the parent of the rule; whilst in others, the absence
of such danger, or the presence of a mere detachment of troops,
under an officer of inferior rank, may have caused the Council to be
made up without looking to the commanding officer. Again : the
Chief Police Magistrate in one colony, the Attorney-General in an-
other, the Collector of Customs in a third, may be found occupying
the remaining seat; and the selection will generally be found
to have been originally determined by the ability of one officer and
the comparative inefficiency of others. Thus the seat occupied by
the Chief Police Magistrate of Van Diemen’s Land may be traced
to the accident that Mr. Forster, a former Chief Police Magistrate
was a man of superior ability and administrative capacity; while
the seat now enjoyed by the Attorney-General of Victoria is as
clearly owing to the acknowledged fact, that he was at the time of
his appointment, almost the only efficient man connected with that
Government.
The old non-elective Legislative Councils consisted of certain offi-
cial and non-official members nominated by the Governors. Both
the number and proportion of one class to the other differed in differ-
ent colonies. In some the number was six, in others fifteen. In
some the official and non-official members were equal in number. In
others the non-official members were required to be the more numer-
ous class. In all, the Governor presided and performed the two
functions of speaker and leader. If a man of experience and abil-
ity, he enjoyed a real and well-deserved weight and influence alto-
gether apart from his mere conventional and local pre-eminence.
In all these councils, the non-official members were commonly chosen
from among men who were either decidedly favourable to the general
policy of the Government, or were men of known moderation who
were not likely to cany into the council chamber a very earnest
opposition ; they were indeed, often “men of no politics”—a class of
men who were despised in the time of Pericles, and are not respected
in the days and in the country of Lord John Russell.
Legislative Councils so composed scarcely afforded scope for ani-
mated debate. They were easily managed by Governors who from
their moderate abilities and limited information would have exer-
cised no influence in a popular assembly, and it was only upon very-
rare occasions (as for instance on transportation in the old council
of Van Diemen’s Land) that any very decided tone against the Go-
vernment exhibited itself. In the Legislative Councils so composed
the members of the Executive Councils necessarily took their places,
and so long as they exhibited a respectable acquaintance with the
functions of their respective departments, (and this they generally
did) and could explain any question that arose within the sphere of
their duties, in a plain and conversational way, they would pass the


ordeal of such a body, at least without reproach. Such councils
were too small either for oratorical display or for acute and animated
debate, and in the very early stages of a penal or conquered colony
they were perhaps not ill-adapted to the early business of legis-
lation.
The Act for the better government of the Australian colonies
found councils of this description in full but not very active opera-
tion. They had for some time exhibited a degree of torpor of which
in some cases the executive partook. Sometimes this feature was
redeemed by an active minded G overnor, but even in such a case the
manifest predominance of the will of one man cast a despotic air over
the Government, to which even an occasional good measure did not
reconcile the public mind. The colonies had in truth outgrown
these primitive institutions. While the councils had become less
efficient by an indisposition on the part of the best men to become
nominees; the colonists had at the same time become better instructed
on constitutional questions, and for some years before the Act was
passed a demand had arisen for more popular—believed also to be
more efficient institutions, —a demand which in itself afforded pre-
sumptive evidence that the colonies were ripe for representation.
The constitutions bestowed by the recent Act upon Victoria,
South Australia, and Van Diemen’s Land bear some resemblance
or rather analogy to the old Scotch constitution. The people elect
the representatives, and the quasi-peers sit and vote in the same
house. The Imperial Act, leaving it to the local legislature to
determine the number of members and other details, prescribed the
proportion of each class Two-thirds of the whole were to be
elected by the people, and one-third of the whole number (or one-
half the number of the elected members) to be appointed by the
Crown or the Governor, and of the appointed members, one-half only
could be chosen from the official ranks.
The several colonial Councils having fixed upon different num-
bers f©r the new Councils, the proportions and numbers during the
whole of the period under notice stood as follows* :
, T . . . i South
Victoria. ■ Australia .
Van Die-
men’s Land,
Officials
4
4
Non official Nominees
Elected
Total
* The Council of Victoria has been augmented to 54 members, and a pro
posal has been made to augment that of Van Diemen’s Land to 36.


In these Councils the Governor, as the reader is aware, has nO
place. His double function of President and leader is now divided.
That of President is filled by a speaker constitutionally chosen and
approved of as in England, and his function of leader'" is or ought
to be filled by the Colonial Secretary, who, with the other official
members, constitute a virtual ministry, somewhat similar to the
ministries of the English monarchs before they became responsible
to the majority of the English Commons.
Now it must be obvious that this quasi-ministry ought either
wholly or in a considerable proportion to be composed of executive
councillors. That is, that those high officers of the colonies
who compose the quasi-cabinet council, should be the men to carry
the measures of the Government through the several legislatures.
In the old councils it was so; but under the new constitution of
the Australian colonies, in order to secure some efficency in debate
and in committee, the several Governors have found themselves
compelled to depart from the obvious rule; and exclude some of the
old executive councillors from the Legislative Councils, appointing
in their places, when they could be got, men who, not unversed in
administrative business, and not afraid to open their lips, could
explain and advocate the measures of the Government, and oppose
with firmness and skill, those measures emanating from the other
side, which the Government might deem either inexpedient or pre-
mature ; together with those imperfectly considered measures which
in all popular assemblies occasionally emanate from individual mem-
bers.
The constitution of New South Wales has now been in existence
about 12 years,* and it might reasonably have been expected, that
by this time, the official body would have been so weeded and
sifted as that all would have been capable of addressing the conncil
in explanation of the views of the Government, and in defence
of their own opinions, or of those they were called upon to adopt.
But this was not generally the case. Although the large number of
the council placed nineofficial seats at the disposal of the Government,
and enabled the whole of the executive council to have seats on the
official bench of the legislative council, without too rigid a scrutiny
into the aptitude of the members of the quasi-cabinet, the official
bench was never free from the defect under notice. Indeed, if one
colony be compared with another, the official bench of Van Die-
men’s Land was, from the beginning, making due allowance for the
smallness of its number, superior to that of New South Wales, both
in general aptitude for business and capacity for debate.
The following table will show the composition of the two councils.
* The New South Wales Act is the sth & 6th Viet, c 76, amended hy Act
7th & Bth Vic , c 74, and the Act for the better Government of the Australian
Colonies in the 13th & 14th Vic., c 59.


bf New South Wales during the period under notice: —
EXECUTIVE.
Commander of the Forces
Colonial Secretary
Colonial Treasurer
Attorney-General
Auditor- General
LEGISLATURE.
Colonial Secretary
Colonial Treasurer
Attorney-General
Auditor General
Solicitor General
Postmaster General
Inspector of Police
Commissioner of Crown Lands
Collector of Customs
It is by no means too far-fetched a notion to say that the official
members, except that they are not yet responsible to the commons*
bear relation to the English ministry by a not very remote analogy.
The four executive councillors may be considered in the light of mi-
nisters “ in the cabinet,” and all below the first four may be styled
ministers “ not in the cabinet.”
Of the four quasi-cabinet ministers, two were said to be good
speakers, and both had the advantage of great official experience.
Hence the measures and views of the Government could be ex-
plained and enforced by those who might be presumed to be consti-
tutionally acquainted with them. Among the members “ not in the
cabinet” the Solicitor-General was said to be a fair speaker and a well
informed man. And this was the whole deliberative, or to coin a word,
debative force of the Government in the legislature. Of the other six
members, whereof two were “in the cabinet” —four “not in the cabi-
net”—scarcely one could address the house with effect, and some never
opened their lips. Even the Treasurer—the finance minister of
the colony —the quasi-chancellor of the exchequer, who should ex-
plain his budget,—was content, on the house going into committee
on the estimates, to leave to the experienced Colonial Secretary the
duty of fighting the financial battle—always a sharp one in our
colonies—against all reasonable and unreasonable, wise and foolish
objectors.
In the colony of Victoria, the matter was far w r orse. In the
midst of difficulties of no ordinary kind, arising from the discovery
and profuse production of gold, the Lieutenant-Governor found him-
self with the very weakest executive in all the colonies. Of
course, the Lieutenant-Governor’s measures have been severely
criticised—not merely by the local press, but it is understood by
persons who hoped to profit by his recall. Biit great allowance
ought to be made for the difficulties of his position. He could not
rely on the people around him. He could offer no reward suff
ficient to attract men from the alluring lottery of the gold-fields
into the police. He could not calculate —no one could Calculate
upon the riches of the gold-fields or upon the prospective revenue*
fend yet in the face of the worst of all difficulties—uncertainty as td
17
THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.


tlic future—he managed to reduce the colony from a state of corn-*
parative anarchy to very considerable order, and that too with very
imperfect materials at his disposal. During the winter of 1852 it
was dangerous to he out after dark. The city of Melbourne was
inundated with escaped convicts from Yan Diemen’s Land, with
conditionally pardoned men, with expirees ; and some ticket-of-leave
men, who tried their fortune either at the diggings or in Melbourne
for a while, and returned just in time for muster. Yet with a police
ill composed, and open to bribes, before the month of December the
town bad been so completely reduced to order that it was safe even
for women and children to move about at any hour. Outrages there
undoubtedly were, but they were chiefly confined to aggressions of
the dissolute class one upon the other.*
The composition of the two councils of Victoria was in December
1852 as follows :
EXECUTIVE - .
Colonial Secretary
Treasurer
Attorney General
Collector of Customs-
X.EGISLATURE,
Colonial Secretary
Attorney- General
General
S plicitor- General
Master of Supreme Court
This state of things in Victoria did in the course of the second
session, lead to a singular rupture. The only men at all capable of
conducting the business of the Government in the Legislature at that
time were the Attorney-General and the Auditor General. The
Attorney-General was necessarily absent at times attending to his
professional duties which, owing to the influx of population from
Van Diemen’s Land had very much increased. At such times the
whole brunt of tire government business fell upon the Auditor, and
he was of course expected to support the views of the Govern-
ment. But how was he to get at those views ? He was not a mem-
ber of the quasi-cabinet, and information was very sparingly, and
even grudgingly afforded him. At lenght he found his position so-
anomalous in relation to the council, and so painful to himself, that
he resigned ; and the Government certainly lost one of its best —one
of its few good officers. Such is his own account. On the other
hand, he was accused of unduly interfering with the official func-
tions of others. It is quite possible that this may have been the
ease ; but how could it be otherwise ? He was called upon to fill
* 'Extract from a Melbourne paper, April 1853.—“ All YandiEmonians.”—
At one of the recent trials at Castlemaine for hocussing, throttling and robbery,
the prosecutor and the four criminals were all Vandiemonians. They were all
“birds of a feather,” and the prosecutor, who was a newly-installed policeman,
was declared by one of his brother constables to be the worst of the lot I”
18
RESPONSIBLE MINISTRIES FOR


llie office of a sort of ministerial jack-of-all-trades, ami it is not very-
wonderful that he found himself driven to tread on the toes of his
Colleagues, who were not unwilling that he should relieve them of
their duties, but were not disposed to allow him to reap the credit.
Of the four members of the executive council of Victoria, two only
were deemed competent to take seats in the legislative council, and
of the five official members of that body two only were considered
decently competent, namely, the Attorney-General and the new
Auditor-General. The reader may here be reminded that a Colo-
nial Secretary has since been sent from England, and some other
changes have taken place, which may perhaps have strengthened
the ministry.
In the colony of Van Diemen’s Land the same feature has from
the first been exhibited of an official bench in the legislative council,
constructed by passing over the majority of the members of the ex-
ecutive council, and seeking as high a degree of efficiency as could
be obtained among the members of the official body generally.
From the first assembling of the legislature in December 1851,
to the end of 1852 two changes took place in the quasi-min-
istry, making in effect three ministries in two sessions. The
first was rendered necessary by the arrival of a new Colonial Secre-
tary in April 1852 ; the second, by a division among the members
of the official body on the question of transportation in September of
the same year.
It will be convenient to exhibit the three quasi-ministries before
offering any remark :
EXECUTIVE.
LEGISLATURE.
Colonial Secretary *
Colonial Treasurer *
Commander of Troops
Chief Police Magistrate
Colonial Secretary
Colonial Treasurer
Attorney - General
Solicitor- General
In the second session, after the arrival of the new Colonial
Secretary, the composition of the two bodies stood as follows :
EXECUTIVE.
LEGISLATURE.
Colonial Secretary
Colonial Treasurer
Commander of Troops
Chief Police Magistrate
Colonial Secretary
Attorney-General
Soi icit or- G eneral
Clerk of Executive Council
* Both temporary. The acting Secretary was Treasurer and the acting
Treasurer was Clerk of the Executive Council. Both of course fell hack upon
their permanent offices.


In the adjourned session of the council Dec. 1852 —Jan. 1853 v
after the Colonial Secretary and Clerk of the Council had
taken leave of absence, in consequence of their disagreement with
the Governor on the question of transportation the following was the
composition of the two bodies respectively :
EXECUTIVE.
Colonial Secx-etary
Colonial Treasurer
Commander of Troops
Chief Police Magistrate
LEGISLATURE.
Colonial Secretary
Attorney-General
Solicitor-General
Private Secretary
The blanks, In all these lists, in the official bench in the legislature
are so many pieces of evidence of the unfitness of the members of
the executive council to fill seats in the legislative council, with this
exception, that the Commanding Officers of the troops very pro-
perly keep themselves aloof from active politics, and as the Attor-
ney-General must have a seat, he may be said to fill that place in
the legislature which the commanding officer declines to fill.
The first appointments in Van Diemen’s Land were undoubtedly
the very best that could have been made. No one could reasonably
take exception to the expedient of passing over the executive for the
sake of securing efficiency in the legislature, and as the principal
officer of the executive, under the Governor, and the able and expe-
rienced Clerk of the Council (first as Treasurer, and afterwards as
Chairman of the Land Board) had seats, the measures of the Go-
vernment could be introduced to the house under the guidance of
those who were constitutionally conversant with them. The then
acting Treasurer was a man of very great ability,extensive inform-
ation and experience, high character, and of no mean power
as a debater. The law officers of the Crown were both efficient
men. The Attorney-General was a good speaker, a man of great
industry, and not unskilled in his profession. The Solicitor-Gene-
ral, without being quite so fluent a speaker, was much readier in
debate. He had also the advantage of varied and extensive infor-
mation. Moreover, he is a good lawyer, and from his family con-
nexions in the colony had great weight and influence in the country,
which was not a little enhanced by his known opinions against
transportation. Speaking of all these appointments in the order in
which they in the first of the above lists, the Lieutenant-Go-
vernor thus descr’bed them in a despatch to the Secretary of State,,
dated 10th January 1852. ;
“ With regard to the official members, the three first, are, from
their position, necessarily members of the legislative council, and I
appointed Mr. Francis Smith, the acting Solicitor-General, in pre-
ference to any other of the officers of the Government, in order to*
20
RESPONSIBLE MINISTRIES FOR


liave the benefit of his talents and power as a debater in the various
questions which must necessarily be brought under discussion.”*
Considering that the Lieut.-Governor had only four seats in the
legislature at his disposal, it must be admitted that the search for
efficiency out of the pale of the quasi-cabinet was much more
successful than in the other colonies.
At the commencement of the second session the new Colonial
Secretary took his seat on the official bench, displacing the acting
Secretary, and this was the only change that took place in the
quasi-ministry. In order to let him in, however, it was necessary
that one should retire. Pursuing the analogy of the English con-
stitution, the Treasurer—the head of the financial department of the
colony—should invariably occupy a seat on the official bench, he
being, in the words of the despatch already quoted, “ an officer who,
from his position is necessarily a member of the legislative Council.”
If the Treasurer had retained his seat, however, either the Solicitor-
General or the Clerk of the Executive Council must have given way.
Now between these two gentlemen it was very difficult to choose.
Both were ready debaters ; both were well informed men. The one
had the advantage of legal knowledge and influence in the country ;
the other, that of great official and legislative experience. In the
end, the valuable services of both these officers were retained in
consequence of the resignation of the Treasurer, Thus, the official
bench was kept in full strength , but at the cost of exposing the
weakness of the executive council —only one member of that body
having a seat in the legislature.
At the next change the same feature as to the comparative ineli-
gibility of the executive councillors to fill seats in the legislature
was preserved, the Colonial Secretary being the only member of the
quasi-cabinet on the ministerial bench. In the reconstruction of the
official party in the legislature a constitutional anomaly, so to speak,
was introduced by the appointment of the Lieutenant-Governor’s
Private Secretary to fill the seat vacated by the Clerk of the Coun-
cil. The necessity for resorting to an appointment so unprecedented
in its natui’e affords a further instance of the difficulty of the search
for efficiency out of the pale of the cabinet. There cannot be a
doubt that tliis appointment weakened the character and influence of
the official body in the legislative chamber, and would probably have
done so, even had the Private Secretary shown considerable skill
in debate. The circumstance that the new member was a subaltern
in the same corps in which his political superior was a captain
tended to create an impression, both in and out of the council, that
the military obedience due from the inferior to the superior officer
would be carried—perhaps almost unconsciously —into the council.
But there was really not much weight in this impression, even if
* Further papers on the Australian Constitutions, presented hy order of Her
Majesty, Ist July 1852, page 91.


strictly correct; because implicit obedience to the head of the
executive—and not as in England, concurrence with the well-con*
sidered determinations of the whole cabinet—was expected of every
official member.
The constitutional character of the official bench was further im-
paired by the position assumed by the Private Secretary. If ago ■
vernment amendment was to be moved to an address, it was the
Private Secretary and not the Colonial Secretary who moved it.
If a question as to the intentions of the executive was asked, the
answer generally came from the lips of the same officer. The in-
evitable consequence was, that the government bench and the
appointed members came to be regarded as a body having interests
and sympathies distinct from, and antagonistic to, those of the elected
members and the colony at large. A moderate degree of care would
have avoided this, and indeed, to some extent, it has been avoided
in the other colonies, A very remarkable illustration of this com-
plete separation of the elected and the appointed members occurred
in March 1853. The Tasmanian reader will recollect that an address
to the Queen, thanking her Majesty for the paragraph in the Royal
Speech announcing the prospective cessation of transportation was
moved by an elective member; to this an amendment was moved by
the Private Secretary. Some discussion arose as to the relative
merits of these two documents, and an elected member, in the hope,
as it seemed, of securing unanimity, moved for a conference between
the elected and appointed members, in order to strike out from the
two rival addresses a sort of ter Hum quid , to which both parties
could agree. This proposal virtually treated the two sides of the
chamber as two distinct bodies, and this anomalous proposal was
actually agreed to by the official body, not one of whom appears to
have perceived that the conference virtually destroyed the integrity
of the council. No doubt the legislatures under the Australian
Act, are as bi-formal as the fabled centaur, but even that monster
was described as being moved and animated bv one heart and head.
So far as the colony of South Australia is concerned, the informa-
tion within our reach is too imperfect to enable the state of the
executive to be spoken of with any degree of confidence; but,
judging from one known instance, that colony is believed to form
no exception to the general condition already described.
To conclude. The conspicuous features exhibited by the several
Australian governments are these; —
1. That although the members of the executive councils, being
the constitutional advisers of the Crown, ought “from their position
necessarily to be members of the legislative council,” yet they have
been found, in a majority of instances, not qualified to undertake the
duties.


2. That It has consequently been found necessary to pass most of
them over, and seek for competent men among the lower ranks of
the official body.
3. That even this search has only been attended by a partial and
modified success —a success differing in degree however in the seve-
ral Australian colonies.
4, That we have consequently in some of the Australian colonies
the remarkable phenomenon of a silent ministry, or, at least, only a
portion of the members of the official bench capable of explaining
and enforcing the policy of the Government.
It is not intended to be either asserted or implied that there are
not in the several governments some public officers of respectable
and even considerable ability. The whole tenour of the foregoing
remarks forbids the supposition of such an imputation. Neither is it
intended to be insinuated that the public officers do not perform their
ordinary and appropriate duties with credit to themselves and ad-
vantage to tlie public. What is really meant is, that the new con-
stitution came upon the official bodies somewhat by surprise, and
found in some of the highest offices gentlemen whose previous train-
ing had not been such as to enable them to fall readily into the new
legislative duties necessarily attached to their respective offices.
The above distinction, properly viewed, really illustrates the
effect of responsibility or the want of it. The public officers are
responsible to the head of the executive for the proper performance
of their official duties. They consequently are careful to make and
keep themselves competent. They are not responsible to the legis-
lature for the proper performance of their legislative duties ; and
therefore, it is only a few of the more ambitious who are careful to
acquire the necessary qualifications.


CHAPTEE 111.
Stopping Supplies.
They who have hitherto anticipated that the introduction of repre-!
sentative legislatures into the Australian colonies would necessarily
bring with it a due constitutional controul over the policy and acts
of the executive governments, seem to have relied on the power of
stopping supplies, whensoever the necessity of resorting to that ex-
treme and violent constitutional remedy should arise.
That power being acknowledged to be inseparable from represen-
tative institutions—the power of granting necessarily including the
power of refusing to grant —it was hoped that a salutary fear of
provoking its exercise would restrain the executive from persever-
ing in any line of policy obnoxious to the people.
It will not be difficult to show that these views are erroneous.
The remedy is no doubt a most useful and valuable one. An un-
wise executive may occasionally be found to persist in a line of po-
licy, the most injurious to the country, and the most repugnant to
the feelings of the people. Even with a responsible ministry, an
attempt might be made to keep a party in power long after it had for-,
feited the confidence of the lower house, For such a violation of
the constitution, a resort to this extreme remedy would be justifiable.
But in general, the remedy is of too extreme and violent a nature
to be resorted to in any but extreme cases ; and the country will
submit to very serious evils and oppression rather than encounter
the mischief which a stoppage of supplies must inevitably carry in
its train.
A legislature having the interests pf the country in its keeping,
without in any degree undervaluing the executive evils to be op-
posed and if possible removed, would find itself compelled to balance
one set of evils against the other; and in a vast number of instances,
the balance of evil being found on the side of the remedy, the re-
medy would not be resorted to; misgovernment, even in the face
of this power over the public purse, could therefore safely be car-
ried on with perfect impunity. An irresponsible executive would


(speculate upon this indisposition to resort to the extreme remedy,
and would soon acquire great practical skill in carrying misgovern-*
ment to a point stopping short of that degree of oppression which would
provoke a resort to the remedy. Sometimes a government would
risk the consequences, and speculate largely on the endurance of the
people. This was the case in this colony on the subject of trans*-
portation. The executive, believing itself secure of the support of the
Secretary of State; having no sympathies with the feelings of the
people on that question; and being under no responsibility to the
repi’esentatives, continued to maintain transportation, and even to
press its continuance, against the unanimous wish of the represen-
tatives. The theory that the Australian executives would be slow to
provoke a stoppage of supplies, and would not press oppression beyond
the point of endurance, presupposes the existence of a degree of
calm and sober judgment which may not always exist. The opera-*
tion of this supposed dread is, in practice, reduced almost to a nullity
so long as the executive regards itself—not as the ministry of a free
people, but as the servant of home government.
Even if the remedy of stopping supplies were perfectly efficient,
and could be resorted to with evil only to the wrong doers, and not
to their victims the public, there would still remain a fallacy in con*
sidering the raisgovernment of an iri’esponsible executive as no evil,
merely because it could he put a stop to by the remedy. The
Jesuits bark is said to he specific in all cases of intermittent fever i
is the ague no evil because we can relieve and finally stop its pai’OXr
isms by the exhibition of quinine ?
Let us look a little closely at its nature, and enquire upon
whom the evil consequences of the remedy fall. It may be safely
and broadly asserted that the evils incidental to the remedy fall
principally on the public at large—the victims of the acts of misr
government to be remedied, and not upon the wrong doers. The
framers of the Australian Constitutional Act seem to have been well
aware that in their attempt to unite a representative legislature with
a despotic executive—a pleasant compound of the English and Bus->
sian forms of government —they *were establishing a form of con-*
stitution in which the stoppage of supplies would be almost inevitr
able. They knew that in Canada, before the introduction of a re-*
sponsible ministry, the stoppage of supplies and a species of impeach-
ment were of constant occurrence, whereas, since the establishment
of a constitutional ministry, the government of Canada, and indeed
those of all* the British North American colonies have worked as
smoothly as that of Great Britain.
But having determined to adopt a form of Government which
was almost certain to produce some of the results in Australia which
* His Grace the Duke of Newcastle has just extended the boon to New-
foundland,


an irresponsible executive had done in Canada; they sagaciously re-
moved from the controul of the legislatures the salaries of most of the
persons likely to become obnoxious, leaving to the councils little
more than the power of inflicting evil on their own constituents and on
the minor officers of the Government who were not implicated in the
policy of the Government, further than being occasionally asked
to go to the poll—and we know what asking means in such a case—
to vote against some popular candidate.
It is true that the gi’eat increase of revenue and expenditure,
since the introduction of the new Australian constitutions has had
the effect of nullifying the scheme of the framers of the Imperial
Act, but that could not be contemplated at the time. The schedules
then formed a large proportion of the revenue. But they were not all.
The customs department was not then under the controul of the local
government. The survey department was kept up without any
legislative controul, by making it a charge on the territorial revenue.
The several Governors moreover had great power of placing other ex-
penses as a charge on that branch of revenue. So that deducting all
that was removed from legislate controul, the legislatures of the
Australian colonies, by “ exorcising the constitutional right of stop-
ping supplies” could do little more than destroy the police, stop
postal communication, and suspend public works.
In thus pointing out the inadequacy of the power of stopping supplies
as a substitute for a responsible ministry, let it not be supposed that this
constitutional function of a representative legislature ought to be dis-
regarded. It has been justly deemed by our ablest constitutional wri-
ters, one of the principal safeguards of public liberty. Undoubtedly
it is a power which should never be given up—indeed being insepar-
able from the function of granting it cannot be given up ; but the
executive ought certainly to be placed on such a footing in the Aus-
tralian colonies, as that the right in question should be one of the
dormant safeguards of liberty, never to be aroused to action. With
good government it never will be exercised, and even with bad
government its exercise will, for the reasons already stated, be ex-
tremely rare. Its exercise is indeed only justifiable in cases of great
oppression, or to force a great constitutional reform against an un-
willing executive.
No one can doubt that the attempt to force the continuance of
transportation upon the unwilling legislature of this colony, against
the indignant remonstrance of all the Australian colonies, was a just
occasion on which to exercise the right; but it must be equally clear
that the prudent and cautious manner in which the council showed
its determination to resort to the extreme measure, yet still delayed
the consummation by voting instalments, was most wise. No one
can doubt that the general action of the Australian legislatures had
an important and almost immediate effect on the minds of her Majes-
ty's ministers. There is reason to believe that the resolutions of


the first session of the Legislative Council of Van Diemen’s Land
had not been one month in the hands of the Secretary of State, before
he perceived the impossibility of carrying on transportation concur-
rently with representative institutions, and had determined to put
an end to the former. It was accordingly mentioned in the Queen’s
speech. The Duke of Newcastle has himself stated that transporta-
tion was put an end to in deference to the expressed wishes of the
colonists. His grace could not fail to perceive that the conflict be-
tween the executive and the legislature which must have ensued
had the prayer of the legislative council been refused, was such as a
prudent statesman would hesitate to provoke ; the more especially
as in the other colonies the issue would have been, not as in Tasma-
nia between the local executive and the representatives of the peo-
ple, but between the local government supported by the people and
their representatives on the one side, and the Imperial government on the
other. The moderation of the legislature of this colony has been
fully appreciated in the Mother Country; let us trust that the readi-
ness of three ministers in succession—for to Lord John Russell’s
statesmanlike perspicacity the people of Australia owe the first sug-
gestion that transportation ought to cease —to fulfil the desires of the
people’s representative in these colonies, will be no less duly ap-
preciated than gratefully acknowledged.
In conclusion, instead of regarding the stoppage of supplies as an
effectual remedy for every act of misgovernment, the necessary evils
inseparable from a resort to this questionable remedy should be re-
garded as a strong argument against that form of government which
is perpetually calling for its exercise. With a despotic executive
this violent and painful remedy may occasionally be resorted to.
In cases of pressing necessity the people will readily consent to the
sacrifices incidental to the resort thereto. But while they acknow-
ledge the necessity, they will be kept in continual alarm lest their
representatives should be driven thereto. It was so in Canada un-
der the old system ; but with a responsible ministry the danger is
wholly removed. The power, it is true, remains, and will always
remain, as a great constitutional beacon; yet, when once responsible
ministries shall have been established in the Australian colonies,
no more will be heard of stopping supplies than is now heard
in England or in Canada. The stopping of supplies is at best but
a rude and clumsy remedy for evils—often of very serious magni-
tude, —which a responsible ministry would wholly prevent. Now,,
prevention is better than cure.


CHAPTER IV.
Some Objections Answered.
The principal objections urged against the adoption of the principle
of the English constitution now under notice are —
1. That the Australian colonies are not ripe for a responsible
ministry.
2. That the Australian colonies do not furnish a sufficiently nu-
merous body of men who have been trained to or are fitted for an
official career.
3. That the Australian colonies, taking into consideration their
present limited population, do not possess a class of men in suffici-
ently affluent circumstances to enable them to afford to accept a pre-
carious office.
1. That the Australian colonies are not ripe for a responsible
ministry is a mere gratuitous assertion without proof, which is
abundantly met by the counter-assertion that they are ripe.
They in whose mouths the assertion is most frequently heard pro-
bably attach no very precise or definite meaning to the word ripe.
It is in truth one of those vague generalities with which the politi-
cal sophist seeks to set aside discussion and dispense with reason.
The only questions worth consideration are: is that monstrous an-
omaly—the union of a despotic executive with a representative le-
gislature—an evil; and if so, is not the introduction of a responsible
ministry the appropriate and effectual constitutional remedy ?
Every Englishman acquainted with the histoiy of his country is
aware that anarchy prevailed In England, almost as the normal con-
dition of the country, before the ministry became responsible to the
commons; whereas a well-working government has prevailed ever
since. It has been also shown that in Canada the introduction of a
responsible ministry acted almost like magic in converting what has
been called a constituted anarchy into political and social order,
qnd a discontented and rebellious, into a contented happy and loyal


people. Transportation being now happily out of the path, these
colonies have not to complain of accumulated political mischiefs at
all to be compared with those which drove Canada into rebellion.
The official bodies of these colonies have never organized them selves
and their adherents into a strong dominant party as the ruling class
did in Canada, They seem not to have thought of anything like
union. The newness of these colonies—ranging from seventy to
eighteen years,—moreover, has not been favourable to such an
organization.
But although it would be a gross exaggeration to say that the
Australian colonies have experienced anything like that accumu-
lation of abuses which prevailed in Canada before the introduction
of Lord Durham’s salutary reform, the power of working mischief
undoubtedly exists. There is the same antagonism, amounting at
times to hostility to the people—the same unsympathising
character in the executive. Not that it is to be supposed that
evil is done for evil sake; but in governments, constituted as those
of Australia are, the executive and the legislature have a strong
tendency to regard each other as natural enemies. The executive
on the one hand, finding their measures often opposed by the legisla-
ture, soon acquire the habit of regarding all that the representlves
desh-e as something to be opposed ; whilst the representatives on the
other hand are not free from a corresponding feeling, and thus a
wholesome co-operation for the public good becomes a matter of
extreme difficulty. Why should not the same principle which has
proved so salutary in promoting harmony wherever it has been tried,
fail in efficacy for the first time in Australia? The mere logical
inference is decidedly in favour of the advocates of a constitutional
ministry, and they who think otherwise are bound to show a reason
for their faith, and cannot rest their case on the bare assertion of
unripeness. Our case is simply this :—that a responsible ministry
has succeeded wherever it has been tried, whereas the attempt to
unite the antagonistic principles of despotism and representation is,
and ever must be, a failure. As to the “ unripe” argument, it will
be time to answer it when they who resort to it condescend to
explain what they really mean by it. We were unripe for repre-
sentation, —we were unripe for the cessation of transportation, we
are unripe for each and every reform that can be proposed; but
somehow or other, at the precise moment that each measure of
reform has been adopted, ripeness has at once accompanied it.
2. The next argument which we are called upon to notice was made
considerable use of in Canada when the question of Responsible
Government was under discussion, and has not been neglected in
Australia. In Canada, from the extent of the population, and the
completely organized state of a comparatively old society, it had
scarcely any foundation ; here it has just enough show of reason to'
require an answer. The argument asserts the scarcity, nay, almost


total absence of a body of men, trained to, or fitted for the higher
offices. This statement really amounts to very little more than tbe
(self-laudatory assertion that the present incumbents of office have no
equals out of the official ranks. But this statement is not correct, inas-
much as the crown has of late years sought and even found some of its
most efficient public servants among men originally unconnected with
office. Invidious comparisons between individual and individual have
been carefully avoided in these pages. The terms in which public
officers have been spoken of have been as general as could possibly
be resorted to, with due regard to clearness of conception, and indi-
viduals are now only alluded to forthepurpose of showing, that thevery
men recently resorted to by the crown to fill high office, were in
fact, furnished by the colonies. To begin with the Tasmanian
Government. The Attorney (late Solicitor) General is certainly
not the least efficient member of the Government. Whether we
Regard him in his place in the Supreme Court, or on the official
bench in the legislature, he appears as one of the most efficient pub-
lic servants in all the Australian colonies. Where did the government
find him ? Not among those especially trained to official life, —
not sent out by the Secretary of State as a ready-formed or heaven-
born minister ; but a member of a respectable Colonial family, care-
fully trained in his profession; and steadily making his way at the
local bar. Tie was in fact furnished by the colony.
The mere institution of a representative legislature must of itself
have a marked tendency to bring forward young men, ambitious of
honorable distinction in the country of their birth or of their adop-
tion. Indeed it would not be difficult to point out some men
whose very character and pursuits have been already changed by
the opening prospect of an honorable and useful career. How much
more conspicuous would this featui’e be, if official rank and station
could, as in England, be won by an exhibition of ability, industry,
and administrative capacity.
In the description of the official bench of the Victoria council th e
Attorney-General and the late Auditor were named as among the
most efficient officers of that government. Where were they picked
Up ? The Attorney-General was found just as our Solicitor-General
was found, making his way steadily and progressively at the colo-
nial bar. These men attained their position precisely in the way
that Sir Alexander Cockburn became Attorney-General in Eng-
land, and as they would have done under a responsible colonial
ministry. The Attorneys-General of Victoria and Tasmania were
in fact just the men that a leader in the council who had been “ sent
for” to form a local ministry would have offered the highest law
offices ; or, if they had taken the political rather than the legal line,
they would perhaps have been themselves sent for in the first
instance to make up a ministry. Now both were furnished by the
colony. The late Auditor of Port Phillip was also a settler; the


present Colonial Secretary of that colony was a squatter and sheep
farmer, and only underwent the moulting process of a voyage to
England. Mr Justice Barry, now acting Chief Justice of Victoria,
earned his seat on the colonial bench in just the same way as our
judges do in England—by first making his way at the bar. He
too was therefore furnished by the colony. In short, the several
representatives of the Crown now find it wise and prudent some-
times to resort to the very men who would form part of the minis-
try, if the executive w T ere made responsible to the commons ; and
where they have resorted to any other class, the result has been
far from happy. Thus the colonies have furnished several very
fitting men, who, under adverse circumstances, have literally forced
themselves upon the notice of the several governments, and it is not
too much to say, that they have proved at least as efficient as those
who have been chosen out of the officially trained class, or who have
been sent from the Mother Country either with office or with
“ strong recommendations to the Governor.” If the highest
offices, as in fact they now nearly all are, are open, and are under-
stood to be open to every man in the colony wdio can show himself
worthy to fill the same, the colonies will become more attractive to
young Englishmen of education, talents, and honourable ambition.
The higher branches of education in the colonies would be more pro-
moted, and more would bo desirous of obtaining proficiency at
schools and colleges, if such proficiency were as useful in the world
as they arc in England. Parents would go to more expense in
educating their sons, if the honours and rew r ards which education
secures in England were open to the ambitious youth of the colo-
nies. The opening of the colonial bench to those who attain dis-
tinction at the local bar, the introduction of representative legisla-
tures, and the adoption of a responsible ministry, taken together,
would act as a most powerful stimulus to the acquisition of official
aptitude of all kinds.
3. The argument, drawn from the want of affluent circumstances
in any very large class of the population may be soon disposed of.
It may be admitted that there is nothing in the colonies at all to
be compared with the great territorial manufacturing and mercantile
■wealth of England ; but taking into consideration the more mode-
rate colonial standard, all these colonies furnish a very large number
of families quite wealthy enough to train their sons up to a very
high standard, and afford them aid while they are making their
way at the bar, in other professions, and in the legislature. It
must not be forgotten that up to a very recent period the only source
of distinction was a profuse and ostentatious expenditure. Wealth
was therefore all in all. But men are now beginning to have higher
aspirations, and these will be gradually enlarged as our colonial con-
stitutions become more fully developed. We are really beginning
to look with some respect on a fair and well-earned professional


deputation, and men are actually to be found who are willing to forego
a life of inglorious ease for the sake of distinction at the bar or in
the senate. If it should however be found that the precariousness
of the tenure of office deterred some efficient men from seeking the
same, it is quite open to the colonies or any one of them to adopt an
expedient which has been resorted to in England. There is. an act
of parliament which gives pensions to retired Secretaries and Under
Secretaries of State, Chancellors of the Exchequer, and others—
with the single condition, that not more than a limited number shall
receive pensions at one and the same time. Thus the Australian
legislatures might pass an act providing that after a certain length of
service all persons who had held certain specified ministerial offices
should receive a certain moderate pension, but that not more than
two persons should receive the pension attached to the same office
at one and the same time. In point of fact, it would seldom hap-
pen that more than one person would draw the pension attached to
each specified office, as the pension would be vacated on the officer’s
return to power with his party.
It need scarcely be said that such of the present officers of the
several colonies as failed to keep office under a responsible ministry
should be compensated by a pension according to their length of
service. Many no doubt would obtain seats in the legislature, and
would form part of the new ministries. It is to be hoped that an
honoi’able ambition is not to be extinguished by the pension above
contemplated, and that the best men who have held office under
the old system will acquire seats in the councils or assemblies, and
compete for office under the new. This was the case in Canada, where
the old grievances were far greater, and the official body more iden-
tified with them than they are here ; so that it will probably be
more extensively the case here. It w'ould not be difficult to name
men in every one of these colonies now in office, whose position is
so far independent of mere favour, and the result of their own talents,
as to enable them to disconnect themselves from the present obnox-
ious features of official life and assume that place in the councils
of their country which their abilities, enhanced by their experience,'
will fully entitle them to. The mere fact that their position has
been one of subordination and obedience, will save many from any
considerable portion of the obloquy attached to obnoxious measures.
In many instances their political sins are comparatively trifling—
their laborious services to their respective colonies most praisewor-
thy. Let the recollection of those sins die with the odious system
really chargeable with them : let the services alone bo remembered.


CHAPTER Y.
Prospects and Results.
It will have been collected from the foregoing pages, that there
exist in the Australian Colonies but few impediments to the intro-
duction of responsible ministries. The prospect indeed is in the
highest degree encouraging to those, who are anxious for as full and
complete an adoption of the principles of the British constitution as
the circumstances of these colonies will admit. If the measure had
been tried only in Canada, it would have been open to objection—
that what had been found to succeed in a colony with a population
of a million and a-half, might still be inapplicable to colonies, the
population of which ranged from two hundred thousand down to
seventy thousand. But it has been found quite as productive of
benefit in Prince Edward’s Island, with its little parliament of
two chambers, and its population of less than fifty thousand, as in
the great and flourishing colony in which it was first tried. It is
therefore no longer an experiment.
Loi'd Grey speaks of the measure in his recent work on the colo-
nies in terms of approbation. His successor Sir John Pakington*
the promoter of the extremely liberal but somewhat complex con-
stitution of New Zealand, is understood to be favourable to it.
His Grace the Duke of Newcastle has practically evinced his
approval of it, by very recently conferring the boon on Newfound-
land—a colony in which party politics, based in a great degree
Upon religious differences, ran higher than in any other of the
British possessions abroad. In England indeed there seems to be
no difference of opinion on the subject, among those statesmen and
public men who have given any attention to the affairs of the colo-
nies ; and it is upon the calm and deliberate opinion of such men*
that those who have not busied themselves much about colonial
affairs will rely.
Nor is it merely on the question of responsible ministries for all
the colonics, that the almost universal opinion of public men in


England is now so favourable to constitutional government in the
colonies. The complete destruction of colonial monopolies by the
abandonment of discriminating duties ; the repeal of the old navi-
gation aws; the discontinuance of the practice of supplying the
•V i- with nearly all public officers, down to those of even a very
.i .re rank, from home ; and the opening of the judicial bench
to a great extent to the local bar ; have left to the ruling class in
England but little, if any, interest in maintaining that vexatious
amount of Imperial controul, which formerly carried interference
into the minutest affairs of the colonic?. They who think that the
colonial connexion is desirable, have in truth some ground for fear-
ing that not a few public men are now disposed to bend the bow toe
much the other way : that, in short, an extreme apathy, a half-lazy
half-culpable indifference is growing up, respecting the very connexion
itself. There is however a different, and we ventre to think a far
more sound state of opinion among those statesmen who are best
acquainted with colonial affairs, which seems much more in conform-
ity with the state of opinion in the colonies; namely, that the con-
nexion between the colony and the parent state is, or may at all
events be made, advantageous to both. That to this end, it should
be entirely and completely stripped of all interference with the
internal affairs of the colonies, and should be reduced within the very
narrowest limits which are consistent with the connexion itself. The
general opinion of statesmen of this class is, that the interference of
the Imperial Government should be confined to subjects and ques-
tions which concern the empire at large, and that these are perfectly
susceptible of distinct enumeration and definition. Colonies, as
such, for instance, can have no peace or war distinct from the Impe-
rial Government. They may be, as the North American colonies
were up to 1759, the original cause and principal seat of war.
The English and French colonies no doubt played an important
part in that war, but the question of war and peace rested with
the parent states, and conquests made in such cases, after the
date of any treaty of peace, and before notice, have been invariably
restored on both sides. Colonies can have no foreign relations of
any kind, and no diplomacy. Beyond these and some other subjects,
strictly reserved from colonial interference, the general impression
—rapidly growing into universality—is, that the Home Government
can never intermeddle with the purely local and internal affairs of the
colonies, without extreme trouble and vexation to itself and
to Parliament, and with every chance—nay, almost certainty,,
of mischief to the colonies. And this be it remembered is not
the mere closet theory of the political philosopher, but is the pi’ac-
tical conclusion drawn from a most successful experiment, which has-
bow been working for some years with the most happy results, in an
important, wealthy, and populous group of colonies. Indeed to some
extent it receives illustration from those colonies in which the con-


trast between the amount of Imperial interference formerly and at
present practised is very striking, and in which every extension of
the principle of non-interference has been productive of beneficial
results. Governed
“ with chains so light
twere net worth while to break them”
the colonial connexion, will in a very few years, be reduced to little
more than is expressed in a very happy phrase, attributed to a dis-
tinguished English statesman, namely, “ a common citizenship and
a common allegiance,” in which case it seems almost impossible to
anticipate that the connexion should be other than practically
permanent.
The adoption of responsible ministries Tor these colonies may
therefore be regarded simply as a question of time; and that too not
merely whether they shall be adopted at once or at some remote and
indefinite period, but whether they ought to accompany or anticipate
the completion of the new constitutions.
If the question had not been raised in the colonies as a measure
proper to be introduced as part of the new constitutional arrange-
ments, it is not at all improbable, that the high favour with which it
is regarded by English statesmen, -would have caused the proposal
to emanate from home, with the single condition that a fair and rea-
sonable compensation should be given to such public officers as
found themselves compelled to retire. There is no reason to be-
lieve that the proposal will be less palatable to the Secretary of
State, or to ministers generally, because it has emanated from the
colonies, and has moreover been placed by the framers of the several
constitutions on a proper footing and viewed in a proper light. Ex-
cept in the bill framed in South Australia, where it is provided that
certain public officers shall have seats in either house of the colonial
parliament, the framers of the other constitutions have contented
themselves by introducing certain provisions, having for their object
to facilitate the introduction of responsible ministries, and above all
to anticipate the condition which ministers would be sure to impose.
In this the legal and constitutional course has been adopted. Lord
Durham, who had the advantage of very able legal assistance, pointed
out that an enactment would be unnecessary and indeed improper.
No local enactment on such a subject would be binding on the
Crown. Its disallowance would be at once advised by the legal ad-
viser of the Colonial Office, or the Law Officers of the Crown. The
selection of the public servants is a matter of undoubted prerogative.
The power of appointing public officers is already delegated to the
Governors of colonies by their commissions, which are instruments
under the Great Seal, and a mere instruction under the Signet and
Sign Manual will be amply sufficient to effect the purpose.
While these pages were passing through the press, intelligence
has been received that a responsible ministry has been adopted by


the general Government in New Zealand,* as well as by the
several provincial Governments. It seems that the general assembly,
convened at Auckland, the capital of the Northern Province,
addressed the officer administering the Government—Colonel Wyn-
yard—praying him to choose the principal officers of his govern-
ment out of the majority of the assembly. Colonel Wynward at
once complied with their request, and the assembly unanimously
agreed to an address of thanks for his prompt attention to their
wishes. At some stage of the proceedings there was a motion to
delay the measure till the pleasure of the Queen, or the concurrence
of the Secretary of State could be made known, but it was lost by a
majority of 25 to 3.
Now, assuming that some provision is made, or is intended to be
made, for the outgoing officers, there seems no reason why her Ma-
jesty should be advised to disapprove of the above mode of intro-
ducing the measure. The choice of officers is Avithin the power of
the Governor or officer administering the Government. There is
nothing in the nature of that power to preclude him from follow-
ing a certain principle in the exercise of the same. An order or
instruction from her Majesty seems only necessary, where the
Governor is unwilling to introduce the reform without it. Added
to the successful working of responsible ministries in the North
American colonies, the recent adoption of the principle, not merely by
the genei’al Government, but by the several provincial Govern-
ments of New Zealand—Avith populations ranging from ten doAvn to
three thousand or less—serves to put the effete system of irrespon-
sible executives more completely in the wrong.
It may noAv be useful to mention a few of the results likely to
flow from a responsible ministry, which have either not been
touched upon at all, or haA’e only been incidentally alluded to
in the foregoing chapters.
Without a strong executive a perfectly efficient government
can haA’e no existence. But an irresponsible gOA’ernment must
always be viewed Avith jealousy and suspicion, by a representative
legislature and by the people whom they represent. Under the
influence of this feeling, not only does the executive derive no sup-
port from the legislature or from general opinion, but constant
efforts are resorted to in order to weaken it. The weakening of the
executive is obviously a mere defensive expedient to mitigate
the evils of irresponsibility. Let responsibility be introduced, and
legislative support —which must include the support of the majority
of the constituencies —will be at once freely given to the executive.
This constitutes a strong executive. With a ministry that can
only hold office so long as it can command a majority in the
* The European Pop ulation of New Zealand, certainly does not reach 35,000, and
probably does not exceed 31,000.


house—with the power of dissolving the provincial parliament, if
there he roason to believe the lower house does not faithfully repre-
sent the constituencies—there seems no place for that jealousy,
suspicion, and constant desire to weaken and damage the executive,
which is, and ever has been so conspicuous in all colonies where, but
only so long as, irresponsibility has prevailed.
Another result, which may reasonably be anticipated, will be the
improved tone of party contention. Party is inseperable from all
free governments. Without going very deeply into the matter—for
that would be out of place here—there will always be the party
desirous of progressive changes, which they believe to be necessary
to the welfare of the people ; and the party disposed to resist such
changes, and keep things as nearly as possible as they are. In Eng-
land the one party is called liberals or reformers—the other party
conservatives, and their types are to be found wherever the British
constitution has been even imperfectly imitated. The liberal party
must not however arrogate to themselves a monopoly of usefulness.
The constitutional function of conservatism is to resist inconsiderate
innovation, and the useful legislation of the last ten or twelve years
*—useful and salutary beyond all previous example—is the practical
result of the party conflicts, which the debates in both houses
of parliament disclose. Scenes of discord no doubt occur, but
they are not the normal condition of debate, which is usually
earnest, argumentative, and pertinent to the matter in hand.
In all numerous deliberative assemblies, the even tenour of debate is
occasionally liable to be interrupted by personal acrimony. But
where one party, and that the party of the minority, is maintained
in power—not by its intrinsic strength, but by the strong hand of the
Home Government against the consent of, and on principles adverse
to, the majority—mutual recrimination and personal acrimony become
the common weapons of attack and defence. No one can doubt
that the element of responsibility, imposed upon the party in power,
would tend to make that party more circumspect in its demeanour
and more courteous in its language towards its opponents; whilst,
as a natural consequence, the tone of opposition would be softened.
In the House of Commons—in spite of occasional episodes of a contrary
character—there is a certain dignity and self- respect in the aspect and
demeanour of parties, which generates respect towards each other.
Though Lord Derby and Lord John Russell profess different political
principles, it is probable that neither of those able statesmen doubts, or
has ever doubted, that his adversary has the good of his country at heart.
In these colonies parties seldom give each other credit for a sincere
desire to promote the welfare of the people. Under responsible
ministries, parties will have no other hope of succeeding to power,
except by a constant and earnest attention to the interests of the
constituencies and the country at large, and that being a matter of
notoriety to all, the sincerity of the end—in spite even of the


ordinary party warfare—will come to be assumed, and tbe inappli-
cability of the means adopted by each party will alone be impugned.
The party accusation now is : “ you are deliberately and wilfully
betraying the best interests of the country”—the party accusation
by-and-by will be—“ the measures which you propose will only
injure the interests of the country, which we all desire to promote.”
The uncharitable spirit which is above described as pervading
parties in the legislature, is unfortunately not always confined within
the walls of the several councils. Even a cursory perusal of the
parliamentary blue books for the last few years will show, that the
tone of the despatches from the head of the executive to the Secre-
tary of State is occasionally marked by party acrimony towards the
opponents of the favourite policy of the executive, and towards the
popular representatives. But sweeping denunciations of political
opponents really meets with little or no sympathy at home; and when
we contrast with these the courteous, and at the same time dignified,
tone of a Secretary of State’s despatch, we are sometimes tempted
to entertain a suspicion, that it was intended as a lesson to the
Governor to whom it was addressed.
Nor is the language which has occasionally been indulged in by
members of the legislature towards the head of the executive less
reprehensible. The attacks of the despatch have been answered by
the diatribes of debate, and the feeling of animosity thereby ge-
nerated between the head of the executive and the leading members
of the legislature, are not easily allayed. No one who has not been
drawn into the vortex of these angry recriminations, can do other-
wise than deplore their occurrence.
The occasional tone of despatches —many instances of which the
reader will recollect for himself—as well as the recriminations of the
members assailed, are only briefly and gently alluded to, for the
purpose of pointing out how much more becoming to the head of
an executive would be that position of “dignified neutrality,” which
Loi’d Elgin so pointedly described as being incidental to the
functions of a Governor with a responsible ministry. Party ani-
mosity would be exhausted in the contentions of the legislature.
The Governor himself would stand perfectly indifferent between
parties, merely giving his confidence and support to that party
which could secure the decided and permanent confidence of the
lower house, and consequently of the constituencies. It is to be pre-
sumed that there are but few persons who may be entrusted with
the confidence of their Sovereign, who would not prefer the improved
position and influence which a Governor would enjoy as consti-
tutional representative of the Crown, which he would become in fact,
as he is now, merely in name, instead of being little more than the
mere head of a party.
It is almost unnecessary to point out that the position of the
Secretary of State would be as much improved as that of the


GoveTnors of tlie colonies. At present every executive act in tlie
colonies is necessarily reported to him, because in theory he is the
minister by whose authority, and under whose instructions, the Go-
vernors are presumed to act. The most trifling determinations of
the government are communicated to him, often in magniloquent
and didactic despatches. These matters he is presumed to enter'
into, as though they were of the greatest moment to the country.
The answers to many of these are of course brief and formal, and
after a time give little real trouble to the Secretary of State, though
they give abundance of profitless occupation to “ the office.”
But that which really is most troublesome to that minister is, that
every dispute between the executive and the party complaining is
referred to him. These keep him, and all under him, in constant
and most irksome employment. Nor is this all. It is quite compe-
tent to the party complaining to get some member of parliament to
move for papers. Formerly, discussion and all trouble to the house,
was saved by resisting such motions. But at the present day, as we
have seen, publicity is more in accordance with the practice of the
Government. Hence a parliamentary debate may be brought about
by a purely local dispute, often not involving any principle, and not
intrinsically worth the time it occupies.
When it shall be understood that the Home Government has
Ceased to interfere with the local affairs of the colonies, and that
they have ministries responsible to their own commons respectively,
every man who has a real or fancied grievance will naturally turn
to the local government and the local legislature, and if inadver-
tently he should appeal to the Secretary of State, he will be referred
back to his own government, as alone capable of understanding
and deciding on the merits of his case, and as fully competent to
settle the dispute on the spot. No doubt there will remain some
eases in which a right of appeal to the Secretary of State will re-
main to the aggrieved party, cases in which non-interference would
be injustice, but they will be of rare occurrence.


