

PARRAMATTA DISTRICT
SOLDIERS
in the
CREAT WAR
1914-1919
who served
with the
AUSTRALIAN
FORCES
in
Gallipoli,
Egypt,
France.
&c &c.
Compiled from records of "The Cumberland Ar gus".




*sr
Mmzi
to
■0
S.P. & L.S. e©’s. SALEYARDS, GEORGE--STREET, PARRAMATTA
TUESDAY and FRIDAY
Southern Produce and Live
Stock Company
ABATTOIR
SALEYARDS,
HOMEBUSH.
PIGS,
TUESDAY.
CALVES,
WEDNESDAY,
AUCTIONEERS
Sydney. Homebush. Parramatta
MUNICIPAL
POULTRY
MARKETS,
SYDNEY.
POULTRY
TUESDAY
and
THURSDAY.
Head Office and Store: 396 SUSSEX-STREET, SYDNEY.


Narsden’s Fruit-Van HARNESS is Unequalled
HORSE and CATTLE MEDICINES
Owners of Horses will save money on all Buggy, Sulky, Cart and Dray Requirements and Harness
by trading with MARSDEN.
ESTABLISHED 46 YEARS.
I specialise in
RUBBER and GOLD
SULKY HARNESS.
MEN’S OILSKINS.
TARPAULINS.
LIVERPOOL HORSE
COLLARS
(Canvas Lined, Hair Faced).
HORSE and CATTLE
RUGS.
iH
187
sJA.ai 1
ISi
R
LE
S A O
'lillTn
w
€M
TELEPHONE U 8052 (Day or Night)
I also specialise in
BANKERS’ GOLD BAGS.
GENTS.’ SUIT CASES.
LADY’S DRESS and
BLOUSE CASES.
CASES and BAGS made by me
are all SOLID LEATHER.
fi \U !•'
ijw'A
fe«iV2/
SADDLE, HARNESS and
COLLAR MAKER,
260 Church Street,
PARRAMATTA
-N
£.


:
CHANTS
TIMBER
A
f $?. ** ****■
* :
kwe&y ■
i
< MM
■/ m
■
r &-4t
Order and Delivery
Telephone,
U 8803.
Head Office and Joinery Works.
DARCY STREET. PARRAMATTA
Office and General
Telephone,
U 8801 (3 lines).
Hart, Hitchcock and Co.
TIMBER MERCHANTS
r I MIE firm is in a unique position to carry out all requirements for the building trade. Mr.
A- William Hart, the senior partner, is not only an expert building contractor, but a practical
joiner and carpenter. The plant is replete with the latest improved machinery and gives
permanent employment to over 200 men. All goods are brought to Parramatta by water direct
from the ship’s side in the firm’s own barges, and clients therefore receive the benefit of this
saving in freight and handling.
Mill, Main Timber Yards and Wharf.
The yard has an area of 10 acres, the wharf a svater frontage of 100 feet.


...
G
LEE
*„ x .
•X ■:
.
_
::
Motor and Engineering Works, 58 Church Street, Parramatta
PHONE: U 8674
J. T. LEE and CO., Ltd.
THE LEADING MOTOR HOUSE.
General Engineers and Oxy-Acetylene Welders
ALL “FORD” SPARE PARTS A SPECIALITY.


r*
o
<■
W. F. JAGO
(MEMBERS OF THE REAL ESTATE AUCTIONEERS AND AGENTS’ ASSOCIATION OF N.S.W. )
Auctioneer ®, Valuer
PROPERTIES OF ALL CLASSES FOR SALE THROUGHOUT OUR EXTENSIVE DISTRICT.
Land for War Service Homes. VALUATIONS for Probate, Partition, Deed of
Gift, Mortgages, etc. TRUST FUNDS to LEND on Approved Freehold Security.
Estates Management Undertaken. Rents Collected. Accounts promptly rendered.
Offices and Salerooms: Macquarie Street, PARRAMATTA
’Phones: Office U 8221, House U 8351. P.O. Box 17.
District Agent for the Alliance Assurance Co. Ltd., Fire, Ac.cident and Employers’ Liability.


PAINTING is a Pleasure when
“A. 8.” HIGH-GRADE PAINT
IS USED
WILL COVER 25 PER CENT. MORE SURFACE than Lead and Oil, and WILL WEAR
TWICE AS LONG. One Gallon will cover 1400 sq. feet. Every gallon of “A. 8.” Paint is a
gallon of satisfaction—
-wi
€
%9
a
H
8
: ■■ : l i
Because:
I—IT FLOWS WELL, it does not
drag under the brush and make
painting hard work.
2. —IT COVERS WELL because it
is beautifully ground.
d. —IT SAVES TIME (which means
money) because it is ready for
use. It, is thoroughly mixed,
and only requires stirring.
4. IT SAVES LABOUR, trouble
and worry and gives gratifying
results.
5, IT GOES FURTHER, lasts
longer and looks better than
any house paint on the market.
Cheapest House for Enamelware, Tinware, Brushware, Disinfectants, Gas Rings, Axes, Lamps,
Trunks, Tubs, Baths, Incandescent Lights, Fencing Wire and Wire Netting, White Lead, Oils,
Colors, Ironmongery, Crockery, Glassware, &c.
W. J. IRWIN
THE LIVE IRONMONGER TOP QUALITY and LOW PRICES ‘PHONE UB5BO
200 and 202 CHURCH STREET, PARRAMATTA.


HADDRILL’S NEW SHOP-FRONT.
To Poultry Farmers. —Special Chicken Feed. Grit, and Poultry Remedies.
To Owners of Horses.—My stock is always carefully selected —the Best on the Market.
k
til
lH
%
k
Head Office and Bulk Store, 262-4 CHURCH STREET, PARRAMATTA, Telephone, U 8075


PARRAMATTA
Bag and Bottle Exchange
DIXON STREET, PARRAMATTA
THE OLDEST-ESTABLISHED BUSINESS OF ITS KIND IN PARRAMATTA.
TELEPHONE U 8475.
BUYER OF
BAGS
BOTTLES
IRON
BRASS
COPPER
LEAD
ZINC
&c., &c.
Mr. HUGH COLQUHOUN.
BUYER OF
TALLOW
SHEEPSKINS
HIDES
RUBBER
BENZINE CASES
BENZINE TINS
KEROSENE CASES
KEROSENE TINS
OIL DRUMS
IN FACT ANYTHING.
Correspondence Invited.
No Parcel too large, none too small.
TERMS—SPOT CASH.


■
*4
-
kv Hwm-?, ?
X 1 fcftt#
77>e Caterer /' F). F. McKA Y
Specialises in WEDDING BREAKFASTS. BIRTHDAY
C PARTIES, etc., etc., either Outdoor, or at Our New and
Up-to-date BALL-ROOM at
238 CHURCH STREET, PARRAMA TTA


£loor
£lO,OOO
—No matter.
We will furnish
your house for
Cash
or
On Terms
and make it a
Real Home.
MARCUS CLARK & CO., LTD.
827-31 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
(OPPOSITE RAILWAY).
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE:
Mr. J. GILBERT, Taylor-street, PARRAMATTA.
Phone U 8243


. Head Office: Pitt and Bridge Streets, Sydney.
FlRE. —Buildings, Rent, Stock, Furniture. Motor Cars, Machinery, Crowing Crops, etc., etc.
MARINE. —HuIIs, Merchandise, Cargo, etc., etc.
ACCIDENT. —PersonaI Accident and Sickness, Workers’ Compensation, Motor Cars, Live Stock
Burglary, Plate Glass, Fidelity Guarantee, Public Risk, Boiler Explosion, etc., etc.
c
Directors:
Colonel the Hon. Sir JAMES BURNS, K.C.M.0., M.L.C., Chairman.
Hon. TEGS. WIAODELL, .M.L.C. A. R. TROUP, Esq.
P. 0. BLACK, Esq. W. T. MACPHERSON, Esq.
A. McVERNOX, General Manager.
C. HAW’KES, Asst. Manager and Inspector of Branches. 11. M. HORN, Secretary.
When Contemplating TRAVELLING ABROAD
You will appreciate the advantage afforded by being able to centralise all your enquiries in
the one office. For example, from Sydney there are about twelve different lines running to
# England. Instead of writing or visiting the office of each line separately, full particulars
regarding sailings, routes, fares, etc., applicable to them all may be obtained from Burns,
Philp and Company, Limited.
Our Tourist Department affords the most convenient and economic channel through
which to complete all arrangements for Oversea Travel, in all classes, by any route, and by
any line between Commonwealth Ports, England, Europe, America, South Africa, and else-
where.
Intending travellers in all classes and by all routes will find it greatly to their advantage
to consult us before finalising their business.
We specialise in “Round Pacific,” “Round Eastern,” “Round Australia,” Round the
World,” and other comprehensive circular tours.
No charges whatever are made for Information, Assistance, Advice. Letters of Credit
issuel. Country clients advised re Passport Regulations, etc. Call, Write, or
Phone City 10688. TOURIST DEPARTMENT.
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., Bridge St., Sydney


Departments:
CLOTHING
DRAPERY
MILLINERY
TAILORING
MERCERY
MURRAY BROS.
PROPRIETARY, LIMITED.
PARRAMATTA
Departments:
FURNITURE
PIANOS
ORGANS
SEWING
MACHINES
THE PREMIER FURNITURE WAREHOUSE OF THE WESTERN SUBURBS.
Well-assorted and comprehensive stocks of HOUSEHOLD FURNITURE and FURNISHING
DRAPERY are offered at LOWEST PRICES compatible with values offered.
Dining, Drawing and Bedroom Suites
jn many styles and sizes, of latest designs, made from well-seasoned woods, well finish-
ed, with best workmanship. OAK, MAPLE ROSEWOOD, &c.
BEDSTEADS in great variety, of AUSTRALIAN-made Designs in Metal (Plain. Nickel or Brass, Oak,
Maple, etc). Wire Mattresses in any width or strength. Sanitary Kapok Bedding' (made in our
own factory).
Latest Designs and Colourings in LINOLEUMS, CARPETS, RUGS, MATS, Sc.
BLINDS made to any size. UPHOLSTERING in all its Branches. SUITES Repaired and Re-covered.
Estimates given for any kind of work of Furnishing.
TAILORING Style and Fit Guaranteed
Pianos. Organs. Pianos.
Iligh-grade Instruments from Standard English and American Factories. Old Instruments taken in
Exchange. Pianos Repaired and Regulated.
GRAMOPHONES and RECORDS. VIOLINS, BANJOS, Etc.
Drophead Sewing Machines
from the leading American Makers. The ROTOSCILLA MACHINE, the Latest and Best in Sewing
Machine construction. EASIEST TO OPERATE.
MURRAY BROS., Pty., Ltd.
CHURCH STREET, PARRAMATTA.


Parramatta and District
SOLDIERS
WHO FOUGHT IN
THE GREAT WAR
1914—1919.
Deblcatton:
To the Gallant Soldier Boys of Parramatta and these
Districts ;
To the Glorious Memory of those who have made the
Great Sacrifice;
To those who have Returned to enjoy the noble country
they have helped to save ;
And to their Relatives and Friends whose hearts thrilled
as they followed their magnificent exploits :
This volume is respectfully Dedicated by their sincere
friends and admirers,
“ c Uhe Cumberland Argus Ltd. ”
famutraffa: £mitlr IHalrs.
Printed and wholly set up at the Works of “The Cumberland Argus,” from the
records of which the Soldiers’ Pages are compiled.


HIS MAJESTY THE KING
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF WALES


Foreword from Admiral Lord Jellicoe
H.M.S. 4 ‘NEW ZEALAND, ’’
„ at Sydney,
14th August, 1919.
I am deeply conscious of the honour you have done me
in asking for a contribution to your book.
It has been a very real pleasure to learn with my own
eyes the beauty and wealth of this fair land of Australia,
whose sailors and soldiers, in all the many theatres of
war, played so gallant a part in bringing about the ultimate
defeat of German arms and the salvation of Civilization.
I cherish the hope that the present and future
generations of Australia will, by their love of Freedom,
Justice and Right, prove that those who have given their
lives in the Great War will not have done so m vain,
and that the bonds of union which have been forged by the
common sacrifice may ever link closer the Dominions
to the Mother Country.
Yours faithfully,
ADMIRAL OF THE FLEET.


When Shall Their Glory Fade?
By the Right Honourable Sir JOSEPH COOK, P.C., G.C.M.G., M.P.
Minister for the Navy, Federal Member for the Parramatta Electorate, who was one of the
Signatories to the Peace Treaty signed at Versailles.
Right Hon. Sir JOSEPH COOK, P.C., G.C.M.G., M.P.
YOUR proposal seems a happy idea. These brave
sons and citizens of the district have already
written their names high on the scroll of the
world’s fame. “Their name has gone out into all the
earth.” To pay them an affectionate tribute in the
manner suggested is a duty we all owe them. It is no
less a duty to ourselves —“lest we forget.”
We are too near these epic and tragic days rightly
to appreciate them. Later on when the blood and
mist and tears have all been wiped away and the true
perspective appears, then the story of what they have
done, how well they did it, and what we owe them for
doing it, will appear in its proper and more vivid
setting.
And what a moving story it will make in the days
that are yet to be. The citizens of to-morrow, looking
back over the radiant days of the district, will ponder
the record with glowing pride. Their heads will be
high as they read of an Army of 400,000 Australians
12.000 miles from the theatre of conflict, leaping
voluntarily to arms and sailing the seas of the world
in defence of King and country. And they will recall
with gratitude how these boys fought and suffered
and died in the brave days of old. ->
Surely it is a happy thought then to make it pos-
sible for them as they recount the doughty deeds of
the Parramatta boys to see the kind of lighthearted,
brave, heroic soldiers who stood comrades and allies
in the breach and covered themselves with immortal
fame.
When shall their glory fade?
JOSEPH COOK.


Let Australia Honour Them.
By CAPTAIN STACY WADDY
Late Headmaster of The King’s School, Parramatta, who served with the Australian Forces in Palestine.
'T'HIS publication stands for a feeling of strong
JL and rightful pride in the men of the Parra-
matta district who fought in the great war and
the families that produced them. There is nothing
more natural and valuable than rightful pride; there
is nothing worse or sillier than conceit. It is import-
ant to see the difference between them. A conceited
man thinks “the British race must be a fine thing, for
it produced me!” To such a man we can only say
“Well, no doubt it did, but we will hope it can live it
down.” But the true spirit of pride is “I ought to
be some good, for I am sprung from the stock of the
British race.”
If we felt that five years ago, surely we are justified
in feeling it even more strongly
to-day. Twice at least before in
history, a great tyrannical power
has set out to smash the world.
In each case they were cruel, and
unhandicapped by scruples; they
had the reputation of being in-
vincible; they were efficient and
organised to the last degree. In
one case the leader was a colossal
genius, Napoleon. Each time an
impartial outsider would have
laid heavy odds on their winning.
And yet Spain and Napoleon
bumped and broke to bits on the
British race. And now we have
done it again. The defeat of the
Spanish Armada, and Trafalgar
and Waterloo took their places as
names that shall thrill our race
for ever. And now we have put
other names alongside them.
The “Old Contemptibles ” have a glory that can never
die. The men who could “stick it” on the Somme
and in the Jordan Valley, at Ypres and Jutland, and
Gallipoli, and a score of other places, give to every
man born of the same race the right to be proud of
his stock. To look at the sum total of achievements
of our race, and the characteristics of the men (and
women) who did them, is no conceit, and is a great
stimulus. It will not make a man swagger, or pour
out voluble stories of his own exploits; but will lead
to the feeling “I am British too; and as that is the
stuff that is in me, here goes for a good try to be a
man myself.” So comes rightful ambition and con-
CAPTAIN STACY WADDY.
fidenee. The race that saved the world must surely
be marked out by God to do a big share in rebuilding
the world. It has a destiny, not merely a history.
The world will hunger and thirst for men who are
men indeed; and each individual of the British stock
can feel that there may be big scope for him. Up and
at it! Our jobs do not cease when the war ends. The
war has educated us for the world-tasks of the next
fifty years.
And we of Australia have not only our share of
pride in the total achievement of our British race; we
have our local patriotism and pride in what the Aus-
tralian branch of that race has done. I am going to
speak of the reputation of the Australian. And I
say emphatically that 1 am proud
and glad that I belong to the Aus-
tralian branch of the Imperial
stock. I was a red-hot Australian
before 1 went on active service;
and after all that J have seen of
our boys in the war, I am ten
times more so. And I can speak
freely, for I am not a fighting
man. but a padre; and a padre
eau have the chance of forming a
judgment, and can speak freely.
Also I hope that I speak judici-
ally, not merely out of patriotism.
We can proudly believe that we
have won our place amongst the
greatest fighting troops of the
world. The deeds that prove it
stand on record; the testimony to
if comes freely and abundantly
from our comrades, our allies, and
our enemies. Never were troops
that received a more whole-hearted generous tribute of
admiration than the men of the A.I.F. And I say for
my part to the people at home, the boys of Australia
have won for us a name that should make us thrill
with the deepest pride; they have done it by effort
and risk that you can never even conceive; they have
shown a heroism of true manhood that you can never
over-estimate and never over-honour. Hold your
heads high. Australians!' You do well to publish such
a record as this. The boys are worthy of it.
There is just one uneasiness that I have; let me
speak of it frankly. There are some people who seem
to think they can only praise one thing by running


down another. Do we not sometimes meet Austra-
lians who are inclined to praise our boys by running
down the fighting powers of others? Sometimes this
intense local patriotism is amusing. Have you heard
the story of the man who was asked whether he did
not think Westhiinster Abbey was fine, and he re-
plied “Ah, but you ought to see Sydney Harbour?”
It is quite a rightful feeling that, if it comes to com-
parisons. We do not intend to admit second-rateness.
But surely the true attitude is to feel that first-rate-
ness is a matter of quality, not of invidious compari-
son. I think that the human race never showed
grander, more glorious heroism than during this war;
and it is good enough for me to feel that our Austra-
lians stand with the best. Personally, I am so sure of
the reputation of the Australian that I see not the
least need to run anybody else down in order to prove
it. And it is totally unworthy of ourselves, to ‘ ‘ crab ’ ’
other people; to tell, or listen with approval, to stories
about how “such and such troops ran away and we
Australians came up and saved the day.” I have
heard a certain number of such stories. In cases where
I could test them, I found them lies; and the men who
started them were not the Australians we are most
proud of. The officers and men, the newspapers and
statesmen, of Great Britain have shown the most won-
derful generosity in estimating and praising us; let
us be proud to think that here too we can give them
as good as we get.
With many of us, our local patriotism goes a step
further yet; we are not only proud Britishers, and
proud Australians, we are also proud of our town and
district of Parramatta. What a link it is! Often and
often men have come up to me on active service and
said “I never met you, but I am from Parramatta
too.” And we proudly felt that, while other towns
had done their bit too, yet we of Parramatta had
reason to hold our heads up in any company. And
speaking now to the people who will buy and treasure
this record I say v “You do well. You mean to honour
your boys; they deserve it. And remember that you
cannot honour a man without effort, by a few easy
words. To honour a real man, you must get to his
level.” It is often said that the boys who come home
will be unsettled. They will, until Australia honours
them in truth by rising to their level. are not
prigs; but they have had the education of war, the
widening of outlook. They are different. They cannot
lay their finger on the place and say “here and here
we have altered” ; but they have —broadened, expand-
ed, grown. Let Australia honour them to the utmost;
it is the hope of our future. And let them be remem-
bered. If fifty years hence the names that now are
honoured are then forgotten ; if families and towns do
not become prouder every year of those who went to
the great war;—-but I cannot imagine it.
In conclusion I would say to my A.I.F. comrades of
Parramatta district: “We have found that the world
is a big place; but also we have found that home is a
good place. We have had a glorious time; we have
a set of memories to make us rich for life; we have a
set of comradeships that are the grandest thing on
earth. We have seen many countries that are splen-
did, and met many peoples that we can heartily
admire. But good old Australia is good enough after
sill; we are prouder than ever of it. And though
plenty of people have been hospitable to us —there’s
no place like home.”
STACY WADDY
S.C.F.
St. George’s College,
Jerusalem.


A Word That Sounds Sweet.
By Mr. R. B. ORCHARD (formerly Assistant Minister for Defence).
PEACE! A word that sounds sweet —a word that
means much to many a household in this our
Australia. Peace which brings back to count-
less homesteads the flower of their family, the sons of
the fathers, the fathers and sons of our future
Australia, an Australia which in a few very bloody
years blossomed from an unknown quantity “down
under” to a live, virile nation worthy to take a place
with the Old World warriors—a nation in being as
well as in name, a nation that can hold its head erect
for all time.
In the early part of 1914 Australia was ploughing
its own furrow. The great majority of us knew little
of the outside world —it seemed such a long way off.
Our papers told us the news and we read and specu-
lated as to what London, Paris, and New York looked
like, whether they were really like the post-cards that
found their way to us “down under.” We didn’t
worry much. Australians don’t as a rule.
Then in the middle of 1914, with a vivid, unexpected
suddenness, war clouds gathered on Europe’s horizon
and fanned by the breath of Mars vio-
lently burst over a peace-loving world.
At the end of 1914 Australia, as a na-
tion, was bom. Our plough and our
furrow were but memories. Our young
men, oft accused of indolence, of plea-
sure-seeking, of sport-loving, of too
much sport-loving, gave the lie direct
and proved to the world that they were
true sportsmen and worthy sons of a
worthy sire.
I will reiterate no further. We all
know how our boys acquitted them-
selves on the immortal shores of Galli-
poli; we know of their prowess on the
scorched, parched plains of Palestine
and Mesopotamia, and their sterling
deeds in the mud sludge mire of France
and Flanders. That we know, and that
we reverence.
We have watched them hourly from the dark days
of 1914 right up to those crazy days at the latter end
of 1918 Avhen the cables sang with the news of the
triumph of the Allied arms. They were crazy days,
yes, but only made possible by the aid of those boys
who dropped their plough and left their lonely
furrow.
I have seen those boys in their camps in Australia
when they were but embryo soldiers (“marmalades”
was the technical term) ; I have seen them in training
camps in the Old Country; I have seen them in
France. They have been Australians all the time —
just Australians. But I have felt mighty proud to be
an Australian too. I remember, whilst in France, at a
village near Fleurbaix, having a conversation with a
white-haired old French lady. She eulogised the
Australian. She said that she and her fellows in mis-
Mr. R. B. ORCHARD.
fortune felt safe when the Australians were there,
they must have a great love for justice because they
came from far, oh! so far to fight for Freedom’s cause.
Mon Dieu! What great warriors they were too —and
also, what great gentlemen.
I met a particular liard-case digger, and noticed he
had most of the buttons, and all the Rising Suns, Aus-
tralia, etc., off his tunic. “What had happened to
them?” I asked. “Give ’em to Mam’selles,” he res-
ponded, ‘sooveneer for the parleyvous.” And he
gave a ponderous wink as he lounged over to join a
group of his cobbers. I’d like to meet him again
somehow —he rang true.
We have heard that the A.I.F. are somewhat lax
where discipline is concerned. Maybe they are.
Maybe, I said. The diggers I have met, when ques-
tioned on the matter, smile cryptically. The officers
1 have met say ‘ ‘ They ’ll do me. ’ ’ Any way their dis-
cipline could not be too lax, judging by that incident
at Amiens —they stopped the machine-made goose-
steppers of the Kaiser in their triumphant glide for
Paris, and saved the day at a most criti-
cal period of the campaign. And now
these Australians of ours are once more
back in their “civvy” garbs. Some are
settled in their various pre-war callings,
taking up their thread once more in the
ranks of our civilian life. Many thous-
ands are yet to come. Australia has
much work ahead. In the boys who have
returned and are to return, Australia
has numbers of a wonderful composite
body of human grit and brains. Travel
and the broadened views of the world as
it is, and the methods of other countries,
have enhanced the value of these sons of
the Southern Cross. Australia has wea-
thered the storms and tempests of the
past, Australia must face the future
with the same steadfastness of purpose
and do duty to these boys as they un-
flinchingly did theirs for Australia.
We must not forget in this hour of Peace the many
gallant lads whose bones rest in foreign soil, whose
dear ones in our midst proudly mourn the memory of
those so very dear. Those brave crusaders, those
brave mourners, must not have died, must pot have
suffered in vain. It is up to Australia to do what she
can, and the best is not too good for the living. Let
us look to the future of our soldiers—those who are
here—those who are still to come. The equitable
re-settlement of the fathers of our future generations
is the all-important legacy of the nation. Australia,
every individual Australian, must concentrate upon
the task of the rapid and honourable re-establishment
of our soldier boys once more in the ranks of reput-
able and welcome citizenship.
R. B. ORCHARD.


Parramatta’s Most Distinguished Soldier.
WITH THE AUSTRALIANS IN PALESTINE.
FEW men in the Empire have had greater experi-
ence on the battlefield than Brigadier-General
Cox, and possibly there are few who thorough-
ly realise how great his services have been, from the
time that he struck the keynote of Imperialism when
he, with his handful of Lancers, on board the Nineveh,
coming home via the Cape to Australia, volunteered
for active service in South Africa, and thus sounded
BRIGADIER-GENERAL C. F. COX, C. B., C.M.G., D.S.O., V.D.
the note that reverberated right through the Empire
and brought the Motherland and her colonies much
closer together.
The subject of this sketch is a son of that staunch
old colonist, Mr. F. C. Cox, of “Blenheim,” Carling-
ford, and was born at the old home in 1863, was edu-
cated at Parramatta, and then entered the Railway
Audit Department. When the first troop of Lancers
was formed in Parramatta in 1891, he joined up as a
trooper and worked himself up to the rank of Cap-
tain, when he went to England at the time of the
Queen’s Diamond Jubilee celebrations in charge of a
team of Lancers selected from the various squadrons,
which, entering into the Empire military competi-
tions, met with considerable success. On returning
to Australia he resumed command of Parramatta
squadron, being appointed Captain 11/11/’97. In
March, 1899, he again went to England with a squad-
ron of picked men, for training at Aldershot, and it
was while on the return voyage in October of the same
year that the Boer war broke out and Cox offered his
squadron for active service. That offer was accepted
and he, with 72 men, landed 2/11/’99, and
was attached to the 12th Lancers, and after-
wards to the Inniskillen Dragoons, under Gen-
eral Allenby. ‘ There is no need now to go
into the history of that war, suffice it to say that
the Parramatta man gained proud distinction, and,
under Kitchener saw action many times and gained
the clasps for the Relief of Kimberley and the battles
of Paardeburg, Driefontein, Johannesburg, Diamond
Hill and Belfast, was given the command of the 3rd
Imperial Mounted Rifles, and afterwards promoted to
the rank of Lieut.-Colonel. He was recommended for
distinction by Lord Kitchener, and on going to Eng-
land to the coronation of King Edward, he was
honored by receiving the C.B. in recognition of his
good work. On his return to Australia, September,
1902, he took command of the N.S.W. Lancers, with
the rank of Lieut.-Colonel. He remained in commis-
sion until 1911, when, having reached the command
limit, he was placed on the unattached list, retaining
bis rank as Lieut.-Colonel of the Australian Light
Horse, also holding the same rank, unattached, in the
Imperial Army.
When the Great War broke out in 1914, Colonel
Cox again volunteered for active service and went
into command of the 6th Light Horse Regt. in Decem-
ber of that year. On the 20th May, 1915, he was
wounded at Gallipoli, but returned soon after and
took part in the wonderful evacuation. It was won-
derful ; as General Cox says, God helped them with a
dense fog. Had it been delayed for twenty-four
hours they would never have been able to evacuate
that terrible wind and storm-swept spot. Men were
even drowned during the storms.
This brings us back to Egypt. Prior to returning,


however, Colonel Cox Avas appointed to the command
of the First Light Horse Brigade, and they were only
in Egypt two days before they were on the move
again, operating against the Sennusi moving doAvn
the Nile, keeping in touch with them for 500 or 600
miles, and thus preventing them giving trouble in
Egypt. In these operations several British brigades,
as well as Cox’s Australians, were engaged. The
next move Avas across to Sinai, and just beiore reach-
ing here the Brigadier Avent doAvn with pneumonia.
However, he Avas back Avith his brigade just after the
battle of Romani, and that was the only fight he
missed right*throughout the Avhole campaign, extend-
ing over four years. Pushing on across the Sinai
Desert they first took El Arisli, then Magdaliba, a
beautiful watering place Avhere the Germans had put
doAvn a splendid watering base, intended as a jump-
off base in an attack on Suez Canal. After the cap-
ture of the enemy garrison the brigade returned to the
railhead at El Arisli, and from there they made an
attack on Rafa, in conjunction with the balance of
the Anzac Division and a brigade of Yeomanry. The
Avhole of the enemy garrison that Avas not killed or
wounded was captured, and that operation cleared
the Turks out of the whole of Sinai, bringing Egypt
clear of all enemy. On the borders of Palestine, at
Wadi Guzzi, the Turks held the expedition up for
some months, when General Allenby, replacing
General Murray, arrived with fresh reinforcements,
including Indian mounted men. In the next attack
on Gaza, Cox, with his brigade, moved down as far as
Asluj, coming in on the east of Beersheba and attack-
ing Tel el Saha. The fight continued all day, but the
mounted men took both places that evening. The
men and horses were famishing with thirst, and the
enemy had bloAvn all the Avells up. but a big storm in
the mountains saved them. Pushing on from Beer-
sheba word Avas received that the enemy had a big
dump of ammunition accumulated at Amedat, some
four miles off. Cox charged this and captured both
garrison and ammunition —seven acres of dump, con-
taining se\ r eral million rounds of all sorts of service
ammunition. Next day they took Jemama, where the
Turks held a fine supply of water. The Avhole con-
cern, together with the engineer, Avas captured, in
perfect working order. This Avas the first Jewish
colony struck, under the new Jewish settlement
system, and it showed great signs of prosperity.
Then Mejdel, a town on the coast of the Mediter-
ranean, was taken. Working along the coast towards
Jaffa they took NeAV Beit Duras, another Jewish
settlement, just east of that Biblical place called Es
Dud. Here they Avere held up till the Infantry came
up, and a good deal of fighting took place. From
there to another JeAvish settlement, Derail. Then they
had Ramleli and Ludd (called Lydd in the Bihle) in
sight, and after a hard day’s fighting these places
were taken —railway junctions of the Jerusalem and
Beersheba line. Continuing on the Brigade went
south of Mulebus, where they were blocked by the big
Wadi Auja. The position was held till the infantry
arrived, and then they moved back, ragged and
weary, to re-fit, after having been on the move and
fighting for some months. The next move of import-
ance was towards Jericho, thence to Bethlehem, and
on the night of the 19th February, 1918, they left
Bethlehem and moved down through the mountains
by goat tracks to the Mebymusa, on the shores of the
Dead Sea, in the vicinity of the last resting place of
Moses, where the Turks held them up all day, and in
the evening, the Brigadier-General, picking up two
Arabs, who pointed out a track that would take the
enemy in the rear, moved off at dusk, rode all night,
and was in Jericho on the morning of the 21st Febru-
ary, at 8 o’clock, the enemy refusing the challenge.
That brought the Brigade to the Jordan Valley, which
they held for about a month, putting in the meantime
a pontoon bridge over the Jordan, which they
crossed on the 21st March, and formed a
bridge head at Gohranya, on the main road
between Es Salt and Jericho. Es Salt was a great
Turkish depot. Three attacks were made here, and
twice the brigade had to retire after taking the place,
but held it on the third and pushed on to Amman, on
the Hedjaz railway, thus cutting off the major por-
tion of the Fourth Turkish Army. Over 10,000 pri-
soners were taken, together with a great lot of rolling
stock and wheat. From there General Cox pushed on
about 60 miles further, when the news of the armistice
came through. In the Jordan Valley one fight of
great interest took place. Two attacks were made on
General Cox’s Brigade, one at the bridge head men-
tioned. when the Turks got within 10 or 15 yards of
the wire entanglements. After fighting all day they
withered away at night, without removing their dead
or badly wounded. The next attack was about ten
miles north of Jericho, at a place called Musselabah,
where defeat awaited the Turks again. They attacked
at midnight with German storm troops, supported on
left and right by Turks. The Germans broke through
the General’s lines, killing and wounding all on the
post where the attack was made. All the other posts
held fast, and Cox sent up a fresh regiment of Light
Horse to attack those who had broken through, with
the result that every German who had got inside was
either killed or captured. Over 500 prisoners Avere
taken and many hundreds were killed. For this splen-
did counter attack General Cox received the immedi-
ate award of D. 5.0., which is very seldom given to a
General. Thus ended one of the greatest expeditions
the Avorld has ever seen.


A Short History of New South Wales Light Horse.
PARRAMATTA—THE CRADLE OF OUR CAVALRY.
LOOKING back twenty years ago, there was no
Commonwealth of Australia, and no Common-
wealth Army or Navy. Each of the six States
had a few volunteers, and N.S.W. had what was
known as the New South Wales Lancer Regiment,
which, about the time of Federation, had reached a
strength of nearly 700 officers and men; and had all
the applications for the formation of squadrons and
half squadrons from various parts of N.S.W. been
accepted then, the strength could have been easily
doubled. So popular was the N.S.W. Lancer Regi-
ment that two other mounted Regiments were organ-
ised, the Mounted Rifles and the Australian Horse,
and considerable rivalry existed between these regi-
ments in their earlier stages, when they were drilled
and went under the title of Cavalry. Before the South
African war broke out a squadron of N.S.W. Lancers,
numbering 105 officers and men, happened to be in
England training at Aldershot, under Captain (now
General) C. F. Cox, and the advent of this mounted
squadron in England created, at that time, great
interest and some excitement. The Regiment paid all
expenses of transit for the squadron to and from the
Old Land, amounting to about £6OOO, and returning
by Capetown they offered to go to the front in the
event of war being declared prior to their arrival at
that port. By a strange coincidence, shortly after
embarking on board the Nineveh at London, war was
declared, so that a New South Wales Lancer squadron
was actually on its way to the front, taking prece-
dence of the British, Indian, Australian and other
forces, which followed, to fight for the Empire in
South Africa. Other Lancer detachments went for-
ward from Australia, as well as detachments from the
Mounted Rifles, Australian Horse and Bushmen, and
altogether 15,000 Australian troops fought in the Boer
War. It should be noted that upon the great advance
to Kimberley, South Africa, made by Lord Roberts,
the N.S.W. Lancer Regt. had' the position of honor on
the extreme right flank, and this was one of the first
victories which eventually led to the winning of the
Boer War. General George Lee, now Commandant of
New South Wales, was at that time Adjutant of the
N.S.W. Lancers, and he, with many other officers and
men of what is now known as the “Old Brigade,”
i.e., the Lancers, Mounted Rifles, and Australian
Horse, went straight to the front when the Great
World War began in 1914. Over a hundred names
could be mentioned of Generals, Colonels, officers and
men of the Old Brigade who have risen to high esti-
mation and rank, or given their lives at Gallipoli,
Palestine, France or other points in the Great War
with the Huns and their allies. It was considered a
marvellous thing for Australia to send 15,000 men for
the Boer War, but when compared to between 300,000
and 400,000 men sent away voluntarily during the
Sir JAMES BURNS
("Father” of N.S.W. Light Horse).
four years of the latest war, no one could have dreamt
of such a stupendous effort being made and achieved
by Australia. When the Federation of Australia was
effected, the three Cavalry Regiments of N.S.W. were
formed into the Ist Australian Mounted Brigade,


which, in addition, had artillery and other units
necessary to form a self-supporting force. Colonel
(now Sir James) Burns was appointed to the com-
mand of this Brigade, the first fully-formed and
equipped in Australia, and on several occasions treks
were made of about 100 miles under active service
conditions, the troops bivouacking in the .open. After
Federation General Hutton split up the three New
South Wales Mounted Regiments into six regiments
and re-named them from the Ist to the 6tli Regi-
ments of Light Horse. They have since changed
the numbers of the regiments more than once, so
that it is now difficult to trace the old regiments,
although the Lancers are allowed to add N.S.W.
Lancers after their title as Light Horse. For the
greater period of its existence Parramatta has been
the headquarters of the original and recon-
structed Lancer Regiments. Each regiment had
at one time a mounted band, the Lancer Band
being mounted on white horses, but latterly the
bands fell into disuse. It would be interesting to
work out a list of the soldiers of the “Old Brigade”
who have participated in the Great World War, and
General Cox, General Ryrie, General Lee and other
Generals and officers, previously members, might help
in collecting such an interesting Honor Roll. The
first Commander of the Lancer Regiment was Captain
Macdonald, an old Imperial officer from India, who
became Colonel, and acted as Commandant of the
N.S.W. Mounted Forces. Colonel (now Sir James)
Burns joined in 1891 as a trooper, and rapidly rose
to Captain, Major, Colonel and Brigadier. He com-
manded the Lancer Regiment for 13 years, and the Ist
Australian Mounted Brigade for four years, retiring
12 years ago. He spent considerable time in working
up the military spirit, and made frequent visits
through New South Wales inspecting and organising
the various units of his Regiment, and latterly of the
regiments forming the Ist Brigade.


The Record of the Australian Forces in the War.
share of Australia in the great victory which
± was registered on November 11th was so con-
siderable that it is not possible, in the space
available for this article, to give any adequate
account of it. In the future the opportunity may be
afforded for worthily recording this remarkable
adventure. Then some attempt may be made to
assess both the material and the spiritual stimulus
which it has given to Australian life. But just at the
present moment the story of the war is being told
from various points of view to listening groups, and
the moment calls for a rough tale of the deeds of the
Australians.
Before the declaration of war on August 4th, 1914,
the Prime Minister of Australia offered the British
Government to supply 20,000 troops and place the
Australian Fleet under its control. This offer was
the starting point of the Australian share in the war.
It was the outcome of the unanimous feeling of the
Australian people; and when, a few weeks later, the
Liberal Government was defeated the Labour Gov-
ernment which took its place assumed the task of
prosecuting the war with the utmost enthusiasm.
The Australian share in the war cannot be viewed
as a mere military and naval expedition. It was a
spontaneous response by a young high-spirited nation,
proud of her successful assertion of the new principle
of Dominion autonomy, to the challenge of Germany.
She was the most complete democracy the world has
ever seen. By a policy of bold experiment she was
seeking to build a new order. The war took her
when she was absorbed in internal economic and social
problems of great difficulty. But she realised at once
that if the aggression of Germany was not repelled
it meant death to all the hopes of democracy. There
wms no hesitation. And when she acted she did not
throw into the struggle merely the bone and sinew
of her sons or the weight of the material with which
she provided them. There were the keen wits and
the initiative of free men living a natural life; the
animal -spirits and love of adventure of a highly
nurtured people. There was also the devotion of men
who, because they had enjoyed a large measure of
freedom, realised what they were fighting for. The
Australian effort was indeed a most signal vindica-
tion of the worth of Australian Democracy. On the
other hand, the difficulties which democracy intro-
duces into the conduct of war have been felt. Aus-
tralian life has since the war been marred by a very
bitter political conflict which has had no satisfactory
issue, the effect of which will last a long time.
Through this her contribution has been lessened, but
neither the spirit of her troops nor the desire of the
nation for a successful termination has been affected.
The progress of the war was followed in Australia
with a concentration which was painfully intense.
When victory did come there was no part of the
Empire where the relief from the strain was more
gratefully enjoyed.
Unlike several of the other Dominions, Australia
possessed a military organisation before the war.
The nucleus of this was the Australian Administrative
and Instructional Staff—an exceedingly tine body of
professional soldiers, many of whom have had most
distinguished careers in the war. When the men
began to pour in. the Administrative and Instruc-
tional Staff was set to work to turn them into soldiers
and provide them with administration and equipment.
In October, 1914, the first Australian Division had
been formed. It left Australia with a number of
additional Battalions, which on arrival in Egypt com-
bined with some New Zealand Battalions to form
another Division. The troops of the two young
nations became the famous Australian and New Zea-
land Army Corps of two Divisions.
In Egypt the Corps first met its Commander, Sir
William Birdwood, who remained with the Austra-
lians after they parted from the New Zealanders.
General Birdwood’s first Staff was almost entirely
British, and immediately the Australians landed in
Egypt they came under British command and the
British training cadre. A tribute of acknowledg-
ment needs to be paid to these British officers and
instructors who played a big part in the efficiency of
the Australian units, but the subsequent history of
the force records a gradual replacement of the British
Staff by Australians, until at the end practically all
the General Staff and the administrative and instruc-
tional cadres were supplied from Australian person-
nel. It is no reflection on those who were replaced (in
every case to receive promotion elsewhere) to say that
the Australian Army has benefited by the change. An
army can never attain true greatness until
supply all the talent it requires from its own ranks.
In the end Australian officers held very high positions
on the Staff of the sth Army, to which they accom-
panied Sir William Birdwood.
This record of frictionless working with the British
Army Command, combined as it was with a growing
assertion of Australian temperament and individual-
ity, is pleasant and creditable to all concerned. It
supplies an example of intimate co-operation which
is typical of the British Commonwealth and which
could hardly find a parallel elsewhere. The Austra-
lian Imperial Force was and remained thoroughly and
typically Australian. There was no acceptance of
military conventions; no slavish imitation of the
methods of other armies. On the other hand, there


was no capricious rejection of what was old. The old
system, embodied in King’s regulations and the other
manuals, was adopted in the main, but nothing w T as
taken for granted. Everything was tested. Accre-
tions were cut away and improvements, found to be
necessary, were adopted without hesitation.
The result was that during the war the Australian
Staff and administration developed a very high stan-
dard of efficiency in which the element of system was
happily combined with the personal factor. Austra-
lians showed conspicuous initiative and energy. They
were never afraid to take responsibility, and had a
faculty for thoroughness and willingness “to go the
whole hog.” The Australian administration some-
times broke down because it attempted too much, but
it avoided the vices of routine and compromise which
frequently affected the British regime. Those from
other armies who were fortunate enough to be attach-
ed to the Australians speak gratefully of the food
they received. This is mentioned because the rations
were the same for all sections of the British Army,
and the superiority of the commissariat.may be taken
as a criterion. Australians did not fight the less well
because they were probably the best fed and the best
equipped force on the Western front.
But we have been talking about externals —it was
the personnel that counted for everything in the Aus-
tralian Army. No more original figure than the Aus-
tralian soldier has appeared in the war. The “Dig-
ger,” as he is affectionately called, is as unique as the
“Poilu.” Hard to manage in camp, he improved in
morale as lie neared the firing line. He was fearlessly
himself. He behaved in the Strand as lie would have
done on a Saturday night in the streets of Wagga
Wagga. Defiance of convention was his one pose,
and he maliciously encouraged the idea, in the con-
ventional among Englishmen, that he was totally
lacking in discipline. But there was no body of men
who so triumphantly satisfied the supreme test of dis-
cipline, the test of being ready in the field just when
they were required, and of moving under fire to
whatever point they were asked to occupy. The Ger-
man High Command marked the Australians as First
Class Storm Troops. The German lines opposite the
Australians had during the last few months to be
manned by volunteers. Sir Douglas Haig in his last
dispatch gives several “striking examples of the
ascendancy” of the Australians over the German
infantry opposite them. The courage of the Austra-
lian was not the courage of the savage or the devotee.
It was never buoyed up by sentiment or illusion. Its
most wonderful feature was a wide-eyed habit of
facing things as they really were—of looking at the
Avorst and defying it. The Australian was seldom an
optimist. He was always a critic, but he was possess-
ed of a fierce lust to accomplish the job he had been
set. This clearness of vision gave him that initiative,
that skill under fire, which made up so large a part of
his valtie in the field.
On the human side, few soldiers have had in such
measure the supreme soldierly gift of comradeship.
Whenever they were in a fight, breaking King’s regu-
lations, or raiding the Hun trenches, they stuck
together. The Battalion was the Digger’s home, and
he was never truly happy, or a really tirst-class sol-
dier, away from it. During 1918 an attempt was made
to reduce the Brigade organisation by dropping a
Battalion. In many cases the idea had to be aban-
doned owing to the intense feeling aroused in the
Battalions that were to lose their identity. The thing,
however, that made the Digger the perpetual delight
of all who love human nature w r as his constant play
of humour. In this he expressed his soul, his criticism
of life, with its wonderful range of insight and feel-
ing. now grotesque, now gay, now grim and sardonic,
feeding on the terrible contrasts of the life around
him. The “Digger” is the best thing that Australia
has yet produced. She will preserve for ever the
memory of this heroic and lovable figure.
The problem of leadership with men of this class
was, of course, an exceedingly difficult one. It was
quite easy to find leaders. Every second man was a
potential leader. On the field the corporal or the pri-
vate found the opportunity and seized it. This mani-
festation of capacity soon became the basis of promo-
tion. Such promotion, however, did not elevate the
officer into membership of a permanent caste in which
advancement was automatic. The officer was the sub-
ject of scrutiny from above and a never-ceasing suff-
rage from below. Australian soldiers developed a
quite uncanny judgment for the leader. They showed
this in their recognition of the high qualifications for
leadership possessed by Sir William Birdwood, and in
the respect, as sincere as unconventional, which they
paid him. It was not every officer who survived the
exacting test. Some were found impossible and were
ignored by their men. In nine cases out of ten these
verdicts held. A man with the gift of leadership
could take his men anywhere. An officer whose men
would not follow him was removed from France and
sent where qualities of a different kind were required.
The weeding out of officers was drastic, but in the end
there was not a finer lot of battle leaders in the world
than the officers of the A.I.F. This credit w T as almost
entirely due to Sir William Birdwood’s masterly man-
agement of the problem, and it is perhaps his most
conspicuous title to fame. The Australian Army was
in real fact a democratic army—democratic in the
highest sense because it successfully solved the prob-
lem of leadership. Its record should therefore be
closely scrutinised by modern students of military
science.
Australian effort in the war was many-sided, but the
work of the Fleet was not so eventful as that of the
Army. The Fleet has one great achievement to its
credit—the destruction by H.M.A.S. Sydney of the
German commerce destroyer, Emden. H.M.A.S. Aus-
tralia took a leading part in the long chase of the
German cruisers Scharnhorst and Gneisenau, but did
not get in at the death, ,and afterwards performed the
usual duties of the fleet without being in any action of
the first importance.
On land there is hardly a front on which British
soldiers fought where there were no Australians, But


the chief campaigns in which Australian interest will
centre are Gallipoli, France and Palestine. The Aus-
tralians landed in Gallipoli on April 25th, 1915, with
the New Zealanders. This was their first experience
of war, but the first man who landed charged straight
up the hill against the Turkish Army in front of him.
Although more than half the effectives were lost, the
landing troops got much further than the High Com-
mand had anticipated, and the position had to be con-
solidated within the limits reached. The landing was
such a success that a few days later, on May Bth, the
second Brigade was moved down to Cape Hellas, and
tried to take the village of Krithia. They got within
a few yards of the final objective and lost 75 per cent,
of their number. Thus, at their very first taste of
war, Australians showed two most conspicuous mili-
tary qualities. The first was what may be called the
maximum interpretation of orders, the other was the
capacity to stand a high proportion of loss without
being stopped. Both these qualities were tragically
displayed at the Nek in August. The Bth Light Horse
was instructed to take a Turkish position, the attack
being organised in four waves. It is said that the pre-
liminary bombardment was stopped ten minutes
before the time appointed for the charge, and tiers of
Turkish riflemen lay ready for the expected attack.
One wave of Australians went over, led by the
Colonel, and was completely destroyed, a second went
over, and then a third, with almost similar result.
The fourth wave was just preparing to go over when
the order was countermanded. Only a few men man-
aged to reach the objective, and of the five or six
hundred men who went over less than 40 survived.
Two great Turkish attacks were repulsed with ease,
and the Australians took a most distinguished part in
the attack of August 7th, which was so nearly suc-
cessful. After this it was mainly a question of holding
on until the evacuation on December 18th. This
evacuation was a most successful piece of staff work,
and reflects very creditably on the discipline and in-
telligence of all. concerned.
The evacuation was also a test of the civilian morale
of Australia. We had not been responsible for the
expedition and had no share in its direction. When it
turned out a failure it was expected in England that
there would be a good deal of criticism and grumbling
at losses. Nothing was further from the truth. In the
early part of 1915 we were told that victory would
probably be achieved in the spring, and recruiting
slackened. Belgian relief occupied public attention.
But with every check to Allied hopes the spirit of the
people became sterner. A wave of patriotic endea-
vour sAvept the country, and-the enlistment figures
from June to the end of 1915 were magnificent. So
many troops were available that when the Australians
got back to Egypt it Avas possible to reorganise them
and form them into four Divisions, while another
Division was formed in Australia and called the Third
Division.
The four Divisions from Egypt Avere transferred to
France in March, 1916, and started fighting there in
July. They soon distinguished themselves, fighting
almost continuously from July 19th to September sth.
The most successful engagements during this period
were the capture of Pozieres and the battle of Mou-
quet Farm. These battles were won at an awful cost.
More than half the effectives were put out of action.
In one day one of the Australian Divisions lost
between 7000 and 8000 men. In November the 3rd
Division came over from England, where it had under-
gone a rigorous training, and from that period to the
end live Australian Divisions were fighting in France.
They fought at Flers between November 4th and
November Kith and endured the horrors of the winter
of 1916.
On March 13th, 1917, Germany started her retreat
to the Hindenburg Line, and the pursuing Austra-
lians occupied Bapaume on March 17th, pushing on
till they met the Germans about Bullecourt and Lag-
nicourt. One of their most glorious achievements
was the defence of Bullecourt when the Germans hit
back. From May 3rd to 23rd they were almost con-
tinuously attacked, and their successful resistance
was referred to by Field-Marshal Haig as one of the
finest military achievements of the war. This set the
seal to their fame. Hitherto they had been recognised
as great assault troops, but their power of standing
against continuous bombardment and attack had
been doubted.
They took part in the battle of Messines on March
7th, and the still more unsatisfactory operations in
Flanders. From September 20th to November they
floundered in the Flanders mud on the Menin Road
and around Passchendaelc, suffering tremendously,
their casualties during this period being considerably
over 30,000. Although they did all that was asked
of them, the year 1917 was an unsatisfactory period,
and the Australians chafed considerably at what they
regarded as a meticulous strategy which restrained
them each time they gained momentum.
In the winter of 1917-1918 they occupied a sector in
Flanders and spent their time in fortifying and re-
organising it. To such a pitch had they brought the
sector that a German attack was anxiously hoped for.
At this time the Australians had been fighting for
three years with a very considerable proportion of
front line work. Their total enlistments at this date
were about 380,000, of which about 300,000 had left
Australia. From these troops five Divisions had been
kept up to strength in France, and there was the
equivalent of a cavalry division in Palestine. The
achievement of the Australian organisation in keeping
such a very large proportion of its enlistments in the
firing line was a remarkable one, particularly when it
is considered that at the end of 1917 the number of
casualties was approaching 200,000. The basis of
enlistment was voluntary, and the stream of enlist-
ments fell off. There was no home leave as with
Canadian and New Zealand troops. Far more was
thus exacted from the individual Australian than
from any other soldier in the British Army. *
But he was to be subjected to a far greater strain.
On March Ist the British sth Army was shattered.
The Germans overran the Somme, and were heading


irresistibly for Amiens. Among others, four Austra-
lian Divisions were ordered south. We Australians
cannot think without affection and pride of these
brave boys, marching down into the blackest night a
soldier has ever known. The Germans seemed tri-
umphant, irresistible. The grim defiance with which
he was met by the Australian and other troops that
barred his way was one of the most glorious mani-
festations of the human spirit the world has ever seen.
Advancing through the broken remnants of the sth
Army, they met what was apparently an overwhelm-
ing tide, and plunged straight into it. For weeks
they fought, never once turning back. At times Bat-
talions lost touch, a couple of miles dividing them,
but they did not yield ground. On March 27th the
12th and 13th Brigades definitely stopped the Ger-
man advance near Dernancourt and kept them at bay
till they ceased to attack on April sth. On March
27th also the Germans were stopped at Morlancourt,
and again on April 4th before Villers Brettonneux.
The first Division had been ordered south to join
its fellows, but news, came that the sector originally
held in Flanders had been broken by the Germans on
April 11th. The Division was ordered north and
detrained near Hazebrouck. They met a German
Division on April 13th marching in column- of fours
and practically destroyed it. Meanwhile a new phase
began to develop in the south. The Australians
began to hit back. Villers Brettonneux, after its
successful defence by the Australians, had been lost
by other troops; and on the night of April 24th, by a
most brilliant converging attack, the 13th and 15th
Australian Brigades retook it. A series of brilliant
small scale operations followed, among which were
Monument Wood, Ville sur Ancre and Hamel in the
south, and Merris in the north. In addition to this
the Germans were rattled by countless raids, which
varied from a full-dress Battalion operation to a
gentlemanly affair by a sergeant with a couple of
friends. There are few soldiers who went through
this black period who do not give the Australians full
credit for the part they played in maintaining the
spirit of the Army. It should be noted that it was
during this period that Sir William Birdwood, pro-
moted to the command of the sth Army, handed over
the field command of the Australian Corps to an Aus-
tralian officer, Lieut.-General Sir John Monash. The
Australian work now became, if possible, even more
aggressive than it had been before. The Staff of the
Australian Corps and of the Divisions, after nearly
four years of hard training and work, had become
exceedingly efficient.
In the great offensive which started on August Bth
the Australians had an honourable share. In this
great vindication of the British arms the share of the
Australians did not stand out so conspicuously as it
had done during the previous four and a half months.
But they shared with the Canadians the honour of
being the spear-head of the attack on the opening
day. By the end of that day they had advanced ten
miles and captured 104 guns and many prisoners. The
Australians then advanced through Vauvillers,
Lihons, Ethenheim, Proyart, Bray and Barleux until
they arrived before Mont St. Quentin and Peronne at
the end of August. German resistance was felt to be
increasing at this point, but, by a most brilliant in-
spiration which surprised the British General Staff
almost as much as the Germans, the Australians at-
tacked at once. Making a two-mile detour to cross
the river, they stormed the Mont and held it against
repeated severe counter-attacks. This “most gallant
achievement,” as it was called by Sir Douglas Haig,
led to the capture of Peronne also by the Australians
on September 2nd.
The Australians, who were now attached to the 4th
Army under Sir William Rawlinson, fought their
way through to the Hindenburg line. They assisted
in penetrating the outlying defences near Templeux
and Holnon in the middle of the month and broke
through the line on the 29th near Bellicourt, captur-
ing Joncourt, Estrees, and Bony on September 30th.
They took part in the Beaurevoir battle and the cap-
ture of Montbrehain on October sth; and then, utter-
ly worn out, the ghost of an army, they were with-
drawn. During the period from August Btli to Oct-
ober sth 3144 Australian lives were lost, and other
casualties brought the total for the period to 21,000.
But during the same period the five Australian Divi-
sions, besides inflicting very heavy casualties on the
Germans, took 23,000 prisoners, 330 guns and many
thousand machine guns, mortars and vehicles. They
recaptured 116 towns and villages, and released 251
square miles of French soil. A total of 30 enemy
Divisions was engaged, of which several were en-
gaged twice and a few three times. Of these thirty
Divisions six were afterwards disbanded. The con-
tinuous campaign from March 21st to October sth
was a feat hardly surpassed by any section of the
British Army during the war. It is not suggested, of
course, that other Corps would not have done so well,
but the opportunity came to the Australians and they
took the noblest advantage of it. General Sir Wil-
liam Rawlinson’s eulogy of the Australians under
him is a generous tribute which the Australians will
always prize as the sincere expression of a gallant
soldier. In an order dated October 20th, he said:
Since the Australian Corps joined the Fourth Army on
April Bth, 1918, they have passed through a period of hard
and uniformly successful fighting, of which all ranks have
every right to feel proud.
Now that it has been possible to give the Australian Corps
a well-earned period of rest, I wish to express to them ray
gratitude for all that they have done. I have watched with
the greatest interest and admiration the various stages
through which they have passed, from the hard times of Flers
and PoziSres to their culminating victories at Mont St. Quen-
tin and' the great Hindenburg system at Bony, Bellicourt
Tunnel, and Montbrehain. During the summer of 1918_the
safety of Amiens has been principally due to their determina-
tion, tenacity and valour.
The story of what they have accomplished as a fighting
Army Corps, of the diligence, gallantry, and skill which they
have exhibited, and of the scientific methods which they have
so thoroughly learned and so sucessfully applied, has gained
for all Australians a place of honour amongst nations and
amongst the English-speaking races in particular.
It has been my privilege to lead the Australian Corps in the
Fourth Army during the decisive battles since August Btli,


which bid fair to b±iug the war to a successful conclusion at
no distant date. No one realises more than Ido the very pro-
minent part that they have played, for I have watched from
day to day every detail of their fighting and learned to value
beyond measure the prowess and determination of all ranks.
Jn once more congratulating the Corps on a series of suc-
cesses unsurpassed in this great war, I feel that no mere
words of mine can adequately express the renown that they
have won for themselves and the position that they have
established for the Australian nation, not only in France, but
throughout the world.
I wish every officer, N.C.O. and man all possible good for-
tune in the future, and a speedy and safe return to their
beloved Australia.
This, supplemented by the testimony of the G.O.C.
15th Corps as to the work of the Ist Division in the
north, shows the crucial part played by the Austra-
lian troops.
General de Lisle says:
Before your magnificent Division leaves my Corps I wish to
thank you and all ranks under your command for the excep-
tional services rendered during the past four months.
Joining this Corps in April 12th, during the battle of the
Lys, the Division selected and prepared a position to defend
the Hazebrouek front, and a few days later repulsed two
heavy attacks with severe losses to the enemy. This action
brought the enemy’s advance to a standstill.
Since then the Division has held the most important sector
of this front continuously, and by skilful raiding and minor
operations has advanced the line over a mile on a front of
5000 yards, capturing just short of 1000 prisoners, and causing
such damage to the troops of the enemy, that nine Divisions
have been replaced.
The complete success of all minor operations, the skill dis-
played by the patrols by day as well as by night, and their
high standard of training and discipline' have excited'the
admiration and emulation of all, and I desire that you will
convey to all ranks my high appreciation of their fine work
and mv regret tin# the Division is leaving my command.
It is unfortunate that there is not sufficient space
to deal adequately with the campaign work of the
five Brigades of mounted troops in Palestine and
Syria. The war in Palestine was a cavalry campaign,
and Australian and New Zealand troops formed more
than half the cavalry in Palestine. The Australians
found cavalry work suitable to their qualities, and
were present at all the most important engagements
from Romani on August 4th, I DIG. to the capture of
Damascus in October, 1918. In General Allenby’s
great victory in September, 1918, they captured over
40,000 prisoners. Australia has a Flying Corps con-
sisting of four service squadrons and four training
squadrons, and a large number of special units such
as Camel Corps, Railway Corps, Tunnelling Corps
and Hospitals. The expedition which captured New
Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago in September,
1914. should not remain unnoticed.
The total enlistments were 420,665, of which
437,060 have embarked. The casualties to January
17th. 1919. were—Dead : Officers, 2736 ; others, 55,735 ;
total 57.871. Wounded: 150,241. Prisoners, 4264.
Total casualties, 212,376. The distinctions earned by
soldiers total 13,000, including 63 Victoria Cross, 555
Distinguished Service Order, 1989 Military Cross, 29
Distinguished Flying Cross, 1413 Distinguished Con-
duct Medal. and 7449 Military Medal.
The achievements of these men will play an integ-
rating part in the future of Australia. They will
form the basis of a noble national tradition which
will, it is hoped, play some part in mitigating the
bittef and destructive political feuds which have
developed while our best have been away.—This
article was first published in “The Round Table,” a
high-class London review, published by MacMillan
and Co., Ltd.


PARRAMATTA
Pte. W. ALGIE.
Son of Mr. W. Algie, Pennant-street, Parra-
matta.
Pte. L. P. W. ANDERSON.
Embarked August, 1916; killed February,
1917.
Corp. S. A. ARCHER,
Late of Pitt Row, Parramatta. Died of wounds,
September, 1918.
Corp. J. C. ALLPORT.
Embarked November, 1916; died of wounds,
France, October, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allport, late of Parramatta.
Pte. C. E. (Roy) ANSCHAU.
Embarked June, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J.
Anschau, Parramatta.
Pte. CLARRIE ATKINS.
Parramatta. Embarked March, 1916.
Pte. F. ANDERSON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. Anderson, Parramatta.
Cpl. G. G. ANSCHAU.
Embarked with 1st Division, 1914; killed at
Bullecourt, France, August, 1917. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. J. Anschau, Parramatta.
Tpr. E. L. ATKINS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. L. Atkins, High
School, Parramatta.


Pte. L. Y. ATKINS.
Parramatta. Embarked April, 1916.
Pte. J. N. ATTWOOD,
Killed in France, 1917. Son of Mrs. M. Att-
wood, Parramatta.
Pte. C. H. BALE.
Enlisted February, 1917; died of wounds,
France, December, 1917. Son of Mrs. Bale,
Church-street, Parramatta North.
Cpl. WM, ASHCROFT,
Parramatta.
Pte. J. W. BACHELOR,
Son of Mr. H. T. Bachelor, of Parramatta
North.
Pte. A. BANKS.
Enlisted December, 1915; killed in France,
November, 1916. Son of Mr. A. Banks, Parra-
matta.
Cpl. G. E. ASPINALL.
Enlisted February, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
A. E. Aspinall, Parramatta.
Sgr. F. T. BAKER,
Enlisted July, 1916. Son of Mrs. A. E. Baker,
Harris Park.
Tpr. BANYARD,
Parramatta. Embarked October, 1915.


Pte. ROY BYRNES.
Son of Mrs. Byrnes, Grose-st., Parramatta.
Pte. ARTHUR BEAVEN.
Killed in France, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A.
J. Beaven, Parramatta.
Cpl. E. S. BELLAMY.
Son of Mrs. M. E. Bellamy, Parramatta North.
Gnr. V. BARR.
Killed in France, August, 1918. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. W. S. Barr, Queensland, late of
Parramatta.
WALTER BEAVEN,
Of the British Mercantile Marine Service. Son
of Mr. and Mrs. A. J. Beaven, Clifford-street,
Parramatta.
Pte. BERT. BENNETT.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Bennett, of Parra-
matta North.
Pte. BATHIE,
Parramatta.
Staff-Sgt. H. J. BEAVIS.
Invalided home March, 1916; re-enlisted 1917.
Son of Adj. J. Beavis, Phillip-street, Parra-
matta.
Lieut. F. R. BENNETT.
Killed in France. Son of Mrs. Gillespie, a
daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Walker, late
of Parramatta.


Pte. E. C. BENSLEY.
Son of Mr. J. Bensley, Parramatta.
Pte. R. H. W. BETHKE.
Parramatta. Wounded at Gallipoli.
Sgt. G. BLUMER.
Enlisted 1914; killed in France, July, 1917.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Luke Blumer, late of
Parramatta.
Pte. J. BENTLEY,
Late of Church-street, Parramatta. Killed in
France, May, 1917.
Capt. J. B. BETTINGTON, M.C.
Grandson Mrs. J. B. Bettington, “Oatlands,”
Parramatta.
Sig. STAN. R. BONSER.
Enlisted June, 1913. Son of Mr. and Mrs. H.
Bonser, Parramatta South.
Pte. S. R. BEEVORS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. G. Beevors, Harris Park.
Pte. O. E. BLOXHAM,
Late of Parramatta. Enlisted May, 1916;
Returned August, 1919.
Tpr. GEO. BOOTH,
Weston-street, Parramatta.


Sgt. S. J. BOOTH.
Enlisted July, 1915; killed in France, Novem-
ber, 1916. Son of Mrs. J. Booth, Harris Park.
L.-Cpl. T. W. BRAY.
Embarked April, 1916; killed in France, Aug.,
1918. Son of Mrs. T. Bray, Parramatta.
Capt. G. M. BROWN.
Served at Gallipoli and through Palestine
Campaign. Son of Dr. W. S. Brown, George-
street, Parramatta.
Lieut. E. S. BOWDEN.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. E. Bowden, Parra-
matta.
Pte. C. K. BRENT.
Embarked September, 1915. Late of Parra-
matta.
Sgt. BRUCE BROWN, A.S.C.
Embarked December, 1914; invalided home
August, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Brown,
Harris Park.
Pte. FRANK BARTER,
Son of ex-Alderman Barter, of Prospect and
Sherwood.
Capt. B. G. BRODIE.
Killed in France, February, 1918. Son of Mr.
W. A. Brodie, late of Parramatta.
Pte. H. T. BROWN.
Embarked July, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. H.
G. T. Brown, Thomas-street, Parramatta North.


Pte. W. N. BROWN,
Embarked December, 1915; prisoner of war in
Germany for 2½ years; repatriated to England
December, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W.
Brown, Wigram-street, Harris Park.
Pte. W. E. BURGESS.
Embarked September, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. J. Burgess, Harris Park.
Capt. JOHN BURNS.
Invalided home, August, 1916. Son of Col. the
Hon, Sir James Burns, “Gowan Brae,” Parra-
matta.
Pte. STAN. BROWNLOW.
Embarked 1916. Late of Parramatta.
Pte. C. A. R. BURKE.
Wounded at Gallipoli. September, 1915; in-
valided home March, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burke, Toll Bar, Parramatta North.
Lieut. R. D. BURNS.
Died of wounds, July, 1916. Son of Col. the
Hon. Sir James Burns, “Gowan Brae,”
Parramatta,
Lieut. S. G. BURDUS, D.S.O.
Embarked 1915. Son of Mrs. Burdus, Marsden-
street, Parramatta.
Tpr. FRED. BURNS.
Killed in Palestine, November, 1917. Son of
Mr. and Mrs. G. Burns, Alice-street, Harris
Park.
Pte. NORMAN BURNS.
Parramatta. Mother lives at Seven Hills.


Capt. J. G. BURNELL, M.C., C. de G.
Son of the late Mrs. K. Burnell, Macquarie-
street, Parramatta.
Pte. HARRY BENNETT.
Son of Mr. W. Bennett, Parramatta North.
Lieut. C. B. CAIRNES.
Killed in France, April, 1917. Son of Mrs. C.
Beresford Cairnes, late of Bank of N.S.W.,
Parramatta.
Gnr. R. BURNELL.
Embarked October, 1916; killed in France,
October, 1917. Son of the late Mrs. K.
Burnell, Macquarie-street, Parramatta.
Pte. A. J. BUTLER.
Embarked November, 1916; killed October,
1917.
Spr. P. CALVER.
Parramatta. 7th Field Eng. Co.
Pte. F. BURROWS.
Son of Mr. Jas. Burrows, Parramatta.
Pte. JACK BUXTON.
Embarked March, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
Geo. Buxton, Church-street, Parramatta.
Sgt. ALAN CAMERON, M.M.
Embarked early 1915. Son of Mrs, W. Cameron,
Harris Park.


Pte. S. S. CANNON.
Embarked March, 1916. Son of Mr. J. R.
Cannon, Parramatta.
Pte. WM. CASTLES.
Parramatta. Died of wounds and was buried
at sea, October, 1917, whilst returning to
Australia.
Pte. G. F. CLARKE, M.M.
Son of Mr. G. Clarke, late Senior Warder, Par-
ramatta Gaol.
Pte. H. CARDOW.
Embarked November, 1915. Brother of Mr.
Roy Cardow, of Harris Park.
Bmbdr. STAN. F. CHIPPENDALE, D.C.M.
Embarked October, 1915; died of wounds,
August, 1916. Son of Mr. J. Chippendale,
Parramatta South.
Lce,-Cpl. JAMES CLARKSON.
Son of the late Mr. and Mrs. W. Clarkson, of
Parramatta,
Corp. C. CARR.
Enlisted September, 1914; invalided home Sep-
tember, 1915; re-enlisted May, 1916; died of
wounds August, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A.
Carr, Smith-street, Parramatta.
Capt. A. G. CHRISTIAN.
Late of Parramatta. Killed at Gallipoli, May,
1915.
Pte. ALF. COLBERT,
Parramatta.


Spr. A. COLBERT, M.M.
Embarked May, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J.
Colbert, Parramatta.
Corp. A. E. CONYERS.
Embarked April, 1915; killed at Gallipoli July,
1915. Son-in-law of the late Mr. A. H. Sibson,
Parramatta.
Pte. A. COTTAM.
Enlisted November, 1915. Son of Mrs. W.
Cottam, Pennant-street, Parramatta.
Pte. S. COLBERT.
Embarked November, 1916; killed in France,
November, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. H.
Colbert, Parramatta.
Pte. CHAS. J. COOPER.
Enlisted September, 1916; killed in France,
January, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. C. Cooper,
Parramatta North.
Pte. J. W. COTTAM.
Enlisted July, 1915; died of wounds, France,
April, 1917, Son of Mrs. W. Cottam, Pennant-
street, Parramatta,
Tpr. E. R. COLES.
Brother of Mrs. W. Booth, Parramatta.
Pte. J. COSTAIN.
Son of Mr. H. Costain, Harris Park.
Sgt. MACARTHUR COWPER.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. H. B. Cowper, Parramatta,


Lieut. W. HARINGTON COWPER.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. H. B. Cowper, Parra-
matta.
Pte. WM. E. COX,
Of Parramatta, Killed in France, 1916.
Pte. L. A. CREED.
Embarked August, 1915; killed in France, May,
1917. Son of late Mr .and Mrs. T. Creed,
Factory-street, Parramatta North.
Sgt, H. H. COX.
Embarked November, 1915; killed in France,
August, 1918. Late of Sandown Meat Works,
Parramatta.
Pte. T. CRANNEY,
Parramatta.
Pte. C. A. CROME.
Embarked August, 1916; killed in France, June,
1917. Resided with Mr. and Mrs. S. A. Gibbon,
Wentworth-street, Parramatta.
Pte. WILFRED E. COX.
Killed in France, March, 1918. Brother of
Mr. W. M. Cox, Overseer of Works, Parra-
matta.
Pte. A. V. CREED.
Albert-street, Parramatta North. Enilsted
March, 1917.
Pte. F. S. CROUCH.
Son of late Mr. C. and Mrs. Crouch, Hunter-st.,
Parramatta.


Pte. A. CURRELL,
Parramatta.
Tpr. J. J. CURREY,
Parramatta.
Gnr. D. DAVIES.
Late of Parramatta. Died of wounds in
France, May, 1917.
Pte. E. CURRELL,
Parramatta.
Pte. N. F. CURREY.
Embarked March, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
J. J. Currey, Parramatta.
Pte. E. DAVIES.
Embarked August, 1917. Husband of Mrs. E.
Davies, May’s Hill, Parramatta.
Pte. C. CURREY.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. J. Currey, Parramatta.
Lieut. J. DAVIDSON.
Harris Park. Died of wounds, May, 1916.
Pte. B. P. DAWSON.
Late of Parramatta. Killed in action, 1915,


Sgt. J. DAWSON.
Killed in France, May, 1917. Son-in-law of
late Mr. Joe Drew, Parramatta.
Pte. GEO. DOWN.
Enlisted July, 1916. Son of Mrs. S. Down,
High-street, Harris Park.
Pte. STAN DUNKLEY.
Enlisted January, 1917. Son of Mr. E. Dunk-
ley, Parramatta (late of Granville).
Pte. S. DICK.
Embarked October, 1915. Nephew of Mrs. J.
Daly, Harris Park.
Pte. ALAN DUNKLEY.
Enlisted January, 1916. Son of Mr. E. Dunk-
ley, Parramatta.
Cpl. ALBERT EASY, M.M.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Easy, Harris Park.
Pte. RAY DONNELLY.
Killed at Gallipoli, May, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. Donnelly, Parramatta South.
Pte. H. DUNKLEY.
Enlisted January, 1917. Son of Mr. E. Dunk-
ley, Parramatta (late of Granville).
Pte. C. G. EATHER.
Late of Harris Park. Embarked February,
1915; killed at Gallipoli, May, 1915.


Sgt. F. L. EDMONDS,
Parramatta.
Capt. E. F. ERBY.
Son of Air. and Airs. G. T. Erby, Harris Park.
Pte. CYRIL FARRELL.
Son of Airs. T. Farrell, Parramatta.
Pte. L. J. EDWARDS.
Son of Airs. Edwards, Crimea-street, Parra-
matta.
Dvr. H. G. ERBY.
Son of Air. and Airs. G. T. Erby, Harris Park.
Pte. LES. FEENEY.
Embarked June, 1915; killed at Gallipoli, Sep-
tember, 1915. Nephew of Mr. and Mrs. J.
Watsford, Iron-street, Parramatta.
Pte. E. FILBY.
Enlisted September, 1915; killed in France,
July, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. Geo. Filby,
Parramatta South.
Pte. GEO. ELLISON.
Son of Air. and Airs. G. A. Ellison, late of
George-street, Parramatta.
Dvr. S. T. ERBY.
Son of Air. and Airs. G. T. Erby, Harris Park.


Pte. G. R. FILBY.
Embarked June, 1915; invaided home October,
1915; re-enlisted and embarked Jan., 1916. Son
of Mr. and Mrs. G. Filby, Parramatta South.
Pte. A. FLEMING.
Grandson of Mrs. G. Brown, Parramatta.
Lieut. G. D. FOLKARD.
Parramatta. Taken prisoner at Fromelles,
July, 1916.
Sgt.-Major A. FINLAYSON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Finlayson, Parramatta
North.
Pte. WALTER FLEMING,
Grandson of Mrs. Brown, of Harris-street,
Parramatta.
Pte. W. H. FORSYTH.
Embarked February, 1915; killed at Gallipoli,
August, 1915. Son of Mr. T. Forsyth, Parra-
matta.
Air-Mech. N. FITZPATRICK.
Royal Flying Corps, B.E.F. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. A. Fitzpatrick, Parramatta North.
Pte. L. R. FOLEY.
Embarked September, 1916; returned April,
1919. Son of Mrs. Foley, George-street, Par-
ramatta.
Corp. JACK FRANKS.
Killed in France, September, 1918. Nephew
of Mr. and Mrs. E. Wain, Parramatta.


Pte. A. FREEMAN.
Enlisted August, 1915. Late of Parramatta.
Pte. P. FREEMAN.
Enlisted May, 1916; died of wounds, May,
1917. Brother of Mrs. Weeden, George-street,
Parramatta.
Pte. A. FULLER.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. G. Fuller, Parramatta.
Pte. E. E. FREEMAN.
Enlisted February, 1916; invalided home May,
1918. Brother of Mrs. Weeden, George-street,
Parramatta.
Tpr. WILLIAM F. FREEMAN.
Enlisted March, 1916. Brother of Mrs. Weeden,
George-street, Parramatta.
Pte. F. E. FULLER.
Embarked November, 1914; reported missing
April, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. Fuller,
Parkes-street, Parramatta,
Pte. HERBERT FREEMAN.
Enlisted January, 1916; died whilst prisoner of
war in Germany, August, 1917. Brother of
Mrs. Weeden, George-street, Parramatta.
Cpl. W. FREEMAN, D.C.M.
Embarked February, 1915; invalided home
January, 1918. Brother of Mrs. Perram, Aird-
street, Parramatta.
Pte. F. FYALL.
Son of Mrs. Fyall, Parramatta.


Tpr. STUART GADEN,
Ex-student King’s School, Parramatta. Killed
in Palestine.
Pte. WILFRED (Dick) GATES, M.M.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Frank Gates, Church-
street, Parramatta North.
Pte. J. W. GILLIGAN,
Nephew of Mrs. Mahony, Harris Park.
Pte. ALEX. GAMACK.
Enlisted October, 1915; invalided home, Oct.,
1916. Son of Mrs. Gamack, Sorrell-street,
Parramatta.
Pte. F. GELL.
Embarked August, 1916; killed in France, May,
1917. Husband of Mrs. F. Gell, Harris Park.
Sgt. BOY GODDING, M.M.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. S. Godding, Parramatta
South.
Sgt. W. C. GAMACK.
Enlisted April, 1915; killed in France, Novem-
ber, 1917. Son of Mrs. Gamack, late of Sorrell-
street, Paramatta North.
Seaman A. V. GIBBS,
H.M.A.S. Australia. Son of Mr. A. V. Gibbs,
Northmead, Parramatta.
Major S. P. GOODSELL, Croix de Guerre.
Late of Taylor-street, Parramatta.


Gnr. E. GOULD.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. E. Gould, Parramatta
South.
Pte. D. W. GREENSHIELDS.
Nephew of Mrs. McPhie, Harris Park.
Lieut. M. GRIFFIN.
Embarked December, 1914. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. T. H. F. Griffin, of Parramatta,
Cpl. LEO. GOWANLOCH.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. Gowanloch, Rosehill-
street, Parramatta.
Pte. E. G. GREENSHIELDS.
Nephew of Mrs. McPhie, Harris Park.
Pte. S. GRUGEON.
Killed in France, September, 1918. Brother of
Mrs. G. Ferris, Pennant Hills-rd., Parramatta.
Pte. TOM GRANT.
Embarked December, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
A. Grant, Parramatta South.
L.-Cpl. TOM GREGORY.
Embarked September, 1915; died of wounds,
France, May, 1916. Son-in-law of Mr. J. Spier,
Parramatta.
Cpl. C. W. GUYOT.
Embarked January, 1916; killed July, 1916.
Son of Major and Mrs. J. Guyot, late Govt.
Savings Hank, Parramatta.


Pte. F. P. HAGIN.
Sou of Mr. and Mrs. P. Hagin, Harris Park.
Dvr. S. HANCOCK.
Late of Parramatta. Embarked November,
1915.
Pte. J. J. HARTNETT.
Enlisted 1914. Invalided home November,
1915.
Pte. JAS. HAIGH.
Embarked October, 1916. Son of Mrs. H.
Haigh, Parramatta.
Pte. GILBERT HARDING.
Killed in France. Son of Mrs. F. Harding,
Fennell-street, Parramatta.
Pte. E. J. HARVEY.
Enlisted December, 1915; died of wounds.
Son of Mr and Mrs. T. Harvey, late of Par-
ramatta.
Gnr. T. R. HAMILTON.
Harris Park.
Lieut. W. E. HART.
Royal Flying Corps. Embarked March, 1916;
returned August 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
W. Hart, Parramatta.
Pte. W. HAWKEY,
Parramatta.


Wireless Operator JOS. H. HAWKINS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Hawkins, Parra-
matta.
Lieut. F. HAYLEN.
Killed in France, September, 1917. Brother of
Mr. T. Haylen, Western-road, Parramatta.
Bglr. E. F. HEARNE.
Enlisted April, 1916; killed in France, Novem-
ber, 1917. Son of Mrs. G. Hearne, Parramatta,
Driver R. W. HAWKINS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Hawkins, of
Parramatta.
Pte. WM. HEAD.
Enlisted 1914; killed at Gallipoli, 1915.
Pte. G. HEARNE.
Rejected for active service; on Concentration
Camp Guard, Liverpool. Son of Mrs. G.
Hearne, Parramatta,
L.-Corp. H. E. HAYDON.
Died of meningitis, Fulham Hospital, England.
Son of Mr. J. Haydon, May’s Hill.
Pte. J. HEANEY,
Parramatta.
Pte. W. C. HEARNE.
Enlisted March, 1915. Son of Mrs. G. Henrne,
Inkerman-street, Parramatta.


Pte. G. T. HEMSLEY.
Embarked October, 1916; killed in France, Oct-
ober, 1917. Son of Mrs. Hemsley, late of Pen-
nant-street, Parramatta.
Pte. F. W. HODDINOTT,
late of Parramatta.
Lieut. GEO. S. HOLMES.
Sou of Rev, T. B. and Mrs. Holmes, late of
Parramatta.
Pte. LES. J. HILL.
Embarked December, 1915. Grandson of Mrs.
Herrington, Parramatta.
Pte. JACK HOLDING.
Embarked October, 1916; killed in France, Sep-
tember, 1917. Resided with Mr. and Mrs.
Wain, Parramatta North.
Pte. E. J. HOSFORD.
Enlisted 1914; invalided home 1917; son of
Mr. and Mrs. J. B. Hosford, Harris Park.
Capt. FRED. HINTON, M.C.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. L. Hinton, late of
Parramatta.
Captain-Chaplain T. B. HOLMES.
Late Superintendent of Parramatta Methodist
Circuit.
Pte. F. B. HOSFORD.
Enlisted 1914; Invalided home July, 1915; re-
enlisted and embarked November, 1915; invalid-
ed home, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. B.
Hosford, Station-street, Harris Park.


Dvr. HERB. HOSFORD.
Embarked November, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. J. B. Hosford, Harris Park.
Sergt. W. E. HUGHES.
Enlisted 1914; invalided home February, 1917.
Son of Mrs. G. F. Hughes, Parramatta.
Pte. ROBT, C. JACKSON,
Enlisted October, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
W. G. Jackson, Northmead, Parramatta.
Pte. W. E. HOSFORD.
Enlisted 1915; son of Mr. and Mrs. J. B.
Hosford, Harris Park.
Pte. MORRIS HUNT.
Embarked February, 1918. Killed in France,
August, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. C.
Hunt, Parramatta.
Pte. A. G. JAGO.
Enlisted October, 1914; invalided home Novem-
ber, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs, W. F. Jago,
Parramatta.
Cpl. J. E. L. HOURIGAN.
Enlisted 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J.
Hourigan, Parramatta.
Pte. W. H. HUNT,
late of Parramatta.
Cpl. A. H. JAMES.
Embarked November, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. A. James, Ross-street, Parramatta.


Spr. A. M. JARMAN.
Late of Wentworth-street, Parramatta. Em-
barked February, 1916; died of wounds, June,
1917.
Pte. A. G. JESSOP.
Killed in France, September, 1917. Brother of
Mr. Ray Jessop, Seville-street, Parramatta.
Pte. FRANK JOHNSTON.
Son-in-law of Mr. Chas. Miller, Parramatta
North.
Tpr. BOB JEFFERY.
Served with 7th Light Horse in Palestine; re-
turned Aug., 1919. Son of Mr. and Mrs. H.
Jeffery, Harris-street, Harris Park.
Pte. HARRY JOHN.
Embarked October, 1916; killed in France,
October, 1917. Husband of Mrs. John, Short-
street, Parramatta.
Pte. G. JOHNSTONE.
Killed in France, July, 1916. Son of Mrs. F.
Barry, Parramatta.
Sgt. J. JEFFERY.
Embarked April, 1916; killed in France, 1918.
Son-in-law of Mr. and Mrs. Montrose, Parra-
matta.
Pte. F. JOHNSON.
Brother of Mr. W. H. Johnson, Parramatta.
Embarked September, 1916; killed in France,
February, 1917.
Pte. A. KEEN.
Enlisted 1917. Clifford-street, Parramatta.


Pte. L. R. KELL.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Kell, Pitt Row,
Parramatta.
Tpr. 0. LAKE.
Son of Q.M.S. Lake, Harris Park.
Pte. HORACE J. LAWN.
Enlisted September, 1915; returned July, 1917.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Lawn, Harold-street,
Parramatta.
Cpl. W. E. KELL,
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Kell, Pitt Row, Par-
ramatta.
Pte. ALFRED LAWN.
Enlisted June, 1917; invalided home September,
1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Lawn, Harold-
street, Parramatta.
Pte. A. E. LEABEATER,
Enlisted January, 1916; killed in France, July,
1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. T. Leabeater,
jun., Church-street, Parramatta.
Pte. F. KENNEDY.
Embarked February, 1918; died of wounds,
France, October, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. F.
Kennedy, 414 Church-st., Parramatta North.
Driver HERB. J. LAWN.
Enlisted January, 1915; returned February,
1919. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Lawn, Harold-
street, Parramatta North.
Pte. G. W. LEWIS.
Killed in France, 7th June, 1917.


Pte. J. LEWIS,
Church-street, Parramatta South.
Pte. O. LING.
Embarked November, 1915. Son of Mrs. A.
Ling, Parramatta.
Pte. ROLAND W. LOFTS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. A. Lofts, Harris Park.
S.B.S. M. G. LEWIS.
Australian Navy. Son of Mr. Ben Lewis,
Parramatta.
Capt. E. L, LLOYD,
Nephew of Dr. W. S. Brown, Parramatta.
Cpl. A. LUCAS.
Embarked 1915; killed in France, November,
1916. Son of Mrs. Sam Lucas, Marion-street,
Harris Park.
Pte. JOE LINDSAY.
Parramatta cricketer. Invalided home March,
1917.
Sgt. W. LOCHENS, M.M.
Embarked June, 1915; invalided home March,
1919. Son of Mrs. M. A. Lochens, May’s Hill.
Pte. HARRY LUCAS.
Son of Mrs. S. LUCAS, Harris Park.


Pte. B. LUSCOMBE.
Killed in France, April, 1917. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. R. Luseombe, late of Parramatta.
Sgt. J. LYNCH, M.M.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Lynch, Ada-street, Harris
Park.
Pte. A. MAHER.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Maher, Parramatta
North.
L.-Cpl. KEITH LUSCOMBE.
Killed in France, July, 1916. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. R. Luseombe, late of Parramatta.
Pte. R. W. MACDONALD.
Enlisted August, 1915; killed in France, Aug.,
1918. Son of Mr. J. W. Macdonald, Parramatta
North.
Pte. JACK MAHER.
Embarked February, 1915; invalided home Sep-
tember, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Maher,
Parramatta.
Lieut. F. LUSCOMBE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. R. Luseombe, late of
Parramatta.
Pte. D. S. MACQUEEN.
Embarked December, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. F. S. Macqueen, Parramatta.
Pte. JOE MAHER.
Embarked January, 1916; prisoner of war in
Germany from July, 1916, to Nov., 1918. Son
of Mr. and Mrs. J. M. Maher, Parramatta Nth.


Pte. M. H. MAISEY.
Embarked August, 1916; killed in France,
October, 1917. Son of Mr. B. Maisey, Ross-
street, Parramatta.
Air Mech. S. M. MARSDEN.
Enlisted December, 1917; accidentally killed in
England, April, 1919. Son of Mrs. A. E.
Marsden, Parramatta.
Pte. W. MASON.
Embarked November, 1915; died of wounds,
July, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Mason,
Surry Hills, late of Parramatta.
Cpl. H. J. MANUEL.
Embarked August, 1915. Son of Mrs. S. A.
Gibbon, late of George-street, Parramatta.
Constable W. G. MARSHALL.
Killed at Gallipoli, May, 1915; late of
Parramatta.
Pte. W. T. MASON,
Brother of Mr. R. J. Mason, of Parramatta.
Died of wounds, France, November, 1916.
Pte. W. MARSDEN.
Enlisted June, 1917; killed in France April,
1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. Marsden, Dunlop-
street, Parramatta.
Pte. J. MASON.
Embarked November, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. W. Mason, late of Parramatta.
Lieut. H. V. MASTERS,
Late of Parramatta South. Accidentally killed,
April, 1918; Brother of Mrs. W. McGlashan,
late of Harris Park.


Pte. E. MATHER.
Enlisted March, 1916; invalided home Novem-
ber, 1917. Son of Mrs. Mather, Sorrell-street,
Parramatta.
Lieut. GEORGE MILLS,
Parramatta. Embarked 1915 with Ammunition
Column to Light Horse Brigade; returned
wounded in an aeroplane engagement.
Pte. C. O. MONTROSE,
Parramatta South. Embarked December, 1915.
Pte. E. MILLER.
Embarked June, 1916. Resident of Wentworth-
street, Parramatta.
Major J. B. MILLS.
Killed at Dardanelles, 30th May, 1915. Son of
Lieut. G. A. Mills, Perth, W.A. (late of Parra-
matta).
Capt. L. MOORHOUSE.
Enlisted January, 1915; killed in France, Oct.,
1916. Late of Dank of New South Wales,
Parramatta.
Pte. FRANK MILLS.
Killed in France. Son of Mr. D. Mills, Parra-
matta.
Pte. R. G. MILLS.
Killed in France, December, 1916. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. Dave Mills, of Parramatta.
Pte. JACK MORRIS.
Enlisted November, 1915; killed in Prance,
August, 1916. Son of Mrs. Morris, Sorrell-
street, Parramatta.


Pte. J. MORRISH.
Enlisted March, 1916; killed July, 1917. Hus-
band of Mrs. J. R. Morrish, Panamatta.
Dvr. CYRIL R. B. MOXHAM.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. D. Moxham, Parra-
matta North.
Pte. W. L. MURRAY.
Enlisted 1914. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. J.
Murray, Philip-street, Parramatta.
Pte. REG. MOTTERSHEAD,
Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. W. Mottershead, Par-
ramatta.
Capt. R. D. MULVEY.
Late of Staff of Parramatta High School.
Enlisted September, 1915.
Pte. H. A. McDOUGALL.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. McDougall, Harris Park.
Gnr. LES. MOXHAM.
Died of wounds, France, June, 1918. Son of
Mrs. and late Mr. T. R. Moxham, M.L.A.,
Parramatta.
Pte. OWEN K. MURRAY,
Enlisted August, 1914; killed at Gallipoli,
April, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. J.
Murray, Phillip-street, Parramatta.
Gnr. J. B. McDUFF.
Crimea-street, Parramatta. Embarked Janu-
ary, 1916; killed in France, April, 1918.


Pte. F. B. McFADYN.
Enlisted April, 1916; eighteen months prisoner
of war in Germany. Son of Mr. and Mrs. D.
McFadyn, Parramatta South.
Pte. W. L. McKAY.
Killed at Gallipoli, July, 1915. Late of Parra-
matta Branch Australian Gas-light Co.
Pte. WALTER McLAREN,
Embarked January, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
W. McLaren, Parramatta.
Pte. JACK McGILL,
Killed at Gallipoli, August, 1915. Nephew of
Mr and Mrs. G. H. Risbey, Parramatta North.
Pte. W. R. McKENZIE.
Embarked November, 1914; killed in France,
August, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J.
McKenzie, Parramatta North.
pte. C. R. McMillan.
Embarked February, 1916; six months prisoner
of war in Germany. Son of Sergt. T. C.
McMillan, Campbelltown, late of Parramatta,
Pte. S. J. McINTOSH.
Embarked October, 1914. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
J. Mclntosh, Parramatta.
Sgt. A. McKINNON.
Embarked 1914; killed at Gallipoli, April, 1915.
Brother of Mrs. S. W. Perry, late of Parra-
matta and Baulkham Hills.
Pte. F. McNAMARA.
Enlisted Sept., 1915; died of pneumonia, Tid-
worth Hospital, England, Dec., 1916. Son of
Mrs. C. McNamara, Parramatta,


Pte. A. J. McSPARRON.
Embarked 1915. Late of Parramatta Railway
Staff.
Dvr. JACK O’HARA.
Embarked February, 1917. Son of Mrs. M.
O’Hara, Villiers-street, Parramatta North.
Spr. URBAN PARR.
Enlisted 1914. Son-in-law of Mr. and Mrs. R.
J. Turner, Sorrell-street, Parramatta.
Cpl. C. J. NORRIS.
Enlisted August, 1915; killed in France Aug.,
1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. H. Nor is, Pitt
Row.
Pte. S. G. O’SHEA.
Embarked March, 1915; invalided home Nov.,
1917; died May, 1919. Son of Mr. and Mrs. G.
O’Shea, Fennell-street, Parramatta North.
Tpr. S. H. PATTINSON,
Harris Park.
Pte. A. ORMES.
Killed in France. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A.
Ormes.
Cpl. T. N. PAINTER,
Enlisted Oceober, 1915; returned May, 1919.
Son of Mr. J. Painter, Thomas-street, Parra-
matta North.
Pte. C. PAUL.
Enlisted 1914; invalided home November, 1918.
Sou of Mr. and Mrs. J. Paul, Church-street,
Parramatta.


Pte. R. R. PAUL.
Embarked 1915. Son of late Mr. G. Paul and
Mrs. Paul, O’Connell-street, Parramatta North.
Pte. A. PEARCE.
Embarked June, 1915; killed at Lone Pine,
August, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Pearce,
Lansdowne-street, Parramatta.
L.-Cpl. F. PHILLIPS.
Son of Mrs. G. Phillips, Marsden-street,
Parramatta.
Pte. A. E. PEACOCK.
Enlisted December, 1915; killed in France,
November, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J.
Peacock, Parramatta North.
Pte. S. J. PETERSON,
Parramatta. Resided with Mrs. J. Hearne,
Inkerman-street, Parramatta.
Chaplain-Major R. H. PITT OWEN.
Rector of Arncliffe, late Curate St. John’s,
Parramatta, Sailed July, 1915.
Pte. PERCY PEAKE.
Embarked October, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
T. Peake, Parramatta North.
Lieut. E. PHILLIPS.
Son of Mrs. G. Phillips, Marsden-street,
Parramatta.
Pte. ERIC PLATT.
Embarked September, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. Platt, Harold-street, Parramatta,


Pte. A. M. PORTLOCK,
Parramatta.
Pte. CECIL QUINN,
Killed in France; late of Parramatta.
Sgt. W. E. A. REA.
Enlisted November, 1914; killed at Gallipoli,
May, 1915. Son of Mrs. h. E. Rea,
worth-street, Parramatta.
Pte. J. A. PYE.
Grandson of late Mr. Clarke Waite, of Harris
Park.
Pte. LESLIE QUINN,
Killed in France; late of Parramatta.
Sgt. L. J. READETT.
Enlisted 1914. Son of Mr. and Mrs. Readett,
May’s Hill, Parramatta.
Pte. WM, QUIGLEY.
Brother of Mrs. H. W. Webb, Parramatta.
Pte. THOS. R. QUINN,
Parramatta.
Pte. HAROLD REECE.
Embarked 11th September, 1916. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. E. H. Reece, Hunter-st., Parramatta.


Lieut. AUB. REES.
Australian Flying Corps. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
W. R. Rees, late of Parramatta.
Pte. W. J. RITCHIE.
Embarked June, 1915; returned 1919. Son of
Mrs. C. Ritchie, Wigram-street, Harris Park.
Pte. H. J. ROBILLIARD.
Served at Galilpoli. Brother of Mr. P. H.
Robilliard, Parramatta.
Tpr. JAS. RICHARDS.
Son of Mrs. Richards, Ross-street, Parramatta.
Pte. LESLIE T. ROBERTS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. Roberts, Parramatta.
Cpt. W. C. ROBINSON,
Parramatta.
Pte. R. J. RISBEY.
Embarked January, 1916; killed in France,
August, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. G. H.
Kisbey, Parramatta North.
Stoker H. ROBERTSON,
Late of Parramatta.
Sgt. W. B. ROBINSON,
Parramatta.


Pte. ROBINSON,
Parramatta North.
Pte. R. T. ROWE.
Embarked October, 1916; of Parramatta.
Cpl. KEITH ROWLING,
Late of Parramatta. Son of Mr. L. C.
Rowling.
Pte. G. B. ROGERS.
Embarked February, 1917; died June, 1917, of
pneumonia, in Fargo Hospital, England. Hus-
band of Mrs. G. Rogers, Inkerman-st., P’matta.
Cpl. RAYMOND ROWE,
Parramatta.
Pte. J. H. SAUNDERS.
Embarked February, 1916. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. J. H. Saunders, Crimea-st., Parramatta.
Pte. R. (Dick) ROWE.
Embarked November, 1915. Son of Mrs. R.
Rowe, Parramatta North.
Sgt. EDWYN ALLAN ROWLING,
Late of Parramatta. Son of Mr. L. C.
Rowling.
Cpl. A. E. SELEMS.
Late of Trott-street, Parramatta.


L.-Corp. JAMES SHARP.
Enlisted August, 1914; killed in France, July,
1916. Father of Mrs. H. G. Brown, Parramatta.
Pte. D. A. SMALLMON.
Late of Parramatta and Lidcombe.
Pte. ROY F. SMITH.
Enlisted 1914. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. H.
Smith, Harris Park.
Pte. E. M. SHIELS.
Embarked September, 1916; died of wounds,
France, April, 1917. Husband of Mrs. G.
Shiels, O’Connell-street, Parramatta.
Pte. A. J. G. SMITH,
Late of Parramatta.
Dvr. STUART SMITH.
Enlisted January, 1916. Son of Aid. J. B.
Smith, Parramatta.
Sgt. L. SHIELS.
Killed in France, July, 1918. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. W. Shiels, Harris Park.
Pte. J. H. SMITH.
Brother of Mr. C. T. Smith, Church-street,
Parramatta South.
Pte. W. S. SMITH.
Embarked 1916; killed in France, 1918. Son
of Mrs. W. Smith, Lansdowne-street, Parra-
matta.


Lieut. J. T. STAPLETON, D.C.M,
Enlisted September, 1915; invalided home
March, 1919. Son of Mr. J. Stapleton, Par-
ramatta.
Spr. B. STRINGFELLOW,
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Stringfellow, Marion-
street, Harris Park.
Cpl. G. STRINGFELLOW.
Embarked Nov., 1915; two years prisoner of
war in Germany; returned April, 1919. Son of
Mr. and Mrs. J. Stringfellow, Harris Park.
Pte. J. H. STETTLER.
Embarked November, 1916; invalided home
January, 1918. Son of Mrs. J. Stettler, Parra-
matta.
Spr. E. STRINGFELLOW.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Stringfellow, Marion-
street, Harris Park.
Driver S. STRINGFELLOW.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Stringfellow, Marion-
street, Harris Park.
Lieut. J. STEWART,
Late of Parramatta. Grandson of Mr. Henry
Granger.
Pte. EDGAR STRINGFELLOW.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Stringfellow, Marion
street, Harris Park.
Sgt. EV. G. SUMMONS.
Enlisted July, 1915; died of wounds, France,
September, 1918. Son of Mrs. and the late Mr.
C. Summons, Parramatta.


Tpr. T. L. STONEY,
Parramatta.
Pte. F. C. SWAIN.
Enlisted 1914; killed at Gallipoli, 1915. Late of
Parramatta.
Pte. JIM TAMSETT.
Embarked April, 1915; died of wounds July,
1915. Son of Air. and Airs. W. Tamsett, Parra-
matta.
Sgt. T. L. STONEY,
Parramatta.
Sig. H. C. SWEET.
Son of Mr. and Airs. A. Sweet, Parramatta.
Pte. L. TAPLIN.
Brother of Air. Eaton Taplin, late of Parra-
matta.
Pte. STAN. STONEY,
Parramatta.
Pte. A. SYMONDS,
Embarked July, 1916; died Fargo Hospital,
England, September, 1917. Son of Mr. A.
Symonds, Marsden-street, Parramatta.
Q.M. Sgt. R. W. TELFER,
Parramatta.


Pte. ROY TERRY.
Embarked May, 1916. Son of Mr. P. B. Terry,
Parramatta.
Pte. FRANK TREVILLIAN,
Nephew of Sgt. R. Trevillian, Parramatta.
Pte. H. W. TURNER.
Enlisted 1916. Son of Pte. and Mrs. R. J.
Turner, Sorrell-street, Farrnmatta.
Pte. G. H. THORPE.
Enlisted September, 1915; killed in France,
July, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. R. C. Thorpe,
Long Bay, late of Clifford-street, Parramatta.
Lieut. G. B. OWEN TUCK,
Late House Master The King’s School, Parra-
matta. Enlisted June, 1915; killed in France,
February, 1917.
Pte. JACK TURNER.
Embarked November, 1915; killed in France,
July, 1916. Son of Pte. and Mrs. R. J. Turner,
Sorrell-street, Parramatta.
Pte. ROLAND L. J. THWAITE,
Enlisted September, 1915; killed in France,
July, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. R. Thwaite,
Parramatta North.
Pte. C. G. TULIP.
Embarked November, 1915; invalided home,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. M. Tulip, Parra-
matta.
Pte. JAS. J. TURNER.
Enlisted 1914; killed at Gallipoli, August, 1915.
Son of Pte. and Mrs. R. J. Turner, Sorrell-st.,
Parramatta.


Lieut. KEITH A. TUNKS.
Enlisted January, 1915. Son of Mrs. W. H.
Tanks, late of Macquarie-street, Parramatta.
Pte. F. C. VICTOR.
Embarked April, 1915. Brother of Mrs. Fraser,
Harris Park.
Pte. FRANK WARREN.
Parramatta.
Sergrt, G. G. VEITCH.
Embarked November, 1915; invalided home
November, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. G.
Veitch, Parramatta North.
Tpr. R. J. WALTERS.
Enlisted March, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J.
Walters, Parramatta.
Pte. A. WATTS.
Enlisted November, 1916; died of wounds, May,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. Watts, Parra-
matta South.
Cpl. HOWARD VEITCH.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Geo. Veitch, Parramatta
North.
Pte. W. WALTON.
Died of wounds, France, April, 1918. Grand-
son of Mrs. E. Walton, Parramatta North.
Pte. E. WATTS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. Watts, Parramatta
South.


Pte. RONALD WAIT.
Embarked February„ 1915; killed at Gallipoli.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Geo. Watt, Harris Park.
Pte. J. M. WHITE.
Embarked June, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
D. White, Isabella-street, Parramatta.
Major Dr. KEITH WHITING,
Parramatta. Returned June, 1919, after nearly
three years’ service in France.
Cpl. ALEX. G. WATSON.
Enlisted August, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
A. Watson, Harris Park.
Pte. H. WHITEMAN.
Embarked April, 1916; died of wounds, France,
September, 1918. Son of Mr. Stephen White-
man, late of Parramatta.
Pte. CECIL W. WHITNEY.
Killed in France, April, 1916. Son of Nurse
Whitney, Parramatta.
Major Dr. R. (Dick) PHIPPS WAUGH.
Parramatta. Embarked June, 1915.
Pte. J. A. WHITEMAN.
Embarked December, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. J. Whiteman, Parramatta.
Pte. R. C. WHOLOHAN.
Killed in France, November, 1916. Son of Mrs.
T. G. Wholohan, Harris Park.


Dvr. C. C. WILLIAMS and Pte. CYRIL
MOXHAM,
Both of Church-Street, Parramatta North.
Pte. D. WOODS.
Embarked October, 1916. Brother of Mr. B.
J. Woods, Parramatta North.
Sgt. ERIC D. WOOSTER.
Mentioned in despatches; invalided home Janu-
ary, 1919, after 4 years’ service. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. J. Wooster, Harris Park.
Pte. J. R. WILLS.
Embarked early 1915. Nephew of Mr. W. Tur-
kington, Parramatta.
L.-Cpl. T. A. WOODS.
Died of wounds, Gallipoli, 1915.
Lieut.-Col. FRANK WOOSTER, A.A.M.C.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Wooster, Harris Park.
Lieut. LEO. A. WILSON,
Son of tile late Mr. and Mrs. R. Wilson, Smith-
street, Parramatta.
Pte. BRUCE WOOSTER,
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Wooster, Harris Park.
Pte. NORMAN WOOSTER,
Invalided home. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J.
Wooster, Harris Park.
[SEE ALSO MISCELLANEOUS AT END OF BOOK.]


James B. MARTYR
(LATE A.1.F.)
Granville's Leading Property Salesman
SOUTH STREET, GRANVILLE, N SW.
I have the Bed Seledion of Properties
in the Di&rid Cash or Terms .
fl Orchards, Poultry, Dairy, Grazing and Agricultural
Farms. Town and Country Residences, Building Sites.
First-class Investments, City and Suburban.
INSURANCES EFFECTED.
RENTS COLLECTED.
VALUATIONS HADE for
PROBATE.
r*
ESTATES MANAGED.
My Motto : COURTESY and
PROMPTNESS.
Telephone: U 8435.


3 □□□□□□!
*3<
1 ; • y ’>^.
5 r
&<?£.
ii i s«
H \P
•fl*
0/rr
ssss
J r
¥ -fe
sSa
?lf
;»s
WSMl ill
ip
mi
'm
#
tm
Gorr
PA/LtYAY
C£Hr/?AL
GA/LtVAY 3™
□□□□□□
OUR
Local Representative
is
Mr. S. A. Armstrong
GRANVILLE
Who will be ple'ased to call upon you at any time and explain to you how you can Dress, Furnish, or make
your old home new again at a minimum of cost, without parting with your ready cash. There stands
behind him one of the
Largest Departmental Stores
in the city. You will see by the above plate that it is quite close to Sydney (Central) Station, where you
will be able to do your shopping with ease and comfort.
WE STOCK EVERYTHING that Man, Woman or Child needs.
Costumes
Millinery
Blouses
Skirts
Underclothing
Corsets
Infants’ Wear
Children’s Wear
Clothing
Mercery
Hats
Overcoats
Underwear
Tailoring
Boots
Travelling Requisites
Hosiery
Gloves
Parasols
Laces
Ribbons
Embroideries
Haberdashery
Perfumery
Leather Goods
Handbags
Carpets
Linoleums
Rugs and Mats
Crockery
Ironmongery
Furniture
Pianos
Sewing Machines
Gramaphones
Mangles, &c.
The Famous CAPT. SCOTT ICE CHEST, which is recognised by the trade as being the best
on the market, and the Lowest Price.
Any of the above goods can be obtained with a “BON” Cash Order, which can be obtained from
our LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE as named above.
We can FURNISH YOUR HOUSE in
SOLID OAK, 3 rooms, for £65 0 0
Or 3 Rooms in MAPLE for .. £B5 0 0
(Current Prices, 1/11/’19.) Or a MANSION up to £5OOO.
All our Goods are marked at LOWEST CASH PRICES and in PLAIN FIGURES.
Bon Marche
The Spot for Bigger Values :: Corner GEORGE $ HARRIS STREETS, SYDNEY


GRANVILLE
Pte. D. F. ADAM.
Enlisted April. 1916; killed in France, October,
1917. Son of Mrs. A. Adam, The Avenue,
Granville.
Pte. WAITER ARMITAGE,
Granville. Embarked February, 1915.
Pte. LES. BALE.
Enlisted April, 1916; died of wounds, France,
June, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. Bale, Eleanor-
street, Granville.
Pte. JOHN ANDERSON.
Killed at Gallipoli, August, 1915. Son of Mr.
Geo. Anderson, Clyde.
Gnr. FRED. S. BAILEY,
Waiter-street, Granville.
Pte. S. E. BOWER.
Returned February, 1919. Son of Mrs. Bower,
Clyde.
Pte. W. A. ANDERSON,
Victoria-parade, Granville.
Pte. A. E. BALDWIN.
Embarked November, 1916; killed in France,
August, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. Baldwin,
Arthur-street, Granville.
Cpl. G. W. BANKS.
Embarked October, 1915; died of wounds,
France, November, 1917. Son of Mrs. W.
Banks, Rosehill.


Sgt. LAURIE BARBER, M.M.
Son of Mrs. F. Barber, Good-street, Granville.
Cpl. F. R. BENSON.
Embarked April, 1915; killed in France, Oct.,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. L. Benson, Blaxcell-
street, Granville.
L.-Cpl. J. D. BLACK.
Killed in France. Son of Mr. and Mrs. Black,
The Avenue, Granville.
Pte. WM. BARTER.
Son of ex-Alderman Barter, Railway-street,
Granville.
Cpl. A. E. BEST.
Late of Ammonia Works, Clyde.
Pte. E. BLANCHARD.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Blanchard, Sydney-rd.,
Granville.
Sgt. JAS. BEATON,
Clyde.
Pte. H. J. BLACK.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Hedley Black, late of
Clyde Engineering Works.
Pte. CYRIL BOURNE.
Enlisted October, 1916; died of wounds, France,
September, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A.
Bourne, Prince-street, Granville.


Tpr. H. W. BROWN (BROWNJOHN),
Granville.
Lieut. HAROLD COLE.
Enlisted September, 1915. Late of Clyde
Works.
Pte. B. CATER.
Killed in France, April, 1918. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. E. Cater, Granville.
Pte. W. E. BRICKLEY.
Embarked October, 1916; killed in France,
May, 1917. Son of Mrs. A. Brickley, Clyde.
Pte. TOD CARPENTER,
Granville.
Pte. H. C. CONVOY.
Embarked August, 1916; killed in France,
October, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Con-
voy, East-street, Granville.
Pte. J. N. BURKE.
Enlisted March, 1915; died of wounds, France,
December, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. F.
Burke, Clyde-street, Clyde.
Pte. J. CARRIG.
Son of late Mr. and Mrs. T. C. Carrig, Gran-
ville.
Pte. T. H. COOK.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. H. Cook, Meehan-street,
Granville.


Pte. W. J. COOK.
Killed in France, April, 1917. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. T. H. Cook, Meehan-street, Granville.
Pte. T. DANIEL.
Brother of Mr. Daniel, Malcolm-street, Gran-
ville.
Pte. SAM DAVIES.
Son of Mrs. R. Davies, William-street, Clyde.
Sig. W. E. S. DANE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Dane, Albert-street,
Granville.
Sgt. F. E. DARE.
Killed at Bullecourt, France, May, 1917. Son
of Mr. and Mrs. F. H. Dare, Commercial Bank,
Granville.
Pte. D. DELANEY,
Embarked October, 1916; killed in France,
October, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. D. D.
Delaney, Granville.
Pte. GEORGE DANE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Dane, Albert-street,
Granville.
Pte. H. S. DARE, M.M.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. H. Dare, Commercial
Bank, Granville.
Pte. E. H. DIGBY.
Embarked June, 1915. Grandson of Mr. and
Mrs. N. Taylor, Alfred-street, Granville.


Pte. H. DIXON,
Granville.
Pte. T. DUNSTAN,
Killed in France, September, 1917. Son-in-law
of late Mr. and Mrs. Geo. Rolley, Granville.
Staff-Sergt. H. ELDERSHAW.
Granville. Enlisted October, 1915.
W.O. FRANK DOHERTY, M.C.
Granville. Died of wounds.
Capt. DOUGLAS,
Richmond. Son-in-law of late Sgt. Illingworth,
of Granville.
Pte. J. ELLIOTT.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Elliott, Granville.
Sgt. W. R. DOUGHAN.
Embarked November, 1916; killed in France,
September, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. J.
Doughan, Kogarah, late of Granville.
Capt. C. C. EASTERBROOK.
Embarked November, 1914. Son of Mr. E.
Easterbrook, Alfred-street, Granville.
Pte. DICK ELLIS,
Granville.


Pte. A. E. EPPS.
Enlisted October, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. T.
Epps, Granville.
Pte. D. D. FARRELL,
Meehan-street, Granville.
Pte. A. C. FIELD,
Granville.
Pte. DICK FAIRWEATHER.
Enlisted Aug., 1915; prisoner of war in Ger-
many for 2½ years; returned April, 1919. Son
of Mr. and Mrs. Fairweather, Granville.
Pte. J. FARRELL,
Meehan-street, Granville. Died of wounds,
May, 1917.
Pte. N. M. FIELD.
Killed in France, June, 1917. Late of Inker-
man-street, Granville.
Pte. W. G. FARGIE.
Killed in France, May, 1917. Brother of Mr.
N. J. Fargie, Trongate-street, Granville.
Pte. M. FARRELL,
Meehan-street, Granville.
Pte. A. E. FITCH,
Killed in France, October, 1917. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. T. Fitch, Carrington-street, Granville.


Pte. W. J. FLACK.
Embarked January, 1916. Son of Mr. J. Flack,
Burnett-street, Granville.
Pte. WM. FRICK.
Nephew of Mr. A. Lines, Alfred-street, Gran-
ville; some time prisoner of war in Germany.
Pte. W. GAIREY,
Sydney-road, Granville.
Pte. HARRY FLUDE.
Killed in France, July, 1916. Son of Mr. J.
Flude, South-street, Granville.
Pte. LES. FROST.
Killed in France. Brother of Mrs. T. J. Wil-
liams, Granville.
Pte. C. GAPES.
Embarked November, 1916; killed in France,
September, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J.
Gapes, Nobbs-street, Granville,
Pte. C. A. FORD.
Embarked October, 1916. Died of wounds,
France, May, 1917. Son of Mrs. Ford, Gran-
ville.
Pte. W. G. FROST.
Brother of Mrs. T. J. Williams, Granville.
Pte. GEO. GENTLE.
Enlisted April, 1915; killed in France, Novem-
ber, 1916.


Bglr. F. GILL.
Mentioned in Despatches. Nephew of Mr. G.
E. Gill, Granville.
Lieut. W. R. HAIGH, M.C.
Enlisted Oct., 1915; died from gas poisoning,
England, Nov., 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. T
Haigh, Croydon (late Jamieson-st., Granville).
Pte. DAVE HAMILTON.
Son of Mrs. L. Hamilton, Granville.
Pte. D. W. GREEN,
Granville. Died of wounds, France, July, 1916.
Pte. W. L. HALLIGAN.
Embarked October, 1917. Son of Mrs. A.
Halligan, Granville.
Pte. C. S. HAMILTON.
Enlisted November, 1914.
Lieut. GEO. HAIG.
Late of Granville. Killed in action.
Pte. A. H. HAMILTON, M.M.
Son of Mrs. Hamilton, Lumley-street, Gran-
ville.
Pte. G. S. HAMILTON,
Granville.


Pte. TOM HAMMOND.
Died of wounds, Gallipoli, July, 1915. Son of
Mrs. Hammond, Clyde.
Pte. A. R. HARRE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Harre, William-street,
Granville.
Pte. W. C. WEARNE,
Granville.
Pte. OLIVER J. HARMON.
Embarked March, 1916; killed in France, Aug.,
1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Hannon, Alfred-
street, Granville.
Pte. L. HARVEY.
Killed in France. Nephew of Mr. and Mrs.
J. Wolf, Alien-street, Granville.
Pte. P. J. HESSELWOOD.
Embarked November, 1916; killed in France,
October, 1917. Son-in-law of Mr. and Mrs,
Gregory, South-street, Granville,
PERCY HARMON,
H.M.A.S. Fantome. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harmon, Granville.
Sgt. ARTHUR C. HAZEL.
Enlisted August, 1915; died of wounds, France,
July, 1918. Son of Mr. S. Hazel, Elizabeth-
street, Granville.
Pte. A. D. HOTCHKISS.
Embarked January, 1916; killed in France,
August, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. John
Hotchkiss, Granville.


Pte. ALBERT A. HOWES.
Embarked December, 1915; killed in France,
August, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. Howes,
Stuart-street, Granville.
ALFRED HUGHES.
Granville.
Pte. W. HUTCHISON.
Killed at Gallipoli, July, 1915. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. W. Hutchison, Daniel-st., Granville.
Pte. R. HUDSON.
Enlisted August, 1915; killed at Bapaume,
France, March, 1917. Son of Mrs. Hudson,
Prospect-street, Granville.
Pte. R. G. HUNT.
Died of illness December, 1916. Brother of
Mr. J. Hunt, Park Hill, Granville.
Pte. JACK IRWIN.
Son of Mr. J. Irwin, Blaxeell-street, Granville.
Pte. R. J. HUGHES,
Granville. Enlisted February, 1915.
Sgt. J. ALEX, HUTCHISON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Hutchison, Daniel-street,
Granville.
Pte. P. A. JACOBS.
Son of Mrs. A. Jacobs, Granville.


Cpl. H. G. JAMES.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. James, Granville.
Pte. R. M. JOHNSTONE.
Embarked July, 1915; killed in France, October,
1917. Late of Alfred-street, Granville.
Cpl. O. G. KOHLHARDT.
Enlisted October, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
G. Kohlhardt, Trongate-street, Granville.
Pte. W. JOHNS,
Granville. Killed in France, April, 1917.
Gnr. T. G. JONES.
Brother of Mrs. E. McKay, Australia-street,
Granville.
Pte. ALEX. R. KYLE.
Embarked October, 1917; killed in France,
September, 1918. Husband of Mrs. Kyle, Glen-
street, Granville.
Pte. R. JOHNSON,
Granville.
Pte. V. KAY.
Killed in France, April, 1918. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. H. J. Kay, Jamieson-street, Granville.
Pte. NORMAN OSBORN LANGFORD.
Killed. Son of Mr. Langford, Granville.


Pte. CHAS. LAIRD,
Granville. Embarked November, 1916; killed in
France, October, 1917.
Pte. R. W. LEE (standing), son of Mrs. T. A.
Lee, Clyde; and Pte. W. FREEMAN, embarked
June, 1915, killed in France May, 1916. Son of
Mr. and Mrs. T. Freeman, Clyde.
Sig. A, J. LINES.
Son of Mr. A. Lines, Granville.
Pte. ERNEST T. LAKEY.
Embarked March, 1915; killed at Gallipoli,
August, 1915. Son of Mr. T. Lakey, Bennalong-
street, Granville.
Gnr. FRANK L’ESTRANGE,
Gregory-street, Granville.
Pte. R. S. LOHMAN,
Enlisted April, 1916. Son of Mrs. S. Lohman,
Burnett-street, Granville.
Pte. W. LEE.
Enlisted October, 1915; killed in France,
November, 1916. Son of Mrs. R. Lee, Cowper-
street, Granville.
Pte. FRANK LEYDECKER.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Leydecker, Alfred-
street, Granville.
Spr. W. LONGFORD, M.M.
Granville.


Pte. L, F. LOTT,
Granville.
Dvr. G. R. MALLINSON, M.M.
Son of Mr. G. Mallinson, Trongate-street,
Granville.
Pte. J. MELEHAN.
Enlisted February, 1915; killed in France,
August, 1918. Son of Mrs. Jackson, Crown-
street, Granville.
Pte. S. E. LUCAS,
Arthur-street, Granville.
Pte. J. E. MALLINSON.
Killed in France, October, 1917. Son of Mr.
G. Mallinson, Granville.
Pte. C. H. MEMBREY.
Embarked 1915. Son of Alderman and Mrs.
Membrey, Granville.
Pte. G. M. LUKEEN.
Adopted son of Mr. and Mrs. Potter, Good-
street, Granville.
Pte. C. H. MARSH.
Enlisted August, 1914. Son of Mr. J. Marsh,
Clyde.
Pte. R. F. MICHELL,
Granville.


Pte. C. A. MIDDLEMISS.
Enlisted December, 1915; died of wounds,
France, May, 1917. Son of Mr. W. D. Middle-
miss, Alfred-street, Granville.
Pte. T. S. MONKS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Monks, The Avenue,
Granville.
Pte. G. MUNGOMERY.
Died of wounds, France, October, 1917. Brother
of Mrs. Devos, Charles-street, Granville.
Pte. GEO. MITCHELL,
Granville.
Gnr. J. P. MORGAN.
Died of wounds, France, October, 1917. Hus-
band of Mrs. Morgan, Smith-street, Granville.
Pte. F. McCABE.
Embarked November, 1916; killed in France,
September, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. F.
McCabe, Hudson-street, Granville.
Pte. J. W. MONKS.
Embarked October, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
J. Monks, The Avenue, Granville.
Dvr. R. R. MOXHAM.
Embarked October, 1917; died of pneumonia,
France, Nov., 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. R.
Moxham, New York-street, Clyde.
Sgt. O. E. McCANN.
Died of wounds, France, June, 1918. Son of
Mr. and Mrs. O. McCann, Arthur-street, Gran-
ville.


Second Officer J. B. McCAW,
Granville.
S.S. Matunga, a victim of the German raider
“Wolf.” Prisoner of war in Germany from
February to December, 1918.
Cpl. McDonald,
Granville. Killed in action.
Pte. W. J. M. McLEOD.
Embarked May, 1915; killed in France, July,
1916. Sou of Mrs. C. R. Smith, Cowper-street,
Granville.
Pte. A. D. McDONALD.
Embarked February, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. J. McDonald, Granville.
Pte. J. S. McKINLAY.
Enlisted April, 1916; invalided home March,
1919. Nephew of Mrs. Allmark, Trongate-
street, Granville.
Pte. A. McWILLIAM.
Killed in France, September, 1917. Son of
Mrs. M. McWilliam, Granville.
Pte. ALAN C. McDONALD.
Enlisted March, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J.
McDonald, Jamieson-street, Granville.
Cpl. C. McLEOD, C. de G.
Embarked October, 1915. Son of Mr. J.
McLeod, Woodville-road, Granville.
Pte. J. Me WILLIAM.
Son of Mrs. M. McWilliam, Granville.


Pte. GEO. NEWHOUSE.
Killed at Gallipoli, May., 1915.
Lieut. JACK OLFEN.
Embarked September, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. C. Olfen, The Avenue, Granville.
Pte. R. PAGE.
Killed in France, June, 1917. Son of Mr. J.
Page, Granville.
Pte. H. NEWHOUSE,
Granville.
Pte. A. OSBORNE.
Embarked December, 1915; killed in France,
September, 1916. Son of Mrs. F. Osborne,
Smith-street, Granville.
Pte. A. PARK.
Killed at Gallipoli, June, 1915.
Pte. O. NICHOLSON,
Granville.
Sgt. F. W. OWENS, D.C.M.,
Husband of Mrs. K. Owens, Blaxcell-street,
Granville.
Pte. GEO. PATERSON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Paterson, Clyde.


Pte. J. S. PATERSON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Paterson, Clyde.
Pte. P. L. PEATY.
Embarked June, 1915; invalided home March,
1916. Son of Mrs. Peaty and late Wm. Chas.
Peaty, of East-street, Granville.
Engr.-Lieut. H. PLATT.
H.M.S. Renown. Son of Mr. T. W. Platt,
Granville.
Pte. L. H. PEARSE.
Son of Mr. W. H. Pearse, Granville.
Pte. A. E. PERKINS.
Embarked November, 1916; killed in France,
May, 1917. Brother of Mrs. G. Morgan,
Granville.
Pte. W. POTTER.
Enlisted Aug., 1915; prisoner of war in Ger-
many for 2 years; ret. to England, April, 1918.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. B. J. Potter, Granville.
Pte. A. PEARSON.
Son of Mrs. Pearson, Meehan-street, Granville.
Pte. LES. PETTIT.
Son of Mr. C. Pettit, Granville.
Pte. J. A. RAMSBOTTOM.
Embarked February, 1915; killed at GalliPoli,
August, 1915. Brother of Mr. G. Ramsbottom,
Granville.


Pte. W. RIDGE,
Of Granville and Clyde Engineering Works.
Pte. H. F. ROBINSON.
Embarked November, 1915. Cowper-street,
Granville.
Gnr. WM. R. ROLLEY.
Died of wounds, France, January, 1918. Son
of late Mr, and Mrs. Geo. Rolley, Granville.
Tpr. ALEX. ROBERTSON.
Embarked October, 1915; killed in Palestine
June, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Robertson,
Parramatta-street, Granville.
Pte. H. J. ROBINSON.
Killed in France, December, 1917.
Pte. DAVE ROWLAND.
Died of wounds, France, September, 1917. Son
of Mrs, A. Rowland. Meehan-street, Granville.
Pte. W. H. ROBERTSON.
Killed In France, July, 1916.
Gnr. F. B. ROLLEY,
Granville.
Pte. V. M. RUHAN.
Embarked September, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. J. Ruhan, Woodville-road, Granville.


Pte. P. B. RUSSELL.
Embarked June, 1915; killed at Gallipoli, Aug.,
1915. Brother of Mrs. T. J. Bourke, late of
Government Savings Bank, Granville.
Pte. H. T. SELL.
Killed in France, October, 1917. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. H. Sell, The Avenue, Granville.
Cpl. A. J. SMITH, D.C.M.,
Granville.
Sgt. T. RUSTIN,
Embarked October, 1916; killed in France,
September, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J.
Rustin, late of Granville.
Tpr. F. SELLERS,
Only son of Mrs. F. Sellers, Granville. Died
of wounds at Gallipoli.
Pte. G. W. SMITH,
Sefton Park. Killed in France, 1916.
Sgt. E. D. SCOTT,
Pitt-street, Granville.
Pte. A. J. SHAW,
Granville. Enlitsed October, 1916.
Spr. S. SOWTER.
Embarked December, 1915; killed in France,
October, 1917. Son of Mr. T. Sowter, Wood-
ville-road, Granville.


Pte. N. J. STAFF.
Enlisted August, 1915; returned January, 1919.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. S. N. Staff, Prospect-
street, Granville.
L.-Cpl. A. R. STAFFORD.
Embarked October, 1914; invalided home, Nov.,
1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. Stafford, Mar-
garet-street, Granville.
Cpl. C. W. SULLIVAN.
Embarked November, 1915; died of wounds,
France, Oct., 1916. Son of Mrs. Sullivan,
Railway-parade, Granville.
L.-Cpl. A. SPRINGETT.
Embarked .Tune, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. R.
Springett, The Avenue, Granville.
Pte. S. O. STAFFORD.
Embarked October, 1914; killed at Gallipoli,
August, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. Stafford,
Margaret-street, Granville.
Cpl. F. TAYLOR, M.M.
Embarked September, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. Taylor, Maud-street, Granville,
Pte. G. SPRINGETT.
Embarked January, 1917; killed In France,
April, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. R. Springett,
The Avenue, Granville.
Dvr. J. STYLES,
Sydney-road, Granville.
Pte. T. TAYLOR.
Enlisted February, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
Taylor, Jamieson-street, Granville,


Pte. W. TAYLOR.
Enlisted August, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
Taylor, Jamieson-street, Granville.
Bdr. W. F. THOMAS.
Killed in France, May, 1918. Brother of Mrs.
R. Thomas, Blaxcell-street, Granville.
Pte. LIONEL THOMPSON,
Enlisted March, 1916; killed in France Jan.,
1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. Thompson,
Good-street, Granville.
Pte. C. V. THOMAS,
Enlisted April, 1916; killed in France, April,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. Thomas, Leich-
hardt, late of Blaxcell-street, Granville.
Pte. C. (Ned.) THOMPSON.
Embarked March, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
O, Thompson, The Avenue, Granville.
Pte. J. E. TILLOTT,
Of Richmond, late of Clyde Loco. Yards.
Pte. W. THOMAS.
Killed in France. Brother of Mrs. Evans,
Trongate-street, Clyde.
Lieut. J. THOMSON.
Late of Granville.
Cpl. W. S. TURNER.
Enlisted August, 1915; killed in France, Janu-
ary, 1917. Son-in-law of Mr. TV. H, Yaughan,
The Avenue, Granville.


Tpr. H. J. VIGORS.
Embarked May, 1916; killed in Palestine,
September, 1918. Late of Short-street, Gran-
ville.
Pte. E. L. WEATHERALL.
Embarked November, 1916. Son of Mrs. A.
Weatherall, Woodville-road, Granville.
Pte. HY. WHITTEMORE.
Enlisted August, 1915; killed in France Aug.,
1916. Sou of Mr. and Mrs. H. Whittemore,
Granville.
Pte. G. F. WALSH.
Embarked September, 1916; died of wounds,
November, 1917. Son of Mrs. F. Walsh, Vul-
can-street, Granville.
Pte. CLAUDE WHITE,
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Geo. White, late of
Granville.
Pte. H. W. WHITTER.
Son of Mrs. F. Cater, Granville.
Pte. WILL WARD,
late of Granville.
Pte. M. WHITEFORD.
Enlisted March, 1916. Brother of Mrs. Ber-
tucci, Clyde.
Pte. G. WHITWORTH,
Son of Mrs, Ynile, Granville.


Pte. J. I. WOODS.
Son of Mrs. I. Woods, Granville.
Railway Crescent, Granville.
Pte. W. P. WILLINGHAM.
Enlisted June, 1915. Son of Mr. W. Willing-
ham, Woodville-road, Granville.
Spr. HY. O. WOLFF.
Died of pneumonia in Moore Park Camp, June,
1917. Son of Mr. J. Wolff, Allen-st., Granville.
Lieut. C. G. WILLIAMSON.
Son of Mr. J. Williamson, “Kelvin Grove,”
Granville.
Gnr. F. A. WILLIAMS.
Embarked October, 1914; died of wounds, Dec.,
1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Williams, Blax-
cell-street, Granville.
Sig. G. F. WINDSOR.
Enlisted August, 1915; died of wounds, France,
August, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. A.
Windsor, Wallace-street, Granville.
WHERE THE AUSTRALIANS MADE HISTORY—THE LANDING PLACE AT GALLIPOLI.
[SEE ALSO MISCELLANEOUS AT END OF BOOK.]


24 AUBURN ROAD, AUBURN
sasssssK SY* %
•w-m* B 'Wr**
•<*& »» iiniimßW'•
■
'W
,
>Y •
mm :
'_r; !•-■<:
H
:
J. W. WYLIE
(LATE ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY)
IRONMONGER, GLASSWARE, CROCKERY AND FANCY GOODS
MERCHANT
QUOTATIONS GIVEN FOR BLINDS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION
PICTURE FRAMES AT CITY PRICES
GOOD DISCOUNT FOR DIGGERS AND COMRADES


AUBURN
Pte. BERT. AIKEN.
Enlisted July, 1915; died of wounds, France,
May, 1916. Nephew of Mrs. E. S. Lewis,
Queen-street, Auburn.
Cpl. E. R. ATKINSON.
Embarked August, 1916; killed in France,
October, 1917. Brother of Mr. and Mrs. W.
Atkinson, Auburn.
Pte. STEVE BARBER.
Embarked March, 1918; killed in France, July,
1918. Son of Mrs. Barber, Prinee’s-road, South
Auburn.
Pte. A. J. ANDREWS.
Enlisted September, 1915; killed in France,
September, 1916. Son of Mr. A. V. Andrews,
Station-road, Auburn.
Pte. BAINBRIDGE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Bainbridge, Sheffield-
street, Auburn.
Pte. H. BARTLETT.
Embarked October, 1917; died of illness,
Palestine, October, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs,
H. G. Bartlett, Alice-street, Auburn.
Pte. JOHN T. ARNOT.
Killed in France, April, 1918. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. Arnot, Louisa-street, Auburn.
Pte. H. W. BANCROFT.
Died of wounds, France, July, 1916. Brother
of Mrs. S. M. Paris, Auburn.
Pte. W. G. BARTLETT,
Auburn. Embarked November, 1915; killed in
France, July, 1916.


Pte. E. BEALE.
Enlisted January, 1915. Nephew of Sir. and
Sirs. J. Coulson, North-parade, Auburn.
Sgt. W. S. BELL,
Auburn. Embarked July, 1915; killed in
France, June, 1916.
Pte. L. BRIZZOLARA.
Embarked July, 1915; killed in France, July,
1916. Son of Mr. and Sirs. L. Brizzolara, St.
Hillier’s-road, Auburn.
Pte. ERN. R. BEESLEY.
Died of wounds, France, April, 1918. Son of
Sirs. Beesley, Mary-street, Auburn.
Sgt. ERIC. BENNETT.
Embarked October, 1915; returned May, 1919.
Son of Sir. and Sirs. H. Bennett, Macquarie-
road, Auburn.
Pte. L. C. BROWN.
Embarked July, 1917; killed in France, March.
1918. Nephew of Sirs. Melrose, Harrow-road,
Auburn.
Cpl. G. M. A. BELL.
Died of peritonitis, England, December, 1918.
Husband of Mrs. E. Bell, Norval-street,
Auburn.
Pte. H. J. BONGERS.
Embarked December, 1915; killed in France,
September, 1916. Son of Mr. H. J. Bongers,
Dartbrook-road, Auburn.
Sgt. G. H. BUFFERY.
Embarked July, 1915; killed in France, Oct.,
1917. Son of Sir. and Mrs. W. Ruffery, Har-
row-road, Auburn.


Pte. C. F. BULLER.
Enlisted August, 1914; invalided home, July,
1917. Son of Mrs. E. J. Buller, Sutherland-
road, Auburn.
Pte. H. J. CALLAGHAN.
Embarked June, 1917; killed in France, April,
1918. Son of Mrs. H. B. Callaghan, Alice-st.,
Auburn.
L.-Cpl. F. W. CASTLEY.
Embarked November, 1915; killed in France,
July, 1916. Son-in-law of Mrs. M. J. Stan-
more, Beatrice-street, Auburn.
Pte. E. J. BYRNE.
Embarked April, 1916; killed in France, Nov.,
1916. Son of Mrs. M. Byrne, Gordon-road,
Auburn.
Pte. G. W. CARPENTER.
Embarked October, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
W. J. Carpenter, Dartbrook-road, Auburn.
Pte. A. CHEETHAM.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Cheetham, Stanley-street,
Auburn.
Pte. M. A. BYRNE.
Embarked October, 1915; died of wounds, July,
1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. M. Byrne, Cum-
berland-road, Auburn.
Pte. R. B. CARPENTER.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Carpenter, Dartbrook-
road, Auburn.
Pte. CHAS. CLARKE.
Enlisted May, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W.
Clarke, Hampstead-road, Auburn.


Gnr. L. R. CLARKE.
Embarked September, 1915; died of wounds,
France, August, 1917. Son of Mrs. M. Clarke,
Elsham-road, Auburn.
Pte. A. H. CREAGH.
Embarked March, 1916; died of wounds,
France, May, 1917. Son of Mr. J. B. Creagh,
Durtbrook-road, Auburn.
Gnr. G. O. DIVORTY.
Embarked May, 1917; killed in France, May,
1918. Son of Mrs. J. O. Divorty, Sydney-road,
Auburn.
Lieut. W. U. CLASPER,
Late fo Auburn. Embarked December, 1914;
died of wounds, France, May, 1917.
Pte. E. CROFT.
Son of Mr. Croft, Sydney-road, Auburn.
Pte. T. H. DOBSON.
Enlisted August, 1915; prisoner of war in Ger-
many for 21 years; returned April, 1919. Son
of Mr. If. Dobson, Auburn.
Pte. R. W. CRACKNELL.
Enlisted June, 1915; killed in France, May,
1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. Cracknell, Mary-
street, Auburn.
Sig. A. E. DAWES.
Died of wounds, France, August, 1918. Son
of Mrs. Dawes, North-parade, Auburn.
L.-Cpl. SID DUNN.
Killed in France, July, 1918. Nephew of Mr.
and Mrs. Henderson, Newton-street, Auburn.


Pte. G. W. EARL.
Enlisted December, 1915; killed in France,
Husband of Mrs. Earl, North-parade, Auburn.
Gnr. J. R. FIELDING.
Died of wounds, France, October, 1917. Nephew
of Mrs. Wade, Cardigan-street, Auburn.
Sgt. FOURRO,
Adderley-street, Auburn.
Pte. E. EASTON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. G. Easton, Sydney-
road, Auburn.
Pte. A. B. FORDHAM.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Jas. Fordham, Beacons-
field-street, Auburn.
Pte. W. GEORGE.
Embarked February, 1916; killed in France,
August, 1916. Son of Mrs. Morgan, Harrow-
road, Auburn.
Pte. T. B. EDMONDS.
Embarked October, 1914; killed at Gallipoli,
August, 1915. Brother of Mrs. J. Robinson,
Marion-street, Auburn.
Pte. J. FORWOOD.
Embarked January, 1916. Son of Mr. G. For-
wood, Auburn-road, Auburn.
Pte. A. K. GIBLETT.
Embarked January, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
A. H. Giblett, Manchester-road, Auburn.


Pte. P. GOODWIN.
Son of Mr. G. F. Goodwin, Auburn.
Pte. CLIFF GWYNNE.
Embarked 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. G.
Gwynne, Sydney-road, Auburn.
Gnr. D. HADLOW,
Auburn. Embarked March, 1916; killed in
France, July, 1917.
Pte. E. J. GOUGH.
Son of Mrs. Gough, Hall-street, Auburn.
Pte. D. HACKETT.
Son-in-law of Mrs. M. Jones, Provincial-st.,
Auburn.
Pte. E. W. HALL.
Enlisted September, 1915; killed in France,
November, 1916. Son of Mr. Alf. Hall, Hall-
street, Auburn.
Pte. G. F. GREGORY,
Newton-street, Auburn.
Pte. J. G. HACKETT.
Son-in-law of Mrs. M. Jones, of Auburn. Left
December, 1916, for war work in England.
Dvr. P. T. HALL, M.M.
Enlisted May, 1915. Son of Mrs. E. Knight,
Stanmore, late of Auburn.


pte. f. McDonald,
Bankstown. Invalided from Egypt, but died
on his way home.
Pte. N. HAZELWOOD.
Son of Mrs. G. Hazelwood, Sydney-rd., Auburn.
Pte. M. HEARNE.
Embarked August, 1916. Husband of Mrs.
Hearne, Norval-street, Auburn.
Pte. W. H. HARRIS.
Embarked January, 1916; killed in France,
July, 1916. Husband of Mrs. Harris, Park-
road, Auburn.
Pte. L. HAYES.
Enlisted May, 1915. Son of Mrs. Hayes,
Sydney-road, Auburn.
Cpl. W. S. HEWETT.
Embarked October, 1916; killed in France,
August, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. C.
Hewett, Auburn-road, Auburn.
Pte. W. G. HATTON,
Auburn. Enlisted December, 1915; killed in
France, July, 1918.
Pte. W. HEARD.
Enlisted February, 1916; killed in France,
June, 1917. Nephew of Mrs. Moyse, Auburn-
road, Auburn.
Pte. A. HICKIN.
Embarked January, 1916; killed in France,
July, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Hickin,
Graham-street, Auburn.


Sgt. A. H. HILLIER.
Enl. 1914; attached to Instructional Staff, War-
wick Farm, Liverpool and Goulburn; later em-
barked for France. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J.
Hillier, Dartbrook-road, Auburn.
Pte. A. HODGKINSON.
Embarked November, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. Hodgkinson, Sheffield-street, Auburn.
Capt. J. HOLMAN, M.C.
Nephew of Mr. F. Hannaford, Gibbons-street,
Auburn.
Pte. A. F. HILLSON.
Enlisted October, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
J. T. Hillson, Chisholm-road, Auburn.
Pte. H. HODGKINSON.
Embarked March, 1916; died of wounds,
France, April, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. D.
Hodgkinson, Sheffield-street, Auburn.
Pte. C. F. HOOD.
Embarked December, 1915; killed in France,
July, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. R. Hood,
Edgar-street, Auburn.
Sgt. J. HOBAN.
Killed in France, December, 1917. Son of Mrs.
M. E. Hoban, Rawson-street, Auburn.
Pte. E. W. HOLLEBONE,
Auburn-road, Auburn.
Sgt. ALEX. HOOD.
Embarked May, 1916; killed in France, October,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. R. Hood, Alice-st.,
Auburn.


Sgt. C. P. HOOK.
Embarked February, 1917; returned March,
1919. Son-in-law of Mr. Geo. Sinclair, Kara-
bah-street, Auburn.
Pte. S. S. W. HORNER, M.M,
Son of Mrs. J. Horner, Union-road, Auburn.
Pte. H. E. HORTON,
Auburn. Enlisted July, 1915; killed in France,
May, 1916.
Pte. A. H. HOOKE,
Son of Mr. and Mrs. H. Hooke, Yillowra-street,
Auburn.
Pte. W. H. HOOKE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. H. Hooke, Yillowra-street,
Auburn.
Pte. R. J. HUTSON.
Embarked January, 1915. Brother of Mrs. J.
Cassidy, Auburn.
A.B. G. T. HOOKE,
H.M.A.S. Melbourne. Son of Mr. and Mrs. H.
Hooke, Yillowra-road, Auburn.
Pte. W. HORSMAN.
Embarked October, 1916; killed in France,
May, 1918. Husband of Mrs. Horsman, Man-
chester-road, Auburn.
L.-Cpl. A. E. IBBETT, C. de G.
Soil of Mr. and Mrs. J. Ibbett, Waterloo, late
of Auburn.


Tpr. G. IBBETT.
Enlisted November, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
J. Ibbett, Waterloo, late of Auburn.
Pte. E. A. JACOBSON,
Grey-street, Silverwater. Embarked November,
1916; killed in France, October, 1917.
Pte. E. JONES.
Sob of Mrs. M. Jones, Provincial-road, Auburn,
Pte. J. R. IBBETT.
Enlisted February, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
J. Ibbett, Waterloo, late of Auburn.
Pte. A. JONES.
Killed in France, August, 1916. Son of Mrs.
M. Jones, Adderley-street, Auburn.
Pte. E. S. JONES.
Embarked June, 1915; killed at Gallipoli, Auk.,
1915, Son of Mrs. E. Jones, Manly, late of St,
Hillier's-road, Auburn.
Pte. C. F. JACKSON.
Embarked April, 1916; killed in France, April,
1917. Son of Mrs. R. Jackson, Alice-street,
Auburn.
ALF. JONES.
Son of Mrs. M. Jones, Provincial-road, Auburn.
Pte. H. JONES.
Embarked October, 1915. Son of Mrs. M. Jones,
Provincial-street, Auburn,


Dvr. W. H. JONES.
Nephew of Mr. W. Pilon, Auburn.
Tpr. JAS. KINCHINGTON, M.M.
Served at Gallipoli and in France. Son of Mrs.
Kinchington, of Auburn.
Sig. V. KINCHINGTON.
Embarked 1917, at 17 years of age. Son of
Mrs, Kinchington, Auburn.
L.-Cpl. JAMES KAY.
Embarked November, 1916; killed in France,
August, 1918. Husband of Mrs. Kay, Gordon-
road, Auburn.
Lieut. PAT. KINCHINGTON, M.M.
Enlisted 1914; returned March; 1919. Son of
Mrs. Kinchington, of Auburn.
Pte. EDGAR LAMB,
Embarked August, 1916; killed in France,
April, 1917. Husband of Mrs. Lamb, Station-
road, Auburn.
Pte. JACK KINCHINGTON.
Killed in France, September, 1917. Son of
Mrs. Kinchington, Auburn.
Pte. ROBT. E. KINCHINGTON.
Died of pneumonia whilst on furlough in Ire-
land, February, 1919. Son of Mrs. Kinching-
ton, Auburn.
Pte. L. W. LANDON.
Enlisted December, 1015; killed in France,
August, 1918. Son of Mrs. London, Auburn-
road, Auburn.


Pte. SAMUEL LESLIE,
Auburn. Embarked June, 1915; died of ill-
ness, England, February, 1917.
Sergt. J. C. LINDSELL.
Embarked February, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. J. C. Lindsell, Simpson-street, Auburn.
Pte. ED. MAGUIRE.
Embarked September, 1916; died of wounds,
France, May, 1918. Son of Mrs. W. A. King,
Sutherland-road, Auburn.
Pte. E. A. G. LEVER.
Enlisted January, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
G. E. Lever, Chisholm-road, Auburn.
Capt. C. H. LINKLATER, M.C.
Brother of Mr. W. J. Linklater, of Auburn.
Died whilst prisoner of war in Germany, Aug.,
1917.
Pte. F. MAGUIRE.
Embarked October, 1916; invalided home, Jan.,
1919, Son of Mrs. W. A. King, Sutherland-
road, Auburn.
Pte. H. G. LEVIN.
Nephew of Mrs. Grimm, Auburn. Killed in
France.
Sgt. W. L. LUSSICH.
Embarked May, 1916; killed in France, Jan.,
1917. Son of Mrs. Lussich, Dudley-street,
Auburn.
Pte. J. MAHER.
Son of Mrs, Maher, Dartbrook-road, Auburn.


Dvr. E. A. MANKS.
Sou of Mr. and Mrs. Manks, Bartbrook-road,
Auburn.
Pte. H. J. MARTIN.
Embarked July, 1915. Brother of Mrs. Franks,
Normanby-road, Auburn.
Pte. R. MONTGOMERY.
Embarked March, 1916. Husband of Mrs,
Montgomery, Harrow-road- Auburn.
Sgt. A. H. MARSHALL.
Embarked February, 1916; died of pneumonia,
Egypt, August, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A.
J. Marshall, Adderley-street, Auburn.
Sig. F. MEADS.
Embarked October, 1916; killed in France,
September, 1917. Brother of Mr. H. Meads,
Adderley-street, Auburn.
Pte. A. E. MOULDER.
Eimbarked September, 1916. Husband of Mrs,
Moulder, Union-road, Auburn.
Cpl. C. E. MARTIN,
Auburn.
Sgt. W. H. MILLS.
Embarked August, 1915; killed in France,
October, 1917. Son-in-law of Mrs. White,
Rawson-strcet, Auburn.
Pte. H. J. NELSON.
Enlisted, 1914; returned April, 1919. Son of
Mr. and Mrs. J. Nelson, Auburn-road, Auburn.


Pte. A. NEWELL.
Enlisted August, 1916; invalided home, August,
1917.
Capt. A. PAINE.
Upturned May, 1919, after 4 years’ service.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Paine, Station-road,
Auburn.
Cpl. R. PAINE.
Gradnson of Mr. and Mrs. E. Paine, Auburn.
Pte. HUGH OWEN.
Embarked September, 1915; died of wounds,
France, September, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
T. Owen, Skarratt-street, Auburn.
Cpl. W. D. PAINE.
Embarked August, 1915; killed in France, July,
1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Paine, Station-
road, Auburn.
Pte. C. R. PEACHEY,
Auburn.
Pte. A. W. PAGE.
Killed in France, April, 1917. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. H. E. Page, Auburn.
Pte. H. J. PAINE.
Grandson of Mr. and Mrs. E. Paine, Station-rd.,
Auburn.
Pte. W. K. PEDEN,
Auburn. Enlisted August, 1916.
France, October, 1917.


Col. S. PERRY, D.S.O. M.C.
Embarked November, 1914; returned June, 1919.
Son of Mrs. H. Bongers, Dartbrook-road,
Auburn.
Aerial-Sig. F. H. PICKERING,
Embarked December 19, 1915; killed in France,
July, 1916. Son of Mr. F. Pickering, Auburn.
NORMAN PICKUP.
Son of Mrs. J. Pickup, Manly, late of Harrow-
road, Auburn.
Lieut. THEO PERRY.
Embarked December, 1915; killed in France,
April, 1918. Son of Mrs. H. Bongers, Dart-
brook-road, Auburn.
Gnr. R. T. PICKERING.
Embarked January, 1916; killed in France,
August, 1916. Son of Mr. John Pickering,
Auburn.
Lieut. R. PICKUP, M.C.
Son of Mrs. J. Pickup, Manly, late of Harrow-
road, Auburn.
Pte. D. PETERSON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Peterson, Gordon-road,
Auburn.
Sgt. DON PICKUP.
Son of Mrs. J. Pickup, of Manly, late Harrow-
road Auburn.
Pte. C. PITTARD.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. L. F. Pittard, Cumber-
land-road, Auburn.


Pte. W. H. PITTOCK.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. C. Pittock, Harrow-
road, Auburn.
Pte. C. RAE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. R. Rae, Auburn.
Pte. J. J. REMILTON,
Auburn. Embarked October, 1915; died of
wounds, France, 1917.
Pte. L. POWER.
Embarked May, 1915; killed in France, August,
1918. Son of Mrs. Power, Cardigan-street,
Auburn.
Lieut, C. J. RAMSAY.
Killed in France, December, 1917. Husband
of Mrs. Ramsay, Pine-road, Auburn.
Pte. W, E. REYNOLDS.
Embarked October, 1916; died of wounds,
France, August, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
W. Reynolds, Park-road, Auburn.
Gnr. ALEX. RAE.
Son of Mr. Ralph Rae, of Auburn.
Pte. E. T. REBOUL,
Auburn. Killed In action, Oct., 1917.
Pte. D. RYAN.
Auburn. Died of wounds, France, November,
1916.


Pte. W. H. SALES.
Enlisted May, 1916; killed in France, August,
1918. Son of Mrs. E. Sales, Chestnut-road,
Auburn.
Gnr. J. E. SHIELDS.
Embarked January, 1916; killed in France,
May, 1918. Son of Mrs. A. Shields, Park-road,
Auburn.
Pte. G. SINCLAIR.
Embarked December, 1915. Son of Mr. J. Sin-
clair, Suttor-street, Auburn.
Sgt.-Major J. SARGOOD, D.C.M.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Sargood, late of Auburn.
Sgt. E. P. SHIPP.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Shipp, Auburn.
C.Q.M. LES. C. SINCLAIR.
Enlisted August, 1915; returned August, 1918.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Geo. Sinclair, Karabah-
street, Auburn,
Pte. A. SHEPPARD.
Embarked August, 1916; died of wounds,
France, January, 1917. Husband of Mrs.
Sheppard, Auburn-road.
Sgt. G. M. SINCLAIR.
Enlisted August, 1914; returned May, 1919.
Sou of Mr. Geo. Sinclair, Karabah-street,
Auburn.
Sgt. ROBT. SMART.
Embarked May, 1915; killed in France, Nov.,
1916. Brother of Misses N. and D. Smart,
Auburn.


Cpl. F. G. SMITH.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. Smith, St. Hillier’s-rd.,
Auburn.
Pte. H. STANMORE.
Embarked April, 1916; killed in France, Sep-
tember, 1917. Son of Mrs. Stanmore, Beatrice-
street, Auburn.
Cpl. JAS. STEWART.
Embarked October, 1915; killed in France,
August, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Stew-
art, McLeau-street, Auburn.
Spr. J. SMITH.
Enlisted August, 1914. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
W. Smith, Normanby-road, Auburn.
Pte. H. STEVENS.
Enlisted December, 1917; killed in France,
August, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. Stevens,
Cumberland-road, Auburn.
Lieut. DON STUART.
Embarked November, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. E. Stuart, Louisa-street, Auburn,
Pte. K. M. SMORTI.
Enlisted July, 1916; killed in France, October,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. L. Smorti, Adder-
ley-street, Auburn.
Cpl. A. L. STEVENSON.
Enlisted July, 1915; killed in France, June,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Stevenson,
Union-road, Auburn.
Tptr. G. SULLIVAN.
Enlisted 1914. Son of Hr. D. Sullivan, nigh-
gate-street, Auburn,


L-Cpl. J. E. SWINFIELD,
Embarked December, 1915; killed in France,
July, 1916. Son of Mr. A. W. Swinfield,
Harrow-road, Auburn.
Pte. H. H. THOROUGHGOOD.
Killed in France, August, 1918. Son of Mrs.
H. Thoroughgood, Mary-street, Auburn.
L.-Cpl. W. TURNER.
Son of Mrs. M. Turner, Hall-street, Auburn.
Pte. E. H. THOMPSON,
Auburn.
Pte. H. J. TOWERS.
Embarked November, 1916; died of illness,
England, November, 1918. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. J. Towers, Dartbrook-road, Auburn.
W.O. FRED. B. WADE.
Son of Sergt. and Mrs. W. H. Wade, Auburn.
Sapper H. H. THORBURN.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Thorburn, Maequarie-
road, Auburn.
Pte. T. A. TURNBULL.
Enlisted May, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. S.
A. Turnbull, Alice-street, Auburn.
Gnr. SAM. WALLACE.
Embarked April, 1916. Brother of Mrs.
Dickenson, Park-road, Auburn.


Pte. W. F. WARD.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. Ward, Macquarie-road,
Auburn.
Gunlayer E. WEBBER,
Of Torpedo Boat 10; torpedoed and drowned in
North Sea, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose
Webber, Auburn.
Pte. J. E. WHEELER.
Embarked April, 1916; killed in France, Oct.,
1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. Wheeler, Wood-
ford, late of Auburn.
Pte. A. E. WATERS.
Embarked October, 1915; killed in France,
October, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. Waters,
Queen-street, Auburn.
Pte. F. J. WEBBER.
Embarked March, 1916; killed in France, July,
1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose Webber,
Auburn.
Pte. S. E. WHEELER.
Embarked April, 1935; returned February, 1919.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. Wheeler, Woodford,
late of Auburn.
Pte. CHAS. WATERHOUSE.
Auburn. Embarked December, 1915; killed in
France, October, 1916.
Cpl. R. WEBSTER.
Embarked January, 1916; killed in France,
August, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. B.
Webster, Mary-street, Auburn.
Pte. R. F. C. WILKINSON.
Enlisted Aug., 1914; invalided home Apl., 1915;
re-enlisted Aug., 1915; killed in France, May,
1918. Son of Mrs. Cartwright, Grey-st., Aub.


Pte. D. WILLIAMS.
Embarked December, 1914; died of wounds,
France, April, 1917.
Pte. R. L. WILSON.
Auburn. Son of Mr. L. Wilson, of Schofields.
Enlisted August, 1916; killed in France, May,
1917.
Pte. D. WOLFF.
Embarked May, 1917; killed in France, July,
1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Wolff, Susan-st.,
Auburn,
Pte. BERT. WILLICK.
Killed at Gallipoli. Brother of Mr. C. F.
Willick, Auburn.
Lieut. J. SLOCOMBE, M.C.,
Cumberland-road, Auburn.
(At bottom of photo.)
Pte. R. WILSON, M.M.,
Auburn. Embarked July, 1915; returned
August, 1917.
Pte. C. F. WRIGHT.
St. Hillier’s-road, Auburn.
Sgt. A. C. WOLFF.
Embarked October, 1915; killed in France,
May, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Wolff,
Susan-street, Auburn.
(SEE ALSO MISCELLANEOUS AT END OF
BOOK.)


LIDCOMBE
L.-Cpl. C. J. ANDERSON.
Embarked August, 1915; killed in France, July,
1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Anderson,
Woodburn-road, Lidcombe.
Pte. A. ASTRIDGE.
Embarked May, 1917; killed in France, April,
1918. Husband of Mrs. Astridge, Lidcombe.
Pte. JACK BAMBURY,
Sou of Mr. and Mrs. R. Bambury, Platform-
street, Lidcombe.
Sgt. A. ETIIISOPP, M.M.
Embarked December, 1915; killed October, 1917.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Allsopp, Kingsland-road,
Lidcombe.
Pte. A. BADGER.
Embarked January, 1916; died of wounds,
France, August, 1918. Son of Mrs. W. Badger,
Cumbridge-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. W. E. BOARD.
Enlisted August, 1915; invalided home, April,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. W. Board,
“Hillside,” Lidcombe.
L.-Cpl. V. J. ARTHUR.
Enlisted August, 1914. Son of Ex-Alderman
and Mrs. Arthur, Victoria-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. KEN. BAIN.
Enlisted Jan., 1916; died of meningitis, Eng-
land, Jan., 1917. Son of Mr. Bain, Johnson-
street, Annandale, and late of Lidcombe.
Pte. T. W. B. BOARD.
Enlisted May, 1915; killed in France, July,
1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. W. Board,
“Hillside,” Lidcombe.


Pte. W. C. BORSERIO.
Enlisted 1915. Son of Mrs. M. Borserio, Hyde
Park, Lidcombe.
Pte. F. R. BYCROFT,
Lidcombe. Killed at Gallopoli, August, 1915.
Pte. E. CLARKSON.
Enlisted January, 1916; killed in France,
November, 1916. Brother of Mr. Clarkson,
Kerr’s-road, Lidcombe.
Pte. E. C. BROWN,
Lidcombe.
Pte. M. CARNEY,
Lidcombe.
Pte. R. CLARKSON,
Lidcombe. Enlisted January, 1916.
Pte. L. J. BUGG.
Embarked November, 1915; killed in France,
July, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Bugg,
John-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. G. A. CLACK,
Lidcombe. Embarked, 1915; died of pneu-
monia, England, March, 1919.
Pte. W. CLOUGH,
Lidcombe. Killed at Gallipoli, 1915.


Pte. JACK CLYDESDALE.
Enlisted September, 1915; died of wounds,
France, August, 1918. Son of Pastor and Mrs.
Clydesdale, Mark-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. H. W. COLLINS.
Son of Mrs. G. Collins, Bank-st., Lidcombe.
Pte. E. COOK.
Enlisted October. 1916: died of wounds, France,
August, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. C. Cook,
Baulkham Hills, late of Lidcombe.
Pte. A. COE, M.M.
Embarked June, 1915; died of wounds, Septem-
ber, 1917. Son of Mrs. Adams, Joseph-street,
Lidcombe.
Pte. A. C. COLLIS.
Embarked June, 1915; died of wounds, France,
May, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Collis,
Nottinghill-road, Lidcombe.
Sgt. J. D. COOK,
Embarked February, 1918; killed in France,
August, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. Cook,
New-street, Lidcombe.
Sgt. R. COLLINGS.
Embarked May, 1915; killed in France, Novem-
ber, 1916.
Pte. J. CONDIE.
Killed in France, March, 1917. Brother of
Mrs. E. L. Kingsley, Lidcombe.
Pte. J. J. COOK.
Enlisted 1914. Wounded at Gallipoli. Son of
Mr. Chas. Cook, Church-street, Lidcombe.


Pte. C. B. COOKE.
Killed in France. Son-in-law of Mr. and Mrs.
C. Eldridge, John-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. F. W. DAVIES,
Lidcombe.
Pte. G. T. DE ROME,
Lidcombe. Embarked December, 1915. Died
Of wounds, October, 1917.
Spr. L. J. CRIDLAND.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Cridland, Francis-street,
Lidcombe.
Pte. H. DAVIES,
Hyde Park, Lidcombe. Embarked January,
1917.
Dvr. J. L. DICKSON,
Lidcombe.
Pte. F. CUMMINGS,
Kerr’s-rond, Lidcombe; invalided home from
Gallipoli, August, 1915.
Bugler A. R. DAWSON,
Lidcombe. Embarked October, 1914; killed at
Gallipoli, August, 1915.
Cpl. C. C. DINGLE.
Embarked September, 1915; killed in France,
August, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. B. M.
Dingle, Childs-street, Lidcombe,


L.-Cpl. V. V. DINGLE.
Embarked September, 1915; killed in France,
August, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. B. M.
Dingle, Childs-street, Lidcombe.
Major T. P. ELLIOTT.
Killed in France, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
T. Elliott, Berala, Lidcombe.
Pte. F. ERICKSON.
Embarked November, 1915. Son of Mr. J.
Erickson, Eglington-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. P. M. DWYER.
Embarked August, 1915; killed in France, July,
1916. Brother-in-law of Mr. H. J. Smithers,
Lidcombe.
Pte. J. ELLIS.
Embarked August, 1916; killed in France,
February, 1917. Son-in-law of Mrs. Greaterix,
John-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. F. EVANS.
Embarked August, 1916. Husband of Mrs.
Evans, Brixton-road, Lidcombe.
Pte. W. ELDRIDGE.
Embarked December, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. W. Eldridge, of Katoomba, late of
Lidcombe.
Pte. R. J. EPTHORP.
Killed at Gallipoli, 1915. Son of Mr. Hugh
Epthorp, Lidcombe.
Dvr. W. H. FARRELL.
Son of late Mr. Chas. Farrell, Lidcombe.


Pte. E. FATHERS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Fathers, Short-street,
Lidcombe.
Pte. E. FOWLER.
Embarked January, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fowler, Mark-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. G. C. GREEN.
Enlisted January, 1916; killed in France, May,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Green,
“Thanet,” Lidcombe.
Pte. W. H. FORD.
Enlisted August, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
C. Ford, Nottinghill-road, Lidcombe.
Pte. S. FOWLER.
Embarked January, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fowler, Mark-street, Lidcombe.
Cpl. F. L. GRIFFITHS.
Embarked December, 1915. Son of Mr. F. H.
Griffiths, Lidcombe.
Pte. W. FOSTER,
Lidcombe. Embarked August, 1916. Killed in
France, April, 1917.
Pte. C. C. GOODMAN.
Embarked January, 1916. Killed In France,
August, 1916. Son of Mrs. Goodman, Kerr’s-
road, Lidcombe.
Pte. C. H. HATTON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. Hatton, Lidcombe.


Cpl. J. HORAM.
Embarked September, 1915; killed in France,
August, 1916. Husband of Mrs. Horam,
Kerr’s-road, Lidcombe.
Pte. R. H. HYDE.
Son of Mrs. M. Hyde, Lidcombe.
Sgt. GEO. KAYESS.
Embarked January, 1916; died of wounds,
France, September, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kayess, Cockthorpe-road, Lidcombe.
Gnr. E. A. HOWARD.
Enlisted July, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E.
A. Howard, Short-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. W. T. HYDE.
Died of meningitis. Son of Mrs. Mary Hyde,
Lidcombe.
Pte. S. J. KELLY.
Embarked September, 1916. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. J. Kelly, Joseph-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. D. HOWARTH.
Embarked September, 1916; killed in France,
September, 1917. Son of Mrs. Howarth, Hyde
Park, Lidcombe.
Pte. R. W. JAMES.
Embarked June, 1916. Son of Mr. J. James,
Nottinghill-road, Lidcombe.
Pte. J. KENNEDY.
Embarked April, 1916; killed in France, Sep-
tember, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. Kennedy,
late of Eglington-street, Lidcombe.


Pte. FRED. KINGSLEY, M.M.
Returned home April, 1919, after 3¼ years’
service. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. L. Kingsley,
Lidcombe.
Pte. C. LANE,
Hyde Park, Lidcombe. Enlisted November,
1915; invalided home, January, 1917.
Pte. H. LASSAU.
Embarked November, 1916; killed in France,
August, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. It. A.
Lassau. Beatrice-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. A. W. KNOX.
Killed in France, May, 1917. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. Jas. Knox, late of Lidcombe.
Pte. W. LANGFORD.
Son of Mrs. A. E. Langford, Lidcombe.
Mr. R. A, LASSAU,
Lidcombe. Embarked for England November,
1917, as munition maker.
Sig. G. F. LAMAN.
Embarked April, 1916; killed in France, Decem-
ber, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. H. Laman,
Martin-street, Lidcombe.
Sgt. E. W. LEWIN.
Enlisted August, 1914; killed in France, Aug.,
1916. Son of Mr. J. F. Lewin, York-street,
Lidcombe.
Sig. R. L ASSAD.
Embarked October, 1916. Killed at Bullecourt,
May, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. R. A. Lassan,
Beatrice-street, Lidcombe.


Pte. W. S. LEWIS.
Embarked from Egypt for France, March, 1916.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Lewis, Lidcombe.
Dvr. JACK MONRO.
Enlisted July, 1915. Son of Mrs. Shepherd,
Kerr’s-road, Lidcombe.
Pte. L. J. C. MUFFETT.
Embarked November, 1916; killed in France,
October, 1917. Brother of Mrs. Kenningdale,
Child-street, Lidcombe.
Spr. WM. MACGUIRE.
Embarked May, 1915; killed in France, Decem-
ber, 1916. Son of Mrs. MacGuire, Platform-
street, Lidcombe.
Pte. E. R. MORRIS.
Killed in France, August, 1916. Son of Mrs.
J. Winter, Lidcombe.
Pte. F. MUNRO.
Embarked February, 1917; died of wounds,
France, April, 1918. Son of. Mr. and Mrs. J.
Munro, Dalley-street, Lidcombe.
Gnr. D. J. MAHER,
Embarked October, 1915. Killed in France,
July, 1916. Nephew of Mrs. Meehan, Eglington-
street, Lidcombe.
Pte. E. MOSS.
Embarked January, 1917; died of wounds,
France, April, 1918. Grandson of Mr. and Mrs.
T. A. Hall, Mary-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. W. J. MUNRO,
Dalley-street, Lidcombe. Prisoner of war in
Germany from August, 1916, to November,
1918.


Tpr. R. H. MUSGROVE.
Enlisted January, 1915; killed at Gallipoli,
November, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. R.
Musgrove, Lidcombe.
Pte. FRED, McGLASHAN.
Enlisted 8th August, 1914, for Rabaul; re-en-
listed and embarked June, 1915; killed at Gal-
lipoli, Aug., 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. W.
McGlashan, Lidcombe.
Capt. D. A. McNAB, M.C.
Enlisted August, 1914. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
D. McNab, James-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. D. McDonald,
Lidcombe.
Lieut. J. J. McGRATH.
Embarked February, 1916; killed in France,
January, 1917. Husband of Mrs. McGrath,
Egerton-street, Lidcombe.
Gnr. W. P. McNAB,
Son of Mr, and Mrs. D. McNab, James-street,
Lidcombe.
Pte. ARTHUR McGLASHAN,
Embarked October, 1915; killed in France,
Aug., 1916. Nephew of Mr. and Mrs. F. W.
McGlashan, Lidcombe.
Sgt. A. McNAB.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. D. McNab, James-street,
Lidcombe.
Fte. J. McNAMARA.
Embarked November, 1916; killed in France,
October, 1917. Son-in-law of Mr. and Mrs. S.
Allsopp, Kingsland-road, Lidcombe.


Pte. J. J. NOAKES.
Embarked January, 1916; killed in France,
April, 1917. Son of Mr. T. Noakes, late of
Lidcombe.
Pte, C. N. O’BRIEN,
Vauglian-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. JOHN POXON.
Enlisted April, 1916; died of wounds, France,
August, 1918. Son-in-law of Mr. Douglas,
Livingstone-road, Lidcombe.
Pte. R. S. NOAKES.
Embarked January, 1916. Son of Mr. T.
Noakes, late of Lidcombe.
CYRIL PAGES.
H.M.S. Brisbane. Son of Mr. and Mrs. L. F.
Pages, Railway-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. LES. R. RAWARD.
Embarked November, 1916; died of wounds,
August, 1916. Resided with Mr. J. Bugg,
Lidcombe.
Sgt. T. S. NOAKES.
Son of Mr. T. Noakes, late of Lidcombe.
Corp. N. A. PINSON.
Son of Mr. R. J. Pinson, Charles-st., Lidcombe.
Gnr. J. ROLFE.
Embarked January, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rolfe, Chnrles-street, Lidcombe.


Pte. T. W. SAYERS,
Lidcombe.
Sgt. A. T. SLEE.
Killed in France. Son of Mrs. Slee, Lewisham,
late of Lidcombe.
Sergt.-Bglr. F. SMITH.
Embarked March, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
F. Smith, Lidcombe.
L.-Cpl. D. SHIELLS.
Embarked December, 1914; killed at Gallipoli,
August, 1915. Son of Ex-Alderman Shiells,
Lidcombe.
Pte. A. H. SMITH.
Enlisted August, 1915; invalided home, October,
1918. Son of Mrs. J. Smith, Vaughan-street,
Lidcombe.
L.-Cpl. ROSS SMITH,
Lidcombe. Embarked January, 1916; killed in
France, October, 1917,
Pte. G. H. SIMPSON,
Lidcombe. Embarked December, 1915; killed
in France, July, 1916.
Cpl. A. J. SMITH.
Embarked January, 1916; killed in France,
June, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Smith,
Oxford-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. W. J. ST. LEDGER.
Embarked February, 1916; killed in France.
Cousin of Mrs. Mulhall, Lidcombe.


Pte. JOE TATTERSALL,
Lidcombe.
Cpl. S. C. TODD.
Embarked September, 1915; killed in France,
October, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. D. Todd,
John-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. D. WELLS.
Embarked August, 1916; died of illness, Eng-
land, December, 1916. Brother of Miss Alice
Wells, John-street, Lidcombe.
Sgt. G. W. TAYLOR, D.C.M., M.M.
Embarked September, 1916; died of wounds,
August, 1918. Son of Mr. Geo. Taylor, The
Boulevarde, Lidcombe.
Sgt. C. TRICK, D.C.M., M.M.
Erskineville. Son of Mrs. Astridge, Kerr’s-rd.,
Lidcombe.
Pte. G. A. WELLS.
Brother of Miss Alice John-street,
Lidcombe.
Dvr. SID THOMAS,
Lidcombe.
Pte. C. WARD,
Killed in France, July, 1916. Son of Mrs.
Ward, Livingstone-road, Lideombe.
L.-Cpl. H. C. WELLS.
Embarked June, 1915. Brother of Miss Alice
Wells, John-street, Lidcombe.


Pte. R. C. WELLS.
Embarked June, 1916; killed in France, Jan.,
1918. Brother of Mrs. Alice Wells, John-street,
Lidcombe.
Sig.-Sgt. D. H. WHITE.
Embarked May, 1915; killed in France, Novem-
ber, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. White,
Raymond-street, Lidcombe.
Pte. A. M. WILSON,
Kerr’s-road, Lidcombe.
Pte. A. WHITE.
Embarked October, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
E. White, Raymond-street, Lidcombe..
Pte. G. W. WHITE.
Embarked October, 1914. Sou of Mr. and Mrs.
E. White, Raymond-street, Lidcombe.
Cpl. A. T. WINTER, D.C.M.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Winter, Egerton-street,
Lidcombe.
Pte. A. E. WHITE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. White, Raymond-street,
Lidcombe.
Pte. E. WILKINSON,
Lidcombe. Killed in Trance, July, 1916.
Sgt. A. W. E. WRIGHT, M.M.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Wright, Mill-street,
Lidcombe.
[SEE ALSO MISCELLANEOUS AT END OF BOOK.]


SOUTHERN LINE
Comprising: Liverpool, Marsden Park, Ingleburn, Hoxton Park,
Cecil Park, Cabramatta, Canley Vale, St. Johns Park,
Smithfield and Fairfield, Wetherill Park, Bossley Park,
Guildford and Merrylands.
Pte. J. C. ADAMS.
Enlisted March, 1917; invalided home, March,
1919. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Adams,
Liverpool.
Sig. P. C. ADAMS.
Enlisted July, 1915; invalided home March,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Adams,
Liverpool.
Pte. R. C. ARUNDELL.
Grandson of Mr. and Mrs. T. Arundell, late of
Commercial Hotel, Liverpool.
Cpl. S. E. AUBREY.
Killed at Gallipoli. Sept., 1915. Brother of
Mr. J. Aubrey, Norfolk-st., Liverpool.
Pte. F. BALL and Stoker J. BALL.
Sons of Mrs. J. Ball, Liverpool.
Pte. J. BALL, Sen.
Liverpool.


Sgt. F. B. BARKER.
Son of Mr. F. Barker, Liverpool.
Lieut. C. O. BENSON, M.M.
Invalided home, April, 1919. Son of Mr.
Benson, Station-master, Liverpool.
Pte. W. H. BREWSTER.
Son of Mrs. Brewster, Liverpool.
Pte. E. A. BAXTER,
Liverpool. Died of wounds, France, December,
1916.
Pte. F. C. BILLETT.
Son of Mr. Stephen Billett, Liverpool.
Pte. J. B. BROWN.
Son of Mr. J. Brown, Liverpool.
Pte. G. BELL.
Enlisted April, 1916; killed in France, Novem-
ber, 1917. Resided with Mrs. H. J. Taylor,
Liverpool.
Pte. JACK BRADBURY.
Invalided home February, 1919. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. J. Bradbury, Liverpool.
Lieut. WM. BROWN,
Liverpool. Embarked July, 1915. Reported
"missing, believed killed,” France, Septem-
ber, 1916,


Pte. P. CAFFERY,
Liverpool. Killed in France. September, 1918.
Pte. ROY CLARKE,
Liverpool. Killed in France.
L.-Cpl. H. A. CLOTHIER, M.M.
Son of Mr. F. E. Clothier, Liverpool.
Pte. W. G. CHALMERS,
Liverpool.
Pte. S. B. CLARKE,
Liverpool. Lied of wounds, April, 1918.
Tpr. H. CONLON,
Liverpool,
Xpr. WM. CHRISTIAN,
Liverpool.
Cpl. W. F. CLOKE.
Enlisted March, 1916; killed in France, October,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. Cloke, Liverpool.
Gnr. J. EVANS,
Liverpool. Enlisted June, 1916,


Sgt. W. FARRELL,
Liverpool and Parramatta.
Lance-Cpl. J. GOMES.
Son of Mrs. Gomes, Liverpool.
Pte. K. HARDING.
Son of Rev. A. S. J. Harding and Mrs. Harding,
late of Liverpool.
Pte. GEO. FULLAGAR,
Liverpool. Enlisted 1914; returned August,
1915.
Pte. L. HANNA,
Son of Mr. W. J. Hanna, Liverpool.
Pte. A. HARRISON,
Liverpool.
Pte. L. GALLARD.
Son of Mrs. J. Gallard, Liverpool.
Bombdr, ERIC HARDING, M.M.
Embarked May, 1916. Son of Rev. A. S. J.
and Mrs. Harding, Liverpool.
Pte. T. HARRISON.
Died of wounds, France. Brother of Mrs. J-
Kelly, Liverpool.


Gunner JACK HILL.
Son of Mr. F. Hill, Liverpool.
Sgt. TOM HOLLAND,
Liverpool.
Pte. W. HUGHES,
Liverpool.
Pte. F. HILLIARD,
Liverpool. Invalided home, 1916.
Pte. V. G. HOSKING,
Liverpool; died of illness, Melbourne, March,
1917, when returning from France.
L.-Cpl. C. E. HYLAND.
Enlisted 1914; died of pneumonia, Belgium,
March, 1919. Sou of Mr. and Sirs. Hyland,
late of Liverpool.
Pte. W. HILLIARD.
Son of Sir. J. Hilliard, George-street, Liverpool.
Pte. R. G. HUGHES.
Enlisted September, 1915. Resided with Ex-
Alderman Retallick, of Liverpool.
Pte. J. HYLAND,
Liverpool.


Pte. H. J. JACKSON.
Embarked September, 1915; killed in France.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Jackson, Liverpool.
Lieut. F. M. JOHNSON.
Enlisted August, 1914. Son of Lieut. G. John-
son, Area Officer, Liverpool.
Sig. J. L. KAMMEL,
Liverpool.
Pte. R. S. JACKSON.
Embarked April, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
W. Jackson, Liverpool.
Capt. H. W. JOHNSON, M.C.
Enlisted Aug. 6, 1914. On return from Rabaul
re-enlistetd and embarked for France. Son of
Lieut. G. L. Johnson, Area Officer, Liverpool.
Pte. N. LACKIE, M.M.,
Moorebank, Liverpool.
Pte. J. A. JENNER,
Embarked September, 1916; killed in France,
September, 1917. Brother of Mrs. C. Grimson,
Liverpool.
P. S. KAMMEL,
Wireless Assistant, H.M.A.S. Melbourne. Resi-
dent of Liverpool.
Pte. W. LACKIE,
Killed in France. Son of Mr. and Mrs. H.
Lackie, Moorebank, Liverpool.


Pte. C. R. LAWLESS,
Lite Assistant Town Clerk, Liverpool. Killed
in France, May, 1917.
Pte. W. E. LEAROYD,
Liverpool.
Pte. J. MORN.
Son of Mrs. J. Schill, Liverpool.
Sgt. JOE LEACH, D.C.M.
Embarked October, 1914. Son of Mrs. S.
Leach, Liverpool.
Pte. O. MARKS,
Liverpool.
Pte. D. M. MUIR,
Liverpool. Embarked October, 1916. Killed
in France, February, 1917.
Pte. ROD LEAROYD,
Liverpool.
Pte. A. E. MAXWELL.
Enlisted April, 1915; invalided home November,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. Maxwell, Hoxton
Park-road, Liverpool.
Pte. W. MUNRO,
Liverpool. Invalided home March, 1919.


Dvr. A. D. (“Scottie”) McDONALD,
Liverpool.
Pte. FREDERICK WILLIAM NICHOLLS.
25th Batt., A.I.F. Killed in action at Fleurs,
France, November 14, 1916. Aged 34 years.
Son of Mrs. Nicholls, Liverpool.
Pte. REG. PAYNE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Payne, High-street, Liver-
pool.
Pte. C. McFARLINE.
Killed in France, July, 1916. Son of Mr. A.
McFarline, Liverpool.
Rev. R. H. NOBLE, C.F.
Chaplain to South Wales Borderers. Mentioned
in Despatches. Son of Rev. H. J. Noble,
Liverpool.
Pte. W. PEARCE.
Brother of Messrs. S. T. and E. Pearce, Liver-
pool.
Sgt. C. G. McKECHNIE,
Liverpool. Killed in France.
Pte. E. W. PAINTER.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Painter, Liverpool.
Pte. W. F. PENNEY.
Died of wounds, France, May, 1918. Son of
Mrs. A. C. Penney. Liverpool.


2nd-Lieut. JOHN BRUCE PYE,
Late of Liverpool and Concord.
Cpl. J. D. REID,
Liverpool. Killed at Gallipoli, May, 1915.
Cpl. LEONARD ROYD.
Nephew of Mrs. J. Ball, Liverpool.
Pte. K. G. RANDALL.
Killed in France, August, 1918. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. A. Randall, Liverpool.
Pte. HUGH ROGERS,
Liverpool. Invalided home January, 1918.
Sig. G. A. RYMAN.
Died of illness, Egypt, May, 1916. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. G. G. Ryman, Liverpool.
Cpl. L. A. RANDALL.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. Randall, Liverpool.
Pte. A. ROWLEY.
Brother of Mr. Alf. Rowley, Liverpool.
Pte. A. SALIS,
Liverpool.


Capt. ERIC SEALY-VIDAL, M.C.
Son of Mrs. Sealy-Vidal, Liverpool.
Cpl. A. G. SHERER, M.M.,
Liverpool.
Pte. JOHN SOUTHWELL, M.M.
Son of Mr. J. Southwell, Castlereagh-street,
Liverpool.
Pte. S. SEALY-VIDAL.
Returned February, 1919, after 4 years’ service.
Son of Mrs. Sealy-Vidal, Liverpool.
Cpl. A. J. SMITH,
Liverpool. Brother of W. H. Smith (the late
popular jockey).
Dvr. B. J. STANLEY.
Nephew of Mrs. TV. W. Smith, Elizabeth-street,
Liverpool.
Pte. W. SHAW,
Liverpool.
Pte. FRANK SOMER.
Enlisted 1914; killed in France, April, 1918.
Brother of Mrs. J. Newnham, Macquarie-street,
Liverpool.
Pte. G. G. STEENSON,
Liverpool. Embarked Tune, 1915; killed
France, July, 1916.


Sgt.-Major HERBERT A. STUART.
Killed in action in France. Only son of Nurse
Stuart, of Liverpool.
Pte. TOM TAYLOR.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Taylor, Liverpool.
Tpr. C. THROSBY.
Died of illness, Egypt. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
A. Throsby, Liverpool.
Pte. E. A. TAYLOR.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. H. J. Taylor, Atkinson-
street, Liverpool.
Pte. A. C. THORNE.
Enlisted March, 1917; died of wounds, March,
1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. Thorne, Liver-
pool.
Sgt. N. UPRIGHT,
Liverpool. Enlisted November, 1915. Killed
in France, April, 1917.
Pte. JOHN TAYLOR.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. H. J. Taylor, Liverpool.
Pte. JACK THORNE.
Son of Mr. R. Thorne, Moorebank, Liverpool.
Gnr. J. WATSON,
Liverpool. Killed in action, October, 1917.


Major A. E. WEARNE, M.C.
Embarked October, 1915; twice mentioned in
despatches for work in Palestine. Brother of
Mr. H. E. Wearne, Liverpool.
L.-Cpl. A. WELLER,
Son of Aid. G. H. Weller, Liverpool.
Co. Sgt.-Major A. A. WOOD, D.C.M., M.M.
Enlisted Feb., 1915; died of wounds, France,
Dec., 1916. Son of Mr. G. Wood, Granville,
late Manager Liverpool Gas Works.
Sgt. C. WEARNE.
Son of Mr. T. Wearne, Liverpool.
Tptr. G. WHITWORTH,
Liverpool.
Lance-Cpl. H. J. (BERT) WOOD, M.M.
Enlisted August, 1915; returned April, 1919.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Geo. Wood, Granville (late
of Liverpool).
Pte. C. C. WEARNE.
A.M.C. Son of Mr. H. E. Wearne, Liverpool.
Pte. L. D. WHYTE.
Invalided home January, 1918, after three
years’ service. Son of Mrs. E. Whyte, Liver-
pool.
Sgt. W. A. WOOD,
Liverpool. Enlisted September, 1915; returned
May, 1919.


Cpl. J. B. SNELLING,
Late of Liverpool. Killed in France.
Pte. J. F. HILDER.
Son of Mr. T. J. Hilder, Ingleburn.
Tpr. D. E. STEWART,
Hoxton Park, Liverpool.
Died of appendicitis in Egypt.
Pte. W. MORRIS,
Son of Mr. J. Morris, Marsden Park.
Pte. T. E. HILDER.
Died of pneumonia, Rouen, France. Son of
Mr. T. Hilder, Ingleburn.
Pte. J. BOYLAND,
Cecil Park, Liverpool.
Pte. G. W. ALLEN.
Enlisted August, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
It. Alien, Ingleburn.
Pte. HAROLD KEMP.
Son of Mr. J. Kemp, Rawson Park, Ingleburn.
Pte. P. BALOGE.
Killed in France. Son of Mrs. Baloge, Cecil
Park, Liverpool.


Pte. B. B. HUNTER,
Cecil Park, Liverpool; killed in action, 1916.
Pte. HARRY HOFFMANN.
Embarked September, 1916. Son of Mr. W.
Hoffmann, Cecil Park, Liverpool.
Tpr. A. P. MARKS.
Died of malarial fever. Son of Mrs. M. Marks,
Cecil Park.
A Trio of Fighters from
Cabramattta:
1. Pte. C. WILLIAMS (returned wounded).
2. Pte. WM. ATKINS (killed).
3. Pte. W. ATKINS, Sen. (returned invalided).
1
2
3
Sgt. P. E. BERGMAN.
Embarked April, 1915; died of pneumonia,
France, March, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. M.
Bergman, Longfield-street, Cabramatta.
Tpr. H. BABER,
Cabramatta.
Pte. W. J. BAILEY.
Son of Ex-Alderman J. Bailey, Cabramntta.


Sgt. C. A. BULL,
Cabramatta. Enlisted 1914; returned Decern-
ber, 1918.
Mayor E. HANBURY,
Cabra-Vale Council. Embarked early 1918 for
England as munition-maker.
Pte. W. JEWEL,
Cabramatta. Enlisted 1916.
Pte. ALEX. DUCKWORTH,
Late of Cabramatta. Killed in France, July,
1917.
Pte. N. E. HANBURY.
Enlisted May, 1915; invalided home, April,
1917. Son of Ex-Mayor Hanbury, of Cabra-
matta.
Dvr. R. LAW.
Enlisted 1914; died of wounds, January, 1918.
Brother-in-law of Mr. H. Smith, Cabramatta.
Sgt. C. FOWLER,
Son of Mr. W. D. Fowler, Cabramatta. In-
valided home March, 1919, after 3½ years’
service.
Pte. ALBERT HOY.
Embarked December, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. W. Hoy, Cabramatta.
Gnr. W. LOWE.
Enlisted September, 1915; killed in Palestine,
August, 1918. Brother of Mrs. D. Murchison,
Cabramatta.


Gnr. W. H. REARDON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. J. Reardon, John-
street, Cabramatta.
Pte. E. TURNER,
Cabramatta. Enlisted August, 1915; killed in
France, September, 1916.
L.Cpl; L. W. ATLEE.
Son of Cpl. and Mrs. L. H. Atlee, Canley Vale.
Enlisted 1916.
Pte. A. G. SCRAGG.
Killed in action, 1917. Son of Mrs. Scragg,
Cabramatta.
Pte. R. ARCHIBALD.
Enlisted March, 1916; killed in France, May,
1918. Son of Mrs. C. K. Archibald, Avoca-
road, Canley Vale.
Gnr. S. E. ATLEE,
Son of Cpl. and Mrs, L. H. Atlee, Canley Vale,
Pte. C. H. SNOW.
Killed at Lone Pine, Gallipoli, August, 1915.
Late of Cabramatta.
Cpl. L. H. ATLEE,
Canley Vale.
Cpl. C. A. BINT,
Canley Vale. Enlisted 1914. Invalided home,
December, 1915. Twice mentioned in des-
patches.


Bdr. R. BOWIE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. P. Bowie, Canley Vale.
D. DUNCAN,
Canley Vale.
Pte. F. C. GILROY.
Embarked October, 1917. Sou of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilroy, Canley Vale (late of Granville).
Pte. W. BOYS.
Adopted son of Aid. G. Stimson, Canley Vale.
Pte. BOB FISHER.
Brother of Mrs. J. Saville, Canley Vale. In-
valided home, 1917.
Pte. C. F. HAMBLING.
Embarked October, 1915; killed in France,
November, 1916. Son of Mr. G. Hambling,
Canley Vale.
Pte. G. B. BRENNAN,
Canley Vale. Killed in France, November,
1916.
Bombr. C. M. GARRETT.
Enlisted October, 1915; killed in France, May,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Garrett,
Humphries-road, Canley Vale.
Pte. C. HEARD.
Son of Mrs. R. Heard, Canley Vale.


Pte. E. HEARD.
Sou of Mrs. R. Heard, Canley Vale.
Pte. W. G. JORDAN.
Enlisted July, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W.
J. Jordan, Canley Vale.
Pte. J. K. MACKENZIE.
Enlisted August, 1916; died of wounds, France,
September, 1917. Late of Canley Vale.
Pte. R. H. HEARD.
Son of Mrs. R. Heard, Canley Vale.
Pte. W. KNIGHT.
Enlisted November, 1916; died of wounds,
August, 1918. Son of Mrs. G. Knight, Canley
Vale.
Pte. H. T. MARTIN,
Canley Vale.
Ex-Aid. A. C. HEYDON,
Canley Vale. Enlisted 1916.
Bgl. G. J. LONG.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. R. Long, Canley Vale.
Pte. JACK MARTIN,
Canley Vale.


Pte. W. H. MITCHELL.
Enlisted 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. H. Mit-
cliell, Canley Vale.
Pte. JOHN PAGE.
Killed in France, 1918. Son of Mr. R. J. Page,
Canley Vaie.
Sig. C. J. STIMSON.
Son of Ald. G. Stimson, of Canley Vale. In-
valided home, February, 1919, after 3 years’
service.
Pte. R. W. MOIR.
Killed at Gallipoli, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
C. W. Moir, Canley Vale.
Pte. A. D. SMITH.
Embarked September, 1916. Son of Mrs. A. M.
Smith, of Canley Vale.
Pte. JAS. TAIT.
Enlisted August, 1916; died of wounds, France,
July, 1918, Son of Mr. John Tait, Beckenham-
street, Canley Vale.
Lieut. S. J. MOIR.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. C. W. Moir, Canley Vale.
Pte. H. D. SMITH,
Embarked March, 1916. Son of Mrs. A. M.
Smith, of Canley Vale.
Pte. J. W. WEST.
Enlisted August, 1915; invalided home, Jan.,
1917. Sou of Mr. and Mrs. J. A. West, Senior-
street, Canley Vale,


Pte. A. W. YOUNG.
Enlisted August, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
W. Young, Avenal-street, Canley Vale.
Sapper F. H. EVANS,
St. John’s Park.
A.B. JACK BETTS.
On H.M.A.S. Sydney, formerly on H.M.A.S.
Tingira. Son of Mr. and Mrs, Betts, Smith-
field.
Pte. WILFRED YOUNG.
Enlisted September, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. W. Young, Avenal-street, Canley Vale.
Pte. H. J. HOWARD,
St. John’s Park, Cabramatta. Returned Jan.,
1917, after service in France and Gallipoli.
Tpr. T. E. BETTS.
Son of Mr. W. Betts, Smithfield.
Pte. E. BUCKLAND.
Enlisted February, 1916; killed in France,
December, 1916. Husband of Mrs. E. Buck-
land, St. John’s Park, Cabramatta.
Gnr. J. A. ANDERSON.
Killed in France, May, 1917. Son of Mr. J.
Anderson, Smithfield.
Pte. L. A. BRODIE, C. de G.
Returned February, 1919, after three years’
service. Son of Mrs. A. Brodie, Smithifield.


Cpl. R. J. BRODIE.
Embarked October, 1915; invalided home, 1918.
Son of Mrs. A. Brodie, Smithfield.
Lieut. W. M. E. CARTER,
Smithfield.
Dvr. A. H. COLEMAN.
R.A.M.C. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. R. Cole-
man, Smithfield.
Dvr. F. C. BROOKING.
Invalided home, February, 1919. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. H. Brooking, Smithfield.
Gnr. L. J. CLARKE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. C. Clarke, Smithfield.
Pte. ERIC COLEMAN.
Enlisted January, 1916; killed in France, May,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. Coleman, Smith-
field.
Pte. HUGH CARTER.
Killed at Gallipoli, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
Worters Carter, Smithfield.
Pte. V. W. CLARKE.
Embarked April, 1916; killed in France, June,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. C. Clarke, Smith-
field.
Pte. F. A. COLEMAN.
Enlisted September, 1916; killed in France,
September, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A.
Coleman, Smithfield.


Pte. S. COLEMAN.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Tom Coleman, Smithfield.
Lieut. J. McL. DAVIS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Geo. Davis, Smithfield.
Pte. ROY H. EDWARDS.
Embarked May, 1915. Son of Mrs. Betts,
Smithfield.
Tpr. HERBERT ROY DALZIEL,
Smithfield. Killed at Gallipoli, August, 1915.
Pte. JAS. R. DUMMETT.
Enlisted May, 1916; died of pneumonia, Eng-
land, August, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J.
Dummett, Smithfield.
Lieut. C. E. FULLER, M.M.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. S. Fuller, Smithfield.
Lieut. H. B. DAVIS, M.C.
Killed in France, October, 1918. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. Geo. Davis, Smithfield.
Pte. E. O. EDWARDS.
Enlisted January, 1916; killed in France, Dec.,
1917. Son of Mrs. Betts, Smithfield.
SYDNEY FULLER.
Serving on H.M.A.S. Tingira. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. H. E. Fuller, Smithfield,


L.-Cpl. A. H. GOESCH.
Embarked May, 1916; returned February, 1919.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. G. Goesch, Smithfield.
Pte. A. J. KOWALD.
Son of Mrs. J. Kowald, Smithfield.
Pte. P. C. LEE.
Embarked August, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
G. Lee, Smithfield.
Pte. J. S. GREEN.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Green, Smithfield.
Pte. ED. KOWALD.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Kowald, Smithfield.
Lance-Cpl. W. K. LEWIS,
Smithfield.
Gnr. M. J. HEALY.
Enlisted January, 1916; killed In France, Sep-
tember, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Healy,
Smithfield.
Pte. H. D. LANDERS.
Killed in France, 1917. Son of Sgt. and Mrs.
H. Landers, Parramatta, late of Smithfield.
Gnr. S. MATTHEWS, M.M.
Son of Mrs. S. Williams, Smithfield.


Pte. J. R. (JACK) MURRAY,
Smithfield. Died of wounds in France.
Pte. N. T. McNAUGHTON.
Embarked January, 1916. Son of Mrs.
MeNaughton, Smithfield.
Pte. N. L. OAKLEY.
Smithfield.
L.-Cpl. ROBT. MURRAY.
Killed in France, October, 1916. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. R. Murray, and grandson of Mr.
Worters, Carter, of Smithfield.
Pte. H. M. NEWELL.
Grandson of Mr. and Mrs. J. McLeod, Smith-
field. Died of wounds, France, November,
1917.
Pte. W. R. OAKLEY,
Smithfield.
Cpl, R. E. MURRAY.
Enlisted 1914. Son-in-law of Mr. and Mrs.
Worters Carter, Smithfield.
Spr. C. C. R, NUNN,
Smithfield.
Pte. THOMAS ROBSON,
Smith. Died from the result of wounds.


Dvr. J. COPELAND.
Killed in France, November, 1916. Son-in-law
of Mr. J. Stein, Wetherill Park.
Pte. WILL DIDCOTE.
Embarked May, 1915; killed at Gallipoli, Aug.,
1915. Resided with Mr. A. C. Bell, Wetherill
Park.
Ptes. J. WHITNEY, L. HANNA, and F. BALL,
Liverpool.
Pte. B. DELLA-VALLE.
Embarked September, 1915; killed in France,
July, 1918. Son of Mr. B. Della-valle, late
of Wetherill Park.
Spr. P. JAMES.
Embarked October, 1916. Resident of Wetherill
Park.
Pte. C. H. MARTIN,
Bosley Park. Died of wounds, 1917.
Sgt. H. F. DIDCOTE.
Embarked May, 1915; killed in France, Jan.,
1918. Resided with Mr. A. C. Bell, Wetherill
Park.
Pte. BERT. THOMAS,
Wetherill Park.
Pte. H. G. MARTIN,
Bosley Park.


Pte. P. T. AINSWORTH.
Late of Fairfield. Killed in action.
Pte. FRED. BOXALL,
Hampton-street, Fairfield. Enlisted May, 1916.
Sig. J. C. CAMPBELL.
Enlisted March, 1915; killed in France, Febru-
ary, 1917. Son of Mr. J. Campbell, Fairfield.
Sgt.-Major J. BERRY.
Son of Mrs. J. Berry, Fairfield.
Pte. J. H. BROWN.
Embarked December, 1914; died of wounds,
August, 1917. Son of Mrs. Brown, Fairfield.
Pte. W. CARRATT.
Enlisted, November, 1916; killed in France,
August, 1918. Brother of Mrs. M. Soult,
Fairfield.
L.-Cpl. W. BLOMFIELD.
Killed in France, July, 1916. Son of Mrs. E.
Blomfield, Fairfield.
Pte. W. BRUNNE.
Embarked June, 1915. Son of Mrs. T. Brunne,
Fairfield.
Staff-Sgt.-Major E. R. CLARKE,
Enlisted September, 1915; invalided home,
September, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. D.
Clarke, Fairfield.


Lieut. H. J. F. COE,
Fairfield.
Pte. H. F. DUFF,
Fairfield.
Pte. ROY FOWLER,
Embarked November, 1916; killed in France,
May, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Fowler,
Fairfield.
Spr. R. J. C. COWAN.
Enlisted 1914. Son of Mrs. Hill, Fairfield.
L.-Cpl. J. FERGERSON,
Fairfield.
Spr. S. FOWLER.
Embarked June, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs,
E. Fowler, Fairfield.
Cpl. A. L. CORCELLIS,
Liverpool-road, Fairfield.
Pte. H. C. FOWLER.
Embarked November, 1916. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. E. Fowler, Fairfield.
Pte. E. J. GIBBES.
Son of Mr. E. J. Gibbes, Smart-street, Fair-
field.


Cpl. ERLE C. GOODACRE.
Son of Mr. G. J. Goodacre, Fairfield.
Pte. TOM HEREFORD,
Fairfield. Died in Alexandria Hospital, Oct.
1915, from wounds received at Gallipoli.
Sgt. E. HILL.
Killed in France, February, 1918. Brother of
Mrs. E. Gamble, Fairfield.
L.Cpl. ERIC A. GOODACRE.
Killed in France, 1917. Son of Mr. G. J.
Goodacre, Fairfield.
Pte. S. HERMAN,
Fairfield.
Gnr. E. W. HODGES.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. A. Hodges, Fairfield.
Pte. R. GORDON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. G. Gordon, Fairfield.
M. J. HERR.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Herr, Fairfield. Returned
after 4 years on H.M.A.S. Australia.
Pte. RAY J. JONES.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. F. Jones, Fairfield.
Returned March, 1919, after 4 years’ service.


Pte. RAY JAMES KELLY,
Fairfield. Killed in France.
Pte. F. A. LANGWORTHY.
Enlisted August, 1916; killed in France, 1917.
Late of Smart-street, Fairfield.
Pte. W. M. E. LESTRANGE,
Fairfield. Invalided home February, 1916.
Pte. W. KING.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. H. King, Fairfield.
Cpl. E. LEAMAN.
Killed in France, 1918, after 3 years’ service.
Son of Mrs. Leaman, Fairfield.
Pte. T. LEVETT,
Mark Lodge, Fairfield.
RALPH LANE.
Leading Telegraphist H.M.A.S. Australia; sail-
ed Aug., 1914; returned June, 1919. Son of
Mr. and Mrs. R. Lane, Canley-road, Fairfield.
Pte. TOM LESTRANGE.
Son of Mrs. E. Lestrange, Fairfield
Pte. E. MARCHANT.
Enlisted December, 1914; invalided home,
February, 1916. Late resident of Fairfield.


Pte. W. V. MATTHEWS,
Fairfield.
COLIN MOIR.
Leading Telegraphist H.M.A.S. Torrens. Sou
of Mr. and Mrs. Moir, East-street, Fairfield.
Pte. D. McLEAY,
Fairfield. Killed at Gallipoli, November,
1915.
Pte. HARLEY MATTHEWS.
Son of Mr. H. Matthews, Fail-field.
Pte. ROGER MORGAN.
A.M.O. Son of Mr. and Mrs. H. Morgan, late
of Fairfield.
Bglr. ROD McLEAY.
Enlisted 1914. Son of Mr. Alex. McLeay,
Fairfield.
Pte. J. D. MILNE.
Prisoner of war in Germany 24 years. Repat-
riated December, 1918. Son of Mrs. W. B.
Wilson, Fairfield.
Petty Officer W. E. McKENNY,
Mark Lodge, Fairfield. Returned after 4 years
on H.M.A.S. Australia.
Gnr. J. J. NOBLE,
Fairfield. Enlisted June, 1916; killed in
France, 1917.


Tpr. M. F. O’SULLIVAN.
Enlisted December, 1914; invalided home May,
1916; died October, 1918. Brother of Mr.
O’Sullivan, Hubert-street, Fairfield.
Pte. H. J. SHARMAN.
Embarked February, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. A. J. Sharman, Fairfield.
Pte. K. M. SIMPSON.
Killed in France, October, 1917. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. J. Simpson, Fairfield.
Cpl. G. A. FAPWORTH, M.M. (and bar).
Enlisted January, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
Geo. Papworth, Ware-street, Fairfield.
Pte. A. SHERER,
Fairfield. Son of Ald. and Mrs. W. Sherer,
Canley Vale. Invalided home, October, 1917.
Pte. THOMAS SINCLAIR.
Enlisted 1914; killed at Gallipoli, August, 1915.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Sinclair, Fairfield.
Pte. E. R. RAILTON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. W. Railton, Fairfield.
Pte. J. SIMPSON.
Invalided home, January, 1918. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. J. Simpson, Fairfield.
Lieut. TRANK SIMS, D.C.M., M.M,
Invalided home, February, 1919. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. H. R. Sims, Fairfield.


Pte. T. C. SMITH.
Enlisted 1914. Invalided home, September,
1915. Of Pine-street, Fairfield.
L.-Corp. H. C. STEIN.
Enlisted June, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. H.
Stein, Liverpool-road, Fairfield.
Gnr. H. K. THORPE.
Enlisted August, 1914, for Rabaul; re-enlisted
and embarked for France, 1917. Dale-street,
Fairfield.
H. G. SNOOK,
H.M.A.S. Encounter. Of Fairfield.
Pte. L, R. STONE.
Son-in-law of Mr. and Mrs. A. Lemon, Fair-
field.
Pte. F. C. THRIFT.
Brother of Mrs. J. N. Eason, Fairfield. Killed
in France, May, 1917.
L.-Cpl. E. SOAPER.
Enlisted March, 1915; killed at Gallipoli, 1915.
Brother of Mr. P. J. Soaper, Fairfield.
HAROLD TALLER.
Serving on H.M.A.S. Tingira. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. Taller, Mark Lodge, Fairfield.
Capt. J. R. TILLETT,
A.M.C. Died of wounds, October, 1917. Son
of Mr. J. V. Tillett, Fairfield.


Pte. F. N. TUCKFIELD,
Fairfield. Invalided home, July, 1916.
Sgt. C. WARDEN, D.C.M.
Enlisted 1914; returned December, 1918. Son
of Mrs. Warden, Fairfield.
Gnr. KEN. WOODS,
Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Woods, Fairfield.
Pte. H. S. TUCKFIELD.
Enlisted September, 1915; killed in France,
April, 1917. Nephew of Mr. and Mrs. H. Sims,
Fairfield.
Cpl. T. C. WEEDON.
Enlisted October, 1914; killed in France, Aug.,
1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. Weedon, Fair-
field.
Capt. REG. WOODS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Woods, Fairfield.
Pte. R. TUKE.
Enlisted August, 1915; killed in France, July,
1916. Husband of Mrs. M. Luke, Lackey-street,
Fairfield.
Spr. H. W. WILDER.
Enlisted January, 1916; killed in France, July,
1917. Late of Parramatta Rifle Club and resi-
dent of Fairfield.
Sgt, ROY WOODS.
Enlisted January, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
E. Woods, “Messines,” Polding-st., Fairfield.


GUILDFORD ROAD, GUILDFORD
» :
wtV.
WOODS,
THE GUILDFORD DRAPER
A WELL-SELECTED STOCK OF GENERAL DRAPERY. HABERDASHERY
RIBBONS AND LACES
GREEN COUPONS GIVEN FREELY


Pte. W. WILLIAMS.
Brother of Mrs. A. Buckley, Fairfield.
Pte. J. S. BERNASCONI.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. L. Bernasconi, Guildford.
Pte. A. COLQUHOUN.
Embarked March, 1916; prisoner of war in
Germany from May, 1917, to Nov., 1918. Son
of Mr. Geo. Colquhoun, Guildford.
W.O. S. H. YOUNG.
Enlisted 1916. Fairfield.
Pte. V. E. BRINKMAN.
Enlisted May, 1915; killed at Gallipoli, August,
1915. Son of Mrs. J. Brinkman, Guildford.
Pte. J. L. COOPER,
Late of Guildford. Killed in France, 1916.
Pte. H. BRODIE.
Embarked April, 1916; invalided home, 1918.
Son of Mrs. A. Brodie, Smithfield.
Fte. W. CHILD.
Son of Mrs. Bounds, Station-street, Guildford.
Invalided home.
Sgt. W. D. FISK, D.C.M.
Enlisted 1915. Officially reported missing in
France, September, 1916. Son of Mrs. Fisk,
Guildford.


Cpl. E. A. GANE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Gane, Guildford.
Lieut.-Airman D. W. HARDIE.
R.F.C. Late of Guildford. Killed in France,
November, 1917.
Pte. S. JUDE.
Died of wounds, France, July, 1916. Son-in-
law of Mr. and Mrs. J. Hare, Guildford.
Pte. E. E. GANE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Gane, Guildford.
Pte. R. HAWKINS.
Killed in France, August, 1918. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. A. Hawkins, Guildford.
Cpl. A. C. KINDRED.
Son of Nurse Kindred, Guildford.
L.-Cpl. G. T. GANE.
Enlisted October, 1916; killed in France, July,
1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. G. W. Gane,
Guildford.
Pte. It. A. HILL.
Enlisted December, 1915; died whilst prisoner
of war in Germany, April, 1917. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. B. Hill, Guildford.
Major F. W. LINDEMAN.
Son-in-law of Mrs. H. Willis, Guildford. Died
of wounds, July, 1916.


Sgt.-Major R. W. McLAUCHLAN,
Guildford.
Pte. J. W. ROBINSON.
Son of Mr. G. E. Robinson, of Guildford.
Lieut. H. K. SOWELL.
Embarked September, 1916; killed in France,
May, 1917. Son of Mrs. Sowell, Guildford.
Pte. E. R. NORRIS.
Enlisted October, 1915; invalided home Feb-
ruary, 1919. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Norris,
Guildford.
Cpl. E. F. ROWLEY.
Enlisted Aug., 1914; killed at Gallipoli, April,
1915. Mentioned in Despatches. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. Jas. Rowley, Guildford.
Pte. C. J. B. STEER.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. R. Steer, Guildford.
Pte. J. OLIFFE.
Killed at Gallipoli, August, 1915. Adopted son
of Mrs. C. Lundie, Guildford.
Spr. A. V. SHIPTON.
Enlisted February, 1916. Son of Mrs. Shipton,
Guildford.
Cpl. R. L. STEER.
Enlisted August, 1914; Served in Rabaul Ex-
pedition; re-enlisted and embarked for France.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. R. Steer, Old Guildford.


Cpl. F. STRINGER.
Killed in France, Sept., 1918. Husband of
Mrs. Stringer, of Guildford, and nephew of
Mr. B. G. Potter, of Granville.
Pte. F. SWIFT,
Guildford.
L.-Cpl. A. E. BATKIN,
Merrylands.
Sgt.-Major H. W. SWEANEY,
Late of Guildford. Enlisted January, 1916;
killed in France, February, 1917.
Pte. W. E. WATSON.
Son of Mr. E. Watson, Military-rd., Guildford.
Pte. G. BENTLEY,
Merrylands. Embarked August, 1916.
Pte. A. SWIFT,
Guildford.
Pte. H. S. WEARNE.
Son of Mr. Jas. Wearne, Guildford.
Pte. E. J. BOTT.
Enlisted March, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. M.
Bott, Merrylands.


Pte. J. C. BRIDGES.
Enlisted August, 1914; killed at Gallipoli, May,
1915. Son of Mr. J. Bridges, late Station-
master, Merrylands.
Pte. O. H. DUNCAN,
Merrylands and Bayview.
Pte. E. G. HICKSON.
Killed in France, April, 1918. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. G. T. Hickson, Merrylands.
Pte. J. K. CAMPBELL,
Merrylands.
Cpl. E. FITZGERALD, M.M.
Grandson of Ex-Mayor J. Kelly, Merrylands.
Pte. ERN. H. HICKSON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Hickson, Merrylands.
Pte. A. J. CLARKE.
Enlisted December, 1914. Brother of Mrs. F.
J. Green, Merrylands.
Pte. S. FYFFE.
Embarked October, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
W. Fyffe, Merrylands.
Pte. ARTHUR JOHN HODGES,
Sherwood. Killed in action.


Pte. C. KAYE.
Enlisted September, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
G. A. Kaye, Hilltop, Merrylands.
Pte. G. LEE.
Killed in France, June, 1917. Son of Mrs. C.
Lee, Merrylands.
Pte. S. W. McLAUGHLAN.
Killed in France, July. 1916. Nephew of Mr.
F. Kerr, Merrylands.
Pte. W. W. KERR.
Enlisted January, 1916; killed in France, May,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. Kerr, Merry-
lands.
Pte. A. MAKINS.
Reported missing, 1917. Son of Mrs. Makins,
Merrylands.
Pte. WM. O’DONOUGHUE.
Son of Mr. M. O’Donoughue, Merrylands.
Pte. D. LEE.
Son of Mrs. O. Lee, Merrylands.
Gunner A. D. McDONALD,
Merry lands.
Pte. ALBERT OSTLER.
Embarked August, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ostler, Hastings River, late of Merrylands.


Pte. A. E. RANNARD.
Enlisted May, 1916; died of wounds, France,
April, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. G. Rannard,
Smithfield-road, Merrylands.
Cpl. F. SILVERSTONE,
A.M.C. Merrylands.
Pte. J. T. WRIGHT.
Son of Mrs. N. Wright, Merrylands.
Cpl. D. REES.
Embarked January, 1916; killed in France,
July, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Rees,
Loftus Park, Merrylands.
Pte. HAROLD W. SMITH.
Enlisted October, l9l5; killed in France, July,
1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. M. Smith,
Merrylands.
Gnr. R. E. E. YEEND.
Ex-Alderman of Prospect and Sherwood Coun-
cil.
Pte. H. ROLLANS.
Enlisted February, 1915. Son of Mr. R. Rol-
lans, Hilltop, Merrylands.
Pte. JACK SUTTON.
Son of Mrs. Sullivan, Merry lands.
Dvr. W. B. YEEND.
Son of Ex-Alderman R. E. Yeend, Merrylands.
[SEE ALSO MISCELLANEOUS AT END OF BOOK.]


BRICK and TILE WORKS
RAILWAY SIDING,
WENTWORTHVILLE.
Shannons’
BRICK and TILE MANUFACTURERS
Depot: PERCIVAL ROAD, PETERSHAM.
i
QUEENSLAND WORKS: FERNY GROVE, ENOGGERA LINE, BRISBANE.
TELEPHONES: Wentworthville, U 8370; Petersham, 1198.


WESTERN LINE
Comprising: WeStmead, Wentworthville, Toongabbie, Seven Hills,
Blacktown, Prospect, Plumpton, Schofield’s Siding, Sackville,
Eastern Creek, Rouse Hill.
Pte. A. J. HILLEARD,
Westmead.
Pte. A. S. KNOX.
Son of Airs, and the late Rev. W. Knox,
Westmead.
Pte. A. J. HILLIER.
Enlisted April, 1916; killed in France, June,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Hillier, Jessie-
street, Westmead.
Pte. H. LEE.
Embarked August, 1917; killed in France,
April, 1918. Son of Mr. and Airs. Lee, Good-
street, Westmead.
Pte. J. H. HOGAN, M.M.
Westmead.
Pte. G. E. ROGERS.
Enlisted August, 1915; died of wounds, France,
September, 1917. Son of Air. and Mrs. G.
Rogers, Westmead.


Gnr. W. A. ROTTON.
Son of Mr. H. O. Rotton, Westmead.
Sig. H. G. ROTTON.
Killed at Gallipoli, August, 1915. Son of Mr.
H. O. Rotton, of Westmead.
Pte. L. G. TYLER.
Embarked November, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. Tyler, Westmead.
Sgt. J. A. TYLER, M.M.
Died from trench fever. Son of Pte. Geo. W.
Tyler, May’s Hill, Westmead.
Pte. S. E. TATE. Pte. W. TATE.
Pte. S. E. Tate died of wounds in France, Aug., 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. A. Tate, West-
mead. Pte. W. Tate, nephew of late S. E. Tate.
Another
scene of
a landing by
Australian
Troops at
Gaba Tepe.


Pte. C. BRAYNE,
Wentworthville. Son of Inspector Brayne.
Gnr. M. B. GARLAND.
Enlisted October, 1917; died of wounds, France,
April, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. B. Garland,
Wentworthville.
Warrant-Officer A. W. LANE, D.C.M.
Wentworthville. Enlisted August, 1914; return-
ed December, 1918.
Seaman E. G. DANDRIDGE.
Son of Mrs. Dandridge, Wentworthville.
Pte. a. HEALEY,
Wentworthville.
Lieut. G. W. M. MILLS, M.C.
Enlisted 1914. Killed in France, July, 1917.
Son of Mr. H. M. Mills, “Yardley,” Went-
worthville.
Pte. R. CUDDEFORD,
Wentworthville. Embarked December, 1915;
killed in France, July, 1916.
Pte. JACK HOWELL,
Wentworthville.
Pte. K. R. GODBEE.
Enlisted October, 1916; died of wounds, France,
April, 1918. Son Of Mr. and Mrs. I. F. Godbee,
Toongabbie.


pte. don. S. McDonald.
Embarked October, 1915; killed in France,
April, 1918. Son of Mrs. McDonald, Macquarie-
road, Wentworthville.
Pte. S. C. ROWE.
Embarked October, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
F. Rowe, Wentworthville and Parramatta.
Pte. E. T. SLOAN.
Enlisted May, 1916; killed in France, June,
1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. R. Sloan, Fleming-
ton, late of Wentworthville.
Pte. R. PIKE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. S. Pike, Wentworthville.
Corporal ARTHUR SLOAN.
Enlisted January 15th, 1917. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. Sloan, Flemington, late of Wentworth-
ville.
Pte. W. W. SLOAN.
Enlisted January, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
It. Sloan, Flemington, late of Wentworthville.
Pte. R. E. QUINN.
Wounded at Gallipoli, 1915; invalided home
June, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. M Quinn,
Wentworthville.
Pte. G. E. SLOAN.
Enlisted February, 1916. Soil of Mr. and Mrs.
R. Sloan, Flemington, late of Wentworth-
ville.
Gnr. F. G. STEVENSON.
Enlisted January, 1916; killed in France, Oct.,
1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. Stevenson,
Wentworthville.


Pte. C. W. TONKIN,
Wentworthville.
Bdr. H. WOODWARD.
Embarked May, 1915. Son of Mrs. H. Wood-
ward, Wentworthville.
Pte. A. BOYLE,
Toongabbie. Enlisted August, 1915.
VIV. WOODALL.
H.M.A.S. Australia. Son of Mr. F. Woodall,
late Station-master, Wentworthville.
Gnr. R. WOODWARD.
Embarked January, 1917. Son of Mrs. H.
Woodward, Wentworthville.
Lieut. T. R. JAMES, M.M.
Enlisted 1914 for Rabaul; re-enlisted and em-
barked Nov., 1915; ret. July, 1919. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. T. C. James, P’tta, late Toongabbie.
Pte. HARRY WOODWARD.
Embarked October, 1916. Son of Mrs. H.
Woodward, Wentworthville.
Cpl. W. WOODWARD.
Embarked June, 1915. Son of Mrs. H. Wood-
ward, Wentworthville.
Pte. G. S. PAGE.
Enlisted June, 1916; killed in France, May,
1917. Son-in-law of Mr. and Mrs. A. Miller,
Toongabbie.


Spr. J. G. PAGE.
Son of Councillor and Mrs. J. C. Page, Toon-
gabbie.
Pte. REGINALD SYDNEY WILLMOT.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. Willmot, of Toongabbie.
Dvr. A. DAVISON.
Sou of Mrs. E. Davison, Seven Hills.
Cpl. H. W. WEST.
Enlisted October, 1915; killed in Palestine,
September, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. H.
West, Toongabbie.
Pte. H. F. BREST.
Embarked December, 1915; killed in France,
November, 1918. Son of Mrs. Brest, The
Meadows, Seven Hills.
Pte. E. HOWARD.
Died of wounds, France, July, 1916. Son of
Mr. S. Howard, Seven Hills.
Pte. R. R. WEST.
Enlisted Sep., 1914; invalided home, Oct., 1915;
re-enlisted Oct., 1916; killed in France, Sept.,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. H. West, Toongabbie.
Tpr. P. BRUNTON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Brunton, Seven Hills.
Pte. R. PICKBURN,
Seven Hills. Enlisted March, 1916. Died of
wounds, France, October, 1917.


Pte. H. TUCK.
Enlisted September, 1915; died of wounds,
Palestine, November, 1917. Son of Mrs. A. S.
Tuck, Seven Hills.
Sgt. Major F. S. JONES.
Enlisted 1914. On return from Rabaul, re-
enlisted and embarked March, 1915. Son of
Mr and Mrs. Stephen Jones, Blacktown.
Pte. N. T. B. SMITH.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Smith, “Flush-
combe,” Blacktown.
Gnr. G. B. JAGO.
Son of Mr. T. W. Jago, Shire Overseer, Black-
town.
Pte. A. R. PYE.
Killed in France, February, 1917. Son of
Councillor J. J. Pye, Blacktown, and nephew
of Mr. L. W. Pye, Parramatta.
Spr. J. J. STONEHOUSE.
Brother of Mrs. J. S. Bromfield, Blacktown.
Gnr. J. L. JAGO.
Son of Mr. T. W. Jago, Shire Overseer,
Blacktown.
Pte. W. G. SINCLAIR.
Enlisted May, 1915. Son of Mrs. S. Sinclair,
Blacktown.
Pte. R. RUTGERSON,
Prospect.


Gnr. A. A. T. PRINGLE.
Enlisted December, 1915; killed in France, July,
1917. Son of Lieut.-Col. and Mrs. Pringle, of
Plumpton.
Pte. H. H. JONES.
Embarked December, 1915. Killed in action.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. T. Jones, Sackville.
Pte. R. WELLS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Wells, Rouse Hill.
Pte. JACK McWILLIAM,
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. MeWilliam, Schofield’s
Siding.
Pte. J. OLIVER.
Enlisted October, 1916; killed in France, July,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. Oliver, Eastern
Creek.
Pte. H. WHITMORE.
Embarked early 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
E. Whitmore, Rouse Hill.
Pte. R. H. OSTLING,
Brother of Mrs. W. MeWilliam, Schofield’s
Siding.
Sig. C. H. WELLS.
Died of wounds, April, 1918. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. Wells, Rouse Hill.
Pte. A. WOODRUFFE.
Son-in-law of Mr. and Mrs. J. Muston, Glades-
ville.


Pte. J. E. and Cpl. W. BRUNTON.
Pte. J. E. Brunton was killed in France, Oct., 1917. Sons of Mr. and Mrs. J. Brunton, Seven
Hills.
Left to right: Pte. J. D. ROBERTS (killed). Pte. H. E. ROBERTS, Pte. C. T. ROBERTS, and a
little brother. Sons of Mrs. Fox-King, Wentworthville.
Ptes. PINCOTT and WATERS,
Both of Prospect.
Pte. A. H. WILLMOT.
Toongabbie. Killed in action, Pope’s Hill.
Gallipoli, December, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs
T. Willmot.
[SEE ALSO MISCELLANEOUS AT END OF BOOK.J


<*ap»
mm
3?^
*
•x
X
MV
-
A Well -worn Track
among the Farms. It spells a name that is known wherever
farms are bought and sold. Established in Granville in
1905, it took a firm hold and grew like a well-planted tree;
because it was planted in the soil of integrity, manured with
energy, and watered by vigorous advertising. Thus the people
came to call it “The Farm Centre of Sydney”
CL OWNERS can place their proper-
ties for sale here, with the full assurance
that they will be offered in the best man-
ner, and provided they are honestly
worth the price quoted, will be pushed
with promptness and vigour.
CL BUYERS have shown their faith in
it to such an extent, that more farms have
been sold here than in any other office in
Sydney or suburbs. And incidentally,
many life-long friendships have been
made. More may be made yet.
W. F. KAY, 273 George Street, SYDNEY


HILLS DISTRICT
Comprising : Arcadia, Baulkham Hills, Ca&le Hill, Dural, Gallon,
Glenhaven, Glenorie, Kellyville, KenthurSt; also Carlingford,
Dundas, Ermington and Rydalmere.
Cpl. H. P. TAYLOR.
Enlisted January, 1915; invalided home Oct.,
1918. Son of Tpr. and Mrs. Taylor, Arcadia.
Pte. H. BOLTON.
Baulkham Hills. Enlisted August, 1915.
Tpr. TAYLOR,
Arcadia.
Pte. A. J. BOWERMAN.
Killed in France, November, 1917. Son of Mr.
R. R. Bowerman, Baulkham Hills.
Pte. J. A. TAYLOR.
Enlisted January, 1915; killed at Lone Pine,
August, 1915. Son of Tpr. and Mrs. J. A.
Taylor, Arcadia.
Dvr. H. BOWERMAN.
Son of Mr. R. R. Bowerman, Baulkham Hills.


Pte. R. BRIEN,
Baulkham Hill. Embarked December, 1915;
returned June, 1919.
Sgt. E. C. COWLEY,
Enlisted August, 1914; killed in Palestine,
January, 1917. Son of Mr. L. J. Cowley,
Baulkham Hills.
Gnr. F. KIRBY.
Son of Mrs. W. Kirby, Baulkham Hills.
Lieut. JOE COOK.
Enlisted in England, 1915. Son of Rt. Hon.
Sir Joseph Cook, late of Baulkham Hills.
Pte. W. ELKINGTON.
Nephew of Mr. and Mrs. E. C. Sherwin,
Baulkham Hills.
Pte. C, S. LUKE,
Enlisted August, 1915; killed in France, July,
1916, Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. T. Luke, Baulk-
ham Hills.
Capt. SID COOK.
Son of Rt. Hon. Sir Joseph Cook, late of Baulk
ham Hills.
Capt. T. C. HEWITT.
Enlisted March, 1915; killed in France, July,
1916. Son of Mr. Hewitt, Baulkham Hills.
Pte. E. L. LUKE.
Enlisted May, 1915; invalided home, Septem-
ber, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. T. Luke,
Baulkham Hills.


Pte. J. RALPH.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Ralph, Baulkham Hills.
Pte. C. SHERWIN.
Nephew of Mr. and Mrs. E. C. Sherwin,
Baulkham Hills.
Pte. A. WALL.
Grandson of Mr. W. Allsopp, Baulkham Hills.
Lieut. C. R. HUNTLEY.
Killed at Gallipoli, April, 1915. Nephew of
Mr. and Mrs. E. C. Sherwin, Baulkham Hills.
Tpr. F. SHERWIN.
Nephew of Mr. and Mrs. E. C. Sherwin,
Baulkham Hills.
Pte. K. WALL.
Grandson of Mr. W. Allsopp, Baulkham Hills.
Cpl. A. T. SHERWIN.
Nephew of Mr. and Mrs. E. C. Sherwin,
Baulkham Hills.
Tpr. N. SHERWIN.
Nephew of Mr. and Mrs. E. C. Sherwin,
Baulkhnm Hills.
Dvr. W. BOOTH.
Embarked June, 1917. Son of Mr. C. Booth,
Castle Hill.


Tpr. F. BUCKLEY.
Son of Mr. D. Buckley, Castle Hill.
Pte. G. KENTWELL.
Grandson of Mr. Hy. Kentwell, Castle Hill.
Pte. J. S. LAWSON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. B. Lawson, Castle
Hill.
Pte. R. A. COWELL.
Enlisted November, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
W. A. Cowell, Castle Hill.
Pte. A. KING,
Castle Hill.
Sgt. F. LEWIS.
Embarked January, 1916; killed in France,
April, 1918. Son of Mr. W. T. Lewis, Castle
Hill.
Pte. J. A. DEVANEY,
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Devaney, Castle Hill.
Pte. A. B. LAWSON.
Killed in France, September, 1917. Son of
Mr. and Mrs. W. B. Lawson, Castle Hill.
Pte. A. G. MUIR.
Enlisted August, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
G. A. Muir, Castle Hill.


Pte. E. A. TUCKWELL.
Enlisted August, 1914. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
A. J. Tuckwell, Castle Hill.
Sgt. G. FULLER.
Killed at Gallipoli, June, 1915. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. E. Fuller, Dural.
Pte. H. B. PARKER.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. J. Parker, Dural.
Pte. REG. ALLEN.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. A. Allen, Dural.
Pte. E. J. KING.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. King, Dural.
Pte. W. H. PORTER.
Enlisted February, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
L. Porter, “St. Elmo,” Dural.
Pte. E. BRAGG,
Dural. Killed at Gallipoli.
Pte. W. B. KIRK.
Embarked 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Kirk,
Dural.
L.-Cpl. H. E. WILLIAMS.
Enlisted February, 1915; killed in Palestine,
November, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. E.
Williams, Dural.


Pte. L. R. FAGAN.
Enlisted May, 1916; died of wounds, France,
April, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. S. Fagan,
Arcadia-road, Galston.
Pte. FRED. GARTUNG.
Enlisted 1916; killed in France, 1918. Son of
Mrs. S. Gartung, Galston.
Pte. G. M. MARSH.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. R. Marsh, Galston.
Pte. VICTOR E. FLAREY,
Galston.
Pte. LEO GARTUNG.
Enlisted 1915. Son of Mrs. S. Gartung,
Galston.
Pte. H. PUGSLEY.
Killed at Gallipoli, May, 1915. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. Galston.
Pte. FEDOR GARTUNG.
Enlisted 1914; died of wounds, France, 1918.
Son of Mrs. S. Gartung, Galston.
Pte. W. HARVEY.
Killed in France, 1917. Son of Mr. E. Harvey,
Galston.
Pte. S. JOHNSON.
Killed at Gallipoli, August, 1915. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. W. Johnson, Glenhaven.


Cpl. G. DALE.
Embarked February, 1916; killed in France,
1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Dale, Banks-
town, late of Glenorie.
Pte. BERT. HUGHES.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. Hughes, Milton Farm,
Glenorie.
Pte. R. ROBERTS.
Reported blissing, France, July, 1917. Son of
Mr. E. Roberts, Glenorie.
Pte. S. DALE.
Enlisted July, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J.
C. Dale, Bankstown, late of Glenorie.
Dvr. H. W. MOBBS,
Glenorie. Son of Mr. and Mrs. K. E. Mobbs.
Pte. F. E. SPENCER.
Enlisted Jan., 1916; killed in France, March,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. S. Spencer,
Glenorie.
Spr. T. DALE.
Enlisted December, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
J. C. Dale, Bankstown, late of Glenorie.
Pte. JAS. ROBERTS.
Killed in France, June, 1917. Son of Mr.
Roberts, Glenorie.
Pte. B. BRYANT.
Son of Mr. W. Bryant, Kellyville.


Pte. H. BRYANT.
Son of Mr. W. Bryant, Kellyville.
Pte. J. S. GRIEVE.
Killed at Gallipoli, August, 1915. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. M. Grieve, Kcllyville.
Pte. M. JAMES,
Kellyville. Enlisted November, 1915.
A FIGHTING FAMILY FROM KENTHURST, N.S.W.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1. Capt. E. F. CLEMENT
2. Chief-Officer G. G. CLEMENT
4. Pte. P. L. CLEMENT
4. Pte. A. B. CLEMENT
5. Pte. H. F. CLEMENT
6. Pte. T. A. CLEMENT
(Sons of Mr. and Mrs. F. Clemen[?]
7. Cpl. C. CLEMENT (Nephew).


Pte. A. BISTENDEN,
Kenthurst.
Pte. M. GRIFFIN.
Embarked Detomer, 1915. Son of Mrs. H.
Griffin, Kenthurst.
Pte. P. ALLEN.
Late of Carlingford. Died of wounds. Buried
at Malta, September, 1915.
Pte. A. W. BUTCHER.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. C. Butcher, Kenthurst.
Gnr. W. H. NOLLAND.
Brother of Mr. G. N. Nolland, Kenthurst.
Pte. G. BEVAN.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Bevan, Carlingford.
Gnr. W. COX.
Enlisted July, 1915; contracted meningitis and
pneumonia; was discharged, but re-enlisted and
embarked Sept., 1916. Son of late Mr. J. B.
Cox, of Kenthurst.
Pte. A. RUSSELL.
Killed in France, 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
W. Russell, Kellyville.
Capt. WALLACE COX.
Hied of wounds, Gallipoli, August, 1915 Son
of Mr. and Mrs. F. C. Cox, Carlingford.


Pte. W. HULBERT,
Carlingford.
L.-Cpl. ROY NEIL.
Son of ex-Mayor and Mrs. J. Neil, Carlingford.
Pte. W. HENSHALL,
Dundas. Enlisted April, 1916.
Pte. A. (Mick) MOBBS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. A. Mobbs, Cox’s Lane,
Carlingford.
Pte. J. TUNKS,
Carlingford. Killed at Gallipoli, June, 1915.
Pte. R. HOCKLEY.
Killed in France, August, 1916. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. Eph. Hockley, Dundas.
Pte. ALBAN MUNT.
Died of wounds, France, November, 1916. Sou
of Mrs. J. Hunt, Carlingford.
Pte. A. WATERWORTH.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. Waterworth, Carling-
ford.
Pte, J. GALLAGHER,
Ermington.


Tpr. ROY SPURWAY.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. G. T. Spurway, Home-
bush, formerly of Ermington.
L.-Cpl. J. HANNAH,
Rydalmere. Killed in France, August, 1916.
Lance-Cpl. WALTER WELLER.
Rydalmere. Son of Mr. Wm. Weller.
Pte. F. WILLIS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Willis, Ermington.
Cpl. BASIL MOLLOY.
Nephew of Aid. F. W. Steel, late of Rydal-
mere.
Sgt. W. F. DOE.
Son of Mr. B. J. Doe, M.L.A., Rydalmere.
Cpl. W. H. MUIR.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. C. Muir, Rydalmere.
WM. TOWNS and DAVID TOWNS.
Sons of Mr. J. A. Towns, late of Rydalmere. Pte. D. Towns enlisted August, 1915; killed in
France, September, 1917.


Hornsby Shire
THE Shire of Hornsby may well be considered one
of the most important in the Metropolitan dis-
trict of Sydney. It covers a large area and
includes almost every class of citizen’s interests —
suburban, rural and farming. Extending right along
to Eastwood boundaries, six large suburbs are grow-
ing apace, and on the Milson’s Point line, Hornsby,
Waitara, and parts of Wahroonga serve as homes for
hundreds who toil daily in the “Big Smoke.” The
outer embryo suburbs of Asquith. Mount Colah,
Kuring-gai and Berowra will soon be placed, by the
electrification of the railway from Milson’s Point,
within quick and easy daily transit to the city. 112
trains leave Hornsby station daily at present.
A variety of climates is to be found to suit every-
one, elevations up to 700 feet above sea level being
within easy reach. The suburban streets are well
lighted, and city water
is available to suburban-
ites in every direction.
Good Roads Associa-
tions “have nothing”
on Hornsby Shire, for
motorists admit that the
Shire roads as a whole
are already excellent,
and doubtless in another
year or two they will
also agree that the Shire
Council is making them
better and better, and
more of them good.
Hornsby itself is a big
industrial centre as well
as an important rail-
way junction. Business
comes to it from all parts of the Shire. The orchard-
ists alone provide a large and regular goods revenue
traffic to the railway system.
Tourists find most attractive scenery, rugged and
picturesque, in the hill districts, peaceful and nerve-
healing in the orchard and farming parts, all within
reach by one-dav motor trips which can be easily
arranged so as to obviate the need for returning by
the same route as the one started out upon. Trips
can he started at Hornsby, via Galston Zig-zag, and
through Dural. Castle Hill, and back by Pennant
Hills and Wahroonga, via Berowra over the Ferry,
through Arcadia and Castle Mill. Carlingford and
Rvde back to Sydney, or by way of Galston, Dural,
and Pennant Hills back to Pearce’s Corner. Wah-
roonga. and along the Lane Cove Road to North Syd-
ney. And a splendid day can be spent in a run up
the Hawkesbury River from Brooklyn Township to
Wiseman’s Ferry and back by motor mail boat and
other craft, with altering scenery every few miles of
the 36-mile run to the Ferry, at a cost of “almost
nothing.”
On all these trips something new and ever-
changing may be seen. There is no monotony, and
the most bored traveller from overseas finds some-
thing to remember and think over with feelings of
pleasure on his return. No unsightly hoardings, such
as destroy the natural beauties of a road journey in
some other parts of Australia, are allowed to pro-
trude themselves. Where Nature is not “unadorn-
ed” she may be seen encouraged and improved by
the intelligent application of human energies expend-
ed in making lots of grass grow where none grew
before, in planting beauteous vines and fruit trees,
whose golden and luscious crops of fruits of all
descriptions, from apples and pears to oranges, pas-
sion fruit, bananas, and other semi-tropical fruits.
reward man’s work
where Nature herself
was contented with for-
est land everywhere.
With intelligent culti-
vation the soil seems to
grow almost every fruit,
besides the humble pro-
ducts of ordinary farm-
ing.
Yet withal there are
still thousands of acres
of glorious forest belts
showing against the
horizon here and there
where least expected,
serving the dual pur-
pose of pleasing the eye.
health-giving, providing
variety of view and landscape, and of sheltering the
farms and orchards from the rough blasts which in
the level countries of other parts sweep so destruct-
ively and indifferently over all.
I'here is no human being—no matter what his state
of mind, of health, temperament, or psychology may
—can come to Hornsby Shire without finding what
he needs, even if it may not happen to be what he
wants —or imagines that he wants —and who will not
go away from it with renewed strength, stout heart,
fine steady nerves, and his love for the beautiful
strengthened and “full roused,” together With a
lasting memory and admiration for the glorious
things of nature, and the live powers of growth of
the people who settle in the district, and who seem
to imbibe power and energy for their daily tasks
and ambitions from the magnetic surroundings of
one of “THE FINEST PLACES IN THE WORLD,
SIR.”


NORTHERN LINE
Comprising: Waitara, Hornsby, Normanhurft, Thornleigh, Pennant
Hills, Beecroft, Cheltenham, Epping, Eastwood, Ryde and
Meadowbank ; Gladesville.
Pte. A. HOWLISON.
Enlisted April, 1915; died of wounds, France,
March, 1917. Son of Mrs. H. Provest, Waitara.
Pte. C. W. POLL.
Enlisted June, 1915.- Sou of Mr. J. W. Poll.
Waitara.
Pte. H. J. WEST.
Waltara.


Pte. A. H. BUSHELL.
Son of Mrs. I. Bushell, Hornsby.
Sig. R. W. BUSHELL, M.M.
Killed in action. Son of Mrs. I. Bushell,
Hornsby.
Pte. E. H. CARPENTER.
Enlisted November, 1915. Son of Mr. C. Car-
penter, Hornsby.
Sgt. A. H. BUSHELL.
Died of wounds. Son of Mrs. I. Bushell,
Hornsby.
Tpr. C. E. BUSHELL,
Son of Mr. H. Bushell, Hornsby.
Pte. G. CARPENTER,
Son of Mr. C. Carpenter, Hornsby.
Pte. B. P. BUSHELL.
Son of Mrs. I. Bushell, Hornsby.
Dvr. L. E. BUSHELL,
Son of Mr. H. Bushell, Hornsby.
Gnr. J. CARPENTER,
Hornsby. Died of gas poisoning, France.


Pte. F. BURTON,
Hornsby. Died of wounds, France, September,
1918.
Pte. J. FITZGERALD.
Killed in France, July, 1916. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. J. Fitzgerald, Hornsby.
Lieut. W. GEAKE, O.B.E.
Mr. Errington, Hornsby.
Lance-Corporal A. D. ARNOLD.
Brother of Mrs. J. A. Schwebel, of Hornsby.
Wounded at Dardanelles. Enl. Aug. 29, 1914,
and again (after recovering from wounds) July,
1916, fighting until the armistice.
Pte. O. FATHERS.
Hornsby, Killed at Gallipoli, June, 1915.
Cpl. ROY GLYNN.
Son of Mr. J. Glynn, Hornsby.
Pte. S. S. FARNELL.
Son of Mr. Frank Farnell, ex-M.L.A. for Ryde.
Pte. M. J. FOSTER,
Hornsby.
Spr. J. GRANT,
Hornsby. Killed in France, June, 1918.


Lieut. C. L. GRAY.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Gray, Hornsby.
Pte. F. E. HOGGARD.
Killed at Gallipoil. Brother of Mr. J.
Hoggard, Hornsby.
Major JENKINS,
Hornsby. Killed at Gallipoli.
Cpl. C. GRIMSON, D.C.M.,
Hornsby.
Cpl. C. D. HOLLIDAY.
Killed in France, July, 1916. Son of Rev. A.
and Mrs. Holliday, Hornsby.
Lieut. G. JENKINS.
Enlisted 1914 with Rabaul Expedition; re-
enlisted and embarked June, 1913. Son of late
Major Jenkins, of Hornsby.
Lieut. A. H. HILL, M.C. and Bar.
Enlisted 1914. Son of Capt. J. Hill, of Peat’s
Ferry-road, Hornsby.
Cpl. J. HOOKHAM.
Died of wounds, France, March, 1917. Son of
Mr. A. Hookham, Hornsby.
Pte. E. W. JESPERSON.
Hornsby. Killed in France, April. 1917.


Cpl. A. JOHNSON,
Hornsby.
Pte. F. B. MOORE,
Hornsby.
Cpl. TOM NELSON.
Died of wounds, Gallipoli, May, 1915. Son of
Sgt. and Mrs. J. Nelson, late of Hornsby and
Parramatta.
Gnr. C. S. KING.
Killed in France. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. King,
Hornsby.
Pte. MARCUS MOSS,
Hornsby,
Lieut. G. W. OLIVER,
Hornsby.
Pte. R. A. KING.
Embarked June, 1915; invalided home July,
1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. King, Hornsby.
Cpl. J. W. McLOUGHRY.
Died of wounds, France, December, 1917. Son
of Mr. W. McLoughry, Hornsby.
Pte. R. L. OSBORN.
Enlisted August, 1915; killed in France, April,
1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. O. Osborn,
Hornsby.


Sgt. J. ROLPH,
Hornsby.
Pte. T. RYAN.
Brother of Mrs. W. Jesperson, Hornsby.
Pte. A. L. SMITH.
Killed In France, August, 1916. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. A. E. Smith, Hornsby.
Cpl. PERCY PARKES,
Son of Mrs. M. H. Parkes, Hornsby.
Pte. F. SALMON.
Son of Mr. T. Salmon, Hornsby.
Spr. S. L. SMITH.
Enlisted May, 1915; died of wounds, France,
June. 1916. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. E. Smith.
Hornsby.
Pte. J. RYAN.
Brother of Mrs. W. Jesperson, Hornsby.
Pte. W. L. SKILLEN,
Hornsby.
Pte. H. WATTS.
Killed in France. Son of Mr. F. Watts,
Hornsby.


Lieut. E. C. WEBB,
Enlisted August, 1915; killed in France, May,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. A. E. Webb,
Hornsby.
Pte. W. YOUNG.
Enlisted July, 1915; died of wounds, France,
August, 1916. Brother of Mrs. W. Dreis,
Hornsby.
Pte. E. J. LIPSCOMB.
Embarked Sept., 1916; killed in France, May,
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. J. Lipscomb,
Pennant Hills-road, Normanhurst.
Pte. T. WHITTAKER,
Hornsby.
Bmbdr. S. HUGHES.
Killed in France, Sept., 1918. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. D. Hughes, Normanhurst.
Gnr. N. LIPSCOMB.
Embarked September, 1914; killed in France,
April, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. J. Lips-
comb, Pennant Hills-road, Normanhurst.
Pte. LEONARD WILLIAMS,
Late of Hornsby.
Pte. K. B. WOOD.
Died of wounds, France, August, 1916. Son
of Mr. and Mrs. J. B. Wood, Normanhurst.
Lieut. F. N. LIPSCOMB, M.C.
Enlisted June, 1915; invalided home Septem-
ber, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. J. Lips-
comb, Pennant Hills-road, Normanhurst.


Pte. W. C. BROWN,
Thornleigh.
Capt. NORM. GIBLETT, M.C.,
Thornleigh. Enlisted August, 1914.
Sig. S. PETTIT.
Killed at Gallipoli, August, 1915. Sou of Mrs.
T. P. Pettit, Thornleigh.
Sgt. G. R. DAVEY.
Enlisted February, 1916. Invalided home, Jan.,
1918. Son of Mrs. W. E. Davey, Thornleigh.
L.-Cpl. H. JOHNSON.
Son of Mr. W. Johnson, Thornleigh.
Pte. P. PLUMB,
Thornleigh.
Pte. W. E. DAVEY.
Son of Mrs. W. E. Davey, Thornleigh.
Pte. C. A. McKENZIE,
Thornleigh.
Pte. J. WELSH,
Thornleigh.


Pte. E. ALLEN.
Killed at Gallipoli, October, 1915. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. J. Allen, Pennant Hills West.
Sig. E. T. FRANKISH.
Enlisted March, 1916; killed in France, July.
1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. Frankish, Pen-
nant Hills.
Pte. F. HANCOCK.
Pennant Hills.
Pte. ROBERT ALLEN,
Pennant Hills.
L.-Cpl. B. GOODWIN.
Son of Mrs. G. Connors, Pennant Hills.
Cpl. R. M. HARRISON.
Sou of Mr. and Mrs. H R. Harrison, Cherry
Brook, Pennant Hills.
Gnr. F. E. ANLEZARK.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. T. Anlezark, Pennant
Hills.
Cpl. J. GOODWIN.
Sou of Mrs. G. Connors, Pennant Hills.
Spr. C. R. HARVEY.
Enlisted October, 1916; killed in France, Oct.,
1917. Son of Mrs. W. Harvey, Pennant Hills
West.


Pte. E. JAMBON,
Pennant Hills. Enlisted July, 1915. Killed in
France, July, 1916.
Pte. R. E. BLACK.
Enlisted December, 1915. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
H. Black, Beecroft.
Pte. H. W. HEWITT.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. W. Hewitt, Beecroft.
Pte. R. SHIELDS.
Embarked October, 1916. Son of Mr. G.
Shields, Pennant Hills.
Bdr. H. K. CRAWFORD.
Killed in France. Son of Mrs. A. H. Craw-
ford. Beecroft.
Pte. B. LITTLE.
Sou of Mr. and Mrs. H. J. Little, Beecroft.
Sgt. A. BLACK.
Enlisted July, 1915. Died of wounds, France,
May, 1918. Son of Mr. and Mrs. H. G. Black,
Beecroft.
Lieut. W. F. CRAWFORD.
Son of Mrs. A. H. Crawford, Beecroft.
Tpr. R. D. LITTLE.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. H. J. Little, Beecroft.


Pte. ALAN JOHN LUTHERBORROW.
Son of Mr. E. Lutherborrow, “Coo-ee,”
Heeeroft.
Cpl. V. M. PERRY.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. M. J. Perry, Cheltenham
Capt. E. J. COLLS.
Brother of Mr. F. J. Colls, Epping.
Gnr. F. SEALE.
Embarked March, 1916. Killed in France,
September, 1917. Son of Mr. J. Seale, Bee-
croft.
Lieut. H. V. SEALE.
Son of Mr. J. Seale, Beeeroft.
A Trio of Fighters—Dawson Brothers, of Epping
Ptes. G. DAWSON, W. DAWSON, and J. DAWSON.
Sons of Mr. and Mrs. Dawson, Epping.


Sig, A. A. JAGGER,
Epping. Enlisted August, 1914.
Pte. J. A. MELLOR,
Epping.
Pte. RAY PITTMAN,
Epping.
Pte. JOHN LARSEN,
Epping. Cousin of Mr. L. P. Rosen.
L.-Cpl. T. McGILL.
Died of wounds, Gallipoli. Nephew of Mr. R.
Hudson, Epping.
Pte. L. C. PRESCOTT.
Embarked September, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. G. F. Prescott, Chesterlield-road, Epping.
Pte. H. MANNING.
Killed at Gallipoli. Nephew of Mrs. J. Riddle,
Epping.
Pte. V. NOBLE,
Epping.
Pte. E. SWIFT,
Epping.


Pte. J. P. THOMSON.
Killed in France, July, 1916. Son of Air. and
Airs. S. Thompson, Epping.
Pte. JACK WALDEN.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. Walden, Epping.
Sgt. A. G. ANDERSON,
Eastwood.
Pte. HARRY and Bdr. HARROP WALDEN.
Sons of Mr. and Mrs. F. Walden, Epping.
Sgt. F. WELLISCH.
Killed at Gallipoli, 1915. Son of Mr. and Airs.
A. Wellisch, Epping.
Pte. F. BERRY,
Died of wounds, Gallipoli, November, 1915.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Jas. Berry, Eastwood.
Pte. E. WALDEN.
Killed in France. Son of Mr. and Mrs. F.
Walden, Epping.
Cpl. G. YOUNG, M.M.
Killed in France, September, 1918. Brother
of Mr. D. Young, Epping.
Pte. C. P. CHAPMAN,
Eastwood.


ALBAN C. ELLIOT,
Son of the late Capt. C. S. and Mrs. Elliot,
Eastwood.
Q.M.-Sgt. J. A. ELLIOT.
Killed at Gallipoli. Son of late Capt. C. S.
and Mrs. Elliot, Eastwood.
Pte. O. E. LOVELL,
Son of Mr. and Mrs. G. Lovell, Eastwood.
The Late Capt. C. S. ELLIOT, R.N.,
Eastwood.
Midshipman W. ELLIOT.
Son of the late Capt. C. S. and Mrs. Elliot,
Eastwood.
Pte. W. LOVELL.
Son of Mr. F. Lovell, Eastwood.
Sgt. D. S. ELLIOT.
Enlisted 1914 and embarked with Rabaul Ex-
pedition. Appointed second-in-eliarge of Native
Affairs at Rabaul. Son of late Capt. C. S.
and Mrs. Elliot, Eastwood.
Pte. J. H. LAWTON,
Eastwood. killed at Gallipoli, May, 1915.
Sgt. W. H. SCOTT.
Died of wounds, Gallipoli, August, 1915. Son
of Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Scott, Eastwood.


Pte. T. A. TURNER,
Son of Mrs Turner, Eastwood.
Q.M.-Sgt. S. J. ADAMS.
Mentioned in despatches. Son of Mr. and Mrs.
G. Adams, Glebe-street, Ryde.
Capt. T. L. BANFIELD,
Ryde. Embarked June, 1915; killed at Galli-
poli, August, 1915
Cpl. C. H. WALSH,
Eastwood.
Pte. R. AINSWORTH,
Ryde.
Capt. C. E. BENSON, D.C.M.
Enlisted August, 1914; killed in France, July,
1916. Son of Mr. E. Benson, North Ryde.
Lieut. A. L. WATSON, M.C.
Sou of Mr. and Mrs. A. P. Watson, Eastwood.
Pte. JACK ARMSTRONG.
Embarked October, 1916; killed in France,
September, 1917. Brother of Mrs. Minnikin,
Ryde.
Pte. R. BILLINGTON.
Son of Mrs, Billington, Hermitage road, Ryde.


Cpl. E. J. EARL.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Earl, Ryde.
Pte. D. HUNTER.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. G. Hunter, Ryde.
Pte. R. J. JUPP.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. J. Jupp, Ryde.
Pte. F. G. ENGLAND.
Enlisted October, 1915; died of wounds, Oct.,
1916. Son fo Mr. and Mrs. J. England,
Waterloo-road, North Ryde.
Col. T. HENLEY, C.B.E., M.L.A.,
Ryde.
Pte. A. L. LANE.
Son of Rev. B. Lane, late of Ryde.
Lieut. R. J. FITZROY, M.C.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. R. Fitzroy, Ryde.
Cpl. W. T. JACKSON.
Embarked July, 1915. Late of Hunter’s Hill
and Ryde.
L.-Cpl. J. E. LUCKETT.
Formerly of Parramatta and Ryde. Killed at
the Dardanelles.


Pte. J. McLEOD. Pte. JAS. MADDEN.
Pte. Madden was killed in France, August, 1916. Son of Mrs. Madden, North Ryde.
EPPING BOYS
Front row: Sgt. GILLETT, of Epping. Back row: Dvr. A. FORREST, also of Epping.
Pte. JOHN MOODIE,
Son of Mr. and Mrs. R. Moodie, Ryde.
L.-Cpl. A. MORRIS,
Ryde. Enlisted September, 1916.
Pte. M. H. PURCELL.
Killed In France, April, 1917. Son of Mr.
and Mrs. M. J. Purcell, Ryde.


Pte. F. NELSON.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. E. Nelson, Ryde.
L.Cpl. F. S. M. SMART,
Ryde. Killed in action.
Spr. F. C. WICKS.
Sou of Mr. T. Wicks, Ryde.
Pte. H. O. NELSON.
Killed in action. Son of Mr. and Mrs. E.
Nelson, Ryde.
Cpl. W. J. STEPHEN.
Killed in France, August, 1916. Grandson of
M-rs. J. Marshall, Ryde.
Pte. G. S. WICKS.
Killed at evacuation of Gallipoli, December,
1915. Son of Mr. T. Wicks, Ryde.
Cpl. C. SEYMOUR,
Ryde and Gladesville. Son of late K. R.
Seymour, J.P., of H.M. 5th Regiment of Foot.
L.-Cpl. E. J. TAYLOR.
Killed in France, February, 1917. Son of Mr.
J. Taylor, Ryde.
Pte. G. WOODCOCK.
Embarked Juno, 1915; died of wounds, Gallipoli,
August, 1915. Son of Mr. W. Woodcock,
Ryde.


Sgt. G. CLARKE,
Meadowbank. Killed at Gallipoli.
Pte. J. E. HEWITSON.
Son of Mrs. S. A. Hewitson, Meadowbank.
Lt.-Col, S. C, E. HERRING, D.S.O., of Gladesville.
Gnr. H. HARDAKER,
Meadowbank. Died of wounds, France, July,
1917.
Dvr. J. NUTE, M.M.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. Nute, Meadowbank.
Pte. E. PHELPS,
Son of Mr. and Mrs. G. Phelps, Meadowbank
and Ryde.


MISCELLANEOUS SECTION
Lieut.-Col. J. M. DURRANT, C.M.G., D. S.O., Parramatta.
Pte. ROBT. JAS. TURNER, Sorrell-styeet, Parramatta. Enlisted 1915.
Cpl. N. BENNETT.
Embarked November, 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. W. Bennett, Parramatta.
Sgt. E. CAMERON.
Nephew of Mr. and Mrs. Harry Ohlsen, Church-
street, Parramatta.
Lieut. J. MEADS.
Son of Mr. and Mrs. F. J. Meads, late of Par-
ramatta, and nephew of Mrs. Alfred Barry.


Pte. S. F. TUNKS, Parramatta.
J. B. MARTYR, Granville.
Guard HUGHES,
Parramatta.
Pte. N. H. HUGHES,
Parramatta. Son of Guard G. and Mrs. Hughes.
Pte. G. F. HUGHES,
Parramatta. Son of Guard G. and Mrs. Hughes.
Pte. W. E. HUGHES,
Parramatta. Son of Guard G. and Mrs. Hughes.
Mr. and Mrs. T. LEE, of Harris Park, and their three soldiers sons, Pte. A. J. LEE, Cpl. T. LEE, and Lieut. F. H. LEE.


Sgt. A. W. LITTLE.
Son of Mr. T. D. Little, Harris Park.
Pte. P. WORBOYS.
Grand-nephew of the late Mr. T. C. Worboys,
Parramatta.
Pte. ROY J. WILKINSON.
Son of Mrs. E. L. Wilkinson, Parramatta.
Ptes. JOE and JIM MURPHY, Sons of Mrs. and the late Mr. Murphy, of High street, Harris Park.
Lieut.-Colonel DAVE McCONAGHY, C.M.G,, D.S.O. (Parramatta Woollen Mills).


Tpr. W. P. TOOGOOD.
Enlisted in England in King’s Light Horse;
died of wounds August. 1915. Son of Mr. and
Mrs. L. W. Toogood, Pitt Row, Parramatta.
A Parramatta Four
Major-Chaplain J. PATERSON and
his three sons:
Lieut. W. S. PATERSON
(killed in action),
Cpl. F. A. PATERSON
Cpl. A. V. PATERSON.
Artilleryman H. WATSFORD
(Female Impersonator).
A PARRAMATTA GROUP.
Back Row: C. POWER, W. HUGHES, O. K. MURRAY, R. BOON, R. CUTTER.
Front Row: W. O’BRIEN and W. MURRAY.


Sgt. A. W. LITTLE and Lieut. R. C. COOGAN (both of Harris Park).
IN THE RETREAT FROM. MOMS.
Drivers J. B. SHORTER (Parramatta) and REG. LONG (Auburn).


A PARRAMATTA GROUP IN EGYPT,
Including Pte. ROY BYRNES, of Grose-street, also two GREENSHIELDS BROTHERS.
THE GROTTO AT THE ZOO IN HELIOPOLIS, EGYPT.
Left to light: SID ERBY, MONTGOMERY, FRANK HUMPHRIES, DARKY READ, F. COGHLAN.
TAKEN BY LIEUT. GORDON BROWN, AT GALLIPOLI.
Left to right: MARKS, MACKENZIE, Major WHITE, Capt. RYRIE, JACK BURNS.
A PARRAMATTA TRIO.
Pte. A. H. JAMES (Ross-st.), Pte. E. F. McLEAN (Harris Park), Pte. R. R. PAUL (O’Connell-st.)


Ptes. PERCY PECK. F. CROUCH, ARNOLD ABEATER, EDWARD HARVEY (all of Parra-
matta).
Mr. W. F. A. LARCOMBE on his faithful donkey in Egypt.
Cpl. E. S. BELLAMY (Parramatta) and a group of Wounded Australians in England.
Back Row, left to right: Sgt. FELTON, Mjr. CHARLTON, Ptes. VEITCH and COOGAN,
Front Row: Dvrs. SHORTER, ERBY, LONG, LITTLE and HOSFORD.


PARRAMATTA— GRANVILLE GROUP.
Baek row, left to right: Ptes. BERT. TAYLOR, DICK FAIRWEATHER, JACK COTTAM.
Middle row: T. PHILIPS, D. GREENSHIELDS, H. BLAKE. Front row: N. BROWN, E.
GREENSHIELDS.
Lieut. JOHN WRIGHT CONNOR, Parramatta. Killed in action.


Sgt. PERCY COATES,
Parramatta.
Sgt. JACKSON.
Pte. H. T. HARRIS.
L.-Cpl. B. BRADFORD
(Late 17th Batt.)
INTERESTING PHOTO. FROM EGYPT.
An ancient piece of statuary, the head and
shoulders being supplied by an Australian
soldier.


A Granville Boy, ANDREW BROWN (on the left), and his mate, who went down with the
Queen Mary.
Sgt. W. A. JONES and Bombardier T. G. JONES, Granville,
Late Lieut. T. A. WALLACE, Lieut. BILLY CLAYTON. Lieut. HARRY FOLEY.
Granville.
14th BRIGADE BAND, A.I.F.,
Of which Pte. ROY LOHMAN, of Granville, was a member. He will be identified in the back
row, third on the right.


Major MACARTHUR KING, C.M.G., Granville.
Pte. A. V. CAIN.
Enlisted March, 1916; killed in France, Septem-
ber, 1917. Son of Mrs. F. Cain, Arthur-street,
Granville.
Pte. GEO. HARMER,
Granville.
E. C. (killed in action) and R. C. BANKS, Clyde.


1 2
Sgt. NED DOHERTY and W.O. FRANK DOHERTY, M.C., Granville.
Three ex-Granville Scoutmasters Who Went to the Front
Sgt. DOUGLAS BLACK, Sgt. GEO. B. KING, Cpl, C. H. MEMBREY.
Pte. DICK FRYER.
GRAVE OE Bombr. STAN CHIPPENDALE, D.C.M.
Late of Parramatta.
GRAVE OF Sig. G. F. WINDSOR,
Late of Granville.


Sgt.-Major W. EASTERBROOK, of Granville (mounted on the charger presented to him by Mr. John Shorter, of Parramatta.


GRANVILLE STRONG POST at the intersection of George and Market Streets, Sydney.
AUBURN'S STRONG POST, in front of Sydney Town Hall.


Cpl. W. F. (BILL) JOHNSON.
Enlisted August, 1915; died of wounds, France, July, 1916. Husband of Mrs. W. Johnson,
Auburn.
WHERE “BILL” JOHNSON LIES SLEEPING.


AN AUBURN FIGHTING FAMILY— THE FOUR BROWNS
Left to right: Pte. C. GWYNNE, Drummer M. CAMPBELL, Bglr. W. CAREY,
all of Auburn.
Ptes. S. H. (died from wounds) and E. S. WHITE, of Auburn.


Ptes. L. and D. STEWART,
of Auburn.
1
2
3
ABOVE.
THREE BROTHERS from LIDCOMBE
1. Sgt. FRANK ELLIOTT
2. Pte. EDWARD ELLIOTT
3. Pte. WILLIAM ELLIOTT
BELOW.
FIVE LIDCOMBE BOYS
1. WILL LANE
2. W. BOSERIO
3. PHIL BARRY
4. BILL BOYD
5. NAT. BOYD.


Ptes. HUGH OWEN, WILL MARDEN, POLEN, and JONES, of Lidcombe.
Pte. CLYDE E. (JOE) DAVIS.
Died from wounds. Son of Mr. and Mrs. R.
Davis, Short-street, Auburn.
Sergt. WALTER DUNCAN, Granville.
FACSIMILE OF MEDALS PRESENTED TO
LIDCOMBE RETURNED SOLDIERS.
AUSTRALIANS AND GERMAN GUARD.
The one seated is Pte. W. J, MUNRO, of Lidcombe.


Pte. JAMES STOCKS, of Lideombe (standing, with overcoat on).
FATHER AND THREE SONS.
Pte. CHAS. COOK, L.-Cpl. CHAS. COOK, Pte. JAMES COOK, Pte. KENNETH COOK, Lideombe.
Ptes. R. W. and SYD. E. YARROL, of Lidcombe.
Pte. WILLIAM BOYD,
of Hyde Park, Lideombe.
Pte. GEORGE GARDINER DOUGLAS,
Lideombe.
Pte. R. P. WHIT,
Lideombe. Embarked October, 1914; invalided
home, September, 1915; re-enlisted and em-
barked April, 1916.
Son ef Mrs. Lessil, Auburn.


Ptes. WALTER FOX and JAMES T. GRANTLEY.
Doth killed in action. Formerly of Granville and Liverpool.
Mr. and Mrs. WEEDON, OF FAIRFIELD, AND THEIR FOUR SONS.
Left to right: WM. E. J., THOS. C. J. (killed in France), ARTHUR F., and HERBERT H. WEED
Dvr. DUNCAN CAMERON.
Pte. H. H. MAYNE.
A GOOD WAR-WORKED.
Mrs, REYNOLDS, of Woodburn-road, Lidcombe,
one of the best war-workers for soldiers in that
district.


TWO FAIRFIELD BOYS.
Pte W. KING and Gunner E. W. HODGES.
OUR BOYS IN THE TRENCHES.
This unique photo, was forwarded by Machine- Gunner W. CLOKE, of Liverpool, and shows the
young soldier with four of his mates, including W. TAMSETT, of Baulkham Kills, The other
three are Ptes. Thompson, McInnes, and Orr, of Sydney.
Pte. ANDREW (Tallow) THORNE, Moorebank,
Liverpool (standing), and Pte. F. ASPINALL,
Fairfield (sitting).
L.-Cpl. W. LEWIS, M.M., and Pte. R. LEWIS.
Sous of Air. and Mrs. C. Lewis, Smithfield.


Pte. JOHN CASH and HIS TWO SONS, of Smith field.
FUNERAL OF THE LATE “JIM” DUMMETT,
of Smithfield and Fairfield.
Pte. S. W. EDWARDS,
Smithfield. Son of late H. Edwards and Mrs.
Betts, Smithfield.
Spr. A. C. YOUNG,
Guildford. Embarked 1916.
A Soldier’s Grave.


Cpl. E. F. ROWLEY and Sgt. R. C. ROWLEY. Late of Guildford (both killed).
Cpl. GUS. LENNAKD, Sgt. HARRY LENNARD, Pte. SAM LENNARD (died of wounds).
of Guildford.
Troopers J. G. CHALLENGER and E. R. KING, Merrylands.
Sappers CHARLES and DUDLEY SMITH, Cabramatta.


“THE ARGUS” IN CAMP IN BELGIUM.
Blind Heroes
These men lost their
sight in fighting the
Empire s battles at
the Dardanelles.
The one on the left is
“Tommy” Burgess, the
hero of Smithfield His
mother is with him.


L.-Cpl. DAWSON, of Toongabbie, and his mate, at the Sphinx. Inset is a
clearer view of the L.-Cpl.
Major PABRKES. Wentworthville.


A GROUP OF GLENORIE BRAVES
Gunner R. E. E. YEEND, Ex-Alderman of Prospect and Sherwood.
J. B. TOMS, Glenfield.


TWO DURAL BOYS.—(Mounted on camel) Sgt. GEOFFREY FULLER, killed in action. (Inset) Pte. CHAS. U. FULLER (died from wounds).
Sons of Mr. and Mrs. E. Fuller, Dural.


Left to Right: Gnr. H. F. HARTLEY, Gnr. S. J. HEDGES, and Gnr. A. S. HEDGES, all of Seven
Hills.
THE BROTHERS BLACK, of Glenorie—Sgt. A. BLACK (killed in action), Pte. ROY E. BLACK.
Capt. G. MARPER, D.S.O.
Late of Rydalmere. Enlisted 1914.
Gnr. A. S. McDONALD.
Enlisted August, 1915. Husband of Mrs. A. S.
McDonald, Pennant Hills-road, Carlingford.
One of the Homes built for Returned Soldiers
by the Voluntary Workers’ Association, Car-
lingford,


ON GUARD. —The late Pte. C. L. REID, of Rydalmere, on guard (killed in action).
Late Lieut. C. W. THOMAS, Thornleigh.


Pte. T. L. CARDEW.
Enlisted June, 1915; killed in France, Septem-
ber, 1917. Son of Mr. and Mrs. J. Hayden
Cardew, Wahroonga.
Pte. E. D. WALKER,
Normanhurst.
Mrs. I. BUSHELL,
Hornsby,
Mother of four brave soldiers.
Sgt. SIDNEY ERNEST PARKES,
of Hornsby (killed in action).
Pte. R. C. WATSON,
Hornsby.
Pte. J. A. WATSON,
Hornsby.


FOOTBALLERS WHO WENT TO THE FRONT
GRANVILLE DISTRICT (MAGPIES) FOOTBALL CLUB.
Sgt. JACK HOURIGAN’S FOOTBALL TEAM ON ACTIVE SERVICE.
Jack appears on the extreme right (standing).
ABOVE.
ENLISTED (left to right):
Back Row.—4th, War.-Officer E. DOHERTY,
M.C., died of wounds.
Second Row,—2nd. DICK FAIRWEATHER;
3rd, JACK COTTAM (killed); 6th, Sgt.
E. J. DOHERTY.
Third Row.—1st, H. WHEAT.
Fourth Row.—1st, J. W, MASTERS; 3rd, W.
E. S. DANE.


SOME HONOUR BOARDS
ANZAC DAY WREATHS ON THE HONOUR BOARDS AT PARRAMATTA TOWN HALL.


LIVERPOOL SOLDIERS’ MEMORIAL.


AUBURN HONOUR BOARD ON ANZAC DAY.
LIBERTY PLAINS LODGE, NO. 277 (DRUIDS), AUBURN.




BLACKTOWN SOLDIERS’ MEMORIAL.
GRAVE OF CAPT. N. M. PEARCE (of Kellyville), at Bir-Etmaler, in the Egyptian Desert.


ROYAL MEMORIAL GATES, ST. JOHN’S CHURCH, PARRAMATTA.
THE GREATEST MARCH IN HISTORY.— PEACE DAY IN LONDON.


Interestin ģ Scenes in Eģypt and Palestine
GENERAL COX. C.B., IN FRONT OF HIS TENT AT CAIRO.
MAJOR FRED. WHITE’S SQUADRON IN EGYPT.
AN AUSTRALIAN CAMP IN EGYPT.
MAIN STREET IN JERICHO, PALESTINE. AFTER OCCUPATION BY THE AUSTRA-
LIANS.


Lance-Cpl. CHAS. CRIXSON, Hornsby, telling his family and relatives how he won the D.C.M.
“THE ARGUS” IN THE TRENCHES.
In this picture are (first, standing) Lce.-Cpl. FRANK ROY SHEERMAN, died of wounds, and
(next, seated) Lce.-Cpl. GERALD J. BURNS, both of Lidcombe.
BRITISH GUNS IN THE MAKING.


AUSTRALIAN HOSPITAL AT HELIOPOLIS AND TRAIN BRINGING IN WOUNDED.
Mrs. KINCHINGTON,
of Auburn. War Worker.
Major H. C. De LOW, D.S.O.,
Parramatta,
CONCENTRATION CAMP AT LIVERPOOL. N.S.W.


Some of Our Boys in Distant Fields.
CONVALESCENT SOLDIERS IN ENGLAND.
Where Cpl. C. A. BINT, of Guildford, nursed his wounds.
WOUNDED AUSTRALIANS AT BIRMINGHAM UNIVERSITY.
Pte. T. C. Power, of Parramatta, is the one with a broken arm.
Sitting: Dvrs. S. GUIHEN, F. WOOD, O’SULLIVAN, Cpl. G. RICHARDS, Sgt. G. T. BELL, Bdrs. S. SCHOFIELD, W, CAMPBELL, Dvr. J. SWAN.
Standing: Gnrs. C. M. McNAMARA, W. GARNER, C. CAREY, G. POTTER, C. DARNLEY, W. WETTON,


Red Cross Society—Parramatta Branch.
IN February, 1915, at 4 meeting called for the pur-
pose by the Mayoress, the late Mrs. J. 11. Graham,
a branch of the N.S.W. Division of the Red Cross
Soeiety was formed. Lady Cook was elected Presi-
dent, Mesdames Moxham and Graham, Vice-Presi-
dents; Mrs. W. Atkins, Hon. Treasurer; Mrs. Evans
and Mrs. Thomas, Joint Hon. Secretaries. The Execu-
tive Committee appointed were Mesdames W. S.
Brown, Griffin, Granger, Cook, Moxham, Graham and
Atkins. A Fete and Continental was held in the Par-
ramatta Park on Empire Day, 1915, in aid of Belgian
and Red Cross funds, the Red Cross share amounting
to £622. Of this sum £3OO was sent to Egypt for Col.
Ryrie’s Brigade and £5O for sheepskin waistcoats.
In July of the same year the Parramatta Branch
was asked to take charge and look after “A” Ward
Hut, Field Hospital, Liverpool. The hut contained
fourteen beds, and this Branch fully fitted same with
all necessary furniture and comforts. The ladies of
the Committee personally gave and received dona-
tions towards maintenance and requirements, and
once every week they visited Liverpool to see to the
wants of sick soldiers. This was the special care of
Mrs. L. Bloomer, an energetic worker, who also man-
aged the produce department, 60 sacks of fruit and
vegetables being sent to the Depot for soldiers’ de-
pendents.
During the war period 1100 dozen eggs were col-
lected and packed, sent to Depot for use in hospitals
abroad. Mrs. E. J. Brown supervised.
The Old Linen Department was not by any means
the least important. Large parcels of clean old linen
were sorted out, some found its way to field hospitals
and dressing stations, in the form of bandages, the
scraps being clipped up by a band of diligent workers
and forwarded to the Depot. Mention might be made
of a few of those workers who never tired of the con-
tinual clipping, for hours at a time, hand-sore from
the use of scissors: Mesdames Muston, Magill, Mars-
den. Ilosford, Hughes, Saunders, Veitch. Mrs. Regan
had sole charge of bandages. Waste linen was sent
to the paper mills.
The Spinning Industry was carried on for some
time in rooms lent by Mr. Jago, under the supervision
of Mrs. Budge and assistants.
The Knitting Circle, under the supervision of the
late Mrs. W. S. Brown, assisted by Miss Houison,
produced many comforts for our soldiers, in the form
of socks, mufflers, caps, etc.
Sacks of clothing made by the members and friends,
consisting of 50,000 garments, have gone forward to
be distributed to hospitals, convalescent homes and
hospital ships. Packing was done by Mesdames
Granger, Barry, Dunn, and Thorpe. Eleven sacks of
empty bottles and tins were sent to Voluntary Work-
ers. Many parcels of books, papers, magazines were
sent to Book Depot. Comforts and sundries were
regularly despatched to the many convalescent homes.
The Branch was ever ready to assist on the differ-
ent “Days” which were held, and by its efforts sub-
stantial sums have been realised. In this connection
it always received practical help from the children of
the various schools.
For many months a street stall was conducted each
week by members in turn, the result of which aver-
aged £4 per week. Mrs. E. J. Brown was responsible
for the success of this movement.
Lady Cook, the first president, resigned in October,
1915, the late Mrs. Graham filling the vacancy till the
following February, when Mrs. Thomas was elected
and held office for one year and five months, Mrs.
De Low being elected in July, 1917, and still con-
tinues to hold the position. Mrs. Barry was elected
Hon. Treasurer in February, 1916, and with the ex-
ception of a few months has ably managed the finan-
ces of the branch to the present time. The following
members have acted as Hon. Secretaries:—Mrs.
Evans, eight months; Mrs. Granger, three years (in-
cluding one year assistant) ; Mrs. Guyot, three
months; Mrs. Dunn, two years; Miss Houison, eight
months. Money received amounted to £3OOO.
PARRAMATTA RED CROSS AT WORK.
Names on Page 259.


FAIRFIELD BRANCH OF THE RED CROSS SOCIETY.
Names on Page 259.
GRANVILLE RED CROSS HOSTEL WORKERS.
Names on Pago 259.


Parramatta Voluntary Aid Detachment
A VOLUME of this character
would certainly not be com-
plete without a short history
of, and some reference to, the tine
work of those subsidiary organisa-
tions which did so much in their
own particular way to help to win
the war. Amongst those auxiliaries
the Parramatta Voluntary Aid De-
tachment occupies a proud place.
Parramatta was early in the field,
and formed its unit of the V.A.D. in
May, 1915, and was the second de-
tachment formed in this State. Its
head, at the outset, was that enthusi-
astic first-aid worker, Mr. John
Drummond, after whom came Miss
Inez Hill, with Miss Fay Simms,
Matron of the Parramatta District
Hospital (afterwards succeeded by
Miss DA SILVA WAUGH,
Commandant Parramatta V.A.D.
Matron V. Morse as superintend-
ent), Dr. W. S. Brown, medical
officer, and Mr. C. S. Grossman as
pharmacist. As the detachment
grew, the constitution provided for
a quarter-master, and the first to be
appointed to this position was Miss
A 1 ice Blumer, who continued in
office till she left the district. The
first duties of the detachment w T ere
at Liverpool Camp, where, at the
Red Cross recreation hut, they took
on the work of sewing, mending,
etc., for the invalid soldiers. In
addition to this they lent their aid
to all patriotic movements, and in
this direction were instrumental in
helping to raise large» sums of
money. Likewise they, for some
considerable time, managed and
PARRAMATTA V.A.D.—1918.
Back row: Misses Eades, Funnell, Ross, Harvey, Sherloek, A. Readett. Second row: Misses Holt, R. Brown, M. Summons, Paterson, Artlett. Third
row: Misses Rossiter, Luc-key, F. Fyall, Burns, Earp, Coogan, Thompson, J. Brown, A. Summons, Kaylock. Front row: Misses Crase, Lumley, R.
Fyall, D. Little, L. Readett, Napper, Thorpe.


Mrs. SAUNDERS (nee Hill).
Miss DULCE LITTLE.
Miss LUCY READETT.
equipped a stall for the sale of goods of
every description, the proceeds of which went to the
.exchequer of the Red Cross. On the resignation of
Miss Hill, prior to her marriage, Miss da Silva Waugh
was appointed Commandant, with Miss Blumer as
Q.M:, followed by Miss Dulce Little. Miss Waugh
continued in command till a call took her further
afield when she enlisted for Red Cross work and she
was sent to Egypt. In the responsible position of
preparing meals for invalid soldiers —hundreds of
them —she carried on for twelve months, sometimes
under the most trying conditions, and the only recom-
pense she received for this work is that it entitles her
to be the proud wearer of the Victory Ribbon. During
her absence the commandants were, in order, Miss
Dulce Little, with Miss Lucy Readett as Q.M.; Miss
Readett, with Miss Little as Q.M. Then Miss Waugh
again assumed command on her return, with Miss
Little as Q.M. During the five years of war much
was done, especially as the wounded and invalid sol-
diers were repatriated. Anticipatory to the return of
our brave boys, maimed and shattered in nerve, con-
valescent homes had been established, and at these
homes the members of the V.A.D. found plenty of
hard work awaiting them. They volunteered for
duty as cooks, housekeepers, housemaids, etc., at The
Mill (Moss Vale), Woodford. Burradoo, Exeter, Rose
Hall, Bomaderry, Graythwaite, Chester, Randwick
Military Hospital, and Randwick Red Cross Hostel.
At Rose Hall, for instance, a detail of up to 20 per
day went on service, paying their own fares daily to
and fro, and even taking with them their own meals.
This work in itself meant great work and no little
expense; but, in addition to the work at the homes
MEETING TROOPS AT CENTRAL STATION, BOXING DAY, 1918.


and hostels, the detachment took its turn in attend-
ing—whether the weather was wet or dry—at the
buffet and! the Sydney railway station and wharves to
meet the trains and transports, there to welcome and
tender refreshments to the returned boys of this and
other States. Be it said to their credit that a great
number of the members,- with a view to better quali-
fying for emergency work, took training at the Par-
ramatta, Prince Alfred, Sydney, and Coast Hospitals,
where their work proved not only a benefit to them-
selves, but to the institutions concerned. During the
terrible influenza pandemic the V.A.D. answered calls
from the Red Cross and the Board of Health, and gave
valuable assistance to the various medical officers at
the several inoculation depots. They afterwards ren-
dered service at the Walker Hospital, which, at the
height of the epidemic, was set apart solely for influ-
enza patients. They also rendered aid at numerous
private homes where the inmates were stricken down
and unable to obtain- skilled nursing.
Following is a list of the members of the detach-
ment : —Misses Waugh, A., L., and M. Readett, R. and
F. Fyall, Carrick, Jackson (2), L. Harvey, Curtis,
Coogan, Napper, Luckey, Sherlock, Coutts, F. and 0.
Noller, Crase, A. and M. Summons, Lumley, Kaylock,
Rossiter, Hill, Thompson, Artlett, Blumer, Porter,
Shorter, Paterson, Ross, Funnell, Burns, Thorpe,
Alexander, Cavanough, Drummond, Pearce, K. and
E. Betts, Cotterell.F. Harvey, Fades, Holt, Richard-
son, P. and A. Hume, Gregory, Hosford, Creagh,
M organ, Bruntnell, Hunt, Hines, Crouch, Hopkins,
Colls, Husband. R. and J. Brown, Earp, Copeland, D.
Little.
PARRAMATTA V.A.D. ENTERTAINING QUEENSLAND RETURNED SOLDIERS
Red Cross Society Workers—Parramatta, Fairfield, Granville
PARRAMATTA RED CROSS AT WORK.
(Page 255.)
The ladies in the photo include Lady
Cook (president), Mesdames Evans (hon.
sec), Granger, Tunks, Blumer, Hunt,
Atkins, McGill, G. Hill, Garnett, Readett,
Pidcock, Clifton, S. Brown, I. Waugh, Wor-
boys, Leddin, Misses Blumer, Davies, Mc-
Gill, Hanson, F. Houison and Garnett. The
photo., by the way, is a flashlight, which
accounts for lots of things; we hope the
ladies will try to forgive us.
FAIRFIELD RED CROSS WORKERS.
(Page 256.)
From left to right—Back row: Misses
V. Bowtell, Weaver, Molly Davis, Pearl
Durbin, Vera Nye. Middle row: Misses
Miriam Thorpe, Doris Smith, Clara Gibb,
Ada Eyles, Mrs. Ferguson, Miss Smith.
Front row: Misses Arline Davis, .Enid
Davis, Croft, Eileen Jones, Jean Morrison.
GRANVILLE REE CROSS HOSTEL
WORKERS.
(Page 256.)
Left to right—Standing: Mrs. Kelly,
Miss Rayner, Mrs. Rose, Mrs. Alderson,
Mrs. Hamilton, Nurse Snelling, Nurse Mc-
Kay, Mrs. Wishart, Mrs. F. Townsend
(voluntary nurse), Mrs. Monks, Mrs. Gal-
loway, Mrs. Garside, Mrs. Davis. Sitting:
Mrs. Black, Mrs. Hall, Mrs. Charlton (pre-
sident), Sister Caddow, Mrs. J. Rayner
(supervisor), Mrs. Epps (Mayoress), Mrs.
Hyslop, Mrs. Hawkins. Other workers ab-
sent when picture was taken are Nurse
Kilbert, Misses Richardson (2), Miss
Black, Mrs. Gordon, Miss Parmeter, Mrs.
Webb, Mrs. Halls, Miss Leydeclcer.


Parramatta War Chest Society
REALISING the great need of providing comforts
for our Australian soldiers, who were having
so strenuous a time in Egypt, France and other
parts of the war zone, it was decided to inaugurate
a branch of the War Chest Society in Parramatta.
With this end in view a meeting was called by the
then Mayor (Aid. F. J. Thomas) for the 24th April,
1917, and about 50 ladies attended. It might be men-
tioned that many of these ladies had been engaged
ever since the outbreak of the war in other branches
of patriotic work. The officers appointed at that
meeting were: —Patron, Mrs. F. J. Thomas; Presi-
dent, Mrs. Thos. Moxham: Vice-Presidents, Mrs.
Joseph Cook and Mrs. Bruntnell; Hon. Secretary,
Mrs. 11. E. Iladdrill; Hon. Treasurer, Mrs. J. 11. Saun-
ders, and a committee of seven. Other ladies who
held positions as President during the existence of
the Society were Mrs. Jago, Mrs. Artlett and the late
Mrs. E. K. Burnell. The hon. secre-
tary and the hon. treasurer held
their positions from the inception of
the movement till its close. The
members of the society met twice
each week in the Parramatta Town
Hall to knit socks and make cloth-
ing to be forwarded to headquarters
for despatch to “Our Boys” at the
front. During the time the Society
was in operation our members made
(1874 pairs socks, about 500 flannel
shirts, 200 Balaclava caps and muff-
lers, and many pairs of mittens. Be-
sides these we forwarded several
cases of goods, such as tinned fruit
and condensed milk, which were
gifts received at gift evenings
organised by three of our members,
Mrs. R. Telfer, Miss Forsythe, and
Miss Ilosford.
Though working hard for our own
society we were not unmindful of
llie needs of other patriotic bodies.
and by means of street stalls, etc., we raised over
£lOOO for such objects as Red Triangle Day, France’s
Day, Red Cross Day, British Red Cross Day, A.I.F.
Day, etc., etc., while for the two big War Chest Days,
with the co-operation of other local patriotic workers,
we were able to forward to head office over £lBOO.
During all our work we had the loyal co-operation
of the citizens of Parramatta generally, and they
made ready and generous response to every one of
our appeals for help.
One feature, too, that stood out prominently, and
of which we cannot be too proud, was the wonderful
help we received from the children. Not a State
LATE MRS. E. K. BURNELL.
school in the district but gave us material assistance
right through the piece, and the Society would par-
ticularly like to mention the Parramatta Superior
Public School, Parramatta High School, Parramatta
North Public School, The Meadows School (Toon-
gabbie), Pitt Row School, Castle Hill School, Grey-
stanes School, W r etherill Park School. Then of course
The King’s School boys were always to the fore in
giving a helping hand to every patriotic appeal. The
little members of the Burnside Homes, too, sent along
many a pair of beautifully knitted socks.
Among the ladies of our Society who rendered yeo-
man service all through one might mention Mesdames
Muston, Sherlock, Ilosford, Lynch, R. Telfer, Gar-
rett, Taylor, Saunders, Gazzard, Yeitch, Hughes, C. T.
Smith, Artlett, Rees, A. Thompson, Bingham, Leckie,
and Misses Blumer, Little, Smith, Ilosford, Forsythe
and Shorter.
Mention must be made before
closing of the last President of our
Society—the late Mrs. E. K. Burnell.
From the day the war started till
the day that peace was declared,
there was no more enthusiastic
worker in the cause than Mrs. Bur-
nell. In fact, she gave her life for
the cause just as surely as did so
many of our dear ones on the fields
of France. “To live in hearts you
leave behind, is not to die,” and the
memory of the late Mrs. E. K. Bur-
nell will live for ever in the hearts of
co-worker of hers in the Par-
ramatta War Chest Society.
It was almost with regret that we
received notice on February 24th,
1919, to close the branch, though the
fact that there was no need for our
efforts any longer in the same direc-
tion was a cause of great rejoicing.
However, orders had come, conse-
quently we formally and finally disbanded on March
27th, 1919. Many of our workers who could not go
back to the old selfish life of only looking after one’s
own comfort, soon looked round for fresh fields where
their activities could be continued, and now some of
them may bo seen one day each week ac the Hospital,
mending and making, and thus relieving to an extent
an already over-taxed staff. Many others have joined
the “Helping Hand” Society, whose object is to re-
lieve distress in the district, and already many a
a family has had cause to bless these women, who give
their time and means to succour those less happily
situated than themselves.


Welcome Home Committee
Parramatta's Glad Hand
WHEN the heroes of the Great War commenced
to return to us it appealed to many that the
time was ripe to form an association that
would interest itself in giving the'boys just as enthusi-
astic a welcome home as they had received a send-off.
It caught on. The first welcome of any note was that
accorded to Frank Hosford, one of the heroes of
Gallipoli, and organised by
the Parramatta Bowling
Club. Frank received an ad-
dress and a wallet of notes.
Then Mr. W. Morphett took
a hand, and, through his ef-
forts, in June, 1917, the Par-
ramatta Citizens Soldiers’
Welcome and Farewell Asso-
ciation was organised. Mr.
W. Morphett and Miss E. L.
Jones were the first secre-
taries. Afterwards the posi-
tion was taken by Mr. H.
Mason, who continued on till
the end of the war, and the
association was wound up,
after doing much praiseworthy work. Farewell socials
were arranged to bid God-speed to the recruits still
going forward to fill the gaps caused by those who had
given their lives to the great cause, and at intervals
“welcome home” functions were held. Besides this
it was seen to that every returned boy was given a
fitting welcome as he stepped on to the railway plat-
Miss COOGAN and Messrs. W. FAIRCLOUGH and H. MASON.
form. Cars were always in readiness to convey him
and his relatives home. These latter arrangements
were in the hands of Messrs. H. Mason and W. Fair-
clough and Miss C. Coogan, and how they succeeded is
now a matter of history. No hour was too early, and
no hour too late. The glad hand was always there.
They even arranged to deck the homes with bunting
for any who so desired, and
thus they won, not only the
appreciation of, the citizens,
but also the gratitude of the
returned boys and those near
and dear to them. This work
of love was carried on faith-
fully till the return of the
last boy, and, be it said to
their credit, the citizens,
owners of motor cars, were
always found ready and will-
ing to supply the cars neces-
sary for each and every occa-
sion, and by this means boys
have been joyfully returned
to their homes, even though
far distant from Parramatta itself. In appreciation of
this work there was that great final function, when the
returned soldiers, combined with the citizens, grace-
fully acknowledged the splendid work of Messrs.
Mason and Fairclough and Miss Coogan by presenting,
them each with an illuminated letter of thanks and ap-
preciation, and gold watches, suitably inscribed.
Soldiers Wives and Mothers’ Centre
ONE of the patriotic features of the Parramatta
war work was the monthly meetings of the
centre for Soldiers’ Wives and Mothers. The
idea originated from Dr. Mary Booth, of Sydney, Miss
Fairclough and Mrs. Thomas and Mrs. Griffin, of Par-
ramatta. At these meetings, held in the Town Hall,
afternoon tea was provided, a musical programme, and
some lectures on cooking. The mothers brought their
children, who were amused by some of the young
people, and much sympathy and interest were inter-
changed. Lady Helen Munro Ferguson came up to
one of these meetings, also Lady Davidson attended
two of the garden parties given by Mrs. Cotter Wil-
liamson in the lovely Hospital gardens. Mrs. Moxham
gave another garden part}'. All were largely attended
and enjoyed. Two Christmas Trees were given by the
committee and working members of the Centre, who
provided a lavish tea and plenty of presents for the
crowds of happy children. Mrs. Williamson was the
President; Mrs. Smythe and Mrs. Griffin, Vice-Presi-
dents; Mrs. Dunn and Mrs. Whiting, Secretaries ; and
Mrs. W. Mathews, Treasurer. The object was to visit
the lonely mothers and wives in their homes, as well
as entertain them and brighten their dreary, anxious
lives.


The Army Medical Corps—Its Great Work
WHAT would an army be
without its Army Medical
Corps and its Red Cross
workers? It would simply rot —
fade out of existence —for where
great bodies of men are brought
together—herded together in many
instances —there is always hovering
near the dread spectre of disease.
This is only a natural consequence
of lack of sanitation, sometimes poor
food, lack of variety in diet, wea-
ther conditions, and the thousand
and one other disabilities and priva-
tions with which an army has to
contend. Consequently one of the
first matters for deep consideration
and concern is the proper organisa-
tion and equipment of the Army
Medical Corps before war can even
be thought of. Germany had
thoroughly prepared in this direc-
tion years before she embarked on
her ambitious and cruel world adventure. Other
countries, such as Russia, Servia, and even England,
were not so prepared, and we all know how Russia,
especially, suffered in consequence. Just a little re-
flection and we come to realise how grateful the Brit-
ish Empire should feel towards the army of medical
men who, when occasion demanded, threw up lucrative
practices and at once enlisted to come to the assistance
not only of the Empire, but of humanity at large-
friend and foe. It was God’s work, and how well it
was performed, with its splendid triumphs, in surgery
and medicine!
Parramatta and district, in common with the rest
of the Empire, owes to its medical men a debt of grati-
Major Dr. R. A. PHIPPS-WAUGH.
tude which can never be amply re-
paid, and so far as the old town is
concerned it can be proudly said
that every eligible medical man
volunteered for this great and
noble work. There was no conscrip-
tion —it was a work of love and pat-
riotism.
In regard to the splendid work
performed by our local medical men
at the war, we would be pleased to
be able to give their splendid record
in detail, but the etiquette of the
B.M.A. forbids, not us, but our
medical men affording the Press
the information we would desire to
publish, viz., the relation the great
War had to the advance of both
medical and surgical science. As a
matter of fact, the world knows that
the advance in both branches was
tremendous, for the best brains
available the world over were con-
centrated on the effort to afford
quick and lasting relief to all who suffered from either
disease, wounds or shell-shock, and to literally drag
them back from the very jaws of death, and their
efforts were eminently successful. We cannot close
these brief remarks without adding that the medical
men of our district responded loyally to the call of
humanity and with our splendid nursing sisters bd
yeoman service in the great cause of humanity.
Also enlisted: Major Dr. Chas. B. Pym, senior
medical officer, Parramatta Mental Hospital, and
Sister Hyland, of Parramatta District Hospital.
Capt. Dr. KEITH S. MACARTHUR BROWN.
Major Dr. KEITH WHITING.
Major Dr. DUGALD BOWMAN.
Lieut.-Col. WM. CHAS. GREY, A.A.M.C.,
Of Lidcombe, N.S.W., was on active service
abroad 1914-1917, Commanding Officer Mena
House Hospital, and No. 3 Australian Auxiliary
Hospital, Egypt. Then went to France, and
afterwards to England.


Parramatta’s Devoted Nursing Sisters.
Sister DOROTHY CAWOOD, M.M.
Embarked with first Nursing Contingent. Nov.,
1914. Daughter of Mr. and Mrs. J. Cawood,
Hunter-street, Parramatta.
Sister P. TRAYHURN.
Late Parramatta District Hospital. Embarked
for front 1915; returned 1919.
Sister E. A. FABER.
Embarked with First Nursing Contingent,
November, 1914. Sister of Mrs. P. H.
Robilliard, May’s Hill.
IN regard to the brave and devoted nursing sisters
who enrolled themselves under the Red Cross of
Geneva, faced perils both on land and sea, giving of
their best to the soldier boys whose blood was poured
out on the battle fields of France, Flanders, Gallipoli
and Egypt, Parramatta has just reason to be intensely
proud. When the call came it was not a question of
how many were prepared and anxious to take up this
sacred and noble work, but of how
many of them could be spared, and
at the same time maintain a stan-
dard of efficiency at home. Our
nurses, one and all, expressed them-
selves as desirous of doing their bit,
both in the cause of Humanity and
in the interests of Home and Em-
pire. It was not, however, a ques-
tion of acceding to the wishes of the
nurses, but of making a wise selec-
tion taking into consideration phy-
sical fitness as well as practical abil-
ity, for it was a campaign that call-
ed for an enduring physique able to
withstand all manner of privation
and the rigors of extremes. Not
alone did Parramatta District Hos-
pital supply its quota, but it s<?nt,
Sister DAISY WEARNE.
Late of Parramatta District Hospital. Sailed
with Nursing Contingent early in 1915.
also brave nurses, natives of Parramatta, and many
nurses, since left the town, who had trained locally.
The first picture on this page is that of Sister D.
Cawood, a native of Parramatta, who trained at the
Coast Hospital. All honor to her for her brave con-
duct. She gained special distinction, and had the
honor of being rewarded at the hands of our King.
Sister P. Trayhurn, who trained at P. 1). Hospital,
Sister E. A. Faber, and Sister
Daisy Wearne also figure .here,
likewise there were Sisters Hyland
and Rush, from Parramatta Dis-
trict Hospital. The latter also
earned special mention, and w r e
doubt not but that one and all de-
served and earned it, though they
were not fortunate enough to re-
ceive it. All honor to their names!
In addition to the names already
mentioned other of our local nurses,
who were not fortunate in being se-
lected for oversea duty, took on
work at the various military hos-
pitals and convalescent homes. In
this respect we might mention Sis-
ter Emert. who filled the position of
matron at Randwick Hospital.


THE LAST CHAPTER —PEACE
Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths,
Our bruised arms hung up for monuments;
Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings,
Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
. - — Shakespeare-
“PEACE DAY” IN SYDNEY.
War Declared
AUGUST 4th, 1914.
Armistice Signed
NOVEMBER 11th,
1918.
PEACE DECLARED
JUNE 28th, 1919.
THE CROWD ON “PEACE DAY.”
V.A.D.'S IN THE “PEACE DAY” CELEBRATIONS IN SYDNEY.—THE SECOND SECTION IS THE
PARRAMATTA DETACHMENT.


"PEACE DAY” CELEBRATIONS IN SYDNEY.
A DETACHMENT OF IMPERIAL OFFICERS IN THE "PEACE DAY” CELEBRATIONS IN SYDNEY.


Our ‘Boys ‘Did the Bidding:
Be great in act, as you have been in thought;
Be stirring at the time; be fire with fire;
Threaten the threatener, and out-face the brow
Of bragging horror ; so shall inferior eyes,
That borrow their behaviours from the great,
Grow great by your example, and put on
The dauntless spirit of resolution.
— Shakespeare.
A Tribute to the Women who Worked:
“ As the vine, which has long twined its graceful foliage about the oak, and
been lifted by it in sunshine, will, when the hardy plant is rifted by the thunder-
bolt, cling round it with its caressing tendrils, and bind up its shattered boughs,
so it is beautifully ordered by Providence that woman, who is the mere depen-
dent and ornament of man in his happier hours, should be his stay and solace
when smitten with dire calamity (as many of our boys were), winding itself into
the rugged recesses of his nature, tenderly supporting the drooping head and
binding up the broken heart v —Washington Irving.
Of Our Boys who Fell in the Great War:
“Oh ! it is hard to take to heart the lesson that such deaths will teach ; but let
no man reject it, for it is one that all must learn, ard is a mighty universal
truth. When Death strikes down the young, for every form from which he lets
the panting spirit free, a hundred virtues rise, in shapes of Mercy, Charity and
Love, to walk the world and bless it. Of every tear that sorrowing mortals
shed on such green graves, some good is born, some gentler nature comes.
.In the Destroyer’s steps there spring up bright creations that defy his power,
and his dark path becomes a way of light to Heaven.’’ Dickens.
FINIS,


The Family Record
NAME and RANK:
REMARKS:


EDITOR’S NOTE
CL Although every care has
been taken, it is obvious that in
such a complicated publication
as the “War Boo\" errors and
omissions are sure to creep in.
The Editor would, therefore, be
pleased to receive details, ad-
dressed :
“ EDITOR, WAR BOOK,”
“ j4rgus,”
‘Parramatta, N. S. W.
for rectification in future editions.
Wholly Set Up, Compiled, and Printed in Australia, by “The Cumberland Argus” Lid ,at their Printing orks
Church and Macquarie Streets, Parramatta, New South Wales,
1920.


/I
K
Wsm&
'A wmz&tiA
V. ///////."/.
"////A
WMMrn
tnOSZ
tIW
c
m
I
$
m
• i •
£
*
vl^fS
Forced to be Big!
Though Australia’s Oversea Army was small to begin with, her soldiers soon made a
name for themselves—they were forced to be big. As time went on they became a
bigger and greater factor in securing the final Allied Victory.
ERBY’S also were forced to be big—b} T always giving the biggest possible values in
Merchandise of the best qualities. During the past 30 years this business has grown
from the three unpretentious shops (shown at the extreme left of the picture) to the
present commodious premises, which are unexcelled in Parramatta.
Continuously striving to give greater values, whilst maintaining an inflexible quality
standard has made ERBY’S the Premier store in Parramatta for
MILLINERY
COSTUMES
BLOUSES
SKIRTS
UNDERCLOTHING
NECKWEAR
LACES
RIBBONS
GLOVES, &c.
CHILDREN’S and
INFANTS’ CLOTHING
MEN’S OUTFITTING
BOYS’ CLOTHING
FOOTWEAR
DRESS MATERIALS
SOFT FURNISHINGS
MANCHESTER GOODS, &c.
The Merchandise at ERBY’S comes from manufacturers who have world-wide repu-
tations to maintain. You can shop here and be assured of finding the best goods at
the powest possible prices—values that are always a little bigger than are obtainable
elsewhere.
Va
I
w
\ WYCOMBE MOUSE /


Wholly Set Up, Compiled
and Printed in Australia, by
“Thll Cumberland Argus”
Ltd., at their Printing
Works, Church and Mac-
quarie Streets, Parramatta,
New South Wales.
1920.
