





Number 1.
PARRAMATTA 3ND DISTRICTS
ILLUSTRATED:
With a Review of chief Municipal, Electoral, Industrial, and
Commercial factors of Parramattan Progress
and Prosperity.
COMPRISING, MOREOVER,
Biographical Notices of Leading Citizens, and a sufficiency of Statistics to enable
readers to gauge aright the potentialities of the localities referred
to for rapid and propitious development.
Parramatta:, 3* *
Cumberland Argus Printing Works, Church and Macquarie Streets.
1899.




Argus (Cumberland) Printing Works, Etc. 70, 71
Auburn ... ... .. ... ... 45
St. Joseph’s Hospital ... ... ... 48
Yale & Sons’ Engineering Works ... ... 46
Australian Gas-Light Co’s. Works ... 7, 12
Bankstown and East Hills
Baulkham Hills
“ Roxburgh Hall,” residence of Mr. W. T.
Wright
Mr. H. S. Bishop’s General Store
Blacktown
BeECROFT, EpPING ANt) Marsfield
Yiew of “ Curzon Hall,” residence of Mr. H.
Smith, Marsfield
Cabramatta, “The Grove,” Residence of Dr. Birch... 62
Carlingpord ... ... ... ... ... 30
Castle Hill ... .. ... ... ... 32
View (looking south) ... ... ... 34
View of Mr. J, S. Heron’s residence... ... 48a
Dundas, Yiew from (over-looking Ermington and
Parramatta River) ...
Dural, View 0f...
Ermington
Galston ... ... ... ... ... 40
View of the Township ... ... ... 39
Granville and Clyde ... ... ... 41, 45
ILiJuifi AIM U \jLiXUSIj ... ... ... **-L,
Portraits :—Mayor of Granville, Mr. J. Mahony 41
Mr. John Nobbs, M.P. for Granville 41
Mr. J. Downie, Station-master,
Granville ... ... ... 41
Mr. J. R. Palmer, an ex-Mayor,
Granville ... ... ... 41
View of Town Hall, Granville ... ... 42
~ Messrs. Mahony & Go’s. Springfield
Yards ... ... ... 64
~ Clyde Engineering Co’s. Works ... 43
~ Marsh Bros. (Ltd.) Tannery ... 32b
~ Brunton & Co’s. Australian Roller
Flour Mills ... ... 32b
~ Goodlet & Smith’s Brick and Tile
Works ... ... ... 320
Holroyd ... ... ... ... ... 23
Hornsby, Thornleigh, etc. ... .. ... 68
Barker College, Hornsby Junction ... ... 56
St. Paul’s Church, Pearce’s Corner, Hornsby ... 68
Hunter’s Hill, Gladesville and Woolwich ... 64
Yiew of Hunter’s Hill, from Wharf ... ... 65
Kellyville
Kenthurst
Yiew of School of Arts
INDEX
Merrylands
View on J. E. Yance’s Sutherland Estate
North Rocks
Parramatta
King’s School, The...
King’s School Chapel
PAGE
Liverpool ... ... ... ... ... 50
Portrait of Mr. Y. Parkes, M.P. ... ... 51
View of George’s River, Liverpool ... ... 52
~ St. Luke’s, Liverpool ... ... 51
~ Park and Benevolent Asylum ... 52
~ Messrs. Scrivener’s Stores & Salerooms 58
~ Mr. Cloke’s Family Hotel ... ... 50
~ “ Warwick Farm ” ... ... ... 56
Lysaght Bros., Ltd., St. John Galvanised Iron and
Wire Netting Works ... ... ... 9
... 5-21
Portraits The Mayor Parramatta, Mr. T.
Moxham ... ... ... 13
Mr. W. J. Ferris, M.P. for Parra -
matta ... ... ... 27
Mr. T. E. McNevin, P.M. ... 19
The Hon. George Thornton, M.L C. 7
Lt. Col. James Burns, N.S.W.
Lancers ... ... ... 63
Mr. C J. Byrnes ... ... 33
The Yen. Archdeacon Gunther ... 17
Mr. C. B. Cairnes ... ... 37
Mr. W. W. Bodenham ... ... 55
Mr. Sydney Wickham, Council
Clerk ... ... ... 23
Mr. J. E. Bowden, Council Solicitor 25
Mr. E. J. Love, Council’s Overseer
of Works, ... ... ... 21
View of Argus Office, Machinery & Bookbinding
Department ... ... 70
~ ~ Newspaper & Printing Office ... 71
~ ~ Composing Room ... ... 71
All Saints’ Church ... ... ... 36
Australian Joint Stock Bank ... 16b
Baptist Church ... ... ... 48b
“ Brislington,” residence of Dr. W. S.
Brown ... ... ... 14
Brown’s (Mr. F. W.) Hairdressing and
Tobacconist’s Club / ... ... 40
Congregational Church ... ... 35
~ Convent Schools of Our Lady of Mercy 16d
~ Court House ... ... ... 19
District Hospital ... ... ... 72
~ Erby’s (Mr.), “ Wycombe House ” ... 20
~ Fitzroy (Lady Mary) Memorial ... 33
~ “ Gowan Brae,” residence of Lt. Col.
James Burns ... ... ... 63
~ Henderson’s (Mr. P. D.) Stores 44
~ “ Hiawatha,” residence of Mr. J. W,
Withers ... ... ... 32d
~ Hospital for Insane ... ... 16a
~ “ Inchneuk,” residence of Dr. Bowman 8
~ Industrial School for Girls ... ... 48


—
-• * • ’ " * V
The “Nineveh” Contingent of New South Wales Lancers,
Many of whom, returning from England, joined the Imperial forces in the Transvaal War. Being a reprint of a photograph taken at the Parramatta Barracks,
February 28th, 1899, and published in The Cumberland Argus of 4th March, 1899. See key to names on opposite page.


PAGE
Parramatta (continued)
Rookwood
View of Mobbs’ (Mr. G. H.) New Offices ... 24
View of Town Hall, Railway Station, etc. ... 47
~ Murray Bros.’ (Messrs.) Stores ... 15
~ Oak Avenue in Park ... ... 4
~ Sydney Meat Preserving Co’s. Works 32c
Rouse Hill ... ... ... ... ... 37
~ Obelisk and Round House ... ... 48c
~ Old Government House in Park ... 27
Rydalmere, View of “Excelsior,” residence of Mrs.
White 28
~ Park Main Entrance ... ... 33
View of Hospital for Insane ... ... 16d
~ Panorama of Parramatta from May’s
Hill ... ... ... Inset
Ryle ... ... ... ... ... ... 59
~ Pollock’s (Mr. T. W.) Emporium ... 30
Portrait of Mr. E. Terry, M.P. ... ... 61
~ Primitive Methodist Church ... 16b
View of Eastwood Estate, residence of Mr. E.
Terry... ... ... ... ... 61
~ Railway Station ... ... ... 6
View of McDonald’s Eastwood Hotel... ... 60
~ Reservoir (Hunt’s Creek) ... ... 21
~ River Steamer “ Bronze wing ” ... 6
~ Nancarrow’s (Mr.) Vineyard ... 16c
~ ~ ~ “ Pheasant ” ... 11
- ~ St. Andrew’s Church (Pres.) ... 57
~ Ryde, from near residence of Hon. H.
Moses, M.L.C. ... ... 62
~ School of Arts ... ... ... 16b
~ Grape-Vine, A Prolific ... ... 31
~ St. John’s Church (C.E.) ... ... 17
~ St. John’s Lodge, residence of Dr.
Kearney ... ... ... 16
Seven Hills
Views of Mr. J. Cocks’ Orangery ... 26-48 n
~ St. Patrick’s Church (R.C.) ... ... 66
~ Simpson’s (Mr. L A.) Dental Surgery 54
~ Soul & Co’s. (Messrs. Washington H.)
Drug Store ... ... ... 22
~ “ Bella Vista,” residence of Mr. E. H.
Pearce ... ... ... 48c
~ Orange Grading and Packing ... 16c
~ Spraying Operations in Orchard ... 49-
~ Town Hall ... ... ... 13
~ Vallack & Co’s. (Messrs.) Brewery ... 18
~ Wesleyan (Leigh Memorial) Church ... 35
~ “ Willow Grove,” residence of Mrs.
Gallagher ... ... ... 32a
Smithfield, Fairfield and Guildford ... ... 58
View of Messrs. Vallance & Sons’ Post Office
Store... ... ... ... ... 58
View of Residence of Mr. W. Stimson, Fairfield 55
~ Messrs. Symons Bros.’ Tile & Pottery
Works, Guildford ... ... 59
~ WoolpacK Hotel ... ... ... 10
Pennant Hills, View of, from Thompson’s Corner ... 37
Eaton’s Hampden Hotel ... ... ... 67
View of “ Linn wood,” Residence of Mr. G.
McCredie, Guildford ... ... ... 32d
Prospect ... ... ... ... ... 24
View of Fairfield Railway Station, etc. ... 48a
View of Waterworks, Valve House, Etc. ... 25
~ St. James’ Church, Smithfield ... 48b,
~ ~ ~ Water Tower ... 43
~ ~ “ Greystanes ” ... ... 32a
Toongabbie and Wentworthville ... ... 22
Portrait of Monsignor Rigney ... ... 65
View of Residence of Mr. T. Wilmot, Jun. ... 23
Beading from Left.
Key to Lancer Group.
Back Eow.—Tpr. Morris, Corp. Gould, Tpr. Cummings, Tpr. Fitzsimmons, Tpr. Hopf. Tpr. Webster. Corp. Dooley, Tpr. Byrne,
Tpr. Palmer, Tpr. Haken, Tpr. Fallick, Tpr. Vernon, Tpr. Milling, Tpr. Stratford, Tpr. Rogers, Tpr. Brandon,
Tpr. Knight, Tpr. Secombe, Tpr. Stewart.
2nd Eow (standing). —F. Sgt. Rose, Tpr. Daley, Tpr. Johnson, Tpr. Roberts, Tpr. Barclay, Tpr. Lardner, Tpr. Pestell, Tpr. Carter,
Tpr. Brew, Sgt. McDonald, Tpr. Harvey, Tpr. Akers, .Tpr. Clarke, Tpr. Peek, Tpr. Saville, Tpr. Chilcott, Tpr. Armbruster,
Tpr. Kilpatrick, Tpr. Harkus, Tpr. Ford, Tpr. Baley.
Front Row.—Corp. Moffit, Tpr. Sutton, Tpr. Brennan, Tpr. Beaver, Tpr. Harrison, Tpr. Bradbury, Tpr. Cox, Tpt. Barnett,
Tpr. Madden, Sgt. M. Read, Capt. Cox, S.S.M. Robson, Tpr. Cook, Tpr. McPherson, Tpr. Waddell, Tpr. Smith,
Tpr. Faulkner, Tpr Avard, Tpr. Marsden, Tpr. Hillis, Corp. Luke, Corp O’Sullivan.




PREFACE.
THE idea of this work is to present to the public a varied and representative series of Pictures and
Narratives, descriptive of the chief objects in Parramatta and Districts that possess claim on
the admiration or attention of the visitor.
The idea of catching and depicting the more typical aspects of the Parramatta and Districts of
To-day, the proprietary of the Cumberland Argus trust has been realised. Since the Argus may
honestly boast of possessing peculiar qualifications for performing the task which it has set itself —chief
of those qualifications being an accurate knowledge of the region to be described —a large measure of
authoritativeness is claimed for this volume.
Both in the photographic and the literary work, artistic excellence has been sought after—with
what result it is left to the public to determine. In forming opinions on this subject, readers are
begged, however, to remember that the principle of selection which has guided the compilers was this
to se i ze u pon modern points of interest alone which are patently indicative of achieved local progress
and clearly indicative of local capabilities for further advance. To the objection (should it be made)
that the selection fails to include many places of interest and beauty, the compilers plead that a veritable
embarras des richesses made their task an individious one. To have included in their scheme every place
of interest would have needed not one volume but many. Should another volume of the work be
published, an opportunity will be afforded to the compilers of including in it many charming local
features compulsorily left unnoticed in the present issue.
Although the book deals mainly with the Parramatta and Districts of To-day, occasional references
to the “Central Cumberland” of the Past are introduced in order to furnish means of instituting
comparisons betwixt the Old Order and the New.


The River and Oak Avenue, Parramatta Park.
The Parramatta River and King’s School.


PARRAMATTA.
WE make no excuse for introducing to the world-spread constituency of Whom-it-may-COncern—the
local lovers of the historic and the picturesque as well as the keen-witted visitor to our shore
who hails from another land —the following pages about Parramatta. Not to know, not to have
seen, not, as it were, to have tasted Parramatta is for the world-seeing pilgrim to confess himself un-
travelled, so far at least as the classic soil of Ancient Australia is concerned. Not to see Parramatta
when propitious rains and fair weather have dowered the district with such loveliness as it often wears
is to miss one of the most charming sights beneath the Southern Cross.
There are three ways of reaching Parramatta from Sydney, by the high road (in buggy, on horse
back, or on bike) ; by railway; and by steamboat.
The line between Sydney and Parramatta is a section of the Great Western Railway (though also
forming portion of the metropolitan-suburban system, along which trains run with great frequency to and
from the Sydney, i.e. the Redfern, terminus). At Strathfield (71 miles from Sydney) the northern
branches
Parramatta Railway Station.
off from the western line. At Homebush, half-a-mile from Strathfield, the metropolitan live stock market
is held. Passing Rookwood, Auburn, Clyde, and Granville (where the southern branches off from the
western line) to*'’Parramatta railway —at 14 miles from the metropolis—reaches its destination a fairly
commodious station (with refreshment room), the centre of an adequate train se^Gce.
The route from Sydney to Parramatta by river is charming. No visitor to New South Wales
should neglect to avail himself or herself of the facilities offered by the Parramatta River Steamers and
Tramway Company for a trip up the head waters of Port Jackson, one of the imest, if not the Imest
harbour in the world.
Two of the Company’s steamers, the Bronzewing and the Pheasant are pictured in these pages.
A start is made from the foot of King-street, Sydney, the terminus of the Rose Bay electric and cable
trams.


On board of one of the comfortable trim and staunchly-built steamers, there lying steam up, the
voyager soon finds himself being carried swiftly past Balmain, Cockatoo Island, Spectacle Island, the
training ship, “ Sobraon,” Greenwich, Fern Bay, Drummoyne, and Hunter’s Hill —the latter lovely spot a
water-side hill clad with vine-dressed villas, the homes of many of the best-known families of the capital and
the colony.
Opposite are Lysaght’s mammoth wire-netting and galvanised iron works, one of the busiest
industries of Australia.
On a little further on the northern bank of the river, is Ryde. Nearly opposite are the Mortlake
Works, of the Australian Gaslight Company, whose arterial mains run through and through the metropolitan
region. Two views of these extensive works are amongst our illustrations.
The Australian Gaslight Company was the first introducer of gas as a lighting agency into this
Continent. A well-known old-time resident of Parramatta, the Rev. Ralph Mansfield, whose domicile was
just under the shadow of St. John’s, was the founder of the Company in 1837 ; the City of Sydney being first
lit with gas upon Queen’s Birthday (May 24) 1841. The S. M. Herald , speaking of the event, at that time,
observed :—“ They (the Company) have conferred a splendid and permanent benefit upon the country, and
we cannot doubt that their expenditure, their toils, their anxieties, and, withal, their exemplary patience, will
be liberally recompensed by the golden opinions of their fellow citizens.”
The P. R. S. & T. Co.’s Steamer “Bronzewing.”
The Works of the Company at Mortlake (see illustrations) occupy some eighty acres of ground, sixty
of which are set apart for manufacturing purposes, the remaining twenty being utilised as a water reserve
and a dam for storing fresh water. This dam holds seven million gallons. The retort house is 280 ft. long
by 70 ft. wide. The adjoining coal-store will hold 8000 tons. The tanks for tar and ammoniacal liquor hold
250,000 gallons each. The first erected gas-holder at Mortlake was a telescopic triple lift rising to a height
of no ft., and containing 2,750,000 cubic feet. After their first expenditure at Mortlake, the
Company found it necessary to build a second retort-house, as well as to provide a tank, 206 feet in diameter,
containing another lift-holder of 3,750,000 cubic feet capacity.
The Company’s mains extend from Mortlake and the City to Rockdale on the south and to Guildford
in the west. In 1890 the Company purchased the goodwill and property of the then existing Parramatta Gas
Company. After mains had been extended from Mortlake to Parramatta, the works at Parramatta were
dismantled.
The head-station of the Company is in Sydney : the total capacity of their gas-holders is 8,635,000
cubic feet : the total number of the hands employed at their different stations is between 900 and 1000.


A very little further on is the Thomas Walker Convalescent
Hospital (privately endowed) —a standing and eloquent memorial of the
beneficence of the late Thomas Walker, of “ Yaralla,” one of the most
successful colonists New South Wales ever had.
After passing underneath the railway bridge—the start-point of
the Parramatta River champion rowing course (the scene of many a
noble contest) —the steamer’s track skirts the south-eastern fringe of
the orange-growing country —the river-washed edge of the municipality
of Krmington and Rydalmere. Then on the southern bank the
Newington Asylum is seen. Opposite, a little further up than the
mouth of Duck River, the imposing buildings of the Hospital for the
Insane at Rydalmere come into view. At last, the wharf, where the
tram is in waiting to take the tourist through the 1 own of Parramatta
to the Park gates.
It is well to remember that the Parramatta River S. & T.
Company have made arrangements with the Railway Commissioners for
all round trips by rail and steamer (to and from Abbotsford) at
extremely low fares; also that the said Company and the said
Commissioners have adopted a system by which the round trip to
Parramatta from Sydney and back or vice versa may be taken without
inconvenience and on a single reasonable payment made when booking
at the initial stage of the journey. This boon to travellers is indicative
of the up-to-date methods which the Company invariably adopts in
dealing with the public.
Hon. George Thornton.
Photo, by
Freeman of Co.
The panoramic view of Parramatta —the most important illustration in this volume—is from a photo-
graph taken on the crest of May’s Hill —the crescent-shaped eminence which marks the southern limit of the
Australian Gaslight Co.’s Mortlake Station, from the Jetty.
Park. May’s Hill as a feature in the district landscape once dominated Parramatta : to live on the aristo-
cratic height was then the hall-mark of social distinction. Nowadays Parramatta merely regards May’s Hill
as a handsome and sometimes emerald coronet —a picturesque back ground to the town. Anyway, from
May’s Hill, as our illustration shows, may be seen mapped out below the town, its mam edifices, its suburbs.


Conspicuous stand the Argus Office Tower, the twin spires of St. John’s, the shapely piles of All Saints’ and
St. Patrick’s, of the Congregational and the Wesleyan Churches. The more frequented part of the Park lies
in the mid-distance. To the left, from close by the pretty Rosehill Bowling Green, the railway embankment
runs Sydney-ward till it ends at the station just a few feet to the south-west of the headquarters of the
N. S.W. Lancers. In the back ground where the orange-growing hills begin to “ melt away in purple
haziness ” may be distinguished the castellated masonry of “ Gowan Brae.”
Yes, that is Parramatta, “ the Cradle of the Australias,” as a Minister of the Crown truly observed
when recently visiting the Borough.
“ Parramatta” is one of the sweetest words heard on the Australian tongue : and meet it is that it
should be so for the district whereof the town so named is the centre is really the birth-place of the Young
Nation of the South now just bursting (as it were) into lusty adolescence. And yet there are many thou-
sands of people in the great City of Sydney—but twenty-five minutes’ ride from the “ Historic Borough ”
who know virtually nothing about the quamtness and the charm of old Parramatta.
Parramatta—literally in aboriginal vernacular “ the place where eels sit down ” —is still the place- for
eels, although eel-fishing is only carried on in perfunctory style by idle boys and men. The crafty savage
with his spear has gone ; he is no longer the enemy of the tough-skinned snake-fish : he merely serves to
give a theme for the design on the Borough’s escutcheon, displayed on the front of the hall wherein fort-
nightly meet in solemn conclave the civic Fathers.
“ Inchneuk,” the Residence of Dr. Bowman, Parramatta.
The Cradle of the Australias ! Here over a hundred years ago, the first town was planted in the new
land that had just been discovered by Cook. Here were made the first successful attempts to cultivate the
soil of what appeared to be at every other point a vast wild barren island-continent. And it was not until
Parramatta had got settled and her richly responsive lands had given earnest of the bounty that the
Australian soil was yet to yield that the Governor felt justified in deciding not to abandon “ New Holland”
to another long era of silence—to the occupancy of the uncouth untutored savage. Thus it is that Parra-
matta possesses unique historic interest for the visitor to Australia. And, besides, there is the fact that the
place has a fascination of its own, palpable even to the daily traveller on the suburban railway of which it is
the western limit —for is not Parramatta the very Portal of the West, through which the city-bred voyager
is whirled —as though in dream—when speeding on his way perchance to droughty Never Never plains far
far beyond the Great Dividing Range ?
One of the most picturesque, and at the same time nationally interesting of Parramatta’s possessions
is its Park, a magnificent recreation ground comprising an area of some 300 acres reserved for the use of the
people in the days of Governor Denison, when the “ Governor’s Domain,” of which it formed part, was cut
up into farms and sold. The main entrance is in George-street, where a handsome building of the Tudor
style of architecture supports the massive wrought-iron gates. On passing these portals, almost the first


object that meets the eye is the stone obelisk, a marble tablet on which commemorates the sad accident
whereby Lady Mary Fitzroy, wife of Sir Charles Fitzroy, the then Governor, met her death, on 7th
December, 1847. A lady, who was present when the accident occurred, gave the following account of it:
“ About eleven o’clock in the forenoon, Lady Mary and Lieutenant C. C. Masters, aide-de-camp, started
from the old Government House in a carriage and four, the Governor driving. As they were going down the
hill, the horses became restive and bolted. In turning the corner up to the park gates, the carriage collided
against a stump and capsized, the horses breaking loose and clearing away from the scene. The three
occupants of the carriage were thrown violently to the ground, Lady Mary’s head striking against the fifth tree
on the right hand side of the drive going in from the lodge, and to which her bonnet and hair adhered.” Mrs.
Wainwright, the lady who tells the story, ran up quickly and tore away the unfortunate lady’s clothing. Mr.
Masters fell against the tree which is twice removed from the other, and Sir Charles Fitzroy was pitched still
lower down, landing on the grass, and rolling on to a sand heap. Lady Mary and Mr. Masters were quickly
conveyed to Government House, but neither of them awakened out of unconsciousness, the former dying
before noon, and the other at six o’clock in the evening. The obelisk marking the scene of this catastrophe
(and which was unveiled by Mr. R. Harper, J.P., during the Centenary celebrations of 1888), and the tree
which is fraught with such melancholy interest, are surrounded by a neat fence.
In a central position in the Park, and, upon a commanding eminence, stands Old Government House,
at one time the house of the Governor of New South Wales, and which in these days has become a boarding-
house.
St. John Galvanised Iron and Wire Netting Works (Lysaght Bros.)
Below is the beautiful Oak Avenue, a source of justifiable pride to Parramatta, along which are
arranged here and there comfortable seats available and availed of for many a cosy, quiet flirtation, when
local gallants leave their labors “to toy with Amaryllis in the shade.” The upper reaches of the Parramatta
River traverse a portion of the Park, and a movement is now on foot for rendering this water both more
ornamental and navigable, whereby the Park’s attraction will be immeasurably enhanced.
On the northern bank of the stream is that portion of the Park which was formerly a race-course. In
its centre is “ The Oval.” This admirable cricket-ground of the C.C.E.C.C. (with bicycle-track, pavilion,
&c.) is enclosed by a high fence of galvanised iron.
Returning to the southern side of the river are the handsome pavilion and level green sward, the delight
of Sunday-school and other picnickers; and the shady slopes dear to the Sunday afternoon orator and
Salvationist.
In rear of Old Government House lies the Back Domain, an extensive area mainly devoted to cricket
and football, overlooked by the Park Ranger’s residence. Close to the ancient vice-regal residence is the
site of the old Observatory, established during the governorship of Sir Thomas Brisbane. The Observatory


was originally in charge of the well-known astronomer Rumker, who was assisted, and eventually succeed e
by Mr. James Dunlop. When that gentleman retired in the fullness of time, the instruments were remove
to the Observatory on Flagstaff Hill, Sydney, where many of them are still to be seen. An obelisk in t e
Parramatta Park now marks the position of the old-time transit instrument.
A stone block near the Park gate on the Western Road indicates the place where formerly stood a
semaphore, by means of which shipping and other news was communicated from Sydney via an intermedia e
station at Ryde.
A practical step of the movement now in progress to improve the Park was the recent planting of an
avenue of young trees, from the Macquarie-street entrance gates to Old Government House. Anot icr
reform which the promoters of the movement desire to effect is the conversion of the quondam vice-rega
residence to public uses as a Museum.
Parramatta Park is under the control of a trust, the chairman of which is Mr. C. J. Byrnes, J.P., an
ex-representative of the Borough in the Legislative Assembly. Many times Mayor of Parramatta, Mr.
Byrnes earned high encomiums for his municipal services. He is a son of the late Hon. James Byrnes, to
whom Parramatta owes its possession of the Park.
Parramatta was incorporated as a Borough on November 27th, 1861. Its area, 1600 acres, is divided
into four wards, viz. : Anderson, Marsden, Gore, and Forrest. its population may be reckoned at about
14,000 ; its ratepayers number about 2000. The Borough contains about 3000 houses.
Marshall’s Woolpack Hotel, Parramatta.
The Town Hall, an imposing structure in Church-street, was erected (as the legend above the entrance
proclaims) in the year 1880, when Mr. J. C. Byrnes was Mayor. The cost of this building was from /5000
to £6OOO. It contains a large and commodious hall, suitable for balls and entertainments, with gallery, stage,
and complete scenic arrangements. The front portion of the building is two storeys high ;on the ground floor
being roomy offices and rooms for the council clerk, overseer, and other municipal officials. Upstairs the
handsome Council Chambers, from the walls of which life-like portraits of ex-Mayor Byrnes and the late
Huo-h Taylor—once M. P. for Parramatta and for many years a member of its Municipal Council—smile
approvingly on the labours of the Borough legislators. On this floor are also the Mayor’s room and other
apartments.
The Borough Council meets every fortnight for the transaction of business.
Parramatta is now exceptionally well off in the matter of its water supply, since, in' the very remote
chance of its own resources failing, it is connected with the Nepean system, from which the water can be
turned on at a moment’s notice. The supply is derived from Hunt’s Creek, a crystal rivulet which meanders
near the north end of the town. In this stream a dam was erected in or about the year 1856, and a capacious


reservoir formed capable of containing about 138 millions of gallons. As the population increased, it became
apparent that such a supply might, in a very dry season, be inadequate; consequently in 1898 the dam was
raised 7 feet 4 inches, whereby its capacity was more than doubled. Some 1200 tons of material were then
super-imposed upon the old structure. The dam is built in circular form on rock foundations and abutments,
and is believed to be the only stone construction of the kind in the colony. Filtration and settlement tanks
are connected with it, and new ones will shortly be constructed to answer the purposes of the enlarged reservoir.
In the year 1898, the supply in the reservoir, before its enlargement, lasted for a period of nine months and
21 days, during which there was no appreciable augmentation from rainfall. It is therefore confidently
anticipated that under present circumstances the supply would hold out during a drought of at least eighteen
months. Two trunk mains are the outlets of the reservoir, one of 10 inch pipes extending two miles, and the
other of g inch pipes miles. These are connected with branches at every intersection of the streets, and
the water is laid on to nearly every house in the Borough.
A work creditable to the enterprise of the Borough Council was the establishment, some seven years
ago, of Swimming Baths, on a piece of land in Church-street, upon the left bank of the river, adjoining
Lennox Bridge. The swimming basin is 126 feet long by 61 feet wide.
Mr. T. R. Moxham (who forms the subject of an illustration) is the present Mayor of Parramatta, and
has for some two or three years proved himself an active and energetic custodian of the interests of the rate-
payers. He is a native of the town and is in no small degree connected with its progress. Mr. Moxham has
The P. R. S. & T. Co.’s Steamer “ Pheasant.”
to his credit, as a municipal administrator, amongst other solid local improvements, the extension of the
Borough’s water supply ; the placing of the water system on a sounder financial basis ; and the pushing
forward of other highly important public works.
Portraits are also given of Mr. Sydney Wickham, member of a family honorably connected with
Parramatta for three generations, who has occupied the position of Council Clerk for the last 28 years ; of
Mr. T E. Bowden, who has discharged the duties of Borough Solicitor for an even longer period ; and of
Mr. E. J. Love, the Overseer of Works, Inspector of Nuisances, etc., etc., who has been an officer of the
Council since 1880. Mr. Bowden fulfilled the responsible duties of District Coroner for many years. Mr.
Love is President of the Metropolitan Fire Brigades’ Association and representative of Volunteer Fire
Brigades on the F. B. Board.
The area of the electorate of Parramatta is a little larger than that of the Borough. The first
members for Parramatta in the partly elective partly nominee Council that constituted the New South
Wales Parliament in the 1843-56 period were Hannibal Hawkins Macarthur and George Oakes. Since the
introduction of responsible government the representatives of the Borough have been James Byrnes, C. J.
Byrnes,]. S. Farnell (sometime Premier of the Colony), A. T. Holroyd, Sir John Lackey (now President of


the Legislative Council), W. A. Long, George Oakes, H. W. Parker (the first Premier of the Colony), Hugh
Taylor, Dowell O’Reilly, and W. J. Ferris.
Major Ferris, the present representative of Parramatta in the Assembly, was elected in 1898, defeating
the previous member, Mr. D. O’Reilly, on the occasion of the great federal upheaval. _ The Major, who was
for a time a teacher at the R. C. Orphan School, and for some years later on engaged in mercantile pursuits,
has ever taken an active interest in the public life and welfare of the Borough. He has held the position o
alderman and occupied with credit the mayoral chair. He is a major of the 3rd Infantry Regiment, u as
passed examination for rank higher than that held.
An honored resident of Parramatta (his native town) is the Hon. George Thornton, M.L.C., who vas
one of the representatives of Sydney in the Lower House so long ago as 1858. He was nominate to t e
Upper House in 1861, but the appointment lapsed. The date of his nomination to the seat he now holds was
1887. He was Mayor of Sydney in 1857, and (the first) Mayor of Woollahra. Sixty-three years ago eorge
Thornton won the classic yachting prize of Australia; twenty-one years ago (in 1878) he brave y rescue
three persons from drowning off Manly. This veteran parliamentarian is one of the most interesting igures
in the public life of the Colony.
Australian Gaslight Co.’s Mortlake Station.
In the Colony’s Defence scheme, Parramatta is the Headquarters of the N. S.W. Lancers (four
s juadrons) to which is attached a squadron of cadets. The Parramatta company of infantry belongs to the
3rd Regiment, the Headquarters of which are at Richmond.
The first Australasian volunteers were the Sydney and Parramatta Loyal Associate Corps, temporarily
formed in consequence of a rumored outbreak among political prisoners in 1800. Captain James Thompson
commanded the Parramatta contingent of this corps, the commander of which was William Balmain. In
iB6O a Parramatta Rifle Corps (now defunct) was formed under Captain W. Brown. Camp colours were
presented to the corps in February, 1861.
The officer commanding the Lancers is Lt. Col. James Burns, of “ Gowan Brae,” near Parramatta.
He is a native of Edinburgh. Thirty-seven years ago he was jackarooing in Northern Queensland.
Things were rough there in those days, but the young Scotch pioneer came through all right, becoming the
head °of a big business that was made particularly flourishing by the “ rushes ” to the Northern
Queensland gold-fields. Later on Mr. Burns settled down at Cleveland Bay, now Townsville;
subsequently entering into partnership with Mr. Philp, Queensland’s present Treasurer. Out of that
partnership grew the important firm of Burns, Philp & Co. (Ltd.), the extent of whose businses, with


PANORAMIC VIEW OF PARRAMATTA
The Parramatta Industrial School for Girls, a large and well-conducted estaDnsnmenr unaer me
control of Mr. T. E. Dryhurst, has for its object the training and reformation of girls committed to its care under
Act 30, Vic. No. 2. The inmates, some 200, most of whom are over 14 years of age, are trained in all the
(Taken from May’s Hill, in the Park, October, iBgg.)


Townsville
subsequently entering into partnersmp wim Mr. rmip, Queensland's present Treasurer. Out of that
partnership grew the important firm of Burns, Philp & Co. (Ltd.), the extent of whose businses, with


its fleets of steamers, its pearl fisheries, its pastoral enterprises, its
considerable agencies, and its branches in New Guinea, the New
Hebrides, Tonga, Vancouver, India, Europe, and elsewhere is
prodigious. An idea of the importance of the business done in the
Sydney office over which Colonel Burns presides may be gleaned from
a consideration of the facts that a Government telegraph operator is
stationed on the premises, and that such “station” (so far as money
returns to the Government are concerned) is the third largest in the
city. As Lieutenant-Colonel of the N. S.W. Lancers, Mr. Burns
has exhibited much munificence and a healthy patriotism, especially
in connection with the despatch of detachments of his regiment to
England for instruction and to the Transvaal for active service.
Parramatta may be justly proud of its Temple of Justice, the
new Court House, a finely designed and substantially built edifice in
George-street. It contains an ornate and tolerably commodious hall
for the holding of quarter and petty sessions, etc. ; offices for the
C.P.S. ; and the usual magistrates’, lawyers’, witnesses’, and jurors’
rooms. In close proximity to the Court-house are the Police Quarters,
Lock-up, etc. According to the latest returns to hand there is more
business yearly in the Parramatta Court than in that of any other town
outside of Sydney except Newcastle and Broken Hill. Parramatta
is a sub-district of the Eastern Police District.
The Parramatta Police Magistrate is Mr. Thomas Edwin
Mac Nevin, a native of Dublin, who (prior to his appointment to his
Ald. T. Moxham, Mayor.
Kerry cr 1 Co.
Photo, hy
present position) was First Clerk in the N. S.W. Department of Justice and Education. He has contributed
to the legal literature of the Colony two excellent Manuals, one for Coroners, the other for Clerks of Petty
Sessions,
The Parramatta Post and Telegraph Office, in Church-street, nearly opposite the Argus Office, is a
handsome building. The local telephone exchange has numerous subscribers. Parramatta, which is within
the suburban rate of postage radius, is itself the centre of a penny postage district.
Town Hall, Parramatta.
The School of Arts, in Macquarie-street, contains an excellent library and reading-room, with a hall
suitable for balls, entertainments, and public meetings ; also committee and other rooms.
The Parramatta Industrial School for Girls, a large and well-conducted establishment under the
control of Mr. T. E. Dryhurst, has for its object the training and reformation of girls committed to its care under
Act 30, Vic. No. 2. The inmates, some 200, most of whom are over 14 years of age, are trained in all the


domestic branches. A Reformatory for Boys, conducted on the Carpentarian system, is in healthy operation
at Brush Farm, a mile or two out of Parramatta on the road towards Ryde.
The Hospital for the Insane at Parramatta is under the management of Dr. Godson. Here the
patients, who number nearly 700, receive the most careful and humane scientific treatment. There is a
magnificent hall for recreation and entertainments, standing in the midst of exquisite garden grounds. A good
extent of grazing land is attached to this institution, on which a fine herd of dairy cattle is kept for the benefit
of the asylum inmates. There are also extensive piggeries, which are managed on “ model farm lines.
Other Government institutions in Parramatta are the massive gaol, capable of holding 400 prisoners;
the George-street and Macquarie-street Asylums for men; and the Cottage Homes for aged couples.
The Parramatta District Hospital, in Marsden-street, partly State endowed and partly maintained by
voluntary contributions, has a first-rate record.
Educationally Parramatta is well served by its three public, its several denominational, and its many
private schools.
The King’s School (Church of England) is one of the cherished institutions of Australia. Our
illustration shows the main building as it is seen from a south-east point of view. It stands in not too
extensive grounds which have a frontage to the fresh water river. It is the oldest school in the Continent,
“ Brislington,” the ResiDENCE of Dr. W. S. Brown, Parramatta.
and possesses a well merited prestige: its scholars being generally heard of later on, making their mark as
men of light and leading. The King’s School has two exhibitions of £lOO each, and tenable for 4 years to
enable the successful exhibitioner to proceed to Oxford or Cambridge. The present headmaster is the Rev.
A. H. Champion. The School Chapel, which nestles in a bower of greenery in the north-east corner of the
grounds, is a handsome structure of grey stone. ETsed mainly in connection with the daily life of the School, it
is occasionally the scene of a fashionable wedding.
The (Day and Boarding) Convent Schools of the Sisters of Mercy (situated opposite to St. Patrick’s)
are admirably conducted. How successful are the Sisters as teachers may be gleaned from the fact that
of 54 pupils who recently went up for a musical examination all but one passed.
St. John’s (C.E.) Parramatta, is always an object of interest to visitors. Its twin towers were built at
the cost of Mrs. John Macarthur, in exact resemblance of those of Reculver Church, Kent (now threatened
by the inroads of the sea). The tradition is that Mrs. Macarthur vowed that if spared to reach Australia on
her return journey she would erect towers for St. John’s in close similitude to the those slowly disappearing
from her gaze as she sailed from the Downs. The towers so erected have ever since been prominent features
in the local landscape. In olden days there was an old-fashioned “three-decker” pulpit in St. John’s and


galleries—long since relegated to the limbo of oblivion—in which were wont to sit the King’s Schoolboys and
a portion of the garrison troops, the majority of whom were accommodated with forms in the body of the
church. Military music was at one time a considerable ingredient in the service—supplied by the band of
the regiment stationed in Parramatta. Governors Bourke, Gipps, and Fitzroy all attended public worship
at St. John’s when in residence in the town. The remains of Lady Mary Fitzroy and of Mrs. Bourke (who
died prior to General Bourke being knighted) lie in St. John’s Churchyard a few hundred yards to the south-
west up the hill-side. Quite recently a new pulpit (erected to the memory of the late Archdeacon King) and
a new prayer desk (to the memory of the late Dr. W. Brown, a much loved and eminent physician) were
dedicated at St. John’s by the Primate.
The rector of St. John’s, the Venerable Archdeacon —W. J. Gunther, M.A., —one of Parramatta’s
most useful townsmen, stands high in influence amongst Anglican churchmen in Australia. Fie has acted as
Commissary for the Archbishop during the latter’s absence from the Colony ; but the offer of episcopal rank
made to him a year or two ago he thought fit to decline. The Archdeacon, who is a native of Wellington,
New South Wales, was educated at the King’s School, whence he proceeded to Oxford. He is a member of
the King’s School Council; a canon of St. Andrew’s Cathedral, Sydney ; and holds a number of other
positions in connection with ecclesiastical and civic affairs.
Murray Brothers’ Stores, Church Street, Parramatta.
All Saints’ (C.E.), North Parramatta, is a graceful vine-clad Gothic structure, from whose lofty spire-
crowned belfry a musical peal of mellow bells “ through the balmy air of night oft ring out their weird
delight.” The rector of All Saints’ is the Rev. John Done.
The Congregational Church, at which the Rev. R. F. Becher, 8.A., officiates, and St. Patrick’s (R.C.),
stand out at opposite sides of Alfred Square, on the north side of the river. The Rev. T. O’Reilly is the
parish priest in charge of St. Patrick’s. He succeeded Monsignor Rigney in the cure, and has won for
himself, during his residence in Parramatta, the goodwill and regard of people of all classes and denominations.
He resides in the vine-clad presbytery situate between the King’s School and his parish church.
St. Andrew’s (Pres.) is in Church-street, in the very heart of the town, immediately to the north of the
Post Office and on the same side of the street. The jubilee of the erection of St. Andrew’s was celebrated in
October, 1899. The Rev. John Paterson is the minister ; according to the arrangements of the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales Parramatta is included in the Hawkesbury Presbytery.
The Wesleyan Church, in Macquarie-street, is a fine though unpretentious building, its lofty spire a
conspicuous object for miles around. It was erected at a cost of about £jooo, close beside the old place of
worship, which had been in use for nearly half a century, and which is only separated from it by the allotment


on which stands the minister’s residence. The new church, which has sitting for
persons, possesses a comfortable organ loft, the music rendered by the occupants of
of high class character. The Rev. J. E. Carruthers, who is the minister, is chairman *he
District of the Australian Wesleyan Methodist Church —a wide district including Y . P
Windsor, Sackville, Gosford, Homebush, Penrith, Camden, Katoomba, and Mount Victoria.
The Primitive Methodist Church is shown in our illustration next door to the School of Arts. It has
lately undergone extensive renovation. The minister is the Rev. John Penman, who is also
Primitive Methodist Church for the year 1899-1900*
The Baptist Church is in George-street, originally the main street of the Borough— aboM halbway
between the eastern town boundary and the main Park entrance. The minister is the Rev. J*L. Ma *
A series of Pictures, which will be studied with a considerable amount of interest, represent S ou th
and interior of The Argus Printing Works, the largest concern of the kind ontside Sy y,
Wales. The photograph of the exterior shows the lofty tower from which an excellent bird s
Parramatta can be obtained. Another picture represents the interior of the machine!’oom whei-« n
Wharfedale Two-feeder used for the production of The Argus and other connecteV whh the
and folding machines, guillotines, and other up to date appliances anc con c , , Mves a good
business of printing and bookbinding and the manufacture of stationery. { r-ises ” and engaged in
idea of the composing room on the first floor, showing various hands at work on the cases, ad g g
the business.
St. John’s Lodge, the Residence of Dr. Kearney, Parramatta.
The local branch of the Australian Joint Stock Bank (Ltd.) is a singularly striking structure, m
Church-street, next the Post Office. It is under the management of Mr. H. M. Todhunter. The A. J. S. B.
which was established in the year 1853, has a capital of £1,566,050, m £lO shares. On the 30th June, 1899,
the paid up capital amounted to £1,168,041 10s. ; the capital uncalled, £2 10s. per share, to £391,505 ,
and the reserve fund and undivided profits to £59,095 is. gd. There is a stiong Board of Management of
which Sir W. P. Manning is the chairman.
The Parramatta branch of the Bank of New South Wales is a handsome building (vine-trellised on
one side) situated at the intersection of George and Church-streets. Its manager, Mr. C. Beresford Cannes,
though an able and experienced banker, is better known, not only in New South W ales and Australasia, but
in the Old World and America, as an accomplished pomologist. He takes the most active and expert interest
in all matters relating to the fruit-growing industry, and is justly regarded as the orchardist’s friend. He is
a native of Ireland,'and of kin to the family whereof to-day the dashing Lord Charles Beresford is the most
distinguished member.


View in the Grounds, Hospital for Insane, Parramatta
General View of the Hospital for Insane, Parramatta.


Primitive Methodist Church and School of Arts, Parramatta.
Australian Joint Stock Bank and Post Office, Parramatta.


Orange Grading and Packing at Mr. E. H. Pearce’s, Seven Hills.
In Mr. Nancarrow’s Vineyard at Ryde.


General View of the Hospital for Insane, Rydalmere.
Convent Schools of Our Lady of Mercy (Day and Boarding), Parramatta.


The local branch of the Commercial Banking Company of
Sydney (Ltd.) is one of George-street’s most prominent edifices. Mr. *
W. W. Bodenham, who is the manager, is one of the Borough’s
worthiest citizens. He is the President of the School of Arts,
As the visitor to the historic Borough makes his way along the
main thoroughfares in which many an old a quaint old-fashioned feature ,J|f
will strike out upon his attention, he cannot fail to be impressed by *B| y >,
the substantial appearance of many of the principal business establish-
ments.
Let us glance at a few of these.
Prominent in George-street stands “ The Woolpack,” a first-
class hotel under the immediate charge of the proprietor, Mr. E. Marshall,
whose attentive management has won for it a good name throughout
the Australian colonies. It has most comfortably arranged suites of
rooms and is an exceedingly popular place of resort for visitors to the
town. The “Woolpack” is nearly right opposite to the site whereon
the old “ Woolpack ” once stood —the present site of the Court House.
The name of the old “ Woolpack ” has been associated with the history
and progress of Parramatta almost ever since the town was worthy of
being called a town —more especially in connection with white favors,
wedding breakfasts, and honeymoon trips.
0 J Yen. Archdeacon Gunther.
The central stores of Messrs. Murray Brothers, a long alignment
on the left-hand side of Church-street, five minutes walk from the railway Dwto. h' Fteeman & Co.
station, make a brave display in a wide variety of commodities ; the firm’s name blazoned on the upper stories
of the main building is to be seen from the hills for miles around. Some years ago Messrs. Murray re-started
the tweed manufacture at the Old Factory near the toll-bar on the Windsor Road, and have conducted
it with marked success.
St. John’s Church, Parramatta.
The attractive establishment of Mr. G. T. Erby is one of the leading drapery houses outside the
metropolis.
Victoria House, the popular emporium of which Mr. T. W. Pollock is the proprietor, is conducted in
smart business fashion on “universal providing” lines.


The fashionable dental studio of Mr. L. A. Simpson, in Church-street; the artistically designed
auction-rooms of Mr. G. H. Mobbs, near the railway station; the long-founded grocery and wine and spirit
stores of Mr. F. D. Henderson, in Church-street, famous throughout Central Cumberland, Mr. bred.
Brown’s cigar divan, also in Church-street ; and the well-appointed and well-patronised drug store o
Messrs. Washington H. Soul & Co., at the corner of Phillip and Church-streets, are established thorough y
up-to-date business enterprises.
In what is perhaps the very oldest quarter of the town, within a chain or so of the main frontage of
the Park, stands “ Vallack’s Brewery” (now owned by Messrs. Emanuel and Burrows). The fame of
Vallack’s ale is proverbial throughout New South Wales, on the lips of those “ who love a drop of good
beer.” We believe that Vallack’s Brewery may claim to be the longest established business in the Borough.
Parramatta has been styled by an Australian writer, “ The City of Vines. And for cause. \Vas
not the very first grape vine that was planted in Australia set in Parramatta soil ? If the vine, as a poet has
said, be the parent of mirth and to sit in its shade be a blessing, then assuredly very many Parramattans
ought to be exceptionally merry and happy—since the best feature, or at all events one of the best features ot
their town is its wonderfully peaceful air as its spires and towers and house-roofs peep out (in any bird s-eye
view) from amidst an exquisite framing of vines and greenery and flowers. Many a respected citizen s house
has been rendered most picturesquely attractive by such a framework.
| t— . . -■;, - T '•■
Vallack & Co.’s Brewery, Macquarie Street, Parramatta.
Look, for example, at two or three.
Dr. Reginald Bowman’s house at the corner of Smith and George-streets is charmingly set in verdant
garniture. “ St. John’s Lodge,” in Macquarie-street, the residence of Dr. James Kearney, stands in grounds
which (just replanted) will soon possess abundant floral attractions. “ Brislington,” at the corner of Marsden
and George-streets, the residence of Dr. W. S. Brown (as our illustration shows) is snugly sheltered from the
by a wealth of umbrageous foliage. The beautiful homes of Mr. J. W. Withers, an
ex-Mayor of Parramatta, and of Mrs. Gallagher, are other examples of substantial domestic architecture
picturesquely set in an arboreal frame.
Splendidly framed in shrubbery and tree-plantation is “ Gowan Brae,” the handsome mansion of
Lt. Col. Burns, that crowns one of the ridges to the left of the Pennant Hills road as the traveller drives
from Parramatta towards Carlingford. The site of “ Gowan Brae ” originally formed part of the grant of
land made to the celebrated George Barrington, who, transported to Botany Bay for picking pockets (in
which business he was an adept) lived down his days of knavish criminality and attained to the position
of Chief Constable of Parramatta.


Parramatta and its immediate neighbourhood was the cradle of
orange-culture in Australia as well as of grape-vine-growing. The
first, or at all events one of the very first orange orchards was Mr. G.
Suttor s, in which trees imported by Capt. Paterson (Lieutenant-
Governor of New South Wales, 1804-5) were planted about the
beginning of the century. John Macarthur, when Commandant at
Parramatta, in 1802, pruned a garden and orchard, which he maintained
in a high state of cultivation : and at what is now known as Subiaco,
Hannibal Macarthur established an equally fine orchard and vineyard.
Writing in the early “ thirties ” of John Macarthur’s garden Sir Thomas
Mitchell, the distinguished Peninsular veteran who was for many years
Surveyor-General of New South Wales, observed :—“ He took me
over his extensive and beautiful garden, when he pointed out to my
attention the first olive tree ever planted in Australia. Here I also saw
the cork-tree in full luxuriance, the caper plant growing amongst rocks,
the English oak, the horse-chestnut, broom, magnificent mulberry trees,
of 30 years’ growth ; umbrageous and green beds of roses in great
variety were spread around and filled the air with fragrance, while the
climbing species of that beautiful flower was equally pleasing to the eye.
The state of the orange trees flourishing in the form of cones 16ft.
high, and loaded with fruit, was very remarkable, as they had risen
from the roots of former trees, which, having been reduced to bare
poles by a drought of three years’ duration, had been cut off, and
were now succeeded by these vigorous products of more genial seasons.
Mr. T. E. Mac Nevin, P.M.
Freeman dr 5 Co.
Photo, by
Mr. Macarthur assured me that by adopting this plan many fruit trees, after suffering the effects of long-
continued drought, might be renovated successfully. The want of moisture in the climate of Australia
may occasionally compel the gardener to such extreme measures for the preservation of his trees ; but the
Court House, Parramatta.
orange had yielded a very profitable and constant return to those who attended to its cultivation in the
colony. The luxuriant growth of the apple and pear in a climate so warm is a remarkable fact, and when
we consider the luxuriance of the vine in the few spots where it has as yet been planted, the variety of soil


and aspect still unbroken in these Southern regions may well justify the expectation that many a curious
luxurious wine still unknown may in time be produced there.”
Parramatta's race-course, which is at Rosehill, not far from the mouth of the Duck Ryer.m the
conventional mile and a quarter. The local tram stops at one gate, and trains y re r i
Great Western, near Clyde, at the other. In the saddling paddock is a stand seating 1600, and m g
reserve another seating 1000.
The first recorded Australian Races were held in Parramatta in 1810. The first race was
horse called “ Parramatta” and another named “Belfast.” Parramatta won On this occasion, £1 sp' g
Boniface gave enough calico to make a chemise as a prize to be run by three vestals o y
order. Under the auspices of the old Parramatta Turf Club many “ historic evente were run. famp was a
has long been a thing of the past. Henry Rous, the “ Admiral of English Jockey Club fame, was a
member of it when he was in command of the “ Rainbow ” on the Australian station (i< 525-30).
Another sporting club, which for several years had a prosperous existence, w^ s the P^ rai g^ tt ?’ Hunt
Club, formed in 1833. It usually threw off somewhere along the “ Dog Trap (now W oodvi e)
Before bringing to a conclusion our remarks on Parramatta, we will subjoin a few statistics, etc.,
possessing local application.
Mr. G. T. Erby’s Wycombe House, Church Street, Parramatta.
The census of 1841 gave the population of the Borough as 5389, that of 1891 (the last census taken)
nut it at 11 67?' it is to-day at least 14,000. In 1891 the townsfolk were classified denominationally as
follows \—Church of England, 3324; Roman Catholic, 1445; Presbyterian, 429 ; Wesleyan Methodists,
671 • Primitive Methodists, 82 ; Congregational, 255 ; Baptists, 120 ; Jews, 14; Quakers, 5 At the same
date the density of the local population was stated as being 3424-08 persons to each square mile ot area.
The Agricultural Returns for the police district of Parramatta (which includes Granville and its
suburbs, but not Liverpool and Ryde which are police districts “ on their own ”) for the year ending March
31st, 1899, show the subjoined figures
Total area under cultivation, 10,060 acres ; cultivated holdings, 808 : population employed in rural
occupations, 1326.
Products-—Grapes, 257 tons ; oranges, 212,560 cases; other orchard fruits to value of £23,600;
honev iQ 459 lb; butter, 16,000 lb ; (the number of dairy cattle being given at 2146). In connection with
honey it ’may be mentioned that the honey-bee (acclimatised m Coastal N. S. Wales m 1822) was first
introduced into the Bathurst and western districts by Mr. Arkell of Campbell’s River, who received the
pioneer hive from the late Mr. Nathaniel Payten of Parramatta, in 1842.


The “ Land District ” of Parramatta is more extensive than the
police district, since it includes Ryde and Hornsby, etc. The district
lies in the centre of County Cumberland, and is bounded on the north
by Brisbane Water, on the south by Liverpool, on the east by the
Metropolitan district, and on the west by Penrith and Windsor. The
land is principally devoted to the cultivation of citrus fruit. The
following are the principal townships and settlements :—Auburn,
Baulkham Hills, Carlingford, Castle Hill, Ermington, Field of Mars,
Granville, Hornsby, Parramatta, Pennant Hills, Rookwood, Ryde,
Seven Hills and Sherwood.
The geological formation about Parramatta is mostly sandstone
of ferruginous character.
Collectors of ferns may be glad to know that the Parramatta
District is rich in the possession of a good many varieties of these
cryptogamous plants. The local varieties of ferns may be thus
scheduled : Ophioglossece; ophioglossum vulgatum and botrychium
ternatum. Mavattiece; schizoea bifida and schizcea rupestris. Osmundece;
gleichenia circinata, g. dicarpa, g. flabellata and g. dichotoma ; todea
bara and (very rare) todea Fraseri. Hymenophyllea•; hymenophyllum
Tunbridgense. Cyathece; alsophila Australis and alsophila Leichardtiana.
Polypodiece davallia pyxidata, d. dubia and d. mycrophylla ; lindsoea
Mr. p:. J. Love.
linearis; adiantumoethiopicum, a. formosum, a. affine and a. hispidulum; n , . , ?. ..
. .. ’ r . . r i “ , Photo, oy rreeman er 5 Co.
cheilanthes tenmfoha; ptens paradoxa, p. falcata, p. tremula, p.
aquilina, and p. incisa ; lomaria Patersoni, 1. discolor and 1. capersis ; blechnum cartilagineum, b. loeirgatum,
b. serrulatum ; doodia aspera and doodia candata ; aspleniumn idus, a. flabellifolium, and a. umbrosum ;
Photo, hy
Parramatta Reservoir.
y. Slater , Parramatta.
aspidium aculeatum, a. mode and a. decompositum ; polypodium australe, p. rugosolum, p. serpens and p.
scandens; nothoclcena distans; platycerium alicorne: lycopodium laterale ; selaginella uhginosa and
psilotum triquetrum.


TOONGABBIE AND WENTWORTHVILLE.
HAVING stations on the Western railway line between those of Parramatta and Seven Hills, and also
readily accessible from the “ Historic Borough ”by means of a pretty drive through the arrama a
Park, lie Wentworthville and Toongabbie, names which attach to flourishing fruitgrowing districts,
there being no nuclei in the shape of villages or even hamlets, unless indeed the Post office, t e rum ive
Methodist Church and Miss Jarvis’ store, just beneath the rise on which stands the Public be oo may le
termed the nucleus of the township of Toongabbie.
On leaving the. Parramatta Park the first principal object of interest is the Westmead Boys
Orphanage—or to give it its full title, St. Vincent’s Industrial Home for Orphaned and Destitute Boys-—an
admirable institution conducted by the devoted Marist Brothers (under the’ control of the Society o .
Vincent de Paul), wherein numberless waifs and strays of budding humanity are housed, clothed, ted an
instructed in useful trades
Messrs. Washington H. Soul & Co.’s Drug Store, Church Street, Parramatta.
Wentworthville, deriving its name from the great Wentworth whose memory is so intimately
connected with the history of the colony, is the place where the first harvest ever reaped in New South
Wales was garnered in December, 1789. It contains several elegant residences and much cultivated land of
great value; whilst a considerable tract yet remains in primitive bush condition.
The boundary line between Wentworthville and Toongabbie is not very clearly defined but, while a
commodious station—the point for loading and sending off considerable quantities of fruit—is possessed by
Wentworthville, Toongabbie can merely boast a platform bearing its name. There is in each place a large
Public School; Mr. Riley is the Wentworthville pedagogue, Mr. Page being the teacher at Toongabbie.
Further on in the direction of Seven Hills a remarkably handsome seminary has quite recently been erected
on the site of a somewhat primitive erection of the same class and there Mr. Bickford daily teaches the young
idea how to shoot.
Toongabbie contains many very valuable orchards and vineyards which were purchased at high prices
some years ago. Those of Messrs. W. L. Oakes, Knox, Field, Nutter, Bohringer, Johnston, Newing and
others, may be enumerated as among the most prominent orchards; whilst the poultry farms of Mr. Ambrose
Hallen and Mr. S. R. Watkins are famous throughout the country.


A vigilant Progress Association (the moving spirit in which is
Mr. T. Wilmot, junr., its president), keeps an attentive eye on local
requirements and takes good care that the Member for the Sherbrooke
Electorate, Mr. B. B. O’Conor, is kept reminded of that part of his
duties which appertain to the district: while an excellently managed
School of Arts provides a good library and reading room, and arranges
a perpetual series of entertaining and instructive lectures for the
benefit of the inhabitants. Mr. Wilmot’s residence, is the subject of
an illustration.
As a striking illustration of the progress of humanity, it is
interesting to contrast Toongabbie’s present happy and flourishing
condition with the dreadful state of affairs when in the long ago it
was a penal stockade where women were worked to death dragging
brick-carts. An old record states that “ The women convicts who
misbehaved themselves were put in iron-spiked collars. Six hundred
died out of eight hundred in six months at Toongabbie.”
MERRYLANDS AND HOI
ROYD
ONE of the busiest little stations in the neighbourhood of
Parramatta, from which place it is distant about two miles, is
that of Merrylands on the Southern line. The revenue from
Photo, bv
Mr. S. Wickham.
Freeman cf Co.
this station would do credit to a much more imposing centre, a fact which is, of course, mainly due to the
propinquity of Messrs. Goodlet and Smith’s large jtettery, brick and cement works, which form the subject
of one of our illustrations. The villages of Merrylands and Holroyd are contiguous and contain several
Churches—might we say churchlets ? —belonging to the Anglican and other denominations ; several stores ;
The Residence of Mr. T. Wilmot, Jun., Toongabbie.
a Public School; etc. The immediate district is within the boundaries of the Prospect and Sherwood
municipality : electorally, it is in the Granville Electorate, with the exception of a portion of its western
area, which belongs to the electorate of Sherbrooke.
“ Chelmer,” the residence of Mr. I. E. Ives, sometime Mayor of Sydney, is a place of some significance
in the history of County Cumberland, it having formerly been the property and home of Arthur Todd


Holroyd—after whom the village of Holroyd was named. The late Mr. Holroyd at one time
represented Parramatta in the Legislative Assembly) was a versatile genius—barrister, physician, African
explorer, New South Wales politician (as well in the parliamentary as in the municipal arena), and Jega
dignitary, not to mention pioneer N. S.W. red-tile maker, expert apple-grower, and generous patron of the
good old game of bowls. In its time, “ Chelmer ” was known as “ Sherwood Scrubs. Mr. Holroyd was
for many years Master-in-Equity.
G. H. Mobbs’ New Offices, Opposite Railway Station, Parramatta
PROSPECT.
“ 'HpO the hill on which they stood Phillip gave the name of ‘Tench’s Prospect Hill,’ that officer having
then seen Richmond Hill from it for the first time.” Thus Barton, in his History of New South
Wales (vol. 1, p. 159), in the chapter dealing with Governor Phillip’s explorations in 1791.
In the early days, the Prospect country swarmed with aboriginals, who were constantly killing the
Government sheep. A General Order of Governor King’s, dated 1801, contains the following paragraph :
“ From the wanton manner in which a large body of natives resident about Parramatta, George’s River and
Prospect Hill, have attacked and killed some of the Government sheep and their violent threat of murdering all
the white men they meet . . . the Governor has directed that this as well as all other bodies of natives
in the above district to be driven back from the settlers’ habitations by firing at them.”
In 1802, Prospect was one of the six districts selected, from which settlers living on and cultivating
farms (independent of Government aid) might compete for prizes of stock (Cape-bred heifers and steers ; and
ewes) offered by the Governor for wheat and maize and breeding swine and land cultivation. The land
south of the Prospect Hills is low-lying, and with the exception of the creek banks, especially on the
Prospect Creek, is a very deep, moderately rich, reddish ash-coloured loam of a rather sandy texture. This


soil, when well-drained, is highly suitable for vine culture and the p
growing of summer fruit. The orange tree grows well in it, and
gains a fair size, but the lowness of the situation prevents the fruit
from attaining the same high quality that distinguishes the fruit grown
on the warm slopes on the northern side.
To-day, St. Bartholomew’s, the Anglican Church (a structure
some 70 years old), is the most historic landmark in Prospect. It
is most picturesquely situated. The Rev. Geo. Middleton is the
rector of Prospect-rw;«-Seven Hills, his residence being at Seven Hills.
St. Brigid’s is the Roman Catholic Church. Our illustrations
oomprise a portrait of Monsignor Rigney, the much loved priest, who
now officiates there. Monsignor Rigney, once a foremost pioneer
of Christianity in these climes, and later an Archdeacon of his Church
and the esteemed parish priest of St. Patrick’s, Parramatta, has elected
to spend the closing years of a long and useful career in ministering to
the congregation of St. Brigid’s. Monsignor Rigney, who was ordained
to the priesthood in Ireland in 1837, arrived in Port Jackson in 1838,
one of a little company of eight priests, of whom he is the sole survivor.
Prospect possesses a Public School ; a Post Office ; a good store ;
a blacksmith’s shop ; a couple of hotels ; a hall for entertainments and
all the other adjuncts of a well constituted village ; while in the vicinity
are “ Horsley,” “ Greystanes,” and other handsome and interesting
family seats, and many fertile farms and orchards. The view from
“Greystanes ” is exceptionally fine.
Mk. J. E. Bowdkk.
freeman cf Co.
Photo, h
Prospect forms,the south-eastern portion of the Sherbrooke electorate. Municipally, a portion of its
area constitutes a district with Sherwood. This municipal district, which includes Merrylands, and parts
of Guildford and Wentworthville, was proclaimed in 1872 : it possesses an area of about 14 square miles,
and a population of about 3,500.
Prospect Waterworks : Valve House, Caretaker’s Cottage, and Aquaduct.
The more especial feature of Prospect is its vast reservoir wherein are stored the millions of gallons of
water, which, by means of a water race and a recently duplicated line of giant pipes, provide Sydney with
its supply of the indispensable element. The catchment area above the embankment is 2400 acres ; the area
of the reservoir’s water surface, when full, is 1,261 acres: the total quantity of water available for supply to


canal is 6744 million gallons. The water is brought to the Reservoir from “I he Pheasant s es , a e
junction of the Nepean and Cordeaux rivers; it is carried by open canal or 6-mch pipes to o s 1
balance reservoir, where the metropolitan suburban supply service commences.
The drive round the Prospect Waterworks is one of the most picturesque in the district. Here are,
moreover, notable stone quarries the connection of which with the railway by the construction o a tramway
is a much-talked-of and cherished scheme. The late Mr. Wilkinson, h.G.S., sometime Geo ogica uryeyor
of New South Wales, was of opinion that these quarries could turn out basalt flagstones as good as those
imported from Victoria.
Rome, Rome thou art no more
As thou hast been,
On thy seven hills of yore
Thou sat’st a queen.
SEVEN HILLS.
X IKE the mistress of the old world the queen of the orange-growing industry in the new regime finds
v h er habitation upon seven glorious hills, any one of which, in its wealth of golden fruit, may well vie
with the most fertile of European climes.
Seven Hills, as its name implies, is a district rather than a village, situated within easy reach from
Parramatta by rail’ It possesses a handsome Anglican Church, adjoining which is the vicarage of the
Rev G Middleton; a good Public School, conducted by Mr. Broadbent; a public hall ; and two
stores ' The district has not yet been incorporated, but the Seven Hills Fruitgrowers’ Association is active
in its efforts to secure local progress and improvement; moreover, the Seven Hills Literary and Debating
Society meets weekly and deliberates upon and decides the burning questions of the hour to the great
contentment of its members and the edification of the world at large.
Industrially, the district is world-famous, the weekly output of fruit, during the orange-harvest
season from the railway station reaching colossal figures. At the orchards of Messrs. Pearce, citrus
culture is scientifically carried on upon the most extensive and successful scale. Members of this family
possess a large extent of country in the district. The home of Mr. E. H. Pearce, who is, perhaps, the
largest producer of oranges and lemons in these Colonies, is the subject of one illustration ; another view
exhibits graders and packers at work at his fruit sheds.


Splendid orchards, too, are owned by Messrs. J. Cocks (a
recognised authority on horticulture, and in whose grounds several of
the orange views were taken), Best, Power, Luke, Horwood, Howard,
Davis, and others ; while the culture of grape vines and the manu-
facture of wine, is also largely carried on.
BLACKTOWN.
TWO miles from the Seven Hills railway station, further west,
is Blacktown Junction, where the Richmond railway line branches
off from the Great Western Line. Blacktown was so named
from the circumstance of Governor Macquarie having founded there an
institution for the improvement of the aborigines—a humane effort
which his successors (though specially charged by the terms of their
commission with the protection of the native blacks) did not continue.
Blacktown, the centre of a thriving horticultural district, possesses two
Churches, a Public School and several stores and an hotel.
NORTH ROCKS.
Mr. W. J. Ferris, M.L.A.
ON the coach journey from Parramatta towards Pennant Hills Photo , by J. Hubert Newman.
should the traveller on arriving at the 5-miles finger-post quit
the vehicle and proceed Parramatta-wards along the road that slopes gently downwards on his
left hand, he will pass through the interesting hamlet of North Rocks. Here is no regular township but
an abundance of prolific orange and summer fruit orchards.
Old Government House, Parramatta Park.
A little way down the road is a tiny village burial-ground ; and, on the opposite side of the way a
recreation reserve, the source of honest pride and legitimate joy to every true North Rocksman, Here it was


that, a few years ago, the then Premier of New Sou*'Wales,.ttgJßfc
fruit-case, and picturesquely dreaming away the tedium •, North Rocks” was, in the
effect that where every prospect was pleasing, the name itself was • . d f rom the profundity of
Premier’s opinion, far too common-place a designation for 80 cha ™“| ooeti/substitute. The Minister’s
his inventiveness, he suggested “ Hillsdale’ as an approbate and^eve subst dj and the
happy thought, however, has never been acted upon. Ihe Reserve contains a guu s
sportsmen are widely known to fame.
ERMINGTON AND RYDALMERE.
'THE Municipal District of Ermington and Rydalmere (formerly a Council-
modation for the holding of religious services as well as of secular entertamme .
“ Kxcelsior,” the Residence of Mrs. W hite, Rydalmeri
Adjoining the eastern boundary of Parramatta, Ermington and Rydalmere are within the Ryde
electorate.
The Rvdalmere Hospital for Insane is a very important Government institution, capable of
accommodating a large number of patients—between three and four hundred. It stands m a wide area of
carefully kept garden and well-cultivated farm land. An admirable hall has lately been completed for service.,
and entertainments of the various descriptions which are best calculated to improve the mental condition
of the inmates of the Asylum.
The Rydalmere Public-school is an increasing establishment, conducted by Mr. and Mrs. Dumbrell.
Not far from it is the local Post-office.
A Roman Catholic Church, dedicated to St. Mary, stands in Rydalmere, and close by is the admirable
School conducted by the Sisters of the Subiaco Convent, the well-wooded grounds of which institution were
once the site of Hannibal Macarthur’s “ Vineyard ” estate. The Benedictine Nuns, who, m 1848, entered
uoon their monastic and educational duties at Subiaco, are a branch of the Anglo-Benedictme congregation.
For many years, Subiaco monastery was the only high school for R.C. young ladies m all the Australian
colonies. The Convent Church in the main building is very tastefully decorated ; and the mortuary chapef


in a lonely corner of the grounds will also repay a visit. In this Chapel were interred the remains of Dr.
Davis, first Bishop of Maitland (in his day a titular
There are in Rydalmere many handsome residences,
recently, Mr. Frank Farnell made his home there
several other business places.
Ermington, which adjoins Rydalmere on the
see) and sometime co-adjutor of Archbishop Folding,
that of Mrs. White being pictured herewith. Quite
Rydalmere can also boast of an hotel, a store, and
further side from Parramatta, is also the abode of a
vigorous and progressive community. The Public School, managed by Mr. Jobson, is a large and flourishing
institution, and the Mechanics’ Institute provides perpetual supplies of amusement and instruction for
members of both sexes. St. Mark’s (C.E.) Church, Ermington, is in the parish of St. Anne’s, Ryde.
There are also in Ermington good stores, blacksmith’s and butcher’s shops, etc.
The Ermington and Rydalmere district is reached by an easy and level drive of about two miles from
Parramatta, along which a line of coaches plies daily, carrying the mails and passengers. There is also here
a station on the new Rosehill line, which will, it is expected, form a convenient point of debarkation for
passengers for Parramatta.
The country around Rydalmere and Ermington is, for the most part, both picturesque and fertile, and
it is largely utilised for nurseries for the introduction of young orange and other fruit trees, of which many
thousands are sent off annually by Messrs. McKee, Atkins, Creswick Bros., Franks, Hughes, Ryan, and
other nurserymen.
From Dundas, overlooking Ermington and Parramatta River.
DUNDAS
DUNDAS is a Municipal District situate within the Ryde Electorate ; its area is between five and six
square miles ; population about 1000. It was proclaimed in 1889. It is both a model and a mother
municipality —mother since it originally comprised the Ermington and Rydalmere area ere the
residents of that region struck for independence and started a municipality of their own ; model, since its
roads, its public works and its financial condition, compare favorably with those of any of its neighbors —
a happy state of things produced without any of that worry and friction so often unpleasantly noticeable
elsewhere. The Town Hall stands in a small tree-planted paddock of its own, adjoining are the courts
of the Dundas Lawn Tennis Club.
The most striking building in Dundas is the Carpentarian Reformatory, formerly Brush Farm, v/hich
at one time was the property and home of William Forster, sometime the Premier of New South Wales, and
is now leased to the Government. At this institution such juvenile culprits are dealt with as are not destined
to undergo the advantages offered by a temporary residence aboard the “ Sobraon.”


The village boasts of a Wesleyan and a Primitive Methodist Church ; an a
recreation reserve; a Protestant Hall; a Band of Hope; a Good Templars Lodge, and a resident
pohceman. which> industrially speak i n g, is purely a fruit-growing one U eastt; y
thereto will alight from the Parramatta to Pennant Hills coach, on its arrival at h s , u ”™rnndroute from
and then proceed a little way in a southerly direction The township y Road Thig ig one
Parramatta, whence vehicles arrive via the old-time highway known as the g ,Wp „i ves an
of the prettiest drives in the vicinity of Parramatta. Our illustration taken from s
excellent idea of the extensive view across Ermmgton, gleaming stretches of the Parra
Liberty Plains country beyond.
In Dundas there is a well-known quarry of blue stone whence is supplied a considerable percentage of
the road metal used in the metropolitan-suburban area.
Dundas, which was settled very early indeed in the history of the colony, wasj Honry
Dundas, who (the staunch colleague of Pitt), had a good deal to do ministerially with the enrolment, etc., ot
the New South Wales Corps.
T. W. Pollock’s Emporium, Church Street, Parramatta.
CARLINGFORD.
OF the pretty villages that crown the pre-eminently picturesque heights of the Pennant Hills, the first
which the traveller by road from Parramatta reaches (after a four-mile trip) is Carlingford. Ihe
journey may be made twice or thrice daily by coach, and the route is both beautiful and highly
interesting. On the way are passed “ Gowan Brae ” and many another splendid mansion.
The May Villa Public School, situated about half-way between Parramatta and Carlingford, is an
unusually ornate specimen of scholastic architecture. Hard by is the residence and orchard of Mr. F. C.
Cox the Mayor of Dundas, father of Captain Cox, of the N.S.W. Lancers. The road crosses the Rosehill
Railway line near its present terminus. This railway will, it is reasonable to suppose, be shortly in acti\e
working order, and will, it is hoped, form an easy means of communication with Carlingford and its vicinity.
A steep incline, known as Mobbs’ Hill, brings the traveller into Carlingford proper. From the top 01
this ascent a magnificent view is to be obtained, the bold out-line of the Blue Mountains conspicuously
standing out against the sky to the north-west. Along the entire ridge of the Pennant Hills the views on
either hand are remarkably fine.
Owing to the beauty of its scenery, the fertility of its soil, and the healthiness necessarily attached to
its elevation, the entire district is eminently adapted for residential purposes, for which it is becoming highly
popular.


The Village of Carlingford, which is in the heart of a most productive fruit-growing district, boasts a
I übhc School ; a Post-Office ; an Anglican Church ; a bakery ; a butcher’s shop ; etc.
Past Carlingford, where there is a station on the Northern line, has lately changed its name, and is
now known as Epping. Quite recently, Mr. Harper, the Postmaster and storekeeper of Carlingford, whilst
gathering wild flowers on the Field of Mars Common, at the rear of a house in Epping, discovered a weighty
substa.nce resembling ironstone, which an assay proved to be flox, largely used to promote the fusion of metal.
The discovery is likely to prove most beneficial to the district.
A Prolific Grape Vine.
BAULKHAM HILLS.
TO view fair Baulkham Hills aright, it is expedient to board one of the coaches which daily convey
passengers through this locality from the Parramatta station. Almost immediately upon crossing the
“ Broken-Back ” Bridge, which terminates Parramatta’s main thoroughfare, the traveller is, strictly
speaking, within the territory of Baulkham Hills ; but it is not until he has journeyed a distance of some
three miles that he reaches the village itself.
The township consists of one long winding street, which, from its commencement on the Parramatta
side to its extreme limit in the Kellyville direction, must measure at least a couple of miles; here and there
on either hand being buildings of varied interest.


Baulkham Hills boasts of a Public School, long conducted by Mr. Womdl,
Progress Association, which has obtained for the distnet several imp 1 p sighing for a Park, a
residents of the district, who run a Lawn Tennis and a Cricket Club, are just now sign g
desirable boon which they hope to obtain in the near future. ,
The religious denominations are well represented, there being an Anglican w
incumbency of Castle Hill, besides Roman Catholic, Wesleyan, Primitive Methodist, and beventn id y
Adventist places of worship. . ,
The thriving general and produce store of Mr. H. S. Bishop imparts an air of general prosperity
the whole place, and near at hand are a wheelwright’s shop, and the “vi age sun y,
Children coining home from school
Look in at the open door ;
They love to see the flaming forge,
And hear the bellows roar.
And catch the burning sparks that fly
Like chaff from a threshing floor.
The Baulkham Hills Hotel stands at “ the Cross Roads,” about the centre of the village, where roads
branch off in the Castle Hill and Seven Hills directions.
“ RoxburCxH Hall,” the Residence of Mr T. W. Wright, Baulkham Hills.
Many fine orchards surround the outskirts of the
of Messrs. Tamsett, Burton, Irwin, Purser, Batchelor, J
others. Old “ Roxburgh Hall,” the residence of Mr. T.
is a type of the homestead erected by our “ first families ’
town. Of these, may be mentioned the properties
Pearce, Wright, Redden, Luke, Reid, and several
W. Wright, formerly the seat of the McDougalls,
1 in the early days of the colony.
CASTLE HILL.
THE Castle Hill district is one of the most—if not the most—interesting, beautiful and fertile orange-
growing regions in Australia. It forms the northern portion of the Sherbrooke electorate, on the
eastern boundary of which is situated the charming hill-side village of Castle Hill, amid the most
romantic surroundings, about six miles from Parramatta, whence it can be readily approached by coach.
The road from Parramatta to Wiseman’s Ferry, St. Alban’s, Wollombi, &c., which runs nearly due north,
passes through Castle Hill.


“Willow Grove,” the Residence of Mrs. Gallagher, Parramatta.
“ Greystanes,” the Property of Mr. Philip Charley, Prospect.


Marsh Brothers’ (Ltd.) Tannery and Residences, Clyde
Brunton & Company’s Australian Roller Ihlour1 h lour Mills, Clyde.


Goodlet & Smith’s Cement, Brick, Tile, and Lime Works, Merrylands.
Sydney Meat Preserving Company’s Works, Rookwood.


“ Linnwood,” the Residence of Mr. Geo. McCredie, Guildford.
“Hiawatha,” the Residence of Mr. J. W. Withers, Parramatta.


From the higher parts of Castle Hill a very fine view of the whole
district can be obtained—
And all the landscape far as one can see
Breathes like a bright-eyed face that laughs out openly.
From here the difference can be noted that exists between the northern
and western sides of upper Sherbrooke, for here at sunrise it is warm
and delightful, but as you look southward, you see the whole of the low-
lying plain stretching away to George’s River, enveloped in a white
chilly mist. The situation of this land is alone sufficient to account
for the backwardness of the orange culture in the southern parts of
Central Cumberland.
Carrington Hill (aforetime One-tree Hill), which is surmounted
by a flagstaff takes its name from the visit here paid some ten years or
so ago by the Governor of New South Wales, on which occasion he
and his wife each planted a Pine tree. This hill, which is 700 feet
above sea level, is a portion of Mr. James Purser’s “ Glen View ”
property.
In Castle Hill there are a large Public School, ruled by Mr.
McCormick ; a handsome new Police Station ; and a couple of halls, in
one of which a recently formed Social Club meets each week for mutual
recreation and instruction. One of the most popular of the local
institutions is the Agricultural and Horticultural Association, with
Mr. C. J. Byrnes.
Crown Studios.
Photo, hy
its Annual Show at which “from time immemorial” the exhibits of fruit, horses, poultry, etc., have been
second to no provincial show of the kind in the colony and indeed have, in some respects, run the Sydney
“ Royal ” very closely. Castle Hill is a strictly temperance district, no hotel is to be found within some miles
of the township, and, despite some little recent opposition, the sale of intoxicating drinks has always
been absolutely forbidden at the annual show.
Main (George Street) Entrance and Lady Mary Fitzroy Memorial, Parramatta Park.
Castle Hill possesses an Anglican Church, St. Paul’s, near which is the vicarage. The Vicar, the
Rev. E. Cranswick, includes within the area of his ministrations, Dural, Baulkham Hills, and other out-
lying places.


In every direction from the village stretch extensive and productive orange gar ens, e 0
characteristic of the scenery being a delicious picturesqueness, the more charming ea lll ps 1 ' 1 G
numerous homes which peap through glowing orchards “ each from its nook of leaves.
now or recently occupied by Mr. J. W. Foster, stands on a commanding height near the entranceMo> the to.
and looks down on the confines of Baulkham Hills. Not far removed from tissi e are P P ,
of the Messrs. Gilbert, James, Crane, Purser, Tuckwell, Kentwell and Fishburn; while, after ascen g
further heights, passing the forge of Mr. Muir, the handsome dwelling of D r - Doudney anc . •
“ Emporium,” and pausing a moment to admire the beautiful view of the Blue Mountains and the
intervening valley, we find ourselves amongst the splendid orchards of Messrs. u er, ,’ ’
Rogers, Smith and other big growers. Each of these properties is truly a model farm, compac a .P
in itself. A careful inspection of any of them would be of infinitely greater bene oan in
culturist than any amount of written lore.
Castle Hill is replete with historic associations. In 1801, Governor King thus reported to English
Government“ I have fixed on a situation (Castle Hill) that Governor Phillip intended as a stock harm
for Government, the soil being of the best and most productive kind, Fifty men i a\e e en c 'i
March, 1802, King further reported :—“ Great progress has been made m clearing anc a as M
I hope to sow 200 acres cn the public account this year, and, 1 hope 600 acres wi e sow ® in ‘ • ‘
Peron, the distinguished naturalist, who accompanied Captain Baudms h renc 1 scien 11c e. f
Castle Hill, Looking South.
Australasian waters, thus wrote in 1802 concerning a visit he paid to Castle Hill l he infan town consists
of a dozen houses ; and already are to be distinguished on the neighbouring hills, vast tracts of cultivated
lands while several handsome farms are settled in the Six hundred convicts are contmually em-
ployed in felling trees etc. When at Castle Hill, Mens. Perm was introduced by Colonel 1 aterson (then
commandant at Parramatta) to Mons. Baron de la Clampe, a refugee noble of France, formerly a Colonel m
her Army who had settled down here (with six convicts assigned to him) and engaged m of
cotton and coffee—cultivation which Peron wrote “ seemed to promise the most happy success. A success,
however, that time did not realise.
On March 4th, 1804, it was announced to Governor King, in Sydney, that the prisoners at Castle Hill
were in a state of insurrection; that they had burned a house, and, under the leadership of one Phiip
Cunningham, were preparing to advance upon Parramatta. King, after ordering a detachment of the
N S W Corps to follow him to Parramatta, hurried off there himself, and proclaimed martial law within the
district on his arrival. The next day, Major Johnston, who, with the just mentioned detachment had
advanced against the insurgents, reported “ I came up with the run-aways near the last Pends (half-way
between Parramatta and the Hawkesbury). I rode up to them .... and desired them to surrender.
I went up a second time and desired to speak with the two leaders (Cunningham and William Johnstone),


Leigh Memorial Church (Wesleyan), Parramatta.
Congregational Church, Parramatta.


who came up to us, when we forcibly drove them into the detachment with pistols at their heads. The rest,
to the number of 250, dispersed in every direction, and we have been under the necessity of killing some and
wounding a great many.” “ General ” Joseph Holt (an Irish rebel convict not concerned in this execute)
wrote of the affair somewhat differently, as follows : —“ About 300 men had assembled at Castle Hill .
Major Johnston went up towards them and demanded of Cunningham what he wanted, and why they had
assembled. If they had any real grievance, he would get it redressed. Cunningham advanced, and took oft
his hat, and, with it in one hand and a sword in the other, replied, ‘ Death or Liberty !’ Major Johnston
made no attempt to molest him, but Laycock (who stood 6ft. 6in., quarter-master in the N.S.W. Corps)
Photo, by
All Saints’ Church, Parramatta.
B. S. Pochee, Parramatta.
came up, and with one blow, killed Cunningham on the spot. On this, the whole of the mob took to their
heels ; and many were shot in pursuit. Cunningham’s body, although he was dead, was brought to Hawkes-
bury, and hanged up as an example to the rest.”
According to the Sydney Gazette, Cunningham was wounded and left for dead on the road, but was
brought along and hanged in front of the Government store at Hawkesbury. Ten more rebels were tried,
eight of whom were executed ; and 60 are supposed to have been shot down. So ended Australia’s “ First
Battle.”


KELLYVILLE AND ROUSE HILL.
TO the westward of Castle Hill is Kellyville, a prosperous orange-
growing district comparatively recently brought into cultivation.
The Post-Office is about 3 miles distant from that of Castle
Hill. Ihe south-eastern boundary of Kellyville is the “ Old Windsor
Road,” the Cattai Creek being its northern limit. The Windsor-road
intersects it.
Rouse Hill and its pleasant district, bearing one of the oldest
and most respected New South Wales names, are further to the west
than Kellyville, the Rouse Hill Post Office being about 7 miles from
that of Castle Hill.
PENNANT HILLS.
W RUING in 1802 to Sir Joseph Banks, Governor King said :-—-
“ I am going on with a new settlement which lies in the
range of Pennant Hills. I have one hundred acres in grain,
three hundred head of cattle and two hundred sheep comfortably
lodged.” To-day the district is principally devoted to fruit-culture ;
but it still possesses an extensive tract of bush whence were formerly
drawn large supplies of timber of various useful descriptions.
Photo, by
Mr. C. B. Cairnes.
Freeman Cf Co.
Of easy access by coach from Parramatta (from which it is distant about seven miles), the atrial village
of Pennant Hills stants on the summit of a steep hill whence it commands (our illustration was taken from
Thompson’s Corner) an unrivalled prospect of mountain and plain, with the “ Historic Borough ”
View from Thompson’s Corner, Pennant Hills, Parramattawards
for middle distance and the suburbs of the metropolis on the far horizon. Should the traveller take the
northward road from Thompson’s Corner, he will quickly arrive at the Pennant Hills station, on the
Northern Line, whence the produce of a very large tract of orange-bearing country is despatched. This
station has been recently enlarged and beautified ; siding accommodation has been also provided for the
enormous tonnage of fruit sent off daily at certain seasons of the year.


, i r ear 16 rai wa 7 station an Observatory is now being completed by the Government. Mr, Russell,
e overnmen i stronomer, anticipates that science will be materially advanced by the accurate
lOnS WIIC 1 IS be enabled to make in the clear pure atmosphere of these elevated
Pennant Hills possesses a Post-Office and a Public School; also, one or two Lawn Tennis Clubs and
a rogress ± ssociation of a vigorous character. A kindred Association has lately been formed at the Murray
arms, near lompson s Corner, with the principal objects of urging the improvement, and watching the
maintenance of the roads. & & v &
’ i at ° a S an^ some n ew hotel, near the station, is every summer a favourite place of resort for distin-
guis le visitors. A store ; a nursery ; a wheelwright’s and a blacksmith’s shop are close at hand.
The road from Pennant Hills to Castle Hill winds along the brow of the ridge, whence glorious views
are obtained all the way. Several magnificent properties are passed, including the farm and stables
un 1 recently occupied by Mr. E. J. Black, the well-known “ whip the fine estate of Mr. T, Hopkins;
and the really model orchard and residence of Mr. J. S. Heron. The last-named gentleman is not only a
P[ ac lca ruitgrower, but also an author whose writings on fruit cultivation are valuable additions to the
1 ®.^ atur ® ° .t* 16 su bj oC t. Part of the Pennant Hills district lies within the Rydc electorate and partin
W illoughby. v
Dural, showing \\ lsleyan Church, Post Office, &c.
DURAL.
DURAL lies to the north of Castle Hill on the road from Parramatta to Wiseman’s Ferry. It is eleven
miles from Parramatta, whence it is easily reached by coach. The possible extension of the Rosehill
line, an event which is being regularly agitated for and anticipated by the sanguine Duralites should
prove a veritable boon to this and the neighbouring districts, whence the orchardists "now despatch the bulk
of their produce by road to the Pennant Hills station, on the northern line.
Our illustration, which was taken from in front of the Anglican Church, gives a general view of the
mam part of Dural. The Wesleyan Church, the Public School, and other buildings appear in it.
The district is divided into Upper and Lower Dural, and is the home of many prominent oramre-
growers, who pursue their peaceful avocation 5
Far from the madding crowd’s ignoble strife.
Glenorie is situate some six miles north of Dural, as its old name—North Dural—implied About
Glenone a good deal of bush country has during the past few years been brought under the plough


The Township of Galston.
and planted out for orchard purposes. The ploughman and the orchardist —“ theirs are the page whose
letters shall be seen changed by the sun to words of living green.”
It enjoys the advantages of a Public School, Post Office, etc.
Kenthurst, Main Road and School of Arts.


GALSTON.
SOME four miles of travel in a north-easterly direction, through a country redolent with t e swee seen
of the orange-blossom, will bring the traveller from Dural to the pleasant little ham et o jason,
the centre of yet another citrus-growing district, connected with which are such names as agan,
Knight, Hunt, Fuller, Moore and others than whose oranges none this side of the world can excel.
Galston boasts of a Public School and a Post Office, besides several places of worship, stores, etc.
The newly constructed recreation ground furnishes an excellent cricket pitch for local exponen s o
game and is the scene of the Annual Wild Flower and Fruit Show for the display of the ore lar is s go en
harvest and the choice flora of surrounding hills and dales.
Arcadia (till lately known as Upper Galston) is in the extreme north-eastern angle of Sherbrooke
Electorate. It is a thriving centre of citrus culture.
F. W. Brown’s, Church Street, Parramatta
KENTHURST.
KENTHURST (formerly Little Dural), a prosperous orange-growing district, lies to the south-west ot
Dural the post-offices of the two places being about three miles apart. Recently many of the
orchardists have turned their attention largely to the cultivation of passion fruit. It has a good
School of Arts wherein are held annually shows of wild flowers, fruit, etc.; also a commodious Public School.
Of late years Kenthurst has developed surprisingly, many local improvements being due to the efforts of
a vigilant Progress Association.


GRANVILLE AND CLYDE.
THE thriving Borough of Granville—the Birmingham, to be, of Federated Australia —lies to the
immediate south of Parramatta. It was incorporated in 1885 ; its proclaimed area being 2830
acres, with 60 miles of streets. The population about 4500, occupying some 1050 houses. The
capital value of the rateable property within the Borough is estimated at over
The Town Hall is a fine building. One of its chambers is a free public library, containing several
hundred works of reference and of general interest
Granville was created a
Act of 1893, which re-modelled
Prior to 1893, Granville was a
ate of Central Cumberland. The
Borough in the Legislative As-
the founders —if not the founder —of
Mr. Nobbs, who by pro-
resided in Granville for close upon
the Chairman of its first Progress
known at the time as Parramatta
lying suburb of the “ Historic
Mr. John Downie.
Parliamentary constituency by the
the electoral system of the Colony,
sub-division of the clumsy elector-
present representative of the
sembly is Mr. John Nobbs, one of
Granville.
Mr. J. R. Palmer.
first Mayor, and on three different
by the unanimous votes of his
Parliaments he was one of the re-
land. An energetic member of the
rose from its ranks to a lieuten-
Amongst other experiences of an
has undergone those of a newspaper
year or two (under the able editor-
Parramatta, a journal yclept the
The large commodious Rail-
fession is a conveyancer, has
a quarter of a century. He was
Association when the locality—
junction —was regarded as an out
Borough.” He was Granville’s
Mr. John Nobbs, M.L.A.
occasions was re-elected Mayor
fellow burgesses. During three
presentatives of Central Cumber-
old Volunteer force, Mr. Nobbs
ancy, which he resigned in 1880.
active varied career, Mr. Nobbs
proprietor, having “run” for a
ship of “Outis” Courtney) in
Independent.
way Station at Granville is one
of the most important in these colonies. Here is the branching
of the ways for here the Great Southern and the Great Western line each starts upon its separate course.
Attractive with palms and ferns and bright-hued flowers are the platforms ; so excellent, indeed, is the
cultural care bestowed, in rare leisure moments, by the energetic station-master and his staff upon these
botanical exhibits, that at the Spring Flower Show, in connection with the Railway Institute, the first
prize for the “ best kept (railway station) garden ” was awarded to Granville.
Mr. john Downie is the stationmaster. He has served for over thirty years in the New South Wales
Government Railways. For a time he was the general overseer of the extensive coal traffic at Newcastle


When the late Mr. Eddy assumed the Chief Commissionership of the Railways he promoted Mr. Dowme to
the position of Inspector, his duties being to assist the Out-door Superintendent over all lines. Mr. iJowme
held the position for eight months, when, feeling that he was not cut-out for a general rover, he applied tor a
fixed position. Mr. Eddy sent him to Granville—admittedly a hard station to manage—where he has been
ever since in charge. Since his appointment the question arose as to the making o yar s. r - Y c c
not at first favor the site to the westward of the present station, and that at Clyde, which runs bac o
Sydney-road, was chosen. It was not until too late that Mr. Eddy recognised that his eye had deem ed
him, and acknowledged that the first-mentioned would undoubtedly have been the best. the doub.e line
was laid to Picton during the past nine years, a work which somewhat increased the Station mas ei s c u
Mr. Downie has a staff of twenty-two employees.
From near the Clyde railway-station (which is under a mile from Granville, Sydney-wards), a private
line to the Rosehill Racecourse was opened in 1888. During 1893 Parliamentary sanction was obtamec
for the extension of this branch to Dural. The proposed extension, however which was only const! uctc
so far as Carlmgford (3 miles 28 chains) was never opened for public traffic The Government having late y
acquired possession of this line, the question —What will they do with it I has natura y ie._,omc o - y
considerable interest, especially in northern Sherbrooke.
The Town Hall, Granville.
In September, 1896, were opened at Clyde the Government Metallurgical W orks : they are connected
with the main railway system, and possess a frontage to Duck River. Prospectors not m a position to pay
for testin" their ores can get parcels treated at these fine works free of charge, the Mines Department
defraying railway carriage. Adjoining this establishment are extensive Chlorination W orks.
Granville possesses a spacious Post and Telegraph Office ; a Superior Public (with accommodation
for some thousand children) and two Public Schools; a well-appointed Fire Brigade Station ; and a
Recreation Reserve—that is to say,-a Park. The School of Arts (which is near the Railway station) is a
well-managed institution, with a good library ; large hall; and rooms m which, under the control of the
Technical Branch of the Department of Public Instruction, large art and science classes are regular y
instructed, with exceptionally good results.
Ecclesiastically, Granville has nothing to complain of, all the leading denominations being well
represented by church and minister. S. Mark’s is the Anglican, and Holy Trinity the Roman Catholic
Church. In connection with the last-named is the Convent of St. Joseph’s. The Salvation Army have
barracks in Granville.


Industrially, Granville-cum-Clyde has been, these twenty years, steadily forging ahead as a
manufacturing centre, to which healthy movement considerable impetus has been given by the recent
decision of New South Wales to enter into federal relations with her daughter provinces. Ihe district
undoubtedly may boast exceptional advantages for industrial expansion in the possession of considerable
acreage fronting the Duck River, a tributary of the Parramatta, which could easily be rendered
permanently navigable.
The Water Tower, Prospect Reservoir.
Chief among the Borough’s manufacturing establishments are admittedly the Clyde Engineering
Works (formerly Messrs. Hudson Bros.) They occupy nearly three quarters of a mile of the frontage to
Duck River, and are one of the largest industries of the kind in the colonies. The buildings cover upwards
Works of the Clyde Engineering Co., Ltd., Duck River.
of five acres. The Company (of which Mr. W. M. Noakes is managing director) have effected several
improvements since coming into possession. Some 580 hands are continually employed upon all classes o
work, a great part of which comprises Government contracts for railway carriages and waggons ; electric


power machinery for tramways, etc. A considerable percentage of Australasian mining machinery is here
turned out. There is large sports and recreation reserve in connection with the Works, and regular
amusements are provided for the employees, their wives and families.
The Brick, Tile, and Cement Works of Messrs. Goodlet and Smith (Limited) are not situated—as are
Granville’s other more important manufactories —in the suburb of Clyde. They stand on between 30 and
40 acres in the south-western part of the Borough, the buildings covering same five acres. In addition to
brick and tile making and all terra-cotta work, the firm manufactures Portland Cement, and a special
laboratory for testing has been erected, as all the cement manufactured here is for Government purposes.
The works, at which about 150 hands are employed, are connected with the Great Southern railway for
loading and unloading goods. The Customs Department have here a bonded store. Mr. J. H. Goodlet is
the Managing Director of this prosperous Company.
Messrs. Brunton and Co.’s Auburn Roller Flour Mills at Clyde form a most noticeable local land-
mark. Their machinery is of the most improved up-to-date description—the article it turns out being of
unsurpassable quality. Our illustration gives a good idea of the extensive substantial character of Messrs.
Brunton and Co.’s far-famed establishment. Mr. J. S. Brunton, a member of the firm, who enjoys a
deserved popularity in the district for energy, generosity, and other civic virtues, is a lieutenant in the N.S.
Wales Lancers, being attached to the Parramatta Half-Squadron.
F. D. Henderson’s Grocery and Wine and Spirit Store, Parramatta
In proximity to the Flour Mills are a woollen manufactory and two agricultural implement and
machinery works.
The Tannery of Messrs. Marsh Brothers (Limited) is one of the best appointed industries of its kind
in Australia. The chief product of these works is a sole leather that has won the very highest reputation in
the boot and shoe trade.
At Springfield, in the southern part of the Borough, are situated Mahony’s Slaughter Yards, which,
constructed on an American model, are unique as well as complete. Work carried out here comprises, also,
digesting tallow-refining, bone-crushing and fertilizer-manufacturing—the buildings covering seven acres of
ground. ’ Some 40 to 50 cattle and 600 to 700 sheep are killed here weekly, in addition to lambs, pigs and
calves, the whole of the stock coming from the Hunter River district. Mr. John Mahony is the Mayor of
Granville.


Near where Clay Cliff Creek empties its waters into the Parramatta River—in River-road, West
Granville—is “ Camellia Grove,” a garden celebrated in local (and Parramattan) history as the spot
whence, for at least two generations, exquisite nosegays of incomparable camellias were culled.
On the road towards Merrylands, on a prominent site stands the handsome house and picturesque
grounds and lakes ambitiously designed by the late Mr. A. S. Low (one of Australia’s pioneer gold-diggers).
This seemly place, with its well laid-out lawns and paddocks—shrubberies and plantations —is now the
property of Mr. Joseph E. Vance. The avenue of pines leading from the lodge gates to the house is about
the longest and best in the colony.
A respected resident of the Borough is Mr. J. R. Palmer (late Town Clerk of Sydney), whose unjust
treatment at the hands of the metropolitan Corporation was recently the subject of wide discussion. He was
for years honorably connected with the municipal affairs of Granville, his place of residence. He was its
Mayor, at the time of the acute financial crisis, when he emphatically proved himself the right man in the
right place.
View on the Sutherland Estate, Merrylands, the Residence of Mr. J. E. Vance.
AUBURN.
THE Borough of Auburn was proclaimed in 1892. Partly manufacturing but chiefly residential, it is a
vigorous young municipality. The Town Hall in the main street is a handsome building : part of it
is leased to the Government for Post Office accommodation.
There are two Public Schools in the place, and a fairly commodious Railway Station (which is three
miles from Parramatta).
St. Joseph’s Sanatorium, a solidly built brick mansion, standing in lovely grounds of twenty acres
extent, is a prominent landmark in this healthy town. It is conducted by the Sisters of Charity (of the
Order of St. Vincent de Paul) —the first Roman Catholic religious community established in Australia.
Auburn possesses Anglican, Roman Catholic, Congregational and Baptist Churches; also Salvation
Army barracks. St. Philip’s, the Anglican Church, is within the rural deanery of Parramatta.
Many of the private residences in this Borough are very handsome structures, set in well-kept
grounds.


The works of Messrs. Vale and Sons, locomotive engineers, founders, boiler-makers, etc., adjoin the
railway station They occupy about two acres and a half. A siding runs into the yards from the mam
southern and western railway' and is carried through all the departments, ''TL,“milling drlllfag and
cghnn where there are a large number of the latest improvements m lathes, planing, milling, drilling, a
other heavy^ machines Jthe fitting and erecting shops, which adjoin the P~ d eP— *
with travelling cranes and every necessary appliance ; pattern-making and uood-workmg. “P ar ‘me t
boiler and smiths’ shops; brass and iron foundries; stores, and gene,ral offices Saving ‘ I PP
modern and up-to-date. A large number ot hands are constantly employed, and throughout the year t e
is a steady regular trade done, the quality of the workmanship being favorably known throug l
Australasia’ The senior member of the firm started business in Sydney with Mr. Lacy, in 1864. They began
mining, mill! fnd marine work, subsequently taking up contracts for the and Lam
motors The first locomotive they turned out was a huge qo-ton engine , it was taken under steal
temporary rails to Redfern. At Auburn, Mr. Vale’s two sons, Henry John and Frederick James, were taken
into the firm.
Messrs. Ritchie Brothers also conduct extensive iron works here.
In the northern part of the district, on a portion of what was once the Newington estate, formerly the
Drooerty of the Blaxland family, is the Newington Asylum, where the Government cares tor over 600 women.
Prior to its removal to Stanmole-road. Marrickville, Newington College was here located m the old home of
the Blaxlands.
Vale & Sons’ Engineering \\ okks, Auburn
rookwood.
T IKE Auburn, Rookwood is a manufacturing, as well as a residential district. Dair> -keepers and
monumental masons constitute a significant proportion of the population. In olden days, the plac
was known as Haslem’s Creek, a tributary of the Parramatta River which empties itself into Home-
bush Bay.
In 1802 eight and a quarter square miles of the area of this district was proclaimed a municipality ;
and, to-day, Rookwood with its conspicuous Town Hall, its public baths, its recreation reserve, ds Volunteer
Fire Brigade, and its two excellent Public Schools, is a live, go-a-head place. Rookwood Railway
Station is ten miles from Sydney.
In the southern part of the district is Pott's Hill, where are situated the screening tank and the
reservoir into which the general water supply of Sydney and its suburbs passes from out the large pipe


service (from Prospect reservoir), ere by smaller mains it reaches its widely distributed destination. When
running full, the level of the Pott’s Hill reservoir is 173 feet above high water mark in Sydney Harbour.
The capacity of this reservoir is one hundred million gallons.
Off East-street is the Rookwood Benevolent Asylum, a State institution with accommodation for over
600 aged and infirm inmates.
hor the two past years the Easter Military Encampment has been held at Rookwood, when as many
as four thousand men have been under canvas at one time.
Within the municipal boundaries is the general cemetery for the metropolitan district -the Kensall
Green or Fere la Chaise of Sydney —usually known as Rookwood Cemetery, though officially termed the
Necropolis. It is about 400 acres in extent, and is divided into compartments for each of the several
religious denominations into which the community is divided. A ranger and six sextons (one for each of the
following sects, —Anglican, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, Wesleyan, Congregational and Jewish) form the
official staff. More than one artistically designed mortuary chapel has been built here. The grounds, which
from the mere horticultural standpoint are well worth a visit, abound in dear and high associations while
silently preaching homilies which connect themselves with human dignity and pride. Funeral trains run
daily into the centre of the Necropolis.
Town Hall, Fire Station, Railway Station, and General View, Rookwood
The Anglican, Roman Catholic, Congregational, and Wesleyan denominations have each a place of
worship in Rookwood. St. Stephen’s, the Anglican Church, is in the rural deanery of Parramatta. There
is a school in connection with the Roman Catholic Church, conducted by Sisters of St. Joseph.
The Works of the Sydney Meat Preserving Company are within the municipality of Rookwood.
They occupy 480 acres of land (extending from the
alone covering a considerable portion of that area,
case-making ; tin-making ; preserving ; etc., etc.
mutton ; slaughtering ; boning ; filling ; extracting
occupies a separate portion of the grounds (just
Parramatta-road to the main railway line), the buildings
The factory is supplied with all the latest machinery for
There are separate departments devoted to beef and
tallow refining ; etc. A fertilizer and desiccating factory
shown in the left distance of the illustration). These
extensive works are connected with the main railway, and served by about a mile and a quarter of lines
diverging all over the place. This establishment, which is capable of killing and preserving 10,000 sheep per
day, employs upwards of 300 hands. Mr. Alban Gee, the manager,* has long [enjoyed in Parramatta


St. Joseph s Hospital, Alice Street, Auburn.
and districts a high reputation as an energetic liberal-thinking public man. He is a model Returnmg-Officer ;
and has filled the Mayoral chair of Granville with credit.
To the northwest of Rookwood, north of the Parramatta Road and extending to Homebush . Bay, m
io tne nonnwesi ui ivuukwuuu, uuuu ui cm- j. , -- , . h tt .1,
the Parramatta River, lies the Homebush Estate, the property of the Wentworth family. Here was once
Industrial School for Girls, Parramatta,


Mr, J. S. Heron’s Residence, Castle Hill.
Fairfield Railway Station and General View


Baptist Church,"Parramatta.
St. James’ Church, Smithfield.


Obelisk and Round House, Parramatta Park.
“Bella Vista,” the Residence of Mr, E. H. Pearce, Seven Hills.


H. S. Bishop’s General Store, Baulkham Hills
•
-•- -
m • ' .... ... -
Orange Orchard and Residence of Mr. Jas. Cocks, Seven Hills.


premier Racecourse of N. S.Wales: the track and
its precincts have long since, however, been relegated
nack to grazing purposes.
T* l6 Railway Station at Flemington, the site
ot the metropolitan cattle sale yards, is about half
way between the Rookwood and the Homebush
stations.
A good deal of Rookwood’s municipal area
(as also the whole municipal area of Auburn) is
within the old time District (or parish) of Liberty
Flams Barton, in his History of New South
Wales (from the Records) says :—“ The first (free)
settlers there were only five of them—arrived
early in 1793 .... anc i each received a small
grant ol land ‘ at the upper parts of the harbor
above the Flats,’ to which they gave the name
Liberty Plains.” Between 1796 and 1800 numerous
grants of land were made to settlers in the district
so named.
The King s School Chapel, Parramatta.
BANKSTOWN AND EAST HILLS
n-!tnr T i°) VN a foum J- ed 80 lon g a S° 35 U9s> was named after Sir Joseph Banks, the distinguished
D discovery ofN^wSouth'WaleT SC ‘ en “’ Wh ° aCCOm P anied Cool < °" the ™yage which led to the
Spraying Operations at “Sorrento,” Seven Hills.
Upper and Lower Bankstown, with their suburb East Hills, are situate along the old mam road to
the south: the central portion of this somewhat scattered community being about 12 miles north-west of
Sydney and eight miles {via the old “ Dog Trap ” road) south-west of Parramatta. A road running- almost
due south from Rookwood also leads to Bankstown. 0


A short way from Bankstown, not far from the Junction of the Dog R ° Australia
Road, is Lansdowne Bridge across Prospect Creek-one of the first stone bridges
(opened in 1836, a few days before the opening of the stone bridge over Duck River, on the Parramatta Ro .)
Amongst grants of land made by the Government between 1796 and 1800 were two of 30ci acres
each in “ Bank’s Town,” one to Lieutenant Matthew Flinders, the celebrated explorer, the other to
Lieutenant John Shortland, the discoverer of the Hunter Ruer.
To-day Bankstown is a Municipality (proclaimed in 1895) with an area of 29 square miles. The
Council Chambers are in Liverpool Road. Amongst the population, which numbers over a thousand,
are a good many poultry-farmers.
There are two Public Schools in the district ; three Post Offices (those at Lower Bankstown, Upper
Bankstown, and East Hills) ; and a Roman Catholic and a Wesleyan Church.
Enfield (another municipality) lies between Bankstown and Burwood. Here is located the \\ estern
Suburbs Hospital. St. Thomas's, the Anglican Church (within the rural deanery of Petersham), is
one of the oldest and most interesting m the Colony.
Cloke’s Family Hotel, Macquarie Street, Liverpool
LIVERPOOL.
cpHF Liverpool Land District, which contains some of the earliest settlements in New South Wales, is
T chiefly a grazing and dairy-farming area, and is bounded on the north by the Parramatta
1 and metropolitan districts, on he south by Campbelltown on the south-west by Camden and Picton,
on the east by the Pacific Ocean, and on the west by Penrith. The geological formation is principally sand-
stone, with (about Cabramatta) Wianamatta shales.
Thp nrinciDal industries of the district are wool-scouring, fell-mongering, paper-making, leather
tanning boot-making, wood-carting, etc. The town is the centre of a large and important table-grape


egion, some of the finest grapes in the colony being grown locally.
rJ ’ wm S ° Ut ° T f V verpool - there are lar g e ca ttle runs. From
r ,^ e S JJill, near Ingleburn, a magnificent view may be obtained
ot the undulating pastoral country for miles around.
Subjoined are some of the agricultural and pastoral statistics for
the year ending March 31st, 1899, for the Police District of Liver-
poo Area under cultivation, 3855 acres ; 692 cultivated holdings ;
population engaged m rural occupations, 1036 ; dairy stock, 1870 head.
roducts : Grapes for table, 913 tons; /4670 worth of other fruit :
70,000 IDs honey ; 21,000 IDs butter.
district, in olden days, was known officially as that cf
George s River ; and it was not until 1810 that Governor Macquarie
named it Liverpool, after Robert B. Jenkinson, second Earl of Liver-
pool, and Baron Hawkesbury, who was England’s Prime Minister
from 1812 to 1827. Macquarie may justly be regarded as the real
founder of Liverpool. It was but a straggling hamlet when he
arrived m the colony the shelter of a few settlers whose homesteads on
George s River had been destroyed by floods ; when he left, after the
long proconsulship which conferred such honor on his name, it was a
thriving little town.
Mr. Varney Parkes, M L.A.
, • , Ge orge’s River, of which an illustration is given, was not men- Photo, by Crown Studio.
tioned by Captain Cook; but Governor Phillip, in 1788, when examining
° f Botan y went a short way up the stream. A year or two later, Captain
dunter subsequently, Governor of the Colony—went a little further up than Phillip. It was Lieutenant
Flinders and Mr. Bass, however, who thoroughly explored it, in 1785.
St. Luke’s Church, Liverpool
For several years, Liverpool was a military post. The first detachment of troops—a sergeant’s
guard—arrived from Parramatta in 1812 and camped upon the site of the present railway goods-shed. The
guard was needed—especially in the 1825-30 period, when “ bould Jack Donohue ” was constantly committing
depredations in the vicinity.


Liverpool Park and Benevolent Asylum.
There are three municipalities within the wide area of the Liverpool District, to wit :1, Liverpool ;
2, Cabramatta and Canley Vale ; and, 3, Smithfield and Fairfield.
The Municipal District of Liverpool was proclaimed in 1872. Its area, if deceives
1898, is 20,608 acres, with a population of some 4500 persons, occupying some 700 dwellings, it recedes
George’s River, Liverpool, from the Bridge.


ts water supply by a 9-mch pipe from the main canal
at Cecil Hills, which extends to Mount Young, and
thence by a 6-inch main to the town. An earthen
reservoir, capable of holding 4,000,000 gallons, has
been constructed for the purpose of tiding over any
interruption in the flow from the canal.
The town of Liverpool is safely situated about "’***
feet above the flood level of George’s River, the .*****
navigation of which stream is stopped just below the 1 * TSfCreia*s«.cs
town by a dam. A tine bridge, connecting Liverpool “3
with the Moorebank-Holdsworthy district, crosses the —-
stream, a little above the dam. —— , .-.****»***
In the muster (or census) returns of 1813, Liver- .. . .
pool was credited with a population of 627. By 1851
that number had dwindled to 392 ; but by 1856 it Scrivener’s New Sale Rooms and Yards
had returned to the estimate of 1813. In 1861, its
population was over a thousand. Since then it has more than doubled, if not trebled.
of th* Th 6 !°. Wn b 6 fd rly regarded as th e “ head centre ”of the Canterbury electorate—why the name
seel. j C n ° nStltUe f nCy WaS not Llver P° ol rather than Canterbury is a query tor whidithe Liverpudlian
/ r l, clm f ° r a convin eing reason. Ihe present member for Canterbury is Mr Varnev Parke,
(son of the great Australian Statesman, the late Sir Henrv Parkesl who for . I*l 7 -
of the members for the abolished electorate of Central Cumberland. Mr. Parkes who is" an architect °bv
profession, was for a short term Postmaster-General in the Reid Cabinet. He ’is a native of Ryde. 7
Scrivener and Son s Stores, Macquarie Street, Liverpool.
Liverpool s principal public buildings are the Town Hall, the Benevolent Asylum, the Post
and Telegraph Office, the Public School and the Court House. In 1826, the town was proclaimed
a place for the holding of quarter sessions; but it has long since been relegated back to mere “petty
sessions ranx. * •


The Railway Station, opened in 1856, is not a particularly commodious one. For a brief space,*
was the terminus of the line running south. There has long been a a o a I , . E p|
Sydney with Liverpool more directly than does the “ way ” w Granville; but P r °P° s ". 1S
nebulous. The distance from Sydney to Liverpool via Granville is 22 mi es , r °™ O' J miles
by a “ loop ” running through Marrickville, Canterbury and Bankstown, it would be about 12 or 13 m
The main structure of the Benevolent Asylum bears date 1825 being one of the.ET'Lretere
which the Colony owes to the indefatigable Governor Macquarie. Between 800 and 900 mmates are
cared for by the State. The illustration given of this Institution shows a portion of the 1 own La .
L. A. Simpson’s Dental Surgery, Church Street,
Parramatta
Livernool also can boast of a Ladies’ Benevolent Society, a well-organised charity which does
relieving destitution and distress. Mr. Alderman C A Scrivener, the best known
and one of the most respected public men m the district, is the President of this Association.
, 1,• r n ;P mnnl St. Luke’s, the Anglican Church, an old and
There are four places o pu iic w . P within the rural deanery of Liverpool and Camden,
interesting, but not particularly handsome edihce, th tl Roman Catholic (Rev. Father
The Rev. J. Shearman is the rector. The <Dther H opkins). Liverpool’s
Lisit! manyb itsAnciL tombstones recording items of a most interesting character
to those for whom old-time history possesses fascination.


4. rhe n g llcan i Theological Seminary, Moore College, is no longer
tuate in Liverpool, having been transferred from its original site
therein to one adjoining St. Paul’s College, Sydney University, where
i was in 1891. The old College buildings, very plain but
• ltb Q a J ) e fl ant r air of conventional quiet about them, were commenced
in 1 5 (the foundation-stone of the Chapel, named after Bishop
roughton was laid m 1857). This institution was founded by the
late Mr. 1 homas Moore, who, in early days having an eye to the
probable future of the district, bought up from the original holders a
good many Government land grants. When he died, he dedicated a
considerable part of his property to the Church of England authorities
or the endowment of a theological college which was to bear his
name. Dr. Beattie, medical superintendent of the Benevolent Asylum,
occupies a portion of the old buildings now.
Liverpool is Well su PP lied with stores, two of which, owned by
Messrs. C. A. Scrivener and Son, are conducted on such up-to-date
lines as to be to the district what Anthony Hordern’s is to the
metropolis. In connection with Messrs. Scrivener’s business, are large
auction sale rooms and yards, where regularly come under the hammer
much farm and dairy produce, stock, etc., etc.
Mr. Cloke s hamily Hotel in Macquarie-street is a most com-
ortable and commodious caravansary, where the tourist will meet with
Mjr. W. W. Bodenham.
Photo, hy Kerry Co.
tbe r L a r t mllD? n 'th V* T* illus f at i° n ° f this hoste r lr y> ther e is shown in the main street, immediately fronting
e verandah, the last or, at all events, one of the last —of the bullock teams. The veteran driver Mr.
e i? ail ’. lS / 1 T ell - kn ? wn olcl , ldentlt y of Liverpool district. In the long ago, such teams would thron^
e town to-day what with metalled high-ways and iron roads and pedigree draught-horses stock
tie staunch-pu ling bullock and his driver, full of strange stimulative oaths, are rapidly becoming, in the
more settled regions of the colony, things of the picturesque past.
The Residence of Mr. William Stimson, Fairfield.
A characteristic of many of the fine residences in this district is their massive solidity, they having
been built under the conditions of the “ old regime ” —a time when substantial mason-work was the order
of the day, when the jerry-builder was conspicuous by his absence.


Barker College, Hornsby Junction.
On the Sydney-road, a little way out of Liverpool, nestling snugly amongst pines and fir trees is
Warwick Farm, a notable spot, the cool and pleasant home of that genuine sportsman. Mr. W Forrester.
The view of the farm shows Mr. Forrester and his daughter m a paddock full of pedigree stock of priceless
value-strains of blood which have made the name of Forrester and Warwick Farm famous wherever high-
class racing is discussed. Here is the home of The Grafter and Gaulus, who, on two successive years, won
for their owner the Melbourne Cup.
Close to Mr. Forrester’s grounds, is the Warwick Farm Racecourse (an oval ; right-handed) ;
to which, from the main Southern Railway, there is a short private line, one mile long.
“Warwick Farm,” the Residence of Mr. W. Forrester.


T ivpr ] 6 lstric^ s Moorebank and Holdsworthy, which are immediately to the south eastward of
er P OO > across George s River, lie in the bend which that often picturesque stream makes in its wayward
n||[ Se running as it does nearly due north from its source near Appin to Warwick Farm and George’s
p ’ an , iT le fl P rett y : nearly due south, for four or five miles. In the upper part of this bend, opposite
vj ° S a ’ IS , ‘Chipping Norton,” the seat of the Hon. W. A. Long, M.L.C., sometime Treasurer of
-New South Wales.
oore iank was named after the Mr. Moore to whom a page or two back reference was made. Early
ln f 6 went ies severa l stone quarries were here opened. Permanent record of the “hard labor”
per orme init lem, during many years, is borne by the sturdy walls of St. Luke’s, of the Courthouse, of
structur °* ° >enevo^en * : Asylum and of the homesteads already alluded to as being of exceptionally solid
St. Andrew’s Church, Parramatta.
In Holdsworthy (to the south of Moorebank) there is an Anglican Church,
the rural deanery of Liverpool and Camden.
Aidan’s, which is in
The Municipal District of Cabramatta and Canley Vale was proclaimed in 1892 : it has an area of over
7000 acres and an estimated population of about 1000. Prior to 1892, it formed part of the Liverpool
municipality.
The Cabramatta Creek, into which falls Prospect Creek, is a tributary of George’s River,
“ The Grove,” the charming residence of Dr. Birch, of which an illustration is given, is in the Cabra-
matta district.


SMITHFIELD, FAIRFIELD AND GUILDFORD.
THE Municipal District of Smithfield and Fairfield (named after the two towns it comprises) was pro-
claimed in 1888. Its area is 7680 acres, with a population a little under 2000 ; occupying some
400 dwellings. It lies south-west of Parramatta, and north of Liverpool. The twin towns are about
two miles apart, with a frequent coach service between them.
Smithfield, the larger of the two, is also much the elder ; its name appearing as that of a town
containing a population of over 200 in the census of 1871. Fairfield did not attain to census honorsi nll
iBqi. The municipal hall of the district is in Smithfield, which also boasts of a Public School a
places of worship, including the neat little Anglican Church, St. James’s (within the rural deanery o
Parramatta). The rector of St. James’s is the Rev. J. O’Conor, father of Mr. B. B. O Conor, M. .r .
In the matter of hotel accommodation, Smithfield is well off. It possesses, moreover, a sufficiency oi
shops and stores to meet all local requirements—at Messrs. Vallance and Son’s emporium, everyt mg may
be obtained “ from a needle to an anchor.’’ At this well-known establishment, matters in connection t
the Government Savings Bank and Post t Office are conducted.
Vallance and Sons’ Store and Post Office, Smithfield.
The chief industry of the place is tanning, there being several first-class tanneries located along the
banks of Prospect Creek. The country in the vicinity of Smithfield abounds with well-cultivated farms,
vineyards, and orchards.
Fairfield is a good-sized, thriving township, with a station on the southern railway line. An
illustration includes the station and its. yards, with the saw-mills within it busily engaged in cutting up
firewood for consignment to the metropolis.
There is a Public School at Fairfield. Also a Wesleyan Church. A large hotel, moreover, and
stores a-plenty. It is in Fairfield that Mr. B. B. O’Conor, the member for Sherbrooke, resides. He was
born at Shoalhaven in 1871 : educated at Sydney Grammar School and Sydney University (where he
graduated B.A. and LL.B), and has been called to the Bar.


Writing, under date April 22nd, 1800, from Parramatta, to the London Missionary Society, the Rev.
Rowland Hassall, said : —“ In the district of Kissing Point, we found it necessary to build an house for God!
. . . The building cost me £\o 12s. 2d. . . . Kissing Point Chappie has not been open’d as yet for
Divine Services through repeated grievances and affliction that the Rev. Mr, Johnston has laboured under.”
In the September following, Mr. Hassall (who was not strong in spelling) reported :—“ On the 16th of July
last, was opened Kissing Point chappel and schoolroom by the Rev. R. Johnson and the Rev’d. S.
Marsden After service there were three children baptized. . . , The Rev. S. Marsden gets
Messrs. Svmons Rmtt f . l airheld Railwa Y Station are the extensive Pottery and Tile Works of
for decorative 'irrhh 1 tlStlC s P ecialt y 15 the manufacture of originally designed pottery
Lraoe vine r„lt purposes. The country immediately round about is principally devoted to
dences lacking of’ t u° me remarkabl y fine vineyards being hereabouts located. Nor are handsome resi-
** ° f StimS ° n ’ “ of the
benH Tounsts , and excursionists may like to know that at very little distance from the Railway Station is a
bend of George s River, where pleasure boats can be hired. There is fairly good fishing in the over at times.
1 fn rfiel l- an li GGranv i lle Guildford > a somewhat scattered township. It has a Railway
Station on the southern line (three miles from Granville).
Preshvwln nP 111 mldf ° rd a l ' l | lhli( ; School, an Anglican Church, and a hall which regularly serves as a
v. ° f w ° rsh ‘P- Tins latter neat, well-furnished building (known as Linnwood Hall) is on the
nwood Estate, the comfortably and handsomely-appointed homestead of Mr. Geo. McCredie the
consulting engineer an ex-M.P, for Granville. There are several other fine residences
in rural Cjuildtord , besides of well-tended vineyards not a few.
Svmons Brothers’ Tile and Pottery Works, Guildford.
RYDE.
THE old-time official names for the country about the Ryde of to-day were “ Kissing Point ” for the
district along the river side, and “ Field of Mars ” for the more extensive region further back. Prior
to the beginning of the nineteenth century, no less than 3675 acres had been granted or leased by the
Government, within the area of the “Field of Mars” District. In 1802, the “ Field of Mars ” and the
“ Kissing Point ” districts were amongst those from which industrious and independent settlers were invited
to compete for the premiums offered by the Government for the best cultivated farms, etc.
on very fast with his new Church ” (St. John’s, Parramatta).


The Rev. Rowland Hassall died in 1820, the victim of an epidemical catarrh which prev ailed through-
out the colony, there hardly being a house but had at least one inmate suffering severely from it. Ei e to-
day’s “ Grippe,”
The Rev. Richard Johnson, mentioned in the above quotations, was the first Colonial Chaplain. He
lived for several years at Kissing Point, devoting considerable attention to horticulture. He is said to have
been the introducer of the orange to New South Wales, having grown trees m his garden at Kissing i omt
from seeds which he had procured at Rio Janeiro on his voyage out with the hirst Fleet.
In 1795, an old soldier named James Squire successfully cultivated the hop at Kissing Point. He is
also credited with having brewed the first ale made in Australia.
To revert to modern themes, —subjoined are some figures (those for year ending March 31st, 1899)
showing the agricultural condition of the Ryde Police District: —Total area under cultivation, 7521 acres ,
number of cultivated holdings, 779; population engaged in rural occupations, 1373; grape-vine produce,
565 tons (of table grapes); orange orchard produce, 128,359 cases; produce of other fruit trees, £ 35,609
worth ; honey, 36,996 Tbs ; stock, 904.
McDonald’s Eastwood Family Hotel, Eastwood.
As above statistics show, the main agricultural product of the Ryde district is fruit —especially citrus
fruit. Each orange-picking season, the local wharfs and railway station platforms present a busy appear-
ance, crowded as they are with cases awaiting transport per train or launch. Though the culture of the orange
and lemon is the leading industry, that of the grape has been prosecuted with magnificent success, as a glance
at our illustrations, taken in Mr. Nancarrow’s vineyard, of vines weighted with countless pendent bunches
of glorious grapes, will surely reveal.
The town of Ryde is distant from the metropolis by road about eight, by river about nine, by railway
about twelve miles ; and is thus accessible by ’bus, by steamboat, or by car. An account of the waterway
from Sydney has already been given under the heading of Parramatta.
The highroad from Sydney to Ryde goes through Drummoyne, and crosses the Parramatta River,
about half-way between Gladesville and Hunter’s Hill.
Ryde is on the Northern Railway Line, which branches off from the metropolitan-suburban line at
Strathfield. After leaving Strathfield, the train passes Concord and Rhodes stations, then crosses the


(after bcMVTepJ a lattlce iron-girder bridge of six spans, and
{ going by Meadowbank station) reaches Ryde.
beneatWhif r^f matt t R J Ver Cham P ion sculling course extends from
r , this railway bridge, past the Mile Point, Putney (R milei
s “ e to “*e Brothers ”f 3 milek 330 yard! from Ihe
t W the Bvo most notable struggles ever negotiated on
HanHn'X cZZ* W< ?u the raCeS between Beach ’ the Ausfralian and
in S’ S Canadian ’ t ll6 one rowed m 1884, the other in 1885—and
n both of which the local man was victor. The first event was
witnessed by 60 000 and the second by something like 100 000 people
fiance ttad"’ * 1885 match ’ that ia ad his consoletx
he £ d f V ®r S6 i n 80 many P ersons at a boat race, except when
he pulled against Pnckett on the Thames. Every pier wharf
“ac°k y w 0 H ° ther P° in f o f vantage along either ba/k Tthe river
th 1 f k T h people ’ whllst multitudes of spectators were aboard
the boats and steamers which lined the course. Perhaps not the least
memorable incident in connection with Beach’s 1885 win was that
rvation: -“ i ,eft •£
In what is generally regarded as the Ryde district there are
three municipahties—Ryde proper ; Marsfield ; and Hunter’s Hill •
each of which is officially classified as metropolitan-suburban.
Mr. Edward Terry, M.L.A.
G ran ze lie.
Photo, by
2500. In consequence of^deto^n^hr^rSMrTrTClamat' 70 Ilf 7 ' l ,° acres ; its population about
June. .87*. The district, whth is Into Tee » *“
miles of water frontage. The water suddlv is from th» ' and West—has about four
(capacity, one million gallons) and pumping-station are near '° Ca ‘ ReSer ™ ir
Eastwood Estate, the Property and Residence of Mr. Edward Terry, M.L.A.
Electorally, Ryde, which once formed part of Central Cumberland, is now the head centre of
Electorate bearing its own name The present representative of Ryde in the Legislative Assembly is Mr
Edward Perry, who was Ryde s first Mayor. He won his seat in Parliampnt of r' im •
1898, when he defeated Mr. Frank Farnell, who had previously repiesented the constituency™™ leC “° n ln


Ryde, from near the Residence of Hon. H. Moses.
“ The Grove,” the Residence of Dr. Birch, Cabramatta.


1 Mr. Terry is a member of an old Australian family He is a
keen sportsman, well-known in the hunting-field. At one time he
took great interest m racing and training, often riding his own horses
as well over the hurdles as on the fiat." He has, on more Than one
TnTnemtn I ”TT m \ nat j° n .'° the u U PP er House - In politics, he is an
dependent fair-trader with an objection to land and income
hospitality 18 nd'wl I°™’ East ; vo . od ’” where dispenses a noble
‘P \ y» ‘ d \\lncli is located in most charmingly picturesoue
L U rhood IS of o %d°e eVera SP ' endid residen,ial P--opert.es in the neigh-
r, I he illustration given of the village of Ryde~as it is still
hnT ’ , t lough 111 reality d has outgrown the state of village-
ood presents a view taken from near the entrance to “ Weemala ”
ho residenceo the Hon. Henry Moses, M.L.C., in Morrison’s road.
In all views of which Ryde is the objective, St. Anne’s Church with
its square stone tower and high gables, is the most conspicuous feature
isTtuald 8 M° e rl° n tle SUmmit ° f the hiH around which the town
Telegraph Offi g Courthouse and the Post and
Ryde and North Ryde are well supplied with
Rach possesses a School of Arts.
Public Schools.
Likut. Col. James Burns.
Photo, by
Kerry Co„
Qu “"«— * -
pr p> r ;T’ A nne s Anglican Church. It is in the rural deanery of North Sydney. The Rev H
denominations have £chk place of worship. 'X“alvatL°n‘Army hi Blrrac^' 67 ” a " d ' h<i
Gowan Brae,” the Residence of Lieut. Col I[ames Burns, New South Wales Lancers.
The Good Council Convent and School; Holy Cross College; and a Home for aged and infirm
priests are Roman Catholic institutions situated in proximity to St. Charles’s.


There are several good stores in Ryde : and comfortable hotel accommodation can be obtained.
. i pi. suburb Mr. Herbert A. McDonald keeps an excellent hostelry —the Eastwood
Family Hotel—which Stands in grounds of some twenty acres extent, an admirable spot for picmcmg an
pleasure parties to rendezvous upon, at a minimum cost.
Rvdp is a noted aquatic resort ; and should a Ministerial promise to have Shepherd’s Bay reclaimed
and converted Into a p2bhc park be realised, the “ Village " will have reason to ant.c.pate tts early
development into a second Henley.
Regarded
with a s g tltely mansions 'that do full credit to the glorious sites and enchanting scenery on which they are
erected, and from amidst which they look forth smilingly.
Milk is exceptionally good in the Ryde district As a local fruitgrower once observed to a young
friend, “Wine and milk, and every other product of the vine do well here! Milk! a product
vine?” “Yes, sonny, of the bo-vine.’
J. Mahony & Co.’s Springfield Yards, Granville
HUNTER’S HILL, GLADESVILLE & WOOLWICH
HUNTER’S HILL was not named after Governor Hunter, as many persons suppose It was the name
aiven in 1794 by Thomas Muir, the Scotch martyr in the cause of freedom, to the land, which, on
his arrival as a convict in New South Wales, Lieutenant-Governor Grose permitted him to purchase
Hunter’s Hill being the name of his father’s farm in Scotland.
There is probably no figure connected with Australian history that possesses an interest so pathetic
and so picturesque as that ot Thomas Muir, his story reading like a veritable romance.
He was born in Glasgow in 1765. Admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates, the young
on the side of political reform. With other “ Friends of Liberty ’’ he
advocated manhood suffrage and annual parliaments—for which grievous trout (!) he was indicted lor
seditious practices, found guilty, and sentenced to fourteen years transportation. His real crime was that
he lived too soon.”


Grose Sd l h r He P urchased ~ b y ‘he way, Lt. Governor
Grose had granted himself 850 acres in the same locality—Muir built
fnv his 6 nhrci of"? ! rea ‘ "I" PoHtiCal ° ffender ) Settled dOT ™ to dear
f £ h P • . f h j tree ? crub ; instructing his less happily situated
issued 1 Httle P rin ‘* n S’P ress > “on! which he
vouna n U nVId iS dli Frien f d S ° f Überty ” had s y m P a ‘ b isers in the then
young United States of America ; and Washington (who was at the
ime m the seventh year of his Presidency) ordered the “ Otter ” sloop
to be despatched to “ New Holland ” to effect his rescue. P
This rescue was effected—and then commenced Muir’s further
and still more remarkable adventures. The “ Otter ” was wrecked in
Nootka Sound Muir and two sailors being all the passengers and crew
that were saved. Ihe three were captured by the Indians. His com-
panions were killed ; but Muir managed to escape and to accomplish a
walk of nearly four thousand miles to Panama, where the Spanish
Governor treated him well. He pushed on to Vera Cruz, where he
ay ill ot yellow fever for weeks—“ a stranger and penniless.” On
his recovery he was sent to Cuba, but was there imprisoned. Finally
o pul i aboard a Spanish frigate as a common sailor. Off the coast
ot Spam, this frigate was captured by a British cruiser, the last shot
MT. Wb l C^5 a iP“A, Muir ;_ °" e . of ‘he English officers recognised in
Monsxgnor Rigney.
from which had struck Muir. One of the English recognised in Phot °' iy J ‘ Black ' Ar S us °-Mce-
from the effects of his wounds—the much suffering, long enduring man ! } * r ° achm S 1 ans he died
Hunter’s Hill from Wharf, towards Villa Maria.
7'°' day ’ when manhood suffrage has long been an article of New South Wales’ political constitution
the citizens of Hunter s Hill may blamelessly accord to the memory of him who named their lovely
promontory after his paternal acres, the meed of a sympathetic respect. ly


The Borough of Hunter’s Hill was incorporated so far back as 1861. It has a population of betwe
1000 and 4000 It is delightfully located between the Lane Cove and the Parramatta Rivers, one result o
hs situation being a considerable extent of water frontage. The Town Hall is a commodious stone structure.
The means of communication with the city are ample and Any one travelhng to or from
Hunter’s Hill by the Parramatta River Steamer and Tramway Company s Steamers °an ol am aboa
(on application to the Captain) an illustrated pamphlet giving a full d escnpti° n , of the ari be said
interest along the river. It is at Hunter’s Hill, when going up stream, that the nve .proper, may be said
to commence —the stretch of water to the eastward being an arm of the sea. From the the view
Hunter’s Hill and neighborhood is extremely fine; all along the river banks from the Hg P
Parramatta, view after view of differing degrees of picturesqueness but each a gem u
gaze to challenge his admiration —
So charming each spot: it’s rarely one’s lot
To see, and when seen it’s as rarely forgot.
In this Borough there are two excellent Public Schools; also a branch of the Technical
company of the Ist Regiment of N.S.W. Infantry belongs to Hunter s Hill.
College. A
St. Patrick’s Church, Parramatta.
The Anglican Church All Saints’, is in the rural deanery of North Sydney. At Villa Maria, at the
head ofTarbanCreek, is the’ beautiful church of the Marist Fathers, The Congregat.onal.sts also have a
place of worship. , , „ T . , ~ „ ,
Two important Roman Catholic educational establishments are here located, St Joseph s College and
.. RivervtewlTe College of St. Ignatius, on Lane Cove. These institutions rank with The King s School,
Parramatta, and Newington College as amongst the great public schools of Australia.


dotted top P ; e ™ U lLTolTof\wo U W Hi ”r iS ?' T eXC “ residential spot. On its villa-
ex-Premier of N.S. Wales (whJ “ blanked ” rhiS^V^ stl f clans ’ of th ® Consul-General of France, of the
waies blanked Chicago) and of many another notable.
Great Northem'Rt^wfeTrun^olShTu^T lies , b «‘ ween , R y de a " d Hunter’s Hill. The old
to GiadesviUe was erected) by a DrUmm ° yne
girdled *in '“jdsuape is the Government Lunatic Asylum—a series of
manner in which horticultural l S ’ y f‘ red “ m <|d from any appearance of gloom by the ingenious
of the Inspector-General ofthe In,Z i «“ r W “ h archite<: ‘ural severity. Here are the offices
eral ot the Insane. Some 800 patients are treated in this institution-treated with the
Eaton’s Hampden Hotel, Pennant Hills
utmost consideration and humanity, the asylum (like those at Parramatta, Rydalmere and Callan Park!
being fitted (to quote Coghlan) with all the conveniences and appliances which modern science points out as
most calculated to mitigate or remove the affliction from which the inmates suffer. Not tar from the main
buildings are the Asylum’s gas and water works ; also a branch of the establishment known as “the Priory ”
There is a good Public School in Gladesville. Christ Church (in the rural deanery of North Sydney)
is the Anglican Church, with the Rev. W. Lumsdame for rector. There is also a Presbyterian Church. *
In Woolwich, a suburb of Hunter’s Hill, there is another Public School. Here too are the
celebrated Atlas Engineering Works. Fern Bay, the resort of many a pleasant picnicing party is in the
vicinity. ° J '


HORNSBY, THORNLEIGH, ETC.
npHE Great Northern Railway, on its course from Ryde to Hornsby J unction which is
from Sydney, passes the stations of Eastwood, Eppmg (erst Carlmgford), Cheltenham, Beecroft,
Pennant Hills, Thornleigh and Normanhurst (erst Hornsby.) At Hornsby Junction, the North S
line from Milson’s Point (now being duplicated) joins the mam Northern Railway, the distance between
the “ Point ” and the “ Junction ” being 13 mile s .
The district of Hornsby was formerly known as South Colah. It is at an elevation of nearly 800 ft.
above sea level, and because of its situation and the purity of its atmosphere can c aim o P
adopted for sanatorium purposes. From its higher points can be seen 0 nig l re p arcs on J ,
Southern Head flashing its warning—its inviting —light across Pacific wa ers .an , ’
vessels may be discerned either entering or departing from the “ Beautiful liar >or.
St. Paul’s Church, Pearce’s Corner, Hornsby.
In the bush around Hornsby many rare ferns and beautiful flowers flourish in wild profusion—as
Byron sings,
—the green hills
Are clothed with early blossoms ; through the grass
The quick-eyed lizard rustles ; and the bills
Of summer birds sing welcome as ye pass :
Flowers fresh in hue, and many in their class
Implore the pausing step.
Normanhurst— formerly Hornsby, and prior to that South Colah—is a quiet country village daily
becoming more and more overshadowed by the rapidly increasing importance of its vigorous offspring
Hornsby Junction.
At the Junction there is plenty of accommodation for visitors in the shape of hotels and boarding
houses.
Barker College (conducted by the Rev. H. Plume, and of which institution an illustration is given)
is the principal of several educational establishments (including a Public School and a School of Arts)
located at Hornsby function. Near, also —at Pearce’s Corner, where the Pennant Hills Road from
Parramatta strikes into the Lane Cove to Peat's Ferry Road-is St. Paul's Church (within the


? sasftM.'arssis x- “ h "•
Waitan Kvau/ ' ted f °J Cltrus ' culture - Similar in character and condition to Thornleigh are Beecroft
Mand boom ™ 'TfP V** «&***'***-*> ** about all of which a veritaWe
places sprinsimr nn r ?n2 s P le ndid architectural results in the form of large and small dwelling
grotesque, yet all contributing dire c tlon —some classic in design, some quaint, some picturesquely
Here it is’the delight of the* b? c sdlnip res jdential very distinctly on these vigorous young districts,
rural hom e b |) P n P ',tl tin T 7 m * n ~ office and counting-house left behind—to enjoy, at his own
comes to seeHS oZ IVn ° f hIS , ° Wn , vine or % tree > rest marking turmoil. Here he
one, bosomed m calm green hills alone ” —happily forgetful for a while of
the vain hot strife
1 hat makes men mad—the tug for wealth and power,
The passions and the cries that wither life
And waste its little hour.
“ Curzon Hall,” the Residence of Mr. Harry Smith, Marsfield.
(now nearing completion.)
beecroft, epping and marsfield
BEECROtT is an unincorporated area, but, m its vigorous Progress Association, it possesses the
requisite means for keeping the Member for the District up to the scratch, as regards paying
, r attenfaon to its little wants. Situated between 400 and 5 00 feet above sea level iteniovs
a delightfully light and bracing atmosphere. The local water supply is from a stand-pipe attached to the
Nepean-Prospect-Sydney system, the charges made being most reasonable.
Public School (also a private one), Anglican Church and Wesleyan Church can Beecroft boast
Postal facilities are not quite all they might be—but the Progress Association is endeavouring to effect the
needed reform. 6


A really charming place is Beecroft ; and what is more, it is peopled by most sociable folks. Ihe
Kennedya Club have very fine Courts in which the fashionable game of tennis is constantly and large y
indulged in,
Epping (late East Carlingford) is another unincorporated area, with a vigorous Progress Association
(composed^o/go-a-head energetic men) to keep things local tolerably well up-to-date. It has often been
&d to as the Sanatorium of the Northern Line-andthe term is really not a m.snomer seetng that
the locality is qmte an ideal spot for a suburban health retreat. Being within easy access from the
Metropolis! its population is mainly city-going. Eppmg is largely the home of an
exceedingly well-to-do class, a fact of which its numerous handsome (m some instances palatial) mans o
give complete demonstration. With good stores ; a post office with telephone exchange and bureau two
halls ; two churches (an Anglican and a Presbyterian), and a well-managed Recreation Club, life at Eppmg
runs smoothly and brightly.
Bookbinding and Machinery Department, The Argus Office, Parramatta.
The Municipal District of Marsfield was incorporated in 1894; its area is 2067 acres ; its population
a little under a thousand.
its warlike name signifies, it formed part of the old Field of Mars, the north-eastern portion
Marsfield includedsome ol filstwood, as well as some of North Ryde. It .s essent.ally a fru.tgrow.ng
district. „ „ . , T
Th Tn
underneath .45. x too feet. The
illustration shows that the building is well on towards completion.


The Cumberland Argus Newspaper and Job Printing Office, Parramatta.
The Cumberland Argus Composing Room.


CONCLUSION.
And now a few words in conclusion, after this rapid survey of Parramatta and Districts.
These pages have dealt descriptively and statistically with the present condition of the region shown
in the Sketch Map, not without reference to its early history and progress.
Thp comnlete volume is a local production having been executed at the Argus Printing Works,
p r \n the illustrations (with the exception of those noted) are reproductions of photographs taken
hv M oim ßlack of fhe Photo. Department for the purpose. The object which the Argus
p y R OPRTFT\RV had before them when undertaking its publication was the presentment to the general public
of the region whereof Parramatta is the centre-rts attractions as a
residential area, its capabilities and potentialities as a fruitgrowing and manufacturing district.
Parramatta District Hospital.
As an area populated by over 50,000 persons, of whom the majority live under progressive municipal
conditions, 1 it must necessarily impress the shrewd commercial man as an appropriate sphere for hea t ly
enterprise.
Of the solendid fruit-growing districts described in this work, those lying afar from the mam railways
11 U preatlv benefited were they tapped by judiciously selected light lines. Another boon to the
orchardists’^industry would be the establishment of a State Experimental Orchard as a technical schoo or
Sfrtsinfgeneration of'Nomologists. Yet another boon to this important industry would be a largely
increased measure of co-operation amongst fruit-growers. But enough—these pages being meant for fac s
not opinions, and, of facts, enough having been given to evidence the prosperous, social and m u
condition of Parramatta and Districts.




