

Partioxilers of Printing Pross at Dogura.Bartle Bay,
Papua S.D.
The Press was established by the Anglican Mission
to Hew Guinea in 1899. The cost (about £166) was defrayed
by subscriptions raised in England by Miss Woolcott,
Trinity House, London, E.G. The Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge gave a grant of £B5. There have
been additions in the way of type and incidentals since
k'
1899. Everything necessary for book-binding on a small
scale was provided.
The first printer was Mr. Smithson, who did not
remain long in the .Mission and Mr. Sydney Ford had charge of
the Press from Oct. 1900 to September 1903, and during
these three years a good deal of very excellent work was
done, both printing and book-binding.
Since 1903 the Mission has had no printer and the
Press fto. has naturally deteriorated a good deal.
A list of publications is appended. Those of
which copies are sent have a mark (x) affixed to them,
others were single sheets.


List of Publications of .the Anglican Mission Printing! a*-
01^VJ
Press, Dogura, Bartle Bay, : npua.
Hote* The Year in each case is. the year ending March 31st.
Year.
1901.
1. x. Service for opening St. Pauls.School Church,
Samaral, Papua.
English.
y 2. x. Confirmation Service and Hymns.
Wedau Dialect.
3. x. Manual for Communicants.
Wadau Dialect.
Church Catechism (E in pamphlet form)
Wedau Dialect.
/
v 5. x. Prayer Cards, x License forms- x Anniversary
Programs.
Wedau Dialect, some English.
/
f 4. x. Selections from Book of Genesis
190 S
Wedau Dialect.
/%. x. Catechism Book,
Y/edau Dialect.
48 pages
19C4 Bo.l) 3.
i. Book of Exodus,
Wedau Dialect.
Chapters I -ZI (selections).
/ 4. x. Book of lessons
Wedau ftialect.
for Sunday Services
/5. x. Selections of Hymns and Psalms 126 pages
Wedau Dialect.
6. Lesson Cards Binandele Dialect, Mamba River.
7, x. Intercession Papers, Botes for Press.
Anniversary programs. All in English.
1903. /l. x. Report for Samarai School Committee 2 years-
English.
2. x. Gospels of St. Matthew and St. Mark
Wedau Dialect. (20 copies only).
(This was printed for convenience in making corrections
and for setting up a large imprint in England.)


Additional chapter of Book of Exodus
Wedau Dialect.
x Anniversary Programs.
4. Inteoesaion Papers
Subscription lists
Hymn Sheets. x Christmas
Cards etc.
All in English.
1. x. Additional chapter of Book of Exodus with
selections from Leviticus, numbers and
Deuteronomy.
Wedau Dialect.
(These with parts of Exodus printed previous years
were bo\md in one volume, some paper, some boards)
2. x. Burial Service
Wedau Dialect•
3. x. *Marriage Service. Dedication of Church.
Restoration of Penitents.
Wedau Dialect.
4. x. Selections from Genesis.
Binandele Dialect. (Mamba River).
5. Inteoession Papers. X Anniversary e# programs
in English.
Two illuminated Presentation addresses* blue
red, gold.


(Tatholio Mission j SsjQ
Yule Island, Papas.
13th October 1908.
She Hon. She Government Secretary,
Port Moresby,
Papas*
Sir,
In reply to yoar circular Ho. 1788/08 asking for
information about the printing press in the Mission,
I have the honor by direction of His lordship Bishop
de Boismenu to send the following answers to the
queries in the said circular;
1. First printing press established by His lordship
Br. Havarre in 1886. It is one of Hopkinson & Copes
improved Albion press, patent 1878*
In 1902 a second press was introduced. It is the
"Mitrailleuse" of Maison de la Bonne Presse, Paris.
2. The issues of both presses are very numerous indeed, but
as no record has been kept of them I oannot fuhly answer
to query 2.
separate
Specimen copies of both presses sent tinder
Sir.
Yours obediently
Sgd. Catholic Mission.


i t ''-, -
i^mo
LOHDOH MISSIOHAEY SOCIETY
Printing Presses
Prom the records it appears that there was
printing press in the Mission in the year 1876. In that
year the said press was taken to Sydney in the "John
Williams". So further information regarding this press
is extant•
The Rev. W. Laves D.D. arrived in the Territory in
the year 1874 and during the early years in Papua made
use of a small printing press tfhloh belonged to himself.
Of this second press no other information is available.
The Rev. A. Pearse oame to Papua in 1887, bringing
Printing plant with him. For many years he
recognised as the looal printer for the Mission. In
the years 189 E and 1893 additions to Mr. Pearse*a printing
plant were made, new type in the former year* and a
book binder's cutting machine in the latter* On Mr.
Pearse*s retirement from service in 1907 he left hiw
printing plant at the disposal of the local Committee
and it is now in the hands of the Rev. E. Pryoe Jones.
Mr. Pearse had also a small printing plant which
he eventually disposed of to the Rev. T I. P. Sohleno^rer.
Towards the end of the year 1903 the Rev. J. H, Cullen
Wane from Mangaia bringing with him a printing press* This
printing press is still at Port Moresby but has not been
used sinoe Mr. Cullen left the Territory in September 1904.
THE ISSUES OP THE PRESSES.
Little Information is available on this head, and
what there is is mostly in reference to the Rev. A. Pearse*s
printing plant. Although, as has been said, Mr. Pearse
was the recognised looal printer for the Mission, it has


j - - ; .":i
safer been possible for him, owiag to other duties, to/ ■
undertake the printing of any large issues. Indeed
most of the printing of the London Missionary society
has been done in England and Australia. Mr. Pearse's
work, therefore, in this respect, has “been mostly
confined to the issuing of materials for school use,
such as alphabet-cards and pgiysioal drill exercises, in
the vernacular (MOTUAB). For many .ears he issued
Calendars annually for the use of the Mission as a whole
whilst in 1904 he printed a small Hymn-Book in the
SIHAUQOLO dialect.
Mr. Fearse has printed very much more than the
above statement would suggest and doubtless he will
himself be able to give an accurate and detailed account
of all the issues, if asked to do so.
Theßev. J. A. Cullen used his printing press only
for the issuing of circular letters to his friends in
England, though it had been his intention, had health
permitted him to remain longer in Papua, to issue a
small newspaper.
R. Lister Turner
Hon. Secretary,
Fppua District Committee.
