

Australian Primary Principals Association (Inc)
“Partnering
a
Better Future”
APPA
National Indigenous Education
Survey Report
October 2000
Department Of Education Training And Youth Affairs


© Commonwealth of Australia 2000
This work is copyright. It may be reproduced in whole or in part for study or training purposes, subject to the
inclusion of an acknowledgment of the sources and that it is not for commercial use or sale. Reproduction for
purposes other than those indicated above requires the written permission of the Department of Education,
Training and Youth Affairs. Requests and enquiries concerning reproduction and copyright should be addressed to
the Assistant Secretary, Literacy and Special Programs Branch, Department of Education, Training and Youth
Affairs, GPO Box 9880, Canberra City ACT 2601
This project was funded under the Commonwealth's Indigenous Education Strategic Initiatives Programme
administered by the Commonwealth Department of Education, Training and Youth Affairs
The views expressed herein do not necessarily represent the views of the Commonwealth
Title Partnering a Better Future National Indigenous Education Report
ISBN 0 9578482 OX


Australian Primary Principals Association Inc.
Partnering a Better Future
National Indigenous Education Report
October 2000
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
TRAINING AND YOUTH AFFAIRS


CONTENTS
Introduction 4
Executive Summary 7
Chapter 1 Alms and Methodology of Survey 15
Aims of the Survey 15
Survey Design, and Construction 15
Survey Structure 16
Survey Population 17
Management of Data and Analysis 18
Survey Issue and Response Rates 18
Survey Limitations 20
Chapter 2 Focus on Local Issues 21
Introduction 21
Specific Local School Focus on Indigenous Education 21
Potential School Improvement Priorities 22
Successful Practices 24
Summary 26
Further Work 26
Chapter 3 School and Community 27
Introduction 27
Existing Relationship between the School and its Indigenous Community 27
Options for Building School-Community Relationships 28
Options for Building more User-friendly Schools 31
Summary 33
Further Work 33
Chapter 4 School Staff 34
Introduction 34
Priority Areas for School Staff 34
Cross-cultural Understanding Issues 35
Variation Across Sectors 36
Successful Practices in Local Staff Development 37
Summary 39
Further Work 39
Chapters Student Learning 4!
Introduction 41
Priority Issues that Impact on Student Learning 41
Variation Across Sectors 43
Successful Student Learning Practices 44
Summary 45
Further Work 45
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Chapter 6 School Organisation 47
Introduction 47
Key School Organisation Factors 47
Variation Across Sectors 48
Summary 50
Further Work 50
Chapter 7 Additional Comments and Suggestions 51
Introduction 51
Summary 52
Appendix 1: Survey Questionnaire 53
References 60
Partnering a Better Future National Indigenous Education Report


Introduction
A sound education base is central to the future of the nation’s most valued resource, the youth of
Australia. There is no greater responsibility than their development and preparation to become
effective citizens in ensuring a productive and cohesive Australian society. In a multicultural
nation, like Australia, this means equal educational opportunity for all students, from all
backgrounds, regardless of location, individual differences and cultural heritage. We can only
maximise future opportunities for Australia as a nation if we maximise opportunities for all its
youth, especially its Indigenous youth. With the rate of global change driven by technology and
information revolutions, we cannot afford to have any group educationally disenfranchised if we
are to move together as a nation.
Of all groups that make up the rich fabric of Australian society it is the Indigenous populations that
are at greatest educational risk. For decades we have assessed, researched and measured
educational outcomes for Australian students, yet one alarming consistency remains, that of
marked under-achievement by Indigenous students. During this time, successful programs and
best practices have come and gone, as have the principals and teachers who introduced them.
Similarly unsuccessful practices, attendance rates and retention rates have ebbed and flowed from
location to location. What evolved over the decades was a series of genuine efforts, deemed
appropriate for a particular time and particular challenges.
Recent reports such as the Collins Report (1999), "Learning Lessons," the Australian College of
Education Report (1999), “Indigenous Education: National Imperatives, Partnerships and Action,”
and other statistics from state and national assessment programs indicate the extent of under-
achievement by Indigenous students. These are not only for outcomes in literacy and numeracy,
but also retention rates in secondary education, post-compulsory education and tertiary admissions.
While there has been gradual improvement over the past decade, for which schools are to be
commended, the disproportionate imbalance compared to other students requires urgent attention.
Australian schools have been addressing these challenges for many years with support from State
and Territory and Commonwealth funding enabling a range of locally developed school based
programs and system strategies such as "Students at Educational Risk" in Western Australia.
Education authorities have provided support through their Indigenous Education departments and
branches. Other Commonwealth funded initiatives such as Aboriginal Student Support Parent
Association (ASSPA) committees have aimed to assist schools through support links with the
parent body. These have been genuine attempts to improve Indigenous education and to an extent
they have been successful. However the reality is Indigenous students are still under-achieving
and schools are still confronted with enormous educational, cultural and social challenges.
The Australian Primary Principals Association recognises that the time has arrived for a
comprehensive approach to bridge the education gap. This view is shared by many of its members
who have and continue to address the many challenges faced by Indigenous students.
These challenges are too complex and nationally important for schools and systems to face alone.
They go beyond the classroom and school grounds. They are integral to the evolution of what we
recognise and understand as being an inclusive Australian community, rich in varied cultural
histories and contributions past, present and future. It has often been said that schools reflect the
society they serve. If so, then the challenges evident in an evolving Australian community are also
experienced by schools. This sense of community is then also critical for schools.
Partnering a Better Future National Indigenous Education Report


If we are to successfully address the challenges of Indigenous education then we must do this
together as a nation, both in developing a sense of belonging and purpose as an Australian
community and a similar sense of school community. This requires a much broader approach than
just the teaching-learning relationships in the classroom. It is critical to provide the essentials in
literacy and numeracy. However, if attendance rates, retention rates, cross-cultural differences,
parental involvement, health and social support, shared values for education and community
inclusivity are varied then potential to maximise outcomes for Indigenous students will continue to
be challenged.
The responsibility to address these broad national challenges rests with all Australians, including
all political parties, the public sector, the private sector, social institutions, education institutions
and the wider community, both Indigenous and non-lndigenous. The responsibility to address
them at the local level rests with schools, but in partnership and with the support of all these
bodies. Schools cannot do it alone. Schools will need support in developing appropriate cross-
cultural awareness, teaching-learning relationships, inclusivity and shared purpose and goals if
they are to evolve a sense of school community and ongoing improvement for Indigenous students.
The Commonwealth’s National Indigenous English Literacy and Numeracy Strategy provides the
stimulus and the framework for change to occur. The Strategy is complemented by recent
decisions of the Ministerial Council on Education, Employment, Training and. Youth Affairs
(MCEETYA), In particular, at its March 2000 meeting, Council identified a number of issues
impeding the achievement of educational equality for Australia’s Indigenous peoples and agreed to
implement a wide range of strategies, including a statement of principles and standards for
educational infrastructure and service delivery.
In April 1999 the Australian Primary Principals Association (APPA) National Executive Council
met with the Commonwealth Government and the Department of Education Training and Youth
Affairs (DETYA) to discuss the development of national policy in Indigenous Education. The
Association, proposed that Primary Principals possessed invaluable expertise and that their
experiences and suggestions needed to be shared in its development. To facilitate their
involvement APPA proposed a national survey of primary principals, from all sectors of education
- Government, Catholic and Independent primary schools. The Australian Primary Principals
Association represents over 7,000 Government, Catholic and Independent primary principals from
all parts of the country. The research was to be undertaken in conjunction with the Edith Cowan
University, Churchlands Campus, in Western Australia.
A submission to conduct the project was lodged with the Commonwealth Department of Education
and Youth Affairs. Following approval and additional contractual arrangements, the APPA
National Indigenous Education Review - "Partnering A Better Future" project commenced in July
1999. The key objective of the project was to provide the Commonwealth with a detailed report of
principals' perceptions and experiences to inform national policy and strategies in Indigenous
education.
Principals' perceptions, experiences and suggestions were collated and analysed in four key school
and community improvement areas; local school issues; school and community issues; school staff
issues; and student learning issues.
Through cross tabulation of data in each of the above, responses were prioritised and
recommendations developed for policy and strategies to assist schools and their communities
improve outcomes for Indigenous Education. These recommendations are in the body of the
Executive Summary’.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


The Commonwealth Government is to be congratulated for its initiatives to improve Indigenous
education. Recognising this as an issue of national importance is the first step forward. APPA
looks forward to working with the Commonwealth and through State and Territory Principals’
Associations to implement the report’s recommendations. This work needs to be done within the
context of a multicultural society, recognising past and present best practices and promoting the
evolution of new education paradigms in teaching-learning, organisation, sense of community and
sense of purpose.
The Australian Primary Principals Association wishes to thank Professor Anne Deden and
Dr Russell Waugh, Edith Cowan University, for their assistance in the development of the survey
tool, analysis of data and help with the development of the report. APPA also thanks Alpha Data
for the development, management and assistance with data analysis. APPA is also appreciative of
the contribution made by the Kalgoorlie District Principals in trialing and assisting the
development of the final survey tool. APPA is indebted to the Western Australian Primary
Principals Association for its support and infrastructure in the management of survey responses
and support for the APPA President. The APPA National Executive Council is also to be
congratulated for its support and promotion of the survey through their affiliated State and
Territory Associations.
The Australian Primary Principals Association wishes to particularly thank the members of its
Steering Committee, May O'Brien (Chair, WA Aboriginal Education and Training Council), Ken
Wyatt (Director of Aboriginal Education, Education Department of Western Australia), Rudy
Rybarczyk (President WA Primary Principals Association) and the Commonwealth Department of
Education, Training and Youth Affairs.
J.[?]
Tony Misich
President
Australian Primary Principals’ Association Inc.
Partnering a Better Future National Indigenous Education Report


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The survey targeted Australian primary principals and their school communities to share their
perceptions, local expertise (past, present and future) and suggestions in addressing a range of
identified issues, but primarily in five main areas;
1) Specific local issues and school focus in Indigenous education;
2) The nature of the relationship between the school and its Indigenous community;
3) What principals value for their staff in working towards improving learning outcomes for
Indigenous students;
4) Priority issues that impact on improving Indigenous student learning outcomes;
5) School organisation factors.
The survey questionnaire (at Appendix 1) was distributed to some 7,000 Government, Catholic
and Independent primary schools across Australia in late November 1999 with a three to four week
turn around period for returns. There were 1,222 identified returns representing over 17% of
schools targeted and providing a valid representative sample across all States and Territories;
Government, Catholic and Independent schools; and urban, rural and remote locations. 60% of
schools that responded had Indigenous student enrolments and over 30% had Indigenous staff or
support personnel.
Specific local school focus in Indigenous education
Overall, principals identified “developing a specific local school focus on purpose and goals for
education of Indigenous students” as a key potential area for school improvement. This focus
should be developed in consultation with the local Indigenous community in promoting positive
relationships and shared understanding of school goals and the value of education. A little over
half of the principals identified a specific local focus on Indigenous education in their school
planning. Almost 50% of schools described the school curriculum or Indigenous culture and
cultural events as the areas that they focussed on in their school planning.
Principals who identified and described specific local focuses in Indigenous education in their
school planning, indicated a broad number of issues need to be taken into consideration.
Numeracy and literacy, along with Indigenous committee support and cultural awareness were the
most common issues.
While only just over 50% of principals indicated they had a specific local focus on Indigenous
students in their school planning, the other principals signalled a need to do so. In addition, almost
32% of principals identified parent community liaison as important to improved local outcomes.
Another 25% focused on local staffing issues, with attendance being a further priority. Examples
of current successful practices were mainly community and curriculum based, and included the
provision of Indigenous aides and support.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Nature of relationship between school and its Indigenous community
The general level of interaction between schools and the local Indigenous community/ies needs
further work if Indigenous student learning outcomes are to improve. Most schools had little
interaction with their Indigenous community/ies, with the exception of remote schools, which have
a high level of interaction. Very few schools indicated conflict.
The majority of principals identified one to one communication as being important to building
school-indigenous community relationships. This included the development of a school liaison
network, making specific use of Indigenous aides and workers in promoting parental support,
understanding and involvement in student learning and school aims. The network is perceived to
go wider building positive relationships with the local Indigenous community and providing
support for families.
The other key areas were parent/community liaison and involvement in the school’s teaching
and/or student service program, the role of committees, such as parent organisations, councils and
Aboriginal Student Support and Parent Awareness groups and the role of Indigenous workers.
Almost 85% of all successful practices focused upon cultural awareness and family/community
inclusion. Over a quarter of these successful practices had a cultural focus, while others focused
upon community development, on ASSPA Committees and on family and parent inclusion. Over
50% of principals saw understanding, awareness and inclusion of local community and culture as
key issues in making schools more user-friendly.
What principals value for their staff in working towards improving learning outcomes for
Indigenous students
Principals’ value greater professional development opportunities for their staff, especially in
cultural awareness, appropriate teaching-learning pedagogy and curriculum, to achieve improved
outcomes in Indigenous education.
Over half the responses identified professional development and training, as key needs if staff are
to effectively improve Indigenous student learning outcomes. The key needs include professional
development of teachers, teacher training programs, professional networking and professional
development for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Education Workers (with the latter an
important issue for remote schools). Principals value the contribution that Indigenous staff and
AIEWs (and their equivalents) make to facilitate effective liaison between both school and parents,
and school and community.
Staff needed greater cultural awareness and cross-cultural understanding. Over a quarter also
indicated a need for specific Indigenous education teaching strategies. This was supported by a
further 16% who identified relevant curriculum professional development as necessary.
The majority of successful staff development practices were culturally focused and based on
promoting the development of the whole school, rather than individual teachers. Principals also
indicated that teacher training programs and practicums need to address Indigenous education
issues.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Priority issues that impact on improving Indigenous student learning outcomes
Principals identified literacy and numeracy teaching skills and methods as the main priority for
improving Indigenous student learning outcomes. Principals then indicated student attendance,
parent involvement, an emphasis on the early years and access to culturally appropriate/inclusive
curriculum materials as the other four main priorities.
Principals place a high priority on culturally inclusive materials, but indicated that such materials
may not be readily available. They perceive such curriculum support as giving greater relevance
to learning and to addressing cultural awareness issues, for all. If teaching staff are not adequately
prepared to handle cross-cultural issues, then the potential for integration of Indigenous materials
across the curriculum is challenged.
Successful practices exist and need to be shared. Almost a third of respondents identified local
student support practices, with over a quarter of others implementing successful curriculum
practices. Of the rest, focuses on improving attendance and staffing were more common.
School organisation factors
Overall, the majority of principals regard greater flexibility in human and fiscal resources, student
grouping and daily organization as a means to better meet local needs. Remote schools also
indicated flexibility in the school year is required.
Greater local flexibility in school organization gives greater control over staffing, resource,
timetabling and curriculum issues. Rather than simply organising classes of students according to
age, a number of alternative arrangements were identified by almost a fifth of respondents as ways
to improve Indigenous student learning outcomes.
Current initiatives
Since the survey was undertaken in late 1999, a number of important national initiatives have been
developed that address a number of the issues raised by principals in the survey.
The National Indigenous English Literacy and Numeracy Strategy was launched in March 2000
and the APPA survey findings support the overall Strategy framework, and are consistent with
initiatives proposed as part of National Strategy implementation. As part of the implementation of
the National Strategy, the Australian Principals Associations Professional Development Council
(APAPDC) has been funded to support stronger school leadership and more effectively engage
school principals in the task of improving Indigenous students’ educational outcomes. APPA is a
member of APAPDC and will raise and promote issues raised by principals in the survey through
the APAPDC project entitled Dare to Lead.
The Ministerial Taskforce on Indigenous Education provided advice to Council in March 2000 and
identified the achievement of educational equality for Australia’s Indigenous peoples as a realistic
goal. Council agreed to implement a national statement of principles and standards for educational
infrastructure and service delivery; a model for more culturally inclusive and educationally
effective schools; and a framework for developing more efficient and effective cross-portfolio
mechanisms. APPA will support the work of jurisdictions to promote and implement this advice.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Way forward
The survey results suggest a range of activities and issues to be undertaken by the Australian
Primary Principals Association and its State and Territory affiliates, by principals in their own
schools, by education authorities and by other stakeholders and service providers.
Australian Primary Principals Association activities
The Australian Primary Principals Association is committed to working towards improving
learning outcomes for Indigenous students and believes that this survey report provides a rich
source of advice for accelerating progress in Indigenous education. The Association, in co-
operation with its State and Territory affiliates, will promote and seek further support for ongoing
improvement in Indigenous education by:
• Providing national professional networks, both directly and through its network of affiliated
State and Territory Associations, to share successful practices for schools across Australia, to
research and develop successful practice models, to share these models and develop
professional development modules and other strategies;
• Supporting and developing a national data base of successful Indigenous teaching - learning
practices, both within and without Australia;
• Supporting appropriate comparative data to assist Tike schools’ with similar challenges in
their planning and evaluation cycles;
• Providing consultation and active participation in the development of national education and
training policy and programs;
• Establishing and developing professional development networks and opportunities, with
State and Territory Associations, to assist principals in building positive school community
relationships in working towards increasing interaction and inclusivity;
• Supporting and undertaking research to explore:
perceived correlations between the professional development and preparatory levels of
staff to the issues of management of student behaviour,
identified successful school focuses and related practices with a view to develop
models and establish a professional network for schools across Australia, particularly
in literacy and numeracy,
case studies of successful practices that incorporate technology and learning for
Indigenous students for future development of learning designs and network support,
case studies of successful practices to develop flexible frameworks, establish
successful practice networks and deliver professional development models to promote
improved literacy and numeracy outcomes;
• Supporting the establishment of a National Forum for Indigenous Education, inclusive of
principals, community, Government, private enterprise, tertiary bodies and other
stakeholders; and
• Developing an Australian Primary Principals Association Education Foundation, with a
commitment to Indigenous education, through promotion of models, creativity, initiative,
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


successful practice, professional development and recognition of contributions by
individuals, schools and communities.
School, community, education authority and other stakeholder activities
The survey results also suggest a range of high priority activities that school principals can
undertake in their own schools and communities, with the support of local authorities and other
service providers and stakeholders.
In summary, principals acknowledged the need to:
1) Develop a local school focus on the purpose and goals for the education of their Indigenous
students in their school planning;
2) Work with their whole school community in building stronger relationships and inclusivity
between schools, school goals and the local Indigenous community/ies;
3) Continue to promote literacy and numeracy as the main priority for improving Indigenous
student learning outcomes;
4) Continue to promote and support greater local school management flexibility; and
5) Focus on available on-going professional development offerings and networking
opportunities for teachers and AIEWs.
Local school focus
In the survey results, principals suggest the need to give high priority to developing a local school
focus on the purpose and goals for the education of their Indigenous students in their school
planning. This focus should be developed in consultation with the local Indigenous community,
with the support of the appropriate service providers, to promote positive relationships and a
shared understanding of school goals and the value of education and should include strategies to:
• Develop and address Indigenous student health issues, especially hearing disorders;
• Promote and enable a cohesive partnership of student education, health, justice and family
support services, at the local level, with resources and flexibility to meet the local needs of
schools and their Indigenous students;
• Promote the potential and role of Reconciliation to improve Indigenous student learning
outcomes by focusing on local cultural histories, cultures and contributions as an integral
part of the local school and Australian community;
• Increase opportunities and numbers of Indigenous staff and helpers to assist in working
towards improving student outcomes, community liaison and cultural awareness and
understanding.
Building stronger school-community relationships
From the survey results, principals suggest that schools give high priority to improving the general
level of interaction between schools and the local Indigenous community/ies by:
• Focussing on one to one communications;
• Supporting the work of Indigenous school-community liaison personnel;
• Having support and capacity for accessing, developing and providing appropriate
professional development and training models for schools and communities to work together
in building relationships, understanding and inclusivity;
• Having access to networks, utilising and adapting current examples of successful practices in
making schools more user-friendly for Indigenous Communities.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


The survey also signals that provision be made for more ADBW training and professional
development to successfully carry out their roles, and in doing so, be able to support and share
student learning outcomes with parents.
Indigenous community support for schools needs to be promoted by;
• Developing shared and understood values of education and school purpose with the local
Indigenous community;
• Providing training for Indigenous school committees to undertake a leadership role in
achieving improved Indigenous student learning outcomes;
• Providing training to Indigenous community members to act as mentors for school students
and staff, to help in classrooms and to participate in school activities and decision making;
• Promoting and supporting intra- and inter-community support networks and resources.
Student learning and literacy and numeracy
The survey results suggest that principals acknowledge schools be supported in their need to give
high priority to:
• Continue promoting literacy and numeracy as the main priority for improving Indigenous
student learning outcomes and promote the development of:
more inclusive teaching-learning methodologies,
more culturally appropriate and inclusive curriculum materials,
early intervention and ‘student at risk’ strategies,
special support strategies, such as homework centres;
sharing of successful practices and professional training related to these issues,
with an emphasis on the early years in education (K-3) and a recognition for additional
resources and support in these early years;
• Addressing issues of student attendance through the promotion of greater involvement of
Indigenous parents/caregivers in school activities and a shared understanding of school goals
and the value of education;
• Promote and implement English as Second Language strategies and the incorporation of
technology into classroom learning, with a view to developing appropriate integrated
curriculum materials and support models developed from examples of successful practice.
To do so, schools will require support and capacity to access a national network of culturally
inclusive materials, successful case studies and identified successful practices to develop local
designs that address local challenges and promote improved school planning and outcomes for
Indigenous students.
Local school management flexibility
In the survey results, principals indicated the need to give high priority to promoting and
supporting greater local school management flexibility, particularly in terms of:
• Flexible organisation of human and financial resources (e.g. staff selection; staffing profiles;
local control over budgets; access to funding; etc.);
Partnering a Better Future ~ National Indigenous Education Report


• Flexible organisation of student groupings; and
• Flexible organisation of the school day/timetable/year.
Aboriginal Student Support and Parent Awareness committee structures, operations and
accountability frameworks should be reviewed, both locally and globally, with the view to
increasing their pivotal role in improving student outcomes and forging family and community
links, and in promoting cohesion and consistency with local school purpose, goals and operations.
Range of school staffprofessional development and retention issues
Schools, education authorities and other stakeholders need to promote and support the ongoing
professional development of teachers and principals in developing understanding, skills, and
confidence to promote improved Indigenous student learning outcomes by providing:
• Professional development opportunities for practicing staff in both cultural awareness and
Indigenous teaching-learning relationships and methods;
• Opportunities for professional networking and sharing of best practices; and
• Improving the availability of diverse and comparable data to enable local self-evaluation and
networking with ‘like’ schools.
Local strategies and incentives should be developed to increase teacher retention rates and promote
staff continuity to ensure the long-term development of school goals and school-community
relationships.
Schools and authorities need to promote and support the ongoing professional development of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Education Workers (and their equivalents) in developing
their understanding, skills, and confidence to promote improved Indigenous student-learning
outcomes by providing:
• Professional development opportunities for practicing AIEWs in both cross-cultural and
teaching-learning relationships and methods;
• Opportunities for professional networking and sharing of best practices; and
• The capacity to develop teaching skills and further career opportunities as teachers, both off-
site and on site, as per training programs;
The survey results suggest that schools and systems review available resources with the view to
increasing the number of AIEWs employed in the school.
In relation to training programs, school principals have indicated the need to review current
teacher and AIEW training programs to:
• Promote and support the universal inclusion of cross-cultural and Indigenous teaching-
learning relationships in teacher and AIEW training programs;
• Promote and support a variety of AIEW program formats and access to training that are
inclusive of face to face course locations, technologies and support for on-site learning; and
• To provide teacher training experiences with Indigenous students as part of the teacher
training practicum.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Conclusion
An analysis of the survey results indicates that principals perceive Indigenous education
challenges to be much broader than just the teaching - learning relationships in the classroom. The
challenges facing Indigenous education are synonymous with challenges facing an evolving
Australian community. A sense of school community and inclusiveness is important to whole
school outcomes. Ongoing improvement is best achieved with family empowerment and
engagement in the student’s learning and by developing a common value for education and aims of
the local school. Without a positive and purposeful sense of school community many of the
current challenges will remain.
Schools cannot face these challenges alone. They are responsibilities shared by all stakeholders
and are more likely to be successfully addressed together, both locally and as a national
community. This sense of Australian community needs to be shared and have purpose for all
Australians. Perhaps it is time to review how we as a nation develop this sense of collective
purpose and belonging.
Schools reflect wider society, but at the same time they are focal points for thousands of local
communities around Australia. Given appropriate levels of support and investment, schools, with
their local communities are well placed to evolve this sense of inclusive local community.
Together, with other school communities across Australia they offer the potential to lead, to help
shape and to enhance a shared and purposeful sense of Australian community for the future.
Indigenous students will be the long-term winners, as will all Australians.
Partnering a Better Future National Indigenous Education Report


Chapter 1: Aims and Methodology of Survey
Aims of survey
The survey targeted Australian primary principals and their school communities to share their
perceptions, local expertise (past, present and future) and suggestions in addressing a range of
identified issues, but primarily in five main areas:
1) Specific local school focus in Indigenous education;
2) The nature of the relationship between the school and its Indigenous community;
3) What principals value for their staff in working towards improving learning outcomes for
Indigenous students;
4) Priority issues that impact on improving Indigenous student learning outcomes;
5) School organisation factors.
This data provides rich information for improving the educational outcomes of Indigenous
students.
The survey also aimed to:
• Provide advice on and promote successful practices;
• Provide a vehicle for national debate and direction for school principal involvement and
strategic planning for the whole school community; and
• Propose strategies for national forums in responding to the outcomes of the survey.
In addition, the survey aimed to provide the basis for future follow-up partnerships to:
• Undertake case studies, particularly of successful practices;
• Develop education models & designs, based upon these practices, as options for schools to
undertake in working towards improving outcomes in literacy and numeracy and a sense of
school community;
• Enlist the participation and support of State and Territory Principals Associations, in
partnership with the Australian Primary Principals Association, to provide professional
development forums and opportunities to share these models and other strategies, such as a
National Forum for Indigenous Education and the development of an Australian Primary
Principals Association Education Foundation.
Survey design and construction
With the assistance of the Australian Primary Principals Association National Executive Council
and their national network of local principals, a draft questionnaire was developed combining
multiple choice options and open-ended questions for related additional comments. It was
estimated this initial draft would take 45 to 60 minutes to complete. In consultation with Edith
Cowan University, Churchlands Campus WA, a more streamlined draft was developed that was
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


able to be completed in 10 to 20 minutes, with less information being requested. The
questionnaires were then trialed with principals.
Some 30 principals in the Kalgoorlie District of WA, representing schools with Indigenous
populations in a range of school locations and sizes, volunteered as a trial group to evaluate both
questionnaires and comment on the:
• Appropriateness of issues and items to achieve the main objective;
• Clarity and understanding of terminology and instructions;
• Time frames for completing the survey;
• Extent to which both formats provided sufficient information in achieving the main
objective; and
• Need for item inclusion, exclusion or modification.
Trial group comments and suggestions informed the final survey structure (see Appendix 1).
Survey structure
In identifying strategic issues, the survey asked for a range of information about respondents'
schools: -
• Demographics of respondents (state & territory; school sector; school location; total
student population; Indigenous student population; and Indigenous staff);
• Local school issues (perceptions on inclusivity; racism; health issues; social issues;
accommodation; infrastructure; telecommunications; geography; challenges; and practices
and suggestions);
• School & community (school purpose; community involvement; local challenges; and
practices and suggestions);
• School staff (staff turnover; teacher training; professional development; Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Education Workers and their equivalents; challenges; and practices
and suggestions);
• Student learning (absenteeism; English as a Second Language; literacy & numeracy;
technology; benchmarking; transition programs; promoting aboriginal culture; long &
short term visions; sharing student learning outcomes with community; learning
challenges; and practices and suggestions); and
• Educational organisation (school organisation; groupings; school management;
timetabling; resources; education year; curriculum organisation; innovation and practices
and suggestions).
The demographics were obtained by respondents ticking the options provided and completing
the numbers of Indigenous staff in the relevant spaces. This data provided opportunity for
cross-tabulations and analysis for any variation according to school sectors, school locations
and States and Territories.
Depending upon whether schools did or did not have any Indigenous student enrolments,
principals were then given the opportunity to either not go further or continue with the survey.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Those principals without Indigenous enrolments and without recent experience with
Indigenous students were directed not to proceed. Those principals who had either or both of
these were invited to continue with the survey. The aim of the survey was to utilise recent
experience from as wide a sample as possible.
For the section on Local School Issues, principals were initially asked to indicate whether
their schools had an explicit focus on the needs of Indigenous students (see Section 1.1 in
Appendix 1). Those who did were also asked to describe them. Principals were then asked to
select five from ten options for potential school improvement areas, with the tenth allowing
for an open-ended response.
For the section on School and Community, the format used was both qualitative and
quantitative. Principals were initially asked to characterise the type of relationship between
their school and community: (see Section 11. 1 in Appendix 1). Again, opportunity for other
open-ended responses was provided. As with the Local School Issues format, principals were
then asked to prioritise three aspects for building school - community relations, with a final
open-ended option. To conclude this section, principals were asked for additional information
about making schools more user-friendly to Indigenous community members (see Question
11.3 in Appendix 1).
The section on School Staff utilised both quantitative and open-ended formats. The open-
ended format focused upon professional development needs and provided opportunity for
three responses.
Sections IV. 1 on Student Learning and V.l in School Organisation used quantitative formats.
In the latter, principals were asked to provide open ended elaborations regarding their choices
for more appropriate school organisation strategies to suit local needs.
Open-ended formats were also used to capture both current successful practices and
suggestions for improvement in all five of the previous key sections.
Finally, in ensuring as many issues and possible variables were covered in the survey,
principals were asked to offer any additional comments or suggestions, in open-ended form.
The survey was accompanied with a self-addressed envelope and the Australian Primary
Principals Association telephone and facsimile numbers, as well e-mail addresses.
Survey population
With the time line available, it was decided by the Steering Committee that a general mail out
to principals rather than a sampling approach was to be used. The survey was sent to some
7,000 primary schools across Australia, with an introductory letter to principals (see Appendix
1 for survey). This included primary principals from Government, Catholic and Independent
schools.
Surveys were issued in late November 1999 with a three to four week turn around period for
returns. Follow-up letters were mailed to principals during this period with reminders issued to
members by State and Territory Associations via the Australian Primary Principals Association
National Executive Council. In addition web site support and information was developed,
along with marketing strategies that included media promotion and a national launch at the
1999 National Conference in Hobart.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 1.1:
State & Territory Response Rates
281
330
197
125
167
49
31
38
Number of Responses
23.1%
27.1%
16.2%
10.3%
13.7%
4.0%
2.5%
3.1%
Percentage of Returns
Management of data and analysis
The survey contained both quantitative and qualitative data based upon principals' perceptions
and experiences from both a local and global context. Several sections provided opportunity
for open-ended responses to elaborate on practices, challenges and suggestions. Sections that
were an additional open-ended option to multiple choices remained in text format and were
entered into Excel (Sections 1.2.10; II.1.7; II.2.8; II.1.13; IV. 1.11 and V. 1.9).
Sections specifically designed for multiple open-ended responses (Sections 1.1; II.3; III. 2; V. 2;
VI; VII and VI 1.2) contained a wealth of data, requiring alternative management. These
were pre-coded with the development of coding keys, identifying common categories for
responses. The coding key was trialed several times with a sample of 100 surveys with
amendments and additions made. A team of principals coded all open-ended responses
together, by entering the coding keys alongside each identified response for data entry. Any
additional changes required to the coding key were made after examination by the coding
team. The raw data was stored for future investigation and analysis.
Both the quantitative and qualitative data was entered into Excel software program in pre-
determined variable codes and fields for ease of access. Excel enabled both numerical and text
based entries. Following data entry checks were carried out for validity. The non-text based
and coded data was then exported to SPSS for further analysis and cross tabulation.
Comparative data was developed providing frequencies and totals for analysis.
Other text-based data was limited to 100 characters per entry and analysed to provide
additional information to the comparative data, both in terms of frequency and explanation.
Survey issue and response rates
At the conclusion of the turn around period 1,222 responses were received. This represents
over 17% of school principals targeted. While the response rate is low, the response pattern
provides a valid representative sample. The response pattern is consistent with the distribution
of schools across the States and Territories, across the Government, Catholic and Independent
school sectors and across urban, rural and remote locations.
Table 1.1 illustrates the response rates by States and Territories, with the majority coming
from the larger education systems in New South Wales and Victoria.
In feedback from the NEC these figures represent a fairly consistent proportion from across
States and Territories.
The largest response rate came from the largest sector, Government schools (see Table 1.2).
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 1.2:
School Response Mates by Sector
ill
sHdeotSKk-nf 1
809
266
143 I Number of Responses
66.4%
21.8%
11.7% 1 Percentage of Returns
Table 1.3: School Response Rates by Location
717
451
38
Number of
Responses
59.5%
37.4%
3.2%
Percentage of
Returns
Table 1.4:
School Size
liiiiil®
125
121
236
417
230
83
Number of Responses
10.3%
10.0%
19.5%
34.4%
19.0%
6.8%
Percentage of Returns
Table 1.5:
Schools with Indigenous Populations
mm
mi
Mi
liHHli
Ustt-i-
499
255
138
127
88
52
40
Number of Schools
41.6%
21.3%
11.5%
10.6%
7.3%
4.3%
3.3%
Percentage of Returns
The distribution is relatively consistent once again.
In the development of the questionnaire, three different school location types: urban, rural and
remote - were identified by principals to provide the necessary scope of information and
varying local needs to achieve the main objective (see Table 1.3).
The timing of the survey was compounded by additional communication challenges to the
more remote locations.
Schools with varying size populations responded, providing a broad spectrum from the total
population surveyed (see Table 1.4).
Approximately 60% of schools that responded had Indigenous student populations enrolled
(Table 1.5), with over half of the schools having less than 10 Indigenous students.
However, not all schools completed the demographics questions and continued with the
survey. It is possible this figure could be larger than identified. Consideration also needs to
be given to the fact that the survey was mailed to all primary schools, with the aim of not only
gaining data from principals with current Indigenous enrolments, but also those with recent
experiences in Indigenous Education. It was considered important by principals and the
Steering Committee that these principals also have invaluable experience and expertise to
offer. Thus, while some 40% of respondents currently have no Indigenous enrolments, it can
be assumed they have had recent experience/s within the context of Table 1.5. This option
was built into the survey (see section on Survey Structure). As such, the responses provide a
wealth of information on Indigenous education issues, practices and suggestions from a broad
spectrum of primary principals.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 1.6: Indigenous School Staff - Frequency Per Number of Schools and
Schools With Indigenous Enrolments
HI?
i"
Teach vrs
i
5 Schools (5)
62 Schools (62)
139 Schools (139)
2
9 Schools (18)
45 Schools (90)
3
4 Schools (12)
25 Schools (75)
4
1 School (4)
11 Schools (44)
5
1 School (5)
9 Schools (45)
6
1 School (6)
5 Schools (30)
7
3 Schools (21)
12
1 School (12)
1 School (12)
Numbers of Staff:
5
119
456
Number of Schools:
5
79
238
% of Schools With Indigenous Staff
out of Total Schools:
0.04%
6.5%
19.8%
% of Schools With Indigenous Staff out of Total of Identified Schools With
Indigenous Students:
34%
In addition to Indigenous student populations, data was sought on the range of Indigenous
staff and support personnel schools access. The aim was to gain a general overview of the
percentage of Indigenous Staff to the overall number of schools and those schools with
Indigenous enrolments. Over 34% of schools with Indigenous students had Indigenous
teachers or support staff (see Table 1.6).
Survey limitations
The project was undertaken within a demanding time line with returns finalised in December
1999. Time prevented the use of selected and tested random sampling. As such the
questionnaires were sent to all primary schools identified in the mail-out database. A number
were returned indicating the database also had errors. In addition several surveys were
received well after the closure date and commencement of data processing. These were
completed over the vacation period, suggesting principals may have also been pre-occupied
with end of year activities and responsibilities during the time of the survey.
While a preferred response rate of somewhere between 2,000 to 2,500 surveys was initially
proposed, the realities of time constraints for project completion and December being a very
demanding period of the school year, this target was revised. Feedback from Principals
verified the timing of the survey occurred during their busiest time.
Partnering a Better Future National Indigenous Education Report


Table 2.1: Describing school focus on Indigenous students
Coded Focus A rears:
Cultural foci;--' tout!
Total Responses Percentage of
Per Code . Responses
96 1 : ;■
Focus committees total:
79
11.5%
Student needs total;
75
10.9%
Additional support focuses total:
75
10.9%
School policy focus total:
33
4.8%
Indigenous focus & support:
33
4.8%
School liaison focus total:
26
3.7%
Indigenous aides & workers total:
17
2.4%
Staff total;
11
1.6%
Other community focus total:
4
0.5%
Chapter 2: Focus on Local Issues
Introduction
In order to ascertain local issues and priorities for improvement, principals were asked to indicate
if there was any specific local school focus in Indigenous education; and to identify five potential
school improvement areas from a choice of ten options.
The options were developed in consultation with principals and the Steering Committee and
included:
• Student health care and health education support;
• Inter-racial relations within the school;
• School - Indigenous community relationships;
• Reconciliation;
• School focus on purpose and goals for education of Indigenous students;
• Telecommunications/technology infrastructure;
• Teacher aide support;
• Student services support;
• Management of student behaviour strategies;
• and any other comments.
Specific local school focus on Indigenous education
52% principals had a specific focus on Indigenous education issues in their school planning, while
48% did not. Several principals chose not to, or failed to, complete the focus questions, but
continued with the multiple-choice options, along with those who had identified a local focus.
Where principals had a specific focus on Indigenous education issues in their school planning, the
top five focus areas were: curriculum; cultural & special events; ASSPA & other committees;
student needs; and additional support programs (see Table 2.1). Almost 50% of schools described
the school curriculum or Indigenous culture and cultural events as the areas that they focussed on
in their school planning.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 2.2: Potential School Improvement Areas for Indigenous Students
School Focus Improvement Area Options
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total
Survey
Population
Selection
Ranking
Student health care and health education support
297
24.4%
6
Telecommunications/Technology infrastructure (internet, computers,
telephone, video conferencing)
213
17.5%
7
Reconciliation
212
17.4%
8
Inter-racial relations within the school
168
13.8%
9
Principals, who identified and described local focuses in Indigenous education, indicated a broad
number of issues need to be taken into consideration.
Numeracy and literacy, along with Indigenous committee support and cultural awareness are the
most prevalent focus areas.
Principals identified that having a specific focus on Indigenous education issues in their school
planning is not restricted to issues relating to student needs and the relevant curriculum, but
includes the role and inclusion of Indigenous committees, community and culture as a part of a
holistic approach to school improvement for Indigenous people.
Principals indicated that there is more to improving Indigenous education than just the process of
teaching-learning in the classroom. The relationship between teaching-learning is perceived as
also being linked to understandings and relationships with community and culture. Shared and
agreed understandings and values about local culture, the purpose of education, school goals and
community participation in school operations and activities are important. If they become
inconsistent, then this leads to strained relationships between the school and the Indigenous
community, to less effective pedagogy, greater absenteeism and increased student behavioural
problems. Support for improved student outcomes cannot be generated from within the classroom
alone, but must also come from within the community. To achieve this, positive community
relationships and shared cross-cultural values are very important.
Potential school improvement priorities
Principals were also asked to identify five potential school improvement areas from a choice of ten
options. Local priorities are described in Table 2.2 in overall terms. The percentages indicate
frequency response percentages of the total survey population.
While only just over 50% of respondents indicated they had a specific school focus, the majority
of principals have signalled a need to do so in maximising potential for school improvement.
From their set of 10 options, overall, principals identified ‘School focus on purpose and goals for
education of Indigenous students’ as the key potential area for school improvement.
Principals indicated that defining the purpose and goals for educating Indigenous students is
important. So too are the partnerships with: local support staff; support services and agencies
(when combined student and health support represents 47% of responses); and the relationships
between the school and the Indigenous community.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 2.3: Rural School Responses to Potential Improvement Areas for Indigenous
Students
School Focus Improvement Area Options
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total
Rural
Population
(451)
Selection
Ranking
Teacher aide support
154
34.1%
2
School - Indigenous Community relationships
151
33.5%
3
School focus on purpose and goals for education of Indigenous students
144
31.9%
4
Management of student behaviour strategies
111
24.6%
5
Student health care and health education support
107
23.7%
6
Telecommunications/Technology infrastructure (internet, computers,
telephone, video conferencing)
78
17.3%
7
Reconciliation
74
16.4%
8
Inter-racial relations within the school
64
14.2%
9
The underlying perception about school improvement by principals is a notion of school
community, incorporating a network of interrelated factors that contribute to improving student
outcomes. They suggest that future national or local initiatives need to be strategically broad
based addressing educational, social and cultural challenges within the school and local
community. They suggest that schools will require support to do so to maximise potential for
Indigenous students. A far more cohesive approach is required of more stakeholders, linking
support services to work together with schools, locally. This services network will also need to
include strategies and support for student behaviour management.
This view is generally consistent among all education sectors.
Greater variation is found when comparing rural and remote school locations (see Tables 2.3 &
2.4). This is to be expected, given differences in school type, size and accessibility. This data
provides a more local focus and is useful in developing specific strategies within a global initiative
for improved outcomes.
While rural schools share some similar ranking of issues to schools in general (see Table 2.3),
their main priorities lie with student services and teacher aide support. Historically these schools
are generally smaller, more multi-aged in class structures, have less experienced staff and can be
quite geographically and professionally isolated. Any future initiatives need to adopt greater
cohesion and access to support services. Options might provide schools with appropriate
resources to access and employ their own needs, or the services need to be provided locally and
coordinated by the schools. Like remote and urban schools, rural schools see the value of greater
Indigenous teacher aide support in improving Indigenous student outcomes.
In remote schools, student health is a top priority and a major challenge. If schools are to
maximise student potential then student health care services and education must also be
maximised. The school is a local focal point for communities and remote school principals believe
that they offer potential to maximise coordination of student health care and education services to
best meet local challenges.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 2.4: Remote School Responses to Potential Improvement Areas for Indigenous
Students
School Focus Improvement Area Options
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total
Remote
Population
(38)
Selection
Ranking
School - Indigenous Community relationships
27
71.1%
2
School focus on purpose and goals for education of Indigenous students
25
65.8%
3
Teacher aide support
22
57.9%
4
Management of student behaviour strategies
21
55.3%
5
Telecommunications/Technology infrastructure (internet, computers,
telephone, video conferencing)
19
50.0%
6
Student services support
15
39.5%
7
Reconciliation
3
7.9%
8
Inter-racial relations within the school
1
2.6%
9
In addition remote school principals also place high value on community relations, education
purpose and goals and teacher aide support. The invaluable role of the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Education Workers was highlighted, along with partnerships with the Indigenous
community in working together toward improved outcomes. Successful examples include:
• Tutoring;
• Aide support in the classroom education program;
• Community liaison roles by aides;
• Community representatives as liaison coordinators;
• Aboriginal Student Support and Parent Awareness committees;
• Aboriginal Education focus committees;
• Local Indigenous community cultural awareness and celebration programs;
• Community education programs; and
• Special purpose community facilities including community rooms and pre-school centres.
The role of telecommunications and technology is also ranked highly by remote schools as
potential areas for school improvement. Feedback in the survey indicated the challenges posed by
distance and communication difficulties. However, it also identified a range of successful
practices that have motivated Indigenous students. Some principals indicated that a high level of
participation and learning could be achieved through integrating technology into the daily
curriculum.
Remote school principals perceive a higher potential for improving outcomes via learning with
technology in comparison to other school principals. In limited follow-up discussions with some
remote school principals, they referred to the high motivational aspect of technology in engaging
students in the learning process, in managing student behaviour and maximising learning potential.
In addition, where principals have shared the implementation of technology with the local
community, either through practical experiences or student outputs, the relationships and
understandings between school and community have also increased.
Successful practices
Principals offered a range of examples of successful practices (see Table 2.5), over half of which
focused upon: community; curriculum; AIEWs and support. These offer useful reference points
for further professional networking and support.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Tab
le 2.5: Examples of Successful Practices in Response to Local Issues to Help Improve
Outcomes for Indigenous Students
hirniiSk-d Siucvwtoi 5 r njc acsa -■ M>os; Sswa:* ; i <h;sI Riapasma Per ■
83
Community
22.6%
Curriculum
74
20.1%
Indigenous Aides/Workers
39
10.6%
Support (Student; School; Interagency)
37
10%
Special Events (Cultural)
25
6.8%
Health
20
5.4%
Family
15
4.1%
Attendance
13
3.5%
Technology
12
3.3%
Relations
11
3%
Meetings
9
2.4%
ASSPA/Committees
8
2%
Reconciliation
7
1.9%
Special Facilities
6
1.6%
Professional
5
1.3%
Students
5
1.3%
School Planning
4
1%
VET
4
1%
Table 2.6: Other Specific Suggestions to Help Improvr
ftr Inilgv-umi" Students
I {/{■ stifled r«ui:;£i,stk;.'r"i cv Proposals - L.■;! issues
1 Send lied .Uespoose;-; ;
Parent & Community Liaison
36
31.8%
Staffing & Staff Support
28
24.4%
Attendance
12
10.6%
Curriculum
11
9.7%
Health
9
8%
Support
8
7%
Relations
5
4.4%
Behaviour Management Programs
2
1.8%
Technology
2
1.8%
VET
4
1%
In addition, principals also proposed a range of other specific suggestions, pertaining to their local
challenges, which they perceived would be positive in improving local outcomes (see Table 2.6).
These are generally consistent with previous perceptions (see Table 2.2) and together offer
direction for future support in meeting perceived needs.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Summary
Overall, principals identified “developing a specific local school focus on purpose and goals for
education of Indigenous students” as a key potential area for school improvement. This focus
should be developed in consultation with the local Indigenous community in promoting positive
relationships and shared understanding of school goals and the value of education. A little over
half of the principals have a specific local focus on Indigenous education in their school planning.
Almost 50% of schools described the school curriculum or Indigenous culture and cultural events
as the areas that they focussed on in their school planning.
Principals that identified and described local focuses in Indigenous education, indicated a broad
number of issues need to be taken into consideration. Numeracy and literacy, along with
Indigenous committee support and cultural awareness are the most prevalent focus areas.
While only just over 50% of respondents indicated they had a specific school focus on Indigenous
students, principals signalled a need to do so, along with Indigenous aide and services support, in
maximising potential for school improvement. In addition, almost 32% of principals identified
parent community liaison as important to improved local outcomes. Another 25% focused on
local staffing issues, with attendance being the third issue. Examples of current successful
practices were mainly community and curriculum based, as well as the provision of Indigenous
aides and support.
Further work
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 3.1 Nature of Existing School Relationships with their Indigenous Community
Indigenous Community Relationships
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total
Survey
Population
Frequency
Ranking
Significant interaction with all stakeholder groups
i4b
i i.yyo
3
No interaction
70
5.7%
4
School caught in the middle between conflicting communities
10
0.8%
5
Moderate to serious conflict between school and part or all of the
community
4
0.3%
6
Chapter 3: School and Community
Introduction
Principals' perceptions were sought to ascertain the nature of relationships between their school
and their Indigenous communities.
Existing relationship between the school and its Indigenous community
First, they were given a choice of seven options describing the existing relationship between the
school and its Indigenous community, ranging from ‘nil’, through to ‘significant’ and on to the
‘school being caught in the middle of conflicting communities’ (see Appendix 1). Principals were
asked to select the descriptor that best characterised that relationship. The overall results are
shown in Table 3.1. The percentages indicate frequency response percentages of the total survey
population.
Most schools had little interaction with their Indigenous communities.
In terms of the overall survey population, the majority of examples characterised their
relationships with Indigenous communities either little (19%) or having more interaction with
some groups than other groups (17.2%). Some 145 (11.9%) perceived their interaction as
significant while 5.7% had no interaction at all. Only 0.3% of schools were identified as
undergoing moderate conflict and 0.8% being caught up in conflict.
However only 55% of respondents chose to describe their school-indigenous Community
relationships in Table 3.1. A more representative picture can be obtained by combing sets of data
as a percentage of the identified total of 670 responses. The majority of schools (52.9%) perceive
their relationship as being either more with some groups or significant with all stakeholders. Some
44.9% of frequencies have characterised little or nil relationships, while only 2% have identified
conflicts.
It would appear that while interactions are relatively varied, very few schools are experiencing
serious levels of conflict. The extent to which these varied levels of interaction impact upon
relationships and outcomes cannot be validated in this survey. Further investigation would be
required to find any correlations between the level of interaction and impact upon learning
outcomes.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 3.2: Characteristics of Remote School Relations with their Indigenous Community
or Communities they serve
Indigenous Community Relationships
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total 38
Population
Selection
Ranking
iviore interaction wun some groups man wnn oiners
1 J
jy.jyo
z
Little interaction
1
2.6%
3
School caught in the middle between conflicting communities
1
2.6%
4
Moderate to serious conflict between school and part or all of the
community
0
0.0%
5
No interaction
0
0.0%
5
However, it is evident there is a need to build up relationships and perhaps further develop the
concept of school community as being all-inclusive. Successful strategies and support include:
• Parent and community liaison programs;
• Using Indigenous Aides/Workers as role models and community liaison coordinators;
• Building trust and positive relationships;
• Meeting special local needs;
• Enhancing cultural awareness;
• Empathetic school leadership;
• Supportive learning environment; and
• Effective and appropriate communication.
It is important to note that while the different school sectors generally reflect similar perceptions to
those in Table 3.1, greater variation is found among remote schools (see Table 3.2).
Remote school principals characterized their community relationships as more interactive and
widespread than other schools. Given their closeness and direct interaction with the local
community this could be expected where these principals have identified community and parent
involvement as significant factors in building relationships.
In contrast to remote schools, rural and urban schools tend to have either little or inconsistent
Indigenous community interaction. To develop strategies to support community interaction by
rural and urban schools, future case studies of successful practices by remote schools, as well as
other schools identified in the raw data, could offer ways in which many other schools might adapt
them to suit local needs. These models may offer possible support and professional development
for all schools and their communities.
Options for building school - community relationships
Principals were then asked to select three out of eight options for building school-community
relationships, seven of which were provided, and an eighth left open ended. Table 3.3 summarises
the overall responses from identified respondents.
The three most important issues identified by principals to building school-community
relationships were:
• One-to-one communications with parents and community members;
• Parent involvement in the school’s teaching and/or student service program; and
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 3.3: Options for Building School - Community Relationships
Options for Building School Community Relations
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total
Survey
Population
Selection
Ranking
Effective communication & reporting of student learning outcomes to
parents
233
19.1%
4
Family-oriented activities
233
19.1%
4
Relationships with community leaders
197
16.2%
5
Community awareness of school's goals & purpose
171
14.0%
6
• Parent organisations, councils and Aboriginal Student Support and Parent Awareness
(ASSPA) committees.
Over 40% of the total survey population perceived the need for improved personal
communications between school staff and parents. This includes the development of a school
liaison network, making specific use of Indigenous aides and workers in promoting support and
understanding and involvement in student learning and school aims. The network is perceived to
go wider, building positive relationships with the local Indigenous community and providing
support for families. Some 45% of open-ended comments highlight the positive potential offered
by Indigenous staff and community liaison officers.
The role of one-to-one communications between school staff and parents is ranked highly for the
development of parent and community support in building positive relationships and promoting
involvement in the school. Again, the concept of an inclusive school community appears to be a
central theme of benefit to Indigenous students. Principals generally perceive direct, one to one
communications with parents as a higher priority in comparison to effective communicating and
reporting of student learning outcomes. They suggest the development of positive relationships is
a precursor to other outcomes.
The role of parent/community liaison and Indigenous aides and workers are the most frequent
recommendations to achieving this outcome. This supports previous proposals to review
increasing their numbers and skills to help improve both student outcomes and school-community
relationships. Some 21% of the open-ended responses focused on this role.
Perceptions about one to one communications and involvement of parents are highly consistent
among school sectors and support direction for future provision of training and additional support
to maximise inclusivity.
However, while both Government and Catholic schools’ three priorities are identical to the overall
perceptions in Table 3.3, Independent schools have given a lower ranking for committees (see
Table 3.4). This may be due to the fact that ASSPA committees may not be as prevalent in
Independent schools. However, the other two priorities remain consistent, supporting the
importance of one to one communication and parent involvement.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 3.4: Independent School Options for Building School-Community Relationships
Options for Building School Community Relations
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total 143
Population
Selection
Ranking
One-on-one communications (e.g. between teachers - parents;
administrators - parents)
31
21.7%
1
Parent involvement in the school’s teaching and/or student service
program
20
14.0%
2
Family-oriented activities
16
11.2%
3
Relationships with community leaders
16
11.2%
3
Effective communication & reporting of student learning outcomes to
parents
16
11.2%
3
Communitv awareness of school's soals & numose
12
8 4%
7
Table 3.5: Remote School Options for Building School-Community Relationships
Options for Building School Community Relations
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total 38
Population
Selection
Ranking
Parent involvement m the school's leaching and or student service
program
) 1
57.9%
2 -
Relationships with community leaders
18
47.4%
3
Community awareness of school's goals & purpose
18
47.4%
3
Family-oriented activities
16
42.1%
5
Parents & Citizens or Friends organisations, School Councils, ASSPA
Committees or other official bodies
11
28.9%
6
Effective communication & reporting of student learning outcomes to
parents
5
13.2%
7
Variation in priorities for building school-community relationships is evidenced when
comparisons are made between school locations, which is to be expected given the varying nature
school types.
Remote schools share ‘communications’ and ‘parent involvement’ as their two key priorities, but
also perceive greater importance in relationships with community leaders as well as community
awareness of school goals and purpose (see Table 3.5). Given the more intimate and direct
relationship with their communities, remote schools appear to be focusing wider than just school
committees in terms of promoting involvement and support for students and the school.
Principals were also invited to identify examples of current successful local practices that have
helped improve school-indigenous community relations. These responses were categorised
utilising a coding key and are summarised in Table 3.6.
Some 80% of responses focused upon culture, community. Aboriginal Student Support and Parent
Awareness committees and families. These are very consistent with recommendations made
throughout the survey and offer useful data for future investigation of successful practices.
Partnering a Better Future National Indigenous Education Report


Table 3.6: Examples of Current Successful Local Practices That Have Helped Improve
School - Community Relations
—e
79
Community
61
19.9%
ASSPA/committees
on
Co
Family & parents
47
15.3%
Communication,
:*
8.1%
Indigenous aides/workers
19
6.2%
Indigenous programs
8
2.6%
Students
7
2.3%
Table 3.7: Suggestions to Make Schools User-Friendly
Community suggestions
352
38%
Cultural suggestions
140
15.1%
School suggestions
134
14.5%
Family suggestions
68
7.3%
Staff & training
50
5.4%
Curriculum
47
5%
Communication
41
4.4%
ASSPA committees
34
3.7%
Meetings
12
1.3%
Support
8
0.8%
Students
4
0,4%
Technology
1
0.01%
Options for building more user-friendly schools
Finally, principals were asked to make general comment as to how schools can become more user-
friendly to Indigenous communities. Their identified responses are summarised under coded
categories in Table 3.7.
Principals proposed a wide range of strategies to build more user-friendly schools, the majority
focusing upon a concept of school community. Proactive suggestions for increasing the
interaction with the community, families and the Indigenous culture support the need for a broad
approach to address Indigenous education challenges.
The eight main categories of suggestions by principals as to how schools can become more user-
friendly to Indigenous communities were:
• Community Focus:
o Involvement and relationships;
o Regular contact between school and community;
o Proactively seeking out community members to participate;
o Increased out of school contacts;
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


o Inclusivity in school decision making and planning; and
o Inclusivity in P&C/P&C, Parent Meetings, School Councils, etc;
o Community/parent awareness and support programs for school goals and operations;
o Role models - successful people, elders, etc;
o Understanding community needs;
o Community run school activities;
o Involvement/ownership in curriculum delivery;
o Community liaison officer; and
o Community service “outreach program”;
• School Focus:
o A welcoming place;
o Open in dealing with issues;
o Building trust;
o Being non-judgmental;
o Understanding; and
o Promoting equity for all;
• Cultural Focus:
o Cultural awareness;
o Cultural acceptance;
o Public promotion of Indigenous Culture;
o Celebrations of special Indigenous events;
o Cultural activities promotion; and
o Language inclusivity;
• Family Focus:
o School getting to know the families;
o Liaison coordinator; and
o The provision of a variety of social and support services and strategies;
• Staff and Training:
o Increasing employment and use of Indigenous staff; and
o Training and professional development in cultural bias;
• Curriculum:
o Indigenous inclusivity in curriculum;
o Awareness of the diversity of Indigenous student learning needs; and
o Indigenous perspectives in curriculum;
• Communication:
o Verbal as well as written; and
o Effective communication strategies;
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


• ASSPA Committees:
o Acknowledging parent and community input; and
o Developing as purposeful and meaningful bodies.
More regular meetings, Aboriginal Indigenous Education Worker support and cohesive use of
system and non-system student services support recorded multiple responses.
Summary
The general level of interaction between schools and the local Indigenous community/ies needs
improving, if Indigenous student learning outcomes are to improve. Most schools had either little
interaction with their community/ies or more with some groups than others. Very few schools
indicated conflict. Remote schools have a high level of interaction.
The majority of principals identified one to one communication as being important to building
school-indigenous community relationships. This included the development of a school liaison
network, making specific use of Indigenous aides and workers in promoting support and
understanding and involvement in student learning and school aims. The network is perceived to
go wider building positive relationships with the local Indigenous community and providing
support for families.
The other key areas were parent/community liaison and involvement in the school’s teaching
and/or student service program, the role of committees, such as parent organisations, councils and
Aboriginal Student Support and Parent Awareness groups and the role of Indigenous workers.
Almost 85% of all successful practices focused upon cultural awareness and family/community
inclusion. Over a quarter of these successful practices had a cultural focus, while others focused
upon community development, on ASSPA Committees and on family and parent inclusion. Over
50% of principals saw understanding, awareness and inclusion of local community and culture as
key issues in making schools more user - friendly.
Further work
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 4.1: Overview of What Principals Value for School Staff in Working Towards
Improving Learning Outcomes for Indigenous Students
Options for Improving Outcomes
| c • - •:;! development for teachers
; under'dandiiiu indiuenesra cuUsoce icross-culiurai awareness;
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total
Survey
Population
IliiWiiBSlii
Selection
Ranking
ifiiiSBSMIl
Teacher ttahibse to be mciusive of reaching. methods fur Indigenous
students and teaching practice for student teachers in schools
; significant indigenous student enroimerns
I Proicssioncl networking with colleagues & peers m similar situations.
! sharing successful practices
: iTofessiona! development fur AlEWs
1 Awareness & availability o> comparable .standards data about students
487 ! 40.0 b;, i 4
~ — —-*■- -jj y v -1 g
Capacity for AIEWs to undertake “lay teaching” roles
181
14.9%
7
Pastoral care of staff
157
12.9%
8
AIEW Retention
125
10.3%
. 9
Teacher retention
115
9.4%
10
Strategies to address staff isolation
93
7.6%
11
Staff accommodation
40
3.3%
12
Chapter 4: School Staff
Introduction
Principals were asked to identify six of thirteen options that would be of most value to school staff
in working towards improved learning outcomes for Indigenous students. The questionnaire
included twelve multiple-choices and one open-ended option. The overall results are shown in
Table 4.1.
Priority areas for school staff
The six priorities identified by principals were:
• Professional development for teaching staff;
• Understanding Indigenous cultures (cross-cultural awareness);
• Teacher training, inclusive of teaching methods for Indigenous students and teaching
practice for student teachers in schools with significant Indigenous student enrolments;
• Professional networking with colleagues & peers in similar situations, sharing successful
practices;
• Professional development for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Education Workers
(AIEWs); and
• Awareness & availability of comparable standards data about students in similar situations.
Principals regarded issues related to professional training and development, along with cultural
awareness, as key priorities in enabling school staff to improve outcomes. This view is largely
consistent across all sectors, school types and States and Territories. Over half the responses
identified professional development and training as key needs if staff are to effect improved
outcomes. This included professional development of teachers, teacher training programs,
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


professional networking and professional development for AIEWs (with the latter given high
priority by remote school principals).
Principals saw a need for greater investment in:
• Opportunities and provision for appropriate skilling and understanding of practicing staff in
Indigenous education, inclusive of professional development programs, professional
networking, cross-cultural awareness and advice on successful practices; and
• Provision for the above in teacher training programs, for students undertaking teacher
training courses, as well as experiential teaching practices with Indigenous students.
Cross-cultural understanding issues
The level of cross-cultural understanding in both Indigenous teaching-learning relationships and
relationships with Indigenous culture impacts on the potential learning outcomes for Indigenous
students. If school staff are to maximise the potential of Indigenous students they need to be
confident and understanding in both their teaching craft and interaction with the local Indigenous
community. For many teachers, their first direct relationship with Indigenous culture occurs when
taking on a class with their first Indigenous student/s. Hence, preparatory programs and ongoing
professional development in Indigenous teaching-learning methods and cultural awareness are
essential.
The need for appropriate expectations in cross-cultural issues is also emphasised by principals who
perceive a need for greater awareness and availability of comparable data about students in similar
situations. In discussing this issue further with some principals, they identify the importance of
realistic expectations within their local context. Comparable data and networking opportunities
with Tike’ schools and colleagues are regarded as useful in both formulating and achieving
expectation levels. To this point, principals generally commented that the current National
Benchmarks lack contextual differences to be of practical use in the classroom. The benchmarks
tend to be universal in their expectations and do not take into account local cultural, social and
geographic variables that all impact upon outcomes. Consequently they tend to become deficit
oriented and offer no practical solutions or support to overcome these challenges. This issue is
more evident in discussions with principals of remote schools, where comparable data was given a
lower priority.
In addition, principals identified a need for greater training and development of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Education Workers. From the open-ended responses, comments included
issues such as;
• Support for students with learning difficulties;
• Assistance with development of literacy;
• Input from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Education Workers;
• Making it easier for AIEW to become teachers;
LIBRARv
• Better career paths; /Co^
//'V
• Putting aside cultural differences; || <c
• Mentoring programs; and Jlj)
• In-service and professional development. //
The role AIEWs undertake in the school is highly regarded by principals and, as such, their
ongoing development would enhance improved local learning outcomes and relationships. Thus a
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 4.2: What Independent Schools Value for School Staff in
Improving Learning Outcomes for Indigenous Students
Working
Towards
Options for Improving Outcomes
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total 143
Population
Selection
Ranking
Professional development for teachers
38
26.6%
1
Understanding Indigenous cultures (cross-cultural awareness)
33
23.1%
2
Teacher training, inclusive of teaching methods for Indigenous students and
teaching practice for student teachers in schools with significant indigenous
student enrolments
31
21.7%
3
Professional networking with colleagues & peers in similar situations,
sharing successful practices
28
19.6%
4
Awareness & availability of comparable standards data about students in
similar situations
15
10.5%
5
Pastoral care of staff
13
9.1%
6
Teacher retention
8
5.6%
8
Strategies to address staff isolation
7
4.9%
9
AIEW Retention
3
2.1%
10
Capacity for AIEWs to undertake “lay teaching” roles
3
2.1%
10
Staff accommodation
1
0.7%
12
strategy for developing skills and understanding of teaching staff also needs to incorporate a
similar strategy for AIEWs. This will necessitate a review of current training and professional
development practices and resourcing.
Variation across sectors
In comparing what schools in different sectors valued in enabling staff to improve outcomes for
Indigenous students, Government and Catholic Schools were consistent with the findings in
relation to AIEWs. In Independent schools, however the need for professional development for
AIEWs was given a lower priority (see Table 4.2). This may be attributed to the fact that a
number of Independent schools do not have any AIEWs as staff members, due to local
demographics.
Analysis of the data according to school locations show a noticeable degree of variation in
perceptions (see Table 4.3) with remote schools having different priorities to urban and rural.
Remote schools place higher priority on ‘teacher retention’ and lower priority on ‘comparable
outcomes data’.
The value of teacher training and the professional development of Indigenous aides were placed
higher by remote schools. In discussions with some of these remote school principals, issues such
as cultural shock and varying levels of preparation and professional development of staff to
undertake duties are factors impacting upon teaching- learning relationships. This may explain the
significantly higher importance placed upon Indigenous aides in partnering educational outcomes
and community relationships. Principals have indicated the professional development needs of
their aides as important as that of teaching staff. If the role played by Indigenous aides and
workers is so important then so too is their training and development to support teachers and
promote improved outcomes for Indigenous students.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 4,3: What Remote Schools Value for School Staff in Working Towards Improving
Learning Outcomes for Indigenous Students
Options for Improving Outcomes
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total 38
Population
Selection
Ranking
Professional development for AIEWs
28
73.7%
1
Teacher training to be inclusive of teaching methods for Indigenous
students and Teaching Practice for student teachers in schools with
significant indigenous student enrolments
28
73.7%
1
Understanding Indigenous cultures (cross-cultural awareness)
27
71.1%
3
Professional development for teachers
22
57.9%
4
Professional networking with colleagues & peers in similar situations,
sharing successful practices
21
55.3%
5
AIE W Retention
16
42.1%
7
Staff accommodation
14
36.8%
8
Strategies to address staff isolation
13
34.2%
9
Pastoral care of staff
11
28.9%
10
Uanacitv for AIEWs to undertake “lav teachinp” roles
10
26 3%
11
Teacher retention is ranked highly by remote school principals (50% frequency rate of responses).
Given the importance they place on school-community relationships, teacher retention would
impact upon the long-term success of these relationships and ultimately, long term improvement of
outcomes. Strategies for improving retention rates and incentives to attract long-term staff to these
schools need to be explored. The "Remote Teaching Services" package in Western Australia may
be one suitable model to explore. Further research would be needed to evaluate the success of this
and other similar programs across Australia.
Comparable outcomes data between like schools and populations is perceived as having a lower
priority by remote schools. One consideration may be the fact that while remote school
enrolments are largely Indigenous, those in some rural and many urban schools are more culturally
diverse, with a broader range of local variation in outcomes and needs. A need for such
comparable data may be more evident. These schools may well perceive the need not only for
Indigenous students, but also those of more diverse cultural and socio-economic backgrounds.
However further research would need to be undertaken to explore any relationships between
school populations and need for comparable outcomes data.
Successful practices in local staff development
Examples of current successful practices in local staff development are summarised in coded
categories in Table 4.4. The majority of successful practices were culturally focused and whole
school development based.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 4.4: Examples of Current Successful Local Staff Development Practices That Have
Helped Staff Improve Outcomes
Cultural awareness development
60
22.1%
Whole school development
55
20.2%
Teaching staff development
39
14.3%
Curriculum
33
12.1%
Support program development
31
11.4%
Indigenous aides/workers development
28
10.3%
Networking with colleagues
19
7%
Comparability of outcomes
7
2.6%
Table 4.5: Key Professional Development Needs Perceived by Principals
Indigenous culture
331
zv.zvo
Teaching strategies
288
25.4%
Curriculum
177
15.6%
Staff development
126
11.1%
Students
103
9%
Relationships - parents/families/community
96
8.4%
Reconciliation
7
0.6%
Technology
5
0.4%
To assist in developing a general overview of professional development needs, principals were
also asked to identify up to three specific key areas that would be a priority for their current staff in
addressing local Indigenous education issues. These are summarised in Table 4.5.
The four priority categories for professional development indicated by principals have been
categorized as;
• Indigenous cultural awareness needs;
• Teaching strategies;
• Curriculum needs; and
• Staff development needs in general.
These suggestions are consistent with what principals regarded as of most value for their staff in
working towards improving outcomes (see Table 4.1).
In analysing specific development programs within these categories, the following ten priorities
for professional development were identified by principals:
• Cultural awareness and understanding 169 Responses
• Cross-cultural understanding and handling of issues 75 Responses
• Teaching/leaming strategies for Indigenous students 62 Responses
• Teaching strategies for reluctant readers 57 Responses
• Curriculum inclusive of Indigenous perspective 52 Responses
• Curriculum - integrated Indigenous education across curriculum 42 Responses
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


• Teaching strategies - appropriate to improve literacy & numeracy 40 Responses
• Teaching strategies - English as a Second Language 35 Responses
• Student behaviour management 32 Responses
• Meeting Indigenous student needs within regular classroom 30 Responses
These are consistent with overall values identified in Table 4.1, specific to practicing school staff.
The frequencies for greater cultural awareness are another indicator of a need to develop a sense of
school community. Principals are looking beyond the immediate school boundaries in suggesting
a holistic approach to improving outcomes for Indigenous education. The links between
community relationships and teaching-learning relationships appear to be a common thread
throughout the survey and need to be taken into account.
Summary
Principals value greater professional development opportunities for their staff, especially in
cultural awareness, appropriate teaching - learning pedagogy and curriculum, to achieve improved
outcomes in Indigenous education. Principals also value the work of Indigenous staff and
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Education Workers (and their equivalents) to facilitate
effective liaison between school and parents and school and community.
Over half the responses identified professional development and training as key needs if staff are
to effect improved outcomes and this included professional development of teachers, teacher
training programs, professional networking and professional development for AIEWs (with the
latter an important issue for remote schools). Staff needed greater cultural awareness and cross-
cultural understanding. Over a quarter also indicated a need for specific Indigenous education
teaching strategies. This was supported by a further 16% who identified relevant curriculum
professional development as necessary.
The majority of successful staff development practices were culturally focused and whole school
development based. Principals also indicated that teacher training programs and practicums need
to address Indigenous education issues.
Further work
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Promoting and supporting the ongoing professional development of Aboriginal and Torres
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 5.1 Overall Principals Priorities of Issues that Impact Upon Improving Student
Learning for Indigenous Students
Options for Factors Impacting Upon Student Learning
Selection
Percentage
Selection
Frequency
of Total
Ranking
Survey
Population
HBBWMMi
WBWBHI
MMMi
■—— 1
MBt
BBBHBBwI
IBBBWI
mmmmmM
Emphasis on development of Oracy teaching skills & methods
291
23.9%
0
Use of technology as a learning tool
217
17.8%
7
Strategies for student transition from Pre-School to Primary and/or Primary
203
16.7%
8
- Secondary
Provision of educational continuity for transient students
195
16.0%
9
English as a Second Language instruction
94
7.7%
10
Chapter 5: Student Learning
Introduction
In focusing on issues that might impact upon student learning, principals were asked to identify
five variables from a multiple list of ten, with an additional eleventh open ended option. Table 5.1
summarises the overall responses. The percentages indicate frequency response percentages of the
total survey population.
Priority issues that impact on student learning
The following five issues were clearly identified as priorities:
• Emphasis on development of literacy & numeracy teaching skills & methods;
• Student attendance;
• Involvement of Indigenous parents in school education activities;
• Emphasis on early years in education; and
• Culturally appropriate/inclusive curriculum materials.
When comparing school sectors, locations and States and Territories there is little variation in the
five highest priorities for improving student learning by Indigenous students.
Effective and appropriate teaching and learning methodology is essential to improving literacy and
numeracy outcomes for Indigenous students. Examples of successful practices include:
• Student support;
• Curriculum initiatives;
• Attendance strategies;
• Staffing issues;
• Technology;
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


• Early years in education; and
• Parent/community involvement and support.
Poor student attendance is a major challenge to learning. This may be linked to different values
placed on education but cannot be stated as being statistically conclusive. However, when linked
to the third priority of greater parent involvement it might be inferred that greater Indigenous
parent inclusivity in school activities is one strategy principals perceive as positive in addressing
this issue. In brief discussions with some principals this would appear the case. The greater the
parent and community involvement in schools, the greater the understanding and value of
education and school purpose. This was quite evident in the "Local School Issues and Priorities"
and School Community" sections of the survey.
Suggestions for improving attendance rates included;
• AIEW/liaison officer absentee follow up program;
• Indigenous police aide truancy program;
• involvement of support services;
• link CDEP moneys (older students) to attendance;
• nutrition/meal program;
• parent involvement;
• tracking transitional students; and
• transition to school program.
The cornerstones to learning are the foundation blocks gained in the early years of education (K-
--3). The high priority given to the early years by principals suggests that the early years of
schooling are even more critical for Indigenous students. When taking into account the cross-
cultural differences and need for better understanding and implementation of culturally appropriate
teaching-learning strategies, the importance of the early years in education is even more evident.
Here the essentials to oracy, literacy and numeracy are established for future development and
improvement. So too are early school-family relationships that may well determine levels of
future inclusivity and support for school purpose and goals.
Recent years have seen a significant investment in the latter years of schooling (secondary and
post compulsory) through national initiatives such as vocational education and training. While the
early years remains a national focus, the resources have been targeted at vocational education and
training in response to the changing nature of employment and preparing for life-long learning. At
the same time, dysfunctional educational outcomes in the latter years of schooling can be related to
under-achievement and development in the earlier years. The low numbers of Indigenous students
achieving tertiary entrance levels attests to this. The high dropout rate from primary through
secondary schooling has been well documented.
Principals suggest it is now time to refocus on the early years initiative, developing policy and
additional resources to implement strategies, such as: speech pathology; peer and aide tutoring;
local Indigenous language programs; early intervention and students at risk programs; and
culturally appropriate and inclusive cultural materials. It has often been argued, the amount
invested in improving learning outcomes in early childhood education is far less than that required
for remediation strategies in latter schooling.
The need for culturally appropriate and inclusive curriculum materials links to the need for
appropriate support materials identified under "Professional Development Needs" in Table 4,4.
Principals have indicated that such materials are not readily available. They perceive such
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 5.2: Other Comments and Priorities of Issues that Impact Upon Improving Student
Learning for Indigenous Students
Student issues & support
14
26.9%
Parents & families
11
21.1%
Curriculum
6
11.5%
T eacher issues
9
14.5%
Indigenous aides; workers; staff; adults
6
11.5%
Culture
4
7.7%
Other
2
3.8%
curriculum support as giving greater relevance to learning and to addressing cultural awareness
issues, for all. If, as the survey indicates, teaching staff are not adequately prepared to handle
cross-cultural issues, then potential for integration of Indigenous materials across the curriculum is
challenged. While principals place a high priority on culturally inclusive materials, many schools
will be limited in their capacity to do so.
Table 5.2 summarises the open-ended responses for improving student learning. Principals
identified student support and family issues as important. Generally they are consistent variations
of Table 5.1, with the exception perhaps of issues relating to parent/family attitudes and values
towards education.
For some principals the cross-cultural differences placed on the value of education, by some
families, is a challenge to improving outcomes. If education is not seen as a valuable service or a
means for self-improvement by parents, there is more likelihood similar attitudes will spill over
into the classroom. The impact upon teaching-learning relationships and purpose of schooling can
be detrimental, triggering related problems of under-achievement, absenteeism, misbehaviour and
poor relationships between the school and families. Given the overall third priority in Table 5.1 is
"Involvement of Indigenous parents in school educational activities", there is a degree of
consistency in these few responses as well
Other comments worthy of note for consideration in policy development include smaller teacher-
student ratios; Indigenous role models; and support for families.
Variation across sectors
When comparing sector responses there is little variation.
Some variation is found between school locations, with remote schools prioritising local issues of
attendance and ESL before literacy and numeracy (see Table 5.3). However, differences in
frequencies are marginal.
Remote schools are vastly culturally different with predominant local languages and cultural
values. Remote school principals perceive that attendance, English as a Second Language and
culturally appropriate materials are perhaps a prerequisite to maximising improvements in literacy
and numeracy. As with overall perceptions by principals in Table 5.1, student attendance is an
important factor for student learning and it is given the highest priority by remote school
principals.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 5.3: Remote School Priorities of Issues that Impact Upon Improving Student
Learning for Indigenous students
Options for Factors Impacting Upon Student Learning
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total 38
DoniilntSnn
Selection
Ranking
English as a Second Language insimclion
24
13.1%
iillliiii/
2
Culturally appropriate/inclusive curriculum materials
22
12%
3
Emphasis on development of Literacy & Numeracy teaching skills & methods
21
11.5%
4
Involvement of Indigenous parents in school education activities
20
10.9%
5
Emphasis on development of Oracy teaching skills & methods
19
10.4%
6
Emphasis on “Early Years in Education”
16
8.7%
7
Provision of educational continuity for transient students
11
6%
8
Use of technology as a learning tool
9
4.9%
9
Strategies for Student transition from Pre-School to Primary and/or Primary -
Secondary
4
2.1%
10
Table 5.4: Identified Examples of Current Successful Student Learning Practices:
Identified Successful Local Practices - Student Learning
Total
Responses Per
Code
Percentage of
Identified
Responses
Student Support (eg Special Classes; Programs; Interagency Networking; Tutoring)
106
31.4%
Curriculum (Local Initiatives)
91
26.4%
Attendance
45
13.3%
Staffing (eg Staffing; Role Models; Teaching Practices; Support Teams)
41
12.1%
Parent - Community (eg Involvement; AIEW Support/Liaison)
27
8%
Early Years in Education
24
7.1%
Technology
6
2%
Research
1
0.3%
Successful student learning practices
Strategies to address school attendance issues are paramount to improving educational outcomes.
Examples of successful strategies provided by principals from all schools include:
• Greater parent involvement;
• Student tracking strategies;
• Cohesive partnerships between student and community services;
• Building school-community relationships;
• Appropriate Indigenous teaching-learning methods;
• Inclusion of culturally appropriate curriculum support materials;
• Improved health and nutrition standards; and
• Transition to schools programs.
These were shared among a wide range of identified successful student learning practices, as
summarised by Principals in Table 5.4. They may offer future potential for professional
networking.
In addition, principals also identified a range of suggestions they perceived as necessary for
improving student outcomes (see Table 5.5). Again this data may prove valuable for future
planning by education authorities.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 5.5: Identified Suggestions for Improving Student learning Outcomes
Identified Suggestions & Proposals - Student Learning
Total
Responses Per
Code
Percentage of
Identified
Responses
Curriculum (eg Literacy/Numeracy; Culturally Appropriate; Integrated; Early Years)
48
38.7%
Student Support (eg Group Sizes; Specialists; Indigenous Aides; Additional Funds)
26
21%
Attendance
26
21%
Cultural Awareness
12
9.7%
Family
6
4.8%
Research
4
3.2%
Health
2
1.6%
Summary
Principals identified literacy and numeracy teaching skills and methods as the main priority for
improving Indigenous student learning outcomes. Principals then indicated student attendance,
parent involvement, an emphasis on the early years and access to culturally appropriate/inclusive
curriculum materials as the other four main priorities.
Principals place a high priority on culturally inclusive materials, but indicated that such materials
may not be readily available. They perceive such curriculum support as giving greater relevance
to learning and to addressing cultural awareness issues for all. If teaching staff are not adequately
prepared to handle cross-cultural issues, then the potential for integration of Indigenous materials
across the curriculum is challenged.
Successful practices exist and need to be shared. Almost third of respondents identified local
student support practices, with over a quarter of others implementing successful curriculum
practices. Of the rest, focuses on improving attendance and staffing were more common.
Further work
Partnering a Belter Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Pormote and implement English as Second Language stategies and the incorporation of
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 6.1: Overall Considerations for More Appropriate Local School Organisation to
Suit Local Needs
Options for Local School Organisation
Selection
Frequency
Percentage of
Total Survey
Selection
Ranking
ia^BiiBli
School council and/or ASSPA Committee
-X-,
.
4
Use of school by community
190
15.6%
5
School environment
168
13.8%
6
Provision of education services (e.g. primary/middle/secondary/post
secondary; VET)
138
11.3%
7
Flexible organisation of the school year (for remote communities -
e.g. 6 weeks intensive on site + 1-2 weeks off site PD & networking.)
81
6.7%
8
Chapter 6: School Organisation
Introduction
In ascertaining whether school organisation factors could be varied to better suit local needs of
Indigenous education and the Indigenous community, principals were asked to choose three from
eight multiple choices, with an additional ninth option for other comments or issues. Their overall
responses are summarised in Table 6.1. Principals regard greater local flexibility as a useful
strategy in improving outcomes.
Key school organisation factors
The three most prevalent considerations were:
• Flexible organisation of human & financial resources (e.g. staff selection; staffing profiles;
local control over budgets; access to funding; etc.);
• Flexible organisation of student groupings; and
• Flexible organisation of the school day/timetable.
Of these, the first two are consistently in the top three, regardless of sector, school location and
part of Australia.
Principals perceive their capacity to have greater local flexibility over human and financial
resources as more appropriate in addressing local needs. There appears to be an appetite for
greater local school management and authority to enable local decision-making. Examples of
what these decisions and local management aspects include:
• Greater local appointment of staff;
• Greater devolution of resources to the school level;
• Greater staffing flexibility;
• Employment of more Indigenous staff; and
• More resources to primary schools to reduce class sizes.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Similarly, principals indicate more appropriate student groupings are required to suit local needs.
The suggestions vary from outcomes focused levels to a range of social and needs based options.
Some examples include:
• Flexible and dynamic needs based;
• Family groupings;
• Cross grouping needs for levels of outcomes;
• Multi-age groupings;
• Indigenous groupings for special cultural programs and needs; and
• Friendship groupings.
Principals have suggested a break from the traditional age based groupings to more flexible and
dynamic groupings that are more relevant to local cultural issues and the needs of the students.
Similarly, the majority of principals indicated greater flexibility in the daily organisation of school
operations as more appropriate for their local needs. Some examples include:
• Changes to school commencement and conclusion times;
• Part of the day be allocated for parent/ community learning and support;
• Varying the learning environment during the day;
• Flexibility to meet local needs; and
• Variation to incorporate specialist-teaching times.
Again, it is greater local flexibility that principals have identified as being more appropriate for
Indigenous students.
Another variable ranked close to daily organisation is the role of school councils and ASSPA
committees. These councils and committees were perceived as an important part of the school. At
the same time principals also indicated the roles and responsibilities of school councils and
ASSPA committees needed review. Feedback suggested they needed to be more focused and
aligned with the purpose, operations and goals of the schools. This will require more formal and
accountable structures, along with provision of training for ASSPA committee office bearers.
Variation across sectors
In comparing school sectors, there is not a great deal of variation in principals' considerations.
Principals from Catholic schools identified student grouping flexibility, and the role of school
councils and ASSPA committees as having more priority than local organisational flexibility. This
may be attributed to the fact that the Catholic sector already possesses a greater degree of local
management in terms of local staff selection, devolved budgets and local governing bodies. These
are less prevalent across Australia in the Government sector, which accounts for the largest
number of principal respondents in the survey. However, given the role of committees and
councils is only 4.5% below the variable ranked third by Government schools, the overall
preferences are relatively consistent.
Remote school principals identified flexibility in both daily organisation and school organisation
as variables that are more appropriately locally determined (see Table 6.2). The day-to-day
operations and routines vary considerably in these schools. Hence the need for a very flexible
timetable and daily program are an essential part in meeting local needs. The interesting variation
here is the high ranking given to the organisation of the school year.
Partnering a Better Future National Indigenous Education Report


Table 6.2: Remote School Considerations for 'More Appropriate Local School
Organisation to Suit Local Needs
Indigenous Community Relationships
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total 38
Selection
Ranking
Flexible organisation of human & financial resources (e.g. st<
selection; staffing profiles; local control over budgets; access to
funding; etc.)
21
JJ.JVO
3
Flexible organisation of student groupings
15
39.5%
4
Use of school by community
7
18,4%
5
School Environment
7
18.4%
5
Provision of education services (e.g.. Priraary/Middle/Secondary/Post
Secondary; VET)
7
18,4%
5
School Council and/or ASSPA Committee
4
10.5%
8
Table 6.3: Urban School Considerations for More Appropriate Local School
Organisation to Suit Local Needs
Indigenous Community Relationships
Selection
Frequency
Percentage
of Total 717
Population
Selection
Ranking
Flexible organisation of human & financial resources (e.g. staff
selection; staffing profiles; local control over budgets; access to funding;
etc.)
194
27.1%
1
2
Use of school by community
iffi
16.2%
4
Flexible organisation of the school day/timetable
114
15,9%
5
School Environment
91
12.7%
6
Provision of education services (e.g.. Primary/Middie/Secondary/Post
Secondary; VET)
75
10.5%
7
Flexible organisation of the school year (For Remote Communities - e.g.
6 weeks intensive on site + 1-2 weeks offsite PD & networking.)
32
4,5%
8
Remote schools tend to follow the same annual time frames and structures as other schools. It is
clear from principals' responses that this may not be appropriate. A range of issues need to be
taken into account when structuring the school year for remote schools, these include:
• Shorter terms to allow for other cultural community teaching;
• Planning term breaks during community events and meeting cultural needs;
• More school terms, but shorter and intensive, enabling staff professional development and
networking between terms;
• An initial planning week before commencement of each term; and
• Fitting in with cultural and seasonal patterns.
Rural schools’ rankings were consistent with the overall data in Table 6,1.
Although the difference in frequencies is only 2.4%, urban schools have indicated a lower ranking
for daily organisation flexibility and a higher ranking for the role of Councils and ASSPA
committees (see Table 6.3). From feedback, urban school principals regard the role of ASSPA
committees as important in promoting both student and community relationships with the school.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


5 While urban schools formed some 60% of the overall school population, only 14% of schools have
or more Indigenous enrolments. Given that urban schools are generally larger, it may be
'erred that these schools have proportionally lower Indigenous populations and possibly, less
iigenous community involvement. These schools tend to be more mainstream and perhaps more
lective of the dominant European culture in their organisation, demographics and decision,
iking processes. Thus the role of ASSPA Committees might be seen as pivotal in terms of
proving student outcomes and forging family and community links. However, further research
mid be needed for any correlation to be statistically correct.
addition principals were invited to describe the organisational changes they might undertake in
ation to their multiple-choice responses (see Appendix I). The five categories with the largest
tuber of responses were:
Student groupings issues;
Community issues, particularly relating to greater involvement in the school;
Timetable and daily organisation;
Aboriginal Student Support and Parent Awareness Committees; and
• Staffing, particularly selection and funding flexibility.
ese suggestions provide direction, for future planning of school organisation, in Indigenous
rcation.
mniary
erall the majority of principals regard greater flexibility in human and fiscal resources, student
mping and daily organization as a means to better meet local needs. Remote schools also
licated flexibility in the school year is required.
eater local flexibility in school organization gives greater control over staffing, resource,
ictabling and curriculum issues. Alternative student groupings were identified by almost a fifth
respondents as ways to better suit local needs and improve Indigenous student learning
:comes.
rther work
i in the survey resu'w, principals ackmm k-dge the need 10 give high priority to promoting and
: supporting crenei Acai school management flexibility, parucifiafiv jn terms of
: * Flexible organisation of human ami financial uvourccs (e.g. staff wiccnon,: stuffing profiles;
; * Flexible organisation of'the school duv.uunclabicweats 1
I accountability frameworks should be reviewed, omh locally and globally. with hie view to ;
; increasing their pivoted roic in unpinning suidcm outcomes and • • aw- family end community i
. !mk> ; and in promoting cohesion and consistency with ioeai school purpose. ••• w and operations, i
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Table 7.1: Additional Comments and Suggestions:
Total Responses
If
Pi>m:Ut3£C iff
itle-fiiii'A'-d Responses
Curriculum & learning
6
21 t-
Parent & family issues
r
17,2%
Community
25
11 ,6%
Attendance & transition
24
! 2 o
Student support
20
9.3%
Attitudes & relations
16
' 4 ,
ASS PA & committees
14
6.5%
Funding
12
5.6%
Staff
8
3.7s,
Health
7
3.226
Networking & sharing
5
2.3%
APPA role
1
0.4%
Chapter 7: Additional Comments and Suggestions
Introduction
In conclusion principals were asked to provide any additional comments and suggestions they felt
were relevant to current challenges in Indigenous education that may have been omitted in the
previous sections of the survey. These were coded and categorised in summary form in Table 7.1.
The majority of comments focussed on:
• Appropriate curriculum and learning strategies:
• Parent and family issues and support;
• Community development and indusivity;
• Student attendance and transitional issues.
These comments and suggestions are consistent with responses in the key sections of the survey,.
Other more frequent responses focused on single issues such as:
• Need for Indigenous human, resources;
• Education, to change attitudes and understandings;
• Sharing Indigenous culture;
• Non-alienating practices;
« Needs based global budget controlled by schools: and
• Student health.
Parent and family issues are given a higher priority in these comments, particularly in:
• The need to believe education is the key to life improvement;
• Empowering families through understanding, engagement and involvement;
• Parents accepting greater responsibility levels for students' education; and
• The need for higher expectations and home support: for students.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


All three of the above groupings reinforce previously identified principals' perceptions and
proposals for improvement of Indigenous education through cultural awareness, culturally
appropriate teaching-learning methods, community and family relationships, health, attendance,
local school management and the value and understanding placed on education. Many of these are
linked to school-community interaction. The importance of cross-cultural awareness, inclusivity
and positive relationships reiterate the need to develop a positive sense of school community with
purpose and belonging.
Schools are focal points in communities and offer potential, with support from Governments, local
authorities, student and family support services, Indigenous groups and other stakeholders, to
evolve a purposeful and meaningful sense of school community. The notion of an inclusive
Australian community is perhaps a more likely outcome by working together in smaller
community clusters, where positive changes can be realised sooner and are tangible. The
collective energies and efforts by all these communities will ultimately improve Indigenous
education and evolve an Australian community that offers a meaningful and rewarding future for
all Australians.
Similarly, issues including the promotion of greater cohesion among the Indigenous community
and involvement to enhance the value of education to students are identified in comments related
to community. Discussions with some principals have suggested challenges to Indigenous
community cohesion may arise where various groups are either placed together or move to more
urban settings. These groupings may be culturally different or culturally displaced creating a
different set of challenges to achieving a sense of cohesive school community.
Summary
: A omoe oSAUk>A corntrsonny ;irO nichiM'orneoo • hnporrai;: to whoie school ooicotnct-. Ongoing
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Name:
School:
Address:
(Please “tick” appropriate box or enter information as appropriate.)
1. Where? WA NT SA
Vic
NSW ACT
Old Tas
2. Which is your School Sector?
Government
Catholic
Independent
3. Which best describes your school
location?
Remote Aboriginal
Community
Rural/Country
Community
Urban
Community
4. Total Student Population?
<50
50-100
101-200 201-400
401-650
650+
5. Indigenous Pupil Population?
0
1-4
5-9 10-24 25-49
50-99
100+
Indigenous School
Based Staff:
Indigenou
s
Principal
Indigenou
s
Teachers
Indigenous
Education
Workers/Aides
Indigenous
Community
Liaison
Other
Indigenous
School Staff
6. Number?
Appendix 1
AUSTRALIAN PRIMARY PRINCIPALS ASSOCIATION
NATIONAL INDIGENOUS EDUCATION REVIEW
“Partnering a Better Future!”
SURVEY DEMOGRAPHICS:
Confidential Information:
(This information is required only to assist with compiling a database for survey returns so we
may follow up with reminders to states & territories where returns are low. APPA requires a
maximum return to maximise principals’ input and influence, and to validate the review. Only
APPA has access to the data. Schools will receive a final report as part of their participation)
** If your school has no Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students please tick one of the boxes
below indicating the remainder of the survey is not applicable and you will not continue, or that
you have had recent experience with Indigenous students and wish to share this in the relevant
sections. If your school does have indigenous students, then please continue**
While there are no indigenous students in my
current school I wish to add my recent
experiences & knowledge in relevant parts of
the survey.
The remainder of this survey is not
applicable.
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


SECTION I; FOCUS ON LOCAL SCHOOL ISSUES & PRIORITIES
1.1. Does your school have an explicit focus on the needs of Indigenous students?
_Yes _No
Describe:
1.2. If you had to choose, which FIVE of the following potential school improvement areas
would be of most value to your indigenous students? (Tick choices.)
1.2.1. Student health care and health education support
1.2.2. Inter-racial relations within the school
1.2.3. School - Indigenous Community relationships
1.2.4. Reconciliation
1.2.5. School focus on purpose and goals for education of Indigenous students
_1.2.6. Telecommunications/Technology infrastructure (internet, computers, telephone, video
conferencing)
1.2.7. Teacher aide support
1.2.9. Student services support
_1.2.9. Management of student behaviour strategies
J. 2.10 Other:
SECTION II: SCHOOL AND COMMUNITY
11.1. Overall, how would you characterise your school’s relationship with the Indigenous
community or communities it serves? (Choose one.)
11. 1.1. No interaction
11. 1.2. Little interaction
11. 1.3. More interaction with some groups than with others
11. 1.4. Significant interaction with all stakeholder groups
11. 1.5. Moderate to serious conflict between school and part or all of the community
11. 1.6. School caught in the middle between conflicting communities
11. 1.7. Other:
11.2. From your experience, what would you say are the THREE most important aspects of
building school-community relations that benefit Indigenous students? (Tick choices.)
11.2.1. Parents & Citizens or Friends organisations, School Councils, ASSPA Committees or
other official bodies
_11.2.2. One-on-one communications (e.g. between teachers - parents; administrators - parents)
_11.2.3. Family-oriented activities
11.2.4. Relationships with community leaders
_11.2.5. Parent involvement in the school’s teaching and/or student service program
_11.2.6. Community awareness of school's goals & purpose
_11.2.7 Effective communication & reporting of student learning outcomes to parents
_11.2.8. Other:
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Key Professional Development Needs
11. How can schools become more “user-friendly” to Indigenous community members?
Section III: School STAFF
111. 1 If you had to choose, which SIX of the following would be of most value to school staff in
working towards improved learning outcomes for your Indigenous students? (Tick choices.)
III. 1.1. Professional development for teachers
III. 1.2. Professional development for AIEWs
III. 1.3. Capacity for AIEWs to undertake “lay teaching” roles
III. 1.4. Teacher retention
III. 1.5. AIEW Retention
III. 1.6. Professional networking with colleagues & peers in similar situations, sharing
successful practices
III. 1.7. Teacher training, inclusive of teaching methods for Indigenous students and Teaching
Practice for student teachers in schools with significant indigenous student enrolments
III. 1.8. Strategies to address staff isolation
III. 1.9. Awareness & availability of comparable standards data about students in similar
situations
III. 1.10. Understanding Indigenous cultures (cross-cultural awareness)
III. 1.11. Staff accommodation
III. 1.12 Pastoral care of staff
III. 1.13 Other?
111.2 Suggest up to THREE key professional development programs or offerings that would be a
priority with regards to your current school staff in addressing local Indigenous Education needs.
Partnering a Better Future National Indigenous Education Report


Item #
Suggestions
SECTION IV: STUDENT LEARNING
IV. 1 Which FIVE of the following do you consider would have the greatest impact upon
improving learning outcomes for Indigenous students?
IV. 1.1. Use of technology as a learning tool
IV. 1.2. Student attendance
IV. 1.3. Strategies for Student transition from Pre-School to Primary and/or Primary - Secondary
IV. 1.4. English as a Second Language instruction
IV. 1.5. Culturally appropriate/inclusive curriculum materials
IV. 1.6. Emphasis on development of Literacy & Numeracy teaching skills & methods
IV. 1.7. Emphasis on development of Oracy teaching skills & methods
IV. 1.8. Emphasis on “Early Years in Education”
IV. 1.9. Involvement of Indigenous parents in school education activities
FV. I.lo.Provision of educational continuity for transient students
_IV. 1.11. Other?
SECTION V: SCHOOL ORGANISATION
V. 1 Schools tend to be organised in fairly predictable and traditional orientations. In considering
your current school and Indigenous community which THREE of the following variables could be
more appropriately varied to suit your local needs? Be creative and think beyond existing
constraints, by promoting solutions. (Tick choices.)
V.1.1. Flexible organisation of the school year (For Remote Communities - e.g.. 6 weeks
intensive on site + 1-2 weeks off site PD & networking.)
V.1.2. Flexible organisation of the school day/timetable
V.1.3. Flexible organisation of human & financial resources (e.g. staff selection; staffing
profiles; local control over budgets; access to funding; etc.)
V. 1.4. Flexible organisation of student groupings
V. 1.5. Use of school by community
V. 1.6. School Environment
V. 1.7. School Council and/or ASSPA Committee
V.1.8. Provision of education services (e.g.. Primary/Middle/Secondary/Post Secondary; VET)
V.1.9. Other? _____
V. 2 In relation to any of your choices (please specify item numbers) can you suggest how you
might reorganise or improve them to suit local needs?
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Item #
SECTION I: LOCAL ISSUES
Item #
SECTION II: SCHOOL & COMMUNITY
Item #
SECTION III: SCHOOL STAFF
SECTION VI: SUCCESSFUL LOCAL PRACTICES
In relation to any of your previous choices (please specify item numbers from Section I to
Section V), can you describe any successful example/s undertaken by your school that have
helped local school improvement in promoting improved Indigenous student outcomes? How
have they helped to achieve success & benefits in these areas?
Partnering a Belter Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Item #
SECTION IV: STUDENT LEARNING
Item #
SECTION I: LOCAL ISSUES
Item #
SECTION II: SCHOOL COMMUNITY
Item #
SECTION III: SCHOOL STAFF
SECTION VII: SUGGESTIONS & PROPOSALS
VII. 1 In relation to any of your previous choices (please specify item numbers from Section Ito
Section V, can you add any suggestions or proposals as to how the issues may be addressed to
promote improved outcomes for Indigenous students?
Partnering a Better Future - National Indigenous Education Report


Item #
SECTION IV: STUDENT LEARNING
V 11.2 Please add any additional comments or suggestions that you feel are relevant to current
challenges for Indigenous Education, but may have been omitted from this survey.
Thank you for the time you have taken to contribute to “Partnering a Better Future” for Indigenous
students across Australia. Your suggestions, along with those from other national colleagues, will
help shape a national strategy. APPA continues to represent the voice of Primary Principals, in the
National Agenda. Thank you for your support.
Tony Misich
President
Australian Primary Principals Association (Inc)
PLEASE RETURN SURVEY IN ENVELOPE PROVIDED TO:
APPA Research Coordinator
WAPPA Business Centre
239 CAPE STREET
Tuart Hill WA 6060
Ph: (08)9345 5323 (08)9345 5326
Mob: 0419 929 833
Fax: (08) 9345 5402 Email: tmwappa@iinet.net.au
Partnering a Better Future National Indigenous Education Report


References
ACE (1999) Indigenous Education: National Imperatives, Partnerships and Action - Outcomes
from National Issues Forum, 3-5 November 1999, Unicorn , Journal of the Australian College of
Education, Vol. 25, No 3 December 1999.
Collins, B (1999) Learning Lessons - An Independent Review of Indigenous Education in the
Northern Territory, Northern Territory Department of Education, Government Printing Office of
the Northern Territory.
MCEETYA (2000) Report of MCEETYA Taskforce on Indigenous Education, MCEETYA
Secretariat, Melbourne.
Partnering a Better Future ~ National Indigenous Education Report
