

P UITICUL \RS OF THE
Transports, at Sidney, New Sooth Wales,oir the
Ith of September last. Copied from the Loudon Sun,
March 10th, 184 ik
o®s33«L—. i ~
The papei s state that about the middle of July last, a desperate gang of
runaway transports infested the fertile district of the Bowpaslures, and the
peaceful inhabitants of that region were kept in a continual state ox at ama-
in vain the Government offered rewards tor their apprehension, in van the
mounted police scon, e 1 the forest; guided by a chief named \\ nrd—t hey ap-
peared to rise superior to every plan for their apprehension, cn§ n a < i.
cunrstance happened, which, al/hough hut trivial in itself, yet led eventually
to the captme of nine of those outlawed felons. The facts are as follows :
An entertainment was given in compliance with the wishes of a few friends,,
at a public house about three miles -from Parromatta, on the Sidney lioad ;;
the company who attended this convivial mectiwg was numerous During the
course of the evening, a labourer named Jones lost his watch, but did not
miss it till he had reached his own dwelling, and was retiring to rest. On re-
flecting, however., he recollected that one or two females had been particu-
larly attached to his wants E eprevious evening, offering him liquor cc other
refreshments , and, suspet ;g one of these ladies as !u n a .rkeW peison to*
abstract the property, he, the next morning waited rpt. .n. ilams, tie ma-
gistrate, and stated his suspicions. The worthy Doctor selected a very clever,,
shrewd officer to trace the perpetrator if possible, ihe constables name was
White, and in addition to his situation of constable, he worked occasionally
at his trade of watchmaking. Placing two watches in his pocket, so as to
make it appear that he had private business on hand, he repaired to tne resi-
dence of a woman named Margaret Heslam, who kept a beer-house and
was supposed iu slielicr bus In angers and to dispose ot their booty, ihe house
was four* miles from Paramatta, and not far from the house where the enter-
tainment was given. When White entered the dwelling he found the mistress'
alone, and after a few preliminary observations, and some compliments pecu-
liar toMie colony, he proposed to beguile the time by playing a hand all-
four, The stake was not for sordid money, oh, no! very tar from it, they
played for half a pint of rum the rubber —.?he general colonial After
purposely loosing four rubbers, ' -d seeing that the lady had r, ’> • visible
the greatest part of the liquor, f ound her gradually ripening for nis pur-
se; he therefore then pr n be tired of cards, & produced the watch-
poes,he offered them sale, ( which, the laughingly told him she could sell
him six or eight of the same c. . vie; and, going to her drawers produced
that number, amongst them the very article of which lie was in pursuit, Not
willing to excite her fears as to the real object of his visit, he merely state*
his intention to purchase, upon win he asked him what it would cost to alter
the dial plate of the one she last bought, (the identical one lost by Jones.) —
The constable named a price, to which she agreed ; he then placed the object
of his-solicitude in his pocket, and returned to Paramatta. The next day
Jones accurately descrided the number and maker’s name of the watch, aml<
a. taarrant was issued for the apprehension of Mrs Plaslem, who was appre-
hended and fully committed for trial. She was found guilty at the Criminal!
Court, and sentenced to 14 years’ imprisonment; hut the Governor being an-
xious to possess some of the. banditti that resorted the house, comuted her
sentence to one year if she would be the means of giving up to justice the
much dreaded “ Bringelly Gang,” This she eagerly availed herself of, and*
with a body of police, disguised as husbandmen, she returned to her habita-
tion. As evening approached, they hid themselves, and in the dead ot the
night, a party of the gang returned to the rendezvous; With every demon-
stration of joy they welcomed her liberation—poured their booty into her lap*,
and, as usual, gave up their arms to her for saf e keeping. The robbers then
commenced drinking; and seeing: that they appeared satisfied as to their secu-
rity, she first of all, poured hot water- into the touchholes of their pieces, and
then, cautiously let in the police. The burglars flew to their arms, but they
had. been rendered useless witA- respect to firing them ; the result was, ot
course, defeat, and seven of them were taken, named Robert Coogan, Chas.
Geary, David Smith, Samuel Gregory, Peter Brown, William Roberts, and
James Thompson, (five of whom had been iransported from Liverpool) were
secured and safely lodged in prison.
On the following day a farther search was made, and in the course of the afternoon •
the horse police discovered a cave in which the found two women named Catherine
Hayes, fa native of Toxteth Park, and who had been transported about ten years ago)
and Mary Ann Phillips, (a native ot Prescot, who bad been transported robbing a
gentleman in Liverpool eleven years ago.) They were all conveyed to prison. In
the cave was found an immense quantity of articles that had been stolen from vari-
ous parts of the country. The whole of the prisoners underwent their trialsin Au-
gust last, and were found guilty and sentence of death passed upon them. On the
4th of September the whole of them were executed: Whilst on the drop they appear-■
ed penitent, and were launched into eternity in the presence of a vast assemblage v£i
spectators. bcott. Printer,. Li v e spool.
