

IN AUSTRALIA.
particulars
OF A
imim ship mmm ah® vail® aim
AURIFEROUS FREEHOLD ESTATE,
SITUATE
In the County of Bathurst, in the Colony of New South Wales,
close to the well-known Mine of the
WENTWORTH GOLD FIELD COMPANY,
Near to the Road from Wellington to Bathurst, close to the Glasson Gold and Copper Mine and in the
vicinity of the celebrated
op!ui* oolH Diggings!,
- ' ‘ —* ~
COMPRISING
887 ACRES OF LAND,
DR THEREABOUTS,
Believed to contain suprisingly rich lodes of Auriferous Clay and Ironstone, and upon which Gold in considerable
quantities has already been found, and
totll he Sol& fig Auction ha
MESSRS,
HOGGART, NORTON, AND TRIST,
At the Mart , opposite the Bank of England , London ,
On Friday, the 14th of January, 1853, at Twelve o’Clock,
As an Entire Property, hut if not disposed of as such, then in TWO LOTS,
By direction of W- C. Wentworth, Esq., Member for the city of Sydney.
Plans of the adjoining locality may be seen, and Particulars of the Estates, with Plans, had of THOMAS BROWNING,
Esq., Solicitor, Hatton Court, Threadneedle Street; at the Mart; and of
Messrs. Hoggart, Norton, & Trist, No. 62, Old Broad Street, Royal Exchange.


LOT I
An Important and Yery Valuable Estate,
Held under Grant from the Crown, and situate
In the Connty of Bathurst, in the Colony of New South Wales,
adjoining the well-known Mine of the
near to the Road from
and in the same Geological district as the Great Nugget Mining Fields.
COMPRISING
347 ACRES OF LAND, OR THEREABOUTS,
(more or less, as shewn on Plan,)
BELIEVED TO BE HIGHLY AURIFEROUS,
AM® ®IP®M WSSMM (MM MM A®IEBA®Y mm FDOT®,
It possesses a frontage of upwards of three quarters of a mile to the Frederick’s Valley Creek, (which separates it from
the Wentworth Gold Fields,) out of the Bed and Banks of which large quantities of Gold have already been dug ; in the
immediate vicinity a lode of surprisingly rich Auriferous Iron Stone has been discovered, considered by many as valuable
as the Vein of the Great Nugget Mining Company; and the yield of Gold in the district evidenced by the number of
persons recently engaged in Digging, may be considered fully equal to that of the celebrated Mount Alexander Gold Field.
LOT £
An Important and Valuable Estate,
Held under Grant from the Crown, situate
In the County of Bathurst, in the Colony of New South Wales,
adjoining Lot One, and nearly similar in description,
CONTAINING
540 ACRES OF LAND, OR THEREABOUTS,
(more or less, as shewn on Plan,)
BELIEVED TO BE HIGHLY AURIFEROUS, j
am® OTd)M wmm M)®® mm A®miA®T mm TOOT®,
This Lot also possesses a frontage of nearly a Mile and a quarter in extent to the Frederick’s Valley Creek.
These valuable Properties are well worthy the attention of Public Companies and Capitalists, the mineral wealth
of the locality having been confirmed by the reports of the Government Geological Surveyor, published by order of the
Legislative Council of Sydney; and according to an assay recently made by Mr. J. A. Phillips, of ferruginous clay and
auriferous iron stone, dug from a lode in the Wentworth Gold Field, a value of from £6O per Ton, to nearly £12,000
per Ton, is shewn, constituting a most important and favourable feature for mining operations upon an extensive scale
in this Auriferous District.
Assays of the Iron Stone, together with Specimens, may be seen at the Office of Messrs. Robins and Barber, No. 29,
Threadneedle Street.
PARTICULARS.


Conditions of Sale.
1. The highest bidder shall be the purchaser, and if any dispute shall arise between two or more bidders, the property or lot in
dispute, shall be put up at the last preceding bidding.
2. No person shall advance less than £2O at any bidding, and no bidding shall be retracted.
3. The purchaser shall immediately after the sale, pay to Messrs. Hoggart, Norton, & Trist, a deposit of £2O per cent, on the amount
of his or her purchase money, and shall sign an agreement for payment of the remainder thereof and completion of the purchase as
hereinafter mentioned, but should payment of the remainder of the purchase money be delayed, from any cause whatever,
beyond the fifteenth day of February. 1853. the purchaser shall pay interest at the rate of £5 per cent, per annum thereon
/ until actual payment thereof, but without prejudice to forfeiture and ri.<rht of re-sale as "hereinafter mentioned.
4. If the property is sold in lots, and whether both lots or only one shall be sold, the limits and boundaries of each lot shall, in case
of disputeTbe sett’ed an! adjusted either by the Surveyor General of the colony of New South WaleiTj or by such person as
out the same) and whoafi-decisioa-sbalL be binding and conclusive upon the vendnFnr piircha.serof either
of the lots, and purchasers ot the sSdlots, but the partition or division line drawn upon the plan annexed to these particulars
slialJ be~adhered to as closely as possible, and as circumstances maylrermit. The expenees of making such decision ancTaward
shall be borheTiTequaT proportions between the vendor and purchaser'or purchasers.
5. The purchaser of each lot shall accept a conveyance, (subject as after provided,) executed by the attorney of the vendor, William Fane
de Salis, of the City of London, Esquire, duly constituted in that behalf under a certain letter of attorney bearing date the 3rd day
of April, 1852, and verified under notarial seal, which, said letter of attorney js open for tl e inspection of intending purchasers.
6. The title to the land is derived by grant from the Crown to William Charles Wentworth the vendor, and his heirs.
An attested copy of such grant shall be furnished to each purchaser as soon as the same can be obtained, but the vendor shall
not be called upon or reqmred coproduce or deduce any other title/or evidence of title/to thlTsaid estate/ and on the
completion oHme purchase" the original grant shall, if both lots be sold, be delivered IcTthe largest purchaser, and snch InrmW
sha]l be more than one purchaser,~sTiaTl enter into the usual covenant for production thereof to the other pur-
chaser, such deed~bf covenant to bein all respects at theTexpense of the purchaser requiring the same, but if one only ofshnli
IdtsTßeTsold, or if the said_graht shall relitetoother lands comprised in such grantretained by the vendor, then such grant
shalTfemain in the custodyof the vendor, on tus entering Into, by himselt or Ins attorney, at the expense of the purchaser, a lil??-
covenantlbr the^productlon~thereof. Until the same grant or attested copy - or copies thereof be obtained, the purchaser or pur-
chasers shall be furnished wTtiriTcopy of the particulars thereof, transmitted to this country by the said William Charles Went-
worth to the said William Fane De Salis, (his duly authorized attorney,) and shall be accepted as conclusive, so that
the arrangements for the completion of the purchase and the deposit of the balance of the purchase money for each lot, as
hereinafter required, shall not be delayed or retarded by reason of the non-production of the original grant or attested copy
thereof.
7. The purchaser shall on the 15th day of February next, pay the balance of his purchase money into the London and Westminster
Bank, London, to the credit of the said William Fane De Salis, (the attorney of the vendor,) and of two
other persons, one of whom shall be nominated by the said William Fane De Salis and the other by the purchaser
of each lot in respect of his purchase, within ten days from the day of sale, otherwise such purchase-monies shall be deposited
in the name of the said William Fane De Salis, and of one person or two persons tu be nominated by him, as he may think fit,
as trustees for the said parties, such money to be held, retained, applied, and disposed of by them in manner hereinafter
mentioned, and upon such payment as last aforesaid the said William Fane De Salis (or other the attorney of the vendor duly
appointed or substituted in that behalf,) shall for and on behalf of the vendor, execute a conveyance in manner as aforesaid
to the purchaser, to be prepared by him and at his own expense, of the property purchased by him, which conveyance shall
__ contain all such usual covenants for title and otherwise on the part of the vendor as may be reasonably required by or on
behalf of the purchaser, and the conveyance when so executed, shall be deposited with the said William Fane De Salis as an
escrow, to be forwarded by him to the said William Charles Wentworth, and be delivered by the said William Charles Wentworth
to the said purchaser, on possessioiLjQfjtheland purchased by him being given, as hereafter provided, and pursuant to the said
contract hereby made.
8. That such deed or deeds or declaration of trust, in respect of the balance of the purchase-monies to be paid ns aforesaid, as the
counsel of the said William Fane De Salis, acting for the vendor, may advise, shall be executed by the said William Fana
De Salis, and the said trustees so to be nominated as afo?esaM,'id 5 3upIicate, one part of which shall be sent out with the said
conveyancefand when possession of the said purchased lands shall so have been delivered as aforesaid, the purchasers of the
land of which possession shall be so de'ivered, shall indorse upon one part of such declaration of trust, such an admission.
deelaraliSirof otlurfliotificatioii as the sail! William Charles Wentworth may require, that the said sale has been completed,"?
and thereupbiTpie balaacrpQhUsaid purchase-money or monies, as the~case may be, together with the deposit or deposits
part payment thereof under the third condition, shall, without any further or other authority, as soon as conveniently may be,
be paid or transferred to the said William Fane De Salis as the attorney and agent for (he said William Charles Wentworth, or
in case of the death of the said William Fane De Salis, then to other the attorney or agent of the said William Charles
Wentworth, together with any accumulation of interest thereon ; such deed or declaration of trust shall be prepared by the so-
licitor of the said William Fane De Salis, and shall contain all such provisions and powers for elfecting the objects of the said
parties, and in the mean time securing the fund, as counsel may advise; and al! costs and expenses attending the preparation,
ingrossment and execution thereof respectively shall he borne and paid by the purchaser or respective purchasers.
9. That in case the vendor by notice in writing to be delivered to each purchaser, or to his agent to be nominated by him, to the said
William Fane De Salis, on or before the said 15 th day of February, or to be inserted twice in the Government Gazette of New
. South Wales, shall declare that possession (save as after provided) of the property sold will be given and delivered to the pur-
chaser or his agent, or purchasers respectively, on or at any day (not being less than 15 days from the date of the last m-
\ / sertion of such notice) or~time~~to se~tHerein named, and the purchaser or purchasers, or Fis or their agent or agents
V shall not accept or atlehd to~ receive such possession, then and in such case, in respect of the Jot of which "possession
\ shall not be accepted, the saicTHeposit from thenceforth shall be forfeited and shall be paid over to the vendor, his heirs, execu - -
/\ tors ) gidmjinstrators orassigns, or his or their authorized attorney in that behalf, for his and their own absolute use and benefit:
I without the necessity of previously Wenvbring or tendering any conveyance to the purchaser or purchasers, as the"c r £se"Tnay-te,
I ( / but inasmuch as the land or part thereof is or may bein the possession of certain cultivators or lessees of the surface thereof, \
\/ the purchaser nr pn renaaers shall not requirelhe vendor or Fis agent to remove such cultivators or lessees previous to the~ileliverv
K of possession as aforesaid, the purchaser or purchasers shall accept the possession and complete lus or their purchase, subject
/\ to the existing rights and claims ot such cultivators Of lessees:' ‘
10. In case the vendor shall he unable to give possession, of the property, (subject as aforesaid,) within three months after the same
shall have been demanded of him under these conditions, and the purchaser shall in all respects have complied therewith,
then it shall be competent for the said William FaneDe Salis, or other the agent or attorney of the vendor on his behalf, and
also for the said trustees so to be appointed as aforesaid, to return to the purchaser or purchasers, as the case may be, the balance
of his or their purchase-money or monies, so to be deposited as aforesaid, and on the repayment or retransfer thereof, to-
gether with the deposits to be made under the 3rd condition, free from all charges, the purchaser or purchasers shall accept
the same in full satisfaction of all costs, charges, interest, and expenses attending or consequent on the contract, and the con-
tract shall thereupon be to all intents and purposes deemed and considered to he rescinded and cancelled.
11. Gold having been already found in considerable quantities on the land now offered for sale, the published reports of the Govern-
ment Geological Surveyor, and of the Wentworth Gold Field Company, (which are open for the inspection of intending pur-
chasers,) shall be taken to be sufficient evidence of the auriferous qualities of the estate. The vendor does not intend to give
any guarantee or warranty upon this point, but desires purchasers to form their opinion from the documents above mentioned.
12. That no personal responsibility shall attach to the said William Fane De Salis in the premises, or otherwise than
to grantor of the said power, except so far as regards his wilful neglect or default, and inasmuch as the said original
power of attorney hereinbefore referred to, relates to several matters and things other than the said lands hereby referred to,
the purchaser or purchasers shall accept an attested copy of such power as sufficient evidence of the authority thereby declared
being properly vested in the said William Fane De Salis, who will at all times produce the original when required.
Lastly. That if the purchaser shall fail or neglect to comply with the above conditions, or any of them, his deposit
money shall be absolutely forfeited to the vendor, who shall be at liberty to resell the property either by public
auction or private contract, and subject to the like or any other conditions of sale, and the deficiency (if any)
occasioned by such resale together with all expenses attending the same, shall be made good to the vendor by the defaulter at
the present sale, and shall be recoverable as and for liquidated damages, and it shall not he necessary previously to tendera
conveyance to the purchaser.


PARTICULARS
OF A VALUABLE
AURIFEROUS ESTATE,
ESS I
In the Colony of New South Wales,
Held under Grant from the Crown, and comprising about
887 ACHES OF LAND,
Which will be Sold by Auction by
MESSRS.
HOGGART, NORTON, & TRIST,
At the Auction Mart, London,
On FRIDAY, the 14th of JANUARY, 1853,
At Twelve o’clock.
IN AUSTRALIA.
jWemoran&um.
It is hereby agreed between Messrs. Hoggart, Norton, & Trist, as Agents of the
Vendor, and
(hat the said has become the
purchaser of Lot described in these particulars of sale, at the sum of £
aid that he has paid to the said Messrs. Hoggaet, Norton, & Trist, the sum of £
iis a deposit and in part payment of his purchase-money, on account of the vendor, and that these particulars
end conditions of sale shall he taken as the terms of agreement for the said sale and purchase respectively.
Dated the day of 1853,
