

PARTY POLITICS EXPOSED,
IN A LETTER.
addressed to
THE RIGHT HO NO HABER
THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE
COLONIESi
CONTAINING
COMMENTS ON CONVICT DISCIPLINE IN NEW SOUTH WALES;
AND EMBODYING
A PARTICULAR ANALYSIS
OF THE
PUBLISHED EVIDENCE
TAKEN AT
CASTLE FORBES,
DY
COMMISSIONERS PLUNKETT AND HELY,
njapEcriNo
WKB TB.BABIHBWT OP ABSXCHNTEXI COWVICT SEHVAITIS.
BY AN EMIGRANT
OF 1821.
3PRINTRD BY ANNE HOWE, AT THE SYDNEY GAZETTE
OFFICE, GEOKGE-STHEET.
1834.
1,/ViVc Three Shillings,]


TO THE
BRITISH NATION.
L'KLI.OW COUNTIIYMIvN,
The following observations collected by an
eye-witness from the most fearful facts, and ex-
posed iu a Letter addressed to the Right Honor-
able the Secretary of State for the Colonies, arc
respectfully dedicated to yon. Although the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans interpose their broad
waves, and separate us ; yet, even at so immense
a distance, can the voice of Humanity success-
fully address itself to your noble and susceptible
minds. The Press is free, and through it’s me-
dium, the wrongs of your persecuted, though
criminal Brethren, languishing in the bitterest
bonds of Slavery, are wafted to your sea-girt
Shores. To increase the cup of woe for the
erring Children of Britain, is said to be the pie


sent policy of those who guide the helm of her
State affairs. Alas ! .that cup already overflows,
ns will manifestly appear from a perusal of the
following details, which are earnestly submitted
for your humane consideration, by
'"cpaiaa
A BltlTlSil EIVOGB.AWI' TO AUSIAiUIA,
01 Tim YU A.II UiiM.
SYDUEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.}
isi a i'ini.i, hum. £


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
EDWARD G. STANLEY.
His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for
the Colonial Department.
SIR,
When you accepted the Seals of the Colonial Department,
the expressions you were reported to have used in the
House of Commons (circulated with great avidity by
the enemies of the present system of prison discipline in
this Colony), gave rise to feelings of great alarm ; for the
public hailed them as the precursors of a mode of cruelty to
the prison population, which every Governor has endea-
voured to prevent in (hose to whom the employment of
transported offenders has been assigned.
In a debate in the Imperial Parliament respecting the
funds devoted to the support of the Convict Establishment*
at Bermuda, a portion of the Public Press of this Colony
has attributed to you the following expression:—“ that
arrangements would be made to render the punishment of
transportation worse than death ! ! !”
The Executive power in this Colony, in attempting to
impose restrictions upon tho sanguinary dispositions of
numerous Colonists, has, particularly since the establish-
ment of the Herald newspaper, created much excitement;
not only among those whose conduct has bordered on the
ferocious, but even with such as have violated no Christian
principle in tho treatment of their assigned servants. This
pervading sentiment can bo traced to a fancied interference
by the Government with the prerogative of tho sctllar, in
exacting labour alone from the prisoner, without, bestowing
tho least attention upon his moral reformation. These two
opposites in the Colouisla’ vocabulary arc wholly irrecon-
cileable—considering, as they in common do, that the
. b .


prisoner is placed in their custody for the purpose of
punishment alone, they view any system of discipline which
contemplates another object, as destructive of their autho-
rity, and generating the seeds of immediate and dangerous
disobedience. As the mode of transportation now operates,
the punishment of offenders is of a very unequal character,
and in many instances calculated to defeat the objects of
philanthropy— reformation,— by sacrificing humanity at the
altar of vengeance. If the Government should resolve to
increase severities, already too often destructive of the best
feelings and hopes of offenders, it will I think be found,
when a remedy can hardly bo applied, that evils have
accrued, and a bitter spirit of hatred been excited,
which, while it may not for years affect the security of the
Government, may be planted as the germ of future dis-
obedience, and even at the present moment, endanger the
public safety by driving numerous desperadoes into the
woods to pillage the Colonists. There is here, a strong
and general sympathy felt among all classes, when a solitary
instance of severity is exposed, beyond that which the good
of the community demands, towards prisoners arriving in a
strange and distant land, heart-broken for that they have
left for ever, and separated from those domestic ties, the
pleasures of which they are destined perhaps, never more
to enjoy. I ask Sir, with all possible respect, if such men
are immediately doomed to labour in chains (for this is
now the punishment to bo meted out to secondly convicted
offenders), under the fiery rays of an almost vortical sun—
spurned by low merciless overseers—scourged for a single
look of resentment by Magistrates, accustomed in many
instances to use the lash upon human flesh with less
reluctance than upon their stubborn bullocks,—to what must
the system lead ? I answer Sir, unhesitatingly—Ao extensive
hushranging.
Suppose, for the sake of argument, that punishment alone
was to bo tho characteristic feature in prison discipline,
allow me to enquire, in what respect would it benefit our
state of society ? What severity in this land can control tho
vicious passions and depraved natures nurtured in another ?
Does not the scaffold seem to possess sufficient horrors to


appal the most reckless mind ?—and yet in what instance has
it's terrors operated as a bar to the commission of acts of
daring atrocity ? Were a thousand victims to suffer'death
to-day for a crime, it would not deter others from heedlessly
rushing into the same vortex to-morrow. This, Sir, is an
incontrovertible fact, established on the broad basis of ex-
perience.
Can the people of England imagine that the prisoners
here are comfortable? If they do, they cherish an idea
which their bettor sense ought to teach them to abandon-}
for thousands, whose bosoms are capable of nourishing the
sentiments of refinement, are languishing at this moment in
Australia in brolcen-heartedness, without one solitary gleam
of hope to encourage them in their miserable pilgrimage..
And yet such persons will frequently tell their European
friends that (hey enjoy prosperity; a representation seldom
indeed correct, and mainly attributable to that natural
proneness which even the most wretched man involuntarily
feels to lull the fears of his relations. Perhaps, also, in
contrasting his individual situation with that of others in
the circle of his companions in adversity, he cheers himself
with the reflection that die is rendered subject to some soli-
tary instance of lesser misery than his wretched associates.
These representations men in England too incautiously seize
upon as the only ground for repudiating the ineflioacy of
banishment with penal consequences. With the view,
therefore, of more distinctly removing opinions of this
description, I will shew you, Sir, (ho exact condition in
which the prison population of this Colony now stands,
classified according to colonial custom.
EDUCATED CONVICTS,
Until, I believe, the arrival of General Darling, there
was no classification of prisoners attempted : it therefore
devolved upon that Governor partially to carry this measure
into effect; and I take the freedom of quoting largely from
one of the letters of a writer in the Sydney Gazette of 11th
February, 1832, subscribed “An Independent.” on this
subject, to which I beg to call your serious attention.
•«‘ho (the Governor) depended for the success of his experiment upon die
" maxim that whore education Ims been implanted, morality may slumber, but


" naver die.”—" Hence tlie distant settlement of Wellington Valley became
" the retreat of the decayed, erring fashionables, whore they were placed
“ under the care of that fatherly and humane Gentleman, Mr. Maxwell,
** whom every party in the Colony cannot fail to eulogise, whether in private
11 life, or in the exercise of his public duty ; and adverting to simple and
" inoonleatible facts, 1 believe I can satisfy the most sceptical opponent, that
“ the result was extremely favourable; for, on a trial of thirty prisoners thus
" selected, not more than one has incurred a colonial sentence since the olassi-
“ fication was carried into effect. The privations consequent upon their
" seclusion from the vices and blandishments of Sydney, enabled them to
11 appreciate the real want of that liberty, and those rational enjoyments which
“ were once within their reach : on their return to society, they feel, as wo
11 have seen, a livelier interest in the blessings of domestic felicity, and enter-
" tain a more exalted view of the invaluable attributes of honesty. During
“ former Governments, as well as during part of General Darling’s adminis-
" tration, men of education -suffered the most degrading punishments and
" privations without any adequate causes ; equal, nay exceeding that to which
■' the moat abandoned ruffian was subject. Xsay worse, because the majority
“ of Overseers of Clearing and other Gangs, under whom they were placed
*• on their arrival in the Country, had sprung from the lowest orders, and bad
" acquired a brief authority here, by acts of base and willing subserviency,
•' bribery, and fraud. The extent of their power was in reality unoircum-
■' scribed: their word was as the laws of the Modes and Persians, which
" • altereth not.’ Punishment, in fact, followed as certain as the threats they
“ uttered;—having the support of their superiors, they naturally joined with
" avidity in depressing men under their control, who had moved in a higher
" sphere, or who possessed superior knowledge and habits to themselves.
" The intelligent and liberal portion of the people deplored the existence of
“ such wanton abuses of authority, and gave General Darling full credit for
" the judicious distinction which ho thus attempted to establish.”
At this Establishment the educated prisoners were, I
learn, occupied in manual labor apart from the other class ;
and since the Government abandoned Wellington Valley,
the Settlement of Port Macquarie has been selected for
their probationary residence.—lf the system of General
Darling be carried inlo operation by the Authorities there,
with the same discernment as marked the superintendence
of Mr. Maxwell, I make no doubt but that those men will,
after a proper knowledge of the condition into which crime
has placed them, return to society, as good members : but I
would respectfully press upon the local Government the
propriety of holding forth a stimulant, by rendering their
resnoval solely dependent upon a certain period of uninter-
rupted good conduct, I am, Sir, decidedly opposed to that
degree of severity which nourishes despair. The law cxacls
a fearful tribute by banishment,--seclusion from civilized


society,—and the various mortifying sufferings'and restraints
to which both classes of prisoners here are liable in a greater
or lesser degree. It is only necessary to carry matters to
dire extremes, when offences or motives justify the means
employed to punish.—To tell a man who shews a manifest
wish to reform, “ Yon are a convict—the law will punish—
“ and if you perish daring the ordeal, you are the property
“ of the law—you shall not amend,” is a mode of dispensing
justice without mercy, contrary to the established principles
of British jurisprudence, which I can never learn to commend.
But I am afraid you will be apt to suppose that the educated
prisoners enjoying the favour of the Government form a
numerous body. Bo not deceived. I have taken the
trouble of ascertaining the number now in Sydney holding
temporary indulgences, the result of uniformly good con-
duct, and they amount to Jive, not one of whom has ever
been placed before a Magistrate for the slightest offence.
Sir, may collect from this fact, that the class of intel-
ligent convicts is scattered over the country. It is prepos-
terous to speak of Ironed Gangs, as some parties have
recommended for such men on their arrival in the Colony:
a system more relined in barbarity cannot be devised, and
will, I trust, never be sanctioned. It’s tendency would be, to
render desperation more desperate, and awfully to increase
the catalogue of human suffering and crime.
Before concluding my remarks upon educated prisoners, I
take leave to observe, that it may bo well for some of the
gay Dons of the Mall, and the exquisite Loungers of 'Re-
gent-street, to know, that here they must exchange the
reins of tho sporting tandem for the bullock’s bridle ; the
prancing charger for the stumbling stock horse ; and enjoy
the felicity of a sheet of hark, and a rough-woolled blanket,
in lieu of a bed of down.— Contemplate yourselves, ye Stars
of tho Western Metropolis ! under the boughs of a swamp-
oak, washing a canvas shirt—turning the quill into a hoe or
an axe—your countenances rendered brown as a nut with
the rays of a fierce, scorching sun—and ask yourselves
whether the temporary gratification of vicious passions can
compensate for the degradation and misery into which a
single step in the path of crime may irrevocably preci-
pitate you.


The other class to whichT have now to draw your atten-
tion, are the
UNEDUCATED CONVICTS.
As there is a very great difference in the natural dis-
positions, and previous habits of men, so ought there to bo
degrees and modes of punishment to answer such differences.
I admit that a comprehensive application of any such rule
of correction would infallibly be attended with extreme
difficulty, but still the system is capable of extensive improve-
ment, and ought not to be abandoned because the duty is
perhaps prospectively laborious. Some men will say that
the punishment of criminals ought to he similar in every
respect, because they have erred. I envy not minds that
entertain such sentiments; will they he defended upon
any principle that the same discipline is commendable,
when it applies with equal force to a man, hitherto moving
in respectable circles, welt educated, and retaining about
him a self-respect, unimpaired amidst till the vicissitudes to
to which he has been liable : and to the hardened offender,
cradled in infamy, and reared to habits of black enormity,
wholly insensible to any emotion beyond that which proceeds
from the gratification of the grossest passions? Besides, can
it be necessary that the pickpocket, burglar, and worse than
all, the beastly unnatural offender, should bo placed on a
level with tbe poacher, smuggler, or other unfortunate,
suffering under a solitary instance of criminal error ? Cor- '
tainly not. Tbe labour to which convicts in general are
placed, particularly those of the uneducated class, consists
either in clearing timber, and otherwise preparing land for
cultivation, or in being employed as domestic servants. It
may perhaps occur to you, Sir, as very probable, that the
hardships of such an employment are not sufficiently severe
on those who have committed crimes, since many of them
have been accustomed to such occupations; but it is in the
restraints imposed by the Local Government, and the prone-
ness of masters to consider convict servants as less entitled
to the exercise of a humane disposition than the animals
around them, that the punishment consists. Yet the labour 1
itself is severe, from it’s unremitting duration ; the beat and
variation of tbe climate; and the insufficiency and bad
quality of the food ; the ration being pretty generally, one


pound of beef, and one pound of bread per diem, willi, in
some instances, a trifling occasional allowance of tea and
sugar. The former article of provision is frequently nn«
wholsome, from being putrid by reason of imperfect curing,
and moreover the refuse of the carcass ; and the latter
consists of a bettor sort of pollard, containing barely
sufficient farinaceous substance to keep body and soul
together.
(This fact is established by the condemnation, as putrid
and unwbolsorae of a whole ship’s cargo of salted beef
forwarded from. Sydney a short time since, £»r the support
of about 700 convicts at Moreton Bay, who, in conse-
quence of it’s total unfitness as provision, were reduced to
a state bordering on starvation, until a supply could be
forwarded from Hoad Quarters. One of the Commissariat
Officers it is publicly said, is a partner in the contract for
these scandalous supplies of unwholesome provisions, and'
through whose influence they arc received into His
Majesty’s magazines.)
Should a single act of remissuess of labour occur (and a
bare suspicion of intention is proof of actual offence,
according to the charitable lexicon of the settler), the
prisoner is made to suffer an infliction of the lash; and I
can assure you Sir, from personal observation, that it is not
uncommon to see a poor wretch working on the roads, or
labouring in the fields with his coarse shirt sticking to the
green and tainted flesh of his lacerated back, and that too,
for the most venial offence—the bare neglect of an order—a
word of insolence or disrespect (and a sour look is so
construed) are held to bo sufficient grounds for awarding
corporal punishment,
I have it from unquestionable authority, that it frequently
occurs in the summer season, that the eggs of the blue-fly
become inserted and hatched in the wounds of the punished
offender, from which they are occasionally extracted by
some, humane companion ; hut I cannot more aptly explain
to you the lamentable condition of the generality of the prison
population, than by quoting the editorial comments of the
Sydney Gazette of the 20th November, 1830, assuring you,
Sir, that the punishment therein described has not abated,


Unless in the auhstitution of 26, or 60, for 100 lashes in cases
of trilling neglect, notwithstanding tho vehement complaints
of the humane Gentlemen resident on the banks of Hun-
ter’s River. In the publication referred to, it is observed,
that
" Tfie prisoners of all classes in Government are fed with the coarsest
“ food; governed with the most rigid discipline; subjected to the stern, ami
" frequently capricious and tyrannical will of an Overseer, —for tho slightest
" offence—sometimes for none at all, —the victim of false accusation —
“ brought before a Magistrate, whom tho Government has armed with tho
tremendous powers of a summary jurisdiction, and either Hogged or sou-
" tenced to solitary confinement, or rctransported to an Iron Gang, where he
“ must work in heavy irons, or to a Penal Settlement, where ho will he ruled
“ with a rod of iron. If assigned to a private individual, lie becomes tho crea-
'■ ture of chance. He may fall into the hands of a kind and indulgent master,
“ who will reward his fidelity with suitable acknowledgments ; but in ninety-
“ nine cases out of a hundred he will find his employer suspicious, or whim-
“ steal, or a blockhead, not knowing good conduct from had, or a despot, who
“ treats him like a slave, cursing and abusing, and getting him flogged for no
“ reasonable cause. He may bo harrasaed to tho very death. Ho may bn
“ worked like a horse, and fad like a chameleon. Tho master, though not
“ invested by law with uncontrolled power, has yet great authority, which
" may be abused in a thousand ways precluding redress. Even his legal
“ power is sufficiently formidable. A single act of disobedience—a single
“ syllable of insolence—is a legitimate ground of complaint, before the
“ Magistrate, and is always severely dealt with. But, besides tho master's
" power, tho prisoners are in somo measure under a dominion to tho free popu-
" lation at large ; any man can give him in charge without ceremony. If seen
“ drank—if seen tippling in the public-house—if met after hours in tho
" street —if unable to pay his trifling debt—if impertinent—tho free man has
" nothing more to do than send him to tho watch-house, and gel him
" punished. Tho poor prisoner is at the mercy of all men.”
Is tins leniency ?
There is. Sir, I submit, no theory more fallacious iu
practice, than that which solely relies upon severity of
treatment tor the moral improvement of offenders. The
conlrary axiom lias boon adopted after years of painful
experience of the workings of the penal codes throughout
Europe by men above every prejudice; who are guided
in their investigations by the noble and solid intention of
mitigating suffering humanity from unnecessary debasement
and cruelty, while the protection of society from the demo-
ralizing examples and acts of atrocious men, is also brought
within the range of their philanthropic enquiries. By such


mon, Sir, it has boon contended as a fixed principle, that
whether as applicable to the Penitentiaries or Hulks, or to
the numerous Prison Houses in Australasia, “ the great
“ ends of penal legislation are wholly defeated by blind seve-
“ rity, as a means of leading to the suppression of crime.”
I shall, Sir, in the sequel, have occasion to lay before
you instances of barbarity, unknown to European society in
tbe present century—cruelties that might even blanch the
cheek of the veriest slave-master; the thought of which
will excite a sympathy in English bosoms, throwing the
crimes of individuals entirely in the shade, and exhibiting
them as objects of barbarous persecution, entitled to the
treatment of, at least, English convicts, if not fellow-men
who have lost, for a time, the rights of British subjects.
In the course of this display of fact and horror, it may
become necessary to allude indirectly to some of the parties
implicated : a direct charge would involve mo in all the
perplexities of litigation ; and under these circumstances,
though I am precluded from holding up to public execration
particular parlies, this, I am confident, will not derogate
from tbe credit to which Ibis exposition is entitled. The
facts are notorious; and where it is desirable, I will accom-
pany my statement with collateral evidence. But before
even entering upon a field so pregnant with incidents of dire
atrocity, I crave, Sir, your permission to give an outline of
the political machinery by which the Press in this Colony
is worked and controlled. Holding a command of great
influence over the passions of civilized society, those who
respect the Press, as giving a limit to the progress of
rapacity and ambition, feel disgust when it’s profligacy
degenerates into the hands of fierce partizanship, and when
the national dignity or interests are compromised for foul
objects of personal animosity and individual degradation.
In no Colony under the British Crown has the fury of
party acquired such an ascendancy and influence as in this.
Religion, morality, and the best feelings of nature have
been outraged by it’s virulence —the domestic circle shame-
fully violated —established authority traduced—and now,
alas! to close the fearful catalogue of ills which have fallen
from this “ •palladium” we have the thunders ol the Press
c


clirecled against mercy, anil an attempt made to introduce
a sanguinary code of laws to debase and fetter thousands
of prisoners—annihilate hope for ever —and present the
children of British parents in all the odious lights of
slaverynot, Sir, to strike terror into the vile,, who revel
amidst dissipation and crime in .England, but to reduce the
prison population hero to the lowest possible, standard which
degraded humanity is capable of enduring, in order to com :
maud manual labour upon the same tenure as the Colonists
hold their horses and cattle. This change in sentiment has
been produced within the last few years. The Sydney
Herald, basing it’s popularity and success upon the Emigrant
portion of the community, is the first to seize upon every
petty circumstance to disseminate a belief that the prison
population is under no control, and that a system of extreme
coercion is necessary to prevent our streets from becoming
the scenes of tumult and blood. 'When I shew you, Sir,
that this journal is under the guidance of certain disalfcctod
individuals opposed to this Government, and when I more-
over allude to the notorious fact, that it’s proprietors aro
merely nominal editors, whose capacities aro below medi-
ocrity, you will perceive that the Herald is a party paper,
devoted to the caprice of individuals, and it’s assumed inde-
pendence entirely devoid of truth. Some months ago, tho
settlers in the district of Hunter’s River, imagining that
insubordination (a word to which they give a thousand
interpretations) had appeared among their assigned ser-
vants, the Herald was the first to sound the tocsin of alarm,
and to magnify every offence into an act of open insubordi-
nation, until defeated by the united voice of the people
in other districts; the compunction of some persons who
had been persuaded to sign a Petition, grounded on the
grossest fallacy, praying the Governor for protection, and
at tho same time advising the abrogation of a local enact-
ment, which had justly deprived the Magistracy of exer-
cising certain extensive powers they had previously pos-
sessed in their summary jurisdiction ; —and last, though not
least, the result of a public enquiry, which drowned, with
indignant reproach, the base misrepresentations of tho dis-
affected, and almost disloyal agents of the scheme.


r 1 point out the political bias of this journal* because I
feel convinced that it will bo referred to as corroborative of
the iauieutablo state of immorality which is alleged to exist
hero. As descriptive, however, of the real manners of the
inhabitants—or as pourtraying the sentiments even of that
class whose interests it professes to advocate—it cannot bo
received as evidence; for though many would desire, like
it, to establish distinctions, odious in themselves, and
destructive of that amalgamation of society which all men
of sound honor and discrimination look to as best calcu-
lated to advance the real and true interests of the Colony,—
yet the great body of Emigrants, reconciled to social
intercourse with the Emancipists, both by mutual obliga-
tions, intermarriages, and the thousand other civilities
incident to a limited society, repudiate even the implied
wish to detract from, or perpetuate the recollections of, the
former state of the Emancipists. The Petition from the
“ Hunter,” above alluded to, proceeded from the following
cause ;
In March 1832, an Act passed the Legislative Council of
this Colony, limiting the hitherto uncontrolled power of the
Justices in administering punishment for certain oflences,
therein particularly described. The extraordinary scourg-
ings which the Magistrates ware accustomed to order, had
excited in the minds of all men the greatest detestation,
and this Act was received by the Colonists with cordial
demonstrations of approval. For a time no symptom of
discontent was exhibited. Confidence between the Go-
vernor and governed was not disturbed, until His Excel-
lency brought the conduct of a Mr. Single under review
for inviting a friend, his guest, to hold a Court in his par-
lour, to try certain of his assigned servants, and deal out se-
vere punishment. This unconstitutional mode of truckling
with justice, produced a merited censure. Mr. Single
appealed to my Lord Goderich, who approved of the Go-
vernor’s conduct, and hence the almost immediate preaching-
up a crusade against the pretended inefficacy of his measures,
and hostility to his government by the partisans of undue


severity, as the only probable mode either of driving His
Excellency into a dilemma by which they might profit to his
disadvantage; or of inducing a change of his confidential
advisers, for others more congenial to their private wishes.
The Governor allowed their party virulence and animosity
to come to maturity in the shape of a bantling Petition for
protection, upon the imputed ground that “ insubordination’'
raged among the assigned servants of the Colonists generally,
in consequence of the limited punishments which the law had
provided. The Governor in this instance foresaw the unwor-
thy aim of the Petitioners, and acted with sound judgment, in
addressing Circular Letters to all the Benches of Magistrates
in the Colony, calling upon them to report specifically on tho
degree of corporal suffering endured by prisoners in those
cases, which the Petitioners impugned as lenient. Tho
result, as anticipated, was such as to convince tho Executive
and the Country that the Petition was wholly groundless.
(" CIRCULAR.)
" N°. 33-48. “ Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney,
“ 16t/i October, 1833.
'• SIR,
“ Inconsequence of two petitions presented to the Governor and Legislative
“ Council a few days before tho Council terminated its last Session, in which
“ petitions, it was amongst other things stated, that the amount of punishment
“to which Justices of tho Peace are empowered by tho Colonial Act, 3rd Cut,
“ IV. No. 3, to sentence convicts in a summary way was too small, and that
tho instrument direoted to bo used in inflicting corporal punishments was so
“ inefficacious as to cause tho power of the Magistrates to ho derided, tho
“ Governor was pleased to command me, on the 21st August last, to address
a Circular letter to the several Police Magistrates in the Colony (a Copy
“ of which is annexed), directing them to superintend personally, all corporal
“ punishments inflicted in their districts, during tho ensuing month of Sep-
tember, and to report tho amount of bodily suffering which tiro infliction
“ appeared to produce, when properly administered with tho standard instru-
“ ment issued by the Prineipal Superintendent of Convicts, in accordance
“ with the intimation given to the Magistrates of tho Colony in my Circular
“ letter of tho 18th May last, and further to report their opinion, whether such
" infliction appeared to them a sufficient punishment for the offences which,
by tlie afore-recited Act, are directed to bo punished with My lashes.
„'• Hl * Excellency now deeming it important, that all the Justices of the
caco m the Colony should be informed of Hie result of this enquiry, 1 am


" commanded' to transmit to you Copies of the letters and Reports of tho
“ Police Magistrates which have just hcen received. The conclusion to bo
" drawn from a consideration of these, documents, is necessarily this: that
“ hath the measure of punishment authorised by tho law, and the instrument
“ fur inflicting it, are sufficient for tho purposes intended. These facts aro
“ established by tire quantum of suffering endured by the criminal when tbs
“ punishment is duly administered, and hy the gratifying assurance of tho
“ peaceable conduct of those persons for whoso coercion the law has been
“ passed. At Hyde Park Barrack, where punishments have been inflicted
“ Strictly according to regulation, the Superintendent reports, that in many
“ cases where fifty lashes wore ordered hy tho Court, twenty-five would, in iris
opinion, have been a sufficient punishment; and it is suggested by tins active
“ and intelligent Officer, that the sentence should ho reduced. In several
“ other Districts tho punishments are represented to he fully sufficient. In
*’ those where it appears to have been less effective, the cause is to be found in
“ the disrepair of tho instrument; or, in the negligence, or possibly the cor-
“ ruptiou of the executioner. Against accidents or abuses of this sort, the
“ vigilance and superintending control of the Magistrates should have pro-
“ Vidcd a prompt remedy; and it is not too much to say, that it is within the
" power, not only of every Police Magistrate, but of every Gentleman holding
“ a Commission of the Peace in tho Colony, to render tho corporal punish-
“ merits which he commands in due course of law, to he as efficiently adrni-
“ nisterod in the place for which he acts, as similar punishments aro at Hyde
" Park.
“ Tho sufficiency of the law, and of the instrument of corporal punishment
“ in all cases where proper superintendence is exercised, being thus estab-
“ Mshed on unexceptionable evidence, His Excellency need hardly point out
" to you how inexpedient, how dangerous it would be, by any new legislative
enactment, to add to tho severity of either, merely because, in some in-
“ stances, the wholesome rigor of tho existing law has boon impeded hy a
“ negligent or corrupt execution. In reading the Reports which have been
“ presented, tho Governor could not fail to observe, that where punishments
“ have boon duly inflicted, the power .of the Magistrates has been any tiring,
“ but derided. Whilst perusing those painful details, His Excellency has,
“ indeed, had abundant reason to lament that the use of the whip should, of
" necessity, form so prominent a part of convict discipline in Now South
“ South Wales; but believing it to ho unavoidable, the Governor must roly on
‘‘ the activity and discretion of the Magistracy for ensuring its wholesome and
“ sufficient application.
" I have tho honor to be,
“ Sir,
“ Your most obedient Servant,
(signed) “ ALEXANDER M'LEAY.”
Added to tho foregoing, we have the united testimony of
every other district, that the prison population was under


proper control, and perfectly obedient. The Sydney Herald
it is true, published an account of a contemplated rising at
Goulburn, with threats of attempted firing of property,
doubtless in order to aid tlio " hue and cry” of llio faction
with whom they Lad evidently coalesced; and circulated
from time to time dreadful alarms of general disaffection of
the convicts, which, on enquiry, were cither discovered to
be totally false, or of so trumpery a nature as to merit the
contempt both of the Government, and the public at
large.
“ Goulbnrn, Glh October, 1033.
<• SIR,
“ I have the honor to acknowledge tho receipt of your letter of the 2Gtli ul-
" time, with reference to an article in tho Sydney Herald newspaper, of tho
“ 23d ultimo, which slates that a llockito or incendiary notice hail linen
“ affixed upon some estate in Argylu by the convict servants, ami requesting me
“to lake measures,-by enquiring amongst the Magistrates and others of tho
“ District, whether the statement alluded to lias any foundation in truth.
“ In answer, I hog to inform you, that, after every enquiry, I (hid tho said
“ statement has no foundation in truth, as 1 cannot suppose it can hoar any
“ allusion to a placard that had been affixed on Dr. Gibson's farm live months
“ since, and which was viewed as solely pointing at that gentleman and myaul f,
“ but of so contemptible a nature as never to have given me a Second
“ thought.
“ No disposition to acts of violence or incendiarism, on tho part of the
" convicts, has boon manifested in tho Southern Districts ; nothing of the sort
" could lake place without my knowledge.
“ Indeed, upon all well-regulated estates, the convicts have given as little
“ trouble during the present, as in former years; so far as my own eslablish-
“ ments are concerned, I can say only one of my assigned servants underwent,
“ punishment for.the last nine months, and that case was for making away
" with his bed and bedding.
“ I have the honor to he,
“ Sir,
" Your most obedient Servant,
(signed) “ L. MACALISTEH,
“ Lieutenant Mounted I’olicc.”
" The Honorable the Colonial Secretary.”
Discomfiture Las rendered the faction morose and vin-
dictive in their temper, and conceiving that an honourable
submission to affronted authority, is loss dignified than an


unjust resistance against it, they liave again taken the field,
and consigned their second foster-child, in the shape of a
Petition, to the Home Authorities, praying the Governor’s
removal, with every circumstance of petty pomp and noise,
to the navigation of Sir William Edward Parry, who cannot
but smile in derision at their cupidity, knowing as he does,
how unpopular and unjust their complaints really are, and
that the Magistrates hold an antidote in their own hands to
every one of the evils complained of, namely—the efficient
exercise of the law as it now stands.
You, Sir, will naturally ask, in which way is it possible
to remedy those dangerous and accumulating grievances ;
to relieve the Government from abject submission to the
presumptuous dictation of honorary Magistrates ; and yet
preserve the public tranquility from any of those convulsions
incidental upon sudden changes, on the other. I admit the
value in the aggregate, of magisterial services, particularly
many years ago, when the country possessed but few en-
lightened Colonists to administer justice. From obedient
ministerial officers, they are now however, become more or
less disposed to blend party politics with tbe discharge of
duty; and to withhold a vigorous administration of their
functions, in order to attain the abolition of laws and orders
which they consider as clashing with their private interests,
and political feelings. To keep such a body in humour,
the dignity of the Crown must be compromised, or it’s
authority vindicated by the adoption of a severe and neces-
sary course, which this Government is censurable for not
having pursued the moment it perceived the growth of
partisanship, opposed to it’s prerogative. Had Governor
Bourko issued a new Commission of the Peace, and mani-
fested his just, displeasure by excluding the names of the
factious, and disobedient persons who still hold office, the
hydra would have been strangled in it’s birth. Toleration is
construed into impunity, and waxing strong by means of
this inaction—disrespect towards the local Authorities is
openly manifested—their opinions treated with contempt—
and reference about to bo made to you, in England, for


vedvcss of grievances, the existence of which, a delibmite
enquiry upon ilia spot, has failed to discover. I recommend,
Sir, strongly for your consideration, in the present position
of affairs in the Colony, the propriety of nominating stipen-
diary Magistrates to preside over tlio interior Courts of
Hetty Session. To in sure coniidenee in tbeii integrity, and
to preclude the possibility ot interested motives being
assumed as possessing a control over their decisions, t
respectfully urge the expediency of administering an oath
of office, binding these Magistrates to hold neither land nor
stock; nor engage, either directly or indirectly, in any
agricultural or other occupation, while holding their public
situations. This would correct the evil. It would eradicate
the cancer whicli now gnaws the root of public tranquility,
embarrassing the Executive Authority, and splitting the
Colonists into parties, who buzz about in all directions,
exciting fears in order to obtain the good old days, when
despotism prevailed, without one man being hold enough to
charge the foul monsters with startling inhumanity, from
the anxiety evinced by the Hunter’s liivor petitioners to
increase the summary jurisdiction of the Magistrates, and
to lend the decision of a single Justice, all the respect
and authority of a full and constituted Bench, a cursory
observer could see little to bo dreaded, hut would at once
accede to a request so moderately, and ingeniously urged.
Convicts, Englishmen would reason, have boon driven
beyond the pale of the law for their crimes, and it behoves
the Authorities, for the sake of example, to hold them up
in all the horrors of degraded servitude—but, Sir, English
convicts carry along with them a recollection of what they
have been, and will not crouch under tho sullen brow, and
upreared arm, raised to brutalise their natures. Experience,
in this Colony, has proved, that rather than continue subject
to degradation in it’s harshest form, the prisoner will either
seek the life of his oppressor, or fly to tho woods, ami perish
on the scaffold, for enormities committed there; and he
courts this fate, as kindly relieving him from afflictions
beyond human endurance. What additional severity do tho


■settlers require ? If a convict, neglect, or even rest from
hia labour, lie is flogged—if be speak disrespectfully to a
master, or an overseer, be is flogged—if be quit without
permission bis master’s farm, be is flogged—if bo do any
thing which in free men would not be noticed, twenty-five
or fifty lashes are dealt out to him with all imaginable
indifference,—and yet, as if the cup of human misery were
not sufficiently full, the merciful and benignant rabble of
setllers on the Hunter, desire power to administer for any
of those petty offences, two hundred or five hundred lashes,
as it may suit the caprice of their Mightinesses to order.
There is, Sir, another object which has created much
chagrin among the Magistrates—namely, the withdrawal of
that protection or indemnity which the Government
used formerly to extend on all occasions for acts, even of the
most flagitious kind, professed to have been performed in
the execution of thoir office. The disgrace which this
entailed upon the administration of General Darling, will
be borne in remembrance by the Colonists, when the other
gross acts of his misgovernment will be forgotten. It was
the fertile source of disturbance and oppression, because the
responsibility of the Magistrate was merely nominal. The
public purse was at his service. This of itself ought to
convince the Government that the present Magistracy is
most injudiciously upheld ; and that holding mere honorary
appointments —anticipating embarrassment front tbeir whims
or dictation—and assuming an authority which neither their
services nor their weight justify—these circumstances con-
joined, point out the absolute inexpediency of relying for
co-operation in the enforcement of local laws from men, who
have so many seeming grievances to goad them on to obsti-
nate resistance, or crafty evasion of their prescribed duties.
But the evil does not even terminate here. Neither the
convict nor hia master has faith in the Magistracy as a body ,
and why should they, when such disgraceful acts as have
hitherto been exposed, arc either justified or palliated by
them? They desire it to be pronounced lawful for one
Magistrate to invite another to dine, and while carousing,
D


like fiddling Heroes, order a few convicts to be scourged iu
llie yard, as a sort of accompaniment to their banquet.: in
the house “ the feast of i aason! and the (low of soul!” —.
in the yard, the feast of flagging, and the flow of blond!
You, Sir, will say that this severity cannot bo just ; hut 1
have seen men for more venial offences scourged till the
blood has dripped into their shoes; and I have seen the
flesh tainted and smelling on a living human body, from the
effects of severe flagellation ; tho very maggots writhing
about in a wretch’s flesh—and for what? Not for robbery,
nor violence—not for a crime that threatened dangerous
consequences to any one—but upon tho charge of an Over-
seer that tho prisoner neglected his allotted task. In this
miserable condition is a convict obliged to labor. Tho
Colonist considers that lie is made of sterner stuff than
other mortals —and sterner he must he to labor in the
fields, exposed to a burning sun, with his hack literally
raw. After being flogged, he must instantly again to the
field—for him there is no compassion. This is but a feeble
picture of tho terrific system which Governor Eourkc has
partially corrected. Ho has attempted to apportion punish-
ment to crime ; “ but no,” say the Gentlemen of tho Hun-
ter, “ you must leave a discretion in us to do as wo like." If
the Governor were to abide by their decision in such mat-
ters—if he shewed any disposition to parley with persons in
whom ambition and misrule have taken deep root, his admi-
nistration would bo pointed at as one of imbecility, and tho
respect due to his station become a bye word and a
mockery.
You may suppose, Sir, that tho great body of the Colonists
who subsist by agricultural occupations are decidedly ini-
mical to the measures of tho Government, and acquiesce in
those violent Petitions to which I have already alluded.
The writer must have become dead to all sense of truth who
would advance such a declaration. Discontent is limited to
the Petitioners alone ; aided they undoubtedly are in all
their movements by two or three Members of the Legis-
lative Council, whose wrath has been kindled against the


Governor for (.lie liberal view entertained by him on the
great point of Trial by Jury—a point wliicb some few of
the principal leaders of the cabal or faction contended
ought never to be yielded to the Emancipists. They preach
a total and irrecoverable proscription of civil immunities to
this body : and were it not that the laws interposed protec-
tion, tlie Emigrant, in some cases, would strip the freed
Colonists of their possessions, and doom them to perpetual
persecution or servitude. Those men, nurtured in ideas of
exclusion, the moment they found His Majesty’s Ministers
disposed to equalize the rights of both parties, denounced
the measure as hazardous; and a man, named “ Camp-
hell,” indulged his gentlemanly spleen upon one of the
wealthiest Emancipists in the Colony, by a public and in-
sulting appeal to our Supreme Court, from the Jury Box ;
an act of unparalleled impudence and ignorance, which
called forth the indignant rebuke of the presiding Judge,
as Well as the condemnation of every liberal mind. This
party it is, who rankling after defeat, and anxious to decry
the salutary operation of the Jury Act, at this time head
the malccontonts, actuated by various motives spring out of
all, or either of the causes X have pointed out.
The next observations I proceed to address to you are,
respecting the
EMANCIPISTS AND EXPIREES.
On reference to the report of Mr. Commissioner Bigge,
it will bo observed that this body lias, almost from the
establishment of the Colony, had to contend with the preju-
dices of a portion of the Free Emigrants, who resisted, and
still continue to resist by every moans in their power, the
advancement of this people to tho enjoyment of the natural
rights of British subjects. But those occasional collisions
of sentiment and feeling reached to no alarming height until
tho arrival of Mr. J. TI. Bent, and the subsequent enquiry
of Mr. Bigge, when men of strict integrity, enjoying the
unlimited confidence of tho Government, were ousted
from their employment in order to gratify the passions—l
cannot say judgment—of a potent party, who wore adverse
to their prosperity, solely because they had been prisoners.
But the wealth and standing a cquired after years of


painful exertion, and a rigid adherence to fidelity in tliefr
engagements, was a resource to this persecuted body in their
hour of trouble, and placed them upon a level with their
bitterest foes,.who vainly attempted to deprive them of
every hope, and to cast them as diseased limbs from the
body of the state. This branch of the subject is very
strikingly illustrated by Mr. Bigge, who published, with
much illiberally of feeling, the parentage, previous life,
habits, and condition in society, of many of the Expirees,
who had distinguished themselves in the Colony both by
their many private virtues and extensive benevolence; for it
formed no part of his duty, nor did it become the high public
station he hold, to wound the domestic feelings of families,
and to tarnish the reputations acquired by many in this Co-
lony, by an unjustifiable and aggravated display of circum-
stances which had taken place in another Country, and
which they had expiated under the severity of the law. I
trust, however, I shall be enabled to prove, that this class
of His Majesty’s subjects are entitled to the fullest confi-
dence of the Country they dwell in, in all the relations of
social life. Their silence, indeed, at a time when the most
pernicious impressions were created by their implacable
enemies against their character and interest, renders them
justly chargeable with criminal negligence of one of the first
duties men of all gradations in society owe to themselves.
A Conditional Pardon, Sir, confers upon the person
receiving it all the rights of a free subject, within the limits
of the Colony only. A Free Pardon restores the holder to
every right he could have enjoyed previous to the commis-
mission of the act which deprived him of liberty. A Cer-
tificate of Freedom is granted to all persons who have duly
worked but the periods of their sentenced exile, and it
expressses that the individual in whose favor it is given is
restored to all the rights of a free British subject. Yet in
the very teeth of this declaration, a handful of men, the
self-constituted guardians of public morality, attempt to
arrogate to themselves the power of creating disqualifica-
tions of citizenship against this portion of their fellow Co-
lonists, which wore never contemplated by tbo law, much
less sanctioned by it. It appears that during the aclminis


tration of Governor Macquarie—or from the commencement
of 1810, to the close of 1821, he granted 306 Free, and
1,365 Conditional Pardons, besides 2,319 Tickets of Leave.
It has been contended on various occasions, that this exten-
sive exercise of tbe prerogative of mercy was improper, by
throwing upon the Country a numerous body of tainted
men, who, by virtue of this boon, were enabled to acquire
property and consequence, to compete with those who claim
an eternal superiority or precedence over them in every
station of life. It was not on account of the imputations
cast on tbe moral conduct of these persons that their eman-
cipation was deemed to bo destructive to the public, or
reprehensible in tbe Government; but tbe opposition arose
from an insidious and censurable aversion from tbe man
and measure that thus laboured so largely to increase the
competition in trade, which, though they condemned, were
nevertheless promoting tbe truest interests of the Colony.
I am not perhaps justified in asserting that all the men thus
indulged deported themselves in such a manner as to realize
the hopes of their amended morals formed by General
Macquarie ; but this is certain, that they were, and still
continue to be the right hand of the Colony in every com-
mercial enterprise; and making all reasonable allowance
for individual cases of dereliction, to which the purest
societies are perhaps as much exposed, I will be bold to
affirm, that the general result has proved the mercy thus
exercised to have been a most judicious act; —moreover it
was recommended for adoption by an intelligent and liberal-
minded Committee of the Commons House of Parliament
in the year 1812.
If, fourteen years ago, both Governor Macquarie and
Mr. Bigge jointly considered "that the wealth of the
“ Country was chiefly in the hands of the Emancipists;”
and the former " was firmly persuaded that the Bank of
“ New South Wales could not be established without their
" co-operation—in what condition. Sir, would this com-
munity ho placed at the present moment, if a body of men
so affluent and influential, commanding the good will of
thousands around them, wore separated by interest and
affection from the Emigrants ? The public and benevolent


Institutions of the Country would vanish into air; lor wind,
charitable society does not number among it’s ardent sup-
porters a majority I may almost add, of Emancipist Colo-
nists?—Yet Sectarians tell the world tbatmen thus benevolent
are alone ruled by the most vicious of the passions ! .But,
thank God ! such imputations are seldom avowed ; and when
adopted, proceed only from such men as consider selfishness
a proof of charity, and benevolence the miserable opposite.
It is very true. Sir, that the Emancipists possess a stake
in the Country infinitely superior to the Emigrants, although
acquired under very discouraging circumstances ; but such
a fact affords no fair proof of the incffioacy of penal
restraint either now or formerly. I consider it as a decided
confirmation of a very just and liberal axiom, that instances
of moral turpitude may arise, and yet leave the perpetrator,
after vindicating tho authority of tho law, a good and
valuable inember of society at a future period. If it had
been the wish of the Legislature to suporadd to tho penal-
ties of the law, and to prevent for ever tho improvement and
return to society of offenders, this result might have been
efficiently attained, by calling into existence some of those
horrid measures that have so greatly tarnished tho ago of
feudal government.—lf, again, the law contemplated that a
person who once invaded it was henceforward eivililer mor-
taura, docs it not occur to you, Sir, and to tho world, as
singular, that a tempororary imprisonment, or a limited
exile, should have been created, when they are expressly
calculated to defeat such a purpose? But it is, I should
hope, almost superfluous to assume positions, or to adduce
principles of law or reason, to prove that such an object
could neter have been contemplated, since it’s inexpediency
is unquestionable, and moreover at direct variance with tho
rules and customs in operation hero since the Colony was
formed. The great constitutional authorities of tho nation
are indeed divided in opinion upon this important subject;
one party contending that a Pardon cannot restore, while
the other maintains, that a Pardon under tho Great Seal
“ makes a man a new creature, and removes his incapacity
“ for all purposes whatever .”
In a population like that of tho United Kingdom, where


the tainted character hears no reasonable proportion to the
pure, policy might perhaps, render it advisable to dis-
tinguish, after the expiration of punishment, persons con-
victed of heinous offences, and to exclude them from many
civil privileges, in order to preserve a moral ascendancy
in the majority of the people. This however, is rendered
unnecessary by our peculiar national policy. England
throws off her tainted subjects, and secures for them an
asylum whore they may reform, and prosper; while Trance,
confining her criminals in her own natural limits, familiarizes
her people to scones of suffering iniquity, and by keeping up
the continued public exposure of her delinquents, renders
their feelings callous, and their reformation impracticable.
This system also tends to demoralize the national character,
and hence crime in France, according to Dupin, taken in
the aggregate, is greater in it’s enormity than in England.
From the British superior policy, we may attribute the
wealth and respectability of the major part of the population
here, who with new scenes of life, have cherished new
desires ; and whose reformation has not been retarded hy
the chilling blast of scorn in the land of their crime. The
wisdom of our ancestors. Sir, having thus provided for the
moral reformation of their erring brethren, there can, I
think, be no question, that they are fully entitled, upon the
broadest principle of justice, and expediency, to a parti-
cipation in every law that has been established for the
welfare of the people. This was the benevolent opinion of
Governor Macquarie, who always maintained, “ that no
“ relrospect should, in any case, be had to a man’s having
“ been a convict”—and however loudly the remission of
sentences may be condemned, it can be shown that the
wealth and intelligence of the Colony, principally centre in
the remnant of the men, or their descendants, who were
liberated by that humans, and excellent Governor.
It has been stated in evidence before a Committee of the
House of Commons, that the “lower order of Emancipists
“ are the most troublesome part of the population,” and by
a convenient mode of inuoudo, an impression is involuntarily
created, that they are moreover grossly wicked, and im-
moral, 1 have no hesitation in very unequivocally repre


stenting to you, that this opinion is erroneous. This traduced
class, from the moment they become masters of their own
exertions, are emulous of acquiring a respectability of
character; and although it is stated, that “ none of them
“ had become wealthy during the Government of General
“ Darling,” I am prepared to prove, and I fearlessly
assert, that this is another example of the deficient know-
ledge of the Colony, possessed by the person who spoke so
roundly on the occasion; since, by the support and
encouragement which can always be commanded by industry
and perseverance, many Expirees have, in the course of tho
last few years, accumulated considerable property, and are
now in the enjoyment of that comfort which well-earned
wealth, and the cordial approval of their liberal-minded
countrymen, are so eminently calculated to bestow. If,
taken on the whole, the standard of morals in Sydney is
loose, and below that of any market town in England
(which I am induced in a relative point of view to dispute),
it cannot bo justly ascribed to tho prison population alone,
and certainly not to the Emancipists, since the fearful
influx of desperate adventurers, decayed and drunken sol-
diers, female unfortunates, chiefly common street-walkers
from the most populous towns of tho Mother Country,-and
other characters of a like questionable utility, which tho
British Government has conceived it necessary and politic
to let loose upon our society (a much greater evil than tho
w'orst of our had harvests), has added grievously to tho
catalogue of human frailty, with which the Colony suffi-
ciently abounded. His Majesty’s advisors, no doubt, intended
by this measure to improve the moral condition of tho
people, but the event has, I think, already disappointed
such a hope, and sadly perplexed the local Government;
since the inhabitants of Sydney can distinguish more mi-
bridled dissipation among the lower order of free Emi-
grants, than is apparent in any of tho prison population ;
the instances among those who have become free
after penal servitude, will be found, on enquiry, to be
comparatively rare.
It is true that most of the higher order of Emigrants
maintain their respectability, although they form but a unit


In tlie grand mass. It is also true that the Emancipists
liold an equally exalted station in moral life ; and balancing
a given number of each body promiscuously selected—or
viewing generally tlie state of public morality in tlie Co-
lony—it will be satisfactorily ascertained tliat experience
and suffering have corrected or modified vices and propen-
sities in the Expirees and Emancipists, which the Emigrants
freely indulge in. It has been charged against the former,
that they are dissolute in their domestic circles—that they
look upon marriage more as a convenience than an impor-
tant and indissoluble bond in the social compact, reverting
to concubinage and other immoral courses of life, that
either afford evidence of vicious levity or depraved prin-
ciple, with a proportionate indifference for public opinion.
Such charges, in a general sense, as applied to the Eman-
cipist body, are most extravagant and unjust. There are
certainly instances (comparatively few, however,) where
these observations might apply; but, Sir, they are not con-
fined to this class alone, hut extend to the highest of the
Emigrants, by whom they are far more prevalent,—con-
ducted more openly—and with greater indecency. Well
may it bo said, “that prostitution is vary general,” since
the lower orders find apt and privileged professors in
those to whom they are desired to look up for example, and
who dwell, with extraordinary pathos, upon their own im-
maculate morality!
“ The Emancipists have never been appointed, of late, to
“ situations under the Government, nor to the Commission
“ of the Peace, neither are they allowed to receive Grants
of Land !” Notwithstanding this entire exclusion from all
share in the favours of the Crown, which constitute the
chief wealth of the Emigrants, who enjoy an extent of
landed estate altogether inadequate to the capital at their
command ; once separate them from the Emancipists, and I
dare predict that they must become, in a majority of cases,
actually dependant upon the bounty of the Government;
for of what avail would uncultivated forests prove to men who
arc not possessed of the means to fall a gum-tree, or grow an
acre of potatoes ? On the other hand, it is a well authen-
ticated fact, that the lives of the Emancipists have been
k


devoted to the improvement of the lands they possess ; that
they are either appropriated to pasturage, or in (lie oecupation
of reclaimed husbandmen, with a progeny of fearless spirits
around them ready to repel aggression, and to preserve
inviolate for their own children, the free institutions inhe-
rited from their fathers.
Shifting ground from the father, his family becomes
mixed in the next observation of Mr. De la Condaraiue,
(who was examined as a witness before a Committee of
the House of Commons, in 1832),—“ there are in the
“ Colony Emancipists of very considerable property, and
“ considerable commercial influence, but they are not
“ associated luith, or received into society by ike respectable
“ inhabitants:” and, moreover, that “ the children of
“ Emancipists would not be received into the first society .”
In so far, Sir, as this remark applies to the fathers, it
may be briefly and justly answered, that yours of unsullied
integrity have produced from the reflecting and liberal
Colonists, a total oblivion of the past; and although the
Civil and Military Authorities were, from the example
and principle of the Governor, constrained to an irksome
reserve, such a feeling had no existence in the minds of the
free and independent Emigrants. If it wore thus limited
to the fathers, no degree of odium was over considered as
extending to their children. Indeed it was a fact perfectly
notorious in the Colony, that during the contentions which
so strongly distinguished the late Government, many of the
most exalted members of it would fain have courted the
support of the children of some Emancipists, and would
have considered themselves honored by their friendship.
If, however, Mr. De la Conclamino thus far derogate from
the hereditary character and respectability of the young
Australians, he nevertheless does full justice to their inde-
pendent feelings ; and when contrasted with the less manly
sentiments of his brother evidences, ho carries the palm for
candour.
The Colonists are well aware, Sir, that the Government
of General Darling appeared desirous of impressing it
upon the minds of His Majesty’s Ministers, that the mani-
festation of a spirit of opposition to the then existing slate


of tilings, and a wish for a different, more mixed, and inde-
pendent administration of public affairs, was not exten-
sive, nor participated in by the more opulent and influential
of the Colonists ; but the consequence of a determined hos-
tility by a few disaffected and factious agitators. This was
not by any means unnatural, because an extension of civil
privileges, and of privileges, Sir, in which the Emancipists
would have unquestionably participated, must have dis-
armed the Government of much of it’s overwhelming au-
thority-equalized the influence of the Colonists—and left
the decision of all points [of public or pi’ivate controversy,
with the enactment of laws, to the sense of men whose
nomination would not emanate from the Crown; —a result
■which men, accustomed to the exclusive direction of the
policy of the country, could not contemplate without alarm.-—■
But I will assure you, Sir, and my assurance is fully cor-
roborated by a Petition now, I believe, in progress of pre-
sentation to the Imperial Parliament, bearing tbc signatures
of upwards of 6,000 individuals, that the sentiment is uni-
versal, and every order in the Colony appears to feel that
security and sound legislation, with an implicit confidence
in the Government, must follow that measure which gives
to tho people a voice in the formation of those laws they
arc called upon to obey.
I am, Sir, induced to believe that an alarm prevails, lost
the Emancipists should, upon some occasion of imminent
danger, turn their influence into the scale against tho
country, and acquire under another dynasty, that importance,
which tho British Government deems it expedient to deny
them. A person named Busby, once a linen-draper in
Edinburgh, to some points in whoso evidence before the
Parliament I shall take the freedom of soliciting your
attention, explicitly states, “ that they” (the Emancipists),
“ have placed themselves at the head of a party opposed to the
“ Government, and regard with hatred every person who has
“ avoided association with them.” I believe I may safely
say, that the Man who could make such a statement, is not
entitled to hatred, but a very different regard! !! This
singular assertion is clearly levelled at the loyalty of the


Emancipist; but you may rely, Sir, that the Crown pos-
sesses no class of subjects more loyal—none more attached'
to the common interests of the community with whom they
are associated, than this body. When a powerful portion
of the Emigrants, found it convenient for their peculiar
purposes to insult the representative of Royalty in the person
of Governor JBligh, the Crown- found a devotion and attach-
ment to it’s service, from the former body, which was vainly
demanded from the free Colonists. Had the Emancipists
been supported iu their resistance against open rebellion,,
the leaders of that commotion would have met the fate
of felons, and expiated their traitorous designs on a public
scaffold. Success however, made their treason lawful, and
men, who in England would have been consigned to exem-
plary punishment, were here rewarded with lands, and
taken into the especial favor of a Government, which they
had violently ami disloyally assaulted.
In addition to the above evidence of the loyalty of the
Emancipists, I request your perusal of the following extract
from the Official Gazette of the l!)th September, 102!).
We have resided in this Colony nine years, and have seen much both of
" the free and of the freed; and, since at this critical juncture” (the passing
of the Jury Act), ** we feel ourselves called upon to give a solemn, and con-
“ sciontious opinion, we do most unequivocally declare cur belief, that the
11 infirmity of prepossession clings more to the class to which we ourselves belong,
“ than to that of the limincipists.”
Cau the most fastidious Emigrant point out a single
instance where an Emancipist or freed prisoner sought to
defraud the public by flying clandestinely from tho Colony?
and if, Sir, the relative state of morals depended upon this
view of the subject, or upon an honest attention to their
engagements in ordinary business, the calumniated Eman-
cipist would stand eminently superior. Fraudulent bank-
ruptcies, alas! have in this Country been frequent, and
that too among the higher Official Members of tho Govern-
meiSt, who nevertheless still retained employment under
the moral administration of General Darling', In fact, it
might in a manner be assumed, that a previous determi-
nation to obtain money by every means, good, bad, or
indifferent, has predominated in the minds of several


dashing “ Levanters”—who, in the hoy-day of their pros-
perity, hardly descended to exchange common civilities
with their more scrupulous neighbours. The possession of
liberty, and a brisk, impudent address, are excellent ac-
quirements in this heterogenous Colony, particularly when
hacked by a few pounds, which rumour, with her many
tongues, and a little gentlemanly necromancy, can soon mag-
nify into thousands : and hence the “ honest reputation” for
a brief season enjoyed by many a daring swindler, who,
bankrupt at home, flies to the unsuspecting people of the
Antipodes, among whom, by reason of his official name, or
recommendation by official characters, he finds an extensive
field for his speculative fraud. We thank God, Sir, such
men have had their day with us; and while the proud and
sensitive sprout, “ growing in his strength, snoeringly tells
the Emancipist, “You, Sir, have been a convict 1” well
may he reply, “ many there arc who ought to be so—but
“ none among us have been found so heartless—none so
“ base—as to leave the orphan to perish, or a parent to curse
“ the credulity that dazzled him to ruin !”
It is, Sir, a very singular fact, that in this, as in many
other societies, the greatest revilers of other men's frailties
are the least immaculate themselves. When Mr. John
Dickson, formerly of the west of Scotland, who had amassed
great wealth in the Colony, and in whom and his friends the
Emancipists ever found a bitter and relentless antagonist,
was lately compelled to seek his personal safety by flight
from a charge of forgery, the Emigrants uttered a piercing
yell, and attempted to argue that this “ faux paux” in him
was not a crime, but a misfortune. To any Emancipist
guilty of such a moral lapse, the terms ruffian and villain
would have been considered epithets of far too mild a nature ;
and the whole body would have been insulted and stigma-
tised on account of the delinquency of one of it's members.
This Dickson is now resident in the Isle of France—an
outlaw from one British Colony to another—and yet the Go-
vernment suffers him to conduct mercantile speculations
there with the most censurable impunity. Here, Sir, is an
instance of criminality originating in the grossest spirit of


avarice. Dickson was immensely rich; yet it is said ho
vitiated a receipt for the payment of £3OO, to acquire more
wealth. A judgment was recovered against him in uuv
Supreme Civil Court for this sum with interest, on a receipt,
the date of which was proved to have been fraudulently
altered. The instrument was impounded in the hands of
the Sheriff, to ho produced at the trial of Dickson for tho
criminal offence of which ho was then under commitment.
In the mean time, however, he absconded from his hail,
and from some cause, to tho public unknown, his recogni-
zances have uevor been estreated ! This was a paltry sum
to a man in his affluent condition; none of his warmest
friends can urge in his behalf that ho stood in need of it.
Instead of General Nicolay affording him an asylum at the
Mauritius, ho ought to return him to this Colony, in order
that he might bo hold up as an example to those committing
deliberate crime, without the ordinary palliative plea of
poverty; and as a useful lesson of humility to tho phari-
saical Emigrant. This individual was wont to say, among
the circle of his acquaintance, that “ once convicted of a
“ criminal act, a person could never again become an ho-
“ norable member of society —and, that his return to an
** association with unimpeaohed men ought never to be
11 tolerated.”—l recollect, Sir, some years since, when a
friend of bis, who is now connected with tho public press of
Van Diemen’s Land, pressed this hitter oxclusionist to yield
his opinion in favour of a Gentleman who was alike eminent
for years of consistent honorable conduct, and a natural ur-
banity of disposition ; and who, it was pressed upon him, had
been expatriated for an offence not marked with any degree
of moral turpitude; lie replied, with his accustomed invete-
racy, “ that the body once tainted, could never become sweet,”
I would now ask this worthy champion of public morality,
and his friends of the same kidney, whether they still
adhere to these sentiments?
Tho Emancipist, Sir, regards this Colony as his homo.
Tho Emigrant merely views it as his speculative field, and
when independent of commercial or agricultural pursuits,
contemplates his retirement to another land. To whom


should then be given the greater encouragement ? To him
who has the interest of the Colony, with the prosperity of
his descendants, at heart; or him who, merely preying upon
it’s vitals, heeds not, when he has accomplished his aim,
whether it exist merely as a desart, or reign the Queen of
the Southern World? The answer is obvious.
lam now about to draw your particular attention to the
circumstances attending the open turbulence and desperate
demeanour of certain assigned convict servants in the em-
ploy of James Mudio, Esq,, J. P., and his son-in-law, Mr.
John Laruack, settlers on the 'River Hunter. With the
view of bringing the case fully under your notice, I shall
beg leave to quote for your information a copy of the trials
of these men before the Supreme Criminal Court, as they
appeared in the Sydney Gazette —a journal which is admitted
to take the lead of all others here in copiousness and ac-
curacy of reporting,
SUPREME COURT.
“MONDAY, DECEMBER 9.
(" Before the Chief Justice, and the usual Military Jury.)
“ Anthony Hitchcock, alias Hath, John Poole, James Riley, John Perry,
“ David Jones, and James Ryan, were indicted for stealing on the 5th !No-
“ vcmber, 1033, in tlie dwelling-house of Mr. James Mudio, at Castle Forbes,
“ in the District of Patrick’s Plains; sundry articles, his property ; one John
“ Hart, an inmate therein, being put in bodily fear.
" The Solicitor General stated the case, and observed, that the aggravated
“ circumstances attending it, were such, that the Crown Officers had been
" induced to bring the prisoners thus early to trial, which would not otherwise
“ have been done until February next. Ho invited the particular attention
“ of the Jury to the case, as a conviction upon the present information, would
“ subject the prisoners at the bar, to the extreme rigor of the law authorised
" by the Act of Council, 11th Geo, IV, No. 10, which was re-enacted by the
“ Local Ordinance, ‘id William IV, No. 10. After the learned gentleman
“ had detailed the circumstances, ho proceeded to call witnesses in support of
" the information.
“ John Hart being sworn, deposed, that he is an assigned servant to Mr.
" John T.arnack, at Major Mudie’s at Castle Forbes, Patrick's Plains, Hunter’s
“ liivor ; knows the prisoners at the bar, they wore all fellow-servants of
" mine ; Poolo, llyan, and lleilly, took the hush on the night of the 4th No-
vembor last; they were absent on the morning of the Oth; Perry absconded


" some lime before tho others; Hitchcock anti .Tones were sent to the lock-up
“ some time previous, and sentenced 12 months to an Iron thing ; they were
« sentenced on tho 4th. and on the flth they were taken away by Samuel
«< Cook, constable'; knows a man named .Parrott, ho was also going to the
“ Ivon Gang, and was in charge with them; X saw them again about 12
“ o’clock the same day; X was in the kitchen, anil saw some men running at
«< t h e hack part of the house; I ran out and one of tho men presented a gun
“ at me. and desired mo to go in again ; one of them snapped a piece at mo :
I can’t say who it was; X’oolc, Jones. Xliley, and Ryan were there; the other
“ was a stranger; they ran into tho house ; I afterwards saw them eomo out
<■ with a double-barrelled gun, a fowling-piece, and a musket., which X am sure
« they did not take in with thorn; previous to this, X had soon a fowling-piece
“ and a musket in Mr. Mudio’s room; I know a double-barrelled piece had
•< been kept in Mr. latnmek’s room; I afterwards saw Mrs. X.arnack ami one
“ of the female servants jumping out of ,1110 dressing-room window; I saw
« Poole, Jones, and the stranger rush up to them from tho house, and order
41 Mrs. 1,, to stand, telling, her that if she did not, they would blow out her brains;
« they wore armed with guns; they compelled her to go into the kitchen, and
“ stationed Xliley at tho door with Mr. L.’s double-barrelled piece; X after-
“ wards saw Hitchcock bring tho shearers from the barn towards tho prevision
« store t he marched them down presenting a gun at them ; X did not see any
" one else; I saw them put forcibly into the store, and Perry was placed
“ over them ; I was in the kitchen which was opposite, and X could plainly
44 see, as there, wore no .windows, and the oases and doors wore open ; Poole
“ afterwards came out of the house to the kitchen, which is about, 10 or 12
'• yards from the former, and ordered me to deliver up the two pistols ; X told
“ him 1 had not got them ; he said if 1 did not deliver them up ho would blow
41 out my brains; he searched the kitchen, and returned to the house ; T. saw
44 Poole bring a chest of tea out, and pour it's contents into a bag, which was
44 hold open by Ryan; Hitchcock said there was not enough ; Jones carried
“ the hag in again, and more tea was put in it; Poole look mo into tho house,
44 and told raq if I did not deliver up the ammunition he would blow out. my
“ brains; he had a pistol; I was taken into the parlour, and saw Jones and
“ the stranger ; Jones was taking away sotau plate out of a drawer; he had
44 an egg-stand; I told him it was of no use for him to take it; Poole asked
“ for the ammunition ; I told him that they had got it; the stranger said if X
44 did not hold rny noise, lie would blow out my brains ; he was armed with a
41 fowling-piece; tho plate was taken away, hut I did not see by whom; X
“ returned to the kitchen, being ordered there by Poole; Hitchcock was
“ parading about the premises armed witli a musket; I saw some flour brought;
44 out of tho store and placed in tire yard, also some pork ; Jones took some
“ pork but of the kitchen; Poolo went into the dairy window, and Jones
“ brought out a bucket of milk ; when tho tea was being brought out, Ryan
“ was standing outside by the door; I’pole was inside; Mrs. Jjurnaek was in
" the kitchen ; tho flour and pork came out of tire provision store; the other


“ articles from the private store in the dwelling-house j it has but one door;
“ it opens into the passage, which is a part of the house; they are both
“ covered over; the plate was put into a hag; at first I was alarmed,
“ but when I tvas taken into the parlour by Poole T was not; I could not
*' prevent armed men from taking the plate ; they took the tea and sugar, and
“ put it on a black mare which was ordered out of the stable by Hitchcock ;
“ the two horses were brought out by Ryan and Perry ; Ryan got on the top
“ of the black mare, and took the reins of the other in his hand ; they were
“ there three-quarters of an hour; they took the men out of tho provision, and
“ put them in the wool stores ; a bucket of milk and box of sugar tbey locked
" up; Mrs. L. and tho rest were also locked up there; they afterwards
“ brought up the night watchman and postboy, and locked us all up together ;
“ they said they should leave a sentry, and the first one that stirred for two
“ hours, they would blow out their brains; Riley told Mrs. Larnack, that
“ they wished her father (Major Mudie), was at home, and they would settle
" him ; they went away, and Perry staid about five minutes after the rest; in
" about a quarter of an hour, I got out at the top of the store, and knocked
, " tho lock off tho door, but hearing a gun fired, wo all went in again ; six of
“ diem were armed; Ryan hail a tomahawk, which contained a knife and a
“ saw ; X hoard one of the men say ho would bring in Mr. Larnack’s head,
“ and stick it on a chimney ; I have no doubt of tho identity of the prisoners
“ at tho bar.
“ Cross-examined by Mr. Thorry—X have been three years an assigned ser-
" vant to Major Mudie; lam not yet entitled to ray ticket of leave, hut
“ expect to get it when duo; X know that there are six or seven on the farm
“ due for their tickets, who have not yet received them ; I was not sent out to
“ this Colony for perjury ; X decline telling for what; X owe the prisoners no
“ grudge ;wo wens good friends; the kitchun and wool stores are not a part of
" tho dwelling-house; Castle Porhes is on tho Hunter; when I first saw Ryan
“ he had the tomahawk in his hand; I saw the tea and sugar brought out of
“ the passage door ; X expect no reward for what I am saying to-day ; I have
“ had no conversation about a reward; I see the rations served out sometimes ;
“ they are sometimes pretty fair, and sometimes very bad; there was a great
" deal of punishment about six weeks ago.
“ The Solicitor-General rose to object to this mode of cross-examination ; it
“ was altogether irrelevant to the case before the Court, and ha trusted that
“ His Honor would restrain the learned Counsel for tho defence from making
“ such remarks.
“ Mr. Therry persisted in his right to elicit evidence on this head, which
“ would be of material benefit to his clients.
“ Tho Chief Justice was loath to cramp the prisoners in their means of
“ defence, but trusted that the learned Counsel would use discretion in pro-
“ posing questions of a similar nature to the last. He thought there was no-
" thing yet asked which could he termed improper, but it was impossible for
“ him to foresee to what the present questions could lead.
F


“ Mr. Rowe, wlio with Mr. Keith sat at the table with (lie Solleitor-CVe-
« horal, now rose to support the arguments of that Officer, and was about
“ to cite some of the learned authorities in behalf of the objection, when
“ The Chief Justice enquired in what capacity the learned 'Gentleman was
" about to address the Court.
“ Mr. Rowe said that he attended to assist the prosecution, at the instance
" of the prosecutor.
“ The Chief Justice doubted whether he could hear Mr. Rowe in that
“ capacity.
“ The Solicitor-General disclaimed, on the part of his learned Colleague
“ and himself, any intention to avail themselves of the professional assistance
“ of either of his learned friends. The Crown Officers had a duty to perform
“ to the Country ; they had resolved on performing it, unaided, and the case
“ now before the Court was in their entire management.
" Mr. Rowe again rose, but
" The Chief Justice was decidedly of opinion that he could not permit him
“ to address the Court. Ho was enabled to state, from his own experience,
“ that the Solicitor-General was perfectly competent for conducting the pro-
“ sent prosecution, which lie observed was instituted by the Crown, and not by
“ a private individual.
“ Mr. Howe bogged to be allowed to state, that lie appeared there on the
“ authority of the Attorney-General, J,y whom ho was appointed us junior
“ Counsel for the prosecution, and again requested to ho heard.
“ The Solicitor-General did not intend any personal disrespect towards Ms
“ learned friends, whoso valuable assistance lie should feel happy on any
“ other occasion to receive, but must again disclaim any professional assistance
“ on the part of the Crown, as the case was in his entire management. At
“ the same time he would be happy to attend to any suggestion they might fool
“ disposed to make.
" The Chief Justice regretted exceedingly that his attention had been
“ arrested from tho solemn enquiry now ponding—an enquiry in which the
“ fate of no less than six human lives was interested, merely for the sake of
“ determining professional right. Hu must, onco for all, rule that Mr. Howe’s
“ addressing the Court was irregular. Tho information was ex ii/Zii'in presented
“ by tho Attorney-General, on whose behalf the Solicitor-General appeared in
“ Court to conduct the case. That Crown Officer had already stated tho
" case, and he could not allow any other person to appear for the prosecution.
“ Mr. Thorry hopod that he might he permitted to conduct tho prisoners'
“ defence in the manner he had already commenced in bis cross-examination
“ of the witness. He contended it waa necessary for the benefit of his clients,
“ for whom, as their advocate, ho had a twofold duty to perform—first, to
“ establish their innocence, if practicable ; and if not, to bring circumstances
“ under the consideration of the Court, which would tend to extenuate the alleged
“ guilt of the prisoners, and move the clemency of the Judgo in their behalf.
“ He thought this line of defence the more necessary, in consequence of the
“ sanguinary local Act, with which they had been threatened—an Act which


u went to deprive them of their existence in forty-eight hours after conviction,
41 assuming' that conviction would follow tho present, investigation.
44 The Chief Justice decided that evidence to move the clemency of the
44 Court, in the manner alluded to by the learned Counsel, was quite iuad-
-44 missible.
« Cross-examined—l did not hear any of the men complain of illness then;,
Vit was Tuesday the sth November; I have seen the men working on the farm
44 on a Sunday ; I did not know .the stranger, and I was always on good terms
44 with tho prisoners ; X was not in fear from the prisoners when in tho parlour ;
*4 the stranger threatened me in the parlour.
11 Re-exammed-I did not like to attack the three armed men, and rescue
41 the plate.
44 George Frost was called for, but it appeared that he had pot been
44 subpoenaed, and was not in attendance.
44 Samuel Cooke being sworn, said, I am a constable at PatricVs Plains ; I
44 recollect, on the sth of November, I had three prisoners in charge ; two are
44 here—thp prisoners Hitchcock and Jones ; the other was Samuel Powell;
« I was to take them to the Maitland Police, under a sentence of 12 months to
44 an iron gang; about a mile and a half from Castle I 1 orbes five men attacked
“ me, two with firelocks, telling me to stand or they would shoot me ; Poole,
tf Perry, ;R.yan, and Riley were there; the other X did not know; it was he
** vyl 10 spoke ; ho snapped his piece, but it did not go off; I had a pistol, but
<< did not think it prudent to resist; they disarmed mo, and took the key from
«my pocket, and loosed the prisoners’ chains ; they took me into the bush and
** fastened me to a tree ; they sat down about ten yards from, me, and X lieaul
41 them say they would make a grand push; Parrott refused to accompany
44 them, and they went away, leaving him secured with mo; they had twd
i* guns and the pistol they took from me; when they left me they went in a-
-44 direction towards Maitland; it was between ten and eleven q clock in the
44 forenoon of the sth of : November. ...
4 * Cross-examined by Mr, Nichols —-Parrott"'refused to go with the pn-
-44 soners, and attempted to persuade Ryan to stay )Vith the constable and him,
44 but he said he was afraid to go back ; the othtn prisoners did pot threaten
ai him, to my knowledge ; Castle l?orbes is in the district of Patrick s Plains^
at least X have always hoard it so called; I have only been there since
44 February; Maitland Town is about twenty-five miles distant from Major
44 Mudie’s; I have read in the papers that it is in tho district of Patricks
41 Plains.
I* Daniel Craddidgo being sworn, deposed, that ho belongs to the mounted
41 police ; that he accompanied Mr. Egbert Scott in search of an armed paity
#* in November last; about five of our party came up with the prisoners near
44 Lamb's Valley, Mr. Reid’s cattle station in the mountains ; I saw three of
44 them, and ordered them to stand ; two of them grounded their arms, but one
stood as if making ready to fire at me; X fired at him ; Mr. Scott passed
« over at the time ; I turned my head, and seeing the men running in anothm
“ direction up the gulley, I pursued them, and when I came up with them, X
V ordered them to stand, and they immediately grounded their arms; Jones and
/« Perry were in the gulley : the other, Hitchcock, was a little on tho range; I


“ only saw six men; the boy Ryan was afterwards found concealed in a
«< scrub; the other three were in charge of Mr. Scott and Ins party ; 1 cannot
“ identify them ; I found a frying-pan on the lire melting lead, a glue put, some
<f tea and sugar, four bags, and six coats ; wo also found the arms now present
“ when we took them; they were among the party; also, four waistcoats,
« some flour and beef in a bag, and one pair of stockings; wo marched the
“ prisoners to Maitland, which is about eleven miles off; it was about sixteen
11 or seventeen miles from Castle Forbes ; it was on the Kith November, about
“ eleven o’clock.
« By Mr. Therry—Tire prisoners gave themselves up without resistance ; I
" have been four years in that district; Castle Forbes is Mr. Larnaek’s rcsi-
“ deuce, and is generally called in the district of Patrick’s Plains, but 1 have
“ also beard it called in the district of Maitland ; I bad but little couversa-
“ tion with tire prisoners.
•' By the Solicitor-General—Lamb’s Valley is in the district of Maitland.
“ Alexander Flood, overseer to Messrs. Robert and Helenas Scott, being’
“ sworn, deposed, that he went with the last witness in pursuit of tiro pri-
<' soners ; their party on horseback captured them, and the whole of the pri-
“ soners with the wounded man wore given in my charge ; two policemen and
" five of our party conducted them to Maitland, and gave them up to the
“ Police Magistrate there ; the wounded man was taken to an adjoining farm ;
" the prisoners went quietly; on the ground there was sumo molted lead in a
" frying-pan, some lead made into sings, tea, sugar, a cask containing a small
“ quantity of rum, and several other -articles; the arms produced wore taken
“ from 'the prisoners, and were charged; 1 marked the arms, but not the
“ other property.
“ By Mr. Therry—They marched to Maitland very quietly, and behaved
“ very well; I know but little of the district, having been there but four
“ months ; I did not boar them praise or dispraise the place they bad loft.
“ Robert Cushion, being sworn, stated that ho is a constable at Maitland,
“ that he brought the property produced, from Maitland with the pri-
“ soners, and that it was given him by Riley, the chief constable there.
“ By Mr. Therry—Did not know Hitchcock before.
“ Robert Scott, being sworn, deposed, that he is a Magistrate of the Torri-
“ tory, and wont in pursuit of au armed parly of prisoners on the- lllth Novem-
“ bet last, assisted by some black natives ; wo traced them to Mr. Dutton’ai
“ where we heard that seven men had robbed the place the evening before ;
“ wo traced some footsteps, and about twelve o’clock we saw sumo smoko
“ arising from a brush ; wo saw a man running down from an eminence, and
“ wo supposed him to be the sentinel; we charged immediately, and .1 saw
" the mounted policeman (Craddigo) lire at some person on die rocks; I
“ saw throe men running away ; I dismounted and followed; tho three were
“ in front of me, the centre man having a musket in Ids hand ; X covered him,
“ and commanded him again and again to lay down Ids arms; two did so ;he
“ would not, and I shot him ; I then sprung towards the other two, and hade
“ them hold up their bauds, which they did ; just then another policeman
“ came up and my second overseer, and one or two of my servants immo-
" diately afterwards; I then dismounted; I. believe them to have been Rilcv,


*' Perry, ami the other man who was shot; he lokl rao his name was James Hen-
“ derson ; ncillier Riley nor I’erry had guns ; all the party called out to the
“ prisoners to ground their arms; Hitchcock, and, I believe, Poole, wore in
" custody of Craddige; afterwards, in galloping round tho ravine, I disco-
“ vered Ryan ; there were six apprehended on that occasion, hut I cannot say
“ whether Perry was one of them; tho others I can identify; after the men
“ wove in custody 1 collected the arms, and marked them; they are those pro- 1
“ duced ; Castle Forbes is Major Mudio’s residence; it is part of the estate of
" Patrick's Plains.
" John Larnack, being duly sworn, deposed, that lie lives at Castle Forbes,
“ which is in the district of Patrick’s Plains, Hunter's River; lie left his reai-
“ donee about ten o’clock on the morning of the sth of November last; and,
“ at bis return, on the following day, he learnt that the house had been piun-
" dered of one double-barrelled fowling-piece, two single ditto, one musket,
several silver table and tea spoons and forks, and other articles ; lie iclen-,
“ tided the fowling-piece produced as his property, which he missed from ids
“ room aa that occasion; the other articles produced belonged to Mr. Mudio,
“ whose Christian name is James.
“ Cross-examined by Mr. Nichols—Ho always considered Castle Forbes to
“ bo in in the district of Paterson’s Plains ; knows so though only from com-
mon report; some of tho prisoners were at work on the farm tho day previous
to tho outrage ; lie received a notice on Friday evening to produce a letter
“ in his possession addressed to the Principal Superintendent of Convicts by
“ one of the prisoners; that letter he believes is now at Castle Forbes ; thinks
“ there was not sufficient time since the serving of tho notice to obtain the
“ letter.
“ Jho Solicitor-General objected to tho witness being examined as to the
purport of the letter, it being hut secondary evidence ; he should also have
felt it Ins duty to oppose the production of tho letter itself, had it been forth’.
“ coming, on the ground of it’s being irrelevant to the question before the
" Court.
“ The Chief Justice held tho objection to be good.
Cross-examination continued—The sideboard in which the plate was
“ contained was in the parlour of the dwelling-house; tho private store is
“ ent ered from a covered passage, under tho same roof as the dwelling-house
“ [ a plan of tile house was handed up to the Bench by the witness, who ex-
plained to His Honor, and afterwards to tho Jury, the situation of tho passage
and store room] ; it was from this private store that the tea and sugar had
been taken ; he missed a considerable quantity of it on his return home';
" was present when tho prisoners were apprehended, and saw tho fowling-
“ piece produced taken from them ; cannot swear to the tea and sugar.
■' Cross-examined by Mr. Tlierry—There is no communication with any
“ other part of tho dwelling-house from tho passage in which the private store
“ is situated.
“ John Hart re-called by the Solicitor-General—Knows the guns produced
“ to be Mr. Mudie’s property, with tho exception of one, which is Mr.
“ Larnack’s; they are the same as were taken by the prisoners at the bar,
“ from Castle Forbes, on the sth November last; lie also identified part of.
the wearing apparel before the Court as belonging to Mr. Mudie.


« 'Phis was the case for the prosecution.
“ Mr. Therry, for the prisoners, submitted that the.ro was no cage to go (i?
•* the Jury, on the following grounds : —Frst, that there was no evidence to
“ prove that Castle Forbes was the dwelling-house of James Mudic ; secondly,
“ that the heus in quo was wrongly laid in the information, there being in the
“ Colony of New South Wales, no such district as Patrick's Plains; thirdly,
“ that it appeared hy the evidence of tho witness, Joint Hart, he was not put.
“ in fear in tho dwelling-house, hut in a detached kitchen at Castlo Forbes;
“ and, fourthly, that the passage in which tho private store-room was situated,
“ was covered, and not enclosed, so as to constitute it a part of the dwelling-
“ house according to tho moaning of the statute.
“ The Court over-ruled the objections.
“ The prisoners being called on for their defence, severally urged in their
*' behalf, the had treatment they had experienced at Castlo Forbes, both from
" Mr. Mudio, and the witness Lavnack.
“ X’oolo stated that ho had written a complaint to the Principal Super*
“ intendont of Convicts, of the had treatment ho had received, which had boon
“ intercepted, hy Mr. Larnack, and kept hack. Tho provisions they received
“ were of very had and unwholesome quality, and deficient in weight, iho
“ punishment on the farm was frequent and severe, and both Major
“ Mudie and Mr. Larnack frequently beat tho assigned servants.
" In support of the second objection, Mr. Therry called Samuel Augustus
#* Pony, Esq., who being sworn, deposed, that ho is Deputy Surveyor
“ General of Now South Wales, and that it is the duty ot tho Surveyor
“ General to apportion tho several districts of the Colony. The chart now
“ produced is the Government Official Map.
<• The Solicitor-General objected to the chart being received in evidence, on
" tho ground that it was a compilation front the field charts of tho Surveyors,
“ and therefore, hut secondary testimony.
•< The Court held tho chart, as the Official Map, to bo good evidence.
“ Examination continued —I should say, from perusing tho chart, that
" Castle Forbes is situated in the parish of Whittington, county of Northum-
" berland, and district of Hunter’s Biver,
"By the Court—lf it were called, however the district of Patrick’s Plains,
" I should know it.
“ The prisoners being asked if they had any other witnesses to examine,
“ Mr. Therry observed, that ho had witnesses in attendance, but their
M evidence being wholly upon the point which had boon over-ruled hy the
“ Court, ho should refrain from calling them. Ho hoped, however, that tho
“ sanguinary local law threatened hy tho Solicitor-General, would not ho
" enforced in the event of the conviction of tho prisoners, as tho system ot
•• defence he had offered, although over-ruled hy tho Court, might, ho made tho
'• subject of representation in another quarter, and tho prisoners ultimately
“ reap tho benefit of it. Ho was sorry to see that there was a determination
“ on the part of the opposite side to chock this enquiry; they ought to have
“ been anxious to meet it.
The Chief Justice, proceeded to stint up the evidence, and remarked that
“ tho line of defence adopted by the prisoners was altogether inadmissible.
“ Our limits will not allow us to follow His Honor through his luminous


“ charge to the Jury, who, after a short deliberation, pronounced a verdict of
" Guilty against all the-prisoners.
“ The prisoners were remanded, and were directed to be brought to trial
“ to-morrow on a second indictment.
“ TUESDAY, DECEMBER. 10.
“ (Before the Chief Justice and a Military Jury.)
“ Anthony Hitchcock, alias Hath, and John Poole, were indicted for raali-
" eiously shooting at Mr. John Larnack, at Castle Torbos, in the district of
" Patrick’s Plains, on the stli November last, witlt intent to kill and murder
tf him ; and James Riley, John Perry, David Jones, and James- Ryan for
“ counselling, aiding, and abetting the said two first-named prisoners in the
" commission of tire said felony. A second count charged the offence with
" having been committed with intent to do the said John Larnack some
" grievous bodily harm.
“ The Solicitor-General stated the case, and called John Larnack, who
" being duly sworn, said, I reside at Castle Forbes, in tire district of Patrick's
" Plains, Hunter’s River; it is tiro residence of Major Mudie; on'tiie morning
“ of tlie stli November last, X went to tire river to superintend sheep-washing ;
" between 12 and 1 o’clock 1 heard a voice exclaiming— 1 come out of the
“ • water every b y one of yon, or we'll blow your b -y brains i rat;’ on
“ looking behind, I saw three men advancing 1 towards mo with guns presented ;
" some others wore at a short distance, apparently with the intention of
“ intercepting me, should I escape from tire other three; Hitchcock and
“ Poole were two of the former number, and Hitchcock called out, ‘ that it
“ ‘ was no use of thinking to make my escape, he would take good care I should
" • never take another man to Court;’ they were about 10 or 12 yards off when
“ tins took place ; there was a general call from tire prisoners (Hitchcock and
“ Poole) to tiro washers, to get out of the way, as X stood between them and
“ tlie prisoners, fearing X suppose, that the shot from tiro latter would be
“ likely to take effect upon the former ; I jumped into the river among the
“ washers, and told them to stand by me, as I was certain the prisoners would
‘‘ not fire for fear of hurling them ; finding the prisoners still pursuing, 1 made
“ the best of my way to the opposite side of the river; on turning my head
" round, I saw Hitchcock levelling his piece at, me, and soon after I hoard a a
“ shot fired, and on again looking round, X perceived Hitchcock to be enveloped
“ in smoke ; I have not the least doubt that it was the prisoner Hitchcock who
“ fired at mo; he called out to the washers, saying—- ‘why did you not get out
“ ‘of my way, I would have shot him.' There was a general cry among the
" party coming down tome, of 1 shoot the b r X'oole called out, (fire
“ ‘ again, I’ll taka cure you shall never gat another man flogged,’ and imme-
“ diately a second shot was fired ; I was just then getting out of the water, on
“ the opposite side of the river; I could not perceive who fired the second
“ time; Hitchcock and Poole, now cried out, • fire again, let’s settle kin, he’s
“ almost finished a third shot was fired, us I was getting up the bank on the
" opposite side; a voice now called out, ‘fire again, let’s follow him an
“ answer was made, ‘no, take care of your ammunition, he’s almost finished ;’
“ X heard the voices of Riley, Perry, and Ryan, and saw the last named
'• prisoner, who called out ‘ settle him,’


"Py the Court —He was dressed in a white shirt and bowsers; I had nut
>• seen him before ; on tint morning ho laid boon reported to mo as having
“ absconded on the night before; I do not recollect hearing the voice ot
" Jones, or seeing him on that occasion; they were all assigned servants at
“ Castle Forbes ; Ryan, Riley, and Rook hod absconded the night previous
“ to this—Perry about ten days before ; I had seen Hitchcock and Poole pass
11 on that morning on tho road to an iron-gang, in cduirge ot a constable ; I
“ had twelve or fourteen men with mo washing sheep; there are three of them
« in attendance here to-day; I made tire best of my way to Mr. Hangar's
“ farm, and returned to Castle Forbes on die following day; on my return
“ there I found that three guns had been taken away from the house since [
" had left it; when I left them, they wore loaded witli powder and buck-shot; had
‘‘ such shot have hit mo at the distance I stood from the prisoners when they
11 fired, it would have been likely to have killed mo ; I eouhl kill a kangaroo
“ with it at that distance ; the shot is about tho size of a field pea ; Hitch-
“ cock was about ton yards from me when he fired ; none ot the shot hit me ;
“ I saw the shot from the second fire fall about eighteen Inches or two loot bom
" me in the sand ; the first shot seemed to tall just hy iny side in the water;
“ they scattered; when the second shot was fired, X should think the prisoners
<l were about twenty yards from me ; I am quite satisfied that, at that distance,
“ the guns which I had seen charged would kill a kangaroo ; 1 think that they
" might also have killed a human being.
" Cross-examined hy Mr. Therry—This was on a Tuesday ; it is not cus-
“ ternary to read prayers to the assigned servants at Cnstlo Forbes on a Sunday j
“ it was done about a twelvemonth ago, hut the parties seeming careless about
“ it, the practice has been discontinued; cither Hitchcock was a very bail
“ shot, or he must not have intended to hit me, as ho could not well have
“ missed me at ton yards distance; 1 cannot say what might have been his
“ intention ; I was certainly very much frightened ; I think I spoke about the
“ shot when before tho Bench of Magistrates.
“ Mr. Therry called for the deposition of this witness, taken at tho Police
" Office on commitment of the prisoners.
“ The Chief Justice was of opinion that tire learned Gentleman could not
" demand that document as a right; it was optional with the Crown Officer
“ to grant it. If, however, there was any apparent contradiction in tho depo-
“ sition, it could be handed up to the Bench, and the Court would take notice
“ of it in its charge to the J ury.
“ The Solicitor-General declined furnishing- Mr. Therry with tho dopo-
" sition.
" Cross-examination continued—My back was towards tire prisoners when
" the secondshot was fired ; I supposed from what the prisoners both said and
“ did, they intended to kill me ; I think the prisoners have all been Hogged at
“ Castle Forbes.
" The Solicitor-General rose to object to this mode of cross-examination ;
" he thought this point had been decided by the Court on the trial which took
" place yesterday; he felt convinced that the learned Counsel for the defence
“ acted at the suggestion and under the advice of some person not before the
“ Court, but he resisted such a line of defence as irregular.
" Mr, Therry denied the imputation of tho Solicitor-General with great


" warmth ; ho called upon that Officer for an explanation j he appeared there
*' as advocate for tlie prisoners at the bar, by whom alone he was instructed as
“ to the particulars of defence. In his professional capacity he would listen to
“ the suggestion of no person whatever ; and lie indignantly repelled the insi*
" nuation thrown out of acting for political purposes at the instance of some
“ one behind the curtain.
“ Tire Court was of opiaion It could not call upon tiro Solicitor-General to
“ enter into the explanation sought for; the learned Judge had heard and
“ lamented the expression alluded to; ho considered it an unguarded one. but
" hoped it would rest there.
“ Cross-examination continued—X did not affix any particular meaning to
“ the words made use of by tho prisoners respecting their preventing my ever
“ getting another man flogged, except what I have before stated; I did not
“ charge tho fowling-piece with duck, hut buck shot; lam not aware of
“ having before stated the transaction differently ; I heard Hiloy’s voice ; I
“ should not be apt to miss a man at the distance of ten yards ; what I have
“ stated as having dropt in the water, and sand, might have* been either
“ peas, or pebbles.
“ John Sawyer, being sworn, deposed—X am a Crown prisoner; I was
“ assigned to Dr. Rutherford ; he is gone to Europe ; I do not know whether
“ I am lent or transferred to Major Mudie; I was sheep-washing at Castle
“ Forbes on the sth November; I was in tho water ; I saw live men coming
“ 'towards onr party; there might have been more ; the prisoners Hitchcock,
“ Poole, Ililoy, and Perry wore there; the other man I did not know; the
“ first I saw was Hitchcock, getting over the fence, on the top of the bank; he
“ had a gun in his hand ; he said to Mr. Larnack, “ Come out of that, you
" villain, and stand back, you men Mr. L. jumped into the river, among the
“ washers; Hitchcock levelled his gun at Mr. L, and fired; he then swung his
“ hand in a great passion, and' said to the washers, ‘ Why did you not got out of
" the way V Poole next presented his piece at Mr. L. and fired from tho fence,
“ saying, ‘You villain. I’ll make you remember your flogging—l will, you
“ tyrantlliley said to one of tho washers, nicknamed Darby, ‘ I’ve a good
" unind to come down and blow out your brains—l have, you villain ;' Mr. L.
“ was moving'on towards'the other side of tho river; X did not see the third shot
“ fired, but it took place immediately after the second ; I did not know whe-
“ thor there was any shot in the guns ; when going away, Ililoy said that any
“ person who should move up the bank fur the space of two hours, would
“ have his brains blown out; I neither saw Jones nor Xlyan ; it was a higli
“ bank on which the prisoners were; I could see them plainly from whore I
“ stood, which was close to tho water’s edge; there was a fence on the top of
“ tho bank.
“ Cross-examined by Mr. Thorry—Hitchcock was fifty yards from Mr. Lar-
“ naok when he fired ; it might he a little more; I would not believe a man
“ saying it was only ten yards ; I cannot say whether there was any shut in
" the gun ; X did not understand what the prisoners meant by flogging ; there
“ was nothing to hinder them if they had liked to follow Mr. Larnack over the
“ river; I have not a ticket of leave; lam a ploughman.
“ Xlo-examincd by the Solicitor-General—There are three feet in a yard ;
O


" Hitchcock was not near the water’s edge when ho fired ; I could not observe
" whether there was any .shot in the guns; Poole must have been nearly
" seventy yards off when ho fired at Mr. Larnack.
, “ By the Court—Hitchcock must have been full fifty yards distant from Mr.
" Laruaok whoa he fired.
“ Mr. Therry rose to request, that Mr. Larnack, who, after having given hint
“ evidence, had taken Ids seat next to the Solicitor-General, he directed to
" leave the Court. Ho made this request at the suggestion of one of the
“ prisoners at the bar, who had a motive for doing so.
" The Solicitor-General thought that the application just made could uot bo
“ granted, unless it were the intention of the opposite, side to put Mr, Larnack
" into the witness box.
" The Chief Justice said, it was perhaps carrying the rule farther than was
" usual, yet he would direct the application to bo complied with. In that
" Court there was no respect of persons. [Mr. Larnack accordingly retired.]'
" Samuel Marsdon, being sworn, said—l am an assigned servant to Mr.
“ Larnack, at Castle Forbes; on the sth November last I was sheep-washing
“ there; I suddenly heard a voice say, ‘Stand every man of you in the
“ water; it said to Mr. Larnack, ‘ Gome up hero, you villain—you tyrant;’
" Mr. Larnack jumped into the river behind some of the washers ; Mr. Lar-
" nack was now crossing the river, and Hitchcock fired at him ; ho was about
" twenty, or thirty yards from him ; after lie had fired, he appeared very angry,
" and turning round to his own party, said, ‘ Fire away, you b rsl saw
“ a strange man fire, who is not here; I hoard the third shot, but did, not sue
" who fired it; I did not see any one fire from the fence; I hoard Hitchcock
“ say, as Mr. Larnack was crossing the river, ‘Lot’s, follow the b r
“ and finish, him—it will he no worse;’ I saw Riley with a pistol; he
“ called oat to Darby, ‘ I’ve a. good mind to blow your b y old head off
" the other replied, ‘What fori’ to which Riley answered, ‘ Because you
“ are a b i y old rogue;’ I saw there, Hitchcock, Riley, Perry, and Ryan,
“ Poole must have been there; I hoard him say, ‘ You’ll Hog mo, you b—r,
" 111 learn you to flog.’
“ Cross;examinei} by Mr. Therry—Hitchcock might bo about twenty or
" thirty yards off when ho fired at Mr. Larnack; there had been a grout dual
" of flogging at Castle Forbes; I have been flogged there myself; 1 heard
“ thvqe sfiots; I,do not know whether the guns were shotted or not; if the
piisoneis had liked, I think they might have followedMr, Larnack across
the water and caught him ; Hitchcock said let’s follow', but did not do so,
William Wilson, being sworn, deposed ns followsl am an assigned
sr - rvLLn t to Major Mudio, at Castle Forbes ; I was sheep-washing, there in
■ November last; I hoard a voice say, ‘Come up here, you scoundrel;’
" turning my head, I saw Hitchcock on the other side of the fence ; ho had a
■ hisjtaml; he presented it at Mr. Larnack, who was in the river, and
fired; X did not see any shot; I afterwards saw Poole fire a shot from the
" fence; he seemed,to fire at Mr. Larnack, who had then nearly, arrived
' t at the opposite; side of the river; Poole said, before ho fired, ‘l’ll learn
l m \ t 0 “»B 5’ Hitchcock was twenty-live yards from the river, when he
fiipd; 1 saw Hitchcock, Poole, Perry, and Riley, there; there was


" another man at some distance, whom I took to ha .Tones; but as I could not
sea him distinctly, I will not swear it was him; I said before the Magistrates
“ the same as I say now.
“ Cross-examined by Mr. Therry—l saw Hitchcock fire towards the river ;
“ I heard the expression made uso of by the prisoners respecting flogging ;
" there had been a great deal of it at Castle Forbes; I thought it alluded to
“ tlxat; the prisoners did not follow Mr. Larnack across the river, which they
“ might have done if they had liked.
“ lie-examined by the Solicitor-General—By not following Mr. Larnack,
“ I suppose the prisoners had no intention of doing any harm to him.
“ John Hart,being sworn,said —X am an assigned servant to Mr. Larnack,
“at Castle Forbes; X saw all the prisoners at the bar at Castle Forbes on the
'* stli November last; they rushed into the bouse, and took three guns out of
“ it; I did not see them charged the last time, but I have on former occa-
“ sions seen them loaded with small bird shot; I never saw them charged
“ with buckshot; I heard Hiley say to Mrs. Larnack, they wore going down
the river to settle her husband ; neither of the other prisoners were present at
“ the time ; I heard one of the party say they would bring in Larnack’s head,
“ and stick it on a chimney ; they were throe quarters of an hour on the pro-
" raises, and when they went away they locked up every one in a store; in
“ about twenty minutes after they had gone, 1 hoard the report of a gun ; it
“ appeared to bo at some distance.
“ Cross-examined by Mr. Nichols—l hoard only one gun; does not know
"in what direction; does not know whether the guns wore loaded when
“ taken by the prisoners.
“ Alexander Xdood being sworn, said—l am overseer to Xlobert Scott, Esq.,
“ and wont in pursuit of some armed bushrangers in November last; was
" present when the prisoners were apprehended ; they were given in charge to
“ mo, with the arms found on them; the arms now produced ate the same ; they
“ arc two double-barrelled guns, four single ditto, one musket, and two pistols.
“ Cross-examined by Mr. Therry—The prisoners behaved well after being
" taken.
" Mr. George Spark being sworn, said—l live atllusham, Patrick’s Plains ;
“ was present when the prisoners were apprehended in Lamb’s Valley on the
“ 13th November last; I hoard Hitchcock say, in presence of the rest of the
“ prisoners, that ho had taken a good aim at Larnack’s head, but missed the
“ b .
“ Cross-examined by Mr. Therry—Mr. Flood and several others were
" present, when Hitchcock said this; they might also have heard it; I have
“ no friendly feeling towards the prisoners.
“ Mr. Xjarnnck recalled by the Solicitor-General —The three guns produced
" were loaded with buck-shot, a few days previous to their being taken away
“ from Castle Forbes; lean swear they were charged on tho evening of the
“ 4th November last.
‘‘ Cross-examined by Mr. Therry—l have heard what was stated by another


“ witness, and I still persist in my former statement as to the idiot falling near
" mo, and the distance from which 1 wag lired at.
"John Hart recalled liy the Solieitor-(l (moral—The three gnus produced.
" were taken by the prisoners, from Castle Forbes, on the Sth November last;
" I don’t know whether Jones was present whim the threat was made respecting
" Mr. Larnack’s head.
" This was the case for the prosecution.
" Mr, Therry hogged to submit for the consideration of the Court, that there
" was no evidence affecting the prisoner Jones on which it would he necessary
“ to place him on his defence.
“ The Chief Justice observed, that although the degree of proof against the
" prisoner Jones was very slight, yet the Court would cxcroiau it's discretion in
" discharging him in this stage of the proceedings, as it might enable the other
" prisoners to examine him in their behalf. He would thuroforo pul the caso
" to the Jury on it’s merits, remarking, however, on the deficiency of evidence
" as affecting the prisoner Jones.
" On being called on for their defence,
“ The prisoner Hitchcock first addressed the Court; he said, the evidence
" of the witness Spark was utterly false; the treatment lie had received at
" Castle Forbes was harsh in the extreme; lie had been several years in the
" Colony, and while in the employment of the Crown, had been so fortunate
" as to gain the esteem of ids superiors, by whom lie was placed in a situation.
" of trust and responsibility; bo bad been employed in, and hud charge of the
" Post-Office in Newcastle; for a knowledge of Ids general diameter there,
" ho would call upon a gentleman in Court, whose testimony he was mm: was
" proudly above comparison with any of the witnesses who had sworn against
" him.
" The gentleman alluded to, Ensign Znnch, one of the Jury, was here
" sworn, and stated, that he had known Hitchcock for about six months, when
" at Newcastle X’ost-OlUeo; from the situation of his quarter# there, which.
“ wore immediately over the prisoner’s, he was enabled to slate of him, that,
“ ho was a quiet, and well-behaved, trustworthy man, and one not likely to ho
" guilty of such an outrage, as that for which ho was now on his trial.
■ “ Hitchcock went on to state, that it was to the unfortunate circumstance of
" his being assigned to the service of Major Mudie, ho attributed all Ids sub-
" sequent misfortune, and present unhappiness; ho had boon in tbo possession
“ °f an exemplary character before ho wont to Major Mudie ;ho had since.
" been repeatedly flogged, by which, and by the unwholesome food ho had
“ subsisted on, his health had been ruined, and life itself rendered burdensome;
“ ho had been sentenced to an iron gang for an offence of which ho knew
“ nothing. The witnesses who swore against him made their depositions
“ before tiro Magistrates in private. No confronting with the accused was
“ permitted, nor was any defence called for. Whatever punishment was
“ threatened by the master to his servant, was always sure, to be inflicted by
" tbo Bench, and this was the way in which justice was administered on the
" Hunter. If they refused to labour on a Sunday, flogging was threatened.


" awd as surely given. Servants who had for months been duo for tickets o f
“ leave, had been refused their indulgence, and, if at all importunate, a ilog-
" ghig bestowed rendered future application unnecessary. If the Court would
“ hut look at their bare backs, it would see that their statement was not exag-
" gorated.
“ The prisoner Poole had only to re-echo what the last prisoner had stated-
“ Bad treatment by Messrs. Mudio and Larnack had brought them to tiro
“ ignominious fate to which they were about to be consigned. While a 4
“ Castle Forbes, he had addressed a letter to the Principal Superintendent of
“ Convicts, as well as to the Director of Public Works, complaining of this
“ bad treatment. If it had been found, on enquiry, that his statement was
“ false or unfounded, he could have been summarily punished, but bis repro-
“ sentationa had been intercepted by Mr. L. and kept hack. He was aware
" that any thing they could urge in their behalf, would he of hut little avail—
“ their doom was fixed; but ho solemnly implored the Judge to cause an
“ enquiry to he sot on foot respecting the treatment of assigned servants at
“ Major Mudio’s, in order to prevent others from being forced into the
“ unhappy situation in which they were then placed.
“ The other prisoners severally concurred in the sentiments expressed by the
“ two first named prisoners.
" Mr. Therry only rose to say that he had witnesses in attendance on behalf
“ of the prisoners; hut the evidence he should offer through them having
" been held untenable, he must how to the decision of the Court, in whoso
“ hands he must now leave the case of his clients.
“ The Chief Justice commenced his charge by directing the Jury entirely
“ to dismiss from their minds the lino of defence adopted by the prisoners at the
“ bar. His Honor observed, that resistance by violence, such as was imputed
“ to the prisoners, of any grievance, whether roa! or imaginary, was not tolo-
“ rated by the law. The learned Judge then summed up the evidence, com-
" menting upon it, as he proceeded, with his usual perspicuity.
" The evidence against Jones, His Honor remarked, was of a very trilling
“ nature, hut it was for the Jury to decide whether all, or any of the
" prisoners were guilty or not guilty upon the information before the Court.
“ The Jury, after a short deliberation, returned a verdict of Guilty against
“ all the prisoners, except Jones, whom they acquitted.
“ The prisoners wore again arraigned on a capital charge, to which they
" severally pleaded guilty..
“ Hitchcock observed, as it had been intimated to them that the time
“ allotted for their existence would ho very short, and two capital convictions
“ being already recorded against them, they thought it unavailing to protract
“ the present investigation ; they wore now only anxious to sock religious con-
“.solution, and prepare themselves for that great change which so shortly
“ awaited them, hut for which, he prayed, that a longer day, than as inti-
“ mated, would ho granted.
“ The Solicitor-General, commiserating the situation of the unhappy pri-
“ aonors at the bar, would not present against them the other informations on
“ the files of the Court; neither would he pray judgment against them under
“ the provisions of the local Act for the suppression of bushranging and
“ robbery.


" Mr. Then'y hoped, tint as there was another tribunal before which the
" plea of mercy might be raised, and the extenuating circumstances of the
“ prisoners’case meet with duo attention, that the Court would bo pleased to
“ direct the stay in town for two or three days of tbo witnesses whom lie had
“ unsuccessfully endeavoured to produce in Court; otherwise they would be
“ returned to the interior of the country immediately, by which he would bo
“ entirely deprived of tbo benefit of their testimony, oven whore it could only
“ be available.
“ The Chief Justice said undoubtedly there was another tribunal where the
“ plea of mercy might bo raised, and it was also competent fur that tribunal
« to grant the remedy for which the learned Counsel applied. It was not in
“ the province of the Court to interfere, and ho could make no order with
“ respect to the application just made,
“ The Solicitor-General would now perform the painful part of his duty, in
“ praying the judgment of the Court upon the prisoners at the bar.
“ Proclamation having been made,
, The Chief Justice addressed the prisoners. They had nil, witli the
“ exception of one, been convicted of two capital felonies, and they bad just
« pleaded guilty to a third capital indictment. Independent of this, their
<• crime involved that of open rebellion against their master. His Honor, after
" a very pathetic address, passed on the prisoners the awful sentence of
« the law, directing them to bo executed at such time and place as His Excel-
“ lency the Governor should ho pleased to appoint.”
The determination of the Executive Council respecting
the fate of these men, will be seen by the following Extract
from the Sydney Gazette of the 21st December, 1833.
" The two principals in the late outrages at Hunter’s Hirer, Hitchcock and
“ Poole, were forwarded to Maitland, by the steamer Sophia Jane, on Thurs-
“ day evening (December 19), to suffer the extreme penalty of the law this
“ morning, at the scone of their depredations. The same awful result awaits
“ three of the other prisoners, at the usual place of execution, in Sydney, this
“ morning, viz. Hilcy, Perry, and IlyiUi. 'With respect to the last named
“ prisoner, wo think that the Executive Government would do well to interpose
the Iloyal clemency in his behalf, and spare a human life, which wo think
“ is not imperatively called on to be offered up at the shrine of justice. Let
“ it be remembered that this prisoner is a mere boy, soma sixteen or seventeen
“ yearsofago; and, although we would notplaee implicitcrcdenceon thostato-
" ments made by some of tbo other prisoners when receiving sentence, yet we
" would urge the extreme probability that the lad was in a great degree incited
“ to join bis associates by the inducements their greater experience in crime
" enabled them to lay before him. We hope, therefore, that his case may bo
“ considered a (it one for the exorcise of mercy.”
The whole of these live prisoners were executed.—The
other (Jones), was transported to Norfolk Island for life.
I will make no further comment upon those extraordinary


trials, than to express my cordial approval of lire pro-
ceedings of Hie Commission of Enquiry which succeeded
them ; and my sense of it’s indispensiblo necessity. If the
whole of the allegations of these unfortunate men were not
substantiated, enough was unquestionably proved, to exhibit
a deliberate system of maltreatment, inconsistent with that
ordinary benevolence of disposition enjoined by the Govern-
ment, and which the most degraded of the human species,
would not calmly have endured, if the means of redress, by
any alternative, however desperate, were within their reach.
The Governor, in communicating his opinion upon the result
of this impartial investigation, speaks with a degree of evasion,
to which, there was no occasion to resort. His Excellency’s
palliation of some features in the case, amounts at best to a
negative sort of appproval, which sensible men consider, as ;
breathing the most ironical spirit of condemnation. The
Governor censures the inattention of Messrs. Mudic and
Larnack, to the quantity and quality of provisions furnished!
their assigned servants 1 ; and the Colonial Secretary, by
direction of His Excellency, pointedly alludes to the mis-
conduct of the latter in the following terms ;
“ X am directed to observe, that His Excellency cannot, but consider the
“ conduct of Mr. Larnack as imprudent in striking assigned servants, for Ilia
“. punishment of whose misconduct the law has sufficiently provided-: and in
" bringing David Jones before the Bench at Patrick’s Plains, upon the 21st
" October last, upon a charge of neg Pot which he established by bis own evi-
“ donee; and bringing afterwards the same person forward a second time, on
" the same day, for the samejoffence, which was established by a man named
*' Brampton, so as to obtain TWO sentences of fifty lashes each,Mr. Larnack
" adopted an unwarrantable and unjustifiable proceeding.”
This speaks volumes of the opinion the Government has
formed of the merits of Mr. Larnack upon the occasion;
but where is Major Mudie, as he is called! We shall see
that ho is not forgotten in the sequel ;
" The Governor is also called Upon” fsays the same letter) " to notice the
“> conduct of Mr. Mudiei in requiring Nagle to go on Sunday for a-winnowing
" machine, and subsequently bringing him to the. Bench, to be punished for
“ refusal; in doing which, be acted in a manner wholly unjustifiable !!!”
W hy, the Governor should have confined his just censure to
these acts alone, lamat a loss, to conceive; when there: are
so many others, of ten times greater enormity which I shall
submit- to-your, consideration. Was His. Excellency deterred


by any feat* of the cahal !—Or was lie anxious to conciliate
them ?—Or had the game been sufficiently run by hint, to bo
bunted down by public opinion, aided by the bloodhounds
of the Press ? Mudie and Larnaok attempt to justify, but
to their mystification of logic, and jargon of sophistry,
I do not propose to refer, until I first extract copiously
from the published evidence taken before the Commission
of Enquiry.
It has boon contended by Mr. Mudie, that the rupture to
which I have already alluded, corroborated the assertions of
his friends, the Petitioners, that insubordination did actually
exist; and that, therefore, the Governor was highly culpable
in his allegation that public tranquillity was not in the least
danger. I will deal fairly with the Major. I will give him
all the advantage of that self-adulation in the Colony with
with which ho has plentifully bedaubed himself : and I will
suffer the encomiums of his Colonial emissaries, and cat’s-
paws to regale the ears of “kindred spirits” here, but it
would be worse than cowardice, or treachery to society, to
allow the British public to be misguided by the false repre-
sentations to which the discontented and disappointed fac-
tious few will probably resort. General Bonrko has, as the
Major states, acquitted him of the charges of tyranny and
oppression, which the men who were executed made against
him : but the Governor censures (and properly so) both his
conduct and that of his son-in-law, in issuing bad and insuf-
ficient provisions at different times to their men, and parti-
cularly for having procured the punishment of a prisoner,
named Nagle, for refusing to labour on the Sabbath, This,
Sir, is a specimen of Botany Bay morality, and will enable
you to form a proper estimate both of the Christian senti-
ments of the master, and the elements which compose the
Courts of Summary Jurisdiction who would dare to mote
out corporal punishment upon such an occasion. With
regard to the servants who proved the charges, in part,
against the Major, he complains bitterly that their evidence
should have been received at all—and points triumphantly to
some others, his servants, who, he says, are good men,
because they speak rather partially of his equivocal treat-
ment. The reason which induces them, however, to sound


Ins praise, ia obvious : they are destined to remain in bis
service ; and it is no difficult matter to discover their motive
in glossing over his unwarrantable behaviour. It is not
likely they would seek to aggravate their cruel treatment
by exposing the author of it, but rather endeavour to soften
his obdurate feelings by that false praise, to which tlio most
ignorant men know that weak and cruel minds are suscep-
tible. The Major in political life is a tactician of no mean
pretensions, since ho boasts of his intention and power to
■change the whole penal discipline of the Colony—an
JEgaxm task, easy enough however of accomplishment by a
Hercules, who “can send a man to Norfolk Island for
life”—or “ get another a pardon,” as the witnesses in-
formed the Commissioners their master had frequently boasted
ho had the power to effect. I have no doubt, Sir, that ia
■any interview with which you may he pleased to honor him,
he will deliver himself with a polish superior to that of the
■community of which I form a member ; and I certainly
long for a supply of that Downing Street intention with
which the Major will, in his accustomed gasconade, unques-
tionably supply us. When it became apparent that the
Governor would direct an inquisitorial proceeding respect-
ing the causes that produced so serious a convulsion on his
particular farm, Mr. Mudio wrote to tho Colonial Secretary,
desiring that particular men should bo removed from bis
employment as insubordinate, and their places supplied by
other’s of more accommodating and docile habits. This, at
first sight, appeared a reasonable desire, and on any other occa-
sion would have been probably sanctioned without much deli-
beration ; but tho Governor wiselypaused. Ho could perceive
a covert purpose, and what was it? That tho writer might,
in tho anticipated enquiry, throw doubt upon the testimony
of men whom no stratagem could debar from speaking tho
truth; and the Major Las naturally enough availed himself
of this protection in the vindication, or rather recrimination
which he has very injudiciously offered to the Government.
When I invoke, Sir, shame and obloquy to become tho
portion of every master who starves his servants in a
Country like this, where provisions are proverbially plen-
tiful and good, I only echo the prevailing public sentiment
H


elicited by tins enquiry.—Submission from convict servants
is not only expected but enforced; and yet tin; treatment
they generally receive nourishes all the elements oi dis-
obedience and rebellion. Reformation is forgotten : and in
the adoption of blind and cruel measures to repress liberty
of complaint, and to brutalise the passions, masters forget
(willingly in many instances) that human beings are the
lamentable victims of their wrath. Men speak. Sir, in
England, of the happiness and comfort of a convict: alas 1
do but look on tho picture—-the plain and faithful portrait
exhibited by the following extracts from the published
evidence taken by unbiassed Commissioners, on a loudly-
eulogised, and complete agricultural establishment. Tho
meat is proved to be nauseous and unpalatable. Brown
says,—
“ It was black when issued, and appeared to bo in a state of mortification :
“ it could not 1)0 eatou.”
Nagle " was obliged to throw it to tho dogs ; for two years good meat had
11 not boon issued to the men above eight times.”
Ponsonby, another witness, adds, “ that the moat was bad always, and that
“ the weekly ration of four pounds of pork (given in harvest time by way of
“ indulgence) it was morally impossible to cat! ’
Cook says, “ I recollect a bullock breaking bis log, and the meat was served
'* out to the men : the meat was very bad—it was not fit for use the day after
" we got it.”
Those who know tho condition of working bullocks, will
readily appreciate the sorry banquet which a number of
hard-working hungry men, must have enjoyed over the tough
and tainted sinewy flesh of an animal of this description.
Alas ! human misery, where is thy parallel ? Nagle, in his
evidence, speaking of the meat alluded to by Brown, adds,
" What was served out was not good: tho flesh was bruised in patches, and
" would not take the salt—tho animal was very poor.”
True; but it was fit, it seems, for the poor servants of
Messrs. Mudie and Larnack to eat. —This witness, in answer
to questions put by Mudie, says,
" 1 never said I was starved ; but I said the rations were bad.—l used to
“ eat cabbage 1 bad at the back of my but with salt (strong symptoms of star-
" vation) when the moat would become short: I used to throw the meat
“ away because it was rnaggotty, and it used to stink that it might be smelt a
“ quarter of a mile off—l mean by this that it had a very strong smell.”
“ The above, Sir, might bo considered as conclusive


evidence' of a system of mismanagement, calculated to goad
men to acts of insubordination and violence : but 1 will
produce still more damning proofs. Henry Brown says,
“ Tho bullock, Punch (whose flesh was given aa ration to the men) lay in
" a bole a day and a half, and bo was served out—bo bad bis log broke."
One would believe this was a solitary instance ; but no
the same witness adds,
" A short time after, (.hero was an old cow Jay alongside a creek, and
" Goorgo Frost, one of llio men on tiro farm, reported, it on a Sunday : alio
“ lay there, and the butcher stuck the beast on Monday, and it was served
“ out; it was old and thin, and the flesh would not take salt.”—Ho adds,
" This meat of the cow was served out, but tho greater part was given to the
" dogs. I have soon the Overseer take out this meat full of maggots, and
" wash the meat, and throw salt on it for tiro men’s use.”
If a settlor expect labor, he should at least supply his
laborers with sufficient and wholesome sustenance. It will
now be my duty, Sir, to point out; to you that Mr. Larnack
lias not only been guilty of barbarity in striking and ill-
using prisoners, who wore prevented by thoir relative con-
dition from retaliating; but has added to the miseries of
their slavery, the horrors of starvation. And now with
respect ,lo tho Jlour issued by Messrs. Mudic and Larnack
to their servants ;
.Tamos Brown—Wc generally get tailings; what was served out about four
" months ago was tho blackest, but not tho worst.”
James Harvey—" The flour that lias boon issued within the last three
" months was very bad : it is hardly fit to bo called flour—it is mixed with
“ grass seed and smut —tho best was sent to Sydney, and the worst kept for
“ the men.”
Kicbard Nagle—" The flour that I complain of being very bad had smul-
" balls in it—ry e grass seeds ami garlic was in it; the best of the wheat was
“ scut to Sydney, and tho tailings were left for tho use of tho men.”
“ Homy Brown —" 1 have taken some good wheat (to the mill), but the
“ greater part was tho sweepings and tailings of it. I took up 36' bushels to
“ bo ground fi>j,Mr. Scott, but tho miller complained of the flour being so bad,
" and it was then served out as a ration; wo got ten pounds a week of it.”
[This wheat Mr. Larnack t was ashamed to send for the
servants of a neighbour, but he was not ashamed to give it
to his own,]
The above, I submit, affords ample proof, that if
such treatment prevails on large and well-regulated estates
here, the ill-managed and small farms arc proportionately
worse, But oppression; Sir, is not confined to bad food.


It displays itself in the violent behaviour of the master,
who, in fits of intoxication or anger, wreaks vengeance upon
the unhappy mortals, whom the British Government commit
to his paternal, or at least humane custody.
Henry Brown —“ I saw Mr. Larnack in Juno last boat a boy of the name
« of Duffy, wbo was in my but, and is still; ho boat him cruelly with a slick
“ for thatching wheat stacks, us thick as one of my fingers; ho gave him
“ several blows, four or five ; the boy is sixteen, or seventeen years old ; on
11 the following Monday Mr. Mutlie brought him to Court, and he got fifty
“ lashes; Big Brown was present when Dully was beaten; X don’t recollect
“ who else was present; Mr. Larnack beat Dully lately when he had a sore
“ back; I have seen Mr. Larnack also strike Maurice Stack, one of the men,
<• before be beat Duffy; ho boat him on different days with a stick, and with a
“ cutting whip, and with his fists; bo also boat Dempsy; 1 saw him beat all
“ these persons ; Dempsy went from his own business to fetch water for a man
" of the name of Cualiin, a constable, and for this it was ho was kicked by
“ Mr. Larnack.”
This witness further adds—" I saw Duffy beaten by Mr. Larnack ; it was not
“ with a strap of leather; it was an oak stick be was beaten with.”—Mr.
" Larnack also beat Stack for neglecting his pigs; ho kicked him up, and
“ knocked him down, and kicked him when down.”
Unmanly and censurable as this behaviour is, as applied
to individuals, what opinion, Sir, are we to form of the
morality of tlie man wbo considers the holy Sabbath as
unworthy of regat'd; and who, rather than enforce by his
precept and example, Christian piety in those whoso lives-
have been too often passed in the worst of profligacy, perpe-
tuates immorality by direct command, and contributes to
it’s further growth,
•Tames Brown—“ I have known wheat to be cleaned and bagged on Sunday.”’
James Ilarvoy—“ I have worked on Sunday loading a team. I knew VVII-
- liam Crisp to bo punished (flogged) for refusing to work on a Sunday; it
“ was three years ago. Nagle told mo that ho (himself) got twenty-live lashes
" for refusing to go to Mr. Campbell’s for a winnowing machine on a Sunday.’’
This witness (who had been five years with Mr. Mudie)
also says,
“ X have received notice that Divine Service was to bo performed in the
” School-house at Patrick’s Plains once or twice during all the time I was at
" Castle Forbes; twice or three limes I attended prayers in the barn; the
" men used to spend their Sundays in washing thoir shirts, and fetching wood
" for their own use.”
Peter X’onsonby—“ I have worked on Sunday at the request of my master;
“ I did not like to refuse him.”
Richard Nagle—l was only onco punished since I came to the Colony—


" then, I got 25 lashes; the Overseer of Mr. Mudio reported to him that I
“ refused to go for a winnowing machine to Mr. Campbell’s on Sunday,, and
" the same day that I refused to drive bullocks, and I was flogged.”
Is it, Sir, surprising, tliat crime prevails here, when such
abandoned acts are sanctioned—when a man is actually
punished by a Bench of Magistrates for refusing to profane
the Sabbath? Wo want stipendiary Magistrates. This is
direct proof of the injustice of the Benches we now possess.
You will doubtless enquire, Sir, in perusing the pre-
ceding disgusting details, why did not these men, when they
found themselves so grievously oppressed, apply for the
interposition of the Government, or the Bench of Magis=
trates ? With regard to the first method of redress, it appears
in evidence, that Mr. Larnack intercepted and detained
written complaints of Poole (one of the prisoners executed),
addressed to the Principal Superintendent of Convicts, and
the Director of Public Works; and with respect to the
second, it may bo remarked, that Justices who would flog a
man for not labouring on the Sabbath day (without any cause
of urgent necessity having called for so great a deviation
from propriety), would not feel much interested in enter-
taining complaints from the assigned servants of a Brother
Magistrate, who might have, at that moment, ample occasion
to shako hands with each other upon a similarity of treat-
ment. You, Sir, may possibly applaud the generalship
displayed, although you will certainly condemn tho system
pursued, in subduing appeals for redress in tho manner
exhibited in tho following :
James Brown—■" I never complained to tho Magistrates ; be, Mr, Mudio,
“ always told me I'd got punished if I did ; X have complained to Mr. Mvulic
" and Mr. Larnack (of tho bad provisions); none of the other men com-
" plained to tho Magistrates; when any man was about to complain, ho was
“ brought up on another charge.”
James Harvey—“ I never made any complaint to the Magistrates ; it was
" dangerous to do so; any one that found fault was considered an iusubordi-
” nato character; if any man spoke of it, Mr. Mudio would call him au
“ insubordinate character, and hunt him down.” ; -
Mr. Larnack was examined as a witness in his own behalf,
and a more injudicious and unprecedented measure, could
not, in my opinion, have been adopted. To allow a man to
give evidence where his conduct was tho subject of enquiry,


was not more novel titan futile. As a piece of oantionu'
Sophistry, ami meagre exculpation, it is worthy only of
contempt; hut as tending either to shako the stability of
the great body of evidence; or as negativing even the
testimony given upon any particular incident, this illegal
mode of proof entirely fails. The Commssionors certainly
showed an unnecessary courtesy to Mr. Lnrnack in receiving
his statement; but it however affords a proof of the strict
impartiality with which they acted; and I will even go
farther, and slate, that no two gentlemen in the Colony, could
have been selected of greater intelligence and more honour-
able independence, than those composing the Members of
this necessary Court of Enquiry. I will here ask, did Mr.
Larunek disprove any of the charges respecting the badness
of the provisions?'Did ho shew that good moat was given
in lieu of the had ?—Did his equivocal explanation of stop-
ping the letter's of complaint, look like the conduct of a man
conscious of his own innocence?—Why did ho not have the
author of them arraigned at, the bar of justice for false ami
malicious accusation? has ho, or Mr. Mudic proved their
conduct towards the unfortunates in their power, to have
been humane?—Or did they wipe off the stigma attached to
the contrary disposition, by the following extraordinary
conduct?
James Brown—" I was brought up two years ago by Mr. Mudic to Court
" for feigning I was sick; a Ur. Sloanc, X believe, certified that I was able
“ to work, and I was flogged; I got fifty lashes, and I was able to go to work
"on the following day —l was obliged to go."
Peter Ponsonby says — 11 I know that tbo men who were tried were
“ severely flogged; I’erry was flogged very often ; I saw bis back, and bo bad
" a horrid back; he often complained that lie bad not enough to cat; bo used
" to call at my but for a bit of bread, and I used to give it to him; tbo flour
" was very bad ; the men all went up to complain of it; after that the flour
" became a little better; I think lleilly had reason to complain; lie bad a
" horrid back, and Mr. Lnrnack wanted him to go to work, and for refusing to
“ work lie was brought to Courtagaiu and flogged; I board Keilly and Poole
" say that they would not get justice at the Bench at Patrick s Plains; I board
“ tbo men in conversation amongst each oilier say that tbo Magistrates wore so
" friendly to each other, no justice would bo done them.”
Good heavens! Is it in the power of pen to express the
horror with which every man, not lost to the common feelings


of humanity, must view this revolting picture. Nature
shudders at the recital of these human woes ; and justice in
vain seeks lor mercy, her sister in the judgment-scat. Who
attempts to deny these hideous facts, among .the supporters
or palliators of the “ Mudie cause ?” None, for they are un-
deniable—refinements of barbarity, cruelty, and torture. If,
Sir, there be either justice or humanity remaining in the
human breast, I would invoke it to my aid, while I
arouse your just indignation in the perusal of these dis-
gusting, these heart-rending details. Perry and his com-
rades (led to the bush; they attempted the life of the author
of their torments ; and they perished on the scaffold. Was
not death preferable to a life of such protracted agony—of
such frequent and relentless scourging and starvation?
William Cook—" Reilly (who was also hanged) had got a deal of flog-
" giog, ami X used to hear it said he could not stand it.”
Peter Ponsonhy —" I often heard Poole (who was executed) say, that he
" wished Mr. Mudie (who indulged him occasionally) was at homo ; that ha
“ was afraid ho would ho hanged before he came: ho told me it was Mr. Lar-
'• nnck tyrannizing over him ho was afraid of; I have hoard Mr, Larnack
" blow him up, and call him a damned scoundrel.”
In fact, Sir, the whole tenor of the evidence seems to
imply that those unhappy men, who were executed, sought
an ignominious death, rather than submit to evils arising
from persecution which they were unable to endure. Is not
transportation under those circumstances “ worse than
“ DEATH ?”!!!
IVIr, Mudic was more cautious than his countryman and
relative, Larnack, He contented himself with merely
making a protest against his worst and most insubordinate
servants being examined, and what followed? His best
were heard, and particularly his merciful and intelligent
maggot-picking Overseer, Crinane, and of what utility wore
they ? With regard to Mr. Mudie, he seems, in all the trans-
actions of his farm, to have confided the management to Mr.
Larnack, and kept up the semblance of humanity by giving
his servants, now and then, cabbages and potatoes (which, by
the bye, the Hoods had spoiled), and a portion of fair words
and unmeaning counsel, as a sort of palliative for the entire


want of tooling displayed by Mr. Lam,ink. Nabob-likc,
too, ho gave a true (heaven save tho mark !) picture of his
importance as a Magistrate and ‘ great man,' in the following
graphic sketch, which I submit as illustrative of the supe-
rior manners, and undoubted vci’acity of Major Mudie, J. P,!
James Brown says —“ Mr. Mutlic said lio expected a free pardon for me
“ and Mr. Bill, and we could not then expect a suit of clothing (coaxing, oil!);
“ on Wednesday, a month or three weeks from yesterday, Mr. Mudie. told mo
“ that he had tho power to keep any man on tho farm during his life, or to send
" him to Norfolk Island, and that ho had received a letter from the Governor
“ to that effect, and to draw the best mechanics.”
Surely, Sir, the Major was jocular, but we shall see :—•
James Harvey says—Mr. Madia said ho had sufficient interest with the Go.
" vornor to send any man to Norfolk Island for his natural life, and could
*' pick tho best tradesmen in Sydney for himself.”
The shifts to which the Major has been reduced for evi-
dence to palliate some of the strange charges embodied in
tho examinations, are as ridiculous as his assumed importance
is contemptible. He brings forward Crinano, who being
an insignificant mortal, was not probably included in tho
merited censure of the Government; but certainly the link
of his barbarity was so connected with the chain of facts of
general misconduct at the establishment of Castle Forbes,
that tho Commissioners should havohesitated before receiving
him as a witness. They however did do so with some
caution, but his testimony amounts to no more than that he
did not hear this, nor see that. Ho does not negative a single
assertion of any moment; and even if ho wore to contradict,
it could not avail against such a host of strong corroborative
proof.
Hugh Thomson, a Scotch Emigrant mechanic, deposed,
that tho conduct of Messrs. Mudie and Larnaok towards
their servants, was marked by humanity ! good feeding !!
and benevolence 1!! Among other instances of unblush-
ing effrontery in this person, we have the following
“ I think the feeding of the prisoners cm the farms generally in this Country,
“ that I have soon, much summon to that of laborers in Scotland. I con-
“ sidcr Mr. Mndio’s farm, during the time I was on it, as well provided as any
“ farm I have seen here, and, from the quantity and quality of tho provisions,
“ equal to tho farming establishments in Scotland.”


This person, moreover says, with the view, no doubt, of
giving weight to his highly important testimony,—
“ I am brother to Mr. Thomson, the Scotch Clergyman of Bathurst.”
Mr. Thomson was on Mr. Muclie’s farm for eighteen
mouths ; he had not seen it since July last, which was some
time before Poole and his companions absconded : lie was
therefore not present at Castle Forbes during the absence of
Major Mudie, the identical time when the cry of insubordi-
nation. resounded ; and when tho taction were excelling each
other in attempts to raise a rebellion, and, of consequence,
an universal slaughter. I consider this testimony as only
remarkable for tho gross ignorance of the witness, expressed
in his libellous attack upon tbo Scottish nation, which vir-
tually amounts to this—that tho hardy sous of Caledonia’s
soil, have acquired their characteristic robustness of consti-
tution, by having been fed on a composition of rye grass,
smut balls, and tho coarsest of pollard; with animal food
bordering on a state of putrefaction, in which maggots have
been engendered, and banquotted gloriously. With these
remarks, I shall bog leave, Sir, to dismiss Mr. Thomson
from your further notice, at tho same time wishing his
friends all tho advantage they can derive, from his com-
pound of bombast and absurdity.
Mr. Robert Rodd and Mr. Baldwin, both settlers, and
the only ones summoned, proved that they treated their own
servants well, and gave them a good ration.
The other men belonging to Messrs. Mudie and Larnaok
were called in, but made no complaint; and, as I have
before stated to you, the cause is obvious —they were to be
retained upon tho estate, and policy naturally suggested the
expediency of silence, as. tho moans of saving themselves
from after consequences.
Reviewing generally tho evidence published by Mr.
Mudie, it will readily occur to you that the manifestation of
a spirit of discontent, and the subsequent rising and execu-
tion of certain prisoners in the employment of Messrs.
Mudio and Larnaok, though it cannot be palliated by the
fact, evidently originated in the treatment they experienced.


If even tlio men had risen in a body, where tho general
treat,men), was such as tlio evidence lias disclosed, who
would venture, in a moral point of view, to blame them '!
Is tlio negro in a slate of slavery like this ? But what was
the result of tho commotion it produced at Castle Forbes i
Tho prisoners on tho adjoining farms, who were unjustly
stigmatised as insubordinate, volunteered to go in pursuit of
the desperate runaways. They Hew with alacrity to the
bush, and assisted in capturing them. The leader of tho
party, Mr. Robert Scott, one of the Justices of tho District,
was rewarded for his exertions by a piece of plate; hut no
one over heard of what became of tho money which a
generous and sympathising public subscribed for tho pri-
soners-who accompanied him. They, insubordinate charac-
ters, although lending their aid to suppress insubordination,
must be forgotten, in order to assist the hue and cry of the
faction ; but the public boars their behaviour in remem-
brance. Money was subscribed for their reward , surely it
cannot have merged into the Scott Plato 'Fund. If it have
not, at least, let the subscribers he made acquainted with
the manner in which it has been applied.
I have already furnished you. Sir, with tho Governor’s
opinion upon the evidence from which the foregoing are
extracts; and as it will be but fair to allow Messrs, Mudio
and Larnack to be heard in explanation, I will now do
myself tho pleasure of analyzing their lucubrations. I must
here observe, with regard to His Excellency’s letter, that
opinions conveyed by his authority with such singular
leniency, ought to have produced submission and gratitude
in both the breasts of Messrs. Miulie and Larnack ; for tho
General, in tho zenith of his popularity and victory over a
virulent, and factious party, might have assumed an imperious
and commanding tone—but no—his desire to act with cour-
tesy ami dignity of fooling ruled supreme; yet this indulgent:
disposition produced a remarkable degree of audacity in those
to whom it was applied, and a letter from each of these
persons, censuring the leniency of the Governor in no
measured terms, and assorting their rights to a triumph,


almost immediately followed. Possessing, Sir, an undoubted
right to comment upon documents, which the hardihood, or
misplaced judgment of those worthies has furnished in pub-
Halting, I shall exert the privilege of discussing the merits
of certain passages therefrom, without anticipating any
blame for that warmth of feeling, which the subject may
probably induce. Those letters it will bo remembered, are
replies to the Governor’s communication of the 13th Fe-
bruary, convoying His Excellency’s opinion, and censure
of the acts disclosed before the Commission of Enquiry.
First, as to Major Mudio. His letter is only singular for
it’s vague and impudent allusions. It’s deductions exhibit
a barrenness of candor, and a plenitude of bombast. Ho
assumes a right of censure, and points out the turpitude of
others, without recollecting that cruelty is a crime ton times
more inexcusable than the burglar’s violence, or the high-
wayman's fury, who in putting a pistol to your oar demands
your purge or life, and politely expresses his regret that
necessity obliges him either to rob or murder you. There
is no necessity, however, that can excuse cruelty. The
Major complains that the men examined wore allowed " not
to give evidence of their own misconduct, but to criminate
“ their master,” What was the object of the enquiry?
Was it not to ascertain to what extent the assertions of the
unfortunate men were founded in fact ? The result is any
thing but complimentary to the humanity of the Major. If
I, Sir, wore proved guilty of similar inhumanity, I would
hurl myself from some “ Tarpoiau” steep, or bury my
remorse and shame in some gloomy recess, far from the
condemning gaze of civilized society. The allegation that
the provisions issued to his servants, wore equal, if not
superior to that given to prisoners under the sanction of the
Conimissaviat, is decidedly untrue: and I look upon this
allusion as convoying a direct insult to the respectable
Oflicers of that Department; since it amounts to a charge
that they disgrace their stations by allowing unwholesome
and filthy food to bo served out under their authority. To
justify his conduct by adducing the unsatisfactory testimony


of an impudent Scotch mechanic, and a tyrannizing Over-
seer, who coolly picks maggots from slinking meat, for the
benefit of his master, and the. punishment of his servants’
bellies, is not one of the least excusable acts of the Major :
but to preach a regard for the Sabbath, and then (o assume
a position of justification for having procured Nagle to he
flogged for not working on that day, is something worse.
Yet this is not all; Mr. Mndie’s temerity keeps pace with
his letter, for he vindicates the Patrick’s Plains Bench for
thoir double punishment of Jones, by two scourgings of
fifty lashes each on one day for neglect. If this bo a sample
of the sentiments entertained by the Justices of that Dis-
trict, the sooner their names are erased from the Commis-
sion of the Peace, the better it will be for the cause of
suffering humanity. The persecuting and vindictive feeling
of the Major towards his servants does not terminate with
their withdrawal from his employ [they are obnoxious in
bis eye because they speak the truth], but ho desires the,
Governor to hunt them to desperation; for such is the con-
clusion his words are capable of bearing: and his modesty
displays itself in the following egotistical episode upon his
own generous and manly behaviour, during those horrifying
disclosures and discussions:
“ 1 hail expected of Hia Excellency, instead of a rebuke on the different
" points above replied to, that His Excellency would have made it a matter of
“ public congratulation to the Colony, that the foul charges made against mo
“ by the prisoners (since executed) wore not only substantively and in their
“ spirit totally false, but that the criminals who made them at the Bur of the
“ Supremo Court bad received better treatment Hum then mre, entitled to,
*' either hy the practice of the local Government, or by the regulations \we-
“ scribed by the lust Governor, in June K\3l ; and consequently that to their
‘' other offences, they had added falsehood, malice, and ingratitude ”
The Major talks a vast deal about his character as a
Magistrate, to give weight, 1 presume, to his opinions—l
leave the world to judge how far the respect due to his ma-
gisterial and ordinary rank in society, is benefitted by the
luminous evidence taken before the Commissioners. Though
the Public of this Colony can account for the station he holds
in society as a Justice of the Peace, yet his claim to the
military rank he assumes is not so easily established. Ivu


inour attributes to him so many titles, from that of Corporal
to Major, and has ascribed to him such varied employments
during the last twenty years, that to trace his peregrinations
and posts, (no doubt always of an honorable and exalted
character) would puzzle any connoisseur in historical
research, even Yidocq himself.
Following in the wake of his patron and relative, Mr.
Mudie, comes the person named Larnack, of whom so much
has already been said and proved. I believe this individual
is less disposed to appear in borrowed plumes, and armed
with a multitude of warlike names, than hi & Munchausen-[ike
predecessor. Ho is. Sir, a man taken from the more hum-
ble walks of life, with still more humble capabilities, except
as to his bruising qualifications, in which he has given so
decided a proof of his superiority. His name might have
descended with him to the silent tomb unnoticed, but for
the conspicuous share be has taken in these proceedings.
This will give him a lustre and a notoriety of which I envy
him not the possession. The chivalrous vindication of this
Gentleman “against all opponents” is dated Patrick’s
Plains, Oth February, 1034, and is recognised to be the
production (for his greatest' enemy will not accuse Mr.
Larnack as the author) of a person who wishes to Do-good
for his shining friends, and to cleanse them from the filth
with which this ungracious encounter has hemired them,
Mr. Larnack is more ingenious than his superior. lie
denies striking the servants, but admits chastising them. If
this bo not a distinction without a difference—a sort of
paradoxical gender, which says a mare is a horse, hut a
horse is not a mare ; —if, I say, this ho not something of that
unintelligible trash, and Mr. Larnack be not cither obsti-
nately pertinacious, or grossly ignorant, I know not what it
can- bo. The equivocation, however, is only worthy the
person who resorts to it in his defence, and it merely leaves
where it found him. Ho foolishly alludes to his oath before
the Commissioners, as confirmatory of his statement. His
admission as an evidence, as I have before said, was in the
highest degree improper; and his sapient remark, that he
ought to be believed (although accused of rank offences
against humanity) in preference to his accusers, can only


acquit him of imp action able presumption, at the expense of
In's intellect. He asserts tliat his was parental correction,
and justifiable. lam disposed to pity Mr, Larnaok ; for in
addition to his highly censurable conduct, ho has been made
to appear ridiculous in the eye of society, by the silly
scribbling propensities of his ambitious plebeian comrade.
The remaining part of this ludicrous communication
alludes to the double punishment of Jones on one day for the
sumo offence, which the Governor severely censures. The
sentiments there delivered are destitute even of (ho quality
of contrivance, to redeem them from the smile of derision
which must necessarily await them: and the idle prate about
the importance of “ our flocks and herds,” as explanatory
of the groaspess of an act of overstrained severity, is too
quixotic to claim ©yep common attention, Mr. Larnack’s
conduct is as highly reprehensible, as his defence of it is
contemptible : and it is by such mon as him, his relative
Mr, Mudie, and the factious Magistracy of the Hunter,
with their few partisans in the Council Chamber and else-
where, that the indecent attempt has boon made to procure
the removal of the Governor and Chief Justice—men of
sound discrimination and exalted character, who, as eagles
ip their eyrie, arc unassailable by the grovelling sportsmen
who fire paper pellets at them from below.
It may bo laid down as an established axiom, that the
convicts have never evinced any spirit of insubordination,
oven in a trifling degree, without the ascertained existence
of cogent reasons on their part, such as—
-Ist,—The want of sufficient whplosomo food, or
2nd.—Unjust, or cruel treatment.
In evidence of this statement, .1 desire leave to look at
those periods, when bashranging predominated. It will be
found that marauding, and excesses prevailed most during
j.ipies of scarcity, when the Colonists wore obliged to import
grain even from India ; or when the prisoners were under
the dominion of tyrants, This deficiency of the principal
article of human food, consequently abridged the ration
given to prisoners; but the same quantity of labor, and the
same unyielding rigor was enforced, without the least allow-
ancebeing made for deficient sustenance, Again, the most


daring instances of insubordination, or revolt, displayed
themselves during despotic management;—for example, the
dangerous risings at Castle Hill, and Toonguhheo were
produced by the cruel and unrestrained brutality of tins
overseers of tiro public gangs in those districts. Was not
the serious revolt at Norfolk Island, while under the com-
mand of Colonel Eoveanx, the consequence of horrible
oppression, where, during his government, prisoners wore
actually hanged, without any kind of examination whatever,
and Hoggings administered with a barbarity unrivalled in
any country recorded in the annuls of history ? In the time
of General Darling, what caused the murders of Donohoo
the plunderings of Walmcsloy and Webber—-and the
Bathurst rising, but an overweening severity of discipline,
and an inadequate sufficiency of food. Norfolk Island has,
within the last few weeks, been the scene of now butcheries.
The system of treatment pursued towards the prisoners
there, by Colonel Morisset, engenders all those combustibles
which must ignite whenever opportunities ofl'or, and human
life cannot fail of becoming the sacrifice to an injudicious
mode of coercion, bordering on absolute ferocity. It is
proper hero to remark, that the middle class of settlers,
principally, nay in some cases exclusively composed of
Expirees and Emancipists, were actually on these occa-
sions, and particularly at Castle Hill, the Colonial Militia
who armed themselves in defence of the Government, and
subdued with a vigor and energy seldom equalled, ono of
the most remarkable risings, which has yet distinguished
the Colony. These, Sir, are however hut partial instances
of insubordination, when compared with the daring and
rebellious purposes of those, who, as X will shew you, wore
engaged in the deposition of Governor Bligh, Those men
boast, Sir, of an invisible influence in controlling His
Majesty’s Ministers, and as giving a direction to their de-
signs, only to an extent that will tally with their prejudices
and interests. All free institutions carry, in their opinion,
dangerous contagion—Reformation in the prison population,
is never viewed with the least concern; and I assort. Sir,
that it is from those who have been actually engaged in
open rebellion, and their relations and partisans, that tho


cry of insubordination has been accelerated, ami His
Majesty’s Ministers appealed to by those loyal and honour-
able subjects of Our Sovereign, as the at; plus ultra of mora-
lity in this Colony; they were rebels during the unlawful
imprisonment of Governor Bligh—enemies to the generous
Macquarie—cyphers in the Government, of the gallant
Brisbane - gods in the eyes of the corrupt, and land-bribing
Darling—and cyphers again during the present adminis-
tration of the veteran Buurko. Major M‘Arthur of London,
is their deputed oracle, from whom, Sir, you will
doubtless learn much; but it will bo dangerous to attend
to bis suggestions; If the Government bo rotten, a public
meeting will soon dcvelopo corruption or injustice,—but
private cabals, and secret whisperings are always the
artifices of cowards, who have private revenge to consummate,
and public happiness to murder.
I shall now, Sir, consign the “ Mudie cause” to it’s fate,
with all it’s incongruities on it’s head ; and in conclusion of
my lengthened address, attempt to give you a faint outline
of the discordant materials of which our infant. State is
composed, and by which our distant community has boon so
long distracted.
THE CABAL.
I feel it necessary to restrict my exposure, in consequence
of the space I have already occupied, to the principles
which give life and vigor to that faction that has so long
divided the best interests of the Colony. This has boon
evinced either in open array against the acts of the Gover-
nor, or in attempts to destroy confidence in his Govern-
ment hy the application of secret incendiary acts. The
opposition of the members of this faction is grounded —first,
upon the denial of indemnification for corrupt acts, or gross
errors in the exercise of the magisterial functions : secondly,
from the refusal of (ho Government to sanction packed
Juries, in which that faction shall hold the power of nomi-
nation among themselves ; and thirdly, by the substitution
of fifty lashes, in lieu of an almost unlimited discretion of
punishment for offences of a trifling nature, among the
prison population, which the Justices at one time hold;


joined with the condemnation of the abominable practice
which some few years since prevailed, of allowing one
Magistrate to invite his neighbour to dine, and while
participating in his good cheer, sit also in judgment upon
his servants, and flog them from friendship to their master.
It will not, Sir, I feel confident, be contended, that these
general regulations of Polices are arbitrary or injudicious
on the part of our excellent, and highly esteemed Ruler.
They are, however, the genu from which has sprung that
rancorous hatred to Ilis Excellency and his confidential
advisers, which the fern wish to communicate to tho many.
Even the Council which passed tho law is divided, and the
Members are supposed to stand as follows
FOR THE GOVERNOR.
Francis Forbes, Esq., Chief Justice.
Colonel Snodgrass, C. B.
John Kincholla, Esq., Attorney General.
'William Lithgow, Esq., Aviditor General.
John Blaxland, Esq.
Archibald 8011, Esq.
OPPOSITIONISTS.
Reverend W. G . Broughton, Archdeacon.
Robert Campbell, Esq.
Alexander Berry, Esq.
Richard Jones, Esq.
Hannibal Hawkins M‘Arthur, Esq.
DOUBTFUL.
Barman Lauga, Esq., Acting Collector of Customs.
Edward Charles Close, Esq.
NEUTRAL FROM NECESSITY.
Alexander M'Lcay, Esq., Colonial Secretary.
The Archdeacon, as tho head of the Church Establish-
ment, is entitled to a seat in tho Council. His salary of
£2OOO a year is a grievous burthen upon the Colony, and so
are his pastoral services. He is a mere cypher in the Stale
K


machinery, ami I look forward, wil.li all good men, in fond
anticipation to the speedy arrival of a time when such per-
sons shall bo compelled to bestow their undivided attention
upon the moral and religious guardianship of their flocks,
without being permitted to dabble in political or temporal
concerns. When this groat end shall bn attained, we may
look to the priesthood for an abatement of their present
insolent austerity, and a return to the primitive simplicity
of their order. Tho Archdeacon, it is said, stands up in the
ranks against tho leniency of the Governor, but surely his
opposition cannot be on this account: it, appears rather to bo
in consequence of the desire which His Excellency has
shown to cut down some of the fat salaries and allowances
which the Clerical body had long gorged upon under the
profligate administration of General Darling. The Church
Corporation, which this venerable head of it had long nursed
with more than pastoral care, has been dissolved, and
the secular control heretofore possessed by the Clergy
has changed hands—a circumstance which an ambitious and
grasping Churchman will never cease to avenge by adopting
a crooked line of politics, and by throwing his weight
(trilling to be sure) into the balance against the measures of
that Government which has accomplished the abolition.
Yet in private society the Archdeacon is a pious and vir-
tuous man. The virtual head of the faction in Council, as
well as in the Colony generally, is the M'Arthuy family,
and their immediate friends and dependants. Mr. H. H.
M'Artbnr is the nephew of John M'Arthur, Esq., whoso
name is associated with tho illegal deposition of Governor
Bligh. The old man was originally one of the Council, but
becoming imbecile, he ceased to be aMember. The whole of
this family arc determined.foes to every measure that has
even the show of liberality. They have acquired so much pro-
perty and influence under a close and despotic form of
Government, that they wish it’s dynasty to he immortal.
James, the son of the old set-on-ono-side Member, is tho
only one of the name who possesses reasonable or consistent
politics. Tiie political support of such a man as Hannibal
can never bo safe. Assistance given to perpetuate undue
severity, and miagovefnment, is alike dangerous to the ruler


and to the ruled. The Governor should rejoice, in such a
foe—it is the very host proof of his integrity. Mr. Camp-
bell is a M'Arthurito, in the strictest sense of tho word, it
would bo difficult to pronounce upon what principle Mr.
Berry’s opposition to the present administration proceeds*
except that, having been during tho reign of misrule an
obsequious Darliugist, he stands opposed to the liberal form
of Government pursued by General Bourko. His support;
however, would bring no weight beyond his single vote, as
ho is a more old woman in affairs of the State. Mr. Richard
Jones is a fiery Darliugist. He is said to bo a moral man—»
one who treats his servants with leniency, and they acknow-
ledge his tenderness with a corresponding anxiety to promote
his interests. This ought, at least, to convince him that
insubordination, so loudly proclaimed to exist, must proceed
in a groat measure from ill-treatment. Ho is known to have
boon formerly a “ high Tory,” and to be now a “ Radical,”
and one of the Governor’s sturdiest opponents : nevertheless
I do not think he could assign a reasonable motive for his
conduct. He is supposed to bo tho tool of others. Those
paltry few it is, who have gathered around thorn a host of
hornets, to bussa about and annoy tho Government. Gover-
nor Darling, by the potent aid of corruption, in giving
among them two hundred and fifty thousand acres of land,
and convict 1 mechanics of every description, silenced every
grumbling, and made them ever obedient to bis command.
General Bourko has no such gifts at his disposal, and if ho
had, I do not think he would bo anxious to .employ this
species of influence to stop tho mouths of the fry who now
agitate tho Colony. You, Sir, may depend upon this fact—■
that tho Guerilla warfare kept up is the effect of bribery ;
and I need no other proof of the motives which actuate some
of the Members of the Council, than the notorious demand
to push in the Reverend Ralph Mansfield as Editor of the
Sydney Gazette, in tho room of Mr. 15. W, O’Shaugbucssy,
the present Editor, who scorned to yield to the dictation of a
base faction, and write right and loft against the Governor
and Chief Justice without any just occasion. The attempt;
however, proved abortive ! A woman’s hand arrested the
blow !! ! And yet, Sir, how will you be surprised, when 1!


inform you that on the trial of an action for libel in the
Supreme Court, about four years ago, this same Mr,
Richard Jones, having been examined as a witness for the de-
fendant(Mr. Mansfield, thenEditorof the Sydney Gazette),
distinctly and positively swore that he never had, and never
would have any thing to do with the management of the
Gazette newspaper. The question which elicited this answer
was put by the Plaintiff’s (Mr, Wentworth’s) Counsel,
in order to ascertain whether Mr. Jones, as an executor to
the estate of the late Mr. Howe, had not an interest in the
result of the cause.—After this, what will the public think
of Mr. Jones’s notorious attempt not only to influence the
line of politics at present advocated by the Sydney Gazette,
but when he could not succeed in that, to endeavour to
thrust in a creature of his own party ?
If we look to the Press, we shall see that the pre-
ponderance of it’s organs, inclines to the system of policy
pursued by the present Government,—
Ist. GAZETTE.— Decidedly favorable to General Bourke’s
measures,
2nd. AUSTRALIAN.— The same.
3rd. MONITOR. —A mere political weathercock, that has
abandoned it’s former creed, to bolster up the “ Mudic
cause,” from kindred feeling; the Major being (as ho
asserts), a sharer in the copyright. Under many circum-
stances however, it contributes a sort of negative support
to the Governor.
4th. HERALD. —Tory,—Whig,—Radical,—or devoted to
the faction, under any, or “ No Sect.”
Here, Sir, is a preponderance of public opinion, suffi-
ciently powerful to silence all further question as to the
solidity of the measures pursued by His Majesty’s Repre-
sentative in this Colony.
During the intermediate period between the announce-
ment, and publication of this letter, the Editor of one of these
Journals (the Monitor), has thought fit publicly to address
himself to you through the medium of his columns, with the
view of prejudicing the subject which my communication


embraces ; and he has followed up this unusual course by a
series of other similar cowardly attacks on me, which have
issued from time to time in the shape of paragraphs in the
same paper. I have therefore deemed it necessary to oiler in
this place, a brief statement of the motives by which I have
been induced to write to you on this subject; and I will also
point out, at the same time, the reasons which have weighed
with Mr. Hall, to enlist himself on the opposite side of the
question.,
With regard to my own motives, they may bo explained in
a few words. Viewing, in common with every other inha-
bitant of the Colony, the political question now at issue
between the contending parties of our rising state, as one of
no common interest j both as regards it’s consequences on
the present order of public affairs, as well as it’s probable
effect in determining the destinies of thousands of the next
generation; I have made use of the common privilege of a
citizen, exercised in all parts of the civilized world, to make
known those impressions which have struck me as being
likely to prove beneficial to the common interests of the
people among whom I dwell. If those impressions ho
erroneous, they arc open to refutation by the same moans.
I can foresee no evil consequences likely to result from
publishing my sentiments, without appending to them my
legitimate signature. The stamp of conviction, or t weight, is
not affixed to public writings by the name, but by the ar</u-
---------menls of an author. I am not ambitious enough to sock to
become the aoknowleged Correspondent ol'a Crowned Hoad,
or a Minister of State, in my own proper person ; but will
content myself with obscurity-—committing my opinions and
sentiments to the impartial consideration, and candid cri-
ticism of my countrymen, as one of their number, actuated
solely in doing so, by the motive of conducing to our common
benefit. I will leave the contrary mode of communication
to my precocious antagonist, the frequent and presumptuous
intrusions of whose name into the Cabinet, the ’Parliament,
and the various departments of the Slate are so notorious,
that it is probably, Sir, hot unknown to you, I will treat


his insulting prediction's as to my being considered “ an
•* Emancipist, or some clever fellow in an Ironed Gang," in
the only manner they merit. They arc beneath my contempt,
and do not influence me in the slightest degree. Such
charges however, from such a source, come with a very ill
grace; but the motives, and the motives alone which I have
explained, are the only ones actuating me to address myself
to you, and to remain “ suh umbrd,”
And now, Sir, I will proceed to develope the reasons by
which the Editor of the Monitor is propelled in his anti-
cipating hostility towards this “ forthcoming pamphlet.”
While General Darling controlled the affairs of the Colony,
the Monitor was the grand nucleus, around which all the
aggrieved (real or imaginary), of the day, concentrated.
The continued out-pourings of it’s denunciations against the
Government, though undistinguished hy any share of
literary merit, were hailed by the phrenziod democrats who
rallied around the Editor, as the honest effusions of pure
and disinterested patriotism. The deadly shafts of his
envenomed attacks, wore then levelled without distinction,
against all the Members of the Government—ho proclaimed
himself the voluntary champion of the People’s rights, as well
as the gratuitous redresser of the wronged. Hurried on by
all the unnatural warmth of an overheated imagination, it’s
concomitant, obstinacy—and an inherent volubility of
narration, in which inconsistency, and misrepresentation
formed the most prominent features; the Monitor then
became the object of criminal prosecution by several
influential individuals connected with the Government, on
whom it’s wholesale vituperation had been unsparingly dealt;
and the result terminating in the incarceration of the Editor,
he was immediately canonized as a Saint of Political Mar-
tyrdom. Why this journalist should condemn in General
Bourke, the judicious abridgement of those undue severities,
the existence of which ho denounced in Governor Darling,
I shall leave to the sophistical Editor to explain; but at the
same time, I must take the freedom of acquainting you with
the prevailing opinion of the great body of the Colonists on


this head ; which is, that (ho Monitor, not having been raised
on an imlopoutli'-ntstructure, the Editor has always been com-
pelled to become the mouth*piece of each succeeding party
in whom the real interest of his journal lay. To (his cause
may be assigned his sweeping condemnation of all the, former
Governor’s measures, aided by that angry feeling which the
prosecutions ho experienced in consequence of it, excited
within his breast; and from a similar source, likewise
springs the singular fact of his censure of our present Ruler,
for the observance of that leniency to the prison population,
which ho himself, before advocated. Added to this, wo
have his still more singular defence of the “ Mudio cause,”
by which he abandons his former romantic professions of
support to the weaker party, and lends all his strength to
uphold the oppressor in his oppression. I repeat, that. I
will leave it to his editorial ingenuity to explain away this
political apostacy, confining myself to the mere dry facts
upon which his advocacy of this rotten cause is evidently
founded.
Some months since, according to Mr. Hall’s account, his
interest in the Monitor was disposed of by public sale, ami
Mr. Mudie was commissioned, in the name of a few of Mr,
Hall’s private friends, to re-purchase it for him, securing it
against further molestation, by vesting it in their joint
names. It will not, therefore, bo difficult to perceive tho
reason of Mr. Mndio’s easy access to the columns of the Mo-
nitor, in which he has cut so conspicuous a figure of late, by
vindicating his conduct from tho grave charges of inhu-
manity cast upon it by tho joint declarations of certain
unhappy dying men, and authenticated by tho censure of
the Governor, founded on tho impartial investigation of two
independent Commissioners of Enquiry —one of them tho
prosecuting officer of those men. But tho Editor did not
rest here. He thought his duty, or friendship, or party
feeling (let him call it by which name ho pleases), was not
sufficiently displayed, until he had published in several
succeeding supplements to his journal, the whole detailed
evidence taken by those Commissioners at Castle Forbes;


ii hasty and injudicious step, which, but for tho known rash-
ness and obstinacy of the adviser, might have rendered him
liable to a suspicion of adopting this imprudent course from
some sinister motive ; as the intrinsic value of these docu-
ments, has a clear tendency to establish that, which tho
publication of them was intended to rebut; namely—tho
propriety of the Governor’s censure of tho conduct pursued
by Messrs. Mudio and Larnack, iu tho treatment of thoir
assigned convict servants. Honco arose Mr. Hall’s violent
predisposition to attack my letter before ho was acquainted
with it’s contents. But, Sir, I have already engrossed 100
much of your valuable time on this unimportant subject, and
shall therefore return to the more ostensible objects I
have in view.
If we turn our attention to the populous districts of the
Colony, wo shall find at least 10,000 men who subsist
by agricultural occupations, perfectly satisfied with the
present order of things ; and some thirty or forty Set-
tlers and Magistrates on the Hunter, affecting with impu-
dent gravity, to represent the wishes of tho Colony, and
“ ohejam satis!" compel the Government at homo to change
the Governor here. Insolent political hravoos !•—You, Sir,
know how to deal with factions. The man who, in Ireland,
was a terror to united and conspiring thousands, will smile
at the contemptible impotency and malice of a scourge-
adoring crew of vulgar aspirants, If wo observe the number
of Magistrates in tho Commission, we shall find 180 on tho
list, and of these only about ten signed the Petition for
extending their summary powers.
In the face of this demonstrative proof of confidence in
the Governor, it were unwise in me to extend the range of
enquiry further than I have already done, because I am
satisfied that the end in view has been fully attained.
You now see, Sir, from the statement of facts I have
respectfully submitted for your consideration, that the most
direct oppression and bitter slavery will inevitably result
from the slightest concession made to the demands of the
Petitioners of Hunter's Hirer, who require more power,
and less responsibility in the punishment of thoir assigned
convict servants. You are here afforded correct and com


plete data for funning a deliberate opinion whether or not
General Bourke acted with proper vigor and judgment in
liia indignant rejection of a demand for the modilication of a
Colonial law, which, while it mitigated many terri Cm fea-
tures in the abominable penal discipline o( the Colony, was
still insufficient to bridle the dispositions of all, and to
prevent the dignity of justice and humane feeling from
degenerating into the extremes! point of savage brutality.
The audacity of these men—their want of shame and ordi-
nary circumspection—has no parallel, I am certain, cither in
this (fertile as it has been in incidents of gross enormity) or
any other Colony. Tbcy—a more handful —speak as if their
sentiments were to bind the community at large ; they see
dangers peculiar to themselves ; and an ill-judged and im-
potent feeling of hatred to the Government which denied
credence to the airy phantoms of their heated imaginations,
lias led them to the impudent alternative of petitioning
through their partisan, Sir William Edward Parry (for a
knowledge of whose humanity I refer you to the dis-
closures made in the cases between the Polar Navigator and
Mr. Barton), for the actual removal of General Bourke,
the Governor, and Francis Forbes, Esquire, the Chief
Justice of the Colony. .1 know not. Sir, whether this out-
rageous request is a greater insult to His Majesty’s Minis-
ters, or to those distinguished Public Officers, whoso
names and excellent qualities I publish for tho information
of the British Nation, with feelings of the most unminglcd
gratification.
Charges proceeding from sources such as I have des-
cribed—charges bearing the names of men who have
themselves been guiltyof cruel excesses and acts of oppres-
sion and tyranny—-charges against our highest authorities for
endeavouring to abate the rigor of laws that would have tar-
nished the darkest ora of feudal times, will rather advance
the characters of tho Governor and Chief Justice, than give
them cause for regret;—the more particularly when such
charges emanate from such men, and at such a time. A few
months ago, and the Governor was greeted with an Address
lauding his Government—professing profound respect for
his person;—in fact, Sir, an Address couched in terms


of tho meanest spirit of adulation, and betraying manifest
insincerity, as it’s principal ingredient;—there was an
evident rankling in the heart against that exalted per-
sonage whoso praise they so lavishly sounded ; but now
the veil of hypocrisy is withdrawn ; and the wrathful hut
•futile denunciations of a recreant faction, are exposed to
public view, and public indignation—striking at their late
idol, who is invulnerable, however, to their feeble darts.
Mr. dames Mudio proceeds to England instanter to give the
first sturdy blow.—Tho Venerable Archdeacon Broughton,
Chaplain of the Tower, it, is said, seconds tho attack with his
Clerical auxiliaries ; and the Hero of tho Pole, Sir William
Edward Parry, directs the naval armament, with all tho
influence he can command. Will not the British Govern-
ment exert it’s strong arm to avert the insidious designs of
a body of men who arc arrayed with hostile front against tho
future destiny of thousands of their unhappy follow-sub-
jects. On you. Sir, will devolve the sacred duty of con-
founding the representations of a few discontented and
daring calumniators. Tho People of Australia look up to
you as the successful arbiter of their fate in tho impending
contest; and I hut reiterate tho sentiments of the great
body of my fellow Colonists, when I pray that a successful
result may crown your anticipated vindication of out-
rights, and our most sanguine expectations.
I liave honor to be,
SIR,
Your most obedient Servant,
HUMANITAS,
AN EMIGRANT OF ,1021,
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES, 1
31st MARCH, 1834, j
Sydney! Printed at the Gazette Office by Anne llutvc.
