

— £2E
PARTICULARS AND PLAN
KNOWN AS
• FORT COOPER NORTH & MOUNT BRITTEN,
In the Leichardt District;
In the Kennedy South District;
VALUABLE STATION PROPERTIES
HOMEBUSH, CAPE PALMERSTON, & GREENMOUNT,
All in or near the celebrated district of
PORT MAOKAY,
AND BEING
The Earliest Squatting Selections in North Queensland,
TOGETHER WITH
7000 HEAD OF CATTLE, 20,000 SHEEP, 180 HORSES,
5000 ACRES OF VALUABLE PRE-EMPTED LAND.
To be Sold by Private Bargain by the Proprietor,
who is leaving for Europe.
From
A. W. Beard, Printer, 311 George Street, Sydney.




■ ■ . —, . -■ ■ ■ ' ■ • ' ■ ■ " -
Is‘ 3<r I4jT I Is_ ~ 3(L '
,\l " 4. -I
<SSy: *" i-S^y^
IS -%* CREiNI PUNT/ r_ . _ 1 75
shamrock VALE jf
?r { W\
4r ( J HOME BUSH K \{
Coppe, Mh,. '' p *'
. T; n •. * *
S 1 LUCH A C‘ SYDNEY




GENERAL REMARKS.
The district of Mackay, which is celebrated for its sugar
plantations and the richness of its soil, has for the last 10 or 12
years been growing into great favour as a cattle breeding and
fattening district.
The climate is more temperate and more healthy, both for
man and beast, than that of more southerly districts. This arises
chiefly from the south-east trade winds, which blow upon the coast
with great regularity, and which are kept cool by the cold sub-
ocean currents breaking upon the coral reefs, and cooling the ad-
joining seas.
Hot winds are unknown.
Rain never fails.
Drought is unknown.
Kennedy, in his 4 years in Queensland, says, “ It is a curious
fact that while droughts have prevailed all over the colonies, the
Mackay district has never suffered from them.”
He adds “ The grasses are very fine; they consist of barley
and kangaroo grass, wild oats, and an endless variety of herbs,
which both horses and cattle are very fond of. The timber is
mixed—gum, Morton Bay ash, Leichhardt, bloodwood, tea-tree,
mahogany, and cedar.”
Animals of all kinds are healthy and prolific.
The correctness and value of these facts have been abundantly
proved during the late trying seasons, when droughts have prevailed
in almost every other part of Australia, while here there has been
a super-abundance of water and green grass.
The proximity of the sugar plantations is an advantage. The
working hands (whites and Kanakas) in addition to the population
of Mackay and Walkerston, create a large and increasing market
for fat stock. The planters, with their wives and families, add
largely to the superior class of educated society, and being concen-
trated within easy visiting distance, form a social circle such as
cannot usually be enjoyed on a sheep or cattle station.
The shipping at Mackay is extensive, there being almost daily
communication by sailing vessel or steamer with Brisbane, Sydney,
or Melbourne. In the town there is every requisite; hotel and
store accommodation, and station supplies, and luxuries of all
kinds, can be purchased at reasonable prices.
Stations in this favored district are limited in number, and as
the holders appreciate their advantages, they seldome come into the
market.
While these remarks apply more particularly to the coast
stations, Homebush and Greenmount, they are applicable, in a
modified degree, to the stations on the western slopes of the
ranges, Fort Cooper and Mount Britten.


The ranges approach the coast more nearly in this district
than anywhere else in the colony, and while the fattening stations,
Fort Cooper and Mount Britten, possess all the advantages of
western stations, they are in reality only sixty to eighty miles from
the sea and can be worked from the coast stations. The heavy
coast rains to a considerable extent cross the ranges, and the
elevated plains (1150 feet) around Fort Cooper Mountain are
favored with regard to rain beyond any other western district. The
distance between the eastern boundaries of these runs and the
western boundaries of the coast runs is only about thirty miles, so
that stock can be moved from the one to the other by the station
hands alone, at all times, without risk.
These stations were the earliest selections in the district, at a
time when the whole northern country was open. There is the
same difference between them and the general run of stations that
there is between a true Darling Downs station and the majority of
stations sold under that name.
These western stations have advantages o/er the coast stations,
the one supplementing the other.
They abound with salt-bush and other fattening herbs.
Their carrying powers are very great.
For fattening stock they are unexcelled.
After two to six months on the runs bullocks can be drafted
weighing over 1000 lbs. butchers’ weight.
Cattle travel well to market.
Inspection of the Stock and Stations is invited, and any fur-
ther information required will be given on application to the
proprietor,
JOHN WALKER,
Homebush,
Port Mackay, Queensland.


The Whole op the Properties, viz. —
FORT COOPER NORTH, Embracing—
Euroka
Budgeree Grass /
Brougthton Downs >ln the Leichhardt District.
Bee Arrow I
Walker Dean
MOUNT BRITTEN, Embracing—
Leavenow }
Mcmt Yackawow f j the LeMlhardt District.
Mount Marlmspike /
Mount Britten }
HOMEBUSH and PALMERSTON conjoined,
In the Mackay District.
GREENMOUNT,
In the Mackay District.
TOGETHER WITH
2,670 Male Cattle
4,106 Female Cattle
61 Bulls
9,205 Ewes
5,333 Wethers
3,115 Mixed Sheep
210 Rams
all more or less.
)
all more or less.
)
150 Head of Horse Stock.
1,321 8 12 Acres *
328 010 „ pre-empted on Homebusli.
875 010 „ )
788 1 9 Acres }
997 121 „ r pre-empted on Greenmount.
176 0 0 „ )
Will be sold, as now worked, in one lot. Failing a purchaser
in one lot, they will be sold in two lots, as described in the follow-
ing pages:—


Euroka,
Acres.
32,640 ...
Rents.
.... £28 12
0
Budgeree Grass,
26,240 ...
27
10
0
Broughton Downs
, 22,080 ...
27
10
0
Bee Arrow,
19,520 ...
27
10
0
Walker Dean,
20,480 ...
27
10
0
120,960
£138
12
0
LOT 1
FORT COOPER NORTH and GREENMOUNT
STATIONS.
Fort Cooper is in the Leichhardt District, on the western
side of the coast range, on an elevated plateau 1,100 feet above
the sea level, and from 70 to 100 miles distant from Port Mackay.
It comprises the following Government Blocks :
These blocks form a compact irregular piece of country,
averaging about 12 x 18 miles, and well known as Fort Cooper
North Station. They are bounded on the north and west by hills
of moderate elevation, extending the grazing boundary, and
yielding an abundant supply of water. Hall Creek, Bee Creek,
Kemmis Creek, and Walker Creek, with their affluents, are
spread over the whole run, and water can be obtained by digging at
a very moderate depth. The country consists of extensive rich allu-
vial plains, open downs, and low, grassy, open ridges. The grasses
are rich and abundant, with saltbush and other fattening herbs.
It is the best sheep country in the district, and acknowledged by
all to be a splendid country, either for breeding or fattening cattle.
The post town of Nebo is distant 15 miles from the Head Station.
The Head Station.— There is a good sized Verandah Cot-
tage, with sitting-room, office-room, 5 bed-rooms, and back kitchen
connected by a covered way. The store is large and roomy. The
overseer’s accommodation, woolshed, killing-house, meat store,
men’s huts, milking yards, stock yards, &c., &c., are all of the
usual description, and have been found ample and convenient for
the management. There is a large Horse paddock, inclosing a
never-failing lagoon, attached to the Hoad station, and other
small paddocks, sheep yards, and small garden surround the
house and main buildings. On the plains there are some miles of
sheep fencing. The Holding is the usual 21 years lease of the
unsettled districts.


Greenmount, 35,200 acres, rent £llO, in the South Ken-
nedy district. —This Station is on the south bank of the Pioneer
River, 15. miles from Port Mackay, and extends 16 to 17 miles to
the south. The southern half extends on both sides of the road
to Nebo. The lower or northern half consists of open plains and
forest land, and is substantially fenced with a four-wire cattle
fence, forming a large paddock 1\ miles by 3£ miles (about 15,000
acres.) The soil appears to be from a limestone formation, and
the grasses are fattening and bone-producing. Water in creeks
and large lagoons is abundant all over the run. It is at present
used as a female weaning station, but would make a superior
breeding station. The lease is the usual one in the settled dis-
tricts, and is subject to Homestead selection. The grazing rights
extend over a similar portion of country thrown open to selection
in 1868, less the lands selected, and this right makes the back coun-
try extensive and valuable. The frontage to the Pioneer, about
2000 acres, has been pre-empted for the use of the Station , and has
been surveyed and approved subject to valuation of improvements.
These two Stations, Fort Cooper North and Greenmount, are
estimated to carry from 20,000 to 30,000 Sheep, and 10,000 to
15,000 head of Cattle, or otherwise in proportion.
They will be sold in one lot with 14,000 sheep, a fair
average of the flocks, and 2000 head of Cattle, average from the
herds. Fifty Horses, average from the stud. Horses, stores,
&c., &c., to be taken at a valuation.
The Greenmount pre-emptions are very valuable, and may be
taken by the purchaser on repayment of back annual payments
and interest, or may be declined at his option.


LOT 2
HOMEBUSH AND MOUNT BRITTEN
STATIONS.
Homebush, with which is amalgamated Cape Palmerston
Station, is on both sides of the Sandringham River. The amal-
gamated Stations extend from the Pioneer River on the north to
the Ranges in the south, and from the sea-shore reserve on the
east to Greenmount on the west. The leased portion is the
southern ha 1 * 1 of this area from the base of tlie Range to and
including the Sandringham River, the most valuable portion of
the banks of which and of the Oaky Creek have been pre-empted
for Station use. The grazing rights extend over the whole area
first described, excepting only the lands actually selected. The
Station is well known to be one of the finest Cattle-breeding
stations in Queensland.
Head Station. —At the Head Station there is a comfort-
able bachelor’s Verandah Cottage, with large kitchen attached by
a covered way; also rodk-house, harness-room, and fowl-house,
all enclosed in a large and fruitful garden. In the Home Lane
there are overseer’s hut, Kanakas’ lodge house, store, large shed,
horse, cow, and milking yards, &c., &c,, and in the Cow paddock
there is a large machinery shed with engine, boiler, and sawmill,
the whole forming a complete, convenient, well arranged, and
comfortable establishment. There are also several paddocks
enclosing the pre-emptions (about 15,000 acres) around the
Homestead, and across the liver in a 300-acre pre-empted paddock
there are extra large and substantial collecting and branding yards,
with all conveniences for the management of a large herd of
cattle. Near the coast are two very large paddocks containing
several thousand acres, bounded partly by the Sandringham River,
Bed’s Creek, a very large lagoon 1 to 2 miles long, and 4 miles
good substantial 4-wire fencing. By a short additional fence on
the south from Bell’s Creek to the Range the whole run could be
formed into one magnificent breeding paddock.


Leavenow,
Acres.
30,560 ...
... £27
Rents.
10
0
Yackawow,
34,560 ...
29
14
0
Marlinspike,
22,720 ...
27
10
0
Mount Britten,
33,280 ...
13
0
0
Mount Britten. —Under this name are included the follow
ing Government blocks or runs, viz :
121,120 £97 14 0
These runs are on the same elevated plateau as Fort Cooper,
about 1,100 feet above the sea. They are bounded north and
east by the coast ranges which rise in some parts more than 1,000
feet above the plains, thus securing a never failing supply of water
to the creeks (Cooper Creek, Oaky Creek, and Cattle Creek),
which are spread all over the runs. The broad alluvial lands
dividing these creeks are noted all over the district for their fatten-
ing qualities. Cattle fattened on this station always command an
extra price in the market, and are nearly all sold in the district.
Last year, owing to the depression in the sugar market, the local
demand was reduced, and a mob of 200 and odds were sent to
Rockhampton (200 miles), where they were weighed, and averaged
over 932 lbs. butchers’ weight, Mr. Pattison declaring them to be
the finest lot of bullocks for quality and condition he had seen in
Queensland. There are huts, paddocks, and yards on Oaky Creek
for the cattle, and a Head Station with sundry huts, yards, pad-
dock, &c., lately occupied as a police barracks, on the lower part
of the run for the sheep establishment.
These two Stations, Homebush and Mount Britten, will carry
10 to 15,000 Head of Cattle, and sto 10,000 Sheep. They will
be sold in one lot, along with
5,000 Head of Cattle 4
3,500 Sheep all more or less.
80 Horses )
The proprietor, as already stated, is prepared to treat for
'he two lots above described separately, but would prefer to sell
the whole in one lot, and in this view would urge the extreme
economy with which the whole, as one large establishment, can be
managed.


Economy of Management.
The arrangements and annual expenses of Management are
at present as follows, viz :
SHEEP.
Superintendent at Fort Cooper ... £2OO
Storekeeper, &c., &c.... ... ... 40
Drayman, Rations, &c. (civilized black) 26
Shepherd (Chinaman) ... ... 52
Shepherd (Kanakas) 11 @ £l5 ... 165
(This includes importing, deporting, clothing,
and tobacco, but not rations.)
Aboriginals, 2 or more, say tobacco
and shirts ... ... ... ... 10
£493
CATTLE AND HORSES.
Working Overseer—Homebush ... £l4O
Assistant, dray and generally useful... 52
Kanakas, 7 @ £l5 105
(1 cook, 1 house servant, 1 milking yard and 1 gar-
dener, 1 entire horse keeper, 2 fencing, and all
generally useful.)
Black boys, 2 after cattle ... ... 10
In charge at Greenmount (female weancrs) 52
In charge at Mount Britten (male wcaners
and fatteners) ... ... ... 65
Assistant droving, &c.... ... ... 40
Black boys ... ... ... ... 10
Occasional help at mustering, &c.
£l,OOO
Exclusive of shearing expenses and other extraordinary
charges.
The Kanakas grow sugar cane, maize, yams, sweet potatoes,
and other vegetables and garden fruits, pine apples, bananas, &c.
They also fence and make other improvements.


STOCK.
* Cattle.— The herd was formed by E. B. Cornish and
William Glen Walker, who spared neither trouble nor expense to
make it valuable. E. B. Cornish selected his cows from his well
known stations Euromedha, Burway, and Euroka, on the
Macquarie and Barwan Rivers, N.S.W., with pure bred bulls from
Christie & Wentworth’s Stud Herd. William Glen Walker
imported from England the two pure bred bulls, Arthur and
Thornton (see pedigrees, page 9), and several pure bred heifers.
With these and cows selected from the Macquarie and other
herds they formed a stud herd at Fort Cooper, which, after several
years, when it nnmbered over 300 head, was blended with the
general herd. The whole herd is therefore originally of as pure if
not purer blood than any other herd in the Colony, their pedigrees
going back through pure stock to the earliest numbers in the
English Herd Book. Its quality has been kept up by the selec-
tion of bulls from Otto Baldwin and other well known breeders.
More recently a separate stud herd was formed by Imperial Ruby,
son of Walter Lamb’s Imperial Purple and White Prince (pedi-
grees page 10). This stud herd was again thrown into the general
herd. The herd has all along been weeded both for colour and
quality, and it will now bear comparison for soundness of consti-
tution, blood, quality, colour, size, quietness on the run and in the
paddock or yard, and for early fattening propensities, with any
herd in the Colony. There is now being added to the herd 8
young bulls, viz., 3 Theodores and 4 Baron Collins from Dr.
Jenkins’ stud at Nepean Towers, and 1 Agamemnon Booth from
Mr. Chisholms, of Wologorang. The herd consists of, say :
3,ooobreeding Cows of ages@ Homebush,')
1.500 female weaners (a) Greenmount, f,, AAA . 3 ,
„ i n i j i m, V/,oooheadmoreor ess
2.500 bullocks and male weaners, Mt. C ’
Britten, )


Sheep. —The sheep are well bred Merinos, The first rams
put to tbe ewes were the produce of Rambouillet Merinos selected
by Mr. E. B. Cornish in Germany.
The country is not so well suited for sheep as for cattle, a
fact applicable to all northern country. This has led to the
removal of sheep and the substitution of cattle on all the sur-
rounding stations. The sheep at Fort Cooper have always done
exceptionally well, and have been profitable, and have therefore
been retained. They now command an exclusive market for
mutton. Forty large framed and fine wooled Merino rams and
their progeny have lately been added from Messrs. Bell’s Jimbour
Station on the Darling Downs. The clip is a fair average one,
and the wool bears a high character in the London market.
The sheep as per last return consist of
Ewes, of ages... ... 9,205 \
Wethers, 1,2, and 8 yrs 5,333 f i
Mixed sheep ... ... s ;„ 3 >17,763 more or loss
Rams .. ... ... 210 J
About 8,000 ewes have been put to the rams this year.
Horses. —The Horses are considerably above average. Two
years ago the thorough bred entire Crown Prince (pedigree page 10)
was put to the best bred mares, and the young stock are very
promising. There are per Stud book
139 Head of Horse stock, including foals.


PEDIGREES.
ARTHUR.
Imported by Mr. William Glen Walker.
White, calved 25th February, 1863 ; by ARTHUR GWYNNE
(19,244)
dam, Miss Nightingale, by Grand Turk 12,969)
gd Cherry 4th, by Gainsforth 2nd (10,255)
g gd Cherry 2nd, by Prince of Wales (7,374)
g g gd Cherry, by Sir Thomas Newton (6,494)
g g g gd Strawberry, by Optimus (4,618)
g S g g gd Old Strawberry, by Rockingham (2,549)
ARTHUR GWYNNE was by Mr. Booth’s Prince Arthur*
Miss Nightingale won seven prizes at the Shows of England and
Scotland.
THORNTON.
Imported by Mr. William Glen Walker.
Red and White, calved 11th March, 1863; by Frederick’s
Grandson (17,881) Frederick (11,489)
dam, Tellurio 2nd, by Horatio (10,335)
gd Taglioni, by Lord George (10,439)
g gd Telluria, by Orontes (4,623)
g g gd Zuik, by Guardian (3,947)
g g g gd Roguery, by Mercury (2,301)
g g g g gd Pageant, by Monarch (2,324)
g g g g g gd Chilton Sale 13th, by St. Albans (2,584)
g g g g g g gd Chilton Sale 4th, by Jupiter (342)
g g 8 g g g g gd Sir Oliver Corr, by Sir Oliver (605)
gggggggggd Raspberry, by Trunnell (659)
ggggggggggd Strawberry, by Favourite (252)
gggggggggggd Lily, by Favourite (252)
ggggggggggggd Miss Lax, by Dalton Duke (188)
gggggggggggg gd Lady Maynard, by Alcock’s Bull (19)
ggggggggggggggd , by Jacob Smith’s Bull (608)
gggggggggggggggd Strawberry, by Jolly’s Bull (337)
See C. H. 8., vol. 13, page 724.
These two Bulls, when imported, were taken to the Station
at once, and were never exhibited in the Colony.


IMPERIAL RUBY.
Red and White, calved Bth October, 1870 ; by Walter Lamb’s
Imperial Purple (116 N.S.W. H. 8.).
dam Lydia, by England’s Glory (19,699), bred by the late Mr.
Clark Irving, Richmond River
gd by Prince Albert (4,784)
The pedigree of Imperial Purple is so well known that it is
unnecessary to repeat it here.
WHITE PRINCE.
White, calved 26th October, 1871 ; by Prince of Middleham
(16,562)
dam, Australian Duchess Ist, by Saxon by Sandydike, by Rufus
(22,811)
gd Princess, by Middleham (16,562)
g gd “27,” by Mugget, by Melnoth (2,291)
g g gd Roan Tinker, by Grinder by Young Pirate (imp)
g g g gd “ 23 ”, by Prince Albert (4,784)
g g g g gd by Roger out of Sal by John Bull.
CROWN PRINCE (Blood Entire.)
Rich Golden Bay, black points, no white ; by New Warrior
(imp.), out of Marchioness by Satellite (imp. Arab), out
of Una by Walrus (imp.) out of Silvertail (imp.), Silver-
tail, dam of St. Helen’s, and other winners.
The pedigrees of New Warrior and Satellite are well known
in all the Colonies —the former being the well-known racing horse,
and the latter the celebrated Arab entire, imported by the N.S.W.
Government to improve the breed of horses in the Colonics.
A. W. BEARD General Printer, 311 George Street, Sydney.




