

78, ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE-
PARTICULARS OF THE VARIOUS DUTIES PERFORMED
THROUGH THE
(Smral JBqcanlife
B
f
fi
►
u
B
>3
a
PRIVATE INQUIRY OFFICE,
First Office of the kind established in the Colonies
of Australasia,
(C
i 3
a
B
B
i 3
Mr. OTTO BERLINER,
For 23 Years connected with the Police and Detective Departments of
New South Wales and Victoria, and late Inspector of Police
by Special Commission.
R
B
B
B
0
HEAD OFFICE :
78, ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.
BRANCH OFFICE :
4, A(9A7J> STREET, SYDNEY.
OTTO BERLINER & CO.
78, ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.
JOHN SANDS, PRINTER, SYDNEY.
fc




78, ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.
PARTICULARS OF THE VARIOUS DUTIES PERFORMED
THROUGH THE
(Smral |J[Upnlil*
0
1
H
g
a
F
PRIVATE INQUIRY OFFICE,
First Office of the kind established in the Colonies
of Australasia,
ft
F
a
Mr. OTTO BERLINER,
New South Wales and Victoria, and late Inspector of Police
by Special Commission.
HEAD OFFICE :
78, ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.
BRANCH OFFICE :
4, BOND STREET, SYDNEY.
OTTO BERLINER & CO.
78, ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.
P
H
N
\
ft
H
For 23 Years connected with the Police and Detective Departments of
V*
g
I
fi
ft
0


EXILES AND EEGTJLATIONS.
i. All communications to be addressed to Messrs. Otto
Berliner & Co.
2. No Member belonging to the Staff will be permitted to
receive moneys under any pretence, nor on account ol this Office.
3. All letters of a secret nature to be marked —Strictly Private.
4. All inquiries, &c., must be prepaid, and instructions from
up-country and the neighbouring colonies accompanied by postage
orders, or names of parties as guarantee of payment.
5. All letters containing cheques, drafts, postage orders, &c.,
must be registered.
Otto Berliner & Co.,
78, Elizabeth Street , Melbourne.


To the Public of
The Colonies of
VICTORIA, NEW SOUTH WALES, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
QUEENSLAND, TASMANIA,
the Provinces of
NEW ZEALAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
FIJI, and GREAT BRITAIN
REPORT
Respecting the Operations and Working System of the
GENEEAL MEECANTILE AGENCY
AND
fricate Jnqmrg
Under the Management op
Mr. OTTO BERLINER,
For 23 years connected with Police and Detective Departments ,
late Inspector of Police by Special Conwiission.
HEAD OFFICE; Melbourne, 78, Elizabeth Street.
BRANCH OFFICE : Sydney, 4, Bond Street.
OTTO BERLINER & CO.


INDEX.
Rules and Regulations.
Introduction ... ... ... X
Missing Friends ... ... ••• 2
Missing Heirs and Next of Kin... 2
Banks and Mercantile Firms ... 3
Protection to the Mercantile
Community ... ... ... 3
Defaulters Traced and Property
Recovered ... ... ... 4
Defaulter brought back from Fiji 4
Prevention of Crime ... ... 5
Adjustment of Insurance Claims 5
Absconding Debtors & Insolvents 6
Evidence for Briefs ... .. 6
Writs Served ... .. ... 6
Certificates of Births 6
Marriages and Deaths ... ... 6
Libel Cases, Fraud Labels, and
Anonymous Letters ... ...
Debts Collected ... 7
Testimonials whilst in Government
Service 7
Testimonials since opening office
in 1866 ... ... 9
Testimonials from Messrs. Casey
and Dunne, Barristers .. 10, 11
Testimonial from leading Bankers
and Merchants of Melbourne... II
English Testimonials and Refer-
ences . . 12
Extracts from Victorian Press ... 13
Le Franchi Murder Case ... 14
Great Forgery Case on Bank of
New South Wales 16
Tibbet’s Murder Case ... ... 17
Highway Robbery under Anns... 18
Clever Capture ... ... ... 19
Uttering Forged Cheques ... 20
Extracts from the Press ... ... 21
Tallow Fraud (False Packing) ... 23
Tichborne Case ... ... ... 27
Missing Friend—G. Patterson or
Pearce ... ... ... ... 31
Testimonials ditto ... 32
Pocket Picking ... ... ... 33
Criminals Arrested ... ... 33
Forging and Uttering .. ... 34
Stealing from a Dwelling ... 34
Robbery under Arms ... ... 35
First Conviction for Gold Coining 36
David Young (innocent) convicted
for the Graham Murder ... 39
Willis, Bank Defaulter ... ... 47
Fire at Emerald Hill ... ... 47
Australian Absconder arrested in
England ... 5°
The Forder Frauds. ... ... 5 1
The Detective Force of Victoria 70
Arrest of Sawell—Bank Defaulter 88
Unfounded Charge Queen v.
MTntosh ... ... ... 9°
Arrest of Rosenwax in Fiji ... 92
SPECIAL INDEX.
Missing Friend —George Patterson, otherwise Pearce 3 1
Bank Defaulters —Willis (Colonial Bank) 47
tf ~ Sawell (Bank of New South Wales) ... ... ••• 88
Defaulters Traced and Property Recovered
for Messrs. Langwill, Craig and Co., W. H. Rocke and Co.,
James Hope ... ••• ••• ••• 10
James Service and Co. ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 10
Eliza Tinsley and Co. —Forder Frauds 10 & 51
Arrest of Rosenwax in Fiji ... ... ... ••• ••• 9 2
Evidence for Briefs —
Govan Brothers —falsely packed Tallow 23
The Queen v. MTntosh —Unfounded Charge ... ... 10, 11, 90


INTRODUCTION.
Dear Sir,
The Proprietors of “ The General Mercantile Agency
and Private Enquiry Office for Missing Friends ” beg
leave to forward this pamphlet for the purpose of giving you
every information respecting the various matters of business
which are conducted under the personal directions and super-
vision of Mr. Otto Berliner.
The high-standing character of our agents in Australia, as well
as in every other part of the world, permits us to guarantee that
each case entrusted to us will receive minute and prompt atten-
tion, and the duties will be carried out by respectable officers
only, with ability, energy, and secrecy.
OTTO BERLINER & CO.


MISSING FRIENDS.
Without going into exhaustive details, it would be difficult to
convey to the reader more than a general idea of the nature,
variety, and extent of the business conducted under the manage-
ment of “ The General Mercantile Agency and Private Inquiry
Office for Tracing Missing Friends, &c.the following lines,
however, may afford the reader some insight into the peculiar and
intricate cases which occasionally occur in the business.
The facilities afforded by telegraphy and steam, combined with
those afforded by our complete and reliable agency system,
enable us to deal with any case, however remote, with as much
certainty of success as would attend a case in our immediate
vicinity. In new countries like Australia, America, &c., are many
instances of persons who, having “ gone to the bad,” have, during
the process, gradually destroyed all home ties, and rendered their
very existence a matter of doubt to their relatives and friends at
home ; and when some occasion arises necessitating the discovery
of such persons, how often is it that after the expenditure of large
sums of money and much time, all attempts at discovery prove
futile 1 In such cases failure can generally be attributed to the
incompetency of those to whom the business is entrusted. To
trace anybody who, without any fixed place of abode, has been
constantly travelling about the various colonies under various
names, or one whose chief care it is, from some motive, to conceal
his identity, is no easy task, and should not be entrusted to any-
body lacking the requisite qualifications, but rather to one who,
from his great experience and ability— i.e., special ability acquired
in a special sort of business, and consequently exactly fitted for
such business—can undertake such a task with every probability
of success.
MISSING HEIRS AND NEXT OF KIN.
Legacies, a fertile source of litigation, often of great value, are
occasionally left to persons constituting a pretty large class in this
part of the world, namely, that known and generally advertised for
as “ Missing Friends.” Sometimes the inheritance of very large
sums of money is in abeyance till proof of death, or the identity
of some person can be legally established. A case in point is


that of Mr. George Patterson, otherwise George Pearce, to which
we especially draw the reader’s attention. (See Special Index.)
This case exemplifies the great advantage derived from professional
ability and experience, for by the employing of it the possession
of no less a sum than £33,000 sterling was decided. The almost
invariable result of any efforts of a stranger to the business to
trace a “ Missing Friend ” is failure, and waste of time and money.
Only they who from personal experience have acquired the neces-
sary knowledge can hope to succeed, and any tyro is at a great
disadvantage from many causes, —he has no systematized method
to work on, he lacks the assistance of skilled agents in every part
of the civilized world, and, in short, he is entering into a regular
business without any knowledge of it, and his chances of success
are not much greater than those of an untutored aboriginal’s would
be in attempting to solve a problem of Euclid.
BANKS AND MERCANTILE FIRMS
Often require the skilled assistance of the trained Detective, in
tracing and convicting absconders ; and here we would remark —
without wishing to intimate the slightest degree of inefficiency on
the part of the Government Police and Detective Forces —that
absconders who have entirely eluded the utmost efforts at discovery
of the Government Police and Detective Forces, have quickly
been brought to justice through the medium of this office. For
an instance of this, see Special Index.
Another branch of our business is the protection of clients
against the extortious measures often resorted to by unprincipled
persons. Reference to Special Index will show to the reader that a
firm of the highest standing in Melbourne instructed the Manager,
in Melbourne, of this office, to trace an offender, engage solicitor
and counsel, prepare the necessary legal evidence for the brief,
and, in short, to take all measures necessary to the bringing to
justice of the offender. In this case, Mr. Berliner received a
complimentary letter and a special professional fee from the
Attorney-General of Victoria.
PROTECTION TO THE MERCANTILE COMMUNITY.
Amongst the various kinds of business conducted by us is
included that of prosecuting or defending in any case entrusted to
us. See No. (extracted from Leader, Feb. 10th.) The


Mercantile community can, by applying at this office, obtain all
desired information respecting the pecuniary circumstances of
those with whom they may have business transactions. Such
information, or the absence of it, often materially influences
business transactions.
DEFAULTERS TRACED AND PROPERTY RECOVERED.
We respectfully direct the reader’s attention to the cases of
Messrs. James Service & Co., Langwill, Craig & Co., W. H.
Rocke & Co., James Hope & Co., Eliza Tinsley, and many
others. (See Special Index.) In all of these cases the offenders
absconded from Australia or England on account of their connection
with defalcations of large amounts of money, amounting to some
thousands of pounds sterling, and through the agency of this
office they were traced, punished, and made to disgorge.
DEFAULTER BROUGHT BACK FROM FIJI.
By reference to Special Index the reader will find recorded a
case well showing the knowledge, ability, perseverance, and deter-
mination which some features of our business call into requisition.
The case is that of a man who, having successfully undergone for
twenty-four years such tests as are generally incidental to a
business man’s character, obtained, in Melbourne, from various
Melbourne merchants, several thousands of pounds worth of
goods without making any sort of payment for the same—
disposed of the goods on receipt of them, and then absconded to
the Fijis. The Fiji Islands at that time were unannexed—not
under British rule —nor did there exist any extradition treaty with
any power; and, principally for these reasons, they were the
refuge of all classes of fugitives from justice. In this case the
leading merchants of Melbourne voluntarily contributed
sterling, chartered the s.s. Balclutha, and requested our Melbourne
manager, Mr. Otto Berliner, to undertake the work of following
and bringing back to justice, and to Melbourne, the absconder,
and to conduct all necessary law proceedings solely on his own
personal responsibility. This request Mr. Berliner promptly com-
plied with. A perusal of the details of the case will show the
difficulties which beset Mr. Berliner in Fiji; how he had to
contend against the active and determined opposition of a large
class of sympathising fugitives, who strongly resented the


establishing by Mr. Berliner of a precedent which might prove
so prejudicial to their interests and liberty—how he had to
provide against the many facilities for escape afforded in the Fijis ;
and, in short, how few chances of success there were for Mr.
Berliner, under the existing circumstances. However, Mr.
Berliner s efforts resulted in complete success, and besides
the good done by the conviction, before the Supreme Court of
Victoria, of the offender, was that effected by the spoiling of the
Fijis as a place of refuge for absconders.
PREVENTION OF CRIME.
One branch of our business is that which, in contradistinction
to detective business, we may term preventive business : e. g .,
young men and women have been saved from ruin and vice by
timely interference and influence brought to bear upon them
through our agency, under instructions from the parents,
guardians or superiors of such embryo-criminals. Respectable
families have been spared the shameful consequences of crime
which would have occurred but for the exercise of our “ Preventive
System.”
ADJUSTMENT OF INSURANCE CLAIMS.
In Cases of Fire and Marine Disasters it is often equally
beneficial to both parties that an arrangement between Insurance
Companies and their clients should be effected without having
recourse to law, All the business involved in such cases has often
been most satisfactorily conducted by Mr. Berliner, under instruc-
tions from the heads of Insurance Companies, who have conse-
quently saved, chiefly through Mr. Berliner’s instrumentality, large
sums of money.
In conclusion, the reader’s attention is respectfully directed to
the annexed cases, some of which occurred during Mr. Otto
Berliner’s engagement under Government, others during the
eleven years of his experience as Manager of this the first
established “General Mercantile Agency and Private Enquiry
Office for Missing Friends, &c.” in Australia.
Otto Berliner & Co.
78 Elizabeth-street, Melbourne, Victoria.


ABSCONDING DEBTORS AND INSOLVENTS.
Thousands of pounds sterling have been saved by the general
public during the last eleven years through the services rendered
by this office, and there was not a single instance in which any
absconder left the territory without being traced or arrested.
It may be mentioned here, for the information of the up-
country and neighbouring colonists, that in every case where a
debtor or absconder leaves, it will be necessary to forward a
postage telegraphic order, or a letter accompanied by draft for
outlays, &c., with full description of absconder. Every such case
will always receive immediate attention.
EVIDENCE FOR BRIEFS.
We have the honour to inform the gentlemen of the Legal
Profession that we are prepared to assist them in any case of note,
in getting up the necessary evidence for the Brief. The satisfac-
tion given to the most eminent Barristers and Solicitors of the
City of Melbourne during the past eleven years will be sufficient
guarantee that we possess the requisite professional ability.
We beg to refer to the case of Govan Brothers, (see
Special Index,) wherein Mr. Berliner received a special fee
for assisting Mr. O’Loghlen, Crown Prosecutor for the
Melbourne Circuit, by direction of the Hon. the Attorney-
General for Victoria.
We further beg to refer the reader to the testimonials received
in February, 1877, from Joseph Henry Dunne, Esq., Barrister-at-
law, and late Crown Prosecutor, and the Hon. J. J. Casey,
M.L.A., and Barrister-at-law, in the great case of The Queen v.
MTntosh.
WRITS SERVED.
We beg to inform the gentlemen of the Legal Profession that
arrangements are made for service of writs, summonses, &c.,
according to special agreement.
DECLARATIONS OF EXTRACTS FROM CHURCH
BOOKS.
Copies of Certificates of Marriages, Birth, or Death in the
colonies of Australia, Great Britain, or any city in the world.
The above documents can be at all times obtained through
this office.


LIBEL CASES. FRAUD LABELS. ANONYMOUS
LETTERS.
This difficult portion of law cases will be carried out under
Mr. 0. Berliner’s personal direction. Evidence will be
obtained in either of such cases through this office, and every
attention, combined with energy and ability, will be paid to all
such cases.
DEBTS
Will be accepted by this office for collection.
ENGLAND AND THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES AND
THE PROVINCES OF NEW ZEALAND.
We have the honour to inform the public generally that it is
our intention if requisite, to despatch a first-class officer every
three months per mail steamer to Great Britain.
TESTIMONIALS WHILST IN GOVERNMENT SERVICE.
[copies.]
Understanding that Mr. Berliner does not seek an appointment undei
the Government, with whose patronage it would be unbecoming in me to
interfere, I have no hesitation in stating that so far as my means of obser-
vation as Chief Justice extend, Mr. Berliner is an active and efficient
officer, possessed of sagacity and discretion.
W. F. STAWELL,
Chief Justice of the Colony of Victoria.
Melbourne, 13 th December, 1865.
I concur in the last Testimonial so far as my means of observation
extend.
ROB. MOLESWORTH,
One of Her Majesty's Judges at the Supreme Court of Melbourne.
Melbourne, 14th December, 1865.
I fully believe Mr. Berliner to be a most efficient Officer from the
knowledge I have had of the performance of his duties.
EDWARD E. WILLIAMS,
One of Her Majesty's Judges at the Supreme Court of Melbourne,


I have had many opportunities as Chairman of General Sessions for the
District of Bourke of observing the intelligence and zeal of Mb. Beblineb
as a member of the Detective Force. It has often occurred to me that he
is qualified for a better position than he has held.
R. W. POHLMAN
Melbourne, *lth December, 1865. Chairman of General Sessions.
I have no hesitation in certifying my knowledge of the conduct and
character of Me. Otto Beblineb, lately of the Detective Police Force.
Mb. Beblineb has been under my observation for many years, he is
strictly honest and trustworthy, with a considerable amount of judgment
and acumen in the pursuit of Police and Detective duties.
E. P. S. STURT,
6th December, 1865. Police Magistrate, Melbourne.
Me. Otto Beblineb was well known to me while employed in the
Detective Police Force of this colony, at the goldfields of Indigo and
Wahgunyah, during the years 1859-61.
Mb. Beblinee’s conduct during that time was marked by the greatest
zeal and attention to his duties, and during the time he remained in the
district under my supervision, 1 had every reason to be pleased with the
manner in which he carried out the onerous and difficult functions of his
office.
WM. H. GAUNT,
One of Her Majesty’s Wardens for the Goldfields, and a Police Magistrate
for Victoria.
Beech wo rth, Uictobia, 11 th December, 1865.
Bank or New South Wales, Melbouene,
Otto Beblineb. Ist December, 1865.
Sib, —In March last year a letter was addressed to the Superintendent of the
Detective Department of the Police by me, expressing the Bank’s appre-
ciation of your conduct and ability in detecting, arresting and securing the
conviction of the forger Nelson.
Understanding that you are now desirous of obtaining some settled and
permanent employment, I am anxious to place this on record, and I may
add that I am of opinion that you would prove a useful Officer in any
department of business where energy and trustworthiness were essential.
I am, your obedient servant,
J. BADCOCK,
Manager of the Bank of N.S. W.
We have much pleasure in stating that we have known Mb. Otto Bee-
linee for many years, and feel assured that he will give entire satisfaction
in anything he may be entrusted with.
MICHAELIS, BOYD & CO.,
Elizabeth Stbeet, Ist December, 1865. Consuls of Prussia.
I have much pleasure in bearing testimony to the zeal and efficiency of
Mr. Otto Beblineb, as a Detective Officer, and I am enabled to do so from
observation I had the opportunity of making during the last year as Mayor
of Melbourne,
GEO. WRAG6E,
Justice of the Peace and late Mayor.
134 Collins Stbeet East, December, 1865,


Police Office, Albury, N.S.W.
This is to certify that Mr. Otto Berliner served in the Mounted Police
at this station under my orders for six years, during which period I found
him zealous, obedient, and efficient in the discharge of his duties.
Mr. Berliner has courage, respectability, and is well educated ; I have
great pleasure in bearing testimony to his strict propriety of conduct in every
particular. Mr. Berliner leaves this service at his own request with the
view of improving his position.
HEYWARD ATKINS,
Police Magistrate and Superintendent of Police, N.S. W
TESTIMONIALS SINCE THE OPENING OF OFFICE,
1866.
No. 47 Broad Street, Birmingham,
Mr. Otto Berliner, 25 th August, 1866.
Dear Sir, —We have great pleasure in bearing testimony to the zeal and
ability you have shown in conducting in so intelligent and business-like a
manner the investigations concerning the late Mr. George Patterson, and
beg, on the part of the Executors, to express their entire satisfaction with
the care and acumen you have displayed.
We are, Dear Sir, your obedient servants,
RABONE BROS. & CO.
M‘Ewan & Co., Melbourne, 21 and 23 Swanston Street,
and 17 Gracechurch Street, London, E.C. Melbourne, 25 th March, 1867.
Mr. Otto Berliner, Melbourne.
Sir,- —We have much pleasure in testifying to the great usefulness of your
office, and to the zeal and skill manifested by yourself personally in the
discharge of the commissions entrusted to you : having recently had occasion
to employ your services in a very important case, the manner in which you
attended to it merits the strongest approbation.
We are, Sir, your obedient servants,
M'EWAN & CO.
Royal Swedish and Norwegian Consulate,
48 Collins Street West, Melbourne,
10 th September, 1869.
This is to certify that I have employed Mr. Otto Berliner in the fur-
therance of my duties, and that I have the satisfaction to state that I have
found Mr, Berliner prompt, zealous, and efficient in his actions, and
moderate in his charges.
J. B. WERE, Consul.
270 Kenington Park Road, London, S.E.,
Bth October, 1869.
Dear Sir, —By last mail I received from Messrs. Yaughan, Moule, and
Seddon your receipt respecting Augustus Henry Farley —missing friend.
I beg to acknowledge the promptitude, skill and efficiency with which you
acted in this matter, and should I have further need of your able assistance
I shall be glad to obtain your good services ; you have my sincere thanks
for those rendered.
I am, Dear Sir, yours truly,
S. A. FARLEY.


Melbourne, Tlth October, 1869,
We, the undersigned Merchants in Melbourne, having employed you in
the matter of an absconding debtor, who fled from New Zealand with pro-
perty in his possession when indebted to us collectively in a large amount,
have much pleasure in testifying to the efficient measure in which you and
your London Agent discharged your duties in this matter, whereby a large
amount of property was recovered and promptly accounted for.
LANGWILL, CRAIG & CO.
WM. H. ROCKE & CO.
JAMES HOPE.
To Mb, Otto Berliner, General Agency and Inquiry Office,
78 Elizabeth Street.
Sedgley, near Dudley, England,
25 th January, 1871.
Mr. Otto Berliner, 78 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne,
Dear Sir,— The December mail is to hand, bringing news of the con-
viction of William Earl Border, which I note with satisfaction, and I
take this opportunity of thanking you for the attention which you have
given to this matter, and also for assistance you have so willingly rendered
to my Mr. Lemard R. Lloyd, which he fully appreciates.
I am, Dear Sir, yours faithfully,
Contractors to ELIZA TINSLEY,
the Honourable Board of Admiralty.
Merchants and Manufacturers
of Nails, Chains, and Rivets.
Melbourne, 6th May, 1872.
To Otto Berliner, Esq., Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —In acknowledging settlement of our claim on J. P. Kennedy,
recovered through your instrumentality, we beg to express our satisfaction
at the success which has crowned your efforts. We put the matter into
your hands entirely as a “ forlorn hope,” and it is the more pleasing on that
account to receive the money. After the result of this, our first experience
with your office, we should hesitate to abandon any claim, however appa-
rently hopeless, without first seeing what you could do with it.
Yours truly,
JAMES SERVICE & CO.
TESTIMONIAL FROM COUNSEL IN THE CASE OF “ THE QUEEN V.
m'intosh.
Sandhurst, February, 1877.
My Dear Sir,— l avail myself of the opportunity of expressing my ob-
ligations for the valuable services you rendered in the late important case
of the Queen v. MTntosh. It was, of course, no more than I expected,
as I have long been aware of the incalculable assistance you are able to
afford to counsel. After so many years’ experience of your professional
abilities, I have much pleasure in finding that you have lost none of your
former ability, intelligence, and zeal. It is a great matter to be assisted by
one whose integrity and truthfulness, any reliance can be placed.
Yours very truly,
JOSEPH HENRY DUNNE.
Otto Berliner, Esq.,
78 Elizabeth-street, Melbourne.


36 Temple Court, Melbourne,
February 20, 1877.
Dear Sir, —Having been engaged as Counsel in the late important case
of the Queen v. MTntosh, I can cordially endorse all that Mr. Dunne has
said with respect to the very great and important service you rendered to
the defendant on that occasion.
The testimony Mr. Dunne bears as to your ability and zeal is very com-
plimentary, more so, that he has been Crown Prosecutor for many years,
and has had frequent opportunities of watching the result of your labors
in cases when you have been engaged.
So far as I could judge, you have an active disposition, and an ardent
desire to accomplish with success any case in which you may be engaged.
I remain, dear Sir,
Mr. Otto Berliner, Very faithfully yours,
78 Elizabeth-street, Melbourne. J. J. CASEY.
To Mr. Otto Berliner, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —We, the undersigned citizens of Melbourne having had
occasion to observe your diligence and attention as an officer in the Vic-
torian Detective Police Department for many years, whilst stationed in Mel-
bourne and other parts of the colony, and also, since the establishment of your
office in this city, having for its object the protection of the mercantile com-
munity at large, have now the pleasure of presenting you with this testi-
monial, in appreciation of the manner in which you have so successfully
conducted the important and intricate matters from time to time entrusted
to your care.
Amongst the many cases which reflect the greatest credit upon your skill
and attention, we may mention the following :
The detection of Alexander Longbottom, who left New Zealand in the
year 1869, heavily indebted to various Melbourne firms, and the ultimate
recovery of a large sum of money and property.
The conviction of William Earl Forder, for defrauding the firm of Eliza
Tinsley and Co,, iron merchants, Dudley, Wales, and the ultimate recovery
of nearly the whole of the property.
The apprehension of Elias liosenwax, in the kingdom of Fiji, who de-
frauded several firms in this city of large amounts, the general conduct of
legal proceedings at Fiji, and the ultimate conviction in this city of the
offender, and finally, the detection of James Greig, who robbed the firm of
W. H. Rocke and Co., of this city, and the recovery of the property, &c.
In conclusion, we have to add, that it will always afford us pleasure to
give you any assistance in our power so long as you conduct your business
with the integrity and zeal hitherto evinced by you.
We are, dear Sir, yours truly,
The Hon. Sir George Verdon, K.C.M.G., C. 8., F.R.S., Colonial and
General Manager of the English, Scottish, and Australian Chartered Bank.
E. P. S. Sturt, Esq. , City Police Magistrate.
R. Goldsbrough and Co.
James Service and Co.
Connell, Watson, Hogarth, and Co.
Osborn, Cushing, and Co.
James M'Ewan and Co.
Banks Bros., Bell and Co.
J. Tyson, Esq.
Samuel Amess, Esq., (late Mayor).
D. M. Parker.
Wilkie, Webster, and Allen.
Horatio Beauchamp.
W. H. Rocke and Co.
W. Detmold.
J. B. Swasey and Co.
George Wilson and Co.
M'Ewan and Co.
W. Young and Co.
W. and S. Gardiner.
H. A. Leishman (Messrs. M'Culloch,
Sellars and Co.)
Croker, Scott, and Co.
Hickinbotham and Co.
Alston and Brown.
J. Smythers.
W. Watson and Sons.


D. C. M‘Arthur, Superintendent and Chief Inspector Bank of Australasia.
John Brett, Chief Colonial Inspector and Manager of London Chartered
Bank.
J. Matheson, Chief Inspector and Manager Bank of Victoria.
H. B. Styles, Manager Bank of New South Wales.
F. G-. Smith, Chief Manager National Bank.
H. Turner, Manager Commercial Bank.
M. Elliott, Manager Bank of Australasia.
Joseph Collier, Chief Manager Victoria Insurance Co.
W. Patteson, Tasmanian Fire and Marine Insurance Co.
W. Macredie, J.P., Secretary National Insurance Co.
Thomas Parsons, Secretary Adelaide Insurance Co.
Dalgety, Blackwood, and Co. Alfred Shaw and Co.
Turnbull, Smith, and Co.
Edward Duckett.
John McGee and Co.
G. and G. Shaw.
F. R. Kendall, (Manager P, and 0.
Co.
S. Lord and Co., (U.S. Vice-Consul).
John Clarke and Son.
James Henty.
Donovan and Malcahy.
Buckley and Nunn.
ENGLISH TESTIMONIALS AND REFERENCES.
J. BADCOCK, late Chief Manager B. New South Wales, Melbourne.
now Secretary Bank of Australasia, London.
THOMAS PARSON, Chief Manager Adelaide Ins. Co., London.
RABONE, BROS. & CO., Iron Merchants, 47 Broad Street, Birmingham.
E. TINSLEY, Iron Merchant, Wales.
J. A. FARLEY, Esq., 270 Kennington Park Road, London,
Solicitors in London
CHARLES ROGERS & SON, 7 Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street,
Westminster, S.W., London.
MERCANTILE AGENTS IN LONDON
J OHN KEMP & CO., Proprietors of Kemp’s Mercantile Offices. Esta-
blished 1849. London : 46, Cannon Street, E.C. Liverpool: Adelphi
Bank Chambers, South J ohn Street. Birmingham : Queen Chambers,
Cherry Street. Corresponding Offices at—
Aberdeen
Albany, U.S.A.
Amiens (France)
Amsterdam (Holland)
Angouleme (France)
Antwerp (Belgium)
Baltimore, U.S.A.
Basle (Switzerland)
Bay City, U.S. A.
Belfast
Berlin (Prussia)
Beziers (France)
Binghampton, U.S.A.
Bombay (India)
Bordeaux (France)
Boston, U.S.A.
Bristol
Brussels (Belgium)
Leeds
Liege (Belgium)
Lille (France)
Lisbon (Portugal)
Louisville, U.S.A.
Luxemburg
Lyons (France)
Madrid (Spain)
Malta
Manchester
Marseilles (France)
Melbourne (Victoria)
Milan (Italy)
Milwaukee, U.S.A.
Montreal (Canada)
Nantes (France)
N ewcastle-on-Tyne
New Orleans, U.S.A.


Buffalo, U.S.A,
Cahors (France)
Calcutta (India)
Carlisle
Chicago, U.S.A.
Cincinnati, U.S.A.
Cleveland, U.S.A.
Constantinople (Turkey)
Copenhagen (Denmark)
Detroit, U.S.A.
Doncaster
Dublin
Durham
Edinburgh
Epinal (France)
Exeter
Florence (Italy)
Frankfort (Germany)
Geneva (Switzerland)
Glasgow
Grand Rapids, U. S. A.
Grenoble (France)
Grimsby
Halifax (Nova Scotia)
Hamburg (Germany)
Hamilton (Canada)
Hastings
Havre (France)
Hull
Indianapolis, U.S.A.
Jersey
Kalamazoo, U.S.A.
Kansas, U.S.A.
New York, U.S.A.
Nottingham
Oldham
Paris (France)
Philadelphia, U.S.A,
Pittsburg, U.S.A.
Plymouth
Portland, U.S.A.
Preston
Quincy, U.S.A.
Rochdale
Rochester, U.S.A.
San Francisco, U.S.A.
Sevres (France)
Sydney (New South Wales)
Sheffield
Stockton-on-Tees
Strasburg (Elsass)
St. John, U.S.A.
St. Joseph, U.S.A.
St. Louis, U.S.A.
St. Omer (France)
St. Paul, U.S.A.
Sunderland
Toledo, U.S.A.
Toronto (Canada)
Troy, U.S.A.
Troyes (France)
Utica, U.S.A.
Yienna (Austria)
Washington, U.S.A.
Yarmouth (Norfolk)
With Agents and Correspondents in every Town in the United King-
dom, the Continent of Europe, the United States, and Canada and the
principal Cities and Ports of the Mediterranean, South America, East and
West Indies, China, Japan, and Australasia.
OPINIONS OF THE VICTORIAN PRESS WHILST IN
GOVERNMENT SERVICE.
Ovens Constitution.
Detective Berliner, who has been stationed at Indigo for
eighteen months past, proceeds to Melbourne by to-day’s escort,
the removal being, we believe, at his own request. Detective
Berliner has earned a high reputation for activity and intelligence
amongst the people of Indigo, and the number of criminals who
have been brought to justice through his instrumentality offers the
strongest proof of his worth as a police officer. Whoever may be
his successor will find plenty to do. The district abounds in
thieves and disreputable characters, who can only be restrained


within due bounds by the most unremitting vigilance on the part of
the police.
Ovens Constitution, in iB6O.
Detective Berliner.— This very active and zealous officer
has been suddenly removed from the district. He had returned
for a short time on the breaking out of this gold field, where he
had been extremely useful in detecting and tracing some of the
vagabonds who usually frequent new rushes. The residents of
Indigo and the Wahgunyah gold field regret his removal, but we
understand that they intend to take advantage of the occasion to
forward to the head of the force a testimonial embodying their
opinion of Detective Berliner’s character and conduct. This
testimonial he has fully earned, and we hope that it may prove ol
service to him.
Daylesford Express, 1863.
Detective Berliner. —This officer leaves Daylesford finally on
Monday for Melbourne. During the time he has been stationed
here Mr. Berliner has been instrumental in bringing to justice
many criminals who had perpetrated serious offences, and it is to
the arduous prosecution of his duties and to the exposure to wet
and cold during many a long night that his recent serious illness is
attributable. Mr. Berliner will leave behind him an appreciating
recollection of the services he has rendered during the time he has
been stationed here.
Le Franchi 1 s Murder Case.
A Murderer Arrested. —Some three years ago some excite-
ment was caused by the news being brought into Ballarat that a
murder had been committed at Mount Blowhard, and that the
murderer had escaped, notwithstanding that every exertion had
been used to discover him. The particulars, as they transpired at
he time were, that two men named Julius Le Franchi and James
Maher had been working together, and a dispute had arisen, which
Le Franchi, it appeared, determined on having revenge for.
Whilst Maher was milking a cow he struck him on the head with
some blunt instrument, supposed to be a stick, and inflicted a
fatal wound. Le Franchi at once made his escape, and has never
been heard of since until a few days ago, when he was arrested by
Detective Berliner at Daylesford. He was brought to Creswick
last night, and will be taken to Clunes, to answer the charge of
murder to be preferred against him in the police court there. —
Ballarat Star, July 22.


Le Franchi, who was recently arrested by Detective Berliner,
for the murder of Maher, was brought before the Clunes Police
Court on Monday and remanded until Wednesday week for the
attendance of witnesses. The prisoner is about twenty-two or
twenty-three years of age, and has a very dejected appearance.
He is a native of the Canton of Ticino, Switzerland. The slip-
rail, clothes, and portion of the skull (frightfully shattered) of the
murdered man are lodged in the camp and will be produced at the
examination.
The Clunes correspondent of the Creswick Advertiser refers to
the recent apprehension of Le Franchi, by Detective Berliner, for
the murder of Patrick Maher. In our issue of yesterday we inad-
vertently fell into the error of confounding the name of the
murdered man with that of the suspected murderer. The circum-
stances of the case are as thus stated :—“ The murder was
perpetrated early in the morning of the nth of December, 1858.
Le Franchi and Maher, it appears, were employed on a farm in
the occupation of a Mr. Lewis (who has now left the district), near
Mount Beckwith. Maher was engaged milking on the morning in
question, when Le Franchi coming up, an altercation ensued
between them on some unimportant subject. Le Franchi, whose
passions were aroused, seized hold of a slip-rail, hit the unfortunate
man a fearful blow on the head, fracturing his skull, from the effects
of which he shortly afterwards expired. A servant girl witnessing
the horrible affair, aroused her master, who hastily dressed, not
allowing himself time, however, to put on his boots. Mr. Lewis
laid hold of Le Franchi, accused of the deed, and told him that
he must answer for it. A struggle then ensued, in the course of
which the Italian endeavoured to unclasp his knife, in which effort
he was happily unsuccessful, otherwise there would undoubtedly
have been another dreadful crime to chronicle. He then made
for the fence enclosing the property —his employer in close
pursuit—climbed over, dropping his knife at the time, and got
clear off, Mr. Lewis following for some distance, but being obliged
to give over in consequence of having no boots on his feet. An
inquest was held in the afternoon of the same day before
Mr. W. B. Lees, and a verdict in accordance with the evidence
recorded. Senior constable Bolger, immediately on receiving in-
telligence of Le Franchi’s apprehension, proceeded with the
warrant to Daylesford. The murderous weapon, eleven feet in
length, has been lying in the camp ever since the crime was com-
mitted. It is probable Le Franchi will be brought before the
bench here to answer to the charge in the course of the week.”


THE GREAT FORGERY CASE ON THE BANK OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Apprehension of a Forger of Bank Notes.—A rather extra-
ordinary case of forgery was brought to light on Saturday evening,
at about half-past five o’clock, by detective officers Berliner and
Eason, These officers have been engaged for the last two months
and a half in tracking a man named Lennan, alias Victory, alias
Horatio Nelson, and on the evening in question they succeeded
in capturing him close to Russell-street, in Flinders-street.
Eason went up to him and said, “ Sir, you have been in Melbourne
for some time, and may I ask how do you get your living ? ”
Nelson, who was attired in a suit of black, got highly indignant,
and refused to answer ; but on the officer saying that he was a
detective, the other replied that he was an English nobleman
travelling for pleasure, and appealed to Berliner, who was standing
near by, asking if “ a gentleman ” was to be stopped in the street
by anybody who pleased. He then made a rush, but the officers
were too quick for him, and after a good deal of struggling he gave
in, at the same time asking Berliner, who was disguised in a wig,
whiskers, and spectacles, if he would take care of his money.
That officer of course very obligingly complied, and on a certain
packet being opened, it was found to contain twenty bundles of
£5 Bank of New South Wales notes in each bundle—
amounting to and two plates engraved with the obverse
and reverse sides of the notes. The manager of the bank states
that the imitation is very clever, as his signature and that of the
director’s has been engraved with the other matter of the note.
It is supposed that Nelson intended to take the spurious notes up
the country and buy gold with them. It will thus be seen that
these officers have saved a great number of people from being
victims of a most impudent fraud, and it is satisfactory to know
that the accused was not able to get rid of any of the notes, for
the detectives have not lost an hour in watching him since they
were put upon the scent. One of them (Berliner) has actually
been in his company several times, and this circumstance induced
him to adopt the disguise referred to. — Herald.
FORGERY OF BANK NOTES.
Horatio Nelson, alias Patrick Lennan, alias Victory, was brought
up, charged with committing forgeries to the amount of
upon the Bank of New South Wales, Melbourne. The prisoner
was a man of about forty years of age, and was dressed in a suit
of black.
Otto Berliner, detective officer, stated that for about two months
and a half he and detective Eason had been keeping a watch over
the prisoner. He had been accustomed to change his residence


about every seven or eight days, and would often change his style
of dress, sometimes appearing in the street wearing only a blue
shirt and trousers, but when going to his place of appointment,
dressed, as then, in a suit of black. On Saturday last witness and
Eason arrested the prisoner in Flinders-lane, when he resisted,
and gave Eason a good deal of trouble. He declared that he was
an English gentleman, and denied their power of arresting him.
He contrived to throw something that he said was money, in a
culvert, and he afterwards asked witness to take care of it for him.
On examination, this proved to be 2,000 forged notes upon
the Bank of New South Wales. Prisoner said he had brought the
notes out with him from London. The two engraved copper-
plates, fac similes of the notes, were also found upon the prisoner.
Witness thought it right, for the credit of the bank, to state that not a
single one of these notes had been circulated. Witness concluded
by asking for a remand of the case for eight days to allow him to
prepare the evidence.
One of the forged notes was produced, and compared with a
genuine one of the same value, when it was seen that the imitation
was most accurate. The signatures were the weakest part of the
imitation, these being evidently lithographs ; but had the notes
been partly worn by artificial means before circulation, the differ-
ence would have been rendered almost imperceptible.
The bench having heard the statement of Mr. Berliner, granted
the remand sought. The prisoner to be brought up again on this
day week.
TIBBET’S MURDER CASE.
Tibbet’s Murder Case. —Extract from Argus telegram, 1862; —
“ Daylesford, Thursday Evening.
“ The investigation closed at five p.m., and resulted in the com-
mittal of Fleming, McHale, and Edwards for trial, bail being
refused. The defence was reserved. The counsel for the prose-
cution passed a high eulogium upon Detective Berliner for the
ability and zeal displayed by him in the conduct of the case.”
Mount Alexander Mail , 1865.
It will be learned with regret that that very efficient member of
the detective police force, Detective Berliner, has resigned his
appointment. Mr. Berliner has been in the force for seven or
eight years, and during that time has done the public much good
service in many districts of the colony. His activity and sagacity
have earned him praise from those who were able to appreciate
the services of something more than the ordinary “ thief-catcher,”


—a gentleman who adopted the role of the detective as a profes-
sion, and who performed its arduous and onerous duties efficiently.
An impression prevails that Mr. Berliner has not been treated
fairly or according to his merits. This may account for his resig-
nation. We shall probably hear more about this affair by-and-bye.
Mr. Berliner is well known in the Castlemaine district.
Extract from Argus.
Highway Robbery under Arms.— The admirable organisation
of our detective police, and the intelligent zeal of some of its
members, was proved once more yesterday at the Bourke General
Sessions, during the trials of three men, named Thompson,
Parkinson, and Williams, for robbery under arms. This offence
has lately been gaining ground in an alarming degree, and several
persons going through the surburban parks late at night have
found themselves stuck up by ruffians who carried arms. It was
a generic condition of almost all these offences that one of the
robbers carried and presented an old-fashioned “ pepper-box ”
revolver. The two cases tried yesterday were those of Mr.
Hutton, a baker, at Collingwood, and Mr. Angleton, a wardsman,
at Yarra Bend. The first was stuck up in Carlton-gardens, and
the last on the Kew-road, and on each occasion the robbers
managed to get clean off. The detective police were appealed to,
but the crimes left no tangible trace. At last, however, that sort
of instinctive bias which often leads the trained detective to his
legitimate prey, brought Detectives Black and Berliner upon the
right men, whom one morning they visited and summarily
arrested on suspicion, without any actual information to guide
them. Their prisoners were soon identified, and, pursuan to the
verdict of an uncompromising jury, and the sentence of a judge
who declined to overlook the enormity of the offences, two of
them have now to spend seven years, and the other ten years, at
Pentridge.
Extract from the Ballarat Star.
Thieves at the Fire. —Three prisoners were committed for
trial at the Circuit Court from the Eastern Police Court, on
Friday, for having stolen worth of goods that had been re-
moved from the fire. The thieves had been tracked by Detective
Berliner with a good deal of shrewdness, and the prosecution was
conducted with some cleverness by him.
Thieves at the Fire. —lt appeared that some furniture and
moveables belonging to Mr. Cantor, butcher, had been rescued
from his house 'before the fire had reached it, and as he had


another establishment near the Market-square on the township,
they were subsequently conveyed there. In doing so, his two
servants, aided by a third person, brought several boxes of choice
clothing, the property of Mr. D. Jones, to the same place. On
Saturday, the trio, whose names are John Walker, Thomas Wilson,
and Frederick Weston, were in the act of removing the boxes
aforesaid from Mr. Cantor’s when Detective Berliner, who had
the gang under his observation for some time, advanced and in-
nocently obtained from them an admission that the boxes and
their contents were their property. They were then taken into
custody, and will be brought before the Police Court to-day on
the charge.
Extract from Herald.
At the East Collingwood Police Court, yesterday, two men
named Hewson and Matthews, were committed for trial, on the
serious charge of having in their possession certain tools, chemicals,
and machinery, usually employed by coiners. Detective Berliner
and two other officers found the prisoners, and the appliances em-
ployed by them, in a house in Fife-street, Collingwood. The dis-
covery and the arrest were made in a manner which reflected
credit on the detective police. A clear prima facie case having
been made out, the bench committed the men for trial. Mr
Atkyns defended Matthews.
Extract from Mount Alexander Mail.
Clever Capture. —Yesterday, Detective Berliner, of the
Daylesford division, made a clever capture of a rogue, who was
evidently “ wanted,” and who has but recently left Pentridge, after
serving two years. It appears that he went, on Wednesday last,
to reside at Mr. Baker’s Temperance Hotel, where he has been
stopping since, paying for whatever he had in the house, without
any suspicion being excited as to his honesty. To-day, however,
the detective came in and inquired if such a man, giving his de-
scription, was stopping there 1 Mrs. Baker, not having paid much
attention to the fellow, was unable to give the requisite infor-
mation ; but it would appear from the sequel, that the officer was
better informed than the landlady; he could tell her not only
where she kept her money, but made a pretty good guess as to the
amount, advising her at the same time to withdraw the money
from the box, and allow it to remain in its usual place in the bed-
room. This advice was followed, and whilst Mrs. Baker was out
shortly after communicating with the police on the subject, the
fellow managed to open the bedroom window and abstract the
box. He was discovered, however, by the servant, and imme-


diately secured with what he thought a prize on his person, and
safely lodged in the lock-up. He will be brought up at the Police
Court to-day.
Extract from Daylesford Express .
Fugitive Criminals. —Detective Berliner appears to be com-
mendably active, and signally successful in assisting to have an
early settlement of accounts with some of those persons whose
deeds have entitled them to special and very particuular notice in
the Police Gazette. Not long past he arrested a man who has been
committed for trial for murder in 1859; an d Rt the Police Court
on Wednesday he brought up a man for stabbing with intent to
kill, in the same year. A man named John Melford, with two
aliases , is charged in the Gazette with having stabbed a man in
June, 1859, at Back Creek, with intent to kill, and this officer
arrested on Monday last, on suspicion of being the person de-
scribed, a man who was acting in the capacity of cook at one of
the hotels in this town. A remand was granted, and it yet, of
course, remains to be ascertained whether the detective has the
“ right man,” but of that he appears to have no doubt.
Extract from Argus.
Two men, named Lawrence White and Robert Anderson, were
brought up before the City Court yesterday, charged, the first with
forging, and the second with forging and uttering, a. cheque for
£2O, on the Bank of Australasia, purporting to be signed with the
signature of the firm R. and P. Turnbull and Co. The cheque
was paid on Monday morning, by Anderson, to Mr. Levi, of the
firm of Sanders and Co., Swanston-street, in payment for a small
purchase made. Only £1 of the balance was paid to Anderson, he
promising to call in the evening for the remainder. Before evening
the cheque was found to be a forgery, and Anderson and White
were both arrested by Detective Berliner near Mordialloc.
Evidence was adduced, tending to prove complicity between the
prisoners, who were both sent for trial.
Extract from Argus.
Uttering Forged Cheques. —Edward H. Green, arrested on
warrant by Detective Berliner, was charged as above. The
detective said there were many cases against the prisoner, who
was at present subject to three distinct charges, in reference to
cheques varying from £$ to £ 5. It appeared that the prisoner
had been accustomed to go into the shops of different tradesmen,


representing himself to be a carrier in want of goods, and after
making a small purchase, to give one of the forged cheques in
payment. He was remanded till Tuesday.
Extract from Argus.
A painful case was tried before the Chief Justice yesterday, in
the prosecution of a young woman named Mary Malone, a ser-
vant on Mr. Watson’s station at Sunbury, for child murder. The
evidence was circumstantial but conclusive, and the unhappy
prisoner, with a recommendation to mercy on account of her
youth and her deserted and unprotected condition, was sentenced
to death. A word of notice is due to the skilful manner in which
a case of some difficulty was got up by the police. It was, we
believe, under the management of Mr. Otto Berliner, of the
detective force.
Extract from Ballarat Star.
An inquest on the body of Mary Walton, held on Saturday, at
the White Hart Hotel, occupied the coroner and jury from mid-
day till half-past three o’clock in the afternoon. James Walton,
who was already in custody, on remand for assaulting his wife,
was present, in charge of a constable, and sat apparently uncon-
cerned throughout. At the close of the inquest, Walton asked
the coroner what was the charge upon which he had to be com-
mitted. The coroner read over to him the verdict of the jury,
and then informed him he was committed to take his trial for
manslaughter. He received the announcement without apparent
discomposure, and was marched off to the lock-up in Lydiard-
street, handcuffed. We lean that Walton has before been in
prison for manslaughter, and for other minor offences. Detective
Otto Berliner conducted the prosecution with ability.
Extract from Melbourne Post,
Private Inquiry Office, —Under this name an establishment
was opened at 78 Elizabeth-street, Melbourne, in January, 1866,
under the management of Mr. Otto Berliner, formerly one of the
principal officers of the Victorian detective police, and in connec-
tion with the one established in Temple Court, London, by the
late F. C. Field, Esq. Mr. Berliner joined the police force of
New South Wales in 1855, and that of Victoria in 1859. During
the eleven years he was connected with the force he made himself
prominent in various cases, and showed the utmost activity for
this branch of the public service. The attention he bestowed in
the arrest of Le Franchi, the Italian murderer, in 1859 j the


murder case at Oxley Plains in the same year; the arrest of the
gold coiners, Carlo Galbretto and Francesco Melange, at Dayles-
ford; the clever capture of Horatio Nelson, the bank note forger ;
and subsequently the arrest effected by him of Carver and Ander-
son, the Collingwood bank robbers, are sufficient proofs as to his
fitness for his present position. Since the opening of this office
Mr. Berliner has been of considerable service to persons at home,
in finding missing friends, next of kin, unclaimed moneys, &c.
We believe that persons, both at home and in this colony, are
largely availing themselves'of his services, and we trust that his
enterprise will prove remunerative to himself and useful to the
public generally.
Extract from Herald.
We observe that Mr. O. Berliner, lately a member of the
detective police force, has opened “a private inquiry” office in
this city. Mr. Berliner was for many years in the service of the
Governments both of this colony and of New South Wales, and
proved, on several occasions, that he possessed rare tact and dis-
cretion, and to his exertions are due that many notorious criminals
received the reward of their misdeeds. He has received testi-
monials from (amongst others) the Judges, of a very flattering
nature, and that from the Chief Justice is the more valuable, as
Sir William Stawell rarely gives such documents The office
which Mr. Berliner has established, in conjunction with another
late officer of the force, is based on the same plan as that of Mr.
Field’s, which known in London. Already, we believe,
the utility of the office has been proved by the amount of business
which has been transacted.
Extract from Australian News.
Private Inquiry Office. —Persons, both at home and in
this and in the other colonies, have often occasion to institute
inquiries regarding missing friends, next of kin, unclaimed
moneys, &c. Such will be glad to know that there is established
in Melbourne, under the management of Mr. Otto Berliner, an
office calculated to be exceedingly useful to them in their in-
quiries. The office in Melbourne, at 78 Elizabeth-street, is in
connection with the one established in 1 emple Court, London,
by the late F. C. Field, Esq. Mr. Berliner was, during eleven
years, one of the officers of the Australian detective police, and
the activity which he displayed in various well-known cases is
ample evidence of his fitness for the service to which he has now
devoted himself.


TALLOW FRAUD.
On the i ith September, 1871, a man representing himself as one
Joseph Allen, came to the office of a carrier situated in Flinders-
street, of the name of James Martin, and engaged him to convey
31 pipes of tallow, branded JA in circle. This tallow was to be
loaded at the Queen’s Wharf, and then by drays carried to D. M.
Parker’s Store (Goldsbrough & Co.)
James Martin is a carrier, always employed by Messrs.
Goldsbrough & Co., and D. M. Parker, and one Thomas Foley,
then employed by D. M. Parker as storeman, was the party who
recommended Martin’s services to the prisoners, and indirectly to
Allen. Martin undertook the business, and carried the tallow to
the store of the above-mentioned firm. Thomas Foley gave a
receipt for them. The duties Thomas Foley had to carry out were
as following : —Previous to an auction sale taking place Foley was
employed to take or draw samples from all tallow submitted by
vendors. In this case he (Foley) made a sworn declaration that
he knew the tallow was packed on the bilge through the bung-
hole, and that the Govan Brothers said that he (Foley) would
know how to draw the samples, and that they further said, “Do
your best, we will make it all right.” However, this witness
altered in his evidence materially, denying this fact altogether at
the Police Court and Criminal Sessions. Allen having arranged
with Martin, the carrier, went then to Mr. D. M. Parker’s store,
saw Mr. Arthur Parker (manager for Mr. D. M. Parker), and told
him that he brought 31 pipes of tallow from Warrnambool, a
Western seaport of Victoria; that the tallow was good, and said
his name was Joseph Allen; the reserve price put by him on the
tallow was 10s. per ton.
The auction sale took place, and 31 samples of fine white tallow
were produced in the sale room by Foley and his assistant,
William Bayes. Mr. Ed. Rowe, the firm’s auctioneer, held the
sale, and the 31 pipes, JA in circle, were sold to Messrs. Croaker,
Scott, & Co., of Collins-street West, Melbourne, at T2s. 6d.
per ton. The day after the sale had taken place Joseph Allen
called again at Mr. Parker’s store, and obtained, by desire, an
open cheque on the Colonial Bank of Australasia for the tallow
JA in circle.
The 31 pipes of tallow were shipped to London per Newcastle ,
and upon arrival and examination in Liverpool, the tallow proved
to be falsely packed. Each pipe contained about one-third of
mutton tallow, and the rest grease, composed of lime and heavy
petroleum oil, almost valueless for soap and candlemaking, and in
bulk about value per ton.
Messrs. Croaker, Scott, & Co : received the letters marked A , B,


C, D, and a box containing portions of the tallow JA in circle,
shipped per Newcastle.
COPY OF LETTERS A, B, C, D.
Dowgate Dock Warehouses, 83 Upper Thames-street,
London, 3rd April, 1872.
Messrs. Anning and Cobb, 11 Lime-street, London.
We, the undersigned wharfingers of Free Trade Wharf, Ratcliff, having
examined the under-mentioned parcel of tallow, found the mark and
numbers referred to to contain a mixture of grease and tallow. As
requested by Messrs. Wm. Jackson and Co., we have drawn an average
sample of same, and forward herewith.
JA in circle, old Nos., 1 to 31, new Nos., 90 to 120, 31 casks tallow, ex
Newcastle from Melbourne.
(Signed) J. GRAVES AND CO.
London, 11 Lime-street, 6th April, 1872.
We, the undersigned brokers, hereby certify that we have carefully
examined the 31 casks tallow marked JA in circle, ex Newcastle at
Melbourne, and find that each cask contains two different descriptions of,
say, about one-third fair mutton, and two-thirds very dark soft inferior
grease, with a strong smell.
(Signed) ANNING AND COBB.
To Messrs. William Jackson and Co.
Thames Soap Works, Greenwich, London,
10th April, 1872.
Messrs. Anning and Cobb.
Dear Sirs, —We have examined the 31 casks at Free Trade Wharf, and
find they contain from one-half to two-thirds of a grease composed of a
lime and heavy petroleum oil, which is of no use for soap-making. Some
of the casks appear to have been run in hot, and are mixed all through
with the rubbish. We cannot offer more than £l5 per ton for the parcel.
Yours truly,
(Signed) WILKIE AND SOAMES.
Austin Friars, London, 10th April, 1872.
Messrs. Croaker, Scott, and Co., Melbourne.
Dear Sirs,— ln our senior’s private letter of 22nd ultimo, we told you
we could not offer the 31 casks JA in circle tallow, ex Newcastle, at the sale
which was held that day, as they required a careful examination, being all
false packed. We went down to the wharf and inspected them ourselves,
and had every cask opened, and found each contained only a very small
quantity of fair mutton tallow, the remainder being the filthiest lot of
grease you ever saw, with a most offensive smell. As it is not possible to
sell this parcel by sample, we have instructed our brokers to dispose of it in
bulk, if they can find anyone to buy such stuff. Whoever sold you such
rubbish as tallow ought to be prosecuted for downright fraud, for we
can call it nothing else. If we had not seen it ourselves, we could hardly


have believed it was so bad as it is, and can assure you that you have been
most grossly deceived. We enclose certificates from the wharfingers, as well
as from our brokers, Messrs. Anning and Cobb, and trust you will be able to
recover compensation for one of the most fraudulent cases of false packing
we ever saw. We are sending a sample per Norfolk, to enable you to judge
for yourselves.
We are, dear sirs, yours faithfully,
(Signed) WILLIAM JACKSON AND CO,
This correspondence and the box referred to, were at once
forwarded by Messrs. Croaker, Scott, and Co., to Mr. D. M.
Parker (Goldsbrough and Co.), and this firm hearing of this gross
fraud, at once instituted strict enquiries amongst the staff at their
establishments, but no result issued therefrom. Joseph Allen
apparently was not known, and could not be found, and he (Allen)
having obtained payment by open cheque, left no trace behind
him. dhe case was one of mystery; neither Foley nor Bayes
gave the slightest information to the firm. Some time after,
Messrs. Goldsbrough and Co. (D. M. Parker) instructed their
Mr. Walters to meet Mr. Otto Berliner, and ask his opinion upon
the case. Mr. Berliner was for many years one of the principal
officers of the Victorian Detective Department, but, since 1866,
has established a Mercantile Agency Office (on the model of
Superintendent Field of London) in the Australian Colonies.
By Mr. Walters's desire, Mr. Berliner called on Messrs, Parker
and Goldsbrough, and, after a short consultation, the firm handed
the whole matter over to him, and gave him the following
authority :
25th September, 1872.
Mr, Otto Berliner.
Dear Sir, —We hereby appoint you as our agent to conduct all matters
connected with 31 pipes mutton tallow, JA in circle. You are authorised to
engage connsel and solicitor, to conduct the law proceedings, and we will
be responsible for all outlays you incur.
Yours truly,
D. M. PARKER.
(Goldsbrough and Co.)
Mr. Otto Berliner.
Dear Sir, —I hereby authorise you to offer a reward of Fifty Pounds
stg. on the apprehension and conviction of the person or persons who obtained
the sum of £392 ss. sd. for 31 casks supposed to contain tallow, JA in
circle, same being falsely packed.
Yours truly,
D. M. PARKER.
Mr. Berliner having obtained a description of “ Joseph Allen,”
and obtaining valuable assistance from Mr. Walters, of Golds-
brough and Co., of all connecting circumstances of the case, then
commenced operations. The first fact ascertained by him was,
that twelve months previous to this enquiry, Captain Logan (now
retired into private life) brought, by his steamer, from Footscray to


Melbourne, the 31 pipes of fraudulent tallow. Captain Logan,
with great courtesy, permitted Mr. Berliner to inspect his books,
and thereby it was ascertained that the 31 pipes of tallow came
from the establishment of Messrs. James and Alexander Govan,
who, in 1871, carried on business as tallow manufacturers at Foots-
cray, near Melbourne.
Mr, Berliner then sent for Mr. James Govan to meet him at his
office, but Mr. Govan, under some excuse, declined this oppor-
tunity. He then placed James Govan under surveillance, and
others connected with the fraud, and after ten weeks’ fruitless
and severe work, Mr. Berliner at last succeeded to find the sup-
posed “Joseph Allen” who sold the tallow JA in circle, and
received the cheque from Mr. Parker, junior. Joseph Allen
turned out to be identical with a Joseph Kelsey, the son of a
respectable family. Mr. Berliner found him engaged at the very
printing office where the placards offering reward were to
have been printed. Kelsey, alias Allen, made at once an open
statement of the whole of this fraudulent transaction between him
the Govan Brothers, stated that he had known them in New Zealand,
and that when this transaction in reference to the 31 pipes J A in
circle, and, further, 22 pipes (which were traced by Mr. Berliner to
carrier Martin’s books, and in Captain Logan’s books) he (Kelsey)
was hard pushed for means, and specially employed by the Govan
Brothers to act for them, but that he received nothing but a weekly
salary from them. (This statement was afterwards borne out by
prisoners’ defence.) Mr. Berliner then came in strict contact with
Foley and Bayes, got their sworn declarations at once taken ; and
it is remarkable to read the sworn affidavit of Foley in comparison
with his evidence at the trial.
These affidavits were taken before Mr. Godfrey, solicitor and
commissioner, with whom Mr. Berliner had communicated, on
behalf of D. M. Parker, Esq. Mr. John Buchanan, solicitor, of
Mr. Godfrey’s firm, took down the statements of Kelsey, Foley,
and Bayes, and the same night Messrs. Buchanan and Berliner left
Melbourne at 12 p.m., and secured and superintended the arrest of
James and Alexander Govan, one at Footscray and another at
Brunswick; Senior Constable Kelly and Sergeant O’Shanessy in
charge respectively. The police acted with energy and tact, and at
Brunswick, where Alexander Govan was only a new resident,
unknown to the police, the arrest was effected in about two hours
(midnight.) The discipline of the Victorian foot police deserves
here a compliment. Some days after Mr. Berliner found E. G.
Bees, the man who was employed by Messrs. Govan Brothers to
fill the fraudulent packed pipes of tallow. His statement was
taken previous to the Police Court sittings. He unfortunately broke
a blood vessel previous to the examination, and at the trial at the


Criminal Sessions his evidence apparently altered from his former
statement.
The evidence of the case was gone into before Call, Esq.,
Police Magistrate at the City Police Court, Melbourne, on the
ist and 2nd October, and Messrs. George Higinbotham and
Molesworth, barristers-at-law, conducted the prosecution, assisted
by Mr. Berliner.
On the 21 st and 22nd October, the Criminal Sessions opened
with these proceedings, before His Honor Judge Molesworth; and
Messrs. Goldsbrough and Co. and D. M. Parker instructed Mr.
Godfrey to employ a reporter of the Argus to obtain a verbatim
report of the whole case. The trial lasted two full days.
The prisoners were found guilty, and sentence passed upon
them by His Honor Judge Molesworth. Mr. Bryan O’Loghlen,
Crown prosecutor, assisted by Mr. Molesworth, barrister-at-law,
prosecuted; Messrs. Wrixon and Smyth defended. Mr. Berliner
assisted the Crown, The conviction was the first obtained in the
colony of Victoria for fraudulently packing, and thereby committing
a conspiracy.
THE CLAIMANT TO THE TICHBORNE BARONETCY.
No law case has perhaps ever excited more interest than the
far-famed Tichborne suit, the hero of which forms the subject of
our sketch. Proverbially, chancery suits are dry and musty, and,
like Jarndyce v. Jarndyce, are of no interest to any one but those
immediately concerned and the gentlemen of the long robe, who
are presumed to grow fat upon the substance of their clients,
doomed to drag out their existence in the court presided over by
the Chancellor of the Exchequer. The Tichborne case is, how-
ever, an exception to the rule, and possesses such romantic
features that the sombre halls of justice seems transformed into a
theatre, on the stage of which is being performed a sensation piece
more intricate in plot, more exciting in situations, than was ever
penned by that fertile playwright, Mr. Boucicault, in his wildest at-
tempts at the startling or the thrilling. “ After Dark ” fades into
insignificance by the side of the Tichborne suit. “ The Cherry
Tree,” grows feeble when compared to the adventures of the
butcher baronet, whose astounding appearance to claim a fortune
and a title after years of absence, is only equalled by the case
of Martin Till, which some years ago puzzled French lawyers, and
created confusion in the French law courts. The claimant alleges
to be Sir Roger Charles Doughty Tichborne, the eleventh baronet
grandson of Sir Henry Tichborne, and heir to the Tichborne
estates, in the county of Southampton, producing a yearly income


of from ,£30,000 to ,£40,000. Alfred Joseph Doughty Tichborne,
the younger son of Sir Henry, died on the 22nd of February, 1866,
leaving issue a son, Everard Francis Doughty Tichborne, who died
in early infancy; but Alfred’s wife, Teresa Mary Josephine
Doughty Tichborne, nee Arundel, who was enceinte at the time of
her husband’s death, gave birth, on the 28th of May, 1866, to a
son —Henry Alfred Joseph Doughty Tichborne, the defendant in
the present suit. The claimant resided with his parents in Paris,
from his birth until the year 1845, when he was sent to England
to be educated at the Jesuit College of Stonyhurst, in Lancashire.
In the year 1849, Roger Tichborne obtained a commission as
cornet in Her Majesty’s Sixth Dragoon Guards (Carbineers), and
joined the regiment in Dublin. He subsequently became a
lieutenant in the same regiment, in which he remained until the
year 1863, being looked upon by his brother officers as somewhat
eccentric in conduct and illiterate for one of his station in life.
Lieutenant Tichborne was a thorough sportsman, and a fearless
rider. In March, 1853, he left England for Valparasio, and
arriving there travelled to various parts of South America. His
reasons for quitting England are not very clear, although a clue to
his course of action has been elicited during the trial. According
to the plaintiffs statement he left Rio de Janerio in April, 1850,
in the Bella, commanded by one Birkett, and bound for New
York. On the fourth day after leaving the mate reported to the
captain that the ship had sprung a leak, and all hands were
ordered to the pumps. Every effort was made to stop the ingress
of the water without avail, and as it soon became apparent
that she was filling fast, all on board took to the boats, of which
there were three —namely, two small boats, and one long boat.
One of the boats was stove in during the process of being lowered,
but the others were got into the water safely. The claimant and
eight others got into one of these, and shortly afterwards the Bella
sank. The captain and one partofthe crew had possession ofthe long-
boat, while Sir Roger was in the smaller one, both being stocked
with a limited quantity of provisions and a few casks of water.
For two days the boats kept in sight of each other, but were ulti-
mately separated during a storm. On the morning of the fourth
day a ship was seen some distance from the boat in which the
claimant was, and signals were made by means of a red flannel
shirt being fastened to an oar, which was hoisted in the air. The
distress signals were answered. The ship came alongside and took
on board the occupants of the boat. The ship was bound to
Melbourne, and consequently there was nothing for Sir Roger and
his partners in shipwreck but to proceed thither. The claimant
was much exhausted by the sufferings he had undergone, and con-
tinued ill until he arrived in Melbourne. Some time afterwards


the putative baronet strolled into a horse sale-yard called Rowe’s
yard, and there he states that he made the acquaintance of Mr.
William Forster (since dead), who invited him to go to Gipps
Land. In company with Mr. Forster and three other men, the
claimant, who had assumed the appellation of Thomas de Castro
(the name of an acquaintance in Chili), proceeded to the Bois-
dale station, owned by Mr. Foster. This was in the year 1854,
and now the complication commences. The defendants in the
suit contend that the claimant is not Sir Roger, but a certain
Arthur Orton, a butcher, whose relations were tenants of the
Tichborne family, and who is known to have been in Australia.
On the other hand, the plaintiff and his friends contend that
evidence is available that in the year 1854 Orton was in Hobart
Town, and did not visit Gipps Land and worked for a Captain
Johnson until two years later. A great number of persons in
Gipps Land have been utterly confused in respect as to these men;
and what makes the difficulty greater is the fact that Orton and
De Castro were in Gipps Land at the same time, and oftentimes
in company with each other. After remaining in Gipps Land for
about three years, the claimant, as he states, went across to the
Omeo, and thence proceeded to Deniliquin, Hay, and Wagga.
Leaving Wagga, he went to Bendigo and Castlemaine, and ap-
pears, in conjunction with Orton, to have got into some trouble
in relation with a case of horsestealing. Later, however, he reap-
peared in New South Wales, at Tumut, and finally returned to
Wagga, where he settled down as a slaughterman to a butcher in
the township.
The mother of Sir Roger Tichborne, Lady Henrietta Felicite'
Doughty Tichborne, having heard from a sailor that certain of
those on board of the Bella had been saved, caused advertise-
ments to be inserted at intervals in various New South Wales
journals, which for a long time were productive of no result.
According to the plaintiff’s statement, he never wrote home, and
had no wish to emerge from the retirement of a bush township, or
to exchange the position of De Castro, butcher, for that of a
baronet with a large rent-roll. De Castro could not escape, how-
ever, the ills thar flesh is heir to, and on one occasion found him-
self served with a piece of paper by which, in the Queen’s name,
he was commanded to appear before a justice of the peace to show
cause why he should not pay a certain sum of money for goods
delivered to him at his request. Terrified at the prospect of a
court of law, he consulted a friend, who recommended him a pro-
fessional adviser, stating that it could easily be made “ all
straight.” De Castro sought the solicitor, explained his case, and
was instructed as to the course he should adopt. Becoming com-
municative, however, he told his legal adviser the story of the


shipwreck, and other episodes of life. On returning home, after
his day’s work, the lawyer mentioned to his wife that he had a
curious client to deal with that day, and in his turn told his better
half the narrative of De Castro’s shipwreck. Time went on, and
once again the periodical advertisment inserted by Lady Tich-
borne appeared in print, and met the eye of the Wagga Wagga
lawyer’s wife, who read it without paying much attention. Con-
siderably startled was the lawyer to be one night roused out of his
first sleep by his wife, who mysteriously announced that his curious
client must be the person advertised for. The advertisement was
carefully read by the man of law, who soon perceived that the
statement made by his client coincided with what appeared in
print. Next day he endeavoured to meet De Castro, but the
latter, on observing that his legal adviser wished to speak with
him effected an escape. The meeting at last took place, when the
lawyer taxed him with having assumed the name of De Castro.
The client was confused, and after endeavouring to deny the
soft imputation, produced a pipe, upon which was engraved the
letters R.C.T. “That is the name,” said the lawyer. “ You are
Sir Roger Tichborne.” An assent was given, and De Castro was
dragged from obscurity. In 1865 he wrote to his mother, and the
extraordinary epistle has been put in in evidence. The quondam
De Castro then proceeded to Sydney, where he was recognised
by a Mr. Gilfoyle, formerly a gardener at Tichborne-hall, who
since, however, proclaims that he is not the real Sir Roger. In
September the claimant embarked at Sydney on board the
Rakaia, and proceeded to England by the way of Panama.
Soon after his arrival in England, accompanied by Mr.
Holmes, a solicitor, and another gentleman, he proceeded
to Paris, where the Dowager Lady Tichborne resided. She
acknowledged him as her son, and returned with him to England,
where the claimant was recognised as the lost heir to the title by
numerous friends of the Tichborne family, amongst whom was Mr.
Hopkins, the legal adviser of his alleged father, the late baronet.
Mr. John Holmes, of London, was appointed solicitor to the
claimant, and lost no time in putting forward the claims of his
client, which were disputed by the friends of the infant, who, up
to the appearance of the quondam De Castro on the scene, had
been looked upon as the true baronet. Commissions were
appointed in South America and Australia. Mr. Sedgefield, now
of the Registrar-General’s office, having been articled with Mr.
Holmes in the same office in London, and being in 1867 the
senior partner in the firm of Sedgefield and Allport, solicitors,
was instructed to conduct the business in Australia. Mr. Curzon
Allport, undertook the duties, and in company with Mr, Otto
Berliner, late a senior officer in the Victorian Detective Police,


proceeded to Gipps Land, Hobart Town, &c., tracing the claimant
step by step, and getting up the evidence required for the trial in
England. Mr. Wyatt, barrister-at-law, conducted the case during
the commission on behalf of the plaintiff. Messrs. Klingender,
Charsley, and Liddle acted on behalf of the defendants, and Mr.
Ireland, Q.C., as barrister at the commission. At present, Messrs.
Malleson, England, and Stewart act as agents for the defendants.
Reports of the trial, as far as it has gone, have appeared in the
public journals, and while it seems strange that the claimant
should be ignorant of his mother’s name and the name of the
ship that brought him to Melbourne, he has shown a wonderful
knowledge of minute incidents in the life of Sir Roger Tichborne,
the lieutenant of Carbineers, and seems to have withstood the
terrible cross-examination of the Solicitor-General wonderfully
well. On the 26th of August of the present year the junior
counsel for the claimant, Mr. Francis Jeune, arrived in the colony
for the purpose of collecting further evidence in relation, it is
stated, to the whereabouts of Arthur Orton, “ the man whom the
claimant is by the defendants stated to be.” Mr. Jeune, who will
return to England by the outgoing mail, has, it is said, been
fortunate in securing evidence of the utmost importance to his
client. The trial of the case in England, which has been post-
poned, will commence again in November, when further details of
this extraordinary case will be brought to light. If the evidence
taken by commission in Australia be allowed, then, indeed, we
may look for some curious revelations relating to the colonial
career of the claimant, either as Tom de Castro, Orton, or
Morgan.
TESTIMONIAL.
I hereby certify that Mr. Otto Berliner of 78 Elizabeth-street, Mel-
bourne was engaged by me on behalf of Mr. Holmes, solicitor, London, to con-
duct the enquiries in the Tichborne Case, and that he displayed energy and
ability in obtaining evidence in Oipps Land, Tasmania, &c.
S. W. SEDGEFIELD,
Melbourne, July, 1871. Solicitor, Registrar General's Office.
GEORGE PATTESON OR PEARCE—MISSING FRIEND.
From Geelong Paper.
Some time ago I mentioned that Mr. O. Berliner, for many
years honorably connected with the Victorian detective police
force, was about to try the experiment of establishing in Mel-
bourne, an Enquiry Office, on the model of such establishments
in Europe. Mr. Berliner’s office has now been in successful
operation for many months, and the Melbourne Enquiry Office is


an accomplished fact. The manager and his confidential staff
undertake a variety of business, collecting evidence in libel and
fraud cases, strikes and elections, searching out missing friends, or
proofs of births, marriages, deaths, &c. A remarkable case of
“ tracing out a man ” has just been brought to a satisfactory con-
clusion by the efforts of Mr. Berliner. A considerable amount of
property was left to one George Patteson, who it is known left
England for Australia, in the ship Argo, in 1853. His friends
and solicitors made enquiries in vain ; it was supposed that he
had gone to the gold fields, and there shared the fate of many an
unfortunate fellow. About two or three months ago this mys-
terious case was put into the hands of Mr. Berliner, who speedily
discovered that the veritable George Patteson had died in the
Melbourne Hospital, under the name of “ George Pearce.”
Among other links in the chain of evidence was this, that George
Patteson (a gentleman by birth and education) had made himself
a great favorite on board the ship Argo, that when he arrived he
had but little money, and was soon hard up ; that then he sold to
a fellow passenger named Davenport, residing at Emerald Hill, a
variety of articles which have since been sent to England for
identification. Mr. Berliner has, however, collected abundant
collateral evidence to show that “ George Pearce,” who died in
the Melbourne Hospital as a pauper was really “ George Patteson,”
who left England in 1853, because of a family quarrel. The
estate will now pass to the next of kin. Such is a specimen of the
romance of real life which Mr. Berliner is from time to time called
upon to deal with. He has already received numerous testi-
monials as to the satisfactory manner in which the business is
conducted.
TESTIMONIALS.
3, Nicholson -street, Melbourne,
9 th October, 1866.
Sir, — I have much pleasure in testifying to the efficient and clever
manner in which you have traced the evidence of the death of Mr. George
Patteson.
The case was a most difficult one, and reflects great credit on the intelli-
gence and zeal displayed by yourself and staff.
Messrs. Rabone Bros., of Birmingham, who requested me to make
inquiries for Mr. Patteson, have expressed themselves highly satisfied at
the result. I remain, yours truly,
(Signed) H. BYRON MOORE.
Mr. Otto Berliner.
Geelong, 13 th October, 1866.
Otto Berliner, Esq., Melbourne.
Dear Sir, — I have the pleasure to forward you the enclosed note re-
ceived from Messrs. Rabone Bros. & Co., of Birmingham, on whose account
and at whose instructions you have instituted and completed the inquiry re


Geo. Patteson and his fate. Trusting this will prove fully satisfactory to
you, I have the honour to he, dear Sir, yours very truly,
ALEX. G. WALLACE.
Birmingham, 25 th August, 1866.
Dear Sir, — We have great pleasure in bearing testimony to the zeal and
ability you have shown, in condncting in so intelligent and business-like a
manner, the investigations concerning the late Mr. George Patteson, and
beg on the part of the executors to express their entire satisfaction with the
care and acumen you have displayed. We are, dear Sir, your obedient
servants
(Signed) RABONE BROS. & CO.
Mr. Otto Berliner.
This is to certify that we, the undersigned, Abraham Dixon and George
Jabet, being the trustees and executors named and appointed in and by the
last will and testament of Edward Wilson Rabone, of Birmingham Heath,
in the county of Warwick, in England, gentleman, deceased, have employed
Mr. Otto Berliner, of Melbourne, in Australia, to discover George Patteson,
a nephew of the said E. W. Rabone, and a legatee of a large sum of money
under the said will, and that the said Mr. Otto Berliner appears to us to
have conducted his inquiries in the said matter in a very careful, painstaking
and business-like manner, and with all due dispatch and economy, and that
we are perfectly satisfied with the steps which he has taken to discover the
said George Patteson.
Dated Birmingham, September 24, 1866.
Arm. Dixon, ) Executors of E. N.
Geo. Jabet, ) Rabone’s Estate.
Mr. Otto Berliner.
POCKET-PICKING.
Thomas Jackson pleaded not guilty to a charge of picking the
pocket of Sarah Anne Stump. The offence was committed in a
Simpson’s-road omnibus, the prisoner having sat next to the
prosecutrix. Soon after he got out she missed her purse. Another
passenger ran after the prisoner, and found him with the purse
in a right-of-way off Smith-street. The prisoner escaped, but was
subsequently arrested by Detective Berliner. The jury found the
prisoner guilty of receiving, and he was sentenced to three years’
hard labour upon the roads. The prisoner had been convicted
on three previous occasions.
CRIMINALS ARRESTED.
Detectives Kennedy and Berliner have succeeded in arresting a
very notorious criminal. His name is Charles Brown, alias
Johnson. The cause of his being wanted is the commission of a


highway robbery under arras, on the lower diggings, in the month
of July last. He will be brought before the Wahgunyah Bench
on Thursday,
CHARGE OF FORGING AND UTTERING.
Robert D. Garland was charged with being accessory to forging
and uttering a cheque for which was presented at the
Bank of Victoria in April last. The name forged on the cheque
was that of Sargood, King and Sargood. Detective Berliner
stated that if the Bench would grant a remand he should be able
to prove that the cheque in question was forged by the prisoner.
The prisoner, who was said to have been a bank clerk at Mary-
borough, was remanded for a week.
STEALING FROM A DWELLING.
James Wilson, alias Jackson, was charged with stealing a watch,
brooch, &c., from William Marshall, of Clayton’s Hill.
The prisoner pleaded guilty.
This robbery was committed on Monday night.
Mr. Dunne said that the prisoner had been repeatedly convicted
of most serious offences.
Detective Berliner deposed that he arrested the prisoner in the
Ovens district for robbing a jeweller’s shop in iB6O ; he was then
discharged, but was sent to the gaol as a ticket-of-leave holder,
having received a sentence of four years at Geelong for forgery.
He was again arrested in Ballarat in 1862 for robbing a jeweller’s
shop, but acquitted. After leaving Ballarat he was arrested at
Geelong and got six months’ imprisonment. Other convictions
were also recounted, and the detective added that Sir W. Stawell
had complimented prisoner on the defences made by him.
The prisoner said he had no extenuating circumstances to urge.
He had been, he said, sentenced for forgery, but was only guilty
of uttering; and he had been associated with those whose career
was a series of crime, and hearing their accounts of their achieve-
ments, and coming forth penniless, he conceived the idea of
gaining or in order to commence business, and hence
was led into the career that brought him to the dock. He now
saw the folly of his course, and hoped to retrieve the character he
once had, and abandon the course he had unwisely followed. He
threw himself on the mercy of the Court.
His Honour observed that the prisoner had a penchant for


jewellers’ shops, and had been successful in evading punishment
previously. But justice to society forbad the passing of a light
sentence on him. He was then sentenced to three years on the
roads.
ROBBERY UNDER ARMS.
John Thompson and George Williams were arraigned fo\
assaulting and robbing one John Angelton, on the night of the
14th September last. Williams pleaded “ Guilty,” saying that he
had never seen Thompson before. He was then remanded.
Thompson pleaded “ Not Guilty.”
This robbery took place at about ten minutes after eight o’clock
at night on the Kew-road, near the Johnston-street Bridge. The
prosecutor, awardsman at the Yarra Bend Asylum, was walking
along at the time and place indicated, when two men appeared
from a cutting at the road-side. One of them, believed by the
prosecutor to be Thompson, drew a “ pepperbox ” revolver and
presented it at Angelton’s head, intimating that he had better
remain quiet and give up his money. He carried a stick, which
Williams _ wrenched from his hand, and then this latter ruffian
robbed him of some silver, Thompson keeping the revolver pre-
sented. When the rifling was over Angelton was allowed to go.
He at once went to the police, who subsequently arrested the two
prisoners in Leicester-street, Carlton, where they lived as neigh-
bours. In the room where Thompson was taken a pepperbox
revolver, answering the description given by Angelton, was found,
capped and loaded. Both the prisoners were shown to Angelton
among a number of others, but he identified both clearly.
The jury returned a verdict of “ Guilty” without hesitation.
John Thompson (the prisoner who had just been convicted)
and Joseph Parkinson were next arraigned for attempting to rob
one Bernard Hutton, under arms, on the night of 17 th September
last. When called upon to plead, Parkinson said he was “ Not
Guilty.” Thompson said that there was no good in his saying
anything, as justice would not be done him.
The Court ordered a plea of “Not Guilty” to be recorded.
Mr. Hutton was a baker, living at Robertson-street, Colling-
wood. On the Saturday night, or rather Sunday morning, in
question he was walking through Carlton Gardens, and just as he
was nearing the western gate he was met by two men —Thompson
and another man, whom he believed to be Parkinson, but was not
absolutely sure. Thompson held a “ pepperbox ” revolver, and
said “ Stand.” Hutton said “ What for ?” “ Your money,” said
Thompson. “ I’ve only eighteen pence ” replied the other, on


which the robber laconically observed that he was a liar. He also
told him to hold his hands up, or he would blow the roof of his
head off. Hutton complied, when Thompson said to his com-
panion, “ Collar him, and turn him over.” Parkinson then made
a rush at the prosecutor, who closed with his man, shouting,
“ Murder,” and “ Police.” This alarmed the ruffians, who ran off.
Hutton meeting Sergeant Joyce, told him of the affair, and even-
tually Detectives Black and Berliner arrested the two prisoners in
the same room, both in the act of dressing. In this room the
“ pepperbox ” revolver, capped and loaded, was found. On the
way to the watchhouse Parkinson gave two accounts of where he
had been on the night of the robbery.
The jury found both prisoners “ Guilty.”
In answer to a question by the Court,
Detective Black said that Thompson, who was a ticket-of-leave
holder, had once stabbed an arresting constable in four places.
Parkinson had previously been sentenced to five years on the
roads for assault and robbery.
Thompson was sentenced to five years’ hard labour at Pent-
ridge for each offence, both sentences separately cumulative on
the sentence under which he obtained his ticket-of-leave. Williams
and Parkinson were each sentenced to hard labour at Pentridge
for seven years.
THE FIRST GOLD COINING CASE IN VICTORIA,
AUSTRALIA.
COUNTERFEIT COINING.
Carlo Galbretto and Francesco Melange were charged with the
counterfeit coining of six sovereigns, at Taradale on the 6th of
June. Mr. Leech defended the prisoners.
In opening the case, the Crown Prosecutor produced a quantity
of coining apparatus found on the premises of one of the prisoners,
with various metals, containing marks of coins, with spurious
money which had been analyzed.
Detective Otto Berliner, stationed at Daylesford, stated that he
searched Galbretto’s house, about five o’clock on the evening of
the 7th June. When he got into the house, he saw the two
prisoners leaning on a table in the first room. On seeing him
they ran out. Witness followed them, and found them at the back
of the premises. He asked Galbretto what they were doing. He
replied that the other man had only come to see him for a minute.
Galbretto was taken in charge by Inspector Whitefoord. Witness
afterwards found six sovereigns, and three half sovereigns, in the
place where he first saw the prisoners. Witness searched the


premises. On the table where the prisoners were, witness found
the board produced, covered with sand, with indentures in it
which fitted the sovereigns. All the remaining articles before the
Court was also there. There was a crucible on the fire, contain-
ing melted metal. He picked up an unfinished half-sovereign, and
a puncheon with the Queen’s head visible upon it. These articles
were in the two front rooms of the house. When he arrested the
other prisoner on the Sunday night, he asked for an interpreter.
He produced a sovereign he received from Mrs. Doran, at Win-
ter’s Flat, and from Mrs. Catabini, which he gave to Dr. Mac-
adam.
By Mr. Leech : Galbretto occupied the house which I searched.
Malengo stated that he had lived with the other man five
or six days. My attention had before been called to the
house in question, as suspicious. The first time I went into the
house was with the search warrant. Found in the house six
sovereigns, and three half-sovereigns. These were all the coins of
any kind found in the house. The nine produced are the same,
two of each lot having been assayed. Found the coins at the
back of the chimney, outside the house, where the prisoners
retired on my first approach. The vyce was in the first compart-
ment, which looked like a working room. Have been in jeweller’s
workshops, but never before saw the metal produced anywhere.
Inspector Whiteford only accompanied me into the house. Never
before saw a board like that produced.
Caleb Whiteford accompanied the last witness to the house of
Galbretto. He found the vyce produced, with marks of letters
upon it.
By Mr. Leech : The coins were marked and left in the posses-
sion of Berliner, who took them to Dr. Macadam. I showed the
coins to Mr. Edwards, the assayer, but they had been previously
marked. I left them with Mr. Edwards.
Pietro de Stephani was examined through an interpreter (Henry
Alessio), and said on the 6th J une he received a sovereign from
Melange, at Guildford, for a glass of ale, giving him 19s. 6d.
change. [Great amusement was occasioned by an attempt made
by His Honor to get the witness to speak English. The only
question to which he could answer was as to the price of a glass
of ale.] He marked the sovereign, upon being told that it was
spurious, and sold it to a countryman for 7s. 6d.
By Mr. Leech : Heard it stated that spurious sovereigns were
in circulation a day or two after receiving the one in question. He
had put it in a compartment of the till by itself.
Francesco Pietro, miner at Guildford, proved having purchased


the spurious sovereign from the last witness, and having sold it to
another man for 10s.
By Mr. Leech : A mark was put upon the sovereign on the 30th
June, at Daylesford, by himself, at the request of the detective.
Giovanni Robarto, shoemaker at Guildford, purchased the
sovereign for 10s. from the last witness, and afterwards passed it
to Miss Jack, in mistake. The sovereign got out of my possession
in mistake, by being in the same pocket with two good coins.
Sophia Jack received the sovereign, believing it a good one.
Francis Williams gave her change for it, and passed it to Eliza-
beth Doran, who gave it to Detective Berliner.
David Sayers, carrier, saw Melango attempt to pass a bad
sovereign at the Five Flags. It was proposed to lock him up, but
witness objected to this, having known the man for a number of
years. He afterwards produced a shilling to pay for the drink.
Andrew Curucli, interpreter at Daylesford, stated that on the
9th June he went to the Detective Office, to interpret for the
prisoners. He cautioned them, and Francisco said on the 9th June
he was several times in the house of Carlo, whom he was watching
at work at the piece of board produced, and that he saw there a
round piece of metal like a half-sovereign. He was not aware
what Carlo was doing. He further stated that vfhen the police
came in, Carlo threw down something at the back, which in falling
sounded like metal. Before the police came in he had been
examining some gold coins he found in a match box, and wanted
to discover whether they were genuine. Albretto said he carried
on the trade of a jeweller, for which the apparatus found on his
premises was necessary.
Dr. Macadam, Government Analytical Chemist, said: On the
20th June I received from Berliner the sovereigns and half-sove-
reigns before mentioned. They were an exact imitation of the
Sydney Mint sovereigns of 1859. One of the three half-sovereigns
was unfinished, and quite rugged at the sides. The sovereigns
consisted of gold, copper, and silver, nearly in proportion to one-
third_ of each. They were only about two-thirds the weight of the
genuine coin. Their specific gravity was 11.4, while that of a real
sovereign is 17.4.
This closed the case for the Crown. Before addressing the
jury for the defence, Mr. Leech asked His Honor if there was any
case to go to the jury, under the section of the Act under which
the Crown had laid their information. He did not think it was
shown that the prisoners had “falsely made or counterfeited ” the
coins, although the apparatus might have been in their possession.
His Honor thought it a question for the jury, and Mr. Leech pro-
ceeded with his defence. He said Galbretto had purchased the
tools of a working jeweller, which fairly accounted for their being


in his possession, and there was nothing among them that was not
liable to be used in a jeweller’s business, He contended that
many doubts and circumstances had arisen in the case, quite con-
sistent with the prisoners’ innocence, and more especially of
Melango.
His Honor, in summing up, said the question was whether the
prisoners were guilty upon the evidence, and not whether or not
a. quantity of spurious money had been circulated through the
district, as had been stated.
The jury found both prisoner’s guilty, after some considerable
deliberation, and they were remanded for sentence.
Sentence, 7 years roads each of the prisoners.
DAVID YOUNG CONVICTED FOR THE GRAHAM
MURDER.
(To the Editor of the Argus.)
Sir, — The last act of the above awful tragedy has been played out;
the life of that unhappy man has been forfeited as an atonement
for the dreadful crime for which he has been convicted by a jury of
his country. Almost in the agony of death his guilt remained
denied by him; and to the solemn appeal that was made to him
on the verge of eternity by Archdeacon Crawford, calling on him
“to tell the truth ere his soul passed into the presence of his
Maker,” he gave the most positive denial to the charge of having
been the murderer of Margaret Graham.
It is truly said public opinion is divided as to his guilt, and
many will now believe that, instead of David Young being the
murderer of that unfortunate female, he himself has been made the
victim of the most odious and dangerous of all murders—a
judicial murder; brought upon him by false swearing, to appease
the fury of his enemies and the ill-founded clamour and outcry of
the public.
His fate, however much we may deplore it, cannot but have the
beneficial effect of causing the people of this colony to consider
whether he has had a fair and impartial trial, and whether the
criminal laws of this colony, passed expressly for the purpose of
keeping the convict population of New South Wales in subjection,
should remain on the statute book of Victoria, or be brought
into complete harmony with those o L the^odibeT'CQMntTjr,, Which
are as near perfections .hrnirana'4egisdatdonfcan/ ihhke it ha oveH
hah beeri) !currently orbportMr nthatfj rthe iproaetitieof(f against
Vdtmg has) [qo?tnthejlaitg>€i
tine* long pmrrse of tihe .Giwemmeht (had alEthdin infludhxret directed


against him. At his trial, besides the Crown prosecutor, Mr,
Aspinall was associated with him, with Mr. Gurner (the Crown
solicitor), Mr, Standish (the head of the police), Mr. Nicolson (the
chief of the detectives), and Mr. Reid and Mr, Culken (of the
Castlemaine and Daylesford police), all of whom were arrayed
against him in close compact in court, with forty-three witnesses
subpoenaed by them to bear witness against him. The nature of
their testimony, their names and places of residence, and the
occupations of the larger portion of them (viz,, all that had not
been examined at the police court), instead of having been com-
municated to me as counsel for the accused, as was done in a
precisely similar case that was tried in London (that of Palmer,
for the murder of Cook), were all of them kept from me, and until
they appeared in the witness-box I was entirely ignorant of the
evidence the majority of them had to testify against the prisoner.
Of this I think I had just right to complain. Surely if a suitor in a
civil action can demand particulars of the plaintiff’s claim against
him, a prisoner charged with the highest crime, for which his life
may be forfeited, should not be kept in ignorance of the evidence
that will be brought against him, in order that he may have an
opportunity of rebutting it, if it be in his power to do so.
Against this array of talent and ability, fortified by the power and
influence of the Government, I had singly and unaided for three entire
days to contend. The prisoner, without money and without friends,
had not means to provide himself with witnesses for his defence.
Mr. Geake, his solicitor, applied, under these circumstances, to the
Crown solicitor for the small sum of to defray the expense of a
material witness for the defence, which was refused him ; in con-
sequence of which he was obliged to give up all idea of procuring
evidence in his favour on his trial, and it is, therefore, not too much
to say he was condemned unheard.
On the present occasion I will not attempt to analyse the evidence
of the prosecution further than that which had reference to the pipe
—the most material part of it—which, in my opinion, was decidedly
in favour of the prisoner. Dr. Doolittle, Irwin, the constable, and
Mr. Graham were the first persons to visit the house after the
discovery of the murder; the two first, under the impression that
Margaret Graham had committed suicide by cutting her throat,
made a minute search for the knife, the instrument of her
death, the constable holding the candle. Neither Dr.
Doolittle nor Mr. Graham discovered any pipe, and the con-
stable, Irwin, swore positively there was not one, otherwise he must
have seen it. Beyond their testimony, Sergeant Whelan, and
Constables Dawson and Tandy, who were ordered to take
possession of the cottage, could and did not see any pipe ; and it
was not until several days after the murder, when many persons


had been admitted into the house, that the pipe which was pro-
duced at the trial was first discovered. Against this evidence
conflicting testimony was produced, the whole of it, however, of a
circumstantial nature, and the weakest for which the life of any
prisoner had been, as I believe, ever previously forfeited, but for
which David Young has suffered death.
Let me now seriously ask the public to consider whether David
Young has had a fair and impartial trial ? Is it just that the pro-
secutor should have the advantage of the most eminent
counsel, his witnesses forthcoming, the nature of their evidence
withheld from the prisoner’s counsel, and the whole of their
expenses paid by the Government; and that the prisoner should
be called upon to defend himself with one counsel only, without
the means of procuring any witnesses, from the want of funds,
against such formidable opponents, and so powerful an influence ?
Is the boasted security of the law common to us all, or is it not,
under the existing system of the criminal jurisprudence of this
colony, practically denied to the poor; creating a power of mea-
suring the civil rights of the rich and destitute persons by the
extent and paucity of their means ?
Is it right that the Attorney-General should hold the three-fold
offices of grand jury, public prosecutor, and judge of the last court
(with a necessary two-fold impression of prejudice in his mind
against the prisoner from the exercise of these two first offices),
sitting in judgment on him as a member of the Executive Council,
deciding on his fate, even on his death? Are not these offices
wholly inconsistent and incompatible with each other ?
In the foregoing observations which I have made in reference
to the recent trial of David Young, and against what I conceive
to be the manifest imperfections of the penal laws of this colony
under which he was tried and has suffered, I disclaim everything
like personality. I impute nothing to the learned Attorney-
General, for whom I entertain a profound respect, who is only
administering the laws as he found them—suitable, perhaps, to
the former degraded state of New South Wales as a penal settle-
ment, but incompatible with, and a reproach to, the present
advanced moral and social condition of this territory; and although
its inhabitants place great reliance on his integrity, I would beg to
remind him of their present injustice and cruelty, and that he
cannot answer for his successors, who might prostitute the
authority of his high office, as it now exists, for the most cruel,
unjust, and corrupt purposes.
Having been brought up in a religious reverence for the laws of
England—laws which are founded on reason, and based on
humanity—l am grieved to find the criminal justice of this colony
stand on a footing so different from that of my own country.


Believing that the time has arrived when the penal laws of
Victoria should be assimilated to those of the mother country, it
would truly rejoice me to find the Attorney-General of Victoria
inspired, like those distinguished statesmen and lawyers, Sir Samuel
Romilly, Lord Campbell, and Lord Brougham, by an elevated
sense of his high official and legislative duties, and directing his
mind to the amelioration of the criminal laws of the colony by
making their liberality keep pace with the demands of justice—by
enlarging the system of natural justice, and thus rendering it an
enlightened principle worthy of the free people of this enlightened
colony, and of the present enlightened age. Then, indeed, he
would confer an incalculable blessing on this highly favoured land,
and a perpetual honour on himself; and then, indeed, even the
most destitute of human beings, like the unfortunate David Young,
might rely on having the common blessings of law, justice, and
mercy secured to them.
I am, Sir, yours obediently,
Pearson Thompson,
Counsel for the deceased David Young.
Daylesford, Aug. 25.
On 25th January, we find a report in the South Australian .Re-
gister of the suicide of an Italian named Antonio Silvestro, who
called at the police-station, and told the officer in charge that he
had just taken the contents of a bottle of strychnine, which he pro-
duced. Antonio Silvestro had fits and convulsions, and during
the intervals of these, the report states that the police officer ob-
tained the following statements : —“ That ten years ago, at
Castlemaine, he, Antonio Silvestro, committed a crime which
placed his life in jeopardy, and ever since the fugitive had wandered
about the wild bush, never venturing near a town or any place of
human habitation, except occasionally in an outlying shepherd’s
hut, fearing detection. The murderer lived on wild animals that
he could catch, and such roots and fruits as he could find in the
desolate and hungry Australian bush, till he at last resolved to end
a life of misery.”
The paragraph further mentions that there being no magistrate at
Fowler’s Bay at the time, no inquest could be held, and all the officer
was able to do was to bury the body and travel to Streaky Bay
and report the circumstance.
It further says :—“ We presume the police will lose no time in
communicating to the proper authorities in Victoria the particulars
of this case. There is something strangely sad and instructive in
the narrative of Antonio Silvestro, told as it was in snatches whilst
the poison was doing its deadly work. The horror experienced;
by the murderer—the ever present 1 dneaktf Hast 1 Jan I unguabded


moment he should let fall some word or give some token of the
fatal secret locked within his breast, has been often and vividly
described, and the brief story of this foreigner, dying friendless
and by his own hand in the very outskirts of civilisation. We are
not aware of the nature of his offence, but that it was one of
particular gravity is evident. Had it not been so, he would
surely not have banished himself from the haunts of men, skulking
through the bush, living on game and roots, and such other
eatables as he could himself procure, never venturing near any
human habitation except in times of extremity, and then selecting
the shepherds’ huts for fear the law should lay its ruthless hand
upon him.”
These are the particulars of the account. We have awaited the
result of the report to the proper authorities in Victoria up to the
present. Our /eaders will remember that in 1863 —ten years ago
—there was one murder case at Daylesford, in the Castlemaine
district; a young woman, named Margaret Graham, was found
murdered in her dwelling. A man named David Young was
prosecuted and convicted for this murder, but up to the last
moment the man denied his guilt. In this he was borne out by
his clergyman, the Rev. the Dean Crawford, of Castlemaine, and
by Mr. Otto Berliner, who at that period was a member of the
detective department, and had been specially called up from
Melbourne to assist Superintendent Nicholson in the inquiry into
the murder case. We will not go into particulars of the case this
time, awaiting further news from South Australia, and from the
proper authorities in Victoria. We only wish to point out that
Berliner communicated to the Chief Secretary some time previous
to Young’s execution his belief that Young was innocent, and that
an Italian was the murderer of Margaret Graham. Mr. Berliner
refused afterwards a reward tendered to him for Young’s convic-
tion. All we wish at present to know is, what other murder was
committed in 1863 in the Castlemaine district? Was Antonio
Silvestro not an inmate of the hotel at Blanket Flat where Margaret
Graham was once a dancing girl ? Is Antonio Silvestro not the
man who last met Margaret Graham in Albert-street, Daylesford,
and had a dispute with her a few hours previous to her death, in
the presence of Anne Jewett, the witness found by Detective
Berliner, who was not examined during the trial of the Young
murder case ?
In a letter that appeared in the Age a few days ago, Mr. Otto
Berliner revived the old question of the guilt of David Young.
We are aware that Mr. Berliner has very superior qualifications
for the profession he has adopted. When in the detective force
he was the best educated man in it, inferior to none in point of


acumen, and having, moreover, the crowning merit of being
thoroughly honest. But he was too independent to submit to the
promotion of those he knew to be inferior to himself in every
respect, while he was left at the foot of the ladder. Hence, he at
length threw up his appointment in the force, and has since kept a
private inquiry office of his own. In this change of position he
has been fortunate enough to prove his sagacity on more than one
occasion, and to win golden opinions from such as have had
occasion to avail themselves of his services. But this is a digres-
sion, and only referred to as a proof that the opinions of such
man on any subject relating to our criminals is not lightly to be
rejected. Mr. Berliner, as is well known, was engaged with
two or three other members of the detective force in endea-
vouring to discover the murderer of Margaret Graham, and
he has never since concealed his belief that the wrong man
was executed. Moreover, he repeats, in the communication
referred to, his conviction that the life of the prisoner who was
hung was deliberately sworn away. There is no mistaking the
allusion in the words about “ persons who had acted as shoeblacks
and orderlies, being made first-class officers for swearing to a pipe
to hang an innocent man. And when he was discharged after being
tried for manslaughter, permitted to leave the force with an income
of per annum.” Now, we have no doubt whatever that Mr.
Berliner is under the impression he has stated, but it is a fearful
charge, nevertheless, to bring against anyone —that he deliberately
perjured himself for the sake of promotion or money, when his
doing so, moreover, led to the execution of a person for a dreadful
crime that he had not committed. If the individual pointed to by
Mr. Berliner took a false oath in reference to the finding of the pipe
in Margaret Graham’s house, the person in question himself deserves
to be suspended from a gallows as high as Haman’s. Mr. Berliner
has expressed his private idea of the facts, but we do not think he
was justified in making such an allegation without much stronger
evidence than he can possibly bring forward. No doubt there have
always been people who have denied the guilt of Young,
but the great majority of the police as well as the public have always
held that he was “ the right man in the right place” when he stood
on the drop at Castlemaine. There were, doubtless, some defects
in the chain of evidence against him, but on the whole everything
indicated him to be the violator and the assassin. He had been
transported for an outrage on a woman, and he had attempted a
criminal assault on another one in the Daylesford district, before he
was arrested on the capital charge. He had been seen in con-
versation with his victim the night she was killed, and he apparently
knew that her husband would be absent till a late hour. There
were marks on his clothing corresponding with those on the white-


wash of the chimney that he entered, and if we remember, the nails
in his boots would make scratches like those that were noticed on
the stones. Moreover, he disappeared from the neighbourhood after
the tragedy, and as soon as he saw the trooper that was in search of
him, doubled like a fox to escape. The only reasonable doubt in
the case was whether he had time to pass the house of the poor
creature and back again to Glenlyon, and it was shown that
though expedition would be required, the distance might have been
traversed. Under these circumstances there could be no rational
hesitation in fixing upon him as the criminal, although the pro-
duction of the pipe made the case stronger. And while we feel
substantial justice was done to a great malefactor, we trust that Mr.
Berliner’s sense of personal wrong has prompted him to make an
unfounded accusation.
{To the Editor of the Mercury and Express.)
Sir, —I have this day perused your leading article, dated 25th
May, 1876. I beg to thank you deeply for your kind expressions
towards me, considering I am absent from your district nearly
fourteen years. But your remark “ that my sense of personal
wrong did prompt me to make an unfounded accusation,” I beg
emphatically to deny.
During Young’s trial I was at Auckland, New Zealand. On my
return from that colony, I, through a gentleman (who formerly,
also, resided at Daylesford) communicated at once with Sir James
M‘Culloch, This took place two day’s previous to Young’s
execution, and I remained a member of the detective department
for many months after. I met Captain Standish and Mr. Nicolson,
but our interview proved useless, however. I ask the question, how
came it to pass that I was neither punished nor reprimanded even
for communicating with the Chief Secretary, and passing my
superior officers of the day, which amounts to a gross act of breach
of discipline ? No, they went further; I was directed to state in
a report what reward I claimed ! I did so, stating that had David
Young been the culprit, then the whole of the reward would have
been due to me, as I traded David Young a few hours after my
arrival from Melbourne, when Messrs. Nicolson, Reid, Detectives
O’Rourke and Walker, Sergeant Wheelan, Trooper Brady, &c.,
&c., failed to do so during the time previous to my arrival.
However, I stated my opinion did not change upon the subject,
and I considered the reward blood money, and a useless expen-
diture from the public purse. Although I expressed all that in
writing, think of my surprise when I saw my name in the columns
of the Argus, “Detective Otto Berliner, £5 ss. reward, for ability
displayed in the conviction of David Young.” But I met the


trick on its deserts. Sir, you will find in the public notices of the
Argus, Age, and Herald (daily at that time), that I advertised
paying the £5 ss. to a poor woman (unknown to me) who was
laid up suffering from dropsy for many years. Therefore, when
you read this explanation, and give it to the world, you will find
that I stood forward to rescue an innocent man from the scaffold
at the risk of losing my position. What motive could I have had
at that period? What good could David Young have done me?
At that period I was keeping a mother and sisters by monthly
instalments on the Continent, and had I been dismissed (which I
ought to have been if I was wrong) all these would have moment-
arily suffered. What benefit could this have been to me ?
Believe me, Sir, from the depth of my heart, that my sense of
personal wrong will never permit me to be vindictive. Let the
Government appoint a proper Board, and I will prove to them that
David Young never murdered Margaret Graham.
Yours faithfully,
OTTO BERLINER.
Melbourne, Bth June, 1876.
The positive statement of Mr. Otto Berliner, that the man
David Young, who was executed for the murder of Margaret
Graham at Daylesford, was not the murderer, and that he can
point to who was the real criminal, or at least prove an alibi for
Young, demands that the matter should be enquired into without
delay. Mr. Berliner is too experienced a man in detective
business to make so deliberate a statement without having good
grounds upon which to go, and it will send a thrill of horror
through the public mind to think that an innocent man should
have suffered such a fate through the miscarriage of evidence
which was meagre, purely circumstantial, and having turned upon
the identity of a pipe found near the murdered body. We know
that —
Justice, while she winks at crimes,
Stumbles on innocence sometimes.
and it may have been so in this case. At all events, the feeling
should either be removed by the results of an examination
by a Board of Mr. Berliner’s proofs, or a grave lesson should
be impressed upon the public as to the necessity of the greatest
possible care in the weighing of evidence where no direct proof of
guilt is to be obtained. It would, no doubt, be some satisfaction
to the friends of the dead man if it can be shown, even at this
late date, and when he has suffered on the scaffold for a crime he
was believed to have committed, that he was innocent. Mr.
Berliner should have his Board of Inquiry, and that at once.


THE ADVENTURES OF WILLIS.
A correspondent furnishes to aDaylesford journal the following
particulars connected with the search for, and the apprehension
of, Willis, who has been committed for trial on three separate
charges in connection with the defalcations in the Tarnagulla
branch of the Colonial Bank :—“Willis left Tarnagulla on Thurs-
day, 13th June; on Saturday, 15th, he arrived at Gisborne, and
stopped at Mr. Gardiner’s hotel. From that house he sent a boy
with his horse and a note to a Malmsbury hotelkeeper. He then
walked from Gisborne to Melbourne on foot. When near the
Digger’s Rest toll-gate, he asked permission from a shepherd
named Brown to lie down for a few hours, and was refused.
Although very weary at the time, he walked on to Keilor, and
called at the Waggoners’ Arms Hotel, where he said he had made
a bet with a man in Ballarat for a walking match. He remained
there that night. On Sunday he walked into Melbourne, and
stopped with a friend in Fitzroy three nights. On Wednesday,
the 19th, he went to the house of his mother-in-law on Emerald
Hill. Willis had a very narrow escape at Gisborne on Saturday.
Detective Black was there on an arson case at Tea-tree Flat.
Black did not mention to Gardiner anything about Willis, other-
wise he must have been at once put on Willis’s track. Mr.
Inspector Green traced Willis on the road to town on Monday,
the 17th, and gave information that Willis had been seen, clean
shaved, near Kyneton. The bank authorities not being able to
get any positive information up to Tuesday, the 18th, engaged
Mr. Otto Berliner, who traced Willis into Melbourne. The detec-
tives did not see Willis enter the house; he was there from
Wednesday to Saturday. When a telegram with the proper
description arrived, search was at once made, and Willis found.”
We may add that Willis met his wife at Emerald Hill, and that
he urged her to go and inform upon him, that she might obtain
the reward for herself and her children, but she declined to do so.
THE LATE FIRE AT EMERALD-HILL.
An inquest was held on Thursday last, at the South Park Hotel,
before Dr. Youl, the city coroner, into the origin of the fire which
destroyed a grocer’s shop in Moray-street, Emerald-hill, on March
3, and caused the death of a child, named Rosetta Hay.
Mr. Roy appeared for Mr. Finlayson, the owner of the shop,
and Mr. Otto Berliner for the Adelaide Fire and Marine Insurance
Company, at whose instance the inquest was held.


Donald Finlayson deposed that on March 3, he carried on
business as a grocer in a shop in Moray-street, but did not live on
the premises, but in another shop which he kept in the same
street. His stock was insured in the Adelaide Insurance Office
for the policy being renewed in May 30, 1869, for one
year. The day after the fire he sent in a claim to the company
for On the evening of the 3rd he left the shop—No. 220
—the one that was destroyed, about half-past 8 o’clock, his
daughter Sophia remaining in charge until it was time to shut up.
She was the only person in his employ who was in the shop for an
hour before he left. A boy named Ward had been in his employ,
but had not been on the premises for an hour before he left. The
value of the stock he left in the store was It consisted of
flour, kerosene, bottles of pickles, and other articles usually found
in a grocer’s shop. He had in stock 4001 b. of flour, some in tins,
some weighed, and some in bags. There were two or three drums
of kerosene in the centre of the shop against the partition. They
had been in store about a month. The account-books, invoices,
and the policy of insurance were destroyed at the fire, but a few
leaves of the books were afterwards found by some children.
Cross-examined. —After leaving the shop he called on several of
his neighbours, whose assistance he was desirous of obtaining in
getting up a lodge. He was talking to a friend shortly after 10
o’clock, when he heard the fire-bell ring. He was in the habit of
placing a barrel against the back door of the shop, but could not
recollect if he had done so on the night of the fire. Some soldiers
were living on the premises.
By the Jury,—The kerosene was in drums containing four
gallons each. After he left the shop he did not return again
until after the fire broke out.
Sophia Finlayson, the daughter of the last witness, said that
after her father left several customers came into the shop, but that
none of them were smoking. She last saw Ward about the place
at dusk. Before leaving she closed the back door, and placed a
barrel containing bread against it. There were two drums of
kerosene in the shop, of which she did not remember to have sold
any on the night of the fire. Her father told her to put away the
matches, which during the day were kept under the counter. She
closed the shop at 10 o’clock, and went home, and about eight
minutes after heard the alarm of “ Fire ” given. Mrs. Hay, the
wife of one of the soldiers living in the place, came and told her.
The kerosene came into the shop the day before the fire. It was
usual to have two or three drums at a time.
Andrew Ward, an errand boy in the employ of Mr. Finlayson,
said he left the shop about half-past 8 on the evening of the fire.
There were then in the shop three drums of kerosene unopened


a^^ir° ne °^ en * n use * matc^es were kept generally on a
shelf above the kerosene. He slept on the premises. He brought
a bag of flour to the shop two days before the fire. Two or three
days after the fire he found some leaves of an account-book lying
about the premises. On March 2, he brought three small bags of
sugar into the shop. The shop seemed as well stocked as usual
at the time it was burnt. There was flour in the bin when he
brought up the bag.
Donald Curtain, a constable, proved that the fire broke out
about eight minutes past 10 o’clock.
Thomas M’Gregor, a grocer, deposed, that about 10 o’clock on
the nighty of the 3rd instant, he looked out of his house and saw
Fmlayson s shop on fire. He ran down to the place, and pushed
open the back door without difficulty and got inside. There was
no barrel against the back door. On entering the shop he found
it on fire, all the partitions behind the counter being in flames, so
that it was not possible to put it out. The fire was not burning
more fiercely in one place than another, but the place looked as if
it had been set on fire. He would not have given more than
all the stock he saw in the shop, and he had been a grocer
for a considerable time, and consequently in the habit of valuing
goods. He saw no bags of flour.
Cross-examined—The fire was confined to the shop when he
first went in. It suggested the appearance of a piece of wood set
on fire after being sprinkled with spirits of wine. The shop looked
empty.
Joseph Bickle stated that about xo o’clock on the night of the
fire he heard the door of Finlayson’s shop slammed, and saw Sophia
Finlayson immediately afterwards rush into the middle of the road,
and either run or walk home. About five minutes afterwards the
place was on fire.
John Murphy, a constable, deposed that he had been frequently
in Finlayson’s shop, and had noticed latterly that the stock was
decreasing. He reported the matter to his sergeant, remarking at
the same time that he thought the place would be burned before
long. On the day before the fire he looked into the shop, and
noticed that there was not a third of the goods in it that he had
seen there before. The shelves were completely stripped. He
did not think there was worth of stock in the place.
George Hewitt deposed that he purchased the remains of the
fire for £1 7s. 6d., and on turning over the debris he noticed that
the flooring of some of the boards near where the kerosene was
said to have been placed, smelt of kerosene. He did not see more
than three dozen bottles about the place. (The inventory which
was put in showed that many dozen bottles had been destroyed.)
This concluded the case for the insurance company.


Hubert Tope, a solicitor’s errand-boy, who was examined for
the defence, stated that he had left Mr. Finlayson’s employ about
a year ago, but was in the habit of assisting him in his shop occa-
sionally at night. On the evening of the fire he went to the shop,
and saw Mr. Finlayson taking in stock. At his request he cleared
out the shelves. He was at work for two hours and a half, and
did not leave the shop until half-past 8. The place seemed to be
well stocked, much as usual. He noticed some sugar in bins, but
did not see any bags of flour. If Mr. Finlayson swore that he and
his daughter were the only persons in the shop for an hour before
half-past 8 it was not true. He could not tell whether it was
Sophia Finlayson or her sister who was in the shop while he was
there. If a grocer of experience swore that the stock in the shop
on the night of the fire was not worth more than jQzo, he could
not say it was untrue.
Mr. J. Roy and Berliner addressed the jury, and prisoner was
committed for trial.
ARREST OF AN AUSTRALIAN ABSCONDER.
A clever capture of an Australian absconder has just been
announced. It appears that in January last a man named Bern-
hard Mass left his business in Sydney, and levanted to Melbourne.
He owed a debt of £lOO to Messrs. Joske & Co., of Melbourne,
and he called on them and gave them a cheque for the amount.
He also owed the same firm £166 17s. 2d., on an acceptance
payable at the City Bank, Sydney, and which would fall due on
the 4th of March. Messrs. Joske & Co., not feeling satisfied about
matters, placed the affair in the hands of Mr. Berliner, manager of
the Private Inquiry Office, 78 Elizabeth-street, who succeeded in
ascertaining that Mass had left for London, in the Pride of the
Ocean, on the 10th of January, two days before the cheque became
payable. Mr. Berliner was then instructed to adopt measures to
secure his arrest, and, a minute description having been furnished
that gentleman, he communicated with Messrs. Field and Nicholls,
his agents in London, and forwarded them the necessary affidavits
and other documents, stating at the same time that the fugitive had
left his,wife and family behind him in Sydney. Mass managed to
land between Deal and Dover, but he was traced and kept under
surveillance until lie entered the Bank of New South Wales in
London, to get a bill discounted for and where Nicholls
arrested him. We are informed that an arrangement has been
effected by which two officers of the Private Inquiry Office, London,
are appointed by the Imperial Court as officers of the Supreme
Court of Victoria, and that the necessary affidavits and documents
in cases of this nature will receive immediate attention by the
solicitors attached to each respective office.


THE FORDER FRAUDS.
(Argus, Tuesday , September 13th, 1870.)
William Earl Forder, a gentlemanly looking young man, was
charged, on remand, at the City Court, (before Messrs. Sturt,
P.M , and Wilton, J.P.), yesterday, on warrant, with embezzling
£l,BOO, between October, 1869, and May, 1870, in various
sums, the moneys of the firm of Eliza Tinsley, manufacturer of
chains, nails, and rivets, at Sedgeley, near Dudley, in the county
of Stafford. J
Mr. J. H. Dunne, Crown prosecutor, conducted the prose-
cution, but he stated that he did so in his private capacity, and
not officially. Mr. A. Read appeared for the defence, and Mr.
Braham watched the case on behalf of the Maritime General
Credit, Loan, and Discount Company, Swanston-street.
Mr. Dunne, in opening the case, said that the prosecution was
brought under the 138th section of the Criminal Law and Practice
Statute. The prisoner had been sent out by the firm of Eliza
Tinsley to this colony, and had after arrival received consign-
ments from his employers of goods to the value of about ,£B,OOO.
He was advised of the arrival of these goods, and received bills of
lading, forwarded to enable him to dispose of the goods to the
best advantage. He was treated confidentially, and received be-
fore leaving England the sum of £5OO for expenses and costs of
setting up business in the colony, and after landing here he re-
ceived a further sum of £2OO. The prisoner was in receipt of
£250 a year, with all travelling expenses paid. No documents
had been taken improperly and treacherously from the prisoner after
his arrest, as had been stated, the prisoner having, while actuated
by contrition for what he had done, handed over the documents
to the representative of the firm. He had given along with these
documents a written statement of his movements since his arrival
in the colony. The amount of benefit the firm had derived from
the actions of the prisoner might be estimated when it was
stated that he had never done a single thing in their service, and
had never disposed in any legitimate or proper way of their
goods from the moment of his arrival in the country to the present
moment, and, according to his own statement, had wantonly and
recklessly obtained money upon the goods, which money he had
spent and appropriated altogether to his own purpose. The firm
sent out another emyloye named Leonard R. Lloyd, who was em-
powered to conduct prosecutions and otherwise act on behalf of
Mrs Tinsley, who constituted the firm by whom Forder had been
employed. Lloyd found that Forder had left the colony, and
followed him to Morpeth, New South Wales, where Forder, who
was living as Harry Moreton, handed to Lloyd a declaration in


his own handwriting, which was as follows: —“ I, Wm. Earl Forder,
hereby voluntarily make the following statement: —That I
arrived in Melbourne on or about the 2nd July, 1868, as com-
mercial traveller for the firm of Eliza Tinsley, of Sedgeley, near
Dudley, England, at a stated salary of per annum. On or
about the 15th October, 1869, 1 was short of cash, and I went to
the Maritime General Credit Company, of Swanston-street, Mel-
bourne, to obtain an advance on a bill of lading of goods con-
signed to me by the above firm. I saw both Mr. Pilley and Mr.
Pirani, and told them my exact position as regarded the above
firm, and ray want of cash; and I also showed them my letter
of engagement from the above firm, which distinctly states that
ray salary as traveller, to the above firm was ,£250 per annum.
They kept the letter for two or three days, and then made an ad-
vance and returned the letter to me. Upon this consignment,
which was for 1,390 iron casks, and 22 wooden casks, under mark
ET over M in triangle, and valued in London at 4s. 6d.,
and shipped per Niagara, I received two advances. The next
consignment was for 756 iron casks of nails and 21 wooden casks,
under mark ET over 3 in triangle, and valued in London at
os. 3d., and was shipped per White Rose. I received
further advances. The next consignment was for 887 iron kegs,
and 11 wooden cases, and 18 chains, marked ET over 3 in
triangle and M under, and valued in London at 15s. 7d.,
and was shipped per Sea Chief. I received further advances. The
next consignment was for 822 iron casks, 4 cases, and 18 chains,
marked ET over 4 in triangle and M under and valued in London at
l9s. 2d., and was shipped . per Percy. I received
further advances. The next and last consignment I re-
ceived was for 961 iron casks, 3 wooden casks, 1 box nails,
and 18 chains, and marked ET over 5 in triangle, and M
under, and valued in London at about or
and was shipped per Samarang. I received further advances.
Whatever amounts I signed for I did not receive in full. I dis-
puted one deduction for wharfage in particular, which was caused
by the above Maritime General Credit Company not removing
the goods in due time. I remonstrated with them, also, as to the
per centage charged, which was at the rate of per cent, per
month, and which interest was charged upon the total amounts for
which I gave receipts, but did not receive in full. Although I informed
my principals that I did obtain advances upon the first shipment, 1
did not state the interest I paid for the accommodation. I did not
inform them of having obtained any further advances upon the
subsequent bills of lading, nor have I accounted for such moneys
so received. I never remitted any amount to them whatever, of
what I received on account of the above consignment. I left Mel-


bciirnc on Thursday, the 12th May last, in the name of Norton,
per the You Yangs, for Sydney. From Sydney, I went to the
Clarence River, and from thence to Morpeth, where I lived under
“ e n T a J ne J ° f P nry Moreton * 0n *6 18th inst. (this day) I met
Mr. Lloyd, the present representative of the above firm of Eliza
linsley, in company with Mr. Berliner, from Melbourne. I am
now making this statement in their presence, without force of any
ind or promise, but simply with the intention of assisting my late
employers to recover all goods and moneys due to them on
account of above consignments ; and, whilst expressing my regret
° r ~c onduct m a bove transactions, I leave the case with
the fullest confidence in their hands, to be dealt with
as they may wish. East Maitland, 18th August, 1870. Wm.
J ar f , Fc f d s r * Witness—Otto Berliner.” Mr. Dunne continued
that he had no hesitation m saying that as far as his transactions
with the Maratime Credit Company were concerned, if his state-
ment was to be accepted as true, Border seemed quite as much
sinned against as sinning, for he (Mr. Dunne) could not conceive
what justification could be put forward for such an amount of
money having been given into Border’s hands. If their transactions
with him were bond, fide , there should be no difficulty in eliciting
from them the precise amount that they received. Notice for the
production of their books had been given to the Maritime Com-
pany m writing, m order that ample opportunity might be given
or eliciting the facts of the course of this prosecution. If the
prisoner s transactions were honest, he had nothing to conceal,
and if the company’s transactions with him were legitimate they
had nothing to conceal. The prisoner accounted for a portion of
t e money m a rather strange way. He had a cabman, he said,
driving him about, not in his employers’ business, but for his own
pleasure, for 90 days, for which he paid the cabman £go. He was
also up country he had stated, on a number of shooting excursions.
At New South Wales he had made a clean breast of the affair,
but he now defended himself, and perhaps the reason of this
change would be found out during the hearing of the case. He
then called
Leonard Richard Lloyd, who being sworn stated that he was
the representative of Eliza Tinsley, and produced his power of
attorney. The signature to the power of attorney was that of
Mrs. Tinsley. Witness left England on the 19th March, 1870,
and arrived here on the nth May, and stopped at Tankard’s
Hotel. Made inquiry for Border at the address given, “ Green-
bank-terrace, Victoria-parade,’ but did not find him there. On
the day of arrival wrote to Border, appointing to meet him that or
the next day, and gave the letter to Joseph Todd, the cabman,
but received no reply, and subsequently received from the prisoner


at Morpeth. The firm was Eliza Tinsley, and did not consist of
a company. Witness received the power of attorney in August,
1870. Forder did not meet witness, and witness having searched
for him up to the 23rd May without success, went on the latter
date to the Maritime General Credit and Discount Company’s
office in company with Mr. Otto Berliner, and saw Messrs. Pilley
and Pirani. In consequence of information received witness went
to Sydney in August, and thence to Morpeth, where he arrived on
the 18th August. He there saw Forder at the railway station,
when Berliner, who had gone for him, introduced him to witness.
All three went to the hotel at East Maitland, near Morpeth, and
when there Forder said he was very sorry for the position he was
in, and that he never would have occupied that position if it had
not been for the Maritime Credit Company. He also said he had
never remitted home a penny of the consignments, and that the
money he had obtained upon the bills of lading came from the
Maritime Credit Company. He asked that they should not take
proceedings against him, and said that he had spent the money
obtained on the bills of lading in company with Joseph Todd and
in shooting up-country. All the banks that he tried refused to
have anything to do with him, and he then went to the Maritime
Company, where he saw Messrs Pilley and Pirani, and explained
to them who he was, and produced a letter stating his salary.
The letter now produced was the letter Forder said he had pro-
duced to Messrs. Pilley and Pirani, who he said kept the letter
two or three days. He said he had also referred them to Messrs.
Nash and Smith and Hughes and Harvey, merchants, whereupon
they made him an advance of He told witness that they
took his note of hand for but only gave him £s° in cash,
and that they explained to him that the kept back was to
pay interest and clear the shipment when it arrived. _ He said
likewise that all the other advances were made to him on the
same footing, he only receiving a part of the advance, while the
rest was kept back for expenses of clearing the shipments. Witness
produced the invoice of the cargo marked “ E. T. M.”, and also
the invoices of several cargoes on the bills of lading of which
Forder had received advances. All these invoices were obtained
from Forder, who distinctly told witness that the rate of interest
was plainly marked on the notes of hand given by him to the
Maritime Company. He said the interest was £\ per cent, per
month, or per cent, per annum, and that he complained to
the Maritime Company of the exorbitant rate of interest, but
without effect. He said he was very sorry for what had taken
place, and was anxious to assist Mrs. Tinsley in the matter.
Forder wrote out the statement produced, which was all, including
signature, in Forder’s handwriting, and he handed it to witness in


the hotel at East Maitland. Forder told witness that before
leaving England he had in his possession on account of
salary and expenses, and that he had received since his
arrival in this colony. Witness found the letter produced in one
of Forder’s boxes, which he searched in pursuance of the authority
written and signed by Forder, and produced now, Forder was
not in custody when he wrote the letter. The letter read as
follows:—“Whittlesea, 15th November, 1869. Gentlemen, —
Please pay to the bearer of this, Mr. Joseph Todd, the sum of
one hundred pounds less the usual interest, and charge
the same against bill of exchange in London for you
hold on my account, or charge it as an addition to the amount
you already advanced on account of my consignment per
‘ Niagara/ I have sold a good portion of this consignment, and
will be in a position to settle with you in a few days. I shall be
back in Melbourne on Wednesday or Thursday, and will call at
once. ,J [There was no signature.] Witness held out no induce-
ment or promise to make Forder sign the authority to have his
boxes searched. Forder was taken before the magistrates at East
Maitland and remanded to Sydney, and thence to Melbourne.
Forder went before the magistrates without compulsion, and was
held on his own bail in while under remand. He told wit-
ness he had no money at all, and had lost or in Sydney
he could not tell how. He had been in Sydney only twelve
weeks.
Cross-examined.—Witness had seen a copy of an agreement
made by Otto Berliner to pay the cabman Todd 5 per cent, on
every sum he obtained from prisoner for Eliza Tinsley, but wit-
ness did not know of this agreement until after it had been made.
Berliner did not dictate the statement made by Forder. Witness
had all the documents belonging to Forder which were taken from
the latter’s box.
James Chas. Pirani sworn, stated that he was secretary to the
Maritime General Credit and Discount Company (Limited) of
which Mr. Pilley was the manager. Witness knew the prisoner
and the company first had a transaction with him on the 23rd
September, 1869. Could not say how long before that witness
first saw him, and if he had seen witness, witness would not have
had anything to do with the transaction, but would have referred
prisoner to the manager, Mr. Pilley. Did not recollect speaking
to him before the transaction, nor his showing witness the letter
produced. The books were kept by clerks, not by witness. Mr.
Smith was one of the clerks who kept the books. The trans-
actions with the prisoner were entered in the usual books—first in
the journal, and from that to the ledger. There was also a bill-
book ; and Forder’s transactions would go in all these books •


but he did not think Forder’s transactions were in the cash-book.
The original cash-book was kept by the manager. There was a
clean copy made of it. There was only one cash-book, which
was kept by Smith. Witness thought his initials were “W. H.,”
and Smith also kept the journal and ledger. Sometimes witness
made entries in the bill-book, sometimes Smith, and sometimes
a person named Atkinson. No one but Smith kept the journal at
present, or had kept it since the first of the transactions with
Forder. Thay had only one journal. Smith also kept the ledger
during the whole of Forder’s transactions. The journal and ledger
would show the actual money Forder received—every penny.
The bank account would not show anything, as they paid by
number. He could not say whether the blocks of their cheque-
book would show the money paid him or not. The blocks of the
cheques would show the moneys paid to Forder. To the best of
witness’s belief there were none of the entries in Forder’s trans-
actions made by any other person than those he had mentioned.
The company had a promissory note of Forder’s for ,£1,365 135.,
dated 2nd May this year. Witness supposed the manager had it.
Witness saw it about last May, and it ought to be in the possession
of the company, who had no other note for the same amount from
Forder, but they ought to have one for £l5O, dated 12th May.
Witness had seen both bills. The first amount of money Forder
received was on a £SO promissory note he got cashed on 2nd
December. The clerk Atkinson’s initials were “J. H.” Witness
filled up cheques for Forder two or three times, but he could not
say whether he did so on the first transaction or not.
Cross-examined.—Witness knew Berliner, who had been at
their place, but they never gave him any money, and he never made
any offer to them. Berliner called upon them about for or five
months ago to make inquiries.
Re-examined. —Witness remembered Berliner and Lloyd calling
at the office, but he did not think he had any conversation with
them. He referred them to the manager, Mr. Pilley, and left them
in the room together. He thought he left them in the boardroom
with Mr. Pilley. Did not remember having had any conversation
with them, and he did not think they told him what they came
for. He never in the presence of Mr. Lloyd patted Berliner on
the back and said, “ It will be all right, old boy,” or words to that
effect. He never said such a thing. He believed he did not
take part in a conversation between Berliner and Lloyd at the
Maritime Company’s place regarding Mrs. Tinsley’s affairs. He
remembered leaving the manager’s room because it was his usual
custom, but he did not recollect having any conversation at the
Maritime Company’s office with Berliner and Lloyd. There might


have been a casual remark passed while in the boardroom, but
nothing was said about the business they had come about.
At this stage the case was adjourned till Wednesday morning, at
half-past 10 o’clock, at the request of the prosecution.
(September 14, 1870. J
At the City Court yesterday, Wm. Earl Forder, the young man
charged with embezzling from Eliza Tinsley, iron
manufacturer, in Stafford, England, for whom he was colonial
agent, was brought up again, the case having been postponed,
after a partial hearing, on Monday.
Mr. Dunne, instructed by Mr. Duffet, conducted the prosecu-
tion, and Mr. A. Read, the defence.
Mr. Dunne said that a further stage of the proceedings he
would call attention to the fact that on the former hearing, after
all witnesses had been ordered out of court, a witness had remained
in court the whole time. He then called
George Pilley, who, being sworn, stated that he was manager of
the Maritime Credit Company, and knew the prisoner, whom he
first saw in September, 1869. The prisoner, came alone to the
office of the company—into witness’s private office. He sent his
card in, and said, “ I see you advance upon bills of lading. I
want a temporary loan and he then produced a bill of lading.
Witness had not that bill of lading now. The messenger got it,
and, witness believed, gave it up when the goods were delivered.
The messenger’s name was James. The bill of lading was for
goods by the Percy or the Sea Chief. On referring to his receipt
book witness now tound that it was the ship Niagara. Witness
told the prisoner he should require some reference to show that
he was the Mr. Forder mentioned in the bill of lading. Witness
wished to correct himself. What he said to the prisoner was that
he wished him to show witness that a Mr. Forder had transactions
with Mrs. Tinsley. Witness did not say to him that Forder was
mentioned in the bill of lading. Witness believed that Forder’s
name was in the bill of lading, but was not certain there were
invoices accompanying the bill of lading. Witness had not brought
them to court, not having received notice to do so in his subpoena.
He could not say how many invoices he got from Forder. The first
witness had was that of the Niagara. There was another, of which
witness did not know the name of the ship.
At this stage, at the request of Mr. Dunne, the witness went to
the company’s offices for the invoices.
Witness produced several invoices, but the name of the ship
was not mentioned in them. Witness had no means of his own
knowledge of telling the number of bills of lading he received from


Forder. He thought the clerk who kept the security book could
tell, and witness might be able to tell if he had the security book.
The witness again went to the office for the security-book.
On reference to the security-book, which was in the hand-
writing of the secretary and two clerks, he found that the first ship
by which the cargoes advanced upon arrived, was the Niagara ;
the next were the White Rose, the Sea Chief, the Percy, and the
last the Samarang. He believed an invoice accompanied every
bill of lading. There were 15 invoices of the goods sent out pro-
duced, but witness could not say whether these were all the invoices.
If they were not the whole, the others must be in the possession of
Mr. Jones, and could be obtained. When witness made the fresh
advance of to prisoner the forms of lien or lien bonds on
the Niagara bill of lading were destroyed. Witness produced two
lien bonds, one for odd, dated the 27th April, and the
other for dated the 12th May, which were drawn up at the
time the others were destroyed. The others were destroyed on the
date of the larger amount, the 27 th April. Forder signed the lien
bond which had been destroyed, and on the face of it Forder ap-
peared as the consignee of the shipment by the Niagara.
To Mr. Read—Witness tore up the lien bonds, which were fac
similes of the lien bonds produced, as to the manner in which they
were drawn up.
To Mr. Dunne —The documents attached to the destroyed bonds
were invoices as well as bills of lading; that is, to the best of his
belief. There must have been bills of lading attached, but he was
not certain about the invoices. Witness would not swear that the
bill of lading was attached to the destroyed bond, but he believed
it was, it being the usual custom to so attach bills of lading. He
could not say whether Forder’s name appeared in the bill of lading
or not, but believed it was. What witness said to Forder when he
asked for the advance was, that they should want some references
to ascertain that he was Mr. Forder. That was the purport of
what witness said, though it might not be the exact words.
Witness did not go to the parties to whom Forder referred him,
but sent the Secretary, Mr. Pirani, to them. Witness could not
say whether the bill of lading produced, and purporting to be that
of the shipment per Niagara, was the the one Forder presented to
him. The bill of lading now produced was dated the 26th June,
1869, as the date of the shipment. None of the invoices pro-
duced had reference to the goods by the Niagara. The invoice
accompanying that bill of lading witness gave to the messenger to
hand to Mr. Jones. The next thing witness said to Forder was,
“ How. long do you want it for ? ” and he said, “ Only as a tempo-
rary loan.” Forder referred to the goods coming out by the
Niagara, the bill of lading and invoice of which he had produced,


or one of them. Witness said, “We will charge you 5 per cent,
commission, besides interest.” Witness believed he (witness) said
the interest would be afterwards settled upon. No rate of interest
was mentioned then, and Forder did not show witness any docu-
ment but the invoice and bill of lading. That was all the conver-
sation which took place, and the defendant left, and said he would
call again in a day or two. Witness was to have inquiries made
in the meantime, and the prisoner called in two or three days, and
saw witness in presence of the secretary, Mr. Pirani, when witness
said to prisoner, “ You can have any money you require,” and then
left him with the secretary to draw out the lien and receipt. For-
der said he wanted about and witness instructed the secretary
to give him £SO. There was a promissory note, which was de-
stroyed at the time witness had referred to. The promissory note
was for the amount he received, and was dated Decem-
ber 23rd, 1869. Forder signed a receipt for £44, and witness
left the secretary to settle about the interest. Witness said nothing
about it at that interview with Forder, and told the secretary to
settle it with Forder. Witness knew that Forder was charged
28 per cent, interest and 5 per cent, commission. With the com-
mission and interest deducted, Forder received £44. Witness
had the block of the cheque. There was also a promissory-note
given on the 25th September for £iso, which was also destroyed.
The receipt produced was in Forder’s handwriting. The amount
deducted from the first mentioned, viz.— £ 6, —would make
interest, if charged as such, at the rate of per cent, per annum.
The company always charged interest on the amount of the pro-
missory note. This amount was deducted not alone on the
but on a loan of for witness saw Forder get a cheque for
,£IOO two days after—on the 25th September. Witness could not
explain why he did not get the whole amount at one time. Wit-
ness also had the block of the cheque for £IOO, and believed that
when Forder got the 100 the j£«;o note was destroyed, and a
promissory note for given. Witness was not certain whether
he destroyed the note or not. He believed the prisoner
called again in October, but he could not say he saw him then,
and could not remember saying anything in particular to him after
the 23rd September. Witness was certain he never saw the letter
produced until to-day. The next transaction with Forder was on
November 2, when he signed a receipt for Witness was
wrong—he signed a receipt for which included
a renewal of the The amount charged upon that
renewal, adding together commission and interest, would make
48 per cent, per annum interest. Forder got out of
this jQ 2OB. Witness was stating this to the best of his belief, but
could not say anything further. On the 23rd September Forder


got jQaA) on the 25th September he got ,£100; on the 15th
October he got on the 2nd November he got £so.
Witness could not tell the exact amount he got out of the
promissory note, as the transactions were conducted by the secre-
tary, Mr. Pirani. The amounts received by Forder were
jQioo, and ; or in all on account of the promissory
note for leaving a deduction of for interest and
commission. Commission attached to each transaction, renewal
as well. There was an advance of £192 on October 15th, for
which Forder gave a promissory note for at one month.
That note was destroyed; or Forder might have it, the documents
having been his after each renewal. He was charged 48 per
cent, on that also. The next transaction was on the 16th Novem-
ber, when Forder was advanced as security for which the
company obtained a promissory note for £IOO. Witness would
not swear whether this note was destroyed or not. Forder might
have it, the intermediate bills, of which this was one, having been
handed to Forder. Witness sent some one with the note to
Forder. The next transaction was on the 23rd December, when
prisoner got on the security of a promissory note for
which deducted previous interest overdue, and interest.
The next was the sth January, 1870, when Forder got a cheque
for £lO, and on the same day another which made £BS,
and as security for this he gave a draft on Scotland for £IOO.
This draft was paid. Out or this, £l2 was deducted for interest
from the time the draft was received till it was sent to where it
was made payable, and the money returned. He did not think
it was made payable at the Union Bank in Adelaide, but if it had
been so it could have gone there and been brought back in a
fortnight. He believed the draft went to England. (The witness
here took another journey to the office for the bank-book, but
stated on return that the lad was out and he could not get the
book. Though he had not the book he could and would swear
that the draft was payable in London, the secretary having just
told him so, and he having seen the duplicate of the draft, which
duplicate he now produced. Assuming the draft to have been
two months in going home, and the money two months in coming
out, the £l2 would be interest at the rate of per month.
The next transaction was on February 9th, when Forder received
;£ioo, and gave a promissory note for There were some
clearing charges at that time. After this, Forder on February
25th got a cheque for and gave a promissory note for
of which was to pay the duty and charges of the cargo of
“ Sea Chief,” while £6 was for commission and interest. On the
16th March Forder got £6O, for which he gave a promissory
note for ;£ioo, of this amount being for charges, and £4


commission and interest. The charges were for duties, storage,
&c. The next was the 26th, when Forder got for which he
gave a promissory note for £IOO, of which 9s. nd. was for
outlay, £4 for commission, and 10s. id. for any other
charges that might come in. On the 27th April all these were
consolidated, and on that day Forder gave a promissory note for
.£1,365 135., payable in five days. Witness did not know how
much Forder had actually received on this note of hand of
£1,365 13s. without going through the book and calculating.
The account produced was in the handwriting either of Smith or
Atkinson, clerks in the company’s office, but witness had never
seen it before. The company received money on account of
goods. On reckoning up the amounts received by prisoner,
witness found it was £1,349, which included other amounts which
witness had not yet been asked about. Witness had omitted to
state that on the 27th April, when the consolidation was made,
Forder received two other sums of £SO each. The next transac-
tion was on the 12th May, when Forder got £144, and gave a
promissory note for £l5O. £260 13s. was the difference between
the amount of the consolidated bill and the amount actually
received up to the 27 th of April by Forder, and out of this
£260 13s. all charges up to the 24th March were paid, amount-
ing to £BB 14s. 6d. The difference between the last-mentioned
amount and £260 135., viz. £l7l 18s. 6d., was interest and
commission. Witness received on the 12th May, as the proceeds
of the sale of damaged consignments, the sum of £322 12s. 6d.,
and on the 18th June received £lB3 7s. 3d.; or in all, £506
9s. 1 id. for damaged consignments sold. After the 27th April
Forder was charged 20 per cent, up to the 24th August, but there
were charges against him to the amount of £225, which with the
£144 advanced to him, left only a small balance in the company’s
hands of about £l3O. If interest was charged against Forder on
the £l3O it was a mistake, and should not have been charged.
There was also an error of £IOO in the account produced, by
which that amount too much was charged against the prisoner.
This concluded the examination of Mr. Pilley, and the case, at
Mr. Dunne’s request, was adjourned for a week, for the production
of further evidence.
(Argus, September 28 th, 1870,)
Wm. Earl Forder was yesterday brought up, on remand, before
the City Bench, on a charge of embezzling £l,BOO from the firm
of Eliza Tinsley and Co., iron manufacturers, Staffordshire,
England, by whom he had been employed as colonial agent.
The magistrates on the Bench were Mr. Sturt, P.M., and
Messrs. Curtain and Prince, J.P.’s.


As on the former hearings, the prosecution was conducted by Mr.
Dunne, and the defence by Mr. A. Read.
Otto Berliner deposed that he was proprietor of the Inquiry
Office, 78 Elizabeth-street, and first saw Mr. Lloyd on the 21st
May last, when he came to witness’s office. Witness went with
Lloyd to Sydney, in the City of Adelaide steamer, and thence to
Morpeth, where he arrived on the 15th of August, and found
Border in a bedroom at Mr. Keith’s Hotel, dressing himself.
Border said he would go quietly with witness, and that his in-
tention was to have come to Melbourne. Border also said, “ Had
it not been for the scandalous manner in which I was treated by
the Maritime Company, I would not be in this position.” He
said he had no money, but had written to Joseph Todd, a cab-
man, for some, and also, “ All the money I have obtained from
the Maritime Company was about and it did me no good ;
the most was spent with Joseph Todd, the cabman, and I was ill
most of the time. Witness introduced him to Mr. Lloyd. Previous
to the introduction, Border said, “ I wish to do everything I can
for the firm ; they have been very much wronged.” He also re-
peated this to Mr, Lloyd, and said that he had been obliged to
pay per month for each £lOO he got from the Maritime
Company, independent of commission. He also said that he had
a promise from them when they made the first advance on the
Niagara goods, that he should have the offer of dealing with the
goods when they arrived, but that when they arrived the Maritime
Company refused to allow him to have anything to do with the
goods. Border said likewise that had the promise been fulfilled
he did not think he would have been in the position he was. Wit-
ness then saw Border hand over to Mr. Lloyd all the papers and
letters he had belonging to the firm of Eliza Tinsley and Co.
Witness gave Border to pay his bill at the hotel. Border
then said, “ I will make a statement in full of everything to assist
you in this matter,” and at Maitland he sat down and wrote out
the statement produced (published in the report of the first
hearing.) Witness told him when he asked what he should write,
that the statement must come from himself, and that it might be
used for or against him. The statement was signed by Border,
and witnessed by witness. Lloyd having told witness that Border
had received when he left England, and on arrival in
the colony, witness asked Border, “ What brought you to the
Maritime Company if you had ,£7OO with that first consignment?”
and Border said, “ I was sick and ill. I spent most of the
money with the cabman.” He showed witness a bill from Joseph
Todd, a cabman, for for 99 days’ cab-hire. Border said his
father was a solicitor at home, and that he himself knew a little
about law, having been once examined for nine hours as a witness.


A warrant was issued at Maitland, which was the next township to
Morpeth, and where there was a police magistrate, andForderwas
arrested, and being brought up at Maitland, was remanded to
Sydney, bail allowed. At Sydney, the prisoner was remanded to
Melbourne, also on bail. He wanted witness to take a coat and
some gold studs out of pawn for him, telling witness that he might
keep the studs, but must not press this matter. Witness told him
to keep his presents to himself, and that he would not be hard
upon him with or without them. Witness arrived in Melbourne on
the 22nd August, on the 26th August the prisoner came to wit-
ness’s office, and said he wanted to speak to him alone. The
prisoner continued, “Now I can give you a point in your case by
which the house at home must get their goods back again ; that is
if you promise me that you will not press this matter against me.”
Witness expressed his astonishment at the prisoner having kept
anything back, and said he thought him to have been thoroughly
honest to them. The prisoner said he was not frightened at wit-
ness, but thought Mr. Lloyd did not think the same as witness,
whereupon witness explained that the matter was a felony, and
Mr. Lloyd dare not meddle with it, and witness called in Mr.
Lloyd, who said, in answer to the prisoner, that he would not pro-
secute him if he could help it. Witness then told Mr. Lloyd he
should not speak any more about the prosecution, and Mr. Lloyd
left, saying he would go and see Mr. Duffett. Forder remained
with witness, and Forder said, “ I can show you now that Pirani
and Pilley knew that I was a clerk, at £2 50 a year salary, to Mrs.
Tinsley; and the way I can prove it to you is, that when I went
there first I had a bill of lading in the name of Thomas Tinsley.
That was the first shipment by the Niagara, and Pilley and Pirani
asked me how I could prove my connexion with Thomas Tinsley.
I then gave them the letter I handed to Mr. Lloyd at Morpeth,
which stated that I was colonial traveller, at a year. I
also gave them references to people who could tell them that I
acted for Mrs. Tinsley, and that Thomas Tinsley was Eliza
Tinsley’s son. They kept the letter for three days, and at the end
of that time I was told I might go to Pirani and get the money.”
Forder then continued.—“ Now you have got that point, let them
show the liens, and on the back of the liens you will find the
money I actually got from them in my own handwriting.” He also
said that what he had told witness was very useful to Tinsley, and
he trusted they would not press anything against him, and witness
explained to him that unless he was prosecuted for the felony his
evidence would be useless in any civil action, on the ground that
the firm connived at the transaction. Witness told him that was
merely his opinion, and that his position was an unpleasant one
in regard to him (Forder). Prisoner said either “receipts” or


“ liens.” Witness could not say which, but prisoner said he
entered on some document the amounts he had received. The
letter the witness got at the post-office, Morpeth, did not contain
any money, although it spoke of transmitting jQ\2. Witness had
been in communication with Todd, the writer of it, in Melbourne.
Todd had intended to send £g, and gave witness £g for that
purpose. Witness did not send the money, but at Morpeth paid
it, and more, for Forder’s hotel bill. The letter was that
produced.
Cross-examined —The letter was written by Todd in witness's
office. Mr. Lloyd saw the £g which it was intended to send.
Witness offered Todd a percentage on such money as he might
assist in recovering for Mrs. Tinsley. Witness met Todd and
said, “ You know where Forder is ; you ought to give us some
information” Todd said, “Well, what would be your terms?”
and witness said, “ I am certain the firm will treat you properly if
you give them information to help in this business.” Later in the
day Todd asked witness to deposit with his (Todd's) father
as a guarantee, but witness refused, though agreeing to give Todd
5 per cent, upon any money he might assist in recovering, provided
Forder also gave assistance when they found him. Forder was
arrested before the 27 th August. Witness took no papers from
Forder, who handed the papers to Mr. Lloyd.
Joseph Todd, cabdriver, driving for his father, stated that he
first knew the prisoner Forder about July, 1868, when the latter
was stopping at the Metropolitan Hotel, near the old Exhibition
site, and witness drove him out once during the first six months.
Forder caught a cold, and was ill most of that time. After that,
Forder went to Mooney’s Royal Hotel, St. Kilda, several times
for fresh air. Witness was not paying for the prisoner’s defence.
Prisoner and witness also stopped a week at Brighton in the end
of 1868 or the beginning of 1869, and in the summer of 1869,
witness and prisoner stopped at Brighton three months. Witness
charged the prisoner a pound a day, and might have driven him
100 days altogether. They were also at Schnapper Point, the
Plenty Ranges, and Echuca, but the cab was not with them.
Were at Somerton six or seven weeks. At the Plenty the prisoner
was stopping at Mr. Taylor’s place, and went shooting kangaroos
when he was well enough, and also shot at Somerton. Witness
did not pay anything, and Forder was spending or a
week at this time. He might have spent £4O a week. Witness
saw most of the bills paid. Forder was paying a day for the
cab when it was at the stable of witness’s father, Forder having
told the witness to put it in livery. It was engaged for Forder
and any of his friends, and witness had driven Forder to Nash and
Smith’s and Hughes and Harvey’s, and other places of business,


pretty often. Witness took a letter from Mr. Lloyd to the prisoner,
who was at the Royal Hotel, top of Swanston-street. Witness
thought this was on the nth May. Forder, on reading the letter,
said a man named Lloyd, whom he did not know, wanted to see
him. Next day Forder said something about going to Footscray
or Somerton, and that he was going to the Maritime Bank to get
some money. He did go to the bank, and afterwards met witness
by appointment, and said he was going by the Sydney steamer at
i o’clock, under the name of Norton. He did not tell witness
why he changed his name, but he went by the steamer, and he said
he would write to witness. Two days afterwards witness told
Lloyd that Forder had gone to Echuca. Forder did write to
witness. Before he went Forder was speaking about speculating
in mines, and also about selling some things for the firm there and
at Adelaide. The letter produced was in Forder’s handwriting.
Witness never got a draft for £lOO from Forder. Forder once
sent him down from the Plenty to the Maritime office with a letter,
and they gave witness a cheque for or £96, on the English,
Scottish, and Australian Chartered Bank, which witness got cashed.
Witness brought back the money to Forder, who gave him £lO
out of it for cab-hire to give to witness’s father. Never got
for Forder from the Maritime Company. The writing in the docu-
ment produced was very like that of witness’s father, but witness
did not recollect giving it to Forder (a bill for cab fare). Witness
pawned a gun belonging to Forder to raise £g for Forder.
Cross-examined —Witness knew that Forder was laid up for six
months or more with rheumatism and dysentery, and required
some one to go about with him.
William Bushby Jones, free and bonded storekeeper, deposed
that he had had a bill of lading of goods by the Niagara, which
he had returned to his principals, the Maritime General Credit
Company. He believed he had returned it, as he had been unable
to find it, after a search.
George Pilley, manager of the Maritime General Credit Com-
pany, stated that he now produced the bill of lading in question,
having found it since his last examination.
James Matthews, ledger-keeper at the English, Scottish, and
Australian Chartered Bank, deposed that the Maritime General
Credit Company had an account at their bank, and he had recently
handed over a number of cheques to Mr. Pilley, who gave witness
a receipt for them. The document contained a correct account of
the amounts for which the several cheques were drawn.
At this stage a remand was granted until next day.


(October i, 1871.^
Wra, Earl Forder appeared at the City Court again on Saturday
before Messrs. Sturt, P.M., and Sutherland, J.P., to answer the
charge of embezzling from Eliza Tinsley and Co., manu-
facturers, England, The case for the prosecution it was stated by
Mr. Dunne, was now closed.
Mr. A. Read, for the defence, stated that at the time the con-
signments were received by Forder, they were a drug in the
market, and therefore he acted in accordance wiih the best in-
terests of the firm of Tinsley and Co., in obtaining advances
on the goods at any price. His absence from Victoria was ex-
plained by the fact that he went to neighbouring colonies under an
assumed name to dispose of the cargoes at a good price, which
were unsaleable in Melbourne, it being a common practice to act
in that manner, so that it might not be suspected that the goods
had been hawked from one port to another, as that would damage
their market value. Forder was returning from a tour of this sort,
under the name of Moreton, when he was arrested. The efforts
of the firm had, all through the case, been directed towards ob-
taining evidence against the Maritime General Credit Company,
and Forder had merely been proceeded against to facilitate the
attainment of such evidence. Mr. Read then re-called.
Leonard Richard Lloyd, who stated that he represented the
firm of Tinsley and Co., in whose employment he had been for
over four years. Witness knew as a fact that there was an agree-
ment between the prisoner Forder and Mrs. Tinsley and had heard
the prisoner say that there was an agreement. Witness received a
number of papers from Forder, and recollected seeing a letter of
September, 1869, but had not got it now. It had some reference,
witness believed, to accounts furnished by the prisoner. Witness
believed the prisoner must have taken it back himself from
amongst the letters. All the letters were addressed to Forder,
and some were from Mr. Charles Tinsley, some from Mr. Thomas
Tinsley, and some from Mr. George Tinsley. They related to
Mrs. Tinsley’s business that Forder ought to have transacted
here.
Cross-examined. —The letter produced, from Forder himself,
and in his handwriting.was sent out to witness by Mrs.
Tinsley.
Mr. Dunne here read the letter referred to as follows ; —“ Green-
bank-cottage, Victoria-parade, Melbourne, Jan. 4,1870. Mrs. Eliza
Tinsley, Sedgeley, near Dudley England. Dear Madam, —I am
favoured by your letters of the 28th and 29th September, 7th
October, 23rd October, and 2nd November, 1869, which together
with their enclosures, duly arrived safely. I would have written


by last mail but was totally unable to do so through illness
brought on by the excessive heat of the weather, which has been
ranging from 9 5 deg. to nodeg. in the shade, and which is very
trying to anyone at first. I have telegraphed this fact to you by
this mail, so that you may not be anxious at not hearing from me.
As explained in my last, I was wholly unable to clear the con-
signment per Niagara without the assistance of a bank, and the
sum named was barely sufficient for that purpose. The draft for-
warded in yours of the 9th September was by a mistake of the
London bankers payable only in London, three days after presen-
tation ; and, therefore, I had to draw it out, and send it back to
London for acceptance and payment,. I was refused by several
banks here to whom I offered it for discount, and therefore was
compelled to adopt the above course. The arrangement I made
with the bank was that they were to pay all the charges of
clearance, and that the amount should be repaid by the first cash
received from any customers on account of sales; but as yet I have
been only able to make one sale for cash, and that only amounted
to Although nearly the whole of the cargo is sold well, still
none of the buyers could pay cash until after the turn of the new
year, and therefore I have withheld delivery. Saturday was New
Year’s Day, and was observed as a general holiday. Yesterday
(Monday) and to-day are mail days, but to-morrow I expect to
commence delivery of the sales made, and by next mail I hope
and believe to be in a position to remit you nearly the whole
amount. The Niagara cargo will realise about but a full
statement of the sales made, to whom sold, and the prices, shall
be forwarded with the cash by the next mail. The White Rose has
been in about a week or 10 days, but has not yet discharged your
consignment. I shall, I hope, be able to clear it myself. None
of it has as yet been sold, but I will commence on it this week.
I have removed to private lodgings, as they come much cheaper
than stopping at an hotel—the address is above. I know of a
good store in Lonsdale-street, and will engage it directly I can get
the consignment cleared. Each shipment shall be kept distinct
in every way, and all your other instructions shall be fully carried
out. As far as I can see the consignments you have sent suit the
market well, but plenty of boiler-rivets would go off best. lam
glad to hear that your brother will be here before long, for he will
set everything at rest, and his experience in the trade will prove
highly valuable, but he will find things very different to what
they were on his former visit. . . My long and unfortunate
illness, together with my outfit, swallowed up the year’s salary due
May last. . . .1 have the honour to be, dear madam,
yours most respectfully, William Earl Eorder.”
Witness’s reluctance to produce the letters the prisoner handed


to him arose from the fact that they related solely to the private
affairs of the firm.
This concluded the evidence for the defence, and the case was
remanded till Tuesday, in order that the prisoner might then be
committed for trial, the witnesses not being present to be bound
over. Bail, it was stated, would be allowed in two sureties of
each.
(Argus, October sth, 1870.)
The transactions of W. E. Forder with the Maritime General
Credit and Discount Company must not be suffered to pass by
without a few words of comment. If it should turn out that those
transactions point no moral, they are, nevertheless, capable of
adorning an artless tale. Besides which, they serve to show the
completeness and perfection to which the machinery of money-
lending has been brought in this city, and its admirable adaptation
to the wants of all classes of the community. For the merchant,
the squatter, the manufacturer, the farmer, the professional man,
the miner, and the shopkeeper, there are the ordinary banking
institutions; for the improvident, the extravagant, and the dubiously-
respectable, there are loan and discount associations innumerable;
for the poor there are the pawnbrokers’ shops; and for the
Forders of the mercantile world, there is the Maritime General
Credit and Discount Company, with Mr. George Pilley for its
manager, and Mr. James Charles Pirani for its secretary. The
precise nature of the institution it would be somewhat difficult to
define. It is not exactly a bank; neither does it display the
armorial cognisance of the Medici. All we know of its internal
economy is derived from the evidence given at the police court,
from whence also we glean the following particulars :
William Earl Forder was sent out here in the month of July,
1868, as the colonial traveller and trusted agent of Mrs. Tinsley, an
iron manufacturer in Staffordshire, He was furnished with an
outfit, provided with a salary, and instructed to establish a branch
of his employer’s business in this city, for which purpose shipments
of goods were made to him. Instead of doing this, he seems to
have taken an early opportunity of negotiating advances upon the
consignments, and dissipating the proceeds in riotous living.
According to his own admission, he applied in the first instance to
some of the banks, with a view to raise money on the bills of
lading. They refused to have anything to do with them ; for,
although the transaction would have been a perfectly legitimate
one if Forder had been authorised by his principals to hypothe-
cate the consignments which were coming forward, the presumption
is, that Forder failed to satisfy them in that respect, and he was


bowed out accordingly. It was then that the Maritime General
Credit and Discount Company opened its hospitable doors to this
Coelebs in search of accommodation, and the uncommunicative
Pilley, and the reticent Pirani received the prodigal if not with
open arms, at any rate, with calculating generosity. Mr. Pirani
asserts that he did not even see the letter of appointment which
Forder held from his employer, and that he never knew his exact
position in regard to Mrs. Tinsley. There were certain consign-
ments ; there was a given sum of money to be raised upon them,
at the moderate rate of 50 per cent, per annum, besides commis-
sion, and no questions asked. We have the testimony of Mr.
Pilley that Forder got for which he gave promissory notes
to the extent of leaving a balance of to cover
interest, commission, charges, &c. Nothing could be more open-
handed than the conduct of Messrs. Pilley and Pirani to the
necessitous Forder. “ You can have any money you require/’ said
Mr. Pilley, “ and as to the interest—well, that could be arranged
hereafter. Meanwhile, applicant could have to begin with ;
upon which he would be only expected to pay interest and com-
mission, amounting in the whole, to per cent, per annum.”
There was a little gentle demur on Forder’s part; but the
rejoinder of Messrs. Pilley and Pirani is not given. It may be
safely left to the imagination. Forder knew perfectly well the
nature of the transaction he was engaged in, and the money-
lenders’ opinion of it may be inferred not only from the evidence
they gave at the City Police Court, but also from the testimony they
did not give. In fact, the defectiveness of Pirani’s memory was as
notable as that of his countryman’s at the trial of Queen Caroline,
with his perpetual Non mi ricordo. Mr. Pirani, “ could not
remember” this, and “ could not say” that; did not know how
much money Forder had had, and was quite unable to estimate
the value of the goods belonging to Mrs. Tinsley, upon which liis
company had made such indefinite advances. And at this _ point,
Mr. Pirani involved himself in such a verbal tangle, that it is only
performing an act of bare justice to him to quote his own words :
“Witness believed that the whole of the goods consigned by
Tinsley & Co. to Forder were in the possession of the Maritime
Company untouched now. Only the damaged portion had been
sold. The Maritime Company had no goods belonging to Tinsley
& Co. in their possession—at least, none that witness knew of.
He could not say what was the value of the goods held by the
company. The account was handed to Mr. Duffett, solicitor for the
prosecution. Could not say whether the Maritime Company had
worth of goods in their possession. Though he could not
say what was the value of the goods, he knew the Maritime Company
held enough to cover their expenses.” We suppose Mr. Pirani


must be placed in the same category as the knight spoken of by
Touchstone, who swore by his honour they were good pancakes,
and swore by his honour the mustard was naught, although the pan-
cakes were naught and the mustard was good, and yet the knight
was not forsworn. Be this as it may, the upshot of the matter is
this : Border has been committed for trial, and Messrs. Pilley and
Pirani still continue to minister to the financial necessities of their
fellow-citizens.
There an old proverb concerning receivers and “ convey-
ancers,” which is too musty for quotation; but we think that, in
the minds of a good many people who have read the reports which
have appeared in the Argus, with respect to this case, there will be
a disposition to speculate upon the connexion which exists between
fraudulent acts and facilities for raising money by them. And some
persons will be tempted to inquire whether, after having been very
properly refused accommodation by the banks, Border would have
persevered in the malpractices alleged against him, had not the
Maritime General Credit and Discount Company so unhesitatingly
and incuriously undertaken to furnish him with “ any money he
might require.”
He was tried before the Chief Justice Sir W. Stawell, and the
jury, after a brief deliberation, returned a verdict of “ Guilty, and
the prisoner was sentenced to five years on the roads.
THE DETECTIVE BORCE.
(7b the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.)
Sir, —Permit me through your valuable columns to make a few
remarks in reference to Captain Standish’s letter, dated 27 th
August, on the present condition of the detective force. 1. In
the recent case of Lennon v. Boyd the captain states that the
hotel was the proper place for Lennon to watch Maher, and that
it was useful and necessary to engage the services of Dogherty,
although he may not be an honest member of the community.
To the experienced police or detective officer it will appear clear
that Lennon had no right to be at the public-house, as he would
always come in contact with the public; and further, supposing
the object he kept under surveillance left by cab, &c., would it
not be absurd to think that the detective could have time to
emerge from his public-house fortress to follow the cab, or even
ascertain the number to trace thereby the fugitive hereafter.
Captain Standish, no doubt, is aware that the surveillance of a
man is easily done by two detectives relieving each other by


mutual understanding, and the excuse for the agent Dogherty is
really unreasonable. 2. Although detectives do require the indi-
rect assistance and information of criminals and dishonest men,
still, the department will not publicly announce that they must
hire their services to keep surveillance. It would be useful, if the
Chief Commissioner will permit me to advise, that no such agent
be at any time hired on public pay. A good detective officer
will know better means to conduct his profession than those advo-
cated, and no doubt submitted originally by Messrs. Nicolson and
Secretan. There was a criminal agent engaged by Mr. Nicolson
at Daylesford in David Young’s murder case. This man was put
for about fourteen days in the lockup cell with Young. This
agent was not called into the witness-box at Young’s trial; nor
was his report, which no doubt reached the Executive Council,
ever published. Why not? Why should the public not know
what such a dishonest agent on police pay had to say upon such
a serious case of murder, as his evidence was not called upon in
court 1 Further, there was a second agent, a labourer named
John Wolfe, at a farm at Smeaton. This man refused Detective
Berliner certain evidence he said he knew, until he could see
Superintendent Nicolson, and get the promise to become a
constable. Some months after he gave some evidence, which
poor Young denied strongly; and when counsel asked this witness
on oath in the box the question, “Do you expect any reward ?”
witness replied, “ None whatever.” Still, directly after Young’s
execution this agent was made first a detective and then a police
constable. The less of such agents all the more beneficial for
the public. They are dangerous and untrustworthy members of
society. 3. Then Captain Standish refers to the escape of
O’Ferrall, Captain Edgar, and the witness Crum in Butchart’s
forgery case; and although the gallant captain tries to pass in
about twelve lines over this neglect, he omits the blunders in
Willis’s case (the defaulting bank manager), Mr. Amess’s gold
chain, and the young lady from East Melbourne boarding-school.
As to the O’Ferrall case, if a committee of inquiry is appointed, it
will be distinctly and directly proved that mismanagement at the
head-quarters of the detective or police department caused the
failure of this case. As to Captain Edgar, the neglect was a
direct one by mismanagement of the detective force. If Captain
Edgar had been kept under surveillance in proper time his escape
could not have taken place. Here we find a man at that period,
charged by information of the Chief Commissioner of Police with
causing the death of several men, take his departure by railway,
passing at every station a police constable, and at Castlemaine
and Sandhurst the detective stations, without molestation until he
is arrested by a New South Wales constable. Will the Chief


Commissioner still labour under the idea that Edgar could do this
as the detectives were getting 12s. 6d. instead of 14s. per day 1 ?
And is it reasonable to believe that a young girl sixteen years of
age, not in any way connected with criminal life, can leave her
boarding-school without the slightest trace, and a combined force
looking after her at the small outlay per annum? It
sounds in itself incredible, but as a fact it is true. And here, in
this case, the working of the general and detective police comes
to question, and although the gallant captain thinks their confi-
dence in each other is not quite so questionable as the case of
Lennon v. Boyd presented, the Chief Commissioner must be
aware that the two forces never worked united, which they ought
to do, and will have to do, for their own credit as much as the
benefit of their employers, the public. I would suggest that the
detective force be reduced in number, and that in each police
division plain-dressed constables should perform detective duties,
such as larceny cases, <fec. The detective ought not to be purely
a constable. He should be a man of good education and abili-
ties in police duties. Further, he should be promoted, and not
reported upon as Captain Standish, no doubt very wittingly,
remarks in his report, “ suffering from failing eyesight.” A good
detective officer ought to be able to be promoted afterwards as
commissioned officer in the general police force, and no doubt
a very good and useful class of officers these would make, without
calling for cadets, &c. The tenor of the force would improve, and
those who do really work hard (good detectives must do so) will
have something in view, but at present a first-class detective could
remain till he was pronounced blind without promotion. Further,
if this were done, police sergeants and constables would not
object to become detectives, when they know the body is respect-
able— not mixed up with convicts nor insolvents —and the united
work of police and detectives would save the country large sums
of money. 4. The Chief Commissioner then states that the
detectives’ duties show that a process of deterioration has taken
place in the force, and by the aid of Mr. Secretan, at present the
head of the detective police, states that the deterioration took
place in consequence of about is. fid. per day salary. But this is
not so. The real reasons the detective force does not work as in
former years are as follow: —1. The promotion of Detective
Secretan by Mr. Nicolson’s advice as inspector, passing over old
officers of unquestionable character and ability, without the
slightest reason advanced to those officers why this promotion
took place. It is a well-known fact that neither Captain Standish
nor Mr. C. H. Nicolson could name a single case in which Mr.
Secretan has shown such activity in the service that he should
overstep such men as Black, Eason, Kennedy, O’Rourke, Alex-


anc j er — m en who were first-class detectives when Mr. Secretan
joined, a third-class officer. 2. The promotion of Constable
Man waring as chief clerk over senior members, and over gentle-
men who can write and spell properly, 3. Promotion given to
inexperienced men, who were reported by superintendents of
police as utterly useless, to first-class officers, over hard-working,
well-educated members of the staff. Although I should be glad
to see twelve good officers to-morrow conducting the detective
duties of the colony at £1 per day, instead of thirty-two members
at 12s. per day, of which one-half have no right to the profession,
I still feel positive that if the detective police obtain a committee
of inquiry from the Legislature to inquire as to the present failure
of the force, it will be proved that £ s. d. had little to do with
destroying and crippling the best force of detectives of crime in
the world. The remarks of Mr. Secretan, that a new class of
criminals are growing up, seems to me ridiculous. There is no
doubt about criminals being born and dying, as well as detectives ;
but surely this cannot affect the question of police or detective
duties in general. —I am, &c.,
Otto Berliner.
(From the )
There can no longer be any doubt of the fact that a searching
inquiry into the conduct of the Police department of Victoria
should as soon as possible be made. More than a dozen years
have elapsed since good cause was shown for one, since a futile
attempt was made to procure one, and since that attempt
most signally failed. More than a dozen years have been
gathered in since it was shown to the satisfaction of almost every
man in the colony save Sir John O’Shanassy and his peculiar
protege, the Chief Commissioner, that our constabulary force was
in a very bad way, and that the only person who had tried to bring
about an improvement in it was the only one to suffer. Brown,
whose case can never be forgotten, was nonsuited by a shuffle, and
absolutely “ smashed." Ever since that miserable failure of justice
things have been going from bad to worse, and Chief Secretary
after Chief Secretary has witnessed the declension without stretching
forth even as much as a departmental finger to arrest it. It
appears to be generally admitted that our police were originally a
splendid body of men, and it is not denied that the majority of
them are still clever and honest men ; but the impression that they
are being gradually demoralised by circumstances over which they
can exercise no control, is being strengthened day by day. It
never could have been supposed that they derived much benefit
from the example set by those placed over them —of those who


over and over again put them on the wrong scent in order that the
cockfighters might not by any chance be interfered with ; nor was
it reasonable to expect that their notions of right and wrong could
be very sensiblv corrected by seeing old officers driven out of the
force for ridiculously trivial irregularities, if for any at all.
However, even with a perfect knowledge of all this, the public
could scarcely have been prepared for what transpired since the
retirement of Detective Christie a few days ago, and for the start-
ling disclosures subsequently made by Mr. Otto Berliner, formerly
a member of the detective force, but one who some years since
flung up his appointment in disgust. About three years ago, Mr.
Berliner wrote to the Age with reference to the mismanagement of
the detective force; but from the fact of his having a short time
previously set up an opposition shop—or to speak more correctly,
opened a private inquiry office on his own account —his remarks
did not command the attention which might otherwse have been
bestowed upon them. Entire disinterestedness is not usually
looked for in such cases ; and it is just possible that Mr. Berliner
may have been suspected of a desire to advertise himself “ upon
the cheap.” The latter object may still actuate him in some
degree, but he now writes in such a tone as to compel the most
serious consideration. His language is decidedly Doric, and he
hesitates not to call a spade a spade. He says things that should
as speedily as possible be affirmed and acted upon, or publicly re-
pudiated upon oath. Silent contempt is all well enough in its way;
but it cannot do this time, as we will now proceed to show. Mr.
Berliner leaves it very clearly to be understood that many of the
sensational cases detected by his old colleagues were put in train
by the detectives themselves, but ere closing his remarks he be-
comes very unpleasantly specific in his allegations. “ Could a board
ascertain” (he inquires) “how it was Mr. Nicolson directed a
reward of ;£io, when he knew that my expenses were over jQxs
out of pocket, paid in cash; whilst Mr. Nicholson, in the
sensational case of the Collingwood bank robbery, directed
to be paid to his officer, Jack Williams, or to the fiddler who put
up the robbery ?” We cannot answer the question, but we think
that a board should do so, and as speedily as possible too. Re-
membering the circumstances of the case, and the frightful
character of at least that one of the ruffians who sang a blasphe-
mous song when standing at the gallows, we should say they
wouldn't have required much “ putting up ” to commit even a
worse crime than the robbery of a bank ; and, as well as we can
recollect, the police, whether detective or preventive, had much
less to do with the capture of the villains than the plucky grocer
whose terrible cheese-knife was during a week afterwards exhibited
in his window. However, the matter is far too serious to be left


in doubt, and Mr. Berliner should be compelled to either prove or
swallow his strangely ominous words.
Still more alarming is Mr, Berliner’s assertion that when he left
the force, Captain Standish wrote on his discharge-paper
“ Character good, but gave a great deal of trouble through hasty
temper lately and this, he says, “ because I refused to acknow-
ledge the guilt of David Young for Murder, and charged the
heads of the Detective department with the offence of ‘ tipping ’
being carried on in the department.” . . . “ I saw an illiterate
convict promoted over me, men who could not spell their own
language, made first-class officers, persons who had acted as shoe-
blacks and orderlies made first-das officers for swearing to a pipe
to hang an innocent man.” Remembering that even during the
course of the trial very grave doubts existed as to the guilt of
Young, and that an Italian subsequently confessed that it was he
himself who had committed the murder for which Young was
wrongly hanged, it would be difficult to find words strong enough
to use when dealing with the parties referred to by Mr. Berliner,
if his statement be correct; and if it be otherwise, that gentleman
will experience some difficulty in setting himself right with grossly
injured officials and an outraged public.
(To the Editor of Town and Country.)
Sir,— The public must be indebted to you for any “ healthy
publicity ” as to either of the Departments, but the sujbpressio veri
suggestio falsi style of writing adopted by your correspondent
“ Hamilton Rex ”is unjust; more especially towards those officers
he, with equivocal taste, names. Nor do the public gain by his
vapid tirade. You are, no doubt, aware the rules of the police
service preclude any of its members addressing the Press, hence
the advantage possessed by your correspondent. From my name
and address (enclosed), you will perceive this or any subsequent
letter cannot be inspired by the officers or others in question ; and
I would, as a matter of bare fair play, ask your readers to stay
their opinions until an opportunity arrives to answer your corres-
pondent’s letter, together with the further communication he pur-
poses addressing to you. When he has closed his correspondence
I will, with your permission, review the whole question. At
present permit me to say that with my personal knowledge of
police and detective duty in England, and on the continent of
Europe, and, from my professional position, knowing the mode of
duty here, I am of opinion the system and success will compare
favorably with the manner of the police system in the countries
named. Soliciting the publication of this, I am, &c.,
ist. September. Exponit.


(To the Editor of the Age.)
Sir, —Permit me to draw your attention to the letter addressed
to the Hon. the Chief Secretary by Captain Standish, dated 30th
May, 1876. Captain Standish states in his reply, under paragraph
two, as an explanation, “ There is no doubt that many persons
would be found ready to take charge of the detective force, or to
administer the police force, at perhaps half its present cost, if they
could find a Government unwise enough to entrust to them such
an experiment,” &c. Sir, this explanation did not arrise from ex-
Detective Christie’s charges, but from remarks made by you in a
leader of your valuable paper, dated 19th May, 1875, wherein
you stated, “No doubt Mr. Berliner would undertake to conduct
the detective department for one-half,” &c. Captain Standish
touches that portion of your leader only; but, for reasons best
known to himself, does not enter into other parts concerning pro-
motion of criminals over educated men, David Young’s case, &c.
I now beg leave to state, that so far as I am personally concerned, I
have no intention to enter into Government service, but I have no
hesitation to prove by practical and theoretical evidence that both
forces could be managed at less expense with better results. How
can the Chief Commissioner explain that it was possible, in
various cases, that a private office, conducted with the means of a
private purse, and assisted only by a few members, should detect
cases in Melbourne, when the Government force, paid by the
Treasury with per annum, failed to do so ? If this was
satisfactorily proved before a board, a Government need not be
unwise to have their departments cheaper and better conducted.
There are some efficient members in our detective force —Messrs.
Black and Eason. Both these officers are talented to a high
degree in their profession. Both these officers have served the
public of Victoria well, and they can produce evidence, abstracted
from Government statistics, wherein they can prove how diligent
and active they were during the last twenty years. Captain
Standish was not brought up from the ranks as a police nor detective
officer, but obtained his position as Chief Commissioner by
political, and, no doubt, family interest; therefore, the captain is
only a theoretical head. When Mr. Nicolson left the detective
department he promoted Mr. Secretan, a junior officer, over
Messrs. Black and Eason, and others. Since that day the
detective force fell daily. This uncalled-for promotion was made
just a few days before the House dissolved ; just a few days before
the Christmas holidays commenced—when everybody was inclined
for pleasure, and to go ruralising—the elver head of C. H.
Nicolson used as opportunity to give a blow to Mesrs. Black and
Eason, both experienced and able officers, superior to Mr.


Nicolson, and capable to challenge any officer in the world in
their own profession. The duties and work Messrs. Black and
Eason performed gained Mr. Nicolson such a favourable name
whilst he was inspector; but instead of promoting such able
talent he made the force the laughing-stock of the public. How
can the public expect officers to watch day and night for their
safety, when the return, instead of promotion, is ingratitude ? So
far as Mr. Secretan’s private position is concerned, I respect him,
and believe him to be a very amiable officer; and, although lam
writing my opinion plainly, it is not my intention to annoy or
molest Mr. Secretan. But, speaking from a public view, and
looking towards the Detective department, I have to state plainly
that the promotion of Mr. Secretan over Messrs. Black and
Eason was an act for which Captain Standish and Mr. Nicolson
ought to be called before a board and dealt with. Mr. Secretan
knows personally that neither this colony nor any other part of
the globe possesses two officers superior to Messrs. Black and
Eason, and that had either of them been promoted the detective
force would be respected this day by the public. The promotion
in the general force has been made on the same footing. Messrs.
Nicolson, Hare and Montfort would not accept any reward for
the arrest of Power, for a very good reason. The party who gave
the information received no less than 00 fr° m the public
Treasury, whilst Messrs Nicolson and Hare draw per
annum, and Sergeant Montfort was made inspector, at a cost to
the public purse, above first-class sergeants senior by many years.
A board would be able to hear some explanation upon such
matters, and devise rules for future promotions and expenditures
of public moneys. I remember a mounted constable being tried
for a criminal offence upon a little girl of fourteen or fifteen years
of age. He was brought before three J.P.’s, and although the evi-
dence was conclusive against him, he somehow divided the bench.
It was proved he came naked to the barrack-room in Castlemaine,
and his clothing was found by a foot constable near the house, or
outside the window of the house, where the girl slept. _ The Castle-
maine press condemned the decision of the J.P. s in loud and
earnest remarks. Instead of discharging this man, Captain Standish
quietly removed him to Daylesford, soon after David Young s
murder case took place. Mr. Nicholson telegraphed for me (having
with his force of three detectives and seven troopers failed to trace
David Young for nine days). I arrived in Daylesford at two a.m.
on Sunday morning, and succeeded in tracing Young by two p.m,
the same day via Blanket Flat. By my instigation a trooper was
sent along the Smeaton-road. During the time I went to Creswick
the mounted constable connected with the rape case was selected,
and naturally he met David Young on a farm as a laborer, living


in his own name. Captain Standish promoted that man as a senior-
constable, and recommended him to a high reward, whilst I was
not thought upon, although the credit of the arrest was due to me
if any credit there was in the arrest. Sir, it will be a wise Govern-
ment who will protect their officers and the Civil Service by insti-
tuting inquiries when evidence is submitted to them tending to
support complaints against heads of departments. I have no wish
to occupy any Government position, but I feel it my duty to assist
to punish those men who destroyed my position by their own mis-
conduct.—Yours, &c,,
Otto Berliner.
(To the Editor of the Age.)
Sir, —Permit me to draw your attention to your issue of the
4th September, 1874, wherein I pointed out to you the fact that
our detective and police force were mismanaged for years past.
Both forces have lost their renown. The reasons are simple,
although difficult to be understood by those who do not possess
professional knowledge of the duties connected with the manage-
ment of either department. During the period Mr. Nicolson was
superintendent of detectives, and during the service of ex-Detective
Christie, the public were treated from time to time to sensational
cases of crime, cases from which it appeared that the detectives
employed therein were like so many Fakirs of Oolu, but almost
immediately after such wonderful performances, when a simple
robbery was committed, and could not be detected, the people
were astonished to notice how wonderfully dull these actors became
from time to time. But sensational cases, although pleasing to the
public for the moment, and not disliked even for news by the press,
are generally produced by crime. Sir, you remember that during
the Prussian war with France documents were traced and found in
the dwelling of the Chief Commissioner of Police at Paris which
proved beyond any doubt that that clever officer bought all the
bombshells (which he afterwards found secreted with supposed
offenders), in fact that he was the first mover and originator of every
crime against the late ex-Emperor Napoleon which he detected.
This clever Chief Commissioner of Detectives received promotion
and was lavishly decorated by Napoleon for this decided cleverness,
and the press praised him throughout the world. All sensational
cases of that class are dangerous, and those who are guilty of pro-
ducing them are worse than criminals. Sir, you will find in your
issue of the 4th September, 1874, my letter, which deals with the
question of the mismanagement of the detective force, all the par-
ticulars of which are renewed by your contemporary, the Leader ,
of the 13th May, 1876. Although lam not a partner of book-


makers, nor fighting men, nor cardsharpers, I can adduce my
character during the last twenty-two years of which I have been
connected with police and detective duties, so as to enable me to
stand forward in rendering my advice to gain a more beneficial
management of the departments. The mismanagement of our de-
tective force was under Mr. Nicolson’s time, just the same as now,
under Mr. Secretan’s, and in proof of it I advance the following :
Let the Government appoint an experienced board of gentlemen,
and I will produce before such board the Police Gazette , say for
twenty years past (this Gazette is compiled in Captain Standish’s
office), and I will prove to the board that a very low percentage of
crime ever was, or is now, detected. Estimation shall be made to
the board of value and goods, properties, horses and cattle stolen
per annum not recovered, and the board, as well as the public, will
be astonished to learn how such a system could have been carried
on for so many years, independent of an expenditure of
per annum. My knowledge is arrived at from service whilst the
force was under Mr. Nicolson’s direction. I saw an illiterate con-
vict promoted over me, men who could not spell their own language
made first-class officers, persons who had acted as shoeblacks and
orderlies made first-class officers for swearing to a pipe to hang an
innocent man, and when he was discharged after being tried for
manslaughter permitted to leave the force with an income of
per annum. Being disgusted with the mismanagement of the force,
I voluntarily resigned ; and when asking for compensation had a
board appointed—Dr. M‘Crea and Captain Standish—and I re-
ceived not one farthing; but Captain Standish wrote on my
discharge from the force —“ Character good, but gave a great deal
of trouble through hasty temper lately,” because I refused to
acknowledge the guilt of David Young for murder, and charged
the heads of the Detective department with the offence of “tipping”
being carried on in the department. However, my main witness,
whose name I submitted to a board, was sent on leave to England
before the inquiry commenced, and was drowned on his return in
the s.s. London. Could a board ascertain why an officer who de-
tected murderers, burglars, and highwaymen at the risk of his life,
in a clear and distinct way, not by sensational acts of bought in-
formers ; who by sheer energy detected and convicted the Italian
gold coiners at Daylesford in 1862—the only detection and con-
viction ever obtained for gold coining in Great Britain or Australia,
according to criminal statistics ? Could a board ascertain how it
was Mr. Nicolson directed a reward of when he knew that
my expenses were over out of pocket, paid in cash ; whilst
Mr. Nicolson, in the sensational case of the Collingwood bank
robbery, directed to be paid to his officer. Jack Williams, or
to the fiddler who put up the robbery ? Such facts, brought before


a respectable board of selected citizens, in presence of the reporters
of the press, will soon show the key to open the wonderful cabinet
of mismanagement of the detective and police force. The failure
and the mismanagement can easily be traced and remedied. The
force, in the hands of two commissioners—one of detectives, another
of police —can be managed for one-half the amount, better and
more useful than it stands now; the position of inspecting-super-
intendent could then be abolished, and each commissioner take a
turn of inspection from time to time. By these inspections the
Commissioner will be able to get personally acquainted with his
officers and men. We require only four superintendents, four
inspectors, six sub-inspectors, and one inspector of detective police,
say at per annum, independent of the Commissioner of
Detectives. As the Detective department is looked upon as the
protector of life and property, every jQi expended will save the
community £IOO in return if proper officers are selected and
trained. When able commissioners are appointed, gentlemen by
name and by act, the force, both police and detective, will do their
duty.—Yours, &c.,
Otto Berliner,
The Gippsland Standard , Friday , June 2, 1876.
Once more in the annals of outrage and crime in Victoria has
the conviction come home to us that there must be something
radically wrong in the organisation, management, or conduct of
the police force in this colony. Without travelling over ground
which has been trodden by us in other districts, or troubling our-
selves to enquire as to the “ reason why” in reference to the far
too numerous trappings of the wrong men and escape of the real
culprits, we purpose offering a few remarks in reference to the
subject of police regime , which at the present juncture will certainly
not be received in the light of inappropriateness, or be ruled out
of course even by the warmest admirers of the Chief Commissioner,
or the most devoted friends of his subordinates. As a noteworthy
proof that the Victorian force in general, and the detective contin-
gent in particular, are not “ all there when wanted,” we have the
fact of the Burrumbeet outrage fresh in our memory, in connection
with which there is the capture of a palpably innocent man after
a lapse of nearly two months—his honorable discharge by the
local bench of magistrates, and the stern fact that the fiend who
committed the worst of crimes upon Mrs. Reeves on the 4th April
last is still at large, and—it may be added —still likely to be in the
face of the half-hearted search that has been set on foot with a view
to his capture. Admitting, for the sake of argument, that there is
a modicum of wisdom in the plan which provides for the catching


of a thief by sending another thief after him, we are still inclined
to write in support of the now more generally received doctrine
which views the enlistment of rogues in the search after their own
moral kith and kin as a fallacy, and the looking over guilty heads
and capture of innocent people as the natural outcome of too much
of that old identity system which obtained in the penal colonies
of Tasmania and New South Wales some thirty years ago.
Whether the vile wretch who attacked the unfortunate woman
above-mentioned will be handed over to justice and the common
hangman, it is of course impossible to say; but that the colony
should be ferretted over from one end to the other in search of the
scoundrel, is imperatively demanded at the hands of the Victorian
Government. For it will be a standing and eternal disgrace to the
colony if such a crime can be committed, either in daylight or
dark, and the guilty party make good his escape. As we have
previously remarked, it is not our intention in the present instance
to traverse the ground that has been already broken by us on
former occasions when we have felt ourselves called upon to refer
to the subject of police organisation; but one case may be cited
in proof at all events, that those plain clothes gentlemen who
assume the role of detectives under Captain Standish, have at
times been eclipsed by the denizens of private inquiry offices,
whose efforts to track the fugitive or pick up missing links, have
resulted in success long after the detectives had given up the
chase. A young girl, residing in one of the Melbourne suburbs,
having fallen into disgrace at school, left her home through fear ol
punishment, and no tidings were heard of her during many days,
notwithstanding the very clever and zealous manoeuvres of the
police, detective and otherwise, in every imaginable direction —
except the right. The girl’s relatives being in humble circum-
stances, were unable to grease the wheels sufficiently to make them
run easily and with precision, so after spending over twenty pounds
in travelling about the country at the beck and call of the knowing
ones, but without success, the parents consulted Mr. Otto Berliner,
of the Private Inquiry Office, in Elizabeth-street; and the result
of the meeting showed itself in the course of a few days, when the
missing member of the family was traced to Kilmore, and Mr.
Berliner received the thanks of her friends, in addition to the very
reasonable amount paid him for his services. The girl in question
waited for the train at Spencer-street station, and mingled with the
crowd dressed in the same habiliments as when she left her home,
and still this maiden of thirteen summers proved more than a
match for the Victorian detectives. Mr. Berliner could get on her
track ; why not those experts whose company he had quitted years
before because he loved not “ the ways that are dark and tricks
that are strange,” in which their very souls delighted. With a


simple Gazette notice as to face, figure, and dress, the police
authorities were quite content; but Mr. Berliner proved himself
wiser than these ancients, for he advertised the fair maiden in the
Argus newspaper; and as a score of intelligent people read that
paper daily for every one that wades through the Government Gazette
on the occasion of its weekly issue, the chances were twenty to one
in favor of Private Inquiry winning the race, and he scored a
victory as the very natural result of laying his plans upon that
simple but sound basis, which teaches the art of letting the world
at large know exactly what is sought after in order that success may
attend the search—no matter whether the game consist of a simple
truant maiden, or a deep-dyed villain whose savage instincts know
no law or limit. Whether Captain Standish is amenable to the
charge of straining at a gnat and at the same time swallowing a
camel, we do not pretend to say \ but we are personally aware of
the fact that he is so jealous of the fair name, fame, and discipline
of the Victorian police force, that he on one occasion sends a
senior-constable from west to east, though at the same time he
declares there is no fault attributable to the officer in question.
He then finjes another constable three pounds, and orders him up
to town for dispensing with the suaviter in modo when in personal
contact with a local justice ; and at the same juncture removes the
stripe from a senior-constable’s right arm after wearing it for six-
teen years, because, forsooth, a petty constable reports having
favored him with a loan of three pounds, which, however, had been
repaid long before the complaint was lodged. This latter case
appears the more extraordinary and unconstitutional when it is
borne in mind that no charge has been laid against the officer
referred to, nor has he been favored with a hearing either before a
bench or in the presence of his superior officer. All this may show
zeal and energy in the enforcement of discipline through the pre-
vention of too great popularity in favour of one man, or too morose
temperament on the part of an other, or the exigency of a three
pound loan on the side of a third ; but after all these are but trivial
matters in comparison with the practical utility and efficiency of
the service. And the conviction is now upon us, that unless there
is a speedy culling out of the black, but apparently favorite sheep
from the flock, both Burrumbeet outrage and Daylesford murder
fiascos will be encouraged rather than stamped out through the
agency of those men in the detective force, who should be a very
terror to evil doers instead of hob-nobbing with them at public-
house bars, or even far worse places of resort in and around the
great metropolis.


{Bendigo Independent, Saturday, June 3, 1875 J
Undoubtedly the best available deterrent from crime, by human
means, is to be found in such an organisation of the police force
as makes the detection of crime and the instant or speedy arrest of
its author, a moral, physical, and remorseless certainty. The
history of embezzlement is significantly suggestive and corrobora-
tive on this point. Men not remarkable for criminal proclivities
are seduced into this crime mainly from their confidence in im-
munity from being found out, and their hope of being able either
to baffle detection, or to make restitution before the crime is
discovered. And the large majority of crimes, we believe, are
committed in the hope —nourished with the immunity enjoyed by
so many criminals—of not being found out and convicted. It is
only the exceptional few, the vain and criminally ambitious,
or the hopeless and desperately daring, who rush into crime in
sheer defiance of the law, and in challenge of its penalties. That
our police force is not in an efficient state of organisation is obvious
from a very cursory glance at a few numbers of the Police Gazette,
and it has been more especially and prominently brought under
public notice of late by Mr. ex-Detective Christie and Mr. ex-
Detective Berliner. On retiring from the detective force, the
former officially stated that his principle reason to be, “ the semi-
disorganised state in which it (the detective force) is, owing to the
admission into its ranks of persons who are not adapted for the
work, and were in some cases a disgrace to any body of men.”
This is not a flattering certificate of character for a body of men
which, in conventional estimation, has come to be regarded as the
special, or national guard for the protection of life and property
men whose character and morale society has been educated to
believe are above suspicion. If such a statement rested upon the
ipse dixit of Mr. Christie, it might be allowed to pass as the
official excresence of spleen from an ex-professional smarting
under some real or supposed injury. But unfortunately Mr.
Christie’s explanation of his reasons for resigning amounts to an
accusation, and one which is supported not only by the circum-
stantial evidence of disorganisation afforded in the immunity
enjoyed by a host of undetected criminals, but also by the direct,
corroborative, authorative testimony of Mr. Otto Berliner, as given
in his letter appearing in the Age of the 19th ultimo. The many
years that have elapsed since Mr. Berliner left the force must have
assauged the bitterness of personal resentments for the treatment
he received, if he ever entertained any, and his opinion now may
be regarded as one of judicial impartiality, if not of quasi-judicial
authority. The Age says of him “ Mr. Berliner is an old officer
of very large experience, and possessing a peculiar right to have


and to express an opinion upon the subject. Like most men who
have steadily refused to give any encouragement to the vices and
corruption of the system under which they worked, he has smarted
for his independence and integrity; and on that account, if, on no
other, he is entitled to a hearing.” The Daylesford Mercury says
of him, We are aware that Mr. Berliner has very superior quali-
fications for the profession he has adopted. When in the detec-
tive force he was the best educated man in it, inferior to none in
point of acumen, and having, moreover, the crowning merit of
being thoroughly honest. But he was too independent to submit
to the promotion of those he knew to be inferior to himself in
every respect. Hence, he threw up his appointment in the force,
and has since kept a private inquiry office of his own, in which he
has been fortunate enough to prove his sagacity on more than one
occasion, and to win golden opinions from such as have had occa-
sion to avail themselves of his services.” Such is one officer, who
left the force in disgust at its mismanagement, whose abilities and
merits have been recognised by the Judges of the Supreme and
other courts, and by the public at large, although they were per-
sistently ignored by the head of the police force, and Mr. Christie
is another. Mr. Berliner states that the detective and police
forces have been mismanaged for years past, and that both have
lost their prestige. He implies that sensational cases of crime
have been put up simply to afford the detectives opportunities
of distinguishing themselves by bringing the perpetrators to justice,
d° es not rel 7 upon generalities, but instances a case,
Whilst Mr. Nicholson, in the sensational case of the Colling-
wood bank robbery directed to be paid to his officer, Jack
Williams, or to the fiddler who put up the robbery.” Mr
Berliner’s letter contains some serious and startling indictments'
charges which, in justice to society, the Government are bound
to have sifted by meeting his challenge. “ Let the Government
appoint an experienced board of gentlemen, and I will produce
before such board the Police Gazette , say for twenty years past
and prove to the board that a very low percentage of crime ever
was or is now, detected, .... and they, as well as the
public, will be astonished to leam how such a system could have
been carried on for so many years, independent of an expenditure
of A 205,591 per annum.” Mr. Berliner was engaged, with some mem-
bers of the detective force in endeavouring to discover the murderer of
Margaret Graham, and he always then, and since, expressed his belief
that in the hanging of David Young for that crime, an innocent
man suffered. In his letter he implies a fearful charge, in reference
to this case, “persons who had acted as shoe-blacks and orderlies
being made first-class officers for swearing to a pipe to hang an
innocent man. And when he was discharged, after being tried for


manslaughter, permitted to leave the force with an income of
per annum.” The local journal, which is familiar with all
the details of the case, says there is no mistaking ” this allusion :
if not, and the party alluded to does not take legal action for
redress, the inference that suggests itself—that an officer of the
force deliberately perjured himself for promotion or money, there-
by brought about the execution of an innocent man, and was
pentioned off with £IOO a year for doing so—is something fright-
ful to contemplate. The practice of tipping and taking tip is unre-
stated as a custom of the force. In support of Mr.
Berliners belief that an Italian was the murderer of Margaret
Graham, there was subsequently an account published of an Italian
who was found half dead in a wild state at Apollo Bay, and who
confessed that he committed the murder for which Young was
executed. It seems imperative that the Government should ap-
point a Royal Commission or a board of inquiry to investigate the
management of the whole police force. Mr. Berliner corroborated all
that was affirmed by Mr. Christie, and adds a great deal more
besides, and both declare that fewer men could do the work if better
qualified and better paid. Mr. Berliner believes that the force, in
the hands of two commissioners—one of detectives—another’ of
police—could be managed for one half the amount, and be made
better and more useful than it stands now.
Melbourne , Friday , ig th May, 1876.
We do not know any subject which appeals more directly to the
interest of the public than the condition of the police and detective
force; and we are afraid, from the indirect evidence that has lately
leaked out, as well as from more direct testimony such as we pub-
lish in another column, that the condition of neither of them is
what it ought to be. We have only to recall the number of flagrant
crimes that have been perpetrated during the last six months
without the discovery of their authors, to satisfy ourselves that the
criminal classes are somehow or other more than a match for the
police. It seems as if detection were the exception rather than
the rule, and nobody can doubt that to the feeling of immunity
which has thus been engendered we are indebted for those strange
epidemics of crime, such as rapes and railway snaring, which occa-
sionally occur to remind the community of its helplessness. A
week or two ago Detective Christie retired from the detective force,
and he took care to put it on record that the principal reason for
his retirement was “ the semi-disorganised state in which it is, owing
to the admission into its ranks of persons who are not adapted for
the work, and were in some cases a disgrace to any body of men.”
This is not a pleasant thing to hear about a body which is supposed


to have special qualifications for protecting the lives and property
of society, and for bringing its assailants to justice. Mr. Christie's
charges are of a two-fold kind. They evidently refer, not only to
the professional unfitness of his late associates, but to a want of
character and morale. It is to be regretted that Mr. Christie has
waited till he could get out of their company to denounce them,
perhaps; but better late than never. The public are indebted to
him for the disclosure; and it is a pity it was not a little more
definite and circumstantial. What are the disgraceful cases he
alludes to, and who is responsible for disorganising the force by
appointing men who disgrace it ? That Mr. Christie has not over-
stated the case at all is clear from the corroboration he receives in
other quarters. In another column we publish a letter from
Mr, Otto Berliner, which not only confirms Mr. Christie's state-
ments and innuendos, but suggests a business-like remedy for the
abuses which he discloses. Mr. Berliner is an old officer of very
large experience, and possessing a peculiar right to have and to
express an opinion on the subject. Like most men who have
steadily refused to give any encouragement to the vices and cor-
ruption of the system under which they worked, he has smarted for
his independence and integrity; and on that account, if on no
other, he is entitled to a hearing. He declares that the force has
always been mismanaged, and that its mismanagement is as glaring
now as it ever was, and he suggests a means of instituting a very
good test of its inefficiency, namely, by examining the Police Gazelle ,
say for twenty years past, and estimating the value of the goods
and property stolen every year and not recovered. He is more
explicit than Mr. Christie in the form of his indictment, for he says
he has seen illiterate men, and even convicts, promoted over the
heads of more deserving officers, apparently for no other reason
than that their superiors had some object to gain by promoting
them. The practices of tipping and taking tips he mentions
without any reserve, and we are afraid that there is very little secret
about it. That it should be necessary to have members of the
criminal class in the pay of the force seems to be inevitable as long
as its members are unqualified for the work of discovering crime.
But there ought to be no excuse for the habit, which is known to
obtain, of putting up crimes simply in order that the detectives
may be able to make a little sensation, and show the public that
they are doing something for their money. Mr. Berliner says, in
so many words, that this was done in the case of the Collingwood
Bank robbery, for which two men were hung ; and he throws out
a very dark hint about the way in which the prosecution for the
Daylesford murder was conducted, for which David Young paid
the penalty on the scaffold. Such statements calculated to
create horrible misgivings in the public mind, even if they do not


exactly leave the impression that Mr. Berliner could throw some
very unpleasant light upon the mysteries of crime in Victoria. As
far as David Young’s case is concerned, our readers may recollect
the story which came to us from Adelaide, of an Italian being found
half-dead in a semi-wild state at Apollo Bay, who confessed that it
was he who had murdered the girl for whom Young died; and it was
very well known at the time that Mr. Berliner himself, who was
employed in the case, always believed and maintained that an
Italian had committed the deed. Be this as it may, the point we
have in view at present is to call attention to the serious charges
which have been publicly made by two prominent ex-members of
the force, and which agree more or less in detail. Mr. Berliner
confirms what Mr. Christie says, and adds a good deal more beside.
Like Mr. Christie, he resigned of his own accord, and from the
same motives of disgust and dissatisfaction, Mr. Christie says
there are still some old and efficient members left in the force, but
that they will soon go if some amendment is not effected. He
suggests that a board of inquiry should be appointed, whose pro-
ceedings should be open to the Press, and Mr. Berliner also
endorses the suggestion. Both assert that fewer men could do the
work if they were better qualified and better paid; and, according
to Mr. Berliner, the same plan might be adopted with advantage
with the police proper. Into this part of the subject the board
alone would be able to go with any advantage ; but it does not re-
quire a board to show us that a good deal of disorganisation and
demoralisation does exist, and that the source of it is to be traced
in the conduct of the officers as well as of the men. Unless the
former are respected for the qualities of manliness and fair-dealing,
the men will not rise above the low level to which they seem by
common testimony to have fallen.
The time has arrived when something must be done to improve
the force. Every day offers some unwelcome proof of its ineffi-
ciency. Crimes are being committed in every direction, and the
criminals are still at large. It is a matter of notoriety that society
feels far more confidence in the private detective officer than in
the Government officer; and we dare say that Mr. Berliner would
undertake to do the whole work of the department, which at present
costs over a year, for a tithe of the amount. His sug-
gestion for the appointment of a board commends itself to the
common sense of the community, and if the proceedings of the
board are made public, as far as may be, there can be no doubt
we should very soon arrive at the root of the abuses which have
done so much to cast suspicion upon the management of the force.


ARREST OF THE DEFAULTER SAWELL.
The defaulter Sawell, who held the position of paying teller in
the Bank of New South Wales, in this city, and who absconded on
Tuesday, the 13th inst, after embezzling between ,-£5,000 and
,£6,000 from the bank in which he was employed, was arrested on
Saturday morning, in Adelaide. The merit of this arrest belongs
to Mr. Otto Berliner, into whose hands the discovery of the
absconder was placed only on Thursday last, at noonday. Mr.
Berliner, with four of his men, lost no time in proceeding with
their inquiries, which they continued all that night, and at
9 o’clock on the following morning were successful in obtaining
indirect information, which, on being followed up, led to the con-
clusion that Sawell and his mother had gone in the Tararua to
Adelaide. We stated on Saturday how Mr. Berliner had this
belief confirmed when on Friday the Tararua returned to Mel-
bourne. He also ascertained the fact that the defaulter and his
mother was still in Adelaide, aud likewise the house in which
they were residing The warrant for Sawell’s arrest having been
issued, it simply remained for the Adelaide police to proceed,
in accordance with the instructions transmitted to them, and for-
mally arrest the defaulter. On Saturday afternoon Detective
Black was despatched overland to Adelaide with the warrant and
depositions, for the purpose of bringing the prisoner back to Mel-
bourne, He will arrive in Adelaide on Tuesday morning, and as
the signing of the warrant by the Governor for the extradition of
the prisoner is a mere formality, he may be expected to leave with
his charge by the first steamer which departs for Melbourne after
his arrival. It appears that the house in South Yarra was left in
charge of a servant girl, to whom Sawell stated that he had ob-
tained an extension of his sick leave, and that he and his mother
were olny going on a visit to the Goulburn district and would
return in a fortnight. The £5OO on which the warrant for SawelFs
arrest was based, was a sum he ought to have remitted to Ararat.
ANOTHER BANK DEFAULTER.
The long list of bank defaulters in this city has received another
addition, the amount of the defalcations on this occasion being
something considerable. The unexplained absence of a young
man named H. P. Sawell from his duties at the Bank of New
South Wales, where he occupied the onerous post of teller, gave
rise to an inquiry into his accounts. At first everything appeared
to be regular, but the investigation had not proceeded far before
the alarming discovery was made that Sawell had systematically


manipulated the books under his control for the purposes of
defrauding the bank on a wholesale scale. When the investigation
closed it was ascertained that the total amount of the deficiency
was a little over and steps were taken to ensure the arrest
of Sawell forthwith. Mr. Otto Berliner was called in, and he
immediately proceeded to Sawell’s place of residence in South
Yarra, when he found that the young man, together with his
mother, had left their home at 11 a.m. on the 13th instant, in a
waggonette, stating to their servant girl that they intended visiting
some friends up the country, and would be away for some weeks.
Before leaving they paid the girl three weeks’ salary in advance,
and at the same time told her the names of some of the friends
whom they were going to visit. Mr. Berliner telegraphed to these
persons as to whether the young man and his mother had visited
them as asserted, and the replies were in every case to the contrary,
and that, moreover, they had not even been seen. The detective
and his officers then made a thorough search throughout the city
for the driver of the waggonette in which the defaulter had left his
home, and information was obtained which leads to the supposition
that Sawell and his mother had driven to the Australian wharf, and
had taken their passages for Adelaide by the steamer Tararua,
which left the same day. The passenger list of the vessel was
examined at the Melbourne office, but nothing could be obtained
from it to strengthen the supposition. However, as the Tararua
was daily expected in from her return trip, a sharp look out was
kept for her arrival. She was telegraphed off Cape Schanck yes-
terday morning, and Mr. Berliner, without delay, boarded her.
The chief steward, Mr. Gray, was interviewed, and when the photo-
graph of Sawell was produced to him, he immediately identified it
with a young man who, with an elderly lady, left Melbourne on the
13th instant by the Tararua, under the name of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephens, and who paid their passage money on board the vessel.
These names consequently did not appear on the Melbourne
passenger lists, but were recorded at Adelaide, and will explain the
difficulty experienced in ascertaining whether there was any proba-
bility of the defaulter having left by the vessel. On the way Sawell
asked the steward to change of Melbourne notes into Adelaide
money. The defaulter was last seen by Mr. Gray, the steward, at
Ford’s hotel, Adelaide, where he was staying. This was after the
departure from the port of the mail steamer for Galle, so any motive
of Sawell’s to elude detection by means of that vessel would be
frustrated. The bank authorities, acting under the direction of Mr.
Smith, the head inspector from Sydney, yesterday instructed Mr.
Stewart (of Messrs. Malleson, England, and Stewart, solicitors) to
apply for a warrant for Sawell’s arrest. This has been granted,
and has, with the valuable information gained by Mr. Berliner,


been handed to the Detective Department, who will, no doubt,
telegraph and have the defaulter apprehended. A leave of eight
days had, through illness, been granted to Sawell, the last day of
which expired on the Saturday previous to his departure. He was
at the bank in his usual place on the following Monday, the 12th
instant, but since then nothing more was seen of him. No import-
ance was attached to his absence for the first two or three days,
but when nothing was heard of him one way or the other, suspicion
of something wrong became general, and an inquiry into his
accounts resulted as before stated. Mr. Berliner only received his
first intimation of the matter on Thursday at noon, and great credit
is therefore due to him for his energy and tact in the investigation,
and in bringing it to the present state. Sawell had been connected
with the bank for the past fifteen years, during which time every
confidence had been reposed in him.
The prompt manner in which the bank defaulter Sawell was
traced, within thirty hours of the time he was reported as missing,
was favourably commented on as soon as the fact became known,
by its publication in Saturday’s Herald. Mr. Otto Berliner had
the case entrusted to him by the bank authorities, and seems to
have worked with untiring energy and great skill, until he thoroughly
established the fact that Sawell was at Ford’s Hotel, Port Adelaide.
Of course, as the warrant had not been transmitted to the sister
colony, Sawell could not be arrested at once, but the telegraph
enabled the runaway to be placed under police surveillance, and
this would have been kept up until the warrant was sent on, had
not Sawell given himself up. The bank authorities, however,
should remember that much of Mr. Berliner’s success is due to the
steward of the steamer in which the defaulter went to Adelaide
with his mother, for had he not readily and emphatically identified
the photographs as those of the people who had travelled with him
on the previous voyage, Berliner would probably have been at a
loss, at least for a sufficient time to enable Sawell to get further
away, and render his capture even more difficult. Altogether,
however, the case stands out in gratifying contrast to the seeming
bungle that has characterised several of a similar nature placed in
the hands of the detectives during the last year or two.
UNFOUNDED CHARGE.
The charge against Mr. Donald MTntosh, a squatter and publi-
can, at Lake Boga, near Swan-hill, of an alleged larceny of a
cheque for was heard before Judge Stephen at the Sand-


hurst Assize Court, on Feb. 8, and ended in an acquittal. Mr.
C. A. Smyth prosecuted; and Mr. Dunne and Mr. Casey de-
fended. The facts, as disclosed in evidence, were simply that on
the 3rd October last, a plumber, named John Dixon, deposited a
letter containing a cheque of and addressed to his wife, in
the open post bag at the accused’s hotel, but neither the cheque
nor the letter reached the destination indicated by the address.
Dixon then put the matter into the hands of the police, and an
investigation followed, which resulted in MTntosh being charged
with stealing the cheque. On the 23rd December last the case
was heard at the Swan-hill Police Court, when Mr. Ogier, the
stipendiary magistrate, without waiting to consult his colleagues
who sat with him on the bench (Mr. Wood, president of the Shire
Council, and Dr. MTntyre) peremptorily committed the accused
to take his trial at the Sandhurst Assizes. Mr. Dunne, who de-
fended MTntosh, strongly objected to this procedure, but in vain,
and accordingly he instructed Mr. Otto Berliner to take up the
matter and prepare the defence for the higher court. This task
Mr. Berliner undertook, and the result was that the tables were
turned altogether against Dixon, and the judge directed the jury
to find a verdict of “not guilty.” It was proved that Dixon was
addicted to intemperate habits; that on several occasions he
had been reprimanded for his intemperance by Mr. MTntosh,
who employed him to do some plumbing work, that he had
threatened to have satisfaction from MTntosh, though it should
cost him “ seven years,” and had said that he would weave a web
for him that would put him (MTntosh) in a corner. It was
further shown that Dixon had spent more money since the alleged
loss of his cheque, than he had earned, or could account for.
The jQxo cheque in question had been passed into Mr. MTntosh’s
bank account, but there was no connection established between
Dixon’s letter and that document, nor any proof that it was not
passed by anyone of the numerous shearers who had thronged
MTntosh’s Hotel in October.
(Argus, February 14, 1877.^
At the Sandhurst Court of Assize on Thursday last, Mr. Donald
MTntosh was honourably acquitted of a charge of larceny, Mr.
Justice Stephen at the same time assuring him that “ there was
not the slightest imputation on his character.” It may be remem-
bered that, about two months ago, Mr. MTntosh, who is a re-
spectable resident in the Swan-hill district, was brought before the
the local bench charged with the larcenous appropriation of a
cheque for £\o belonging to a man named Dixon. The case
was adjudicated upon by Mr. Ogier, P.M., Mr. Woods, and Dr.


M‘lntyre. The first of these gentlemen decided that the matter
ought to go before a jury, and Mr. MTntosh was committed for
trial, heavy bail being required for his enlargement. The case, as
reported in one of the Bendigo papers, appeared to challenge
comment unfavourable to the two local magistrates, who refused
to concur in the decision arrived at by Mr. Ogier, and we spoke
of it at the time accordingly. We are glad to learn, however, that
our strictures were undeserved, and that the report upon which
they were based must have been inaccurate. Mr. Justice
Stephen, in directing Mr. MTntosh’s acquittal, gave it as his
opinion that there was no case to present to a jury, and refused to
comply with an application from Dixon for the return to him of
the impounded cheque. This seems to have come into Mr.
MTntosh’s hands in the ordinary way of business; for as the
Bendigo Advertiser points out, such documents have much the
same currency in the pastoral districts that bank notes have in
town. “ Shopkeepers sell their goods for them, and when change
is required, it is given in smaller cheques, the man of business
considering it necessary only to see that the signature is genuine,
and the amount not tampered with.” The case was evidently
one which required the exercise of more than ordinary discrimi-
nation and circumspection ; and the least that can be said of it
is that “some one has blundered.” Fortunately for Mr.
MTntosh, he is an old resident in the district, where the alleged
offence was committed, and is highly respected by his friends and
neighbours, so that he will not suffer by this unpleasant incident;
but it is easy to see that if he had been a newcomer and a
stranger, a permanent stain might have been inflicted on his
character by so serious a charge having been brought against him.
As it is, he is to be congratulated upon his honourable acquittal,
and it is to be hoped that Mr. Justice Stephen’s decision, which
was tantamount to a judicial rebuke of the committing magistrate,
will have the effect of including, on the part of Mr. Ogier, the
exercise of greater caution for the time to come.
ARREST OF ROSENWAX AT FIJI.
Considerable interest was manifested yesterday on the arrival
of the steamer City of Melbourne, in consequence of its being
known that Elias Rosenwax, late pawnbroker of Melbourne, who
left suddenly at the beginning of last mouth without paying his
debts, was on board, having been arrested in Fiji through the
exertions of Mr. Otto Berliner, proprietor of a private inquiry
office, and formerly a member of the Melbourne detective force.
The steamer arrived at the Sandridge railway pier at about 6 o’clock


last evening, and a large crowd had assembled, anxious to obtain
a glimpse of the prisoner, who was attended by a Geelong police-
man, who took charge of him at Queenscliff, and a native Fijian
constable named Evarama. The latter was picturesquely dressed
in a turban and waistband, supplemented by a Rob Roy plaid
shawl twisted round his body. He is a man of medium height,
but of strong build, and looks as if he could display a considerable
amount of activity. His hair is woolly, but his features are not at
all negro-like, and have an intelligent and rather pensive expression.
He spoke only a few words of English, and his behaviour was
quiet and unobtrusive. The prisoner was taken to Melbourne in
a cab by Constable Brosnahan, of Geelong, who took charge of
him at Queenscliff, and Detectives O’Rourke and Quinton, and
was lodged in the city watchhouse, on two charges,—one of having
on the 12th September obtained from Messrs. M‘Arthur, Sherrard,
and Copeland, Flinders-lane, various goods with intent to defraud,
and the other of larceny as a bailee, of two gold watches and
chains belonging to Leopold Saunders. The prisoner appeared
in a most dejected state of mind. His wife was on the pier when
the vessel arrived, and naturally was very much distressed.
It was stated that the total amount owing by the prisoner is
but that ,£2,000 of this consisted of ordinary debts, so
that fraud is alleged only in regard to the other ,£2,000 worth of
property obtained by Rosenwax immediately before his departure
for Fiji. It may be remembered that some ,£2OO or worth
of this property was recovered by the detectives after Rosenwax’s
flight at places in town where he had disposed of it. The firms
which are sufferers by dealing with Rosenwax are said to consist
principally of Messrs. M‘Arthur, Sherrard, and Copeland, Flinder's-
lane ; Wm. Watson and Sons, Little Collins-street; Fenwick,
hlinders-lane ; Stevenson and Sons, Flinders-lane ; Rosenthal,
jeweller, Little Collins-street ; Saunders, Little Collins-street ;
Bloomington, bootmaker, Elizabeth-street; Laing and Webster,
warehousemen, Little Flinders-street ; and E. and G. Dance,
clothiers, Flinders-lane. Up to the present the cost of bringing
back the prisoner has amounted to ,£1,500, but the money outlay
is not so much thought of, as a question is at issue affecting the
whole mercantile community, viz., the possibility of legally seizing
absconders to Fiji, and the willingness of the government of
that “ kingdom to give up offenders against the British posses-
sions. Of course if offenders who could get away to Fiji were
harboured and protected, a convenient asylum would be provided
for rascals of every description, and, as has been before pointed
out, the presence of so handy a refuge would be an encourage-
ment to fraud and crime. The efforts of Mr. Berliner, now brought
to a successful issue, as far as regards the bringing back of the


absconder, have been so favourably regarded in Sydney, it is
stated, that Mr. Berliner has been informed that the Chamber of
Commerce in that city intend to offer him a complimentary testi-
monial.
The following is a condensed description of the events attending
the arrest of Rosenwax. On the 4th of last month Mr. Berliner
set out in the steamer Balclutha for Fiji, via Sydney, and arrived
at Levuka, on the island of Ovalau, on the 18th, at half-past 6 a.m.
On board there was a man named Aaron Pinkus, stated to belong
to Melbourne, who intimated his intention of rescuing Rosenwax
if arrested, and of shooting Berliner. He went also by the name
of Davenport. Mr. Berliner went ashore at Levuka, and
announced that he had come merely as a private citizen repre-
senting the mercantile community of Melbourne in this matter,
and not a Government agent, and that he brought with him merely
copies of the warrants issued against Rosenwax in Melbourne, and
declarations against him by different Melbourne merchants. The
Government consists of white men, and a Cabinet meeting was
held, at which Mr. Berliner attended, and stated that he was the
representative of the mercantile community of Melbourne in refer-
ence to the defalcations, and showed documents, &c., indicating
what the charges were against Rosenwax. The Fiji Government
agreed to render every assistance, and gave Mr. Berliner a letter
to King Cakobau, who was at Bau, a fortified island, 50 miles
distant, agreeing at the same time that a police boat should cruise
outside the harbour of Levuka to watch for the Eliza Firth. Mr.
Berliner saw the King, who entertained him, and loaded him with
presents in regal fashion, and said he would grant a warrant, as he
fully confirmed the action of his Government, not wanting any
more bad white men at his place. The warrant was issued by Mr.
Patrick Brougham, chief police magistrate, and placed in the hands
of Sergeant Moore and the water police. The King sent an influ-
ential chief with Mr. Berliner to Suva, 80 miles distant, in an open
boat, information having been obtained that the Eliza Firth, with
Rosenwax on board, was at that island. The voyage, sailing and
rowing, lasted from 5 a.m. till 8 p.m., bad rainy weather being
experienced nearly all the way. On arrival there it was found
that the Eliza Firth, with Rosenwax on board, had left five hours
for Levuka by the open sea, stopping only an hour. Mr. Berliner
set out back, navigating the back way as it were, instead of the
open sea, going through the Rewa River, where a stop of two
hours was made for refreshment. The only provisions in the boat
were biscuits and gin, which were supplemented by fruit and fish
from the natives. Levuka was regained on Saturday, after three
days and two nights had been spent in the boat. The Eliza Firth
was found at Levuka, having arrived at 8 p.m. the previous night,


when great excitement had been caused by the attempted arrest
of Rosenwax, and his rescue and re-arrest, as thus described in the
Fiji Gazette of the 21st October:—“The greatest excitement pre-
vailed on the beach last evening, shortly before 8 o’clock, at
hearing an alarm bell rung, which succeeded the report of a revolver
fired near the steamship Balclutha, followed by a discharge of
rockets from that ship. It soon was ascertained that Rosenwax,
who had been captured by the police, had been arrested on board
the Eliza Firth, and had effected his escape. The police magis-
trate, accompanied by constable Moore, proceeded on board the
Eliza Firth so soon as she got into harbour to arrest Rosenwax,
who was on board under the name of Green. The captain declined
to allow the accused to be arrested, and the police remained on
board. After dark the accused proceeded into a waterman’s boat,
and was immediately re-arrested by Mr. M‘Galium, and taken on
board the s.s. Balclutha The accused proceeded to
leave that vessel in a boat, and on getting into it with an accom-
plice, Mr. M‘Galium again attempted to take him. Mr. M‘Galium
was fired on from the boat, and slightly wounded, and got to the
shore, where the hue and cry was raised. The accomplice of
Rosenwax was soon arrested and taken to the station-house. At
about 10 p.m. Mr. Woods (Premier) received information that
Rosenwax was in a native house belonging to Mr. Heritage, at
Nai Koro Koro. Mr. Woods, Golonel Hamilton, and Captain
Brown proceeded there and arrested him. He was in the house
secreted in a mat. He was taken to the station-house a pallid,
miserable object. When there he confessed himself to be Rosen-
wax, was searched, and locked up.” The Fiji Gazette refers to the
behaviour of the prisoner in following terms : —“ On the prisoner’s
apprehension nothing could exceed the miserable cowardice he
evinced. He frequently cried out, ‘Shoot me, gentlemen!’
‘ Hang me ? hang me ! ’ And when taken to the station-house,
was so overwhelmed with terror that he could not speak.” It
turned out that the rescuing party consisted of Messrs. E. S.
Smith, R. D. Ireland, R. Graham, and Aaron Pinkus, and the last-
named was subsequently charged with attempting to rescue a pri-
soner lawfully held in custody. Evidence was given as to the
rescue. During the struggling on the companion, Rosenwax and
M'Callum fell into the boat alongside the Balclutha. M‘Callum
stated—“ At this moment a voice from the deck, I believe to have
been prisoner’s, called out, ‘ Rosenwax, there’s a pistol in the boat,
use it.’ I called out to Scotty to clear off from the ship. He
declined to do so, but ordered us out of the boat. Immediately
afterwards some one entered the boat whilst I was on the top of
Rosenwax, holding him down, and called out, ‘ Let go, or I will
shoot youand a shot was fired, and the report was that of a


pistol loaded with powder and ball On turning round I felt a
sharp knock on my hip. Rosenwax quivered, and said, ‘ Oh, my
God !’ Believing Rosenwax to be shot, I turned and saw the
prisoner, who had a revolver then in his hand, which he again pre-
sented at me, and said, ‘ I’ll shoot you ! I’ll shoot you ? ’ The
pistol was again flashed in my face, and I attempted to throw
prisoner down, I threw him on the side of the boat. At that
moment I heard Captain Moore’s voice calling out —‘ For God’s
sake come out of that boat; you have done enough, and more
than enough.’ I then stepped on the gangway, and the boat was
immediately pushed off clear of the ship by the waterman.
Captain Moore ordered the waterman to take Rosenwax and pri-
soner to the ship Eliza Firth, and hand them over to the chief
officer. Scotty replied, ‘ All right, sir, I will’ Captain Moore
asked me if I was hurt. I said, ‘ No, not much.’ I was bruised.
I believe I was hit by a bullet, but am not certain.”
The Fiji Gazette adds that “ Mr. Murray addressed the Bench
for the prisoner, who threw himself on the mercy of the Court.
He adverted to the fact that the prisoner had been 23 years in
Melbourne, had a wife and family, and was in every respect, as he
could show, an honest man. He had been advised that Rosenwax
was illegally arrested, and, acting under an impulse, without having
anything to do with Rosenwax, had committed a very foolish
action. Mr. Murray again feelingly threw himself on the mercy of
the Court, and called—
Otto Berliner, who said—l know prisoner. He resided in
Melbourne, and I never knew him to be connected with the
criminal class. I believe him to be an honest man. I don’t
believe him to have been experienced in the use of firearms, or
he would not have fired as he has done. I don’t believe he would
have acted as he has done if he had not been advised to do so. I
can’t say if he is connected with Rosenwax. I have no charge
against him. I believe he came to Fiji to assist Rosenwax to
escape from me. He told the chief officer and the boatswain of
the steamer he did.
“ His Worship said that the prisoner had pleaded guilty to a
charge of shooting, and he was bound to say that his act was one
which narrowly approached that of murder; had the pistol shot
taken a course very little different to that it took, something very
serious would have happened. He, as magistrate, would uphold
the dignity of the Court, and support the police and special con-
stables, all of whom, for their promptitude and vigour, had his
confidence and that of the Government. He sentenced the
prisoner to a fine of 80 dollars and two hours’ imprisonment.
Prisoner then begged to be allowed to beg the pardon of Mr.
M‘Callum and every one he had offended, and after having done
so, was locked up.”


It should be stated that Mr. Berliner was made an inspector of
police for the kingdom of Fiji to facilitate his operations ; but as
soon as he had secured his prisoner and got him safe on board
ship for Sydney, he resigned the office, thanking the Government
for their kindness. Another passenger named Moore, or Fletcher,
and described also as an absconder from Melbourne, was on
board the Eliza Firth, and could have been brought back by Mr.
Berliner, who, however, had no authority or instructions to deal
with him. Two or three days before the charge against Pinkus
was heard, Rosenwax was taken before the Court at Levuka, where
he pleaded “Not guilty” to a charge of stealing and converting to
his own use two watches and chains belonging to Leopold Saunders,
of Melbourne. Mr. Berliner prosecuted ; and, in order to show
that the Court was a legally constituted one, with jurisdiction to
remand the prisoner to Melbourne, produced a mass of evidence
to show that Cakobau was King of Fiji, and acknowledged as
such by the British Consuls at Fiji and Tonga, by the French
Treaty, the American bond, and the Consul of the King of
Hawai. The Constitution Act of the kingdom was also put in as
evidence. Evidence was given by James Waters, captain of the
Eliza Firth, who said he first saw Rosenwax at a house in Russell
street, kept by a pawnbroker named Waxman, about the 20th
September, when Rosenwax said he wanted to go to Fiji in con-
sequence of a girl having a child by him. The witness also found
that Rosenwax was a Freemason, and Rosenwax gave him a good
many presents. Finally he left port on the 23rd September,
having received altogether from Rosenwax 12s. Rosenwax
went under the name of F. Benegur. When constable Moore
came on board at Fiji, he said Rosenwax had committed depre-
dations to the amount of The witness continued—
“ Moore asked me if I had a passenger on board named Rosen-
wax. I said, ‘No, I don’t think I have a passenger of that name
on my list, but I will soon see/ and I then handed the passenger
list into the constable’s hand. I did not mention anything to the
constable. Moore did not say who he was. He said Rosenwax had
committed some depredations to the amount of Moore
did not produce a warrant, and did not tell me he had one. The
pilot went on deck and took charge of the ship. Moore and I
also went on deck. About ten mtnutes afterwards he came to
speak to me ; he said the man was on board. I said, ‘ Ha, yes ?’
About an hour after a boat passed us, and directly afterwards
Moore collared the prisoner. I saw the scuffle, and heard prisoner
say, ‘ You have got nothing to do with me —I am a free man.’ I
ran down off the poop, and put my hand on Moore’s shoulder,
and said, £ How dare you meddle with this man ? lam magistrate
here—show me your authority.’ He said, ‘ I have it.’ I said, 4 Bro-


dace it then.’ He said ‘he would not produce it/ I then told him to
keep his hands off the man Rosenwax. He did not seem inclined to
desist, and I then threatened to shoot him, upon which he
desisted, both prisoner and constable remaining on board quietly.
I afterwards several times advised prisoner to go on shore, and
told him he could not stop on board. He afterwards gave me a
gold watch and chain and a revolver. The constable was not pre-
sent. Prisoner was at liberty to go where he liked. I told
prisoner I would take him ashore. He consented to go, and just
as he left the ship’s side he stepped into another boat alongside
and was seized. He told me he dropped some sovereigns over-
board because he was nervous. He called on me to protect him.
I said I could not, as all were armed.” After hearing further
evidence, the prisoner was remanded to Melbourne. The remand
warrant, which was sealed with the King’s seal (C. R. for Cakobau
Rex.), commanded Inspector Berliner to convey the prisoner to
Melbourne, and hand him over to the keeper of the Melbourne
gaol, and further commanded the keeper of the Melbourne gaol
to receive the prisoner into his custody, and safely keep him
there till he could be brought by Inspector Berliner before the
proper court. It was signed by “ Patrick Brougham, police
magistrate.” The Blaclutha took the prisoner, with Mr. Berliner
and the Fiji constable Evarama, to Sydney, whence they came to
Melbourne in the City of Melbourne. At Queenscliff they were
boarded by Constable Brosnahan, who wanted to arrest Rosen-
wax by virtue of the warrant issued in Melbourne, but Mr. Berliner
told him that he could not have him except by force unless he
gave the Fiji constable a receipt for him, and took him with
Police-magistrate Brougham’s remand warrant The constable
finding that no other plan would do, accepted the proposition and
took the prisoner with the Fiji warrant described above, giving
Evarama a receipt for the prisoner. The prisoner, however, was not
taken to the Melbourne gaol, as the Fijian remand warrant
directed, but was lodged in the city watch-house on the original
warrant issued in Melbourne. During the voyage the
prisoner made a voluntarily written statement to the effect that he
acknowledged he had done wrong under pressure of circum-
stances, and prayed to his creditors for mercy and a chance to
begin life honourably again. He also thanked Mr. Berliner for
his kindness on the journey. No doubt a good deal of argument
will take place as to the legality of all these proceedings, and the
result will be watched with interest. The inhabitants of the
islands seem determined to conduct matters in an orderly manner,
and have sent the native policeman to Melbourne to learn some-
thing of police duty, in order that he may be useful in teaching his
coloured brethren. Mr. Berliner was treated with great kindness


both by white and black residents, and expresses himself indebted
to a solicitor named Forward for assistance.
Rosenwax will probably be remanded by the City Bench
to-day.
From the
Messrs, M‘Arthur, Sherrard, and Copeland and other merchants
of Melbourne, are under infinite obligations to his Fijian Majesty
for his prompt extradition of the runaway pawnbroker, Elias Rosen-
wax, into the custody of the Victorian plenipotentiary, Mr. Otto
Berliner. Mr. Berliner, formerly a principal officer in the Mel-
bourne detective department, and now proprietor of the Private
Inquiry Office, for missing friends, &c., in Elizabeth-street, appears
to have acted with singular energy, tact, and diplomatic skill on
the occasion, and altogether in a way to increase the reputation he
has always sustained for smartness, in bringing to light anyone—
“wanted.” Immediately on landing at Fiji on the 18th ult, he
went to Government House, and immediately brought about a
Cabinet meeting. He represented himself simply as a private
citizen bearing copies of warrants issued for apprehension of the
defaulter, with declarations of embezzlement made by the creditors
who had been duped. And he invited the Ministry by order
in council to issue the King’s warrant for the arrest of Rosenwax
as a felon. A warrant was issued accordingly,—“ by special
authority of the King,”—and placed in the hands of Sergeant
Moore and the water police. Mr. Berliner proceeded in an open
boat, supplied “ by order of the King,” and manned by six natives
to intercept the ship Firth in which the defaulter was expected, via
Suva. But he first went to Bau, 50 miles, to interview the King,
and experienced heavy rain and lightning during the voyage.
His Majesty indorsed the action of his ministry, and gave Mr. Ber-
liner a royal reception at his palace. Accompanied by “ a power-
ful chief,” Mr. Berliner left Bau at 5 a.m. on the 19th, and arrived
at Suva, 90 miles, at eight p.m., where he was told the Firth had
left five hours previously with Moore, the Williams defaulter, on
board, besides Rosenwax. Mr. Berliner left Suva at nine p.m., in
the open boat, amidst a heavy gale and sea, and arrived at Rewa
at four a.m., of the 20th, He left there at six a.m., and arrived at
Levuka in due course, when Rosenwax was arrested and brought
before th court on the 21st, and remanded to Melbourne, which
must be admitted as pretty sharp work, as testified by the Fiji Ga-
zette, which says : —“ The sufferings experienced by Mr. Berliner
and crew were of no ordinary character, and we have no objection
to state from what we were told, that Melbourne creditors could
not have acted with better or shrewder foresight than they did in


selecting Mr. Berliner. From the moment of his arrival to the
moment of his departure, his earnest attention and his strict be-
haviour, coupled with his ability as a prosecutor, won the good
feeling of the Government and the people of this country. During
the capture on board the Firth, an attempt was made to rescue
Rosenwax by Aaron Pinkins, who fired a pistol and wounded one
of the police. Pinkins was also prosecuted before the same court,
by Mr. Berliner, for this offence, but as it appeared in defence that
he was not aware of the facts, and had been misled that Rosenwax
was being illegally arrested, he was let off with a fine of eighty
dollars, and two hours’ imprisonment.”
One thing is now proved, and that is, Fiji has lost its sanctity
as a refuge for levanters, and they must in future turn again to
Callao, or in their conventional idiom, —“to some other place of
worship.”




To the Public of
the Colonies or
The Provinces of
NEW ZEALAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
FIJI, and GREAT BRITAIN ;
REPORT
Respecting the Operations and Working System of the
AND
friimtc Jmprj) <D||i^,
Under the Management of
Mr. OTTO BERLINER,
For 23 years connected 'with Police and Detective Departments ,
late Inspector of Police by Special Commission.
HEAD OFFICE: Melbourne, 78, Elizabeth Street.
BRANCH OFFICE : Sydney, 4, Bond Street.
OTTO BERLINER
VICTORIA, NEW SOUTH WALES, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
QUEENSLAND, TASMANIA,
GENERAL MERCANTILE AGENCY
