

Particulars, Views, Plan
OF
The Tarana Estate,
TARANA,
On the Great Western Line of Railway, 2561 feet
above sea level,
FOR AUCTION SALE ON THE GROUND,
ON
Saturday, 6th November, 1886,
THE PROPERTY OF THE
Imperial Land, Building, & Deposit Company,
(LIMITED,)
122, ELIZABETH STREET.
WILLIAM P. SMAIRL, Manager.
Solicitor:
W. T. A. SHORTER, Esq., Pitt Street.
Hardie & Gorman,
AUCTIONEERS,
133 Pitt Street.




Particulars, Views, Plan
OF
The Tarana Estate,
TARANA,
On the Great Western Line of Railway, 2561 feet
above sea level,
FOR AUCTION SALE ON THE GROUND,
ON
Saturday, 6th November, 1886,
THE PROPERTY OF THE
Imperial Land, Building, & Deposit Company,
(LIMITED,)
122, ELIZABETH STREET.
WILLIAM P. SMAIRL, Manager.
W. T. A. SHORTER, Esq., Pitt Street.
+
Hardie & Gorman,
AUCTIONEERS,
133 Pitt Street.


TARANA.
CCUPYING a most delightful position upon the
Great Western Railway Line, and sheltered by
the picturesque range of hills so well known
throughout the Australias as the Blue Mountains,
is situate the Improving and Flourishing
Township of Tarana.
The Rare Salubrity of the Climate is ad-
mitted by the medical faculty, and is being increasingly
appreciated by the public from year to year.
To the denizens of the metropolitan cities oi London,
Paris, Brussels, Berlin in the old world, a journey to
Swiss and Italian Alps, occupying two or three days, is
necessary to invigorate the system after months of hard
labor in the smoky, densely-populated cities and over-
grown suburbs ; but in New South Wales the opportunity
is offered to secure precisely the same, perhaps greater
advantages, after a Four Hours Trip in Comfortable


TAR AN A


Railway Carriages on the Great Western
Railway Line, with
Varied and View?
of land and water. To many who perhaps may have lingered
on in the Metropolitan towns near the Coast, and have
become almost acclimatized to the moist sea air, the
bracing climate of Mount Victoria, Katoomba, and other
townships on the summit of the Range may prove too
strong, to these people specially is opportunity pre-
sented of securing a property possessing all
the advantages desirable from the Mountain
air, yet so tempered and softened as to Suit the
weakest Constitution.
Tarana has long been known to all the
inhabitants of New South Wales as the most direct and inex-
pensive route to the Tenth Wonder of the World—
Jenol&n op C&ves;
—one of the First Resorts of all Tourists and Visitors,
and it is confidently expected that in the near future it will
form an important junction for a branch line of Railway,
or for a Tramway, from Tarana to the Caves, for which
a trial survey has already been made. It would require,
therefore, no great prophet to predict for this Township a


VIEW OF ESTATE
Looking West.


great future, the fruits of which will undoubtedly be reaped by
the purchasers of the Estate now placed before the public.
A POPULAR ROUTE
to Sunny Corner is via Tarana, and a Company is
at present being formed to run a Line of Coaches to that
Township.
The Tarana Estate, comprising a gently undulating
block of about 800 ACRES, runs from the Railway
Station back to Mount Tarana, a picturesque hill just
within the boundary line of the property now offered for
sale. The whole of the land is nicely grassed, and a
small portion is covered with light timber.
The Population is Rapidly Increasing,
and considerable improvements should soon follow, and
many Buildings be erected on the Land, now offered
for Sale.
To those who propose to establish
POULTRY FARMS
the TARANA ESTATE is well worthy of inspection, as
The Land is Cheap,
The Soil is Good,
Water Abundant,


VIEW OF ESTATE
Looking South


and the means of Communication with the Centres of
Population easy.
Tarana is distant by rail about 120 miles from Sydney,
and about 20 miles from the flourishing assize City of
Bathurst. At the present time there is a service of four
passenger and numerous goods trains daily; and the enormous
yearly increase in the traffic will ere long Necessitate
the Running of Trains more frequently.
The speedy growth of Wallerawang since the
branch line has been opened to Mudgee may be accepted
as an index of what may be expected at Tarana within
the same period, and as the holdings round the Railway
Station at this latter township are exceptionally large, it
is fair to say that the present is likely to be the best
chance for purchasing Town Residence, or small
Farming blocks.
Tarana possesses, as the views will show, a really
pretty
Church,
A Public School,
Two Hotels,
well conducted, and two or
Three Stores,


CHURCH OF ENGLAND


at which may be purchased all the necessaries and many
of the luxuries of life.
The Climate of Tarana and the surrounding
district is one of the Most Enjoyable under the
Sun. It is not subject to the intense cold which settles
upon the summit of the Range in the winter, and has also
a happy exemption from the sweltering, humid heat of
summer, so productive of lassitude to the residents of
The Coast Districts.
The Soil, as the vegetation now thriving upon the
land will testify, is adaptable for the production of any
of the Cereals, Fruits, or Flowers, which the
occupier may desire, and as the Liberal Subdivision
of the Property will show, the opportunity is afforded
of securing large enough sized blocks for farming or
dairying.
The main Western or Bathurst Road traverses the
Estate, making Bathurst accessible either by Train
or Highway.
THE VENDORS,
The Imperial Lapd, Building, & Deposit Company,
with a view of suiting all classes of purchasers, have made
The Terms


BATHING- POOL 8c FALL
Cave River.


exceptionally easy, placing the Purchase of an Allotment
within the reach of everybody.
The Deposit
is only io per cent, deposit, while the buyer has the
option of paying the balance as follows :
(A.) By fortnightly instalments of 26/- for euery £lOO
of purchase money , extending ouer 3 years.
(B.) By fortnightly instalments of 15/6 for euery £lOO
of purchase money, extending ouer 5 years.
(0.) By fortnightly instalments of 7s. 9d. for euery £lOO
of purchase money, extending ouer 10 years .
With Interest at the rate of 7 per cent, per annum.
THE TITLE IS FREEHOLD.


lARANA STATION


A SPECIAL TRAIN
Will leave the REDFERN TERMINUS
at 8 o’clock a.m. on
SATURDAY, 6th NOVEMBER,
and will return from Tarana same day.
■—
A limited number of tickets for adults only can
be purchased at the Sale Rooms,
price, ss. each.
Hardie & Gorman,
Auctioneers.


The Jenolan Caves
JSfHE Mayor of Sydney (Alderman John Young) has, within
Vy the last few days, visited the Jenolan Caves, and the
following account of them has been furnished by His Wor ship:—
“I visited the Jenolan Caves from June 1 to 3, and after
spending the best portion of three days in these caves I must
confess that they are the most extraordinary things of the
kind that I have ever seen.
“ I believe that without doubt they are not to be excelled for
their beauty and the rarity of stalactite and stalagmite forma-
tion. The lime beds and floors, the fossil bones, as well as those
loose on the floors, deserve systematic examination. The
peculiar drifts seen at various portions of the strata are highly
suggestive of former levels of creek or river beds, and would
lead to the probability of there having been a gradual rising of
the land for many thousands of years, as well as the floors and
levels of waterworn action seen on every side, go to prove this
view of the matter. A great surprise to me is the enormous roofs
and covers of the larger caves, and the difficulty of explaining
how they are supported without abutments or other apparent
support. No doubt the continued stalagmite, stalactite, and
other crystalline formation, when sufficiently strong and con-
nected, may in some measure account for this ; but from my
short examination, it certainly puzzles me, as I notice that the
caves are one over the other, and frequently interlaced.
“ I think, however, for the safety of visitors and the preser-
vation of the caves that an accurate survey should be made of
the whole of the known caves, with a view to erect or construct
such supports as will keep the present caves in their positions,
for I noticed many fissures in the rocks, some of which will
certainly fall, and even in some cases the floor had sunk down-
wards, breaking away the stalagmite and stalactite that had met'
together and consolidated to form one column. This the
Government should at once take in hand for reasons which I
will hereafter mention.
“ I think also that no smoke of any kind should be allowed in
the caves, as I noticed that in the earlier discovered caves a great
deal has been done to discolour and to spoil the pure and clear
appearance of all the peculiar and varied crystalline formations.
“ The practice of stupid, ignorant people marking and writing
their ignoble names in places so conspicuous injures and de-
stroys the beauty, and renders those portions of the place as
vulgar as the people who do these things.
“ It may not be out of place to mention that it is to the in-
terest of the Government and people of this country that good
communication should be made to these caves, as they are un-
doubtedly one of the greatest natural wonders in the world,
and the more extended knowledge of them must gradually
bring more and more visitors and tourists from all parts of the
world to see and inspect them ; and the easier the communi-
cation, the better the accommodation to those who come, must
tend to bring others to see for themselves, and in doing so must
benefit the people of this country generally.
“An interest should also be taken, I think, by either the
Minister of Works or of Mines, or whatever department it may
be, in making better facilities for people visiting the caves to
see them comfortably and more easily. There are many places
where rough stones might easily be put on one side and a smooth
path made. Steps might also be cut in many places, where
now there is nothing more than a jumble of uneven angular
points and loose broken stones. Wooden steps should be put
in convenient places, and the more dangerous holes on either
side of the tourists’ track railed off and made more secure.
Some regard also should be given to better ventilation, and,
without making them draughty, or taking away anything from
the beauty, grandeur, or wonders of the caves, make them such
as to be more come-at-able to visitors generally.
“ As a suggestion, also, it does appear to me that it would be
an advantage if the various caves, one or two of which may be
seen either in a half or a whole day, as the case may be, should
be made continuous, so that -no return over the same tracks
would be necessary ; and if, as I suggest, an accurate survey be
made, I think it quite possible that entrances which would carry
out this idea might be made in various places from the outside.
“My views are those of a practical man, who thinks that the
people of New South Wales, having one of the greatest natural
wonders of the world ready-made to their hands, of the great-
est beauty, and so extensive and varied as to take a week to see
them properly, and of such an uncommon character that they,
on being better known, would draw people from far and near
to visit them, should turn them to good account.
“In addition'to that, they arc of the greatest interest to all
scientific men, be they who they may, geologists, palaeontolo-
gists, osteologists, mineralogists, and all those who feel an in-
terest in the wonderful works of nature in the varied forms of
alteration and crystallisation.
< ‘For the beneiit of those who desire to see the Jenolan Cave*
and how to get there, I will state how I proceeded, and the order
of seeing the portion of the caves as seen by me when there.
“Before starting I placed myself and party entirely in charge
of the Tourist Bureau, of No. 6, Bridge-street, Sydney, and who,
from first to last, gave the gi’eatest satisfaction with all their
arrangements, doing everything necessary for our comfort,
knowing exactly what to pay and paying it, leaving us free to
enjoy our holiday. Starting by the 9 o’clock train, Tarana was
reached by about half-past 4 in the afternoon, where conveyances
were ready to take us to Oberon, at which place we arrived at
7 o’clock, stayed there at the hotel all night, and next morning
went on by conveyance, reaching the caves at half-past 2 in
the afternoon, the conveyances taking us right down the zig-
zag of the mountain to the cavehouse at the caves.
“The caves were visited in the following order:—The Grand
Arch and Waterfall: The Devil’s Coachhouse; the Nettle Cave,
and from this fine views were obtained of the Devil’s Coach-
house and Grand Arch. We next visited the Arch Cave and
Belfry, where the stalactites on striking them rung like bells.
Next the Carlotta Arch, past the entrance to Elder Cave. We
had a good deal of climbing to get to the Lucas Cave, in which
are the Cathedral, Butcher’s Shop, Shawl Cave, Exhibition
Cave —where the large broken column is seen—The Jewel Cas-
ket, Bride’s Chamber; and a wire ladder to other caves we
could not mount, it not being safe to trust ladies up a wire
ladder 90 feet in height.
“ The Imperial Cave.—This cave has a right-hand and left-
hand branch. The left contains the Woolshed and Margarita
caves, Architects’ Studio, and a crawl to the Bone Cave, Helena
Cave, and beautiful passage to the Lucinda Cave and Burmese
Canopy (so named by myself), on the way to Katie’s Bower.
The right-hand branch of the Imperial Cave contains the Fossil
Bone Cave, Crystal and Shawl Caves, Lot’s Wife, Crystal City,
Showroom Cave and Fairies’ Bower Crystal Palace, Gem of the
West, Bride’s Veil, Garden Palace, Fairies’ Retreat, which
requires a little acrobatic struggle to see. The Queen’s
Diamonds are equal when illuminated to about 100,000 Koh-i-
Noors stuck together at the base of each crystal. After which
the Selina Cave, Grand Stalactites, Josephine Grotto, the
Mystery, and finally Nellie’s Grotto were visited.
“ This is a list of the caves seen by me, but if visitors
have a longer time at their disposal there are many more caves
to see. Neither the Elder nor the Mammoth Caves were in-
spected by me.
“ Although I inspected these caves on one afternoon, the
whole of the following day up till 10 o’clock at night, and
again the next day up till 7 o’clock at night, it would be much
better to spend a week in doing the same inspection ; for ex-
amining the caves from half-past 9 in the morning until 1
o’clock each day is quite sufficient exertion for comfort, and
it enables a visitor to better digest what is seen.
“ The cavehouse is plain but clean, the food well cooked
and of good quality. The bedrooms have the bare necessaries,
but the beds are clean.
“The caretaker, Mr. J. Wilson, is evidently the right man in
the right place. Most of the caves (more especially the
Imperial, the greatest of all) have been found by him, and I
verily believe he knows every stalagmite and every stalactite
and even every crystal in the caves, having lived in and about
them for 30 years. The caves need a caretaker such as he is,
who will not allow any of the contents either to be injured or
carried away, for there are plenty of ignorant and foolish
visitors who would break off and carry away portions that
would injure the caves for ever, little thinking or caring
whether they do or do not spoil the beautiful effects for all
the visitors that come after them.
“ Instead of returning by way of Oberon and Tarana, which
is the easiest route to anyone who requires to ride to the Cave
House, we walked up the mountain side about two miles, by a
bridle track at an inclination of about 1 in 6. This requires
good lungs, but can be walked easily by men, although some
delicate ladies could not do it, and it is what may be called
a stiff pull up : but when once you are on the top of the moun-
tains, 1200 feet above the caves, a fair road goes to Mount
Victoria, about 31 miles.
“We travelled by a conveyance of Mr. Whittall’s of the
Imperial Hotel, Mount Victoria, the whole distance to Mount
Victoria, and the road, although a little rough at places, was
generally very good, and a more pleasant ride could scarcely
be obtained through the grand forest of Binder and in the
ranges until descending to the Valley of Hartley and up Mount
Victoria Pass, arriving there at about 6 o’clock in the evening.
“ I can only say that after seeing the Jenolan Caves, I
would advise all those who have not seen them to do so at the
first convenient opportunity, and they will feel gratified,”






dOHH SiINDS LITH




VIEW OF ESTATE
Looking South
