

Art. IX.—l. Declarations between the Governments of Great
Britain and the German Empire relating to the Demarca-
tion of the British and German Spheres of Influence in the
Western Pacific , and to Reciprocal Freedom of Trade and
Commerce in the British and German Possessions and Pro-
tectorates in these Regions. Parliamentary Paper, Western
Pacific, No. 1. London : 1886.
2. Agreement between the British and French Governments
relative to the New Hebrides , 1887 and 1888. Parliamen-
tary Paper, Prance, No. 1. London : 1888.
3. Final Act of the Conference on the Affairs of Samoa.
Parliamentary Paper, Samoa, No. 2. London : 1890.
4. Convention and Declaration between Great Britain and
Germany of November 14, 1899, for the Settlement of the
Samoan and other Questions. Parliamentary Paper, Ger-
many, No. 1. London; 1899.
5. The Caroline Islands: Travel in the Sea of the Little
Lands. By P. W. Christian, 8.A., Balliol College,
Oxford. London : 1899.
6. Aux Antipodes. Enquetes Coloniales ( Nouvelle-Caledonie ).
Par Jean Carol. *Le Temps.’ Paris : 1899-1900.
Yasco Nunez first sighted, in 1513, the great
Mar del Zur from the summit of the Darien isthmus,
little did that early pioneer dream of the vastness or pro-
fundity of the immense oceanic area which must be traversed
before the Asiatic Indies could be reached from the western
shores of the new world. But, although Nunez was the
first European to construct and navigate small vessels on
the waters of the newly discovered sea in 1516, it was
reserved for Magellan, some five years later, to effect an
entrance with his ships into what he christened ‘ El Mar
‘ Pacific©.’ The tortuous strait which he penetrated still
bears the name of that intrepid Portuguese navigator, who
naturally supposed the inhospitable Tierra del Puego, which
is so narrowly separated from the then named 4 Patagonum
4 regio,’ to form an outlying portion of the great southern
continent—Terra Australis incognita—which, from the days
of Marco Polo, was universally understood by geographers
to extend into these latitudes from the neighbourhood of
the Antarctic Circle.
It is remarkable that, during the whole of his passage
across the Pacific, Magellan seems only to have sighted but


two solitary islands, at some distance apart— £ las islas
‘ Desventuradas,’ which have not yet been satisfactorily
identified —before reaching the Ladrones and the Philip-
pines, where he met with his death at the hands of the
Zebu natives in the island of Mactan after accomplishing
the first circumnavigation of the world. The first ad-
venturer to follow Magellan’s footsteps in the Pacific was
Alfonso de Salazar, in 1525 ; and within the years 1528-29
Alvaro de Saavedra, sailing from Mexico, discovered the
Uluthi group, Hogolu or Ruk, and Ualan or Kusaie, all in
the Caroline archipelago, and reached the shores of New
Guinea; while Diego Hurtado and Fernando de Grijalva,
when searching for the illusive Terra Australis, found the
island of St. Thomas in 20° south latitude. After him,
Villalobos and Legaspi made fresh discoveries on their way
to the Philippines from New Spain, in these waters, of which
Yap was the most important.
In 1567 Mendana, starting from Callao, discovered
Ysabel and Guadalcanar, two of the present Solomon group,
as well as the Isla grande de Santa Cruz; and next our
great countryman, Drake, in his famous privateer, the
‘ Pelican,’ entered the South Seas, more, perhaps, in pursuit
of the Spanish galleons and plunder than from any particular
love of geographical exploration.
Mendana, on another voyage to colonise the Solomons,
discovered the Marquesas group before losing his ship and
his own life at Santa Cruz in 1595 ; and thus it came to
pass that, by the end of the sixteenth century, not a tithe
of the innumerable groups of islands and islets, with which
we now know the western portion of the Pacific to be
studded, was known to the map-makers of Europe. In
1595 Quiros also fell in with the Ngatik group, which he
called Los Valientes, from the warlike character of the
natives he found there.
At the commencement of the seventeenth century the
passage of Torres through the strait now bearing his name
proved the separation of New Guinea from Australia; and,
in the same year (1606), Quiros added to his chart the Islas
de Quiros, Taumaco, and some lands which he designated
Terra Australis del Espiritu Santo, now recognised as the
largest islands of the New Hebrides. After him, fresh
discoveries were made in these seas by Lemaire and Schouten,
among which was the group known to us as the Lord Howe
Islands.
Abel Tasman, starting from Batavia in 1642, not only


discovered Van Diemen’s Land, but steered an adventurous
course into the Pacific, and first set foot in New Zealand,
whose western shore he coasted to Cape Maria Van Diemen,
sighted the Three Kings Islets, and then, proceeding in a
north-easterly direction, passed within the tropic, where he
found a number of small islands, Plystaart, Amsterdam,
and Rotterdam, since known as the Friendly or Tonga
Islands. Sailing thence more westerly he met with a fine
group, the Prinz Wilhelm’s Isles, more familiar to us as the
Fiji Islands ; and, on his homeward track, he sighted Horn
Island, one of the New Hebrides, and passing the Fifteen
Islands of Schouten, returned to Batavia by the northern
coasts of New Britain and New Ireland. In 1686 a small
island to the south of the Mariannes was found, and called
Carolina, from which the name became applied to the whole
archipelago. Dampier’s explorations in 1688 did not ex-
tend eastwards beyond New Britain, which until his visit
was supposed to be a portion of New Guinea.
Meantime, while these explorations were being pursued
in the Pacific, various portions of Australia were being
visited, mostly by Dutch voyagers. Among these may be
mentioned the Terra de Concorde or Endracht, in 1616 ;
Arnhem, so named by Zeachen, in 1618; Leuwin, by Endels,
in 1618; Nuitz, by Peter Nuitz and De Witt, in 1627; and
Carpentaria, by Peter Carpenter, in 1628. The whole of
the above lands, together with Van Diemen’s Land, were
now regarded as forming one solid continent under the
name of New Holland, with which New Guinea might or
might not be connected ; for the passage of Torres through
the strait separating Australia from New Guinea was still
unknown in Europe, his reports having remained buried in
the archives at Manila. When writing in 1774 the geo-
grapher De Freville, who had then learnt of Cook’s passage
through Endeavour Strait in 1770, did not know whether
Tasmania was united to New Holland : ‘ On est aujourd’hui
bien assure qu’un detroit la separe de la Nouvelle-Guinee,
‘au Nord; mais il est encore douteux si, vers le Sud, elle se
‘ joint a la terre de Diemen.’
In 1721 Admiral Rogge win was despatched by the Dutch
East India Company to search for land, said to have been
discovered by Captain Davis in 1686, and he discovered a
number of island groups on his way to New Guinea. We
now enter upon the period of more scientific voyages under-
taken by the governments of European nations for the
systematic exploration of unknown waters. The first of


these was an English expedition under Commodore Byron,
who, passing through the Strait of Magellan, in 1764, with
the ships ‘ Dolphin ’ and ‘ Tamar,’ discovered the islands
named Disappointment, George, Prince of Wales, Danger,
Duke of York, and Byron. The ‘ Dolphin ’ was again sent
out under Captain Wallis, with the ‘ Swallow ’ under
Captain Carteret. Wallis discovered, among many islands
of lesser note, the since famous island of Tahiti, returning
home in 1768. Carteret likewise made several new dis-
coveries, sailed through the strait between New Britain and
New Ireland, and reached England in 1769. Meantime,
Bougainville had closely followed in the wake of Wallis with
‘ La Boudense ’ and ‘ L’Etoile,’ and, after discovering the
Low Islands, made some stay at Tahiti, visited the Naviga-
tor’s Islands, and passed between the New Hebrides— ‘ Les
‘ grandes Cyclades ’ —failed to penetrate Torres Strait,
coasted by the Louisiades, and arrived in France in 1769.
Captain Cook’s voyages, however, far surpassed in impor-
tance all previous explorations. His first expedition, in the
‘ Endeavour,’ was undertaken for the purpose of observing
the transit of Venus at Tahiti, which had just been dis-
covered by Wallis. The transit was duly observed in April
1769, and then Cook proceeded on his celebrated voyage of
exploration.
‘ He discovered the Society Islands, determined the insularity of
New Zealand, discovered the straits which separate the two islands and
are called after his name, and made a complete survey of both. He
afterwards explored the eastern coast of New Holland, hitherto unknown,
through an extent of twenty-seven degrees of latitude, or upwards of
two thousand miles.’
Cook’s second expedition left the Cape of Good Hope in
1772 in search of the southern continent. It consisted of
the ships ‘ Resolution ’ and ‘ Adventure,’ which again visited
Tahiti and the Tonga Islands. After another search for
Antarctic lands in high latitudes Cook again returned
to the tropics, discovered, among others, Palmerston and
Savage Islands, visited the New Hebrides, and, above all,
discovered and partially explored the north-east coast of
New Caledonia. The important additions Cook made to the
charts of the Pacific have never been equalled in any single
voyage. Cook’s last and fatal voyage was devoted to the
exploration of the North Pacific, with which we are not
concerned at present.
The voyage of La Perouse in the ‘ Astrolabe,’ and Captain
de Langle in ‘La Boussole,’ obtained unusual notoriety


from the mysterious disappearance of the ships. After
leaving Sydney, New South Wales, in 1788, nothing was
heard of their fate for many years. It was known that
Captain de Langle, the naturalist, M. de Lamauon, and
nine sailors had already been massacred at Tutuila, in the
Samoan Islands, before reaching Sydney, but it was not
until 1826 that Captain Dillon found the wreckage of the
‘ Astrolabe ’ and ‘Boussole’ at the island of Yanikoro, the
southernmost of the Santa Cruz group. The ‘ Recherche ’
and ‘ Esperance,’ under Admiral d’Entrecasteaux and Huon
Kermadec, were sent from France to attempt to ascertain
the fate of La Perouse in 1791. They returned in 1794,
after making valuable discoveries; but the voj'age was
disastrous, as both the commanders and half the original
crews of the two vessels lost their lives. The next explora-
tions of note in the Western Pacific are those of the Russian
captains, Krusenstern and Liitke. The results of their
labours were the tirstfruits of the nineteenth century, and
another Russian, Yon Kotzebue, son of the well-known
author, made successful discoveries with the ‘ Rurick,’ in
the Radack Channel, the Low Archipelago, and the Caro-
lines in 1818. Kotzebue’s explorations were continued in
another voyage, 1826-1826, when important surveys were
made of various groups, especially those of the Navigator
Islands and the Ladrones, which had already been visited
by the scientific expedition of Louis de Freycinet in 1819.
Another famous expedition was that of Captain Dumont
d’Urville, also in search of La Perouse’s ships, in which
many important additions were made to the chart of the
Western Pacific. On reaching Sydney Captain d’Urville
heard of Dillon’s discoveries at Yanikoro, whither he pro-
ceeded and rescued many relics of La Perouse. The cur-
rents and magnetic variation of this portion of the Pacific
were also examined and charted carefully by Captain
Duperrey in 1822 to 1825, and a second expedition under
Captain d’Urville, 1837 to 1840, added much to our know-
ledge of the hydrography of the same waters.
The voyages of H.M.S. ‘Adventure ’ and H.M.S. ‘ Beagle,’
under Commanders King and Stokes, from 1825 to 1830,
accomplished a great work in South America, while the
next expedition, under Captain Fitzroy, in H.M.S. ‘ Beagle,’
to carry a chain of meridian distances round the world—
-1831 to 1836 —has become more famous and popular on
account of its record by Charles Darwin. Next followed
in chronological order the voyage of the ‘Yenus,’ under


Captain du Petit Thouars, undertaken for the encourage-
ment of the French whale fishery, in 1837-1889, from which
valuable results were obtained, and finally the great United
States exploring expedition of 1838, under Lieutenant
Wilkes, by winch, besides other work, the Low Archipelago,
the Society Islands, the Fijis, the Tonga and Phoenix
groups, the Ellice and Gilbert Archipelagos, and other
portions of the central Pacific were thoroughly surveyed.
It would be impossible here to enumerate the list of naval
officers, in our own and other services, whose labours during
the last sixty years have enabled European hydrographers
to construct a series of detailed charts of the Pacific which
serve as an efficient guide to the vessels of the mercantile
marine through labyrinths of reefs and innumerable hidden
dangers. To attempt to do so would be nearly equivalent
to writing the history of our Hydrographical Department
and of the marine surveys so admirably conducted under
Admiral Wharton and his predecessors at the Admiralty.
Hitherto we have dealt with the Pacific as a whole. We
now proceed to consider somewhat particularly that western
portion of it which is especially interspersed with archi-
pelagoes, and of considerable importance to our Australasian
colonies, to which they are more nearly contiguous than the
remoter regions of that Ocean. The present conventional
expression ‘Western Pacific ’ has been officially declared to
comprehend, for international purposes, all that part of the
Pacific Ocean, lying between the fifteenth parallel of north
latitude and the thirtieth parallel of south latitude, which
is included between the meridians respectively of J 65°
longitude west and 130° longitude east of Greenwich.
Within this area we find innumerable islands, scattered
apparently in inextricable confusion ; but, bearing in mind
Darwin’s observation that the arrangement of the atolls in
single or double lines forms rude outline charts of the sunken
islands over which they stand, and also that their lines
generally extend parallel to the prevailing strike of the
high islands and great coast lines of the ocean, it will not
be difficult to arrange the majority of them into definite
groups, and their arrangement will be all the more readily
comprehended when the lines of deep-sea soundings are also
considered, for then the contours of the submerged lands
which they represent can be resuscitated without much
effort of the imagination.
All these islands, then, have been separated by geo-
graphers into three main divisions, which, as it happens,


also accord fairly with the ethnological distribution of their
populations—viz. Micronesia, Melanesia, and Polynesia.
Micronesia includes those numerous islands—none of
large size—somewhat sparsely scattered —to the north of
the equator, such as the Ladrones, the Pelew Islands, the
Carolines, Marshall, and Gilbert Islands. These are mostly
inhabited by a mixed Malayo-Polynesian race of men. Me-
lanesia comprehends all the groups extending east and south-
east of New Guinea within the tropic, south of the equator,
and includes New Britain, New Ireland, the Solomons, Santa
Cruz, New Hebrides, New Caledonia, and the Pijis. These
archipelagoes are chiefly occupied by the black and woolly-
haired Papuan race. Of Polynesia, which comprises a
number of distinct archipelagoes over the whole of the
Central Pacific, only the westernmost groups come within
the limits assigned politically to the Western Pacific, with
which we are now dealing; and these consist of the
Phoenix, Ellice, Samoan, and Tongan Islands, inhabited by
the Polynesian or Mahori race, with smooth and curly hair,
totally different from the frizzled hair of the Melanesians. It
must be understood that the above divisions, as regards
their populations, are somewhat arbitrary, and the excep-
tions are numerous; for instance, some of the small islands,
although close together, may be inhabited by quite a different
race.
For many years after their discovery none of the islands
of Australasia was regarded as of any value as a possession
by European na.tions. The settlement of New South Wales,
New Zealand, and Tasmania naturally attracted our own
emigrants by their advantageous lands fit for agriculture
and sheep and cattle pasturage outside the tropics under
temperate skies. Little attention was paid to the archi-
pelagoes of Oceania, except by the missionaries and the few
traders for sandalwood, copra,* pearl-shell, and heche-de-mer.
The history of most of the islands, from their discovery to
within the last thirty years, is to be found in the records
of the various missionary societies, foremost among which
has ever been the London Missionary Society, both as
regards the priority and the extent of its operations in
these regions, particularly in Polynesia. In Melanesia a com-
paratively new field was opened to civilisation by George
Augustus Selwyn, the great Bishop of New Zealand ; and
* Copra is the kernel of the cocoanut, chipped up, sun-dried, or
artificially dried by fire, and put into sacks for export.


the work of the Melanesian Mission, which he established,
has been well continued under his followers—Codrington,
Patteson, and the late Bishop John Selwjn, the worthy son
of a noble father.
With the establishment of plantations within the tropical
settlements of Queensland and Piji came the curse of the
islanders, in the shape of the labour traffic. In the New
Hebrides was found the most convenient recruiting-ground
for this ‘ blackbirding; ’ and the fact that, as Mr. Wallace
tells us, no interpreters in the many absolutely diverse
languages spoken in these islands could be found is
sufficient proof that the natives cajoled under various
pretexts to work in Queensland could not possibly be made
to understand where or for what they were going to be
taken.
Two years after Great Britain had taken possession of
New Zealand—that is in 1842—Queen Pomare, of Tahiti,
was induced to place herself under the protection of France.
Later the French admiral seized Mr. Pritchard, a mis-
sionary, who had been English Consul, and Sir Robert Peel
demanded satisfaction from the French Government. Queen
Pomare was nominally restored to power in 1844, but the
French protection was equivalent to actual possession, which,
however, was not formally recognised until 1880.
This was the commencement of European rivalry for
possessions in the Pacific; and Fiji, the most important
group in the Western Pacific, naturally-attracted the atten-
tion of the greatest naval Power. The London Missionary
Society had successfully worked from 1885 in these islands,
where a number of ex-convicts and a small colony of
Australians had at that time established themselves.
The opening of the Panama railway, and the impetus thus
given to commerce with the Pacific in 1854-5, increased the
importance of Fiji; and Consul Pritchard obtained an offer
for the cession of the islands from the principal chief
(Thakombau), in 1858, in return for a debt of 9,000 Z., which
he owe! to the United States Government. On the return
of H.M.S. ‘Herald,’ under Captain Denham, with Colonel
Smythe, of the Royal Artillery, who had been sent to report
on the proposed cession, the offer of Thakombau was re-
jected ; but. Consul Pritchard having been appointed
governor by the chief in 1860, Fijian affairs remained in
an unsatisfactory state until 1868, when the debt to the
States was paid by an Australian company in return for
200,000 acres of land in the island of Viti Levu, with an


allowance to the chief. A provisional government was then
formed, which existed only, however, until the British
Government resolved to annex the group, at the instance of
Sir Hercules Robinson, Governor of New South Wales, who
hoisted the British flag in September 1874. Sir Arthur
Gordon, now Lord Stanmore, was appointed Governor, and
lauded at Levuka in June 1875, since which date the success
of this possession, the first British colony in the Western
Pacific, has been assured. Besides his duties as Governor
of the colony, Sir Arthur Gordon had also entrusted to him
a general supervision as High Commissioner over all the
islands of the Western Pacific ; and since that time various
groups of the smaller islands have been annexed by the
High Commissioner. In this manner Rotumah was annexed
to the colony of Fiji, by request of its chiefs, in 1880 ;
Cook’s Islands—not strictly within the specified limits of the
West Pacific—were annexed in 1888 ; the Gilberts or Kings-
mill and the Ellice Islands, which with the Phoenix and
Union groups are popularly known by sailors as the ‘Line
‘ Islands,’ were also taken under the protection of our flag
in 1892—thus establishing, as it were, a British preserve
over all the scattered islands in the Western Pacific south
of the equator, with but few exceptions.
Although that huge continental island. New Guinea,
cannot be considered as properly belonging to the Western
Pacific, yet it is necessary to advert to the partition of its
eastern half, as more recent demarcations depend upon it.
The Dutch, as successors to the Sultan of Tidor, have long
claimed the suzerainty over the western moiety of the
island, although the eastern boundary line was not clearly
defined until in 1888 the 141 st meridian was agreed to by
the Powers interested. In that year the Government of
Queensland sent a commissioner to take possession of the
south-eastern coast, but the act was repudiated by the home
authorities, who, however, ordered Commodore Erskine to
proclaim a British Protectorate at Port Moresby in 1884.
In the following year the German New Guinea Company
was officially authorised to establish its headquarters at
Mioko, in the Duke of York group, between New Britain and
New Ireland, where certain German traders had formed a
factory as early as 1878; and in 1886 an agreement was
arrived at with Great Britain by which the dividing line
between British and German possessions in the eastern
portion of New Guinea was amicably settled. 7 "
* The east boundary of the German New Guinea Company waa


An understanding was likewise come to, at this time,
with Germany, by which the British and German spheres
of influence in the Western Pacific should be set apart; and
a conventional line was fixed upon, commencing from a point
on the north-east coast of New Guinea in 8° south latitude,
following the parallel, south of the three largest islands of
the Solomon group, and thence continuing in a north-easterly
direction to a bank marking the extremity of the Marshall
Islands, and then along the meridian of 173° 30'. Germany
engaged not to make acquisitions of territory, accept pro-
tectorates, or interfere with the extension of British in-
fluence throughout that part of the Western Pacific lying
to the east, south-east, or south of this line, while Great
Britain made a similar engagement with regard to the
islands lying to the west of this same line shown in the
accompanying map. This declaration, however, was under-
stood not to apply to the Samoan and Tongan groups, which,
it was agreed, were to continue, as formerly, neutral groups ;
and of course it did not apply to New Caledonia, the Loyalty
Isles, and the New Hebrides, over which Prance possessed
sovereign and protectorate rights.
On the German portion of New Guinea the high-sounding
designation of Kaiser Wilhelm Land was conferred, while
New Britain, now New Poramern, New Ireland, or New
Mecklenburg, with the Admiralty, Schouten, and other islands
north-east of New Guinea, were christened the Bismarck
Archipelago, after the great statesman who had incor-
porated them with the Empire. About the same period the
boundary between the German possessions and the Spanish
waters, including the Carolines, Pelew, and Mariannes, was
marked by the equator.
As indication of the almost illimitable number of islets
which are to be found around the coasts of Eastern New
Guinea, we may quote the late Deputy Commissioner, Mr.
Hugh Rom illy, who states that ‘ it is, perhaps, not too much
‘ to say that there are probably some islands which have
* never even been sighted.’
By an arrangement with the Australian colonies, which
guaranteed the cost of the administration, the British
portion of New Guinea was formed into a colony from
October 30, 1888, while a British Protectorate was also
fixed at the 154 th meridian E. long,, the west by the 141 st meridian,
and the northern limit at the equator, north of which were the
Spanish waters.
VOL. CXCI. NO. CCCXCII. - K k


i6o° J 73 3° l8<
!7
i°
"7
’ .• .rMogolu - _. Pona J
• *• • *..o
* Caroline Islands
.* Marshall
* .. Is.
• *. •
WESTERN PACIFIC OCEAN.
K cat’s
Bk - Illustrating the Declaration signed between
6°
6°
Mart lock Is. *•’
/
/
Great Britain and Germany 14th Nou
ember isuy.
GERMAN PROTECTOR A
T E
0 ■'
1900
/ t
*Hopper 1.
o°
o
G
l
• .** * „ #
Admiralty /s~ : v .*-• A . , .
..... " Ireland or
Bismarck Mecklenburg
Archipei ? go rtO* .
e*w * . ■..»■• /t s ■' ■sv* •
X ’r\Boug{fininlt» 7.
1 N E Vv J Britain or \V»«ga,W//e
BRITISH'Xr NeuPommern •
,SR, NM's
7T
/*o‘ >
. i . n . e .« Po
!fr. /
4 \ . * 8 i"' on '•
Netherla.
Ellice*
Phoenix Is. *
d 1.
..Phoenix I.
8°
8°
7
on
\ \ Woodlark 1. d,
_> ■ \ t-fS?-.. / o‘~ •• *
■ 0 .. .. D'Entrecasteaux Is. Q V
es .Strait v^
j V r ' Chi 1 ’ 1 **
f \ I Archipelago
1 Nv/ \\®
j C.ORAL SEA
. Is. •'■
• /.
Ss*' . San • Santa Cruz
r s _ ant l% uz
Vanikoro*
mmmm 'Tucopia »
4 * Banks Vs.V
/ »««.'• X BRITISH
* Santana 0 >. ** _...
/ NewV *,<?/> % Fiji
‘Vv \ Vanua
f '% Hebrides i 'Vc*. \ /J.,
! . * Wtf teu “<0>£*
\ - *
unafuti « Ur
t
rSamoa
• .* <a?™
* P Opolu
1874 GERMAN
;*. * /*••••
X
'■1 Eastern ,«•*
.‘ Group / R R
,< » . ?Gp. x
• .. '..Tonga or
lion Group
ir Navigatoi> %
"AMERICA^
“r. 'Manna •
'**•••
[TISH\
Sewage 1. J
1
20
Q
UEENSLAND A ' ..
. , l i-,Friendly
" *♦ 0 iTongatabu
x
S i899 /
# # #
I
4°°
\$Gt. Sandy 1.
5o° ******** Long. East of Greenwich i
8o° Long. West of Greenwich 171
Walker &• Bout
a// jc


1900* Partition of the Western Pacific. 489
proclaimed over the eastern and southern Solomon Islands
in 1893, of which we shall make mention presently.
Extending northward, for a thousand miles' from the
shores of Kaiser Wilhelm Land, lies what was once Spanish,
what is now German, Micronesia, between the equatorial
line and the eleventh parallel of north latitude, and between
139° and 170° E. longitude. Within this wide stretch of
ocean, over a thousand miles in breadth, are scattered 652
islands, forming the six-and-thirty minor groups which
collectively form the Caroline archipelago, populated by
some fifty thousand inhabitants of mixed Papuan, Polynesian,
and Malayan races. Following Mr. Christian’s account,
the most recent and trustworthy of all authorities on
these islands, we cannot do better than take a few notes
from this author’s historical sketch of the islands. After
alluding to the early Spanish discoveries he tells us how the
icligious expeditions from Manila also failed disastrously,
ending in the death of the missionaries. There is still a
grim story of how ironclad men came up out of the sea and
fought with the men of Kiti until overwhelmed with slino--
stones and spear-thrusts.
Coming down to recent years it seems that a tentative
effort was made by a German gunboat to raise the Imperial
flag at Yap in 1885; but this was disavowed at the instance
of the Pope, and the Spanish flag was raised in 1886 at
Ponape, where the colony of Santiago was founded in
Ascension Bay. The Methodist missionaries from Boston,
who had been established at Kiti since 1850, speedily felt
the antagonism of the Capuchin priests, through whose
influence the head of the American mission was deported to
Manila. In the same year a general rising of the natives
took place, and massacres of the Spaniards were rapidly
succeeded by punitive expeditions, with amnesty and peace
until 1890, when another rising and massacre was followed
by bombardment of the native villages and desultory
fighting, during which operations the Spanish commander
was killed. The same alternation of massacre, assassination,
and retaliation has lasted throughout the Spanish occupa-
tion of the Carolines.
As for the wonders to be met with in these little-visited
islands, their curious stone money—huge discs of arragonite
quarried in the Pelew Islands—like grindstones, weigh-
ing- sometimes three tons ;-their ancient fortifications, pre-
historic stone, breakwaters, harbours, and canal streets
bordered with cyclopean monuments of bygone days, their


clubhouses of to-day—for a good account of all these
tempting subjects our readers must be referred to Mr.
Christian’s admirable volume, which will certainly come as
a revelation to many.
Mr. Christian had the good fortune to meet a German
emissary of the great firm of Godeffroy Brothers, of Ham-
burg, by name Mr. Kubary, who had explored and planned,
in 1872, the mysterious ruined island-city of Nan Matal
on the east coast of Ponape, at the mouth of the port
of Metalanim. He has well nigh conclusively proved that
(1) the stone buildings of Nan Matal were erected by a
race preceding the present inhabitants of Ponape ; (2) the
builders of Nan Matal belonged to the black race, and the
Ponapeans are a mixed race; (3) the ruins of Ponape
afford no proof of the sinking of the island—on the contrary,
they unmistakeably show that they are the remains of a
water-building; (4) the fourfold aspect deprives of all
support the theory that the ruins are the remains of fortifi-
cations built by Spanish pirates.
The rapid collapse of the Spanish naval power gave the
German Emperor the opportunity of extending the limits of
his possessions north of New Guinea; and on June 2, 1899,
Spain ceded, for a sum of 800,000?., to Germany all the
Caroline, Pelew, and Marianne or Lad rone Islands, which
have been duly incorporated this year in the Protectorate of
German New Guinea, which, therefore, now stretches north
of the equator some 20°. By the recent agreement with
Great Britain, the Marshall group, east of the Carolines,^is
also included within the sphere of German influence, and
thus it may be said that the whole of Micronesia belongs to
Germany. Whether the Micronesians will be the happier
for this transfer is a question we can hardly ask. Our late
Commissioner, Mr. Eomilly, evidently had some doubts on
the subject, as he thus writes of the Admiralty Islands :
‘ Now that the Germans have hoisted their flag there, the Admiralty
islanders will probably become more and more acquainted with the
ways of white men. But as the population is small, it will probably,
as has already been the case in the Hermits, disappear rapidly before
those energetic colonists. If this should be so, it will be much to be
regretted, for a more remarkable race does not exist in the Pacific.’ *
And he goes on to tell us how ‘ a short time afterwards
< two German warships went to the Hermits, and took such
* ‘ The Western Pacific and New Guinea,’ by Hugh Hastings
Eomilly, 1886, p. 119.


‘ revenge that the population now is, I believe, reduced to
‘ about half what it used to be.’
On the other hand, Mr. Christian, writing, before the
recent transfer of authority, in reference to the recent
massacre of Don Miguel Yelasco and his sailors at Eoukiti,
says:
‘ Perhaps, if the Carolines are handed over to Germany, as Spain
seems disposed to do, we shall hear less of this odium theologicum,
which elsewhere has proved such a firebrand to the world, and here
has brought about such lamentable waste of life and treasure and cruel
humiliations to Spain.’
Small doubt but the American Methodist missionaries and
their converts will fare better under the German than under
the Spanish flag.
It will be noticed on the map that, by the demarcation
line of 1886, four of the main islands forming the Solomon
group were allotted to the British sphere of influence.
These islands, Malaita, New Georgia, Guadalcanar, and San
Christoval, were subsequently annexed, in 1893, by Great
Britain.* By the last (1899) arrangement,f two of the larger
and more northern of this group (Choiseul and Ysabel) have
been ceded to us; thus leaving Bougainville, the largest of
them, still in the hands of Germany. It certainly seems
a pity that the continuity of this fine archipelago should
thus have been broken up and placed under separate govern-
ments, especially as Bougainville Strait is a very narrow one;
but doubtless large German commercial interests had been
created in this island superior to ours, as the German
traders have usually been beforehand in these waters within
the last few years.
All the larger islands of the Solomon group are moun-
tainous ; indeed, some of the summits are lofty, as Mount
Balbi, in Bougainville, over 10,000 feet; in Guadalcanar is
another of 8,000, and in the other five islands are ranges of
4,000 feet altitude. Their formation seems largely volcanic,
as at least two active volcanoes are known there; but the
* A British coal depot has already been established on Gavutu.
The residence of the Commissioner is fixed on the island of Tulagi.
t In Article 11. paragraph 3, of the Declaration of November 14,
1899, ‘she (Germany) recognises as falling to Great Britain those of
the Solomon Islands, at present belonging to Germany, which are
situated to the east and south-east of the island of Bougainville, which
latter shall continue to belong to Germany, together with the island of
Buka, which forms part of it.’


geological structure of older rocks offers a promising field
for mineral research, as soon as the interior of the islands
can be safely penetrated. The Melanesian inhabitants are
vigorous, bold, and warlike, and are reputed cannibals.
Some of them, especially in Guadalcanar, are good bow-
men, and they are expert in building and managing large
canoes. The practice of head-hunting, so characteristic of
the Papuans of New Guinea, is universal among them ; never-
theless, when taken over to Queensland they make tractable
labourers. Altogether these islands will become a valuable
acquisition to our Australasian colonies; and some day, let
us hope, they may be developed into British colonies them-
selves. We must not forget to add that Germany has stipu-
lated that she retains her right to freely engage labourers
in all the Solomon Islands.*
South-eastwards from the Solomons are the Santa Cruz
Islands, which by the German agreement of 1886 have been
acknowledged as British possessions, and lately brought
under direct British, administration. The Santa Cruz Islands
were first properly charted by that admirable geographer,
M. Beautemps-Beaupre, who accompanied Admiral d’Entre-
casteaux in 1793. But they are peculiarly interesting to
French seamen, in that they include that reef-bound island
of Yanikoro on which the ships of La Perouse, the ‘ Boussole ’
and the * Astrolabe/ were wrecked in 1788. The fate of these
vessels was not ascertained until Captain Peter Dillon dis-
covered in 1827 their relics, more of which were recovered
by Dumont d’Orville in 1828 and later in 1838. Nitendi,
or Santa Cruz, is the largest of the islands, and notable as
the scene of the treacherous attack on the boats of H.M.S.
‘Pearl ’ on August 12, 1875, when Commodore Goodenough
and two bluejackets were mortally wounded by arrows.
Another neighbouring island, Nukapu, is likewise celebrated
in the annals of the Melanesian Mission as the place where
Bishop Patteson and his companions were slain in 1871 by
the natives, in revenge, as it is supposed, for wrongs previously
inflicted by a labour vessel.
Bishop John Selwyn afterwards in 1880 courageously
landed from the mission yacht ‘ Southern Cross ’ and made
* Article IV., Declaration November 14, 1899 : ‘ The arrangement
at present existing between Germany and Great Britain, and concern-
ing the right of Germany to freely engage labourers in the Solomon
Islands belonging to Great Britain, shall be equally extended to those
of the Solomon Islands mentioned in Article 11. which fall to the
share of Great Britain,’


friends with the natives at both these islands, and native
missionaries are now established on them. The whole group
is volcanic, and one of them an active volcano.
Twenty-two years ago the British and French Governments
agreed that neither Power should annex the islands known
as the New Hebrides. In 1886, however, two of the smaller
southern islands of the New Hebrides were occupied by
some French detachments of marine infantry, and a certain
amount of apprehension was created among the colonists of
Australia and New Zealand that the French Government
intended to annex the whole archipelago. Communications
between the two Governments elicited assurances that no
project of annexation was contemplated, and a Convention
was negotiated by which provision was made for the protec-
tion of life and property in these islands by means of a Joint
Commission in 1887. A declaration was signed at Paris in
the following year by which a Joint Naval Commission was
constituted of British and French naval officers on the
Pacific station, charged with the duty of maintaining order
and of protecting the lives and property of British and French
subjects in the New Hebrides.
This extensive archipelago stretches from Banks Islands,
in latitude 14° S., to Aneiteum, in latitude 20°. The islands
are actively volcanic, and the most powerful volcano of the
group, Tauna, when discovered by Captain Cook, was in
full eruption, forming a splendid natural lighthouse, 980 feet
high, its noise and flames being visible forty miles around.
Although the inhabitants of the New Hebrides are mostly
Melanesians—for Polynesians inhabit Cherry Island, Tucopia,
and the Duff Islands—they are divided into as many inde-
pendent and separate tribes as there are islands, and the
islanders likewise differ greatly in physical qualities, speaking
also a great variety of languages. The English Church
Mission, having established itself in the northern islands,
has adopted the language of Mota,* one of the Banks
group, as their standard language at St. Barnabas School on
Norfolk Island. The Presbyterian Mission occupies itself
with those islands south of Ambrym, on one of which,
Erromanga, the missionary John Williams was murdered.
* The island of Mota is one of the smallest of the Banks Islands ;
but it was in 1860 that openings occurred for mission work there, and
Bishop Patteson took a party of sixteen to Lifu in the Loyalty Islands,
where in 1863 some of the boys from Mota were christened; thus the
Mota language became the one used by the mission.


Since, four other missionaries have there met with a similar
fate.
In January 1895 a terrible eruption took place from the
Crater Mountain, or Mount Marum, in Ambrym, by which
half the island was devastated by the flow of lava and the fall of
ashes, and a large number of the inhabitants lost their lives.
Espiritu Santo is the largest of the whole group, measuring
sixty-five miles by thirty miles, with mountains four thousand
feet high. There are here some remarkable ruins, which
seem to resemble somewhat those of the Carolines. At
Mallicollo, another good-sized island, fifty-four miles in
length, Bishop George Augustus Selwyn nearly lost his life
in 1851.
Great Britain having acquired Fiji, and France being
already in possession of Tahiti, with the adjacent islands, it
can be well understood that both for Germany and the
United States it also became an object to establish a centre
of trade and influence within the Western Pacific. The
Samoan group, situated nearly midway between the French
and British possessions, was therefore naturally regarded as
a desirable strategic possession by both these Powers.
The largest of the Samoan or Navigator’s Islands are
Savaii, Upolu, Tutuila, and Manua. IJpolu contains the
principal harbours and the chief town, Apia, which has
attained importance as the chief emporium of many of
the other Pacific Islands, excepting Tahiti and Fiji. The
Samoan group collectively contain an area of about 2,650
square miles, with a population of 56,600, of whom 14,850
had embraced Christianity, and 12,300 attended schools in
1840. The political history of these interesting islands, the
headquarters, so to speak, of the Polynesian race, is most
complicated, but we may try to sketch a general outline of
the principal facts connected with it.
The Tongans, a superior race, appear to have invaded
Upolu and Savaii some five hundred years ago, and to have
effected their conquest by making a road along the central
mountain ridge, and thence descending on the villages.
Traces of these roads, called Ala-i-Tonga, can still be seen.
The Samoans, however, revolted under their chief Malietoa,
perhaps about three hundred years since, and expelled the
Tonga dynasty. Between twenty and twenty-five generations
of Malietoas have succeeded to the title of supreme chieftain
of Samoa, so that the legitimacy of the claim of the modern
family of Malietoa to the chieftainship is undeniable.
When John Williams, the pioneer of missionary work ip


the Western Pacific, arrived in Samoa in 1880, he found the
only European residents, ex-convicts, and other cosmopolitan
rascals from Australia had been before him and greatly
interfered with the success of his first efforts to introduce
the blessings of Christianity and civilisation. At that time
the chief Malietoa was king, his dynasty having ruled the
Samoans for some generations back, although representatives
of the original Tui Samoa, the more ancient Tupua dynasty,
were still extant.
In 1840, however, civil war broke out on the death of the
then reigning Malietoa, and since that date at irregular
intervals there has been continual strife between the con-
tending factions, but the Malietoa dynasty has generally
held its own.
In 1857 the house of Godeffroy, of Hamburg, became
firmly established in Apia, and rapidly absorbed a large
proportion of the trade throughout the Western Pacific.
To this firm the intertribal disputes for the sovereignty
afforded an opportunity for disposing of arms manufactured
at Liege to the combatants in exchange for land at two or
three marks per acre. By this means Godeffroy’s house
obtained some thousands of acres, on which cotton planta-
tions were formed, with cheap labour imported from other
islands. A shipbuilding yard was constructed, and, alto-
gether, the transactions of this firm were on an extensive
scale, for there was no competition until the arrival of an
American company in 1868 —the Polynesian Lands and
Commercial Company of San Francisco. This company
arrived at an opportune moment for supplying arms to the
Samoans ; for a split in the Malietoa dynasty occurred on
the death of the king in 1869, his two sons contesting the
succession. The chiefs of Savaii elected the elder brother,
while those of Manua elected the younger. The islands of
Anna and Atua seem always to have remained faithful to
the old Tupua family. The American company likewise
were willing to take broad acres in exchange for their fire-
arms, and soon became proprietors of large estates; and a
protectorate was exercised by the United States
Consul. Affairs remained in an unsettled state, with varying
success on either side, until 1873, when the Samoans appa-
rently resolved to have a king of each dynasty to rule
conjointly, and Pulepule ascended the throne, as a puppet,
we may suppose, with Malietoa Laupepa as his executive
coadjutor. This arrangement lasted until 1875, when
Colonel Steinberger was sent by the United States Govern r


merit, in the ‘ Tuscarora 5 frigate, to report on Samoan affairs.
He promptly put Malietoa on the throne, with himself as chief
of the executive powers, and proceeded to fit out a schooner,
in which he sailed to Tutuila under the American flag, in
defiance of the American Consul, who caused him to be
arrested, with the assistance of H.M.S. ‘ Barracouta.’
Malietoa was carried off to Savaii, rescued by the ‘ Barra-
‘ couta,’ and brought back to Upolu ; but in the course of
these operations several bluejackets and marines were killed
and wounded. Again Malietoa Laupepa reigned, and more
internecine war was carried on until he finally gained the
upper hand, being acknowledged king by the foreign Powers,
with General Bartlett, of the United States army, as his
minister. Meantime, Godeffroy’s firm having become bank-
rupt, its business and estates were undertaken by another
German company —the Deutsche Handeln- und Plantagen-
Gesellschaft, of which Herr Brandeis, a German officer, was
an active agent. Treaties were concluded in 1878-9 with
the United States, Germany, and Great Britain, whereby
the port of was placed at the disposal of the
United States, that of Saluafata given to the Germans for
a naval station, while Great Britain was permitted to place
coal depots on the islands. This last treaty was carried out
by Sir Arthur Gordon, who came over to Samoa from Fiji
in 1879. On November 8, 1880, King Malietoa died, and
the country was once more in a state of disturbance, the
representatives of the three Powers being drawn into the
strife by the antagonism of their mercantile houses.
Generally Herr Brandeis and the German Consul sup-
ported Tamasese, while the English and Americans were on
the side of Malietoa Laupepa. To make a long story short,
after a commission of inquiry had been held by the repre-
sentatives of the interested nationalities, a conference was
held in Washington to determine what steps should be
taken to form an international administration in 1887. In
the same year the German Government not only made a
claim against Malietoa for compensation amounting to
several thousand dollars, but sent a squadron to enforce
payment; in default of which Malietoa’s people were
attacked, and that chief himself was carried off to Cameroons,
Europe, and Jaluit (Marshall Islands), while the Tupuan
chief, Tamasese, was set up in his place. Tamasese’s powers
did not last long, for a large body of the Samoans soon
rebelled against an administration imposed upon them by
the Germans, and they united under Tuiatua Mataafa, also


Tupuan. A fierce civil war ensued, in the course of which
Tamasese was forced to leave Apia, while the Germans
shelled several of Mataafa’s villages. In December 1888
the Samoans offered resistance to a landing party on the
beach at Eangalii, which was repulsed with severe loss,
Lieutenant Siegir and fifty-four of his men being killed
and wounded out of the hundred and forty who had landed.
The survivors were only brought on board under the covering
shell-fire from the ‘Eber,’ under Captain Wallis. Asi,
Maunga, and Tuiletufunga were likewise deported to the
Marshall Islands.
It was owing to these complications that three American
raen-of-war, the ‘Trenton,’ ‘Yandalia,’ and ‘ Nipsic,’ three
German ships, the ‘ Adler,’ ‘ Olga,’ and ‘ Eber,’ with the
British cruiser ‘ Calliope,’ happened to be assembled in the
small harbour of Apia, on the north side of Upolu, in
March 1889, together with some dozen trading schooners,
when the fierce cyclone occurred on the 15th and 16th of
that month which wrought such havoc and destruction on
these squadrons. Of the Americans the ‘ Yandalia ’ sank,
the ‘ Trenton,’ while drifting on the ‘ Yandalia,’ ran
aground, and the ‘ Nipsic ’ ran on to the beach. The
German squadron fared even worse, for the gunboat ‘ Eber ’
was absolutely rolled over and smashed up on the reef; the
‘ Adler’ was also overturned, and lay on her side on the
reef; while the ‘ Olga ’ steamed on to the mud flats, from
which she was subsequently hauled off. As for the British
cruiser, ‘ Calliope,’ Captain Kane alone succeeded in saving
her by steaming right in the teeth of the hurricane out to
sea through the entrance of the reef, saluted by the cheers
of the ‘ Trenton,’ then apparently drifting to destruction.
The Samoans behaved gallantly in saving the lives of as
many as they could —even of those who had so recently been
bombarding their homes.*
The Conference at Berlin, whither it had been adjourned
from Washington, had meantime decided that the Samoans
were neutral, and free to elect their own king; upon which
Malietoa was brought back from exile and recognised by the
Great Powers.f
When Malietoa Laupepa was reinstated, his powerful and
* In all one hundred and forty-four lives were lost by the combined
squadrons in this cyclone.
f Samoa, No. 2 (1890), Final Act of the Conference on the Affairs
of Samoa, signed at Berlin, June 14, 1899. Ratifications deposited
at Berlin April 12, 1890.


popular kinsman, Mataafa, whose titles, as Stevenson in-
forms us, might be held equally good, and whose abilities
were certainly greater, had expected to occupy a position of
influence in the new government: finding himself ignored,
he withdrew to Malie, outside Apia, where he lived in semi-
royal state as a kind of passive rival to Malietoa, who
resided at Mulinu. Meantime a Swedish Commissioner and
a German President of Council, together with a British
Chief Justice, were appointed to carry on the work of the
government, according to the declaration of Berlin. When
Malietoa Laupepa died, in August 1898, the Chief Justice
had to decide in the election of his successor, pronouncing
in favour of Malietoa Tanu, son of the late king; and
thereupon another outbreak of civil war took place, during
which, unfortunately, the lives of several bluejackets and
marines, American as well as English, were sacrificed.
More commissioners and more reporting to the Powers
at home in Europe, where another Conference was held,
resulted in the recent Agreement of November 14, by
Article 1 of which 4 Great Britain renounced in favour of
4 Germany all her rights over the islands of Upolu and
4 Savaii, including the right of establishing a naval and
4 coaling station there and her right of extra-territoriality
4 in these islands.’ By Article 2 : 4 Great Britain similarly
4 renounced in favour of the United States of America all
4 her rights over the island of Tutuila and the other islands
4 of the Samoan group east of 171° longitude east [sic]* of
4 Greenwich.’
We may refrain from discussing here the other clauses in
the same convention regarding the partition of the neutral
zone in West Africa, the reciprocal tariffs in Togo and the
Gold Coast, and the renouncement of the German rights of
extra-territoriality in Zanzibar —except briefly, to express
our disapproval of the present diplomatic methods of pro-
cedure whereby European interests in such opposite quarters
of the world should be in any way made to depend upon one
another, f
* Of course this should be longitude west of Greenwich. It is an
example of the carelessness with which some of these important docu-
ments are compiled at the F.O.
t In the autumn of 1880 a Convention for a French Protectorate
over the island of Kaiatea (one of the islands to leeward of Tahiti) was
made dependent upon the settlement of the disputed fishery questions
in Newfoundland. So also the question of the French Protectorate in
Madagascar was mixed up with the demarcation of Nigeria.


This break-up of the unworkable tridominium established
by the Berlin Conference of 1889 has been satisfactory to
all parties, excepting perhaps to the Samoans themselves,
who probably would have preferred to be placed under
British rule. A protest signed by some of the Samoan
chiefs, however, has probably been withdrawn, and no doubt
both the Germans and Americans will find their new subjects
and fellow-citizens perfectly amenable to the newly con-
stituted Imperial and Republican authorities respectively.
By the second Article of the recent Convention 4 Ger-
-4 many renounces in favour of Great Britain all her rights
4 over the Tonga Islands, including Yavau, and over Savage
4 island, including the right of establishing a naval station
4 and coaling-station, andtherightof extra-territoriality in the
4 said islands.’ These rights, it appears, were obtained by
the German Government, as long ago as 1876, by a treaty
with Tuikanakubulu, otherwise King George of Tongatabu.
This Tongan archipelago is composed of at least one hundred
islands, in groups, of which the principal and southernmost
is that of Tongatabu; which island is 20 miles in length,
8 in width, of an irregular crescent form, with its concavity
facing north, forming a not too safe harbour, where Captain
Cook, and subsequently d’Entrecasteaux, stayed for some
time and erected observatories. Niukalofa, the principal
town, lies at the head of the harbour —not to be compared,
however, for convenience or security with that of Pango-pango
or Apia. The only other islands of any size are Yavau and
Eooa. Of the Hapai group, Lifuka is the most interesting,
as it was that on which Mariner- chiefly resided between
1806 and 1810. The London Missionary Society attempted
the conversion of these islands as far back as 1797, but was
compelled to withdraw; however, since 1826 the Wesleyans
have established successful mission stations in Tongatabu,
Yavau, and Lifuka, where all the inhabitants, about 30,000,
have embraced Christianity, and of these some 1,200 are
Roman Catholics. We should add that there are hundreds
of horses in the archipelago, and the Tongans are fearless
horsemen.
Of Savage Island, or Nieue, where Captain Cook was
attacked in 1774, little is known. The Nieueans of the
present day seem harmless, and their islet, but nine miles in
length, possesses small attractions or value; but of course
its position may possibly become of importance as an out-
post, or for telegraphic communication in time of war.
Another little-known volcanic island, Niuafu, although


lying at a distance from the Tongan group proper, is in-
habited by Tongans, and the description of it by Rorailly is
fascinating. It is inaccessible for boats, so there are no
canoes; the islanders, however, are good swimmers, and
can leap into the sea at any state of the tide, although they
can only climb to land at high water. In the centre of the
island is a mysterious crateral lake with mineral waters,
from constantly bathing in which, the natives, by far the
handsomest in the Pacific, have obtained skins like satin,
while the figures of the men and women are as near
perfection as possible. Its cocoa-nuts are the largest in the
world, excepting the double cocos-de-mer from the Sey-
chelles ; and among its other wonders are the remarkable
Megapode birds, whose numerous tunnels are dug round the
margin of the romantic lake.
One characteristic trait of the Tongan islanders must not
be omitted. They are first-rate cricketers, having been
well coached in the game by the Rev. Mr. Moulton, of the
Wesleyan Mission. Mr. Romilly writes * —
‘ln Tongatabu, in which island the capital of Tonga is situated,
you may see the natives playing cricket—and very well they play, too.
I believe they have never sustained a defeat, though they play an
eleven of every man-of-war that visits the place. They were first
supplied with the necessary implements by the officers of H.M.S.
“Emerald,” on which ship I was a guest at the time. We
came there professing to teach them the game, but I am afraid to say
by how much we were defeated. In fact, it has become necessary to
legislate on the subject of cricket, and to limit the number of days on
which that game may be played to two per week. The Tongans, like
some gentlemen in and Australia, sacrificed all their time to
it, and their families suffered in consequence.’
Nothing struck Admiral Cyprian Bridge during his long
cruises in the Western Pacific more than ‘the great intelli-
‘ gence of the natives of Oceania in general, and of the
‘ Melanesians in particular. Within the limited sphere of
‘ their requirements, whatever they do, they do thoroughly.
‘ This will be generally admitted.’ One quality which his
experience compels him to credit them with is, he says, more
likely to be disputed; that is their truthfulness. Bishop
John Selwyn confirms this opinion. Writing from Norfolk
Island in 1874, he says
‘lt is marvellous how like a boy, say, up to twelve or thirteen,
from the Solomon Islands is to a boy from Belgravia. In point of
adaptability to circumstances I should be inclined to give the palm to
the former, but qua pickle and jokes, &c., &c., I don’t think there is a
pin to choose. ... I say it is all nonsense to say that these fellows


are not capable of higher training because they are dull at first, or to
compare them with those who have had all the weight of thousands
of years of at least partial civilisation to start with, and whose common
everyday facts would be great discoveries to these fellows.’
On this subject we must again quote that high authority,
Admiral Cyprian Bridge :
‘ Several South Sea Island races are not now savage in any sense,
except as to rarity of trowsers and absence of novels, and never
deserved that epithet hi its sense of ferocious. There is no finer
people on earth than the Tongans and the closely related and but
slightly less vigorous Samoans. The physical beauty of both sexes
-—which attains its highest development amongst the Samoan women
—is paralleled by their intellectual endowment. The grace of manner
and general dignity of bearing, habitual with members of chiefly
families, could not be surpassed in the most polished of European
courts. The contrast in these respects between the natives of high
birth and the proselytising and trading white men who come to
civilise them cannot escape the notice of the least observant.’
Of all the islands we have mentioned in the West Pacific
New Caledonia has proved to be the richest as far as its
mineral wealth is concerned, while its commanding situa-
tion to the east of Queensland adds greatly to its impor-
tance from a strategical point of view. Indeed, its position
relative to Australia may be compared with that of Mada-
gascar in relation to Africa. Discovered in 1774 by Captain
Cook, it was not until d’Entrecasteaux had coasted along
its western reefs in search of La Perouse and completed
what Cook had left undone, that the full extent and capa-
city of the future French colony was ascertained.* During
the succeeding half-century the island was visited only
by the South Sea traders in sandal wood, but in 1843 Mon-
seigneur Douarre and four missionaries were landed at
Balade and received hospitality by the native Kanakas. At
a meeting of the islanders held in honour of the newly
arrived Frenchmen, the Kanaka chief, as we are told by
Father Rougeyron, declared that ‘ Tons les Framjais etaient
‘ de bons blancs et que tousles homines d’Ohao (Nouvelle-
‘ Caledonie) devaient amour et respect aux etrangers qui
‘ allaient vivre parmi eux.’ With regard to which M. Carol
dryly remarks: ‘ Les Canaques out eu a rabattre de cette
‘ opinion optimiste.’ Indeed, the Marist brothers did not
long remain at Balade, but were forced to take refuge on
* New Caledonia is 250 miles long, with an average breadth of
85 miles.


the Isle of Pines in 1847, and New Caledonia remained
without a master for some years longer, although not a few
Australian pioneers made their way over from Sydney pro-
specting for gold and introducing English manners and
language among the native and sparse European inhabitants,
mostly ‘ beachcombers/ who were settled at Noumea.
The recognition of the island as a French possession by
Great Britain was not obtained until the eve of the Crimean
expedition, the flag being hoisted by Admiral Despointes in
September 1853 at Noumea, where Napoleon 111. had decided
to establish a prison for convicts. Within a few months the
French Government issued regulations for the formation of
penitentiary establishments, but ten more years rolled by
before the first shipment of convicts reached the quarters
prepared for them in 1864. The principles of the prison
administration were benevolently supposed to be formulated
by the three words, 4 Eehabiliter/ 4 Civiliser/ 4 Produire.’
But an experience of nearly forty years has, alas, but too
well served to prove the fallacy of these Utopian visions.
Of course the introduction of the criminal element into this
magnificent island ruined its prospects as a colony, while as
a place of punishment it has been manifestly a failure.
M. Carol, who has recently been examining the island, its
capabilities and resources, in one place speaks of New
Caledonia as an 4 oasis penitentiaire, un chef-d’ceuvre de
4 philanthropic a rebours/ and in another he speaks of 4 ce
4 paradis des on la transportation et la relegation
4 caledoniennes constituent, comme des inities I’affirment,
4 une veritable prime a la sceleratesse.’
The criminals imported since the initiation of the special
New Caledonian administration have never afforded any
examples of amelioration ; nor has any enterprise conducted
by the convict authorities ever been productive of any profit
to the establishment, which, as it was supposed, ought to
have become entirely self-supporting. On the contrary, it
has always remained a constant charge on the mother
country.
The most varied systems have been experimented on by
different governors, but none seems ever to have been per-
severed in sufficiently to command success. M. Carol ex-
claims vigorously against this constant change of policy :
4 Plus qu’ailleurs, Ton a eu a souffrir, en Nouvelle-Calddonie, du
regime des cfdcrets, qui n’offre aucune garantie aux affaires de longue
haleine, et de la frequence des changements dans le personnel adminis-
tratif, source d’intrigues ou d’alarmes pour les interets en suspens.


L histoire de cette petite colonie jette un jour deplorable sur notre
manque de direction et d esprit de suite. Elle compte dans ses fastes
30 gouvernements, dont 13 interimaires, trois ou quatre systemes de
colonisation agricole, plusieurs programmes de travaux publics com-
mences puis abandonnes, un essai de phalanstere, deux insurrections
sanglantes. Le regime douanier de 1892, avec ses exigences, ses
tracasseries, son deni du droit de reciprocity avec sa tutelle egoiste et
sa conception mesquine du patriotisme, est venu couronner dirniemcnt
cet edifice de fautes et de maladresses.’
A few of these schemes for colonisation may be briefly
glanced at. Thus a phalansterienne of twenty im-
migrants was started under Governor Guillain in 1864 on
the banks of the river Yate, whose work was intended to be
carried out in community, but the result proved deplorable
and the society speedily became bankrupt. An experiment
of garden culture was next initiated at Bourail in 1870,
intended for the benefit of the convicts, among whom were to
be found a few skilled gardeners; and two years afterwards
small grants of land were awarded to military officers and
soldiers who elected to take their discharge in the colony;
but few were able to do anything; the majority sold their
land, and but two or three succeeded in maintaining them-
selves on their properties. It was at this period that
numbers of prisoners, condemned to deportation after the
suppression of the Communist insurrection in 1871, were
brought to New Caledonia, and the rules for their manage-
ment formed the subject of grave debates in the National
Assembly with the object of facilitating their settlement as
colonists, for not more than one third of their number
belonged properly to the criminal classes, and great pains
were taken to keep the political exiles apart from the
transported convicts. With some of these exiles and a few
Alsatians, Governor de la Richerie formed in 1873 a centre
of ‘petite culture familiale’ at Moindou; but after the
amnesty most of the politicals returned to France, and but
a very few have remained satisfied with their position.
In 1873-74 an unsuccessful attempt was made by some
colonists from Reunion to start a sugar plantation by the
river Foa, worked by some sixty Malabars,but both machinery
and capital were insufficient and the enterprise proved an
utter failure. Governor Olry also formed another centre of
colonisation at Kone in 1878—79 under better auspices; but,
as at Moindou, the concessionnaires were colonist's without a
sou. They were maintained by Government for six months,
at the end of which time these amateur agriculturists took
VOL. OXCI. NO. CGOXCII. L L


themselves elsewhere, so that by 1884 but seven remained.
Between 1884 and 1888 thirty new colonists were introduced
into the centre of Kone. The Government insisted on these
last doing a certain amount of clearing the land, and now
some fifteen out of the original number remain—an experi-
ment which may be regarded as a success. Another batch
of colonists without capital has arrived since 1888 to take
the places left vacant and to complete this centre. Of these
last about half have declared that their land will produce
nothing, but the remaining planters at Kone seem to be
fairly satisfied. Yet another experiment. The local ad-
ministration, having acquired some extensive properties, had
them cleared of forest, ploughed, dug up, planted, and fenced
with palisades, with roads constructed, as well as houses built,
all at the expense of the State. A thousand acres thus
prepared were given to a Society of Colonisation, who in
1889 installed therein fifteen families, forming an effective
total of 53 individuals, supplied with provisions for six
months, tools, and other advantages.
In return each family was supposed to make annual re-
payments, but not a centime of this debt was ever received
by the State. Of the fifteen families thus established there
remain but four who have made a little profit by other
means than agriculture. Nevertheless some increase to the
population of the colony resulted, for M. Carol tells us that
in New Caledonia four families at the end of ten years have
given more births than eight families in France at the end
of fifteen years.
Another centre was formed at Yoh in 1892, where some
excellent land was divided into twenty-seven properties.
Here but ten families have made their living by agriculture,
the others living from hand to mouth, and, contracting
debts, have set up shops and cabarets of which they are
themselves the chief frequenters.
Admiral Guillain, while Governor from 1862 to 1870, en-
couraged some old soldiers to go and live among the
Kanakas, and it would seem that these have succeeded best
of all. Another project of ‘ce brave Amiral Guillain ’is also
recorded by M. Carol: —
* C’est a lui que I’on doit I’inunigration d’un certain nombre d’orphe-
lines envoyees par publique. La population se composant
alors presque exclusivement de celibataires des deux sexes difficiles a
conjoindre, il voulait favoriser le rnariage, fonder de vrais foyers. Dans
quelle mesure il y reussit, c ! est ce qu’il serait delicat de Mais a


I’arrivee de la fregate qui portait les jeunes pupilles de I’Etat, officiers
et fonctionnaires pousserent des cris On chanta :
Void des femmes, enfin !
Merd, cher monsieur Guillain.
Et I’arairal, pendant quelques jours, fut populaire ! ’
In fact without its mines New Caledonia would have been
a profitless colony to France, useful only as a penitential
depot, and not too successful in this respect. The discovery
of the, inexhaustible stores of mineral wealth which lay-
hidden beneath the mountain sides of the island is dtie to a
certain M. Jules Gamier, who, while searching for coal on
Mont d’Or, within sight of Noumea, in 1875, first found
traces of nickel in a green mineral ore, which has been named
£ garnierite,’ peculiar to New Caledonia. The conversion of
this mineral was first treated by M. Caulry, who soon dis-
covered, however, that this green ore was not nearly so rich
in metal as a certain brown-coloured grit, now vulgarly
termed ‘ehocolat,’ which had hitherto been thrown aside as
valueless. The importance of the New-Caledonian nickel
thus obtained in the markets of the world dates from this
discovery, which, however, was first practically exploited by
Mr. John Higginson, who soon became the principal owner
of the richest mines, which he opened after prospecting
throughout the recesses of the island. Since 1875 the
properties of nickel as an alloy in the manufacture of steel
and other compounds of copper and zinc, as well as for nickel
plating, have become widely recognised, and the consequent
demand for this mineral, which, in the year of its discovery
in New Caledonia, called for a yearly consumption of four
hundred tons, now requires from eight to nine thousand tons
in the year, and this consumption is constantly increasing.
The American and Canadian nickel ore at one time held the
European markets, but the New-Caledonian ore is so much
more pure, and can be produced at a much cheaper rate, so
that the American products have been driven off the field of
competition. The principal mines, situated in the districts
of Mueo and Kone, near Mueo Bay, where there is a fine
harbour, are all now in the hands of a British company—
the Nickel Corporation.
So, also, the copper mines in the Diahot district, on either
side of the river of that name, at the mouth of the island,
are owned by another British company. We be lie re that
silver, lead, and gold mines are also worked. Not only
nickel and copper, but deposits of cobalt and chrome, are


506 Partition of the Western Pacific. April,
found in the same neighbourhood, deposits of decomposed
serpentine rock between Mount d’Or and Unia, in the islets
of Belep and Yande, in Oland Bay and elsewhere. But we
have no space to devote to the mineral riches of New
Caledonia. What we have already said about them is
sufficient to indicate their great value and importance,
besides the fact that they are mostly owned, not by French but
by German and British capitalists. We trust that our ex-
periences of the uitlander troubles at Johannesburg may not
find a repetition in this Antipodean French territory. Ahsit
omen. ' n ,
Admiral Cyprian Bridge’s forecast of the future develope-
ment of the Western Pacific is, we venture to think, too
pessimistic. It does not seem to him that the Pacific
islands are likely for generations yet to come to be of any
use to mankind at large. To be of any profitable use for
Europeans is, perhaps, what he meant to say, for he added:
4 Fertile as they may be, they can only be made productive
‘ with labour of which no man can say where it is to be
< obtained.’ Whether it may be the best for the natives
themselves that their lands should be exploited for the
profit of the European race is a question of ethics which
we would rather not answer too plainly. The senior foreign
secretary of the London Missionary Society has put the
question lately as to how far it is justifiable for any one
Power to hand over to any other Power sovereign rights
in islands over which it has not itself exercised any sove-
reignty in the past, and to deal with the people as if they
were part and parcel of the soil, without any personal J J ght
to express their preference. Such was the case with Mada-
gascar, it may be remembered, in 1890, when the Hovas,
who had been christianised by the London Missionary
Society, were handed over by us to a French protectorate,
wholly against their will, an act which led to disastrous
wars and calamity, whose effects are even now not wholly
assuaged. In like manner we have now handed over to
the mercies of the Germans, together with the islands of
Samoa, some thirty-five thousand Samoan Chiistians, of
whom at least thirty thousand have been, and are, under
the direct care and instruction of our Congregational and
Wesleyan missionaries, who have been careful, as we are
told, not to anglicise their pupils. This is the acme of
political morality at which we have arrived on the close ot
the nineteenth century. Indeed, trade interests would
appear to be everything nowadays, when even the Union


Jack has come to be looked upon as a ‘ commercial
The French missionaries, on the other hand, regard with
complacency the appropriation of native lands and the dis-
posal of the natives themselves, but only when they are
savcigcSj and wo know tliat th.6 Samoans cannot bo icgardcd
as barbarians. Hear what Monseigneur Vitte, Vicaire
apostolique of New Caledonia, has to say on this subject .
‘ C’est un principe admis chez les nations civilisdes, que les peu-
plades sauvages ne ferment pas un people proprement dit; qu’elles ne
possedent pas ce pouvoir social nomme par nous I’Etat, ni tons les
droits qui lui appartiennent. Naturellement incapables de triompher
par elles-memes d’une barbarie qui les rend dangereusss, elles peuvent
etre conquises legitimement, par toute nation civilises et soumises a
ses lois. Or, une de ces lois est quo toute terre non occupee est du
domaine de I’Etat, et que celui-ci a le droit d’en disposer pour le bien
public.’
To which M. Carol adds :
‘ Quand, sans provocation, nous de son patrimoine (la
chose s’est vue) un people organist, autonomy, regi par des lois
fixes, avide de progres social, deja fort avance en civilisation, mais ayant
ce grand tort de n’avoir pas la peau de la meme couleur que la notre,
nous commettons, vis-a-vis de ce peuple-la, une violation du droit des
gens.’
The present administration in New Caledonia certainly
seems to be acting fairly towards the Kanakas; and our
rule in New Guinea is apparently proceeding on right
methods. Some writers have supposed that the gradual
depopulation of the Pacific islands has been going on for
years, even before the appearance of white men on the
scene, and that the Polynesians are fated to disappear
before long. But in some of the islands —such as Tonga
and Savage Islands —there seems to be a renewal of the
lease of propagation; while in the Gilbert or Kingsmill
Islands we are told:—
‘ The overflowing swarms of population are a continual source of
surprise. Some of the islands seem to form one great village. The
very smallest of these atolls, only two miles across, has a population
of from 1,500 to 2,000, while Taputeuea has from 7,000 to 8,000.
The population of the whole group is estimated at over 40,000, while
the area of dry land is not more than 170 square miles, giving more
than 230 persons per square mile, while in some of the islands it is
said to reach 400 per square mile —a density of population certainly
unequalled in the world in any area where the people depend for fopd
solely on their own exertions. .


So—without calling in Chinese immigration, which our
Australasian colonies would not tolerate, or even without
negro or that Indian coolie labour by which the Mauritius
sugar plantations were rendered so profitable not many years
since—we may be able to find a hardy, prolific, mixed race
of labourers, said to be of an energetic temperament within
our British possessions, capable of making the fertile soil of
the West Pacific islands productive of sugar, cotton, and
other crops, which have formerly made fortunes for our
planters in the West Indies and elsewhere. Some of the
islands, such as Espiritu Santo, are much larger than
Mauritius, where crops of cane producing 130,000 tons of
sugar for exportation have been obtained. But although
our class of traders in the Western Pacific has improved
very much in the last few years, the Germans are still ahead
of us in this respect, for they send out clerks better educated
than ours, capable of speaking French and English besides
their own language, while our young Englishmen can
seldom speak any language except their own. Fortunately,
the natives of Polynesia learn English with more ease than
German ; and even in New Caledonia the Kanakas acquire
English in the neighbourhood of the mines where our
Cornish miners are at work. ,
Certainly for some years to come our object should not be
to extract all the profit possible put of our new possessions
in the Western Pacific. Our first duty is towards the native
inhabitants, and our chief endeavours should be directed
towards saving them from parting with their patrimony to
all those grasping syndicates and monopolising companies
which spread their financial trail over whole archipelagoes.
Should a generous policy be carried out, more for the
benefit of the native populations than for the exhibition of
a prosperous budget, we may look forward to a sure recom-
pense in the loyalty of the inhabitants, and therefore an
inexpensive administration over them. Pomilly tells us
how when he arrived out in Fiji in 1879—a friend of Sir
Arthur Gordon, without employment—he was sent off in
command of a party to make the natives of a neighbouring
island, Kandavu, pick cotton to pay their taxes. This is
decidedly unpleasant reading. But that is too often the
first object of a civilian official despatched by the Colonial
Office to take charge of a newly acquired possession—
to make it pay, .to show a surplus.* Admiral Cyprian
We must point to Mr. Woodford’s modest budget for the Solomon


Bridge indicates the right path to be pursued when he
writes :
‘ As we have chosen to go to New Guinea uninvited, we are bound
in honour to do all the good we can to the races who have not resented
our intrusion, but have received us as friends. If we do not take the
proper steps, we shall soon find that we have a wolf by the ears. We
have a noble chance —we are not likely to have another -of showing
that Englishmen can rule barbarians without exterminating them or
dispossessing them of their lands. I believe it possible to make New
Guinea happy, prosperous, and civilised; I also believe that it may,
and in no long time, be made self-supporting. But the right method
must be adopted, and a system to suit politicians here and in Austra la
may be utterly unsuited to the conditions of the country. If the
latter be adopted, the natives will deserve all the pity we can give
them.’
If our foreign and colonial officials in Whitehall would
take into more consideration the honour of the flag which
our naval and military officers have ever in mind, we might
have fewer of these diplomatic games of chance and skill in
which the weal of fellow creatures is passed from hand to
hand like the counters of Napoleon :
‘ Whose game was empires, and whose stakes were thrones,
Whose table earth —whose dice were human bones.
Islands as a promising indication of a more righteous and humane
policy.
