

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
VICTORIA. AUSTRALIA
BULLETIN No. 6
(NEW SERIES)
PASSION FRUIT CULTURE
in Victoria
Rem 7 1936
Reprinted from the Journal of the Department of Agriculture
of Victoria
CCB6. Wholly set up and printed in Australia by the Government Printer, Melbourne, 1930.


Passion Fruit Growers
a
Protect your Vines with
eRAMO JS
PLANE” DUSTS
INSECTICIDES . . . FUNGICIDES
The BEAUTY
(KNAPSACK)
DUSTER
The SUPERIOR
(ROTARY)
DUSTER
For use when an inter-
mittent flow of dust is
required.
For use when a continu-
ous flow of dust is
required.
Manufactured by
N. N. McLEAN Pty. Ltd.
395 Queen Street, Melbourne, C.l.
Phone: F 6994


DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA
BULLETIN No. 6
(NEW SERIES)
PASSION FRUIT CULTURE
in Victoria
Revised 1936
Reprinted from the Journal of the Department of Agriculture
of Victoria
6086. Wholly sot up and printed in Australia by the Go/crnment Printer, Melbourne, 1936.


Just
CSV
v
tV**' ' -NO*
Published
ft.w
•P
»
v»
w:
Price
.•.»
19
C including
postage)
Anew edition of
“ Beekeeping in Victoria,”
a comprehensive book in
which beekeeping practices are
fully described, has been published
by the Department of Agriculture.
This publication, which contains
165 pages, is well illustrated,
and should be of interest not
only to commercial apiarists, but
also to those who desire to carry
on bee culture as a hobby or
side-line to other occupations.
Obtainable from
The Director,
Department of Agriculture,
Melbourne, C. 2


CONTENTS.
PAOE
Introduction .. .. .. .. .. .. .5
History of the Development of Passion Fruit Culture in this State .. .. 6
L Situation and Climatic Conditions Desired . . .. .. 7
II Soils Desired .. .. . . .. .. .8
111. Raising Young Plants ~ .. .. .. .. 9
IV. Preparation of Land .. .. .. .. 11
V. Planting Out and Erecting the Trellises .. .. .. ..11
VI. Tying up the Vine and arranging its Branch System .. .. .15
VII. Pruning .. .. .. .. 21
VIII. Soil Management and Inter-Planting .. .. 23
IX. Manuring, by F. M. Read, M.Agr.Sc. .. .. .. 25
X. Drainage .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
XI. Habit of Leader and Lateral Growth and Mode of Producing Fruit Buds.. 28
XII. Blooming and Pollination; Setting, Development, and Ripening of the
Fruit .. .. . . .. .. 30
XIII. The Mammoth Passion , . .. .31
XIV. Sterility and Kindred Defects .. .. .. .. 32
XV. Diseases of the Passion Vine, by S. Fish, M.Agr.Sc. .. .. 35
XVI. Yield per acre, Marketing Fresh Fruit, Prices, Uses, Processing, and
Prospects of the Industry .. .. .. .. 38
XVII. Chemical Composition of Passion Fruit, by W. R. Jewell, M.Sc. .. 40
XVIII. Harvesting and Packing Passion Fruit, by Basil Krone .. 41
XIX. Storage of Passion Fruit, by G. B. Tindale, B.Agr.Sc. .. .. 55


PUBLISHED MONTHLY
A
y^> 6
For the . . .
HORTICULTURIST
WHEAT GROWER
DAIRY FARMER
POULTRYMAN
k \\ BEEKEEPER
GRAZIER
Etc.
k V
ANNUAL
SUBSCRIPTION,
POST FREE
G^ V
vo
vtOV
,v°
\> e <> c 6%
. „ vV e ,
O’O
■ \<\S, \ Y°
, vV 6
cK
'*• »■
Write for a FREE specimen copy to
vA' (1 v v
The Director of Agriculture, Kelt., C. 2


Passion Fruit Culture in Victoria.
By J. Farrell , Orchard Supervisor (1923).
(Revised by E. E. Pescott, 1936.)
Introduction.
The passion vine (Passiflora edulis ) belongs to the Natural Order
Passifloracese, and the place of its origin is Southern Brazil. There are
probably over 200 known species of this order, many of which yield
edible fruits, but, because of its being so amenable to commercially suc-
cessful cultivation in Victoria, P. edulis is made the principal variety
grown here. America is regarded as the home of most of the species
of this order, as some are found in different parts of the United States,
including Pennsylvania, Illinois, Florida, also Mexico, Central
America, and the West Indies, while others belong to Guiana, Peru,
Bolivia, the La Plata States and Australia. From this it will be
observed that plants of this genus are naturally favoured by tropical
or sub-tropical conditions, as the places mentioned mostly lie between
45 degrees north and 35 degrees south latitude.
Although the original home of P. edulis is confined mostly to that
portion of Brazil which lies between 20 degrees and 30 degrees south lati-
tude, this variety is capable of adapting itself to a comparatively wide
range of climatic conditions, and will make good growth, and yield
heavy crops of fruit, except where severe frosts occur, when the young
wood often becomes badly affected. Individual vines thrive and fruit
well in and around Melbourne as well as in most parts of Victoria. The
localities of the State, however, where passion fruit is grown commer-
cially, include Wandin, Seville, Silvan, Monbulk, Mount Dandenong,
Warragul, and Buln Buln, and the portions of these localities where
it is grown have an altitude ranging from about 500 feet to 1,500 feet,
and they lie between 37 degrees and 38 degrees south latitude.
Of recent years plantings have been made in the Mornington
Peninsula, but it is not yet possible to say whether this area offers scope
for commercial expansion.
Experience has taught that elevations or gentle slopes make the best
sites for passion plots, as there is now an ample accumulation of
evidence to show that the vines should not be planted in low-lying
secluded valleys in which frosts are pocketed.
New South Wales and Queensland also offer a genial home to the
passion vine, and it has been cultivated commercially for some years in
these States, where in many instances it is now growing wild.
History of the Development of Passion Fruit Culture in this
State.
To the late Mr. Christopher Thomas Briggs, a pioneer fruit-grower
of Wandin, is due the credit of having commenced passion fruit culture
on commercial lines in this State. Mr. Briggs began in 1892 by sowing
a few seeds which he obtained from the fruit of a plant growing at the
residence of Mr. G. E. Overton, a local gardener. The young vines
made good growth, and when one year old, about forty were planted out
6086.-2


in a row 9 feet apart. The next year the block was increased to half-an-
acre, which was extended to 5 acres during the few succeeding years.
Mr. Briggs, junior, states each row of vines was supported by a trellis
9 feet high made of posts from rough split timber, with seven 8-gauge
wires, and a continuous line of saplings nailed along the top of the
posts. The vines yielded well, and owing to the height of the trellis
ladders had to be employed in picking the fruit.
Fig. 1. —A three-year-old passion vine in its summer condition.
The product of the variety under consideration is at first of a pale
green colour, but as its development proceeds the fruit becomes darker
until, when fully matured, it is dark purple, and is consequently com-
monly known among the growers as the “ black passion.”
At first, Mr. Briggs experienced difficulty in selling his passions,
often accepting as low as 4s. per case for them. As the public developed
a liking for this class of fruit, however, prices went gradually up to Bs.,
and sometimes £1 per ease. Some growers obtained as high as £2 per
bushel ease for their late crops. Certainly this crop was light, but the
prices paid indicate the public liking for passion fruit.
Mr. Briggs’ sons also commenced growing the passion, and its culti-
vation became general in the district, having been taken up by Messrs.


Year.
Victoria.
New South Wales.
Queensland.
Total.
Bushels.
Bushels.
Bushels.
Bushels.
1932-33
24,861
59,558
10,014
94,433
Hogg, Johnson, Hunter, Anker, Aitken, Baker, Sebere Brothers, and
others, and later, growers in the neighbouring localities gave it a place
in their orchards.
The Government Statist has issued the following information
regarding the quantity of passion fruit grown in Australia: —
The estimate for 1933-34 for Victoria is 29,514 bushels.
I. —Situation and Climatic Conditions Desired.
jThe passion vine’s aversion to cold climatic conditions is now well
kn<!»wn,,and it is a matter of paramount importance that, when select-
ing a situation for the passion plot, this aspect of the question should
receive the first consideration. Light frosts do this vine little or no
damage, but fairly heavy ones affect it badly. It thrives and fruits best
in p. warm, humid atmosphere such as that obtaining in the sub-tropical
country of its origin. It is obvious, therefore, that when planting in
this country, conditions similar to those should be sought. It is unfor-
tunate, however, that the climatic conditions which favour the growth
of the vine are even more favorable to the development of the wood,
leaf, and fruit fungus which attacks it, but, as previously stated,
measures are being taken to cope with this disease.
The passion vine is an evergreen, and makes a little growth during
mild winters, and occasionally growers find to their cost that it should
not be planted in cold, low-lying situations, especially between hills,
where it is most likelv to be attacked by winter frost, the effect of which
is more severe on plants which suffered from Glceos-porium during the
previous late summer and autumn than it is on healthy ones.
In hilly country the site for the vine plot should preferably occupy
an elevated part with a gradual slope to the north or north-east, and
plants do well on the north-west slope, provided the site be nicely shel-
tered. 'Southerly slopes are mostly avoided, but even on these, if not too
abrupt and suitably sheltered, good crops are sometimes harvested.
Passions like shelter, and are not averse to a reasonable amount of air
circulation, but they abhor wind-swept positions, and particularly during
winter. No hard and fast rule can be laid down in this regard, ;but
intending planters should give the matter the consideration it deserves,
and determine the needs of individual cases. In these undulating
localities sufficient shelter is sometimes afforded by the lie of the
as adjacent hills often intercept prevailing winds. Then in grubbing
the site for the passion plots belts of native timber are allowed to remain
as shelters. Where these natural advantages are absent, however,
break-winds of Finns insignis, gums, or other 'suitable trees, are
employed.


II. —Soils Desired.
In tlie case of the other fruits both large and small, we have a more
extensive knowledge of the suitability of the different classes of soil;
with the passion, however, our knowledge of its requirements in this
regard is limited. This is because of its comparatively recent intro-
duction to the ranks of commercial fruits here, but evidence of its
Fig. 2. —Two passion fruits, A and B.
c and e are cross-sections of A.
d and f are longitudinal sections of B.


requirements as regards both climate and soils is accumulating. Up
to the present, the fairly rich, red friable soils of Wandin, Seville,
Silvan, Monbulk, and Mount Dandenong seem to have come nearest to
the liking of this plant. It also grows well at Welshpool, Yarram,
Buln Buln, and Warragul, in Gippsland.
The soils of the main districts in which passions are grown com-
mercially are deep, friable, and fairly rich, but are of a rather porous,
loose, or open construction, and are, therefore, liable to dry up quickly.
These districts being hilly, however, have a fairly heavy rainfall.
Individual vines thrive and crop well in many of the private gardens
of Melbourne and on the lighter grey soils around Ringwood, Bays-
water, and several other places.
It is probable that if climatic conditions be favorable this vine will
tolerate a fairly wide range of soils so long as cultural practices are
suited to them. For instance, on rather poor light soils the supply of
organic matter will be found of great importance. Good drainage will
be essential in the heavier types, and so on.
III. —Raising Young Plants.
Young vines are raised from seeds, which should be saved from fruit
ripening from April to June, as these give a higher percentage of
germination and stronger plants than those ripening at any other time.
The need for careful bud, scion, and seed selection when propagating
other fruit trees is now generally recognised, and it is desirable also when
establishing a passion fruit garden that this principle should be
observed. The seeds for propagation purposes should be taken from
the large fruits of vigorous healthy plants known to be precocious and
prolific bearers. These fruits should not be picked until fully matured,
then allowed to wilt and dry naturally, and afterwards kept in a dry
cool place until the seeds are required for sowing. The seeds may be
sown in drills in beds or boxes from the end of September
until the beginning of November, according to weather con-
ditions prevailing locally. The best plants are those grown
in the open, the earlier the seed is sown the better, and the young
vines may be protected from late frosts with the boughs of trees, with
hessian or other suitable material. Before sowing the seed the soil
should be brought to a fine state of tilth, and the seeds may be covered
with an inch of fine earth. The seeds soon germinate, and the young
plants appear above the ground, and if the soil be kept free from weeds
and nicely watered during the summer the result is usually what is
desired.
Seedlings are depicted in Fig. 3. A gives section of a bed, and
B shows them growing in a drill. Those in the bed made the better
growth, the seed having been sown earlier than that for those in the
drill, and on account of having received more attention than the latter
during the main period of growth. The drill system is recommended,
because the soil between the drills can be kept cultivated and the
stems and lower parts of the plants would get more light and air
than those grown in beds. The seedlings should not be allowed to
grow too thickly, and the weak, useless ones should be weeded out so as
to give the good plants sufficient room. The best results are obtained


when the seedlings are allowed a reasonable amount of space—about
6 inches apart, and while growing in the nursery their stems should bo
kept single, without side shoots, to a height of from 4 to 6 inches above
the soil level.
The matter of growing young vines is a comparatively simple one
and growers should raise those required for their own use. Then, when
establishing or extending the plot, the young vines are on the spot, and
it is only a matter of carefully lifting out each one with a spade, keeping
its soil and roots intact, and placing it in its permanent position. When
planting takes place under these conditions, the results are much more
Fig. 3. —Seedlings growing—A, in a bed ; B, in a drill.
satisfactory than when the foliage branches and roots of the young vines
are crushed and broken in transit from one place to another. Seedlings
raised under glass or forced with heat are not recommended, as they
are usually of a yellowish colour, delicate, and rarely grow into as strong
and profitable vines as those raised in the manner explained. In order
to obviate injury to plants in transit, seedlings are sometimes grown in
pots and forwarded in them to growers, but potted plants are also
inferior to those grown in the open.


IV. —Preparation of Land.
The passion, like most other fruits, both large and small, thrives
better on virgin soil than on land previously cultivated, and especially
where. cereals have been grown for lengthy periods, and most of the.
young plantations are being established on new land. When the prelimi-
nary essentials—locality, climate, and soil—have received consideration,
the site selected for the plantation should be cleared of all native timber
and the roots of same carefully removed to a depth of 18 inches to obviate
the possibility of native pests and diseases attacking the vines. The removal
of the roots also facilitates deep cultivation in preparing the land for
planting. When the grubbing is finished, the plane of the site may be
graded to remove surface inequalities, and crab-holes should be located
and filled in. Then, if not subsoiled, the land should be ploughed to
a depth of from 10 to 12 inches, according to the depth of the surface
soil. During winter is the best time for grubbing; grading and plough-
ing may be done afterwards, as soon as the land is in a fit state. Culti-
vation should then be continued during the following summer and
autumn to get the land into a mellow, sweet condition to receive the
young vines in the following September or October, when the frosts are
over.
When it is intended to utilize previously-cultivated land, this should
be ploughed, and, if necessary, graded and brought into a fine state of
cultivation prior to planting. In grading the red friable soils, pri-
mitive locally-made wooden implements are used to do the work of
buck-scrapers and slickers.
The passion vine has a great aversion to sour soil conditions, and par-
ticularly if these are created by stagnant water. In preparing the
land, therefore, this aspect should be considered, but the subsoil of the
red land is almost invariably of a porous nature, offering free natural
drainage. Where these favorable conditions are non-existent, however,
sub-drainage should be provided. While good natural drainage is
desirable, it should be remembered that the great fault with the red
soil is that, in some places, its subsoil is too porous, and consequently
in hot weather, and when water is not available, growers are obliged
to resort to extra-intensive cultivation to maintain sufficient soil moisture
for their vines.
V. —Planting out and Erecting the Trellises.
The soil having been brought into a fit state of tilth to receive the
young vines, pegs are used to mark the exact positions in which they
are to be planted. Formerly a great diversity of opinion existed among
growers as to the most suitable distances apart to plant, but it is now
generally recognized that the most suitable distances apart are 12 ft.
x 18 ft. —that is, 12 ft. between the rows and 18 ft. between the vines
in the rows. The 12 ft. spaces between the rows admit sufficient light
and air to the vines, and facilitate proper cultivation; while the 18 ft.
spaces between the plants in the rows afford natural expansion of the
fan-shaped structure -which they are made to assume when being tied
up on the trellises. The end headlands are usually 20 ft. wide, this
being sufficient when cultivating, or spraying, while those at the side are


only 12 ft., cross-cultivation being precluded by the wire trellises which
run from end to end.
Frequently the trellises are erected before planting the vines. This
is done by placing the first or corner post of the block 20 ft. from
the end and 12 ft. from the side fence. The remainder of the first
row of posts are placed in a straight line at the distance stated from
the side fence, and 18 ft. apart to the other end, where another 20 ft.
headland is provided. The second row of posts is placed similarly 12 ft.
from the first, and so on, until all those necessary for trellising the
block are in position. The posts are almost invariably made of rough
split timber 6 in, x 6 in., 7 ft. to 8 ft. long, from 2 ft. to 3 ft. being
placed in the ground, leaving about 5 ft. above the soil level. Three
to five 8 to 10-gauge wires are employed to support the vines, the
weight of which, with the tight condition of the wires, exercise a con-
siderable strain on the end posts.
To keep these rigid, however, they are supported by stays as shown
in Figure 4. In setting out the young vines one is planted midway
between each two posts in the trellis, and exactly beneath the wires.
Thus the vines will also be 18 ft. apart, and have a space of 9 ft. on
each side of the stem for fan expansion.
The methods of constructing trellises vary, and mostly according
to the experience of growers, and many types are employed in the
different districts. The following is one that has given general satis-
faction :—Trellis, 6 ft. high, end posts 8 in. x 8 in., with 3 ft. 6 in. in the
ground, and “ stayed ”; others 6 in. x 6 in., and 2 ft. 6 in. in the
ground; five 10-gauge galvanized iron wires. 18 ft. between the posts,
and the trellises 12 ft. apart.
To find and peg-out the exact positions which the vines are to
occupy when planting is done before the trellises are erected, the follow-
ing method may be observed: —Place the first or corner peg 29 ft.
from the end and 12 ft. from the side fence; then complete the first
row by placing the pegs 18 ft. apart, as explained in connexion with
the erection of the posts. Then the pegging-out of the plot may be
completed by putting in parallel rows of pegs 12 ft. from each other.
Where there are no fences, or where those on the land do not describe
a right angle to serve as a guide in planting, a right angle may be
set out by constructing a triangle with sides of 3,4, and 5 units
respectively.
Planting-out is usually done between the end of September and the
beginning of November, according to the conditions prevailing in the
different localities, and when the frosts are over. The holes should not
be made deeper than the soil has been cultivated, for the obvious
reason that basins formed in the subsoil may collect and retain surplus
water, which is injurious to *he plants. In planting, the vines should
bo placed at the same depth as they grew in the nursery, and at this
time the advantages of the planter having raised his own vines will
be amply apparent. The holes should be sufficiently wide to permit of
the roots being made to radiate naturally before the soil is filled in.
When pegs are used to mark the correct positions for the vines, a
planting board should be employed to ensure that the plants are


Fig. 4.—Trellises at Silvan.
6086. 3


accurately placed in those positions. The construction of the planting
board and method of using same have also often been depicted and
explained by the experts.
The vines are usually planted out when one or two years old, and
then supported by stakes until trellises, with four or five wires, are
A B
Fig. 5.—Stakes Supporting Young Vines.
erected. Should trellises constructed with three wires only be in
position prior to planting, stakes are also used to conduct the vines on
to the wires, the lowest of which is further from the ground than when
four or five are employed.


VI. —Tying up the Vine and Arranging its Branch System.
When the vines are planted out, and the trellises erected in the
manner explained, the next operation requiring attention is tying them
up on the wires, and when planted 12 ft. x 18 ft., as shown, there
are 200 plants per acre to be handled. The desired symmetrical
appearance and future stability of the vine’s superstructure largely
depends on how it is treated at the tying-up. This part of the work
should, therefore, be done in a scientific and systematic manner and
on the most approved lines. It should be generally understood that
the passion, like the grape vine, produces tendrils which during their
development take hold of branches, laterals, wires, &c., with which they
come into contact, and are not easily detached when growth ceases and
the tendrils become dry and hard. Now the advantages which follow
the proper spacing and directing the leaders of the vine on the wires
prior to the development of the tendrils will be easily realized. Stripe
of the green leaves of New 7 Zealand flax (Phormium tenax ) and binder
Fig. 6. —Four Methods of Trellising Vines.
twine (made from the fibre of the same plant) are generally used in
tying up, and the bands should not be made too tight, as the leaders
require sufficient room for natural expansion. Bands are tied at each
point where the leaders come into contact with the wires, and sometimes,
also where they touch the wooden droppers, or the vertical wires
occasionally employed to afford further support to the vines and
strengthen the espalier.
The sketch in Figure 6 shows the mode of strengthening the trellis,
and depicts four methods of trellising vines. It is desirable to keep
the wires constantly tense and the framework rigid, because a freely
vibrating trellis is not conducive to the growth of passions. Seven
to nine saplings about three-quarters of an inch in diameter, are
employed to stiffen that portion of the trellis occupied by each vine,
and these are woven about 18 inches apart, one against the other, into
the wires, on the principle of wicker-work, as depicted at (o) in section
A. Here also is the figure of a young vine which may be regarded a a
one or two years old, according to its development prior to planting out


and the amount of attention bestowed on regulating its branch system
of six leaders; and ( b ) shows the formation of the plant a year or two
later, when the number of main arms have increased to twelve; while
(c) with sixteen leaders, illustrates the fully developed vine of, say,
five or six years old, and occupying the whole of the section of espalier
assigned to it. It is not suggested that the main arms can be made to
Oadiate from the crown as accurately as the lines drawn here to
represent them, but the writer would invite experienced growers, as
well as intending planters, to accept this as the most modem and
approved plan, and in trellising their vines to imitate it as closely as
they can.
The type of vine recommended has a single stem, about six inches
and only the main arms are shown. These give out numerous
light laterals on which the fruit is produced. In order to maintain
healthy, vigorous growth, with a view to producing fruit of the finest
quality, as in the case of fruit trees (apples, pears, and peaches), most
of the laterals should be removed at the pruning. This can be much
more easily accomplished when the leaders assume the positions shown
and are made firm, than if allowed to become twisted into objection-
able shapes, as so often happened during former years.
Three other methods of trellising are depicted in section B—(a)
shows a rather nice type of vine with single stem, and it will be
observed that the two outside leaders are drawn up from the crown so
as to describe a circle, cross each other at the centre wire, and then
incline in opposite directions to the top corners of the espalier. Two
other leaders inclining more to the vertical, cross each other higher up,
and again rise gradually to the top wire. The next pair of leaders
rising from the crown describe such an angle to the vertical as to leave
the usual space for the centre dropper. The fourth pair of leaders
strike out almost horizontally, and are supported by the bottom wire
as shown. Now it will be seen that the vacant spaces on the trellis
are filled in by sub-leaders, or side arms, growing on the main
branches.
The mode of trellising passions shown at (6) has been practised only
to a limited extent. This consists of bringing the main stem up to the
top wire, and during its growth twisting the horizontal arms, produced
from suitable nodes, around the wires and tying them in position.
From what is known of this method it cannot be recommended, as the
side arms rarely make uniform growth, indicating that a less equal
distribution of sap is maintained through the centre stem than obtains
when the leaders radiate from a crown. This method is largely resorted
to in trellising grape vines.
In (c) we have the most undesirable formation. Here, instead of
a single stem, the necessity of which has been previously emphasized,
the leaders constituting the fan or framework of the vine are allowed
to come from below the soil level. This type is of common occurrence,
but should neither be planted nor grown, as it is practically impossible
to keep the butts of the leaders free from fungi, and possibly deleterious
soil acids, and particularly where wet soil conditions exist. Many vines
of this formation have died through the rotting of the bark under the
soil, even where no fungous organisms were found. There are other


Fig 7 —Three-year-old Vine prior to being tied up.


methods of trellising, and many modifications of those illustrated, but
the one depicted in section A typifies, the best and most practicable
style for general adoption.
The young vine should be tied up as early as possible, so that its
first produced tendrils may be utilized in clasping the wires, which
offer support, and facilitate its systematic construction and satisfactory
development. The plant appearing in Figure 7is three years old, and
although some are supported by the stake, most of its leaders are
lying on the ground, having produced and expended their tendrils to
no advantage. Here also is seen the method of using vertical wires in
lieu of wooden droppers to strengthen the trellis, which in this case
consist of three horizontal wires, though at least four should be
employed, as the bottom one is much too high from the ground level
When not placed on the wires until the condition shown here is reached,
the vine’s subsequent development and general make up are rarely
satisfactory.
Fig. 8- —Sections of Two Eight-year-old Vines-
A shows the approved stem, and B the objectionable one.
In Figure 8 are given illustrations of eight-year-old vines, depicting
two of the classes of stems to which reference has been previously
made. A shows a single stem with leaders striking off from the
crown six inches above the ground, but this cannot be regarded as
the best type of its class, as a sufficient number of main arms, sub-
leaders and side shoots have not been encouraged to complete the
framework. The required number of leaders may easily be obtained
from the crown if judicious pruning be practised during the first
few years of growth; hut, like most kinds of fruit trees, the leaders
become bare of fruit wood below if allowed to produce too many
side arms or shoots above, as may be seen by the picture. The leaders
are sometimes cut hard to remedy this defect, and good growths are
often produced, but the resultant framework is rarely as substantial
or the vine as fruitful, as when properly trained at the beginning


Bis one of the class which establishes itself by throwing,up two.or
more leaders from below the soil level, and for this reason is afterwards
subject to the disadvantages previously mentioned. Vines of this type
are rarely selected for planting. What usually happens is that after
being planted out the seedlings are cut down by frost, causing numerous
Fig. 9. —Experimental Trellising.
suckers during the following period of growth to come from that part
of the stem immediately above the root systems. Then instead of
selecting one of the most suitable of these growths for a single stem,
and keeping the others suppressed until the basal buds die out, all the
growths are allowed to remain, causing extra labour and anxiety not


experienced in treating the single stems. The specimen under review
has three stems, but is nevertheless a healthy and productive vine
This part requires more care and attention, however, because of the
disabilties explained than the single stem. The fungous organisms, or
Fig. 10. —Experimental Trellising.
lowly forms of vegetable growth which attack the roots and stems, as
well as those which afiect the foliage and young growths, thrive best
in moist shaded situations. It is therefore advisable, if at all prac-
ticable when planting, to run the rows north and south so that the
morning sun may shine on the east side of the trellises and the after-
noon sun on the west side.


VII. —Pruning.
In the past, little attention was given to pruning, but, from our
present knowledge of the passion vine’s requirements, its future scien-
tific treatment in this respect, so that the best results may accrue from
its cultivation, should be regarded as essential. The type of vine most
amenable to pruning treatment is that illustrated in Fig. 6, Section A,
but less favoured types are often improved by the same process. In
pruning the young vine so that the required number of leaders may be
obtained, the stronger branches should be cut back or suppressed, so as to
flush the sap to the “ crown ” buds, with which the plant is usually
abundantly supplied. By the proper manipulation of the growths
from those buds, the fan or framework of the vine may be perfected
as already described.
The passion vine being a gross feeder, grows rapidly; therefore,
during its development as well as afterwards, the soil should be kept
well worked, and liberally manured where necessary. Many passion
plots have been slow in coming into full bearing because of the neglect
of these essentials in their cultural management. The vine begins to
produce fruit when about two years old, but this does not retard its
growth provided thorough soil cultivation be practised; in fact, pre-
cocious vines are preferable. Pruning during the first three or four
years consists mainly in regulating and directing the leaders which
afterwards produce numerous superfluous light laterals. If these be not
removed at the pruning, their subsequent maintenance causes the plant
to become somewhat devitalized, and consequently more easily de-
foliated by disease and frosts, particularly when cultivation is neglected.
With proper care and attention the vine usually reaches its maxi-
mum of fruitfulness when about six years old, and the retention of the
debilitated willowy growths appearing after that time especially
causes the feeding roots to become sluggish and to eventually cease
functioning. Then the death of the plant, from what was formerly
regarded by most growers as the effect of some mysterious cause,
ensues. The passion being an exotic, however, probably suffers also
from other yet unknown disabilites. A much higher percentage of
vines died in former years, in the manner explained, when pruning
was omitted, than during recent times when pruning has been more
generally practised, other conditions being equal. It is, consequently,
generally conceded that pruning must be regarded as a prime factor in
passion-growing.
Reducing the superstructure of a reasonably healthy vine by re-
moving the numerous useless lateral growths stimulates root action, and
the sap is flushed to the several selected points of vantage. A smaller
number of laterals appear during the next period of growth, but,
although less numerous, the fruits produced on these are invariably
more luscious and of finer quality than those of an unpruned vine.
It should be generally understood that the passion, like the grape vine
develops its fruit on the succulent laterals produced during the currency
of the same season’s growth, and that these laterals mostly come from
leaf-buds on the previous year’s wood.
During normal seasons and in suitable position, the matured foliage
assists materially in protecting the leader wood and fruiting laterals
from frost during winter; pruning, therefore, should not be commenced


Fig. 11. —Trellis of passion vines showing method of pruning.


until the frosts are over. Fig. 11 shows a trellis of five vines eight
years old, the one in the right of the picture pruned and the four on
the other portion of the trellis unpnined.
The visitation of Gloeosporium in a most virulent form, which
usually follows heavy rains experienced in early summer, destroys a
high percentage of the first crop then ripening, and causes the vines
to become sparsely foliaged. The plants are unable to regain their
normal condition during the remainder of the growing period. These
cold conditions supervening on the Olaeosporium attack are responsible
for the almost complete defoliation of the vines, the condition of the
plants shown in the picture (Fig. 11) being typical. There is no reason,
however, for intending planters or others inexperienced in passion-
growing to become dismayed, because severe winters are of rare occur-
rence, and even when badly “ frosted ” the vines, if carefully tended
afterwards, quickly recuperate when the spring growth commences.
Prior to being treated, the pruned vine appearing in the illustration
was covered with a dense mass of light willowy growths like those
on the untreated ones on the other end of the trellis. Some of the twigs
had been killed by frost, while others were still alive but without leaves.
In pruning the established vine, all the sickly or dead laterals are
severed, at or near their base, from the main branches and sub-leaders.
The healthier laterals may be shortened back or removed in like mauner,
according to the condition of their buds and that of those at the base;
but, generally speaking, practically the whole of the laterals may be
removed. Dead or diseased leaders should also be cut out and suitably
placed young growths made to take up their places. The main arms
as well as the smaller growths sometimes become badly “ frosted ”
during severe winters and often even in mild winters when the vines
are grown in unfavorable situations. When it is plain that a plant
suffering in this way or affected by fungi will have great difficulty in
recovering, the best remedy is, when pruning, to cut all the leaders off
at the crown. Then the latent crown buds will yield an ample supply
of young growths with which a new fan may be constructed.
When pruning was first adopted a long hook-shaped knife, or
sometimes a hedge shears, was employed to get over the work quickly,
the mass of laterals being practically shorn off. Through knowledge
gained by practical experience, however, the use of those implements
has been abandoned in favour of the ordinary secateurs by which,
though pruning becomes a slower process, the growths may be cut
back more accurately and neatly to the desired nodes and bases.
Apart from the advantages derived from treating vines in the manner
explained, it may be further stated that pruning, to a great extent
also, regulates the time of cropping. Unpruned vines blossom early
and mature the first or heavy crop of the season, sometimes causing
a glut and relatively low prices; whereas, pruned plants yield a later
crop when higher prices are obtainable.
VIII. —Soil Management and Inter-Planting.
The amount of cultivation needed by passion plots so that the best
results may be obtained from same depends largely on the nature of
the land and the weather conditions prevailing locally. Two ploughings
a year are usually sufficient to keep the soil in a sufficiently loose state
to enable cultivators and harrows to maintain its satisfactory condition


of tilth. One ploughing to 6or 8 inches deep, according to the
depth of the surface soil, should be given as soon as possible after the
first autumn rain. On this occasion the soil should be drawn towards
the rows of vines on both sides, so that the furrows formed between
the trellises and running with the fall of the land may carry away the
surface water during winter. Where the soil is heavy and tenacious,
it, should not be further broken up by harrows but allowed to remain in
the rough state to become aerated and pulverized by the influence of
winter weather conditions. When with the arrival of spring the
desired alteration in the soil has taken place and the land becomes
sufficiently dry, it should be harrowed down prior to being ploughed
again. On this occasion the furrow depressions should be filled in by
drawing the soil away from the vines, thus restoring the level surface
which existed prior to the autumn ploughing. The type of single-
furrow plough, used in orchards for ploughing near the trees to obviate
digging the strips, has proved the most suitable for employment on the
the passion plot. Its shifting handles and adjustable head-rack
facilitate the working of the soil around the butts of the vines when
ploughing either on or off.
No time should be lost after the spring ploughing in bringing the
soil into a fine state of tilth. For this work a nine-tine spring-tooth
cultivator is the most suitable implement, being preferable to the
ordinary drag-harrow and disc cultivator. The “ spring-tooth ” should
be frequently used during summer and particularly after rains or
irrigation. It often happens, however, that owing to pressure of work
or lack of the necessary assistance, cultivation after rains has to he
omitted; then the use of the disc cultivator becomes imperative.
Some of the more friable, red soils lend themselves to intensive
cultural treatment even during winter, and when fairly rich and in
nicely-sheltered warm positions, the passion shows its appreciation of
these. This feature is more noticeable when the vines are growing
on virgin soil than on previously cultivated land.
When ploughing and cultivating, great care should be exercised
not to damage the hark of the stems or branches of the vines with the
implements, as the spores of fungi often find a lodgment in the
wounded parts, sometimes causing the death of the plants. There are
no cultivated orchard plants more easily injured than passion vines.
They often suffer considerable damage by having branches broken and
portions of the hark removed from their stems by the projecting
ends of the old-fashioned swingle-bars and long trace chains still used
by some growers. The chances of injury to the vines may be reduced
to a minimum, however, by employing modern orchard harness.
The fact that the passion vine being a greedy feeder invariably
responds w 7 ell to good cultivation cannot be too frequently emphasized,
as this phase of its culture is so often neglected. It should also be
remembered that, as one-way working Ls imperative (cross-cultivation
being precluded by the wires), and as the vine is an evergreen, the
soil should be at all seasons of the year kept in as perfect a state of
cultivation as local conditions will permit.. The vines, when left to
their own resources or treated to shallow cultivation, become surface-
rooted, producing a high percentage of their roots in the surface soil.
Deep working, from 6 to 8 inches, according to the depth of the
surface soil, so necessary for the passion plot, counteracts this object-
ionable condition, and trains the roots to function below the reach of


cultivating implements. ISTo crops of any kind, particularly cereals
and cabbage, however well tended, should be grown among the vines.
Not only do these crops deplete the soil of the vines’ essential food, but
they also monopolize the air spaces between the trellises to the detri-
ment of the passions.
IX. —Manuring.
By F. M. Read, M.Agr.Sc.
The problems of soil fertility in passion fruit culture are essentially
similar to those of other branches of horticulture, and for a general
discussion the reader is referred to the departmental pamphlet, “ Soil
Fertility in the Orchard.”
Good cultivation keeps the soil mellow, moist, and sweet, enabling
it to yield up freely to the vines the elements of plant food. Continuous
cropping, however, gradually exhausts and disarranges the balance of
these constituents, which, if not replenished and regulated by the appli-
cation of suitable organic manures or fertilizers, soon causes the vines,
especially when pruning is neglected, to show signs of weakness.
The virgin soils in the passion fruit districts are relatively good;
but the growth of the vines may he considerably improved, even on
these soils, by the application of manures from the time of planting.
The organic manures should be worked in during late winter or early
spring as the grower desires, hut the quicker-acting artificial fertilizers
may be applied in spring during the currency of the main period of
growth.
Green Manure and Organic Matter.
Where stable manure is available in sufficient quantities for annual
application it will be found very’ satisfactory from all points of view.
It should, if possible, be well rotted before application, either in winter
or spring. However, this manure is now so relatively unavailable
that soil organic matter or humus has to be maintained chiefly by the
ploughing under of plenty of green manure grown for the purpose
between the rows of vines. ' This is a most important feature of soil
fertility
There would appear to be three main methods of providing soil
humus in addition to the application of farm yard manure and straw,
and so on:—
1. We can sow a crop of peas, beans, oats, barley, rape, or, in fact,
any crop which will grow well and give a good bulk within a few
months. In general, the leguminous crops are preferable when they
will grow strongly but if they will not thrive the crop most suitable
to the district should be sown. It is essential that such a crop be
sown early so that it secures a good start before the cold weather comes.
March is the best month from this point of view.
2. We can establish such a plant as subterranean clover, which will
reseed itself naturally. This has been done with apparently satis-
factory results. There does not appear to be much difficulty in re-
seeding subterranean clover when it is ploughed under, as is the general
rule at present, in September, for the plants go on maturing after
ploughing, and until the surface is broken down by the cultivators and
harrows. It would be wise to leave the strips of clover under the vines
until the seed has formed.


3. The third alternative which may be useful as a stop-gap, but
which would not appear to be as permanently satisfactory as the two
above, is to allow the miscellaneous herbage to grow by ceasing culti-
vation in late February or early March. This can probably be
encouraged by top-dressing with artificial fertilizers in autumn.
Super, or sulphate of ammonia has in general given most noticeable
results to date. The final choice between these two fertilizers should
be made after trial. On the whole, super, tends to be more generally
effective for this purpose in the north, while a nitrogenous manure,
such as sulphate of ammonia, is more usually effective in the south
of the State. These results, how-ever, depend largely on the type of
herbage. Clovers seem to prefer super., while Capeweed responds
more usually to nitrogen. The results from grasses are variable.
Artificial Fertilizers.
As in the case of most crops, the elements of plant food most usually
necessary to add are nitrogen, phosphoric acid, and potash, and on the
whole the use of a mixed fertilizer such as the type known commercially
as 2:2:1 mixture, consisting of sulphate of ammonia, superphosphate,
and potash has proved generally satisfactory in horticulture, and may
be used by passion-growers with confidence. A dressing of sto 6 cwt.
per acre applied immediately before the spring ploughing and promptly
turned under would represent a liberal application to mature vines.
Where growth is very restricted and general colour of the leaves poor
a nitrogenous fertilizer such as sulphate of ammonia should be tried
in place of the complete fertilizer at the same rate of application.
In southern Victorian passion-growing districts it would appear
desirable to apply in the winter a dressing of agricultural lime equal
to that of fertilizer added in the previous spring. This, although
generally desirable, is essential when heavy applications of sulphate of
ammonia are being used.
The lime will keep the soil free from any' tendency to increasing-
acidity or sourness —a condition most unfavorable to the passion fruit
plant.
X.—Drainage.
Although, the passion vine is capable of accommodating itself to
a wide range of soils, provided the climatic conditions are favorable,
also geographically both in respect to latitude and altitude, its powers
of making a congenial home under the varying circumstances will never
overcome its antipathy to sour soil conditions created by stagnant
water. There is, therefore, no phase of passion fruit culture that re-
quires more careful and prompt attention than drainage.
Through want of drainage, the soil becomes saturated, its interspaces
being thus filled with water which prevents aeration, and while in this
state beneficial bacterial activity is suspended and acidity develops.
Such a state is also unfavorable for the growth of cover crops for
green manure, and, even when fairly well grown and ploughed under
in such wet land, the process of their decomposition is often unsatis-
factory. The rate at which the chemical changes necessary to produce
soluble plant food proceed is so slow that its completion is often too
late to be of much service to the vines during the succeeding period of


growth. It is frequently impossible to plough such land in early
spring, and when dry enough to cultivate later, it usually turns over in
hard sods. This involves extra expense by operating against bringing
the soil into an early, fine state of tilth. When the surface earth is
shallow, and frequently even when cultivated, the subsoil, if tenacious,
cracks badly during hot weather, permitting the moisture to escape.
There are two factors, surface drainage and sub-drainage, involved in
conducting the surplus water from the passion plot.
Surface Drainage.
Before the winter rains commence, provision, through the medium
of a system of small surface drains, should be made for carrying off
the surface water from the planted area during the rainy season. This
method should be practised more carefully where underground drains
have not been established. A planted area consisting of almost flat
land is usually surface-drained by a series of plough furrows running
parallel to each other and connected at right angles with a head ditch
or drain leading to a lower level; whereas the contours occurring in
undulating land are made the basis of surface drainage operations. In
both instances, when autumn ploughing is being carried out the soil
should be drawn towards each trellis on both sides, and the furrows
created between them made to serve as surface drains. It was previously
stated that, in planting, the rows of vines should, where practicable, be
made to run north and south, so that the morning sun may strike the
east side of the trellises, and the west side receive the sunlight in the
afternoon. A slope to the north suits this method of planting best, and
also affords better facilities for surface drainage of the nature ex-
plained, because trellises running north and south, on an easterly slope,
preclude ploughing with the fall of the land. Abrupt slopes, with loose
surface soil, should not be ploughed immediately before winter, as heavy
rains sometimes cause them to wash away.
Sub-Drainage.
The soil of the passion plot may be saturated and the vines water-
logged by springs, by water accumulated from seepage or by rain water
being allowed to lie on the block. The last-named condition is of most
common occurrence, and to prevent or remedy this sub-drainage should
be resorted to, although, in some cases, the trouble may be averted by
proper surface drainage. The favorable soil conditions accruing from
sub-drainage in the orchards and passion fruit plantations offer better
facilities for spraying, pruning, and early spring cultivation, and the
heavier crops of fruit which are obtained from the extensive areas
at present sub-drained demonstrate most convincingly the further
advantages which follow this practice.
Surplus irrigation water lodging on impervious clay subsoils may
also create unpleasant conditions for the vines, although the results are
generally much less serious those produced by winter and early
spring lodgment. Nevertheless every care should be taken to make
the application of irrigation water uniform and not excessive.
The most suitable time for carrying out drainage operations is
during winter, when the subsoil has become sufficiently moist to make
it amenable to ditch excavation, and labour for the work is then more


easily obtained. Tile drains are now almost exclusively employed, and
these are placed at a depth of from 2 ft. 6 in. to 3 feet, according to
the depth of the surface soil, and 12 feet, 24 feet, or 36 feet apart, ac-
cording to requirements. The pipes may be 3 inches in diameter, and
made to deliver into a head ditch or may be connected with a cross
main drain of 4-inch pipes or larger, depending on the size of the
system. When the soil lends itself to free working, the drain excava-
tion is commenced by opening up, with the plough, a furrow as deep
as possible. This is made deeper still by an ordinary spade, and a
special draining spade, 4 inches wide at the edge, completes the work.
A draining scoop cuts out portion of the earth and rectifies inequalities
in the grade of the bottom decline, thus offering a solid and suitable
bed for the tiles before the ditch is filled in. Ordinary unglazed,
porous, 12-inch long kiln-burnt tiles are used, and when placed in posi-
tion they should fit closely together. A piece of stout pipe should be
placed over each joint to exclude earth when filling in the drains.
In planning the under-drainage system of an area composed of level
land, it is sometimes preferable to open a head ditch, into which the
parallel pipe drains are made to deliver the water, rather than to con-
nect them with the 4-inch pipe drain previously mentioned. The
bottom of the ditch should be 4 inches below the point of water de-
livery from the pipes, so that these may not become blocked up with
silt or debris, and the ends of the pipes entering the open drain should
be covered with galvanized iron wire netting, mesh, to exclude
rats and other vermin.
When minor surface inequalities occur in the plane of a slope to
be drained, these may be overcome by altering the depth of the lateral
drains at the various points where necessary to insure gravitation to
the open ditch or head drain. Where several planes, with various de-
grees of decline, are involved in the drainage system, however, the main
drains, whether open or piped, must be carried systematically along
the lowest parts. There the small parallel drains of each plane should,
when practicable, run with the greatest fall and junction at the neces-
sary angles with the head drain or ditch. Sometimes rather steep de-
clines, owing to cross impervious under-strata or spewy subsoil, need
nnder-drainage more than less abrupt slopes which offer better natural
drainage. Generally speaking, the lateral drains should run with the
trellises, but to obtain the best results, it is sometimes, owing to the lay
of the land, desirable to construct these diagonally across the plane to
be drained.
XL-Habit of Leader and Lateral Growths, and Mode of
Producing Fruit Buds.
When the young vines are systematically tied up on the trellises,
and growth commences in the spring, the leaders, aided by their
tendrils, extend by creeping along the horizontal wires. At this
time the advantage of good cultivation and manuring becomes manifest,
and as it is desirable to obtain the most vigorous growth possible,
this condition should be maintained until the end of the growing period.
Most other kinds of fruit trees that make early vigorous growth rarely


come into bearing as soon as those of weak or normal development.
This, however, does not apply in the case of the passion vine; on the
contrary, vigorous growing young plants show the desired precocity,
and continue to bear heavier and more consistently than less robust
or weakly ones, and the fruit is larger and generally of better quality.
The sections of the two leaders, with their alternate lobed leaves,
illustrated in Figure 12, are typical of these growths. The leader (a)
is shown in the natural and comfortable position which these growths
like to assume, “ walking ” along the wire, and in this way all the
tendrils are utilized in clasping same. It will be understood that, while
young, the tendrils are soft, pliable, and pendulous, coming early into
contact with the wire, which they lay hold of as shown. Leader (a)
is in a less favorable position in relation to the wire from which it is
suspended, and for the reasons explained, is deprived of the service
Fig. 12. —Habit of leader growth.
of some of its tendrils. It generally happens, however, that the growing
point of a leader like this gradually rises above the wire, and the
further extension assumes a position like (a). The desirableness of
obtaining the best method of lateral growth is a further reason for
careful and systematic treatment of the vine at the tying-up, when the
fan-shape may be established and its permanency secured.
When a vine is of prolific character, and growth commences in the
spring, a high percentage of blossoms appear, but many of these do
not set fruit. The blooms, as well as the tendrils, are produced singly,
one flower and a clasper appearing in each leaf-axil, although often
either or both may be missing. The blossoms and tendrils are produced
during the currency of the growth of the yearling wood, and these
rarely begin to appear until the leader or lateral, as the case may be,
has extended beyond the fourth or fifth node from its base on the
older wood. Although the leaders are fruitful while young, the laterals
are usually more prolific. This may be seen by comparing the present
weaker condition of the yearling lateral and its apparent impending


florescence depicted in Figure 13, with the more virile but less floriferous
leader growths appearing in the immediately preceding illustration.
Both lateral and leaders were taken from the same vine.
The leaders and laterals extend during succeeding years by con-
tinuous growth from the terminal buds, whereas the sub-leaders and
sub-lateral growths come from buds formed in the leaf-axils, with the
flowers and tendrils on the previous year’s wood. A high percentage
of these buds gives out relatively short growths, all of which are capable
of yielding fruit. Now we more clearly realize the necessity of
pruning, as in the case of other vines and fruit trees, to regulate their
length and maintain the proper number of these growths. Owing to
past neglect in this regard, the urgent necessity of pruning to obtain
the highest number of fruits of the finest quality and to relieve the vines
of the burden of supporting numerous, superfluous, willowy growths
cannot be too frequently reiterated.
Fig. 13. —A fruitful lateral.
XII. —Blooming and Pollination; Setting, Development, and
Ripening of the Fruit.
The passion flower is so named because of a fancied resemblance of
the parts of the flower to the instruments of Christ’s crucifixion. The
corona represents the crown of thorns, the stamens and pistils the nails
of the cross, while the five sepals and five petals stood for the ten faith-
ful apostles.
Weather and other conditions being favorable, passion vines
produce two crops of fruit each year. The first crop ripens in February
or March and the second during June or July. In some places, and
during certain seasons, however, cropping is almost continuous from
February to July or August. TJnpruned plants bloom sooner and
ripen their first fruits earlier than pruned vines. The blossoms from
which the early fruits mature usually appear in November, and those
for the later crop in March or April. Now it will be seen that prun-
ing, to a great extent, regulates the time of ripening, and conse-
quently, marketing of the fruit. Early ripening passions and the last


fruits of the season bring the highest prices on account of the scarcity
of fruit at these times; whereas, lower returns are accepted for those
ripening in the interim, when gluts sometimes occur.
The pistil is in three divisions, the stigmas of which incline towards,
and come into contact with the partly revolving anthers, thus insuring
perfect pollination. Bees like to frequent these flowers, and while in
search of the nectar, they cause the anthers to swing round and brush
the pollen, with which these are abundantly supplied, on to the stigmas.
Up to the present this variety has not shown any need for cross-
fertilization, but, possibly, the introduction of pollen from the Mammoth
passion, which is in every respect similar to the commoner passion,
except that the plant grows stronger and produces larger fruits, would
cause the setting of even heavier crops. The Mammoth is in itself
a shy bearer, but we are not to infer from this that its pollen would be
unsuitable for crossing with the common black. It is well known that
two varieties of pear trees, both of which are self-sterile when brought
into contact with each other, become highly fruitful through the influence
of interpollination.
Most of the flowers appear during the mild or warm weather; but,
even in winter when the atmosphere is cold, crisp, and clear, many of
these attractive flowers may be seen nestling among the green foliage.
The fruit, on arriving at the ripe stage, should be picked off and
marketed as soon as possible; if not, it commences to wilt, drop on
the ground and deteriorate in value. Although the contents of wilted
fruit is the more palatable, retailers like to stock passion fruit before
this condition is reached, because, when wilting commences it proceeds
rapidly, and, when the demand is slow, the fruit often shrivels before
it can be distributed; therefore, higher prices are obtained by the
grower for fresh fruit.
The fruits may be produced at consecutive nodes, or alternately
along a leader or lateral, and as many as ten or twelve appearing in .the
former order is of common occurrence in cerlain seasons when growing
conditions are most favorable.
XIII. —The Mammoth Passion.
This sub-variety—which was probably evolved from F. edulis, and
introduced from other States of the Commonwealth into Victoria—ia
not now extensively planted. While young, particularly, it makes much
stronger growth, and its leaves and fruits are one-third or more larger
than those of the common passion. Its requirements in respect to
climate and soil are similar to those of the latter. It is also pro-
pagated in like manner, and as regards planting, cultivation, manuring,
and pruning, the best results accrue when these details are carried out
on the lines previously explained.
The Mammoth fruit is nearly round, large, and attractive, and
when ripe its colour is also dark purple. On a few occasions in the
past exceptionally strong growing plants, like the Mammoth, have been
raised from the ordinary passion seeds. These made strong growth for
a few years, and during that period produced large fruits. When


growth became steadier and regular heavy cropping commenced; how-
ever, the characteristics of these vines in every respect reverted to those
of the parent— P. edulis. The Mammoth variety has proved in Vic-
toria to be a very shy cropper, and on that account its cultivation is
not recommended.
Fig. 14. —A two-year-old Mammoth passion vine.
XIV. —Sterility and Kindred Defects.
Provided the growing conditions be favorable, the black passion
produces a great number of early blossoms, and a relatively high
percentage of these set fruit; but, when those conditions are not
satisfactory, the crop matured is often light.
Sterility may become apparent in either of two forms. A
number of blossoms may grow to about one-third full size, then, without


opening, lose their vitality, turn yellow, and drop from their cups;
in other cases some blooms may attain full size, open naturally and be
apparently fertilized, but soon afterwards wither and fall from the
flower cups. Either or both forms of sterility may be noticed in leaders
or laterals, but these mostly occur in the order as shown. These objec-
tionable forms are less pronounced, however, in localities where ideal
climatic conditions prevail. Some plants are greater offenders in this
regard than others; therefore, when selecting seed from which to pro-
pagate young vines, growers should give this matter careful attention,
and collect seed from the most precocious and prolific bearers only.
Either form of barrenness mentioned may occur at any time during
the flowering period; but as a rule the dropping of the apparently-
fertilized flowers happens early in the fruit season, while the immature
Fig. 15. —Transverse and Longitudinal Sections of Two Full-grown P. edulis
Fruits without Matured Seeds or Pulp.
blossoms usually fall in mid-season, or just prior to the setting of the
late crop. The losses sustained through these forms of sterility are
sometimes serious, but they may be reduced to a minimum by careful
seed selection, good cultivation, manuring, and heavy pruning.
As passion fruit is grown for its pulp, planters should endeavour to
prevent any form of barrenness likely to militate against the production
of the highest number of fruits per vine, or the yield of fruit not
containing a full quantity of pulp.
There is another defect, which may be regarded as akin to the two
forms of barrenness already described, sometimes found in passion
fruit. This irregularity may exist in fruits of outwardly apparent
normal growth, but which, when cut open, show that some or ail of the
seeds are neither developed nor enclosed in the usual natural pulpy


covering. This form of barrenness is illustrated in Fig. 15, which
shows the two transverse sections of one fruit to the left, and the
longitudinal sections of another appear to the right in the picture.
To thoroughly realize this objectionable condition, the reader should
compare the sections under notice with the corresponding sections of
the well-filled fruits shown in Fig. 2. There are rarely any external
indications of the “ empty ” condition of such fruits, but as they are
light compared with the " full ” fruits, practical pickers and packers
quickly detect and reject such “ duds,” which are known as “ shells.”
A properly developed, ripe fruit contains three elongated clusters
of seeds running from end to end of same. There are 50 seeds in
each cluster, or 150 altogether, each seed being covered with pulp and
enclosed in a fine film or skin. The seeds are borne on short, stout
Fig. 16. —Transverse and Longitudinal Sections of Two Fully-grown Mammoth
Fruits Showing only Three Matured Seeds and Their Pulp.
fibres or threads which project inwards from the capsule or shell, the
clusters describing a triangle, as shown in the cross-sections in Fig. 15.
The pistil of the flower being in three divisions, it is obvious that
these correspond with and are the responsible media through which
their respective clusters of seeds are fertilized. These defective fruits
usually grow to full size, some ripen a few seeds, but a high percentage
are like those illustrated, in which not a single seed had matured.
This class of fruit rarely appears on the Common Black passion until
late in the fruit season when the weather becomes cold, and when the
vines feel the effects of previous heavy cropping.
The last remark does not apply in the case of the Mammoth, how-
ever, as it is a more regular offender in this regard, producing many


empty or partly empty fruits during the whole season. The two
Mammoth fruits cut into sections to correspond with the Common Black
specimens appear in Fig. 16. Here only three seeds matured in the
fruit cut into cross-sections, but not a single seed developed in the
one cut longitudinally. Some vines yield more of these worthless
fruits than others; and the five-year-old plant from which the two
fruits illustrated were picked never yielded a perfect specimen. Here
again we have an indication of the need for careful seed selection.
A grower determining on raising vines from the seeds of such fruits
as these would certainly be wooing failure. There is no occasion for
planters and others interested to become alarmed at this irregularity
appearing in the Common Black passion, because this condition may
be reduced to a minimum, if not absolutely eliminated, from this
variety by practising the methods of seed selection, cultivation, prun-
ing, and manuring previously advocated. But in the Mammoth the
different forms of barrenness (apart from shy bearing), and particularly
the one under consideration, are more extensive and serious in their
effect because of the apparent inherent tendency of this sub-variety to
produce these worthless fruit?
Fig. 17. —Leaf of the Common Black Passion Affected with Brown Spot.
XV. —Diseases of the Passion Vine.
By S. Fish, M.Agr.Sc.
Brown Spot of Passion Fruit.
Brown spot of passion fruit is caused by tbe fungus Gloeosporium
fructigenum which appears on the leaves in the shape of small circular
brown spots surrounded by a dart-green border. Small white or greyish
spots usually develop in the centre of the dead tissue which in advanced


stages may be considerably cracked. Elongated discoloured spots
found on the stem may develop into cankers exposing the underlying
wood tissues, and in some cases the laterals are completely girdled.
Affected shoots ultimately wither and die back. The fruits first develop
small sunken brown spots with concentric markings, subsequently the
fruit assumes a texture like parchment, and the fruits may shrivel up
and drop.
Infection may occur at any time during the growing period if
conditions are favorable. Heavy falls of rain during the spring and
summer favour infection.
The removal of infected material is an important supplementary
measure for the control of the disease. Bordeaux mixture 6:4:50 should
be applied about the middle of November when the young shoots of
the pruned vines are several inches long. The spraying should he
followed with Bordeaux mixture 6:4:80 immediately the disease is
noticed.
Fig. 18. —Two Ripe Fruits of the Black Passion, showing Effect of Brown Spot.
Botrytis and Sclerotinia Diseases.
Passion vines attacked by Botrytis and Sclerotinia diseases produce
rather similar symptoms, the result of the invasion resulting in the
wilting and death of the plant above the point of attack. Both fungi
gain entrance through wounds. Botrytis commonly appears where the
vine is tied to the trellis wire, while Sclerotinia usually attacks the
plant at ground level or slightly below it where injuries are likely to
occur during cultural work.
Both diseases can be held in check where their presence has been
noticed by cutting away and burning the diseased portions of the vine.
Great care should be taken not to injure the vine during cultural opera-
tions, as such injuries provide points of entry for the Sclerotinia
fungus.


Root Rot due to Armillaria mellea.
Root rot due to Armillaria mellea may cause serious damage to the
passion vine, and has a wide range of hosts, including pome, citrus,
and berry fruits, conifers, and wattles. The first external symptoms
of the disease are the decline of vigour and retarded growth of the
plant as a whole or of certain branches. Leaves may remain under-
sized, turn yellow, and fall prematurely, and branches may die back.
It must be remembered, however, that these symptoms may follow
attacks from other fungous parasites. The fungus Armillaria most
probably gains entrance at an injured or dead root, spreading by a
fan shaped felt-like growth of white mycelium between the wood and
the bark. It invades the whole root system, finally killing the plant,
Fig. 19. —Two Ripe Fruits Affected by Woodiness.
Affected vines should be completely removed and burnt to prevent
spread to healthy vines in the vicinity. The principal source of in-
fection of passion vines by Armillaria appears to be the presence in
the soil of stumps of native trees.
Experience has shown that Armillaria will disappear from cleared
land after a period devoted to some farm crop; hence in selecting a
site for a plantation newly cleared land may be viewed with suspicion.
Wooiunkss —A Virus Disease.
bruits affected with woodiness are hard, woody, and of purplish
leaden colour, generally small and deformed. The rind is abnormally
thick, and the outer layers often are cracked and scaly. Fruits of all
sizes may be affected, and young fruits, when severely attacked, may
fall prematurely. Diseased vines generally appear stunted and sickly,
with abnormally small yellowish or mottled often puckered and twisted
leaves, especially on the end shoots. ■ Mature leaves may develop small
pale, yellow spots, especially between the veins. The disease is


commonest in winter, and may be confined to individual vines or be pre-
valent throughout a plantation. Slightly diseased vines may produce
normal fruits in the summer, but are less productive than healthy vines.
Even young seedlings may be affected.
The control measures recommended comprise the planting only of
seedlings of good vigour and healthy colour. The prompt removal and
destruction of infected vines is essential in preventing a spread of the
disease, and precautions should be taken against possible transmission
of the disease during pruning.
XVI. —Yield Per Acre, Marketing Fresh Fruit, Prices, Uses,
Processing, and Prospects of the Industry
Passions usually come into full bearing at from two to three years
old, but the subsequent annual yield of fruit varies considerably,
according to the nature of the cultural, manurial, and other treatment
bestowed on the vines during the period of development. In adopting
the 18-ft. x 12-ft. system of planting, provision is made for, approxi-
mately, 200 vines per acre, and, when cared for in a reasonable way, a
case of fruit to the vine, or 200 cases per acre per annum, may be
regarded as a fair average crop. Conditions of growth also largely
influence the size and quality of the fruits.
In cultivating the common Black Passion, the main objective should
be the production of the largest fruits possible for the variety.
Uniformity in size is also desirable, and the fruit should be graded prior
to being marketed. Large fruits of uniform size with dark, smooth
skins, command the highest price, whereas, the mixing of large and
small fruits in a case affects, in the inverse ratio, the commercial value
of the better specimens. For instance, a case of well-graded small
fruit is of higher value than one in which occasional large fruits appear.
Measured longitudinally, the larger, well-proportioned, common black
fruits may reach an average of 21 inches; whereas a similar measure-
ment of the smaller, inferior types would, probably, not average more
than inches. This recognised discrepancy in its size and quality
makes, when the higher prices obtainable are desired, the grading of
fresh fruit for market obligatory.
The fruit should not be allowed to remain on the vines after it has
reached the ripe stage, for it soon begins to wilt and deteriorate in com-
mercial value. It should, therefore, be picked and placed on the market
with as little delay as possible. The skins of ripe fruit are dark-purple,
smooth, and glossy, the perfect specimens being well filled with pulp
and seeds. As previously stated, the sacks of pulp, each containing
one seed, are borne on short stout fibres attached to and projecting
from the inside of the fruit capsule. In dry warm weather particu-
larly, the fruit capsule quickly loses its natural moisture, and the pulp-
sack, because of its connexion with the shell, also soon parts with its
liquid. This is indicated by indentations appearing in the outer surface
of the fruit, commonly termed “ wilting.” Although the pulp of
slightly crinkled fruit is the more palatable as a dessert, it is obvious,
nevertheless, that passions should be marketed as soon as possible after
ripening.


Nature provides fruits of normal development with 150 pulp-vessels
and seeds, but sometimes all do not ripen, though as many as 158 seeds
have been found in abnormal specimens, while the average number in
sub-normal fruits may not exceed 140. However, the cash value of a
fruit cannot be based solely on the number of pulp-vessels and seeds,
but rather on the actual quantity of pulp it contains, and as a rule the
best filled fruits are those of normal development containing the highest
number of seeds for their class.
Passion fruit is usually sold unwrapped in the ordinary two-division
bushel case, which contains about 35 dozen fresh fruits of medium size,
weighing • about 34 lbs. Prices vary considerably during the fruit
season; early fruits, about the beginning of March, bring from 20s. to
255. per case; later, when the supply is more plentiful, from Bs. to 125.;
then, near the end of the late crop, from 23s to 305.; while small lots
later sometimes command 40s. It is somewhat difficult to strike an
average; but, for the last few years, this would probably be in the
vicinity of 15s. per case for the fruit season.
The ever increasing popularity of this deliciously flavoured fruit
for use as a dessert, its suitability for jam making, flavouring fruit
salads, for icings, fruit drinks, and making cakes has ensured it a per-
manent place in the fruit markets of the Commonwealth. Notwith-
standing the increasing local demand for the passion, the relatively
extensive areas being brought under its cultivation will necessitate the
finding of markets for a sure, future exportable surplus. The best
and most economic method of exporting passion fruit is in the form of
pulp, which, because of its unique virtues, has fortunately already made
an extremely favorable impression on its users in England, America,
and other countries.
Relatively large quantities of passions are treated by manu-
facturers during the fruit season, and they find that a bushel case
contains from 30 dozen to 36 dozen fruits, according to size, and that
the quantity of pulp obtained from a case is from 10 lbs. to 14 lbs. This,
they say, is worth anything between Is. 6d. and 3s. per lb., according to
the method of processing, style of container, and general get-up; and
that from 10s. to 11s. per case is the outside price that manufacturers
can give for passion fruit for this purpose. Although there is a limited
market for Banana passions ( Tacsonia ) for dessert purposes these are
of little value for processing.
There is a feeling in England and America that the numerous black
seeds which characterize this fruit should be removed at the pulping;
but Australians acquainted with same who sec samples of this seedless
pulp abroad, usually assume that it is not the “ real article.”
There is an ever-increasing demand for passion pulp, for passion
fruit juice for fruit drinks, as well as for the fresh fruit, and recently
a large catering firm in London sent an order to Australia for 1,000
cases of bottled pulp. Assuming that the demand for this article
during the next five years increases at the same ratio as happened in
the last five, and if care be taken in the cultivation of the vines and in
marketing the fruit, the prospects of the industry would seem to be
assured.


Table I. — C
OMPOSITION
or the Pulp.
—
i Fresh Basis.
Dry Basis.
i 0/
/O
0/
/o
Moisture
70-4
Ash
0-7
2 4
Protein (N. x 6*25) ..
2-9
9-9
Fat
2-1
70
Fibre
7-7
26-0
Acidity — as citric acid
2-8
9-5
Reducing sugars — as invert sugar
7 ■ fi
25-5
Non-reducing sugars — as sucrose
1-6
5*4
Starch (difference) ..
4-2
14-3
Table IT-
—Composition of Shells.
—
fresh Basis.
Dry Basis.
| 0/
! /O
0/
/o
Moisture
; 79-8
Ash
.. 1 1-8
8-8
Protein (N. x 6-25) ..
.. i 2 1
12 2
Table III. —Mi>
'eral Composition of
Passion Fruit
Pulp.
Shells.
Whole
Fruit.
Fresh
Dry
Fresh
Dry
Fresh
Dry
Basis.
Basis.
Basis.
Basis.
Basis.
Basis.
0/
/o
0/
/o
0/
/o
0/
/o
0/
/O
%
Total ash
0-72
2-43
1-78
8-82
1-19
4-76
Silica (SiO a )
001
0-01
0-02
0-10
0-01
0-04
Silica-free ash
0-71
2-39
1-76
8-72
1 -18
4-72
Phosphoric acid (P 2 0,-)
iron and alumina (Fc,0 3 4-
0-16
0 55
0-05
0-25
0-11
0-44
AI 2 0 3 ) ..
0-020
0-067
0-017
0-082
0-019
0-08
Lime (CaO)
0-012
0-041
0-050
0-25
0-029
0-12
Magnesia (MgO) . .
0-057
0-19
0-044
0-22
0-051.
0-20
Potash (K a 0)
0-31
1-03
0-90
4-76
0-60
2-40
Soda (N‘i 2 0)
0-024
0-081
0-025
0-12
0-024
010
Chlorine (Cl)
0-005
0-018
0-21
1-05
0-10
0-40
XVII.—Chemical Composition of Passion Fruit.
By W. R. Jewell, M.Sc., Research Chemist.
Passion fruit (Passiflora edulis ) is perhaps more widely grown in
Australia than in any other country, and this may explain why a search
of the literature failed to disclose published data on its chemical analysis.
As inquiries relative to the composition of passion fruit are received
frequently an average sample was analysed recently, and the results
obtained are recorded below.
The sample consisted of 24 pieces of average size and normal
ripeness, the mean weight per piece of fruit being 27.5 grams.
The fruit was divided into—
Pulp . . . . 55.2 per cent.
Shells . . . . 44.8 „
The composition of the pulp, including seeds, is shown in Table I.
A partial analysis of the shells was made with the results as shown
in Table 11.
The mineral composition of passion fruit is shown in Table 111.


XVIII. —Harvesting and Packing Passion Fruit.
(By Basil Krone, Fruit Packing Instructor.)
Until recently the grading and packing of passion fruit was regarded
as superfluous. Experience during the last few years, however, has
shown that attention to these details pays handsomely. In some in-
stances as much as ss. per case and 3s. per half case has been the
difference between the price paid for carefully graded and packed fruit
and the price of the ordinary “ orchard run.”
The market of to-day definitely proves that in every consignment
of ungraded, unpacked passion-fruit, the producer not only loses
pence, but shillings per case. Therefore, it is desirable that all grades
and packs be standardized.
Harvesting.
Successful marketing of the passion cannot succeed without good
harvesting. The degree of maturity at which the fruit is picked is
vital.
1. At the beginning of the season the fruit should not be gathered
until it has completely changed to its darker colour, but long before
any sign of shrivelling appears.
2. As the season advances the fruit should be gathered when it is
a little more than three parts suffused with colour. This degree of
maturity will ensure the complete development of the ripening process,
and the fruit will be quite black by the time it reaches the market.
3. In hot districts the fruit should be gathered while in the state
of development suggested in the previous paragraph, and, when possible,
this operation, as well as the packing, should be conducted in the very
early morning or late evening.
4. In some hot districts it has been found preferable to pack the
fruit, lid the cases, pile them closely together, and cover the stack with
damp bags until just before they are to be removed to the train rather
than to leave the fruit on the bench overnight.
5. The fruit should be harvested daily. The wind-falls should be
picked up first; a couple of hours in the hot sun will ruin the grade.
6. Passion-fruit must always be handled carefully so as to avoid
damaging the cuticle.
Grading.
Strict attention must be given to the elimination of “ dummy ” fruit
or “ shells.” These may be discerned by their extremely light weight,
and with a little practice the packer can easily detect them. Shrivelled
passions should never be packed in the same case as fresh fruit.
No regulations dealing with the grading and packing of passion fruit
have been made, but it is suggested that they be sorted into three grades,
namely:
Extra Fancy. —Large sized (full of pulp) and free from “ dummy,”
“woody,” or shrivelled specimens.
Standard. —Medium sized (full of pulp) and free from “dummy,”
“ woody,” or shrivelled specimens.
Plain. —Small sized (full of pulp) free from “ dummy ” specimens,
but this grade may include those of any size that are shrivelled or
affected by “woodiness” of the skin.


Sizing.
This is best carried out during the operation of packing, when
cases to hold large, medium and small sizes respectively can be placed
side by side and packed at the same time; this will facilitate the tvork.
Packing.
The increasing popularity of the “ diagonal” pack is a proof that
it has found favour amongst passion-fruit growers. With this system
the quantity of fruit in a case can be ascertained at a glance, and thus
buying or selling by counts or dozens is facilitated.
Fig. 20. —Correct method
of placing first and second
layer of the 2-2 pack in the
Long or Half Long Bushel
Case.
Fig. 21. —Correct method
of placing first and second
layer of the 3-2 pack in the
Long or Half Long Bushel
Case.
Fig. 22. —Correct method
of placing first and second
layer of the 2-1 pack in the
Long or Half Long Bushel
Case.
The fruit in the second and succeeding layers should rest in the pockets or spaces
caused by the fruit beneath, and not directly on top of them.
Note.—All stalks in the 2-2 and the 3-2 packs face in the same direction except
the last fruits in each layer, which are reversed. All stalks in the 2-1 pack face the
centre, otherwise the fruit will not reach the desired height when the packing of the
case is finished.
Cases.
New cases and white lining paper enhance the value of the fruit.
Specifications of the cases used should be as follows:
Long Bushel Case.—26 x 6 x inches (inside measurements clear
of the division).
Half Long Bushel Case.—26 x6x 7J inches (inside measurements
clear of the division).
Half Dump Case. —18 x 8§ x 7J inches (inside measurements).


The Long Bushel and Half Long Bushel Cases.
Packing passion-fruit is a very simple process. Those who use the
Long Bushel or the Half Long Bushel case will find that the 2-2
(two-two) packs will pack most of their fruit, while it may be necessary
to employ one or two 3-2 (three-two) packs for the very small sizes,
and perhaps one or two 2-1 (two-one) packs for the very large sizes
for the packing of the Black Mammoth variety.
Fig. 23. —The 2-2 pack, 5 x 5 layer, 10 layers. Total 400 or 33 dozen and 4.
Fig. 24. —Correct method of placing
first and second layer of the 3-3
pack in the Half Dump Case.
Fig. 25. —Correct method of placing
first and second layer of the 3-2
pack in the Half Dump Case.
The Half Dump Case.
Those who use the Half Dump Case will find that the 3-3 (three-
three) pack will suit practically all sizes, though here again, with the
Black Mammoth a variation may be necessary, and the 3-2 (three-two)
pack will be found the best for extremely large sizes.


When used in hot districts the Half Dump case should be made with
reasonably close-fitting boards. Lining paper is then unnecessary, but
a very thin layer of wood-wool at both top and bottom of the case is
recommended. This will retard rapid evaporation, and prevent the
fruit opening up in a shrivelled condition.
The packing of the Half Dump case is very similar to the Long or
Half Long bushel cases just illustrated, except that 3-3 (three-three)
packs will be required instead of the 2-2 packs; 3-2 packs may be
necessary if the fruit is exceedingly large. Figures 24 and 25 illustrate
the method of placing the passion fruit in the Half Dump case so as
to form the 3-3 and 3-2 packs.
The correct method of placing the first and second layers of fruit
in the different styles of cases is shown in several illustrations. Illus-
trations are also given showing the correct “ layer counts ” in the
various packs used for most of the commercial sizes of passion-fruit.
(See pages 48 to 54.)
Correct Height of Fruit in Cases.
Packing passions to the correct height in the case and the " snugness ”
of the specimens in each layer are the important features for safe
carriage over long distances.
The top layer of passion-fruit should be from three-quarters to one
inch above the top in the long bushel case, and from half to three-
quarters of an inch in the half cases before the lid is nailed on.
Packages wherein the top layer is just level will be low and arrive
slack, while the reverse means damaged fruit.
Branding and Stencilling.
Figure 26 illustrates a suggested method of branding or stencilling
Fig. 26.
Nailing Down, etc.
This is an important operation, as the fruit may he easily damaged.
Do not nail down on a hard or uneven floor. Place battens beneath
each end of the case, or use a nailing down bench to lessen any severe
pressure from the centre of the package. (See Figs. 27 and 28.)


Fig. 27 .— A home-made nailing-down bench suitable for the Half Dump Case.


Fig. 28— A home-made nailing-down bench suitable for the Half Long Bushel Case.


THE PACKING CHARTS.
Long Bushel Case (26 x 6 x 14} in.).
Pack.
Layer.
Layers.
Total.
3-2
6x6
12
600 or 50 dozen
2-2
7x6
10
620 „ 43 dozen and 4
2-2
6 ,x 6
10
480 „ 40 dozen
2-2
6x5
10
440 „ 36 dozen and 8
2-2
5x5
10
400 „ 33 dozen and 4
2-2
■ 5x4
id
360 „ 30 dozen
2-2
4x4
10
320 „ 26 dozen and 8
2-1
; 6x6
8
288 „ 24 dozen (stalks to centre, otherwise low)
2-1
; 6x5
}
8
264 „ 22 dozen (stalks to centre, otherwise low)
Half Long Bushel Case (26 x 6 x 7J in.).
Pack.
Layer.
Layers. '
Total.
3-2
5x5
0
300 or 25 dozen
2-2
7 x 6
s 0
260 „ 21 dozen and 8
2-2
6x6
■ 5’.
240 „ 20 dozen
2-2
0x5
5
220 „ 18 dozen and 4
2-2
5x5
5 '
200 „ 16 dozen and 8
2-2
5x4
5
180 „ 15 dozen
2-2
4x4
5 ’
160 „ 13 dozen and 4
2-1
0x0
4 '
144 „ 12 dozen (stalks to centre, otherwise low)
2-1
6x6
4 ’
132 „ 11 dozen (stalks to centre, otherwise low)
Half Dump Bushel Case (18 x 8| x 7J in.).
Pack.
Layer.
biyers.
Total.
3-3
9x8
5
255 or 21 dozen and 3
3-3
8x8
5
240 „ 20 dozen
3-3
8x7
5
225 „ 18 dozen and 9
3-3
7x7
5
210 „ 17 dozen and 6
3-3
7 x ti
5
195 „ 16 dozen and 3
3-3
i) x 6
5
180 „ 15 dozen
3-3
6x5
5
165 „ 13 dozen and 9
3-2
7x7
4
140 „ 11 dozen and 8


PACKING THE HALF LONG BUSHEL CASE.
3-2 pack, 5 x 5 layer, 6 layers in the
case. Total, 300, or 25 dozen.
Finished case, 25 dozen count, showing
top and side view.
The 300, or 25 dozen, count.
Note.—All stems h c in the same direction except the last fruits in ea.h layer, which aie re versed.
2-2 pack, 6 x 6 layer, 5 layers in the
case. Total, 240, or 20 dozen.
Finished case, 20 dozen count, showing
top and side view.
The 240, or 20 dozen, count.
Note. —All stems face in the same direction except the last fruits in each layer, which are reversed.


2-2 pack, 6 x 5 layer, 5 layers in the
case. Total, 220, or 18 dozen and 4.
Finished case, 18 dozen and 4 count,
showing top and side.
The 220, or 18 dozen and 4, count.
Note. —All stems lace in the same direction except the last fruits in each layer.
2-2 pack, 5 x 5 layer, 5 layers in the
case. Total, 200, or 16 dozen and 8.
Finished case, 16 dozen and 8 count,
showing top and side view.


2-2 pack, 5 x 4 layer, 5 layers in the
case. Total, 180, or 15 dozen.
Finished case, 15 dozen count, showing
the top and side view.
The 180, or 15 dozen, count.
Note.—All steins face in the same direction except the last fruits in each layer, which are reversed.
2-1 pack, 6 x 6 layer, 4 layers in the
case. Total, 144, or 12 dozen.
Finished case, 12 dozen count, showing
the top and side view.
The 144, or 12 dozen, count.
Note.—All Stems lace the centre, otherwise the fruit will not reach the desired height when , the
packing is finished.


2-1 pack, 6 x 5 layer, 4 layers in the
case. Total, 132, or 11 dozen.
Finished case of 11 dozen count,
showing the top and side view.
The 132, or 11 dozen, count.
Note. —All stems face the centre, otherwise the fruit will not reach the desired height when the
* packing is finis! ed.
PACKING THE HALF DUMP CASE.
( All stems face in the same direction except those of last fruits in each layer, which are reversed.)
3-3 pack, 9 x 8 layer, 5 layers in the
case. Total, 255, or 21 dozen and 3.
Finished case, 21 dozen and 3 count,
showing the top and side view.
The 255, or 21 dozen and 3, count.


3-3 pack, 8 x 8 layer, 5 layers in the
case. Total, 240, or 20 dozen.
Finished case, 20 dozen count, showing
the top and side view.
The 240, or 20 dozen, count.
The 225, or 18 dozen and 9, count.
3-3 pad, 8 x 7 layer, 5 layers in the
case. Total, 225, or 18 dozen and 9.
Finished case, 18 dozen and 9 count,
showing the top and side view.


3-3 pack, 7 x 7 layer, 5 layers in the
case. Total, 210, or 17 dozen and 6.
[3-3 pack, 7 x 6 layer, 5 layers in the
case. Total, 195, or 16 dozen.
The 210, or 17 dozen and 6, count.
The 16 dozen count.
Finished case, 17 dozen and 6 count,
showing the top and side view.
Finished case, 16 dozen count, showing
top and side view.


3-3 pack, 6 x 6 layer, 5 layers.
Total, 180, or 15 dozen.
3-2 pack, 7 x 7 layer, 4 layers in the
case. Total, 140, or 11 dozen and 8.
Finished case, 15 dozen count,
showing top and side view.
Finished case, 11 dozen and 8 count,
showing the top and side view.
The 180, or 15 dozen, pack.


XIX.—The Storage of Passion Fruit.
By G. B. Tindale, B.Agr.Sc.
From time to time growers and others have been hopeful that by
means of cool storage, an export trade in passion fruit might be
developed as with apples, pears, &c. Attempts indeed have been made
to export fresh passion fruit to England, but the results have usually
been very variable and disappointing.
Many people have cool stored passion fruit, and have claimed suc-
cessful storage for periods up to seven weeks or so. One may easily be
deceived, however, in this regard, for the storage life is determined not
by the actual development of rots or fermentation of the fruit in cool
store, but by the ability of the fruit to stand up to marketing after
temoval from store. Passion fruit, like all other fruits, has a definite
cool storage life, and when stored beyond this period the fruit will
break down before marketing can be effected. Actually, however, the
fruit may appear to be quite sound in cool store for some weeks after
the storage life is over.
Experiments with the cool storage of passion fruit have shown that
they are very susceptible to too low a storage temperature. If stored
with apples at the usual temperature of approximately 34°F., the
passion fruit gradually breaks down, the skin becoming soft, red in
colour, and easily injured when handled. The skin then becomes
quickly invaded by moulds, and about the same time the pulp will
develop a fermented taste.
In order to prevent this breakdown of the skin, it is necessary to
store passion fruit at a much higher temperature than that suitable
for apples. A minimum of 45°F. has been found to prevent the break-
down of the skin, and at this temperature a storage life of one mouth
is obtainable, provided the fruit was freshly picked when stored, and
not too mature. This temperature allows for a reasonably long
marketing period after storage without breakdown or fermentation
developing. However, it is too short to allow for successful export to
England under present conditions.
From an export point of view, the storage of passion fruit pulp
is a much more promising proposition. The storage of the pulp, with
or without seeds, is indeed a relatively simple matter, and already limited
amounts are being exported to England, where it is used for flavouring
ices, cordials, and cocktails.
The pulp can be preserved in various ways. Sterilization by means
of heat is effective, but has the disadvantage that the flavour of the
pulp, in which lies its unique value, is impaired. The full retention of
flavour may be obtained by adding sugar to the pulp in the proportion
of equal weight of sugar and pulp (continual stirring being necessary
to dissolve the sugar). This mixture of pulp and sugar may then be
cool stored at a temperature at or below 25°F., and will retain the
full passion fruit flavour for a period of at least a year.
Other methods for preserving the pulp include the use of chemicals,
the most important being sulphur dioxide. Some proprietary pulps
preserved by the addition of both sugar and sulphur dioxide (and not
cool stored) are indeed excellent, but where the use of chemical pre-
servatives is contemplated, it is necessary to consult the health authori-
ties, as the amounts permitted are strictly limited by law. There is
also an increasing tendency to reduce the amounts permissible, and
indeed a tendency to forbid the use of some altogether.


Department of Agriculture
New Publication :
The
POULTRY
INDUSTRY
COMPREHENSIVE and
profusely illustrated book
for Poultry Farmers has
been issued recently by the
Department.
Incorporating in an improved
manner all that has appeared
in the “Poultry Bulletin,”
now out of print, together
with articles that have
appeared in the Journal of
Agriculture, this publication
deals with every aspect of
the industry, from the
establishment of the farm
to the marketing of eggs
and of birds.
Director, Department of Agriculture
Melbourne, C.2
Now On Sale
Price
Per
Copy
Posted 2/8
Obtainable from
H. J, Grkkn, Government Printer, Melbourne


AGRICULTURAL
LIME
is necessary to secure the best
results.
“APPLIM BRAND ”
Analyses 95°/ 0 Calcium
Carbonate
It is finely ground, goes
further, and gives more
immediate results.
Write for special prices and
leaflets.
Ammonia Products Pty. Ltd.
Lyons Street, Footscray, W.ll
Telephone: FOOTSCRAY 99


3K
Mb'
m
r
W
m
m
*■
-
#■
mm
2&s
Showing- the remarkable
growth and heavy
{milling-of a 12-months-
old “passion” vine—
trellised on special
“PERFECT” Welded
Fence. The great ad-
vantage this particular
type of fence has over
the old type of plain
wire is the fact that
a much greater number
of “ Leaders ” can be
carried upwards from
the vine—this together
with the even spaciugs
which can be given to
the “Laterals’' enables
the vine to he grown
in an even, “ fan ’’-like
shape. Sndi shape,owing
to the fence being
rigidly welded together,
must remain even, thus
ei lorm o usly inc r easi n g
the vine's fruiting capa-
city and mainta iningf its
healthy growth.
¥
Ol
fi
g>
*
Showing spacingß and method of erecting special “ PLBJ’ECT ” Welded Fence for trellising p-U
vines, as used exclusively by Passiflora Plantations Pty. Ltd., at Bed Hill, Victoria.
Bottom wire is 2 It. 4 in, from ground level, “ Laterals ” are spaced 12 in. apart and “ Uprights ”
14 in. apart. “Uprights” are carried a further 2 in. below and. ID in. above the “Laterals" —
this latter extension enabling vine “ Leaders ” to be carried on to top No. 8, Black Wire —height
overall being 6 ft. 6 in. Requires | mile to the acre planting rows 12 f;. apart.
Manufactured and supplied by —
D. & W. CHANDLER LTD.
Flinders Lane, Melbourne, C.l F4I7S Brunswick St., Fitzroy, N. 6 JS6OI, J 4145
BALLARAT BENDIGO WARRNAMBOOL HORSHAM COLAC
