

PASTORAL ADDRESS
Dearly Beloved Brethren—
Saving had our attention directed to the Lord’s doings in the extensive revival of religion that has
been experienced in the United States of America we feel called on, as a Church of Christ in this land, to
acknowledge with deep gratitude and lively joy the grace thus vouchsafed, and to consider, ourselves, and
to urge on you the lessons thus conveyed to us. There are good grounds for believing that this is a real
work of God. Authentic and faithful reports have been published. And from these we learn that no
means have been resorted to for the purpose of producing mere excitement; but that the ordinary means
which God is wont to bless were faithfully and earnestly employed. From these reports we further learn
that the work has not been attended, generally speaking, with outward demonstrations, but has been
characterised by a spirit of deep earnestness, leading to a diligent use of the means of grace,—a vast
number of all ranks and classes crowding the churches and resorting to week-day prayer meetings, even
at noon. “ A general seriousness has prevailed among the people,—there has been a striking accessibility
among almost all classes to approaches on the subject of salvation, —there has been a hearty desire to be
instructed in those things that belong to our eternal peace,—there has been a conviction of sin in those
esteemed moral and amiable, and a consequent breaking up of that false peace which a merely outward
morality had been conferring for years,—there has been an evident quickening of the graces of God’s
people, manifested particularly in an unusual earnestness among them in behalf of the salvation of the
perishing,—there have been the reclamation of backsliders, and the in-gathering of many into the Church
of God, who, in the judgment of charity, must be regarded as truly converted.” It is also to be noted, as
a remarkable feature of the case, that the work has been carried forward without reference to any promi-
nent man or men as the chief instruments. God himself has been the leader of the people. And, again,
as little have we observed that this work has been dependent on the presentation of any one sided views of
doctrine, such as had marked some former periods. On the contrary, we have been gratified to observe
that Christ is made the central point to which attention has very generally been directed. References to
his person and work in sermons and addresses, and publications setting forth the truth as it is in Jesus,
have been the chief instruments in giving this work its peculiar character. It is not to be denied, indeed,
that there have been some excesses. Some things have been done, and a good many things have been
said, which we could much wish had been left undone and unsaid. But, after all, when we reflect on the
wide extent of this influence, and upon the masses that hare been gathered daily together, embracing
persons of all denominations, we are led rather to wonder that comparatively so little that is objectionable
in speech or action has occured, than to decry the work for what has taken place of this nature. “ With
these facts before us we cannot withold our assent to the view, that the present wide spread movement is
the work of the spirit of God, and as such we rejoice in its progress,” And besides, the work is unusually


extensive. It is not confined to one, but has reached all evangelical denominations. It is not limited to
a few parts of the country, but is spread over the length and breath of the land. It had been ascertained
a considerable time ago that it had extended to above two thousand cities, towns, and villages. And this
was not a vague guess ; the names of those places had been collected and actually published, and the
work has since been progressing and extending.
Now, Dear Brethren, who that is at all deeply interested in the salvation of his fellow immortals
and the progress of Christ’s kindgom, is not constrained in contemplating such a work, to exclaim “ The
Lord hath done great things for them,” “ This is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes,” and
to pray earnestly that the work may be established and greatly extended.
Surely, Beloved Brethren, such occurrences should stir us up to consider our ways.—They should
lead us to make an impartial investigation of our spiritual state, —to enquire whether we have become the
subjects of God’s regenerating and sanctifying grace, examining ourselves by the marks wherewith we are
furnished in the unnering directory of Divine truth. “ Examine yourselves whether ye be in the faith, prove
your own selves, &c.”—2 Cor. xiii, 5. And if as the result of that investigation it be found that we are
destitute of the evidences of spiritual life, let us not rest satisfied until we have some ground for hoping
that a transition from death to life has been experienced by ns. And, in those cases, in which the
investigation results in ascertaining the existence of spiritual life, but the existence of it in a low and
languishing condition, let there be a searching for the causes of such declension, “ a strengthening of
the things that remain and are ready to die,” and a striving after a great increase of the life of God in
the soul.
Further, Dear Brethren, such occurrences should lead us to think of our spiritual necessities as a
Church, and of the spiritual necessities of our land ; and to pray and labour for a similar visitation to that
which has been experienced in America. Allow us, plainly and elfectioriately, to remind you that our need
of such a visitation is very evident and exceedingly urgent. Is there not a fearful prevalence of vice and
worldliness? Do not Sabbath desecration, intemperance, lying, profane swearing, and uncleanness abound
to a most lamentable extent ? Is there not a vast amount of soul-engrossing earthliness, leading to courses
of a most selfish, grasping and unprincipled character, increasing the natural deadness of the heart to Divine
and eternal thing's, and men’s natural want of concern for the advancement of Christ’s kingdom in the land
and through the world ?
These things taken in connection with the wlth-holfling of Divine influences, needful to render the
means effectual for the salvation of souls, should give rise to much searching of heart, deep humiliation,
and earnest prayer.
Let us, through grace, as individuals, families and congregations, make honest and diligent search
why the Lord is contending with us in withholding the early and latter rain, and let us amend our
ways and our doings and turn unto the Lord. “Behold the Lord’s hand is not shortened that it cannot
save ; neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear: but your iniquities have separated between you and your
God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear.”—lsa, lix. 1, 2. “Let us search
and try our ways and turn again to the Lord.”—Lam. iii, 40. And thus let us “prove Jehovah herewith
if he will not open the windows of heaven and pour down a blessing until there be no room to receive it.”
Mai. iii, 10. Let every praying person in cur congregations be anxious lest this season of refreshing
should pass away without our participating in its benfits, stirring himself up to take hold of God, keeping
no silence and giving Jehovah no rest until he arise and bless us.—lsa: ixii, 6, 7. Should not living
souls in our congregations, in addition to secret individual pleadings, band together and form themselves
into social prayer-meetings, making the outpouring of the Holy Spirit on our districts and laud the special
object of their joint supplications. “ Again I say unto you that if two of you shall agree on earth as


—)/7
I'D
touching any thing they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father who is in Heaven. For where
two or three are gathered together in my name there am lin the midst of them• ,, Mat. xviii. 19, 20.
And should not God’s people more than ever seek for and embrace opportunities for dealing plainly,
closely and affectionately with their fellow men respecting those matters that pertain to their eternal
peace ; and besides labour in disseminating Divine truth by circulating such religious books, tracts
and periodicals, as are calculated to be really useful.
In name and by appointment of the Synod of Eastern Australia,
ARCHIBALD CAMERON,
PRINTED BY HENRY THOMAS, OPPOSITE DICKSON AND COMPANY, HIGH-STREET, WEST MAITLAND.


