

PASTORAL HOMES
OF
AUSTRALIA












PASTORAL HOMES OF AUSTRALIA




PASTORAL HOMES
OF
AUSTRALIA
Volume 111
(NEW SERIES)
Published by
THE PASTORAL REVIEW Ply. Ltd.
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, and LONDON
1 93 1


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
McCarron, Bird & Co., Printers and Publishers
479 Collins Street, Melbourne


LIST OF PROPERTIES AND OWNERS
INCLUDED IN THIS VOLUME
PACE
Allanvale, Vic. .. Kilpatrick, Estate of the late
William . . . . . . 73
Balarang, N.S.W Stirton, P. E 157
Barolin, Q I nnes , S. N 373
Burrundulla, N.S.W. . . . . Cox, V. D. . . 181
Campo Santo, N.S.W Capel, George .. .. ]33
Chatsbury, N.S.W Carr, A. F 265
Coliban Park, Vic. . . , . . . Barber, A. and J. . . . . 61
Coombing Park. N.S.W The Whitney Pastoral Co. Ltd. 121
Courallie, N.S.W The Courallie Pty. Limited . . 205
Dabee, N.S.W Evans, R. F 253
Darbalara, N.S.W Knox, Sir Adrian . . . . 301
Delatite, Vic. Ritchie, R. G 85
Edinglassie, N.S.W. .. .. White Bros 193
Eeyeuk, Vic. . . . . . . . . Dennis and Sons, A. . . . . 25
Eurella, N.S.W Macfarlane, J. B 241
Gunyerwarildi, N.S.W Mackay Bros 169
Hobartville, N.S.W. . . . , Reynolds, Percy . . . . 289
Landscape, Vic Knott, Gordon . . V 97
Larra, Vic. . . . . . . . . Currie, John L. . . . . 13
Longarm, Eulabil, Chatsworth and
Rocky Creek, N.S.W Capel, H. W 145
Mawallok, Vic. . . . . Russell, Philip . , . . 1
Moroco West, N.S.W Kilpatrick. W. A. and L. M. 109
Mount William, Vic. . . . . Barr-Smith, R. . , , . 37
Nalpa, S.A Withers, A. R. . . . . 325
Nappa Merrie, Q The Nappa Merrie Pastoral
Company . . . . . . 337
Roma Downs, Q McGeoch, R. S. and E. Q. . . 385
Rotherwood, N.S.W. . . . . Hall, E. S. . . 277
Stoneleigh, Vic. . . . . . . Fhe Stoneleigh Estate . . 49
Strathbogie, Mole Vale, and Eulupna,
N.S.W. .. .. .. .. Body and Sons Limited, E. C. 217
Terrica, Q McLeod, Scott . . . . 361
Victoria Downs, Q Lord, Robert P. . . . . 349
Wallangra, N.S.W Black, R. A 229
Weribone, Q. Weribone Studs Limited . . 385
Wilgena, Wooltana, &c., S.A. . . Mcßride Ltd., A. J. and P. A. 313




INTRODUCTION
IF ever deeds deserved lasting remembrance, they were those which led to the founda-
tion of the great pastoral industry, on which rests Australia’s national existence and
hope for the future. In this volume, therefore, is set down history of the almost for-
gotten days of early Australian settlement, and of that subsequent period of development
and consolidation of what the pioneers had already won.
Those deeds may not be as dramatically recorded as they who hunger for sensation
might wish. Mostly it is a plain unvarnished tale of past and present that is told. Contrast
between the two eras is always obvious, but there is no graphic or detailed description of
the disasters that befell in those far off days; of the droughts that wiped out the early flocks;
of the difficulties —more or less unknown to-day—gradually overcome; of the discomforts
endured; of the toil and struggle so frequently brought to nought by tumbling markets
and financial chaos; and finally of the heartbreaks of men and women who had given all,
endured all, and finally lost all in one of those catastrophes which in the first days of pas-
toral settlement men were less fitted, or rather less favoured, to withstand than are their
descendants to-day.
All of these things are sketched rather than actually depicted. For all their shadowy
outline, however, they were none the less real, none the less troublous. Metaphorical
flood, fire, and slaughter occur in the pastoral industry in these years of grace as they did
in its infancy, but those who suffer by them prefer to forget rather than cherish the
memory. So it is with most of the distant past. Few recorded their trials, and fewer still
remain who shared in the pioneering and can tell first hand of the hardships and
the fights against odds.
Their descendants to the second and third generation now occupy the old runs, or
more often still a stranger has taken over the work begun by the first settler and he pro-
bably knows little of what went to the first rough fashionings of the orderly, well-improved
property that is his.
Yet all these have done, and are doing, their part in the making of the history of
the Pastoral Homes of Australia. Inevitably, in the natural order of things, their work of
to-day will become part and parcel of the history of Australian development, for these
homes, or at least the majority of them, will sooner or later no longer exist as we know
them. The tide of closer settlement, a tide that will not recede, is advancing and sub-
merging them utterly, or leaving here and there surrounded by its flood an isolated island,
the homestead block of some famous old station. The names remain, likewise all that
they convey to those who can remember the beginnings of settlement, but with the growth
of new generations more and more of those old names become names only and the past
becomes less than a memory. It is, therefore, only through some such record as this aims


to be that the work of those who fashioned, and of those who developed and perfected, the
solid foundations which support the structure of our economic life can be held in deserved
remembrance.
Where to-day is a vista of ploughed earth or flourishing crops and all the other
visible signs of a farming community, not so very long ago stretched broad sheep pastures
cleared, fenced, watered, and hewn from the rough. These have passed from man’s ken,
others are passing, and vet others will disappear in the future, but that the part they have
played in our national growth shall not be forgotten there are set down in the following
pages brief histories of some of them. Separately they tell of what men and women have
striven to do and have done for themselves and their descendants. Collectively they con-
stitute the story of the evolution of primary production from its raw beginnings to its
specialised and more or less perfected form as we know it.
No less important, though perhaps less spectacular than the task of establishing and
improving the general flocks and herds, has been the work, so often recorded in these
pages, of the stud breeders of Australia. Both in this book and in the columns of The
Pastoral Review is shown how they have made possible the later advance of the industry in
general, and that it is they who must always be indispensable to its continued prosperity.
By their perseverance, their long experience, their skill, and their money invested and
reinvested in their industry, favoured by, yet often despite, natural conditions, they
have established a level of quality, particularly in regard to the Merino, that has
no equal in the world. They founded and have maintained a source of pure
blood upon which the general flocks of the country are able to draw, without cianger of
exhaustion, for the retention and steady improvement of a stanciard which it is vital should
not fall away in these times of increasing competition from other countries. Their
“essentialness" in the scheme of things is so obvious that it need not be stressed. That they
should continue to carry on their work, not only unhampered, but encouraged by every
incentive that is in the power of Governments to offer is a wish that must surely materialise.
The very best that the photographer's and publisher's art can furnish has gone to the
compilation of this volume. Many thousands of miles have been covered by train, by car,
and by aeroplane to secure the wherewithal for its makings, anci our acknowledgments are
due to the photographers, Messrs. W. Hall and Co., Sydney, and Mr. }. A. Sears, Melbourne,
for their splendid co-operation. Our acknowledgments are due, too, to the late Mr. Arthur
Krone, whose advocacy of the undertaking of the work and whose keen interest in its pro-
gress enabled these important records of pastoral progress to take concrete form out of a
nebulous idea. It is fitting also that there should be associated with the production of these
volumes the name of Mr. Lionel Arthur Krone (well known to The Pastoral Review readers
as “Crossley") because of his close association with his late father in visiting a very great
portion of the pastoral areas of the Commonwealth, in compiling the literary data for the
volumes, and in bringing the work to a successful termination after his father's death, which
occurred in March 1930, coincident with the production of Volume 2.
Melbourne, December, 1931.


MAWALLIK, BEAUFORT, VICTORIA
The Property of Philip Russell, Esq.
SPREAD through the Western District of Victoria
are many notable holdings whose names, with
those of their owners and of their families, are
linked closely with the progress of the State’s great wool-
growing industry. Of these, one of the most distinctive
Mawallok is an example of what can be accomplished in
the direction of pasture improvement.
Its area of 12,000 acres freehold embraces some of the
best fine wool sheep country in Victoria, made up chiefly
of healthy stony rises, volcanic in origin, and of gravel,
THE ENTRANCE GATES AND DRIVE TO MAWALLOK HOMESTEAD
in many ways is Mr. Philip Russell’s Mawallok Station,
which lies 10 miles south of the town of Beaufort and
110 miles from Melbourne, for apart from historic as-
sociations, the great charm and beauty of the homestead
surroundings, its old-established Merino flock and its
cattle and the well kept appearance of the run in general,
basalt, and ironstone character, unsheltered from the ele-
ments save for scattered timber and the plantations of
shelter belts, yet possessing soil which, under the en-
couragement of a 22-in. rainfall, grows a wealth of
clovers, herbs, and natural grasses upon which stock
thrive to perfection. In its ordinary state more than one


sheep to the acre can be run with safety through any
year, and up to ten times this number when the pastures
are sown down with ryes and clovers and top-dressed.
Only about a quarter of the property, however, is suitable
for developing the pastures scientifically, and it has been
found that intense culture in no way impairs the pro-
duction of a fine to superfine quality of pure Merino
wool, nor does the heavy growth of pasture cause footrot
or fluke, owing to the hard nature of the subsoil.
M awallok is a highly improved property carrying at
the present time 17,000 sheep and lambs, about 250 head
of cattle, including a Shorthorn stud, and a stud dairy
herd of Friesians, as well as a small number of thorough-
bred brood mares for breeding a racehorse or two, and
a few yearlings.
Originally it was part of St. Enochs run, which was
stocked up in 1838 by Thomas Steel and Richard Black,
and worked by them in two sections until 1847, when
the place was subdivided into St. Enochs an d M awallok.
The former was retained by Mr. Black, from whom it
passed in 1851 to Thomas Brown and his father, and
from them in 1858 to Robert Adams, and so on; whilst
M awallok, a blackfellow’s name for the call of a frog,
and spelt with several variations in the early days, was
taken over by Thomas Steel, who disposed of it in the
same year (1847) to Alexander Russell and Co., com-
prising M essrs. Alexander, George and Philip Russell
and the Rev. Dr. John Lillie, the area of the grazing
license then being 20,000 acres. After the first named
became sole proprietor the run was consolidated and de-
veloped along sound lines of management, and at his
death in January 1869 the owner entailed the estate to
his son, Mr. Philip Russell, the present owner, who en-
tered into possession on reaching the age of twenty-one
in 1887. In the interim Mawallok was in charge of that
capable gentleman, the late Mr. George Lewis, eldest son
of William Lewis, founder of the adjoining Stoneleigh
Station, and a nephew of the late Alexander Russell. Mr.
George Lewis continued to manage Mawallok for many
years afterwards for Mr. Philip Russell, and died at
his Yaccamunda Station, Victoria, in 1915.
As time went on M awallok was increased to about
26,000 acres, carrying 28,000 sheep, but has been reduced
in recent years to its present size, the disposals including
the well-known Buln Gherin property, and takes in a
block of about 1000 acres of heavily timbered land on the
north towards the foothills of the Dividing Range, ac-
quired by the owner mainly to provide firewood and
building timber, in which the rest of the run is deficient.
Mr. Russell follows a well thought out policy of im-
provement, and has placed the run in the hands of a
resident manager, while concentrating his own efforts
upon the development of an area of some 3000 acres of
the best country surrounding the homestead, with the
objective of running thereon at least five sheep to the acre
all the year round, or as many as are carried at present
on the total working area of 11,000 acres.
Subterranean clover and English rye grass form the
basis of the improved pastures, and bring along a tremen-
dous growth of feed as they become established under
THE MAWALLOK HOMESTEAD FROM THE NORTH
M A WA L L OK, VI CTO R IA


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HOUSE
treatment with superphosphate. So well, indeed, have
these areas responded during the past few seasons that
there are paddocks now supporting ten sheep to the acre
over several months of the year, and these beautifully
grassed lands show out in contrast to the country along-
side that remains in its natural state, but which is first
class nevertheless. They make a wonderful picture to
the eye, and set a lead which others could follow wi th
decided gain. Especially dense in clovers, herbs and
grasses of an infinite variety are the small paddocks close
to the homestead, and it is obvious that such an advanced
state could not have been reached without having mas-
tered the rabbit problem. Nearly every one of the 50
subdivisions on Mawallok is netted securely, some of
them being enclosed with double fencing. 1 he fine old
stone walls that were built before the days of wire net-
ting, and which are most useful as firebreaks, are now
netted against the pest, the total amount of fencing being
about 88 miles.
The property has a splendid water supply from dams,
mills and troughing, and fresh water springs, the main
dam, near the homestead, being 550 yards long and form-
ing the head of a lake, which covers an area of 10 acres.
From this dam water is pumped into a 30,000-gallon
reservoir built on an elevation, whence it is run down
to the house, and also through small channels, which are
fitted with simple valves, to every part of the gardens.
These comprise several acres of beautifully laid out
lawns, terraces, shrubberies, hedges, and trees of many
kinds, while almost every description of flower blooms
in profusion. In the midst of these park-like grounds,
at the end of a long shaded drive, and confronted with
lush meadows that slope down to the edge of the lake,
stands the Mawallok homestead, a spacious two-storied
residence built of reinforced concrete in a graceful style
of architecture, in every sense a luxurious pastoral home.
It was erected soon after the owner’s return from Eng-
land in 1910, in place of the former bluestone villa, and
contains amongst many features an elaborately fitted
workshop, Mr. Russell being a skilled amateur mechanic.
He takes a justifiable pride in everything connected with
the station and its headquarters, which also boasts a large
zoological park full of native fauna. This reserve is
alongside the lake, whereon, in summer months, yachting
and other aquatic sports hold sway.
The permanent improvements on the run include the
M A JV AL L OK, VICT() R I A


THE ROSE GARDEN, TAKEN FROM THE ROCKERY IN NOVEMBER 1930
THE PERGOLA WALK IN MAWALLOK GARDEN


A CORNER OF
THE GARDEN
A VIEW LOOKING ACROSS
THE GARDEN FROM THE
MAWALLOK HOMESTEAD
MA W A LLO K. VICT 0 R I A


THE LAKE AT THE FOOT OF THE HOMESTEAD GARDEN
ONE OF THE STUD SHORTHORN BULLS AT MAWALLOK
,1/ AJV A LLO K, VICT O R I A


THREE-YEAR-OLD BULLOCKS IN SUBTERRANEAN CLOVER
widest use of concrete, even to the sills beneath every
gate, these latter being uniform in pattern and swung
on independent posts. The wool shed is an efficient struc-
ture containing 10 stands of machines, with a fine dip
alongside. This was published in detailed plan in The
Pastoral Review of April 1903, creating a great deal of
interest at the time. Shearing, which takes place in
October, is done by contract, and the culling of the flock
is particularly heavy. No effort is spared to maintain
the flock at the highest possible standard of quality, and
as the country is suited to the growth of a fine wool, this
naturally dominates the policy of breeding.
A stud flock is bred to supply rams for the general
flock, and it is a bad season that does not mark an aver-
age of from 80 to 88 per cent, of lambs from a breeding
strength of about 5000 ewes, which trace back in descent
to the sheep brought over from Van Diemen’s Land by
the late VI r. Alexander Russell, and which were built
up with rams from Ercildoune for very many years.
Scone blood was introduced into the stud flock later on
HERD COWS AND CALVES
M A WALL 0 K. VI C TORI A


THE FRIESIAN STUD AT MAWALLOK
ONE AND TWO YEAR OLD STEERS
MAWAI. LO K. VI CTO R I A


THOROUGHBRED MARES AND FOALS
with marked success, and the policy of buying the best
available high-priced rams from leading studs in Tas-
mania that has been followed during the past thirty years
has further increased the efficiency of the Mawallok
sheep, which have won prizes and championships at Bal-
larat and Melbourne. Apart from these occasional out-
crossings, no other blood has been used, so that the
general flock is practically bred from within its own num-
bers. The result is a steady perpetuation of one type
of sheep, fairly large framed, with good deep plain bodies
and sound backs, and healthy constitutions, producing a
soft handling, stylish wool of over 70’s count, full of
character, and of the beautiful quality that has made
the Western District famous.
The clip sells consistently well at the Geelong sales,
where, in 1925, the whole run of locks, pieces, bellies and
fleeces returned the exceptionally high average price of
per lb. In other years the returns have compared
with the best average sales in the State, while even on
the abnormally depressed market of 1930-1 the line to
superfine clips have more than held their own, proving
that this class of Merino wool is a most valuable asset
wherever conditions warrant its production. It does not
by any means follow that fine wool means a low yield
per head of sheep, for at Mawallok especially the yield
is profitable, the grown sheep in 1930 cutting in excess
of 10 lbs., and the wethers 12 lbs. per head.
The property also has a name for the prime quality of
its fat stock sent in to Ballarat and Melbourne. Top
prices have been the rule rather than the exception for
wethers, whilst as high as £42 10s. was obtained for a
pen of fat bullocks at Ballarat. This remains the re-
cord average price at auction or private treaty for that
market, where the Mawallok drafts always attract keen
bidding. The owner prefers to turn the cattle off as
fats, although the stud of Shorthorns is of outstanding
merit, and aims to secure an early maturing type of
low set, stocky beef, with small, tender joints, and an even
distribution of meat over the beast, not too proportionally
fat. Established many years ago on Derrimut blood,
the stud is maintained with suitable bulls purchased at
the leading shows, the last addition being Lord Weston
of Lochinver 15th, a lengthy 3-year-old bull, bred at
Carisbrook, by the imported Shorthorn sire Heatherwood,
and bought for £llß after winning second prize at the
1930 Melbourne Royal, the bull which beat him winning
the championship (Quatta’s Duke of Derrimut 35th).
Mr. Russell, who has been on the committee of the
V.R.C. for many years, and who is well known for his
liberality and sportsmanship, has bred some good race-
horses at M awallok, and used to breed polo ponies. One
of the thoroughbred sires at his stud was Berriedale, but
no stallion is kept to-day, the brood mares going out to
M A WA L L OK. V 1 C TOR I A


THE OLD MAWALLOK HOUSE
PART OF THE ORIGINAL HOMESTEAD
M A TV AL L O K, VI C TOR IA


THE MANAGER'S COTTAGE
other studs. The names of the females and horses more
prominently associated with his stud include Harriett
Graham (imp.), Maid of the Mist, Happy Queen
(imp.), Mistral, Gold Cup, Gossip (dam of Bobrikoff),
Sans Culotte, See., the last-named running a good second
to Gothic (imp.), later on dropping dead on the racing
track. The owner’s colours have been carried to victory
many times, his wins numbering amongst them two Aus-
tralian Cups, but only one or two horses are kept in
training nowadays. Both Happy Queen and another first
class mare, Golden Beauty, have foals at foot at the pre-
sent time, the latter being a handsome colt by The Night
THE MENS QUARTERS
M A WALL OK, V ICT OKI A


THREE-YEAR-OLD WETHERS MUSTERED FOR DIPPING AT MAWALLOK
Patrol, and the other a filly. The Mawallok stud is
represented by a few well bred yearlings at the annual
sales held at Melbourne in March.
Mr. Philip Russell was born at Geelong in 1866, and
is the surviving son of the late Alexander Russell, one
of five sons of Philip Russell, of Clunie Estate, Fife,
Scotland. Between them the brothers Alexander, George,
Thomas, Philip and William Russell proved great
colonists, and their names are amongst the most honoured
of the old pioneering families of Tasmania and Victoria.
Such well known and successful properties as Golf Hill,
Barunah Plains, Wurrook, Carngham, and Langi Willi,
as well as the one under review, are still held by their
descendants, whilst Old Terrinallum, Mt. Cole, and
other big runs of the early days came under their far-
sighted control at one time or another. Probably no
other family has figured more successfully in the State’s
pastoral development, in which the fortitude, endurance
and splendid characters of the pioneers meant so much
to its welfare.
The late Mr. Alexander Russell first left Greenwich
on 21st November, 1838, on a voyage round the world,
via Van Diemen’s Land, returning on Christmas Eve,
1839. Three months later he published an account of
the long trip, and at the end of 1841 he arrived at Hobart
Town, where some of his brothers had preceded him by
several years. In January 1842 he went to the Port
Phillip settlement, eighteen months later was appointed
manager of Hopkins Hill Station, and in 1847 settled
at Mawallok, where he died in January 1 869.
1 he present owner received his education at the Edin-
burgh Academy, and in October 1888, at Geelong, mar-
ried Mary Gray, daughter of Thomas Guthrie, of Rich
Avon. Mrs. Russell died in 1927. The family consists
of one daughter, Mary, who assists her father in a most
practical manner to manage the “farm,” and one son,
Alexander, who resides at Sandringham, Melbourne, with
his wife and family of three children. Educated at Gee-
long Grammar School, where he captained the first cricket
eleven, he afterwards served at the war with the
R-A.F .A., attaining the rank of IMajor, and received the
Military Cross for conspicuous service. Mr. Alexander
Russell is well known as one of the lending amateur
golfers in Victoria.
.1/ A W A LLOK, V 1 C TOR IA


LARRA, CAMPERDOWN, VICTORIA
The Property of John Lang Currie, Esq.
LARRA S 1 A 1 lON is one of the oldest holdings in
the district surrounding the town of Derrin-
allum, Vic., and has been in the hands of the
Currie family since 1844. The original property was
selected from the Crown by the late James Kin ross, and
for many years it embraced a great stretch of the un-
dulating basalt plains common to this central part of the
Western District, taking in its stride the extinct volcano,
those who came upon the scene later planting breaks of
trees for shelter purposes as they developed their runs.
In 1844 Mr. Kinross sold out his interests to the late
Mr. John I Currie, who in 1865 took advantage of
the Duffy Act and converted the run into a freehold.
He died in 1889, and the station was carried on by two
of his sons, the present owner and his brother Sibbald,
and when the latter went on his own Larra passed into
FRONT VIEW OF LARRA HOMESTEAD
Mount Elephant, whose slopes were clothed with a
mantle of sheoak, and much of the country overgrown
with scrub, bush, and more or less useless timber before
the advent of the pioneering grazier. Practically the
whole of this over-growth was cleared off within a few
years of the opening up of the property, and eventually
the grazing areas became open plains, which necessitated
the sole possession o f Air. John I Currie, who has
made it his home ever since.
Larra is situated about 4 miles south of the town of
Derrinallum, and about 150 miles from Alelbourne. In
its existing state it is made up of open grassy plains,
about one-third of which would be described as volcanic
rocky rises, which grow sound, healthy pastures under the


STUD CORRIEDALE EWES AND LAMBS, WITH THE WOODSHED IN THE BACKGROUND
SOME OF THE SHORTHORN CATTLE AT LARRA
ANOTHER PICTURE OF STUD CORRIEDALE EWES AND LAMBS AT LARRA
LARRA, VICTORIA


influence of an average rainfall of about 21 in. A fea-
ture of the improvements that strikes the eye of the
visitor is the abundance and excellence of the plantations
which have been provided over a long period of years
for the comfort of the stock. These long rows of gums,
most of them being 66 ft. in width, also give the place
a sheltered, picturesque appearance. Vermin are a nuis-
ance of the past. In the eighties, however, rabbits were
very troublesome, but the late Mr. Currie energetically
tackled the problem, and gradually they were overcome
and exterminated completely. Larra has been kept free
from rabbits ever since by means of strong wire netted
boundaries and constant vigilance.
Native grasses, herbage, and clovers provide the feed
throughout the 21 pad-
docks into which the
run is subdivided for
working the flock, and
in addition about 350
acres of wheat and oats
are put under culti-
vation annually on
shares. The practice
in this direction is to
allow the tenant far-
mer to retain most of
the profits from the
crops, the owner get-
ting the benefit of hav-
ing the land broken up
and sufficient hay for
station use. Every
three years certain sec-
tions of the property
are sown down with
rye grass and clovers,
which respond satis-
factorily under a little top-dressing, but no natural pas-
tures are top-dressed, as there is usually a luxuriant stand
of feed lasting well into the summer and reviving with
late summer and autumnal showers, thus ensuring green
feed for sheep of all ages.
There is a spring of perfect water near the homestead,
and this runs right through the property. From it the
domestic supply is drawn, and only one paddock does not
derive its supply from this and other permanent volcanic
spring water, which is obtainable at depths ranging from
25 to 30 ft. That paddock has one of several sub-
artesian bores equipped with windmills that are also fur-
nished for stock-drinking purposes in various parts of the
run. Their depth is not very great and the water is
excellent for the sheep.
THE ENTRANCE TO THE DRAWING ROOM THROUGH THE LOUNGE
The sheep are purebred Corriedales, and include a
small but select stud, the whole constituting one of the
highest class flocks of this popular dual purpose breed to
be found in the State, proof of this being furnished at
the Geelong sales by the animated competition for the
clip, which has a reputation for being very clean, bright
and beautifully grown, of approved 50’s to 56’s quality,
and cutting from 8 to 10 pounds of wool per head accord-
ing to the sheep. High average prices are secured for all
lines. In 1925 the Larra clip sold to 35d. per lb. for the
A com. lines and for super com. was secured. In
the same clip 12 bales of cbk. pcs. B made 28|d., and
13 bales of cbk. pcs. A sold at 30d. per lb. In 1927 the
prices paid at the sales ranged from 20d. to per
pound, figures that a
lot of people did not
realise for their Mer-
ino wools.
The early sheep on
Larra were purebred
Merino, and as long
ago as 1861 the late
Mr. J. L. Currie began
to win many prizes and
certificates at various
shows and exhibitions.
He was a very success-
ful breeder of Merinos
and an equally success-
ful grower of fine
Merino wool. For
many years his sheep
were held in the high-
est esteem throughout
Victoria, his stud es-
pecially being in the
limelight on account
of its breeding. It was commenced in 1848 from
the best of his Merino ewes, and the introduction
of rams bred in Germany and rams bred at Camden
by Macarthur, and was developed subsequently from Vic-
torian blood. So important were his operations in the
pastoral world that many of his individual stud rams
offered for sale realised prices which in those days were
considered exceptional, records showing that figures run-
ning up to 350 guineas per head were paid for Larra
stud rams. Many of the Merino studs that flourished
in the State in after years sprang from or were developed
from the Larra stock, but the greatest prominence enjoyed
by this property, amounting almost to fame, was when
the late Mr. Currie built up a superfine stud flock known
as the Larra Lustre Merinos, these sheep possessing a
LARRA, V ICTORI A


ANOTHER VIEW OF LARRA HOMESTEAD TAKEN FROM A DIFFERENT ANGLE
THE LOWER PORTION OF THE GARDEN, WITH ITS SETTING OF WILLOWS AND GUMS
LARRA, VICTORIA


MILKING SHED AND DAIRY COWS
covering of long soft wool of magnificent character and
colour, and proving one of the outstanding features of
the sheep world of the day.
The end of the Larra Merinos came shortly after the
ravages of the rabbits in the late eighties. Their depreda-
tions upon the natural pastures brought on a growth of
herbage, and in time this gave rise to footrot in the sheep.
The volcanic nature of the country then gradually proved
too rich for the continuance of breeding Merinos on
Larra profitably, so a change of policy brought about the
establishment of a flock bred by crossing the best and the
largest framed Merinos with the best Lincoln rams
obtainable. From the pick of the ram lamb progeny of
this crossing a very heavy cull was made, and only the
most desirable sheep were retained for service with the
choicest of the halfbred ewes.
CORRIEDALE FOUR-TOOTH WETHERS AT LARRA
LARRA, VICTORIA


LARRA HOMESTEAD IS
BUILT OF THE LOCAL BLUE-
STONE, AS ALSO ARE THE
WOOLSHED AND STABLES
LARRA, VICTORI A


A VIEW OF THE
HOMESTEAD FROM
THE FRONT DRIVE
LA RR A, VICTORIA


THE OWNER OF LARRA, MR. J. L. CURRIE, ON HIS HACK
Since inaugurating this flock the owner has aimed to
produce a Corriedale in accordance with the best tradi-
tions of the breed, the same attention being given to wool
and carcase as to uniformity and prepotency. As an aid
to the inbreeding of the flock to conform to the require-
ments of the Australian Corriedale Sheepbreeders’ Asso-
ciation, Mr. Currie formed a stud some years ago, keeping
to the strain of the original Larra sheep when purchasing
Merino rams, and of late years the rams imported have been
mostly from the Titanga stud flock. These are crossed
on to the coarser fibred ewes in the present general flock.
At the present time the sheep may be said to be
characterised by uniformity of type, the ewes being large
and bold, lacking nothing in hardiness, having long,
broad, level backs, deep barrels, wide hindquarters, strong,
firmly set legs and a covering of long stapled, dense,
stylish wool, spread evenly all over the body. The wool
in the young sheep in particular is of beautiful quality.
At the yearly lambing in May-June a high percentage
is marked, one of the many good points of the Corriedale,
in fact, being consistently high lambing results, as well
as early maturity.
The improvements at Larra for taking off the clip are
centred in a large stone woolshed, with cover for about
1500 sheep and having an excellent set of yards, races,
pens and dip, and it is interesting to note that the present
owner laid the foundation stone in 1860, at which time
he was little over four years of age. Shearing is done
by hand nowadays, though formerly by machines.
There is also on Larra a herd of Shorthorn cattle which
was commenced in the early fifties with a cow given to
the late Mr. Currie by the late Mr. Joseph Ware and
used as a milker. In the herd to-day there are over 50
stud cows amongst a total of about 280 head. The bulls
introduced to develop the herd were obtained from the
late Hon. Neil Black, and from time to time in more
recent years suitable stud bulls have been obtained from
leading sources. The herd is possibly one of the oldest
in the district and is of excellent quality. In the beef
line there is a good demand for breeding purposes, and
the sale of heifers constitutes a relatively big part of the
station’s business.
The founder of Larra Station, the late Mr. John Lang
Currie, was born in 1820 at Howford, Selkirkshire, Scot-
land, where his family had lived since the year 1630 as
tenant farmers of the Duke of Buccleuch, and where
some of the descendants reside to the present day. The
late Mr. Currie, whose mother was a Miss Lang, came
out to Australia in 1841 at the instigation of one of her
brothers, and upon arrival he went to the Ballarat dis-
trict, where his cousins were engaged in forming a sheep
station. After gaining experience there, and sharing in
LARRA, VICTORIA


THE GARDEN IN
FRONT OF THE
HOMESTEAD
THE MANAGERS
COTTAGE AT LARRA
LARRA, VICTORIA


THE SOUTH WALK
THE EASTERN LAWN
LA RR A, VICTORIA


THE LARRA WOOLSHED
THE SOLIDLY-BUILT STABLES AT LARRA


STONE IN THE WOOLSHED SHOWING THE DATE
IT WAS ERECTED, 1860
the trials of the young country, he purchased Larra Sta-
tion, and adhered patiently to the slow work of develop-
ment right through his life. In 1848 he was joined by
his brother, George Currie, who was born at Howford
in 1823. The latter went off to the goldfields a few
years later, and in 1856 purchased Mindie Station, on
the Woady Yallock Creek, disposing of it four years later
to join Scott and Dufrayer in acquiring the adjacent runs
of Strathmerton West and Kaarimba, both of which had
a frontage to the Goulburn and Murray Rivers. 1 he
whole of these fine station properties were lost in the
seventies, when the provisions of the New South Wales
Land Act enabled open selection of country to be made
by any applicant. In 1879, in company with John
Mackinnon and Thomas Shaw, the late George Currie
purchased Puckawidgee Station in Riverina, N.S.W.,
from Robert Patterson, and turned that country to good
use for Merino wool growing. He sold out all but the
homestead block in 1906, and in April of 1908 died there
at an advanced age.
M eanwhile, the late John Lang Currie became a lead-
ing Victorian pastoralist. He married in 1852 Louise,
daughter of the late Hon. J. S. Johnston, a former
Minister for Public Works, and a member of Sir John
O’Shanassy’s Government, and their family consisted of
seven sons and three daughters. To each of his sons he
gave a thorough training in pastoral affairs, and set them
up eventually in properties of their own.
Included in the various runs acquired by him may be
mentioned Titanga Station, which originally was part of
Gala Station. From 1852 until 1871 it was held by
Thomas Aitken, and in that year was sold to Alexander
Buchanan, from whom it passed into the hands of the
late Mr. Currie in 1886. Since 1910 it has been the pro-
perty of his relatives, Messrs. P. and S. Lang. Gala
Station, near Lismore, was another place acquired by the
late J. L. Currie. It was purchased in 1889, and both it
and Titanga are the homes of high class flocks of Merino
sheep bred up very largely from Larra blood. Gala is
now the property of Mr. Edwin Currie, the fourth son.
Another son is Major Allan Currie, of Ercildoune, near
Burrumbeet, Vic., whilst Ettrick Station, which is half
of old Larra Station, is the property and home of the
late Mr. Sibbald Currie’s family.
The late Mr. John Lang Currie died in 1889. Ihe
present owner of Larra is the second son, and he was
given his father’s name. He was born in Geelong in
1856, and in 1898 married Lorna, daughter of Mr.
Henry Box, of Geelong, and the family consists of one
daughter, Inez, who is the wife of Colonel Frank
Thornthwaite, of Marong Station, adjoining Hartwood
Station, in Riverina. Mr. Currie has always taken a
keen interest in sport, and apart from the renowned
coursing meetings held on Larra many years ago, which
included the Commonwealth Cup, he patronised the turf,
racing under the well-known colours —maroon, yellow
sleeves and cap. Amongst the thoroughbreds owned and
raced by him with prominent success were Duverney,
Captain White, Even Time, Tisno, Lindean, Star
Spangle, Bow Hill, and Howford, the last three being
sired by Blankney IE, one of the present sires at the Hon.
Agar Wynne’s stud at Nerrin Nerrin, from the above-
mentioned mare Lindean, who was bv Traquair, from
Marv F.
CAIRN ERECTED ON THE SITE OF THE FIRST HOMESTEAD
ON LARRA, BUILT IN 1844
LARRA , VICTORIA


EEYEUK, TERANG, VICTORIA
The Property of Messrs. Alexander Dennis and Sons
THIS well-known and old-esrablished wool-growing
and stud sheep property, the name of which is
thought to have been derived from the peculiar
screech of the black cockatoos which were thick there-
for both sheep and cattle, some of the areas in the
vicinity of Mt. Noorat having been sold for as much as
<£3o per acre thirty years ago or more, whilst of cor-
responding value were the grazing lands further to the
EEYEUK HOUSE IN ITS BEAUTIFUL SETTING
abouts when the country many years ago was overgrown
with timber and honeysuckles, is part of old Keilambete
Station, taken up about 1839 by John Thompson, the
pioneer settler of the immediate district.
Keilambete extended for several miles north of the
town of Terang, and embraced some magnificent country
north. The section surveyed into Eeyeuk Station was
purchased in the late fifties by Dr. McFarlane, and on
Ist January, 1867, was acquired by the late Mr.
Alexander Dennis, of Tarndwarncoort, near Birregurra,
which property he had taken up in 1840. He leased
Eeyeuk to his two sons, Richard V. Dennis and Alex-


FOUR-TOOTH STUD
POLWARTH RAMS
ander Dennis, until the marriage of the latter in 1872,
when the former son returned to take charge of Tarnd-
warncoort, leaving Mr. Alexander Dennis in sole owner-
ship of Ee5 r euk. He is the head of the firm by which the
property is run to-day, the active management being in
the hands of his eldest son, Mr. G. L. Dennis, for a
number of years, until, in 1928, he purchased Penrose
Station, near Ballarat, which belonged to Mr. R. Mor-
rison, now of Wooriwyrite, and an outside manager, Mr.
I. A. Campbell, was employed from then on to look
after Eeyeuk and its flocks.
Eeyeuk, which has an area of 8000 acres freehold, and
through which runs the main Terang-Darlington road,
the former town lying 10 miles to the south, and the
latter a few miles to the north, with the Mortlakc-
Camperdown road passing close to the homestead (Mort-
lake is 10 miles distant), is made up of undulating vol-
canic plains, the soil being mostly of a deep and fertile
nature such as to endow the property with a rvonderful
growth of natural grasses in normal years. Native trees
have disappeared in the course of time, leaving the run
poorly off for natural timber, but there are, however,
quite a number of excellent plantations of gums and
wattles, &c., for shelter purposes.
In order to eat down rough feed about 300 head of
cattle are depastured on the run and sold off either as
fats or stores. The practice is to buy young cattle of
the Hereford-Shorthorn cross Avhenever these are procur-
STUD POLWARTH EWES AND LAMBS
EE Y E UK, VICTORIA


ONE OF THE MANY PRETTY WALKS
IN THE BEAUTIFUL GARDENS
SURROUNDING EEYEUK
CORNER OF EEYEUK HOUSE
WITH A VIEW OF THE
GARDEN FROM THE EAST


able, and a good name has been established for the class
of beef turned off Eeyeuk every year.
The capacity of the run has been brought up to over
one and a-half sheep to the acre through able and judi-
cious management, thus enabling between 13,000 and
14,000 sheep and lambs to be shorn annually. These
sheep are Polwarths, a name given in 1919 to a type of
comeback which had been fixed definitely and successfully
by a number of breeders after many years of patient effort
to evolve a breed that would suit rich country better than
the Merino or the pure Lincoln. At a meeting held in
brother, the owner of Eeyeuk, were the originators of
the Polwarth sheep. They were encouraged to launch
into these experiments by the success of some comeback
wool sold in Geelong during the seventies by the late
Mr. R. V. Dennis, who commenced to breed the type at
Tarndwarncoort about a year before Mr. Alexander
Dennis laid the foundation of his comeback flock at
Eeyeuk in 1881, where the sheep originally were Merinos.
For some years prior to 1881 Eeyeuk had a flock of pure
Lincoln sheep, founded in the seventies on ewes bought
from Mr. Albert Austin, of Eilyer, and a Brie Brie Lin-
MR. A. DENNIS, SEN., MOUNTED ON HIS SHOOTING HORSE
Melbourne in September, 1919, the men responsible chose
the name Polwarth in deference to the place where
the breed originated, namely, at Tarndwarncoort, in the
county of Polwarth, Victoria, and at the same time the
Polwarth Association was formed to consolidate the re-
cognition in the sheep world that this Australian type had
won, as well as to distinguish the flocks then existing
from ordinary comebacks, and to set a standard of breed-
ing to guide the perpetuation of that type for the future.
Mr. R. V. Dennis, of Tarndwarncoort, and his
coin stud ram. It was considered that the general cli-
matic conditions on country too wet and cold for the
Merino would favour the Lincoln breed, but the change
to a fixed type of comeback promised even better returns
than the Lincolns, and these early predictions have proved
to be correct.
It is of significance that these attempts to establish an
essentially local type of sheep by the Dennis Bros, began
at about the same time as the Corriedale breed was com-
menced in New Zealand, but whereas the latter was de-
EEYE U K. VICT O R I A


EEYEUK HOUSE, BUILT IN 1875, IS A GOOD
EXAMPLE OF THE BLUESTONE HOME-
STEADS OFTEN SEEN IN THE WESTERN
DISTRICT OF VICTORIA. A GOOD VIEW OF
THE HOUSE IS GIVEN ON A PREVIOUS PAGE
KEYE U K, VIC T()R I A


SOME OF THE
OUTBUILDINGS
A NORTH-WEST VIEW FROM THE HOMESTEAD
EEYE U K, VICT 0 R 1 A


THE SOUTH CORNER
OF THE GARDEN
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE STATION FROM THE HOMESTEAD LOOKING NORTH-EAST
EEYEU K, VI CTORI A


THE MANAGER'S RESIDENCE
signed to perpetuate a first cross or halfbred, tlie other
was a serious endeavour to obtain and hold a type from
a comeback to the Merino from a Lincoln cross.
Mr. Alexander Dennis formed the new flocks by cross-
ing 2000 Eeyeuk Lincoln ewes with Carrs’ Plains Merino
rams, and mating a further 2000 Merino ewes, purchased
from Longerenong, with Eeyeuk Lincoln rams. The
ewe progeny of this iirst cross were joined with Merino
rams from Carrs’ Plains, and from the resultant come-
back progeny a stud was formed and the flock developed
by selective methods of breeding from within itself.
Carrs’ Plains Station, on the Richardson River, Vic.,
was the property of the late Alexander Dennis and his
two brothers, who took it up between them in January
1854. Their flocks of Merino sheep were of outstand-
ing merit, as witness the sale of 139 bales of washed wool
at up to 23Jd. per lb. at the first sales held in Geelong
by Mr. C. J. Dennys, in 1857, but the owners leased the
property to Mr. Holford H. Wettenhall when Eeyeuk
was purchased. Carrs’ Plains was cut up and sold in
1905.
For thirty-four years after the flock at Eeyeuk was
formed not a single drop of outside blood was introduced,
and only when, in 1915, about 2000 acres of the adjoin-
ing Wooriwyrite Station were added to Eeyeuk to make
it more compact, was the flock enlarged by additions from
outside. 1 hese were 450 lambs from Uondo comeback
ewes of fixed type, and were the progeny of Eeyeuk
sires.
In 1926 one Polwarth ram was purchased from Tarnd-
warncoort (Stud Book Flock No. 1), and as Uondo (Stud
Book Flock No. 4) was formerly part of Tarndwarn-
coort, the purity of the Eeyeuk flock was not disturbed
by these introductions.
Not only is the evolution of the Polwarth type of
sheep a triumph in breeding methods, but it is a very
useful asset to the pastoral industry on account of its
utility for mutton or wool, or both. It has been amongst
the flocks of Victoria for too many years for its merits
not to be known widely, but if further evidence of its
value as a good all-round productive sheep is required
one only has to turn to the beautiful comeback wools
displayed annually for sale.
4'he Polwarth resembles a large edition of a plain-
bodied Merino, and can be depended upon for a long
frame, symmetrical appearance, strong virile constitution,
thriftiness, resistance to ailments such as foot-rot, ability
to fossick for its feed, and a covering of extra long stapled
wool which realises good value in the sale room.
Mr. A. W. Dennis, son of the late Mr. R. V. Dennis,
outlines the characteristics of the Polwarth in a descrip-
tive pamphlet compiled by him with the help of the Pol-
EEYE U K. VICTORIA


HERBACEOUS BORDERS IN THE EEYEUK HOMESTEAD GARDEN
EEY EU K, FIG T OKI A


warth Breeders’ Association, and dealing with the origin
and history of the breed. It is pointed out therein that
in order to conform to the standard of type to qualify
for registration with the P.B.A. as a stud flock the sheep
must be bred to the fifth generation from the progeny
of the third cross of pure Merino x pure Lincoln sheep,
the ewe progeny from which is covered by pure Merino
rams, and the resultant comeback inbred. The sheep
must have a level frame, be well sprung, heavily fleeced,
and free from skin folds, the fleece to be of no less than
58’s quality and distributed over the animal evenly, with
at least an average of -I in. in the staple, good top-knot
free from wig, clear eyes, soft face, pink nose preferred,
either horned or hornless, and hoofs mostly black. The
clean yield of the wool from the Polwarth is consistently
high.
At the 1928 shearing, which commenced about the
middle of October, 10,670 grown sheep were shorn for
an average of 8 lbs. 14 ozs. greasy wool, and 3170 lambs
cut an average of 2 lbs. ozs. per head.
Lambs are dropped in June-July each year, and the
marking is about 85 per cent, on the average, the natural
increase in 1928 being 85 per cent., and in the previous
year 87 per cent. The lambs are run on natural pas-
tures entirely, and grow out into healthy, well-nourished
sheep, true to the three-quarter Merino and quarter Lin-
coln strain that is in them. As hoggets they are par-
ticularly attractive in form and vigour, and in the general
flock, no less than in the stud, the most noticeable features
of the sheep at Eeyeuk to-day are uniformity such as
pure breeding on the most careful lines only can produce,
large frames set firmly upon strong bone, freedom of
action and their very good covering of soft wool, with a
light, firm tip.
In the Wimmera district near Stawell the Polwarths
cut heavier fleeces than at their headquarters, the breed-
ing ewes and hoggets at Willaring (part of old Carrs
Plains Station) cutting 11 lbs. at the 1928 shearing.
The annual clip from Eeyeuk is sold at Geelong, and
invariably returns a most satisfactory price per lb. all
round. It is of 60’s to SB’s spinning quality, and as a
result of half a century’s in and in breeding naturally
runs very true. Both the flock and the stud sheep have
been raised to the highest degree of excellence by a strict
policy of culling and expert classing, and it is only to be
expected that the property has been improved thoroughly
to correspond with the breeding methods in force. I here
are, for instance, over twenty splendid plantations of
shelter belts, with more coming along year by year, whilst
throughout the twenty-three or so well-fenced sub-
divisions there is a great supply of water from sub-
artesian bores, wells and windmills, in addition to a
few natural watercourses. The water is typical of the
Western District, being slightly mineralised, but some
is fresh enough for the domestic supply. Strangely
enough the northern part of the run is nearly all brackish,
while the water to the south is drinkable.
Eeyeuk possesses a very fine type of station buildings,
amongst which is a spacious stone woolshed erected in
1867, and containing eight stands, the shearing being
FOUR-MONTHS-OLD STUD POLWARTH LAMBS
EEYE U K, VI CTO R J A


AGED POLWARTH RAMS OF THE POLLED TYPE
A QUARTETTE OF YOUNG POLWARTH EWES
EEyE U K, VICT O R IA


done by hand. The homestead is a square built stone
residence of two storeys, constructed in 1875, roomy and
comfortable, and tbe borne at present of Mr. Alexander
Dennis and members of his family. The installation of
electric light and other necessary conveniences has been
carried out in recent years, and, standing in three acres of
grounds, in which there is a great wealth of ornamental
the Wimmera district. He went to Carrs’ Plains until
Eeyeuk was purchased, and has made the latter place
bis home ever since, rearing a family of five sons and
two daughters there. He was educated at the Geelong
Grammar School under Dean Vance in 1856-1859, and
after that at Scotch College under Dr. Morrison. His
wife was a daughter of the late Air. James Fairbairn,
SOME TWO-YEAR-OLD EWES AT EEYEUK
trees, palms and shrubberies, it is typical of many of the
earlier Western District homes, having an old world
charm all its own.
The Dennis family came from Cornwall, whence the
late Mr. Alexander Dennis and his two younger brothers,
John and William, sailed in the ship “John Bull” for
Australia in 1839. The master of the “John Bull” was
Captain Ormond, father of Francis Ormond, of Ormond
College, Melbourne University. Arriving in Victoria in
January 1840, the brothers took up Tarndwarncoort Sta-
tion, between Winchelsea and Colac, about 80 miles from
Melbourne, and were very successful in all they under-
took. When they set out from Colac in 1854 to take up
Carrs’ Plains the present owner of Eeyeuk accompanied his
uncles and father on horseback, and although only ten
years of age, saw the journey out rvith the enthusiasm
of youth, in which was inculcated an inherent love for
“The Bush,” an enthusiasm which never waned.
In 1861 John Dennis sold out his interests and went
to England, leaving William at Carrs’ Plains and Alex-
ander at Tarndwarncoort. Mr. Alex. Dennis, Jun.,
who was born at Tarndwarncoort on 26th March, 1844,
went with his uncle to the Old Country, and returned
the following year on the same boat as the late Mr.
James Richmond, of Haddon Rig, and John Wilson, of
of Scotland, whose brother, George Fairbairn, was a
pioneer pastoralist of Victoria.
In after years Mr. Dennis divided the property be-
tween members of the family, retaining the house and
part of the grounds for his own use. To-day at 85
years of age he is hale and hearty, and is riding the
same horse that he has ridden since 1907 —twenty-two
years! His time is spent in attending to the odd rabbits
and hares about the place, and during 1928 he bagged
over 200 of the latter. In his day Mr. Dennis was one
of the crack shots of the State, both with gun and rifle,
and was a lieutenant in the Mounted Rifles, which after-
wards became known as the Australian Light Horse. In
every way possible to him he has sponsored the welfare
of the district in which his interests have lain, and has
been always a great man for the progress of the wool
industry.
Of his sons, Mr. Richard Fairbairn Dennis and Mr.
William James Dennis are in partnership in Willaring
Station, near Stawell, which is placed in charge of a
manager, William residing near Colac and Richard at
Eeyeuk, while George Llewellyn Dennis, as stated be-
fore, has taken over Penrose Station. He and his
brothers take a very keen interest in all matters pertain-
ing to the woolgrowing industry.
EEYE U K, VICTORIA


MOUNT WILLIAM, WILLAURA, VICTORIA
The Property of Robert Barr-Smith, Esq.
JT OUNT WILLIAM STATION is essentially
|\ | a sheep and wool growing property, compris-
ing 15,330 acres freehold, and 1883 acres of
leased lands, its location being 9j miles from the town-
ship of Willaura, in the northern part of the Western
District of Victoria.
of the headquarters in ages gone by of one of the most
powerful tribes of aboriginals in Australia. It is be-
lieved from evidence still to he seen on the mountain
nearby, in the form of carvings and huge diorite quarries,
that these natives carried on an extensive stone implement
industry, and were highly cultured.
A VIEW ACROSS THE MOUNT
WILLIAM PADDOCKS ON
A CLOUDY MORNING
The present owner, Mr. Robert Barr-Smith, purchased
the run in 1919 from Mr. Wm. Philip, of Hamilton.
1 he property, which to-day carries a Hock of some 12,000
sheep, has an historic connection with the opening up of
this district, having been established as a sheep run in
April 1842, but furthermore it marks the neighbourhood
Mount William itself has a peak over 3800 ft. in
height on the southern end of the Grampians, west and
north-west of Ararat (the locality of the famous Deep
Lead Gold Mine, where 30,000 miners took the field),
and dominating the country from the Wannon Valley
to the River M urray to the north, and right to the coast


A MOB OF MAIDEN EWES ON MOUNT WILLIAM
on the south, being therefore of strategic value to the
blacks. Although Mr. Barr-Smith’s property lies a few
miles below Mount William, it takes its name there-
from, for originally the run extended to its foothills,
and to Willaura, with Alt. Elliott as an out-station.
Mount William Station was pioneered by the late
Thomas Chirnside, the head of a well-known family of
graziers in Victoria, who, with his brother Andrew, bred
up a valuable flock of Merino sheep under the subsequent
management of men such as Mr. Calder (1852), and
Air. G. C. Hescott. In its heyday over 100,000 sheep
were shorn for some 800 bales of wool, and over 50 hand
shearers and shed hands were employed. Many of the
improvements were so substantial that their use by the
present owner has called for comparatively little alter-
ation. In the seventies the run was leased to Andrew
Chirnside’s two sons, Andrew and Robert (of Carran-
ballac), eventually passing to Air. Philip, and to the
present occupant, undergoing a decrease in acreage from
time to time.
The property as it is to-day is composed mostly of
dense red gum country, with a gentle undulating for-
mation, the ground sloping in the centre of the run to
a large swamp, which contains a beautiful lagoon. Around
this portion are magnificent open plains, where grows a
sward of natural grasses through any normal summer,
giving sound and healthy grazing pastures. In the tim-
bered areas the soil improves enormously after it has been
put to the plough and cultivated, and the owner is fol-
lowing a systematic policy of clearing, breaking up the
ground, and sowing down English grasses and clovers.
Excellent results in this direction have been obtained
with subterranean clover, by allowing it to grow unin-
terrupted through the first summer, and trusting to a
normal autumn to establish a stand of permanent feed.
Once it survives the autumn period between February
and M ay, the worth of this clover on the red gum country
is inestimable.
There is an annual rainfall of 22 ins., which is fairly
regular, due no doubt to the proximity of the Sierra
Ranges ten miles distant, and which, snow clad in winter,
loom up as a picturesque background of rugged beauty.
MOUNT WILLIAM , VICTORIA


A VIEW OF THE GRAMPIAN
RANGES FROM MOUNT
WILLIAM STATION
MO UN T WI LLIA M, VI CTO R I A


MUSTERING ON MOUNT
WILLIAM STATION
MOU N T WILLI AM, V ICT OR IA


A VIEW SHOWING THE OPEN TO
LIGHTLY-TIMBERED COUNTRY COM-
PRISING MOUNT WILLIAM STATION
MOUN T WI LLIA M. VICT 0 R I A


THE ARCADED FRONT
VERANDAH OF THE HOMESTEAD
RENOVATED BY MR. BARR-SMITH
71 /()U N T WI LLI AM. VICT() R I A


THE MOUNT WILLIAM HOMESTEAD AND GARDEN
MOUNT WILLIAM, VICTORIA


These ranges also influence a number of good creeks
(with dams) and watercourses, which, in addition to the
lagoon and several surface tanks, water the run. A lot
of the creeks, including Mount William Creek, are silted
up as a result of gold mining activities, and even to-day
the work of diggers impedes their natural flow except in
a good season, whilst another effect of this is the presence
of sludgy, alluvial country, which lends itself to pasture
improvement. The north of the run is very thick, and
lighter, and the owner has achieved wonders where he
has tackled clearing in these parts. During 1927, 1928,
and 1929 more than 2000 acres were ploughed up, whilst
dead timber is being cleared and burned off continually.
There can be but one result of this, and that is a heavier
carrying capacity.
Destroyed by fire in the 60’s, the old home was re-
placed in 1886 by the present homestead, which has been
altered considerably by Mr. Barr-Smith, and brought
thoroughly up-to-date. It is built of stone, and stands
in attractive grounds in which is a fine cement tennis
court, as well as pretty gardens. A little way off are the
men’s huts, built of concrete, and the stone wool shed,
which has been up since 1865. The latter has 10 stands
of machines and a steam engine, good lighting, a slate
roof, and a particularly efficient set of yards, the utility
of which is increased by a curved, battened ramp for the
sheep.
April is the lambing month, whilst shearing commences
in October. The sheep are plain bodied, and of excellent
type, fairly large in frame, with barrels well sprung,
deeply set, and well carried on strong legs. Open faces,
and the signs of stout constitutions, are their main char-
acteristics, while they are particularly notable for their
evenness and uniformity. Special mention may be made
of a line of 2000 maiden ewes seen early last autumn,
with about four weeks to go before lambing; they were
indeed a credit to the management, the Barunah Plains
type being pronounced throughout to a marked degree,
with splendid backs and underline. 4he present blood
has been worked in since 1922, prior to which Nareeb
Nareeb rams were employed.
So far the shearings have returned an average of about
10 lbs. per head from the grown sheep, and lbs. from
the lambs. The wool is described by buyers as bright,
with an excellently nourished tip, staple about four inches,
well grown and full of character, and with an elasticity
that is ideal for spinning. It fills the hand very well,
and is recognised as a leading clip.
The cattle at Mount William are restricted to about
400 head of Herefords, which seem to do much better
MAIDEN EWES
MOUN T WIL LIA M, VICT 0 R IA


MOUNT WILLIAM WOOLSHED
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE MOUNT WILLIAM COUNTRY WITH THE GRAMPIANS IN THE BACKGROUND
MOUN T WILLI AM, VI CTO R I A


MOUNT WILLIAM CREEK
RUNNING THROUGH THE
STATION PADDOCKS
MOUNT WILLI AM, VI CTO R I A


there than Shorthorns, owing to the cold winter climate
and the natural surroundings.
1 he eldest son of Mr. T. E. Barr-Smith, whose name,
together with that of his family, is linked with the
earliest establishment of the Merino wool growing in-
dustry of South Australia, and especially with the pro-
gress of the well-known organisation of Elder, Smith and
Co. Limited, the owner of Mount William was born at
A SUNNY CORNER IN
THE NORTH VERANDAH
OF THE HOMESTEAD
ANOTHER ASPECT OF
THE WOODSHED ON
MOUNT WILLIAM
Mitcham, South Australia, in 1893. During a visit to
England in 1914, he accepted a commission in the Ist
Life Guards, and saw active service on the Western
1 ront for the next four years, thereupon returning to
Australia, and shortly afterwards entering upon his pre-
sent ownership of Mount William Station. In 1920 he
married a daughter of Mr. J. A. Seeck, and of this mar-
riage there are two sons.
MOUNT WILLIAM. VICTORIA


THE VIEW FROM THE
ENTRANCE HALL
MOUN T WIL LIA M, VICTORIA


STONELEIGH, BEAUFORT, VICTORIA
The Property of The Stoneleigh Estate
OWNED conjointly by Messrs. Philip, Robert,
Charles and Miss E. Lewis, members of the
family of one of the most highly esteemed pioneer
settlers of the Western District of Victoria, the late Mr.
William Lewis, Stoneleigh Station is an outstanding fine
wool property, and the home of an exceptionally well-
bred flock of pure Merino sheep.
It is situated about 100 miles from Melbourne, with
tremely difficult to plough this country, which is suitable
wholly for grazing purposes, hence the cultivation of it
is restricted to a few picked spots. There are 310 acres
at present devoted to oats, which are threshed and stored
in bins against the emergency year, whilst 70 acres are
under plantations. Sufficient shelter is afforded to the
stock, however, by the natural hollows behind the rises,
and few, if any, are the deaths amongst young sheep from
THE FRONT OF THE STONELEIGH HOMESTEAD
The centre portion, built in 1856, is the original cottage lived in by the late William Lends before he
was married. The stone part in front was built in 1864, and that at the back was added in 1876.
the homestead, which is near the centre of the run, lying
'° miles from the town of Beaufort and 16 miles
from Skipton, and is surrounded by Mawallok, Challi-
cum, \ alla-y-Poora, Blythevale, St. Enochs, Mooramong
and Buln Gherin Stations.
Stoneleigh has an area of 12,100 acres freehold, made
up of volcanic stony rises, which are rich in the native
grasses peculiar to the district, and is timbered sparsely
' : ‘h lightwood, honeysuckle, and a few gums. It is cx-
exposure. Neither are the sheep affected by disease of
any kind.
Droughts of a serious nature are practically unknown,
for the rainfall is regular, ranging from about 16 to over
30 in. in a year, the worst year of recent times being
1914, when 16 in. fell, and the best year being 1924,
w hen the registration was 32.13 in. The average is
about 22 in. per annum. The climate is perfect for the
stock, despite the gales which sweep in from the west at


THE SOURCE OF THE WARRAPINGO FRESH WATER SPRING
THE ENTRANCE DRIVE TO STONELEIGH HOMESTEAD
STOXE L E I G 11. V ICT OKI A


Top —A MOB OF WETHERS. Centre — ONE-YEAR-OLD EWES. Below — FOUR-TOOTH SALE RAMS
THE STONELEIGH MERINO FLOCK.
STONE L E I G 11, VIC T () RI A


A VIEW OF THE LAKE AT STONELEIGH
odd times. It was perhaps due to the open, non-pictures-
que landscape, with its draping of rocks and scattered
timber, that this type of country was passed over by the
earlier selectors, to whom no doubt it seemed to be too
monotonous and uninviting, and it was not until 1842
that the first owner pitched his tent near the Warrapingo
spring of fresh water, and formed a sheep run there. He
was Mr. Thomas Vickery, and the site of his original
camping place is marked to-day by a clump of trees.
In 1844 he sold out to Mr. Duncan Cooper, who dis-
posed of the property in 1854 to the late Mr. William
Lewis, the size of the run in that year being 14,000
acres. Convinced of the value of the volcanic soil for
fattening as well as grazing purposes, Mr. Lewis en-
larged Warrapingo (as it was known at first) by the
addition in due course of some 4600 acres from Messrs.
Adams’ St. Enochs Station, and about 1200 acres of
Eurambeen, and except for a brief visit to England in
1859, continued to own and live at Stoneleigh until his
death on the 27th August, 1900, six years after the de-
cease of his wife, whose companionship was a big factor
in inspiring in him the highest ideals of home life and
of citizenship.
During those 46 years he paid conscientious attention
to the development of the property, and besides improving
it very completely, under an energetic and progressive
policy, he established a Merino flock that became well
known throughout Victoria and South Australia, both
the fat sheep and the fine quality of wool grown return-
ing high prices. In other parts of the world also was
his product known, for his readiness to uphold the pres-
tige of Victorian wool led him to exhibit fleeces from the
Stoneleigh flocks at London, Paris, Amsterdam and
Chicago, where he won many certificates and medals.
The wool gained awards also at Melbourne and Ade-
laide.
Upon the death of Mr. Lewis the estate was held in
trust for his six sons and one daughter, and was wound
up after 28 years on the 31st December, 1928, when the
present partnership was formed. From 1904 until he
purchased a part of Stoneleigh and established a place
of his own, which he named Warrapingo, in 1918, the
run was managed by Mr. Charles Lewis, one of the sons,
and from 1918 to 1922 by Mr. Ivan Hay. In 1922
.S’ T 0 N E LEI GH, VI C T OKI A


the management of Stoneleigh was entrusted to Mr.
Hugh McCallum, a son of Mr. A. McCallum, who
was for many years the manager and studmaster at Mt.
Hesse, and the present efficiency of the property is a
tribute to his zeal and capacity. Amongst the appoint-
ments are 48 subdivisions, 9 mills, 33 dams, 21 miles of
wire netting, 43 miles of wire fencing, and 10 miles of
stone walls, the construction of the latter standing as a
monument to the skill and practicability of the early
flockmasters. Such wonderful workmanship as is seen
in these old walls, both in Victoria and elsewhere, be-
longs essentially to a past age.
The late Mr. Lewis laid down a very able policy of
draining his country, and a feature of the improvements
is a square slab tunnel, 400 ft. in length, which runs
under the Beaufort-Streatham road and drains about 800
acres. Altogether some 1500 acres have been drained
and sweetened, for which purpose there are 8 miles of
channels on the run at present.
The woolshed, built in the fifties, lies a quarter of a
mile from the homestead, and contains 12 stands of ma-
chines, worked by a petrol engine. It is equipped to
cope with a speedy shearing, which takes place at the end
of each September. Following this the sheep are dipped
in an arsenical solution, and no ticks have been seen for
several years. The men’s quarters and other structures
are neat and orderly, and of no mean importance are
the main gates. These are worked by ropes on the yard-
arm vertical lift and side drop principle, and do not
seem to go out of order like so many other kinds of patent
gates. The idea is said to have originated at Dhurringal
with Mr. Winter in the seventies.
In connection with the water supply it is of interest
that the paddocks are independent of the spring water,
which contains plenty of lime and is excellent for drink-
ing purposes. This is allowed to run into a huge storage
dam near the house, and is pumped up to the domestic
tanks for household and garden use by means of a double
hydraulic ram, as well as an oil engine.
The homestead is one of the most comfortable places
in the country. Originally it was a little cottage of
weatherboard, with a flat iron roof, and through it is the
present main entrance to the stone house erected by Mr.
Lewis in 1864. This was enlarged in 1876 by the addi-
tion of a two-storied wing at the rear, and no alterations
having been made since, apart from the installation of
sewerage, a hot and cold water service, and minor im-
provements, the ivy-covered homestead retains an old-
world charm. It stands in lovely grounds, through
which flows the spring, whose glades are shaded by im-
mense weeping willow trees, while a forest of vegetation
runs riot around the spring head and dam. Flowers
and fruit grow in profusion in the rambling garden, with
its shrubberies, hedges and walks, all of which are tended'
with affectionate care.
The Stoneleigh flock is, of course, pure Merino, the
MERINO EWES AND LAMBS AT STONELEIGH
STO N E LEI GH. VICT O R IA


THE FRONT OF
THE HOUSE
THE EASTERN
CORNER
THE LAWN IN
FRONT OF
THE HOUSE
VIEWS OF THE STONELEIGH HOMESTEAD
.S’ TONE L E I G 11. VICTORIA


THE STONELEIGH GARDEN PHOTOGRAPHED IN THE EARLY SPRING
STONEL E I G H, VICT O R IA


Studs
Flocks
General
Aver-
Aver-
Young
Aver-
aged.
O/
aged.
°/
Ewes.
<y
age.
°/
1923 . .
/o
■ • 86^
/o
80
/o
771
/o
81
1924 . .
. . 87|
88|
844
871
1925 . .
. . 93^
944
89}
93
1926 . .
. . 87|
88|
84i
87i
1927 . .
. . 87
834
82“
84i
1928 ..
. . 93
86|
82i
88i
STONELEIGH STUD EWES
wool being typical of the fine quality foi which Western
Victoria is famed. It runs in spinning count from 64 s
to 70’s, and approximately 13,000 to 14,000 head of
sheep and lambs are shorn annually. Lambing takes
place from March to April, beginning with the studs
first. An early lambing is favoured because the seasons
are fairly certain, and naturally this helps on the young
stock. That it is successful, too, is seen from the returns
for the past few seasons, which make interesting read-
ing, viz.:—
There were 3043 flock ewes and 800 stud ew es in
1923, but at present, 1930, there are about 700 stud ewes
STUD MERINO RAMS AT STONELEIGH
STO N E LEI C 11. VICT 0 R I A


THE DRIVE THROUGH THE SHRUBBERY,
APPROACHING THE HOMESTEAD
.S’ TONE L E I G 11, VICT 0 R I A


THE WOOLSHED AND YARDS
and about 2700 flock breeding ewes, and the owners and
management aim to carry on the improvement of the
type of sheep which has been bred at Stoneleigh for the
past 60 years. This is a large, well-shaped animal of
hard\ constitution, beautifully woolled on top and
underneath, while throughout the flock as well as the
stud evenness and uniformity are outstanding features.
The sheep are characteristic of the best type of Merino
bred in the State, and owe their origin as a flock to
selections of sheep from leading breeders in the early
days. In 1870 the late Mr. Lewis formed a stud from
the station ewes and rams from Ercildoune, with later
on a ram from Borriyalloak, the latter being named
Crown Prince, and a noted sire. In 1889 the high-
THE STABLES AND OTHER OUTBUILDINGS
STON E L E I GH, VI CTO R I A


priced ram Wellington was introduced from Messrs.
Gatenby’s celebrated stud in Tasmania, and for the next
few years the stud was built up on Tasmanian blood.
By means of strict classing and culling the flock was
raised to a high standard, and in 1915 it was deemed ex-
pedient to form a fresh stud for the purpose of breeding
rams for sale. Mr. Frank Beggs, of St. Marnocks.
accordingly laid the foundation of the present stud by
selecting the best of the ewes on the station (which
had absorbed the old
stud flock), and mating
them with Eurambeen
rams, bred by the Hon.
Theodore Beggs. He also
attended to the classing.
After his death the work
was done by Mr. W.
McKay, of Carngham,
until 1925, when the pre-
sent manager took charge
of the work. The most
recent additions were a
150-guinea ram in 1924
from Eurambeen, and a
150-guinea sire from
Carngham in 1928. The
breeding policy is sound
and progressive, and about
100 flock and selected
rams are turned oft the
property annually at good
figures. Buyers of Stone-
leigh rams invariably rea-
lise high prices at the sales
for their wool.
In past years many
prizes have been gained
with the sheep, as well as
with the wool, and the
brand, WL/Stoneleigh, is
one of the best known in
the Geelong market. The
wool is bright, clean, well
grown, and full of substance, and a feature is its classing,
care being taken to separate the pieces and bellies that
contain grass seed, with the result that 26d. and other
good prices have been paid for pieces.
Apart from the sale of fat sheep, the station’s earning
capacity is illustrated by the following statistics, which are
a brief summary of operations for the past few seasons:—
1921-22—grown sheep cut 7 lbs. 9.6 ozs. Lambs
cut 3 lbs. 6.1 ozs. Average price, 19.6 d. per
lb. all round, or £25 11s. Id. per bale.
1923-2-1 —grown sheep cut 6 lbs. 11 ozs. Lambs
cut 2 lbs. 9.2 ozs. Average price, 27.25 d. per
lb. This was a good year and the wool beauti-
fully fine and free, and returned £37 18s. per
bale for 234 bales.
1925-26—grown sheep cut 7 lbs. 12 ozs. Lambs
cut 2 lbs. 14.9 ozs. Average price, 21.9 d. per
lb., or £2B 19s. sd. per bale.
1926- —grown sheep
cut 6 lbs. 15 ozs.
Lambs cut 2 lbs.
6.3 ozs. Average
price, 22.5 d. per
lb., or £29 2s. Bd.
per bale. The
shearing count was
13,440 head.
1927- —grown sheep
cut 9 lbs. 7.5 ozs.
Lambs cut 3 lbs.
10.5 ozs., the aver-
age for 10,587
sheep and 2819
lambs being 8 lbs.
4 ozs. per head all
round. Very satis-
factory prices were
realised on a low
market, the top
price being 33d.
and the average
26.1 d. per lb.
In addition to the
splendid Merino flocks on
Stoneleigh there is a small
herd of purebred Short-
horns, including about 50
head of breeders. These
cattle are noted in the
Ballarat market, where
fats have sold up to £32
per head.
The late Mr. Lewis came from Boglily, Fifeshire,
Scotland, where he was born in 1825. He arrived in
Australia in 1846, and gained his first station knowledge
whilst with his uncle, Mr. William Russell, in Tas-
mania, the latter gentleman and his two brothers, George
and Philip Russell, becoming celebrities in the sheep
world of Australia later on. When Messrs. Russell and
Simpson leased Mt. Cole Station from the Campbells in
the early fifties Mr. Lewis received the post of manager,
THE LATE MR. WILLIAM LEWIS
STONEL E I G IE V I CTORI A


THE MEN'S QUARTERS
AT STONELEIGH
and when the term was up he accepted the management
of the properties owned by the Clyde Company, of which
George Russell was the chief representative. These
runs included Golf Hill, Terrinallum, and a big area
of country along the Moorabool and Leigh Rivers.
In the face of difficulties such as the terrible bush fires
which swept the countryside on that “Black Thursday”
of the early fifties, and the outbreak of the gold diggings,
which took away most of the labour from the district, Mr.
Lewis displayed the qualities of a born flockmaster, and
was very successful for the Clyde Company.
Some time after launching out for himself in Stone-
leigh he bought a share in Elderslie Station, near Apsley,
Vic., but sold out to concentrate upon making Stoneleigh
his magnum opus, and a home for his family. His life was
wrapped up in the affairs not only of his run, but of his
district as a whole, and his advice and pocket were ever
ready for any good cause. In him the Presbyterian
Church had a strong supporter, whilst charitable causes
knew him for an unostentatious benefactor. He was
loved by his employees, in whom he took a keen interest.
At the age of 22 he was appointed a Justice of the Peace
by Governor Latrobe, and represented West Riding in
the Ripon Shire Council for over 25 years, often being
the president of this body, and when health forced him
to retire in 1895 he received an illuminated address from
the ratepayers, and his eldest son, George Lewis, was
elected unopposed to the vacancy. His death at the
age of 75 closed a successful career, and removed one of
the grandest types of country gentlemen, tall, handsome
and courteous, a generous host, and a loyal father, be-
loved by all whose privilege it was to know him.
The eldest son, George, managed Mawallok Station for
Mr. Philip Russell, and afterwards disposed of his in-
terests in Stoneleigh to buy Yaccamunda Station, on the
Maroona-Gheringhap line, where he died on 23rd
November, 1915.
Alec Lewis, who entered the service of Dalgety and Co.
Limited, died in February 1911, and of the four surviving
sons, Charles was manager of Stoneleigh, and now lives at
Warrapingo, miles away, with his wife and family of
one daughter, Robert Russell Lewis and Philip Lewis
and Miss Lewis making Stoneleigh their home. The re-
maining brother, Air. Henry Lewis, a solicitor, has no
interest in the estate, which is carried on by the four
partners mentioned.
SToNE L E I G 11. VIC T ORIA


COLIBAN PARK, ELPHINSTONE, VICTORIA
The Property of Messrs. A. and J. Barber
COLIBAN PARK is one of the comparatively few
first-class holdings devoted to the production of
fine Merino wool, and is owned by Messrs.
Anthony and John Barber. Comprising an area of
about 12,000 acres freehold, upon which are shorn an
average of 12,000 sheep and lambs, in addition to carry-
ing a registered stud of Hereford cattle, the property is
situated 70 miles north of Melbourne, and 16 miles be-
For many years this property has been a factor in up-
holding the prestige of Victorian wools, possessing, as it
does, one of the oldest stud flocks of pure Merino sheep
in the State, whilst historically it is linked with the
earliest settlement, having been formed in 1837 by Alex-
ander Fullerton Mollison, within two years of the foun-
dation of Port Phillip.
Mollison was confronted with many setbacks on his
THE NORTH-EAST CORNER OF COLIBAN PARK HOMESTEAD
yond Kyneton. The homestead is nine miles from
Elphinstone, through which the splendid Calder High-
way passes on its way from Bendigo to Melbourne, the
latter being reached from Coliban Park in two hours by
car. It is thus a convenient situation for a pastoral home,
while many years of hard toil have moulded the heavily-
timbered hills and vales, amid which the run was chosen,
into parklands of delightful beauty.
pioneering trek from the Murrumbidgee early in 1837,
his plant consisting of 20 horses, 600 head of cattle, and
5000 sheep (put together at 255. to 31s. 6d. per head).
The winter was spent at Bontharambo (near Wan-
garatta), at that time occupied by Geo. Faithfull, and
since then by the Docker family, and an official grazing
licence was issued in January 1838 for 25,000 acres of
the lands by the Coliban River. Mollison held the run


STUD HEREFORD
COWS AND CALVES
AT COLIBAN PARK


ONE OF THE BULLS IN THE COLIBAN
PARK HEREFORD STUD MYALL GLEN
GARRY, AT TWO YEARS OLD
CO LI BAN PARK. VICTORIA


FOUR-TOOTH SALE RAMS BRED BY MESSRS. A. AND J. BARBER
for ten years, enlarging it to an area extending approxi-
mately from M acedon’s foothills to the vicinity of Kyne-
ton, Malmsbury, and Redesdale, with Castlemaine to the
north-west. During that time John and Henry Adair
Orr held leases of part of Coliban, as it was called, and
in May of 1848 Mollison signed a transfer to James
Orr, who held a licence' for part of the lands on the
run, now Stratford Lodge, as early as 1839. In October
1852 another section of the run was held by Barfold,
who subdivided it into Barfold and Lower Coliban, the
latter being held in the fifties by James, Edward and
John Orr. This period coincided with the gold rushes
and with the submission of Crown lands to auction, and
when Coliban, like so many other valuable runs, faced
extinction, about 13,000 acres were bought by William
Degraves, and improved in due course into the nucleus
of the present holding.
The first improvements to be erected were a brick
homestead, a granite woolshed, post and rail boundary
and other fencing, and timbered sheep and stock yards,
stables and outbuildings. After thirteen years Mr. De-
graves put the property in charge of Mr. Robert Oliver,
to whom is due much credit for laying the foundations
of the present stud flock. Upon the death of William
Degraves the estate was worked by his brothers, Charles
and John, and at the death of the latter, in accordance
with his will, the property and all its flock were offered
for sale. They were purchased in 1886 by the late Mr.
W. H. D avidson, who held and developed them for the
next thirty-one years. In 1917 the executors of his
FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAMS IN THE COLIBAN PARK FINE WOOL MERINO FLOCK
COLI B A N PAR K. VI CTO R I A


STUD MERINO RAM BALDWIN
estate sold out to the late Mr. Anthony Barber, who
handed over the land and stock to his two sons, the pre-
sent owners, in 1926.
The holding embraced 15,300 acres in 1917. In 1925
the area was reduced by the sale of 4100 acres, but was
subsequently brought up to its present size by the purchase
of other blocks. Excluding some soft flats, the run is of
granite formation, with a hard surface soil, growing a
luxuriance of native grasses and clover, shaded by lovely
widespreading red gum and box trees. Influencing these
pastures is a 25-in. annual rainfall, and an altitude of
1000 ft. Not only do the natural conditions make it a
safe, sound run, but also they render it suitable in every
way to grow fine wool and to breed vigorous rams for
other centres.
Under the present able management the run is being
divided into compact and easily-worked areas indispen-
sable for stud purposes. Rabbits have been completely
eradicated, and every part of the run is netted securely
against them, much of the fencing having concrete posts,
which in their neatness and efficiency indicate the general
thoroughness of the working of the whole place.
Rounding the property on the east is the Coliban River,
and other excellent water is provided permanently by
springs and several surface tanks. There is also a large
concrete dam, which was built by the present owners
in 1927-28. It is a gravity section overshot weir pro-
vided with a 3-ft. pipe through the base for scouring
purposes during the winter. The foundation is of solid
granite, which also forms a natural apron on the down
stream side. Its capacity is about 9,000,000 gallons.
From this source water is gravitated through about a
COLT BA N PAR K. VI C T ORTA


A VIEW OF COLIBAN PARK
HOMESTEAD AND GARDEN
FROM THE LAKE
quarter of a mile of piping to the homestead, and further
to the woolshed and surrounding paddocks. With such
an acquisition as this reservoir it is only natural that the
fullest possible advantage will be taken of it as time
advances. In many other directions the improvements
are of an enterprising character.
I he homestead stands in a rambling garden beside an
ornamental lake, around which are graceful poplars and
large pine trees. Approached by an avenue of conifers,
the house is the original one built in the sixties, but it
has been brought thoroughly up to date with modern
conveniences, and an exceptionally fine electric generating
plant supplying current for light and power has been
installed. The stables, garage, outbuildings, men’s
quarters, See., are all connected to the power house; the
woolshed will also be connected in the near future. Both
Mr. Anthony and Air. John Barber, especially the latter,
have a flair for practical mechanics, and this is reflected
in many of the station improvements, as much as possible
being done with electric power.
In the woolshed are twelve stands of Wolselev ma-
chines, the shearing commencing in September for the
special studs and the general shearing beginning in
October. Young sheep thrive exceptionally well on Coli-
ban Park, growing out into healthy, bulky-framed
animals in a way that challenges the oft-heard belief that
fine-woolled sheep must necessarily be small framed.
1 he Hock is Tasmanian in origin, and has remained
1 asmanian in type, though generation after generation
having been bred under different conditions slightly dif-
ferent characteristics have been developed. In the pro-
cess of building up the flock to its present standard there
has been very little assistance from climatic outcrossing,
but at the same time a heavy elimination of undesirables,
the objective being a uniformly even robust type of frame
and an even covering.
'The history of the Coliban Park sheep dates back to
the earliest days. In 1869 Air. Oliver weeded out the
Hock which Mr. Degraves had established ten years
earlier in 1859, with the purchase of the whole of the
4-tooth ewes offered at the dispersal of the famous Alt.
Ait ken stud flock. 1 hese Alt. Aitken sheep were re-
C()L1 B A N PAR K. VI CT() R I A


THE GARDEN AT COLIBAN PARK


garded as the pinnacle of Merino breeding of those days,
and were joined with Rambouillet rams specially selected
from the Emperor’s flock in France by Mr. C. P. Davis,
of Mt. Camel (a nephew of Mr. Degraves), in 1858.
Only these sires and their progeny were used for the next
eleven years, 1859 to 1869, by which time such close in-
breeding demanded a change. Accordingly Mr. Oliver
classed the whole flock very carefully, and only about
1500 of the progeny of the Mt. Aitken ewes found their
way into the foundation of the present flock, the balance
being disposed of. To those that were kept were added
a line of 900 ewes out of
a lot bred by Frederick
Wolseley and depastured
at William Degraves’ Too-
ringabby Station, N.S.W.
They were the progeny of
rams imported by Mr.
Caldwell, of Cobran, from
Adolph Steiger, of Lente-
witz, Saxony, and of Cob-
ran ewes. No other ewes
have ever been added to the
flock from outside.
In reforming the stud in
1869-70 most of the Ram-
bouillet type rams were dis-
carded and replaced with
ten selected stud rams from
Jas. Gibson, of Belle Vue,
Tasmania. This strain
was adhered to until 1886,
when the new owner, Mr.
Davidson, continuing the
stud along the same lines,
introduced the stud rams
W.G. No. 19, Royal Duke,
Chief, and Chancellor
from Wm. Gibson, of
Scone, Tasmania, in 1886,
1889, 1892, and 1896 re-
spectively. In 1899 he
formed a No. 1 and a No. 2 stud flock, and in 1901 pur-
chased the stud ram Winton from John Taylor, Winton,
Tasmania. These were the only outside rams used by
the Davidsons.
A year after the late Mr. Barber took possession he
purchased stud rams from Philip Russell, of Carngham,
and from Theodore Beggs, of Eurambeen, and joined
them with a certain type of ewe. These rams were used
for three years, by which time it was considered that they
had served their purpose, and in 1922 Tasmanian rams
of the same foundation as previously used were purchased,
being two from Winton, six from Belle Vue, two from
Bengeo, and one from Rhodes, all these rams being of
the same strain.
In 1923 two more Winton rams were purchased; then
in 1927, after the present owners acquired the stud, they
introduced Young Nationalist, a proved sire, from Belle
Vue, and in the following year they obtained a 4-tooth
ram, J.T. 751, from Winton. This ram cut 25 lbs. of
wool the following year. From Young Nationalist 31
lbs. were shorn in 1927 and 26 lbs. in 1928. This year
(1931) the Belle Vue-bred ram Baldwin was purchased
from John Taylor, of Win-
ton. Baldwin was bought
by him at the Belle
Vue dispersal sale in 1928,
and has proved a splendid
sire at Winton, one of his
get obtaining the champion-
ship at the 1931 Campbell
Town Show.
It wi 11 be seen then that
the Coliban Park stud has
been bred uninterruptedly
from a splendid foundation
for well over sixty years, a
fact that should commend
itself to flockmasters who
desire true fine-woolled
rams for stud or flock pur-
poses. There are many
indisputable cases to show
that the fine wool Merino
can be bred into a heavy
cutter of choice payable
wool when run on the right
class of country under cor-
rect and skilful manage-
ment. The time has
never been more opportune
for the production of the
finer staple, as was pointed
out in an article on the
subject in the December 1930 issue of The Pastoral
Review, and it can well be repeated that even where con-
ditions are wholly against the production of fine to super-
fine wools, the use of good fine-woolled rams would be of
great benefit to the grower.
1 he Coliban Park sheep are under the care of Mr.
Anthony Barber, whose methods insure a highly attrac-
tive standai d in the sheep, and an equally rigid care in
the classing and preparation of the wool clip for sale, his
principles being governed by the law that quality controls
the return from the property.
STUD HEREFORD BULL, GOLF HILL ROYAL BROCADE
CO LI BAN PARK. VICTORIA


THE CONCRETE
WEIR AT
COLIBAN PARK
Below—
A VIEW OF THE
LAKE ABOVE
THE WEIR


YEARLING HEREFORD HEIFERS
STUD MERINO EWES SIX WEEKS OFF SHEARS
STUD MERINO EWES AND LAMBS
COLI B A N I> AR K. VIC TOR I A


THE WOOLSHED AND OUTBUILDINGS
The average cut per head, excluding lambs, from 1908
to 1929 has been over lbs., the highest being 10 lbs. 14
ozs., and the lowest 7 lbs. When considering these
figures the proportion of breeding ewes carried must be
taken into account. Elsually more than 50 per cent, of
the sheep shorn are ewes and lambs, and latterly no dry
sheep over 6-tooth have been retained. The finest lines
of wool are up to 80’s count, bulk 70’s being the best
description of the clip in the past; however, the aim is a
bulk 74’s clip, provided frame and cut can be main-
tained.
The Coliban Park clip has realised at auction for
many years prices well up with all the leading clips,
having regard to the market level ruling at the time of
the sale. The 1930 clip averaged over 17d. per lb. for all
fleece wool, and the whole clip (locks, lambs, &c., in-
cluded) averaged the relatively high figure of 13.07 d.
per lb. Compare this with the average of 8.3 d. for the
whole Australian clip.
Numerous prizes were taken in the early days with
wool from Coliban Park. At Messrs. Hastings Cun-
ningham and Co.’s Wool Exhibition at Melbourne in
1865 the prizes for the most valuable 60
fleeces of washed ewes’ wool were won
as follows:—Coliban Park, Ist; Ercil-
doune, 2nd; Terrinallum, 3rd.
In addition to the stud flock, the pro-
perty runs 250 to 300 head of cattle,
including a stud herd of Herefords.
i his has been bred up on Beattie and
Golf Hill blood by Mr. John Barber.
Ihe stud was founded in 1919 on
Beattie blood, and in 1929 ten stud cows
with calves at foot by Royal Ringer and
local 1 ewkesbury were purchased from
Golf Hill. Bulls used in the stud have
been Baron Eclipse, by Broadward
Eclipse (imp.) ; Gisborne Propeller, by
Hansel Propeller (imp.) ; Metro Silver
Eight, by Perton Conqueror (imp.) ;
Golf Hill Royal Brocade, by Royal
Ringer; and in 1931 Myall Glen Garry
was purchased at Sydney by auction. He
is by Myall Sensation, the 1927 Sydney
champion. Although Shorthorns were
tried by the late Mr. Barber, he found
the Herefords better suited to the dry
autumn months, and his sons notv have
a herd from which some excellent bulls
are sold regularly.
The late Mr. Anthony Barber was
born at Warrnambool (Victoria) in
1857, and died at Coliban Park in Sep-
tember 1929 at-the age of 72. His
father was George Barber, who mi-
grated to Victoria as a young man in
the forties as a solicitor and an en-
gineer. H e came from the north of
England, where his family, which is
still represented on the land there, held
estates from the Duke of Northumber-
land. Seeing no prospects at that
time in the engineering profession he turned to the law,
and eventually built up a successful practice at Port
Fairy, and later in Warrnambool. He married Miss
M eara, daughter of a Tasmanian pioneer, and there was
a family of two sons, one of whom died in early man-
hood, and two daughters, who reside at Warrnambool.
The late Mr. Anthony Barber declined to study for
law, and took up pastoral life instead. His first three
years of experience were gained with John Taylor at
Woodford, Victoria, after which he managed Wallangoon
for the estate of the late Mr. Anthony Mackenzie, and
also about this time bought Larpent Park, near Colac
(3000 acres) in partnership with Randolph Howe. Next
he managed Springwood and Kanawalla for the Trustees
of the late Mr. W. C. Mercer, during which time he
purchased Glendenning, near Balmoral. Eventually he
crowned a successful career in 1917 with the acquisition
of Coliban Park.
Esteemed by all with whom he came into contact, the
late Air. Barber was an outstanding personality, known
for his progressive spirit towards the pastoral industry,
his tolerance, and his great kindness. He was married
THE ENTRANCE TO COLIBAN PARK
CO LI HAN PARK. VICTORIA


educated privately, and studied sheep husbandry under
their father, whom they accompanied on all his trips.
Each entered into the work at Coliban Park possessed of
a keen practical outlook, the former brother having made
a close study of fine wools during two years of association
with the late Mr. E. P. Carter, of Goldsbrough, Mort
and Co. Limited, to whom he attributes his knowledge
of fine wool, and also studied market requirements during
a visit to England in 1924.
Mr. John Ba rber has concentrated upon the cattle,
and is a member of the Hereford Society. He has made
a hobby of mechanical and electrical engineering, which,
as already mentioned, is expressed in many ways on the
station, and also is an enthusiastic motorist, having won
numerous trophies in road trials and contests run by the
R.A.C. of Victoria.
SHOWING THE FLEECE OF THE STUD RAM BALDWIN
SILO FOR GRAIN STORAGE
twice, there being only one child, a son, George, by the
first marriage. He resides in Warrnambool, not having
taken up pastoral pursuits. In 1899 the late Mr. Barber
married Margaret, daughter of the late Mr. John Robert-
son, of Skene, near Hamilton, Victoria. Mrs. Barber’s
grandfather, James Robertson, who came from Ballater,
near Balmoral, Scotland, arrived in Victoria in 1840 in
the ‘‘John Bull” with his three sons, James, John, and
Thomas, and with several relatives who made the jour-
ney at the same time, he becoming a well-known pioneer
of the Western District. The late Mr. John Robertson
owned, in addition to Skene, Yarram Yarram, Victoria
Valley, and other properties.
The late Mr. Barber’s second family comprises one
daughter, Charlotte, and two sons, Anthony and John,
the present owners of Coliban Park. Both were
THE SCOURING PIPE THROUGH THE WEIR
CO LI BAN PARK, VICTORIA


ALLANVALE, GREAT WESTERN, VICTORIA
The Property of the Estate of the late Mr. William Kilpatrick
\ LLANVALE SI ATI ON, which is owned by the
Estate of the late Mr. William Kilpatrick, and
is the home of Mr. W. A. Kilpatrick and his
family, is situated on the border of the Wimmera and the
Western Districts of Victoria, near the town of Great
Most of this district was occupied by the pioneers or
their managers in the early forties. That romantic per-
sonality, Benjamin Boyd, was at Ledcourt in June 1842;
P. D. Rose in March 1843 was at Rosebrook; H. N.
Simson at Glenisla (June 1843) ; J. M. Darlot and A.
A DISTANT VIEW OF ALLANVALE HOUSE TAKEN FROM A NEIGHBOURING HILL
V\ estern, and about 9 miles from the important centre
o* Ararat, Melbourne being 127 miles distant. Both the
Cueat Western highway and the interstate railway run
through Ararat, following more or less the trail blazed
by Joseph Howden on his overland expedition to Ade-
laide via “Ballaarate,” in 1838, and a year later by the
thirty-niners” during their quest for new grazing coun-
try.
McLachlan at Brighton (July 1843); McPherson and
Taylor in February 1844 at Longerenong; whilst the
Creswicks, Donalds, and Martin Stranahan had brought
their flocks up the Richardson River. Rich Avon, on
the Avon, was taken up by James Horsfall in February
1845. Up to the year 1846 the Portl and Bay district
embraced the country now known as the Wimmera, tak-
ing in the Marnoo and Wimmera Plains, the lands north


VIEWS OF THE COUNTRY ON ALLANVALE
ALLANVALE. VICTORIA


of the Glenelg, See., and at that time the Scotts were at
Warracknabeal, both sides of Yarriambiak Creek, the
Wilsons at Walmer and Vectis, and Messrs. Alexander
Ayrey, James R. Darnell, and Henry Nicoll at War-
ranooke, this place lying to the north of Allanvale, be-
tween the Wimmera and Richardson Rivers. On the
east of Warranooke was Carrs Plains, taken up in March
D 45 by George Rutherford and Andrew Russell. Join-
ing into Allanvale on the west was Lexington.
Allanvale was taken up in 1841 by William Wooton
Blow, later of Pentland Hills, for Mr. John Sinclair,
who was a trader and merchant at Clairville, near Laun-
ceston, Tasmania, and a member of the Port Phillip
Association. It was then known as Sinclair’s run. In
1 43 John Allan, second son of George Allan, of Allan-
vale, near Launceston, set out with a number of sheep
from Geelong for the district so favourably spoken of by
THE HOMESTEAD DAM
WITH A CAPACITY OF
4 MILLION GALLONS
Mr. Sinclair, and passing through the Manifold’s country
at Purrumbete, followed the Hopkins River to its head,
where he crossed the Divide and reached the source of
Concongella Creek directly opposite, on the southern
portion of Sinclair’s run, which stretched northwards for
about thirty miles. He named the placed Allan Vale,
and settled there with his wife, Eliza, second daughter
of Captain Lipson, R.N., whom he had married at Ade-
laide on 29th February, 1840. John Allan had not
exercised squatting rights for long before the inevitable
disputes of those days over boundaries occurred. His
conflict with Sinclair went to arbitration in 1844, with
the result that Allan Vale was allotted to John Sinclair,
and the northern portion of the run named Cuncungella
(later known as Cuncongella, and finally as Concongella)
was awarded to Mr. Allan. On the 15th March, 1845,
the death occurred of Mrs. Allan, aged 26, followed four
ALLANVALE, VICTORIA


THE WELL-APPOINTED
TENNIS COURT
THE LILY POND
ALLANVALE GARDEN
ALLANV A L E. VICT 0 R I A


VIEW OF THE
HOUSE FROM THE
ROSE GARDEN
THE DRIVE
UP TO THE
FRONT PORCH
ALLANVALE HOMESTEAD
ALLANVALE, VI CTO R I A


VIEWS OF ALLANVALE GARDEN
ALLANV A L E, VICTORIA


weeks later by the death of her newly born child, Eliza
Anne Lipson Allan. Both were interred in the Lexing-
ton Gardens, near Ararat, being one of the first burials
of a white woman in these parts. After this tragic
sequel to his pioneering efforts Mr. Allan departed from
the district, and in 1846 the run went to the Bank of
Australasia, for which D. C. Macarthur was manager. In
July 1847 Concongella was leased to Dr. John Blundell.
It had about 60,000 acres, and embraced Glenwyllan,
which later was owned by Mrs. Anne Greene, also the
owner of Woodlands, near Melbourne. Dr. Blundell
was associated with her in both these properties. The
pre-emptive right of Concongella was taken out by John
THE MAIN
ENTRANCE TO
ALLANVALE HOUSE
Blundell in 1853, and five years later the run was trans-
ferred to Frederick Gonnerman Dalgety and Charles Ib-
botson, and eventually passed to other hands.
Allan Vale, which continued to be known also as
Sinclair’s run, was held in the name of John Sinclair
until 1854, and its area was 80,000 acres. In September
1854 the grazing license was purchased by John Arm-
strong, the official transfer bearing the names John Sin-
clair and John Armstrong. The latter was residing at
Allan Vale with his wife in 1853, and was related to Wil-
liam Armstrong, of Hexham Park, who also resided there
in some capacity from 1845-7. John Armstrong, after
whom a railway siding has been named between Ararat
THE SOUTH VERANDAH
ALLANV A L E, VI CTO RIA


A GOOD VIEW OF ALLANVALE COUNTRY LOOKING TOWARDS THE GRAMPIANS
and Great Western, died about the end of 1856, and in
February of 1857 George Ewbank took over the property,
and the official documents show that he took out the
pre-emptive right to a block of 640 acres as late
as 1860.
The ’fifties will go down in history as one of the most
trying periods of pastoral development, especially in this
district, for in addition to the thousands of miners who
flocked to the goldfields, the landowners were harassed
by the action of the authorities in throwing open certain
areas of land for selection, without survey, by all and
sundry at £1 per acre on terms, a step that was taken
in spite of almost universal advice to the contrary by
graziers, who were called before the Commission to ex-
press their views. This Act aimed in good faith to en-
courage those who contemplated the establishment of a
home, and to protect their improvements and buildings,
and otherwise to improve the social and moral conditions
of the district as a whole. Under the regulations license
holders could obtain a block not exceeding one square
mile, with grazing rights over certain lands adjoining.
But the system led to abuses, and disorganised many of
the old runs that were of greatest importance to the
woolgrowing industry, forcing some landowners to ruin,
and others to buy out the selectors in order to preserve
their flocks on adequate areas of the country which they
were developing. North and south of Allanvale the
selections were in uniform 640-acre blocks, but on Allan-
vale they varied from a few acres to the maximum. Al-
though Mr. Ewbank did not remain many years, it is of
interest to note that his station brand “E” for the sheep
became one of the best known in the district, and is still
in use by the present owner.
In December of ’62 Allanvale was acquired by S. J.
Davidson, the area at that time being 44,000 acres, carry-
ing half that many sheep, and in July 1876 the lease and
ALLAN V A L E, VI CTO R I A


ALLANVALE WOOLSHED WITH CONCRETE YARDS
freehold blocks were held by Samuel Williamson, man-
ager of the National Bank at Stawell Reefs. In this
ownership the name of Joseph Clarke, financier, also ap-
pears.
Mr. Andrew Scott, jun., of Warracknabeal, later of
\ uulong, Scotsburn, Victoria, leased Allanvale from the
late Mr. Samuel Williamson from May 1883 to May
1890, the area at that time being about 8000 acres freehold,
with fairly large tracts of Crown lands adjacent. These
leased areas, which took in a lot of the rough hills, were
never considered first class for grazing, and no doubt this
w T as the reason why so much of Allanvale and other runs in
THE SHEEP PENS CONSTRUCTED OF REINFORCED CONCRETE
ALLAN V A L E. VICT 0 R IA


the neighbourhood were selected in odd-size blocks. This
assortment of blocks passed into the hands of the Colonial
Bank in the early ’nineties, and about eight or nine
thousand acres of the freehold, constituting the nucleus
of Allanvale to-day, were sold by the bank in 1902 to
the late Mr. William Kilpatrick at less than 40s. per
acre, including stock. The run, which had been
neglected, was improved, enlarged and consolidated into
a successful property as time went on, specialising in the
production of fine wool from a purebred Merino flock.
Except for a period whilst on active service at the war,
the management of Allanvale has been carried on per-
sonally by Mr. W. A. Kilpatrick, eldest son of the late
Mr. William Kilpatrick.
The property now has an area of over 16,000 acres,
and is exceptionally well improved and managed. It is
made up of a mixture of basalt, slate and granite country,
undulating in character, with an annual rainfall of about
23 ins., and is covered beautifully with perennial grasses
and trefoil chiefly, with various other clovers and herbs
in the season. Combined with an attractive lot of tim-
ber these indicated to the late Mr. Kilpatrick the presence
of sound country underneath, and so it has proved under
constant, progressive care, for the pastures are essentially
adapted for growing healthy, vigorous sheep, and a class
of wool of fine quality that has come to be known as
one of the truest types of fine Merino wool produced in
the State of Victoria. The annual clip from Allanvale
has sold frequently at prices amongst the highest of the
sales conducted by Messrs. Goldsbrough, Mort and Co.
Limited, whose reports show that buyers commend the
wool for its high scouring yield, and generally as a clip
that can be relied upon for unusually careful preparation
for use by the manufacturers. The owners have concen-
trated upon the production of big even lines of 66’s to
70’s spinning quality, the type best suited to the condi-
tions at Allanvale, and aim continually at the maximum
return per head of sheep. In fact it is recognised as one
of the most valuable clips in the State from a grower s
point of view. The wool is described as clean, bulky,
long stapled and of delightful handle and character,
which, combined with the satisfactory prices obtained for
it, is the most gratifying result of the skill which has
been directed towards the development of the run.
During the past 29 years, which is the longest un-
broken period of ownership in the property’s history,
many thousands of pounds have been expended on im-
provements under a policy of modern progressive man-
agement. The superfluous timber has been thinned out,
rabbits have been exterminated completely from the run,
about 70 miles of vermin-proof boundaries and subdivi-
sional fencing erected, an efficient water supply laid down,
and buildings renovated and constructed, &c.
The run has a number of good springs, and is inter-
sected by several creeks, the permanence of the water
supply for the stock being ensured by additional excavated
tanks. For domestic use the supply is drawn from a
large dam built in the fold of a hill, whence the water
gravitates also to the dip, wool shed and gardens. The
wool shed contains eight stands and was comparatively
new in 1902. It was one of the first in the Western
District to use machines, but blades were not dispensed
FOUR-TOOTH FLOCK MERINO EWES AND LAMBS
ALLA NVA L E, VIC TOR I A


with entirely at first owing to the difficulty of obtaining
good men who understood machines. In the replanning
of the wool shed and its equipment, concrete has been
used to pave the yards, to minimise dust, and in the con-
struction of the new counting out pens, &c., whilst else-
where this excellent building material is conspicuous.
Concrete, indeed, marks another step forward in modern
station management, and is taking the place of timber
in every practicable direction, as surely as motor transport
superseded the horse. It certainly is an important fea-
ture in the excellence of the permanent improvements on
Allanvale, from troughing and fence posts up to the
beautiful homestead. The latter reposes in well shel-
tered, prettily laid out lawns, shrubberies and gardens,
and is one of the most attractive homes in the district,
having been completed in 1921 in place of the former
dwelling, which was destroyed by fire two years earlier.
Allanvale is divided into eight netted blocks embracing
over 40 paddocks, in some of which artificial grasses have
been planted and top-dressed. There are no noxious
weeds on this country and hardly any roughage or scrub,
hence the pastures are easily worked, and they are also
free from disease of any kind. No extensive cropping
has been done for some years, but where an occasional
crop is put in for station use the results are excellent, a
recent paddock of oats having yielded 72 bushels to the
acre.
Having been bred up carefully for many years on first
class blood, and classed and culled with an eye to unifor-
mity both in type and quality throughout the whole of
the flock, the sheep on Allanvale are a sound constitu-
tioned, fairly large, plain-bodied type of Alerino, and
PHOENIX CANARIENSIS PALM
THE LATE MR. WILLIAM KILPATRICK
are heavy cutters, despite the fact that the flock contains
a big percentage of ewes and weaners. This satisfactory
standard has been reached only through patience and
prudent management, with the right class of sheep to
work on, and is maintained with rams bred on the pro-
perty from a stud flock which for many years was at-
tended by the late Mr. Arthur D. Wigan, an
expert of the highest calibre and the late stud-
master of the well-known Murgha stud. Since
his death in 1929 the Allanvale stud has been
bred by Mr. W. A. Kilpatrick with the assistance
of a son of the late Mr. Wigan.
I he late Air. William Kilpatrick was born on
25th May, 1856, at his parents’ estate at White
Hall of Martenham, Coylton, Ayrshire, Scot-
land. With his imagination and enthusiasm
stirred by the accounts of Australia, he made up
his mind to go there and try his luck, and arrived
in Victoria by the ship “Loch Tay” in 1874
whilst still in his teens. He was without the
assistance of letters of introduction, and on ar-
rival set out in the train for Echuca, in which
he met a fellow passenger, Mr. Lachlan McKean,
who was returning to his Woorooma and Win-
douran runs, near Deniliquin. Air. Mcßean
ALLAN V A LE, VIC TOR I A


SOME OF THE HOMESTEAD OUTBUILDINGS
offered the young man employment, and for the next nine
years Mr. Kilpatrick remained with him, gaining ex-
perience in all branches of station management. In 1882
he married Christina, the daughter of Mr. Alexander
Mcßean, brother of the owner of Woorooma, and the
owner of Baldon Station, Kapunda, S.A., and in 1884
was offered and accepted the management of Barratta
Station for the late Mr. Henry Ricketson. In all he
undertook he displayed unusual ability, and soon became
an authority on all classes of stock, taking a keen in-
terest, especially in horses, breeding some very good sorts,
which won many races at open and picnic meetings.
His grip on pastoral matters earned for him in due
course the management of the whole of the properties
owned by the late Mr. Ricketson, including Aratula,
Gannon’s Farm, Upper Moira, Barratta and Cornalla,
where he made his home, and in addition he acquired
for himself Allanvale, Tammit and Euston Stations, the
latter being a large wool-growing run west of Balranald.
When the Ricketson estates were sold in 1915 he pur-
chased a share in Cornalla, which, however, was disposed
of after his death on 16th December, 1916. His widow
resides with one of her daughters at Coylton, St. Kilda-
road, Melbourne.
Mr. William Alexander Kilpatrick was born at Bar-
ratta on 10th November, 1884, and was educated at
Haileybury College, Brighton, Melbourne, upon leaving
which he spent three years at Cornalla before entering in
1905 upon his successful career of management of Allan-
vale, in which to-day he is part-owner with his brother
on behalf of the estate. He served at the war with the
1 Ith Battery, 2nd Division of the Australian Field Ar-
tillery from 1915 to 1919, attaining the rank of lieu-
tenant, and his wife, Helen Miller, who is a daughter
of the late Mr. G. C. Forbes, of Burrumbeep Station,
Maroona, Victoria, went to England, when he moved
to France after some months in Egypt, and returned
with him at the end of 1919. Their family consists of
two sons, William Robert and lan Forbes Kilpatrick.
In 1920 Mr. W. A. Kilpatrick and his brother, Mr.
Lachlan Mcßean Kilpatrick, purchased Moroco West
Station, near Deniliquin, in partnership with the late
Mr. R. J. Fairbairn, and at Mr. Fairbairn’s death two
years later the brothers acquired his interests, thus be-
coming sole owners of that first class run, where Mr. L.
M. Kilpatrick made his home. Messrs. W. A. and L.
M. Kilpatrick also are joint trustees in their late father’s
Euston Station.
ALL ANVA L E, VICE OKI A


DELATITE, MANSFIELD, VICTORIA
The Property of Robert Geoffrey Ritchie, Esq.
ONE of the prettiest station properties in Victoria is
to be found in the 8000-acre freehold woolgrow-
ing run embraced by Delatite, owned by Mr.
Robert Geoffrey Ritchie, a son of the late Mr. Geoffrey
Ritchie, its situation being in a natural basin of uplifted
valleys, framed by hills and mountains in the mid-central
part of the State, 9 miles from Mansfield, and 130 miles
from Melbourne. To the west lie the Strathbogie
first commenced to trek out from the settlements on
Hobson’s Bay in the thirties of last century, for it was
not until the forties that squatting rights were exercised
around Mansfield. The country that now comprises that
part of Delatite situated on the north bank of the Delatite
River, and which was known as Loyala, was taken up
by Watson and Hunter in 1840, and purchased by Dr.
Rowe in 1846. Dr. Rowe subsequently sold Loyala to
THE NORTH SIDE OF DELATITE HOMESTEAD
Ranges, the haunt of gangs of outlaws in the old days,
whilst within 20 miles to the east the country rolls into
the foothills of the Australian Alps, with Mt. Buller
(6000 ft.), Mt. Howitt (about 6000 ft.), and Mt.
Feathertop (6200 ft.), all of which are snow clad in
winter months, forming a sharp, ragged skyline.
Perhaps because of these formidable barriers this graz-
lng district was given a wide berth by the pioneers, who
M essrs. Chenery Bros, and Goodman, and then bought
Mt. Battery, in the same district. The estimated area
of Loyala, according to the Port Phillip “Gazette” of
1847, was 30,000 acres. The original Delatite. on the
south side of the river was first occupied in 1840 by
Mr. Waugh, whose servants were murdered by the
blacks. Then came Bosworth, Curlewis, and Chenery
and Goodman, the date of these partners taking pos-


WISTARIA ON THE HOMESTEAD VERANDAH
THE LAWN ON THE EASTERN SLOPE
DE L A TIT E, VICT O R IA


A VIEW OF DELATITE HOMESTEAD AS SEEN FROM THE TENNIS COURT
session being about 1846. Eventually Delatite was
purchased, in the nineties, by the late Henry Ricketson,
who used it at certain seasons of the year to fatten store
bullocks purchased and overlanded from Queensland, and
from the trustees of his estate the property in 1904 passed
into the possession of a partnership consisting of the late
Geoffrey Ritchie, C. B. Palmer, and Arthur Staughton,
the two latter being bought out later on by Air. Ritchie,
who employed the run almost exclusively for crossbred
wool growing, up to the time of his death in 1923. By
exercising his option to purchase the property when he
reached the age of 25 vears, his son became the owner
in 1927.
Made up of hilly and undulating country, with an
average rainfall of 29 in. per annum, though a phenomenal
season occurred in 1928, when 40 in. fell from January
to October, the conditions generally on Delatite are un-
satisfactory for Merino sheep, but for the type of come-
back Merino and Lincoln-Merino crossbred sheep that
constitutes the flock to-day, the environment is ideal, the
run having a capacity of over one sheep to the acre, be-
sides the ability to fatten several hundred head of cattle
every year.
1 he land is not very well covered with natural trees,
the timber seeming to have dried off or been rung gradu-
ally over past years, but nevertheless a good many of
the original red gum and box trees have remained, and
wherever necessary the owner has laid out plantations of
sugar gums, pines and willows for shelter and shade pur-
poses throughout the 23 paddocks into which Delatite is
subdivided. Around these the boundaries are wire-netted,
and rabbits kept down by the simple expedient of digging
them out annually.
In this and other directions the run is very well im-
proved, and is made even more valuable on account of
the excellence of its water supply, for in addition to the
Mansfield scheme intersecting most of the paddocks, and
a number of permanent creeks with dams, and some
sub-artesian bores of a depth of from 150 to 180 ft., the
Delatite River swings right across the property on its
way to the Goulburn. This river is wide and deep in
many places, and has its head behind Mt. Buffer, whence
big volumes of melted snow are carried down in the
spring of the year, flooding its low banks freely. As a
DE L A TIT E, VICT O R I A


A GARDEN PATH
LEADING TO
THE RIVER
A VIEW FROM THE HOME-
STEAD ACROSS THE RIVER
FLATS TO THE HILLS
DELATITE RIVER
BELOW THE
HOMESTEAD
I) EL A T 1 TE, VICT() R I A


CROSSBRED EWES WITH SHROPSHIRE CROSS LAMBS AT FOOT. HEREFORD STORE BULLOCKS ON THE RIVER FLATS
SOME OF THE STOCK ON DELATITE
DE L A TIT E, V I CTORIA


A PATH LEADING UP
FROM DELATITE RIVER
TO THE HOMESTEAD
DE L A TIT E, VIC TOR I A


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE
BEAUTIFUL GARDEN,
WHICH SO ADDS TO THE
CHARM OF DELATITE
DE L A TIT E, VICT O El A


A VIEW OF
THE STABLES
AT DELATITE
result of the silt deposited there are some beautiful graz-
ing flats along its course, and full use is made of these
by the management, although their cultivation with
lucerne has not yet engaged Mr. Ritchie’s serious atten-
tion, principally on account of the rich feed already
produced there by the rains and soakage, and the annual
floods. In all fencing improvements and replacements in
the course of construction nothing but heavily reinforced
concrete posts are used. Also concrete is used for all
tanks and troughing.
On parts of the country there is a wonderful growth
of subterranean clover, especially upon the rocky crests
of the hills. This fodder plant has indeed come into its
own on Delatite, for since it crept in about fifteen years
ago it has forced its way already over numerous sections,
and looks as though it will spread right through the older
feed. The owner holds subterranean clover in high re-
gard, and is fostering a more intense growth with super-
phosphate, the results so far being successful. Natural
grasses and other kinds of clovers also come along in pro-
fusion with the seasons, the soil being classified as red
over the hills, white loam in parts away from the water-
courses, and black country on the flats.
Lambing takes place in June, and marking in August,
the returns for many years panning out at over 80 per
cent., showing that the run is good breeding country for
the class of sheep carried. Shearing commences at the
end of October in the old Delatite shed, which has the
THE ENTRANCE
GATE TO THE
HOMESTEAD
DK L A TIT E, VI C TORI A


CROSSBRED HOGGETS IN ONE OF THE OPEN PADDOCKS
reputation of being one of the first sheds of machines in
Victoria, being situated within a mile of the homestead,
and containing eight stands of machines to-day, together
with the usual complement of yards and buildings, which
are all of solid and efficient construction and well main-
tained. The appointments all through, as already indi-
cated, have been carried out with an eye to thorough-
ness, but the heavy expense has been justified by the con-
sequent ease with which the property is worked.
A policy is maintained of joining crossbred sheep with
Lincoln rams, and the flock is based largely upon the
historic Lincolns bred by Mr. R. A. D. Hood at Mer-
rang, Hexham, Victoria. These are well known for
their breeding and quality, and much of the all round
high standard that has been developed in the Delatite
flocks is due to them and their descendants, through the
stud of Lincolns formed by the late Mr. Ritchie in 1904.
This was a small but select flock built up from stud
Lincoln ewes bought from Mr. Hood, and a few obtained
from Mr. Skene, and from time to time replenished by
additions of stud ewes from Merrang, and maintained by
regular introductions of Merrang and other high class
stud Lincoln rams. For many years nothing but pure
Lincolns was run at Delatite, and the present flocks con-
tain a good deal of the original blood. This breed, of
course, is a very hardy type of longwool, especially suited
to conditions such as those prevailing on this property,
and in building up the wool clip of the present day the
owner is working on lines favoured by his father, draw-
ing upon the noted Eurambeen Merino stud for lines of
good quality ten guinea rams for use in the general flock
of crossbred sheep that superseded the pure Lincolns.
The size of the flock to-day is between 8000 and 9000
head, and of these about one-half are comebacks, and the
rest crossbreds. About 100 purebred Lincoln ewes have
been retained from the old stud for breeding ram re-
DE L A TIT E, VICT O R I A


quirements, the sire at the top of the stud at present
being a splendid masculine type of ram bred by Mr.
Leishman, of Climes, this sheep having taken first prize
and champion in 1926 at the Melbourne Royal.
Mr. Ritchie has expert assistance in classing the sheep,
as well as insisting upon a thorough culling, with the
result that the clip each year ranges from to 10 lbs.
per head.
From the 8500 sheep and lambs that were shorn in
1928 the output was 246 bales, representing an average
of 10 lbs. per head for the grown sheep and the lambs
combined. The returns from 3700 ewes were 11.4 lbs.
net, from the hoggets 9 lbs., wethers 12 lbs., and from
the lambs 3 lbs. per head. It was an exceptional season,
and produced over 60 bales more than 1927. The top
lines of comebacks, which in 1927 topped the series of
sales in Geelong, realised 25d. per lb. at the 1928 sales,
and considering that the highest price paid for comeback
wool at Geelong for that year was per lb., it will
be seen that the Delatite wool is well to the fore in this
section of the trade. In other years prices have been
just as satisfactory, comeback fleeces in 1923-24 returning
38d., 1924-25 23d., 1925-26 24d., 1926-27 per
lb. The clip is described as approximately a quarter-bred
wool of excellent quality and handle, and under present
conditions the owner is making an attractive return per
acre from his property, which when all is said and done
is the true test of a station’s value, and can only be
brought about by correct and progressive improvements
and good management.
About 1000 fat lambs are turned off annually by mating
Shropshire rams with crossbred ewes and running on
supered country. 900 lambs were sold in the paddock
in 1928 at 235., and the 1929 drop averaged 21s. in the
paddock. The Southdown ram is now being tried in
addition to the Shropshire. The Delatite wethers sold
as 4 and 6 tooths command top prices in the Melbourne
market.
MR. R. G. RITCHIE'S RESIDENCE AT DELATITE
DEL A TIT E, VICTORIA


THE DRIVE TO THE HOMESTEAD
VIEW OF THE OWNER’S COTTAGE FROM THE HOMESTEAD GARDEN
DE L A TIT E, VICTORIA


DELATITE WOOLSHED
Mr. Ritchie finds that the rich fiats and other pasturage
will fatten about 600 head of cattle a year, and favours
the Shorthorn and the Hereford breeds, and a cross of
these cattle. Mansfield provides a convenient trucking
centre, and the drafts that are sent in to the markets
sell very well, as high as £24 per head being paid for
fat bullocks turned off Delatite in 1928. There are also
about 20 blood mares on the property, with the stallion
King’s Treasure (Comedy King-Independence). The
progeny are sold to Indian buyers and a certain number
used as station hacks.
Surrounding the homestead, which is the home of the
widow of the late Mr. Geoffrey Ritchie, are well kept
trees and shrubs, broken by sweeps of wide lawns and
flower gardens. This beautiful place has numerous nooks
and walks, shrubberies and arbors, and a fine lawn tennis
court, and when all is green and blooming it is a picture.
The house is large and well fitted out, and stands amid
the trees a little way up from the river, which skirts the
lower end of the gardens, and, incidentally, affords splen-
did trout fishing. Across the river, beside two old Lom-
bardy poplars, is the new homestead built by the present
owner.
The late Mr. Geoffrey Ritchie was the son of John
Ritchie, who came out to Australia from England in
1837, amongst his fellow passengers being the well-known
Henty family, who were making their second voyage out
to Victoria. In due course Mr. John Ritchie took up a
sheep run named Boortcarra, near Port Fairy, where he
made a success of sheep and wool growing, and where
the father of the present owner was born in 1863. Ihe
late Mr. Geoffrey Ritchie and his two brothers became
engaged actively in the pastoral business and carried on
this property until 1900, -when the first named leased
Ballangeich, now owned by Mr. George Gordon. lis
widow is a daughter of Mr. J. W. M. Aitkin, and of
their family of two daughters and one son, the latter
was born at Warrnambool in 1902. He was educated
at the Geelong Church of England Grammar School,
upon leaving which he went to Delatite. In 1926 he
married Sylvia, the daughter of Mr. Rupert Greene, and
their family consists of one son.
DELAT IT E. VICTORIA


LANDSCAPE, TALLAROOK, VICTORIA
The Property of Gordon Knott, Esq.
LANDSCAPE is one of the most beautiful pastoral
homes and one of the choicest grazing and fatten-
ing properties to be found in the north central
district of Victoria. Acquired by the present owner, Mr.
Gordon Knott, on Ist January, 1929, it occupies a free-
hold area of approximately 3000 acres amidst undulating
hills and flats at the southern end of the Goulburn Valley,
2 4 miles east of Tallarook. The main interstate high-
way passes through this village 54 miles due north of
Melbourne, thus bringing the property within an easy
two hours’ drive of the southern capital.
The district, of which the adjacent town of Seymour
is the main centre, was discovered in 1820, about fifteen
years before Melbourne was founded, but it was not
until the early forties that settlement began there. Land-
scape is linked directly with the opening up of the pas-
toral industry of those parts, for it is the homestead block
of old Tallarook run, which the Jamieson brothers took
up and established in 1842, with cattle and Timor ponies
overlanded from Sydney. Their country extended for
miles along the river, embracing the pick of the well-
grassed and heavily-timbered pastures, and, in common
■with most other parts of Australia, it was not pioneered
without first overcoming the resistance of hostile natives.
Those wild, lonely times of less than ninety years ago
are to-day reflected in the remains of the original Tal-
STUD ROMNEY MARSH RAMS ON THE RICH RIVER FRONTAGE AT LANDSCAPE


CROSSBRED EWES ON LANDSCAPE
EWES AND FAT LAMBS
LAN DSC A PE, V I C T OKI A


VIEW OF LANDSCAPE
HOMESTEAD FROM
THE NORTH
FAT LAMBS REARED ON LANDSCAPE READY FOR THE MARKET
LANI) S C A PE. VICTORI A


larook homestead, which is built of quarried stone, with
massive beams, some of the rooms having slotted walls,
like a small fort, through which the settlers had to de-
fend themselves at first from the blacks, and later from
bushrangers. One of the haunts of notorious outlaws
during the “gold” period lay in the Strathbogie Ranges,
just east of Tallarook, whose homestead stood back over-
looking the old coach road to Melbourne, where it forded
the Goulburn River, but such is the present-day peace
and orderliness of such well-kept properties as Landscape
that one can scarcely believe it could ever have been
disturbed by such dangers.
Tallarook was sold to Sir Joseph Hordern in 1847,
who disposed of the lease a few years later to Mr.
RED POLL HEIFER, NORTH-
WOOD ZENA, ALSO PUR-
CHASED BY MR. KNOTT AT
THE 1930 MELBOURNE ROYAL
SHOW STUD CATTLE SALES
RED POLL BULL, NORTH-
WOOD DARBY, BOUGHT BY
MR. G. KNOTT, OF LAND-
SCAPE, AT THE 1930 MEL-
BOURNE ROYAL SHOW
STUD CATTLE SALES
Thomas Collier Brook. Ihe run progressed considerably
from then on. Mr. Brook built substantial shearing ap-
pointments (now the headquarters of Worrough Sta-
tion), and in 1862 erected the present homestead, at the
same time surrounding it with beautiful gardens that ran
down to the river, and with many different kinds of Eng-
lish trees, including some magnificent specimens of the
Bunyah, or “monkey puzzle,” which have since attained
a height of 80 ft. At the subdivisional sale of Tallarook
in 1867 the homestead block was purchased by Mr. James
McCormack, and named Landscape, and during the 62
years of this gentleman’s ownership the district progressed
at a steady rate, the main incidents in its history being
a devastating flood in the Goulburn in 1870, the open-
LAND S C A PE, VIC TOR I A


ng of the branch railway from Fallarook to Yea on
10th November, 1883, provision of a water supply for
leymour in 1895, the opening of a timber industry by
lessrs. G. W. Knott Pty. Limited on top of the Warri-
uls about 1900, a second big flood in 1916, a third, and
he worst, flood in 1920, and in 1925 the completion of
he Eildon Weir.
1 he country at Landscape is ideal for combining the
'reduction of good commercial wool with fat lamb rais-
:ig. Being a compact run it can be managed and
rorked economically, and being so close to the market
and red box chiefly, with rye, cocksfoot, danthonia, and
many varieties of clovers making up the natural pas-
turage, which responds quickly to the average rainfall of
27 in. per annum and holds on well all through the sea-
sons. Even in times of drought there is an abundance
of nutritious feed, whilst a number of springs and creeks
in addition to the river provide every one of the fourteen
paddocks with plenty of first-class water, surface tanks
being unnecessary.
One of the worst tasks that had to be tackled on
taking over was the eradication of rabbits from the hilly
TWO RED POLL YOUNGSTERS AT LANDSCAPE
the stock are always in prime condition when sold. Mr.
Knott took over about a thousand head of crossbred and
comeback ewes with the property in 1929, and with the
assistance of a resident manager laid down a progressive
policy of improvement to the whole of the paddocks, in-
volving heavy expenditure. The volcanic nature of this
district is enhanced in fattening value by the alluvial de-
posits which cover the deep, rich river flats, and Land-
scape is balanced by sweet slopes which intervene between
the frontages and the granite hills which complete the
holding. It is all very picturesque, the timber compris-
ing grey box, stringybark, redgum, blackbutt, messmate
sections of the run. On these steep parts it was noticed
that the young stock made very rapid progress, so that
when the vermin are cleared right out of the cracks and
crevices as a result of the unceasing trapping, blocking,
digging out, and fumigating that have been in hand for the
past two years the entire place will be extremely valu-
able, for there are no rabbits on the lower country, which
is strongly netted.
Mr. Knott has made a close study of the needs of fat
lamb raising, and concentrated from the first upon the
improvement of the natural pastures by means of top-
dressing with superphosphate as Avell as by introducing
LAND S G A PE, VICT O R IA


THE RICH
RIVER FLATS ON
LANDSCAPE
SHORTHORN
CATTLE ON ONE
OF THE FLATS
LAND S C A PE, V 1 C TOR I A


THE GOULBURN RIVER RUNNING A BANKER AT LANDSCAPE
English grasses and clovers. A great deal of the more
suitable ground has been ploughed up and prepared in
this way, giving extraordinarily successful results in
carrying capacity. Such methods are a sound invest-
ment, and fully repay the expenses in a greater return per
acre. The spring of 1930 showed these areas covered
with a dense mat of beautiful feed, one of the paddocks
being as smooth and as fine as any lawn. Upon a pad-
dock of 80 acres 94 per cent, of lambs were marked from
180 ewes, and it carried the sheep for eight months. The
country is cultivated and top-dressed heavily before being
thrown into pasture, and this policy goes hand in hand
with lucerne cultivation, and, in a smaller degree, the
cultivation of oats and wheat for station use. In the
latter respect it is interesting to note that from some of
the flats as much as 51 bushels of wheat to the acre has
been harvested.
Essentially a fat lamb raising property, Landscape is
stocked up with about 3500 head of sheep and lambs,
including ewes and dry sheep, about 60 head of cattle,
besides the necessary working horses, and in addition
there are running on the place a number of ponies which
are descended from the original 1 imor stock brought to
Tallarook 88 years ago. I hese hardy, thrifty, agile
ponies are most uncommon to-day in southern parts of
Australia, and it is both unique and interesting to find
such splendid pure representatives of the breed so close to
Melbourne.
There is also the nucleus of a first-class stud of Red
Poll cattle at Landscape. Mr. Knott laid the foundation
of this herd in October 1930 with the purchase of the
eleven months old bull Northwood Darby (A.A., vol. 6
H.B. of A.), the heifer Northwood Zena (A.A., vol.
6), and two other promising young heifers. All were
secured after the Melbourne Royal Show, at which the
above, except one of the younger heifers, were prize win-
ners.
Northwood Darby, calved 6th November, 1929, repre-
sents one of the most successful lines of this useful dual
purpose breed ever produced in England. He is a son of
Woodburn Liberal (several times champion at Melbourne
Royal), whose sire, Easton Liberator (12232), was im-
ported at a high figure by the Hon. T. H. Payne, of
Woodburn, Vic., from the well-known Easton Hall stud
herd in Suffolk, England. Easton Liberator’s dam was
Knepp Meadow Dell Ist, also brought by Mr. Payne to
Victoria, where he won many prizes with her. She was
an outstanding prize winner in England, and came from
LAND S C A PE, VIC TOR I A


the famous Knepp Castle stud at Horsham. I he dam
of Northwood Darby was Burnewang Phyllis, by Mar-
ham Prior, imp. (12372) ; 2nd dam Belmont Geyser, by
Acton Ajax (imp.) ; 3rd dam Gay Girl, by Laureate
(imp.); 4th dam Gay Lass (imp.).
Northwood Zena was calved 25th February, 1928, sire
Campaspe Count, by Honingham Astrologist (imp.) ex
Belmont Candour; dam Northwood Phyllis 2nd, by
Campaspe Count; 2nd dam Burnewang Phyllis, by Mar-
ham Prior (imp.) ; 3rd dam Belmont Geyser, by Acton
Ajax (imp.) ; 4th dam, Gay Girl, by Laureate (imp.) ;
sth dam Gay Lass (imp.).
The young heifers are daughters of Woodburn Liberal.
One is Northwood Phyllis 6th (A.A., vol. 6), calved Ist
October, 1929, ex Northwood Phyllis, by Campaspe
Count; 2nd dam Burnewang Phyllis, by Marham Prior
(imp.) ; 3rd dam Belmont Geyser, by Acton Ajax
(imp.); 4th dam Gay Girl, by Laureate (imp.); sth
dam Gay Lass (imp.). The other youngster is North-
wood Geyser 13th (A.A., vol. 6), calved 10th February,
1930, from Northwood Geyser 2nd, by Astronomy.
The Landscape Red Poll stud therefore has a sound
basis from a breeding point of view. Bred by Mr. A. G.
Hunter at Northwood Park, Seymour, each of the ani-
mals purchased by Mr. Knott is a worthy specimen of
this type of cattle, which is becoming increasingly popular
in many different districts where herd owners desire an
early maturing, compact, thrifty beast, with equally valu
able qualifications from a cream and butter producing
standpoint. Mr. Knott is applying the best principles or
breeding to his small but select stud, which has very
bright prospects of success.
As the sheep taken over with the property had been
bred to an even type by the previous owner, there has
been no trouble in maintaining them at a high standard.
All inferior animals are culled after the annual classing,
and the introduction of Romney Marsh and South-
down rams from leading stud flocks has been respon-
sible for a heavy output of fat lambs of excellent quality
as well as producing more wool. Both from the wet and
dry sheep the clip has a nice even quality and soft handle,
and is received at the sales in first-class condition. It is
this keen attention to a well-classed wool clip that offsets
the effect of a low market, for in the past two seasons
Mr. Knott has been rewarded with higher average re-
turns than those from the general run of crossbred and
comeback wools grown in the district. The output of
fat lambs has reached approximately 1000 head per sea-
son, which is a creditable performance, and the prices
received at Melbourne are further proof that it pays
A PART OF THE LANDSCAPE GARDEN
L A N DSC A PE, VICE O RIA


A PORTION OF
THE SOUTH-
EAST GARDEN
THE EASTERN
CORNER OF
LANDSCAPE
HOMESTEAD
L A NDS G A PE, VIC T 0 RIA


THE ORIGINAL OUTBUILDINGS, SHOWING STABLE OVER 100 YEARS OLD
THE ORIGINAL TALLAROOK HOMESTEAD
Note the loopholes used for defence purposes by the first settlers
LAND S C A rE, VI C T 0 R 1 A


THE DRAWING ROOM
THE ENTRANCE HALL
THE BILLIARD ROOM
MR. AND MRS. GORDON KNOTT’S HOME ON LANDSCAPE
LANDSCAPE. VICTORIA


MR. AND MRS. GORDON KNOTT
handsomely to spend money upon the improvement of
natural pastures in a scientific manner. Mr. Knott is
one of those men who are setting a splendid example in
this direction, for not only has an expensive programme
of improvements been put through at a time when econo-
mic conditions throughout the pastoral industry have per-
haps never been more discouraging, yet with enterprising
outlook he has set in train many further reforms cal-
culated to gain a maximum production from the pro-
perty.
As a home in the true sense of the word Landscape
meets every requirement. It has been remodelled since
1929, and contains about fifteen beautifully appointed
rooms, with hot and cold water laid on throughout the
house. An electric light and power plant of 110 volts
runs the cold storage, See., and there are septic tank and
other conveniences. Recreation is afforded by a large
billiard room, home cinematograph plant, tennis court,
and 9-hole golf course. The homestead, which rests in
pretty gardens amid old trees, overlooks charming views
of the flats and opposite hills and of a sweep of the river,
which cuts a corner of the run.
Mr. Gordon Knott is a native of Melbourne, where
he was born in 1902. He is the son of the late Mr. G.
W. Knott, a well known and successful member of Mel-
bourne commercial circles, and received his education at
the Geelong Grammar School, which has given the State
some of its ablest pastoral men. His hopes to settle on
the land were fulfilled when he made his start at Land-
scape after gaining experience on properties in New
South Wales and Victoria, and in the same year (1929)
he married Betty, the daughter of Mr. C. H. Ballantyne,
architect, of Melbourne.
Mr. Knott’s enthusiasm for the progressive develop-
ment of the property is noteworthy, inasmuch as it will
he to the present young generation of stockbreeders and
sheepmen that the great wool and meat industry of this
country must turn in due course for its leaders.
LAND S C A PE, VICT O R I A


MOROCO WEST, DENILIQUIN, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Messrs. W. A. and L. M. Kilpatrick
. /t OROCO West is the western half of old M oroco
Station, which, taken up in about 1843 by
M essrs. Redfern and Alexander, became one
o the best known of the great Riverina runs, having
; i area of some 50,000 acres in the early years of its
( velopment, with a frontage of eight miles to the River
urray on the south, and about the same frontage to
Tuppal Creek on its northern boundary a few miles dis-
rived in the district on the look-out for good cattle coun-
try, after riding over from the Monaro along the Mur-
ray; it appealed to them on account principally of the
excellent natural water supply, and they bought the run
for £24,000. The deposit put down in hard cash
amounted to £lO,OOO, and, of course, many thought that
the McLaurins had over-estimated the value of the dis-
trict, or had more money than sound judgment, especially
THE FRONT OF MOROCO WEST HOMESTEAD
tar . Tocurmval was the nearest town to the home-
ste !, 25 miles east, while Deniliquin was a little farther
av in the opposite direction.
- rom the original holders Moroco was acquired by
Me srs. Tootal and Glass, who held it for twelve months
bet e selling out to Mr. John Mooney. The run next
cha ed hands during the fifties, when the four brothers,
Rob. rt, James, Archibald and Alexander M cLaurin ar-
as other runs in the neighbourhood, such as Tuppal and
Deniliquin Stations, changed hands at about the same
time for £7OOO and £IO,OOO respectively on long terms.
Such, however, was the luck of the game in those days
that the newcomers experienced a splendid season right
away, and what was more fortunate, they had 1500 head
of cattle in forward condition ready for sale when the
news came through of a romantic rise in cattle values


MOROCO WEST WETHERS
FIRST PRIZE WINNERS
AT DENILIQUIN SHOW
Below —
EWES AND LAMBS IN THE
YARDS AT THE WOOLSHED
MOR O C O H ES T. NK JV S O UT II H r AL E S


A MOB OF EWES AND LAMBS IN ONE OF THE MOROCO WEST PADDOCKS
in Victoria, as a result of the gold boom, and before they
bad been in possession of Moroco twelve months they
bad disposed of the above stock at a price enabling them
to wipe off the outstanding debt of £14,000, and com-
mence the second year with a credit balance.
When this flourishing partnership was dissolved
Moroco was taken over by the late Alexander McLaurin,
wno built up a successful flock of Merino sheep, and
bred high-class Shorthorn cattle up to the time of his
death in 1871, after which the property was worked by
his trustees for seventeen years. In 1888 his sons,
Messrs. A. J. and R. W. McLaurin, became the owners,
dissolving their partnership in 1902, in which year
Moroco West Station was formed by R. W. McLaurin
as is share of the estate.
In 1914 the property was purchased by Mr. R. A.
Staughton, of Gunnible Station, N.S.W. From him the
run was taken over in 1920 by Messrs. William Alex-
ander Kilpatrick and Lachlan Mcßean Kilpatrick in
partnership with the late Mr. R. J. Fairbairn, of the
firm of L. A. Fairbairn and Co. Limited, whose in-
terests were acquired hy the Kilpatrick brothers after his
death in 1923. Moroco West is managed by Mr. L. M.
Kilpatrick for the partnership, and has been his home
since 1920. Air. W. A. Kilpatrick resides at Allanvale
Station north of Ararat, Victoria, in which both he and
his brother are trustees for their late father’s estate, as
well as being trustees for Fusion Station, a splendid
woolgrowing run developed by the late Mr. William Kil-
patrick west from Balranald in Riverina.
MOR O C 0 WE ST, NK W S O UT II WAL E S


A VIEW OF THE WOOLSHED AND QUARTERS
IN THE DRAFTING YARDS
MORO C O ME ST. \K W S()U T II M r AL E S


THE ENTRANCE PORCH TO THE MOROCO WEST HOMESTEAD
A CORNER OF THE GARDEN AND TENNIS COURT
MOR 0 C 0 WE ST, NE IE S 0 UT II W A EES


TWO VIEWS OF MRS. L. M. SPACIOUS DRAWING ROOM AT MOROCO WEST
MORO C O WE ST, NE IV SOU T H W A EES


THE PRESENT HOMESTEAD OF
MOROCO WEST WAS COMPLETED IN
1927. IT IS A ROOMY BUILDING OF THE
BUNGALOW TYPE, CONSTRUCTED
OF REINFORCED CONCRETE
MO R 0 C O WE ST, NE W S 0 UT II WAL E S


THE SHEARERS’ QUAR-
TERS SITUATED IN
PLEASANT SURROUNDINGS
There were no stock at all on Moroco West when it
was bought in 1920, nor were the improvements in an
effective state of repair. Practically the whole of the
run had to be reorganised thoroughly for the purpose of
making it a fattening proposition exclusively. Ihe
owners considered this to be the most profitable and most
easily worked avenue of production for the Moroco West
country, which lies along both sides of the Huilatale
Creek and Taylor’s Creek, with magnificent frontages
to the Tuppal Creek and the river Murray, and that they
showed keen judgment in going in for this activity in a
thorough manner is evidenced by the fact that the run
now turns off approximately 5000 fat lambs and a out
2000 wethers per annum, as well as one of the roost
valuable crossbred wool clips in the district, in add ion
to which as many as 1000 head of cattle have been ar-
ried according to the season.
The area is 16,642 acres freehold and about 7000 ; re?
of leased lands along the Murray flats, with an an ual
average rainfall of 17 in. There is an ample perma ent
supply of fresh water from the streams mentioned, md
only here and there has it been necessary to put down
MOR 0 C 0 WE ST, NE W SOU TII W A EES


A CORNER OF THE
SMOKING ROOM
THE COOL
DEEP VERANDAH
MOR O C O M ES T, NE W S 0 UT II IV AL E S


WHEAT CROP GROWN ON MOROCO WEST COUNTRY
surface tanks to ensure water close at hand in every
paddock, of which there are 27 on the freehold area and
several on the Murray frontages, each paddock being
fenced in a very strong manner and entirely free from
vermin.
Since 1920 Moroco West has been improved into one
of the heaviest carrying properties in Riverina to-day,
the safe capacity being calculated at a little more than
one sheep to the acre year in year out, exceeding this con-
siderably in good seasons. 1 his has not been accom-
plished without a great deal of hard cvork and the invest-
ment of capital. The erection of rabbit-proof and sub-
divisional fencing and clearing the paddocks of super-
fluous timber absorbed an initial outlay of £33,000, while
in other directions similar optimism has been displayed in
effecting improvements of a substantial and progressive
nature, and a return on the investment of this small for-
tune can come only from the numbers and quality of
stock sent to the markets from the property. Messrs.
Kilpatrick’s enterprise has set a fine example to the dis-
trict, and no less characteristic of their ability are die
up-to-date methods of management employed under the
direction of Mr. L. M. Kilpatrick.
A new woolshed was completed in 1928 equipped with
eight stands of machines, many hundreds of pine posts
cut on the property being used in its construction, the
yards being enclosed with sawn timber, and embodying
a splendid drafting race designed by the owners, whilst
there is cover for about 2000 sheep. I he shed is a m del
of smooth working efficiency. Shearing takes place in
August, and the lambs are dropped in May and June,
fattening rapidly on the sweet, healthy pastures of native
SHEEP BEING FED OFF THE SAME COUNTRY TWO YEARS LATER
MOR O C 0 WE ST. NE W S O UT II WAL E S


refoii, barley grass, and other indigenous grasses and
erhage. The strain favoured in the flock is a Romney
vlarsh cross owing to the great strength and vitality of
his dual purpose type of sheep, which has become so
opular in many parts of Australia for fat lamb produc-
on. Purebred Romney Marsh rams are drawn from
a normal season is one of peace and plenty. Proof of the
value of this country for the industry engaged in is clearly
illustrated by the records of stock turned off Moroco
West in the past few years. Ihe drafts of wethers in
particular have topped the Melbourne sales frequently.
In 1927 the present homestead was completed for the
THE LATE MR. WILLIAM KILPATRICK
lea ng studs of this breed, and careful attention is paid
t 0 e classing to keep the type as even as possible. In
gen ral the ewes are big framed, hardy, and uniform to
‘ ln tractive degree. 'I hey rest in paddocks shaded
ea ' full y b y tb e box, pine and red gum timber, which
Kro bke a forest by the river, and the whole aspect in
use of Mr. L. M. Kilpatrick and his family, in place of the
wooden structure built in the early ’sixties. It is a large
roomy residence of the bungalow design, made of rein-
forced concrete. Ihe house is replete with tasteful appoint-
ments, and every modern innovation of the home builder,
special attention having been given to the domestic ar-
M()R O C O WE ST, NE W SOU T II WAL E S


CATTLE CROSSING CREEK
rangements, which, from a woman’s point of view, form
the vital side of successful station management. Pretty
grounds surround the homestead, and include a tennis
court, orchard, and vegetable garden. The town of
Deniliquin is 24 miles to the west, and is the nearest post-
office, whilst Melbourne is 200 miles distant by road.
Mr. Lachlan Mcßean Kilpatrick is the younger son
of the late Mr. William Kilpatrick, and was born at
Cornalla Station, near Deniliquin, on 16th June, 1894.
Cornalla at that time was owned by the late Mr. Henry
Ricketson, for whom the late Mr. Kilpatrick was man-
ager, in addition eventually to supervising the rest of
the Ricketson estates, which embraced the well-known
Barratta Station, Aratula, &c., until
they were realised in 1915. Barratta
was the first of these big holdings
to be placed in the charge of the late
Mr. Kilpatrick, nine years after his
arrival in Victoria from Scotland at
the age of 18. To those who risked
everything in setting out on their un-
certain enterprise to “the colonies,” and
who subsequently made good on the
land, the pastoral industry owes a tre-
mendous debt of gratitude; it is to
their great credit that they succeeded
under all manner of conditions, not only
in building up assets for their own
enjoyment, but also in laying the
sound foundations of the wealth of
Australia.
The late Mr. William Kilpatrick;
acquired a wide knowledge of pastoral
affairs, and undoubtedly helped forward
the progress of the industry in Riverina,
where he was known as an authority
on horses, sheep, cattle, and station
management. Born in 1856 at Coyl-
ton, Ayrshire, Scotland, he arrived in
Australia in 1874, and died on
16th December, 1916. He is su-
vived by a widow, two sons and tu >
daughters.
Mr. L. M. Kilpatrick received hs
education at first at Greenvale, in the
Western District of Victoria, after-
wards attending Scotch College, Mel-
bourne, upon leaving which he went .o
Cornalla to gain pastoral experience un-
der his father. During his brother’s
absence at the war from 1915 to 19.9
he managed Allanvale, and has been at
M oroco West since 1920, displaying ,n
all his undertakings a far-sighted en-
thusiasm. On 28th February, 1918, he
married Katherine Margaret, daughter
of Mr. Thomas Turner Shaw, whose
father will be remembered as one of
the most prominent of the pioneer wool-
growers of Victoria, and the owner for
many years of the well-known Woori-
wvrite Station, near Terang. The
W ooriwyrite M erino sheep achieved a
far-reaching reputation, and gave the State one of her
most valuable wool clips of the time, the late Mr. Thomas
Shaw, sen., often having been spoken of as the father of
the wool industry in Victoria.
Mr. and Mrs. Kilpatrick’s family consists of three
children, William, Jean and Gordon, and their beautiful
home at Moroco West has come to be known as one of
the most hospitable in southern Riverina. The owner
takes a keen interest in the affairs of the surrounding
district, assisting in its development in every way prac-
ticable. He is also a supporter of local sporting bodies,
and at times keeps a good horse or two in training for the
picnic race meetings.
THE GARAGE
M()R 0 C O WE ST, NE W S() UT H WAE E S


COOMBING PARK, CARCOAR, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of The Whitney Pastoral Company Limited
COMPRISING an area of about 10,000 acres free-
hold, which carries two sheep to the acre, some
300 head of cattle, and one of the leading studs
of Shorthorns in New South Wales, Coombing Park was
one of the first sheep runs to be formed upon the dis-
covery of grazing lands west of the Blue Mountains, and
since 1880 has belonged to members of the Whitney
Sunny Ridge. It had a Merino flock built up from
sheep procured from Captain Macarthur and elsewhere,
and which, with the exception of an unsatisfactory at-
tempt to cross English Leicesters in the year 1840, be-
came historic, it being recorded that the famous Bungaree
stud in South Australia was started by the late Hon. G.
C. Hawker, in 1841, by the purchase of 2000 ewes of
THE PRESENT-DAY COOMBING PARK HOMESTEAD
family. It lies between Carcoar and Mandurama town-
ship, 12 miles from Blayney, 35 from Orange, 37 from
Bathurst, and about 187 miles from Sydney, with Cowra
32 miles to the south-west.
I he station originally was a Crown grant issued to
the late the Hon. Thomas Iceley, M.L.C., in 1826, and
extended over a wide expanse of the Central Tablelands,
taking in the stations known later as Waugoola and
Camden Park blood in lamb to Steiger rams from Thomas
Iceley, of Coombing Park, or Coombing, as the run was
called for many years. Also the station had a name for
the outstanding class of thoroughbred horses bred by the
owner, whilst besides, the old homestead and wool shed
figured in some sensational attacks by bushrangers. On
one occasion the stables were “held up” whilst the owner
was entertaining a party of police officers, whose horses


were stolen, but afterwards returned. Its progress in-
deed was typical of the ups and downs experienced by
the pioneer woolgrowers, Avhose sole link with civilisa-
tion until comparatively recent years consisted of the
saddle, bullock dray, or cart.
COOMBING HOMESTEAD, FROM AN OLD ETCHING
From the late the Hon. T. Iceley the run passed to
his son, the late Air. Thomas Rothery Iceley, who sold
rnost of the property in 1880, with about 3000 Merino
sheep and a few cattle, to the famous Royal Mail coach
proprietors, Messrs. Cobb and Co., of whom the late Mr.
William Franklyn Whitney was an ori-
ginal partner. He took over the pro-
perty in its rough, mostly unfenced
state, disposed of the cheese and dairy-
ing industry that had been commenced,
set in force an energetic campaign of
improvement, and at the time of his
death in 1894 had developed Coomb-
ing Park into a first class pro-
perty, which ranked with the most im-
portant woolgrowing runs in the State.
His interests were carried on by
his widow under the management
of her son, the late Mr. A. W.
Whitney, and with the advice and
help of her brother, Mr. Arthur
Leeds (the remaining partner in Cobb
and Co., the late Mr. Jas Ruther-
ford, having been bought out), and
when in 1907 the late Mr. Whitney formed Waugoola
Station, Coombing Park and one or two subsidiary runs
were transferred to the ownership of the Whitney Pas-
toral Company Limited, under the control of Mrs. I.
Whitney. Although now in her 85th year, this lady
continues to exercise a keen and active interest in the
welfare and breeding operations of the company, which
also owns Claverton Station, in south-western Queens-
land, comprising 170,000 acres, and supporting about
30,000 pure Merino sheep and a select stud flock,
as well as a general and stud herd
of Shorthorn cattle, numbering about
1200 head. This place is managed
by a son of Mr. Leeds, and has
been under its present ownership since
1863.
Coombing Park owes much of its
progress to the eradication of rab-
bits, which first appeared in the 80’s.
Neither the late Air. W. F. Whit-
ney nor those who came after him
relaxed in carrying out a system-
atic plan of destruction of the pest, and
the result of all their tedious, expen-
sive work is a sound property to-day,
free from rabbits, beautifully shaded
by light timber and plantations of pines,
its pastures of native and English
grasses protected by vermin-proof fencing, and further
strengthened by a policy of careful stocking, while the
undulating to hilly, soft, red, rich country of which the
run is composed is watered permanently by creeks and
other sources of supply. Over a large area of magnifi-
COOMBING PARK HOMESTEAD UNDER
SNOW, FROM AN OLD PHOTOGRAPH
cent flats the management cultivate lucerne from im-
ported French and other seed, and get about four cuts
per annum in addition to the high value of these flats for
grazing. The average rainfall of 30 in., and an altitude
of 2400 ft., render the climate severe, hut healthy, with
CO 0 M BIN GPAR K, NEW SOU TII WA LE S


STUD SHORTHORN BULL, COOMBING LORD RUSSELL 3rd, BRED AT COOMBING PARK, CARCOAR. WINNER
IN A STRONG CLASS OF OVER 40 ENTRIES, ONE YEAR AND UNDER 18 MONTHS, SYDNEY ROYAL SHOW, 1930
a short summer season and falls of snow in some winters;
nevertheless the conditions are ideal for stud cattle breed-
ing and woolgrowing, whilst from a scenic point of view
the station is situated in some of the prettiest country in
the State.
Many of the appointments built by assigned labour in
the early days remain in use, forming a contrast with the
modern garages, petrol bowser, workshops, &c., that have
been added from time to time. New sheep yards of sub-
stantial design and workmanship are a recent improve-
ment, and embrace a cement bath, with battened drying
yards for the occasional treatment of footrot. All these
buildings are grouped conveniently on a hill adjacent to
the homestead, which nestles in a wealth of foliage and
gardens at the end of a long, shady drive of pines, over-
looking a panorama of the home paddocks. The present
house was built in 1900, upon the site of the original
dwelling constructed by the first owner in 1826, and is
of one storey, built of stone and brick, with a spacious
interior, equipped with every modern comfort, and pos-
sessed of a charming, hospitable atmosphere.
The present stud flock was formed in 1907 with
Uardry-bred stud ewes and Boonoke rams, for the pur-
pose of breeding rams for the general flocks of both
Coombing Park and Claverton. A direct branch of this
stud has now been established at the latter place. The
owners have bred to a high standard all along, and stud
rams have been purchased at up to 1000 guineas in order
to maintain and improve upon the type of pure Peppin
sheep most suited to the district. These sheep to-day
conform to the hardy, big framed, plain bodied type of
Merino, with good, even coverings, and in particular the
breeding ewes stand out for their uniformity, in respect
to which they compare favourably with many first class
registered stud flocks. They are selected and mated by
Mr. J. W. Mathews, who took over this work from
C 0 0 M BING PAR K, NK W S O UT II IV AL E S


THE HOMESTEAD. THE COURSE OF THE RIVER IS TRACED BY THE TREES GROWING ON ITS BANKS
COOMBING PARK STUD SHORTHORN COWS
THE OLD HISTORIC WOOL SHED AND QUARTERS
C 0 0 M BIN G PAR K, NE IV SOU TII IV AL E S


PASTORAL SCENES ON COOMBING PARK
COO M BING PARK, NEW SOU TII WA LES


THE ENTRANCE GATE TO THE HOMESTEAD
Mr. W. J. McCarthy a year or two ago, and the policy
is to retain the best rams and ewes each year for Coomb-
ing Park, and to despatch the balance to Claverton, where
the surplus rams are disposed of freely at good rates
around the district.
The general flock at Coombing Park also is dominated
by Boonoke blood, and as a result of good management
the sheep are even in type and profitable woolgrowers.
Their wool is a true medium quality, soft handling, long
in staple, showing plenty of character with a higher scour-
ing yield than is found in the general run of flocks.
Buyers consider that the clip is one of the best medium
quality offerings sent to Sydney, and the prices realised
afford proof of the standard to which the sheep have been
raised by strict culling and classing, and careful prepara-
tion of the wool for sale. Lambing takes place in Sep-
tember, with an additional lambing for the stud ewes in
the autumn, while shearing commences in October, when
about 20,000 sheep and lambs are shorn, the natural in-
crease of marked lambs being on the average about 81
per cent., and the average weight of wool shorn per head
of grown sheep being about 10 lbs.
Shorthorn cattle were raised by the late Mr. W. F.
Whitney at Buckiinguy, on the Lower Macquarie, before
he went to Coombing Park in 1880, and the nucleus of
the present general herd was transferred from that place
and developed to a high standard of quality. But it is
through the Shorthorn stud formed by Mrs. I. Whitney
in 1910 that the name of Coombing Park and of its owner
have come into prominence among breeders of this popu-
lar beef type of cattle. Bred under ideal conditions the
Coombing Park stud of Shorthorns is undoubtedly a
strong factor tending to general improvement in quality
in the beef trade.
The foundations of the stud were cows from the
famous Lee herd, and 21 heifers from H. Smith, which
conformed to the standards of the old Lowe cattle,
descending from Violet, and the equally famed imported
COO M BING PAR K, NE W SOU T H JV A LES


A SCENE ON THE RIVER
NEAR THE HOMESTEAD
CO OM BING PARK, NEW SOUTH WALES


cow Countess. From the beginning no expense was
spared to build up the stud with the right type of sires
and females. The first sire was a Lee bull, then Tan-
talus, from James Holmes, of Holmhust, Bathurst,
THE ORIGINAL BARRACKS
calved 1906. His sire was Lord Russell 48th (1926
N.Z.H.8.), and his dam Lady Red Rose 23rd, by Count
Minstrel 3rd (1931 N.Z.H.8.), tracing back to Hub-
back and J. Browne’s Old Red Bull. Bolinda Duke of
Derrimut 349th, c. August 1909, was the next sire, bred
by Sir Rupert Clarke at Bolinda Vale. He was by
Lindenow Duke of Derrimut 19th, from Bolinda Duchess
of Derrimut 224th, by Duke of York (imp. 68546
C.H.8.), the 7th dam being Roan Summerton (imp.),
tracing to Marfleet’s Old Red Bull. In 1913 another
first class Derrimut bull was purchased, followed by the
sire Bolinda Duke of Derrimut 396th,
a dark roan, c. August 1914, bred by
Sir Rupert Clarke, by Bolinda Duke
of Alpine sth, out of Bolinda Duchess
of Derrimut 330th, also running back
to Marfleet’s Old Red Bull.
The owner obtained several Bolinda
Vale-bred cows later, and eight pedi-
greed females at the Holmhurst sale,
also eight from the late Mr. N. Fal-
kiner’s sale in Victoria in 1917, all of
these well-bred animals being served
by the 1100-guinea bull Wilgul Duke
of Derrimut, and all but one traced
back to Marfleet’s Old Red Bull. At
the dispersal of the Angas herds in
South Australia the outstanding sire Beverley Duke
of Derrimut 75th was acquired, and after doing
successful service at Coombing Park was taken to
Claverton, where he now heads the stud recently formed
there.
Another first class bull used was Secret Sergeant
(imp.), while of recent years Mrs. Whitney has intro-
duced Clifton and Hordern blood.
There are three grand sires in use at present (1930) at
Coombing Park, one of them, Harlequin of Milton, by
Doune Monarch, purchased for 800
guineas in 1926 from Mr. Anthony Hor-
dern, having his headquarters at Wau-
goola, whither selected females are sent
across from Coombing Park to be served
by him. Some beautiful young heifers
and bulls are numbered among his pro-
duce, which have taken many prizes at
the Sydney Royal Show, but one of the
bulls, Coombing Lord Russell 3rd, is
quite outstanding, and at the 1930 Royal
in Sydney he was placed first in the one
year and under 18 months old class, in
which there were over 40 entries
from leading Shorthorn breeders from
four States. His dam is Coombing Charming
Oxford Ist, by Milton’s Granite Rock, by Master-
key (imp.). Stylish, deep and lengthy, with a great
broad back and even topline, he gives promise of being
a successful sire. His dam proved an outstanding
breeder from the first, her calves conforming to the
highest standards of the breed. The first of her progeny
was a bull calf by Beverley Duke 75th, and sold for 175
guineas after the 1928 Sydney Royal Show. The next
was a white heifer, Coombing Charming Oxford 2nd, win-
ner of first prize in the under 18 months class at the 1929
STUD MERINO EWES ON COOMBING PARK
Sydney Show. Coombing Lord Russell 3rd was her third
calf, while the fourth is a promising roan bull calf, full
brother to the white heifer, and which was sired by Clif-
ton White Ensign (by Milton’s Mariner), purchased
from Mr. A. J. Simpson, of Clifton, Hamilton, Victoria,
his dam being the 449th Bolinda Duchess of Derrimut,
CO OM BING PARK, NEW SOUTH WALES


MUSTERING SHEEP IN QUARTER WOOL
A TRIO OF STUD SHORTHORN BULLS, BRED ON COOMBING PARK
A FEW OF THE COOMBING PARK STUD SHORTHORN COWS
C 0 0 M BING PAR K. NE PR S 0 UT 11 PGA LE S


THE LOUNGE
AT COOMBING
PARK HOMESTEAD
THE WELL
APPOINTED DIN-
ING ROOM
MRS. WHITNEY'S
DRAWING ROOM
AT COOMBING PARK
C O OMB I N G PAR K, NK W S 0 U TII IV AL E S


one of Mr. Simpson’s best cows.
Clifton White Ensign possesses great length of body,
and a fine masculine appearance typical of the best of the
Derrimut strain, and is proving a good stock getter. His
own sterling qualities are being stamped into his pro-
geny, two of which were prize winners at the Sydney
Royal in 1929 (Coombing Lord Gazelle 7th and Bth).
The third sire introduced recently to the stud is a
well bred, fleshy, red bull, Coonong’s Masterlock, by Mil-
ton’s Masterkey. He was bought as a yearling after
he won first prize in the novice class at the 1929 Sydney
Royal.
The success won by the Coombing Park Shorthorns at
the Royal Easter Show in Sydney in 1929 shows to
what an extent they have come to the fore. Each of three
bulls exhibited won prizes individually, annexing between
them three firsts, one second and one fourth, including
first prize for group of three bulls under 18 months.
Other awards in the open classes were as follows:—First
prize bull, 1 year and under 18 months, Coombing Lord
Gazelle Bth (his full brother Coombing Lord Gazelle 7th
was fourth in this section) ; third prize bull calf, 6 months
and under 12, Coombing Serenader; second prize
Memorial Cup for two best Shorthorn bulls under two
years bred and owned by the exhibitor (Lord Gazelle
7th and Bth). In gaining these ribbons and beating such
noted studs as Milton Park, &c., Mrs. Whitney has put
ONE OF THE SHEEP PADDOCKS
MRS. I. WHITNEY
the Coombing Park Stud definitely in the van of Short-
horn breeding, while the achievement also was a tribute
to the skill of the studmaster, Mr. J. Zindlaeren. (Since
the foregoing was written the stud has added to its laurels
by its successes at the 1930 Sydney Royal. In addition
to first in the one year and under 18 months bull class,
it won the Robert Clarke Memorial Cup for best two
Shorthorn bulls under two years, bred and owned by
exhibitor, and secured second in group of three bulls not
over 18 months, bred by exhibitor.)
The breeding policy aims at the deep flesh, early matur-
ing type of Shorthorn, of vigorous constitution, and able
to thrive economically under all conditions. The three
leading sires have a choice lot of pedigreed companions,
which include two cows purchased in 1928 from Milton
Park, while without exception the young stock now com-
ing along are of good soft handle and best quality, nicely
coloured and stylish. With such a wealth of breeding
to recommend the young bulls offered for sale, buyers
can depend upon obtaining purebred stock of the highest
grade with which to improve their herds. This is borne
out by the fact that up to 240 guineas has been paid for
3 r oung Coombing Park bulls.
The stud at Claverton is a direct branch of the cattle
bred at Coombing Park, and is supplying herd bulls to
an increasing clientele in Queensland.
Born in 1845, Mrs. I. Whitney is one of the oldest
CO O M BIN G PARK, NEW SOU T H WA LES


LUCERNE FLATS. THE HOMESTEAD IS SHOWN IN THE DISTANCE
surviving members of the pioneering pastoral families,
whose industry and enterprise were perhaps the main
factors in the national progress of Australia.
Her whole lifetime has been devoted to her family’s
interest in the land, towards which has been directed an
extraordinary ability, in no way lessened by age, during
the past 23 years in which Coombing Park has been
under her personal supervision as managing director of
the company. In other directions, too, her influence has
been far-reaching, while during half a century of residence
at Coombing Park Mrs. Whitney has helped materially to
advance the district around her property.
M rs. Whitney’s four daughters are Mrs. Kelty, widow
of the late Dr. Kelty, Mrs. Cargill, widow of the late
Dr. Cargill. M rs. Selwyn King, and Mrs. Lionel
Hood, whilst there are thirteen grandchildren.
STORE CATTLE ON THE RIVER FLATS AT COOMBING PARK
CO OM BIN G PAR K, NEW SOU T H WA LE S


CAMPO SANTO, BARRABA, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of George Capel, Esq ,
and wide through the hills around Barraba,
New South Wales, are depastured flocks of
Alerino sheep which have earned world-wide
recognition for their valuable wool, the superior to which
manufacturers and spinners cannot obtain from any other
wool-growing country. Of the properties which con-
Station, a large tract of grazing country pioneered by
Air. J. W. Cheeseborough in the fifties, after the Namoi
district was opened up by the first settlers. From Air.
Cheeseborough Tareela passed into the hands of Air.
Arthur Swift Derby, who made alterations to the area
by creating Campo Santo and other new runs, but by the
THE HOMESTEAD OF CAMPO SANTO STATION
tribute such clips to the overseas markets, Campo Santo
Station is second to none in its advancement, for since the
run was acquired in 1894 by the Capel family, both the
country and the stock there have gone ahead steadily
under a system of consistent improvement.
Originally the property was part of Old Tareela
time the Capel brothers took over, its area was diminished
to 16,000 acres.
It was part of the ambition of the late Air. Daniel
Capel, father of the Capel brothers, to acquire a separate
run for each of his sons to manage, and it was his stead-
fast policy, and the policy of his sons after him, to free


each property from encumbrance before going into
another. His will made provision for a partnership
between his sons to continue for seven years after his
death, consequently the seven brothers wound up their
interests in 1908, and each received the property of which
he had charge as his share of the estate, which totalled
no less a sum than approximately three-quarters of a mil-
lion sterling. This fortune was made from a very humble
beginning on Piedmont in 1841, and provides what is
partnership—Piedmont, Gorian, Derra Derra, Gour-
nama, Menedebri and Campo Santo —have left their im-
pression in the progress generally of the wool, sheep, and
cattle industry.
When Campo Santo was purchased Mr. George
Capel went up from Gorian on the western plains of
New South Wales to take over the management, and
after he became the owner of the run its area was in-
creased to the present size of 20,000 acres freehold by
MUSTERING STUD MERINO EWES ON CAMPO SANTO
acknowledged to be an epic among the careers of our
pastoral families.
No disagreement marred the breaking up of this his-
toric partnership, which was accomplished with the
simple straightforwardness that is typical of the Capels,
and, furthermore, the success of the late Mr. Daniel
Capel senior takes its place with the romances that are to
be culled from the pages of Australia’s pastoral life just
as the way in which the several properties owned by the
the acquisition of neighbouring sheep farms from the
settlers thereon. As it is to-day the property is made up
of rough hilly country suited essentially to the produc-
tion of Merino wool, and only here and there in the
valleys is it possible to engage in a little cropping for
home use. The Manilla River winds through Campo
Santo, giving a double frontage for several miles, and
there are innumerable springs and soakages for the sup-
ply of water for every requirement. The rainfall also is
CAM P O SAN T O, NE IV S O U TII IV AL E S


MERINO EWES ON
THE RIVER FLATS
STUD MERINO RAMS ON
THE BANKS OF THE RIVER
IN ONE OF THE
PADDOCKS
cAM P 0 SAN T O, NE IP S OUT II W A LES


SOME OF THE STUD SHORTHORN COWS AND CALVES
assured, and whilst in some years it is erratic, as instance
the fall for the first six months of 1928, when 32 in.
were recorded all over the run, and that for the same
period of 1929, when only 9 in. fell, the average over a
long period is 26 in. per annum, under the influence of
which there is an excellent growth of mixed pasture, the
predominant feed being red grass for summer grazing.
This is balanced by finer and sweeter grasses, and the
fact that sheep look well throughout the coldest winters
shows the country to be safe.
Stringy bark and box are the main timbers, their only
economic use being for shade purposes, and the axe has
not been spared in improving the 60 odd paddocks into
which the property is subdivided. Each of the enclosures
A FEW MORE OF THE SHORTHORNS, WITH THE MASTER OF THE HERD
CAM P O SAN T O, NE W S 0 UT II WAL E S


STUD MERINO EWES
ON THE TREK
Belo w—
A BEAUTIFUL
PANORAMIC VIEW
OF THE CAMPO
SANTO COUNTRY


CAMPO SANTO HOMESTEAD
NESTLING IN THE VALLEY
CAM P 0 SAN TO, NE W SOU Tll IV AL E S


A RESTFUL SCENE
AT THE CROSSING
ON THE RIVER
CAM P 0 SAN TO, NE W S 0 UT II WAL E S


is protected by wire netting fences, and rabbits are hardly
ever seen. Any intrusion of this pest is dealt with effec-
tively at once. In many of the paddocks the owner has
put down paspalum
to improve the feed
value, and it is
found that this
grass does well on
the lower slopes of
the hills, and on
the flats, which
will mean more
extensive improve-
ment of the pas-
tures as time goes
on.
The standing
appointments are
those of a first-
class, well - man-
aged property, and the homestead retains its original
character, except for the introduction of electric light,
sewerage, &c. It was constructed by Mr. A. S.
Derby, in the sixties, from stone hewn from the hori
zontal strata of rock that abut on the river, and has ar
attractive setting of gardens, whilst from the site of the
house is obtained
the full effect of
the green hillsides
and scenery of the
valleys through
which flows the
river on its way to
join the Namoi.
Adjacent to head-
quarters is the
wood and iron
woolshed of ten
stands, with water
laid on, and cover
for about 2300
sheep, as well as a
fine set of yards,
with everything about the shed designed to give con-
venience and efficiency. Shearing begins at the end of
the first week in September, and the lambs are dropped
THE CAMPO SANTO HOUSE
FOUR AND SIX TOOTH EWES ON CAMPO SANTO
CAM P O SAN T 0, NE W S 0 UT H WAL E S


STUD MERINO
RAMS CROSSING
THE RIVER
A VIEW OF THE
HOMESTEAD FROM
A NEARBY HILL
AN OVERSHOT
WEIR ON THE
MANILLA RIVER
CAM P O SAN T O, NEW SOU TII WAL E S


LOOKING ACROSS RICH
RIVER FLATS TOWARDS
THE HOMESTEAD
CAM P O SAN T O, NE W S 0 UT II IV AL K S


in October-November, about 75
per cent, being the usual aver-
age marked.
Campo Santo has a name in
the sheep world for the quality
and purity of its Hock, which
numbered some 20,000 head at
the 1929 shearing. The basis
of the flock is pure Havilali
blood, and for forty years the
owner has used this type of ram.
The sheep have proved them-
selves ideal for the country, and
whilst in size they may not
have the big frames of western
Merino sheep, in uniformity
they have no superior.
Throughout the flock quality
and compactness are features
that are outstanding, whilst
their wonderful evenness of
covering is a criterion of their
standing in the wool world.
Air. Capel has striven hard to
raise the flock to a high level,
and his reward is a firm market
at all times for the surplus
sheep, in addition to an excellent return from the annual
clip.
Including the wool from
lambs shorn as hoggets the
average weight cut from the
flock has been in the region of
8? lbs. per head for many years,
and as the great bulk of this is
represented in fleece lines the re-
turn per sheep is very satisfac-
tory. A fine quality wool is
produced, of a 70’s count and
upward, typical of the better
class of Barraba wools, and
whereas Mr. Capel does not
aspire to grow a superfine
quality, his clip is acknowledged
by buyers to be one of the
soundest in the district. This
is borne out by the prices the
wool has realised. In 1928-29.
a year which returned growers
all over Australia an average
of £2l 12s. 2d. per bale, the top
lines from Campo Santo sold at
33|d. per lb., and in the pre-
ceding year the same qualities
returned per lb. The
major part of the clip in 1924
sold at per lb. Mr. Capel is one who deplores the
boom year on account of its unpleasant consequences to
MR. GEORGE CAPEL
THE HOMESTEAD, WITH THREE AND FOUR-YEAR-OLD EWES IN THE FOREGROUND
CAMPO SANTO, NEW SOOTH ITALES


A FEW OF THE CAMPO SANTO STUD SHORTHORNS
ensuing markets, and is a strong advocate for the produc-
tion of the best quality fleeces to suit the country on which
the wool is grown, year in year out, with the objective
of realising high average prices for all lines in the clip.
He is also a strong believer in a campaign for stimulat-
ing the wider use of wool.
Since the foregoing was written the 1929 clip has been
sold in Sydney, the top line fetching 28Jd. despite the
drastic decline in the general level of the market as
compared with the previous season.
When the Capel brothers ran their business together
their combined wool clips were shipped from Newcastle
direct to London, but to-day the Campo Santo clip is
sold locally, and the owner believes this to be the best
for the country. His clip bears the well-known brand
A.S.D/Campo Santo, a brand with which the late Mr.
Derby built up a high reputation in London many years
ago, and which is equally well known to-day for the clips
shorn by the present owner. Similarly Mr. Derby’s
brand for the cattle, viz., DD, is still used by Mr. Cape!,
who runs a herd of Shorthorns on the property, mainly
to eat down the rough feed. These cattle are not bred
as a stud, although they include some particularly fine
heifers that would be suitable for inclusion in the stud
book. One of these heifers, calved at Campo Santo in
1928, out of a heifer purchased earlier in the year at the
Sydney Royal Show, and in calf to a Hordern-hred bull,
would grace any stud herd. About 300 animals comprise
the herd.
Of the brothers Capel—John, Daniel, Charles, George,
Albert, Richard and Henry—all of whom have earned
distinction amongst the sheep and cattle men of New
South Wales, the owner of Campo Santo is the eldest
but three, and was born at Piedmont in 1852. He is
therefore 77 years of age, and has worked hard all his
life, finding recreation in supervising the active working
of the station right to the present time, and setting a fine
example to Ids men. Mr. Capel attended the Sydney
Grammar School in the sixties, after receiving education
from a tutor, and from there returned to Piedmont,
where he laid the foundation of his sound knowledge of
stock. In 1870 his father sent him out to Gorian Sta-
tion in the Walgett district, and he, with three brothers,
under the management of Charles, was responsible for
building up this run from cattle into a first-class and
well-known sheep and wool-growing establishment during
the 26 years of his residence there. As he was only
eighteen years of age when this big responsibility was
entrusted to him, and the western leaseholds in those
days called for the greatest courage and determination,
what with droughts and pests and other troubles militat-
ing against progress, he welcomed the change to Campo
Santo, where he soon earned the respect of the district
as one of its ablest supporters. His son, Royston Stanley
Capel, lost his life at the age of 30 in action at Villers
Bretonneux, France, during the war, in which he par-
ticipated with the 33rd Battalion of Infantry, A.I.F.
Mr. George Capel has avoided any active public part
in the affairs of the districts in which he has resided,
preferring to serve their welfare by concentrating upon
the practical management of his flocks and herds. In
this capacity his record is a monument to the high prin-
ciples established and maintained by the other members
of this notable family.
CAM P O SAN T O, NE IF S O UT H IF AL E S


LONGARM, EULABIL, CHATSWORTH & ROCKY CREEK
NEW SOUTH WALES
The Properties of Mr. Henry William Capel
LONGARM is the station propertv and home of
Mr. H enry Will iam Capel and his family, and
is situated 10 miles south-west of the town of
Barraba, in the central north-west of New South Wales,
about 350 miles from Sydney. 1 he run comprises 7500
acres freehold of first-class grazing country, and derives
its name from the unique lay-out of the land, which em-
braces a long stretch of valley between bills that are part
of Burendi, and also of Campo Santo, the latter being a
big run formed in the 50’s by Mr. Arthur Swift Derby
out of the old Tarella Station, which was one of the
earliest tracts of country taken up when this territory
first caught the eye of the discerning pioneer. When
Mr. Derby sold out his interests about the winter of 1894
the Capel Bros, acquired most of Campo Santo, and it
was at this period that Longarm was established as a
A CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD AT LONGARM
of the outjutting spurs of the Great Divide, and which
are covered with box and other timber, swxet grasses and
herbages, whilst the soil throughout is typical of the rest
of the Barraba district, which is famous for its Merino
wool growing properties.
Longarm is exceptionally w T ell improved, and runs a
purebred flock of some 8000 head of Merino sheep with
many \Tars of successful production of a valuable medium
quality wool behind it. The station w r as originally part
separate run. tor some years it belonged to the well-
known Cooper family, of Inverell, and was in the hands
of Mr. Guy Wilson when the present owner made
negotiations to purchase it in 1917.
Mr. H. W. Capel has missed no opportunity to provide
the property with substantial, serviceable improvements,
on the principle that a thing worth doing at all is worth
doing well, and that where the betterment of country is
concerned it is essential to carry out all work in a thorough


and practical manner. One cannot help but be im-
pressed with the appointments at Longarm, and especially
does this apply to the homestead and its surroundings, for
in all respects they combine the personal happiness of
DIGHTON MAID, BERRADEEN, ROSE WARREN,
MR. CAPEL'S THREE CHAMPION PICNICKERS
home life with the comforts of the present age, such as
electric light and power, wireless, home cinematograph
machine, a first-class tennis court, septic sanitation, See.,
while there are large gardens, both
flow’er and vegetable.
The property is subdivided into 20
paddocks, every one of which is pro-
tected by wire netting, and it is well
known that the methods of digging
out rabbits on Longarm have proved
so efficient that to-day the run is en-
tirely free from the pest, apart from
an odd few which are dealt with as
soon as they show their heads. The
fencing is maintained in first rate
order, and a feature of this part of
the management is the staunch type
of well-hung gate. Many of these
will no doubt be superseded by the
motor ramp as time goes on, thus ob-
viating the necessity of opening the
several gates between the homestead
and the main road into Barraba, for
the owner does a tremendous lot of motoring, like many
another progressive owner, and the ramp, or run-over, is
fast becoming just as important as the ordinary gate.
There are some beautiful flats amongst shoulders of the
open hills which have never failed to produce a number
of cuts per annum of good quality lucerne, nearly 1000
acres of it having been in at one time on Longarm some
years ago. They have been a reliable source of fodder
storage and grazing, until recently,
when the stands showed signs of age,
but they are now undergoing a
thorough reconditioning, and by the
end of 1929 over 800 acres had been
resown.
Judicious ringbarking has left the
property beautifully shaded and both
sweet and sound. The average rain-
fall is 26 inches, and the water sup-
ply comes from creeks and natural
springs, and is permanent. Two of
the water-courses flow all the year
round, and as the wells are erected
close to the frontages in the valleys,
the stock are always within easy reach
of good, fresh water.
The natural pastures produce an
attractive medium wool from the
sheep, which are all of Haddon Rig
blood, and the Longarm clip is con-
sidered by the trade to be not only one of the
most stylish wools offered, but one of the best
prepared for the market. No disease affects the sheep
STUD MERINO EWES IN 10 MONTHS WOOL BRED ON LONGARM
at any time, due no doubt to the all-round healthy-
state of the whole district, which at Longarm is about
1 800 ft. above sea level, and these good conditions are
reflected in the lambing, which takes place in October
L() VGA R M. EU L A 111 L, CIIATS IF O R TII A VI) ROC K Y CRE E K. N.SAF.


STUD MERINO
EWES AT LONGARM
SHEEP GRAZING ON
T HE RICH LUCERNE
FLATS AT CHATSWORTH
LON C A RM, E ULAB I L, CH A TSW O R TII AN D ROCKY CRE E K, N.S.W.


after the Hock is shorn at the end of September, the
marking as a rule averaging 80 per cent. From 1926 to
1929 the figures in this respect totalled 85 to 86 per
cent., due to better seasons, and also to the eradication
of rabbits from the whole property, as well as to capable
management of the country and careful classing of the
flock. It h as meant many years of patience and a rigid
policy of culling to bring about the desired results in
quality and uniformity of conformation, and Mr. Capel
big framed, plain bodied sheep for which the Haddon Rig
stud is famed, and the weights cut by the ewes and
hoggets (no wethers are run at Longarm) are in the
region of 9to 10 lbs. per head. The woolshed is located
half a mile from the homestead and contains 8 stands of
machines, with the usiual complement of buildings, all of
which are constructed to an efficient design, and kept in
first rate order.
In conjunction with Longarm Mr. Capel has a 2200-
STUD SHORTHORN COWS AT ROCKY CREEK
knows from a lifetime amongst Merino sheep that there
are no short-cut methods to breeding up a flock to high
standards. The introduction of rams from Haddon Rig
is confined to sires for use in the select stud flock which
is run on Longarm for the purpose of breeding rams for
use in the general flock, and the surplus over these re-
quirements finds a ready sale to neighbouring farmers and
graziers at good figures.
The type maintained in the general flock is the robust,
acre farm, called Chatsworth, adjoining the trucking
yards at Barraba, where fat lambs are raised for the
metropolitan markets. The cross favoured is cast flock
Merino ewes from Longarm and Romney Marsh and
Border Leicester rams, the sires coming from recognised
breeders of these English breeds. They have been found
to produce a crossbred lamb of excellent weight, and one
that matures early, and the drafts sent in regularly have
earned a high reputation as suitable for both the home
L O VaA R M, KULA B I L, CII A TSIV 0 R TII A VI) R()C K Y CRE E K. N.S.W.


Above —
THE BULLOCK PAD-
DOCK AT ROCKY
CREEK. FLATS
TYPICAL OF
THIS COUNTRY
Below —
VIEW OF THE VAL-
LEY AND LUCERNE
FLATS AT LONGARM.
TH E HOMESTEAD
AN D BUILDINGS
ARE SEEN IN THE
DISTANCE
LO N GAR M. E UL A BI L, CII A TS W 0 R TII A.V I) R() C K Y CRE E K, X.SJF


STATION - BRED
STUD MERINO
EWES AT LONGARM
STATION-BRED MERINO RAMS IN FOUR MONTHS WOOL AT LONGARM
LONG A R M, EULA B I L, CII A TSW O R T H AND ROCKY CRE E K. N.SJC.


YOUNG MILTON PARK
BRED SHORTHORN
BULLS BOUGHT FOR
THE ROCKY CREEK
STUD - MILTON'S
MASTER OF OXFORD
5TH, BY COLLYNIE
KING EDWARD,
AND STUDENT OF
MILTON, BY MIL-
TON’S PASTMASTER
STUD SHORTHORN COWS ON THE CREEK
LONG A R M. EU L A HIE. CII A TBIV O R TII AK 1) R()C K Y CRE E K, N.S.W.


and export trade. Chatsworth is used also for the cul-
tivation of lucerne and other crops for use as hay or
grazing, and in this direction the property shows an ex-
traordinary fertility and sweetness, giving to it the at-
STUD SHORTHORN BULL, CUDGELO EARL, BY CLIFTON
CHERRY CROWN, USED IN THE ROCKY CREEK STUD HERD
tributes of a very valuable fattening proposition. From
the fields of lucerne the yield is never below five cuts
per annum, and this includes a large quantity cut for
seed, which has a big market in the immediate district.
The lucerne hay is stored in strong,
well-constructed sheds, Mr. Capel
having his own hay press, the crop
being baled out in the paddocks
and pressed on the spot.
Chatsworth is deep black soil with
a prolific growth of natural herbage
and grasses, while the whole farm is
nicely shaded and fully improved for
the work carried on. The Barraba
Creek runs through it from one side
to the other, affording a permanent
supply, and underground water can
also he obtained at a depth no greater
than 14 ft.
The property is part of the old
Hoskinson estate of Barraba, which
was pioneered in the 40’s, and had
passed through various degrees of sub-
division and numerous hands before
it was secured by the present owner
in 1924. Mr. Capel has enlarged
its scope considerably, and employs
the well-grassed paddocks for topping off wethers
drawn from Longarm and fattened at Eulabil Station a
few miles away, the drafts sent in to the yards at Sydney
being well known for their butchering qualities, and
often topping the market there.
Eulahil comprises some 4000 acres freehold, and was
portion of Piedmont Station, the historic old home of the
Capel family. It is a choice selection of that well im-
proved property, being acquired by
Mr. H. W. Capel in 1903, when
he launched out for himself. He
now uses it exclusively for wethers
bred on Longarm; they grow out
into strong, healthy sheep of good
shape and style at Eulabil, and
form a profitable branch of Mr.
Capel’s business, the wool shorn
from them being up to the stan-
dard concentrated upon at the head
station.
About 40 miles west of Barraba
is another small freehold, held on
lease from his late father’s estate, and
named Rocky Creek, the 3500 acres
comprising it being the homestead
block of the famous old Rocky Creek
Estate. The creek from which the
property took its name runs through
the present country held by Mr.
Capel, and other good waters give
the place an ideal and permanent
supply. The rainfall is 24 in. per annum, with a bracing
climate, and the soil grows an abundance of nutritious
grasses and herbage, the crowfoot dragging in the stirrups
in a good season. Adequately sheltered, and fenced
STUD SHORTHORN BULL, MILTON’S MASTER OF OXFORD 3RD, BY
MILTON'S PASTMASTER, USED IN THE ROCKY CREEK STUD HERD
against rabbits, the property is devoted to beef cattle rais-
ing, and runs a high grade stud herd of Shorthorns, Mr.
Capel’s ideal being the popular low set, deep fleshed,
quick maturing type. It has been very gratifying to him
LONG A R M. EU LA BI L. CHATS W O R T H AA 7 D ROC K Y CREE K, N.S.JV.


MUSTERING STUD SHORTHORN COWS AT ROCKY CREEK
STUD SHORTHORN COWS AND CALVES COMING INTO WATER AT ROCKY CREEK
L 0 A G A R 71/, EU L A Bit. CH A TSW O R Tll A A I) ROC KY OR EE K. N.S.W.


YEARLING FILLY, BY SIR DIGHTON FROM BARDEEN, FROM PHOTO TAKEN BEFORE SHE WAS 12 MONTHS OLD
to have succeeded in establishing the stud upon a sound
footing, demonstrated by the active demand for young
bulls from an increasing clientele, despite the hard times
through which the beef cattle industry has passed in the
last few years.
The Rocky Creek herd comprises about 150 purebred
stud cows, mostly secured from the well-known Durham
Court stud, which unfortunately did not keep a tabulated
record of the pedigrees of their breeding cattle. The
balance of the cows was drawn from other leading Short-
horn studs, and at present Mr. Capel is using Milton
Park bulls. No expense has been spared to maintain the
best standards of efficiency throughout the stud, which
to-day is in an advanced position as regards quality, and
is bred entirely upon natural pastures. Coming along in
the spring of last year (1929) was a particularly fine
young bull out of a sister to the dam of Milton’s Master-
key, and sired by Milton’s Pastmaster, by Masterkey
(imp.), out of Miranda. Two other bulls at Rocky
Creek, by Milton’s Pastmaster, are Milton’s Master of
Oxford 3rd and Student of Milton. Of the heifers it
may be said that they conform to the highest standards
of the breed.
Mr. Capel is a lover of a good horse, and in about
1913 laid the foundation of a stud of thoroughbreds as a
hobby, with results that have exceeded all anticipations.
A private track has been laid down at Chatsworth, where
one of the station men resides to supervise the farm man-
agement and the training, and at present the owner has
four mares in active preparation. With the exception of
a 3-year-old Magpie mare out of a Tressady mare, these
were bred by Mr. Capel (Rose Warren, Dighton Maid
and Berradeen), the stallion at the head of the stud
being the successful Sir Dighton, by Bayardo. Sir Digh-
ton is a grand specimen of the thoroughbred, full ribbed,
deep chested, and beautifully flanked, with the hall mark
LONG A R M, EULA K I L, CH A TSW O R TII A A I) ROC K Y CRE E K, N.S.JV.


STUD SHORTHORN COWS ON ROCKY CREEK STATION
ROCKY CREEK BRED STUD SHORTHORN COWS


STUD HEIFERS WATERING AT ROCKY CREEK
of breeding stamped on his strong face. He is related to
the well-known sire Magpie, whom he resembles in con-
formation.
Mr. Capel has had a big measure of success with his
horses at the various meetings, as the many trophies dis-
played at the Longarm homestead testify, the most out-
standing winner being Dighton Maid, sired by Sir Digh-
ton, and 6 years old last spring, for she has won 32 races
around the district, including the Barraba Cup of 1928.
Another exceptional mare is Rose Warren, by Rangag,
out of a W arren Hill mare, to whom 24 races are cre-
dited, including the Barraba Cup of 1929. This coveted
prize having been won twice in succession, it becomes the
sole property of Mr. Capel, who also won the Armidale
Gold Cup of 1929. Another good performer bred by
him was Saladen, sold in 1928 and sent to Queensland,
where he won a number of races in good company.
Mr. H enry William Capel is the only surviving son
of the late Mr. John Capel, who was the eldest son of
the late Mr. Daniel Capel, the founder of Piedmont.
His only brother, the late Mr. D. G. Capel, died in
1926 at his home, The Oaks, a property which adjoins
the present Rocky Creek run. The father of the present
owner made his home at Piedmont and remained on there
as manager for his father after the partnership of the
seven brothers was dissolved, and at the same time the
second son of this notable family also remained at Pied-
moot, and is to-day the owner of that property, enjoying
good health at the age of 81. The late John Capel died
in 1909.
Mr. Henry W. Capel was born at Piedmont in 1882,
and after completing his education at The Armidale
School returned to the station to learn the pastoral busi-
ness under his father and uncles. In 1903 he began
woolgrowing for himself on Eulabil, which he formed,
and his subsequent success has been due to an inherited
optimism, determination, and untiring energy which have
characterised the members of the Capel family. Endowed
with a cheerful personality, his practical solicitude for
the welfare of the Barraba district has won the high
esteem of all who come into contact with him, whilst his
progressive aims are a big factor in the development of
the surrounding countryside.
In 1907 he married the daughter of Mr. George Capel,
of Campo Santo, and their family comprised three
daughters at the time of Mrs. Capel’s death in 1921.
Two years later Mr. Capel married again, and his pre-
sent wife is a daughter of Mr. Daniel Capel. the owner
of Piedmont. There is a family of two daughters and
one son by the second marriage. Mr. Capel patronises
all the sporting bodies of the immediate neighbourhood,
and besides playing tennis and golf, is an ardent motor-
ist, a sphere in which he covers a big mileage in the
year in the course of his pastoral pursuits.
LOS G ARM. EULABIL, CHATS WORTH A.V I) ROCKY CREEK, X.S.JV


BALARANG, WEEMELAH, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of P. E. Stirton, Esq.
THE Moree district of New South Wales extends
for 100 miles south-east from the Maclntyre
River on the Queensland border, near Mun-
gindi, and spreads at its widest part for about 80 miles,
comprising one of the flattest and broadest expanses of
plains country in Australia. From these broad fertile
A. N. and P. E. Stirton in 1895 from selections of Wel-
bondongah, Werrina and Bunarba North. The area to-
day is approximately 30,000 acres, secured land, very
highly improved country, on which are run a select flock
and a general flock of purebred Merino sheep numbering
some 23,000 head.
THE BALABANG HOMESTEAD WITH A FEW OF THE FAMILY PETS IN THE FOREGROUND
plains come some of the outstanding commercial Merino
wool clips of New South Wales, and it is due to the
extensive improvements made to the majority of stations
in this belt of country that the Moree wools collectively
are so favourably known.
Balarang is one of the most valuable of these station
properties, having been formed by the brothers Messrs.
On the 4th of September, 1926, the partnership of the
Stirton Bros, was dissolved by mutual consent, and Mr.
P. E. Stirton became the sole owner.
Balarang is situated about 60 miles north-west of
M oree, via Garah and Weemelah, a natural track lead-
ing from the latter township to the homestead, a distance
of 10 miles, whilst the border town of Mungindi lies 30


MUSTERING ON THE OPEN PLAINS FOR SHEARING
SOME OF THE STUD MERINO EWES
ONE OF THE STUD PADDOCKS ON RALARANG
BA LARA NG. NE W SOUTH WALES


THE FAMILY RETURN
FROM THE MUSTER
I> ALARANG. N E IF S 0 U Tll IF ALES


BALARANG EIGHT-TOOTH MERINO EWES
miles north-west of Weemelah. The property is first-
class sheep country, with a preponderance of crisp black
soil, and some belts of lighter soil intervening. The
level plains are timbered generously in some places with
coolibah and wilga trees, a little box and some rosewood,
in addition to a great variety of native trees indigenous
to this part of the State, such as belah and white-wood
This timber has been rung extensively, although, o:
course, it has not been overdone.
At the present time Mr. Stirton is creating a numbei
BALARANG SIX-TOOTH MERINO EWES
BA LA RANG, NEW SOUTH WALES


of additional stud paddocks, which when completed will
provide ideally shaded pastures. The grasses comprise
blinders, short Mitchell and blue grass, never-fail and
coolah, while during the winter months of May, June
and July there is always, in normal seasons, an abund-
ance of clovers, crowfoot, wild carrot, mustard plant,
spinach, lamb’s tongue, wild geranium and many other
varieties of herbages. A good winter on Balarang is a
certainty after decent rains in the autumn.
1 here are 34 paddocks apart from the small enclosures
near the homestead, and all the boundaries are netted
against rabbits. With only one exception, about 25
years ago, there has never been any trouble from the
rabbit, and when on that occasion danger threatened with
a wave from the west the more cautious owners netted
their properties.
Another feature that has contributed to the success of
wool-growing in this centre is the provision of trust
bores. Balarang is watered almost entirely by bore
drains, which reticulate through every paddock, and the
supply is of excellent quality, and never-failing. Nor do
the sheep have to pad very far for water. An average
rainfall of 21 in. per annum keeps all this country sweet
and sound, and besides its grazing virtues the property
has proved to be excellent breeding country, but is not
adaptable to cultivation.
Peculiar to the formation of the run are numerous sand
basins, which fill up after rain, and one of these near the
homestead is so good that the owner has it equipped
with mill and well, the water therefrom, which percolates
through the sand and is clear and fresh, giving an extra
dependable supply to the house, in addition to the catch-
ment tanks of 15,000 gallons storage capacity provided
for domestic use. The unlimited supply of water at
Balarang enables it to be laid on to most of the station
buildings, but especially to the woolshed, sheep yards,
men’s quarters, cottages, gardens, &c., and it is all more
or less “soft.”
Mr. and Mrs. Stirton’s homestead stands in the heart
of a belt of timber, and was constructed in 1928 out of
“Trueline” cement bricks alongside the site of the old
house, which stood for many years. The structure of
the new place is a feature of modern homebuilding, for
the cement bricks, made from 3 parts sand and 1 of
cement by a machine which holes and groves them for
the steel reinforcing and to take the binding of liquid
cement, make a tremendously strong wall. These bricks
are also ideal for tank construction. Furthermore, they
make a very cool house, which retains warmth during
the cold weather, and the climate at Balarang rarely ex-
ceeds a summer temperature of 100 degs., with sunny
balmy days and frosty nights in the winter time.
In designing the homestead the owner and his wife
have provided every comfort. The light and power is
from a 110-volt plant, hot and cold water service is laid
on to all necessary parts, and there is a spacious freezer,
septic equipment, &c. Wide gauzed-in verandahs sur-
A MOB OF YOUNG MERINO RAMS
BALAR A N G, N E If 7 SOU T 11 JV AL E S


MR. P. E. STIR-
TON'S HOME.
THIS PICTURE AND
THE ONE OPPOSITE
GIVE A PANORAMIC
VIEW OF BALA-
RANG HOMESTEAD
NO. 1 STUD MERINO FLOCK
BALAR A \ G, NE W SOUTH WALES


SOME OF THE
OUTBUILDINGS
— THE TENNIS
COURT IS ON
THE RIGHT
TYPICAL COUNTRY TO BE SEEN ON BALARANG
nA LA RAN G, NE W S O UT H W ALES


EWES MUSTERED FOR SHEARING.
THE FIGURE IN THE FOREGROUND HAS FOR 25 YEARS BEEN OVERSEER ON BALARANG
round the house, while the luxury of the interior includes
deep cosy lounge rooms, billiard room, and a wireless
set on which can be heard stations of foreign countries.
As yet the gardens and environment are in process of
creation.
The woolshed is a quarter of a mile away, and con-
tains 14 stands of machines, adequate cover for sheep,
ample light, well-built yards in which dust is kept down
to a minimum, good huts, &c. The shearing takes place
in July/August, and dipping about three weeks later.
TYPICAL VIEW OF THE COUNTRY IN ONE OF THE STUD PADDOCKS
nALAR A .V G, NE U 7 SOU T 11 WAL E S


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE COUNTRY
1 he usual number of sheep and lambs shorn per annum is
approximately 23,000 head, this being the maximum capa-
city of the station, with judicious stocking of the paddocks.
1 here are no ticks, lice, footrot, fluke or worms on
Balarang, but nevertheless precautions are taken to keep
the sheep immune, and the only trouble occasionally ex-
A FINE WATERHOLE ON WHALAN CREEK
BA L A RAN C, NE IV SOU TII WALES


THE SHEEP YARDS AT THE WOOL SHED
perienced is from the fly. Mr. Stirton has capable men
to assist in the management of the property, and the care
of the stock is reflected in their condition, and particularly
in the state of the wool sent to the Sydney sales. The
clip invariably sells at a good average figure, and is a
64’s quality, true, shafty, and full of character.
The practice has been always and foremost to cull the
flock as heavily as possible at Balarang, and at the same
time to pay special attention to the classing of the young
sheep. The whole flock is of Collaroy foundation, and
for many years has enjoyed a high reputation throughout
the district, buyers always being on hand to book up
surplus sheep for forward delivery. The standard that
has been reached in the general flock, indeed, is the direct
result of applying to good sheep a wise discretion in the
class of rams used, attention to pastures and strict man-
agement. In 1929 all the breeding ewes averaged 10
lbs. 10 ozs., and the wethers 13 lbs. with twelve months’
growth of fleece.
The Balarang stud Merino flock was formed in 1904
with 300 special stud ewes purchased from the well-
known Collaroy stud, near Merriwa, N.S.W. The rams
were drawn from the same source and were of the type
of big-framed, plain-bodied sheep that has been held and
improved upon right through to the present day. The
only introductions of rams from studs other than Col-
laroy comprise one ram from Austin-Wanganella, one
from Murgha, two from Deniliquin Stud Park, and three
from Uardry. To-day there are about 800 breeding
ewes in the stud, which is flock No. 4 in the Register of
Stud Merino Flocks of Australia. It is one of the best-
known of the old established smaller studs of New South
Wales, especially in the north-west, where there are
flockmasters who have been on the books for many years
as regular buyers. The confidence that has been won is
due to the adherence to pure line breeding, and the con-
centration upon a continually improving standard of
quality. The classing is entrusted to the capable hands
of Mr. R. R. Futter, and an inspection to-day shows the
sheep to be essentially suited to their environment. The
main characteristics of both the stud and the general
flock, apart from their good frames and plain bodies, are
style and uniformity, a clean tip being a special feature,
whilst the sheep show a sound constitution in their
sturdy, well-set-up appearance, which has the air of
breeding and quality.
At the various district shows fleeces from Balarang
stud have been awarded special prizes for a great many
years, the most recent of these being a cup for the best
two fleeces at the Inverell Show in March 1929. The
first prize for fleeces at the Moree Show also went to
exhibits from Balarang. These latter successes are im-
portant, inasmuch as they prove that the flat open plains
country at Balarang and the rich dark soils of this splen-
did property are able to produce a valuable, commercial
type of medium quality Merino wool well above the
average.
"The lambing percentages as a rule are good. The
lambs come along quickly, and as the drop is arranged
for September, the young stock have as a rule plenty of
nA L A RAN G. NE JV S O UT 11 JV ALES


MR. AND MRS. P. E. STIRTON WITH THEIR FAMILY ON THE FRONT VERANDAH
good, sweet green feed to give them a start in life.
A herd of Durham cattle is run at Balarang, number-
ing about 400 head at the present time. These do well,
and good prices are obtained for the fats turned off at
regular intervals.
Although no stallion is kept now, the owner maintains
his interest in horses by having on hand a number of
good thoroughbreds, with which he races at the various
picnic meetings around the district. Lord Bona Rosa
(imp.) used to be the sire at Balarang, and before him
the stallion was Cobham.
Mr. P. E. Stirton is the yougest of three sons
A WINTER'S EVENING AT BALARANG HOMESTEAD
nALAR A N C. XK JV S O UT II WAL E S


of the late Reverend Dr.
Thomas Stirton, D.D.,
late of Inverell, N.S.W.,
who left his native heath
in Perthshire, Scotland, as
a young man to come to
Australia. He spent his
first few years in the
colony on the Paterson,
and in 1876 removed to
Inverell, where he made
his home up to the time
of his death.
Mr. P. E. Stirton re-
ceived his education at
the Sydney Grammar
School, and from there
matriculated and studied
for the law, afterwards
practising as a solicitor in
M oree for the next
twenty years. Whilst
there he became interested
in the progress of the dis-
trict from the pastoral
point of view by entering
into partnership with his
brother in 1895, the re-
sults of this enterprise
finding expression in the
highly improved state of
Balarang to-day. Mr.
Stirton, who has lived at Balarang for many years,
married the daughter of Mr. M. L. Deloitte, of
Neutral Bay, Sydney, and their family consists of three
sons, Jack, Percy and Thomas, all of whom were or are
being educated at The Armidale School, and one
SIX KOOKABURRAS COME EVERY DAY
TO BE FED; TWO WERE CAMERA SHY
daughter, Nancy. Each
of the sons is under-
going a thorough training
in the pastoral industry
with a view to continuing
the development of a na-
tural gift for sheep hus-
bandry, so there should
be no halt in the progress
of the property for very
many years to come.
The eldest son, Jack,
has just completed the
two years’ course in sheep
and wool at the Sydney
Technical College, secur-
ing an honours pass in
the final examinations;
he also secured second
prize in the sheep judging
competition for students
at the 1929 Sydney Sheep
Show. The second son,
Percy, has just completed
his first year at this col-
lege, securing an honours
pass. The youngest son,
Thomas, is still at school.
Mr. P. E. Stirton
served in the South Afri-
can war thirty years ago,
and has travelled exten-
sively throughout the world; he is also the owner
of a small run named Lorraine, near Inverell. He
was interested in other important properties, and at all
times has been a strong factor in the welfare of
the district.
BOWER BIRDS PLAY-HOUSE CLOSE TO THE HOMESTEAD
HALAR A N G, NE IF S 0 U TII IF ALES


GUNYERWARILDI, WARIALDA, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Messrs. Mackay Bros.
GUN\ ERWARILDI SIAT I ON lies about 500
miles north-west from Sydney, and is approached
by either of two right-hand turn-offs between
the 21 and 22 mile pegs of the Warialda to Boggabilla-
road. It is the home of Mr. Ronald Mackay and his
brother Donald, together with the latter’s family, having
The property has an area of 28,000 acres freehold, as
well as a few thousand acres of leased lands, and for the
most part consists of undulating black soil downs that
have a sprinkling of box and other timber, and a good
deal of stone. Everywhere the country is picturesque,
now that the paddocks are highly improved, but most
FRONT VIEW OF THE GUNYERWARILDI HOUSE
been purchased by them and another brother, Mr. John
Mackay, in 1891 from the late Mr. P. C. Campbell, of
Inverell Station. The ensuing years have seen Gunyer-
warildi improved to the extent of ranking to-day with the
most beautiful pastoral homes of New South Wales,
whilst its value for Merino wool growing and cattle
fattening is likewise outstanding as the result of continual
careful management of the country.
beautiful is the wide outlook from the central “Sugar-
loaf.” 'Ebis panorama indeed was the deciding factor
when the Mackay brothers came up to inspect the run in
1891. I hey visualised good results from grazing, despite
the reputation that the whole of this district in its natural
state was perhaps the worst watered country in New
South Wales at that time, but ruled agriculture out of
the question because of the stony nature of the black


FAT BULLOCKS ON GUNYERWARILDI
areas, and the unsuitable distribution of rainfall on the
red parts of the property. Subsequent events proved their
judgment to be correct. Wheat farming has never been
successful, but under systematic, progressive improvement,
carried out enterprisingly, the owners have lifted the
capacity of Gunyerwarildi for carrying stock to 25,000
sheep, about 1400 head of cattle and nearly 100 horses
at the present time.
Gunyerwarildi dates back in the history of the north-
west to the late ’fifties, when Mr. Sloper Cox secured
and pioneered the original parts of the run. 1 he lease-
hold country was taken up by settlers, and when it
changed hands in 1891 the combined property had an
area of 18,000 acres freehold, 54,000 acres leased lands,
and 27,000 acres of occupation license. Ihe latter was
held subject to resumption at any time. Nevertheless
the Mackays spent a lot of money and time improving
these brigalow and prickly pear areas, and in 1922 made
some 11,000 acres over to the Government for closer
settlement. A condition was that the land was to be
used by returned soldiers. Four men were established on
suitable living areas, and all the boundary fences, which
had been netted, together with the permanent water im-
provements, &c., were given to them free. This is an
isolated case of successful closer settlement in this district.
To-day there are 37 paddocks and six rabbit proof
STATION-BRED FIVE-YEAR-OLD MERINO FLOCK EWES
G UNYE R W A RILI) I, NE IF SOU TII WAL E S


A WEALTH OF BLOOM IN THE GUNYERWARILDI HOMESTEAD GARDEN
GUN YERIfARIL in, NEW SOUTH WALES


enclosures on the property, made secure from the pest
at a cost of 2s. per acre apart from the cost of wire
netting, and apart also from the expenditure of over
£IO,OOO for the renovation of all the fencing after the
place changed hands. The surface tanks formerly on the
run were enlarged considerably, and with the advent of
found that maize was the safest and most economical
feed. The drought from 1919 to 1922 proved this when
over 20,000 sheep were kept alive on the present run at
a cost of 10s. per head, and further convinced the owners
that it pays to feed sheep on country when the dry period
is not too prolonged.
A LADY HILLINGDON ROSE IN THE GUNYERWARILDI GARDEN
the sub-artesian bore in the early 1900’s, of which the
late Mr. Richard Capel, of Gournama, was the pioneer
in this neighbourhood, the progress with grazing was
rapid and sure. After pulling through the financial crisis
of the ’nineties the owners were caught with 64,000 sheep
on Glendon and Gunyerwarildi in the big drought of
’Ol and ’O2, and as a result of that experience it was
1 he feed consists of an infinite variety of herbage and
grasses in a normal year, with plenty of couch in the
gullies and creek beds. Upon the open rolling downs the
tall, tufty, heat and frost resisting myall grass is a joy to
behold, as well as providing great feed for the stock.
I here are no watercourses of any consequence, and the
supply of water, therefore, is artificial, consisting of sur-
GUNYERWARILDI, NEW SOUTH WALES


Top- —
GUNYERWARILDI HOME-
STEAD, SHOWING THE NEW
BUNGALOW THAT HAS BEEN
ADDED TO THE OLD HOME
Below —
MUSTERING FAT BULLOCKS
ON GUNYERWARILDI


UNDER THE SHADE
OF A PEPPER TREE
FIFTY YEARS OLD
BEAUTIFUL
DELPHINIUMS
AND A KENTIA
BRAHEA PALM
G UNYE R WA RILDI. NEW SOUTH WA EES


THE DRIVE UP
TO THE FRONT
ENTRANCE
END VIEW OF THE
NEW AND OLD
BUNGALOWS
CUNY ER W A RILD I, NEW SOU T H WA LE S


TYPICAL FLOCK MERINO RAMS
face tanks of several thousand yards capacity, and upon
sub-artesian bores of a depth of about 150 ft. on the
average. Croppa Creek, which in the early 70’s watered
20,000 head of cattle, is now silted up, and other old
flows, such as Hughie’s Arm and Sugar Loaf Creeks,
are no longer of use. The rainfall averages 26 in. per
annum, which also is less than in former years, but except
for periodical short dry spells it is sufficient to keep the red
and black country well balanced in feed. Good shallow
wells are also utilised for watering purposes, and the
whole of the supply is lifted by mills into retaining
tanks, and watered to the stock by troughing. There
are no open tanks on the run apart from the surface
reservoirs.
The flock is of pure breeding, typical of the most valu-
able Wanganella strains, and is used solely for producing
high quality Merino wool. Until 1903 the sheep were
of Tasmanian blood, and the property had a stud flock.
The whole of these sheep averaged 5.4 lbs. per head when
the present owners took over in 1891, but within ten
years the yield had been raised to an average of 10 lbs.
8 ozs. per head. After the stud was dropped fine wool
FLOCK MERINO EWES ON GUNYERWARILDI
CUNY ERWA RILDI, NEW SOUTH WALES


THE BILLIARD ROOM
AT GUNYERWARILDI
HOMESTEAD
IN THE
DRAWING ROOM
A CORNER OF
THE LOUNGE
CUNY ERWARILDI, NEW SOUTH WALES


A VIEW OF THE GARDEN FROM THE VERANDAH
rams were introduced from the well-known Coonong
flock, in Riverina, and put with the Tasmanian ewes
retained, the cross being an unqualified success, suiting
the local conditions nicely. Since then only fine wool
rams of the most suitable blood have been used, and care-
ful attention has lifted the Gunyerwarildi flock to an
even standard of quality, typifying the true Peppin
characteristics of big frames, plain bodies, uniform con-
formation, and strong constitutions.
The covering is long in the staple, and is described by
brokers as fine wool of excellent quality, long, bright
and slightly burry. The yield per head at the annual
shearing each October has been maintained at over 10
lbs., and in 1929 the ewes averaged 10
lbs. 6 ozs. for twelve months’ growth.
Lambing takes place after shearing,
from approximately 12,000 ewes, and
the lamb-marking figures are invariably
above 80 per cent. In 1928 the natural
increase was 81 per cent., and the whole
of this crop of lambs was disposed of in
one lot at £1 per head.
The shed contains 16 stands of ma-
chines, and is situated one mile from
the homestead. Built in the 80’s along-
side the original shed, which now serves
as sweating pens, it is equipped with
modern appointments, including men’s
huts costing £lOOO to comply with the
Act. It is worth noting that the
shearers state the old accommodation
was the more comfortable.
Gunyerwarildi is noted also for its
cattle, which are run on account of the
good rough feed available. These pad-
pocks are grazed off with sheep after
the big stock are removed, and the prac-
tice has given good results. The herd
to-day numbers about 700 breeders,
with which are run Durham bulls. In
earlier times the herd at Gunyerwarildi
was Hereford, and the story goes that
one of the drovers, Jack Timmins, used
to drove mobs of about 400 head to
Sydney with only two dogs. These
dogs were well known for their habit
of cutting out any stray cattle that
got into the mob at night, &c., and
are said to be unique in the annals of
droving.
The early cattle that came from
Queensland developed pleuro, and upon
the advice of Dr. Vallick, of Sydney,
the owners burnt every affected beast
completely instead of inoculating them,
and this policy has cut down losses to
a minimum, not 30 head having been
lost since 1910. The owners shoot and
burn every beast at the first sign of this
disease, and there is no doubt it is a
certain preventive of its spread.
In addition to its wool and beef proclivities Gunyer-
warildi is a show place of the north-west, its atmosphere
of home life and hospitality being typically Australian.
His Excellency the Governor-General, Lord Stonehaven,
was a guest there during his tour of the north-west in
May 1929. Improvements were made to the homestead
taken over by the present owners, who in 1927 erected
beside this dwelling a modern bungalow residence, in
which is incorporated every luxury and comfort known
to the home builder. There are 22 rooms and 4 bath-
rooms, long shady verandahs and protected lounges,
whilst in the extensive gardens Mrs. Mackay cultivates
innumerable roses and a profusion of other flowers, which
THE DRIVE TO THE GARAGE
G UNY E R IE ARIL I) I, NK W S 0 UT H WAL E S


THE LATE MR. JOHN MACKAY, SEN.
MR. JOHN MACKAY, JUN.
MR. DONALD MACKAY
MR. RONALD MACKAY
GUNYER IT A R I EDI, NE JV S OUT II IT AL K S


make a beautiful display
beneath the trees and
shrubberies set amongst
wide lawns.
J'he birthplace of the
Mackay family was in
Strathnavar, Scotland, and
their clan figured promi-
nently in the Reformation
on the side of William of
Orange. Mr. Murdoch
Mackay, grandfather of
the owners of Gunyer-
warildi, was born in
Sutherlandshire, Scotland,
in 1799, whence he went
to manage the sheep farm
of his kinsman, Sir Eben-
ezer Mackay, of Callert
Nether, Lochaber. In
1880 John Mackay, sen.,
purchased Mullengudgery
Station in New South
Wales, and soon afterwards retired, leaving that
40,000-acre run to his three sons. He died at Burwood
in 1010. Mullengudgery was then held by Messrs.
Donald, Ronald and John Mackay until they purchased
Gunyerwarildi, and during this partnership the brothers
acquired a half-share with Mr. George Magill in
Weilmoringle.
In 1025 Messrs. Donald and Ronald Mackay bought
out their brother John, who became a director of Harri-
son, Jones and Devlin, and upon the absorption of the
company by Goldsbrough, Mort and Co. Limited w T as
elected to the directorate
of that company.
Mr. Donald Mackay
was born at Lai Lai West
in 1858, and is the eldest
son of the late John Mac-
kay. In 1901 he married
Margaret Kate, daughter
of Mr. Thomas Hobbes,
Police Magistrate, of Port
Macquarie, and there is a
family of one son, Donald
Reay Alackay, and four
daughters.
Mr. John Mackay, who
was president of the
Graziers’ Association of
N.S.W. for some years,
and was also a director of
B.A.W.R.A. Limited, is
the second son of the late
Mr. John Mackay, whilst
Mr. Ronald Mackay is
the youngest of the brothers. He takes a very keen
interest in the district, is president of the P.P. Board,
president of the Inverell Picnic Race Club, and vice-
president of the Inverell Polo Club. He has also held
office as president of Warialda Amateur Race Club, being
an enthusiastic racing man. His mare Chipwood, by
Chipilly, has won a great number of races, including the
Grafton Gold Cup of 1929.
Another brother who resides at Gunyerwarildi, but
who takes no active part in the working of the run
owing to ill-health, is Mr. Murdoch Mackay.
RUFUS, MR. D. MACKAYS FAVOURITE HORSE
THREE DAUGHTERS OF MR. AND MRS. DONALD MACKAY, EN ROUTE TO MUSTER CATTLE
G UN Y E RJV A RILD I, XE W SOU Tll JV AL E S


BURRUNDULLA, MUDGEE, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Mr. Vincent Dowling Cox
L\ ING along the southern banks of the Cudgegong
River, within a mile of the town of Mudgee,
N.S.W., 200 miles from Sydney, and comprising
an area of 2284 acres freehold of intensely cultivated
hats, of which 1499 acres are worked by the owner and
. 85 acres are leased to tenants —deep, rich, alluvial land
that is both fertile and picturesque, with a little high
land, where he was born in 1764, and whence he left to
make the voyage to Australia in 1800, arriving at Syd-
ney Cove in that year. In 1815 he was the recipient of
a grant of land near Bathurst, named Hereford, in recog-
nition of his valuable services in supervising the con-
struction of the main western highway over the Blue
Mountains. After some time, his son George was placed
THE BURRUNDULLA HOUSE
ground here and here, Burrundulla is the home and pro-
perty of Mr. Vincent Dowling Cox, and part of one of
the historic pastoral holdings of New South Wales. Mr.
George Cox, grandfather of the present owner, and his
brother, Henry Cox, took up the property as a double
Crown grant in 1828, and Burrundulla has remained ever
since in the possession of this notable family of pioneers.
he father of these two brothers was Captain William
Cox, a son of Robert Cox, of Wimborne, Dorset, Eng-
in charge of Hereford. Captain Cox had in 1800 pur-
chased Brush harm, near Parramatta, and at the time
when he undertook the construction of the road over the
Blue Mountains was living on his property, Clarendon,
near Windsor. In about 1810 Winbourne, at Mulgoa,
was acquired, and here a fine herd of dairy cattle was
established in due course under the management of his
other son Henry. Each of these three places took a lead-
ing part in the early settlement of the colony.


CLYDESDALE MARES AND FOALS SHELTERING BEHIND A HAWTHORN HEDGE
In 1821 George Cox made an expedition to the country
which lay north from Bathurst for the purpose of expand-
ing his family’s interests, and, following the tracks and
descriptions of Lieutenant Lawson, who was his friend,
decided to form a cattle run upon the open pastures
watered hy the Cudgegong. Upon his return to Here-
ford he sent for his brother Henry, and in the same year
they set out with plant and 500 head of cattle and
camped at Munna, acting upon the advice of Lieutenant
Lawson, who was with the party. The cattle, however,
strayed, and were eventually located further up the river
in some good swamps. The disposition of the cattle to
these swamps influenced George and Henry Cox to move
from Munna, and in 1828 they formed Burrundulla,
which at that time embraced a considerable area of
country. At the same time Lieutenant Lawson took up
a tract of land on his own across the river, and he and
the Messrs. Cox constituted the farthest north-western
pioneering settlement in the State.
By dint of draining and cultivating, and cautious
management, the Cox brothers soon had their run in an
important stage of development, which was to prove in
the years ahead a valuable acquisition to the district, and
the foundation of Burrundulla’s subsequent success in the
industry. In 1845 the manager, Mr. Head, was super-
seded by Mr. George Henry Cox, eldest son of George
Cox, and the father of the present owner, and during the
ensuing half century the property became famous as the
headquarters of one of the foremost flocks of line woolled
Merino sheep in the State; in addition to the sheep there
was a particularly fine herd of Hereford cattle on the
property until 1890. About 1896 the Merino stud was
dispersed, and in that year the late Mr. G. H. Cox passed
over the reins of management to his youngest son, the
present owner, whose impulse was to make greater use of
the rich chocolate soil by fattening stock, and cultivating
lucerne on a scientific scale. With the gradual decrease
in the area of Burrundulla as the district advanced this
B UR R U \ DU L LA, NE W SOU T H IV A LE S


A DRAFT OF BORDER
LEICESTER - CORRIE-
DALE LAMBS READY
FOR MARKET
A LOAD OF LUCERNE
HAY ON THE WAY
TO THE RAILROAD
CARTING IN PRIME
LUCERNE HAY
H U R R UN D VLL A, A EIV S 0 UT II IV AL E S


GROUP OF SIXTEEN CLYDESDALE MARES
proved to be a wise move, and is the basis of the pro-
perty’s business to-day.
Another feature of Burrundulla’s development is the
early date at which share farming was practised. The
records disclose that as far back as 1847 there were some
half-dozen tenant farmers to whom the late Mr. G. H.
Cox leased country on liberal terms. Five years later the
system was in general vogue, although it was a difficult
matter to find suitable farmers owing to the lure of the
goldfields. By 1864 the number of share farmers on
Burrundulla had increased to 26, but at the present time
the estate supports seven tenant farmers, some of whom,
it may be mentioned, were born on their farms. At a
recent date several of these men were enabled by Mr.
V. D. Cox to purchase their holdings, upon which was
placed an upset price of £75 per acre.
These farms nestle among the lucerne flats, and have
an air of flourishing independence. Elms, oaks, Lom-
bardy poplars and walnuts, with clumps of native gums,
pines and weeping willows are studded about the pad-
docks, line the banks of the river, or stand about the
homestead, which dominates the whole scene from a rise,
all forming a most beautiful landscape.
A pine drive leads to the homestead, a two-storied
brick residence erected in 1864 by the late Mr. G. 11.
Cox in place of the old cottage which was on the Hats,
and although an old home, it has been brought up to
date with the installation of present-day conveniences,
such as to make of it one of the show places of the dis-
trict. A rare collection of silver plate and other trophies
is in the possession of Mr. Cox, dating as far back as
1841, for an exhibit of wine from Winbourne. Prettv
gardens surround old Burrundulla homestead, whilst the
conical peak of Mount Frome, set in the ranges across
the river, gives a pleasing touch to the outlook. Behind
the house, framing a stone courtyard, in the centre
of which is a quaint well, is an immense grape vine,
planted when the homestead was being built, and this
II UR R UN I) U L LA, NE W S() UT II WAL K S


BULLOCKS FATTENED ON THE RICH PASTURES OF BURRUNDULLA
HARVESTING LUCERNE HAY
BURRUXI) U L L A, X E //' .V 0 U Til If'A LE S


SPRING HOLES ON
FLATS IN FRONT OF
THE HOMESTEAD
THE SWIM-
MING POOL,
WITH CLUMP
OF ENGLISH
TREES IN THE
BACKGROUND
BU RRU N I) ULL A, NE If S () U TII WAL E S


A VIEW ACROSS THE GARDEN OF THE LUCERNE FLATS
FRONT VIEW OF THE BURRUNDULLA HOMESTEAD
/> URR V \ DILL ./, NE W S()U T U JVA LE S


gnarled and twisted old monarch has a trunk over a foot
in thickness.
Burrundulla, which is a native name for an indigenous
reed, is subdivided to-day into numerous small paddocks
for cultivating and for grazing purposes, and is watered
along the northern boundary by the river, and elsewhere
TRIMMING ENDS OF BALED LUCERNE AFTER BEING PRESSED
by abundant springs and wells. The latter are from 10
to 12 ft. deep on the flats, and on the higher ground
go down to about 40 ft., the water being of excel-
lent quality for every use. Taken over a long period
the ’annual rainfall has averaged 24.70
in., whilst there is an almost perfect
climate.
The main crop, of course, is the
lucerne, and whilst a great deal of Bur-
rundulla is already devoted to growing
this fodder, the owner has laid plans
to cultivate still further areas with it
for grazing. Mr. V. I). Cox expresses
himself as convinced that lucerne is the
most profitable agency, in this district
at any rate, for fattening, and the results
he is getting certainly speak for them-
selves. It returns handsome prices mar-
keted “on the hoof,” and does infinitely
better than clover. The system adopted
when lucerne is sown for purely hay
purposes is to plough up the plant when
about twelve years old, and for three
years sow such crops as maize or pumpkins; then the
ground is again put down to lucerne. It is of interest
to note that the lucerne devoted to hay making is
not allowed to be grazed, and seven cuts are ob-
tained annually. As an example of the prime quality
of the hay produced at Burrundulla, and around the
district, the Mudgee Pastoral and Agricultural Associa-
tion were awarded the certificate of merit and bronze
medal at the British Empire Exhibition in 1924 for a
display of lucerne grown in the district.
In addition to lucerne cultivation, and some cereal
crops, the property runs about 1000 breeding ewes of the
Corriedale type, from which fat lambs
are raised for the metropolitan markets
by crossing them with first-class Border
Leicester rams. A fair number of fat
wethers are turned off the place annu-
ally, as well as the fat lambs, but such
excellent country is it for fattening
stock on account of the prolific growth
of natural herbage and grasses, apart
from the added value of the lucerne,
that a regular supply of fat cattle is sold
to one of the local butchers. One can-
not, in fact, note the splendid type of
cattle which are depastured on Burrun-
dulla without realising the enormous
scope of its soft, fertile paddocks, which
seem to be evergreen.
The property is noted, too, for its
stud of Clvdesdale horses, the stallion
in command at the present time being Prince of
Buchlyvie, a handsome, upstanding aristocrat of the
breed imported from New Zealand.
The females are likewise a classic lot, and prizes have
LOADING BALED LUCERNE
been won at the Royal Show in Sydney with them or
their progeny, while the large number of ribbons in the
office testify to their success at the local show. At the
1929 R.A.S. Show this stud was represented by four
animals in a group of five Clydesdales sent down from
the Mudgee district, which gained third place to groups
B U R R U N DULL A, NE IV S() UT II IV AL E S


ONE OF THE GAR-
DEN WALKS IN A
SPRING SETTING
A PART OF THE
SHRUBBERY
AN EXTENSIVE
VIEW OF THE
LUCERNE FLATS
AND RANGES
BEYOND
BURRIIN1) U L L A, NK IV S()U T II IVA LE S


THE BURRUNDULLA LIBRARY
from Culcairn and Sydney.
The late Mr. George Cox was born in England in
1795, and married a daughter of Archibald Bell, who
held a commission in the 102nd Regiment of the New
South Wales corps. With his death in 1868 there passed
away a devoted colonist of the highest character, leaving
a family of twelve sons and daughters. His eldest son,
the late Hon. George Henry Cox, was born at Win-
bourne, Mulgoa, in 1824, and died at Burrundulla in
November 1901, after a distinguished
career in the political life of the State,
as well as enjoying an outstanding asso-
ciation with the development of the pas-
toral industry. He was a member of
the first elected Parliament of New
South Wales, having been elected to
represent the Mudgee district, which
took in in those days Wellington and
Molong, his opponent being Sir Saul
Samuel, afterward Agent-General for
New South Wales in London. The
late Mr. G. H. Cox also left a family
of twelve sons and daughters, of whom
Mr. V. D. Cox, the present owner of
Burrundulla, is the youngest son, being
born on the estate in 1875.
Spending his early days mostly at
Winbourne, Mr. V. D. Cox entered The
King’s School, Parramatta, whence after
completing his education he went to
England for twelve months, returning
in 1894 to take a course of scientific
farming at Hawkesbury College for
two years. In 1896 he went to Bur-
rundulla, where he made his home and
reared his family of three sons and three
daughters, his wife being a daughter of
Mr. C. O. Lamb, of Parramatta.
Mr. Cox shares the traditional
enthusiasm of his forebears for the pro-
gress of the Mudgee district as a whole.
His practical and far-reaching ideals
have been responsible for assisting very
materially in local development, although
he holds aloof from active politics, with
which, nevertheless, he keeps in close
touch. Since February 1905 he has
been president of the local Agricultural
Society, and is a member of the council
of the Royal Agricultural Society of
N.S.W., and vice-president of the
Clydesdale Horse Society, whilst for
many years he has been a Justice of the
Peace and a Deputy Sheriff. Mr. Cox,
who is a life member of the Historical
Society of New South Wales, also is
chairman of directors of the Mudgee
Dairy Company Limited, and a trustee
of the show ground, the hospital, and
the general cemetery.
Of Mr. Cox’s family, the eldest son,
Mr. V. G. Cox, who has qualified as
a veterinary surgeon at the Sydney University, has
just lately, in company with the second son, Mr. G. C.
Cox, a graduate of the Hawkesbury Agricultural
College, taken over one of the lucerne farms on the
estate. The third son is at present a student at the
Hawkesbury Agricultural College. They were all edu-
cated at The King’s School, and were the third genera-
tion to receive their early training at this oldest of the
Great Public Schools of New South Wales.
TWO-YEAR-OLD CLYDESDALE STALLION, BURRUNDULLA LORD LYNN
—SIRE SCOTLAND'S FOOTPRINT (733), DAM LYLA (566)
nVRRUAI) U L L A, A' E W SOU T II JVA LE S


MR. VINCENT DOWLING COX
AND HIS THREE SONS
V. G. COX
W. R. COX
G. C. COX
/>’ URRUND U L L A , NE If S()U T H WALE S


A REMINDER OF EARLY DAYS. THE
GRAPE VINE, THE PUMP, AND COBBLE
STONES AT THE BACK OF THE HOUSE
li UR R UN 1) U L LA. A E //' S 0 UT II IV AL E S


EDINGLASSIE, MUSWELLBROOK, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Messrs. White Bros.
There are very few stations in Australia that have
been retained by the one family for over 100
years. Edinglassie is one of these beautiful old
pastoral homes, and comprises at the present time about
30,000 acres freehold, f rom which are turned off regu-
larly over 5000 head of fat cattle every year. The pro-
perty lies within a few miles of the town of Muswell-
brook, New South Wales, on the Hunter River, in the
Tucka Tucka Station in New South Wales, on the border
of Queensland, 21 miles east of Boggabilla, and 1600
miles south of Brunette Downs.
Tucka Tucka, which comprises 22,000 acres freehold
of good grass and herbage “flood” country, mostly black
alluvial soil (no better fattening country in N.S.W.),
with a 26-in. rainfall, and a double frontage to the
Macintyre River, was famous in the days of its former
A CORNER OF THE EDINGLASSIE HOMESTEAD
heart of a 27-in. rainfall district that is famous for its
deep, luxuriant flats and grassy hills, and is the head-
quarters of an historic stud herd of Aberdeen-Angus
cattle.
1 he present owners, Messrs. James, Bruce, and Alan
White, Ruth White, an d M rs. Dutton, conduct their
extensive operations in cattle under the name of Messrs.
A hite Bros., and in conjunction with Edinglassie they
are part-owners of Brunette Downs, a vast cattle run in
the Northern Territory, and other places, including
owner, the late Mr. J. R. Smith, as the breeding ground
of many famous racehorses, including three winners of
the Melbourne Cup—Gaulus, The Grafter, and Acrasia.
It is used for fattening store cattle exclusively, and when
they are in forward condition the stock are sent to Mus-
wellbrook, to he topped off at Edinglassie. This business
accounts for the trucking of about 5000 head of cattle
from w ari alda annually. A good number of fats are
sent also to Melbourne at different times.
In the past 1 ucka 1 ucka was a large breeding


STUD COWS AND CALVES ON THE RICH RIVER FLATS
EDINGLASSIE STUD ABERDEEN-ANGUS BULL, CAPTAIN BURGESS, BY MASTER BURGESS (IMP.)
EI)IN G L A SSI E, NE W SOU T II IV A EES


A SUNLIT CORNER OF THE
EDINGLASSIE GARDEN
ED INC LASSIE, NE W SOUTH WALES


A YOUNG EDINGLASSIE BULL
place for horses for India, for which good blood stallions
were kept, but only horses for station use, and a few polo
ponies, are bred at the present time, one of the
sires being Paddington Junior, by Paddington—
Bucharia, whose get were being broken in last winter
(1929).
Mr. B ruce White resides at Tucka Tucka homestead,
and his brother Alan at a new residence named Doonkami,
four miles away, which is one of the most up-to-date
homes in the north. Mr. James White, the managing
director of the hrm, lives at Edinglassie, where his
father, the late Hon. J. C. White, laid the founda-
tion of the present Aberdeen-Angus stud in 1880.
Before this date he went in for
Devons and Herefords, but came
to the conclusion that for all round
utility in beef production and for rais-
ing the average standard of beef in
general herds, the black polled type of
cattle offered the greatest scope. His
first purchases of the Aberdeen-Angus
breed were from the late Mr. J.
R. Smith, and were descended from
high class stock imported from Gui-
sachen, Gavenswood and Kirkside stud
farms in Scotland.
In 1886 the late Hon. J. C. White
went into partnership with his brother,
Mr. F. J. White, and purchased cows
and bulls from I). G. Clark and Rich-
ard Binnie, of Victoria, two years later
acquiring the entire stud herd bred at
1 ucka 1 ucka, and some time subse-
quently buying the property itself. All
these cattle were run at Edinglassie,
and were strengthened in 1897 with
50 stud cows purchased from D. G.
Clark. These cows had the hall mark
of Aberdeen-Angus breeding, and had
been served by Prince of Richmond, an
imported hull by Souter Johnny, cham-
pion of his day in Great Britain, out
of the imported cow Fairlight, bred by
Sir George Macpherson-Grant, of Ball-
indalloch. In the same year Messrs.
J. C. and E. J. White bought the im-
ported bull Zulu, bred by the Exors.
of the late D. Mackinnon, Victoria,
and two bulls bred at Totara Estate,
N.Z., through Mr. Richard Binnie.
The owner spared no expense to
obtain high class sires for the develop-
ment of the Edinglassie herd, and in
1903 went to the stud of the Duke of
Richmond and Gordon for Carolus of
Mulben, and to Haynes Park, England,
for Quinton of Haynes. Each of these
bulls was regarded as the most out-
standing Aberdeen-Angus bull at the
time in England and Scotland, the
former being first and champion at
the Royal Counties Show, and the
latter first and reserve champion at the Royal Show in
England.
In 1904 the whole of Capt. S. G. Staughton’s stud
heifers were purchased from his Victorian stud, these
being in calf to the New Zealand champion Maori, which
was imported to Melbourne in 1901, and won the cham-
pionship at the Melbourne Royal. In 1906 Messrs.
White Bros, imported the well-known bull Everall, bred
by Mr. J. J. Cridlan, of Maisemore Park, Gloucester,
England, and a prominent prize winner as a yearling at
important shows in England. Born in 1905 Everall was
sired by Wizard of Maisemore from Evergreen 3rd, and
did well at Edinglassie. With him was imported
BACK VIEW OF HOMESTEAD, WITH THE WATER TOWER
EI)INCL A S S I E, NE IV SOU T H IV ALES


STUD ABERDEEN-ANGUS YEARLING HEIFERS
BULLOCKS FATTENING AT EDINGLASSIE AFTER BEING OVERLANDED FROM NORTH AUSTRALIA
EDINGLASSI E, NE IV SOU T II JV AL E S


GROUP OF STUD BULLS, UNDER TWO YEARS, AT EDINGLASSIE
STUD ABERDEEN-ANGUS COWS AND CALVES WATERING AT THE RIVER
EDING LASSIE , NEW SOUTH WALES


STUD COWS AND HEIFERS BRED AT EDINGLASSIE
THE HUNTER RIVER AT EDINGLASSIE
EDING LASSIE, NEW SOUTH WALES


A VIEW FROM THE HOMESTEAD
Rescobie, by Elshenda out of Risca, bred by Patrick
Chalmers at Aldbar Castle, Brechin, N.B.
The whole of Mr. Richard Binnie’s stud cows were
purchased soon after this, and when the White Brothers
dissolved partnership in 1908 the Edinglassie stud had
become probably the most noted stud of Aberdeen-Angus
cattle in Australia. Mr. F. J. White took over Saumarez
and Aherfoyle (Bald Blair) Stations and the cattle which
were running thereon, working under the name of F. J.
White and Sons, while the late Elon. J. C. White retained
Edinglassie and Tucka Tucka, together with their herds,
including the stud. These properties were divided after
making a valuation of the stock and adjusting the balance
in cash. There was absolutely no
splitting up of the stock whatever, so
that the Edinglassie stud was preserved
to its full breeding strength. The only
stock transferred were a few heifers
which were purchased by Messrs. F.
J. White and Sons in 1908, with which
to form the basis of a stud at Bald
Blair.
The late Hon. J. C. White added
two first class New Zealand-bred bulls,
Tartan and Harry Lauder, in 1914,
and seven heifers from Mr. J. C. M ac-
kinnon, and in 1916 further strength-
ened the stud with the purchase of the
outstanding bull Periscope of Kilbride,
and an equally fine sire in Proud Everard
of Maisemore, which came from one of
the most aristocratic families of Aberdeen-
Angus cattle in England, with innumer-
able prizes to his credit. Proud Ever-
ard was secured just in time to prevent
him going to Argentine buyers, who
had paid 1040 guineas for his grandsire.
Tiger and Titus were purchased in
1918 at the dispersal of Gladbrook herd
in New Zealand, at which prices ran up
to 465 guineas. About ten years ago
the present owners took over the control
of the stud and northern properties
under the name of White Bros., and
one of their first purchases, about 1920,
was Walhallow Prince of Noth, a bull
with a great reputation and with the
blood of notable families in his veins.
With him the Messrs. White Bros,
were successful at the Sydney Royal
Show in 1923.
In 1922 they purchased Master Bur-
gess of Tullochgribben from Mr. J.
Mackenzie, of Banffshire, who won first
prize at the Perth (Scotland) Show with
a heifer bv Master Burgess before the
bull came out to the Edinglassie stud.
Another bull of merit was bought at the
same time, namely, Dandaleith Erolo,
bred by Mr. John Philip, of Dandaleith,
Craigellachie, Scotland. Relations of
this sire have been succesful in the show
ring in England, Scotland, Argentina and New Zealand.
A year later the owners sold the imported bull Periscope
of Kilbride to Messrs. F. J. White and Sons for use at
Bald Blair, after having used him with good results for
six or seven years.
The imported bull Denoon Even Barney was purchased
at auction in Sydney in August 1927. Bred by the
trustees of the Estate of the late Alex. Whyte, Easter
Denoon, Forfarshire, Scotland, he was one of several
youngsters sent out to Australia by the Aberdeen-Angus
Cattle Society, and was judged by experts to be an excep-
tional bull. His sire was first as a two-year-old at the Angus
Show, and won the cup for the best animal bred in Forfar,
THE SCENE OF MANY A WELL-FOUGHT GAME
ED IN GLASS lE, NE IV SOUTH IV AE E S


BULLOCKS FATTENING ON THE RICH PASTURES OF EDINGLASSIE
STUD ABERDEEN-ANGUS COWS AND CALVES
EDINGLASSIE, NEW SOUTH WALES


THE
ENTRANCE HALL
AT EDINGLASSIE
A CORNER OF THE
LOUNGE AT
EDINGLASSIE
EDING LASSIE, NEIL SOUTH WALES


while his grandsire was first
at Angus as a three-year-old,
when he weighed over a ton,
and gained the cup for the
best bull, besides being sup-
reme champion of the show.
The imported bulls Mas-
ter Burgess, Dandaleith
Erolo, and Denoon Even
Barney are the leading sires
in the Edinglassie stud to-day.
Each possesses the charac-
teristics of the best type of
Aberdeen-Angus sire, and
the females with which they
are joined are no less aristo-
crats.
In May 1930, since the
foregoing was written, two
further introductions of sires
were made to the stud. One
of these. Black Edward
Glencarnock 3rd (41845)
(imp.), purchased by
Messrs. White Bros, for 610
guineas, bred by the Hon. J.
D. McGregor, Glencarnock
Stud, Brandon, Manitoba,
Canada, calved 6th Septem-
ber, 1928, was imported in
1929 by the N.S.W.
MR. JAMES WHITE
Department of Agriculture.
He is an outstanding bull,
by Edward Glencarnock
(’31940), dam Blackcap
Bixie 2nd (38527), by
Blackcap Burtis (33252).
Edward Glencarnock, a son
of the world-famed bull
Blackcap Revolution
(27530), sold by Air.
McGregor for over 16,000
dollars, is at present the
leading sire at the Glencar-
nock stud, whilst his grand-
sire, Earl Marshall, was one
of the greatest quality bulls
ever seen in the United
States.
The other of the two bulls
recently added to the Edin-
glassie stud is Alulben Epau-
let (71475), bred by Wil-
liam G. Macpherson, Mul-
ben Adains, Alulben, calved
29th January, 1929. He is
by Evenson of Ballindalloch
(59290), dam Euthalla 40th
(72228), by Easdale of Har-
viestoun (41175), g. dam
Euthalla sth (49266), by
Eclipser of Ballindalloch
MR. JAMES SUTTOR WHITE, JUN.
THE LATE HON. J. C. WHITE.
EDING LASSIE, NEW SOUTH WALES


(26733), 3rd dam Euthalla 4th (44118), by Pictorial
(19619), 4th dam Euthalla (26910), by Entertainer
(13373), running back through Erica (843), by Cup-
bearer (59).
With such a wealth of pure breeding to recommend
them, it is but natural that the Edinglassie sires are at
the top of the tree. Their surroundings are ideal, whilst
there is no doubt as to the ability of those who are guid-
ing their destiny. The late Hon. J. C. White, who died
in 1926, after having devoted the best years of his life
to the study and breeding of Aberdeen-Angus cattle, has
passed on his inherent discernment for a good beast to
Ids sons, who are breeding a low set, big framed, well
topped type of animal with the right vigour and constitu-
tion to enable it to thrive under the most severe condi-
tions. The stud cattle are not pampered in any way,
and are notable for their fresh appearance and beautiful
handle. But it is in the disposal of young bulls and other
stock from the stud that the reputation of Edinglassie as
a premier Aberdeen-Angus herd is put to the true test
and upheld, for it is gratifying to find from the stud’s
wide clientele that the possibilities of this breed for herd
improvement or stud purposes are being recognised to a
larger and greater extent every year.
In the important show rings the Edinglassie stud has
carried off its share of the awards regularly, the more
outstanding exhibits of late being August Burgess, which
won first prize and reserve championship at the R.A.S.
Show in Sydney in 1924, and first prize in 1925, and
Reuter Erolo, also bred by Messrs. White Bros., which
gained first prize in his class and the grand champion-
ship at Sydney at the Easter Show of 1928, although
only 13 months old. After the show he was sold at public
auction for 620 guineas to Mr. J. Ross, of Kinross Estate,
N.S.W. T rooper Burgess, another bull bred by White
Bros., by Master Burgess (imp.), and exhibited by Mr.
Newman, was awarded first prize in his class and cham-
pionship at the Brisbane Show in 1929.
The stud was not represented at any show in 1927
owing to the death of Air. J. C. White.
The popularity of the Aberdeen-Angus is no more
convincingly shown than in the increasing number of
entries of the breed at the leading shows throughout the
Commonwealth. The export trade in particular is being
catered for by breeders, who are demonstrating clearly
the value of crossing this breed on to other strains
for the production of the choicest quality of baby
beef. Alessrs. White Bros, are conducting experiments
in this direction, while the Royal Agricultural So-
ciety offer a special prize of 100 guineas for the best
pen of three steers suitable for export in the fat
stock section every year, the steers to be of any breed
or first cross and under 30 months old. At the 1930
R.A.S. Show at Sydney in this section the Aberdeen-
Angus was very successful in the face of keen competition
from other breeds and crosses, and the entrance of Messrs.
White Bros, into the held should open a wide scope for
general herdmasters who desire to cater for the big
demand for prime quality young steers, of the neatly
boned, thick fleshed, early maturing type, so much de-
sired by the meat trade and consumer alike. Edinglassie
as a source of bulls for a highly profitable cross for
domestic consumption affords outstanding opportunities,
for apart from the breeding and intrinsic merit of its
stock, it has behind it the skill of several generations of
experienced breeders.
Personal
Mr. James White, born May 1886, was educated at
The Armidale School, and in 1911 married Ruth,
daughter of the late Air. Norman Suttor, of Bathurst;
their family consists of two sons, James and Peter, and a
daughter, Joan. The elder son was educated at The
King’s School, while the younger will, in a few years,
complete his studies at this school. Joan is at Ascham.
M essrs. Bruce and Alan White were also educated at The
Armidale School. In 1924 Alan married Dorothy Alen-
zies, of Roseville, Sydney, and they have two daughters.
Bruce married Margaret Furnival in 1928.
COTTAGE HOMESTEAD AT EDINGLASSIE, WHERE THE PRESENT OWNERS, WERE BORN
EI) 1 N GLASSIE, NE W SOU T II WAL E S


COURALLIE, MOREE, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of The Courallie Proprietary Ltd.
COURALLIE STATION is situated 19 miles
south-west of Moree, in the parish of Courallie,
nearly 300 miles N.N.W. from Sydney, New
South Wales, and is the eastern portion of old Comba-
dello, which was owned for very many years by those
well-known pastoralists and sportsmen, Messrs. W. and
F. A. M oses. When the latter dissolved partnership in
the run, the part which is now Courallie fell to Mr. F.
G. Schlapp, the hrst named being the managing director
resident on the property. They took over the run with-
out stock in the spring of 1926 with the objectives of
Merino ram breeding, wool growing and fattening cattle.
For each of these purposes the country has proved itself
suitable.
Courallie embraces an area to-day of 24,000 acres free-
hold of open box country which has been rung judiciously,
THE COURALLIE HOMESTEAD
A. (Fred) Moses, who built himself a homestead there,
and continued the business of Merino wool growing with
his share of the (lock.
Comhadello had a good reputation for its sheep and
fattening qualities, especially for the stud flock bred by
the Moses partnership, and this was one of the reasons
that prompted the present owners to purchase the pro-
perty when it came up for sale in 1926.
he Courallie Proprietary Limited is composed of
Major R. C. Phillipps, Mrs. R. C. Phillipps, and Mr. E.
and which bears heavier timber hear the double frontage
and bends afforded by the Meehi River, and the single
frontage to the Moomin Creek, which forms the southern
boundary. About three parts of the run are composed of
red country, grading off near the watercourses to choco-
late soil, with a red sandy ridge towards the centre of
the station, making a combination of beautiful rich graz-
ing lands, well balanced as to pastures and having an
average rainfall of 24 in. per annum. That much of it
is extraordinarily good fattening country is shown by the


way in which the stock thrive, whilst the reputation
Courallie enjoys of being one of the soundest sheep and
cattle runs in the north-west of New South Wales is
based very largely on the profuse growth of clovers and
wild carrot, geranium, spinach and other herbages that
comes along with the rains and forms a thick mat of feed
in a normal winter.
the lighter country for stud breeding purposes.
The equipment of the woolshed also was reorganised,
and now has 13 stands of machines at the outside of the
board instead of down the centre, with the motor power
from a t.c. 12 h.p. Lister engine. Additional bins and
tables were installed, extra lighting provided, whilst the
yards, pens, &c., have been remodelled.
YARDING THE MORROW'S SHEARING AT DUSK
There are also many varieties of good summer grasses
as well, especially Mitchell. About 700 acres were top
dressed in the autumn of 1929 by way of a test prior to
extensive treatment in this manner.
The owners place the capacity of the run at about
19,000 sheep, about | of a sheep to the acre normally,
for although the country is very strong and safe the fore-
going figures afford a good margin without risk of over-
stocking, and allow several hundred head of cattle to be
carried as well. No expense has been spared to stock up
with the best of material, the general flock having as a
foundation the purchase of 6000 single stud Boonoke-
bred ewes, and a similar number of ewes from Lake
Cowal. A large sum of money has been paid out in
reconditioning the run from end to end, and in improv-
ing the appointments which existed in 1926. There are
to-day 23 paddocks, and a number of small enclosures on
The shed, which lies some distance from the homestead,
is now up-to-date in all respects, and is in full swing with
the shearing by July of each year, 1927 marking the first
clip taken off by the present owners. The sheep then in-
cluded a line of 12,000 2-tooth wethers from Riverina,
and the Boonoke-bred ewes, the former cutting 11 lbs.,
and the ewes 13 lbs. per head; 25Jd. was the top price at
which the fleece lines sold in Sydney.
After the shearing the wethers were turned into
various paddocks apd disposed of within a month as fats
for an average of about 295. per head, their weights run-
ning from 50/60 lbs.
The entire flock averaged 1 1 lbs. per head the follow-
ing year, 1928, a dry period having been experienced,
and the fact that practically all the sheep that year were
ewes and lambs is a criterion of the station’s soundness,
the lamb-marking being 78 per cent. The clip totalled
COURALLIE, NE W SOU TII IV AL E S


TYPES OF COURALLIE-BRED SELECTED FLOCK RAMS, WANGANELLA BLOOD
COWS AND VEALERS WATERING AT THE RIVER ON COURALLIE
c 0 UR A L LIE, NE W S 0 UT H WAL E S


PURE BOONOKE-BRED EWES
JUST AFTER SHEARING
500 hales, and the top price was per lb. At the
1929 shearing about 19,000 sheep of all ages were put
through the shed for a clip of 472 bales, and an average
cut per head of 11 lbs. of good quality medium wool.
The whole of Courallie, including the frontage areas,
which of course have a further advantage from the
creeks and river, is watered permanently by a complete
system of 32 miles of well-made flowing bore drains,
reticulating from a 3000-ft. artesian bore situated with-
in the Combadello boundary, which the owners of
Courallie have the right to use. Lambing at different
times has been tried in order to get the best results, and
it has been found that September is the most beneficial
month owing to the better feed in April and May, when
the rams are joined.
Maj or Phill ipps lives at the homestead erected by Mr.
F. A. Moses. Its surroundings have been improved, and
the house has been enlarged, being most comfortable and
modern, with electric light, sewerage, domestic con-
veniences, See., wide verandahs and a tennis court. Fie
began the present Courallie flock at his former property,
Coleambally, situated half-way between Flay and Nar-
randera, 20 miles south of Carrathool, with the purchase
in 1919 of 300 cast for age stud ewes at six guineas each
from Fairlie Grange and Eli Elwah, two well-known
Riverina stud Merino properties. I he ewes were in
lamb to high-class rams of pure Peppin-Wanganella
blood, and were classed subsequently by Mr. John Mcßae
into 80 double studs and 220 single studs. In 1919
Major Phillipps introduced half a dozen rams of the Sir
Hercules strain from Eli Elwah, these being in fact
grandsons of the celebrated ram Hercules, the sire of
many prize winners at the Sydney Show. No. 82, a son
of Hercules, and the sire of most of the rams bought for
C O URALLIE, NE W S O UT II IF AL K S


THE COURALLIE HOMESTEAD
THE WOOLSHED
THE BORE THAT WATERS COURALLIE STATION
c O URAL L I E, NE W S 0 UT 11 WAL E S


SOME OF THE STUD MERINO EWES
Coleambally, was perhaps one of Elercules’ most out-
standing sons, his prepotency perpetuating a bright uni-
form wool of true character and breeding in his progeny.
The stud flock at Coleambally was developed with pro-
nounced success, both flock and stud rams therefrom sell-
ing at good prices; buyers invariably spoke highly of their
wool, and their ability to hand on their qualities. Drafts
also were sent to Sydney, and rarely sold for less than
10 guineas per head, whilst stud rams made up to 100
guineas per head.
No other blood than Eli Elwah, Uardry, and Pembel-
gong has been used in the stud flock now at Courallie,
which, when transferred from the south, comprised 800
breeding ewes of high grade stud quality of pure Wan-
ganella blood, bred on Coleambally.
The sires put to these ewes included ram No. 3.1, pur-
chased in 1926 from Pembelgong, and which unfortu-
nately died in 1928. He left some excellent progeny,
however, so that his loss is not altogether irreparable.
He was a son of Pembelgong No. 1, the first prize un-
MUSTERING EWES AND LAMBS FOR SHEARING
C 0 URAL L I E, NE W S O UT II WAL E S


housed medium wool ram, 3 years old, champion medium
wool ram unhoused, champion ram unhoused and grand
champion ram housed or unhoused, at the Sydney Sheep
Show of 1923, bred at Murgha and purchased as a lamb
TYPICAL FLOCK
RAMS BRED ON
COURALLIE
for the Pembelgong stud at the dispersal of the Austin
Murgha stud flock in 1921. No. 3.1 resembled his sire
in his magnificent covering, and he was replaced by a
high-class ram from Uardry. In 1927, another very good
CATTLE WATERING AT THE CREEK
c O URAL L I E, NE IV S 0 UT II IV AL E S


ram was purchased from Pembelgong, and at the Sydney
sheep sales of 1028, Courallie Limited bought the stud
ram No. 7.27 from Eli Elwah. The latter was an out-
standing 2-tooth ram of great frame with even top and
underline and long dense bright wool carried well over
the points. Shorn soon after the sales, he cut 27/ lbs., a
splendid fleece for a 2-tooth ram. No. 7.27 is to-day a
w ell -grown sire of excellent conformation, and has justi-
fied all that was expected from him. Also acquired at the
ness about the backs, straight hocks, depth in the flank
and arm, strong virile constitutions and splendid cover
ing. The stud ewes are stylish and possess a breedy
appearance, carrying a medium wool of great character
and colour. Mr. W. J. McCarthy supervises the class-
ing, having taken the place of Mr. John Mcßae, who
attended the stud at Coleambally. There is a good
demand from the district for surplus rams, and it seems
very likely that Courallie will exert a healthy influence
CATTLE IN THE BED OF THE RIVER
-1928 sales was Pembelgong No. 6.28, a big sheep with a
very bold front, and a fleece weighing 25 lbs. when shorn
at Courallie a few weeks later. Another product of
Pembelgong bought at the same time was ram No. 52,
of the 16.1 family, a typical sire with a fleece of long,
bright soft wool of medium-strong quality, which cut
25 lbs.
The dominant features in the sires in use in the
Courallie stud to-day are good heads and horns, no slack-
on the district’s wool through the avenue of its high
grade stud flock.
About 500 head of cattle are fattened and turned off
annually apart from the other business of the station,
and it is the practice to buy weaners from 14/18 months
of age towards the end of the year, and dispose of them
in prime condition within eight months. A Shorthorn-
Hereford cross is favoured, and that it is a type that
does well is made plain by the sale of young steers re-
C o URAL LI E, NE IV SOU TII WAL E S


SALE FLOCK RAMS
cently to local buyers of prime beef at 455. per hundred
pounds on the property, the market in Sydney at the
same time being in the vicinity of 48s. per 100 at the
saleyards. The aim is to grow cattle of the highest pos-
sible standard, with quality in view the whole time.
There is a small stud herd of pedigreed cows from Eli
Elwah, and the bull is Collendina Duke of Derrimut
58th, first as a calf at the Melbourne Roval Show in
1923.
The Courallie Proprietary Limited also own Yarrow
Creek Station, of 6000 acres freehold, situated on the
eastern slopes of the ranges 14 miles south-east of Glen
Innes, N.S.W. Phis place was purchased in 1929, and
is the old home of Major Menzies. Yarrow Creek is
beautiful grazing country, soundly improved, and is used
for breeding cattle and running wethers from Courallie
LAMBS JUST AFTER BEING MARKED
c O URAL LI E. NE JL S O UT H JV AL E S


LAMB MARKING ON COURALLIE
in the summer months. Its value may be estimated from
the fact that throughout the summer of 1928-29 it car-
ried two sheep to the acre.
Maj or Roy C. Phillipps was born at North Sydney in
January 1893, and is the son of the late Mr. William
Phillipps, of Northumberland, England, who died in
1894. After receiving his education at the High School,
Perth, W.A. (originally Bishop Hayles’ College, and
one of the oldest of the G.P.S. in Australia), Major
Phillipps started pastoral life on Argyll Station on the
Ord River, in the Kimberley district of Western Aus-
tralia, where he put in five years gaining practical ex-
perience. Upon the outbreak of the war in 1914 he
enlisted in the 28th Battalion of Infantry, W.A., with
the rank of 2nd Lieutenant, and saw active service in
Egypt, Gallipoli, and France. Transferred to the Aus-
tralian Flying Corps in 1916, in which he held the rank
of flight commander, he had a brilliant career, and was
awarded the Military Cross with bar and the Distin-
guished Flying Cross.
In 1917 he married in London Ellen Hillman Robin-
son, daughter of the late the Hon. R. T. Robinson, K.C.,
whose residence at Mt. Lawley, Perth, W.A., was con-
sidered to be one of the show homes of Western Aus-
tralia. M rs. Phillipps also gave her services to her
country during the war as a V.A.D. There is a family
of two girls, Helen and Joan, and one son, Neil.
Major Phillipps returned to Australia in 1919 and
settled at Coleambally, a property which he purchased
from Mr. H. L. Austin, and which formerly was part
of the well-known Fairlie Grange Station. This place
he sold when he went to Courallie in 1926. He is on the
reserve of officers of the A.F.C., and apart from this
military association, and his interests in Courallie, is a
member of Moree Polo Club, and also of sporting bodies
such as the Moree and Inverell Picnic Race Clubs and
the Riverina P.R.C. When Courallie was in the posses-
sion of the Moses Brothers, prior to the division from
Combadello, it was a noted stud breeding place for
thoroughbred racehorses, and was the home of such well
known scions of the Australian turf as St. Alwyne,
Poseidon, and others.
The third member of the proprietary, Mr. Eberhardt
George Schlapp, was born at Broken Hill in 1894, and
is the son of Mr. H. H. Schlapp, of Melbourne, the
w ell known mining metallurgist and engineer for the
Broken Hill Proprietary Company Limited. Mr. E. G.
Schlapp graduated in science at the University of Cali-
fornia in 1921, after serving at the war with the A.1.F.,
and purchased a small property near Wangaratta, Vic-
toria, upon his return. Here he goes in for certain kinds
of farming as a hobby, and at the present time is experi-
C() URAL L I E, NE W 8 O UT II WAL E S


MAJOR AND MRS. ROY PHILLIPPS AND THEIR HOME AT COURALLIE
C 0 URAL LI E, NE W S 0 UT H WAL E S


FLOCK RAMS GRAZING ON THE NATURAL PASTURES AT COURALLIE
menting with the cultivation of some 75 acres of walnuts
as practised in California, where the methods of grafting,
and the elimination of known diseases, are there resulting
in a return of approximately £2OO per tree per annum.
Mr. Schlapp, who specialised in agriculture after com-
pleting his science course, is making interesting headway
on his farm, where other experiments are also being
carried out.
ANOTHER VIEW OF COURALLIE WOOLSHED AND YARDS
C O URA ELI E. NEW SOU Tll WA LE S


STRATHBOGIE, MOLE VALE AND EULUPNA,
NEW ENGLAND DISTRICT, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of E. C. Body and Sons Limited
COMPRISING 30,000 acres freehold of undulat-
ing, timbered basalt and granite country, Strath-
bogie Station lies wholly in the Tenterfield P.P.
centre, partly in the Ashford shire, and partly in the
Severn shire, whilst to the homestead of this historic
pastoral holding the distance from Sydney is 450 miles,
from Inverell 40 miles, from Glen limes or Ashford 30
held by its pioneers, the Gordon family, for 62 years, and
has been in the possession of the present owners for the
past 29 years.
Mr. Hugh Gordon took up Strathbogie in 1839, and
erected the present homestead in 1868. The run in those
days was over thirty miles in length, and was the pick
of the land in the district, with rough country surround-
THE STRATHBOGIE HOMESTEAD
miles, from the Deepwater railway siding 25 miles, and
from Emmaville 8 miles. Emmaville is the postal address
of the station and its nearest telegraph office, the Strath-
bogie telephone line being the first to be erected in the
district. The property, therefore, has a central situation
in the lower limits of the New England district of New
South Wales, with an altitude of 2470 ft. above sea
level, an invigorating climate, and an average rainfall of
30 in. per annum, while in its development it has had
almost uninterrupted ownership, for the property was
ing it on every boundary, and old Maidenhead Station
joining it on the north across the big range along the
Queensland border. Mr. Gordon sold most of the pro-
perty in 1901 to Mr. E. C. Body, retaining the lower
portion named Rocky Creek, which he sold later to
Messrs. Campbell Bros., from whom Mr. E. C. Body
purchased it in 1909, and made it an outstation worked
in conjunction with Strathbogie with a separate set of
men.
The whole run at about that period covered some


WARANA, INVERELL, THE HOME OF MR. E. C. BODY
150,000 acres with the occupation license and improve-
ment leases, but resumptions and disposals from time to
time reduced the station to its present size, and in 1920
the owner formed the business into a limited liability
company.
Apart from its influence on the progress of the im-
mediate district, Strathbogie was always well known for
its cattle, and has figured as a producer
of high-class Merino wool for many
years, in which respect the run has been
steadily improved under the direction of
Mr. E. C. Body, and under the able
management of his eldest son and man-
aging director of the company, Mr. F.
E. Campbell Body, assisted by Mr.
Neville Body, and the overseer, Mr.
Gross (who has been at Strathbogie for
over 60 years).
The 22 main paddocks into which
the combined run is subdivided are
bounded nearly the whole way round
with rabbit-proof fencing, and where
the small mesh is not erected the boun-
daries are dog netted. It has been a
costly procedure to free the run from
pests, but the work has been well justi-
field by the safer and heavier carrying
capacity, and any odd vermin that get
in are dealt with effectively. The tim-
ber is mostly white box and apple tree,
and has been rung and cleared in many
places. One can see the effect of this
improvement to-day in striking contrast
with the stock routes which pass through
the property, which are in their un-
touched state, and are poorly grassed
most of the year. The soil varies from
light sandy loam to rich chocolate. No
crops are cultivated. There is, how-
ever, an extensive lucerne patch near
headquarters, from which good cuts of
hay are obtained for home use, whilst
out in the paddocks efforts are being
made to thicken up the natural pasture
in some parts by introducing outside
varieties of feed. To this end experi-
ments have been made with subterranean
clover, without much success, and others
are being carried out with Phalaris bul-
bosa and Rhodes grass, from which bet-
ter results are expected.
To-day the run has a carrying capa-
city of just under a sheep to the acre,
besides several hundred head of cattle.
There is unlimited fresh water from
the Severn River and from good creeks,
and in addition the paddocks draw a
supply from surface tanks with wind-
mills, whilst near the woolshed lies a
big permanent waterhole shaded by
trees. This is a feature of the property,
and gives a picturesque setting to
the adjacent homestead. Soon after
the change of ownership the woolshed was enlarged in
order to cope with shearing more quickly. It is now a
long, well built structure of iron and timber, containing
16 stands of machines on a double board, with the tables,
bins, &c., so arranged as to facilitate getting the clip
away. Yards and pens are extensive, while there is cover
for about 2500 sheep, or enough to keep the work going
ANOTHER VIEW OF STRATHBOGIE HOMESTEAD
STRAT 11 BO G lE, MO L E VAL E, AN 1) EU LU PN A, NE IV S O UT 11 W ALES


YARDING THE WOOLLIES AT STRATH BOGIE FOR SHEARING
STUD MERINO EWES AND LAMBS ON EULUPNA
STRATHBOGIE, MOLE VALE, AND EUEUPNA, N EIV SOUTH WALES


THE WOOLSHED AT STRATH BOGIE
in wet weather for two days. The dip lies some distance
away and has elevated draining pens.
Up to the time of the great war the Strathbogie clip
went straight to London, but under the appraisement
scheme it was sold in Sydney. In 1929, however, the
entire clip was sent to Newcastle, through the New Eng-
land, North, and North-west Producers’ Company Lim-
ited, an organisation formed in 1928 to handle primary
produce at Newcastle with the purpose of saving trans-
port costs and assisting decentralisation. Messrs. Body
and Sons are keen supporters of new enterprise when the
objective is a practical endeavour to benefit the grower
and the industry at large, and in the present case they
are sanguine of good results at Newcastle.
Shearing takes place at Strathbogie at the end of Sep-
tember, and a feature for years has been the round of
entertainments accorded to the men, the annual shearers’
ball being an event of the district. At the 1929 shearing
STUD HEREFORD COWS AND CALVES ON EULUPNA
STRATH BOGIE, MOLE VALE, AND EULUPNA , NE IV SOUTH WALES


A BEAUTIFUL REACH OF THE SOVEREIGN RIVER ON MOLE VALE STATION
approximately 27,000 sheep were put through, from
which an average of lbs. wool per head was obtained,
including the lambs dropped off shears the previous No-
vember. The figures include the sheep, numbering about
5000 head, which are brought down 50 miles from Mole
Vale Station, and those from Rocky Creek out-station,
both these properties being worked with Strathbogie.
Mole Vale is situated 35 miles west of Tenterfield along
the Queensland border on the New South Wales side,
and comprises 10,000 acres freehold of well timbered
hilly country, with sweet natural pasture land in abun-
dance, and plenty of water from the Mole and Sovereign
Rivers and Reedy Creek. This run was known formerly
as Sovereignton, and since it was acquired in 1912 has
undergone progressive improvement, especially along the
beautiful river frontages, under the care of Mr. Dudley
Body, who resides there with his wife and family.
The general flock to-day reflects the aim of Mr. E. C.
Body to build up a Merino flock of outstanding merit
when he went to Strathbogie. The run confined its
activities to wethers prior to that time, and amongst
Mr. Body’s early purchases to found his flock were drafts
of ewes totalling 3000, and a number of rams, from
Bundemar, Trangie, the well-known stud Merino pro-
perty owned by the Estate of the late Mr. F. E. Body,
also a number of well-bred ewes and rams from Inverell
Station, near Strathbogie. These were bred, classed and
culled with the definite objective of the most profitable
type for the country, and to assist in maintaining that
standard a small stud flock was founded, also on Bunde-
mar blood. The fact that the Strathbogie sheep have
held a reputation in the surrounding district for many
STRATH BOGIE, MOLE VALE. AND EULUPNA, NEW SOUTH WALES


A MUSTERING
SCENE ON
STRATH BOGIE
TWO-YEAR-OLD
STEERS ON
EULUPNA


OVERLOOKING
MOLE VALE
HOMESTEAD
EXTENSIVE VIEW
OVERLOOKING THE
WOOLSHED AND
STRATHBOGIE
HOMESTEAD
sTRATIIB () G I E, M 0 L E VAL E, AND E U EVEN A, NE IV SOU T H WAL E S


THE RIVER SEVERN NEAR STRATHBOGIE HOMESTEAD
years for their quality, constitution, size and covering,
indicates the success that followed the policy of manage-
ment. The sheep are big framed, plain bodied animals
with fleeces of medium to fine quality wool, of excellent
style and handle. In its preparation for sale the clip
undergoes the most careful classing at the hands of an
expert, who has done the work there for many years, and
the prices realised at auction have proved repeatedly that
the clips that are classed thoroughly on the stations will
bring invariably the highest prices for all lines. In the
average rates obtained for the whole clip the returns have
been very satisfactory, despite the absence of peak prices
for special fleece lines.
In 1922 the company purchased Eulupna Station of
about 10,000 acres freehold, located 33 miles north-west
of Inverell, N.S.W., on the Wallangra-road, for the
purpose of running the stud sheep. This country, which
is managed by Mr. Graham Body, is exceptionally well
suited for breeding both sheep and cattle, being formed
of undulating, open slopes, soft, sweet and healthy, with
a good mixture of feed. The timber is spread about
nicely, while the property has a splendid water supply.
Eulupna also is the headquarters of the herd of Elereford
cattle that were bred formerly at Strathbogie. This
herd is descended from stock purchased many years ago
from Tocal, and from direct importations from leading
Hereford sources in New Zealand. It is in an advanced
state to-day, and whilst not so widely known perhaps as
some of the older studs, the cattle are indeed an especi-
ally well bred lot, and show their value convincingly in
the regular sale of young bulls. A number of the latter
are taken to Strathbogie to develop, for in addition to
the Merino flock there are about 400 Hereford breeders
kept at the head place. The culled heifers are sold as a
rule, and the remainder maintained according to season
either at Eulupna or at Rocky Creek.
Standing on the north bank of the river behind a wide
verdant flat, the Strathbogie homestead built by Mr.
Gordon in 1868 remains intact, with the addition of an
electric light plant, and other modern conveniences. It is
of twin gabled ground design, made of granite with walls
2 ft. thick throughout, and is both spacious and com-
fortable. It is, in fact, a show place of the district with
its well kept, prettily laid out gardens, lawns, hedges, rose
vines and pergolas, tennis court, and fine old trees, and in
the years gone by, when the big stations were the prin-
cipal centres of settlement in their districts, Strathbogie
was a social “rendezvous,” whilst the hospitality of its
family life was a by-word. I here is still a warm welcome
for visitors, although much of the old life has changed
with the times. Strathbogie to-day is the home of Mr.
F. E. C. Body and Mr. N. C. Body, while Mr. E. C.
ST RAT 1180 GIE. MOLE VALE, AND EULUPNA, NEW SOUTH WALES


THE BEAUTIFUL GARDEN AT WARANA, THE HOME OF MR. E. C. BODY AT INVERELL
STRATH BOGIE , MOLE VALE, AND EULUPNA, NE IV SOUTH WALES


TYPICAL EULUPNA COUNTRY
Body resides in retirement in his 86th year with his
wife and some of his family at Warana, a town estate of
120 acres on the hills overlooking Inverell, 40 miles
away. This property was acquired in 1917, and is one
of the finest homes around Inverell. That he has been
spared in perfect health to see the ambitions of a lifetime
fulfilled, and his interests carried on successfully by his
sons, is indeed a fitting reward to Mr. E. C. Body, who
is one of the oldest surviving pioneer pastoralists in New
South Wales at the present time.
Imbued with the highest principles of service to the
industry he chose for his career, Air. Edmund Cuthbert
Body has played a big part in its progress. He was born
at Devonshire, England, in 1843, and accompanied his
father, the late Mr. Frederick Eliel Body, to Australia
in 1850. Acquiring a grazing run in the same year at
Tumut from Sydney Watson, the late Mr. F. E. Body
gave his several sons every opportunity to learn the pas-
toral business as time went on. The Tumut property
became very valuable, and part of it was chosen for the
site of the present large town of that name that sprang
up. Mr. E. C. Body received his early education
privately at the hands of the Rev. Samuel Fox, and in
1865, when the West Bogan country was thrown open
for occupation, ventured out there with one of his
brothers, and remained there several years. The con-
ditions which existed in those early days of western
pioneering, and the big drought of the ’seventies, were
disheartening, and Mr. Body joined his elder brother, the
late F. E. Body, at Wonbobbie Station, on the Marthaguy
Creek, Warren, at that time embracing 270,000 acres.
In 1878 he accepted an invitation from Mr. P. W. An-
THE RIVER AT MOLE VALE
STRAT II K 0 G lE. MOL E V A EE, AND EU LU PN A, NE W SOU T II W ALES


MR. E. C. BODY
derson to visit Newstead Station, near Inverell, N.S.W.
His visit extended to two years, during which time he be-
came the manager of the run. In 1880 he married
Catherine Campbell, youngest daughter of the pioneer of
Inverell Station, the late Mr. Alexander Campbell, and
forthwith left to make a home for himself and his wife
at Jindabyne, a large property which he purchased in the
Monaro, at the foot of Mount Kosciusko. This pictures-
que station was formed in a natural basin, watered by
THE DINING ROOM AT WARANA
MR. F. E. CAMPBELL BODY
the Thredbo and Snowy Rivers, and encircled by moun-
tainous hills with a background of alps. Mr. E. C. Body
worked up this run successfully with sheep and cattle,
the latter having to be overlanded to Twofold Bay for
shipment to the Tasmanian market.
In the ensuing twenty years of his residence
at Jindabyne he came to be regarded as a leading
figure in the development of that part of New
South Wales—the Anglican Synod, the Cooma P.P.
THE LOUNGE AT WARANA
STRATH B O G I E, M OLE VAL E, AN 1) EUEU P N A, NE W SOU TII WAL E S


Board (of which he was a
member for 17 years), and
practically all other local or-
ganisations seeking the influ-
ence of his ideals, whilst in his
leisure time he took a prominent
place in sport, especially shoot-
ing and picnic racing. The
latter pastime was a favourite
hobby, and before going to Jin-
dabyne the Inverell Amateur
Picnic Race Club, which held
its inaugural meeting on 23rd
August, 1879, appointed him its
first hon. secretary. Two years
before that he owned and rode
Error, the winner of the Wam-
biana Cup at the Central Mac-
quarie Picnic Races (1877).
He carried on a stud of
thoroughbreds for a time at
Strathbogie after he sold Jinda-
byne to return to the Inverell
district. His identification
with the present property and
surrounding country has earned
him a wide circle of friends, and
amongst the posts held by him
those more noteworthy have included the chairmanship oi
the Tenterfield P.P. Board for five years. He was ap-
pointed to this important position by the Government, and
after the latter ceased electing its own officers was elected
by the ratepayers. His eldest
son, Mr. F. E. Campbell Body,
is to-day a member of this
board, and was for two years
president of the Ashford Shire
Council.
The family of Mr. and Mrs.
E. C. Body consists of five sons
and three daughters, one of the
latter being the wife of Dr. A.
J. Corfe, of Glen Innes. Each
of the sons attended The
King’s School, Parramatta,
N.S.W., and four of them
went to the Great War, where
they served in the ATE. Mr.
Campbell Body had perforce to
remain at Strathbogie to look
after the property. Mr. Gra-
ham Body, of Eulupna, was in-
valided from Gallipoli to Eng-
land, and later obtained a com-
mission with the Flying Corps,
in which he was shot down by
enemy planes from a height of
10,000 ft., and held prisoner
until the armistice. Mr. Theo.
Body was also severely wounded
and resides to-day at Warana, Inverell. Mr. Campbell
Body and Mr. N. C. Body live at Strathbogie, and their
brother Dudley at Mole Vale, and each takes an active
part in the welfare of his district’s industry and sport.
THE QUEEN OF FLOWERS AT WARANA
EULUPNA HOMESTEAD
ST RATH BOGIE, MOLE VALE, AND EULUPNA, NEW SOUTH WALES


WALLANGRA, WARIALDA, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of R. A. Black, Esq.
ORIGINALLY taken up by Captain Russell in the
thirties, Wallangra was developed into a large,
well-improved cattle station and woolgrowing
property —one of the outstanding places of the early days
of settlement on the northern tablelands of New South
Wales. F or generations the run extended over 250
square miles of this timbered northern region, with a
double frontage to the Macintyre of about 25 miles, and
before legislation was enforced to provide for closer
adjoining Coolatai Stations, which were inspected and
occupied respectively by two Englishmen, Captain Rus-
sell and R. B. Ottley. After them Messrs. Broadhurst
and Cheek took up Gragin, Waterford settled on Ban-
nockburn, A. A. Adams acquired Gineroi, Blake settled
at Bogamildi, Gaily had Welbon and Dight pioneered
Yetman. Yallaroi, which adjoins Gunyerwarildi farther
to the west of Wallangra, was established by the
Dangars. The township of Warialda, with its provision
WALLANGRA HOMESTEAD
settlement of outside districts the township of Wallangra
was a fair-sized white settlement. It is a curious
anomaly that nowadays there are considerably fewer
people, and far less activity here, than when the whole
district was embraced by old Wallangra Station, although
these pastoral areas when established were staffed largely
with hired ticket-of-leave men. The Gwydir, or
Warialda district, which embraces the present holding of
9600 acres, in fact had its genesis in Wallangra and the
for police control of natives and lags, was surveyed in
the late thirties.
Captain Russell was superseded by his son, William
James Russell, and their run was managed for many years
by Mr. Frank Wyndham, member of a well-known
family who held Bukkulla for a long period. The present
homestead was built during Mr. Wyndham’s manage-
ment, in 1875, one year before Mr. Russell was joined in
partnership in Wallangra, and in Blue Nobby Station.


24 miles away, and comprising 30,000 acres, by the late
Mr. John Richard Black, father of the present owner.
Upon the death of Mr. Russell soon after this arrange-
ON THE VERANDAH AT WALLANGRA
ment was made the two properties were purchased out-
right by the late Mr. Black, who in 1899 retired, and
gave the management over to his four
sons. Mr. Richard Alfred Black is the
youngest son, and when Wallangra
passed into his possession in 1921 the
area was about 7000 acres, having been
reduced by disposals for closer settle-
ment and other purposes from time to
time. To this property the owner has
added some country lying on the boun-
dary, and in 1929 enlarged his scope a
little more with the purchase of Glen
Lee, of 5000 acres, adjoining Wal-
langra, and originally part of the old
run, so that to-day there are about
15,000 acres freehold worked together
as Wallangra, and used for woolgrowing.
This country is situated west of the
town of Ashford, the homestead being
53 miles north of Inverell, via Ashford,
and 40 via a direct route through
Graman. Inverell is the postal address,
and Ashford the nearest telegraph office.
Practically all is first-class fattening and woolgrowing
country, supporting at the present time about one sheep
to the acre besides cattle. Of a basaltic formation and
some granite outcrops, with an aspect everywhere of un-
dulating, rolling plains that have been thinned out of
indigenous timber by ringbarking in past years, the whole
property is very attractive from a scenic
point of view, and has an outstanding
feature in a high knoll in the centre
of the run, broad and level, from which
the hills on every hand can be seen for
more than 30 miles. The Queensland
border lies not far distant to the north.
In type the country is made up of red
and black soil, growing plains grass, blue
grass and shorter varieties, and a pro-
fusion of herbage, amongst which tre-
foil predominates, while the average
rainfall is in. per annum. These
pastures are sound and sweet, due very
largely to the progressive nature of Mr.
Black’s management since 1921, when
the place was infested with vermin,
which had taken a firm hold during the
war period. It was estimated that
more than ten rabbits to the acre were
on the propert} r when the present
owner started to deal with them.
In one paddock alone of 800 acres over 8000 rabbits
were dug out, trapped, &c., while in another of
AMONG THE WILLOWS ON THE RIVER MACINTYRE
about 1500 acres about 14,000 were exterminated.
Naturally this brought great relief to the country,
in the form of a new and prolific growth of feed,
w ALLAN GRA, NE W S O UT II WAL E S


TWO-TOOTH MERINO
EWES OFF SHEARS ON
GLEN LEE, WHICH IS
WORKED WITH
WALLANGRA
TWO-TOOTH WETHERS
ON WALLANGRA
WALLA NGR A, NE W SOUT LI WA LES


THE CROSSING OVER THE MACINTYRE AT WALLANGRA
and the fact that there is not a vestige of vermin on the
old part of the run to-day accounts for its flourishing
condition.
The newly-acquired country is undergoing similar
treatment, and already has been enclosed within wire-
netted boundaries. There are four sub-artesian wells on
Glen Lee at present. The principal part of the run is
divided oft into five netted blocks, with vermin-proof sub-
divisions, designed as much to offset stock stealing as to
keep out pests, and draws its water supply from the
Maclntyre River and wells. The latter have a depth of
about 20 feet and provide excellent water. A number of
small streams are in evidence, which appear to have been
caused by old cattle tracks that led to the river having
A PLEASANT VIEW ALONG THE MACINTYRE RIVER
WALLAN G R A. NE W SOU TII WAL E S


A VIEW ACROSS THE PADDOCKS TOWARDS THE HOMESTEAD
WEEPING WILLOWS LINE THE BANKS OF THE MACINTYRE
W ALLAN GR A, NE W S O UT 11 WAL E S


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE MACINTYRE RIVER AT WALLANGRA
worn into juvenile creeks, and no doubt the silt carried
down by these is responsible for the gradual filling in of
parts of the Macintyre, which, near the Wallangra home-
stead, opens out into a long broad hole, lined by beauti-
ful willows.
The buildings are of a substantial nature, as can be
expected on such an old established run, worked by
experienced men for so many years. The woolshed in
particular is one of the noted machine sheds of the north-
west, containing 24 stands, of which only six are now
used. It is constructed on posts from the narrow-leafed
ironbark with cypress pine girders, and walls and roof
of iron. There is abundant space, with plenty of light
and excellent outside equipment. Shearing takes place
in September.
Wallangra homestead has been altered from its former
state, and, standing on the brow of a granite ridge at the
slope of which runs the beautiful reach of the river, it is
fitted out with every modern convenience and attribute
for comfort.
About 8000 sheep were shorn in 1929, and that the
country is ideal for breeding is indicated by a regular
natural increase in the Hock of 80 per cent, and upwards
of marked lambs. The flock has a high reputation, and
the sheep—of Haddon Rig blood —reflect the care that
has been bestowed on them in the past, and justify the
pride Mr. Black takes in maintaining their exceptional
woolgrowing abilities. Of recent } r ears the rams used
have been from the small but select stud bred by Mr.
W. Scott at Moree, of pure Haddon Rig blood. This
type of Merino suits the country at Wallangra, where
the flock is characterised by long roomy frames, well-set
heads, bold fronts and good sound constitution. It has
been the aim to class and cull the young sheep with
definite objectives in view, one of the principal of which
is uniformity, both as regards size and covering. As a
result the sheep stand up to the closest scrutiny, especi-
ally after they have been shorn, which is a very good
WALL A N G RA. NEW SOU T H WA LES


LOOKING
ACROSS THE
WALLANGRA
PADDOCKS
TWO - TOOTH
WALLANGRA
WETHERS
OFF SHEARS
rr ALLAN GR A, NE W S OULU W A LE S


time to see what a sheep is made of. The wool from the
Wallangra flock displays good breeding in its fine medium
quality, its nice softness, brightness of colour, length of
staple and density, and moreover gives a high yield.
Until 1929 the Wallangra clip was sold in Sydney, but
in the latter year the owner offered the wool at the new
selling centre at Newcastle under the auspices of an
enterprise which aims to effect for growers in northern
districts a saving in rail freights, &c.
A concise idea of the high standard of the Wallangra
flock is gained from the
figures for the 1929
shearing, which discloses
an average of 11-12 lbs.
per head for the wethers,
10 lbs. for the breeding
ewes, and 7J lbs. for the
hoggets. During the in-
flated year of 1924 the
clip distinguished itself
by realising 42d. per lb.
for a big line of fleeces.
This is in contrast to the
depressed state of the
market in the present
(1929-30) selling sea-
son, though, despite the
ruling conditions, the
wool sold at a satisfac-
tory average price.
The property, which
used to be noted for its
draught horses, no lon-
ger carries this class of
big stock, and apart from
the sheep only a few
cattle are run. These
are Shorthorns and are a
well-bred herd.
Mr. R. A. Black also
holds an interest in the
Myall Plains Pastoral Company, which is a family
concern, Myall Plains comprising about 60,000
acres 25 miles from St. George in the south-west
of Queensland. It is extensively improved country,
with an average rainfall of 21 in. per annum, and
for sixteen years was the home of Mr. R. A. Black
prior to his ownership of Wallangra. The country
is typical of this section of Queensland, with its
dense timber and good light soil, not altogether free
from prickly pear, and apart from occasional dry years
is a profitable asset. Having been in the possession of
the Black family for many years the flock has been bred
up to a high standard that thrives to perfection on this
light country. In former years the rams were drawn
from Welltown stud, but nowadays Haddon Rig flock
and selected rams are used.
Mr. R. A. Black, who is looked upon as one of the
most active influences in the welfare of the district around
Wallangra, and who is president of the Ashford Shire
at the present time, was born at Wallangra Station in
N ovember 1879, and re-
ceived his education at
the Sydney Grammar
School. From there he
set out to gain a
thorough knowledge of
woolgrowing and sheep
management, in which
he had the able guidance
of his late father on
various classes of coun-
try, including Myall
Plains.
In 1912 he married
a daughter of W.
Witt, of Maryborough,
Queensland, and had a
family of one son, John
Richard, and some time
after his wife’s death
he married Mrs. Owen
Prosser, widow of the
late Mr. Owen Prosser,
of Sydney. When war
broke out Mr. Black
enlisted and presented
his private car to the
military authorities, tak-
ing it to Egypt with
him. He saw service
in France, where he Avas
attached to the military transport, and returned in due
course to manage Myall Plains until the Wallangra
Pastoral Company was dissolved in 1921, and Wal-
langra became his share of the estate. Horse breeding
and the turf are his hobbies, and he is a member of the
Warrigal Club, Sydney, and the Queensland Club, Bris-
bane. Mr. Black also believes in travel as an educational
and broadening influence, and has been in many parts of
the world.
The late Mr. John Richard Black, founder of the
THE ENTRANCE HALL
WALLANGRA , NEW SOU T H WA LE S


THE SITTING ROOM
THE DINING ROOM
WALLANGRA HOMESTEAD
W ALL A N GR A, NE W S 0 U TII WAL E S


SHORN TWO-
TOOTH EWES
ON GLEN LEE
Below —
THE
WALLANGRA
WOOL SUED
WALLA N G R A, NE W S O UT 11 W A LES


MR. R. A. BLACK
family in Australia, was born in Ireland in 1832, and
was seven years of age when his father, Lieutenant Hum-
phrey Gunn Black, a retired Army officer of county
Langford, Ireland, made the voyage out to seek new
fortune. It was an eventful introduction to his adopted
land, for the vessel on which they journeyed was wrecked
off the Cape of Good Hope. Everything he possessed
was lost in the wreck, and it was not until twelve months
later that the family arrived in New South Wales.
Lieutenant H. G. Black finally settled at Windsor, where
his son received his early education. At 19 years of age
John Richard Black accepted a position on one of the
Moffatt’s big sheep and cattle runs on the Darling
Downs, and got on so well that he. was given the manage-
ment of Wyaga Station three years later for Mr. Russell
and James Taylor. After the sale of this property he
managed Dunmore for the same men until 1862, when
he decided to enter into partnership with Edward Lamb
in the purchase of Yamala, on the Peak Downs, Q. Here
they engaged in woolgrowing with successful results for
eleven years, during which time, in 1867, Mr. Black
married Josephine Rens, daughter of Mr. Gilbert Cory,
of the Paterson, N.S.W. When Yamala was sold in
lh/3 he retired to Sydney, but re-engaged in the pastoral
business with the acquisition of a half-share in Wallangra
an dBI ue Nobby in 1876. These runs eventually became
his own, and be then purchased Milchengowrie in the
Boggabri district, passing over the control of all these
interests to his four sons in 1899, in which year he re-
tired to Yamala, his residence at Strathfield, Sydney,
where he died in 1913 at the age of 81.
When he ceased active management of his properties
lie formed the Wallangra Pastoral Company Limited,
which later purchased Taroo, near Collarenebri, from the
executors of the late W. F. Buchanan. In 1906 Myall
Plains was purchased by the late Mr. Black as a partner-
ship between himself and his youngest son, the present
owner of Wallangra, whilst from the date of his retire-
ment until 1921 his other sons, John Y. Black, managed
Wallangra, James H. Black Blue Nobby, and Alexander
H. Black Milche ngowrie. The last named died in 1921,
after serving at the war, and with this bereavement the
Wallangra Pastoral Company Limited was wound up.
Mr. J. H. Black took over Taroo, which he has en-
larged, Mr. J. Y. Black took his share in cash, and Mr.
R. A. Black took Wallangra. Milchengowrie was sold
to Mr. McCarthy, and Blue Nobby was disposed of to
Mr. P. A. Field. Myall Plains is still retained by the
remaining brothers in partnership under a resident
manager.
MRS. R. A. BLACK AND HER FAVOURITE HACK
tV A L LAN GR A, NE W S O V T H WAL E S


THE BRIDGE OVER
THE MACINTYRE
AT WALLANGRA
WALLANGRA. NEW SOUTH WALES


EURELLA, RYLSTONE, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Mr. J. B. Macfarlane
A URELLA S 1 A 1 lON, which was purchased by
\j the present owner, Mr. J. B. Macfarlane, in
1924, is a choice area of alluvial country situated
miles east of Rylstone, almost in the centre of the
( pertee Valley, New South Wales, the town of
C j, pertee lying 26 miles to the south, and Sydney 147
n les distant by road. Within five miles of Eurella is
cattle which the owner is building up.
As is well known, the Capertee Valley is a magnifi-
cent formation, but contains only a few pockets of work-
able land. These areas are extremely valuable for graz-
ing, and the country is ideal for stud breeding purposes, a
feature that was recognised by Mr. Macfarlane when he
first went to Eurella on New Year’s Day 1914 to man-
CORRIEDALE RAMS ON EURELLA
th ittle township of Glen Alice, which affords the postal
ant telephonic facilities.
ade up of undulating flats, which contain a good
de of deep volcanic soil, and well balanced with silt
CO! try, the property occupies a freehold area of 3500
aci , and has achieved distinction in the pastoral world
no alone for its advanced state of improvement, its
S P did natural assets, and the picturesque setting of
ste sandstone cliffs which hem it in, hut chiefly because
°1 e historic stud flock of Corriedale sheep bred there,
ant nore lately through the stud herd of Aberdeen-Angus
age for his father, Mr. Donald Macfarlane, who pur-
chased the run from Mr. A. Stewart two months earlier.
Eurella was originally a Crown grant to Mr. S. Lord,
from whom the property passed into other hands, includ-
ing those of Sir John Jamieson, before coming into the
possession of the well-known Macfarlane family.
In 1913 the country was heavily timbered, and most of
this had to be cleared off to make way for grazing pad-
docks, the property now being cut up into 17 sections
with wire-netted boundaries, and with all the subdivisions
protected in like manner from rabbits, from which Eurella


is quite free. Through the centre
of the property flows Nile
Creek, a valuable watercourse,
while the rainfall is well spread
over the year, and averages 25
inches. The stock are also
watered by very shallow wells
and troughing, and only in cer-
tain sandstone or limestone sec-
tions is the water inclined to
lose that softness which is its
prevailing quality. A drought
in this locality has never been
known, for in the lowest rain-
fall years, and at the end of
every summer, there is an abun-
dance of good feed and plenty
of first-class water. The pro-
perty is favoured further by a
mild climate, exceedingly
healthy for the stock, and is f e
from disease, the elevation n
the valley being about one
thousand feet lower than
at Rylstone, thirty miles
away.
Mr. Macfarlane is a be-
liever in allowing this country
to develop under the influence
of natural conditions, having
discovered through experience
that most fodder crops, as well
as the application of super-
phosphates to this particular
belt, are superfluous on ac-
count of the rich growth of
vegetation on the alluvial and
volcanic deposits carried down
from the ranges, hence the
stock feed out upon pas-
A PAIR OF EURELLA HOGGETS
A SPECIAL STUD SIRE USED WITH MARKED SUCCESS IN THE EURELLA STUD FLOCK
EUR E L LA. NE IF SOU T U WAL E S


CORRIEDALE RAMS,
ALL EURELLA BRED
EURE L L A, NE W SOU T II IE AL E S


EURELLA FOUR-TOOTH STUD CORRIEDALE EWES AND LAMBS
tures which are almost untouched, and receive no pamper-
ing in any way. Lucerne, however, can be grown success-
fully under ordinary conditions, and the deep black slopes
here and there are utilised to a fairly large extent in
sowing it for grazing and fodder conservation, but the
distance from rail and the consequent high cost of trans-
port preclude the more extensive cultivation of lucerne
from a commercial viewpoint.
On the other hand there is plenty of good soft tussocky
land for the cattle, whilst rye grass, white clover and
other species of clovers, paspalum, canary grass, varie-
gated thistle, &c., are mixed with the indigenous sweet
native grasses throughout all the paddocks, these being
shaded beautifully by applewood, river gums, grey and
white box, kurrajong, some black wattle and a little iron
bark, sufficient timber having been spared for this very
essential purpose in the process of ringing and clearing.
It would be difficult indeed to find anything superior to
STUD ABERDEEN-ANGUS HEIFERS ON EURELLA
EUR ELL A, NE W S (JUT II WAL E S


the timbered bushland of this section of the valley for
sheer natural peace and beauty. The site chosen for the
homestead is pretty, whilst the house itself has been ex-
tended in recent years to comfortable proportions. Its
great charm as a pastoral home, however, lies in its set-
ting between walls of high sandstone cliffs feathered w ith
trees, and rising bold and rugged for 1000 ft. A spur
of the range turns west a little way up the valley, in-
tensifying this effect of shelter and privacy to the pasture
lands spread over gentle open slopes.
The improvements made to Eurella allow the run to
CHAMPION CORRIEDALE
EWE, SYDNEY, 1924
be worked smoothly at all times, with the result that the
utmost is obtained from the country, which, as already
indicated, is ideal for breeding both sheep and cattle.
The Eurella Corriedale flock at the present time numbers
about 2000 breeding ewes, all of which are studs. These
are direct descendants from the original Corriedale flock
which was established by the New Zealand and Aus-
tralian Land Company Limited in 1874, by mating stud
Lincoln rams with stud Merino ewes on The Levels
Estate, Canterbury, New Zealand, and they have been
bred up by the present owner and his father from 800
HUSTLE OF KOIRO, AN ABERDEEN-ANGUS SIRE ON EURELLA
EU R ELLA, NE JV SOU T II WAL E S


A GLIMPSE OF THE EURELLA COUNTRY,
WITH NILE CREEK IN THE FOREGROUND
E U REEL A. NE W S OUT II WAL E S


A GLIMPSE OF MT. TYAN
FROM THE HOMESTEAD YARD
EURE L L A, NE W SOU T H WAE E S


Corriedale ewes purchased in 1904 at the time of the
dispersal of I'lie Levels stud. Five years later a draft of
the same sheep was purchased from the New Zealand
and Australian Land Company’s Moeraki Estate, Otago,
whither a portion of The Levels stud flock had been
transferred when that property was sold to the New
Zealand Government. Mr. Donald Macfarlane estab-
lished his stud with these purchases first at Teviot, Otago,
and afterwards at Claremont, Timaru, and upon leaving
New Zealand in 1911 transferred most of the stud flock
to Wairoa Station, near Narrabri, N.S.W. When
Eurella was acquired in 1913 the stud was divided and
portion brought down to its present headquarters, under
the management of Mr. J. B. Macfarlane.
dales lack nothing in this respect, for from 1916, wh a
they were first exhibited at the Sydney Sheep SL v
(recognised as the most important exhibition in the Com-
monwealth for Corriedales and other breeds of shee <)
until 1927, when the stud was withdrawn from compe i-
tion, they annexed 14 grand championships, 9 rescue
championships, and innumerable other prizes. This is
perhaps the greatest tribute to the quality of the Eun la
Corriedales. The more important of these awards are
set out hereunder, and it should be added that on one
occasion only did the same ram win twice:—l9l6, grand
champion ram; 1917, grand champion ram; 1918, grand
champion ram; 1919, grand champion ram; 1919, grand
champion ewe; 1920, grand champion ewe; 1921, grand
NILE CREEK, WITH EURELLA STATION BUILDINGS IN THE DISTANCE
The Eurella Corriedales are thus part of the oldest
established Corriedales in existence, and have been kept
up to the highest standards by the owner. Lincoln-
M erino blood, and no other, is in the entire flock of to-
day, while the rams used for service have been drawn
from only direct branches of the parent stud or bred
within the Eurella stud itself. Upon taking over the
property as his own in 1924 Mr. J. B. Macfarlane took
over also all the sheep, and the stud is registered as
Flock No. 1 in the Australasian Corriedale Society’s
Flock Book. His practice is to breed his own sires or
to procure them, as in the past, from direct offshoots of
The Levels sheep, such as those bred by his brothers
(Cullingral, &c.), but in no way is the direct line of
breeding interfered with, his rigid apprenticeship under
his father teaching him the necessity for pure line-breed-
ing if a flock is to become a success.
There is plenty of evidence that the Eurella Corrie-
champion ram; 1922, grand champion ram; 1922, g nd
champion ewe; 1924, grand champion ewe; 1925, g nd
champion ram; 1925, grand champion ewe; 1926, g .nd
champion ram; 1926, grand champion ewe.
Volume 4 of the Corriedale Association’s Flock 1 >ok
sets out full details of the Eurella flock and its ; ize
winnings, and the owner claims the distinction of hi ng
one of the leading Corriedale flocks in the Commonwt Ith
to-day from the point of view of purity, evenness nd
superb quality. In every instance the rams to whicl the
championships were awarded were sold to a keen der nd
immediately following their respective shows (with the
exception, of course, of the ram that gained the at ard
twice). This consistency in the production and sa of
grand champion rams has earned the stud the hi lest
reputation in the Corriedale sheep world, but no less ' ilu-
able have been the show ewes, an illustration of this
being the stud ewe —lambed 1920, and winner oi the
EU REEL A, NE W SOU T H IF AL E S


CORRIEDALE STUD EWES AND LAMBS ON EURELLA, WITH SANDSTONE HILLS IN THE BACKGROUND
SIX-TOOTH STUD CORRIEDALE EWES AND LAMBS
EU R E LLA, NE W S OUT II WAL E S


A CORNER OF THE
SMOKING ROOM
ATEURELLA
A COOL RETREAT
FOR A HOT DAY —
A CORNER OF THE
VERANDAH
EUREL I L A , NE W SOU T II WAL E S


MR. DONALD MACFARLANE
championship at the Sydney Sheep Show in 1924 and
again in 1925—which had, during the period 1922-24,
five lambs, and reared all except one.
Shearing at Eurella takes place after the ewes have
been lambed down in September. The lambs then come
up for shearing in the following March, and again as
hoggets in September. Large well-formed backs that are
set squarely on deep, well-sprung barrels, as well as almost
perfect uniformity, characterise the ewes, which right
through the entire flock are shapely and stylish, and
approach the ideal in quality at every point. Mr. Mac-
farlane’s objective is the maintenance of a type corre-
sponding with the best qualities of this dual purpose
breed, the principal of which are symmetry, strong sup-
ports, avoiding legginess, and covered with dense long-
st pled wool of character and breeding. The ability of
these sheep to produce prime fat lambs maturing early is
another feature to which due attention has been given at
Eurella.
Fhe wool ranges in quality from a 50’s spinning count
in the rams up to 56’s in the ewes, and in one year re-
tu ned an average price for all lines of over 20d. per lb.
T e staple is long, and the wool lustrous, dense and well
ci nped, the yield per head of grown sheep as a rule
be og about 11 lbs. Perhaps no better indication of the
E ella wool can be given than the following extract
ft n the woolselling broker’s report (referring to the
19 6-27 clip), which stated, inter alia: “Prices obtained
e of a high standard for Corriedale wool, and the
sh p must show you a good return per head. We might
add that during the past few years your wool has shown
excellent bulk and evenness of quality throughout the
clip. In the present clip only 5 per cent, comprised the
second quality, and, further, your skirtings sold so well
on account of the nice even quality of same. No coarse
crutch ends were noticeable. Your Corriedale ram’s wool
also displayed splendid style and breeding, which accounts
for the high figures realised for ram’s wool of this type.”
In addition to their popularity in the western districts
of New South Wales, and in Victoria, South Australia,
and I asmania, the Eurella Corriedales are well known
in Argentina, U.S.A., Japan, Fiji, and New Zealand
(Mr. J. B. Macfarlane claiming to be the first to send
Corriedale sheep from Australia back to the land of
their origin), and frequently 150 guineas and over has
been paid for the stud rams, and up to 50 guineas for
ewes. Cast for age ewes are disposed of for 5 guineas,
and orders are in hand for these for years ahead for for-
ward delivery for as many as can be obtained. Sheep-
men have shown great confidence in these sheep, and the
owner fosters this feeling by giving a guarantee that all
sheep sold will breed true to type. In his persistent
efforts to improve the fleeces, Mr. Macfarlane runs no
risk of neglecting the standard of quality in the carcase,
or the constitution of the sheep, and buyers have never left
Eurella without doing business, so attractive do they find
the all-round usefulness of the stock.
In April 1929 a stud herd of Aberdeen-Angus cattle
was formed with the purpose of breeding high-class, early-
maturing bulls of strong constitution for sale to herd-
MR. J. B. MACFARLANE
EURELLA, NEW SOUTH WALES


masters. The foundation stock comprised 25 cows and
6 calves (3 of each sex) purchased from Mr. Norman
Forster, of Abington, N.S.W., and the bull Hustle of
Koiro. The latter is the magnificent animal which won
the championship at Sydney Royal Show in 1929, and
was also champion of the Dannevirke Show, N.Z., and
three times champion at the Melbourne Royal Show.
His breeder was Mr. N. B. Gibbons, of New Zealand,
and he was calved in February 1924, his sire being
Hayston Bright Print, from Etiquette of Koiro. Hayston
Bright Print was by Perinthian, and was bred by James
White, Hayston, Glamis, Scotland, and as a calf realised
1000 guineas. Perin-
thian, a noted prize
winner, was sold to
America for 6000
guineas, and established
a name at once by win-
ning first prize at the
International Show at
Chicago.
Hustle of Koiro is
a deep-fleshed bull of
striking conformation.
His quality from poll
to hocks is superb, and
he should produce
good stock in his new
headquarters. All the
cows purchased are
registered with the
A.A.A. Society, and
were in calf to Rex of
Ben Lomond, an out-
standing sire tracing
back in his pedigree
through the N.Z.
Aberdeen-Angus cow
Flower —bred in 1902
and acquired by Mr.
J. S. M acfarlane later
for his famous stud at
Ben Lomond—to the
best blood of the cele-
brated Erica and
Queen Mother families.
Rex of Ben Lomond
was first yearling bull
at Hastings 1923, and
champion the following
year as a two-year-old.
In regard to his dam, Helen of Ben Lomond, the founder
of the New Zealand Flower family, her progeny are
numbered in innumerable prize lists, and as a consistent
breeder of high-class stock she is said to have no equal in
New Zealand. The value of a prepotent line of female
descent in the breeding of stud cattle cannot be questioned,
and in the nucleus of the Eurella herd Mr. Macfarlane
possesses the richest quality of purebred stock which it is
possible to procure in this type of cattle.
The heifers and bull calves were sired by Rex of Ben
Lomond at Abington. Amid their new surroundings
Hustle of Koiro and his choice female companions ai i
their progeny will be given every opportunity to asse :
their qualities for the benefit of herd owners wanting j
improve the standard of their cattle.
Mr. James B. Macfarlane is the second son of A
Donald Macfarlane, who, after winning his way to t ■
top of the tree in the course of a strenuous pastoral career,
now resides in Sydney. Born at The Levels, Canterbur ,
N.Z., in 1885, the owner of Eurella was educated at the
Waitaki High School, Oamaru, N.Z., whence he entered
the service of the New Zealand and Australian Lard
Company at Edendale Estate, Southland, N.Z. The e
were over 6000 head
of Aberdeen - Angus
cattle at Edendale, and
the experience gained
among this fine herd is
being used to advan-
tage now with the
stud at Eurella.
Coming to Austra-
lia in 1911 Mr. J. B.
Macfarlane took over
the management of
Bowylie Station at
Gundaroo, near Yass,
N.S.W., for Mr. J. B.
Osborne, and from
there moved to Eurella
in 1914. In 1913 he
married a daughter of
the Rev. Thomas
Neave, of Kunr ■,
N.Z., and there is a
family of two sons and
one daughter. Ihe
former are being edu-
cated, 1930, at Sc ts
College, Sydney.
Mr. J. B. Mad: r-
lane belongs to t at
class of men wh e
long-sighted, prog: 'S-
sive minds are the r 1
basis of a district’s v -
fare, and in this resp t
he manifests a keen in-
terest in the impro e-
ment of the neighbc r-
hood in which he as
made his home. le
is a member of the Rylstone District Land Board, presir it
of the local branch of the Graziers’ Association, an .i
councillor of the N.S.W. Graziers’ Association, repres t-
ing the Mudgee district. Both his father and his mo er
were held in high esteem in the pastoral life of New / i-
land, the former having also, since 1908, iy
undertaken a number of ventures in station propert m
New South Wales and Queensland. Enterprise, in s-
try, and enthusiasm are characteristic of the member of
the Macfarlane family, and whatever they undertal is
done well, of which Eurella affords plenty of proof.
THE EURELLA WOOLSHED AND MEN'S QUARTERS
EUR ELL A, NEW SOUTH WALES


DABEE, RYLSTONE, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Mr. P. F. Evans
DABEE STA FION is situated in the Rylstone
district of New South Wales, miles from the
town of Rylstone, 160 miles from Sydney, and
occupies a freehold area of 16,820 acres of undulating
grazing country, containing a few good hills, and at one
time very heavily timbered with appletree, box, gum and
some stringy bark.
The natural conditions of the property are here com-
bined with a very r able administration under the present
relates to the death of this man on the property in the
year 1819. As it was only in the year 1814 that the Blue
Mountains were crossed, Dabee, or Dabey Farm as it
was called at first, must have been started between then
and 1819.
It comprised a grant of 1000 acres to the late Mr.
Richard Fitzgerald, and to his son, Robert Fitzgerald, a
similar grant was made. Adjoining their land was a
grant of 2000 acres taken up by Mrs. Macquarie, and
DABEE HOUSE FROM THE TENNIS COURT
owner, Mr. R. F. Evans, who purchased Dabee from the
Perpetual Trustee Company off shears in 1923, and in-
deed are such as to contribute largely in the factors which
have made Dabee famous as the headquarters of one of
the best of the fine Merino wool clips offered at the
Sydney sales.
Through its present owner the station is carried on
into the fifth generation of the pioneering family of Fitz-
geralds, having been taken up in the very early days of
New South Wales. There are, however, no definite
records at hand to show in exactly what year Dabee was
established, but a tombstone bearing the name Purvess
subsequently this block, together with that held by his
father, was acquired by Robert Fitzgerald, bringing
Dabey Farm up to an area of 4000 acres, upon which he
grew sheep and wool. The flock with which he began
numbered 500 purebred Alerino ewes, and was developed
into a first-class stud and general dock, with the induence
of imported pure Gadegast (Saxony) rams. Robert
Fitzgerald, grandfather of the present owner, also drew
from the fine-woolled Merino docks bred on Burrun-
dulla by the late the Hon. G. H. Cox, and on
Havilah by Mr. Bailey, and it is noteworthy that
some of his wool is preserved to this day in the British


Museum, whither it was sent from Dabee in 1851.
In conjunction with this sheep run Mr. Robert Fitz-
gerald carried on Tongy Station (near Cassilis), Coree,
Yarraman (near Tamworth) Midkin (near Moree),
and all the country formerly known as the Bollon in
Southern Queensland, besides owning a number of city
investments. Upon his death in 1865 the station pro-
perties passed to his only surviving son, the late Robert
made his home in 1926. The present luxurious additions
to the homestead were then added.
When he became the owner of Dabee one of the first
things that Mr. Evans did was to go through the sheep
and cull them very heavily with the purpose of holding
on to the original quality. Those that retained the
characteristics of the old type were put on one side and
the rest discarded, and if drastic, this tremendous culling
ONE OF THE PADDOCKS, WITH THE WOODSHED IN THE MIDDLE DISTANCE
Marsden Fitzgerald, who died in 1910, whereupon Dabee
and other places were bequeathed to the last named’s five
sisters, one of whom was Mrs. Emily Evans, wife of the
late Mr. George Evans, solicitor, of Sydney, and were
administered by the Perpetual Trustee Company Limited
on their behalf until in 1923 Dabee was put up for
•auction and fell to the bid of the present owner, a son
of Mr. George Evans. At this time Mr. R. F. Evans
.owned the well-known Merriwa (now Merawah) Sta-
tion on the Macintyre River, near Goondiwindi, on the
New South Wales side, but sold it after buying Dabee,
-.where, after two years’ residence in Sydney, he finally
left about three thousand ewes or so of the original fine-
woolled type with which to start the 1924 season. With
these sheep, rams from Havilah were used in order to
maintain the consistency of the old Dabee strain, and the
first clip, 1924-25, resulted in 265 bales of wool which
sold up to 47|d. per lb. With the following year’s clip
the record price of 39d. was established, the shearing,
which commenced on the 14th September and cut out on
sth October, amounting to a total of 10,189 sheep and
lambs, yielding an average of 7 lbs. ozs. per head for
grown sheep.
In 1926-27 the ewes, wethers and rams cut 9 lbs. 13^
DA BEE, NEW SOUTH WALES


CUTTING LUCERNE FOR HAY
MERINOS IN HALF-WOOL BEING MUSTERED ON DABEE
I) A nE E. N E IV SO U TII IF AL E S


ozs. per head, with an average of 8 lbs. 13f ozs. for the
whole flock, and produced 381 bales, the top price for
which was again 39d. A record was established in 1927-
1928 by Dabee fleece lines, which sold to 4ld. per lb.,
wbile in 1928-29 the clip, which sold to per lb.,
held the record for the year until right at the end of the
sales, when fine and superfine wools became very scarce.
The clip from Dabee that year totalled 487 bales
(124,618 lbs. gross and 119,019 lbs. net weight), these
The 1929 Dabee clip, sold at the last November sales
in Sydney, totalled 574 bales; “fleece” sold to
“necks” to 16d., “bellies” to 15d., and “broken” up to
14fd., despite the marked general decline in the market
as compared with the previous season.
The R. Fitzgerald/Windsor/N.S.W. brand, which has
been in use now for more than one hundred years, stands
for the hall mark of one of the finest quality clothing and
combing wools grow n in Australia, if not in the world.
A VIEW ALONG ONE OF THE MANY RIVER FLATS ON DABEE
figures, and the details following, being given in view of
the oft expressed contention that the production of fine
or superfine Merino wools does not pay the grower.
F rom the 5985 ewes shorn the average was 8 lbs. 2.8 ozs.
per head, giving 199 bales of uniformly high quality
fleece lines of 70’s count and higher, and from the 4130
wethers put through the cut per head was 1 1 lbs. 4.6 ozs.
The 3650 weaners lambed from 14th October to 27tb
November, and shorn early in October 1928, returned an
average of 6 lbs. 0.4 ozs. per head, whilst the net average
for grown sheep over one year old was 9 lbs. 7 ozs., rams not
included, the total clip, as already stated, being 487 bales.
-1 o those who are dubious as to the returns per head,
or per acre, from superfine wool flocks, Mr. Evans points
not only to the comparatively big weights cut at Dabee,
but to all the factors that combine to make this class of
business profitable, such as the class of sheep, the methods
of looking after the flock and the pastures which feed the
stock, and the choice of country most suitable for fine
to superfine wools. Ibe owner believes that there is a
good deal of country used for growing medium to strong
wool that is peculiarly adapted for stocking up with finer-
woolled sheep at a greater profit, and as a life-long ex-
perience in sheep husbandry and wool production is be-
DAn E E, NE JV S O U TII JV A EES


MERINOS IN HALF-WOOL OX THE TREK
A LUCERNE FIELD ON DABEE READY FOR HARVESTING
DAB E E, NE W S 0 U Tll WAL E S


A SCENE TYPICAL OF THE
EARLY DAYS ON DABEE
I) ABE E, NE JV S 0 U TII WAL E S


A VIEW OF DABEE HOME-
STEAD TAKEN FROM
THE HOME PADDOCK
1) A BE E. NK W S 0 U Tll IF A LK S


A DISTANT VIEW OF DABEE HOMESTEAD
hind his opinion, and he can back up his assertions with
actual results, his conclusions are important.
The Dabee country, 2000 ft. above sea level, is pic-
turesque and restful, resembling parts of the New Eng-
land district without the latter’s steepness. It contains
very little basalt, whilst the light red to brown soil grows
an abundance of fine grasses and herbs typical of this part
of the State, but differing from the richer feed around
the Mudgee areas, 30 miles away, where conditions do
not favour the silky texture wools to the same extent,
being more adaptable for fattening purposes. Over a long
period the rainfall at Dabee Station has averaged 26 in.
per annum. In places there are fertile river flats, the
Cudgegong River flowing right through the property,
having its head a few miles from the homestead, and
these pockets enable a prolific cultivation of lucerne to
be carried out to the extent of over seven cuts in a good
year, equivalent to about 6 tons to the acre. For winter
grazing purposes these flats are an ideal and valuable
asset, and also provide a good storage of hay for the
emergency year.
Since taking over Dabee the owner has spared no ex-
pense in an endeavour to rid the property of rabbits,
with which it was virtually overrun, and to date more
than 12,000 acres have been improved perfectly in this
direction. His aim is to clear the whole of the run of
this pest once and for all time, and to this end is burn-
ing up timber, digging out the burrows, and erecting safe-
guards with systematic thoroughness, there being at pre-
sent about 100 miles of vermin-proof fencing, and some
50 paddocks, included in which are eight sections where
improvements are complete, enabling a heavy supply of
sheep to be carried.
In addition to the water from the river, the run has
an inexhaustible underground supply of soft, pure water
—which can be used for every purpose—at only a few
feet below the surface of the ground. The sheep possess
medium size frames, plain bodies, and are exceptionally
uniform. In 1928 the run carried 14,000 head to the
shearing, but this year 18,015 head were shorn, and a
corresponding increase is expected next year, as further
areas are improved. This progress is due solely to the
sound way m which the country has been treated since
1923, when the size of the flock was 9000 and the wool
clip comprised 179 bales of wool. In other words, the
clip has been increased by nearly 400 bales within six
years.
I he rams are joined with the ewes m order to regulate
the diop in the spring months of October-November,
following the shearing, and the average of lambs marked
is about 80 per cent.
1 he substantial old woolshed is near the homestead,
and has eight stands of machines, a feature of this build-
ing being its cedar fittings, while the yards, pens, &c.,
I) A HE E. NE IF S O U T H JF AL E S


MERINOS WADING
THROUGH NATURAL
PASTURAGE TO
WATER AT DABEE
MERINO SHEEP IN
HALF-WOOL GRAZ-
ING ON THE
RICH PASTURES
I) AnE E, NE W SOUTH WALES


TWO VIEWS OF THE DRAWING
ROOM AT DABEE HOMESTEAD
I) .1 nE E, XE IV SOU T H W A LES


THE DIKING ROOM
AND BILLIARD ROOM
DAB E E, y E W S O U TII JV A LES


TYPICAL COUNTRY ON DABEE
and accommodation are up to a high standard in keeping
with the rest of the appointments.
Dabee is noted also for its up-to-date homestead, the
owner being one who, having lived and worked hard
most of his life in Queensland and other parts, now
believes in surrounding himself and family with a full
measure of comfort. The original house itself is a fine
example of the artisanship of a century ago, when assigned
labour was cheap, and thick stone walls were the rule.
It was considered an old homestead when the present
owner’s mother, who died in 1929 aged 81, first went
to Dabee in 1855. The new home erected after 1923 is
of stone hewn on the property, and embraces much of the
original dwelling, thus preserving the old associations.
In it are installed all the attributes of a town house,
including a fine billiard room and an extensive library,
the latter containing many works gathered by Mrs.
Macquarie, and which are of historic value. Many
works of art adorn the homestead, while from the veran-
dahs there are beautiful panoramic views of shaded pas-
tures and flats framed by a chain of hills.
The late Richard Fitzgerald died on 25th May, 1844.
H is family comprised three sons, Richard, born 1806 and
died 1822; Robert, born 1807 and died 1865; and John,
born 1811 and died 1835.
Mr. Robert Fitzgerald Evans, who was born in 1874,
is one of four sons of the late Mr. George Evans, whose
marriage with Miss Fitzgerald took place in 1868. He
has one brother and two sisters surviving. Upon leaving
school in 1889, after passing his matriculation examina-
tion, he decided to enter the pastoral business, and a year
and a-half later was invited by his uncle to jackaroo at
Dabee. Later on he went to Cobar, and when he reached
his majority was given the management of a property in
Queensland which his father bought. In 1906 Mr.
Evans purchased Merriwa, from where he went to
Dabee. During his career he has experienced the ups
and downs of the pastoral business, one of his greatest
knocks being in 1920, when the cattle market slumped.
Apart from his pastoral affairs Mr. Evans takes a
keen interest in all the local sporting bodies of the dis-
trict, and runs some good horses at the annual picnic
meetings. His family consists of three sons and two
daughters, the eldest son, Robert Fitzgerald Evans, who
is an old King’s School boy, at present being engaged in
studying woolgrowing under his father’s guidance.
DAB E E, NE W S 0 U TII WAL E S


CHATSBURY, GOULBURN, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Mr. A. F. Carr
THE district around Goulburn and Crookwell is
one of the most prolific “inside” pastoral centres
of New South Wales, and is noted particularly
for its ability to produce high-class types of sheep either
ror wool, as the Merino, or for mutton or crossbred
wools, such as some of the more successful British breeds.
for Merinos, and of the many first-class flocks of British
breeds throughout the State the Chatsbury Romney Marsh
stud is recognised to be in the very front rank. It has
been built up during the past twenty years on the best
strains of Romney blood known to the Commonwealth
and to New Zealand, and heavy culling, expert classing,
CHATSBURY HOMESTEAD
The importance of the longwoolled sheep to Australia
and New Zealand cannot be over-estimated, whether the
various strains are used as purebreds, or crossed with
other British breeds or the Merino, and it is obvious
that they bear the same relation to mutton and lamb
production as the purebred Merino does to wool grow-
ing. In particular is the longwool type of sheep a source
of profit to the grower on country that is too wet or cold
and the most careful husbandry have combined to estab-
lish in the Chatsbury sheep the most desirable form of
carcase and evenness of fleece.
Chatsbury is situated 17 miles from the city of Goul-
burn, about 150 miles south-west of Sydney, in pretty
undulating country, where the annual average rainfall is
28 inches, and where snow covers the ground at times of
the year. It is owned by Mr, A. F. Carr, who is acknow-


STUD ROMNEY MARSH RAM, MAHUA 129 OF 23, THE PROPERTY OF MR., A. F. CARR
Won First and Champion Sydney, 1926, First for Shorn Ram Melbourne Royal Show, 1925, First and
Reserve Champion Melbourne Royal, 1296
ledged to be a leading authority on the Romney Marsh
breed, and dates back in the history of pastoral settlement
to the early thirties, when part of the present holding
was established by a Mr. Cowper, not long after such
notable places as Springfield, &c., were pioneered in 1827.
After passing through various hands, and undergoing
alterations in size from its original area of 13,000 acres,
it came into the possession of the late Mr. Henry Carr in
the eighties. The late Mr. Carr was one of the old
pioneering identities of the Binda district, and will be
remembered as the owner of Funny Hill Station west of
Crookwell. This property is still owned by the family,
and is one of the biggest individual wool-growing runs
in that part of the State, besides carrying a herd of over
500 head of cattle.
Under the care of the late Mr. H. Carr, who died in
1904, and was the father of the present owner, Chats-
bury \\as devoted to general pastoral pursuits, princi-
pally fattening in conjunction with his country at Binda
and elsewhere. Mr. A. F. Carr became the owner in
about 1908, since when the property has been subdivided
considerably, leaving an area to-day of approximately
6700 acres freehold, upon which are run about 7000
comebacks, a stud of purebred Romneys, and sufficient
cattle to eat down the rough feed. Mr. Carr attributes
much of the success he has had at Chatsbury to a policy
of stocking with a big margin of safety. The improve-
ments also are responsible very largely for the beautiful
appearance of the paddocks to-day, and the healthy con-
dition of all the stock, and one would seek far to find
more congenial surroundings for the purpose to which the
run is put.
1 he ridges, hills, slopes and valleys carried exception-
all}’ heavy timber in the pioneering days. It was exten-
CH A TS B U R Y, NE W S O U T H WALES


PINE SHELTER BELTS IN SOME OF THE SMALLER PADDOCKS
sively rung on parts of the property, and subsequently
picked up and burnt by the present owner, so that it
became essential a few years ago to lay down plantations
of pines, &c., to give shade to the extra paddocks that
were created from time to time as the stud flock was
enlarged. All this work is another factor responsible for
the splendid sward of feed that is in evidence most of
the year. All the enclosures are netted in securely, and
there are no signs of the rabbit, while the main water
supply is from small creeks fed by never-failing springs.
Small wells equipped with mills and troughing provide
water for the smaller paddocks used for stud purposes.
The pastures are composed of native grasses peculiar to
this part of the southern tablelands, but by themselves
these are not sufficient, and have to be supplemented with
outside varieties such as ryes, clovers, &c. In this direc-
tion Mr. Carr has had wonderful results, especially from
subterranean clover, for which parts of this district are
famous, whilst perennial rye has come along so strongly
that it was found necessary to cut it down for hay. This
was the case during the early part of the 1929 summer
with the crops of that year, and areas seen in December
A VIEW ACROSS THE CHATSBURY PADDOCKS
cHA TS B UR Y, NE W S O UT H JV AL E S


left no doubt that this grass increases the carrying capa-
city to a great extent, and it demonstrated more forcibly
than anything else the value of improving natural pas-
tures under the right system of management.
Both crops and grasslands are treated with superphos-
phate, and the area of improved pastures in 1929 was
nearly 1000 acres. Mr. Carr stresses the fact so often
touched upon by leading sheepbreeders, that it pays to put
money into the improvement of good country, as well
as inferior land, and Chatsbury is an example of how
high-class appointments all over the run have paid for
themselves in increased returns.
Built of brick, with a slate roof—there being a fine
centres, while the telephone connection is Chatsbury No.
1. Some distance away there is an 8-stand machine
woolshed, fitted with up-to-date improvements, which
like those all over the run are of substantial order, and
maintained in proper working efficiency.
Shearing takes place in November after lambing, and
the wool is amongst the best comeback clips grown in
New South Wales. About 10 lbs. per head is the regular
return from the general Hock, and this sells at prices
which compare with many of the Merino clips. Ihe
policy is to breed a good type of comeback from pure
Merino rams mated with the ewe progeny of Romney
Marsh rams and pure Merino ewes. The result is a
STUD ROMNEY MARSH RAM, MAHUA 66 OF 25, THE PROPERTY OF MR. A. F. CARR
deposit of slate on the property —the homestead was
erected in 1911 by the present owner, and is a small,
but very comfortably appointed, residence containing
electric light, septic sewerage, hot and cold water service,
wireless, &c., and stands in compact grounds. Twenty
years ago the elevation chosen as the site for the house
was quite bare of protective trees or shrubs, but to-day
there is evidence of much hard work in the tall English
laurel and cypress pine hedges and the trees that surround
the garden, which is approached by an avenue of pines
from the main Goulburn-Taralga road that runs through
Chatsbury. The nearest railway is at either of these
hardy animal of good commercial shape and covering,
brought up to high standards by strict culling and class-
ing. It is considered a poor season if the lamb-marking
percentages do not exceed 90 per cent., with correspond-
ingly good results from maiden ewes.
The stud flock was commenced in 1910 with 49 pedi-
greed stud Romney Marsh ewes purchased from Mr. G.
F. Doyle, of Cardington Hall, Molong, N.S.W. (Flock
No. 3, A.L.S.A.). In 1914 Mr. Carr purchased 35 ewes
of 1913 from S. M. Osborne, of Bolaro (Flock No. 23,
A.L.S.A.), of which 14 were bred from English sires
and dams, and the balance from New Zealand sources.
GH A TS B U R Y, N E IV SOU T H WAL E S


In 1915 he obtained 7
ewes from J. A. Mur-
doch, of New Zealand,
and a year later bought
50 2-tooth ewes from
Mr. Pat Osborne, of
Wi 1 ler o o, N.S.W.
(Flock No. 29, A.L.
S.A.), and 25 ewes
from the well-known
Romney Marsh flock of
Capt. A. E. T. Payne,
of Yarraview, Victoria.
These ewes were
joined with the noted
Romneysire Elham No.
53 (imp.), and each
ewe is registered singly
in flock book, vol. 5, of
the A.L.S.A., the regis-
tered number of the
Chatsbury Romney Marsh stud being Flock No. 57.
Other importations include 50 stud ewes from the
Estate of the late Mr. E. Short, of Parorangi, New Zea-
land, whilst during the past four years 180 cast for age
stud ewes have been introduced to the stud, which the
CUPS AND CHAMPIONSHIP MEDALS WON BY
CHATSBURY ROMNEY MARSH SHEEP
owner hopes to develop
in time into a pure
Parorangi strain.
The best class of
rams was obtained to
build up the general
flock and for breeding
high-class pure Rom-
ney Marsh rams, pur-
chases having been con-
fined exclusively to the
Parorangi and Mahua,
Feilding, N.Z., stud
flocks, the latter being
the well-known pro-
perty of Mr. E. E.
Short, one of the fore-
most Romney Marsh
breeders in the Do-
minion. The extent to
which Mr. Carr has
provided his ewes with the best quality sires is shown in
the following list of rams purchased during the past few
years: —Mahua 129 of 23 (130 gns.), 79 of 24 (200
gns.), Parorangi 45 of 25 (75 gns.), Mahua 70 of 26
(150 gns.), 66 of 25 (600 gns.), 122 of 26 (150 gns.),
STUD ROMNEY MARSH EWE, CHATSBURY 125-27, FIRST AND CHAMPION SYDNEY SHEEP SHOW, 1930
CH A T SBU R Y, NE W SOU Tll WA LE S


STUD ROMNEY MARSH
EWE, CHATSBURY
115-6, FIRST AND GRAND
CHAMPION SYDNEY
SHEEP SHOW, 1929
STUD ROMNEY MARSH
RAM, CHATSBURY
87-27, RESERVE CHAM-
PION SYDNEY, 1929,
CHAMPION ROMNEY
MARSH RAM OF AUS-
TRALIA, MELBOURNE
ROYAL snow, 192 9
CII A TS B U RY. NE ir S 0 UT II WA LES


A PAIR OF TWO-YEAR-OLD
STUD ROMNEY MARSH
EWES BRED AT CHATSBURY
Belo w—
PARORANGI STUD ROMNEY
MARSH EWE, 1065-25, THE
PROPERTY OF MR. A. F.
CARR. FIRST AND RESERVE
CHAMPION 1927, FIRST
AND GRAND CHAMPION
1928, SYDNEY SHEEP SHOW
CII A T SBU R Y. NE W S O UT II W A LES


220 of 27 (300 gns.), and
42 of 27 (50 gns.). From
Mr. W. R. Glasson, of Mo-
long, the ram Parorangi 79
of 25 was also purchased.
The produce from these
sires has been exceptional,
especially from No. 66 of 25,
which sired 106 lambs in his
first season at Chatsbury. Fie
was sent to Sydney in 1927,
where he was placed reserve
to the grand champion, but
soon after his return to
Chatsbury he died. Mahua
129 of 1923, bred by Mr. E.
E. Short, has a splendid show
record, having taken first prize
against 24 entries for one year
and under two at the Feild-
ing Show in 1924 and the
reserve championship, first
prize at the Melbourne Show
in 1925 for shorn ram, and
first prize and grand champion
at the Sydney Sheep Show in
1926. He has been success-
ful in stamping his own
qualities on the Chatsbury
stud.
Mr. Carr has come to the
front very quickly since he
began to exhibit in 1921, and his achievement is a meri-
torious one. From 1925 to 1929 inclusive his stud has
annexed 25 grand and reserve championships, 63 first
prizes, 7 first prizes for Romney Marsh fleece judged on
its commercial value, Sires’ Memorial Cup in 1925 and
the Savage Memorial Cup in Melbourne in 1927 and
1929. These prizes were won both at Melbourne and
Syd ney, one of the most outstanding sheep being the ewe
Parorangi 1065 of 25, which was first and reserve cham-
pion in 1927 and first and grand champion in 1928 at
Sydney.
In 1929 at Sydney, Mr. Carr carried off the ewe
SIDE AND BELLY WOOL OF A CHATSBURY-BRED
ROMNEY MARSH RAM
grand championship and the
two reserves, while in 1930
he annexed seven first places,
one grand championship, two
reserve championships, and
first in the group for one ram
and two ewes bred in Aus-
tralia.
The wool from the Chats-
bury stud rams is declared by
experts to be equal to the best
wool grown in Kent, Eng-
land, the home of the Romney
Marsh breed. It has mag-
nificent character and lustre,
and is even in quality all over
the sheep. Mr. Carr classes
and culls with his mind fixed
on uniformity, and no one
could visit Chatsbury without
being impressed by the regular
conformation of all the sheep
in the stud. The rams in par-
ticular are of immense size,
and the lambs especially well
grown. The 2-tooth rams at
the end of 1929 had furnished
well, possessing firm legs and
feet, sound broad backs, a cor-
rect masculine type of head
and attractive top and under-
line, with fleeces typical of
their sires. Mr. Carr, who makes a study of breeding,
and is ever eager to increase his knowledge, invited Mr.
E. E. Short to go through the stud in 1928, and during
a recent trip to the Old Country made visits to many
of the leading Romney flocks. Whilst there he was
paid the compliment of being invited to judge at Ashford
Show and Sales, the principal Romney Marsh sheep
show in Kent, and the experience will be of benefit to
the Chatsbury stud.
The output of Chatsbury Romney Marsh rams every
year finds a ready sale in many parts of Australia, and
Mr. Carr has also sold three rams to New Zealand, as
GROUP OF ROMNEY MARSH EWES AT CHATSBURY
CHATS B U R y, NE IV SOU T II IVA LES


STUD ROMNEY MARSH EWE, CHATSBURY 44 OF 28, FIRST AND RESERVE CHAMPION SYDNEY, 1930
STUD ROMNEY MARSH RAM, MAHUA 50 OF 28, THE PROPERTY OF MR. A. F. CARR
CH A TSBU RY, NE W SOU TII W A LES


SIDE ENTRANCE
TO CHATSBURY
HOMESTEAD
THE
DINING ROOM
CII A TS B U R Y. NK W S() UT II IVA L E S


A VIEW ACROSS THE CHATSBURY
PADDOCK S— A PICTURE
OF PEACE AND BEAUTY
CH A T S BURY, NE W SOU T H WA LE S


PART OF 30,000-GALLON TANK, WATER SUPPLY FOR THE VEGETABLE GARDEN, &C.; IT IS ALSO USED FOR SWIMMING
well as a special stud Romney ram to Dr. Brownell, who
has one of the leading flocks in California (U.S.A.).
Born in 1872, Mr. A. F. Carr is the youngest son of
the late Mr. Henry Carr, whose family consisted of ten
children, and who was one of those hardy men who com-
menced at the bottom rung of the ladder and rose to the
top, having gathered together an estate of over 45,000
acres of freehold country at the time of his death.
The present owner was brought up to the business
under his late father, and practically the whole of his
life has been devoted to the scientific understanding of
all classes of sheep, but principally crossbreds. He takes
an interest in the welfare of the district in which he
has lived for so long, and his property with its well-bred
stud and other stock is unquestionably an asset to the
industry.
TYPICAL CHATSBURY COUNTRY. THE HAYSTACK CONTAINS 30 TONS OF RYE GRASS AND CLOVER
CII A T SBU R Y. NE W SOU TII WAL E S


ROTHERWOOD, TARAGO, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Edward S. Hall, Esq.
OVER 100 years ago the homestead block of Rother-
wood Station was a grant made by Governor Mac-
quarie to the present owner’s great grandfather,
and having been ever since in the possession of the Hall
family, takes its place amongst the historic pastoral hold-
ings of New South Wales. It never was a very large
property, but Rotherwood and its development form a
experienced before this district came into its own with
woolgrowing. The severe drought of the ’thirties, raids
by marauding outlaws, interference by the natives, and
financial stringency were overcome, and with the dis-
covery elsewhere of gold in the early ’fifties, the district
went ahead, and has steadily progressed to the present
day.
A GLIMPSE OF THE ROTHERWOOD HOMESTEAD FROM THE TENNIS COURT
link in the chain of progress which binds the prosperity
of our great Commonwealth to the genesis of a vital in-
dustry, the growth of which is one of the romances of
the world.
The years 1826 and 1827 marked the pioneering of the
Goulburn district by the Chisholms, Faithfulls, Halls
and other adventurous settlers, and many set-backs were
Situated five miles from Tarago township, on the
shores of Lake Bathurst, 24 miles south-west of Goul-
burn, and within 165 miles of Sydney, and an easy dis-
tance from the Federal Capital, Rotherwood comprised
about 4000 acres freehold in 1917, in which year the
present owner, Mr. Edward Smith Hall, entered into
possession upon the death of his father, the late Mr. E.


S. Hall, who purchased the run from one of his uncles
in the ’seventies. It was devoted to fattening and wool-
growing under the care of a resident manager in con-
junction with Willeroon Station, near Nyngan, out on
the western plains, where the late Mr. E. S. Hall made
his home in 1861. In the course of the years im-
mediately following the war, Mr. Hall enlarged Rother-
wood to an area of 7600 acres freehold, and set about
the task of consolidating this land into a highly improved
property for the production at first of fat stock, par-
of the district, whilst the box, gum and stringy bark
timber is scattered more or less thickly over most of the
run, affording plenty of shade to the stock. There are
13 principal subdivisions, throughout all of which there
is no sign of rabbits, which are kept out by strong netting
fences, and the practice of the owner in having these in-
spected regularly, and any trace of vermin followed up
and dealt with at once, is largely responsible for the pre-
sent capacity of carrying one sheep to the acre safely all
the year round.
DRAFTING QUARTER-WOOL MERINO EWES AND LAMBS AT ROTHERWOOD
ticularly fat lambs, and subsequently of the best quality
Merino wool which the country and the natural condi-
tions allowed. The extra cost of improving Rotherwood
for woolgrowing, and a little fattening, was considerable,
and entailed the reorganisation of the whole property in
addition to the selection of a type of sheep that would
give the very best results. The fact that the flock now
being developed conforms to high standards, and pro-
duces beautiful soft handling wool of commercial value,
shows that the change has been more than justified.
Rotherwood is flat to undulating in formation, with an
annual average rainfall of 27 in. Upon a variety of red
productive soils the seasonal rains of the spring and
autumn produce a profusion of fine sweet grasses typical
It is practicable to water every paddock by means of
dams, on account of the splendid catchment areas pro-
vided by the natural lay-out of the country. These are
arranged in such a manner that the sheep can reach water
without unnecessary walking, and with the exception of a
supply for the homestead there has never been any short-
age, which is a valuable asset. Augmenting the surface
tanks are a few creeks, but their flow is subsidiary to the
excellent system of artificial waters, which are equipped
wi th windmills. Ihe problem of a permanent supply of
fresh water for the homestead was solved after many ex-
periments. The waters of the lake offered one solution,
but the expense of reticulating a supply for all require-
ments proved too great, and eventually the owner re-
R()TIIER IV O 0 D, N EIV S O UT // IV AL E S


THE ROTHERWOOD EIOMESTEAD AND THE HOME PADDOCK
A VIEW OF THE ROTHERWOOD HILLS WITH LAKE BATHURST IN THE DISTANCE
ROTHERW O O D, NE JV S 0 UT II WAL E S


LOOKING ACROSS THE HOME PADDOCKS FROM THE FRONT BALCONY
sorted to the use of a divining rod.
Mr. Hall has held a deep respect always for the divin-
ing rod, and was not surprised to see it operate strongly
as he paced the brow of the hill upon which the home-
stead stands. Sinking a well on that spot to a depth of
69 ft., he located water of excellent drinking quality,
and the supply appears to be inexhaustible.
The owner classes and culls his flock personally, with
the definite objective of producing a
hardy, plain bodied sheep of good style
and conformation, in accordance with
the rigours of the climate and pasture
conditions at Rotherwood. There are
about 8000 head in the flock, which was
based upon purchases of rams made from
Mr. George Merriman, of Yass,
N.S.W., and some idea of the way these
sheep thrive at Rotherwood is revealed
in the lambing figures for the past
several years, the natural increase of
marked lambs averaging from 70 per
cent, to 80 per cent. The drop is
timed for August, by which month there
usually is a good amount of green feed
for both the ewes and lambs, and the
annual shearing takes place in October/
November.
The 1928 shearing ( 1929 clip not yet
sold) can be taken as an indication
of the successful management of
the property, for that season was not
only below par in rainfall, but the wool
met a market which has only been
surpassed for dulness by the current one
(1929-30). Inferior yields due to
drought, and low prices due to economic
influences abroad, were almost general
factors that featured the wool-selling
period, but in spite of this depression the
Rotherwood clip returned the owner a
satisfactory average price, with the top
lines selling at per lb. This
figure was well up to the average for
greasy Merino wool not only from the
Goulburn district, but from the entire
State of New South Wales, being ex-
ceeded in value only by the superfine
wools from the big flocks bred on higher
country. From the wethers an average
of 12 lbs. per head was cut, whilst 75
per cent, of the ewes returned an aver-
age of 10 lbs., and the balance 9j lbs. of
wool per head. The quality of the clip is a little on the
fine side of medium. It is known to buyers for its sound
commercial value, and is invariably one of the outstand-
ing exhibits on the display floors. Mr. Hall gives par-
ticular attention to the preparation of the wool for sale.
Rotherwood is considered to be one of the best im-
proved holdings in the district, with one of the most
attractive modern homesteads in the south. The house
A CORNER OF THE ROTHERWOOD HOMESTEAD AND GARDEN
RO T H ERW OO D, NEW SOUTH WALES


A VIEW OVER LAKE BATHURST
FROM THE CAIRN, THE HIGHEST
POINT ON ROTHERWOOD STATION
is one mile distant from the wmol shed, and was com-
pleted in 1927. It is a residence of two storeys built
of brick with a red-tiled roof, and with interior appoint-
ments carried out in excellent taste. Such necessary com-
forts as electric light and power, a freezing plant and
modern sanitation have been installed, whilst wireless
and other attributes to home life are important ad-
juncts. Cement pathways and walks face the entrance,
m a setting of what is the nucleus of an expansive garden,
with lawns, rockeries, and a first-class hard tennis court.
Stretching away from the homestead is an aspect of
open pastoral scenery, with a beautiful view of the lake,
while the power house, garages and other incidental
outbuildings are constructed in harmony with the main
building.
Mr. Edward Smith Hall was born in 1893 on his late
father’s property near Nyngan, where he acquired his
early knowledge of sheep and wool upon the completion
of his education at St. Stanislaus College, Bathurst,
N.S.W. He launched out on his own initiative in 1914
in a small partnership, and soon afterwards purchased
his own property, Waverney, which he worked success-
ROTHERWOOD, NEW SOUTH W A EES


MARK HALL WITH
HIS YOUNGER
BROTHER MICHAEL
MARK HALL, SON
OF MR. E. S. HALL
THE HOMESTEAD AT ROTHERVVOOD
ROTHER W 0 0 D , NE W SOU TII WAL E S
R O TIIERW O O D, NEW SOUTH W A LES


THE SHEARING
SHED AND HUTS
AT ROTHERWOOD
A GLIMPSE OF
THE WATERS OF
LAKE BATHURST


fully until the death of his father placed him in control
of Rotherwood.
He married the second daughter of the late Mr. B.
I ier, of Sydney, and their family consists of four sons
A GLIMPSE OF THE TENNIS COURT FROM THE TERRACE
and one daughter, the eldest son carrying on the same name
as each preceding head of the family, which is in its fifth
generation in Australia at Rotherwood.
It is a fitting tribute to the past and present
owners of the property to mention the splendid ser-
vices rendered to the early life of
New South Wales by the late Mr.
Edward Smith Hall, great grandfather
of the present owner, who was born
in England in 1786, and died in 1860.
He arrived in Sydney on 25th Octo-
ber, 1812, with letters of introduc-
tion to Governor Macquarie from Sir
Robert Peel (then Under Secretary
for the Colonies), William Wilber-
force, Sir James Shaw (Sheriff of Lon-
don) and others, but for some reason
did not gain the Governor’s favour.
On Bth May, 1813, he founded the
Benevolent Society of N.S.W., was
chairman of the original meeting, the
first secretary, and the first subscriber
to this memorable institution. He
opened business as a merchant in 1814,
and with Simeon Lord engaged in
various enterprises.
In 1817 Mr. E. S. Hall was appointed the first secre-
tary and cashier of the Bank of New South Wales, but
resigned a year later, and upon Earl Bathurst’s recom-
mendation to Governor Macquarie that his desire to
practice as an attorney in the local
courts be considered, was made Coroner.
He held this post until 1825, when
Governor Ralph Darling (who suc-
ceeded Governor Brisbane at the end of
that year) withheld his renewal of the
appointment.
Chiefly owing to the new method
of administration under Governor
Darling, Mr. Hall founded a news-
paper named “The Monitor” on 19th
May, 1826, in which as editor and
publisher he undertook a campaign to
expose the despotism and tyranny to
which the young colony became sub-
jected. Governor Darling was hos-
tile to the press, upon which, other than
the official gazette, he imposed a tax
of 4d. per copy. At this time
there was one other newspaper,
“The Australian,” edited by Mr. W.
C. Wentworth and Dr. Wardell
(who was shot dead by bushrangers at Peter-
sham on 8/9/1834). They and Mr. Hall were
united in their criticism levelled against Darling’s
extreme autocratic militarism, and although the late
Mr. Edward Smith Hall, or Mr. “Monitor” Hall,
A VIEW FROM THE FRONT VERANDAH, SHOWING THE ENTRANCE
ROTHERWOOD , NEW SOUTH W A EES


THE PANELLED
DINING ROOM,
WITH TABLE IN
REFECTORY STYLE
A BRIGHT AND AT-
TRACTIVE ROOM.
THE LOUNGE
AT ROTHERWOOD
ROTIIE R W O 0 1). NE W S 0 UT El IV AL E S


ENGINE ROOM FOR
ELECTRIC LIGHT PLANT
STORM CLOUDS OVER LAKE BATHURST
R O TIIERJV O 0 D, N EJV SOU TII JV AL E S


as he was called, endured considerable persecution until
1830, including the temporary loss of his right to lease
pasture land, and of his assigned servants, he worked
fearlessly and with great courage and determination, and
SHORN LAMBS BRED AT ROTHERWOOD
eventually with success, to bring about better conditions
for the convicts.
In 1830 he was freed from further hardship and
made secretary to the Patriotic As-
sociation. He was also largely instru-
mental in bringing about the system
of trial by jury in New South
Wales, and strangely enough he pro-
vided the first case in Australia to
be tried before a jury of 12 citizens,
when he brought litigation against
a church and recovered damages. In
refusing to submit to the newspaper tax
he was sued by the Solicitor-General,
but the jury, led by Sir Daniel Cooper,
gave a verdict in Mr. Hall’s favour,
the tax involved amounting to £4OOO.
In 1830 Mr. Hall directed a report
upon the State of New South
Wales in letter form to the secretary
of the National Colonisation Society,
London, who made this important
document available to the general
public in England as an aid to settle-
ment in Australia.
It can be said that the late Mr. “Monitor” Hall was
a cause in the freedom of the press made possible by Chief
Justice Forbes in the late 1820’s. The “Monitor”
flourished until 1842.
Mr. Hallj whose wife died in August
1826, leaving him with a large family,
made a success of his establishment
at Lake Bathurst, where he grazed
cattle, but will be remembered more
for the prominence he won in his un-
ceasing propaganda for free press, trial
by jury, and the amelioration of the
treatment of the lower classes in Syd-
ney’s early days.
The late Mr. E. S. Hall, father of
the present owner, was a Avell-known
identity in the district around Wille-
roon Station, near Nyngan, his pro-
perty there being a large and important
one.
The present owner of Rotherwood,
who makes periodical visits to other
parts of the world, his latest voyage
being in April 1930 to the United
States and Europe with his wife and two
sons, takes a keen interest in the progress
of the Goulburn district, where his per-
sonality and enthusiasm have won him high esteem, while
he is at all times a keen worker for constantly improving
methods in the pastoral industry.
DRAFTING EWES AND LAMBS AT ROTHERWOOD
ROTHER W 0 O D. N EIV S 0 UT II WAL E S


HOBARTVILLE, RICHMOND, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Mr. Percy Reynolds
ADJOINING the historic town of Richmond, 40
miles from Sydney, in the fertile Hawkesbury
River district of New South Wales, lies Hobart-
ville, the property of Mr. Percy Reynolds, who has built
up thereon what is undoubtedly the most successful stud
of Hereford cattle in Australia at the present time. The
holding is one of the oldest in the State, and embraces
William Long and George Hill, and was purchased by
the present owner on Ist May, 1900.
Rich in old associations, Hobartville has figured pro-
minently at all times amongst the noted pastoral homes
and studs of New South Wales. It is made up of sweet
uplands and valuable river flats, plentifully grassed and
shaded, with an average annual rainfall of 32 in., and
A FRONT VIEW OF THE HOBARTVILLE HOMESTEAD
the original grants, made by Governor King, of 100 acres
to James Blackman on 31st March, 1802, and of 400
acres to Edward Luttrell on Bth August, 1804. Captain
William Cox acquired the bigger block not long after,
and by him the picturesque two-storied brick residence
which is still in use was erected, for his son William.
After the ’sixties, at which time Sloper Cox was the
owner, Hobartville passed to the Towns, and the Hon.
is ideal in every way for stud farming.
In Andrew Town’s time its stud of thoroughbreds pro-
duced some of the noblest scions of the Australian turf—
Grand Flaneur, Trenton, Maribyrnong, Sardonyx, Epi-
gram and other champions, whilst the annual sales of
yearlings in the beautiful oak avenue behind the home-
stead were events looked forward to by the sporting
world. The place was famed later for its trotting stal


lions. To-day old traditions are maintained by Mr.
Reynolds with a stud headed by the imported sire Toma-
tin, by Lemberg from Coignafaern, by St. Frusquin (sire
of the dams of Magpie, Gainsborough, See., and of win-
ners of over £250,000), and containing about 30 high-
class mares. The owner races under the name of “Mr.
R. L. de Percy,” and some of the winners he has bred
include Ebullition (V.R.C. Newmarket, V.A.T.C.
Debutant Stakes), Sunburst (V.R.C. Newmarket), Whiz
THE MAIN ENTRANCE
TO HOBARTVILLE, A
GOOD EXAMPLE OF THE
MACQUARIE PERIOD
Bang (V.R.C. Ascot Vale Stakes), Bu rrawang (Caul-
field Guineas), Prince Bardolph (Williamstown Cup and
Sydney Cup), Wishing Cap (Williamstown Cup), Ard
Glen (Queensland Derby and Q.T.C. St. Leger),
Joyance (Queensland Derby), Wee Glen (Queensland
Derby and Cup), Scorcher (Brisbane and Perth Cups),
Gold Cuffs (Adelaide Birthday Cup), and Spreadeagle
(Launceston Cup), while Tulkeroo lost the Melbourne
Cup by a head.
Mr. Reynolds confines his main efforts, however, to
breeding Hereford cattle. Born at Tocal Station, on
the Paterson, in 1857, he grew up with the renowned
Tocal stud herd, which his father, Charles Reynolds,
commenced soon after his arrival in New South Wales
in 1840. The late Charles Reynolds came from his
family’s estate at Raddon Court, Exeter, England, and
founded the Tocal stud with picked animals from the
pure Hereford herd bred by George Hobler, one of the
pioneer breeders on the Hunter. This stock traced t
leading Hereford sources, and was improved by import; -
tions by the late Air. Reynolds of the best available blood
in England. One of the early importations was in 185 .
when Ihe Captain (Ist prize Royal Show, England),
and the cow Wanton, and her heifer calf Columbine,
were brought to Tocal. Young Carlisle and The Wan-
derer were by The Captain, who proved a great sire.
In 1859 the bull 1 hruxton was imported, and later came
II 0B A RTV ILL E. NE IV SOU T II WAL E S


THOROUGHBRED BROOD MARES AND FOALS AT HOBARTVILLE
Lord Ashford and Royal Head (a noted winner in Eng-
land). They gave the Tocal stud the well-known bulls
Triumph, Sir James, and Jupiter.
The stud was bred after the death of Charles Reynolds,
in 1871, by his son Frank, and in 1879 was strengthened
with 15 cows and heifers descended from the dam
Minerva, from the late A. A. Dangar’s Baroona stud.
At the same time Kenilworth (by Pearl Diver, imp.)
was acquired, followed in 1881 by Dale Tredegar from
England, where he was a first prize winner at the Roval
STUD HEREFORD COWS ON NATURAL PASTURES
HOBA R T V ILL E, NE W SOU 7' H IVA LE S


HOBARTVILLE ROYAL RINGER AT
17 MONTHS OLD [BY EYTON MEDDLER
(IMP.), DAM WAKEFUL 2ND],
CHAMPION SYDNEY ROYAL AND SOLD
10 VICTORIA FOR 1050 GUINEAS
HOBARTVILLE STARLIGHT, BY
EATON CONQUEROR, DAM
HOBARTVILLE FANCY 8TH,
CHAMPION BULL SYDNEY
ROYAL SHOW, 1930
HOBARTVILLE FOREST KING [BY
ROYAL RENOWN, DAM MISS MINERVA
27TH], CHAMPION BULL AT
BRISBANE, 1928 AND 1929, AND
SYDNEY, 1929, ROYAL SHOW; SOLD
TO QUEENSLAND FOR 725 GUINEAS
HOBART V ILL E, NE W SOU T IT WAL E S


AN AERIAL VIEW OF HOBARTVILLE, WHICH SHOWS THE CARE TAKEN IN LAYING OUT THE PADDOCKS
Show. He left his mark on the stud through his sons
Bondsman and King of the Vale. Pearl Diver 4th (by
Pearl Diver (imp.), out of the English prize winner
Leonora 2nd (imp.) ) was the next sire at Tocal, then
came Lord Warden in 1884 from the N.Z. Stud Com-
pany, Sarchedon, Three R’s, Chippendale, Silurian,
Knight Errant, and Rossmore (19065 E.H.8.), by
Launcelot (13917), ex Roberta, by Downton Hero
(6406), by Conqueror (1929).
Whilst at Tocal Mr. Reynolds bred a stud herd of
his own from the cow Purity, the winner of a great many
first and champion prizes, including two silver cups at
Sydney in 1876. Her daughter, Purity Ist, was never
beaten in a show ring, and amongst her prizes was a
silver cup, still in the possession of Mr. Reynolds, given
at the Singleton Show of 1878 for the best cow of any
breed on the ground, also the Hunter River A. and H.
Association’s Cup in 1879 for best female Hereford, an
honour gained also in 1880. This purebred herd was
transferred to Hobartville in 1900, and when the well-
known Tocal dispersal sale was held in March of 1901,
Mr. Percy Reynolds bought a number of the best females,
with which he formed the present stud. There is a
breeding strength to-day of 60 to 70 cows, all the pedi-
grees of which trace back faithfully to: —
1. The Cressy Company’s (Tasmania) importations from
England in 1825, producing the Lioness, Constance, Persis-
tence and Tiger Lily families.
2. From stock imported by George Hobler in 1836 to New
South Wales, giving the present Purity and Queen Victoria
families.
3. Minerva (imp.), e. 28/10/1867, imported by A. A. Dan-
gar to Baroona in 1869, and bred by Philip Turner, The
Leen, Pembridge, Herefordshire. Won second prize R.A.S.
Manchester Show, first in cow class, Singleton, 1872, and first
at Sydney Show 1873 (her last show).
Minei \ a Queen, Lady Mdnerva, Mass Minerva, Mdnerva
Lily, and Wakeful represent this family.
4. Wanton (imp.), bred by Lord Bateman, Shobden Court,
Leominster, Eng., imported by late Charles Reynolds on 26th
December, 1857, with heifer calf at foot. The Fancy Fairs
emanated from this dam, producing the 1930 Sydney cham-
pion bull Starlight.
5. Last Day, bred by George Loder, Abbey Green, Single-
ton, N.S.W., and bought by Frank Reynolds, of Tocal, in
1876 as a yearling for £l5O. Last Day was by Sir Hercules
(4971), dam Fattie, by Garibaldi (imp.), g.d. Rebecca (imp.).
Fattie was champion cow of her day, and was beaten only
once, by her dam, Rebecca (imp.). Last Day won first prize
HOBART V I L L E, NEW SOU TI I WA LE S


STUD HEREFORD COWS AND CALVES ON LUCERNE AT HOBARTVILLE
at Muswellbrook Show 1876, first at Maitland 1876, also
1877. From this line is descended the First Day family.
Skilful breeding has improved the type of the Hobart-
vilie cattle to the point of perfection, the objective being
a level fleshed beast of the greatest hardiness and quality,
symmetry of conformation, uniformity, and the ability
to mature at an early age. It can be said that there is
not an inferior beast on Hobartville, and this stud must
take credit for much of the popularity of the Hereford
type of cattle amongst herdmasters. Also the Hobart-
ville blood is responsible for the present status of several
outstanding Hereford stud herds in at least three States
of the Commonwealth. Mr. Percy Reynolds is one of
those breeders who have the uplifting of the beef in-
dustry at heart, and in his son Raymond he has an excep-
tionally keen studmaster, and an acknowledged judge of
cattle.
An impressive feature of the Hobartville bulls is their
quiet disposition, while many of the breeders retain their
fecundity to old age, as, for example:—First Day ist,
by Montebello, and dam of twice champion of Svdney
Royal Show cow First Day 7th, still breeding at age of
19; Persistence 2nd, by Lord Horace (imp.) (369
A.H.8.), and dam of Resolute (sold in 1927 for 700
guineas), still breeding regularly at age of 17; and Miss
Minerva Bth, c. 16/9/1913, grand dam of Forest King
(the 1929 Sydney Royal champion, sold for 725 guineas),
and also still breeding.
The outstanding matrons of the stud to-day include
Minerva Lily Bth, Purity 25th (by Corncrake), and
Wakeful 2nd (by Eaton Conqueror (imp.), dam Lady
Minerva 4th, by Lord Horace (imp.) ), the last-named
cow being the dam of Royal Ringer, Wakeful 6th, and
Gay Gordon.
Naturally the owner looked about for the highest class
of bulls for use as sires, the foundation sire at Hobart-
ville being Rossmore 3rd (532), by Rossmore (imp.),
which was bought at the Tocal sale in 1901.
HOBARTVILLE MATRONS THAT CONFORM TO THE HIGHEST BREEDING TYPE IN HEREFORD CATTLE
HOBARTVILLE, N EIV BOU T 11 EVA LE S


Ihe next was Surprise (imp.) (611 A.H.8., 21044
E.H.8.), selected by the late H. C. White. The dam
of this bull, Rubella, was champion cow of England in
her day, and beaten only once. Surprise was bred by tbe
late John Tudge, of Duxmoor, Craven Arms, Salop,
England, and vastly improved the stud. He was suc-
ceeded by his son Montebello, b. 1905, bred at Hobart-
ville. This bull, which won first prize in two-year-old
class and reserve champion at Sydney 1908, and first in
three-year-old class 1909, and was never beaten in his
class, was used with success until 1918.
Then came Lord Horace (imp.), the sire of many great
females. He was bred by R. W. Hall, of Herefordshire,
and worked with Montebello for some years. Most of
the Hobartville prize winners of to-day trace to this
blood. Thumper (imp.) followed, purchased for Mr.
A GLIMPSE OF HOBARTVILLE HOUSE FROM
THE HISTORIC OAK AVENUE, WHERE SOME
£18,000 CHANGED HANDS AT A SALE OF
THOROUGHBRED YEARLINGS SOME YEARS AGO
Reynolds by James Stuckey from Sir John Cottrell, of
Garnons, Herefordshire. He won first prize at Royal
Counties Show, first at Hereford Breeders’ Society’s
Show, and second in the group class at R.A.S. Show
England, in 1914.
In 1917, ex the troopship “Barambah,” arrived the
next, and most successful, sire used in the stud. He was
Eaton Conqueror (673 A.H.8.), bred by Sir Charles
Pulley, Eaton Bishop, Lower Eaton, Herefordshire, who
gave permission to the late Mr. C. V. Reynolds, a son
of Mr. Percy Reynolds, whilst on leave from active ser-
vice during the Great War, to select personally from the
entire crop of 1916 calves. Eaton Conqueror was in hand
at the time for the English Royal Show, and accordingly
was withdrawn. The first of his get at Hobartville won
second and third prizes in bull calf class, and second and
II OBARTV I L L E, NE W SOU T El IV AL E S


A FEW OF THE RIBBONS AND TROPHIES WON
BY MR. PERCY REYNOLDS WITH THE
HOBARTVILLE HEREFORDS
fourth in the heifer calf class at the Sydney Show in
1920, but in 1922 his sons and daughters carried every-
thing before them. Out of ten classes
competed for they annexed nine first
prizes. Eaton Conqueror was exhibited
four times in Sydney, and stood down
only to the champion Hereford bull
I wyford Hero. His best stock were
Eaton Victory (reserve champion Syd-
ney 1923, champion Brisbane 1923),
Champion Chief (reserve champion Syd-
ney 1924, champion Brisbane 1924 and
1926), and Starlight (first and cham-
pion Sydney Royal 1930). The last-
named is the best bull ever bred at
Hobartville, and was considered the
outstanding Hereford bull seen at the
Sydney Royal Show for many years.
He is of magnificent type, compact, even
fleshed, and as active as a pony, and is
the leading sire in the stud at the present
time. Right Royal was another son of
Eaton Conqueror to show promise, but
met with fatal injuries in transit to the
show in 1927. A full brother to Wakeful 2nd, he weighed
1848 lbs., and went 7 ft. 11 in. round the girth at his
death at the age of 18 months and 3 weeks.
Eaton Conqueror’s daughters were no less illustrious,
and those with first prize records at the Sydney Royal
Show include:—
First Day 7th (champion 1923 and 1924, reserve 1925 and
1927), Minerva Lily sth (champion 1922), Wakeful 2nd
(reserve champion 1922), Miss Minerva 27th (first yearling
class 1925, and first three-year-old heifer 1927), Eaton
Sunshine, Purity 21st, Lady Lily 4th (weight at
age of 23 months 1509 lbs., girth 7 ft. 9 in., and
first in calf class 1923), Queen Victoria. 36th, First
Day 13th, Minerva Queen 11th, Hobartville Princess
Victoria (owned by J. C. Tanner), Tiger Lily 20th, &c.
The preparation of stud females for exhibition at the show
lias not interfered with their breeding qualities, as will be
seen from the fact that First Day 7th is the dam of Eoyal
Renown, first prize bull under 18 months, and reserve cham-
pion Sydney 1925, and champion at Brisbane 1925 and 1927,
and a premier Hereford sire of Queensland to-day (1930);
also dam of First Day 13th, first prize heifer 18 months and
under 2 years Sydney 1927, and of Hobartville Highborn,
second to Starlight in a very strong two-year-old class at
the 1930 Sydney Royal. Minerva Lily sth is" dam of Minerva
Lily Bth, first prize at Sydney 1927; Wakeful 2nd’s progeny
have made Hereford history, Royal Ringer gaining first and
championship at Sydney in 1926" at 17 months of age, when
he was sold at auction to Mrs. J. Biddlecombe for 1050
guineas, his weight at the time being 1642 lbs., and girth
measurement 7 ft. 4$ in., and winning first and champion-
ship at Melbourne in 1927, then retiring to the stud, where
he now stands as one of the leading Hereford sires of Aus-
tralia (his get being outstanding in the show ring, and in-
cluding the 1930 Sydney Royal champion cow, Golf Hill
Marshall Lass 30th). Wakeful 6th was first in calf class
at Sydney 1927, and first in yearling class 1928, and Gay
Gordon, another of Wakeful 2nd’s offspring, beat a field of
31 entries at Sydney in 1928 in bull calf class, and after he
had been sold to the Metropolitan Board of Works, Victoria,
he won reserve champion at Melbourne in 1928, and the
championship in 1929. Miss Minerva 27th is the dam of
Forest King, first prize winner at Sydney 1927 under 18
months, first in two-year-old class and reserve champion
Sydney 1928, first prize two-year-old bull and champion at
Brisbane 1928, and first prize three-year-old bull and champion
at Sydney Royal 1929, when he was sold to Mr. 8. N. Lines, of
STUD HEIFERS BY EATON CONQUEROR (IMP.).
THE CENTRE HEIFER IS THE DAM OF ROYAL RINGER
11 OBA R TV ILL E, N EIV S 0 U Tll IV AL E S


A GLIMPSE OF THE HALL FROM THE DINING ROOM
THE ENTRANCE HALL AT HOBARTVILLE, SHOWING A UNIQUE STONE FLAG STAIRCASE, IN KEEPING WITH
THE STONE FLOOR
II 0B A RTV ILL E, NE W SOU T H IV AL E S


Barolin, Q., for 725 guineas. For this owner Forest King
won the championship at Brisbane Royal in 1929.
In 1921 Corncrake (imp.) came to the stud from
A. L. Harris, of Condell Park, Maldon, N.S.W. He
was bred by 1 . L. Walker at Knightwick Manor, Wor-
cester, England, and at Hobartville imparted a great
milking strain to his females, and a delightful freedom
of action to all his progeny. After three years’ service
this sire was sold for 100 guineas at the age of 13 years
to Air. A. W. Bootes, Bywong, Sutton, N.S.W.,' for
whom he did well. His best son at Hobartville was Royal
Renown.
sold for 700 guineas, and another at 300 guineas. In
1928 his sons Gay Gordon and Garfield were placed first
and second in calf class (31 entries), and afterwards the
former and another were sold at 380 guineas and 400
guineas respectively.
Eyton Aleddler’s winning females included Alinerva
Lily Bth, Lady Minerva 15th and 17th (first and reserve
champion Sydney, 1930), Miss Loyal Bth of Abbey
Green, and Wakeful 6th.
Hobartville Starlight, sired by Eaton Conqueror, ex
Hobartville Eancy Fair Bth, represents the first progeny
bred from an Eyton Aleddler cow, and Royal Ringer
A MODERN NOTE IN AN OLD SETTING-AN AEROPLANE LANDING AT THE BOTTOM OF THE GARDEN
Corncrake was followed in 1923 by Eyton Meddler
(40915 E.H.8.), bred by E. Craig Tanner, Eyton-on-
Severn, Shrewsbury, England. He was shown in Eng-
land only as a yearling, and only three times, and won
first prize and reserve champion at R.A.S. Show, Cam-
bridge, first and reserve champion at Bath and West of
England Show, and first prize at Shropshire and West
Midlands Show in 1922, each time meeting the champion
Hereford bull of England, giving away twelve months,
yet nevertheless Eyton Meddler was adjudged the best
young bull of the year, and was the highest priced bull
in Englan d in 1923, costing Mr. Reynolds 1000 guineas.
His first get were successful at Sydney in 1926, King’s
Medallist and Royal Ringer winning first prizes, also
the Hereford Society’s Silver Cup for best pair of year-
ling bulls. At the sales at auction his progeny averaged
420 guineas. In 1927, at Sydney, his son Resolute was
was the first stock by Eyton Meddler out of an Eaton
Conqueror cow, so that the owner’s judgment in crossing
these two families has been rewarded with the two most
noteworthy bulls so far bred at Hobartville.
. Eyton Meddler also sired Captain Cuttle, a prize win-
ning bull sold to Archer Bros., of Rockhampton, Queens-
land, and Hobartville Hercules, winner of first prize
yearling class at Sydney 1930, and reserve champion to
Starlight. Garfield, another son of Eyton Meddler, won
the junior championship of Queensland in 1928.
It is well known that the 12 and under 18 months class
tor bulls at the Sydney Royal is the classic test for Here-
fords, bringing out, as it does, the biggest number, and
generally the best quality young bulls of the year This
event has been won by Hobartville five times out of six
since 1925, with Royal Renown (against 16 entries);
Royal Ringer, 1926 (26 entries); Forest King, 1927;
HOBARTVILLE, NEW SOUTH WALES


Ope
n Cl
asses.
Groups (Special 1
rizes)
Com-
v.h.c
Un- Com-
Cham-
Res.
petecl.
Won.
2nd
3rd
II.c.
placed peted.
Won
pion.
Ch.
3921 .
C
3
3
—
2
1
—
—
1
1922 .
. !)
7
4
i
—
4
3
i
1
1923 .
. 8
4
3
2
i
1 3
3
i
1
1924 .
. 8
3
3
i
—
1 4
2
i
1
1925 .
. 8
3
5
—
—
3
3
2
1926 .
. 8
2
4
2
—
3
2
i
—
1927 .
. :)
6
4
i
i
4
4
—
i
1928 .
. 9
4
5
i
4
1
i
1929 .
. 10
4
4
i
2
4
—
i
1930 .
. 9
5
2
2
—
1 4
2
i
2
Total
84
41
37
ii
6
3 34
20
6
10
highest honours at Brisbane for seven years running, i.e.,
1923-1929. In addition to the championship and reserve
championship at Sydney in 1930 in the male class, and
reserve championship in female class, cattle bred from
Hobartville stock won fifteen out of the sixteen open
classes. Seven of these first prize winners were from
Hobartville, six from Golf Hill sired by Hobartville
Royal Ringer, one from Mount Leonard, and one from
Me Mel.
No serious effort was made to exhibit the stud prior to
1918. In that year Air. Raymond Reynolds was given
the management of the stud, and brought twenty head to
the Sydney Show, being the progeny of Thumper (imp.)
(31111 E.H.8.), Lord Horace (imp.), and Montebello.
They were successful, and at the sales realised 4015
guineas, or an average of 223 guineas each.
On four occasions from 1924 to 1930 the Hobartville
stud topped the cattle sales at the Sydney Royal for any
breed, while the team of four young bulls taken to Bris-
bane in 1928 won all their events as follows:
First for bull two years old (Forest King); first and second
bull, 18 months and under tAvo years (Hobartville Highland
Prince and Tocal Cromwell); first bull 12 months and under
18 months (Garfield); first pair of bulls under tAvo years;
first three bulls under three years; champion bull of Queens-
land (Forest King); reserve champion bull (Highland
Prince); junior champion bull (Garfield). At the sales which
folloAved, the sale bulls brought the highest prices for the
year for any breed. Hobartville Avas also awarded the
special prize for most successful exhibitor in beef cattle
section at the 1930 Sydney Royal ShoAv.
MR. PERCY REYNOLDS
Starlight, 1929; and Hercules, 1930 (30 entries). The
stud was second in 1928 against a field of 32 with Kings-
dale, but at the auction sales this bull realised 100 guineas
more than any other offered.
A fitting tribute to Mr. Percy Reynolds and his son
Raymond is given by the following particulars of prizes
Avon at Sydney Royal Show by the Hobartville stud from
1921 to 1930;
Grand total for 10 years, 118 classes competed for, and won 61
first prizes, 11 second prizes, 11 third prizes, 6 V.11.C. and H.C.,
and only 3 times unplaced; 6 championships and 10 reserve cham-
pion ribbons. There is only one second prize given in group
' lasses, that for sires’ progeny; Hobartville has secured this on
four occasions, while in several of the open classes the stud
secured first and second.
In 1929 Hobartville-bred bulls won the championship
at the Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth Royal
Shows, while bulls bred in this stud have annexed the
MR. RAYMOND REYNOLDS
HOBARTVILL E, NE W SOU T II IV AL E S


ANOTHER GROUP OF STUD HEREFORD COWS AND CALVES
ENTRANCE TO THE FAMOUS OAK AVENUE AT HOBARTVILLE
HOBART FILL E, NEW SOUTH WALES


DARBALARA, GUNDAGAI, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Sir Adrian Knox
THE country to the north-east of Gundagai, N.S.W.,
along the Murrumbidgee and Tumut Rivers, is
made up of hills, valleys, and flats of unsur-
passed fertility, and of great beauty from the scenic point
of view. One of the earliest runs to be taken up in this
area then being about 9000 acres. For the next twenty
years Darbalara earned a high reputation through its
Milking Shorthorn cattle bred under the management of
Mr. J. T. Cole, and when the owners cut the place up for
sale in 1927 the best part of the river flats and some high
ON THE SHADY PASTURES OF DARBALARA
vicinity was Darbalara, in the early thirties of last cen-
tury. From a small area on the Tumut it was developed
into a famous cattle breeding property by that useful
pioneer, the late Henry Osborne. From him the pro-
perty passed into the hands of the late Mr. W. B. (Dar-
balara) Smith, and about 1907 it was acquired by the
Scottish Australian Investment Company Fimited, the
ground were purchased the late Mr. John Brown, of
Newcastle.
It was a rare opportunity to secure better headquarters
for his stud of thoroughbred racehorses kept at Wills
Gully, adjoining M inimbah Park, near Singleton, in the
Hunter Valley district, and there is no doubt that the
change was beneficial to the stock. Over 400 horses were


transferred to Darbalara, which has an area of 1800 acres
freehold along the Gobarralong road, 14 miles from Gun-
dagai, which is 298 miles by rail from Sydney. When,
upon the death of the late Mr. John Brown in March
1930, the property and the stud passed into the possession
of the present owner, Sir Adrian Knox, arrangements
were made to sell off about half the number of horses,
and to-day there are about 80 brood mares and about 130
head of other horses, including yearlings, forming the
Darbalara Stud. The management is in the hands of
Mr. L. F. Bower, who has
been directly connected with
the stud for many years.
Apart from its setting of
volcanic hills, which give
an air of charm and peace
to the beautifully timbered
undulating river frontages,
there is an ideal balance of
pasture land for all breeding
requirements.
The property extends for
about four miles along the
eastern bank of the Tumut
and about a mile along the
M urrumbidgee River, these
streams joining near the top
end of the run, and it has in
addition a double frontage
to the Adjungbilly Creek.
Fed as these waters are with
snow from the Alps, and
more or less impregnated
with lime, the purity and
abundance of the supply of
water for the horses leave
nothing to be desired. The
excellence of this water, in
fact, was considered one of
the greatest factors in the
success of the old Darbalara
cattle both in tests and in the show ring, and
it plays a big part in the health of the present stud
generally. The average annual rainfall in the district
is about 26 in. This produces dense vegetation along
the flats, the recuperative powers of which are
tremendous, as witness the luxuriant growth of swamp
couch, rye grass, cocksfoot, crowfoot and clovers,
&c., that follow upon good soaking rains after dry
periods.
The deep chocolate soil of the flats responds to cul-
tivation in the same way, and at the present time, the
spring of 1930, there are over 400 acres of lucerne under
crop, besides other areas sown down with this legume for
grazing purposes amongst other introduced fodder plants.
The management have lost no time since 1927 in improv-
ing the natural pastures with sweet clovers and English
grasses, and with oats and a little corn have laid down
provision for the stud stock to meet every contingency.
A feature of the feed supply this year will be the storage
of meadow hay.
Sir Adrian Knox is sparing no effort to equip the stud
farm with up-to-date im-
provements for the conduct
of breeding operations com-
parable with the best estab-
lishments of the present day,
and this is especially the case
as regards attention paid to
the paddocks of playgrounds
devoted to the brood mares
and yearlings. There are no
rabbits, whilst the accommo-
dation for the stallions is
another feature of the effi-
cient management.
The late Mr. John
Brown, who was one of Aus-
tralia’s greatest sportsmen, es-
tablished the stud about
1900, and his subsequent suc-
cess as a breeder and owner
(under the assumed name of
“Mr. J. Baron”) was due to
the judgment displayed in
laying the foundation with
the best class of mares and
stallions available in England
and in this country. The
stud had never been avail-
able to outside breeders un-
til recently, so that the
entry into the breeding in-
dustry by the present owner, who relinquished the
Chief Justiceship of Australia to devote the rest of
his days to his hobby, and who for many years before
being elevated to that position was a member of the com-
mittee and chairman of the Australian Jockey Club, pro-
vides opportunities that should be most welcome to local
breeders and owners. The sires heading the stud are
Richmond Main, Air Balloon (imp.), March Along
(imp.), and Bonnement (imp.), while a number of
splendidly bred yearlings will represent the stud at the
annual sales in 1931 for the first time in its history.
OLD RIVER GUMS
DARE A LARA, NEW SOUTH WALES


AIR BALLOON (IMP.)
Each of the stallions is a beautifully bred horse of the
highest class. Richmond Main, a strong handsome chestnut
of outstanding quality, carrying the blood lines of a notable
ancestry, is well known to Australian turf lovers. He was
foaled in 1916, and is a son of Prince Foote (5), who runs
back through Sir Foote (19) to Sir Hugo (19) and Wisdom
(7). Prince Foote was one of the best staying three-year-
olds seen in Australia. He won the A.J.C. and V.R.C.
Derbies, and went on to defeat Alawa and Trafalgar in the
Melbourne Cup of 1909, and won also A.J.C. Sires’ Produce
Stakes, Tattersall’s Chelmsford Stakes (twice), V.R.C. St.
Leger, Champion Stakes, A.J.C. St. Leger and Plate, Cum-
berland Stakes, &c., and also sired good winners.
The dam of Richmond Main was Australian Gas (dam of
Pelaw Main, Wallace Mortlake, &c.), by Traquair (1) (imp.),
(sire of Woorak, a brilliant racer and successful sire) out of
Sundial (imp.) (whose sister Lindal was the dam of Limond,
sire of Limerick, and another sister, Cheery, was the g.dam
of Phalaris, leading English sire 1925 and 1928, and the
sire of the Derby winner, Manna), by Kendal (16) out of
Sunrise (dam of Dunmure, &c.), by Springfield (12) out of
Sunray (1), by King of the Forest (31) out of Sunshine (a
noted winner), by Thormanby (4) out of Sunbeam (Leger,
c.), by Chanticleer (23) out of Sunflower (ancestress of
Cay Crusader, &c.), by Bay Middleton (1). Among the
many successful sires produced by the Sun shine family are
Phalaris (the present leading sire in England), Martian (the
greatest sire of stayers in New Zealand), Positano, &c., and
Richmond Main shows in his pedigree a rich blending of
the best modern lines, with a background of names that made
turf history—Wisdom, Galopin, Isonomy, Peter, Hampton,
Goldfinch, Bend Or, &c. He is bred as follows:
Richmond Main was a high-class racehorse and a proved
stayer. His victories include Chelmsford Stakes, Williams-
town Cup, Rosehill Rawson Stakes (dead heat Poitrel),
A.J.C. Derby (dead heat Artilleryman), V.R.C. Derby (de-
feating Artilleryman), while in the Melbourne Cup he ran
second to Artilleryman.
Richmond Main has sired a lot of winners, and his excel-
lent breeding and record should attract good mares to him
at Darbalara.
March Along (imp.) (1) is a lengthy, massive chestnut
horse, showing a lot of the Isinglass type, bred by Lord
Derby in England in 1917. He is by Swynford, the sire of
Westward Ho (who realised 11,500 gns. at auction as a
MARCH ALONG (IMP.)
D ARB ALAR A, NE W S 0 UT H WALES


yearling), Blandford (sire of Trigo and Blenheim, both
recent English Derby winners), and other good sires, and
his dam is Marchetta. In his first two seasons of racing
March Along won over £7OOO stake money, his five wins
being Manchester Royal Standard Stakes (£875), Man-
chester Cup (£2560), Liverpool Stakes (£735), Atlantic
Stakes (£1719), York Ebor Handicap (£1285), running
second in the Liverpool Knowsley Dinner Three-year-old
Stakes, Nottinghamshire Three-year-old Handicap, Grosvenor
Cup, Manchester Handicap, and third in the Sussex Stakes. As
a four-year-old he went through the season unbeaten, after
losing the Liverpool Cup. So much was Lord Derby im-
pressed with the horse he retired him then and there to the
stud, until he was induced by the late Mr. Brown in 1922
to let him come to Australia.
March Along, who did not race in Australia, is a distinct
asset to the blood stock breeding industry here, and he is
one of the best representatives of the Isinglass line, which,
through his sire Swynford, is meeting with such marked
success in England in his sons Blandford, Stratford, Sanso-
vino, and other promising young horses. March Along repre-
sents a very valuable out-cross to the many mares of St.
Simon blood which are in this country, and already he has
given the Australian turf some nice stock, amongst his best
being that beautiful young mare Elizabeth’s March, who won
her two initial events, the Kirkham Stakes and A.J.C. De-
cember Stakes, and finished second to Mollison in the A.J.C.
Sires’ Produce Stakes. Her promising career closed with
her death as a rising three-year-old. Others sired by March
Along were John’s March, Adrian’s March, Macpherson’s
March, Lady Dudley’s March, Bob’s March, Marco March,
&c. His yearlings should attract attention when they come
up for sale, as a choice lot of mares have been given to
him. His pedigree reads as under:
The imported stallion Air Balloon had five wins, twelv
seconds and one third to his credit prior to his departur
from England in 1922 for the Wills Gully stud. In hi
native land he showed great ability to stay, for he van
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE BEAUTIFUL DARBALARA COUNTRY, LOOKING WEST OVER THE TUMUT RIVER
D ARB AL A RA, NEW SOU T H WA LES


A GROUP OF
YEARLINGS
ALL ATTENTION.
THREE AND FOUR
YEAR-OLD GELDINGS
A FEW OF THE
THREE-YEAR-OLDS
SOME OF THE BLOOD STOCK ON DARBALARA
D A RB A LAR A, NE W SOU TII JV AL E S


BROOD MARES IN ONE OF THE SHELTERED PADDOCKS
quished the champion Flamboyant (to whom Air Balloon
conceded a pound) in the Ascot Alexandra Stakes of 2J
miles and 58 yards (.£1570). Flamboyant was noted over a
distance, and won the Doncaster and Goodwood Cups, &c.,
while later on his son Flamingo won the Two Thousand
Guineas and ran second in the Derby. Air Balloon’s other
successes were the Sandown Park Coombe July Plate, Hurst
Park Durham Handicap, 1 mile 5 furlongs (£472), (Queen’s
Handicap, 2 miles (£890), and Lewes Handicap (£495)
of 111 miles with 9.7. He .ran second in the Derby, Hartigan
Plate, Newbury Summer Cup, Ascot High Weight Stakes,
Liverpool Lancashire Handicap, Osterley Handicap, Man-
chester November Handicap, Chester Cup Stakes (of
miles to Chivalrous), Ascot Stakes, Goodwood Plate, Don-
caster, Great Yorkshire Handicap, and ran third in the
Kempton Park Addlestone Maiden Three-year-old Plate.
In Australia Air Balloon did not race, but is represented
by good performers in his progeny Balloon King, Autumn
Balloon, &c.
It will be noticed from his pedigree that Air Balloon is
bred faultlessly to some of the greatest staying lines known
to the English and Australian turf. His sire, Stedfast, who
comes down in tail male descent from Galopin through St.
Simon and Chaucer, ran second to Sunstar in the Two
Thousand Guineas and also the Derby, and gave Australia
that well-known racer and sire The Night Patrol. Air
Balloon’s dam Highness is related through her half-sister
Gay Laura to the triple crown winner Gay Crusader, and
is by Cyllene (9) out of Galeottia, by Galopin from Agave,
by Springfield (12). The following is his breeding, and as
he stands at Darbalara at a reasonable fee this handsome
horse and proved stayer has everything to recommend him
to breeders:—
Darbalara has another promising sire in Bonnement (8)
(imp.), a bright bay, bred in England by Lord Woolavington
in 1925. He is considered by keen judges to be one of the
most handsome young stallions standing in this country at
the present time. The finest thoroughbred quality is stamped
all over him; a perfect balance is combined with unusual
muscular development, while the most fashionable blood lines
run through his breeding. Bonnement is by Tracery (19),
winner of nearly £20,000 stakes, and the sire of Papyrus
(winner of Derby and £17,863 stake money, and the sire
of winners of seventeen races and £10,151 in 1929 at hxs
second season at the stud, his list for 1930 being full), The
Panther (Two Thousand Guineas, &c.), Flamboyant (sire of
the Two Thousand Guineas winner, Flamingo, and winners
of nearly £30,000 in stakes in England), Transvaal (Grand
Prix, and a proved sire in France), Abbot’s Trace (who
DARE A LARA, NEW SOUTH IV ALES


ON THE MURRUMBIDGEE RIVER FRONTAGE.
THE BRANCH IN THE FORK OF THE
TREE ON THE LEFT INDICATES THE
LEVEL OF A BIG FLOOD A FEW YEARS AGO
DARB A LA RA, NEW SOUTH IT ALES


A VIEW LOOKING UP ADJUNGBILLY CREEK. THE ALPS ARE SEEN IN THE DISTANCE
sired winners of 143 races and £76,098, and who is full for
1930), Pantheon (imp.), Gothic (imp.), High Force (imp.),
&c., out of Spean Bridge (winner of three races, and dam
of Legionnaire, Knockando, Princess Margaret, &c.), by
Spearmint (1), the best son of Carbine, and the winner of
Derby, Grand Prix, &c., and sire of winners of over £166,800,
out of Santa Brigida (Goodwood Prince of Wales Stakes,
2800 sovs., Yorkshire Oaks, &c.), dam of Bridge of Canny
(£14,500 in stakes), Bridge of Sighs (dam of Light Brigade,
a leading sire in U.S.A. and winner of £11,394 in stakes),
Bridge of Earn (sire of winners of over £75,850), &c., by
St. Simon (11), unbeaten on the racecourse, and sire of
winners of over £554,000, out of Bridget (sister to the
Derby and St. Leger winner Melton, and dam of Oliver
Goldsmith, also third dam of Carlaris, a big winner in
U.S.A.). Spean Bridge, the dam of Bonnement, is a beauti-
ful mare, and has produced classic stock in Knockando and
Legionnaire, both half-brothers to Bonnement. The former
had his first start as a three-year-old in the Two Thousand
Guineas, which he lost by a short head to Ellangowan, and
since retiring to the stud in England in 1926 has been booked
up regularly for the season ahead at a high fee. Legionnaire
(imp.) won £3725 in stake money, and his oldest stock here
are now three-year-olds, and include Frontier and First
Legion, both high-class winners, and the two-year-old colt
Commandant, a recent winner in New Zealand, who is de-
scribed as being exceptionally promising.
Bonnement was a successful performer on the turf, his
wins including the Newmarket Stretchworth Stakes of
li miles, defeating Saracen. The tap root from which he
comes has been responsible for some of the best stallions in
the world, and has given Australia such horses as Valais and
Linacre, who were both most successful, while in England
it has produced Ayrshire, Melton, Bridge of Canny, &e. On
breeding considerations there is no better bred horse stand-
ing at the Australian stud than this good-looking son of
Tracery. His pedigree is set out herewith, and lie stands
the 1930 season at Darbalara at a stud fee of 50 gns. for a
limited number of approved mares:—■
DARBA L A R A, NE W SOU TII IV AL E S


BROOD MARES ON
THE TUMUT
RIVER FLATS
RED POLL
STEERS AT
DARBALARA
YEARLINGS AND THEIR
QUARTERS. THE
MANAGER’S RESIDENCE
IS ON THE LEFT
DARBA L A R A, NE W SOU T H WA LE S


ANOTHER PICTURE OF DARBALARA BROOD MARES
THREE AND FOUR YEAR-OLDS RUNNING ON THE DARBALARA PASTURES
D A RB A LARA, NE W S O UT 11 WAL E S


RICHMOND MAIN
BONNEMENT (IMP.)
TWO OF THE LEADING SIRES AT DARBALARA
D ARB ALAR A. NE W SO UT H IV AL E S


The last stallion purchased by the late Mr. John Brown
was Light Brigade (1) (imp.), bought at auction in April
1929, and kept at Wills Gully for a year before going into
his present training for the turf, preliminary to a prospec-
tive stud career at Darbalara. Light Brigade was bred in
March 1927 by Lady Sykes at the famous Sledmere Stud
in England, and is a magnificent specimen of a thoroughbred.
His breeding is all that could be wished for, and great things
are expected of him in due course. His sire, Hurry On (2),
was unbeaten in his only season at racing (as a three-year
old), and stood at a stud fee of 400 gns. with full list for
1927-28-29. Beside his victories in the Maiden Plate,
Stretchworth Plate, Newbury Stakes, Newmarket, St. Leger,
Jockey Club Stakes, &c., Hurry On sired the Derby winner,
Coronach (who won £.43,871 in stakes), Captain Cuttle
(Derby and £15,037), Call Boy (Derbv), Applecross
(£4969), Town Guard (£11,016), Hurry Off' (£6036), Tom
Pinch, Diligence, Plack, and other good stake winners, whilst
his dam relates him to Ladas, Chelandry, Heroic, Eossendale
(imp.), Magpie (imp.), Cicero, Prince Palatine, and all the
rest of the classic stock descended from that great dam
Illuminata.
Light Brigade’s dam Paraffin Light was the dam of
Aladdin’s Lamp, who was sold for 4100 gns. as a yearling,
and was placed in six out of eight starts in 1928 (he is a
full brother to Light Brigade), and also the dam of Light
Cavalry and Illuminated, both excellent winners, and was
by Henry the First (8), a good performer and successful sire
in France, out of Corposant, a half-sister to the Derby
winner Ladas, also to Gas (dam of Cicero, the sire of Valais
(imp.) and Valve, the dam of Vaucluse) and to Chelandry
(one of the very best mares of her time, and dam of Traquair
(imp.), Neil Gow, Dark Flight, and numerous other brilliant
racehorses and breeders, and the ancestress of St. James,
Pogrom, Cross Bow, Book Law, Wrack, Syce (imp.), &c.)
by Sheen (2) (winner of Derby, and the sire of thie
dam of Martian (imp.) ), out of Illuminata, by Rosicrucian
(5) out of Paraffin, by Blair Athol (10) (Stockwell’s best
son, and winner of Derby, St. Leger, &c.). A half-sister to
Light Brigade, Fastnet Light, sold as a brood mare at the
1928 December sales for 3000 gns.
Light Brigade possesses great substance, with a well-
sprung barrel and sound limbs, and his main breeding lines
are given herewith in brief: —
Since they went to the ideal surroundings of Darbalara the
brood mares have improved in every way. They represent
the blood of many classic families, and include Princess
Electra, Princess Ortelle, Alison, Main Flower, Charming
Balloon, Duchess Mimi, Princess Susan (dam of Bob’s
March), Princess Mundola, Lady Whittingham (dam of Sir
Alick), Lively March, Princess Sundial, Atalanta Richmond,
Pet March, Lady Ortelle, Footstool, Australian March (a
most beautiful mare), Margaret, Cathay (imp.), Encore
(imp.), Lady Lonsdale (imp.), Berry’s March, Princess Berry
(dam of Balloon King), Peeress March, Princess March, Girl
Guide, Lady Dudley’s March, Brighton Main, Pet March,
Princess Lively, Queen’s March, Air Baroness, Baroness
Balloon, Richmond Cross, Main Cyllene, Ortelle’s Balloon,
Military Balloon, Balloon Princess, Balloon Flower, &c. They
are run in their sheltered enclosures all the year round, under
perfectly natural conditions, and their yearling fillies and
colts that are due to come before the sporting public at the
next auction sales were in very satisfactory shape and con-
dition early in the present spring of 1930. The yearlings
referred to number amongst them 20 by March Along, 16 by
Richmond Main, 16 by Air Balloon, and 14 by the sire
Wallace Mortlake, who was sold by Sir Adrian Knox dur-
ing the year.
There is a bright future ahead of the Darbalara Stud now
that there have been removed the disadvantages of over-
production under which the stud laboured at Wills Gully.
In reducing the number of horses Sir Adrian Knox has made
it possible to concentrate ever so much more attention upon
the welfare of the mares and stallions, a factor without
which no first-class thoroughbred stud can be successful.
LOOKING SOUTH UP THE TUMUT VALLEY ACROSS THE DARBALARA FLATS. THE ORIGINAL DARBALARA
HOMESTEAD IS SITUATED AT THE FOOT OF THE HILLS ON THE LEFT
D ARB A LARA, NEW SOUTH WALES


WILGENA, WOOLTANA, &c., SOUTH AUSTRALIA
The Properties of A. J. and P. A. Mcßride Limited
SITUATED 255 miles north-west of Port Augusta,
South Australia, and over 450 miles from Ade-
laide, beyond Lake Gairdner and Lake Everard,
Wilgena is a pastoral leasehold of 3000 square miles, and
was purchased by the present owners from Mr. Joseph
Timms in 1924. It is admirably adapted for develop-
ment into sound grazing country for Merino sheep, de-
spite its varied fortunes of pastoral occupancy since the
shorn a few years previously. During his tenancy also
Government assisted in the erection of the present vermin-
proof boundary that now encloses the Wilgena vermin
district. This district embraces the old runs known ori-
ginally as Kingoonya, Arcoodaby, part of Mt. Eba, and
Wilgena itself, which were all deserted after their leases
ran out, and remained idle until early this century,
when lower rentals and better prospects prevailed
BIRDSEYE VIEW OF WOOLTANA STATION HOMESTEAD AND BUILDINGS
district was first pioneered by Messrs. Acraman and Main
in 1877.
Taken over soon afterwards by Messrs. M ain, Sells
and Co., only to be abandoned by them, and carried on
by Mr. Price Mau rice, the lease passed through various
managements until, in 1882, Mr. A. Beviss, from Yardea
Station further south, improved the water supply and
began the task of development more seriously. In 1884
Mr. A. W. Cocks was manager, and he became the
owner, but gave it up prior to the lease expiring late in
the nineties. In that period the run was fenced, and
cattle took the place of sheep, of which some 70,000 were
and induced the re-pioneering of this outlying part of the
State.
Wilgena, which included the other leases mentioned,
was then taken up by Mr. Simon Matheson, who was
joined later by Messrs. Teesdale Smith and Joseph
Timms, the two lastnamed being contractors during
the construction of the Transcontinental railway, which
was laid down through Kingoonya and Wilgena, a factor
which no doubt influenced the partnership. The pre-
sence of a good well at Kingoonya led to the claim upon
the Federal authorities for something like £ 120,000 later
on, as compensation for country and water used for the


THE HOMESTEAD AT KINGOONYA
line, the litigation coming to a head in 1920, when it is
understood the costs amounted to four times the amount
awarded! Mr. Timms had acquired his partner’s in-
terests, but did very little improvement to the run, which
was in a bad state of disrepair when taken over, at a cost
of £IB,OOO, by the present ownership.
The run had not been stocked with sheep since the
peak days of the district in the early ’nineties, when the
effects of drought, dingoes, expiry of leases and high
rentals for continuance, dealt the sheep industry in the
north-west a paralysing blow. Thanks to the enterprise
of far-sighted and determined men the production of wool
in these parts is now built up again, only nature’s kind-
ness being necessary to accelerate this progress and com-
PART OF THE WOOLTANA GARDEN, AT THE FOOT OF THE FLINDERS RANGE
IF IL G E NA. IF OOLT A N A, &c.. SOII T II AUSTR A LI A


STATION IMPROVEMENTS AT WOOLTANA
BRANDING SHEEP OFF SHEARS. A SUB-ARTESIAN BORE. BOUNDARY RIDER'S COTTAGE
ir 1L G E NA , WO () LTA N A . tic. , SOU T H AUSTR A LI A


THE WOOLSHED AT WOOLTANA
LOADING WOOL AT WOOLTANA
rr il g ena , ir aol ta na, & c ., so u t // aus tr a lia


THE SHEARING
SHED AT
KINGOONYA
BREEDING EWES AT WOOLTANA STATION. FLINDERS RANGE IN THE DISTANCE
Jr JLGE A A, Jr OOLTA A' A , tec., SOU T // AUSTR A LI A


pensate those who are developing their interests for their
own and the State’s benefit.
The country at Wilgena is mostly of a loose sandy
nature, stretching away in broken formation with a good
growth of mulga, myall, peach and other edible trees and
scrub, and interspersed with beautiful salt bush plains.
There is plenty of spear grass, geranium, white and
yellow everlastings, herbage, vetches and other indigenous
feed after the seasonal rains, which have averaged 7.25 in.
per annum over a period of fifty years.
But to maintain big flocks of sheep in proper condition
for the production of a commercially useful wool it is of
the utmost importance to provide waters in all parts of
the run, together with suitable subdivisions. That this
problem has received full attention under a bold policy
of improvement cannot be better illustrated than by the
shearings which have taken place since the present owners
entered into posssesion in September 1924. During the
following June 13,000 sheep were put through; in 1926
the count was 25,000; in 1927 the numbers were 25,000;
THE HOMESTEAD AT WOOLTANA,
TYPICAL OF THOSE IN THE
NORTH OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
while in 1928 the shearing tally amounted to 60,000
sheep. Within that time a sum of no less than £IOO,OOO
has been expended in making alterations and additions to
two-fifths of the run (representing 1300 sq. miles) the
policy in force being to divide the property into five
blocks.
At the present time work is in hand to develop the
balance of the blocks. Ihe improvements effected con-
sist mainly of vermin-proof paddocks, pipe lines for the
reticulation of stock water, erection of windmills, tanks
and troughing, sinking of bores, and the restoration or
reconstruction of the buildings. It was necessary to sink
1 10 bores to get thirty successful ones, and these vary in
depth from 40 ft. to 150 ft., while one is 500 ft. deep.
Although more than 50 miles of pipes have been trenclied
over the run, the owners state that it will take at least
50 miles of 2-inch and 3-inch pipe lines to complete the
water improvements and carry 30 sheep to the square
mile, which is the objective. In this regard the late
Mr. A. J. Mcßride said only a few years ago that it
W 1 LG E NA, ir () OLTA N A, S 0 UT II A USTR A L I A


ON THE ROAD TO WOOLTANA
THROUGH ITALOWIE GORGE,
IN THE FLINDERS RANGE
IVI LG ENA, WOOLTANA , &c., SOU T H AUSTR A L IA


A VIEW OF THE OPEN COUNTRY AT WOOLTANA, TAKEN FROM THE HOMESTEAD
THE SHEARERS’ QUARTERS AT WOOLTANA
TV ILG E NA, WOOLT A X A . r dc., SOU T II AUSTR A L I A


BREEDING EWES AT WOOLTANA
was his ambition to carry over one hundred thousand
sheep on Wilgena. and whilst he has not been spared to
see this project realised, his dream has every hope of
materalising in due course under the guidance of his son’s
management.
The main homestead is at Wilgena, 12 miles from
Tarcoola, and the second, and new homestead, lies four
miles from the railway siding at Kingoonya. Each of
these is a modern residence, occupied by a manager.
There are 16 stands of Moffat Virtue machines in the
woolshed at Wilgena, and at the new iron shed put up at
Kingoonya, 36 miles away, there are 16 stands. The
yards, enclosures, dips, men's quarters and so on are a
model of working efficiency.
Lambing takes place in November and December, and
whilst the young sheep have a trying time through the
summer, they grow out strongly during the ensuing sea-
son. and become hardy doers as time goes on. In all his
undertakings in outside country, as well as on the smaller
runs, the late Mr. Mcßride has favoured the Dungaree
SHEEP ON BLUEBUSH, MULGA AND MYALL AT KINGOONYA
Jr 1L a E \A , WOOL TAV A, C dcS OUT II AUSTR A LI A


THE SITTING ROOM AT KINGOONYA HOMESTEAD
strain, which has given very satisfactory results, and with
careful classing has raised the standard of the sheep to a
high level.
1 he weights cut on Wilgena during the past shearings
have averaged from 9 to 10 lbs. per head, and the wool
is noted for its nice soft handling qualities, scouring com-
paratively well, and always commanding keen attraction
at the sales in Adelaide. Buyers have declared this wool
to be similar to the splendid product of
the big runs in the Murchison district
of Western Australia.
'The influence of the firm of A. J. and
P. A. Mcßride Limited upon pastoral
production is extended over other areas
of South Australia, the combined hold-
ings returning about three thousand
bales of wool annually. The develop-
ment of Wooltana, Teetulpa, Lincoln
Park, Braemar, M ernowie and Faraway
Hill stations, as well as Wilgena, is evi-
dence (if it were needed) that wool-
growing will never languish while there
are men in the country of the stamp
of the late Mr. Mcßride.
The Wooltana country, which now
includes the once well-known Paralana
Station, runs up the west side of Lake
Frome, about two hundred miles north-
east of Port Augusta, and has an area
of 1000 square miles. It is, of course,
pastoral leasehold, and is now in a state
of advanced improvement, carrying a
Hock of 30,000 to 40,000 sheep, typical
of the large-framed Bungaree Merino.
Soon after the property was acquired in
1917 these sheep were returning an aver-
age cut of 11 to 12 lbs. of wool per head
at each shearing, which takes place in
June. Wooltana was originally taken
up in 1856 by the late Mr. McTaggart,
who, with his family, held and consoli-
dated the run until it was sold to Messrs.
A. J. and P. A. Mcßride for the sum
of £60,000.
The improvements taken over were of
an extensive nature, and included 13
permanent waters, which carried 26,000
sheep. To-day there are 50 permanent
watering places, and a further ten
thousand head of stock on the property,
but it is the policy to proceed slowly and
avoid overstocking, at the same time
bringing up the run to a maximum capa-
city as each section is watered and ren-
dered vermin-proof. The owners state
that it is better country for boring than
Wilgena, as excellent supplies were
struck at depths of from 60 to 200 ft.
The sheep are of Bungaree foundation,
and on account of a slightly different
climate are much heavier than those
on the sister station, whilst the wool
also is a bigger and bolder type. From a buyer’s
point of view the quality is not so nice, never-
theless it is a very profitable type to grow, and returns
a high average price for all lines. One of the fea-
tures of the clip, which has earned a reputation for
soundness, is the splendid way in which it is classed and
prepared generally for manufacturers’ use. The same
painstaking management is also a feature in the arrav
THE SHEARING SHED AT KINGOONYA
IVI LG ENA, WOOLT A N A, tic., SOU T II AUSTRALIA


of station buildings at Wooltana, the homestead, wool-
shed, hut accommodation and so on all being built on
approved lines.
In their perpetual lease of Lincoln Park Station the
owners have a difficult proposition owing to the rough,
bleak character of the surroundings, and a flock of well-
classed Merinos of similar blood to those on the other runs
is maintained there. Formerly known as Lincoln Gap,
this run was the first
leasehold to be tried
out west of Spencer’s
Gulf, being 12 miles
from Port Augusta,
with a long frontage to
the gulf. After Charles
Swinden took it up in
1857, it experienced a
procession of owners up
to the time the lease
ran out in 1888, about
which time the Crown
cut it up into small
farm holdings for
closer settlement, with-
out success though, for
not long afterwards
these areas were turned
back to the more suit-
able occupation of
grazing. Lincoln Park
is a well-improved
place to-day, and the
wool is profitable.
Teetulpa run lies in
the north-east section of
the State, and is a per-
petual lease of 150
miles, carrying a flock
of 12,000 sheep on an
average. This capacity
of one sheep to about
eight acres has been
achieved by skilful
management, the proof
of which is seen in the
sound state of the pad-
docks and waters in the
1929-30 season, which
was considered to be
one of the worst on re-
cord.
Sixty miles from
The Burra lies Brae-
mar, of 250 sq. miles,
adjoining Koomooloo
Station, and the production of good commercial wool
here from a flock of 20,000 sheep of Bungaree type
further illustrates the effective way in which the owners
raise the value of their holdings. This is mostly salt-
bush country, in a 9-inch rainfall, and is covered in parts
with black oak and sandalwood.
It was in order to supply the yearly drafts of about
five hundred rams for their stations that the firm em-
barked upon stud breeding recently, and the nucleus of
the stud flock, which is to be built up to about 1500 ewes
of Bungaree blood, is stationed at Mernowie, a freehold
of some 5000 acres near Saddleworth, in the stud country
of the lower north. This run is also being used as a
depot, and incidentally being developed from an agricul-
tural standpoint, the property comprising four or five
farms when purchased
in 1925.
The late Albert
James Mcßride was
born at Kooringa
(Burra) in 1869, and
died after a short ill-
ness at Middelburg,
South Africa, in
February 1928, shortly
after leaving for a
world tour. His
father, the late Mr.
Robert James M artin
Mcß ride, was born in
the North of Ireland
in 1831. Mr. R. J.
M. Mcßride arrived in
South Australia while
yet in his teens, and
with no capital, but
eventually acquired a
number of valuable
runs, the first of these
being the well-known
stud property, The
Gums, east of The
Burra. Other sheep
runs built up by him
were Faraway Hill,
Oakleigh, Redcliffe,
Outalpa, Oulnina,
Stony Gap and so on,
and in the development
of these Mr. Mcßride
rose to prominence, no
less than in his associa-
tion with the establish-
ment of the great min-
ing industries of
Broken Hill and
Western Australia.
He died on the 13th
October, 1921, leaving
an imperishable record
of achievement, and as
one of the greatest
public benefactors the State has known he also was a
patriot in the truest sense.
That his mantle of usefulness has fallen upon the
shoulders of his sons and grandsons cannot be gainsaid,
for in the late Air. A. J. Mcßride the industry possessed
a real sponsor, and his loss was a blow to the country. He
ranked among Australia’s foremost pastoralists. After
THE LATE A. J. MCBRIDE
WI LG E NA. WOOLT A N A , &c., S()V T U AUSTR A LI A


GENERAL VIEW OF WILGENA HOMESTEAD AND OUTBUILDINGS
completing his education at Prince Alfred College, Ade-
laide, he identified himself with the opening up of per-
haps more outside pastoral lands in due course than any
other person in the State, building up from small begin-
nings until Wilgena and Wooltana claimed most of his
attention. For several years he owned the well-known
\ ardea property, which was made into a first-class run,
and sold in 1926 for nearly £120,000. Pewsey Vale, of
nearly 9000 acres, the estate of the late Wm. Gilbert, was
another property purchased by A. J. and P. A. Mcßride
Limited, and brought up to a high degree of efficiency
at the time of the subdivision and sale in 1926. The late
Mr. Mcß ride took a keen interest in the turf, and owned
and raced several good horses.
There survive a widow and a family of five daughters
and two sons, one of whom, Mr. Philip Albert Mcßride,
is the managing director of the firm, which continues
under the name of A. J. and P. A. Mcßride Limited.
KINGOONYA HOMESTEAD AND OUTBUILDINGS
WI LG E NA, IV O() L TANA, &c., S()U TH AUSTR A LI A


NALPA, LAKE ALEXANDRINA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
The Property of A. R. Withers, Esq.
NALPA, a freehold property of nearly 10,000 acres,
bordering Lake Alexandrina, 60 miles south of
Adelaide, is a model, and one of the show places
of the South Australian pastoral industry. It is 22 miles
south of Murray Bridge, and 15 miles from Tailem
Bend. The overland road to Melbourne passes through
which include couch, barley and clover, saltbush, pas-
palum and reeds. On the samphire flats there is a dense
growth of strawberry clover in winter.
With such a range of first class pasture, and an aver-
age rainfall of 14 in. a year, together with its convenient
position to the railway and markets, Nalpa has every
NALPA HOMESTEAD, SHOWING THE OFFICE AND STORE ON THE LEFT
Nalpa, leading to the punt at Wellington on the River
M urray, six miles further on.
Being very flat country, Nalpa is only a few feet above
the water level of the lake, the shores of which it skirts
for about seven miles. As a matter of fact, the highest
point on the property is but 60 ft. above the lake.
This water is a great asset. The soil is a light and
free loam, growing a great variety of natural grasses,
advantage for the profitable rearing of stock. The quan-
tity of lime and salt in the soil ensures remarkable health
in stock, and it is excellent country for fattening pur-
poses.
Mr. Withers has a reputation for thoroughness, and
since he purchased the property in 1923 from the trus-
tees of the Estate of the late Sir Edward Stirling he has
brought it up to a high state of efficiency, enabling it to


ANOTHER VIEW OF XALPA HOMESTEAD
"WOODHAYES," GLEN OSMOND, ADELAIDE, MR. A. R. WITHERS’ CITY RESIDENCE
NAL P A, S O U TII A USTR A LI A


carry more sheep, in addition to several hundred head of
cattle, and a few horses.
So soon as he took possession Mr. Withers drew up
plans of improvement, and simultaneously framed a policy
of able management.
An elaboration of the improvements effected, costing
between £12,000 and £13,000, hardly does justice to the
work which was
entailed in bring-
ing about the
modern conditions
of living and pro-
duction at Nalpa
to-day. Yet they
are a real criterion
of the progress
made.
Substantial new
sheep drafting
yards and jetting
race, encircled by
a limestone shelter
wall, have been remodelled to work between 7000 and 8000
sheep. Redgum posts and 5-in. Oregon rails have been used.
To-day the water supply consists of a sub-artesian bore
of unlimited flow, 15 wells and windmills, and extensive
troughing, and the waters of the lake can be run out any-
where by means of ordinary pumping gear and plant.
Early in 1929, several miles of piping were laid down
to connect up with Murray Bridge water supply. This
THE HOMESTEAD IN 1923, WHEN
MR. A. R. WITHERS TOOK POSSESSION
OLD NALPA
HOMESTEAD
IN 1857
was installed as a safeguard against the lake water get-
ting salty when the River Murray is abnormally low.
Fortunate in his neighbours, Mr. Withers has been
enabled by negotiation to square up and re-establish the
property.
Nalpa is immune from vermin through the construction
of wire-netted boundaries, including each side of the main
road. This work
was completed in
1928. A portion of
the lake frontage
has been fenced
off, and the sta-
tion subdivided in-
to a system of
more than 33 pad-
docks.
Visitors to Nal-
pa never go away
without comment-
ing in eulogistic
terms on the high
standard of the fencing, the substantial and uniform gates
and ramps, and in fact the property generally.
Mr. Withe rs soon set to work to remodel and improve
the old homestead, and many additions were made. For
the domestic and garden water supply two iron stands,
35 ft. high, were assembled, and upon these four 4000-
gallon tanks were placed. A windmill near the shores
of the lake, three-quarters of a mile away, pumps the
TYPICAL
RAMP AND
GATE ON
NALPA RUN
NALPA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


OVERSEER'S QUARTERS
water into these and thence it is reticulated through pip-
ing, of which a total length of two miles has been laid
down round the homestead. This inexhaustible supply
has enabled Mr. Withers to create a picturesque garden
around headquarters, and sprinklers are going the whole
day long in summer. A hot and cold water service is
also installed.
Other features of the homestead are its wide veran-
dahs, sleeping-out quarters, electric light and sewerage
system. The interior appointments, which include a
telephone switch-board connected with the main bed-
rooms, smoke room, office, and different parts of the run
are such as to place Nalpa homestead among the best and
most comfortable in the State.
The owner has arranged at his own expense to have a
special mail delivery three times a week from Nalpa gate
on the main road to the homestead, 4 miles distant.
Close at hand, overlooking the garden, is a handsome
building used as an office and store, and a cattle stud
groom’s cottage has also been erected. Convenient to the
homestead are garages and a petrol bowser, laundry and
dairy.
The whole surroundings possess an appearance of meti-
culous tidiness, and nothing is out of place. An avenue
of Western Australian flowering gums is making good
progress along the drive to the homestead, while gal-
vanised iron fences serve as a protection from the strong
south winds.
At the stone woolshed, two miles from the homestead,
the clip is conveyed on rails to a loading jetty, where a
boat picks it up and takes it to Murray Bridge. From
there it is sent by rail to Port Adelaide. The sheep are
machine shorn at eight stands.
Nalpa is a depot for sheep bred by Messrs. A. R.
Withers and Sons at Woodlands (on the Anabranch)
and Yararoo (near Port Wakefield) Stations. There-
A 7 ALP A, SOU TII AUSTRALIA


THE NALPA WOOLSHED
fore there is no lambing there, and the size of the flock
shorn in September varies with the season.
The sheep are all purebred Merino, built up from a
foundation of Wirra Wirra blood. Rams from this stud
were used for 15 years, when North Bungaree blood was
introduced.
Mr. With ers later procured selected rams from Mr.
Walter Hawker at Anama (portion of old Bungaree),
and has worked his flock up to a high standard through
rigid classing and culling.
The sheep, which are above ordinary flock levels of
quality, are essentially a wool growing and mutton pro-
ducing type —big framed and hardy, with an even cover-
ing of medium to strong wool.
The weights, which cut 11 to 12 lbs., denote that the
fleeces are dense and well packed on. Buyers know it
for its consistently good quality, and the wool, which is
sold in the Adelaide market through Elder Smith and Co.
Limited, always meets with a good demand.
'The Shorthorn Stud
In 1925 Mr. Withers decided to establish a beef
Shorthorn stud. The foundation of it was laid by the
purchase of seven cows, two heifers, two bulls, and eight
calves from the well-known Estate of the late John
Dunne, of Netley.
These represented some of the cream of the famous
Angas Collingrove stud, which had been bought 18
months previously by Mr. John Dunne at the big dis-
persal sale. 1 he nucleus of a stud could not have been
made from a better source.
The draft, which arrived at Nalpa in 1926, included
the pedigreed cows Gazelle 79th, Gazelle 85th, Rose of
Connaught 74th, Rose of Connaught 78th, Rose of
Connaught 86th, Beverley Duchess 86th, and Minstrel
121st.
These are registered in the Shorthorn Herd Book of
Australia, and were bred by the late Mr. C. H. Angas.
The remainder were bred at Netley, and comprised
NALP A, S O UT H A U S TRA LI A


THREE YOUNG PUREBRED BEEF
SHORTHORN HEIFERS, BRED BY
MR. A. R. WITHERS AT NALPA
VA L PA. S 0 UT II A U S TRALI A


FRONT VIEW OF NALPA
HOMESTEAD, SHOWING
THE ENTRANCE DRIVE
NAL P A , SOU T H AUSPR A L I A


GROUP OF NALPA
SELECTED RAMS
Lady Netley Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, sth and 6th, and the bulls
Lord Netley Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, sth and 6th.
Five cows were in calf upon arrival at Nalpa, and the
progeny were named Nalpa Grand Duke, Nalpa’s Earl,
Nalpa’s Prince, Nalpa’s Duke and Nalpa’s Princess.
Pursuing his ideals further, Mr. Withers went to
Sydney in 1926, and paid 510 guineas at the Royal Show
sales for a Shorthorn bull, Milton’s Mastertouch, by the
imported sire Masterkey, from Mr. Anthony Hordern’s
Milton Park stud.
This bull won champion ribbon for the breed in 1926
and 1928 at the Adelaide Royal Show. He was not
exhibited in 1927.
Mr. Withers bred the 1928 reserve champion, Lord
Nalpa L, by Milton’s Mastertouch, out of Rose of Con-
naught 86th ; he is a promising young bull, rising two.
This youngster was sent to the 1929 Sydney Show,
and was commended in his class. He was subsequently
THREE STUD
SHORTHORN COWS
NAL P A, S 0 UT II A USTR A LI A


NALPA JETTY ON LAKE
ALEXANDRINA, FROM WHICH
THE STATION WOOL IS SHIPPED
sold for 200 guineas in the sale ring.
Two heifers were bought in Sydney, one from Mr. A.
J. Simpson, of Clifton, Hamilton, Victoria, and the other
from Mr. A. J. Webb, of Rathfarnham, Hillside, Victoria.
The latter heifer was Grand Duchess of Lindenow
20th, by Lindenvale Duke of Derrimut, out of Grand
Duchess of Lindenow; the former was Clifton Wood-
bine, by Milton’s Mariner (a son of Masterkey, and the
sire of a white bull which realised 1300 guineas in Syd-
ney in 1927), out of Lindenow Duchess of Derrimut
90th.
Again in 1929 Mr. Withers and his son, Edwin,
visited the Sydney Show sales and purchased freely. He
paid 525 guineas for a yearling bull, Milton’s Emperor
3rd, a beautiful well grown red by Collynie King Ed-
ward (imp.) out of Milton’s Miranda 2nd, a daughter of
Masterkey. This bull was champion at the 1929 Ade-
laide Royal Show.
In addition, Mr. Withers bought five Shorthorn
heifers, one at 130 guineas, three at 100, and one at 60.
He secured a fine red two-year-old, May Queen of
Lochinver (Collynie Red Lavender, imp.—May Queen,
imp.).
Other purchases were Milton’s Geraldine 2nd (Doune
Monarch (imp.)—Grand Duchess of Lindenow 3rd),
Fancy Lady 2nd (Milton’s Paymaster—Milton’s Fancy
Lady), a yearling, Quatta’s Lady (Milton’s Masterpiece
—Quatta’s Duchess of Derrimut 21st), and a two-year-
old red roan, Lindenvale Duchess of Derrimut 10th
(Milton’s Mariner—Clifton Duchess of Derrimut 9th),
w hich proved a champion also.
1 bus the strains of outstanding families of the herd
book have been infused largely into the Nalpa stud.
Gratifying progress has been made, and the support
accorded Mr. Withers’ enterprise leaves no doubt as to
NAL P A. SOU T H A USTRA LI A


MR. EDWIN WITHERS IN HIS HYDROPLANE DOING 46 MILES AN HOUR ON THE LAKE
SHORES OF LAKE ALEXANDRIA AT NALPA
,V ALP A , 50U T H AUSTR A LI A


MILTON'S MASTERTOUCH, HEAD SIRE
AT NALPA SHORTHORN STUD
the future importance of Nalpa’s Shorthorns to the beef
industry.
Even before he founded his stud Mr. Withers was
successful with the beasts he handled. In May 1925
eight purebred white Shorthorn oxen, showing quality
of breed and in choice condition, easily topped the Ade-
laide market, realising up to £39 155., and averaging
£35 ss. 3d.
Eight beautifully bred roan Shorthorn heifers in the
same market met with spirited competition; the best
realised £27 12s. 6d., and the line aver-
aged £22 18s.
A magnificent exercise yard, \\ acres
in extent, has been erected at Nalpa for
the head sire. The fencing consists of
pine posts with four oregon railings,
6x3 in.
The feed house for the bulls is also a
fine structure, designed to minimise
handling and built on modern, hygienic
principles. Oaten and lucerne chaff is
emptied direct into a large chamber with
a boarded floor. In another apartment
mouseproof feed storage boxes are lined
with zinc, d ime and labour are saved
in feeding by the installation of sliding
doors, behind which are excellent stalls.
lit by electric light.
Mr. Withers is a strong advocate
for a compulsory tuberculin test, and he
will never part with an animal until it
has been certified by a Government
veterinary surgeon.
Regular tests have shown the Nalpa
herd to be disease free.
Personal
Mr. A. R. Withers, who belongs to
an old English sheep and cattle family,
was born in Devonshire, England, on
7th December, 1863, and came to Aus-
tralia with his parents in 1876.
His father, the late Mr. J. H.
Withers, took up land on the Ana-
branch (River Darling), where his son
made his first start on the ladder of
success.
Mr. Withers speaks feelingly of his early years of
struggle, and attributes much of his ultimate progress to
the encouragement and help of a loyal and devoted wife,
whose courage was true to the best traditions of woman-
hood, and no greater than when things looked blackest.
In 1888 he married Margaret, the daughter of the late
Mr. and Mrs. Edward Stewart, of Kilmarnock, Ayrshire,
Scotland. Mrs. Withers passed away on the 20th August,
1929. The family comprises two daughters—Hilda
Gregory, wife of Mr. W. Garnet Kain (Mildura), and
THE WIDE VERANDAHS AT NALPA
iV ALP A, S() UT H AUSTRALIA


MR. A. R. WITHERS
THE LATE MRS. A. R. WITHERS
Alfena Janet, wife of Mr. R. H. Ayliffe (Adelaide), who
were educated at the Misses Thornber’s Unley Park
School, Adelaide, and three sons—Messrs. A. R.
(Yararoo), E. J. (Nalpa), and B. S. Withers (Wood-
lands). They were educated at Kyre (now Scotch) Col-
lege, Adelaide, and the last-named also at the Church of
England Grammar School, Melbourne.
Mr. A. R. Withers, sen., is a member of the leading;
turf clubs of South Australia, and a generous supporter
of country bodies in his district. He has raced with
success the Lucknow gelding Lahara, and has at present
three horses in his string.
At the 1929 Adelaide yearling sales he paid 300 guineas
for a filly by Amalfi, out of Cannawigra (by Magpie).
A MOB OF EWE HOGGETS
NAL P A, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


NAPPA MERRIE, COOPER'S CREEK, QUEENSLAND
The Property of The Nappa Merrie Pastoral Company
NAPPA MERRIE Station, comprising 2000 square
miles of leasehold and secured land, lies well into
the interior of Australia, and its designation as
“Burke and Wills” country conveys some understanding
of the real outback conditions of life which prevail there,
its wide horizons, stretching on all sides into the haze of
earth and sky, being truly characteristic of the broad, open
spaces of this vast continent. The property is tucked
into the south-western corner of Queensland, the border
between that State and South Australia framing it on
the west.
On account of there being no Queensland mail com-
munication with the station, it is to all intents linked up
with South Australia, postal delivery and telegraphic con-
nection being via the town of Farina, 330 miles from the
homestead. Broken Hill lies 400 miles due south, and
this is the route taken by the owner when visiting Ade-
laide, over 700 miles distant. In these days of high-
powered motor cars this journey is not the anxiety it
was in former years, for the city can be reached com-
fortably in three days, as against several weeks only a
few years ago.
The nearest telegraph station in Queensland is at
Thargomindah, 200 miles east, and the closest hospital is
a similar distance away from the station at Tibooburra
(N.S.W.), but now that the Australian Inland Mission
A VIEW OF COOPER’S CREEK NEAR THE NAPPA MERRIE HOMESTEAD


BILPA LAGOON ON NAPPA MERRIE
BARRIOOLA CATTLE STATION
VAP P A M E ERIE. () UE E N SEAN 1)


THE FRONT VERANDAH OF THE HOMESTEAD
has built a hostel at Innamincka, only 30 miles from
Nappa Merrie, the district will be much better served
in cases of So far aeroplanes have not
reached out to these regions, but no doubt it will not
be long before this essential service penetrates to
isolated districts such as that in which Nappa M errie is
situated.
The type of country of which the property is composed
is mostly wide rolling stony downs, and covered with an
abundant growth of Mitchell grass and scrub, red mulga
(minaritchi), plain mulga, bloodwood,
beefwood, gidgee (excellent material
for fencing), and varieties of gums, all
this timber growing mainly along the
innumerable watercourses which inter-
sect the run. There is a large area
of cattle country comprising porcupine
sandhills, mulga, and the growth of
lignum upon the flood sections reaches
to a height of 20 to 30 ft.
Watered splendidly by the Cooper and
Wilson Creeks, which join near the
main outstation, Barrioola (native name
meaning two gruhs), the property has
a double frontage of over 80 miles to
the first-named river. I here are also
dozens of other natural streams, and in
flood times these tributaries form an
inland sea of fresh water, ranging fre-
quently over an area of 40 miles in
width.
The Cooper is one of the most valu-
able rivers in the continent, rising as it
does in the Great Dividing range in
Queensland and emptying when full
into the waters of Lake Eyre in South
Australia, and its offshoots, the 1 horn-
son, Barcoo, Alice, Aramac, and Darr
Creeks endow Nappa Merrie with any
amount of surface water in normal
times. The average rainfall is 7 in. per
annum, and upon this depends, of course,
the condition of the country. A good
season will inundate a considerable part
of the run, and after these flood waters
subside the growth of feed is pheno-
menal, making wonderful fattening
country, whilst at all times the property
is noted for its well-grown M erino
wool. The station, in fact, has an
enviable reputation for the magnificent
cattle turned off for the various markets
every year, chiefly Adelaide, and is well known also for
moderately large clips of scoured wool.
The property was opened up in 1872 by the late Mr.
John Conrick twelve months after he went out to inspect
the conditions of that part of the country, and as it has
remained in the possession of his family ever since, it is
the only holding in those parts to retain its original
ownership. Travelling nearly one thousand miles over-
land from Victoria with a mob of cattle, Mr. Conrick
eventually made his camp at a large waterhole on the
THE OUTLOOK FROM THE HOMESTEAD
NAP P A MERR I E, OUE EN S LAN D


SHEARERS' QUARTERS AT NAPPA MERRIE
SOME OUTBUILDINGS AT THE HOMESTEAD
NAP PA MERRIE, QUEENSLAND


A LAKE ON NAPPA MERRIE STATION
SHORN SHEEP AT NAPPA MERRIE
-V AP P A MERR I E , QUEEN S L A N D


THE BULLOO BULLOO CROSSING ON COOPER'S CREEK
ANOTHER MOB OF SHORN SHEEP
NAP P A MERR I E, QUEEN S L A N D


A FINE SHEET OF WATER
BARRIOOLA WATERHOLE
ON NAPPA MERRIE
NAP P A MK R R lE, QUE ENSL A N I)


THE COOK AT THE CATTLE CAMP
Cooper, named by the natives Nappa Merrie, and pro-
ceeded to depasture the stock and establish a run, the size
of which then was 800 miles.
In 1875 he was partnered by Mr. George Ware (who
afterwards settled at Minjah, Victoria), and together they
succeeded in placing the country upon a sound footing for
both woolgrowing and cattle-raising. Mr. Conrick pur-
chased his partner’s interest in 1911 and brought the
holding up to the present area of over one and a-quarter
million acres. Under his progressive management the run
was improved to a considerable degree,
and its status to-day reflects great credit
upon his shrewd judgment and untiring
energy.
In the hands of his son, Mr. Edward
Gerald Conrick, who is the principal
shareholder in the private company, the
property is being maintained in an effec-
tive and highly improved condition, and
has a carrying capacity in ordinary sea-
sons of over 20,000 sheep, besides a herd
of 10,000 head of cattle. At the pre-
sent time, however (1930), the run is
holding only 4000 sheep and some 5000
cattle. It has gone through one of the
worst droughts ever experienced there,
for since 1926 until recently there had
been no rain, except for scattered
showers, and in spite of the fact that
Cooper’s Creek flowed well from Feb-
ruary 1928 for several months, the owner
lost some thousands of head of cattle.
The loss from June to August 1928
alone totalled 2000 head, due to the
scarcity of feed. The country, however,
has the habit of recuperating very
quickly after a drought, and at no time
in the history of the run has a lean
period ever dulled the optimism of those
in charge.
With regard to the flock of Merino
sheep on Nappa Merrie, these are built
up from pure Bungaree (S.A.) blood,
and the opinion generally expressed that
the northern M erinos of the central
State are small is refuted definitely in
the type grown at Nappa Merrie. The
extent to which the sheep have been
looked after at the annual classings, and
the level to which the flock has been
raised was emphasised in a convincing
manner in June 1928, when a large mob
of shorn wethers was walked overland for 400 miles to
trucks at Broken Hill, and railed to the metropolitan
market, where they topped the sales amongst a big yard-
ing. The wethers were all big and strong and in prime
condition.
The lambing at Nappa Merrie takes place in August,
with the idea of striking the summer storms and the pick-
ing of nice green feed that follows, and as a result of this
policy the clip shorn eight months later, in May, is in-
variably very much better. The class of wool grown is
THE “DOGGER,” NAPPA MERRIE
NAP P A MERK I E, OUE E N S LAN D


UNLOADING STORES AT THE HOMESTEAD
STATION STORES FOR NAPPA MERRIE
NAP P A MERR I E, QUEENS LA N I)


a bold robust type, bright, soft, dense and long. It has
been the practice for many years to scour the whole of the
clip on the premises, and no surer indication of quality
can be found than in the fact that it has the record of
having topped the sales at Adelaide on many occasions.
The best price at which it has been sold was 63d. per lb.
At the sales held on 6th September, 1928, one line of 61
is essentially a cattle man, as he has looked after this
side of the business since boyhood, only taking over the
sheep as well in recent years, hence his enthusiasm when
it comes to uplifting the standard of the herd, which is im-
proved regularly by the introduction of the best quality
bulls. These are obtained from a stud kept for that sole
purpose on the property. It was founded more than forty
COOPER'S CREEK NEAR THE HOMESTEAD
bales of scoured combing realised 40d. per lb., and another
of 21 bales of A combing brought 38fd. per lb. After
the wool is shorn and scoured it is despatched to Farina
(330 miles) by means of pack camel.
The cattle run on the property are a good class of
Shorthorns, and have come to be recognised as one of the
best herds in the interior. The present head of the firm
years ago —in the late eighties—the original stock being
procured by the late Mr. Conrick from Mr. Neil Black’s
stud near Geelong, Victoria. The owners have bred a
polled Shorthorn type, and in due course it is expected
that this type will probably go right through the whole
herd. At a sale of Nappa Merrie cattle a heavy draft
returned the average of £9 per head at Adelaide. This
FAT CATTLE AT NAPPA MERRIE
N APR A MERR I E, QUEENSLAND


was on 21st August, 1928, and the well-known firm of
G. and E. A. Brooks Limited lifted about 100 head of
them. Apart from the great freedom from disease upon
the property, the animals are known to be of docile dis-
position, and this weighs well with buyers who attend the
markets.
1 ouching briefly upon the improvements at Nappa
Merrie, it is of interest to note that the divisional wire-
netted boundary between South Australia and Queens-
land gives protection to 50 miles of the western side of
the run, while on the
south there is a check
fence which extends for
200 miles to Thargo-
raindah, part of this
forming another boun-
dary of the station.
Elsewhere the run has
been made vermin proof,
and subdivided, and the
waters other than the
natural supplies are three
sub-artesian bores on the
south side of the river,
giving an unlimited flow
of pure water at an aver-
age depth of 300 ft. and
a few deeper ones on
the north side, where
the water is not free
altogether from salinity,
although good for stock.
During recent years
many of the buildings
have been extended or
improved, notably the
wool rooms of the shear-
ing shed, which contains
twelve stands of ma-
chines. The homestead
is a modern building,
set in a wealth of
natural trees, pretty gar-
dens and an orchard,
with a well-cared-for
area set aside for the cul-
tivation of vegetables.
Within the nicely fitted
out home there are most
of the conveniences of the
suburban house, besides
spacious verandahs and cool lounges, all of which go a
long way towards offsetting the interior location and ap-
parent isolation. Near the homestead is the historic spot
where the intrepid explorer Burke and his mates King,
Gray, and Wills formed their depot in 1861 whilst on
their tragic expedition across Australia.
The late Air. John Conrick, who was a member of the
Royal Society, was horn at Geelong, Victoria, in 1852,
and died in January 1926. The son of Patrick Conrick,
of Warrnambool, Vic., an early settler in that colony,
the late Mr. Conrick received his education first at the
local school, and afterwards at St. Patrick’s College,
Melbourne, following which he had a year or two of
commercial training. He launched out into pastoral life
as a young man by undertaking the hazardous, but suc-
cessful, journey to Nappa Merrie, and within three y r ears
(1875) achieved some prominence by opening up the pre-
sent stock route from Queensland to Blanchewater, in
South Australia, a splendid piece of pioneering that in-
volved long stretches of
lonely riding.
In 1885 he married
Agnes Jane Ware, the
sister of his former part-
ner, and the family con-
sisted of four sons, viz.,
John Ware Conrick,
who now has Popiltah
Station, near Went-
worth, N.S.W.; Francis
Clive Conrick, the pre-
sent owner of Wallal-
berdina Station, 28 miles
from the town of
Hawker, S.A., and for-
merly the property of
Mr. Sawers; Joseph
Patrick Conrick, who
lives at Craiglands, near
Euroa, Vic.; and Ed-
ward Gerald Conrick,
the present resident
manager and chief share-
holder in the family
partnership. 'The last
named was born at
Nappa Merrie in 1890,
and went to St. Xavier’s
College, Melbourne, and
to Riverview College,
S y due y, where his
brothers also attended.
On leaving school he
began his training in
stock raising under the
able tuition of his father,
taking over the manage-
ment of the run in 1923.
In that year he married
Nellie, the daughter of
Mr. Joseph Harvey, of Terang, Vic., and there is a
family of three sons, Edward Neil, Rupert John, and
Peter, and one daughter, Betty. Mr. Conrick is an ardent
supporter of any movement which has at heart
the improvement of outback conditions, whilst his wife,
who shares in this earnest desire to encourage the settle-
ment of inland centres, is herself an influence in the
scattered social life of the district surrounding Nappa
Merrie.
MR. E. G. CONRICK
NAPPA M ERR lE. QUEENSLAND


ANOTHER MOB OF NAPPA MERRIE FATS
KOOLANGOO BORE, WHERE A PUMPING SUPPLY OF GOOD WATER WAS STRUCK AT 543 FT.


VICTORIA DOWNS STUD, MORVEN, QUEENSLAND
The Property of Mr. Robert P. Lord
THE VICTORIA DOWNS HOMESTEAD
STUD Merino ram breeding in Queensland is to-day
a definite and progressive factor in supplying the
right class of sheep to local station owners with
which to build up, maintain, and improve the quality of
their flocks. This great wool-growing State of the Com-
monwealth, curiously enough, has possessed very few
large stud flocks until recent years, the general opinion
having been held that stud Merino breeding could not
be carried on successfully on account of the lack of suit-
able conditions. This is a fallacy that has been upset
conclusively within the past twenty years, and none have
shown more convincing proof that high class rams and
ewes can be bred just as well in Queensland as in any
other State than the Victoria Downs stud, which is bred
and owned by Mr. Robert P. Lord, and situated near
Morven, in the south-west of the great pastoral areas of
Queensland, about 450 miles due west of Brisbane.
Comprising an area of approximately 30,000 acres, the
property is made up chiefly of nicely sheltered open
downs country, beautifully healthy and sound, carrying
scattered belts of myall and other native timber, which
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD


AWAITING THEIR TURN ON THE TENNIS COURT
is at present being improved by ring-barking. The an-
nual average rainfall over a period of years has been
21 in., the soil varies from red to black, and carries a
fair amount of stone, there is an invigorating winter cli-
mate, whilst the pastures embrace many varieties of heat
and frost resisting -grasses, predominant in which is the
sweet, short, curly Mitchell grass. The unique suitability
of the local conditions for stud sheep breeding is, more-
over, enhanced by the proximity of rail transport to the
station, the main western line from Brisbane to Charle-
ville passing along the southern boundary and affording
the greatest facilities in the delivery of sale rams.
Mr. Robert P. Lord has brought the whole of the
property to an efficient level, and few places are so well
known in the district for good management, and the
excellent class of appointments and permanent improve-
ments that have been laid down for stud breeding pur-
poses. There are over thirty subdivisions, in which
pests are unknown to any extent, and a duplicated system
of waters makes the run independent of rain in times of
drought. The supply is drawn from six sub-artesian
bores equipped with mills, tanks and troughing, supple-
mented by a series of surface tanks placed on quick
catches. There is a particularly fine body of water along-
side the homestead, around which are centred the main
stud paddocks, and in no instance have the stock to travel
far for their water.
The homestead is large and commodious, and has a
convenient situation six miles from Morven township, to
•which it is linked by telephone. The importance of hav-
ing wmll planned, spacious headquarters is apparently very
necessary for the proper conduct of the stud, as fre
A REST UNDER THE MYALL TREES
VI CTO R IA DO WN S, 0U E ENSLAN D


A CORNER OF
THE GARDEN AT
VICTORIA DOWNS
ONE OF THE
NUMEROUS DAMS
OUT ON THE RUN
VI CTO R I A I) () wN S, () UEENS E A N I)


EXTRA SPECIAL STUD RAM, NO. 1558, AT SIX YEARS OLD. BRED BY AND THE PROPERTY OF ROBT. P. LORD
VIC TOR IA I) OWNS,QUEE N S L A N D


EXTRA SPECIAL STUD
EWE, FIVE YEARS OLD,
BRED BY AND THE PRO-
PERTY OF ROBT. P. LORD
ANOTHER SPECIAL STUD EWE BRED AT VICTORIA DOWNS, AND WINNER OF MANY PRIZES, INCLUDING GRAND
CHAMPION HONOURS, DURING THE LAST FEW YEARS THE STUD WAS EXHIBITED
V 1 CTO R I A I) OWN S, Q UEENS L A N I)


EXTRA SPECIAL STUD RAM, NO. 1737, BRED BY AND THE PROPERTY OF ROBT. P. LORD
SPECIAL STUD RAM, NO. 1744, BRED AT VICTORIA DOWNS
This ram was one of two Victoria Dozens rams that topped the Brisbane ram sales 1930 , and was pur-
chased by Messrs. Crassonie and Stone, Quilberry, Wyandra; the other ram referred to was No. 1822, and sold
to Messrs. R. H Nantes and Sons, Kennersley, Wyandra, for the same price at Messrs. Dalgety and Co.’s sales.
VICTORIA DOWNS, QUEENSLAND


STUD MERINO EWES DRAWING INTO THE SHADE AT MID-DAY
quently during the season w hen the sheep have sufficient
wool to he classed, the homestead accommodation is taxed
to its utmost, for it is rarely at that period that the stud
is free from buyers, or visitors inspecting the sheep. Built
of weatherboard on a generous scale, the house is typical
of many western Queensland homesteads, being sur-
rounded by gauzed-in verandahs, with a shady setting of
trees and shrubs, and the indispensable and much used
ant-bed tennis court.
The Merino stud was established in 1911 by the late
Mr. Alfred P. Lord, father of the present owner. From
him it passed to the ownership of his sons under the name
of Messrs. Lord Brothers, consisting of Robert P. Lord,
Reginald Simeon Lord, Alfred Victor Lord, the late
Francis Guy Lord, and Arthur Brougham Lord. In
1922 the brothers sold their interests in the stud to the
present owner, under whose management and skilful
classing it had been cared for from its commencement in
1911. Mr. R. P. Lord has continued to devote the whole
of his personal attention to the breeding operations.
The basis of the Victoria Downs Me rino stud is ab-
solutely pure Peppin-Wanganella blood, which came from
Ueniliquin Stud Park in New South Wales, the stud
that produced the celebrated sires Donald Dinnie (sold
by Mr. Millear for 1200 guineas), Sir William (sold
for 1350 guineas), Lord William (sold for 1250
guineas), Stud Park No. 10 (sold for 2500 guineas),
&c. No expense was spared to procure the very best
material which in Mr. Lord’s opinion would give the
most satisfactory results in Queensland, the foundation
stock consisting of 3000 aged ewes which were their own
ram breeders in the parent stud, and high class sires from
the same source. Quite a number of the famous Donald
Dinnie’s progeny were introduced at the outset of the
stud’s career, while in 1918 Mr. Lord purchased the out-
standing sire, Stud Park No. 10, at 2500 guineas.
Another sire was procured at the price of 760 guineas,
one at 700 guineas, one at 500 guineas, one at 460
guineas, one at 400 guineas, nine at 320 guineas each,
and several at from 100 to 200 guineas each.
Such has been the foundation of the Victoria Downs
Merino stud, each sire having been chosen with the de-
A GROUP OF SPECIAL STUD EWES AT VICTORIA DOWNS
lie TOR I A I) OWN S. Q UEENS LA N D


SPECIAL STUD RAM AND SPECIAL STUD EWES, BRED BY AND THE PROPERTY OF ROBT. P. LORD
finite objective of maintaining, and improving upon, a
fixed type throughout the stud flocks, which, having had
the extra advantage of being classed, selected and mated
by Mr. Robert P. Lord right from the start, have made
sure and steady progress, and advanced into the front
rank of Merino sheep breeding in Queensland and Aus-
tralia. Air. Lord attributes the success of the stud to
the concentration upon fixed types, possessing the soundest
of constitutions, sound backs, and the best of quality all
through their covering.
The stud flocks comprise about seven to eight thousand
sheep, with the breeders graded into different classes. The
extra special stud ewes number about 400, all being of a
very high standard of quality, and from them certain
numbers are selected for mating with the single sires.
Other special ewes are graded into two flocks, the first
specials and second specials, each flock containing 600
ewes. The balance of the ewes, numbering about 2000.
are divided into two flocks of first stud ewes and second
stud ewes. An outstanding characteristic of the whole
of the breeders is their uniformity, and it is this wonder-
ful evenness of appearance that stamps them as aristocrats
of the sheep world. Mr. Robt. P. Lord has that discern
ment for quality born in the true sheep man, to which
SPECIAL STUD RAM AND SPECIAL STUD EWE, BRED BY AND THE PROPERTY OF ROBT. P. LORD
V 1 CTO R I A I) O WNS. Q UKENS L A N D


A GROUP OF STUD RAMS BRED BY ROBT. P. LORD AND SOLD AT THE 1930 BRISBANE RAM SALES,
TWO OF THEM TOPPING THE MARKET
is added the experience of years of close study of the
principles of breeding. His sires are selected with care,
and the policy at all times is to retain the tops of all
classing for use in the stud before selecting the sale rams.
Hence a steady rate of progress is assured.
The sheep generally are a big type of pure Peppin-
Wanganella Merino, plain bodies, with attractive neck
folds, and acclimatised to Queensland conditions. They
have exceptionally good backs, and are good underneath,
quality, in fact, being the strongest point of the Victoria
Downs sheep, which are acknowledged to compare favour-
ably with the leading stud flocks of Australia, and which,
in Queensland especially, have a name for their hardiness
and the wonderful character now established in the wool
of all the sheep right throughout the stud (registered
Flock No. 100 in the Register of Stud Merino Flocks
of Australia).
Bred and reared on hard western Queensland country,
the Victoria Downs sheep are not pampered in any way,
and have to fend for themselves on natural pastures,
hence they may be relied upon wherever they go to repro-
duce their own valuable qualities in their progeny. In
the past the sheep have established many high figures
and records for their wool, and wool from their pro-
geny, which had been taken on to granite country, made
a record price for Queensland two years in succession,
in 1922 and 1923.
1 he stud also has a fine record of success at the various
shows and exhibitions, having secured 496 prizes, includ-
ing 10 grand championships for rams, and 8 grand cham-
pionships for ewes; 4 reserve grand championships for
rams, and 4 reserve grand championships for ewes; 30
champion ribbons for rams, and 29 for ewes; 22 reserve
champion ribbons for rams, and 18 for ewes; 217 first
prizes, 149 second prizes, and 4 third prizes. These
splendid results cover a period of eleven years, from
1913 to 1924, since when the stud has not been repre-
sented by its sheep at any show. Nevertheless Mr. Lord
keeps in close touch with the outside sheep world by
judging the Merino sheep section at different shows, in-
cluding the Sydney Sheep Show, where he has officiated on
several occasions. The latter is considered to be a
high honour, and it is one of the proudest results coming
from any work in connection with stud sheep breeding.
There is a regular and general demand for all sale
rams from Victoria Downs, and orders often have to be
refused owing to the inability to supply requirements at
all times, everything having been disposed of. This is a
THREE-YEAR-OLD SPECIAL STUD RAMS, BRED BY AND THE PROPERTY OF ROBT. P. LORD
VI C r()R I A DOIF N S, O UEEA’S E A N D


A CORNER OF THE OFFICE AT VICTORIA DOWNS, SHOWING SOME OF THE 496
SHOW PRIZES WON FOR SHEEP, ALSO WOOL CASE AND PHOTOGRAPHS
DESPATCHING BY MOTOR LORRIES A CONSIGNMENT OF RAMS PURCHASED BY MR. W. V. YOUNG, BYRGENNA,
AUGATHELLA, MR. YOUNG BEING ONE OF THE MANY REGULAR BUYERS FROM VICTORIA DOWNS STUD
VIC T()R I A I) () IV NS, Q UEENS L A N I)


SPECIAL STUD EWES BRED BY ROBT. P. LORD ON VICTORIA DOWNS
gratifying acknowledgment of the quality of the sheep.
In the past rams have gone to Russia and South Africa
and to numerous places in Australia, whilst at the annual
Brisbane ram sales the stud is invariably first or second,
both in top price for individual sires and average. In
1928, 1929, and again in 1930, as well as in pre-
vious seasons, the sale sheep held first position, and the
stud further distinguished itself in 1929 by creating a
record price for a ram sold at the Brisbane sales, namely,
300 guineas. In the second year that the stud sent down
a sale team of rams, in 1919, they made a Queensland
record for the highest priced ram sold up to that year,
and averaged 114 guineas for six stud rams. This record
long remained to the credit of the Victoria Downs stud,
and was beaten only at the 1929 sales, when five Victoria
Downs stud rams averaged 120 guineas each. The ram
which sold at 300 guineas was a very handsome dense
woolled sheep, and the buyers, Messrs. Nantes and Sons,
ANOTHER GROUP OF VICTORIA DOWNS BRED STUD MERINO EWES
VICE OR IA DO If 7 NS.OUEEN S E A N D


MUSTERING YOUNG MERINO RAMS ON VICTORIA DOWNS
who have built up their flocks on Victoria Downs blood,
give credit for their profitable returns from wool and
wethers to the sheep bred by Mr. Lord.
During the past selling season Mr. Robt. P. Lord dis-
posed of one stud ram at 300 guineas, four at 200 guineas,
two at 150 guineas, seven at 100 guineas, and two at 50
guineas each, while the flock and selected rams sold in
large and small lots at prices ranging from 4 to 15
guineas. Stud ewes and cast for age stud ewes were
disposed of at prices up to 25 guineas each. Despite the
drought through which the property passed in 1929
the sales included 19 stud rams averaging 120 guineas
each, and it is worthy of note that many buyers of
Victoria Downs sheep in past years have written to ex-
press their satisfaction at the improvement obtained in
weights and quality after the use of these sheep.
There is no doubt that there is a bright future ahead
of the Victoria Downs stud, and the owner is ready at
all times to welcome visitors and conduct them round
the sheep. It is perhaps fitting to mention that they are
assured of warm hospitality at the hands of Mrs. Lord,
who attends to the important domestic side of the stud
management’s welfare. There are no sons to help carry
on the stud work, but Mr. Lord’s daughters have all done
their share, the eldest, Catherine Nelse, up to the time of
her marriage to Mr. J. C. Capper, assisting with the
mustering, as well as office and house duties. Her twin
sisters, Mar jory and Beryl, together with the youngest
daughter Nelse, assist in the same work, and one and all
are enthusiasts like their father in the welfare of the
stud, and in the social and economic progress of the dis-
trict in which thev reside.
A GROUP OF YOUNG VICTORIA DOWNS RAMS TO BE CLASSED
VIC TORIA DOWN S, QUE E N SEAN I)


TERRICA, INGLEWOOD, QUEENSLAND
The Property of Mr. Scott McLeod
Terrica station is one of the largest and best
known Merino wool-growing properties in
Southern Queensland, and is the home of Mr.
Scott McLeod and his family. Its location is 36 miles
west of the town of Stanthorpe, and about 40 miles from
the border of New South AVales above Texas, the town
Pike and named after him, was subdivided by the Gunn
family, who had become the owners, and the present por-
tion known as Terrica fell to the bid of Slade and Mar-
shall, afterwards known as Slade and Parr, the former
gentleman (Slade) being the original partner in Glengal-
lan, Warwick, and later the owner of Glenelg Station.
THE OLD TERRICA HOMESTEAD BUILT BY THE LATE MR. RODERICK MCLEOD
of Inglewood, 25 miles distant, serving as the postal
address.
Comprising 41,000 acres freehold and about 10,000
acres of leased country, which is carrying about 30,000
sheep and a herd of cattle, Terrica has become prominent
in this wide fertile part of Queensland, not only on ac-
count of its flock of purebred Merinos, their care, and
the exceptionally able management of the property as a
whole, but also through its association with the opening
up and development of the State’s wool industry. The
grazing country hereabouts was settled first by Captain
Pike, whilst Mr. Treverton and Fred Bracker also were
linked with the pioneering of this part. During the six-
ties the holding, which had been apportioned to Captain
Messrs. Slade and Parr sold the lease of Terrica in
1875 to the late Mr. Roderick McLeod, who, in partner-
ship with Samuel Dight, of Yetman, entered into pos-
session on Ist May, 1875, at which time the run was in
its virgin state, unfenced, and practically unimproved.
Right from the outset of this venture the property was
hit by drought. The failing pastures suffered absolute
depletion from a wave of kangaroos, and Mr. McLeod
was forced by circumstances to leave a caretaker in charge
and travel his stock from place to place until the drought
broke, 18 months later. By July 1879 the outlook was
so unfavourable that Mr. Dight sold out on liberal terms
to his partner, who held on in the face of difficulties until
a run of fair seasons enabled him to erect fences, sub-


THE TENNIS COURT
divide, make surface tanks, ringbark the dense timber,
and gradually consolidate the run into a well-improved
holding, securing, within 25 years, the present area of
freehold. Throughout the lean years occupied in build-
ing up, the late Roderick McLeod did not slacken his
attention to the sheep, and as a result of regular classing
and culling and good flock husbandry, with which was
combined expert judgment, Terrica, by the time it was
handed over to his only son, the present owner, had
reached a state of transformation from its original condi-
tion beyond all conception.
To-day the country is advanced still further in value,
and presents a soft, well-cared-for appearance. Bold
grassy hills that command a view extending into the dis-
tant haze fall into undulating slopes and rich flats, and
provide a passage for Treverton and Spring Creeks,
Connor’s Creek, and innumerable watercourses fed bv
springs. On every hand the prospect pleases. Nearly
the whole of the run is red basalt country, with an aver-
age rainfall of 21 in. per annum, a fairly mild climate,
and excellent summer conditions for the stock except in
rare times of severe drought.
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE PRESENT TERRICA HOMESTEAD
T ERRICA, QU EE N SEAN D


1 here are 28 main paddocks to the property, all of
which are wire-netted against both rabbits and dingoes,
and an outstanding feature is that all the fencing, gates,
and grids (motor entrances) are of standard pattern, de-
signed and built to withstand long wear. When new
grids, gates, or posts are wanted, the material is sawn
and fitted, and delivered to the spot ready for erection.
Air. Scott AlcLeod is practical in all that he undertakes,
and is efficient also. His father believed that if a man
was to become a capable manager over men, he should
&c., whilst there are spacious lounges and verandahs, a
billiard room panelled with native woods and adorned
with beautiful trophies of big game hunting trips in South
Africa, while no less attractive are the grounds and the
ant-bed tennis court. A feature of the outbuildings is
the garage and workshop, which contains up-to-date ma-
chinery and equipment to cope with any repair job on the
station. The garage has its own petrol bowser.
Situated three-quarters of a mile from the homestead
the woolshed has 14 stands of machines driven by a Robey
ABERDEEN-ANGUS BULLOCKS OF QUALITY, BRED AT TERRICA BY MR. SCOTT MCLEOD
have a thorough training in all practical work, and there-
fore when his son left school he began right at the bottom,
and worked up from the rough station work to the posi-
tion of manager. A knowledge of shearing machinery
was acquired, so that he could “expert” at the annual
shearings, whilst in addition to many other accomplish-
ments Mr. McLeod equipped himself to do his own sur-
veying, draftsmanship, architecture and building. As an
amateur craftsman he could have few if any superiors,
and the results of his energy and skill are in evidence in
the character of the station’s appointments.
Of rambling style, the Terrica homestead is built of
timber, and dates back to 1907. It is complete with
electric light, hot and cold water service to the bedrooms,
septic sewerage, cold storage, wireless, a Kodascope out-
fit for elaborate home moving pictures in natural colour,
steam engine, and was built to Mr. McLeod’s design
and under his personal supervision in 1905. All the tim-
ber was cut alongside, the milling plant being a feature
of the station. It is a T-shed, with the doors of the
catching pens painted white, and everything kept at all
times in perfect order and cleanliness. Well built and
comfortable men’s accommodation huts are nearby, and
of similar neatness are the yards, dip, &c., which are laid
out to minimise dust and all unnecessary work. The
windmills, troughs, and other permanent improvements
out on the run are attended with meticulous care, hence it
is not unexpected to find corresponding merit in the sheep
and cattle.
The former are based on Collaroy blood, with an ad-
mixture of blood from the late Alick M ur ray’s M ount
Crawford stud (S.A.), Haddon Rig, and Uardry
TERRICA, OU EENS L A N D


SOME OF THE TERRICA FAMILY AND A DISAPPROVING “FELIX”
(N.S.W.). Rams are put to about 12,000 breeding ewes
every year, and these produce on the average not less than
60 per cent, of marked lambs, which grow out well by
the time they are weaned. The best are retained in the
flock at classing time, it being the policy to cull without
reserve in order to advance the weight and quality of
MUSTERING MERINOS ON TERRICA
TER RICA, QU EENSLA N D


A PLEASING PICTURE OF
TERRICA HOMESTEAD IN
THE LATE AFTERNOON
TERR I C A, O UEENSL A N I)


THE BREEDING OF HIGH-CLASS STATION HACKS IS A SIDE LINE. A FINE GROUP OF MARES AND FOALS
A TYPICAL LOT OF ABERDEEN-ANGUS COWS AND CALVES ON TERRICA
TERR I C A. QUE ENSL A N I)


A MOB OF THE LARGE-FRAMED MERINOS FOR WHICH TERRICA IS NOTED
wool grown. The clip in 1929 returned an aver-
age of over 8 lbs. per head all round, which includes
all the previous year’s lambs. The wool is on the fine
side of medium, and has a name in Brisbane for the
splendid way in which it is classed, baled and prepared
generally for sale. This factor and the excellence of the
wool for manufacturing purposes result invariably in a
high average return to the owner.
The cattle depastured on the rich Hats comprise a herd
of some 2000 head of the Aberdeen-Angus type. They
are not bred as a stud, although the standard of breeding
is very high. Mr. McLeod gives the breeders first-class
sires that are purchased from leading Black Polled stud
sources, and has established an increasing business with
the fats turned off regularly, and the few herd bulls that
are bred for sale.
Personal
Roderick McLeod, father of Air. Scott McLeod, was
born on 21st June, 1827, in the Highlands of Scotland
on the dividing range at the head of Loch Broom in
Ross-shire, 40 miles from Dingwall, a port on the east
coast of Scotland, 10 or 12 miles north of Inverness.
Alexander McLeod, father of Roderick, had been in
Canada with another Alexander McLeod, known as
"Hoppy” McLeod, and the youngest son of McLeod of
Dunvegan Castle. Both were connected with the Hud-
son Bay Company. After returning from Canada
“Hoppy” McLeod decided to have a look at Australia.
Finding that conditions were favourable for land settle-
ment he advised his friend on his return to Scotland to
avail himself of the opportunities offering in Australia,
and Alexander decided to follow “Hoppy” McLeod’s
advice. Land was promised to Alexander before leaving
Scotland, but the Act under which this grant was to he
made was cancelled during the passage out.
Alexander McLeod, with his family, including hve
sons, Donald, John, Angus, Roderick and Kenneth, sailed
TERRICA. QUEEX SLAND


from Dingwall for Australia on 20th June, 1837, on a
boat of 600 tons named “William Inglis,” which was the
one to bring the news to Australia of the death of King
w illiam IV. and the accession of Queen Victoria to the
th rone. This news was signalled to the boat two or
three days after the ship left port. The family landed
in Sydney on 28th October, 1837.
Travelling from Sydney via Morpeth on one of
the Hunter River Steam Navigation Company’s boats
to M aitland, on the Hunter, Alexander McLeod
took charge of Back
Creek Station, on
the Liverpool Plains,
belonging to Alexander
(“Hoppy”) McLeod.
There he stayed about
three years and then
went to Bubbygullion
Station, on the Peel
River, belonging to
Mr. Robert Pringle
(always called “Bob-
by”), where he stayed
about twelve months,
shifting to an out-sta-
tion of Bubbygullion,
60 miles out from
Camacamool. Here he
stayed a further three
years.
In the summer of
1844 the family started
out in search of land,
having been advised by
Mr. Bracker of the
prospects in Queens-
land. They travelled
via Barraba, Bingara,
Myall Creek, Bon-
shaw, and on to At-
kin’s Flat, where they
camped, about 7
miles from Mingoola,
in the vicinity of Glen
Lyon, which place
they later took up.
In those times every-
one in the country
looked to one another
for mutual assistance,
particularly owing to the blacks, who in many cases were
very bad. Settlers when fixing on their homestead sites
did not look very much to where the best site
was, permanent water, &c., the first thought being
the nearest neighbours in case of blacks coming in
on them.
The McLeod family settled in this vicinity, whence
the father and son-in-law, William Wright, went to
search out country. They travelled by Ipswich down
on to the Clarence and Richmond Rivers, but after
some little time returned, not liking the country
for sheep, and having seen the Glen Lyon country,
decided to take this up.
In those days most employees were paid with stock,
and they were allowed to run them on their employer’s
property. In this way Alexander McLeod had accumu-
lated a fair number of sheep, horses and cattle—3ooo
sheep, 300 cattle, and 46 horses, and once settled on Glen
Lyon country these were soon brought across. The father
and older boys erected houses, yards, and other necessary
improvements, and Roderick had to mind all the stock.
While attending to this work he gradually made further
out into the country
to the north, cross-
ing the dividing hills
between Glen Lyon
and Warroo, and fol-
lowing the direct
course over the fall for
some distance.
Alexander McLeod
sent word to his late
employer, “Hoppy”
McLeod, and sug-
gested his looking up
this country, which he
eventually did. He
came to Glen Lyon,
and from there
Roderick was able to
pilot him through the
country which they
knew as the North,
Middle and South
Branch, and which is
now known as Glenelg,
Terrica, and Warroo.
They inspected this
country, but being a
very dry time on the
South and Middle
Branch, the only water
available was where
the Warroo Creek
junctioned with Tre-
verton Creek, 3 miles
from the present War-
roo homestead. North
Branch was well
watered, and “Hoppy”
McLeod decided on
this piece of country.
On returning to Glen Lyon, they mapped out the coun-
try intended to be applied for, “Hoppy” McLeod decid-
ing to have all the country on this North Branch. This
decision arrived at, he started for Cambooya, where the
land commissioner, Christopher Ralston, was living, in-
tending to select. He travelled across to Pikedale the
first day and spent that night with Fitz, the then manager
of that country, which was originally selected and held,
as already indicated, by Captain Pike. From Pikedale
he travelled to Rosenthal, where Mr. Bracker was manag-
ing. Ihe latter was thinking of seeking out country for
himself at this time, and after talking of that on the
MR. SCOTT MCLEOD’S ELDEST DAUGHTER ON HER FAVOURITE HACK
TERR I C A, 0 U EEN S LAN I)


A DRAFT OF FAT BULLOCKS READY FOR MARKET
MERINO EWES AND LAMBS


A PANORAMA OF THE HOME PADDOCKS AT TERRICA
The old homestead is on the brow of the hill to the left, and the present one among the clump
of trees on the right.
North and South Branch, he decided to go with Mr.
McLeod, and select the South Branch, which he did,
naming it Warroo. "Hoppy” McLeod returned to his
own property and brought all his son’s stock, consisting
of about 7000 sheep, about the year 1845, to Glenelg.
From there he completely failed, losing everything, and
ANOTHER PANORAMIC VIEW ON TERRICA LOOKING EASTWARD TOWARDS THE MAIN DIVIDING RANGE
TERR 1 C A, 0 UEENS L A N D


THE LATE ALEXANDER MCLEOD,
GRANDFATHER OF THE PRESENT OWNER OF TERRICA
MR. SCOTT MCLEOD
THE LATE RODERICK MCLEOD,
FATHER OF MR. SCOTT MCLEOD
RODERICK SCOTT MCLEOD,
SON OF MR. SCOTT MCLEOD
FOUR GENERATIONS OF THE MCLEOD FAMILY
T ERRI CA. OUEENSLA N D


THE COOL LOUNGE AT TERRICA
later took a position somewhere close to Sydney, where
he finished his remaining days.
Alexander McLeod remained at Glen Lyon a little
over a year, then leaving his eldest son, Donald, to look
after his interests there and to run the place in con-
junction with his son-in-law, Wright, he took the man-
agement of a place called Ena, 6 miles from Wallangra,
taken up and owned by Captain Russell. Roderick was
employed as overseer and ration carrier at £l6 per an-
num. They remained here for three years, and returned
to Glen Lyon in forty-eight. There Alexander McLeod
remained until the early fifties, when he purchased a
place, Gladfield, part of Westbrook, 9 miles from Single-
ton, at a price of £1 per acre. Alexander McLeod and
his wife spent the remainder of their days there, and after
their deaths the property was sold for
30s. per acre with improvements.
After leaving Ena, Roderick joined
his brother Angus, and hearing that the
Leslies of Canning Downs had horses
that wanted breaking-in, they went over
and applied for the job, which they re-
ceived, and were able to make money
at the rate of £7O per annum apiece.
This was good money considering that
Fitz only received £5O per annum for
managing Pikedale. This lasted about
a year, then Roderick got a job as over-
seer on M aryland Station, near Stan-
thorpe, owned by Marsh, of Salisbury,
near Armidale, under the management
of Magnus McLeod (no relation),
where he remained for about two years
at a salary of 15s. per week.
The gold rush broke out in Victoria
in the early fifties, and the three
brothers, Roderick, Angus and Kenneth,
decided to try their fortune, so went to
the Ovens, an alluvial field. They
stayed about nine months and worked
hard, but had no luck. About this time,
owing to the Russo-Turkish war, leather
for boots was scarce, and the price of
hides high, and as there were a lot of
wild unbranded cattle and bulls running
on Westbrook Roderick got permission
to shoot them. The first 200 hides
averaged 325. apiece; the next lot sold
averaged only 20s. The war had ended
and the demand for leather diminished.
Then about 1855 Roderick was offered
a position as manager for the late
Samuel Dight, of Yetman, near Inverell,
which position he held till Mr. Dight’s
son, William, became of age to take over
the management.
About 1871, Roderick, having left
Yetman, decided to take a trip to
Europe, where he spent three years. Re-
turning about the end of ’74, he pur-
chased Terrica in May ’75, and lived
there the remainder of his life, which
ended in 1924 at the age of 96.
Mr. Scott McLeod, who was born at Terrica in 1879,
and was educated at The Armidale School (N.S.W.),
enlisted in July 1915. He was seriously wounded in
France and returned to his wife and family in 1917, since
which time he has fully maintained the standards of wool
and beef production set up by his father. His wife,
whom he married in 1908, was a daughter of Mr. B.
Burt, the railway engineer, and there is a family of two
sons and three daughters. Another daughter died at
ten years of age.
Apart from his proficiency in station management, Mr.
Scott McLeod is prominent in the field of sport, his
colours being represented at the picnic race meetings,
while before the war he played polo with Inglewood and
Goondiwindi. With the rifle or gun he has few peers.
ONE OF THE MEN’S COTTAGES ON THE STATION
T ERRI CA, OU EE N S LAN D


BAROLIN, BUNDABERG, QUEENSLAND
The Property of Mr. S. N. Innes
SITUATED 11 miles east of the town of Bunda-
berg, Queensland, Barolin is an exceptionally well
improved and choice freehold property, comprising
1700 acres devoted exclusively to the breeding of stud
Hereford cattle by Mr. Sidney North Innes. Mr. Innes,
presence of an extinct volcano on the old run explains
the depth of rich soil which covers the present holding,
which is a plain flanked on one side by the Pacific Ocean,
overlooking which the owner built a large, modern home-
stead. Behind the grounds that surround the house
STUD HEREFORD COWS AND CALVES AT BAROLIN
who is recognised as one of the leading authorities of the
day on cattle in Queensland, purchased this property in
1912, it being originally the homestead block of old
Barolin Station, a run that in the early days spread over
a wide area of coastal country embracing the town of
Bundaberg, which lies 200 miles north of Brisbane, and
180 miles south of Rockhampton. This country was
taken up in the 50’s by Mr. Nugent Wade Brown, and
its name is an aboriginal term for the kangaroo, which was
in great numbers in the district for many years. Ihe
stretch most luxuriant pastures made up principally of
blue grass and herbage, under the influence of a 38 in.
rainfall, and here Mr. Innes is concentrating a lifetime
of experience, among all kinds of cattle in the develop-
ment of his stud Herefords.
Exerting as it does a big influence over this branch of
pastoral activity in New South Wales, Victoria and
locally, the cattle industry of Queensland depends for its
maintenance on men with the knowledge, patience and
enterprise to breed high class cattle suited to the needs


THREE HEREFORD
BULL CALVES SIX TO
EIGHT MONTHS OLD
FOREST KING, THE HEAD OF THE BAROLIN HEREFORD STUD
BAROLI N, Q UEENS L A N I)


THE HOMESTEAD AT BAROLIN
of herdmasters, and the Bardin stud offers a good example
in this respect. Mr. Innes commenced breeding the pre-
sent stud herd in 1925, and despite the trying times
through which the cattle industry has struggled during
the last decade, when cattle men generally have had to
live upon their capital, he has spared no expense in pro-
viding the females with the very purest breeding in sires
that it has been possible to obtain for his purpose.
Before entering the ranks of stud breeders Mr. Innes
used Bardin for fattening big stock in conjunction with
his Walla and Takilberan Stations, the former run being
located on the high banks of the Burnett River, 53 miles
from Bardin. It has a frontage of ten miles to the
river, and is all improved, well grassed, and valuable
cattle country, carrying at the present time over 3000
head. Walla has been in the possession of Mr. Innes
since 1905, and besides serving as a flood warning station
for the town of Bundaberg near the the mouth of the river,
LOOKING SOUTH FROM BAROLIN HOMESTEAD VERANDAH ON TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN
BA R 0 LIN, Q UEENS L A N I)


GROUP OF HERD BULLS AT WALLA
STUD HEREFORD COWS AT BAROLIN ALL PRIZE WINNERS AT SYDNEY OR BRISBANE
GROUP OF STUD BULL CALVES, 6 TO 8 MONTHS OLD, AT BAROLIN
BAROLI X, OUEEX S L A X D


1. COWS AND CALVES ON A PERMANENT WATER HOLE, BAROLIN. 2. GOLF HILL ROYAL ENSIGN,
BY ROYAL RINGER. 3. HERD CATTLE AT WALLA
BA RO LIN, OU EE N S LAN D


STUD COWS AND CALVES GRAZING IN ONE OF THE PADDOCKS AT BAROLIN
has a distinct feature in a splendid set of cattle drafting
yards which, built many years ago, express a quality of
wonderful workmanship, considered in fact to be amongst
the finest examples of yards in Queensland. The stock
turned off Walla are noted for their excellence, and as a
herd were kept together under a policy of careful man-
agement when others languished through the dull market
conditions of the past few years.
Takilberan, which comprised 16,000 acres freehold, and
was sold in 1926 to Mr. E. J. Shaw, and Tenningering,
another property owned by Mr. Innes and used for breed-
ing, and also since disposed of, were the other runs from
which cattle were drawn and topped off at Barolin. With
only the latter place and Walla to look after, the owner
formed the stud herd as a profitable hobby, but on the
principle that a thing worth doing is worth doing well.
The Hereford was his favourite breed, and accordingly
the foundation of the stud herd was laid with selected
pedigreed Hereford heifers, the source whence they were
chosen being the Duninald and McConnel’s Cressbrook
stud. The Holmwood herd of Mr. A. J. Turner,
descended from Reynolds and Loder cows, was drawn
upon also, and to a choice collection of purebred females,
which trace in absolute purity of blood to the best known
strains of the breed in Australia, being descended from
pedigreed cows bred by the well known breeders, Rey-
nolds, Loder and McConnel, Mr. Innes has made a prac-
tice of adding prize winning heifers and cows every year
from the Royal Shows at Sydney and Brisbane. Out-
standing among these were Lioness, with which Mr.
Innes secured the reserve championship at Brisbane in
1926; Grand Duchess, a matron of high merit, who se-
cured ribbons at four successive Sydney Royal Shows;
Juliet of Golf Hill, first prize winner at Sydney in the
under 12 months class, and also first prize winner at
Brisbane in 1928 in the under 18 months class; Tocal
Laura, and many others, the famous Tocal and Duninald
blood therefore being strongly manifested.
The Barolin stud herd to-day numbers between 100
and 120 registered Hereford stud cows, and a number of
other good wellbred females, in which Golf Hill and
Tocal blood is heavily infused.
The high quality of stud and herd bulls and paddock-
reared stud heifers that are disposed of regularly from
BARO LI N, 0 UEE N S LAN D


Barolin have brought Mr. Innes into prominence among
exponents of the Hereford, but the stud definitely estab-
lished its superiority at the Brisbane Royal Show in 1929
by annexing the male championship with its leading stud
sire h orest King (A 1494). This magnificent bull was
also first and champion at the Brisbane Show in 1928,
and first and champion at Sydney Royal 1929, when he
was purchased by Mr. Innes.
Ihe supremacy of the Barolin stock was enhanced
further at the sales which
followed the 1929 show at
Brisbane, when the owner
secured the highest price for
young Hereford bulls,
namely, 210 guineas.
The sires in use at the
present time, 1930, include
Hobartville Persistent Lad,
by the imported sire Eyton
Conqueror, one of the most
successful imported sires of
his day; Tocal Monitor, by
Twyford Hero, who was
champion at Sydney for six
years, and retired to the stud
unbeaten; Golf Hill Royal
Ensign, by Royal Ringer, for
w hich M rs. Biddlecombe
paid 1050 guineas in 1926,
and with which she won the
championship in Melbourne;
and Forest King. The last
named is the head of the
Barolin stud, though he is
closely contested for the
honour by Royal Ensign.
One of the features that
must appeal very strongly to
herd masters in Queensland
who desire to infuse the best
available Hereford blood into
their stock is that the
Barolin stud cattle are bred on coastal country that is
more or less heavily infested with tick, and therefore their
immunity from infestation in this direction is as positive
as it is possible for them to be. Mr. Innes has bestowed
inhnite care and trouble to bring his cattle up to a high
standard. Already noted for its proved adaptability to
all conditions, the quality of its flesh, and the economy of
its production, the Piereford enjoys an increasing popu-
larity. Early maturity, constitution, vigour, thriftiness,
ability to put on flesh of prime quality, these and other
THE PACIFIC OCEAN BEATING ON THE COAST
OVERLOOKED FROM BAROLIN HOMESTEAD
factors are principles which govern the policy of breeding
at Barolin, where the owner breeds with an eye for the
modern, low set, deep bodied, lengthy type, possessing a
broad level back, depth of heart and lung capacity, com-
pactness of build, and the most desirable characteristics
in the set of head and tail, spring of barrel, thickness of
thigh, &c., whilst all the time striving to eliminate ob-
jectionable features, such as commonness, bad colours,
weak vitality, &c.
There is plenty of evidence
that the owner of Barolin
is established on the right
path to success, and is deter-
mined to stay there. His long
experience has taught him
that the surest way to reach
uniformity in beef animal
production is through correct
selection and mating, sus-
tained by the use of good
herd matrons and good herd
sires. Not only have his stock
commanded the admiration
of breeders of registered
Hereford cattle and pro-
ducers of quality commercial
beef, wherever and whenever
they have been exposed for
sale, but in his enthusiasm
to reach as near to perfection
as practicable, Mr. Innes has
shown himself to be one of
the strongest supporters of
the Australian Hereford So-
ciety, which is doing good in
its efforts to rebuild the
country’s beef cattle trade.
As these lines are being
written, Mr. Innes has a
consignment of cattle on the
water purchased in England.
These were carefully selected
for him by the well-known judge, Mr. Richard Bach,
and they consist of a young bull and two heifers. The
bull, Condover Conquest, was bred by Mr. J. C. Brook-
held, of Condover Grange, and won hrst as a calf. He
is by Priory Resolute, who won hrst at Shrewsbury, and
who is by the champion bull, Resolute, sold for 8000
guineas. Mr. Bach writes that it is said Condover Con-
quest is \ ciy like what his grandsire, Resolute, was at
his age. The two heifers, Louise Vern 4th and Oyster
Giil were bred by Captain R. S. de Quincey, of the
BARO L 1 N t QUE E N SEAN D


THE BANK OF THE BURNETT RIVER AT WALLA STATION
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE BEAUTIFUL BURNETT AS SEEN FROM WALLA HOMESTEAD VERANDAH
BA R O LIN, QUEEN S L A N D


THE HOMESTEAD AT WALLA, SOME 50 MILES UP THE BURNETT FROM BAROLIN
Vern, and both of them trace back to champions in all
the outlines. This shipment should make a valuable
addition to the high class Barolin stud, and mated with
bulls of Forest King’s, Royal Ensign’s, and Condover
Conquest’s stamp, the Barolin cows should produce stock
second to none in the Commonwealth.
A list of the awards gained at the last (1929) Brisbane
Royal National Show by exhibits from the Barolin stud
herd is as follows: —
Bull, 4 years and over, third prize, Tocal Gladstone
(A 1407), by Twyford Statesman (E 43241), dam
Fancy (348, A.S.), bred by Estate F. Reynolds, Paterson,
N.S.W.
Bull, 3 years and under 4, first prize, Hobartville
Forest King, by Royal Renown (A 1394), dam Minerva
(A 3806), bred by P. Reynolds, Hobartville.
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE OLD-TIME HOMESTEAD AT WALLA
BA RO LIN. QUEENSLAND


THE BILLIARD ROOM
WITH STAIRCASE
AND GALLERY
A SECTION OF THE
DRAWING ROOM
INTERIOR VIEWS OF STANDISH, THE RESIDENCE OF MR. S. N. INNES, ON LANE
COVE, SYDNEY.
BAROLI N, 0 U E ENS LAN I)


MR. S. N. INNES
Bull, 18 months and under 2 years, second prize, Golf
Hill Royal Ensign (A 1585), by Hobartville Royal
Ringer (A 1413), dam Golf Hill Pearly Gate 2nd (A
3560), bred at Golf Hill, Victoria.
Bull, 12 months and under 18 months, third prize, Golf
Hill Viscount (A 1690), by Tocal Tewkesbury (A
1351), dam Golf Hill Juliet 19th (A 3448), bred at
Golf Hill. Th is exhibit was a soft-coated bull of great
attraction and girth, and wonderful quality, and was
sold after the show for the highest price at the sales, as
already indicated.
In the class for group of three bulls, 12 months and
under three years, the Barolin stud secured second place,
and third in the cow or heifer class 2 years and under
3 years.
In the section for heifers 12 months and under 18
months, second prize was won with Myall Fussy Lady,
by Myall Sensation (A 1427), dam Myall Heroine, bred
at Myall Creek, Singleton, N.S.W.
It has been a creditable achievement to advance so
rapidly into the front rank of stud breeders, and there
is every prospect of a successful future ahead of the
Barolin Herefords, if the excellence of the young stock
now coming along is an indication, apart from the suc-
cess won already.
Mr. Sidney North Innes was born at Banbury, Oxford-
shire, England, in 1864, and was the third son of the
late Mr. James Innes, an estate agent with large interests
in Oxfordshire. Educated at the High School, Edin-
burgh, he was 16 years of age when he and his elder
brother arrived in Australia in 1880. 1 he remaining
brother, John Robert Innes, stayed at Oxford and be-
came a barrister-at-law, and in 1900 was appointed a
judge of the Malay Straits Settlements Court, subse-
quently being elevated to a Chief Justiceship.
M essrs. S. N. and James Spencer Innes commenced
their pastoral life at their uncle’s, Mr. William Spencer’s
property, Ironbark Station, near Barraba, on the Liver-
pool Plains, N.S.W., after they had made a trip to
Queensland, but within two years James met with a
fatal accident. Two years later Mr. S. N. Innes took
up surveying under Mr. Stewart Russell, and eventually
practised this profession in the Moreton Bay district. He
forsook surveying in 1895 to enter into partnership with
the late Mr. T. A. Perry in the purchase of Cresswell
Downs, a cattle run of 2000 miles in the Northern Terri-
tory, and a photograph taken in January 1895 is repro-
MESSRS. T. A. PERRY AND S. N. INNES WHEN ON
CRESSWELL DOWNS IN 1895, WITH THEIR NATIVE
SERVANT "BANJO." MR. INNES IS ON THE RIGHT.
BA RO LIN, QUEENSLAND


duced herewith showing these two partners with their
native servant “Banjo.” It was not long afterwards that
Mr. Perry was murdered by the blacks who were em-
ployed on the station.
The loss of his brother, and then of his partner, were
grave setbacks to Mr. Innes, who for the next several
years carried on Cresswell
Downs on his own, droving
cattle frequently for hundreds
of miles to market, in com-
mon with the general experi-
ence of cattle men outback
in those days. One of the
trips Mr. Innes recalls was
the pursuit of a buyer of a
large mob of heifers for over
a thousand miles. The che-
que with which the cattle
were paid for was a dummy,
and it was only when Hall’s
Creek was in sight that the
buyer was overtaken and the
matter straightened out with
no little trouble.
The drought of the early
1900’s depleted the Cresswell
Downs herd, and in 1904 the
owner completed the sale of
what were left, about 3000
head, and returned home
after an absence of 25 years.
His journey from the sta-
tion is worth recording, as
a contrast to the facilities of
the present day. To Cloncurry, 550 miles, the stage
was accomplished with pack horse, thence by the famous
Cobb and Co.’s coach to Longreach via Winton, a dis-
tance of 400 miles, and from there by rail to Rockhamp-
ton, Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide, embark-
ing at the latter port.
Mr. Innes returned in 1905, sold Cresswell Downs
and its well-known brand, and purchased Walla and
Tenningering Stations from Mr. Tidswell, together with
3500 head of cattle. He made his home at Walla. In
1910 Takilberan was acquired from Mr. Capper, of
Maitland, N.S.W., and two years later Mr. Innes
made his permanent home at
Barolin.
When in England in 1904
he married Caroline Noble,
daughter of Mr. W. A.
Noble, of Toowoomba,
Queensland, and there is a
family of three sons and one
daughter.
No welfare movement of
importance in the Bunda-
berg district lacks the open-
handed support of Mr. Innes,
who was a member of the
Kolan Shire Council for
many years, and president of
the Gin Gin Pastoral and
Agricultural Society, besides
having held a similar posi-
tion on the local Gin Gin
Hospital Board ever since the
inception of that institution.
At Sydney, where at one
time Mr. I nnes intended to
settle down for the purpose
of educating his family, he is
the owner of a fine old resi-
dence, Standish, which occu-
pies ten acres on Lane Cove. He has all the interests
of the cattle industry at heart in the development of the
Barolin stud Herefords, and, indeed, it is to such men
of practical experience and far-sightedness that the in-
dustry looks in the critical periods of its existence for
encouragement and improvement.
MR. AND MRS. S. N. INNES IN THE GARDEN AT STANDISH
B A RO LIN, QUEENS LAN D


ROMA DOWNS, ROMA, QUEENSLAND
The Property of R. S. and E. Q. McGeoch
WERIBONE, SURAT, QUEENSLAND
The Property of Weribone Studs Limited
ROMA DOWNS homestead is six miles south-east
of Roma, which is a large town and important
railway centre, 318 miles from Brisbane, on the
main western railway system of southern Queensland.
Blythedale Siding is within a quarter of a mile of the
boundary towards the north-eastern end of the run. The
and Frank Badgery in 1884. In 1892 they disposed of
the property to Mr. Charles Southcote King, for whom
Mr. H arry Pockley managed for some years. After Mr.
King’s death in 1924, the property was acquired from his
estate by Mr. Robert Stewart McGeoch and his wife,
Eileen Queenie McGeoch, who entered into possession
ROMA DOWNS HOMESTEAD
property lies just to the south of the main line, and
abuts on the south-eastern boundary of the municipality
of Roma.
Originally Roma Downs formed part of Blythedale
Station, the pre-emptive right of which was taken out
by a Mr. Brown in the sixties. For many years it was
a cattle run, but eventually sheep were depastured, and
it has now been in sheep for half a century or more. In
the eighties Blythedale was purchased by a Mr. Scott,
who sold out the Roma Downs portion to Messrs. Charles
on the 30th June, 1925. The business in connection
with the property is carried on under the firm name of
R. S. and E. Q. McGeoch.
The homestead is 1065 ft. above sea level on an upland
that gives a sweeping view of the rolling downs. To
the east the Blythe meanders on its journey to the south;
to the west the Bungil bounds the property, whilst Bas-
sett’s Mountain is limned on the northern skyline.
The homestead is built of wood, being well and con-
veniently laid out, containing spacious but comfortable


rooms with extensive gauzed-in
verandahs. Without, the amenities
are a well tended rose garden, with
fine tennis court, and within, a
treasured collection of paintings by
leading Australian artists beautifies
the home, and an extensive and valu-
able library of philosophy, science,
travel, and general literature, as well
as rare "belles lettres,” lends grace
and charm.
Roma Downs is a freehold pro-
perty with an area of 23,213 acres.
M uch of the land in its natural state
was heavily timbered, but it has been
ringbarked and is now cleaned up.
About a third is typical southern
Queensland downs country; another
third is open improved timber-lands
with a heavy grey clay soil, and the
remaining part is rich loamy to
sandy soil, with frontages to the
Blythe and Bungil Creeks. This
nicely balanced run responds in some
part or other, whatever time of the year rains may
come.
I he records for fifty-two years show the rainfall to
average twenty-four inches per annum. The monsoonal
type of rainfall predominates, but winter rains are more
or less generally experienced. The former suit the Mit-
chell, Blue and F linders grasses, which form the greater
part of the pasture, but there are also numerous varieties
of winter and spring grasses. In favouring seasons there
is a wealth of herbage growth, including crowfoot, tre-
foil. carrot and geranium.
The climate is equable, and although heavy frosts are
sometimes experienced in winter, bright and sunny are
THE ROMA DOWNS DRAWING ROOM
the days. It is seldom very hot in summer, and prac-
tically without exception cool nights are experienced.
Box, carbeen, sandalwood, myall, wilga and gum lend
attraction to the landscape and give shade and shelter for
stock. The country is abundantly watered by an artesian
bore at the homestead (with a daily flow of 40,000 gal-
lons), two sub-artesian bores, several permanent water-
holes in Blythe and Bungil Creeks, an overshot dam on
Blythe Creek, and some twenty-three tanks and dams
of 1000 to 7000 yards capacity.
Subdivision into forty paddocks facilitates efficient
stocking in rotation and gives a maximum carrying capa-
city.
A CORNER OF THE GARDEN AND TENNIS COURT AT ROMA DOWNS
R 0 M A DOWN S AND WE RIB ON E, OUEENS LA N D


A TREE STUDY ON
THE FARM LAGOON,
ROMA DOWNS
Belo w-
A LAGOON ON
THE FARM AREA
RO M A DOWN S AND WE RIBO N K, QUE K N SEAN D


FIELD TRIALS OF "sOUTTER” WHEAT ON ROMA DOWNS
Mr. McGeoch believes that farming can advan-
tageously go hand in hand with grazing pursuits. Mr.
A. R. Soutter, the manager of Bungeworgorai State
Farm, near Roma, who is a noted plant and wheat ex-
perimentalist, has developed a number of remarkable
strains of wheat, and Mr. McGeoch has assisted him
by placing many of these under field trials on Roma
Downs. Results are most encouraging and eventually
promise to be of great national benefit to the wheat-
growing districts not only of Queensland, but of Aus-
tralia. Watchman, Bunge, Novo, Three C’s, Amby,
Flora, are outstanding drought and disease resistant varie-
ties of wheat, bred by Mr. Soutter, that have been suc-
cessfully and extensively grown at the State Farm and
elsewhere in Queensland.
Dry farming is practised at Roma Downs under up-to-
date methods and with modern machinery. To suit local
conditions ploughing for fallow is carried out in Septem-
ber or October and followed by har-
rowing or scarifying during the en-
suing months after each rain, so that
the soil is kept in tilth and never
allowed to set. Sowing is carried out
at the end of April and during May.
Lucerne is also extensively grown
on the ordinary wheat lands with con-
siderable success. April is found the
best time to sow on a well-prepared
seed bed. A light seeding, of not
more than two lbs. per acre, gives the
best results. The lucerne stand is
stocked very heavily with sheep only,
but in no circumstances for more
than a few days at a time. Nor-
mally, in this way, is carried an aver-
age of three sheep per acre, and a cut
of a half ton of hay per acre per year
is obtained.
The chief objective of the farm
operations is to grow wheaten and
lucerne hay for fodder conservation
for the stud stock during recurring drought periods, and
to afford the supplementary green ration necessary for stud
sheep. The property is a most convenient depot for stud
and flock rams from Weribone that are to be railed from
Roma.
WERIBONE
Weribone Station is situated to the south-west of
Surat, the homestead being eighteen miles out of that
township, just off the main road to St. George. It is
67 miles from the homestead to the nearest railway
station, \ eulba, and 70 miles to Roma. Weribone and
Roma Downs homesteads are 65 miles apart.
The run was taken up in the fifties by Mr. David
Duncombe and a Mr. Hall, being part of the first lands
settled in the Maranoa district. In those early days it
was a cattle run extending from Surat to the New South
Wales border, including Noorindoo, and all of the Noon-
LUCERNE FIELDS AT ROMA DOWNS
R 0 M A 1) OWN S AN D WE RIBO N E, OUEEN S E A N D


doo group of stations along the Condamine, Balonne,
and M oonie Rivers, right down to the Barwon.
Changing hands at various times, it was eventually
held by Goldsbrough, Mort and Co. Limited for over
twenty years, and was sold by them in 1923 to Messrs.
Field and Vickery, who disposed of it to Mr. W. J.
Lloyd early in 1925. In August, 1927, Mr. Robert S.
McGeoch and his wife acquired the property from Mr.
Lloyd, and a private company under the style of Weri-
bone Studs Limited now carries on the Merino stud and
station business there.
The homestead, large and comfortable, is equipped
with electric light, and water is laid on throughout, also
to the gardens. The flower garden is an exceptionally
fine one with delightful lawns, and in addition there is
that practical adjunct, a most serviceable vegetable
garden.
Nearby, the overshot dam on the Youngerman Creek
provides a beautiful stretch of water, which is fringed
with stately gums and graceful willows, whilst providing
a copious supply to the homestead paddocks and for all
domestic purposes.
Weribone comprises 19,716 acres freehold lands and
36,640 of pastoral lease. It is intersected by a tributary
of the Darling, the Balonne River, on which there are
two magnificent reaches that never fail the station even
ON THE YOUNGERMAN
CREEK, A BEAUTIFUL STRETCH
OF WATER ON WERIBONE
in the driest season, and provide splendid fishing. The
Muckadilla Creek flows through the property also, and
has its confluence with the Balonne about the centre of
the run. The Little Mucca Creek and the Youngerman
Creek also run through Weribone, and there are numer-
ous “gundies,” so that the greater part of the property
is served with natural waters. There are, however,
four sub-artesian bores and a number of large tanks, thus
the whole run is excellently watered.
The records for the station and district show the rain-
fall to average 22 ins. per annum. Summer and winter
rains are experienced, but the former give the greater
portion of the annual precipitation.
The run is remarkable for its variety of soils and con-
sequent diversity of pasture. Large box and gum flats
extend over what is known as the “homestead section” or
the “river country.” Then on the “Mucca” portion there
is the large open Mitchell grass plain, which runs off into
red timbered country, with wilga, currajong, sandalwood,
belah, box and some pine. On the Mt. Weribone section
there is magnificent myall, bottle tree, and sandalwood
country, with a wealth of native saltbushes, admirably
adapted for producing outstanding frame and constitution
in the stud sheep depastured thereon.
There are valuable belts of the edible bauhinia tree
near the wool shed and on part of Mt. Weribone section.
R 0 M A 1) OWN S AN I) WERIB 0 N E, OUEENS L A N J)


A VIEW OF WERIBONE HOMESTEAD AND GARDEN
These, unique amongst Australian trees, shed their leaves
completely, usually in the summer months, and some-
times twice within a three or four month period, de-
pending on seasonal conditions.
There is a profuse admixture of grasses, including Mit-
chell, Blue and Flinders, which are typical of Queensland,
together with the Danthonia and Panic families met with
in New South Wales, also many other winter and spring
grasses. Flerbage flourishes in the winter months, com-
prising trefoil, crowsfoot, wild carrot, geranium, and
numerous other fattening varieties that have made Weri-
bone famed for its rich pasturage, so that it is one of
the best known properties in Queensland.
Competent authorities have adjudged it one of the
finest areas of stud sheep-producing country to be found
so far north in Australia.
Since its purchase by the present owner in 1927 the
number of paddocks has been doubled, and the property
is now most conveniently divided. There is an up-to-
date woolshed built in 1925 and situated two miles from
the homestead. The appointments include twelve stands
of Wol seley shearing machinery and a Super-Diesel
Crossley engine. The men’s quarters are complete in
every detail. At the shed is an excellent set of sheep
yards with a first class long-swim sheep dip.
Phenomenal lambings have been obtained on Weribone,
110 per cent, being returned on one occasion. The clip
is a feature of the Brisbane sales, and is usually well up
on the list of prices, but it is in return per head that
the flock has its greatest achievement.
The Weribone Stud
The Merino stud was commenced at Roma Downs in
1925, but Weribone was purchased for the express pur-
pose of embarking on an enlarged stud undertaking. The
stud was transferred thither in 1927, and its inaugura-
tion marked the most important introduction of stud
Merino sheep ever made into Queensland, involving an
outlay of more than £40,000. The dominating prin-
ciple that held sway in the founding of the stud was the
ideal of purity of blood and line breeding, thereby en-
suring the production of a superior class of ram of a fixed
type, year in and year out. Great as this influence
undoubtedly is, a most careful policy of classing to type
MYALL AND SALTBUSH ON MT. WERIBONE COUNTRY
R 0 M A I) OWN S AN I) WE RIBO N E, OUEENS E A N I)


IMPERATOR 4.3
Special Austin Wanganella Stud Rani by 9.1.
Purchased for the Weribone Stud in 1926 for 1600 guineas
THREE STUD WORKERS
ROMA DOWNS AND JFK RIB ONE, QUEENSLAND


STUD RAMS BRED ON WERIBONE
and the elimination of fault is adhered to.
Mr. McGeoch gave careful thought to the type of
sheep to be bred, and decided to develop sheep of the
greatest stamina with outstanding character in covering
as well as the propensity for cutting big fleeces, thus pro-
viding rams to improve and maintain the flocks of the
State.
Fortunately, the Weribone stud has been established
on an excellent basis by securing a definite unbroken line
of descent from the original Peppin flock formed in 1861
at Wanganella. It will be remembered that the Austins
transferred some of the best of their sheep to Murgha,
which became a very eminent stud before its dispersal in
1921. When this stud was sold many of its top stud ewes
and rams were bought by Carwell an d M unnell studs, in
which they were kept pure to that strain.
Weribone stud is under the supervision of, and is
classed by, Mr. H. Frank Pennefather. His expert
knowledge and advice during his half-yearly visits is
thus available and assists to secure the best possible man-
agement within the stud.
The foundation ewes were purchased from the Carwell
stud flock in August 1925, and comprised 70 extra special
stud ewes, 100 special stud ewes, and 80 special stud
TWO-TOOTH FLOCK RAMS ON MT. WERIBONE
RO M A 1) OWN S AN I) WE RIBO N E, QUEEN S L A N D


THE MATRONS OF THE STUD
ewes, being all selected from either special Murgha ewes
or their progeny. These latter were bought or bred
by Carwell Studs Limited, of Coonamble, New South
Wales, between the years 1921 and 1923, and were by
Murgha or Austin Wanganella special stud rams. 100
special stud ewe lambs running with the extra and special
A FLOCK OF RAM BREEDERS
RO M A I) () WN S AN I) JFK RIBO N E, OUEENS L A N I)


EILEEN Q. MCGEOCH
stud ewes and 100 first double stud ewes were
selected and also bought. This first purchase ran
into a matter of 8000 guineas.
In 1926 the whole of the balance of the Carwell
stud flock was purchased, namely, 1166 stud ewes
with 811 lambs and 490 stud ewe weaners, and in
1928 641 special stud ewes with lambs and 268
two-year-old stud ewes, thus making a total of 3791
stud ewes of pure Peppin blood of the one direct
line of breeding.
In 1925 twenty special stud rams, including three
extra special stud rams, were purchased from Car-
well with the first lot of stud ewes.
In 1926 a further twenty-four special stud rams
were bought from Carwell with the remainder of
the stud.
In the same year the ram No. 4.3 was purchased
from Austin Wanganella stud for service with the
top stud ewes. This ram, which has been named
Imperator, cost 1600 guineas, being the highest priced
ram sold out of that flock in 1926. 5000 guineas was
paid for his celebrated sire 9.1. Imperator has magnifi-
cent qualities and has left his imprint upon the Weribone
stud in the same manner as his illustrious progenitor
(Emperor) did in making history for Wan-
ganella.
In 1927 ten pure Peppin sires were acquired
at the Sydney ram sales as stud workers.
In 1928 twelve tw r o-year-old special stud rams
and the whole of their stud drop of ram weaners,
namely, 627, were purchased from the Munnell
stud.
The objective is to maintain a breeding
strength of about 4000 stud ewes, so that the out-
put may be about 1000 stud and flock rams an-
nually. The stud has progressed rapidly, and
is now in the front rank in Queensland. Grati-
fying results have been achieved in making sales
of large drafts of rams throughout Queensland,
and this year a line of 240 was sent back to the
Mother State.
A feature of the sales policy is to offer to class
the flock ewes of any buyers of rams, to mate
the rams purchased for two or three generations,
ROBERT S. MCGEOCH
and to give practical advice on any problems confronting
the buyer in his flock.
R 0 M A DOWN S AN D WE RIBO N E, OUEENS L A N I)


THE LATE ROBERT MCGEOCH
There have been no purchases of any rams since 1928,
as the stud is now fully self-contained in respect of all
units necessary for its breeding requirements, including
that of the replacement of the top sires, there being at
present four or five co-equal leading sires.
Personal
Mr. Robert Stewart McGeoch is a son of the late
Robert McGeoch, who was born at Isleworth, London,
ROBERT TYNDALE MCGEOCH
MRS. MARION T. MCGEOCH
in 1849, and came to Australia with his parents in 1857.
The family became settlers at Brown’s Plains, in the
Rutherglen district of Victoria, after the days of the
Chiltern Valley gold rush. In the seventies, the late
Robert McGeoch, with his brothers James, Walter, and
Albert, crossed over the Murray and took up land in
Riverina. He was one of the first to take up land under
the Robertson Act in the Corowa district, selecting part
of Kilnyana run, near Mulwala.
BETH MCGEOCH
ROMA DOWNS AND WE RIB ONE, QUEENSLAND


THE WERIBONE WOOLSHED
AND SHEEP YARDS SHADED
BY BAUHINIA TREES
In 1884 he returned to Scotland and married Miss
Marion Thompson, of Stranraer, coming hack to Aus-
tralia the following year. Their children were May
(who died as an infant), Robert Stewart, Marion,
Samuel (who died in 1925), and Margaret.
Eventually the late Mr. McGeoch acquired his
brothers’ blocks, putting together the West Kilnyana
holding, and for very many years carried on business
under the trade name of McGeoch Bros. He en-
countered all the vicissitudes of the arduous pioneering
days, but achieved well merited success, due to his stead-
fast and sterling qualities of character. In 1924 he sold
out and retired to Sydney, where he died in 1927 in his
seventy-ninth year.
Born at West Kilnyana in 1887, Mr. R. S. McGeoch
was educated there by private tutor, and later at Stran-
raer High School, Stranraer, Scotland, where his grand-
father, James McGeoch, was born. Subsequently he
entered Wesley College, Melbourne, which he left at
the end of 1904. In 1905 his career “on the land’’
began at West Kilnyana, and in 1907 he took over the
management of his father’s property, Gerogery West,
near Albury, later entering into partnership with him in
that place until it was disposed of in 1914. In 1910
Thule, in 1911 Keewong, and in 1912 Wirlong stations
were purchased by him and his father, these properties
being situated in the Cobar district, western division of
New South Wales.
In 1915 Mr. R. S. McGeoch married Eileen Queenie
Stubbs, daughter of Mr. Tyndale Stubbs, of Sydney and
Yass, and in the same year his father and he acquired
Coan Downs Station, where he went to live. Mr. R. S.
McGeoch formed the properties into three private com-
panies, in which the interests were preserved,
namely, Coan Downs Pastoral Company Limited, Kee-
wong Pastoral Company Limited, and Wirlong Pastoral
Company Limited. He became managing director of
each of these companies, managed the stations, and re-
sided at Coan Downs for ten years until they were dis-
posed of in 1924 and 1925.
Their family consists of one son, Robert Tyndale
McGeoch, who has entered The King’s School, Parra-
matta, New South Wales, and Eileen Beth McGeoch,
who is at Frensham, Mittagong, New South Wales.
Mr. McGeoch has given deep study to the scientific
principles of agriculture, sheep-husbandry, and stud-breed-
ing, and his very extensive practical experience has re-
sulted in a wide knowledge of pastoral affairs under vary-
ing Australian conditions. He takes a keen interest in
all matters relating to public and national affairs. He
is vice-president of the Maranoa Graziers’ Association,
and is on the executive of the United Graziers’ Associa-
tion of Queensland. He is a member of the Federal
Graziers’ Council, and also a member of the Australian
Woolgrowers’ Council.
In 1930 he originated a comprehensive scheme for
wool stabilisation, and in 1931 attended the Empire Wool
Conference held in Melbourne, and presented his paper
on “Imperial Economic Unity and Wool Production.”
He was president of the Roma District Hospital for two
years, and takes an active interest in the affairs of the
districts in which his properties are situated.
Mrs. McGeoch is a vice-president of the Country
Women’s Association of West Queensland, president of
the Roma branch of the Girl Guides, and an enthusiastic
worker for all local welfare movements.
RO M A DOWN S AN D WE RIB ONE, QUEENS LA N 1)












