

PASTORAL ADDRESS
TO THE
MEMBERS AND ADHERENTS
OF THE
pmbgtepn (|)nn|dj of Heir J&mtjf IS alp.
Dearly Beloved Brethren in the Lord :
During the Session of the General Assembly in October last, one day was set apart for a
conference of the ministers and elders present on the state of Religion. There was a full expression of
opinion, and much brotherly intercourse, on this all important subject. A feeling of solemnity pervaded
the whole assembly, and all felt that the time, so spent, was a season of refreshing from the presence of
the Lord.
Deeply deploring the low state of vital Godliness amongst us, and fervently desirous of promot-
ing the cause of pure and undefiled Religion throughout the land, we have thought it meet, in order to
stir up your minds to devout thought and earnest prayer on these, things, to address to you a few words
of exhortation in the form of a pastoral letter.
It must be confessed with deep sorrow of heart, that Religion seems to be in a languishing con-
dition throughout the colony generally, as well as in our own Church. Iniquity abounds,
and the love of many waxeth cold. Intemperance, with all its attendant evils, licentiousness,
and fraudulent transactions, are fearfully prevalent. The Sabbath is openly profaned, both
by public companies and private individuals. The ordinances of public worship are despised by not
a few, and neglected by multidudes. To such may be applied the language of the Apostle of the
Gentiles : “ For many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are
the enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory is in
their shame, who mind earthly things.”
It is to be feared that many of the rising generation are growing up in ignorance of the way of
salvation, and, instead of being trained to the regular observance of religious duties, live in the habitual
neglect of the same. Even of many of those whose lives are irreproachable in the eyes of the world, and
who possess the form of godliness, may it not be said, that they are destitute of its power ? Prayer is
offered up, and the public ordinances are attended, more from habit, than from an inward experience
of their preciousness. How seldom are the hearts of ministers cheered by the visits of those in distress
about their souls, and anxious for salvation ! How very few are they of whom the earnest pastor or
teacher can say : “ These are the children whom God hath given us! ”
Surely the contemplation of such a state of things is sufficient to humble us to the very dust be-
fore God; and to give rise to great searchings of heart on the part of the members and
adherents of the Church throughout the land. We ought to imitate the conduct of the people
of Nineveh under the preaching of Jonah “ When they believed God, and proclaimed a fast.
But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: “Yea let them turn every


one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands. Who can tell if God will turn and
repent, and turn away from his fierce anger that we perish not?” (Jonah, iii. 5,8, 9)—“ And I will
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplica-
tions : and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one
mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for his first-born. . . . And the land shall
mourn every family apart.” (Zechar. xii. 10.)
We would solemnly admonish every one of you, dear brethren, over whose souls we watch as
they who have to give an account, to ask yourselves the question : Am lon the Lord’s side ? Have I
really believed in Jesus Christ? Do I now enjoy the peace of God that passeth all understanding?
Have I experienced that change without which I cannot enter the kingdom of heaven? A question of a
moie momentous character could not be entertained by the human mind. If every individual and every
family in all the congregations of the Church in town and country, were duly pondering it as we are now
entering upon a new year, this would form a memorable era in our Church’s history. Let every one
ijow lesolve to cany out, by God s grace, the resolution of Joshua “as for me and my house, we will
serve the Lord.”
Having once entered the service of Christ, it becomes us to be diligent workers in the Lord’s
vineyard. By every motive that most powerfully influences the human mind, we ought to be stimulated
to greater zeal for the glory ot God, and for the salvation of souls. Gratitude to Jesus for the inestimable
blessings of pardon, regeneration, and peace which he has bestowed upon us, and compassion towards
those still under the wrath and curse of God, ought to urge us to greater diligence in Christian effort.
Accordingly the Apostle thus exhorts the Christians at Home : “I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of
God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
service.”
You have been already urged to put to yourselves the important question, am I in Christ? We
now press upon jour attention another of equal importance, what am I doing for Christ? It is one of the
first impulses of the renewed life that we endeavour to lead other's, especially those nearest and dearest
unto us, to him from whom we have received the forgiveness of sins ; and where there is entire absence
of such efforts for the good of others, we have reason to question -whether Christ has been received.
True Christian charity that deplores the sorrows of the soul as well as the sufferings of the body, begins at
home, but does not end there. It leads him in whose heart it fervently burns, to use all lawful means to
deliver others it may be a son or a daughter, a friend or a neighbour—from that state of sin and misery
into which we have all fallen.
Let prayer without ceasing be made in all Christian families for the unconverted of their own
number ; and for all in your respective communities -who are without God and without hope. Pray for a
thorough reformation of life, and for the revival of pure and undefiled religion. This -work should begin
in our Christian households, and from thence spread throughout all our congregations. It is one in which
all classes can, and ought, to engage. The poorest and most illiterate, as well as the wealthiest and most
learned, can wrestle with their heavenly father, in behalf of their unconverted friends and relatives, neigh-
bours and fellow-worshippers.
Active effort must be combined with earnest prayer. We must speak to men about themselves,
as well as speak to God in their behalf; and where there is a sincere desire to do good, suitable oppor-
tunities of doing it will soon present themselves. On this subject the General Assembly resolved as follows:
Ihe Assembly is of opinion that if an efficient system of lay-agency, with godly, zealous, and prudent male
and female agents, can be brought into operation, no other means will be found more successful, not only in
promoting a Kevival of Peligion within the Church, but also in extending the blessings of the Gospel to
those who are yet without hope, and without God in the world.”
All who love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity and truth may bo workers together with God in
promoting the cause of vital godliness throughout their own respective districts. This is a work of most
stupendous chaiacter, capable of employing all willing hands, and of giving to every worker, male and


female, that kind of work which they are best fitted to perform. Whatever gifts God may have bestowed
upon you, let them be all consecrated to the service of Christ; and whatever paths of usefulness may open
up before you, enter at once upon them. Some may be able to assume a commanding position, 'others
can occupy only a subordinate one, among the labourers in the Lord’s vineyard ; but whatever wecan do
for the cause of Christ, be it much or little, let it be done with all our might and in the strength of the
Lord. By inviting to the House of God these living in the neglect of gospel ordinances; by acting as
collectors in beaalf of benevolent and Christian objects; by the distribution of suitable tracts ;by the house-
hold visitation of pious office-bearers and Christian brothers and sisters; by faithful but affectionate
warning of transgressors, by a word spoken in season during a common conversation; and by commending
Christ to all as opportunity permits, much may be accomplished, through the blessing of the Holy Ghost
upon such efforts for the conversion of the ungodly and for the edification of believers “ Who will come
forth to the help of the Lord—to the help of the Lord against the mighty ?”
“ The Assembly strongly recommends that a series of special religious services should be held,
by appointment of Presbyteries, at the principal centres of population within the bounds of each Presby-
tery, continued at each place during two or more consecutive evenings, as may be found expedient. It is
recommended that these special services may be profitably conducted on a less formal plan than the
ordinary Sabbath services, each minister arranging the details of the services held within his own charge,
care being always taken to bring forward the fundamental doctrines of the Gospel with clearness and
fulness.”
An opportunity will thus be afforded to all the members and adherents of the church, not only
of calling upon God in secret and at the family altar, as you have already been enjoined to do, but also
of engaging in united prayer for the coming of Christ’s Kingdom and for the Revival of Religion
throughout the land.
It is to be feared that the Sabbath is burdensome to many, and that its hallowed services are too
frequently felt to be a weariness to the flesh. The unconverted are not awakened to a sense of their sins;
believers are not stimulated to greater zeal in the work of the Lord ; and the conduct during the week of
the worshipper is often not of such a character as would lead us to infer that the services of the sanctuary
have exercised a permanent influence for good.
This state of things presents a striking contrast to that of Apostolic times. When the Holy
Ghost was poured out upon the infant church on the day of Pentecost, “ they were pricked in their hearts
and said unto Peter and to the rest of the Apostles, men and brethren, what shall we do. . . . The
same day there were added unto them about three thoussnd souls.” Since that period the Church has
been often visited with seasons of refreshing from the presence of the Lord. Instead of the prayer
meetings being attended by tens , as is too frequently the case among ourselves, hundreds flocked to
them, and that, at certain seasons, on every night in the week. Instead of the Sabbath services proving
uninteresting, they were a delight to all, both old and young. A solemn feeling pervaded every heaver,
God was felt to be present to many hearts, impressions were made which time never effaced, and many
could in truth declare that there they had found what they had never found before, “ the peace of God
that passeth all understanding.” Then it was true of God’s people that they ofien spoke to each other of
the cause of God and of the work of God in their hearts. Men living in open sin—neither fearing God
nor regarding man, were aroused to a sense of their guilt, and led to find peace through the blood of the
cross. Those who were boasting of their obedience to the law, and trusting in their own righteousness
were led to feel that their best works were but filthy rags in the sight of the Judge of all the earth.
Surely every true Christian amongst us is longing that we, in these days and in this distant part
of the world, may be visited with seasons of Revival. God is still the same as when he poured out his
Spirit on the day of Pentecost and when he favoured the churches of our fatherland with periods of
awakening. “Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.” His power to convert the hard
heart is still the same, and he is as willing to extend unto us all spiritual blessings as when he declared—
“ Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you;” or,


“ what man is there of you, whom, if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone, or if he ask a fish will
he give him a serpent ? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how
much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him.” We are not
straitened in God, but in ourselves. Let us pray for great things, let us expect great things. The waste
places of the land may yet be reclaimed, and the wilderness “ blossom as the rose.”
In conclusion, the « Assembly feels deeply, that all outward efforts will be merely formal in
character and barren in results unless there be a rekindling of spiritual life, and a stronger sense o
personal, as well as of official responsibility, among ministers and elders themselves ; and for this end,
the Assembly earnestly and affectionately urges upon the ministers and elders of the Church generally,
the necessity of more attention to the cultivation of their own souls in the knowledge and love of Christ,
the necessity of frequent and special prayer in secret for the advancement of the Divine Life in . emse ves
and in the congregations under their government, and the necessity of more rigorous self-examination, as
well as of sobriety of spirit, and watchfulness over their own walk and conversation; that so a savour o
godliness may go forth from them, and exercise salutary influence upon them that are without, as well as
upon the actual members of the Church themselves.”
And now, brethren, “we commend you to God, and to the word of His grace, which is able to
build you up and to give you an inheritance among them that are “The grace o t e or
Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all- men.
By appointment of the General Assembly,
WILLIAM GRANT, Moderator.
N.8.-The General Assembly enjoined all Ministers, Missionaries , and Catechists to read this Address
to their congregations not later than the first Sabbath of 18/0.
