





s
\


ROME’S HIDDEN SPRINGS OF FIRE AND BLOOD.
THIS Lecture was delivered in the Temperance Hall, Pitt-street
on October 24th, 1876, by Pastor Daniel Allen, upon the sub-
ject of “Rome’s Hidden Springs opened in Fire and Blood,” and as
a reply to Dr. Vaughan’s Lecture upon “ Hidden Springs.” The
Lecture was given under the auspioies of No. 4, No Surrender Loyal
Orange Lodge. J. Roseby, Esq., J.P, presided. The large Hall
beneath and the small one above were densely crowded, and hundreds
were unable to get into the building. The Lecture was listened to
with much attention, and obtained much applause.
Pastor Allen said
“Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,—l am to address you
to-night upon “ Rome’s Hidden Springs opened in fire and blood,”
Dr. Vaughan lays down positions which we also accept and urge,
namely,—Firstly, for Supernaturalism —that the hidden perfections
of God are opened by the works of His providence and grace.
Secondly, for past Paganism—that the hidden iniquity of Pagan
idolatry was opened by the wickedness of the idolaters. Thirdly,
for present Materialism in the sects of Protestant Churches that
the hidden wickedness of all heresies is manifest by the evil works
of the heritics. This is the sum and substance of his Lecture, though
he has foolishly wasted thousands of words to set these positions be-
fore his audience. But though we accept this idea of the hidden
springs of underlying princinles, in God, Satan, and man, being
opened by the works of such Beings, we protest against Dr. Vaughan’s
application of this principle as being opposed to the whole face of
history, and to all true theoligical principles.
1. His assertions relative to Pagan Mythology are untrue to a
very great extent.
2. His declarations as to the Hidden Springs of Divine mercy,
love, and goodness, being opened in his Church, is most monstrously
incorrect.
3. His affirmations as to the works of the evil one being mani-
festly opened in Protestantism are most shockingly and revoltingly
untrue, being in violation of the testimony of God, angels, and men.
Before I enter upon our main point, namely, that the Hidden
Springs of the principles of the Church of Rome have ever been
opened in the fires of Martyrs and the floods of blood —honourable
blood—upon the battle field, permit me, Mr. Chairman, and ladies
and gentlemen, to direct your attention to some of the shockingly
untrue assertions of Dr. Vaughan upon the first of these three ques-
tions. He says of the Pagans :
“Now, in what relation did those men stand to the gods? Was it a relation
of love and reverence? Just the reverse. Their relation sprang from secret ha-


tred and craven terror. The malignity of Jove is proverbial. The sufferings of
Prometheus were caused by his having befriended man ; whilst Herodotus himself
assures us of the secret detestation which the nations through which he travelled
entertained for their divinities. Common prudence itself would recoil from placing
trust in the club of demons who disported themselves in eternal outrage on Olym-
pus ; and whose spitefullness sealed up every avenue to confidence, and whose
cruelty excluded every approach to love. Man hated the gods because they were
brutal and cruel ; feared them because they were stronger and better equipped
for committing outrage than himself.
“Such being the relations, what positive teaching is found amongst the
Pagans ? First, as to creed, or a code of dogma ; Paganism has absolutely no creed,
no dogma ; it had no sacred book ; nothing resembling a Pentateuch, or Gospel, or
even a Koran. The gods had no moral relation whatsoever to man, who hated
them and feared them. ‘ They were,’ says a lively writer, ‘ mere odius facts, like
scorpions or rattlesnakes, having no moral aspect whatever, public nuisances :
bearing no relation to man but that of capricious tyrants.’ Had the Pagans, then,
no code of ethics ? None. Their mythologies and legendaries tales amused the
multitude. But they had no moral or dogmatic bearing. The only code of ethics
which the Pagans practised was that which was distorted by brutal instincts, and
corrupted by contamination with the gods. ‘ Religion, ’ says a high authority,
‘in the eye of a Pagan, had no more relation to morals than to shipbuilding or
trigonometry. ’ ”
I. Firstly, This is so far from being true, that it is evident the
ancient Pagans at first set up their (rods as Rome does now, to re-
present the invisible perfections of the unseen Gods, which they
called “ The spirit of the Gods.” Therefore a Pagan Queen once
said to a Pagan King of Daniel, the prophet, “ There is a man in thy
kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the Holy Gods.” Dan. v. 10.
Another Pagan Monarch said to him, “ Your God is the God of
Gods ; ” and another, “ I know that the spirit of the holy Gods is in
thee.” From this idea, which at first occupied the whole Pagan
mind, they formed their Gods to represent some character or name
of the invisible Gods, just as the Church of Rome does now relative
to the invisible Gods, Christ, the Virgin, Apostles, and Saints.
In proof of Dr. Vaughan’s errors relative to the Pagan Gods,
I refer you to some important references to ancient mythology in
Dr. Gill’s “ Body of Divinity 7 ,” upon the names of God.
The Hebrew name Elion, which signifies God of Gods, or strong
God. From this the Phoenicians named one of their Gods Elioun,
the Most High.
The Hebrew name Shaddai, which means a nourisher, a breast,
from this name the Pagans had their God Jupiter Tonans, which
means the thunderer. Also from this name, the Egyptians had
their God Isis, an immense image of a woman sixty feet high, with
very large breasts suckling her big child. See J. Gadsby’s “ Wan-
derings,” page 395, &c.
The Gods Ceres and Diana had large breasts for this reason.
From the Hebrew name Adon they had the many Baali Gods, as it
signifies lord or dominion. Some of the Pagans gave this name to
the Sun, as one of their chief Gods, as at first they supposed it well
represented God, who is “.a sun and shield.” Macrobius says —
“ Bacchus is called Ebon or Edon, who he says is a'so the same
with the sun.” After the same manner as these Pagans named their
idols from the names, and Hidden Perfections of God, Rome has
named the Pope and other of their idols with the name of God, say-
ing, as the Pagans did, that the Pope, &c., are the representatives < f
God on earth. After this maimer we have his names, “ Universal


Bishop, Sovereign Pontiff, Christ’s Vicar, God on earth, Lord God
the Pope, His Holiness, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, Prince over
all nations and kingdoms, The Most Holy and Most Blessed Master
of the Universal World. Father of Kings, Light of the World, Most
High and Sovereign Bishop, &c., &c.—See Council of Sienna, printed
at Paris 1612, Pius V.
Can we find anything in Paganism to equal this in arrogant
blasphemy ? I think not. If Dr. Vaughan knows anything of the
origin of Pagan Gods, we can well see why he has, by a garbled
sophistication, hidden the great historical facts relative to it, namely
because of its great resemblance to idolatry in his own Church.
Again, he is most incorrect in stating that this Pagan worship
produced nothing but infamy, shame, filthiness, and evil. There
were many thousands in all the Pagan nations, who would in point
of character, put Dr. Vaughan and his Church to shame.
Let him consider
Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Zeno, Cicero, Varro,
Homer, the Plinys, Juvenal, Senneca, and thousands more who
would have scorned to have done the amount of misrepresentation
and falsification as that of which Dr. Vaughan has evidently been
guilty. I affirm, fearless of contradiction, that many of the Pagans
looked upon their visible Gods as only representations of an invi-
sible Being or Beings, They held rigid dogmas also, and performed
reverential worship, and lived such consistent lives as would put the
whole Church of Rome to shame. Yet I, at the same time, agree
with Dr. Vaughan that as the Pagans broke off from their faith in the
spirit of the Gods, and only worshipped the visible image, they were
most vile indeed.
They had many like the notorious Nero, and Vitellius, the latter
of whom spent six millions in sevenmonths, to gratify his vile appe-
tites and lustful passions. But then some of the Popes have been
equal to him in the same kinds of sin, such as Pope Alexander,
the VI.
Making honourable exceptions, it has been well asked of Rome
—Pagan and Papal—
“ Lord, is thy sceptre lost or laid aside,
Is hell broke loose, and all her fiends unsty’d ?
Lord, canst thou see and suffer ? Is Thy hand
Still bound to peace ? Shall earth’s black monarch take
A full possession of thy wasted land !
Oh, will thy slumbering vengeance never wake
Till full-aged laws, resisting custom, shake
The pillars of Thy right,
by false command ? ”
Again, Dr. Vaughan greatly misrepresents the Pagan worshippers
relative to their manner of devotion to their gods. He seems to think
they did nothing but eat and drink unto drunkenness, in honour of
their deities. But their whole history proves, that mostly they were
as devout and sincere as ever he was before an image of the Virgin
Mary. They sincerely and devoutedly prayed for deliverance in war,
famine, plague, sickness, and trouble, and if they were saved from
these, they praised their gods for the same, just as much as the Roman
Catholic does the Virgin, St. Peter, and the Pope.


And if the doctor should say that he, in his dovotions, looks at
the invisible God, whom these represent. I answer, the Pagan
Priest would answer too, he only looked to his Isis or Diana, as a
representative of the invisible spirit of the gods. For instance
history records that the Emperor Antoninus Philosophus, being in
war with the northern nations, he was surrounded with mountains
and had no water, he feared that himself and army would have
perished with thirst. All the Pagan gods were invoked in vain, when
the men belonging to the Thundering legion, being Christians, were
by him ordered to call upon their God. They did so, and he heard
them, and sent rain, which filled all tbeir dykes and pools, which sup-
plied them with water in abundance. This Emperor then wrote to
the Roman Senate as follows:—“When I saw myself not able to
encounter with the enemies, I craved aid of our country gods ; but
at their hands finding no relief, and being cooped up by the enemy,
I caused those men, which we call Christians, to be sent for, who
being mustered, I found a considerable number of them, against
whom I was more incensed than I had just cause, as I found after-
wards ; for by a marvellous power they forthwith used their endea-
vours, not with amunition ; drums, and trumpets, abhoring such pre-
parations and furniture, but only praying unto, and trusting in, their
god, whom they carry about with them in their consciences. It is
therefore to be believed, although we call them wicked men, that
they worship God in their hearts, for they, falling prostrate on the
ground, prayed not only for me, but for the army also which was
with me, beseeching God to help me in that hour of extreme want of
victuals and fresh water, and in our enemies’ land, even in the midst
of Germany. I say, falling upon their faces, they prayed to a God
unknown to me, and immediately thereupon fell from Heaven a most
pleasant and cold shower, but amongst our enemies a great store of
hail, mixed with thunder and lightning, so that we soon perceived
the invisible aid of the mighty God to be with us ; therefore we give
these men leave to profess Christianity, lest, by their prayers, we be
punished by the like ; and I thereby make myself the author of all
the evil that shall accrue by the persecution of the Christian religion.”
This will be sufficient proof that many of the Pagans as solemnly
called upon their gods in time of trouble as Dr. Vaughan does upon
any of the saints in the Church of Rome. It will give us an idea
also of what Pagans thought of Christianity at times. Surely this
is a very different view of Paganism to that given by Dr. Vaughan.
The above account, by Dr. Southwell is but one account out of a
thousand of a like kind. The fact is, 1 have never read a pi’oduction
from the pen of any man so opposed to standard authority, as the
effusions of the pen of Dr. Vaughan. Ido think, if he really was
what is called a well read man, he would certainly blush with burn-
ing shame at his shameful conti’adiction of all standard historians.
Again, we find him conti’ary to all accredited authorities, when
he says that Pagans had no fixed dogmas, and that these can only
be found in his Church. As opposed to this, we find a far greater
number of persons in Paganism than in the Church of Rome, holding
the same dogmas for a much longer time than the Church of Rome
has been in existence.
- hammedans have always been double the number of the


Roman Catholics, and have always had the same dogmas. If, there-
fore numbers and perpetuity of faith and unity of dogma, was any
evidence of having the right Hidden Springs and the true streams,
the Mohammedans have a far stronger claim to them than Dr.
Vaughan.
The Buddhist number about three hundred millions of the
human race —Inidan Pagans—that is three- times the number of Dr.
Vaughan’s Church ; and it has existed 2460 years—that is twice as
long as Dr. Vaughan’s Church. They have had their fixed dogma
of Nirwarna, or Annihilation of Bodies, and return of spirits into
God. They were so called from their founder, whose name means
The Wise, the enlighted ; showing that their assumptions were
about the same as the Pope’s.
If their greatness of number, long existence, and fixedness of
dogma, be real signs of having the true springs and streams, then
the Pagan Buddhists have three times the claim to those as Dr.
Vaughan’s Church has.
The Brahman’s of India have a larger and longer claim, being
150,000,000 in number, and they have been in existence for 3000
years, and far more fixed in their dogmas and priestly ritualism than
the Church of Rome has ever been.
Then again we find Dr. Vaughan all at fault in his affirmations
about the Christianity of his Church purging away the world of Pa-
ganism and planting the world with mercy, truth, and love. This is
so far from being true that the whole page of ancient and modern
history demonstrates that there has ever been five Pagans to every
Roman Catholic ever since the Church of Rome has had its existence
and is so to this day. In Sir Isaac Newton’s time there were 500
millions Pagans, out of the 800 millions of the earth's inhabitants,
and only a hundred million Roman Catholics. There are now about
1000 millions upon the earth, and out of them there are but 100
millions Roman Catholic, and 500 millions of Pagans. What nonsense
then for Dr. Vaughan to talk of his Church, his Hidden Springs, as
having purged the world of Paganism. The fact is it has rather
reproduced Pagan montrosities.
No man can read Gibbon, Dr. Neauder, Millner, Scott, Dr.
Mosheim, Danver, Dupin, Mezeray, and such like historians, and not
be struck with the fact that when the Church of Rome took hold of
some of the Pagan nations she remoddled herself into as near a resem-
blance to the ancient Pagan worship as it was possible for her to do ! I !
The Pagan temples became her churches. The Pagan altars became her
altars. The Pagan priests became her priests. The Pagan vestments
became her robes. The Pagan incense became her incense. The
Pagan images became her images, and the image of St. Peter now in
Rome, has been proved to have been that of Jupiter.
The Pagan worship of women-gods became the worship of the
Virgin Mary.
The Pagan mode of dedicating of new-born children to the gods
by salt, oil, honey, &c., was adopted by the Roman priests. The
Pagan sacrifices gave rise to the sacrifice of the mass, and the Pagan
feasts to the festivities of the Church. The Pagan fires through
which many were supposed to pass into the fellowship of the Spirits
of the holy gods gave rise to purgatorial lire. The Pagan order of


making their emperors their gods, gave rise to making the Pope the
Church’s Lord God upon earth.
The Pagan method of sitting up the image of their Emperors to
be worshipped in their camps, temples, and assemblies, gave rise to
the setting-up of the priests, and the cross in the Church and confes-
sional, as the image of the beast, and their representative God on
earth—hence the law of the Church of Rome is that the priest does
not hear confessions and give absolution as man, but as God.
Thus I am prepared to meet any persom whom Dr. Yaughan
may wish to appoint, publicly, upon this point, namely—that almost
every vestage of worship, dogma, and ritualism now found in the
Church of Rome was taken from Pagan worship. These are the
Hidden Springs of the Church of Rome. See John Gadsby, 577.
“ [n Rome, on a tablet to the main entrance to the amphitheatre is incribed
the very astonishing announcement that the building had been purged from idols
and idolatry ; and yet on one side of the gateway a cross is carved in the marble
with the following inscription, “ If you kiss this sacred cross you acquire, or shall
have, one year and forty days indulgence.” Again in one of the archways inside
the building are these words, ‘‘Plenary perpetual indulgence.” Over the door
of the Pantheon is an inscription that exceeds all, “ A daily perpetual indulgence
for the living and the dead ! ”
“ 0 ye worshippers of stocks and stones; ye adorers of cats, snakes, and
crocodiles ; can ye bring anything worse than this ? ”
These are the things seen and written by this English traveller
only a few months ago, and his books have been received and read
by our Sovereign the Queen.
Thus the whole body of Pagan Rome is still retained in the Church
of Rome. And what is worse, the same hatred and malice which led
the Pagans to slaughter the People of God has ever been manifest in
the Church of Rome—kindling more martyr’s flames and reddening
more battle-fields with the blood of the righteous than Pagan Rome
ever did, which now crieth unto God from the whole European earth, as
the blood of Abel once did. That I may remove all suspicion of
making assertions without proof as to that Paganism which Dr.
Yaughan so fully denounced being incorporated into his own
Church, I will give a few proofs. E. Harper, Esq., in his unanswered
letters to Dr. Wiseman, says :
“ The boasted statue of St. Peter, at Rome, whose toe is worn from the iuces-
sant kissing of its worshippers —what is it but a stupendous lie ? It is firmly
believed that it stood in ancient times for Jupiter.
“It !s said by some to be only recast from the old material of which the
Jupiter image was composed ; but this does not mend the matter much.
“ And here I would give an illustration or two, out of many, of your Churches
ready appropriation to her own worship, of the gods stolen from the heathen, which
christened anew by the Pope or his agents, thus constitute the idol ‘ A Doable
Lie.”
My authority shall be the Tablet newspaper, a journal whose
Roman orthodoxy, I doubt not, you will be happy to acknowledge.
This is the brief story of an idol.
“ The inscription on the noble monument at the Piazza del Popolo, which
had once decorated the Temple of the Sun, and now stands before a shrine of our
Imaculate Queen of Heaven, thus beautifully alludes to the happy change in its
position. _ .
“ I now stand more venerable and joyful before the shrine of her from whose
virginal womb the eternal Sou of justice himself arose.’ This is the writing Rome
herself affirms.
“ You are aware that the Decretals of Rome embody what is well-known to
be 1 The forged donation of Constantine’ ; which is held to be the 1 ope s title deed


to the possession of Rome and the Papal states. From the translation given in the
Rev. T. R. Birks’ work we take the following in which Constantine is represented
as handing over to the Pope all the imperial dignities.
“ ‘To the blessed Sylvester, our Father, the Supreme Pontiff Pope of the
whole City of Rome, and all the Pontiffs, his successors, who to the end of time
shall sit in the see of the blessed Peter, we now give the Lateran Palace of our
Empire. Next the diadem or crown of our head ; also the Phrygian and Super-
humeral, or collar, which is wont to surround the Emperor’s neck ; and also the
purple cloak, and the scarlet tunic, and the Imperial robes ; conveying further
the dignity of our imperial presidents, and the imperial sceptres ? and also the
insignia and banda, and various imperial ornaments, and all the pomp of imperial
elevation, and the glory of our power.’ Thus, all the Godship of the Pagan Em-
perors of Rome passed over to the godship of the Church of Rome in the person of
the Pope, and all these surroundings of the once worshipped Emperors now
become the surroundings of the worshipped Popes by their own forged deed. As
it was with the Gods in the Palace, or Vatican, so it became with the gods in the
temples, which at the same time became the Gods of the churches, because the
foi'ged deed goes on.
‘ ‘ ‘ And as the imperial soldiery are adorned, so we decree that the clergy of
he holy Roman Church be adorned likewise. And as the imperial power is
honoured by various offices of chamberlains and porters and all the variety of
guards, so do we will the holy Roman Church be decorated, and that the Pontifical
Glory may shine forth in highest refulgence. We decree that the horses of the
clergy of the same holy Church of Rome be adorned with white trappings, and
in this guise they ride forth.’ ”
Thus the pride and luxury of the Papal priesthood was fostered
by this forged instrument of fraud and wickedness. Volumes more
of this kind might be produced, to show that the Church of Rome de-
rived her existence, glory, wealth, gods, altars, palaces, temples, and
priests, from Pagan Rome. This was the removal from the seventh
to the eighth head—Rev. 17th. Those purple and scarlet robes
made the scarlet coloured Beast.
From these facts it is evident that the Hidden Springs of the
Church of Rome were the ramifications of Pagan Rome. The Hidden
Springs of her gods were in Pagan Rome. The Hidden Springs of
her Popes were in the Pagan Emperors. The Hidden Springs of her
Priesthood were in the Pagan priesthood. The Hidden Springs of
her robes were in the garments of her Pagan priestly vestments.
The Hidden Springs of her gorgeous churches were in Pagan temples.
The Hidden Springs of her Woman God were in the Pagan Queen
of Heaven. The Hidden Springs of her whoredom were in the
Pagan Temple Chambers of fornication, by woman priests.
The Hidden Springs of what Dr. Vaughan calls her supernatural
power for lying wonders were in the marvellous wonders of Pagan
gods and priest.
The Hidden Springs of her works of art were all in the Pagan
grandeurs to which their own forged deed refer, and almost all of
them produced long before Peter left his nets and fishing boats to
follow his humble Lord.
The springs of her wealth were all derived from Pagan
stores of silver and gold which was gathered by mighty Pagan Rome
from every nation upon earth. It rolled down from Babylon, Media,
Nineveh, Tyre, Greece, India, and the northern world, and then was
claimed by the first Popes, as we have proved by their own forged
deed.
The Hidden Springs of her malice and deadly hatred to the
true people of God, were in that Pagan Rome where Our Lord was
slain, and his Apostles died. These hidden springs have fired a


million martyrs’ piles, and covered thousands of battle-fields with
honourable and righteous blood. These hidden springs have lately
commanded Popish nations to help the Turk in his work of blood,
which has just now appalled the whole world with horror, and filled
every tender heart with unutterable anguish, and have made every
true Englishman wish to bind his sword upon his thigh.
I think it is most ungrateful of Dr. Vaughan to receive so much
for his Church from the Pagan Palace, Temple, and Treasury, and
thus to abuse and falsify Paganism as he has done.
The Church of Rome, in her thus infolding the gods and worship
of the Pagan Empire of Rome only did what many of the ancient
Pagan nations did relative to the Jewish Tabernacle services.
Every reader of history must be much struck with the fact, that
after Moses, almost every Pagan temple mixed up some imitations of
the ceremonies commanded by him unto Israel. And just as
Paganism infolded Judaism to a great extent, so Paganism infolded
much of the name and externals of Christianity in the Church of
Rome.
Thus as it was with Rome in England, it was throughout the
whole Roman Empire.
Camden says—
“ Redwald, King of the East Saxons, had in the same church, one altar for
the Christian religion, and another for sacrificing to devils.”
Trapp says—
“ And a loaf of the same leaven was that resolute Rufus, that painted God
on one side of his shield and the devil on the other, with this desperate inscrip-
tion, “In utrumqixs Paratus —Keady for Either ! Catch me as catch may.’”
A sinful mixture, such as was that of those mongrels named in
2 Kings, 17 and 28 ; and their natural nephews, the Samaritans, in
John, 4th ch. Ambodexters, in their religion, which being grosser
at first, was afterwards refined by Manasseh, a Jew priest, such
another as Balaam, and brought many Jews with him.
Of Constantinus Copronymus, it is said—
“ That he was neither Jew, heathen, nor Christian, but a hodge-podge of
wickedness. ”
Thus was the Church of Rome made a hodge-podge of Paganism
and external Christianity, ready for either as the circumstance of the
case should require.
An old writer has well said—JTpon the mixture, first of this
Judaism v'ith Paganism, and secondly, Paganism with Christianity
as now found in the Church of Rome—
“I think I may call Satan God’s ape, for whatsoever the Almighty does
from heaven above, the devil tries to imitate on earth beneath, only God intends
our salvation, and Satan our destruction. If God sends his angels as minister-
ing spirits, to minister to them who are heirs of salvation, Satan transformed
himself into an angel of light, to imitate them. God sent Moses and Aaron ; Satan
sent Janus and Jambus to counterfeit their works. When God sent persons in the
character of prophets into the world. Satan sent four hundred to one. When God
ordered Solomon to build him a temple, the devil strewed the heathen world with
temples. When God sent priests, Satan sent Chemarims—Zeph. 1-4. When God
ordered sacrifices for Israel, then the Gentiles were set to offer sacrifice to devils.
When God sent the Apostles, Satan sent false Apostles, transform!n<r themselves
into ministers of righteousness. And soon after God had set his King upon His
holy hill of Zion, the devil gave the Pope his seat and great authority at Rome.
If the Lord makes his ministers burning and shining lights, Satan sends


others to counterfeit them with his rays. ‘ Take heed, lest the light that is in
thee be darkness,’ said the Lord. If God constrained the primitive °saints to sell
all they had, to supply the needs of the righteous, Satan fills the hearts of
Ananias and Sapphira to imitate them. If God made his servants liberal to the
poor, Satan led Judas to say ‘ Why was not this ointment sold, and given to the
poor. ’
“ If God ordered lambs and kids for sacrifices the devil ordered children to b e
offered to him. ‘ They sacrificed their children to devils’ (Psalms 106 and 37)’
‘ And made them pass through the fire to Moloch. ’ (Jer. 32 and 35.) If God
sends prophets to predict future events ; Satan pretends to do the same by en-
chantments, astrology, and conjurations. If God condescends to espouse souls to
Himself, as a husband, Satan turns wooer and whoremonger, ‘ and they shall no
more offer their sacrifices to devils after whom they have gone a whoring.’—Lev.
17, 7. If God orders Moses to smite the waters, and turn them into blood, Satan
orders his magicians to do the same. God calls for frogs, Satan does the same.
God orders lice from dust, Satan tries to do the same ; but God puts a hook in
his jaws and baffles the king of darkness, and all his princes, in tbe open court
of Egypt, by a louse.—Ex. 7th and Bth chs.”
After this manner Satan has apedthe Almighty in Paganism mixed
with Judaism ; and as the whole body of Pagan Rome was claimed
by, and passed over to, the Church of Rome—by a deed of fraud—-
even so we have Paganism and Judaism amalgamated with the ex-
ternal form and name of Christianity in Dr. Vaughan’s Church ; the
Hidden Springs of which we have proved to be—old “ Pagan
Rome.”
• 11. Let us now proceed to notice how these Hidden Springs of
infranatural agencies have been opened in “ Fire and Blood.”
If we pass over the Constantine period, when Pagan Rome was
infolded in the Church of Rome, and run along the historians’ page
up to the seventh century, we shall then see the Hidden Springs of
the Nero and Yetilus or Pagan Rome gushing out in flames of lire,
and streams of blood. The result of this fraudulent deed, which
purported to make over the whole of Pagan Rome to the Church of
Rome was the murder of the Emperor Mauritius and his family, con-
sisting of six sons and two daughters, by Phocas, who made Pope
Boniface 111. the Supreme Bishop of the whole world. And as this
doctrine was commenced by this awful tragedy, it was consummated
by volumes of falsehood upon the Fathers, Bishops, and Popes,
before Gregory VII., who did excommunicate and usurp authority
over the Emperors. Thus lies and murder gave the Popes dominion
over kings. This Pope, Gregory VII., having thus fully established
this doctrine in the holy Roman Chair of St. Peter, proceeded to
swagger, and down with kings in the following manner:—
“ For the dignity and defence of God’s holy Church, in the name ®f the
Almighty God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, I depose from all imperial and royal
administration King Henry, son of Henry, sometimes Emperor, who too boldly
and rashly hath laid his hands on the Church ; and I absolveallChristiansubjectsto
the Empire from that oath, whereby they were wont to plight their faith unto
true kings ; for it is right that he should be deprived of dignity, who doth endea-
vour to diminish the majesty of the Church.” “Go to, therefore, most holy,”
Princes of the Apostles, and what I said, by interposing your authority, confirm—
“ That all men may now at length understand, if you can bind and loose in
heaven, that you also can upon earth take away and give empires, kingdoms, and
whatever mortals can have ; for if ye can judge things belonging unto God, what
is it to be deemed concerning these inferior and profane things ? And if it is your
part to judge angels who govern proud princes, what becometh it you to do to-
wards their servants ! Let kings now, and all secular princes learn by this man’s
example what you can do in heaven, and in what esteem you are with God ; and
let them henceforth fear to slight the commands of Holy Church ; but put forth


suddenly this judgement that all may understand that not casually, but by your
means, this son of iniquity doth fall from his kingdom.”—Barrow p. 14, tom Plato
in Greg. VII. et tom. Adi. cone. Rom. 3. apud Bin. page 484 and 493.
Let us now glance through the world’s history to see the wars
the Decree of Infallibility has produced on the earth; to enumerate
all the dreadful slaughter would be a task impossible for man, if not
for angels to perform. By various means for not submitting to the
Pope’s civil and Church power, a million of the people called Wal-
denses were persecuted with fire and sword for many centuries. I
will just notice the testimony of Thuanus, a priest under the Pope’s
government, who is considered an historian of repute ; he says—(in
Prsef. ad., Henry IY., also Pet. Hist. Alb. c. 17, &c.)
“Against the Waldenses, when exquisite punishments availed little, and the
evil was exasperated by the remedy which had been unreasonably applied, and the
numbers increased daily ; at length complete a-mies were raised, and a war of no
less weight than what our people had before waged against the Saracens was de-
creed against them ; the event of which was, that they were either slain, put to
flight, spoiled everywhere of their goods and dignities, and dispersed here and
there, rather than that they were convinced of their error and repented So that
they lied into Provence and the neighbouring Alps of the French territory, and
found shelter for their lives and doctrines in those places. Part withdrew into
Calabrea, part passed into Germany, and fixed their abode among the Bohemians,
and in Poland and Livonia ; others turned to the West—obtained refuge in
Britain.” (Mark, this is from one of the priests ) Peter says—“ In these wars,
when the Pope led on his troops to besiege the city of Beziers, he put to the sword
60,000 persons, among whom were many of his own religion, the Pope’s legate
crying out— ‘ Kill them all, for the Lord knoweth them that are His.’ ”
The Queen of Navarre not obeying the Pope’s edict —on the
24th August, 1572, and a few following days, there were slain in
Paris and France 70,000, and in a few years, 300,000 Within thirty
years were killed in France, 39 princes, 148 counts, 234 barons,
147,518 gentlemen, and 760,000 persons of inferior rank and life.
In England, during the time the Pope had power by Miry, after the
death of dear Edward the VI., his authorities slew 1 archbishop, 4
bishops, 21 preachers, 81 gentlemen, 84 artificers, 100 husbandmen,
26 wives, 20 widowers, 9 unmarried women, 2 boys, and 2 infants.
In Ireland, in 1641, by the Pope’s influence, 40,000 were cruelly
murdered ; in Scotland, in Holland, in Germany, in Spain, in Italy,
in Portugal, in Poland, in Hungary, in Bohemia, and other countries
in Europe and in South America, innumerable multitudes have been
slain, 'they justify this slaughter in their comment upon Rev.
xvii. 6, in the Rhemish testament after this manner :
“ Protestants foolishly expound it of Rome, for that there they put heretics
to death, and allow of their punishment in other countries. But, their blood is
not called the blood of saints, no more than the blood of thieves, mankillers, and
other malefactors, for the shedding of which, by order of justice, no common-
wealth shall answer.”
1. Here then is their own confession of slaying millions of Pro-
testants as before shewn. 2. Here is the light in which they view
the slaughter, namely to slay heretics or Protestants (such as her
majesty and her Protestant subjects), is only the s ime as killing
thieves, man-killers, and malefactors, for which slaughter of heretics
no commonwealth shall answer. Now let these Popes, Bishops, and
Priests get the commonwealth into their power, which they are now
straining every nerve to do ; then by this their own declaration, we
heretics must be executed, as well as murderers. This is in full


agreement with the oath of the Priest—to “ persecute heretics with
all his power.” In agreement with this, Pope Urban YU. sent the
following bull to his Irish subjects, which endorsed the awful
masaere in 1641.
‘ Urbanus Octavius, &c. ” “ Having taken into our consideration the great
zeaJ of the Irish towards propagating the Catholic faith ; and having got certain
notice, how, in imitation of their godly worthy ancestors, they endeavour by
force of arms to deliver their thralled nation from the oppression of the heretics ;
and gallantly do in them that lieth to extirpate and boldly root out these workers'
of iniquity, who in the kingdom of Ireland had infested the mass of Catholic
purity with the pestiferous leaven of their heretical contagion. We, therefore,
being willing with the gifts of those spiritual graces whereof we are ordained the
only disposers on earth, and by virtue of that power of binding and loosening
souls which God was pleased to confer upon us, to all and everyone of the faithful
Christians in the aforesaid kingdom of Ireland, now, and for the time militating
against heretics, do grant a full and plenary indulgence, and also take remission
of all their sin ; desire heartily all the faithful in Christ, nowin arms, to be par-
takers of this precious treasure—Dated at Rome, in the Vatican of St. Peter’s
Palace, May 25th, 1643, in the 20th year of our Pontificate, A. M. Moraldus.”
See trial of Lord McGuire, for high treason.
He also wrote to the rebel O’Neal October 18th, 1642, and also
to the Popish clergy and nobles of Ireland to the same effect.
By some computations, those who perished by these cruelties
are made to amount from 150,000 to 200,000 ; by the most moderate,
and perhaps the most probable accounts they must have been near
40,000 —See Hume’s History of England.
Here then is the old thing over again. The Pope by his power
moving to, encouraging in, and pardoning rebellion in a number of
British subjects, whose cry is, “ The Pope first, the Queen next,” to
rise, and kill, right and left, man, woman, and child who will not
acknowledge the Pope’s supremacy. If this Vatican Decree did this
by Pope Urban VII.. why not by our present Pius IX. ? If Dr.
Manning and Dr. Vaughan can get up enough loyalty to the Pope in
a sufficient number of persons, and Pius IX. does not do the same, he
will be unlike all the Popes for ten centuries past. Yea, more, he
will violate his own titles, decrees, and obligations to his office, and
for the first time the oaths of the priests and bishops will be made
void. Is it not right, then, that we should now ask a reason for
these things ? Why should we expect the Popes to become what
they have never been for ten centuries 1 Why should they now fail to
do to us heretics what they have not failed to do all this time ? Why
should they put down all other heretical kings, princes, and people
when they have had the power, and now save our Queen if they had
the power to put her down ? As by them lam a heretic, and a loyal
subject of one judged by them to be a heretic, I demand an answer
to these questions of a very satisfactory character, before I can look
upon any follower of the Pope as loyal to our Protestant throne.
These are questions to which our nation and rulers should have
demanded answers before they allowed themselves to be so mon-
strously falsified, duped, and deceived by Bishop Doyle in working
the Toleration Act through Parliament in 1829. Never was anything
more opposed to the whole body of Roman dogmas, Roman history,.
Roman deeds, Roman Popes, Roman oaths, and Roman bulls, than
the representarions of this Bishop Doyle to our statemen at that
time. Never was anything proposed to man more opposed to truth


since the world was made than his most awful sayings before the
English Parliament. As to whether we are right in supposing that
holy Popes and Bishops can go into the field of battle and blood to
execute this decree of infallibility according to their oaths and titles
let their past history answer this. We have already seen in the pages
of history blood-stained Popes, red in the battle-field with the blood
of our brother heretics. Now take the following as a sample of what
the bishops can do in this art also :
King Richard 1., in one of his battles with the French took Phillip De
Dreux, Bishop of Beau ms, prisoner. The Pope interceded for his liberty in a
letter, wherein he styled the lighting prelate ‘ his dearly beloved son. ’ The Kirin
by way of answer, sent the bishop’s suit of armour, stained with blood and
covered with dust to the Pope, and asked him, ‘ Whether he knew his son’s coat
or not ? The Pope was ashamed at the sight, and left the bishop to Richard’s
mercy. —Toplady, p. 498.
Now, if this Roman bishop could fight so desperately in the Pope’ 8
cause, what is to prevent bishops Manning, Cullen, and Vaughan 1
Certainly almost any old lady could manage the grand old Archbishop,
but the new Dr. would make a fine general. These prince bishops have
been very prevalent in some Roman Catholic countries. Surely the
Hidden Springs which sent forth such streams of fire and blood as
these can never be from God. No, they are the same as those which
gushed foith from the Pagan Nero, when he covered the Christians
with pitch and grease, and placed them in his gardens, and burned
them as torchlights by night. Can such springs as these be found in a
merciful God and a loving Saviour ? It is to blast the fame of God
and the Lord Jesus to say they can. Yet Dr. Vaughan tells us that
the Hidden Springs of his Church flow from the Babe of Bethlehem
the Boy of Nuzareth, the Man of Calvary, and the Lord of Glory.
Just think of the Babe of Bethlehem, the Boy of Nazareth, the Man
of Calvary, and the Lord of Glory, running through the world, leaving
cities in flames, battle-fields covered with noble blood, and a million
martyr s piles ablaze in His train ! To say that such acts can spring
from a loving, meek, and lowly Christ, is a horrible and most accursed
blasphemy.
Yet this is the import of the greater part of Dr. Vaughan’s lecture
at the opening of the hall of the Holy Guild.
However, let us take another view of the opening o: Rome’s Hidden
Springs in fire and streams of righteous blood. Father Grass! latelv
said at Rome—
“ 0 you Inquisitors, Pontiffs, Cardinals, and Prelates ; God speaks to vou i
io what have you brought the true Church ? She that was so pure; so beautiful'
so glorious, her you have betrayed, violated, despoiled, wounded, and crucified by
your doctrines, superstitions, immorality, and sealed her tomb by your blasphe-
‘ do , glna of infallibility.’ Hear what God says to His suffering children,
the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.’ Do you not
tremble at these words ? Who but Satan instigated and inflicted the tortures in
this place ' 0 could these walls, within which so many have been burned speak •
could this roof but echo back the cries of agony from your innocent victims and
the vaults beneath us reveal the corpeses of those who have been buried alive no
other sentence of condemnation would be required. But the Breath of God’has
for ever extinguished the fires of the Inquisition and swept away your
power ; therefore I stand before you to-day and declare these truths, while you
dare not touch a hair of my head ! Yes, God has begun the work and soon this
tribunal, these walls and instruments, will be bruised under our feet and scattered
as ashes to the four winds, proclaiming to the world that the Most Holy Universal


Roman Inquisition is dead. Dead because God has crushed it under the feet of
His children.”
Thus we have all the bloody deeds of the Inquisition endorsed, by
Pius IX. and the present Church of Rome, so that they now stand
guilty of the blood of tha righteous for the last 1260 years, by the wit-
ness of their own hands and lips. In the face of these facts will
our Dr. Vaughan and his priesthood, and the Roman Catholics in New
South Wales, dare to deny that their Church is the Church of the
tortures and racks of the Inquisition 1 How dare they talk of English
tyranny after this their slaughter of the people of the Lord ?
Nicollini, in his “ History of the Jesuits.” pp. 479-80, says:—
“ To return to our narrative : the French entered Rome, July 8, 1849,
and with them priests and Jesuits who had concealed themselves, or
assumed different disguises (not frequently that of patriots), reap-
peared, to enjoy their triumph and the groans of the unfortunate
country. Oudinot, covered with the blood of the brave Romans,
hastened to Graeta to receive the Pope’s blessing and acknowledgment,
and was hailed there as an angel of deliverance. The vindictive priests
rejoiced at the recital of the slaughter of the flock committed to their
paternal care, and made the General repeat the names and numbers of
the victims. Then when the hero of St. Pancrace returned to Rome,
the priests, to enjoy a barbarous pleasure, ordered a solemn Te Deum to
be sung in all the churches of the State; and those of the unfortunate
Italians whose sustenance and liberty were in the power of their relent-
less enemy were obliged to assist at the ceremony, and with their lips,
at lea«t, thank the Almighty for the slaughter of their best friends and
nearest relations. Blasphemous profanation ! Then began that cease-
less persecution which is still continued; and the priests gratified their
thirst for revenge by crowding the dungeons with victims, and by driv-
ing thousands into exile in foreign lands. I will not prolong the pain-
ful history of our miseries. I will not speak of ruined families—of for-
lorn and wandering children. I will not dwell upon the fate ol the ten
thousand captives taken by Papal sbirri and French gendarmes, and who
fill the prisons of the State. I will not implore compassion for the
many victims who have been again immured In the dungeons of the In-
quisition, some of whom, for the last three years, have never seen a
friendly face or heard a compassionate word. I will not point out the
inhuman and hypocritical conduct of the so-called Vicar of Jesus Christ,
who, while speaking with devout emotion of his clemency, his paternal
heart, and the mercies of the Christian religion, has not granted a single
pardon, dried a single tear, shortened for a single day the torments to
which he has condemned thousands of his subjects. I shall only give
an account of the wholesale execution which, in the last month, took
place at Sinigallia and Ancona, and which has filled Italy and Europe
with horror and amazement. As the Jesuits are notoriously the soul
and spirit of Popery, and are at the present moment the recognised ad-
visers and ministers of the Court at Rome, this short narrative will not,
we hope, be considered extraneous to our subject.”
Mr, Gadsby, writing upon the subject in 1858, p. 573, says ;
“As the Church of Rome has ever been, so she is now unchanged and un-
changeable, the prisons of Rome at this day too lamentably testifying to the fact.
The prisons were full when I was there, and full they still remain. Of whom ?
Of housebreakers or murderers ? No; but of respectable citizens —men who, hav-
ing long groaned beneath the Papal yoke, had determined to throw it off and de-


dare themselves free : and free they would have been, hid It not been for the
French army pouring into the city and crushing them by brute force. I remem-
ber my guide, an honest and intelligent Italian (one of the only two honest guides
I ever met with, for I never met more than two), once making remarks to me in a
low whisper, about the Pope and the Cardinals, which so surprised me that I said
to him, ‘ Are you not a Catholic’ ? ‘ Hush ! ’ he replied, de vails can hear you ;
and dey can speak, and send me to prijou !’ And then, putting las mouth close
to my ear, after looking about him to see that no one was near, he said, ‘ Yes, I
am a Catholic to my God, bu£ not to de brigand cardinals ! ‘ Look, sare,’ he con-
tinued, pointing to a particular spot in the city walls, beneath which we were then
walking ; ‘ dare (there), dare, dare is de spot vare I stood ven ve fired at the beg-
garly French. ’ In Naples, a pamphlet, supposed to be published under the
sanction or permission of the Government, contains the following passage : ‘ The
world will never have peace till all the sovereigns united shall be able to destroy
this plundering people (England), and wipe them away from the nations of the
earth—until the English people are dispersed like the Hebrews—until London,
like Jerusalem, shall be in ruins and askes ; then Europe will be safe. Let us
console ourselves in God. France will do it. The time approaches. ’ In St.
Prassedo is shown a pillar, said to be the identical one to which the Saviour was
bound when he was flagellated On reminding the priest who accompanied me
that this pillar was also shown at Jerusalem, he said* ‘ Yes, I am told so, but if
so the pillar must have been broken in two ?’ ” —From “ Gadsby’s Wanderings.
Now permit me to ask—What can we think of professedly Protes-
tant ministers who can dare to speak of these cruelties of the Church of
Pome as a thing of the past, and not now to be found in her midst 1 In
the face of these facts, can that minister be held guiltless of the blood of
men who can speak of the present Pope as *• That good, but mistaken
old man?” Such persons are traitors to God and man, and are aiding
Pome as much as possible in her endeavours to recommence the same
deeds of blood and fire.
Pome’s language is—
“ Use every instrument !” they loud exclaim,
“ To darken truth and render reason tame ;
Let the Inqnisition rage ! Bring fresh cruelties !
Make the dire engines groan with tortured cries !
Let Oampo Flori every day be strew’d
With mangled carcases and clotted blood ;
Eepeat again Lombardian slaughter o’er,
And Piedmont valleys droAvn with floating gore ;
.Swifter than murdering angels, when they fly
On errands of avenging Deity !
Fiercer than storms let loose with eager haste—
Lay cities, countries, realms, whoL nations waste—
Sack, ravish, massacre, destroy, bury, flay—
Act what you will, so Popery has its way ”
Such are the thoughts that fill each Popish mind,
And this the enmity they bear mankind ;
This is the freedom of the true Roman born ;
This is the teaching of the learnen Dr. Vaughan ;
This is one of John’s sad, sad complaints—
‘ ‘ I saw the woman drunken with the blood of saints ;
I saw beneath the altar the souls of those who died
For Jesus—and they for vengeance cried.”
Is it now with Italy, Austria, France, and Spain,
“ Blood for blood,” as they the saints have slain 1
God keeps accounts—most solemn, just, and true, —
Rendering to every man and nation, every one his due.
In conclusion, let us be relieved from the gloom of these most in-
fernal instruments of inhumanity and death, by some few accounts of
their coming to an end ; yes, as the Egyptian cruelty had an end at the


Ked Sea, so had the horrible Inquisition by the righteous vengeance and
mercy of Heaven, who has
Vengeance for the proud,
And mercy for the oppressed
In the beginning of the eighteenth century, M. De Legal, a French
officer, opened the doors of the Inquisition in the city of Arragon and
released its prisoners, amounting to 400, among whom were 60 beauti-
ful young women, who appeared to form a seraglio for the three princi-
pal inquisitors ! Horrible ! He sent one of these prisoners home to
his parents and afterwards made her his wife, when she wrote the whole
history of her seduction by one of the holy butchers of the Inquisition,
and her imprisonment there. The breaking up of this horrible den by
M. De Legal would give material sufficient for a lecture in itself; there-
fore I must leave it for the present, and conclude this lecture by a refer-
ence to the destruction of another of a similar kind, and sincerely trust
that all inquisitions will share the samt fate.
He said —and dreadful as he stood—
He sunk the millstone in the flood.
Thus terribly shall Babel fall,
And never more be found at all.—-Dr. Watts.
The Rev. Henry Seddall, in his “ Historical Sketches on
Romanism,” pp 145-51, says:—
“ In the year 1809 Colonel Lehmanowsky was stationed at Madrid with a
body of French troops ; and whilst in that city the Colonel used to express his in-
tention with soldier-like frankness on the dark deeds of the Holy Office. A de-
cree had already been passed by Napoleon for the suppression of this tribunal, and
of all monasteries.”
Then follows the account of its destruction by this General.
All this, with volumes of a like kind, clearly proves that what
Pagan Rome was in her hatred to the people of God and followers of
the loving Saviour, just that Papal Rome has been, and now is, so far as
she can get the power to do so. It must ever be remembered that we
are all liable to faults and errors, and that the Protestants have some
stains of blood about them. Nevertheless, these are exceptions to the
general life of Protestantism. But with Rome, her whole life has been
a life of fire and blood for 1200 years, when and where she has ever
had the power, and she is so still, without exception.
Mr. Gadsby says in his visit to Spain in 1873 :
“From 1481 to 1820, no less than 35,168 Protestants in Spain were burnt
alive, 18,049 were burnt in effigy, and 209,250 sent to the galleys or imprisoned.
“ Providentially, at the very time when the discussion was going on in the
Cortes as to whether or not their should be religious freedom in the country, the
authorities in Madrid were forming new streets. When cutting through some
mounds of earth in the Quemadero de la Cruz, or Burning Place of the Cross,
they came upon a large quantity of charred wood and human bones. Here it was
the Inquisition burnt the heretics—wholesale butcheries of Christians. Castelar,
a deputy, and famous orator and Republican, lost not a moment in taking advan-
tage of this. He made a speech, which, it is said electrified the whole house ; and
the day for liberty of worship was won. Amongst other remarks which Castelar
made was this : ‘ There are in the earth strange geological sections and strata,
and there are also strange theological sections and theological strata.’ A ‘de-
monstration was made on the spot soon after the discovery, and tens of thousands
of people assembled. Five of their missionaries went with their books, and to
preach. One man ventured to contradict one of the speakers, when some one
near took off the man’s hat to see if he were a priest ; and finding, by the top of
his head being shaved (tonsure) that he was, he had quickly to disappear.
‘ ‘ Mr. Fenn took me to see the piace. The ground extends over some acres.


There has been a monastery on the spot, the ruins of which, with carved stones,
&c., are still to be seen. In some parts the bones, &c., were not only deep down
in the ground, but almost up to the surface. One shuddered to look at them.
Hands have been found with nails driven through them, ribs which had been
pierced, See. , &c. I brought away a piece of charcoal and a small bone. One of
the new streets going through this hideous spot has been named ‘ Calle de Mala
Sana ;’ i. e. , ‘ The Street of Evil Worth ; ’ or, more literally, ‘ Evil Worth
Street.’ What a change has come over the Spaniard ! ”
hlr. H. Gratton Guinness, who visited the spot last January,
(1873), wrote the following poem :
“ Ye layers of ashes black, and half-burnt bones,
Ye monuments of martyrs’ stifled moans,
Of human agony and dying groans,
Cry out till every ear has heard your tones !
Cry out till the murderess trembles, though her brain
Be drunken with the blood of millions slain ;
She did not mean to show you—’twas the spade
Of simple workmen which your horrors laid
Unearth’d and bare before the light of day ;
They only dug to open a new way.
As they advanced, the ground before them grew
In patches softer, changed its wonted hue,
And with the smell of death defiled the air.
They dug and they discover’d layer on layer,
Black bones, rusted chains and human hair,
And iron nails and bits of melted lead,
And the burnt fuel of unnumber’d dead.
“ They cut the heap across, —it crowns a hill;
It’s length is shown,—its breadth lies buried still,
Doubtless thou, reader? I was there to-day ;
I saw them at their work ; I brought away
Some horrible remains which, while I write
These very words, are lying in my sight.
“ O Rome ! Thou mother of a oherish’d race ;
Blush not to show the world thy kindly face !
Thy bosom—hide its demons ! Hush —thy breast,
“ Tis there alone that suffering men can find rest.
How mild the chastisements thy love hath used,
Whene’er thy children have thy laws refused !
Gentle coercion ! Pity’s tender tones !
Tell me, thou murderess black, what mean these bones, —
These bones before me ? Those upon that hill,
Who, what were these thus slaughter’d by thy will ?
What did these helpless women ? These poor men ?
Why didst thou shut them up in thy dark den ?
Why didst thou pinch their flesh, and starve their frames,
And cast them bound into devouring flames ?
“ True, they reproach’d thee for thy crimes and lies,
And pray’d for thee with sin-forgiving sighs ;
Thy multiplied idolatries abhorr’d ;
No mediator honoured but their Lord ;
Condemn’d thy priestcraft and thy love of gold ;
Clung to God’s Word, and for its truths were bold ;
Adorned by blamelessness, the name they bore ;
Loved not their lives to death. What did they more ?
Were they adulterers, these prison’d saints ?
Or murderers, these who died without complaints ?
“ Hush ! For they sleep in Jesus ; soft their bed ;
His suffering saints their Lord hath comforted !
Hush ! For the seven-fold wrath of God grows hot !
Hush ! For her deep damnation slumbereth not.”
These are Rome’s Hidden Springs !


The Pope not only presumes to put to death those whom he calls
heretics, but his bishops take an oath that heretics, schismatics, and
rebels to the Holy Father, they will resist and persecute.
Hot only is it true that Rome does send forth these streams of fire
and blood from her infranatural hidden springs, but she justifies her
acts in doing so as the following will demonstrate from their own pen.
One of their annotations on the New Testament says—
“Protestants foolishly expound it, (■». e., Babylon noticed in Rev. xvii. 6,
And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood
of the martyrs of Jesus ; and when I saw her I wondered with great admiration,’) of
Rome, forthat there they put heretics to death, and allow of their punishment in
other countries. But their blood is not called the blood of saints any more than the
blood of theives, man-killers, and other malefactors ; for the shedding of which,
by orders of justice, no commonwealth shall answer.” (Rhemish Translation,
Rev. xvii. 6).
These, then, are the Hiddens Springs of Dr. Yaughan, which, in
murder’, tyranny, sin, cruelty, and death, far exceed all that was ever
knows in Pagan Rome.
We have the same Hidden Springs of fire and blood gushing out
in the Carlos proceedings in Spain, and the Pope’s wish to return
Spain back to her days of fire and blood, when Alva butchered his
36,000 by the hands of his common executioner, besides the tens of
thousands he slew in war, to please the man at Rome.
And not only have these Hidden Springs of Rome thus sent out
her streams of fire and blood of late in Spain, but only a few days ago
the man at Rome ordered his subjects to aid Turkey in her murder and
cruel destruction of her Christian subjects. Surely if the very heart of our
nation, yea, the very heart of every Christian people, is appalled at the
non-interference of England in relation to these horrible deeds of blood,
what must we think of the command of the Pope to help on the flames
and streams of blood which make widows and orphans by thousands
daily, by the cruel slaughter of fathers and husbands by wholesale, and
with burning their homes above their heads. Are these the streams
which flow from Dr. Yaughan’s Hidden Springs 1 How he could dare
to hold up his face before a civilized people in the presence of such
guilty monstrosities I am at a loss to know.
Dr. Yaughan has a vast amount of assurance to face the present
state of things relative to the Hidden Springs, and opened streams of
his Church. Certainly this is the most barefaced and ironhearted
piece of bravado I have ever known, to face and justify the present
bloody deeds of the Sultan. These are Satan’s Hidden Springs.
HI. Let us turn for a moment from these heartrending and most
revolting springs and streams of Rome, to the pure streams of love,
mercy, and truth, as flowing from the Babe of Bethlehem, the Boy of
Nazareth, the Man of Calvary, and the Lord of GHory. These we find
to be as different from the Pagan and Papal Rome, as death is different
to life, darkness to light, love to hatred, Christ to Satan, Q-od to the
serpent, or hell to heaven. Of these David said, “ All my springs are
in thee.” Dr. Watts says :
“ Ho ! ye that pant for living streams,
And pine away and die ;
H ire you may quench your raging thirst,
With springs that never dry.


Rivers of love and mercy here
In a rich ocean join ;
Salvation in abundance flows,
Like floods of milk and wine.”
As opposed to Dr. Vaughan’s Springs, we urge upon your atten-
tion Bethlehem Springs :
Water so pure, nor half so good,
From Nature’s fountain never flowed ;
There’s curse and death in every st‘earn
Save in the well of Bethlehem,
Wide as the stretch of human woe,
These death-consuming waters flow,
Spring up ! 0 Well ! Be this my theme,
Thou water sweet from Bethlehem.
Medley says :
Here in thy love will we rejoice,
All sovereign, rich and free ;
Singing, we hope with heart and voice,
Our springs are all in thee.
To whom, dear Jesus, 0 to whom
Shall needy sinners flee
But to thyself, who bid’st us come ?
Our springs are all in Thee.
Kent says of these, —
Beneath the sacred throne of God,
I saw a river rise,
The streams were peace and pard’ning blood,
Descending from the skies.
Angel’s minds cannot explore
This deep unfathom’d sea ;
’Tis void of bottom, brim, or shore,
And lost in Deity.
I stood amazed, and wonder’d when,
Or why, this ocean rose,
That wafts salvation down to men,
His traitors and his foes
That sacred flood, from Jesus’ veins,
Was free to take away
A Mary’s or Manasseth’s stains,
Or sins more vile than they.
Now, dare Dr. Vaughan say that these holy streams have ever
poluted the world with murder in such flames and streams of blood as
those which have flowed from the Hidden Springs of his Church.
May God bless the Queen, the nation, the nations, and you, with
protection from the deadly Hidden Springs of Rome, and flood man-
kind with his streams of love and mercy, from Christ Jesus the Lord.
As Dr. Vaughan has made such free use of the Nonconformist
English poet, Milton, whom he considers as an heretic ol the deepest
dye, it may be as well to hear what he says upon Romes Hidden
Springs. He wrote the following when Cromwell s ambassador returned
from Italy with Hie account of Rome’s slaughter of the Waldenses :
“ Avenge, 0 Lord, thy slaughtered saints, whose bones
Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold ;
E’en them who kept thy truth so pure of old,
When our Fathers worshipped stacks and stones.
Forget not ! in thy book record their groans
Who were thy sheep, and in their fold
Slain by the bloody Piedmontese that roll’d


Mother with infant down the rocks. Their moans
The vales redoubled to the hills, and they
To Heaven. Their martyred blood and ashes sow
O’er all the Italian fields, where still doth sway
The Triple Tyrant, that from these may grow
A hundred fold, who having learned thy way
Early mayfly the Babylonian Woe.”
Relative to the present aggressions of Rome upon mir nation, I
can only say :
If chains for freedom must be forged,
If England’s Throne must fall ;
If any part of our free Isle
The Pope must hold in thrall ;
If we must live mean-hearted slaves,
Or as brave heroes die,
Two hundred thousand Orangemen
Must know the reason why.
If we must wear his yoke,
With bent neck and sunken eye,
Our banners once again must wave
In azure sky.
Put your trust in God, brave boys,
And keep your powder dry,
Two hundred thousand Orangemen
Must know the reason why.
God save the Queen, prosper her nation, and abundantly bless the
colony.
S. GLASSOP, We»t City Machine Printing; Office, 92 Clarence-street,


%


