

PASTORAL LETTER
HIS EMINENCE THE CARDINAL ARCHBISHOP
OF SYDNEY
TO TH K
CLERGY AND FAITHFUL OF THE DIOCESE,
ON TilK
UNITY OF THE CHURCH.
(Sgbncg:
F. CUNNINGHAME Sc CO., GENERAL PRINTERS,
146 Pitt Street.




FisrtfO
PASTORAL LETTER
HIS EMINENCE THE CARDINAL ARCHBISHOP
OF SYDNEY
TO THE
CLERGY AND FAITHFUL OF THE DIOC ESE,
ON THE
UNITY OE THE CHURCH.
(Snbney
F. CUNNINGHAME & CO., GENERAL PRINTERS,
146 Pitt Street.




Very Reverend Fathers, and Dearly Beloved
in Christ :
It has seemed well in the ways of Divine Provi-
dence that I would befreed from the severe illness from
which I was suffering for some months and be restored
to my former health. It now becomes my pleasing
duty to return thanks with all the outpouring of pater-
nal affection, to the Catholic faithful of this Diocese,
who in union with their zealous Clergy and devoted
religious communities, during this period of my
illness, were so persevering and so earnest in the
prayers -which they offered to Heaven in my behalf.
Such affectionate sympathy and such cordial union
of the flock with its spiritual pastor, cannot but be
truly pleasing to our Divine Lord, the Prince of
pastors. It is a proof to the world of the incom-
parable unity by which we are all bound together in
the sacred bonds of Divine Faith, and it cannot fail to
obtain many graces from Heaven alike for the pastor
and for the whole flock. Your reward for such piety
can come only from God. For my part, the onty
return that I can make is to devote entirely to your
spiritual welfare whatever span of life it may please
Almighty God to assign me, and to be mindful daily
at the Altar when offering the Holy Sacrifice of the
Mass, of your pious intentions, that all those graces
and blessings of which you stand in need may be
abundantly bestowed upon you. The Blessed
Virgin, Help of Christians, Chief Patron of the
Australian Church, and the other Saints, Patrons
of this Diocese, will, I trust, unite their prayers with
mine that those gifts of the Divine Mercy may be
your rich inheritance.
PIAIZO
iq.ii.qv~


Anri now, permit me to avail of this opportunity
to address some words of pastoral instruction to you.
We cannot close our eyes to the most praiseworthy
efforts which are being made in the various Pro-
testant denominations around us to secure for them-
selves in some measure the blessings of Christian
unity. In the home countries and in the United
States, as in our several Australian colonies,
thoughtful men who take a leading part in their
respective Protestant denominations, are clamouring
for unity. In the many conferences and congresses
which have been held during the past few years
by the representatives of the various Anglican
and Non-Conformist communions, whether in Aus-
tralia or in England and Switzerland, the prayer put
forth by the assembled representatives no less than
the burden of their discourses, has been, that it is
time once for all to put an end to their disastrous
divisions and conflicting dissensions, and to amalga-
mate together in some way, for it is too plain to
the whole world that hitherto they have had no
unity, and that rent as they are to the core by bitter
controversies on the most vital questions of faith and
discipline, and Divine Worship, they can offer no
claim to be the Church of God.
We must regard with the deepest sympathy the
commendable efforts of those devoted men, and it
should be our prayer that God may vouchsafe them
His light and grace to lead them to the one true
fold. Holding as we do, without any merit of ours,
in the Catholic communion the priceless inheritance
of the perfect never-failing Unity with which Christ
endowed his Church, it is plainly our duty to offer
fervent prayers that the Divine Spirit “ who maketh
men to be of one mind ” may guide the footsteps of
those who are separated from us that all may come to
the feet of Our Blessed Lord and may be partakers


of the blessings of Redemption in the “ one fold
under the one Shepherd.” The fulfilment of this
duty will not only be most pleasing to God and draw
down His gifts and graces on our separated brethren,
but it will also be a source of the greatest merit to
ourselves, as we are reminded by the lesson of sacred
writ —“ Pray for the peace of Jerusalem ; they shall
prosper that love thee.”
No feature of the Church is more clearly set forth
in the Sacred Scripture than her unity. In the
sublime prayer breathed by the Divine Redeemer to
the Father when setting out from the last-supper
room to perfect the holocaust of His love we read :
“ I have manifested Thy name unto the men whom
Thou gavest Me out of the world. I pray for them ;
I pray'not for the world, but for those whom Thou
hast given Me, because they are Thine. Holy
Father, keep them in Thy name whom Thou hast
given Me, that they may be one as We also are.
While I was with them I kept them in Thy name.
And now I come to Thee : and these things I speak
in the world, that they may have the fulness of M} r
joy in themselves. Sanctify them in the Truth :
Thy word is Truth. As Thou didst send Me into
the world, even so have I sent them into the world.
And for them do I sanctify Myself, that they also
may be sanctified in Truth. And not for them only do
I pray, but for those also who through their word shall
believe in Me : that they all may be one, as Thou,
Father, in Me, and I in Thee ; that they also may be
one in Us, that the world may believe that Thou
hast sent Me. And the glory which Thou hast given
Me, I have given them, that they may be one as We
also are one. lin them, and Thou in Me, that they
may be made perfect in one, and the world may know
that Thou hast sent Me,and hast loved them, as Thou
also hast loved Me” (John, xvii. 6-23).


How fully that gift of unity for which the
Redeemer prayed was granted to the Church, is set
forth by the Apostle in the Epistle to the Ephesians :
“ I, the prisoner in the Lord (lie writes), beseech
you to walk worthily of the calling wherewith ye
are called; careful to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace. One Body, and one Spirit, even
as ye were called in one hope of your calling. One
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism : one God, and Father
of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all.
But to every one of us is given grace, according to
the measure of the gift of Christ . . . And he
gave some indeed Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and others Pastors and Teachers ;
for the perfecting of the Saints unto the w T ork of the
ministry, for the building up of the Body of Christ;
until we all attain unto the unity of the Faith, and of
the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a fullgrown
man, unto the measure of the age of the fulness of
Christ; that we may no longer be children, tossed
to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the deceit of men, in craftiness, accord-
ing to the contrivance of error. But dealing truth-
fully in love, we may grow up in all things in Him,
who is the Head, Christ: from whom the whole
body, fitted together and connected by that which
every joint supplieth, according to the working in
measure of each member, maketh the increase of the
body unto the building up of itself in love.” (iv. 1-16.)
If it be asked what is the quickening principle,
the hidden source of that marvellous unity, the Sacred
Scripture points out that it is the Holy Ghost, the
Divine Spirit of Truth ever indwelling in the
Church : “ I will ask the Father, says our Saviour,
and he will send the Paraclete to teach you all Truth
and to abide with you for ever.” Moreover the
invisible guardian of the Church’s unity is none other
than the Redeemer Himself: ‘‘Behold, lam with you


all days even unto the consummation of the world.”
Satan and the wickedness of man would never cease
to wage war against the Church, but our Saviour
comforts His Apostles with the cheering words :
“ Fear not, I have conquered the world.”
The Church was, moreover, endowed with the
outward and visible seal of unity. Our Saviour
chose one of His apostles —St. Peter—and set him
as the foundation on which the whole edifice should
rest, and invested him with supreme authority over
the whole Church : “ Thou art Peter, and upon this
rock I will build My Church, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it : and I will give to thee
the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven ; whatsoever
thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound also in
heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth
shalljbe loosed also in heaven.” (Matthew xvi., 18.)
Under manifold types and figures the unity and
perfection of the Church are presented to us in the
Sacred Scripture. In prophecy it was foreshadowed
as “ a city set upon a mountain,” whither all
nations should bend their steps to learn the teachings
of the Divine law. Again, it is the fruitful vine,
whose branches, though spreading far and wide,
should all be connected with the stem, and be
nourished by its life-giving sap. It is likened to the
mustard seed, the smallest among the seeds of the
fields and gardens of Judaea, from which, neverthe-
less, should spring up a mighty tree, spreading out its
branches throughout the whole world. So, also, it
is presented to us under the image of the leaven,
which silently, yet irresistibly, extends its influence
to the whole human race.
St. Cyprian, more fully than most of the early
Fathers and Doctors of the Church, illustrates this
important maxim of Catholic teaching. A few
passages from his treatise on “ The Church’s Unity”


must suffice for our present purpose : “ Heresies and
schisms (he writes) are the inventions of Satan,
wherewith to subvert the faith, to corrupt the truth,
and to rend unity. Those whom he cannot detain
in the blindness of the old way, he circumvents and
deceives by misleading' them on their new journey.
Let no one deceive the brotherhood by falsehood—
no one corrupt the Truth of faith by faithless pre-
varication. The Episcopate is one —an integral part
of which is held by each bishop. The Church is
one —though extended far and wide—and is further
multiplied by the increase of her fruitfulness. As
the sun has many rays, yet one light; and the tree
many boughs, yet its strength is one —resting on the
firmly-clinging roots; and as when many streams
flow down from one fountain-head, though a multi-
plicity of waters may seem to be diffused from the
bountifulness of the overflowing abundance, yet is
unity preserved in the common source. Cut off a
ray of the sun from its orb, this division of light the
unity allows not; break off a branch from the tree,
once thus broken it can bud no more ; separate the
stream from its source, the remnant dries up. Thus,
the Church, flooded with the light of the Lord, puts
forth her rays through the whole world, yet the light
is one which is spread over every place. In the
luxuriance of her plenty, she stretches her branches
over the universal earth, and spreads out, far and
wide, her bountiful and onward streams. Yet is
there one head and one source, and one mother—
abounding in her fruitfulness. It is of her that we
are born ; with her milk are we nourished ; her
breath is our life. The spouse of Christ cannot
become an adulteress ; she is undefiled and chaste.
Whosoever having separated from the Church, is
joined to an adulteress—he is cut off from the pro-
mises of Christ. He shall not come unto the rewards
of Christ, who leaves the Church of Christ. He is


an alien ; he is profane ; he is an enemy. He can-
not have God for a father, who has not the Church
for a mother. If anyone was able to escape from
the flood without the ark of Noah, then he can be
saved who is not in the Church.”
A distinctive feature of the Church’s unity is her
teaching with an authority that none can gainsay.
Our divine Saviour unfolded his lessons of heavenly
wisdom to the Jews “as one having authority”—
an authority which the voice of the Father
from heaven had more than once summoned them
to obey : “ This is My beloved Son, hear
ye Him.” With the same authority, the
Church, clothed with queenly majesty, shall con-
tinue till the end of time to teach the children of
Christ, winning their souls no less by reverence than
by love. The Redeemer invested her with this
authority ; “ As the Father hath sent Me, so I send
you.” And again He adds : “He who will not hear
the Church, let him be to thee as the heathen and
the outcast.”
In the last commission given to the Apostles
before the ascension into Heaven, our Saviour uses
the emphatic words : “ All power is given to Me in
Heaven and on earth : Go ye therefore and teach
all nations, and behold I am with you all days even
to the consummation of the world.” It is eighteen
centuries since these Divine words were addressed to
the chosen disciples,but they have never ceased to find
an echo in the heart of every follower of Christ. He
to whom all power is given on earth and in Heaven,
shall not forsake His Church. No persecutor can
destroy the Church, no efforts of the prince of
darkness can corrupt her teaching. Her mission is
Divine, and despite the assaults of Satan and the
hostility of a sinful world, the Divine light which
the Redeemer gave to His Church shall never cease


to shine upon the faithful, and she shall continue to
hand on from generation to generation, till the end
of time, pure and uncorrupted the teachings of
revealed Truth.
That pitfalls would be dug and efforts made to
scatter corruption and to sow division, Christ had
clearly foretold. Addressing the whole body of
disciples, He said to them : “ Satan hath sought you
to sift you even as the wheat is sifted in the win-
nowing time.” But the Redeemer had provided a
remedy against this danger. Turning to Peter, He
said to him : “ I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
fail not : do thou confirm thy brethren.” He whose
prayer is a Divine decree, whose words cannot pass
away even though earth and Heaven should vanish,
hath so ordained that Peter would be the immovable
centre of unity, and every assault of men and every
effort of Satan shall be made against him in vain.
He, divinely strengthened, shall guide and defend
and strengthen his brethren in the Faith.
More frequently, perhaps, than by any other
designation the Church is presented to us in the
Sacred Scripture as a Divine Kingdom upon earth.
When announcing the great mystery of the Incar-
nation, the Angel declared in regard to the Redeemer
that “ the Lord God shall give unto Him the throne
of David, and He shall reign in the house of Jacob
for ever, and of His Kingdom there shall be no end ”
(Luke i. 32). At every page of the sacred Parables
the Church is designated under the figure of a
Kingdom. Addressing the chosen disciples, our
Saviour said to them : “ Fear not, little flock, for it
hath pleased your Father to give to you a Kingdom”
(Luke xii. 32). And at the close of His public
ministry He announced to them : “I appoint to you,
as the Father hath appointed to Me, a Kingdom ”
(lb. xxii. 29). Now it is only by obedience to a


supreme authority that a Kingdom can subsist.
Languages and customs and even laws may vary,
but the Kingdom is one, so long as all are subject to
the same supreme authority. Here again we have
the explicit teaching of our Blessed Lord ; “ Every
Kingdom, He says, that is divided against itself shall
be brought to desolation, and house upon house shall
fall ” (lb. xi. 17); or as we read in the Gospel of St.
Mark : “If a Kingdom be .divided against itself,
that Kingdom cannot stand, and if a house be divided
against itself, that house cannot stand” (iii. 24).
The Prophet Daniel, looking to the future destiny of
the Church, contrasts its enduring vitality with the
decaying condition of all earthly things. Empires
after empires, he tells us, shall arise and shall
crumble to dust, but in the latter days God shall set
up His own Kingdom on earth, that is, His Church,
which shall not crumble away : “ The God of Heaven
will set up a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed,
and His Kingdom shall not be delivered up to another
people ; and it shall break in pieces, and shall con-
sume all Kingdoms, and itself shall stand for
ever ” (Daniel ii. 44). Our Saviour instructing the
disciples as to this never-failing firmness of the
Church, indissolubly unites it. with the supreme
commission entrusted to the Prince of the Apostles :
“ Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it; and I will give to thee the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven ” (Matth. xvi. 18). Thus it is
that are linked together the unity of supreme
authority and the all-conquering strength of Holy
Church. And here we may cite the very appropriate
words of St. John Chrysostom: “The very deriva-
tion of the word Church, he says, means unity and
unanimity. In that unity the Church is beautiful,
like unto God the eternal beauty ; like unto Heaven
which knows not the deformity of sin—sin which


alone is the cause of division. For moral division
goes before moral and sectional separation. Unity
while it is the beauty of the Church, is also her
strength. Her unity it is that makes her invincible.”
Not unfrequently in the New Testament, but
particularly in the Epistles of St. Paul, the Church
is declared to be the Body of Christ. It is declared
to be a living organised body, of which Christ is the
head. All the faithful are its members, linked
together in the closest bonds of union, and the secret
of their spiritual life is their union with Christ, their
head. Men may fashion to themselves a statue to
the perfect image of the human frame, but they
cannot impart life to it. The breath of God alone
can quicken the slime of earth into life and make it
a living man. Our Saviour breathed His own divine
Spirit into the Church which He formed, and He
linked together and harmonised all its parts, so
that it shall ever continue to be His living Body,
and thus give glory to the Most High. In the
Epistle to the Ephesians, as we have seen,
the Apostle teaches : “He gave some Apostles,
and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists,
and other some Pastors and Doctors, for the per-
fecting of the Saints for the work of the ministry,
for the building up of the Body of Christ:
until we all meet in the unity of faith and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ :
that henceforth we be no more children tossed to and
fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine
by the wickedness of men, by cunning craftiness
by which they lie in wait to deceive.” (iv., 11.)
Thus it is that throughout the course of the world’s
history, the Church united with Christ preserves the
unity of Faith, and the faithful, quickened by a
supernatural life, are made partakers of the full
measure of the riches and blessings of redemption.


To accomplish the work of our redemption, our
Saviour took upon Himself the Triple office of our
Teacher, our High Priest, and our Spiritual King.
In each of these He is all-perfect and divine, and, as
the Apostle teaches us, “Christ yesterday and to-day,
the same unto all ages,” He shall continue to exercise
such ministry throughout all time. Enthroned at
the right hand of the Father in heaven, He protects
and sustains the Church which He created, and by
the Spirit of Truth and His own abiding presence
He preserves the sacred deposit of the Faith which
He committed to her, and unceasingly guards the
purity of her teaching. He is the One High Priest,
and, at the same time, the Lamb as if slain yet living,
presenting His sacrifice before the Father, interced-
ing for men and bestowing His divine blessings upon
them. Through the ministry of His Priesthood in
the Church, the same eternal Sacrifice is perpetuated
on our Altars, fulfilling the prophetic words ; “From
the rising of the sun, even to the going down thereof,
My name is great among the Gentiles, and in every
place there is sacrifice, and there is offered to My
name a clean oblation : for My name is great among
the Gentiles, saith the Lord of Hosts.” (Malach. i..
11.) In fine, He is the Supreme King and Lord of
the world and the Church He rules with Almighty
power : all things are subject to Him, and by His
wisdom He controls even the evil deeds of wicked
men, so that all things contribute to the fulfilment
of the merciful designs of God, All the faithful
to-day as eighteen centuries ago are disciples of that
Divine Teacher, and partakers of the Sacrifice of the
Eternal High-Priest, and subjects of His royal
authority. But they are such through the Priest-
hood which He instituted in His Church, and which
He commissioned to teach in His name, to perpetuate
His sacrifice and to govern by His authority. Thus
it is that the Church never ceases to be Christ’s


representative on earth, and in the words of the
Apostle ; “ The fulness ot Him that filleth all in all ”
(Ephes. i. 23).
St. Paul describes the Church as the House of
God on earth. It is not built upon the sand, nor is
it the mere handiwork of man. It stands on the
divinely-strengthened rock, and it is built by the
Redeemer’s hands, and thus it is “ The Church of
the Living God, the Pillar and the Ground of Truth ”
(1 Timoth. iii. 45). Outside the Church, Divine
Truth is not guaranteed to be preserved from false-
hood and deceit. Too easily it is mixed with error,
and becomes a prey to human caprice, adulteration,
and disfigurement. Put the one Church, and that
alone among earthly institutions, holds the inheri-
tance of Divine Truth, and her teaching cannot betray
us into error, for Christ’s abiding presence shall
never fail her, and the Spirit of Truth is ever present
to her, her Lord, her Light, her Life. It is in the
Church that the stream of Truth, as of grace, flowing
from the fountains of our Saviour, shall never cease
to enrich the world with its fertilizing waters, and
to pursue its onward course till it reaches the ocean
of eternity. Thus it is that no unity on earth can be
conceived more perfect than that which is the dis-
tinctive mark of the Catholic Church, whilst at the
same time every varied gift of God and everything
that is richest in the gems of Truth or most beautiful
in the bloom of virtue is her inheritance. The more
men assail hei Divine mission and the greater the
difficulties that are strewn in her path, the more
clearly is her Heavenly strength revealed, and the
more brightly shines the lustre of her diadem of
Truth. “ There are diversities of gifts, but the
same Spirit; and there are diversities of ministries,
but the same Lord ; and there are diversities of
operations, but the same God, who worketh all in
all ” (1 Corinth, xii. 4).


Another figure under which the Church Is pre-
sented in the Sacred Scripture is that of a sheepfold.
The Redeemer is “ the Great Pastor of the Sheep,”
as the Apostles style Him (Hebr. xiii. 20). He
watches over them with all care, and He loves them
with more than a mother’s love. As the Prophet
foretold : “ He shall feed His flock like a shepherd,
and shall gather together the lambs with His arm,
and shall take them up in His bosom; and He Himself
shall carry them that are with young ’’ (Isaiah xl. 10).
Lest anything should be wanting to the perfect unity
which this picture presents, our Saviour, whose pre-
sence was not to be always perpetuated upon earth,
appointed St. Peter to be the chief visible shepherd
of all the spiritual fold. “ Feed My lambs, feed My
sheep,” that is, be pastor of My fold, .were the
memorable words with which our Saviour imparted
to him the Divine commission (John xxi. 15). To
the Sacred writers of the Old Law the Jewish people
were the spiritual fold of Jehovah, and He was their
shepherd guarding them with loving care. As a
consequence, nothing could be more complete than
their religious unity. They had one Law, one High
Priest, one Temple, and their whole religious system
was cast in the mould of unity ; and as the Apostle
writes : “ To them belonged the adoption of children,
and the glory, and the covenant, and the giving of
the law, and the Service of God, and the promises”
(Rom. ix. 4), The mission of the Jewish dispensa-
tion was fulfilled in the coming of the Redeemer. In
the Christian Law the blessings of Redemption were
no longer to be restricted to one race or people, but
the unity of the religious fold was to remain
unchanged. In the outpouring of His mercy, our
Saviour declared to His disciples : “ I am the Good
Shepherd; and 1 know My sheep, and Mine know
Me : and other sheep I have that are not of this
fold ; them also 1 must bring, and they shall hear


My voice, and there shall be one fold and one shep-
herd ” (John x. 14). The Doctor of the Church, St.
Bernard, commenting on these words, thus addresses
the visible Head of the Church : “ Thou art he to
whom the keys were given, to whom the sheep were
entrusted. There are, indeed, also other gatekeepers
of Heaven and pastors of flocks ; but thou hast
inherited both titles, as much more gloriously as
differently in comparison with the others. They
have particular flocks severally assigned to them :
all are entrusted to thee, one flock to one man. Nor
of the sheep alone, but of all the shepherds also,
thou art the one pastor. Dost thou ask me whence 1
prove this? From the Word of the Lord. For, to
whom, I do not say of the Bishops, but of the
Apostles themselves, were all the sheep committed so
absolutely and without distinction ? If thou lovest
Me, Peter, feed My sheep. Nothing is excepted,
where no distinction is made.”
As it is in the unity and holiness of God through
the infinite power and wisdom of the Redeemer that
the unity of the Church has had its origin, so it was
from the pride and selfishness and corruption of the
human heart that the number and diversity of false
religions have sprung which from age to age have
warred against the one true Church of God. Those
sectaries could not destroy the Church’s unity,
because being a Divine work it is indestructible.
They went forth from the Church, but they could
not take with them at their departure the Heavenly
promises and gifts and graces which are her inheri-
tance, nor the Spirit of Holiness and Truth that ever
abides with her. They fell off* as decaying branches
from the living tree, but the tree remained
unimpaired, putting forth new shoots with inexhaust-
ible vitality and yielding its life-giving blossoms and
fruits as before.


Those branches that have fallen from the living
tree may be fashioned as you please; they may be
bundled together with cords of silver or gold ; they
may be adorned with everything most precious of
earth, and with all the art that human genius can
devise, but it is not in the power of man to transform
them into the Divine and life-giving tree of God’s
Holy Church.
If it be asked what was the attitude of the early
Church in regard to those who would sow religious
dissensions among the faithful, the Apostle of Nations
will give us the answer. Writing to the Galatians,,
he says: “Though we, or an angel from heaven,
should preach unto you any Gospel other than that
which we preached unto you, let him be anathema.
As we have said before, so say I now again, if any
man preacheth unto you any Gospel other than that
which ye received, let him be anathema.” (Gal. i., 8.)
Again, addressing the Romans, he no less emphati-
cally insists on maintaining this unity of the Faith :
“ JNow, 1 beseech you, brethren, to mark them who
make dissensions and occasions of stumbling contrary
to the doctrines which ye have learned, and to turn
away from them. For they that are such, serve not
our Lord Christ; . and by pleasing speeches
and fair words they seduce the hearts of the
innocent.” (xvi., 17.)
The Apostle of love, St. John, in his 2nd Epistle,
also writes : “ He that knoweth God, heareth us: he
that is not of God, heareth us not. By this we know
the spirit of truth and the spirit of error.” And
again : “ Whosoever recedeth and continueth not in
the doctrine of Christ, hath not God : he that con-
tinueth in the doctrine, he hath both the Father and
the Son. If any man come to you, and bring not
this Doctrine, receive him not into the house and give
him no greeting, for he that giveth him greeting
partaketh in his evil ways.”


In conformity with this teaching, the great orna-
ment of the Eastern Church (St. Poly carp), though
the meekest and most charitable of men, did not
hesitate to reject the proffered friendship of the
heresiarch Marcion, and to brand him as “ the first-
born of Satan.”
Indeed, the Fathers and other sacred writers, from
age to age, have insisted, with special emphasis, on
the necessity of guarding, at any cost, the priceless
Divine gift of the Church’s unity. St. Ignatius, the
glorious martyr —Bishop of Antioch, disciple of the
Apostles—writes : “ As many as are of God and of
Jesus Christ, these are with the Bishop, and as many
as shall repent and turn to the unity of the Church,
these also shall be of God, that they may live accord-
ing to Jesus Christ. Be not deceived, my brethren,
whosoever folio weth him that createth schism,
inheriteth not the Kingdom of God.”
A century later, Clement of Alexandria attests :
“The true Church is one, the truly ancient Church,
in which are enrolled all who are just according to
God’s purpose. The one Church is associated to the
nature of the Eternal One ; which Church men
violently attempt to divide into many heresies. In
its essence, as in sentiment, in origin, in excellence,
the ancient and Catholic Church is alone. But the
excellence of the Church is in unity, surpassing all
other things, and having nothing similar or equal to
itself.”
In the third century, St. Methodius commends with
no less emphasis this prerogative of unity, whilst he
describes the Church as “ the garden of God arrayed
in the beauty of eternal spring, shining in the richest
splendour of immortalizing fruits and flowers,” and
salutes her as the virginal, unspotted, ever-young and
beautiful royal bride of the Divine Word.


We may allow St. Irenseus to speak for all, for he
represents alike the East and the West, and may
justly be regarded as the great champion of orthodoxy
against all heresies towards the close of the second
century. It is thus he writes : “ God will judge
those who cause schism, men destitute of the love of
God, who have in view their own interest, but not
the oneness of the Church, who, on account of slight
and exaggerated causes, rend and divide, and, as far
as in them lies, destroy the great and glorious Body
of Christ, who have peace on their lips but enmity
in their actions. No corruption can be effected by
them so great as is the perniciousness of schism.”
Again he speaks of the Church as the haven of
rescue, the way of salvation, the entrance to life, the
paradise in this world, of whose tree of life we may
partake. The Church (he adds) is inseparable from
the Holy Ghost; it is His house, His only dwelling-
place on earth : “ Where the Church is, there is the
Spirit of God ; and where the Spirit of God is, there
is the Church and all grace.” Only in the bosom of
the Church (he continues) can we be nursed to life.
To her must we flee to be made partakers of the
Holy Ghost ; separation from her is separation from
the fellowship of the Divine Spirit. On the other
hand, he describes heretics as “ enemies of the Truth
and sons of Satan, to be swallowed up one day, like
the company of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram.”
The whole history of the Church may be said to
be the record of Her marvellous unity. Her teaching
has been the same in the days of persecution as in
the season of security and peace. Her doctrines and
sacraments have been shared alike by the rich and
the poor, the learned and the ignorant, the king and
the peasant. The same fountains of redemption are
flowing for all: the same Divine worship is offered
to the" Most High ; the same visible authority binds
all the faithful together as the Body of Christ.


How different is the lot of those who have sepa-
rated themselves from Holy Church? Unceasingly
they pursue the parent Church with enmity ; but,
rent asunder by their own dissensions, they are
always found at variance among themselves, so that in
the ways of Providence the history of the various
heretical communions is little more than the record
of their variations.
The very yearning after unity which is so charac-
teristic of the Protestant denominations at the
present day, is it not of itself a proof that they are
not in possession of the unit} 7 for which they seek,
and that therefore they hold not the inheritance of
the true Church of Christ ?
It is only a few months ago that a distinguished
Anglican Bishop in his Triennial Charge to his
Clergy took occasion to lament the “ unhappy
divisions ” on doctrinal points that prevailed through-
out the Church in England. In regard to the
Blessed Eucharist alone, he pointed out that no
fewer than eight notoriously discordant opinions
were held among their Churchmen, some contending
that the Blessed Eucharist is a Sacrifice, others that
it is only a Sacrament; some affirming a real objec-
tive presence of our Saviour under the forms of
bread and wine; others admitting no real presence
whatever. For some there are in the Church a
Priest and an altar ; for others, only a Presbyter
and a table. These and many other fundamental
differences rend to the very core the Anglican
Church, and his Lordship adds that there is no sign
of things becoming better. Many had hoped that
the Lincoln decisions might put an end to some of
these dissensions, but it has only made things worse.
The same prelate further tells us that Ecclesiastical
Law about Doctrine and Ritual in England is prac-
tically dead and buried, so that every Clergyman


now does and teaches what he considers right in
accordance with his own ideas.
Need I remark that among the various Pro-
testant denominations the dissensions in the matter
of the Sacred Scriptures are no less Avidespread as
they are no less destructive of their first principles of
Faith. Three centuries ago it was regarded as a
primary maxim among the English Reformers that
the very words of the Bible were inspired. Step by
step the promoters of Anglicanism have receded from
that position, till at the present day no two among
them can be found to agree as to what is the teaching
of their Church regarding the Scripture. It is within
the remembrance of many that a Bishop of the
Anglican Church propounded the theory that the
greater portion of the Sacred Scripture was not
inspired, and the highest tribunals in the Kingdom
decided that he was quite within his rights in doing
so. The higher criticism of the present day goes
still further, and will make us believe that the olden
ideas of the so-called Reformers regarding the
Inspiration of the Sacred Books were little better
than a delusion or an empty dream, and that our
Anglican brethren may be well content if even a
fragment of the Bible be recognised as a truthful
narrative. An eloquent speaker at the Hobart
Congress a few weeks ago piously exclaimed,
“ Higher criticism has robbed us of our Gospels.”
And yet the exponents of this higher criticism hold
some of the most responsible offices in the Universi-
ties and in the Anglican Church. To what source,
then, are Protestants to have recourse that they may
learn the truths of Divine Faith. An authoritative
exponent of the Reformation principles has declared
that “ the Bible and that only, interpreted by our
reason, is the religion of Protestants.” Now the
Bible by their own leaders is ruthlessly snatched
from their hands; whither, therefore, shall they


turn ? Is not their case precisely that which the
Apostle describes when he speaks of the unhappy
lot of those who have forfeited the unity of the
Faith, and are tossed about with the winds of every
varying doctrine, by the tempests of human passion,
and by the deceit and cunning of designing men.
There is a fanciful theory, indeed, which was
held of old by some Calvinists in France, and which
being exploded there, has of late been proposed by a
leading exponent of Protestant ideas in the United
States. The various conflicting theories and sects
of Protestantism, he contends, contribute to its
beauty and add weight to its claims of a divine
mission. And hence it is, as he remarks, that
precisely in the most progressive and active nations,
England and the United States, he might have
added Australia too, we find the greater number of
those conflicting sects and every variety of Protestant
denominations. ‘‘Variety in unity,” he adds, is a
principle of perfection in the domain of nature and of
history; why should it not also prevail in the Christian
Church ? So, too,he says, “there is no harmony with-
out many sounds; and a garden encloses all kinds of
flowers.” Put this enthusiastic admirer of the modern
Peformation seems to forget that it is not variety in
unity, but variety without unity that the history of
the conflicting sects of Protestantism presents, some
affirming as divinely taught and true what others
reiect as diabolical inventions and false. It is not
every multiplicity of sounds that produces harmony,
and it is precisely on such inharmonious and con-
flicting lines that the various Protestant theorists
proceed. So too in many an enclosure it is not
choice flowers with their varied beauty that attract
us, but we find repulsive weeds and briars in their
manifold deformity. It must ever remain a vain
attempt to blend together the discordant elements of


the Protestant sects, or to harmonize their conflict-
ing theories, for the teachings of Divine Faith
cannot be at the same time true and false, rejected
as erroneous and embraced as divine.
What a contrast does the Catholic Church present
to the conflicting theories and the ever-varying
phases of religious life of those who are outside her
pale. She stands before the world arrayed in the
comeliness of virtue as the chosen spouse of Christ
—her brow adorned with the diadem of divine truth.
Fearlessly she proclaims before a hostile world her
commission to be the representative of Christ on
earth, and to preserve to mankind till the end of
time the inheritance of His blessings. Though
spread throughout every nation, she yet maintains a
perfect unity in her teaching, in her sacramental life,
in the'worship that is offered to God. Even those
who raise their voice in enmity against her cannot
fail to recognise this sublime attribute, and they go
so far as to commend the unity of the Catholic
Church as a model which the conflicting sects of
Protestantism would do well to emulate.
Her grand communion spans the whole earth, and
yet her children, whilst differing in everything else,
are in matters of religion of one mind, one belief, one
hope. She is to be found in every known land,
leading every tribe and every tongue to give glory
to the Most High. In the icebound regions of
Alaska and Labrador, and on the inhospitable coasts
of Terra del Fuego, as in our own fair sunny lands,
her missionaries will be everywhere found spreading
out the Kingdom of our Blessed Lord. In the
East and in the West, in the Islands of the Pacific
and in the forests of Central Africa, in the old
centres of civilization, and in the newest Bepublics
rejoicing in the freedom and freshness of youth, the
Church is ever the same—preaching the lessons of


heavenly wisdom alike to the rulers and their sub-
jects, to the rich and the poor, lifting up the fallen,
extending to the outcast her merciful embrace,
unfolding the beauty of Divine truth to the pure of
heart, proclaiming to us all our brotherhood with the
Redeemer, and enriching us with the inheritance of
His graces. All her children, no matter what their
language and condition of life, whether they be free
citizens of a Christian State, or receiving in their rude
wigwams the first rudiments of civilization, or suffer-
ing all the hardships of exile for the faith in Siberia,
all alike obey the supreme spiritual authority of the
Successor of St. Peter, all worship at the same altar,
believe the same Divine truths, and are sanctified by
the same Sacraments.
In her communion is found every blossom of
cheering hope, every richest fruit of peace and
spiritual joy for which the human heart can yearn.
No other unity like hers can anywhere be seen.
The powers of this world have assailed her ; all
the devices of Satan have been brought to bear
against her, yet she has withstood them all.
In the ways of men she is weakness itself, yet
strengthened by the promise of Christ, “ I am with
you all days,” she is fearless amid every assault.
As she has come forth victorious from every conflict
in the past, she serenely advances towards the future,
confident that her triumph shall endure from age
to age, and shall never cease to give glory to the
Most High.
In the Catholic Church, the words of the Prophet
have been fulfilled, “ Thy gates shall be open con-
tinually : they shall not be shut day nor night, that
the strength of the Gentiles may be brought to thee
and their kings may come. . . . And the
children of them that afflict thee, shall come bowing
down to thee, and all that slandered thee shall


worship the steps of thy feet, and shall call thee the
city of the Lord, the Sion of the Holy One of Israel.”
(Is. lx., 11.) And again: “No weapon that is
formed against thee shall prosper ; and every tongue
that resisteth thee in judgment thou shalt condemn.”
(Ib. liv., 17). It was not after the fashion of human
wisdom, or of earthly power that our Saviour insti-
tuted His Church to be the channel of the blessings
of redemption to man. It is not from the riches or
the wisdom of the world, but from Him alone that all
her life-giving graces flow ; from Him proceed all the
authority and dignity with which she is equipped. All
merely human organizations are subject to the vicissi-
tudes of time, and to gradual decay ; and when they
have fulfilled their destiny they, of their own weight,
fall to the ground. But the Church is founded
by Christ, to whom is given all power in heaven and
on earth ; and is quickened by the Holy Ghost, who
abides with her for ever. Thus she bears with her
the seal and sanction of heaven, and holding aloft
the standard of redemption, till the end of time her
mission cannot fail.
By a singular feature in the Church’s mission God
in His mercy so overrules the thoughts and deeds of
evil-designing men that all their assaults only add to
her strength and give new glory to His name. The
persecutions of the first three centuries only resulted
in the whole Homan Empire being gathered into her
fold. The heresies and sects that went forth from
her communion in the fourth century, caused
her teaching to shine before the world in
brighter light. The barbarian natives that rushed
in upon the fated Empire to trample out every
spark of religion and civilization, little thought
that they were being led to receive at the Church’s
hands the waters of regeneration and the birth to
Christian life. The fierce tempests that swept over


the domain of Holy Church at the Reformation
period only served to clear the atmosphere and to
separate the chaff from the good grain. So it is that
from age to age the Church pursues her onward
course, unfolding more and more the merciful designs
of God in regard to man. During the present
century how many times have her enemies foretold
that her course was run and that her end was at end ?
Their wish indeed inspired their prophecy, for it is a
glorious prerogative of the one true Church that
when wicked men seek to spread corruption around
them, their deadliest shafts are aimed at her destruc-
tion. Yet now at the close of the nineteenth century
who will say that she has been overcome ? Is she
not as fearless to-day and as confident in the
Redeemer’s promise, as when the legions of Imperial
Rome first bowed down before the standard of the
cross? As in the past,so in the present her energies are
devoted to uphold the principles of Christian civiliza-
tion, and to strengthen the foundations on which
morality and social order rest. Even the sovereigns
and statesmen that have combated against her have
been forced to acknowledge her power and to fear
her if they do not love her.
Through the same marvellous unity of the Church
we may regard as our own the victories and triumphs
of the Faith in past ages. The countless martyrs
who joyfully offered up their lives in witness of their
fidelity to our Blessed Lord, are our brothers; their
heroism which won the admiration of their Pa*ran
persecutors, their love which was stronger than
death, their patience which overcame the world, their
hope which amidst the most cruel torments intoned
canticles of glory to the Most High, form part of our
rich inheritance. So, too, we rejoice in the glorious
achievements of the missionaries of mediaeval times.
They went forth from their tranquil abodes of piety


to bring into the fold of Christ nations that knew
not God, and they imparted to them together with
the teachings of Heavenly Truth all the purest
blessings of true civilization and of Christian life.
“ How beautiful are the feet of those who evangelize
good tidings, who evangelize peace.” Those cham-
pions of the Cross are our fellow citizens. Their
trophies and their triumphs are ours. And so it is
through the marvellous unity of the Church that all
that was best and brightest and most glorious in the
past eighteen centuries, the virtues of the cloister,
the austerities of the desert, the peace and perfection
of domestic life, the motherly charity extended to the
poor, the mercy shown to sinners, the loving care of
the widow and the orphan, the shelter of the
oppressed, the repose found in her sanctuaries by the
weary of heart, the untiring watchfulness in the
education of youth, all these form part of the Church’s
rich store of merit, and are our inheritance as co heirs
of our Blessed Lord.
We should never cease to return thanks to God
for the manifold blessings which He has thus vouch-
safed to us in Holy Church, It should, moreover,
be our constant prayer that those who are separated
from us may, through the mercy of our Blessed
Lord, be made participators of the same priceless
blessings, so that the truths of Divine faith may
shine the more brightly before men, and all who
profess to be followers' of Christ may offer to God
the homage of their hearts in the “ one fold, under
the one Shepherd.”
May the peace and blessing of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all.
© PATRICK F. CARDINAL MORAN,
Archbishop of Sydney.
St. Mary’s Cathedral,
10th of March, 1894.


