

PASTORAL HOMES
OF
AUSTRALIA












PASTORAL HOMES OF AUSTRALIA




PASTORAL HOMES
OF
AUSTRALIA
Volume 11.
(NEW SERIES)
Published by
THE PASTORAL REVIEW Pty. Ltd.
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, and LONDON
1930


Wholly set up and printed In Australia by
MeCarron. Bird and Co., Printers and Publishers.
479 Collins Street, Melbourne.


LIST OF PROPERTIES AND OWNERS
INCLUDED IN THIS VOLUME
PAGE
Barunah Plains, Vic. . . . . Russell, Executor of the late
James . . . . . . 1
Barwonleigh, Vic. . . . . . . Kelly, Mrs. A. M. . . 337
Ben Lomond, S.A. . . . . Butler, G. T. . . . . 61
Brickhouse, W.A. . . . . The Brickhouse Company . . 121
Buln Gherin, Vic. . . . . . . Beggs, Robert G. . . . . 301
Canowie, Sheaoak, Oraparinna, and
Wilkatana, S.A. . . . . , . Sawers, K. P. P. 13
Clifton, Vic. . . . . . . . . Simpson, A. J. . . 349
Edaggee, W.A. . . . . . . M orrell and Hearman 3
Eurambeen, Vic. . . . . . . Beggs, Theodore . . . , 289
Ihe Glen, S.A. . . . . . . Hay, J. and A. . . 49
Golf Hill, Vic. . . . . . . . . Biddlecombe, Mrs. J. . . 325
Gorrinn, Vic. . . . . . . . . Gorrinn Estate Pty. Limited 361
Keayang, Vic. . . . . . . . . Staughton, A. J. . . 241
Keyneton and Weroona, S.A. . . . . Keynes, J. and R. N. . . 37
Langulac, Vic. . . . . . . . . Twomey, E. R. . . 265
Meerogoolia, W.A. . . . . Hearman, D. J. . . 133
Merrang, Vic. . . . . . . . . Hood, R. A. D. . . . . 253
Mianelup, W.A. . . . . Richardson, O. P. . . 193
Middalya, W.A. . . . . Middalya Pastoral Co. Ltd. 133
Millbrae and Sturtbrae, S.A. . . . . Mills and Son, W. G. 73
Munduney and Moralana, S.A. . . Davies and Sons, John . . 25
Murgoo and Mt. Narryer, W.A. . . Atkins Bros. Limited 109
Nardlah and Pardoo, W.A. . . . . Thompson and Co., F. S. . . 169
Nareeb Nareeb, Vic. . . . . . . Beggs, Hugh N. . . . . 313
Narrapumelap and Rock House, Vic.. . Buckley, Gerald N. . . 277
Padthaway and Lake Roy, S.A. . . Lawson and Sons, A. B. . . 85
Privett, W.A. . . . . House, F. M. . . . , 205
Struan, S.A. . . . . . . . . Robertson, Alexander . . 97
Telyarup, W.A. . . Timms, H. O. . . . . 181
Tillellan, W.A. . . . . . . Piesse, G. A. W. . . . . 229
Woodyarrup, W.A. . . . . Rischbieth Bros. . . . . 217
Wooleen, Mardie and Balmoral, W.A. Sharpe, B. H. , . . . 145
Vanget, W.A. . . . . , . Grant, A. E. 157




INTRODUCTION
IF ever deeds deserved lasting remembrance, they were those which led to the founda-
tion of the great pastoral industry, on which rests Australia's national existence and
hope for the future. In this volume, therefore, is set down history of the almost for-
gotten days of early Australian settlement, and of that subsequent period of development
and consolidation of what the pioneers had already won.
Those deeds may not be as dramatically recorded as they who hunger for sensation
might wish. Mostly it is a plain unvarnished tale of past and present that is told. Contrast
between the two eras is always obvious, but there is no graphic or detailed description of
the disasters that befell in those far off days; of the droughts that wiped out the early flocks;
of the difficulties—more or less unknown to-day—gradually overcome; of the discomforts
endured; of the toil and struggle so frequently brought to nought by tumbling markets
and financial chaos; and finally of the heart breaks of men and women who had given all,
endured all, and finally lost all in one of those catastrophes which in the first days of pas-
toral settlement men were less fitted, or rather less favoured, to withstand than are their
descendants to-day.
All of these things are sketched rather than actually depicted. For all their shadowy
outline, however, they were none the less real, none the less troublous. Metaphorical
flood, fire, and slaughter occur in the pastoral industry in these years of grace as they did
in its infancy, but those who suffer by them prefer to forget rather than cherish the
memory. So it is with most of the distant past. Few recorded their trials, and fewer still
remain who shared in the pioneering and can tell first hand of the hardships and
the fights against odds.
Their descendants to the second and third generation now occupy the old runs, or
more often still a stranger has taken over the work begun by the first settler and he pro-
bably knows little of what went to the first rough fashionings of the orderly, well-improved
property that is his.
Yet all these have done, and are doing, their part in the making of the history of
the Pastoral Homes of Australia. Inevitably, in the natural order of things, will their work
of to-day become part and parcel of the history of Australian development, for these
homes, or at least the majority of them, will sooner or later no longer exist as we know
them. The tide of closer settlement, a tide that will not recede, is advancing and sub-
merging them utterly, or leaving here and there surrounded by its flood an isolated island,
the homestead block of some famous old station. The names remain, likewise all that
they convey to those who can remember the beginnings of settlement, but with the growth


of new generations more and more of those old names become names only and the past
becomes less than a memory. It is, therefore, only through some such record as this aims
to be that the work of those who fashioned, and of those who developed and perfected, the
solid foundations which support the structure of our economic life can be held in deserved
remembrance.
Where to-day is a vista of ploughed earth or flourishing crops and all the other
visible signs of a farming community, not so very long ago stretched broad sheep pastures
cleared, fenced, watered and hewn from the rough. These have passed from man s ken,
others are passing, and yet others will disappear in the future, but that the part they have
played in our national growth shall not be forgotten there are set down in the following
pages brief histories of some of them. Separately they tell of what men and women have
striven to do and have done for themselves and their descendants. Collectively they con-
stitute the story of the evolution of primary production from its raw beginnings to its
specialised and more or less perfected form as we know it.
No less important, though perhaps less spectacular than the task of establishing and
improving the general flocks and herds, has been the work, so often recorded in these
pages, of the stud breeders of Australia. Both in this book and in the columns of The
Pastoral Review is shown how they have made possible the later advance of the industry in
general, and that it is they who must always be indispensable to its continued prosperity.
By their perseverance, their long experience, their skill, and their money invested and
reinvested in their industry, favoured by, yet often despite, natural conditions, they
have established a level of quality, particularly in regard to the Merino, that has
no equal in the world. They founded and have maintained a source of pure
blood upon which the general flocks of the country are able to draw, without danger of
exhaustion, for the retention and steady improvement of a standard which it is vital should
not fall away in these times of increasing competition from other countries. Their
“essentialness” in the scheme of things is so obvious that it need not be stressed. That they
should continue to carry on their work, not only unhampered, but encouraged by every
incentive that is in the power of Governments to offer is a wish that must surely materialise.
The very best that the photographer's and publisher's art can furnish has gone to the
compilation of this volume. Many thousands of miles have been covered by train, by car
and aeroplane to secure the wherewithal for its makings, and our acknowledgments for the
use of many of the pictures are due to The Sydney Mail and the following photographers:—
Messrs. W. Hall and Co. (Sydney), J. A. Sears (Melbourne), and R. G. Illidge (Perth). It
is perhaps right, too, in a concluding word that there should be associated with its produc-
tion the name of Mr. Arthur Krone, for it is in a measure due to his advocacy of the
undertaking of the work, and to his keen interest in its progress, that its concrete emergence
from a nebulous idea is due.
Melbourne, March, 1930.


BARUNAH PLAINS, HESSE, VICTORIA
The Property of the Executors of the late James Russell
BARUNAH PLAINS Station is recognised through-
out the pastoral industry as one of the leading
Merino fine wool sheep-breeding establishments
of the Commonwealth, and as such represents undeniably
one of the most valuable assets possessed by the State of
Victoria.
The property has an area of 46,000 acres freehold at
the present time (1929), and is situated within easy
consistently to the highest standards of line breeding by a
family whose name must go down to posterity with the
honoured pioneers of Australia and of its wool industry.
The run w r as known as Long Waterholes when Mr. A.
Hopkins settled there originally, and the late Mr.
Thomas Austin became the owner at the latter end of
the forties. In 1851 the property was purchased by
M essrs. Thomas Russell and Company, who at once set
BARUNAH PLAINS
reach of the wool markets, rail and steamship facilities,
and the great metropolis of Melbourne; lying 30 miles
west of Geelong, 45 miles south of Ballarat, and 75 miles
from Melbourne, to each of these important centres it is
connected by good roads. The village of Inverleigh is
10 miles distant, whilst the Winged siding on the
Maroona railway, which intersects the run, is only 2 miles
from main headquarters. The postal address is Hesse,
and the telephone number of the homestead Inverleigh 4.
Having been taken up in the early forties the property
is of historic interest, but its importance to the sheep
world lies in the fact of its flocks having been reared
about the task of evolving the most valuable type of
Merino to suit the district, using for their foundation
the sheep introduced to the run by the previous owner,
and appointing Mr. Kininmonth, a keen judge of sheep
and an expert studmaster, as resident manager. At this
time the name was changed to Barunah Plains. The
property and stock were acquired subsequently by Messrs.
George Russell and Sons (the late Mr. Thomas Russell
being the youngest brother of the late Mr. George Rus-
sell), and in due course Messrs. J. and A. Russell became
the proprietors, these partners being the sons of George
Russell. Finally, Barunah Plains passed into the sole


THE SPACIOUS
BALL ROOM
THE DRAW-
ING ROOM
RECEPTION ROOMS AT BARUNAH PLAINS
BARU X A II PLAI X S, VICT O Rl A


A PORTION OF THE HOMESTEAD GARDEN
THE WESTERN ASPECT OF BARUNAH PLAINS HOMESTEAD
BARU N A II PLAI N S, VIC TOR IA


STUD RAMS
CARRYING
UNDER 11
MONTHS
WOOL
possession of the late Mr. James Russell, who worked
hard and planned soundly for the future of the flock, and
for the progress of the sheep industry as a whole, even-
tually becoming a leading pastoralist (he was president
of the Australian Sheepbreeders’ Association in 1893 and
from 1907 to 1910), and after his death in January 1911
the property was carried on by his eldest son, the late
Mr. George Kincraig Russell.
Upon the death of the latter in 1915 the management
of the estate was carried on by the Trustees, with Mr.
William Nelson as overseer. He had been employed
on the station since the early eighties, but in 1922 the
whole of the supervision of the stud and of the business
of the property generally was taken over by the youngest
but one of the five sons, Mr. James Kincraig Russell.
That he has proved equal to the responsibility has been
borne out by a close and unremitting application to the
work, in which enthusiasm, pronounced skill and success-
ful results have stamped him as a born sheepman. Mr.
Russell has the assistance of a right-hand man in Mr.
Jack Campbell, who has been on Barunah Plains for
about thirty-five years in various capacities, hence there
is an administration in force to-day that bodes w ell for
the perpetuation of the high principles laid down by the
TYPE OF SPECIAL STUD EWES, CARRYING UNDER 11 MONTHS WOOL
11. IRUA A II rLAI N s. VICT() R I A


SPECIAL STUD
RAM 3 YEARS
OLD, NO. 500
Both these sires
were carryi ng
under 11 months
wool when photo-
graphed
SPECIAL STUD
RAM 3 YEARS
OLD, NO. 564
RARU N A 11 PLAI \ S, VICT() R I A


THE DRIVE TO BARUNAH PLAINS HOMESTEAD
head of the family.
Made up of a well-balanced mixture of sound, sweet,
healthy rises, which contain a great deal of volcanic
stone and undulating tussocky plains, all of which bear
an abundance of native grasses, kangaroo grass and white
top predominating, the conditions all over the run are
admirable for wool-growing purposes. The average rain-
fall is 21 in. per annum, but it is on the erratic side, giv-
ing rise to an occasional drought throughout a fairly wide
belt of the district, such as the one which commenced in
1925, and was broken only in the autumn of 1928, and
which was the worst on record. Almost the whole of
the Barunah Plains country is too hard for the plough,
and as a result it is possible to cultivate only a few
patches of the less stony areas. In this direction about
1000 acres are let out on shares for wheat and oats and
some 150 acres cropped for oaten hay by the owners for
their own use.
The management do not lose sight of the likelihood of
a dry season coming along when least expected, and have
made provision to store in well-constructed silos and sheds
up to 6000 bags of oats, equal to about 20,000 bushels,
and this is fed out to the stock only when absolutely
necessary. Otherwise the sheep fend for themselves out
upon the open pastures, where natural timber simply does
not exist, and over which sweep gales of wind in the
winter time. These severe conditions enable none but
the hardiest type of animal to thrive. They exemplify
a law of nature that is as old as nature herself, that the
fittest shall survive, and as the sheep here not only sur-
vive, but grow out into healthy, beautiful specimens of
the true Australian Merino, it speaks well for the splen-
did constitution which has been bred into them over a
long period of years. Denied the protection of native
trees, the sheep on Barunah Plains nevertheless enjoy
a measure of comfort from the long plantations of sugar
gums, pines and wattle which were set up many years
ago, and the extension of which is being proceeded with
year by year.
For the water supply the property depends upon wells,
surface tanks, and sub-artesian bores, the latter running
in depth down to about 100 ft., and whilst the under-
ground water is inclined to be brackish it has proved
excellent for the general health of the stock. A natural
supply is afforded by the Warrambine Creek, which flows
through some of the paddocks, and for the homestead and
gardens large catchment tanks are provided. There are
over 100 paddocks on the property, all practically free
from rabbits, and fenced in a creditable manner, especially
so with regard to the vermin-proof stone walls which
stretch across the country for miles. In some of these
paddocks subterranean clover has been sown with success-
BARU N A II PLAI N S, VICT 0 R IA


ful results, and in other respects the country is worked
for stud breeding purposes under a very stringent policy
of improvement.
Worthy of special note is the special ram enclosure
within a stone’s throw of the railway siding, alongside
the homestead of Mr. J. K. Russell. Of considerable
size, and improved by means of top-dressing and the in-
troduction of nutritious fodder plants and grasses, the re-
serve is used for topping off sale and show sheep, and its
verdant slopes, sheltered by rows of matured trees and
set off by the dense foliage and extensive flower gardens
around the Wingeel house, are a pleasure to see. There
is a high order of efficiency in each and every detail of
the appointments throughout this exceptionally well-im-
proved property, and quite appropriately the Barunah
Plains homestead and surroundings figure as a show place
of the Western District.
No less commendable from both an architectural and
servicable point of view is the woolshed, which is built of
bluestone, with the wool floor running out at right angles
to the shearing board, which is about 200 ft. long, and
contains twenty stands of machines. The management
would prefer blades for shearing the whole Hock, but find
it too difficult to get the right kind of labour, hence for
some years now the work has been done with machines.
All stud sheep, however, are shorn by blades during latter
part of August and early September. The shed has plenty
WARRAMBINE CREEK
AND PLANTATIONS
of light and space, and is kept scrupulously clean, whilst
there is cover for about 2000 sheep. Elsewhere on the
station elaborate bluestone buildings meet the eye and
strike a convincing note of good management.
The wool clip reaches the third series of the Geelong
sales as a rule, and at the 1928 shearing the count totalled
40,500 sheep of all ages, but this is in excess of the nor-
mal capacity of the property, which is about 33,000, in-
cluding lambs, after all the surplus sheep have been sold.
April and May are the lambing months, after which an
average of about 75 per cent, lambs are marked, although
in 1928, which was a very good season, following upon
a three years drought, 824 per cent, lambs were obtained
from the general breeding ewes numbering 13,000.
1 he Barunah Plains Merinos are characterised by a
type possessing wonderful uniformity in size, shape and
covering. Almost without exception the sheep are large,
long and roomy, particularly the ewes, whilst generally
the outstanding features, apart from a pleasing freedom
of movement, are their plain bodies, strong heads, soft
open faces, deep sides and nice fronts, and well-formed,
straight legs. Year after year they grow a fleece of
magnificent quality. This is a long-stapled, bright, dense
wool of beautiful soft handle, chock full of character,
exceptionally clean, and having all the attributes of the
most desirable high-yielding wool for spinning purposes.
The quality runs consistently into the 70’s count.
BARU N A II PL AIX S, VICT() R I A


1017
Fleece.
Top Price.
. . 304
Lambs.
Top Prie
244
1918
.. 30|
254
1919
. . 30
26
1920
.. 444
194
1921
. . 31
28
1922
. . 36|
374
1923
.. 464
364
1924
.. 534
47
1925
.. 41
284
1926
.. 35
404
1927
. . 35
484
1928
.. 294
32
The incomparable reputation for quality and high yield
enjoyed by the general run of the Western District s
Merino flocks finds a great deal of its expression in the
wool produced on Barunah Plains. After all, it is the
actual result at public auction which sets the seal of good
breeding upon any clip, and the following table of prices
paid over the last decade by manufacturers in all parts
of the textile world for the “Plains clip best indicates
the merit of this fine Merino wool: —
The last clip total-
led 1043 bales (a re-
cord), and the prices
for the 1924 clip estab-
lished an Australian
and New Zealand re-
cord for greasy Merino
wool. Lambs’ wool in
1927 also figures con-
spicuously in the re-
cords, and taking them
all round the above
prices are more than
satisfactory. Moreover,
it must he pointed out
that for many years
over 50 per cent, of
the clip has been made
up of fleece lines,
and as the output
runs into several
hundreds of bales annually, it shows most forcibly what
the owners have achieved after their years of patient and
skilful breeding methods. The sheep are also heavy cut-
ters. On the average the lambs cut 3 to 4 lbs. per head,
and the grown sheep in a good year have averaged just
on 11 lbs., whilst stud ewes cut up to 14 lbs., and the
stud rams over 23 lbs. per head, which, considering the
fine quality produced, are highly remunerative weights.
The history of the stud flock dates back to the forties,
when the late Mr. Austin commenced with well-bred
Merinos brought from his family’s stud in Tasmania, the
Hill Stud. The sheep were descendants of the old
Dunrobin Merino stud, one of the earliest flocks in the
Commonwealth. In 1851 Messrs. T. Russell and Co.
picked out the best of the ewes and mated them with rams
bought from the late Mr. J. L. Currie, of Larra, and
from the late Mr. John Bell, of Warrambeen, both of
whom were leading stud breeders. A special stud flock
was founded in 1860 by choosing 150 of the most desir-
able ewes from the flock and covering them with specially
selected stud rams from Larra, augmenting this good
start three years later with a Rambouillet sire. Although
this ram died after only one year’s service his progeny
grew out satisfactorily and imparted valuable characteris-
tics to the succeeding generations in the stud, and actually
the existing double stud flocks on Barunah 1 lams to-da\
have been guided up from this special stud formed in
1860.
Later on rams from
Ercildoune were intro-
duced, but for very
many years now the
stud has been sub-
jected to careful in-
breeding. A thorough
record was kept of
the service of every
sire, and these histories
played no small part
in the policy of line
breeding which has
been developed so suc-
cessful ly. Over a
dozen families are
used for mating pur-
poses to-day, and of
the 2500 stud breed-
ing ewes in the two
top studs 1600 are
labelled and pedigreed. Only once or twice have
experiments been made with outside rams, but the pro-
geny failed to reach standard and were eliminated,
so that the stud flocks are absolutely pure to the original
strain.
One only has to look over the Barunah Plains sheep to
see that the sires throw true to type. Phis is one of their
indisputable traits, and a reason why breeders of fine
wool flocks uphold these sheep as ideal for their require-
IN THE SMOKING ROOM AT WINGEEL
BAR U N All PLAI N S, VICT 0 R IA


WINGEEL HOUSE AND GARDEN, THE RESIDENCE OF MR. JAMES K. RUSSELL
BA RUN AH PLAINS, VICTORIA


THE WOOLSHED AND MEN'S QUARTERS
ments. The stud has gained distinction also by its suc-
cesses in shows prior to, hut principally since, the year
1880, numerous prizes being won at the Australian Sheep-
bredeers’ Show in Melbourne and at Ballarat (w hich is
reputed to be perhaps the most important fine wool sheep
show in Australia), as well as at Hamilton, Horsham,
Geelong, Euroa, and other centres, and also at the Mel-
bourne Royal Show. Enumeration of these awards is
unnecessary, but it is of significance to mention that from
1907 to the present no fewer than 48 championships have
been annexed at the Ballarat Show alone, whilst the most
meritorious of the recent successes include the grand
championship at the Melbourne Sheep Show in
1927, and again in 1928, with a fine wool ram, and
the cup for the greatest aggregate of points at Ballarat
in 1928.
A great many of the leading wool clips of the Western
District owe their success to the use of Barunah Plains
rams, and not a few of the Hocks were founded on this
blood. But sheepmen from other centres than the
Western District are numbered amongst the regular cus-
tomers on the station’s books, and altogether the output,
which averages approximately 800 flock and stud rams per
annum, for which the average price charged is about 10
guineas per head, can be put down as going to mam
parts of the world, including South America, South
Africa, Geneva, and France, as well as to New
South Wales and Tasmania. Barunah Plains Merinos
are an ideal type of sheep for use in flocks where a fine
silky texture is desired in the wool, and having splendid
constitution and the best of breeding, can be recom-
mended to flockmasters with every confidence.
In addition to the sheep the owners breed a herd of
beef Shorthorn cattle and a herd of Red Devons. The
STABLES AND OUTBUILDINGS AT THE HOMESTEAD
BARU N A II PL Al\ S , VICTORIA


TWO-YEAR-OLD STUD EWES
STUD EWES AND LAMBS
TWO-YEAR-OLD STUD EWES
THE BARUNAH PLAINS FINE WOOL MERINO STUD
ALL THE ABOVE EWES ARE CARRYING UNDER 11 MONTHS WOOL
BARU V A II PLAI N S. VICT U R I A


former numbers about 60 head of breeding cows at the
present time, and is descended from cattle bred by the
Robertson Bros, many years ago. Well-bred bulls only
have been used, such as Clifton Cherry Duke, by the
famous 40th out of Chorus, bv Lindenow Duke of Derri-
SHORTHORN BULL NOW IN USE AT BARUNAH PLAINS
mut 32nd; Merrimu Duke of Derrimut 10th, bred by
Mr. Robert Dugdale and sired by a Lindenow bull out
of Oxford Countess 36th; and others of equally high
quality. The stud bull now in use is Metro Lord Luck
Bth.
The herd of Devons is purebred and of high merit,
nothing but the best blood procurable being introduced
to the breeding cows. It is of interest to record that
this stud was founded with cows purchased from the late
Mr. J. C. Manchee’s Glenmoan stud near Quirindi,
N.S.W., and the bulls used in the past include imported
sires, as well as others from Carngham and from Havilah,
the latter stud being in New South Wales. Hulls also
have been bought lately from the well-known 1 asmanian
breeder, Mr. Grubb, of Strathroy. These cattle are-
flourishing at Barunah Plains, and sell well to the trade
owing to the attractive grain of their flesh and othei
features.
There are also a few draughts and half-draughts bred
on the property, and these horses reflect the same high
standard of breeding which has made Barunah Plains
CLYDESDALE SIRE IN USE AT BARUNAH PLAINS
famous for its Merino sheep and wool. A few stud
book Clydesdale mares are kept and the present sire is a
New Zealand bred horse.
TYPICAL COUNTRY ON BARUNAH PLAINS
BARU X A H PLAI N S, VICT 0 R I A


CANOWIE, SHEAOAK, ORAPARINNA AND WILKATANA,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The Properties of K. P. P. Sawers, Esq.
THE history of the Canowie flocks, now owned and
carried on by Mr. Kenneth Sawers at Canowie
and Sheaoak, 125 miles north of Adelaide,
traces back to the pioneering days of the Merino in South
Australia, when the two brothers, Dr. J. H. and Dr.
W. J. Browne, showed their incontestable judgment in
acquiring those extensive runs, Booboorowie and Canowie.
1 his country lay in a belt of clean, well-grassed ranges
Sawers in April 1925. A month earlier he had acquired
the tops of the Canowie stud—-386 ewes and two rams —
at the Canowie Pastoral Company Limited’s dispersal
sale.
Elevated more than 2000 ft. above sea level, and with
an average annual rainfall of 18 in., biting frosts and
snow in winter and high temperatures in summer are not
uncommon on Canowie. Nevertheless the country has a
THE CANOWIE HOMESTEAD
of hills between which are soft open valleys. To-day,
subdivided into mixed farming and grazing areas, with
lucerne blocks changing hands at £6O an acre, these old
stations provide a wealth of productivity.
CANOWIE AND SHEAOAK
Canowie remains among the most northern of the
Merino studs of this State. Its freehold area is 2302
acres, being the homestead block purchased by Mr.
healthy covering of grasses, is very sound, and free from
stock diseases. Upon it only the hardiest type of sheep
will thrive. As every sheepman knows, these conditions
are ideal factors in a stud, and when such endowments
are followed up by complete improvements and capable
administration, as is the case at Canowie under Mr.
Sawers’ regime, the future is assured.
The homestead, with its colony of imposing outbuild-
ings, lies 12 miles -west of Hallett railway station. In


SPECIAL STUD MERINO RAMS
order to augment his holding Mr. Sawers bought 3990
acres of the southern end of old Canowie and the northern
part of Booboorowie, including 800 acres known as old
North Booboorowie ram paddock. This is now called
Sheaoak, and perpetuates the name of his flocks bred on
Sheaoak Hills, near Hallett, a property previously owned
by Mr. Sawers and sold to the Government.
There are 6000 stud sheep on the properties, and they
embrace the only two original pure Canowie blood stud
flocks in existence. Having consolidated these flocks at
their birthplace, the owner is carrying on the stud under
the name of Canowie, with C. H. Adams as manager. Mr.
Sawers is a capable and energetic studmaster, and holds
the School of Alines Diploma and Exhibition Aledal for
knowledge of sheep husbandry, and wool and wool fibres.
He has a wide, practical grasp of the principles of stud
breeding. He rears his sheep under natural conditions
entirely, and will have nothing to do with pampering.
Founded in 1839 upon a selection of pure Merino ewes
mated with Negretti rams, Canowie stud was later
ANOTHER GROUP OF CANOWIE BRED SPECIAL STUD RAMS
CANOWIE, SHEA OAK, ORAPARINNA AND HA LK AT AN A, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


GROUP OF STUD RAMS
changed over to the Rambouillet type of ram, five of
which were imported from France in 1859. The stud
owes much of its progress to the prepotency of the Ram-
bouillet rams, and it was unnecessary to introduce any
fresh blood from 1864 to 1906. During that long span
of years the stud distinguished itself at many leading
shows, emphasing its superiority in 1875, when 23 stud
rams, sold at an average of 150 guineas each in Mel-
bourne, were sent into Victoria, New South Wales and
Queensland. They were the first South Australian
M erino stud rams to be introduced into flocks in the
eastern States.
MR. K. P. P. SAWERS' TOWN HOUSE IN STANNINGTON AVENUE, TOORAK, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
CANOWIE. SHEA OAK, ORAPARINNA AND JVILKATANA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


The introduction of the ram Donald Dinnie, purchased
at 1200 guineas in 1906, had the desired effect of thicken-
ing up the fleeces without impairing the staple, while the
remarkably prepotent qualities of this famous ram, joined
for eight seasons with picked Canowie stud ewes, gave a
most useful fillip to the stud. This was then divided
into the pure Canowies and the Canowie-Uonald Dinnie
familjq and among the stud’s achievements of more recent
years was that of winning champion honours at the
Adelaide Royal Show three times in succession—in 1910,
1911 and 1912.
Canowie stud also sold many notable sheep to South
1908, when it was purchased by Airs. R. M. Sawers.
From that date it has been conducted by Mr. K. P. P.
Sawers, who ultimately bought it from Airs. Sawers in
1913, together with 2400 ewes. Since then there have
been additions of 50 stud ewes from Austin-Wanganella
in 1916 and 20 from Uardry in 1920.
Until 1914 no rams were used other than pure
Canowie-bred sires, but after that, in order to secure
greater covering of a 60/64’s super combing strength,
individual sheep were worked into the flock from Collins-
ville, S.A., and Uardry, N.S.W. The combined Cano-
wie stud is now registered as block No. 338 in volume
STUD EWES AND LAMBS
Africa at prices ranging from 500 to 800 guineas, while
the well-known Koonoona stud, South Australia, paid
700 guineas for the ram Majuha, creating at the time
a record for a Merino sire hred and sold within the
State.
Thus it is apparent that when in 1925 Mr. Sawers
acquired 386 special Canowie ewes in lamb—the cream
of the stud—there was pure blood for his future plans,
bred in a straight line for 86 years.
The present Canowie (late Sheaoak) stud was founded
in 1897 by the late Thomas Goode, formerly manager
of Canowie, by a selection of rams and ewes from the
No. 1 Canowie stud. It was carried on by him until
seven of the Australian Stud Merino Flock Register.
The leading sires are known as 2.38, 2.34, 1.336 and
4.186, all of which are typical of the Canowie male sheep,
and are powerfully built, outstanding rams, of great
vigour and constitution, big framed, plain bodied, and
open faced, with an even covering of dense wool, and
especially sound on the backs. With a strong masculine
turn of the horns, they are an attractive valuable type of
sheep, thoroughly adapted for a strenuous life.
Some very good sheep ranking among the sires of the
past include the ram Flereward, purchased in 1921 for
1000 guineas from Uardry, and Royal Charles, for which
2500 guineas was paid to Collinsville. Both these rams
CANOWIE, SHEAOAK, ORAPARINNA AND WIEKATANA. SOUTH AUSTRALIA


STUD RAM NO. 14, BRED AT CANOWIE
died in 1926. Another, 2.39, which died a year pre-
viously, deserves mention on account of the remarkable
preponderance of males in his get, the ram lambs in one
season totalling 80 per cent. He grew big, bold, bright
wool, and as a 4-tooth in 1924 cut 33 lbs.
The Uardry and Collinsville rams were the only out-
crossings, and these, mated with pure Canowie ewes, gave
a half-blood Canowie sheep, the results from which are
crossed on to the Donald Dinnie strain that has been
kept distinct in the stud, affording scope to cater for a
wide demand for high-class rams.
The output usually runs into about 500 head per
annum, and these sale rams find a ready market. In
1927 the following disposals were made:—l6 rams, in-
cluding one extra special, to South Africa; 190 flock rams
to Olive Downs, New South Wales; 100 flock rams
to Gnalta, New South Wales; 100 flock rams to Arcoona,
north-west of Port Augusta, South Australia; 15 selected
rams to Koo-owie, South Australia; and one special ram
to the Hawker district, South Australia. In addition,
Oraparinna and Wilkatana Stations were supplied. The
wool clip is well recognised on the Adelaide show floors,
and brings a satisfactory price every season, while clips
grown from Canowie blood are frequently near the top
prices obtained at the sales. Mr. Sawers aims at a
60/64’s quality throughout, and the Canowie stud repre-
sents what might be described as the type admirably
suited to low rainfall country.
In the vicinity of Canowie and Sheaoak much intense
culture is carried on, more than 2000 acres being under
CANOWIE, SHEA OAK, (JR APA RINK A AND IVILRA'T AN A, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


STUD EWES AND
LAMBS AT CANOWIE
CANOWIE, SHEA OAK, ORAPARINNA AND IF ILKA TAN A, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


THE THOROUGHBRED STALLION PEITHIAS (IMP.), THE STUD SIRE AT CANOWIE
lucerne, while 1000 acres are devoted to wheat growing
on the share system. At each station there is an up-to-
date wool shed, yards, and out-buildings. September
is the usual shearing month, and in April-May
the lambing takes place. The two-tooths in 1927 cut
22 to 27 lbs. of wool a head.
ORAPARINNA
I his station in picturesque surroundings in the Flinders
Range, South Australia, was purchased in 1922 by Mr.
Sawers. For the preceding 31 years it had been used
as a cattle proposition, and was in an unimproved state
when taken over. Yet within two years a good wool clip
was taken off it, and in 1927 27,000 sheep went through
the shed. This achievement was the outcome of an
ambitious scheme of improvement upon which, during the
first two years, £25,000 was invested in labour and
material.
Oraparinna is situated 50 miles north-west of Flawker,
on the eastern side of the Flinders Range. Its 320
square miles is an expanse of rough, hilly country, very
high and clean and well grassed, with a rainfall averag-
ing 12.64 in. over 35 years. There is a wealth of natural
rugged beauty in the high pine-covered slopes, gum-lined
water courses and shady mountain springs, and it is sur-
prising that the place remained undeveloped so long.
Hans Heysen has found great scope for his brush in the
beauties of this landscape, and of thirteen oil paintings
selected by the Sydney Art Gallery to send to the National
6VM OUT E, SHEAOAK, ORAPARINNA AND JVILKATANA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


Gallery in London, eleven represent scenes on
Oraparinna.
Many years ago wool off the adjoining property,
Aroona—now portion of Oraparinna, and an out-station
made famous by Heysen—frequently topped the market
in London, and this fact was borne in mind when Mr.
Sawers took up the task of reclaiming the country from
the wild dogs which overran it.
To-day there are 128 miles of vermin-proof fences
surrounding and subdividing the run, which is entirely
freed from dogs and rabbits. 1 here is a new and modern
woolshed, together with a fine homestead equipped with
two sets of wireless, and substantial accommodation for
men and stores. Water is laid on to various points of
the station.
WILKATANA
On the western side of the b finders Range, about 25
miles north of Port Augusta, is another of Mr. Sawers
sheep holdings, which embraces 120 square miles of salt-
bush plains, one-third of which is perpetual leasehold.
This is Wilkatana, which, in native terms, means “Wild
Dog Water.” It was taken up in 1917, and has a carry-
ing capacity of 80 sheep to the mile. Ihe flock of puic
Canowie blood sheep grown there generally numbers
about 10,000, but in the dry season of 1927 the total did
not exceed 5000. For three years subsequent to 1924 no
water ran into the dams, and yet the sheep were active
and in fat condition, a result which indicates that it is
exceptionally good country.
Wilkatana has no altitude beyond a few low sandhills.
A PANORAMIC VIEW FROM CANOWIE HILL
In 1926 Oraparinna was the only run in South Aus-
tralia supporting 24,000 sheep without wells or dams on
it. Since then two wells have been sunk, but the natural
streams, one of which flows through 15 miles of the
station, give abundant permanent water. In addition to
other improvements 52 miles of private telephone lines
have been laid, and two out-stations supplied with modern
well-built dwellings.
Other improvements are being effected, and already
leaseholds in the district have increased in value conse-
quent upon the influence of this enterprising pastoralist.
Since 1925 the wool from Oraparinna, which is stocked
with Canowie blood sheep, has topped the far northern
clips at the Adelaide sales. The big-framed sheep grow
a heavy fleece of 60’s quality, and this wool is soft hand-
ling, bulky, and of great commercial value.
Most of the plains, as a matter of fact, are below sea
level. Myall and sandalwood form the sole varieties of
timber, and the sheep do well on this top feed in dry
times. This property is subdivided into five by five mile
paddocks, and fenced with netting and ring chain
boundaries. All vermin has been cleared. Four good
wells are in use, and from these water is run out to the
paddocks for several miles. In August, 1928, Mr.
Sawers had the good fortune to strike an artesian bore at
a depth of 236 ft., giving a flow of two thousand gallons
of excellent stock water an hour.
Wilkatana is well represented by its annual clip, and
in 1927 made per lb. for the fleece lines. It
finished third to Balah and Yardea clips, which realised
id. per lb. more, and all these stations have used Canowie
Blood.
CANOWIE, SHEAOAK, (JRAPARINNA AND WILKATANA, SOUTH AUSIRAEIA


THE CANOWIE WOOLSHED
THE HORSE YARDS AND STABLES AT CANOWIE
CANOWIE, SHEAOAK, ORAPARINNA AND JVILKATANA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


THOROUGH BRED
YEARLINGS, THE
FIRST PROGENY OF
PEITHIAS (IMP.),
AT CANOWIE
HEAD STUDY
OF PEITHIAS
CANOWIE, SHE A OAK, OKA PARISH A AND WILKAT AN A, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


MEN’S QUARTERS AND OFFICE AT CANOWIE
Thoroughbreds
Mr. Sawers is also keenly interested in breeding blood
stock. He founded a stud in 1915, when he bought a lot
of young mares in Sydney, including Porooma, dam of
Paroodus; Almolite, dam of Drimdena; and afterwards
some daughters of Comedy King and Sea Prince. These
were never seen under silk, for Mr. Sawers believes in
putting unraced mares to the stud if the blood lines are
proved, in order to retain their full vitality. He has no
fewer than 36 first-class mares at Canowie, and purchased
the imported sire Peithias, whose pedigree speaks for
itself.
SHEARERS' QUARTERS AT CANOWIE
CANOWIE. SHEA OAK. ORAPARINNA AND IV ILK A TANA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


Peithias is proving a successful sire, if anything is to
be judged by bis progeny. They look real aristocrats.
1 here is not a bad legged or faulty coloured youngster
among them. Pbey are beautifully topped and balanced,
450 BALES OF WOOL FROM THE FIRST SHEEP SHORN THERE FOR
32 YEARS STACKED OUTSIDE ORAPARINNA WOOLSHED IN 1923
and show the heavy quarters of the sire. Mr. Sawers has
refused many requests for services by Peithias to outside
mares.
The Canowie studmaster is aiming to breed the Per-
simmon strain strongly in one section of the stud from
Comedy King and Sea Prince mares, and in other lines
gets The Welkin-Carbine blood through Daius, as twelve
of the Daius fillies have gone to the stud unraced. Two
of his latest purchases are imported
mares by Cignus and Lamond. Snowy
Sale, by Cignus, out of a Bachelor’s
Double mare, is the exact blood strain
of the dam of the last English Derby
winner. Millbrook, the imported
mare, by Lamond, belongs to a strain
well known in New Zealand and Aus-
tralia through Limerick.
Batches of yearlings have sold well
in Melbourne and Adelaide; a nice
lot were sent to Perth for the 1928
sales, and averaged excellent prices.
They were by the good Daius, who
was by The Welkin out of the Wal-
lace mare Danaide, and a full brother
to Furious. Daius’ career at the stud
was tragically cut short in 1926, but
he sired good winners in Paroodus,
Drimdena, Rabneb, Little Mervie,
Hereward, Darius, Daistep, Canowie,
and so on.
Personal
Mr. K. P. P. S awers, a son of a worthy Scot and
pioneer pastoralist, Mr. A. D. Sawers, was born at Salis-
bury, South Australia, in 1876. He spent his early life
on his father’s station, Uno, west of Port Augusta, and
now owned by Mr. H. H. Dutton. He was edu-
cated at Prince Alfred College and by private tuition,
and subsequently studied wool classing
at the South Australian School of
Mines.
In 1907 he visited England on a
health trip, and returned a year later
to manage Sheaoak Hills, and took
over the property and stud in 1913-
1914. From 1915 to 1919 Mr.
Sawers was senior valuer for the
Federal Land Department. He de-
voted, by special arrangement, half
his time from his stud business on this
essential work, which was certainly not
undertaken for popularity or profit, nor
without serious thought. During those
five years nearly the whole of the
settled portion of the State was
covered.
Mr. Sawers in 1917 married
Dorothy, daughter of Charles Mor-
timer M uirhead, a well-known Ade-
laide barrister, and the family consists of a son (Kenneth
Muirhead) and two daughters (Betty Primrose and Rose-
mary Margaret). Mr. Sawers’ town house is “Sheaoak,”
Stannington-avenue, Marryatville. He has an interest in
Pitcairn Estate, in the north-east of the State, with his
brother Ernest (manager), and the sons of the late
Ronald Leslie Sawers.
Mr. and Mrs. A. D. Sawers, who in 1927 respectively
BIRDSEYE VIEW OF ORAPARINNA STATION IN THE FLINDERS RANGES
celebrated the 93rd and 80th anniversaries of their birth,
are enjoying the “twilight of life” at their residence,
Partridge-street, Glenelg, South Australia.
CANOWIE, SHEAO AK, ORAPARINNA AND JV ILKAT AN A, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


MUNDUNEY AND MORALANA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
The Properties of Messrs. John Davies and Sons
MUNDUNEY is one of the better known of the
South Australian properties which have as their
objective the dual purpose of breeding pure
stock and turning off large numbers of fat sheep for the
Adelaide market throughout the year.
The owners of these properties—Munduney is at Spald-
ing, and Moralana in the Upper North, near Hawker,
constitutes their outside countrv —also make a feature of
hold 17,000 acres of freehold land, a large portion being
the south-western corner of Canowie Estate.
Practically the whole of the property is undulating
country, with its rich valley flats. On the eastern side
of big untimbered hills, the owners of Munduney have
an area of 800 acres, which form part of the fertile Boo-
boorowie lucerne flats. The rich loamy soil is eminently
adapted to this purpose, and side by side are smiling wheat-
THE HOMESTEAD AT MUNDUNEY
growing wool, which for length, character, density, and
weight is well up to South Australian standard.
Munduney, which is a native name meaning “beautiful
water,” lies 7 miles from Spalding, 120 miles north of
Adelaide. It was taken up in 1868, when the late Ed-
ward Davies bought from the Crown a freehold block of
2000 acres. Mr. John Davies took it over in 1888, and
increased the holding to about 6000 acres. In 1907 the
present firm was formed, and to-day the members of it
fields and verdant paddocks of lucerne. Munduney has
been improved to the extent that on one paddock of 120
acres no fewer than 869 sheep were grazed for a con-
siderable time during the latter six months of 1927. There
are 1200 acres allotted to this valuable fattening agency
that extends round Munduney homestead and elsewhere
on the place, which has been subdivided into about 60
paddocks.
All of these, with two exceptions, are provided with an


unlimited supply of water that even the driest years fail
to influence. They are controlled in this vital respect
by means of wells, bores, and tanks, and running streams
with a system of pipes reticulating water for stock over
distances that obviate unnecessarily long travelling.
Messrs. John Davies and Sons lay the greatest stress
upon water supply, and have installed excellent double-
sided troughing at all the drinking points.
The country in normal times is a waving expanse of
barley and spear grasses, clover, and geranium, while
vermin-proof fencing is another item which has received
minute consideration. Where stud stock are kept par-
The lucerne areas are used solely' for grazing the stock
at certain seasons of the y'ear, and very little is cut for
hay. About 200 acres only' of arable land are let out for
share farming, and this provides the property with its re-
quirements for hay and chaff, the storage of which has
not been continued during recent y'ears on account of the
ravages of mice.
With its well-appointed homestead, built in 1914, a
two-storey building of sandstone hewn from outcrops on
the property, Munduney can justly lay claim to be one of
South Australia’s best assets. On its pastures are grazed
and bred a flock of 20,000 purebred Merino sheep, in
A VIEW OF THE SHEARING SHED AND FARM BUILDINGS FROM THE HOMESTEAD
ticular care has been bestowed upon fencing to ensure
maximum protection.
It has taken many, years to improve Munduney to its
present level of efficiency, but the money expended is re-
compensed in the form of high prices for quality stock
produced. Mr. John Davies, whose good judgment and
lengthy pastoral experience are widely recognised, early
saw the possibilities of growing lucerne. He set about
raising his own seed on a plot of 18 acres, and the ex-
periments proved successful.
addition to studs of Hereford and Shorthorn cattle.
The late Mr. Edward Davies laid the foundation of
the present stud flocks on his small holding at Mintaro
before going to Munduney. When he transferred to the
Spalding district in the late sixties he started to build up
this flock under a policy of selective mating on the best
known stud lines. The actual number of ewes with which
he commenced is not recorded, but that they were of good
quality is shown by the additions of Booboorowie ewes
an d M urray (Rhine Park) rams. This M urray strain
was supplemented by the infusion of Bungaree blood, and
M U\ D UN E Y AA’ D MORAL A XA, S() U TII A U S TRA LI A


QUALITY WITH MASCULINITY.
THE STUD HEREFORD BULL, CON-
FIDENCE 2nd. BRED AT MUNDUNEY
MU N D UN L Y AN D M ORAL AN A, SOU T H A US TRA LI A


in more recent years by Anama and Canowie rams, as
well as some ewes purchased at the Canowie stud dis-
persal sale in 1925.
In 1909 Mr. John Davies paid a big price for the
Anama-bred ram Nugget, and in 1914 for the Canowie
sire DD—397, which represented one of the famous
Donald Dinnie’s progeny, noted for its wool-growing
propensities and great frame. 'The ram Jellicoe was then
worked in towards the end of 1917, and later D 804.12.21
was purchased, thus giving a most beneficial cross from
Canowie’s best blood on to the original Bungaree strain.
expert judgment in the development of the stud. One
of his guiding principles has been frame —a good big sheep
of the right type, first and foremost. Having fixed this,
it was a matter of plain sailing to maintain that standard,
and to-day an inspection of Munduney stud reveals what
good breeding can do. All the sheep are large and plain-
bodied, and have a reputation for strength and robust-
ness.
The stud rams, in particular, exhibit all the signs of
being carefully bred, and are a praiseworthy example of
skilful classing. Munduney stud, it may be added, be-
MUNDUNEY-BRED HEREFORDS AT GREEN SPRINGS
Also at the Canowie dispersal sale Messrs. John
Davies and Sons purchased 35 extra special stud ewes,
which they intend to keep distinct from their own stud.
In this fashion a change of blood can be obtained when-
ever it is considered necessary.
M unduney stud is registered in the Australian register
of M erino flocks. Knowing full well the value of breed-
ing the best from the best, after taking into account that
some types are better suited to certain districts than others,
Mr. Da\ ies has persevered with unremitting patience and
vond supplving the above-mentioned requirements and
M oralana with an excellent class of rams every year, is
the main factor of the firm’s business in producing the
exceptionally high quality wethers that are consigned at
regular intervals to the Adelaide market, where they
have obtained the record price of 89s. 4d. a head. Hav-
ing striven for years to attain this standard, Mr. Davies
is not likely to let it deteriorate.
The wool grown from the general flocks each season
brings in a handsome return. The clip has been blade
M UN DUN E Y AN 1) MO R A LAN A, S() UT II A U S TRA L I A


ANOTHER
MUNDUNEY-
BRED STUD
FEMALE. THE
HEREFORD COW,
BEATRICE 3RD.
THE STUD
SHORTHORN
HEIFER BETTY,
BRED AT
MUNDUNEY
M uX 1) UX E Y AN D MOR A L A XA, S 0 U TII A USTR A L I A


MERINO EWE, 1398, BY
STUD PARK NO. 1 , EX
283, AT 2½ YEARS OLD.
BRED IN THE MUNDUNEY
STUD MERINO FLOCK BY
JOHN DAVIES AND SONS
MUNDUNEY MERINO RAM, 1429, BY STUD PARK NO. 1, EX 201, AT 1 YEAR 10 MONTHS OLD
M UX I) UX E Y AX I) M()RAL A X A, S() U TII A US T RALIA


MUNDUNEY STUD
SHORTHORN COW,
MINSTREL. CHAM-
PION ADELAIDE
ROYAL SHOW IN
1927 AND 1928
MUNDUNEY CONFIDENCE II. CHAMPION HEREFORD BULL AT THE ADELAIDE ROYAL SHOW OF
1926, 1927, AND 1928. LIVE WEIGHT, 2806 LBS.
M UN I) UN E Y A N D M 0 RALA N A. S 0 UT II A U S T R ALIA


A TYPICAL HEAD OF A MUNDUNEY-BRED STUD
SHORTHORN COW
shorn under ideal conditions during September for many
years, and experiments have proved that this allows of a
more even growth of fleece. On the London market, to
which the Munduney wool has always been consigned, the
clip is well known, and is described in the catalogue as
fine. The average price made in 1921 for the whole clip
was lb., while at the November 1927 London
sales 911 bales averaged 23jd. lb. Top lines of Mun-
duney wool went to 24§d. lb. From Moralana 125
hales of g reasy averaged 21|d. in London at the same
sales, the scoured portion of Moralana realising 44d. per
lb.
All his life Mr. Davies has been a firm believer in
quality, and the principle of strict mating to achieve this
end is perhaps the underlying feature of the firm’s cattle-
breeding policy. It is difficult to imagine anything but
the highest class of stock on the beautiful pastures of
M unduney, where climate and a 20-in. rainfall combine
with able management to produce these results.
Mr. Davies’ objective is to breed stud and herd bulls
that will do well in the hot dry climate of Queensland
and South and Western Australia. Nothing is left to
chance in building up confidence among the herdmasters,
and delivering the right class of animal. The Mun-
duney Herefords represent the highest standard of cattle.
Mr. Davies founded the stud in 1920, and the sire
Admiral Beatty 11., which was obtained from Mr. J. A.
Beattie, of Billenbah, Narrandera, N.S.W., has proved
his worth in creating the nucleus of the stud, fifteen
pedigreed cows were bought from Mr. Beattie and Mr.
Percy Reynolds, and these were the foundation females
of the Hereford herd.
In 1924 fourteen head of purebred cows were imported
from the noted Bushy Park stud in New Zealand, and
a year later the sire San Juan was introduced from the
same source. Although the latter met with an accident
shortly afterwards, he was worked with considerable suc-
cess, and has sired sons and daughters which will un-
doubtedly make good in the stud, judged by their virility,
good colour, and lines. One of Admiral Beatty ll.’s
sons, out of Persistence Bth, namely, Munduney Confi-
dence 11., was the champion Hereford bull at Adelaide
Royal Show 1926, 1927, and 1928. Possessing a mag-
nificent top line and typical masculinity from poll to hoof,
and embodying all the character of his aristocratic for-
bears, this bull is a specimen of the type concentrated
upon at Munduney, and buyers have no hesitation about
introducing the strain to their own herds.
In addition to Herefords, Munduney has a Shorthorn
stud, which was founded in December 1923, after the
purchase of 13 females from the Canowie herd. A
couple of months later, when the late Mr. C. H. Angas
sold the renowned Collingrove stud, Mr. Davies was a
big buyer, and he secured at auction 13 cows and the
THE TYPE OF HEAD BRED ON THE MUNDUNEY
HEREFORD FEMALES
MUXD U X E Y AX D MORAL A X A. S()U T 11 AUSTR A L I A


HEREFORD BULLS, RISING TWO YEARS OLD, ON MUNDUNEY LUCERNE COUNTRY
UNDULATING COUNTRY ON MUNDUNEY
M UN D UN E Y AK I) MORAL A N A, S O U TII A U S TRA L 1 A


STUD MERINO EWES AND LAMBS AT MUNDUNEY
■' ill' Im <i! hull lieser 1 1 1 \ 1 hike 7 Jiul.
Ir ! 1 *_’■ ■ iwn Inch clas> hellers were* imported from
. i huid. 111 d :ii die S\dne\ Ro\al Show in the same
\ 1 : . i ). \ o’' puieh.iM'd a heiter, bred by Air. J. ID.
u! l.iiuhn \ ale, Victoria. The two Scottish
l ; Princes Juan from the Princess
I-' i; e ~ ■ 11! t'd:—( 1 1 ace t rum the Lady No rah
■ m : ■ -a e ored 1" (. apt am John Mac Gi-
l: t , : ai-a , is -hii e, > cut land. In the summer
'. • ■’ h ::.e .• e:t ei ' li.id icehmati'ed nicely under
V'■’i ‘ . i: v • 111 d;‘ : > 11 -. end were m calf to a
The stud is typified by massive, level-backed animals,
long and deep, with strong heads and good colours—
beasts that will hold their own in any show ring.
On Moralana the firm run a flock of 24,000 Merino
sheep, and utilise this back country for wool and mutton
production. It embraces 420 square miles, and lies 32
miles north of Hawker, with the head station a few miles
from Mern Merna. Since acquiring Moralana in 1904
from the late Simon Matheson, Air. Davies took up in
1917 the northern portion of Lake Torrens Station. Tim-
bered with bull oak, mulga, and acacia, and plentifully
supplied with natural herbage and grasses, Moralana is
THE WOOLSHED AND YARDS
M UX I) UX E Y A XI) MORAL AN A, S 0 U T H A U S TRA L I A


DON JUAN, A PROMISING YOUNG HEREFORD BULL AT MUNDUNEY
SHORTHORN BULL, MUNDUNEY DUKE OF DERRIMUT 10TH
.1/ UXI)U X E Y AX I) MORAL A X A, S()U T 11 AUSTR A L / A


THE STUD HEREFORD COW, ALMOND, RESERVE CHAMPION ADELAIDE ROYAL SHOW IN 1927
undulating country, but not the best of holding land in
drought seasons. This, however, is now largely over-
come by an efficient water scheme, and extensive im-
provements to safeguard against vermin.
On Moralana there are 17 wells and sub-artesian bores,
the majority of which are equipped with reinforced con-
crete tanks and modern pumping gear. The supply is dis-
tributed to the centre of each paddock to obviate the
necessity of sheep walking far to water.
To the owners credit is due for the effective lay-out of
the woolshed and outbuildings. Large numbers of sheep
can be handled with a minimum of trouble. On the 15th
September, 1920, a line of two-year-old Moralana
wethers averaged 755. 4d. a head in the Adelaide market,
and a few weeks previously 81 three-year-old wethers
realised the top price of 80s. a head. They dressed an
average weight of 80 lbs. each. Messrs. John Davies
and Sons also have interest in country at Coward Springs.
Personal
The late Edward Davies was born in 1839 at Tylch,
Montgomeryshire, Wales, and came to South Australia
in 1851 in the ship “China.” After a strenuous and
well-rewarded life he retired in 1890. He revisited his
homeland in 1903, and died at Semaphore, South Aus-
tralia, in 1910.
Mr. John Davies was born at his father’s farm at
Mintaro, South Australia, in 1861, and in course of time
gained a thorough knowledge of stock. He is a sturdy
lion-hearted pastoralist, and his sound judgment and
business acumen have brought Munduney and Moralana
to a high standard of perfection.
In 1881 Mr. Davies married the third daughter of
the late Alfred Coon, of Gumbowie, South Australia,
and the family consists of three sons and three daughters.
The latter were educated at Methodist Ladies’ College
and the sons at Prince Alfred College. The second son,
Edward Reginald, has his own pioperty at Yellcwie, Hal-
lett, while Eric Hartley (born 1905) and John Stanley
(born 1889) are partners in the firm, and look after the
stud stock under their father’s supervision.
Mr. John Davies has been actively associated with the
welfare of the Spalding district all his life, and is now
gradually retiring from business.
.1/ UXDU X E Y AX D MOR ALA X A, SOU T II AUSTR A LI A


KEYNETON AND WEROONA, KEYNETON,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The Properties of Mr. J. Keynes and Mr. R. N. Keynes
KEYNETON Estate, near Angaston, which was
established by the late Mr. Joseph Keynes in
1841, and carried on successfully as a stud breed-
ing property after his death in 1883 by his son, the late
Mr. Richard Robinson Keynes, passed eventually into the
possession of the founder’s two grandsons. In Novem-
ber 1923 Mr. R. N. Keynes took over some 7000 acres,
and in July 1925 Mr. Joseph Keynes the balance of the
estate, amounting to about 10,000 acres. Upon each of
which is reached through a picturesque pine drive.
Weroona homestead is two miles to the east, on the crest
of a hill. In this ideal pastoral environment is springing
up a fourth generation of sons who will safeguard the
perpetuation of the stud flocks.
The country embracing Keyneton and Weroona is a
compact freehold block made up of undulating ranges. In
its virgin state it was heavily timbered by sheoak, pepper-
mint, red and blue gums. These majestic trees, however,
KEYNETON HOMESTEAD THE RESIDENCE OF THE LATE MR. R. R. KEYNES
these holdings the brothers have erected a modern horfie-
stead. The latter retains the original name of Keyneton,
and the other is known as Weroona, while their father
during the later years of his life enjoyed peaceful retire-
ment at the old homestead, which has been the head-
quarters of this well-known property for so many years.
Keyneton is 56 miles by road from Adelaide, and 8
miles from Angaston. Mr. Joseph Keynes’ new home
is situated a quarter of a mile from the parent dwelling,
impeded development, and as the years passed they were
thinned out in order to make way for better pastures.
The timber was utilised for fencing and building.
In connection with the origin of Keyneton, it is of
historic interest to note that the late Mr. Joseph Keynes
arrived in South Australia in 1839—three years after the
proclamation of the colony— to undertake the manage-
ment of some of the interests of the South Australian
Company. He was under engagement to the late Mr.


FOUR OF THE KEYNETON STUD RAMS, NOS. 49, 34, 293 AND 15
George Fife Angas, who was one of the founders of the
famous company in London, and its chairman of direc-
tors. Evidently Mr. Keynes was impressed by the future
prospects of the young colony from a sheep-raising stand-
point, for in 1841 he took up a lease within what is
termed the Hundred of Jellicoe, and later converted it
into a freehold of 17,000 acres.
Immediately he took possession of the property he
stocked it with a few Merino sheep chosen with extra-
ordinary care from several small flocks around Adelaide,
and in 1842 launched out with a comparatively large
breeding flock and a number of rams, all of which
were selected from the best known sheep of the day. The
stud attained considerable success, and gave the name of
Keynes a significance among fiockmasters and raised the
reputation of Keyneton Merinos to a high level. 1 his
eminence was only achieved by determination, courage,
unremitting labour, and skilful judgment that is “born
in some men, and brought out by a lifetime in the bush.
To-day the estate is improved almost to its maximum.
In working the two branches independently, both Mr.
Joseph Keynes and his brother breed the sheep on the
set policy which was laid down by their father and grand-
father. Hence the appointments at Keyneton and
SOME MORE OF THE STUD MERINO RAMS
KEY N E TON AND W ERO ON A, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


SHORTHORN HEIFERS ON KEYNETON
HEIFERS MOVING TOWARDS THE CREEK
KEYNETON AND IV EROO N A. SOUTH AUSTRALIA


A VIEW SHOWING KEYNETON COUNTRY, WITH SOMME CREEK IN THE CENTRE, AND WEROONA
HOMESTEAD ON THE HILL
THE PINE DRIVE TO THE KEYNETON HOMESTEAD
KEYNETON AND WEROONA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


Weroona vary but slightly., The larger place is sub-
divided into 17 paddocks, and Weroona also into 17,
with the addition of new stables, buildings, and men’s
quarters, while Keyneton uses the equipment attached
to the old homestead.
I he whole estate is watered naturally by springs, soak-
ages, watercourses and the Somme Creek, besides which
there are a few dams. The annual rainfall averages 20
inches. The property is extensively sown with grasses
and clovers, the latter making remarkable ingress to the
paddocks each successive season. Top-dressing with
superphosphate enhances the growth of subterranean
clover, and in course of time it will be well established
over both estates.
Lambing starts in April-May, and shearing invariably
at the end of the first week in September. One shed is
utilised to shear both halves of the stud and general
flocks, the practice being to shear Keyneton rams first,
followed by Weroona rams and the whole run of its
sheep, followed by the Keyneton stud and general flock.
All the work is done by blades, and the shed has eight
stands. I he total number shorn, on an average, is
12,000, and the wool is sold in the Adelaide market.
The bales are branded still with the well-known Keynes
brand—JK (conj.) over Keyneton—and the clip’s value
as a commercial wool could be reflected in no better man-
ner than by the fact that in 1924 and other years it has
made prices ranging up to 42d., 32d., 26d./27d., and so
on. Each season the Keyneton clip amounts to about
250 to 300 bales. High lambing percentages are obtained
regularly, and the 1928 lambing season gave an 82 per
cent, marking. Of 5100 stud ewes lambed down 2100
were maidens.
The stud flock, founded in 1842, has been built up on
Murray blood. Its foundation sheep were probably ob-
tained from the same source as were those of Mr. John
M urray, who got his first flock together a few months
later. Records do not state definitely what were the
initial units of the Keyneton stud, but merely indicate
that the sheep were assembled from Grange Farm, near
Adelaide, Castle Bagot, River Light, and from Mr.
Crisp, Gawler River. Five years after forming the flock
the owner drew some rams from Mount Crawford and
Pewsey Vale, but discarded the progeny of the latter,
and adhered to the Murray blood, which has, with only
three exceptions, been the guiding influence since 1847.
The exceptions were the ram Nudicot in 1851, said to
be a lineal descendant of the famous King George Spanish
VIEW FROM MR. J. KEYNES' HOMESTEAD. CLEAN PASTURES WITH AMPLE SHADE
KEYN E T 0 N AN D IE ERGO NA, SOU Tll AUSTR A LI A


MR. R. N. KEYNES' WEROONA HOMESTEAD IS A HANDSOME BUILDING ON MODERN LINES
NOTE THE BEAUTIFUL VIEW FROM THE VERANDAH
KEYN E T ON AN I) fV ERGON A, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


THESE ARE VIEWS
OF MR. J. KEYNES'
MODERN HOMESTEAD
ON KEYNETON
KEY N E TON AND W ERO 0N A. 80U TH AUSTRAL! A


KEYNETON HOMESTEAD WITH ITS COMPLEMENT OF OUTBUILDINGS
VIEW OF THE OLD HOMESTEAD, TAKEN FROM THE DRIVE
KEYNETON AND WEROONA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


Merinos; and in 1855, two imported rams bought from
Mr. O. Neuhaus. These also claimed family relation-
ship with the original Spanish flocks.
I he 1855 importations were descended from sheep pre-
sented by Charles 111. of Spain to Frederick August of
Saxony in 1765, and bred up by Prince of Reuss, Klipp-
hausen, Saxony. 1 hey were purchased from Adolf Seiger,
of Leutewitz. The two rams referred to won prizes at
Melbourne and Sydney in the late fifties. In 1877, and
again in 1906, fresh rams were introduced from the Mur-
ray stud flocks, apart from which until more recent years,
when sires have been obtained from Rhine Park, Wirra
Wirra, and other pure Murray studs, the Keyneton
which has given South Australian stud sheep a good
reputation.
Among the leading Keyneton sires No. 15, a 6-tooth
by General, purchased from Rhine Park in 1919, cut
20 lbs. of long, dense, bright wool at the September 1928
shearing—a fleece of merit.
No. 34, a 4-tooth by a Cappeedee importation out of a
Keyneton special ewe (ear-tagged 73), by Lord Forrest,
cut 20 lbs. Breeding is stamped all over his massive
frame, shapely head, and dense fleece. No. 2.93, clad
with beautiful sire’s wool of 60’s count, with the crimp
well defined from butt to tip, who is also used with great
success in the top lines, is another typical Keyneton ram
THE ENTRANCE GATE TO THE OLD HOMESTEAD
studmasters maintained a policy of close in-and-in breed-
ing.
This practice of selecting the best types of ewe and
ram for in-breeding purposes has given splendid results.
No chance was left of inferior animals remaining in
the stud, as the culling was strict, heavy, and often ex-
cessive. When the Keyneton stud was divided a few
years ago both brothers determined to continue the good
work, and to-day the sheep form a high-grade stud flock
of great size. Features most apparent are their conforma-
tion, and strong heads, plain bodies, and big proportions.
The covering of wool is typical strong combing quality,
of masculine proportions. No. 4.9, by the Rhine Park
(M urray) sire Nondi, 'which is a recent acquisition from
outside Keyneton stud, is a little finer in the wool, but
shows wonderful breeding, and, like others on the estate,
has the desirable qualities of shape, size, and constitution.
These leading rams in the Keyneton half of the stud
are typical of the top sires at Weroona. Their char-
acteristics are similar. Keen judgment and skilful mat-
ing are obvious accomplishments of the owners, for
throughout the No. 1 studs and other grades there is
pronounced masculinity. Wide nostrils, clean faces, silky
noses, wide turning horns, as well as straight backs, and
K EYN ET ON AND W ERO ON A, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


A MOB OF WETHERS AND RAMS
GROUP OF STUD EWES AND LAMBS
KEYNETON AND WEROONA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


otherwise firm bone, are features bred most rigidly into
Keyneton and Weroona rams.
Though seen under adverse conditions in August 1928,
the female side of the stud and the growing lambs were
decidedly uniform. No wrinkles were evident; their
STUD RAM NO. 34
jaws were firm, and on close inspection disclosed an even
bite. Wide thighs and strong, straight hocks were other
outstanding proofs of the efficacy of the ewes as stud
matrons. One ewe by Egypt, a Rhine Park sire, ex-
emplified her sisters in the magnificent quality medium
wool all over her, full of character. The average run
of ewes’ wool is classed as a 60’s, and generally the
weights of fleeces average 13 to 14 lbs. a head.
The Keyneton breeders are in a position to dispose of
300 flock and stud rams annually, priced at from 5
STUD RAM NO. 15
to 10 guineas. It is the rule not to dispose of any stock
under years old, hence those interested can rely upon
their orders being filled with the right quality rams for
their requirements.
Apart from the years 1876 and 1885-88, the Keyneton
STUD EWES AND LAMBS ON KEYNETON
KEY NET ON AND WEROONA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


Merinos have been withheld from the show pen. Their
successes in the years referred to at Adelaide, Philadelphia,
and Colonial and Indian Exhibitions were considerable,
in addition to which many prizes were won at local shows,
and a change of policy may now see members of this
stud again in open competition. Three fleeces were sent to
the Wembley Exhibition in 1925.
Stud Shorthorn cattle on the
joint properties total about 80 head.
This stock represents a high quality
herd, and good prices are paid for
Keyneton herd bulls and heifers.
There is, also, a splendid stud
of draught mares, twelve in num-
ber. The sire is Ebondale, a
handsome black by an imported
stallion.
THE LATE MR. R. R. KEYNES
PERSONAL
The late Joseph Keynes was
born in 1810 at Blandford, Dor-
setshire, England. He became
widely known in Australia as an
expert on the Merino, and his
efforts to assist in enhancing the
prestige of the sheep and wool
industry by raising the standard
of flocks were not in vain. His
heart was in his stud, and no movement of interest to
the welfare of the district was without his keen support.
It is thanks to men of his wide vision that South Aus-
tralia has such a solid wool industry.
The late Joseph Keynes, whose uncle, John Angell
THE LATE MR. JOSEPH KEYNES
MR. R. NEVILLE KEYNES
James, was a celebrated English Congregationalist, died
at Lockeys on the 14th May, 1883. His son, Richard
Robinson Keynes, who died towards the end of Novem-
ber, 1928, was born in 1857, and was educated at Park-
stone, Dorset. After three years’ mercantile training
in London he joined his father at Keyneton in 1877.
The present owner of Keyneton,
Mr. Joseph Keynes, was born in
1895 on the estate, and was edu-
cated at St. Peter’s College, Ade-
laide. In 1915 he enlisted for
active service, and was attached to
the 104th Howitzer Battery (Aus-
tralian Field Artillery). In 1919
he returned to Keyneton from
abroad. His marriage to Doris
Mary, daughter of J. B. Lille-
MR. JOSEPH KEYNES
crapp, of Devon, England, took
place in 1924, and the family con-
sists of a son, Richard Joseph, and
a daughter, Doris Ruth.
Richard Neville Keynes was
born in 1896, and also was
educated at St. Peter’s College.
Being rejected for active service,
he assumed the management of
Keyneton until the estate was
divided. He married in 1923 May
Prince Lillecrapp, whose father owns Hill Ridge at
Eden Valley, South Australia. The family comprises
two sons, John Neville and William George.
Both Mr. J. Keynes and Mr. R. N. Keynes take a
keen interest in district affairs.
KEYNETON AND W ERGON A, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


THE GLEN, HARROGATE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
The Property of Messrs. J. and A. Hay
WITH its healthy and restful atmosphere, The
Glen Merino stud is located in the midst of
verdant soft undulations around Nairne. It
is within a couple of hours’ picturesque drive from Ade-
laide through the Mount Lofty Ranges, and is 12 miles
east from Nairne township, with the village of Harrogate
on the boundary.
so that the family ranks among the pioneers of the pas-
toral industry in South Australia. His son, Archibald
Dauntless Hay, was, first and foremost, a Merino man,
and at his small estate engaged in Merino sheep farming,
and turned to the production of first-class rams in 1870.
At that time The Glen comprised barely 600 acres, where-
on he formed the stud.
THE HOMESTEAD AT THE GLEN
Although The Glen is not a large Merino stud it
nevertheless occupies a prominent place in the ram-breed-
ing industry of South Australia by reason of the par-
ticularly high quality sheep bred there by the owners
and studmasters, Messrs. James and Andrew Hay.
The Glen was originally taken up in 1840 by the pre-
sent owners’ grandfather, the late James Hamilton Hay,
Handicapped by lack of capital, the father of the pre-
sent owners set out to compensate for this by breeding
quality into his small stud flock, and the fact that his
M erinos were reared on comparatively heavy rainfall
country did not militate against individual sheep achieving
conspicuous success at leading shows in competition with
those from larger studs. In fact, his name as an out


standing breeder became prominent, especially at the
annual show at Mount Barker in 1871, at which The
Glen stud annexed many awards.
1 he late Mr. A. D. Hay died in 1886 at the age of
47 years, and left three young sons —James, Andrew, and
A. D. H: iv, who is manager for Goldsbrough, Mort and
Go. Ltd. at Bordertown—for whom trustees managed
the property until 1894. During that period, however,
the business of ram breeding may be said to have been
allowed to remain dormant. At the time of Mr.
Hay’s death the area of The Glen was 5000 acres, which
was subsequently improved to carry a sheep to the acre.
Both James and his brother were brought up to the busi-
ness of sheep breeding, in which they have had continuous
practical experience. In addition, both brothers evinced
from the first an aptitude for mating and classing, which
stamped them as born sheep men.
The stud flocks at The Glen have been developed to
keep in line with the quality demanded from flockowners
in different parts of the country, but particularly in
Western Australia, where Messrs. J. and A. Hay direct
the bulk of their yearling and special stud rams each
year.
With regard to sires, the owners of The Glen stud
THE HOMESTEAD AT NAIRNE
In 1894 the eldest son, James, attained his majority,
and, in conjunction with his brother Andrew, at once set
about reforming the stud on more modern lines. With
twenty-three years’ breeding to the Murray strain behind
them it was more or less easy to lay a safe foundation.
But only twenty of the best ewes were picked out, and
these, together with twenty selected first stud aged ewes
and 300 selected young stud ewes from Mount Beevor
stud, formed the nucleus of the existing stud flocks.
The Hay brothers did not go past the same stud for
their sires, and paid a big price for the special stud ram
Block 16, as well as good figures for selected stud rams.
used Murray blood until 1920, thereby infusing into
their flocks a pure strain of 77 years’ descent. The first
outcross took effect in 1920 with the introduction of the
Lucernedale-bred ram Loyalty, with a view to conform
to the owners’ ideas of putting the right amount of char-
acter into the stud to suit the type of country and the
climate at Ihe Glen. This sire was purchased for the
high figure of 2100 gns., and he has since paid for him-
self over and over again.
By Lord Charles out of a Dandie Dinmont ewe,
Loyalty sired the Lucernedale ram Fealty, which was
bought bv Mr. A. G. Michaelian, South African Govern-
TII E GLE N, S 0 U TII A USTRA LI A


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE GLEN HOMESTEAD AND PART OF THE GARDEN
TYPICAL COUNTRY ON THE GLEN
TII E GLE N, S O UT II A USTRA LI A


merit sheep expert, for Mr. A. G. Robertson, of Ma-
quabie, South Africa, for 4000 gns.
Fidelity, a son of Loyalty, was introduced in 1924, and
the progeny of these two rams, more especially of Loyalty,
have topped the ram sales invariably since their stock have
been produced. The progeny of Loyalty have borne
out his own remarkable characteristics, proving what
wonderful constitution and prepotency the sire possessed.
In 1922 seven of his sons sold up to 235 gns. at the
Adelaide stud ram sales and averaged £99. In 1923 six
Book), and have not hesitated to introduce new blood of
the same strain to improve the consistency of their flocks.
At the start of 1928 the breeding flock at 4 he Glen
numbered 1500 ewes of a uniformly high standard —big
roomy animals with free carriage and upstanding ap-
pearance, plain-bodied and open-faced. 1 heir broad
backs and well-shaped legs denote the acme of good breed-
ing. Greatest credit is reflected upon the progress of
the stud since its reorganisation in 1894, subsequent to
which it became imperative for the owners to decide upon
MERINO RAM
FROM THE GLEN
STUD WHICH
TOPPED THE
ADELAIDE SALES
AT 500 GUINEAS
rams averaged £lBl, going up to 300 gns. At the 1927
Port Adelaide ram sales 500 gns. was paid for a ram
bred at The Glen by Loyalty out of a Lucernedale-bred
ewe. The record price at these sales was 521 gns., paid
in 1921 for a ram from the same stud.
During recent years the cry has been for more quality
in the general wool clips, and the owners of The Glen
recognise that quality is required to-day by progressive
flockmasters. All along they have striven to implant
quality into their stud (No. 116 in the Merino Stud
a policy either of turning off flock rams in the greatest
number each year or else culling heavily to produce a
steady output, which would take their place with the
best.
In adopting the latter course the Hay brothers have
had no difficulty in disposing of about 300 rams annually.
These, as already stated, go mainly into the flocks of
prominent breeders in Western Australia.
Messrs. J. and A. Hay do all their own classing and
mating, and are severe in culling all sheep that do not
TII E (I LE N, S 0 U TII A USTR A LI A


A GENERAL VIEW AT THE NAIRNE HOMESTEAD
THE FARM HOMESTEAD AT THE GLEN STUD
Tll E GLE N, S 0 UT II A USTR A L I A


A QUINTET OF CHAMPION RAMS BRED AT THE GLEN
YOUNG WETHERS ON THE FLATS AT NAIRNE
TII E GLE N. S() UT II A USTR A LI A


THE TYPE OF RAMS THAT HAVE MADE THE GLEN MERINO STUD
PLENTIFUL WATER SUPPLIES FROM THE BREMER RIVER
TII E GLE K, S O UT H A US T R ALIA


A SHADY PADDOCK AT THE GLEN
conform to standard, so that only the best quality rams
come out of the stud. Their guiding principle is to re-
tain customers year after year, and only by rigorous and
fearless culling is this possible.
The Glen Merinos are distinguished to-day by plain,
big bodies, carrying a fleece of 60/64’s quality, and pos-
sessing all the attributes of good doers on back country,
and especially in Western Australia. The most exacting
conditions of life bring out the best in The Glen sheep,
which are hardy, well mouthed, strongly supported, and
great wool growers.
The annual wool clip commands a good price at the
Adelaide sales. It is a typical blue-tipped wool, mostly
strong, possessing beautiful body and colour, with pro-
nounced character throughout the long staple. Wool
grows to perfection on this hilly red gum and sheoak
country, and the owners take full advantage of their as-
sets to forge ahead. For the 1927 clip an average of
24d. was returned for fleece wool, whilst the sheep cut in
the vicinity of 40 bales to the thousand.
Large drafts of selected and flock rams are purchased
annually by the De Grey River Pastoral Company
(W.A.) for their Mulyie and other stations in the nor’-
west, where they are showing excellent results in wool
production and frame.
During recent years The Glen sheep have gained
marked successes in competition in the show pens. In
1925, 1926, 1927 and 1928, the stud won grand cham-
pion honours for rams at the Mount Barker Sheep Show,
and, with the exception of a defeat by a Millbrae ewe in
THE GLEN. SOUTH AUSTRALIA


THE WOOLSHED AT THE GLEN
ANOTHER HOMESTEAD AT THE GLEN
TII E GLE N, S O UT II A US T RALIA


THIS PICTURE, TAKEN FROM
THE TOP OF A HILL, SHOWS THE
TYPE OF GRAZING COUNTRY
TII E GLE N, S() UT II A USTRA E I A


A VIEW ON THE PROPERTY
STUD MERINO RAMS BRED BY MESSRS. J. AND A. HAY GRAZING ON SUBTERRANEAN CLOVER PASTURES
Tll E GLK X, S O UT H JUS TRA LI A


THE DRIVE AT THE GLEN
1925, have won all the championships and grand cham-
pionships in the medium to strong wool sections.
It is, therefore, a pity that the Hay brothers have
decided not to show in future. They intend to con-
centrate upon their objectives of quality, and still more
quality, in good strong wool, without the interruption of
preparing sheep for show.
There is a total flock of between 5000 and 6000
M erinos on The Glen, which embraces 7000 acres of
freehold, all well improved, and subdivided into numerous
small paddocks. Facilities for water are such that there
is never a scarcity of it. Numerous springs and wells,
also modern mill equipment and troughs, are relied upon
solely, and whilst it is difficult to cope with the rabbit
all the year round, adequate wire netting and constant
vigilance protect the pastures from the pest.
The Hay brothers have been always keen on pasture
improvement, and have at present (1929) 2000 acres
under subterranean clover.
Lambing at The Glen takes place in May, and shearing
is begun in September, blades only being used.
Nestling in the shoulders of protecting hills, surrounded
by plantations of pine trees and gardens are the respec-
tive homes of the Hay brothers. A private telephone
line connects up the homesteads and the outstations.
Mr. James Hamilton Hay was born at The Glen in
1875, and Mr. Andrew Wilson Hay in 1877. After
having received their early education at the well-known
old Hahndorf College, they went back to The Glen to
study the scientific side of stud breeding. Their father’s
sudden and untimely death checked their pastoral career
temporarily, but once set upon their path the progress made
adds another chapter to the persistent enterprise which
has always supported Australia’s ram-breeding industry.
TII E GLE N. SOU Tll A U S ERA L I A


BEN LOMOND, KAPUNDA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
The Property of G. T. Butler, Esq.
THE Ben Lomond Hock was founded in 1912 by the
late Sir Richard Butler, and is being carried on
successfully to-day by his son, Mr. Guy T. Butler,
whose stud is No. 315 in volume seven of the Australian
Stud Merino Flock Register.
Ben Lomond is a beautiful stretch of undulating hill
country, and lies about 65 miles north of Adelaide, and
eleven miles past the town of Kapunda, with Hansborough
siding one and a-half miles away. The property com-
acquired an additional 3000 acres of Anlaby country. In
1919 Mr. Guy Butler purchased the northern portion,
embracing 2100 acres of the original estate from Mr. R.
D. N ewland, and in 1923 acquired that part held by his
father, thus regaining the whole of the 8200 acres. Soon
afterwards a block of 2700 acres was disposed of at a
satisfactory figure, and in the present year of 1928 the
remaining area represents as fine a piece of country as
there is to be found in the district.
THE BEN LOMOND HOMESTEAD
prises an area of 5681 acres of freehold, and was origin-
ally part of the historic Anlaby Estate. It was taken up
by Sir Richard Butler in 1900 in conjunction with the
late Mr. Simpson Newland, C.M.G. Roth these gentle-
men rendered great service to the State as Cabinet Minis-
ters, and the latter was also well known as the author of
that notable book, “Paving the Way.”
The partnership ceased in 1905, and Sir Richard Butler
took over the southern half of the property. He later
Ben Lomond has some splendid prominences, and the
boldest of these is a hill of that name 2100 ft. above sea
level. The River Light flows for three and a-half miles
along the boundary of the property, and with innumerable
springs and shaded watercourses the water supply is well
maintained. Only two paddocks are without a natural
water supply, and as Mr. Butler has subdivided his pro-
perty into 25 sections he well may be pleased with his
“liquid” assets.


Over the hills many native grasses grow profusely,
varying according to the subsoil and the numerous out-
crops of barytes, limestone and bluestone that prevail.
Pine and sheoak are the principal trees, with a fair sprink-
ling of peppermint and white gum over to the east.
Mr. Butler’s objective is the production of high class
purebred Merino sheep, and in pursuing that aim is de-
termined to avoid the pitfall common to sheepbreeding,
and to follow the advice of Lord Forster to “go for
quality,” and concentrate upon pedigree.
At Ben Lomond, where in former \ r ears a great deal of
wheat farming was carried on, the pastures are too valu-
able for ordinary feeding, or for agriculture on a wide
and another block of the same area in the following year
■ —an alternate system.
Experiments have been made with grasses, and those
best suited to the soil are cultivated intensively. It is
found that native clovers thrive well on the healthy hills
with an average annual rainfall of 18 in.; the burr,
cluster, white flowering and subterranean proving the
most valuable.
The last named is a particularly useful fodder in any
sort of an average season, and Mr. Butler’s opinion is that
not only does it increase the carrying capacity, but also
tends to improve the constitution of his sheep. He finds
that where clovers are established a better frame is grown
STUD EWES AND LAMBS ON FRESH WATER CREEK
scale, and their adaptability for growing large framed
sheep of good quality has shaped the future for Mr. Butler
admirably. Not only is he a successful grower of fine
medium wool, and a breeder of good sheep, but he is
recognised as a progressive grazier, and is a keen en-
thusiast on top-dressing with superphosphate, and the cul-
tivation of subterranean clover and other useful fodder
grasses.
Through the medium of these Mr. Butler aims to
largely increase the present carrying capacity of approxi-
mately three sheep to two acres. His method of artificial
fertilising is to top-dress one year a block of 2000 acres
with 1 cwt. of 45 per cent, superphosphate to the acre,
by sheep, and the wool is more robust. Ram lambs, for
example, that come off dry subterranean clover are better
grown than those taken off the lucerne and other pas-
tures. Such are the climate and conditions on Ben
Lomond.
Each year, Mr. Butler, as chairman of the local branch
of the Agricultural Bureau, holds a “Field Day” at Ben
Lomond in order to demonstrate and ventilate the ad-
vantages of top-dressing. Between 50 and 70 members
invariably attend this annual gathering, the results of
which have been to stimulate pasture improvements in
the district, and to establish the fact that top-dressed pas-
tures are sweeter and hold out longer in summer, thus
B E X L 0 M O X D, S O U Tll AUSTRALIA


THE PROMISING BEN LOMOND STUD SIRE, NO. O.T.26
making the country more permanent in low rainfall years.
In order that the nourishment will be kept up to the
wool throughout the year it is intended to lay by big
stores of ensilage. Lucerne also is being sown over larger
areas, so that with hand-feeding during the early winter
months, and fairly heavy grazing through the summer,
specially during lambing down time for the stud ewes,
the utmost production on Ben Lomond will be attained.
An average of at least two sheep to the acre all the year
round is aimed at.
Mr. Butler has expended a considerable sum during
his regime upon the above improvements, as well as in
exterminating rabbits, the erection of strong fencing and
gates, employees’ quarters, and so on. Nothing in reason
is spared to encourage the married workers on the pro-
perty. These Mr. Butler treats particularly well, on the
grounds that a sounder rural population would result.
He encourages the migration of picked family men from
England.
Included among a total of 6200 fully grown Merino
sheep, of which 2500 ewes were in hand early in 1928,
there is a promising stud of about 600 first class
sheep. These are divided into No. 1 stud of 130 ewes,
and No. 2 stud, comprising 450 ewes.
Formerly Murray blood was used, but in order to work
into the flock a combination of the best of New South
Wales and South Australian strains—welding the quality
fleeces of the eastern studs to the valuable frame of the
local breeds —Mr. Butler during recent years has intro-
duced two Collinsville rams of the Lord Charles strain.
Early records of the stud reveal that Sir Richard Butler
started with 1900 Bungaree, Boconnoc Park, Burta and
Ryelands ewes, with which Murray rams were worked
until 1923, when he sold out to his son. To this flock
BEN LOMOND, SOUTH A US T RALIA


CATTLE ON BEN LOMOND
were then added 10 selected and 2 stud rams from Mr.
K. P. P. Sawers’ Sheaoak stud, and 21 selected and two
stud rams were procured in the following year.
After the purchase of Ben Lomond North in 1920 from
Mr. R. D. Newland, Mr. Butler secured 450 selected
flock ewes and 17 rams from Mackerode, and 250
Skilly bred ewes, in addition to 150 two-tooth and four-
tooth Kadlunga ewes.
In 1924 the foundation of the present stud was laid,
and Mr. A. J. McDonald, the well-known expert and ex-
manager of Canowie stud, was engaged to do the selecting,
classing and mating. After having weeded out the un-
desirables, Mr. McDonald chose 291 top stud ewes, and
these, mated with six Sheaoak, Canowie blood, rams
gave the Ben Lomond stud its fresh start. Mr. Butler’s
aim is to produce suitable numbers of the highest quality
rams, with a covering of the best of the fine to medium
wool.
In 1925 a ram was secured from Mr. H. C. J. Collins,
of Wyndara stud, and this is the No. 1 sire in the first
stud flock to-day. Mr. Butler sought for twelve months
to acquire this ram, and eventually was successful.
GENERAL VIEW OF THE BEN LOMOND HOMESTEAD
BEN L O M ON D. SOUTH AUSTRALIA


GROUP OF EWE HOGGETS AT BEN LOMOND
Further introductions in 1926 were several high-priced
rams from the same stud for general stud services. Also
two top stud rams have been purchased this year (1928)
from Wyndara—one, Record 8, being a particularly fine
sheep. Splendid results are beginning to show from the
rigid policy of culling and the selective principles of mat-
ing that govern the stud’s upbringing.
1 hat both owner and studmaster are anxious to supply
rams true to label was an impression gained after an in-
spection of the stud. Uniformity of type was accentuated
hy the repetition in all the ewes of deep, big frames and
plain bodies, with every appearance of good healthy
matrons. Clean silky faces and heads nicely set up de-
noted their fine breeding, while other features were the
wide level backs, sound underline, firm arms and plenty
of lung room. Their covering is being brought to per-
fection by the only practical method—culling and mating
to a definite goal.
Ben Lomond sires are true aristocrats of the Merino
breed. The tops of the first stud show their Lord Charles
breeding to every advantage. Typical sires’ wool cover
their sturdy frames evenly from poll to hocks, leaving no
doubt as to their benefit to the stud.
Little difference is apparent between the number one
FOUR SPECIAL STUD RAMS
BEN LOMOND, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


SPECIAL STUD MERINO EWES
AND LAMBS AT BEN LOMOND
BEN LOMOND, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


OUT OF CURIOSITY THE
MILKERS STOP IN THEIR
HOMEWARD TREK AT EVENING


and two flocks, and in due course Mr. Butler hopes to
build up a ready sale for surplus rams in the south-east
of South Australia and Victoria. Through consignments
of hoggets to the south-east in former years, the Ben
Lomond sheep are more or less well known there, where
they do well. Their wool particularly improves remark-
ably in south-eastern flocks, while frames take on a rapid
growth.
A promising future lies before Ben Lomond stud,
stud career with a clip of 250 bales off 6300 sheep and
lambs, the top price of which realised 34Jd. per lb.
The Milking Shorthorn stud, conducted formerly
under the name of Butler and Muirhead, has been re-
duced to about 15 head. The leading sire is Muirhead
of Ben Lomond, out of Royal’s Gayboy’s Janet of Ben
Lomond, which, as a junior 3-year-old, produced
lbs. of milk, and 579.42 lbs. of butterfat in 273 days.
This was an Australian record. The dam’s blood is
SHEEP YARDS, SILOS AND HAY STACKS AT THE HOMESTEAD
which has the advantage of having been started on right
lines. Lambing takes place in March/April, and shear-
ing in September/October, and a splendid wool clip goes
to Adelaide each year. Equipped with modern appoint-
ments, and a five stand plant, the woolshed is planned to
do its work quickly and thoroughly. A satisfactory cut
is obtained, the average in 1927 having been 11 lbs. a
head, with an average of 5 lbs. for lambs. At the Decem-
ber sales top fleeces sold to 26Jd. per lb., which was 2Jd.
below the highest price. During the 1924 season, when
wool was in exceptional demand, Ben Lomond began its
right through the herd. At private treaty the Govern-
ment paid 430 guineas for twelve animals.
In addition to these high class cattle there is a stud of
Clydesdale horses, numbering 30 head. Baron Douglas,
a stud book stallion, is the sire, being by John Douglas
(imp.), winner of 22 first and champion prizes, out of
the New Zealand-bred Princess Bute. Mr. Butler is
developing a fine type of Clydesdale.
Gloucester Spot pigs are doing well under the ideal
conditions at Ben Lomond.
In 1922 additions were made to the pretty bungalow
BEN LOMOND, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


SPECIAL STUD
MERINO RAM
NO. 8 AT
BEN LOMOND
THREE SPECIAL STUD RAMS
BEN LOMOND , SOUTH AUSTRALIA


MERINO EWE HOGGETS AROUND A SILO
A MUSTER OF EWES AND LAMBS
BEN L OMOND, SOU T H A US TRALIA


TYPICAL COUNTRY ON BEN LOMOND
GOOD GRAZING COUNTRY ON THE STATION
BEN LO M O N D, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


homestead, which lies
in a picturesque setting
of hills, amid gardens,
lawns and hedges. The
old homestead, some
distance away, is now
used to accommodate
employees, whilst there
are four other modern
dwellings on the estate
to house the overseer
and others.
Personal
Mr. Guy T. Butler
is a member of a dis-
tinguished South Aus-
tralian family. Born
at Mallala in 1888,
and educated at St.
Peter’s College, Ade-
laide, he is the fourth
son of the late Sir
Richard Butler, a for-
mer Premier of South
Australia, who died in England while on a visit
there in 1925. After having spent some time in the
offices of Elder, Smith and Co. Limited, and Butler,
Shannon and Co., in order to gain commercial experience,
Mr. Butler went to Ben Lomond in 1904 to train for
pastoral pursuits.
In 1914 he sailed
for Egypt with the
9th Light Horse. He
later saw service on
Gallipoli, where he
gained a commission,
and in France. He
married in 1917
Gladys Seymour Keay,
daughter of John Sey-
mour Keay, an Anglo-
Indian banker, and an
ex member of the Bri-
tish House of Com-
mons. The family
consists of two sons
and two daughters—-
M ichael and Peter*
and Nina and Vivian.
Mr. Butler is presi-
dent of the Kapunda
branches of the Agri-
cultural Bureau and
the Liberal Federation.
One of his brothers, the Hon. R. L. Butler, has followed
in his father’s political footsteps, and as Premier of South
Australia has earned wide respect and esteem for his fear-
less and statesmanlike efforts to direct the affairs of the
State.
A CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD GARDEN
AN INTERIOR VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD
B E N L O M O N D, SOU T H A U S T RALJA


MILLBRAE, NATIVE VALLEY, & STURTBRAE, STURT,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
The Properties of the Hon. W. G. Mills and Son
MILLBRAE
DURING recent years the Hills district —better
known as the Mount Barker district—has come
to the forefront as ideal sheep and wool pro-
ducing country, and one of the prominent studs which
not far away. It experiences a cold winter climate, with
an average annual rainfall of 20 in., receding to 14 in.
in the back country.
The Mills family have been settled at Native Valley
since the early fifties. The late Richard Mills, father
THE HOMESTEAD AT MILLBRAE
has met with a due measure of success there is Millbrae,
owned by the Hon. W. G. Mills and Son.
Millbrae, Native Valley, is situated 32 miles south-
east of Adelaide in hilly and undulating country similar
m type to that through which the railway line to Mel-
bourne passes in the neighbourhood of Nairne, which is
of the present head of the firm, carried on farming opera-
tions there until 1880, when, owing to indifferent health,
he retired from active life and sold all his property, with
the exception of the present Millbrae homestead block
of 500 acres. Mr. W. G. Mills, who had had full con-
trol of his father’s estate for some time previously in the


TOP STUD EWES
AND LAMBS
AT MILLBRAE
year referred to above, leased what remained of it. Ihe
old farm of 500 acres at Native Valley grew to 5000
acres under the management of Mr. W. G. Mills, and
forms the present Millbrae and also Bondleigh Estates,
the latter of which is held by the eldest son, Mr. W.
Champion Mills.
Millbrae is well improved, and is subdivided into 30
paddocks, with a permanent water supply in each. There
are upwards of a hundred acres under lucerne, grown in
the rich gullies without irrigation. Regular cultivation
and top-dressing with superphosphate enable several cuts
of valuable hay to be harvested each year, as well as
providing plenty of green fodder for grazing purposes.
The lucerne hay is baled and held as reserve feed for
sheep and stock. Free from mice and easily kept, it is
found to be the best crop for the purpose.
The foundation of the Millbrae Merino stud in 1878
was laid by the late Richard Mills when he purchased
400 ewes by Donald McCuish and the necessary rams
from the stud of the late A. B. Murray’s Tungkillo
STURTBRAE, OVERLOOKING THE ADELAIDE PLAINS
MIL LBR A E AN D STURT B R A E. SOU T 11 AUSTR A L I A


A QUARTET
OF YOUNG
RAMS BRED AT
MILLBRAE
A GLIMPSE OF THE LUCERNE
FLATS AT MILLBRAE. THE
HOMESTEAD IN THE DISTANCE
M ILLS RA E AN D ST U RTBR AK. SOU T H AUSTR A LI A


Estate. These were bred from until 1890, when Mr.
W. G. Mills started to exhibit at the Mount Barker
Show. Finding that he was exhibiting against high-class
sheep he acquired the first stud ram from Mr. Alick J.
Murray, of Mount Crawford, South Australia, followed
a few years later by the introduction of rams of the
great Peppin strain from Boonoke, Wanganella, and
subsequently from the Bundemar stud of New South
Wales.
I he success of this move can be judged by the list of
were sold afterwards in Sydney for £l2 15s. 3d. —an
average of £2 2s. Bd. each, which is understood to be a
world’s record for fleeces from sheep publicly shorn,
judged and valued.
The achievement of one Millbrae ewe, in particular,
is perhaps a record, for when four years of age she had
reared three lambs, and taken four champion prizes, and
also five first prizes. One of these champion prizes was
obtained at the Sydney Show in 1921. For her wool
three first awards and one champion were gained, cut-
YOUNG RAMS GRAZING ON LUCERNE COUNTRY AT MILLBRAE
prizes won annually at the most important shows in
every State, and also the freedom with which all surplus
stock are disposed of.
At the Adelaide Royal Show of September 1927 Mill-
brae stud won, among other high awards, the champion
medium, the champion strong, and grand champion and
reserve for ewes. At the Sydney Show of 1924 Mill-
brae stud won the shearing prize with first for ewes and
second for rams. The three ram fleeces were valued at
£6 10s., and the three ewes’ at £5 14s. These six fleeces
ting as much as 23 lbs. for twelve months’ growth.
Again at the Adelaide Royal Show in 1928 two rams’
fleeces from the Millbrae stud annexed champion honours
in strong competition. The pair weighed 32 lbs. 10 ozs.
and 26 lbs. respectively, and were valued at £4 16s. 4d.
From 200 to 300 rams are sold annually from Mill-
brae, and have made a name for themselves throughout
Australia and South Africa. They are reared under
ordinary grazing conditions, and only one instance has
been reported where a ram from Millbrae stud has
MILLB R A E AND STURT BRAE. SOUTH AUSTRALIA


SPECIAL STUD
MERINO EWES
AT MILLBRAE
ARISTOCRATS OF THE
MILLBRAE STUD
WITH THEIR LAMBS
MILLBRAE AND STURTBRAE. SOUTH AUSTRALIA


THE STUD MERINO RAM NO. 5-54,
BRED AND USED IN THE
MILLBRAE MERINO STUD
TYPICAL LUCERNE COUNTRY ON MILLBRAE, USED LARGELY FOR GRAZING PURPOSES
MILLER A E AND STURT BRAE. SOUTH AUSTRALIA


TOP STUD EWES
BRED AND USED
IN THE MILLBRAE
MERINO STUD
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE LUCERNE PASTURES ON MILLBRAE
M ILLBRAE AN D STURTBRAE, SOU TII AUSTRALIA


proved useless as a sire. Leading sires in use in 1928
were:—
2-9, rising seven years, a large-framed, bold-faced,
straight-backed sheep, with dense long-stapled 64’s wool.
This ram has averaged 28 lbs. for five consecutive shear-
ings.
No. 650, rising nine years, was fine-wool champion
at the New South Wales Sheepbreeders’ Show in Sydney
in 1923, and has cut up to 34 lbs. of wool for twelve
months’ growth.
5-210 is a son of 2.9. His dam is a Millbrae special
stud ewe. He is a well-shaped animal, with good head
and horns, and is splendidly covered by super 64’s wool.
5-54 was sired by 8.1.6, and is a big-framed ram, carry-
ing a very soft handling 64’s wool of great spinning
value.
One of the three rams sent to the Wembley Exhi-
bition from South Australia in 1925 was selected from
MILLBRAE-BRED EWE. CHAMPION STRONG WOOL
MERINO EWE, SYDNEY, 1925; GRAND CHAMPION
MERINO EWE, ADELAIDE, 1925
the Millbrae stud. It excited favourable opinion among
sheep experts in London. Major Weir, who was in
charge of the sheep exhibited from the Commonwealth,
reported that this ram, being the biggest animal, had
exceptional wool. It cut 24 lbs., which was one of the
two most valuable fleeces at Wembley. A fair amount of
wool was left on the sheep.
Millb rae wool under the appraisement scheme was
valued up to 24|d. per lb., and in 1922 the clip realised
per lb., and yet then did not meet the best market
for the season. These prices, combined with an average
clip of over 12 lbs. per sheep for more than a decade,
prove that the stud is worked on very sound lines.
STURTBRAE
In 1923 the Hon. W. G. Mills purchased Sturtbrae, a
small estate of 250 acres, seven miles south of Adelaide
and three and a-half miles from Brighton. On this
property Mr. Mills now resides, and in the time he has
to spare from his political duties breeds fine wool sheep
in conjunction with his Millbrae interests.
RAM USED IN THE MILLBRAE STUD
Sturtbrae is beautiful hilly grazing land overlooking
the Adelaide plains. It is subdivided into six paddocks,
and surrounded by a dog-proof netting fence. The pro-
perty is watered from the Happy Valley reservoir, and at
present is carrying 300 stud sheep.
Five one-year-old ewes from Sturtbrae were entered
at the 1928 Adelaide Royal Show in the shearing class
in order to ascertain how the fine-woolled sheep compare
with the strong-woolled South Australian Merinos when
shorn and valued publicly.
ANOTHER MILLBRAE STUD RAM
M ILLB RA E AND STUR T B RAE, SOU TII AUSTRALIA


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE MILLBRAE HOMESTEAD
STURTBRAE HOMESTEAD NESTLING IN ITS WELL SHELTERED VALLEY
MILLBRAE AND STURTBRAE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


ONE OF THE FIRST SIGNS
OF SPRING-THE ALMOND
TREES IN BLOSSOM
MILLER A E AN D STU R T BRAE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


VINEYARD AND
ALMOND GROVE
AT STURTBRAE
THE HOME-
STEAD AT
STURTBRAE
PHOTOS TAKEN
IN EARLY SPRING
SHOW THE VINES
BARE, BUT THE
ALMONDS IN
FULL BLOSSOM
M ILLBRAE AND STURT B R A E, SOU T H AUSTR A LI A


THE HON. W. G. MILLS
It was from Sturtbrae that Mr. Mills recently sold
the ram Cobham, an immense sheep, deep and wide in
the body. The wool, however, was of strong quality,
and the reason why Mr. Mills parted with the ram was
that he only breeds fine-woolled sheep at Sturtbrae.
The returns for wool from the Sturtbrae stud in 1927
averaged £1 2s. a head from all sheep over one year old.
80 per cent, being ewes that had reared lambs.
Personal
The Hon. W. G. Mills, M.L.C., was born at Native
Valley in 1859, and received his early education at the
Nairne public school. He completed his scholastic
studies at the Rev. A. Law’s Grammar School at Mount
Barker.
Lpon leaving school Mr. Mills went to Winnininnie
Station in the north-east of South Australia for experi-
ence under the late Robert Browne. Some twelve months
later he returned home, on account of his father’s serious
illness, to assume full management of the farm. In 1881
he married Miss L. Champion, and there were five sons
MR. ALEC MILLS
and four daughters. Two sons. Jack and Thomas, gave
their lives in the war.
Mr. Alec Mills, who manages Millbrae, was educated
at the Springfield and Native Valley public schools, and
subsequently at Prince Alfred College. Adelaide. He
saw service in the war in company with his brother Jack
in the 10th reinforcements to the 50th Battalion. He
was wounded and Jack mortally wounded in the Battle
of Norieul on the 2nd April. 1916. Invalided to Eng-
land, and later returned to Australia as permanently in-
jured in the right shoulder, he resumed his previous
occupation of the successful breeding of a true commercial
type of Merino sheep. In 1919 he married the eldest
daughter of the Rev. John and Mrs. Blacket, and he
now occupies the Millbrae homestead.
7 he second son, Mr. R. S. Mills, is woolgrowing on
Eyre’s Peninsula, where he has an extensive holding of
his own, as well as managing three thousand acres for
his mother. The daughters are Mesdames H. R. Pat-
terson and R. R. Loveday, of Cungena, Eyre’s Peninsula;
Miss Mills, Unley High School staff, and Sister Mills,
of the Loxton Hospital, South Australia.
1/ ILLB R A E AV D STURTBRAE. SOUTH AUSTR A LI A


PADTHAWAY AND LAKE ROY, NARRACOORTE,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
The Properties of Messrs. A. B. Lawson and Sons, and Mrs. Lawson
PADTHAWAY, owned by Mr. Allan Hell Lawson
and his two sons, and Lake Roy, the property of
Mrs. A. B. Lawson, adjoin one another in the
rich pastoral lands of the south-east of South Australia,
75 miles inland from the coast at Robe, and some 30
miles from the Victorian border. Narracoorte, which is
the principal centre of the district, lies 19 miles from
this represents the largest holding in the south-east.
The runs are devoted to the production of high class
Merino wool, cattle raising, and to the breeding of a few
blood horses, besides which a limited amount of cultiva-
tion of oats is carried on. This is the one cereal that
has proved a success in these parts, but the class of coun-
try is such that generally speaking it is most suitable for
PADTHAWAY HOMESTEAD
hake Roy homestead, whilst the homestead at Padthaway
is 12 miles further on along the main road to Woods’
V ells. The two properties form an area of 47,425
acres, of which 7758 acres are held under right of pur-
chase, 8328 acres under perpetual lease, and the balance
is freehold, the latter comprising some 2315 acres at Lake
Roy, and the remainder (29,024 acres) at Padthaway, and
grazing, and not adaptable for large scale agriculture.
With further clearing and an extension of first class im-
provements the two stations will be raised to a capacity
of about one sheep to the acre, but at present the rate is
nearer one sheep to two acres.
In character the country is a level expanse with few
open spaces, and is broken only by a range of low-lying


hills. By far the greater part of the runs is timbered
heavily with red and blue gums, great and beautiful
monarchs of the bush, and one of the most picturesque
of Australian trees. In its virgin state this country from
th ree miles out of the town of Narracoorte to the other
end of Padthaway was a jungle of undergrowth and
honeysuckle, while overhead were the intertwining
branches of the gums, almost shutting out the sky, and
in most places it was an impossibility for two horsemen
to ride abreast.
these are said to cause these generally fresh, but some-
times slightly brackish, reservoirs. The name of Pad-
thaway was given to the first well put down on the run,
by the blackfellows, and this still remains in use beneath
a solitary willow near the homestead.
The late Robert Lawson was the pioneer settler of
Padthaway in the forties, and was issued a pre-emptive
right for his home. He was born in Ayrshire, Scotland,
in 1816, where he inherited an estate upon reaching his
majority. He sailed out to South Australia in 1839 by
BACKWATER ON THE CREEK AT PADTHAWAY
Once cleared of the ground vegetation, however, the
rich soil responded with a sward of ideal pasturage, but
probably the feature of the district was found to be the
existence of a shallow sub-artesian basin which, combined
with a generous rainfall averaging 24 in. a year, provides
an unlimited source of water for all requirements. The
underground w T ater, in fact, maintains a number of
lagoons .throughout the properties, especially after good
rains have fallen in the western parts of Victoria, and
the ship “Superb,” leaving his estate rent free to his
tenants, and soon after his arrival took up a holding in
the Mt. Barker district and went in for sheep farming.
According to records his farm carried 550 sheep in 1841,
and was improved to the extent of a turf homestead, a
few yards, and a well.
The discovery of copper thereabouts a few years later
—Mr. Lawson being one of the discoverers—led to such
increase in the population that sheep farming became a
PA D TIIA IV A Y AN I) LA K E K 0 Y. S 0 UT II A USTR A LI A


NATURAL PASTURES SHADED BY RED GUMS ON PADTHAWAY
THE WOOLSHED AT PADTHAWAY
PA D THA W A Y AND LAKE RO Y, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


trying experience, and Mr. Lawson was one who sought
quieter surroundings beyond the hills in the lesser known
lands of the south-east. In the year 1851 he set out from
Adelaide to occupy Padthaway, the area of which was
set down as 53,760 acres, and, accompanied by his young
wife, the daughter of Mr. Bell, a pioneer of the Mt.
Barker district, made the journey of 190 miles in the
saddle. 1 heir road led past Lake Alexandrina, across
the River Murray, and by way of Meningie and Woods’
Wells through the Coorong desert. Frequently their
camp was disturbed by bands of marauding blacks, who
in after years became indebted to the young Scotsman
paratory to laying out suitable paddocks, and it says much
for the ability of the young owner that 26,500 Merino
sheep, 250 head of cattle, and a number of horses were
carried within a few years of his arrival there. The
horses were bred from stock brought from New South
Wales, some high class thoroughbred stallions being used
for the purpose, and the connection that Mr. Lawson
built up in India in due course earned a good reputation
for the stock that was shipped.
Evidence of the station’s early establishment stands to
the present in the form of the original low-built, old-
world, stone homestead, which is being preserved in its
entirety. Alongside it in 1882 the present 22-roomed
A USEFUL RESERVE OF WATER BACKED UP FROM THE CREEK
for the large aboriginal encampment formed and carried
on at Padthaway.
The property was enlarged later by the addition of
28,000 acres of open plains in the swampy regions of the
Mosquito Plains district, and the fact that the total
annual rental for the lease of the whole of the run,
which amounted to 131 square miles, was £1236 125.,
shows that Mr. Lawson went in for grazing on an im-
portant scale. The development of the run was re-
gulated by the time occupied in ringbarking and felling
the huge timber and burning off the undergrowth, pre-
residence of two stories, equipped with electric light,
sewerage and later telephone connection with Lake Ro\
Station was constructed, but Mr. Lawson did not live
to share its luxury. He died in 1876 at the age of 60
years, leaving the property in trust to his two sons,
and a life tenancy for his widow, who survived him until
1913. Prior to his death the late Mr. Lawson con-
solidated the run into freehold, chiefly through farmers
requesting him to buy them out and disencumber them
of their small holdings, which had been taken up as a
result of the Government resumption of much of the
best part of Padthaway for closer settlement a few years
earlier.
P A I) TII A ir A Y AX 1) LA K E R() Y. S() UT II A U S TRA L I A


STUD FRIESIAN
CATTLE ON THE
NATURAL PASTURES
AT PADTHAWAY
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD AT PADTHAWAY
PAD TIIA IV A Y AN I) LA K E R 0 Y, S() UT 11 A U S TRA LI A


THE THOROUGHBRED MARE, NANAPA, BY ST. SPASA OUT OF LASSWADE
Padthaway was managed for over twenty years after
the death of Mr. Lawson, sen., by Mr. John Bell, a
nephew of Mrs. Lawson, and after that by the elder of
the two sons, the late Mr. Robert Lawson, jun., and upon
his death in 1908 the property passed into the possession
of his brother, the present owner.
In the early ’nineties Mr. A. B. Lawson leased part
of the Cowan Estate, named Riversdale, on the River
Murray, near Tailem Bend, and for some fifteen years
used this country in the winter months for fattening sheep
which he purchased in the south-east and kept for a while
at Lake Roy. Mr. A. B. Lawson made this proposition
pay very well, and that depot contributed largely to the
building up of the family’s pastoral interests. Rivers-
dale, which comprised country essentially suited to graz-
ing, and not adaptable for agriculture, was disposed of
in 1906, in which year Mr. A. B. Lawson and his wife
went to Lake Roy Station, which he purchased in 1899
from the Estate of the late John Neil. In 1912 Mr. A.
B. Lawson transferred Lake Roy to his wife.
Lake Roy was first taken up by Mr. E. Cameron
about the same time as Padthaway, and it subsequently
passed into the hands of Mr. R. McDonald, who gave
it its present name. Mr. McDonald was the father of Mr.
A. J. McDonald, the noted stud sheep man, who was for
a long time manager of the famous Canowie stud Merino
flocks, and it is believed that he endeavoured to establish
a dairying industry on the place. A member of the
well-known Laidlaw family bought out Mr. McDonald,
and after four or five years sold the run to the late John
Neil. Mr. A. B. Lawson began the construction of the
magnificent home which graces the property to-day soon
after entering into occupation and completed the work
by 1907. It is situated in beautiful surroundings, and
its tasteful appointments and architecture entitle it to
the claim of being one of the finest country residences in
the State.
The property to-day, as already indicated, consists of
2315 acres freehold, 7758 right of purchase, and 8328
perpetual lease.
Both Lake Roy and Padthaway Stations are improved
to a considerable degree, and whenever the brand Pad-
PA D TII A IV A Y AND LA K E R O Y. S O UT // A US TRA LI A


ST. SPA, BY ST. SPASA, FROM LASSWADE. OUT OF 6 STARTS OVER HURDLES IN 1928
ST. SPA WON 3 FIRSTS, 2 SECONDS AND 1 THIRD
thaway is observed on the floor of the wool stores in
Geelong it attracts considerable attention from the
valuers, and is always amongst the highest priced wool
at the sales. It is a purebred Merino wool of super 64’s
quality as a rule, of long staple, clean and substantial,
and manufacturers have expressed their liking for its fine
spinning quality. Although each of the properties has
its own flock, the shearing is carried out in the shed at
Padthaway, beginning towards the end of each Sep-
tember. The number of sheep shorn in 1928 was ap-
proximately 20,000.
1 he shed is a solid structure of stone and iron,
equipped with 13 stands of machines, and was erected in
1880. Over 1100 head per day can be handled effec-
tively on the large board.
The wool is carted to Narracoorte by a 3-ton truck,
which has so far given six seasons of service without
costing one penny in repairs, and it forms a contrast to
the methods of former times when the annual clip had
to be carted by bullock teams over swamps and sandy
hills to the coast, the return trip taking more than two
weeks.
The sheep are an excellent and profitable type of
Merino, and do not suffer to any appreciable extent from
the comparatively wet nature of the conditions under
which they are reared. They are based upon South
Australian and Tasmanian blood. In the drought of
1914, which affected most of the pastoral country of the
whole of the Commonwealth, the Padthaway and Lake
Roy flocks were reduced through deaths by over 10,000
head, and in order to make up this heavy deficit it was
necessary to procure big lines of sheep as near the one
quality as possible. This was managed by the purchase
of 5000 two-tooth ewes from Dunlop Station, in the
north-west of New South Wales, and a further draft of
3000 one-year-old ewes from TrawalU, in the Western
District of Victoria, the property at that time of the late
Admiral Bridges, and to-day owned by Engineer Com-
mander Mackenzie. Both these lots of sheep displayed
an evenness that fitted in very well with the flocks they
PAD TH A JV A Y AN D LA K E R OY, S O UT II A U S TRA LI A


augmented, and were exceedingly good
quality sheep.
1 o-day the characteristics of the Hock
are their plain bodies and even covering
of the Heece, with which is combined a
frame that is of medium size, and the
rigid classing every year has produced
on the two runs an all-round Hock of a
high standard. For the purpose of
maintaining this level the owner lias
built up a stud over the past few years
from which rams of the required calibre
can be drawn. Following is a brief
notation of some of the weights at the
last five shearings at Padthaway:—
AVERAGE PER HEAD
1924 wethers cut 8.6 lbs., ewes 7.11 lbs.
1 *925 „ „ 8.7 „ „ 10.4
1926 „ „ 8.8 „ „ 8.4
1927 „ „ 8.6 „ „ 8.4
A May June lambing is adopted owing to the abund-
ance of feed after the spring rains, upon which the coun-
try depends, and in 1928 the lamb-marking right through
averaged 77 per cent. There are 51 paddocks on the
combined holdings, and on account of the timber it was
LAKE ROY HOUSE
a problem for many years how to gain the upper hand
over the rabbit problem. This is happily no longer a
serious menace, and was overcome by a system of wire
netted boundaries, even between the two stations, as well
as along the roadways and around the forest reserve
LAKE ROY HOMESTEAD GARDEN
PA D THA JV A Y AN D LA K E R 0 Y, S O UT II A USTR A L 1 A


A VIEW OF COCKATOO LAKE ON LAKE ROY STATION
LOOKING FROM THE PADTHAWAY HOMESTEAD ACROSS THE HOME PADDOCKS
PA D Tll AIV A Y AN I) LA K K R O Y. S 0 UT II A VSTR A L I A


A CORNER OF THE
DRAWING ROOM
AT LAKE ROY
THE BILLIARD
ROOM AT LAKE
ROY HOMESTEAD
PAI) T H A //' A Y AN I) LA K E R() Y, S 0 VT H A USTR A LI A


Left —
THE LATE MRS.
ROBERT LAWSON
Right—
THE LATE MR.
ROBERT LAWSON
MR. A. KEITH LAWSON
MR. ERNEST R. LAWSON
MR. A. B. LAWSON
Left—
MRS. B. J. MAGAREY,
NEE MISS BESSIE LAWSON
Right—
MRS. A. B. LAWSON,
OF LAKE ROY
PA I) Tll AW A Y AN I) LA K K R 0 Y. S O UT H A USTR A L I A


which lies in the centre of
the runs. This reserve, by
the way, forms a striking
illustration of the state of
the properties in their pre-
sent highly improved condi-
tion as compared with the
wild virgin growth, but it is
unfortunately a breeding
ground for vermin and a
source of anxiety in this re-
spect to the owners.
The netted boundaries, of
which there are 140 miles,
are 4 ft. high, the netting
being 6 in. below the ground,
and in addition to this pro-
tection two mechanical rab-
bit exterminators are kept
employed all the year round.
The clearing of the proper-
ties, especially Padthaway, is
by no means completed yet,
but what has been done has
created a park-like appear-
ance, which for beauty few places could excel. Water-
holes. shallow wells, and a full equipment of windmills
provide the stock waters, and these have never failed.
I'he head of the firm of Messrs. A. B. Lawson and
Sons, who was born at Padthaway on the 27th March,
1863, became an apt student of the pastoral industry
under his father upon completing his education at Whin-
ham College, Adelaide. In 1893 he married Lucv, the
daughter of Mr. Benjamin Pickworth Hunt, of Eng-
land and Adelaide, and the family comprises one
daughter, Bessie, now Mrs. B. J. Magarey, of Glen Roy
Station, near Penola, south of Narracoorte, and two
sons.
The elder son is Allan Keith, and after his education
at Queen’s College, Adelaide, and later at the Geelong
Grammar School, he as-
sumed the management of
Padthaway under his
father, and resides at the
homestead there. Like
both his father and grand-
father, he is an enthusiast
in shooting, and his well-
kept gun room contains
many beautiful pieces. He
is a member of S.A. Tat-
tersalls Club, Narra-
coorte Racing Club, Mt.
Gambier, Millicent, Pen-
ola and Narracoorte Gun
Clubs, &c, and devotes a
good deal of time to the
affairs of the district. His
brother, Ernest Robert
Lawson, was educated at
Queen’s College, Adelaide
after which he completed
ENTRANCE HALL AT LAKE ROY
LAKE ROY DRAWING ROOM
his studies as an electrical
engineer at the Adelaide
University, taking it up
more or less as a hobby. He
resides with his parents at
Lake Roy homestead, and is
undergoing a thorough train-
ing with a view to taking
over eventually the active
management of that part of
the family’s interests.
Mr. Allan Bell Lawson
now devotes more of his time
to his favourite pastime of
breeding and racing a few
good horses, and is a mem-
ber of numerous racing and
sporting bodies, principally
in the south-east. Amongst
the thoroughbreds at present
kept by him is Lady Luck-
now, the five-year-old
daughter of Lucknow, a
Caulfield Cup winner. Lady
Lucknow started nine times
as a three-year-old in 1926, her first season of racing, and
her performance was six firsts, two seconds, and one third
place. Quindaro, a hurdler and steeplechaser bred by
Mr. Ben Chaffey, was a prominent winner at Mt. Gam-
bier, Millicent and Morphettville under Mr. A. B. Law-
sun’s colours, and held the record for the last-named
course. Nanapa was another winner, and with Andrada
the owner won both the Narracoorte and Millicent Cups,
and with Rametta, in 1925, won the Mt. Gambier Cup.
These trophies make a fine display at Lake Roy.
Mr. Lawson was also a first class footballer and
cricketer in his day at college, and later on with the
local club, which made frequent tours through western
Victoria. He is credited with the record of having taken 7
wickets for no runs on no less than three occasions, once
against Penshurst, a strong
Western District team.
The family are ardent
motorists, and possess a
small fleet of high-
powered cars, which make
the journey to Adelaide
or Melbourne in a few
hours compared to the
arduous drive in a buggy
often undertaken by the
founder of Padthaway,
through the dense scrub
of the Coorong to
Woods’Well s in the days
when motors were a
dream of the future. Of
the late Mr. Robert Law-
son s (sen.) family of
four daughters two are
living, both residing in
Narracoorte.
PA D THA tV A Y AN D LA K E R 0 Y , SOU T H A USTR A L I A


STRUAN, NARRACOORTE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
The Property of Alexander Robertson, Esq.
STRUAN Station, the property of Mr. Alexander
Robertson, is located astride the Penola-road, ten
miles from the town of Narracoorte, in the south-
east of South Australia, and is a freehold comprising
same time most productive, pastoral holdings in South
Australia in its flush days, Struan is of outstanding in-
terest historically, the run having been discovered and es-
tablished in the year 1842 by the brothers John and Wil-
VIEW OF STRUAN HOUSE FROM THE HOMESTEAD CREEK
11,500 acres of plains and undulating country, on which
are run to-day a flock of purebred Merino sheep, over a
hundred head of cattle, and a number of thoroughbred
horses.
Apart from constituting one of the largest, and at the
Ham Robertson, the first named being the father of the
present owner, and in after years becoming famous for
the hospitality and generosity of its Laird, who, singularly
enough, was referred to frequently as “Poor Man Robert-
son.”


BROOD MARES AND FOALS IN THE HOUSE PADDOCK
The original area of this holding was 43,520 acres, for
which an annual rental of a fraction over £ll per square
mile was paid to the Crown, and until about the time
the near-by town sprang into existence in the year 1845,
the run was known as Robertson’s Plains. At an early
date the brothers began to extend their operations by the
purchase of the adjoining Warrattenbullie Station from
the late Mr. Wallace, father of Air. Donald Wallace,
and when resumptions took place in 1868 the opportunity
was seized to convert large areas of the Alosquito Plains
country, into which Struan extended for some miles, into
freehold, thus consolidating these rich flats with other
parts of the station already made secure of tenure.
In the early seventies the partnership between the two
brothers was dissolved by mutual consent, and Mr. Wil-
liam Robertson settled down on Wando Vale, near
Casterton, Victoria, a few miles away from another
brother, Mr. Duncan Robertson, who had taken over
Gringegalgona Station, near Coleraine, also in the
Western District of Victor ia. In 1875 the late Mr.
STORES TOPPING UP ON THE RICH STRUAN PASTURES
S TRU AN, SOU TII A U S TRA LI A


A SCENE ON THE BOOL LAGOON
A BEND IN MOSQUITO CREEK
STRU AN, S O U T H AUSTRALIA


John Robertson enlarged the scope at Struan by adding
to it Elderslie, one of the finest properties of the time,
comprising 35,420 acres of freehold, and situated on the
\ ictorian side of the border adjoining Struan. At one
period the estates owned and leased by this enterprising
grazier reached a maximum of over 125,000 acres, while
the stock carried, when the various runs directed from
Struan were at their zenith, may be put down at 60,000
sheep, 2000 head of cattle and 500 pedigreed thorough-
breds.
1 he late Mr. Robertson was just as progressive and
the Mosquito Creek, while the blood stock had special
paddocks to themselves.
In 1873 the owner began the construction of a home-
stead that was destined to make a name for the property.
It was the third house to be erected on the estate, the
other two being built in the forties and in the sixties
respectively. By the end of 1875 the new residence was
completed, and according to an old record, it cost some
£IO,OOO, while the official opening was marked on 27th
January, 1876, by a house-warming, at which 150 guests
were entertained. Struan House is a stately mansion
STRUAN MERINO RAMS
just as zealous in his methods of sheepbreeding as the
leading Hockmasters of the present day, and the Struan
flocks, which were bred up from the best Tasmanian
blood out of the late Mr. James Gibson’s Belle Vue stud,
became well known for their high quality and their cover-
ing of beautiful fine wool. The owner went about his
work with a rare skill, turning the heavily timbered lands
into rich pastures and generally improving the country.
He always kept the sheep separate from his cattle, the
latter being run on the fertile flats through which coursed
of over forty rooms, in which the acme of comfort and
luxury of the day were incorporated. As time went on
it became a celebrated half-way house to those journeying
between Melbourne and Adelaide in the old coaching
days. It is a bye-word amongst the old identities of the
district that the owner dispensed a lavish hospitality to
all classes, whilst his guests frequently included State
Governors, judges, and other high officials. The effluxion
of time brought an inevitable end to all these time-
honoured customs of country social life, and whilst the
s TRUA N, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


MISCELLANEOUS, A SUCCESSFUL
PERFORMER WITH MR. ROBERTSON’S
COLOURS, RED AND WHITE STRIPES
ST RU AN. SOUTH AUSTRALIA


LOOKING OUT FROM
TH E COOL PORCH
OF STRUAN HOUSE
S T R UA N, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


STRUAN HOUSE WAS BUILT IN 1875, AND
WAS FITTED UP WITH THE SOLID LUXURY
OF THE LATER VICTORIAN PERIOD. THIS
WAS ALSO A TIME OF LAVISH HOSPITALITY
ST RU AN, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


house is still in perfect order to-day, its use is confined
to the quiet home life of the present owner.
Many settlements were formed on parts of the old
estate, which were alienated for the closer development
of the district, and this gradual decrease of area was com-
pleted with the conversion of Elderslie Station after the
war into a soldiers’ settlement, which brought the size of
Struan down to its present acreage.
Mr. Alexander Robertson inherited the estate after
perties, 15,000 acres, is carrying at the present time an
average of 14,000 Merino sheep, as well as several
hundred head of cattle and a number of thoroughbred
horses.
Mr. Alex. Robertson believes in small paddocks, into
which Struan and the new run are closely subdivided to
advantage. These methods of concentrated grazing were
not possible until the superfluous timber was cleared, only
sufficient of the fine old red and blue gums having been
spared to provide necessary shade for the stock, and the
A VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD SURROUNDINGS, WITH STRUAN HOUSE STANDING OUT ON THE BROW OF THE HILL
his father’s death, and was successful in maintaining the
high reputation of the Struan sheep and wool. He
further improved the property by attending to the pas-
tures, and the splendid state of the run to-day is largely
the result of his close study of the soil and of those out-
side grasses best suited to the fairly wet climate of the
district. In 1927 Mr. Robertson disposed of the War-
rattenhullie run, where all the shearing used to be done,
and purchased a new property, named Wirringulla, ad-
joining Struan. It comprises 3500 acres of freehold
undulating country, and the total area of the two pro-
effect is that of a beautiful park. Rabbits have been
eliminated by the erection of wire netted boundaries, and
the paddocks are kept clean by the use of fumigators.
The property is favoured with a plentiful supply of water
in sub-artesian bores and wells with up-to-date mills and
engines. The windmills are the most favoured and are
kept going night and day. The overflow is allowed to
run into the paddocks, and so some green feed is pro-
vided through the year. Within three-quarters of a mile
of the house theie are seven mills. In addition to the
inexhaustible underground supply, and an annual rainfall
S T R UA N. S O V TII A US T RALIA


HEAVY CARRYING PASTURES 43 HEAD OF GROWN CATTLE AND 15 CALVES ON 15 ACRES
A 13- MONTHS-OLD SHORTHORN BULL CALF, STRUAN BRED
STRU Ay, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


averaging 24 inches, the Mosquito creek winds through
the greater part of the property, and, moreover, it is
always running. From its source in Victoria it flows out
to the sea near the town of Kingston, and is fed from
THE HOUSE DOGS
an underground river, which gushes forth near the Narra-
coorte Caves.
On the black flinty soil on some parts of the plains the
owner has cultivated a good stand of cabbage grass, a
legume not unlike lucerne in many respects, and a very
succulent feed for stock in summer, whilst elsewhere the
soil, after it has been turned over and
treated with a multi-packer, is sown
with a wide range of grasses and clovers,
including phalaris bulbosa, rye, pas-
palum, strawberry and subterranean
clovers. On the low hills, where the
country inclines to be sandy, the African
kikuyu grass has proved a wonderful
success. Top-dressing plays a big part
in the improvement of the Struan pas-
tures, and Mr. Robertson, who must be
recognised as a foremost expert in this
direction, spares no expense to achieve
a maximum carrying capacity.
The Merino flock is of Tasmanian
origin. About 1908 it was strengthened
by the introduction of a number of rams
from Eli Elwah, in Riverina. This
tended to maintain the size of the
frames with satisfactory results, and the
type now to be seen at Struan has been
developed from this combination. In
more recent times the owner has
worked up a select stud from which to
provide his own rams, and the management of the whole
of the flock and stud sheep is in the hands of Mr. Begg.
The owner follows the principle of classing carefully
every one of the sheep, and will not allow kempy wool
animals to remain in the flock. Sale sheep receive the
same personal attention. In appearance the flock is
typical of the fine wool type of the Western District ot
Victoria.
The sheep are dense on the back, have plain bodies,
and a pleasing uniformity, with an
even topline and good underneath, as
well as a well proportioned conforma-
tion. The spinning quality of the
fleece is a 64’s to 70’s, and well known
to manufacturers at the other side of the
world, while the prices realised at the
Melbourne sales are frequently at the
top of the market, having returned
as high as 29d. and 33d. per lb.
The average weights usually pan
out at from 9 to 11 lbs. for the
wethers, and 8 lbs. per head for the
ewes.
Shearing takes place in October,
and a new shed has been constructed at
Wirringulla containing eight stands
and modern equipment. Although
there is a railway siding within one
mile of Struan House, the clip, which
is shorn and carted under contract, is
taken by bullock teams to Glen Roy
siding five miles from the new shed, where formerly it
was conveyed a distance of ten miles from the Warrat-
tenbullie run. Before the advent of the railway, how-
ever, the wool from Struan and its dependent properties
was carried 120 miles to Portland, in Victoria, and
shipped from there to Melbourne.
THE MAIN DRIVE
Until 1928 lambing took place in May, but now the
owner intends to change over to spring lambing owing
to the fact that cold snaps on the plains have been re-
sponsible for too much mortality amongst the young
stock during the winter months. He believes that the
5 TRUA N, S 0 UT II A USTRA LI A


A CORNER OF THE
DRAWING ROOM
THE ENTRANCE
HALL, SHOWING THE
BEAUTY OF THE
MAIN STAIRCASE
ST RU AN, S 0 U TII A U S TRA L I A


new policy to come into force for the first time in 1929
will ensure better weights with the ewes’ wool and a
better fleece, while the lambs should go forward con-
siderably quicker.
A mixed herd of cattle are fattened on the rich flats
along the river frontage, and the owner also has the
nucleus of a stud herd of Shorthorns. These latter
comprise a foundation of seven of the picked cows of
the late Rosebank, South Australia, stud, and were bought
at the dispersal of that well known herd at the beginning
of the year 1928. At the same time Mr. Robertson
purchased the bull Clifton Cavalier from Mr.
A. J. Simpson, of Clifton, Victoria, and with
this excellent material
upon which to work the
stud should be developed
successfully. The male
progeny will be used to
improve the quality of the
general herd, features of
the cattle being their
docility, nice colours and
good conformation.
The output of the Struan
stables is maintained by the
purchase of a few yearlings
from time to time at Mel-
bourne, and when broken
in at Struan they are not
put into training for the
race track until they are 4
years old. The owner races
purely for the love of the
sport, and his colours, red
and white stripes, gold cap
(sometimes red cap), are
conspicuous at many of the
country meetings, and as a
consequence he is the pos-
sessor of some fine trophies.
A prominent winner at
Mt. Gambier was Black
Garter.
In the area set aside for
the cultivation of crops on
Struan over 600 acres are
at present under barley, and
at Wirringulla a further
300 acres are under crop on
the share system. This cereal does very well on the open
plains country, and yields consistently the splendid aver-
age of from 55 to 60 bushels to the acre.
Personal
The father of the present owner of Struan, the late
Mr. John Robertson, was born at Dunachton, Inverness-
shire, in the year 1809, and came to Australia in the
“St. George” in 1838. He landed at Sydney, and later
moving to Melbourne, he soon became engaged in pas-
toral pursuits at a place on the river Wannon, in the
central west of Victoria. A year or two later he and
his brother William set out on a tour of the extreme west
of the State and of the country on the other side of the
border, and this trip led to the occupation of the Mos-
quito Plains in the year 1842. Other runs which the
late Mr. John Robertson owned were Woodford, on
the Glenelg River, and some valuable country near Port-
land. At Struan, however, the greater part of his life
was spent, and in furthering the welfare of the surround-
ing district during a particularly strenuous career, he
also found time to devote a good deal of attention to
sport of various kinds. His stables included many first
class thoroughbred horses, with which he took a lead in
the district race meetings, and he also fostered coursing,
which sport is recorded as
having had its origin in
Australia on his cousin’s es-
tate, Moy Hall, adjoining
Struan. This latter place
was opened in 1867 with
an elaborate function some-
what similar to the open-
ing of Struan House.
Some of the best grey-
hounds that have ever been
seen in Australia were bred
and trained at Struan.
In those days kangaroos
were plentiful in the neigh-
bourhood, and the stations
organised many drives. But
it was chiefly through his
open-handed treatment of
all deserving causes that
the name of John Robert-
son is held mostly in re-
membrance, and his death
in 1880, at the age of 71
years, was marked by wide-
spread expressions of deep
sorrow. He is buried in
the private cemetery near
Struan House, where there
is a monument to his
memory and to that of his
wife Susan, who was born
at Kinrara, Inverness-shire,
Scotland, in 1831, and died
on 27th May, 1906. Their
eldest son John, who was
born 31st December, 1855, and died 19th April, 1917, their
third son William, born 4th April, 1862, and who died
20th November, 1904, and other members of this not-
able family were laid to rest in this cemetery, as well as
the late Mr. Wm. Shiels, Premier of Victoria in 1892-3,
who for 24 years was member for Normanby, in Victoria,
and who died at St man House in December 1904. The
late Mr. Shiels married one of Mr. Robertson’s
daughters, while another daughter, Mrs. May Pender,
resides at the present time at Narracoorte, and another
daughter is married to Mr. Vincent, of Geelong, Vic-
toria.
THE STATELY ENTRANCE TO STRUAN HOUSE
5 T R UA N, S 0 U TII A USTRA LI A


MURGOO AND MT. NARRYER
MURCHISON DISTRICT, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Property of Atkins Bros. Limited
MURGOO Station is located near the centre of the
Murchison division of Western Australia, a dis-
trict of extensive area of pastoral lands, and em-
bracing some of the soundest sheep country to be found
in the State.
Murgoo can well claim to be a sound Merino wool-
growing and stud proposition, and its present owners,
prising 511,000 acres of pastoral leaseholds, expiring in
1948, the property was one of the first runs taken up in
the State. When the district was surveyed in 1854,
stress was laid upon the prospects of fairly rich mineral
deposits there, but it was regarded poor wool-growing
country. Even after Messrs. Gregory and Trigg came
to a different conclusion in 1856, and laid plans for open-
MERINO EWES AND LAMBS AT MURGOO
Messrs. Atkins Bros., who are associated intimately with
the development of the pastoral industry in the lower
north-west, have proved the value of their holding by the
splendid type of wool growm there to-day, and by the
high-class stud of Merino sheep.
The Murgoo homestead lies 400 miles due north of
Perth, 93 miles north of Pindar and 111 miles from Mul-
lewa, whilst Yalgoo is 100 miles south by east. Com-
ing up a part of its wild virgin scrub, little or nothing
was done, and possibly the discovery of good grazing land
further north overshadowed those parts. Not until the
sixties and seventies were stock first tried out in this re-
markable top feed country, and to Messrs. E. and F. Wit-
tenoom fell the task of pioneering around Murgoo. Mr.
E. H., now Sir Edward, Wittenoom, pitched his camp
in the vicinity of the site occupied by the existing wool


THE WOOLSHED AND MEN'S HUTS AT MURGOO
shed, and it may be significant that the present owners
are now building a new homestead near the same spot on
account of the excellent water thereabouts. The area
taken up in 1872 by Edward Wittenoom and the late
Thomas Burges was 50,000 acres, but later it grew to
700,000 acres, on which Boonoke sheep were grazed with
good results.
The first camp was pitched at Chingwa, and in 1880
Messrs. E. and F. Wittenoom established the homestead
at Murgoo on the present site. In 1891 this partnership
sold out to Messrs. Holmes and Moloney, and some years
later Mr. Henry Mostyn Moloney bought Mr. Richard
Holmes’ share and he carried on the property until his
death in 1903. During the next two years the station
was under the control of the Executors of the late Henry
Mostyn Moloney, who disposed of it at auction, Mr.
Charles Atkins, sen., being the purchaser. In 1905 a
company, comprising Mr. Charles Atkins, sen., and his
two sons, E. C. and H. G. Atkins, took over the station,
and it has since been carried on under the name of Atkins
Bros. Limited.
In those days the great sub-artesian basin that flows
beneath the Murchison was barely recognised, but with
its general discovery came a more rapid development all
through the district, and at Murgoo each succeeding year
has been marked by the appearance of more windmills
and better appointments.
Since 1919 the general management of the property has
been in the capable hands of Mr. R. W. Fremlin, and the
present season of 1928 sees Murgoo in an exceptionally
good state of improvement. Mr. Fremlin has been in
the West since 1896. He is an authority on the destruc-
THE MT. NARRYER WOOLSHED
MURGOO AN I) M T. N A RRY E R, IV E S T ERN A U S TRA LI A


TOP STUD RAM
USED IN THE
MURGOO STUD


IMPORTED STUD RAMS AT MURGOO
tion of wild dogs, and was for some years manager of the
well-known Yuin Station for Mr. William Burges.
The Murgoo country comprises wide sweeps of un-
dulating land covered with the most desirable of edible
scrub, the predominant feed being karara, with many
varieties of seed bearing bush and mulga growing in pro-
fusion. Cutting through the centre of the run there is a
belt 32 miles long and 15 miles wide of blue bush and
salt bush flats, interspersed with innumerable kinds of her-
bage. This belt lies along the course of the Sanford
River, which is dry for most of the year with the excep-
tion of some good holes. These last well into the sum-
mer months, whilst some are of a permanent nature. The
average rainfall is in., falling generally in the winter
from May onwards. A summer rain is not looked for,
although when this does occur at odd times, the shallow
light red soil responds in marvellous fashion with sweet
grasses, annual saltbush, and similar fodders, but the
winter herbage is the chief supply of new feed, such as
wild geranium and crowfoot. In the spring of the year
it is a delight to traverse the acres and acres of multi-
coloured wild flowers, broken by vivid patches of Sturt
pea with its black and crimson blossoms, and by purple
vetches, whilst the mulga and scrub in its shades of green
set off a picture of prolific growth. In flood times the
waters of the Sanford extend out to a great distance, but
very rarely do they reach the homestead areas, as was the
case in the winter of 1927, when there was a depth of 2 ft.
of water throughout headquarters.
Murgoo is some 800 ft. above sea level, and the climate
covers a range from severe winter frosts to high summer
temperatures, and it is recognised that the climate is un-
MURGOO TOP STUD EWES
MURGO 0 AND M T. N A RRY ER, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


surpassed for the well-being of both man and stock.
The management is doing all within its power to aug-
ment the splendid drought-resisting resources of the coun-
try with the right forms of improvement. First and
foremost, the policy is to avoid over-stocking. Small
paddocks are not favoured, and the 5x5 enclosures into
which the run is divided give the Merino sheep plenty of
space to wander about, and they also have a sufficient
three miles from an overhead tank, whereby four pad-
docks are watered at their corners by means of trough-
ing. Careful fencing is another feature of the manage-
ment. This is of the standard five and six strand type,
of which there are 423 miles erected. Ihe gates are
staunch and well hung, while clear notice boards are put
up at various points along the tracks which intersect the
property.
OLD MURGOO HOMESTEAD
supply of water. In this regard, ample provision has
been made with wells. There are no dams on Murgoo.
Cood water is available, and between 60 and 70 wind-
mills stand by shallow wells, averaging about 35 ft. in
depth. In most cases, one well waters each paddock, and
only in one instance has difficulty been experienced in
sinking a well. This was overcome by running a supply,
at a cost of £lOOO, through 2-in. piping for a distance of
The run is not troubled by rabbits, but due precaution
is being taken to escape any invasion should the vermin
sweep up from the south. Foxes, however, are beginning
to appear in numbers, whilst emus and kangaroos do con-
siderable damage to fences. A number of natives are em-
ployed both for stock and domestic work.
Lambing takes place in May with the change of season,
and an 80 to 84 per cent, is always counted upon. In
MU RG O O AND MT. N A RRY ER, TV ES TERN AUSTRALI A


A FLOCK OF GALAHS SETTLED
ON A TREE NEAR THE
MURGOO HOMESTEAD
MU RG O 0 AND MT. N A RRY ER, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


SCENE AT MURGOO
A FINE EXPANSE OF WATER AT MT. NARRYER
MU RG O 0 AND M T. N A RRY ER, IV ES TERN A UST R A LI A


THE MT. NARRYER HOMESTEAD
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE MT. NARRYER POOL
M URG O O AND MT. N A RRY ER, WE S TE RN A UST R A LI A


THE COMFORTABLE SITTING ROOM IN THE MT. NARRYER HOMESTEAD
1927 the marking was up to 97 per cent. No summer
lambing is favoured owing to the unreliability of the
thunderstorms, hence the end of summer is usually marked
by very dry conditions.
Shearing takes place in August-September in the large
and well-equipped shed five miles from the homestead.
From an average count of under 20,000 up to 1920, the
number of sheep shorn was increased to 28,000 in 1922,
dropping to 23,000 in the drought year
1924 and amounting to over 31,000 in
1926, whilst in 1927 900 bales of
wool were clipped from a similar
number of sheep and lambs. This clip
averaged £3O ss. per bale and 22Jd.
per lb. all round. Some 8000 station-
bred wethers were sold in the wool in
1924 at an average price of 40s. per
head.
1 hat both sheep and country are
sound is illustrated by the figures of
1925, in which year 17,000 fully grown
sheep and 6000 lambs were shorn. The
former cut over 11 lbs. per head and
totalled 490 bales, and this included
1000 wethers only, all 2-tooth.
1 birty-three bales of lambs’ wool were
produced, and whilst the growth for the
sheep was Imonths, the season was
below normal.
1 he Murgoo clip is sold in London.
Soon after shearing it is carted to Pin-
dar by motor lorry, Messrs. Atkins Bros,
being the first people to introduce motor
transport for station use in the district.
From Pindar the clip is railed to Gerald-
ton, thence it is shipped via Singapore to
London.
Following is a table of weights per
head averaged at recent shearings:—
1922, 7 1-5 lbs., including lambs; 1923,
7 7-16 lbs., including lambs; 1925,
111-6 lbs., including lambs; 1926, 11.7
lbs., grown sheep only; 1927, 10.71 lbs.,
grown sheep only.
In the 1928 season, 21,729 grown
sheep cut 588 bales, averaging 8.95 lbs.
of wool, while 9880 lambs cut 87 bales,
averaging 3.16 lbs. of wool.
In November 1927 the management
sent a consignment of prime spring lambs
to the Midland Junction sales with most
satisfactory results. Estimated to kill
and dress from 30/36 lbs., the lot created great interest
and averaged 235. 7d. per head, topping the market with
245. Id.
The Merino Stud
Registered in the Australian Stud Merino Flock Re-
gister as Flock No. 203, the Murgoo stud numbers about
2000 special breeding ewes. Apart from the pure
Boonoke blood reared from 1872 to 1900, the history of
THE MT. NARRYER HOMESTEAD VERANDAH
MU RG O O AND MT. NARRYER, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


ONE OF THE MURGOO IMPROVEMENTS
Murgoo stud flock actually dates back to 1902, when
M essrs. Holmes and Moloney formed the stud with a
selection of 50 of the best ewes and the stud ram Bis-
mark, bought from F. S. Falkiner and Sons Limited,
Boonoke, Riverina.
The Murgoo stud flock numbered 148 breeding ewes
when the present owners took over in 1905. The stud
was maintained judiciously by them along the same lines,
with the regular addition of Boonoke rams as sires until
1910, in which year, and again in 1914, the breeding
numbers were augmented by the importation of drafts of
selected ewes from the Murgha stud, Riverina, together
with the Murgha-bred sire Caesar in the latter year. This
stud supplied two other stud rams in 1917, whilst a third
IN ONE OF THE PADDOCKS ON MURGOO
MU RG 0 0 AND M T. N A RRYER, W ESTERN AUSTRALIA


was purchased at the same time from Deniliquin Stud
Park, Riverina. In 1923 another strain of pure Wan-
ganella or Peppin hlood was infused into the stud by the
purchase of stud ram No. 21.53 from Uardry, Riverina,
together with ten special ewes. Another ram was
obtained from the Mt. Widderin stud, Victoria. Good
progress was made, and in 1924 the classing and mating
of the whole of the stud were entrusted to the expert
personal supervision of Mr. A. J. McDonald, late of
Canowie, South Australia.
The numbers were then cut down from three
thousand to one thousand ewes, and another standard
raised. Everything that
did not conform to the
type laid down as being
the most advantageous
from all points of view
was discarded from the
stud, and the culling re-
sulted in a very high-
class nucleus for future
breeding. The advance
of the stud since Mr.
McDonald’s advent has
more than justified the
drastic reduction made,
both as regards the sheep
and wool, the latter con-
forming to an almost
perfect type of medium/
strong quality of broad
60s to super 64’s count. For uniformity of size and
evenness of covering, appearance, build, and their great
constitution, the Murgoo stud and flock sheep leave very
little to be desired. I he stud rams generally are an
aristocratic lot, and strike an ideal combination with the
matronly ewes, turning out some excellent progeny.
A Bundemar ram was obtained in 1926, and in 1927
the owners invested several thousand pounds in the pur-
chase from Uardry of 100 double stud ewe hoggets, 1100
first single stud ewes, 29 stud rams, 2 selected stud rams
and one special stud ram, all of which were chosen to
suit the conditions at Murgoo. The sheep acclimatised well
and are typical of the general stud ewes at Uardry, hav-
ing the clear open face, silky nose and ears, good head, nice
Font, and strong legs, and carry a beautiful even fleece.
Early in 1928 a stud ram was purchased from Haddon
Big, and is doing yeoman service with his mates to develop
quantity and quality along the best lines. A ready sale
is made of all available rams each year at from 5 guineas
upwards, the output up to date being 2/300 head. Most of
the sales are hy contract, and the whole of the surplus for
1928 and 1929 was booked up well before the end of 1927.
The owners have set a very high ideal, and hope to
have in due course everything in the stud on the same
level as the extra special studs. One fact that
is certain is that the Murgoo stud is amongst the lead-
ing studs in Western Australia, and the Murgoo
clip is recognised as one of the best grown clips of the
State. An extract of a report on the recent clip
speaks for itself, viz.: “For attractive conformation the
sheep are the equal of any large flock of its
type, and their covering
is full of defined char-
acter, high yielding and
deep grown. The wool
of this clip is fascinating
in colour; it has a kindly
mellow handle in perfect
show condition, such as
some broad lines of the
best bred Geelong
clips.”
Atkins Bros. Limited
also hold Mt. Narryer
Station, a highly im-
proved run of 480,000
acres just north of Mur-
goo. Some 20,000 sheep
are shorn there annually,
the whole of the flock
rams being drawn from the stud at Murgoo.
In 1928, 26,212 sheep and lambs cut 550 bales of wool
—7777 wethers averaging 10.05 lbs., 3641 hoggets averag-
ing 9.04 lbs., 8072 ewes averaging 7.55 lbs., 6471 lambs
averaging 1.82 lbs., and 251 rams averaging 12 lbs.
The nearest railway is Mullewa, 170 miles dis-
tant. Light horses are bred for station use. The
small but purebred herd of Shorthorns has now been
brought down to Murgoo, where the cattle do very well.
The bull at present in service was bought from Mr. M.
W. Roberts’ herd of Duke of Derrimut strain.
At Mt. Narryer there are a number of stone tanks,
built when iron threatened to soar into high prices. A
magnificent homestead replete with every improvement
and a large woolshed have been built.
In 1928, Messrs. Atkins Bros, purchased Tibradden
Station from the Estate of the late J. B. Percy. This
station comprises some 13,800 acres freehold, and is
situated 20 miles east of Geraldton.
THE DINING ROOM AT MT. NARRYER
MURGOO AN D MT. NARRYER , WESTERN AUSTRALIA


MR. E. C. ATKINS, SENR.
Personal
Mr. Edward Charles Atkins, managing director of the
company, was born in London in 1873. He arrived in
South Australia in 1874, and moved to the West in 1896.
Business interests claimed his attention until Murgoo
MR. E. C. ATKINS, JUNR.
came on the market in 1905, when he and his brother,
with the assistance of their father, entered actively into
the principal primary industry of Australia. His brother
died in 1927, and his father, now in his 80th year, spends
his days in making frequent visits to Perth from London,
where he makes his home. Mr. E. C. Atkins resides at
Applecross, Perth, with his wife and family of one son
and one daughter. His wife was formerly Miss Lizette
Boddington, daughter of the late 1 homas Boddington, of
South Australia.
Mr. Atkins takes a keen interest in the State’s welfare,
and is popular amongst his fellow pastoralists. He is a
member of the committeee of the W.A. Stud Merino
MR. R. W. FREMLIN
General Manager, Atkins Bros. Limited, Murgoo
Sheepbreeders’ Association, and member of the Melville
Road Board. His manager, Mr. R. W. Fremlin, is pre-
sident of the Murgoo Picnic Amateur Race Club, the
annual meeting of which, held in May, is an event in the
social life of the country. Mr. Fremlin donated the Pre-
sident’s Cup, also, many years ago, the Murgoo Cup,
which he won seven times out of ten meetings. Mr.
Atkins owns some good picnic racers, and is an en-
thusiastic supporter of the club.
MR. H. G. BEASELEY
Manager, Mt. Narryer
M U RG O O AN I) M T. N A RRY ER, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


BRICKHOUSE, CARNARVON, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Property of The Brickhouse Company
OCCUPYING 596,000 acres of mixed pasturage
and saltbush country in the vicinity of Carnar-
von, Western Australia, with a frontage of about
45 miles to the sea, and with the River Gascoyne inter-
secting the northern end of the run for about 32 miles,
Brickhouse Station is a most productive and valuable
Merino wool growing property. The Brickhouse Com-
pany, which comprises most of the family of the late
Hon. Septimus Burt, K.C., is the owner.
Minilva Station, and settlement seems to have gone on
apace, for other enterprising sheepmen came on the
scene either late in the seventies or in the early eighties.
Among these early settlers were Charlie Gale and Robert
McNeil, who formed Doorawarrah Station, adjoining
the runs of Aubrey Brown; R. E. Bush, whose hold-
ings are known to-day as Mt. Clere, Landon and Lower
Clifton Downs (or Bidgemia) ; Messrs. Lionel and
Charley Davis, who took up large tracts of land around
FRONT VIEW OF BRICKHOUSE HOMESTEAD
This wide property is of historical interest in that it
was the first country to be taken up in the Gascoyne
district. The pioneer was Aubrey Brown, a brother of
Maitland Brown, and apparently he arrived there with a
flock of about 4000 Merino sheep in July 1876, after a
long journey overland from the districts behind Perth.
According to early records, Mr. Brown was assisted at
the initiation of his sheep run by the late C. S. Brock-
man, who was exploring the district on the lookout for
pastoral country, and who returned to the locality in
April 1877 and established Boolathana Station, north of
Carnarvon. A few years later he formed the well-known
the Lyons River and at Mt. Clere; the late George J.
Gooch, of Wandagee; Mervyn Bunbury, of Williarn-
bury; the Phillips, who took up Jimba Jimba Station,
on the east of Doorawarrah; and M aitland Brown, who
took up Middalya, now owned by Mr. D. J. Hearman
and family. The opening up of these large areas around
the Gascoyne, Lyons and Minilya Rivers was approxi-
mately in the above order.
Turning to the development of Brickhouse, it is ap-
parent that the life of other days was a stern battle, but
local conditions eventually were mastered, and the half
century that has elapsed since the first occupation has


THE WOOLSHED AT BOODALIA OUTSTATION
wrought changes which it is difficult to realise. Within
a few years Aubrey Brown sold out, and J. M. Finnerty,
afterwards warden of the Goldfields, and John H. Mon-
ger were in possession, from whom the station was bought
by the late Alex Forrest and the late Septimus Burt
early in the eighties. The name Brickhouse was evolved
from the habit of people in the district always referring
to the homestead put up by Mr. Finnerty as “the brick
house,” it probably being the first dwelling to be erected
in the north of the State of bricks, which, of course, were
made on the spot. With the last change of ownership
the area of the run was increased from 436,000 acres
to 596,000 acres by the purchase from Messrs. Bush and
Campbell of 160,000 acres running down the coast from
Carnarvon, which was built upon part of the property.
The station was then carried on and devoted to grow-
ing a good quality Merino wool, under the name of
Messrs. Forrest and Burt, until the death of the former
in 1905. Soon afterwards Mr. Septimus Burt pur-
chased Mr. Forrest’s half share from the trustees, Messrs.
David and John Forrest, and Brickhouse has remained
in the hands of the Burt family to the present day.
The late Septimus Burt, who died in 1919, was one
of the outstanding figures in the development of West-
ern Australia. The well-known Minderoo Station, in
the Ashburton district, was formed by him in conjunc-
tion with those other illustrious men, the late John For-
rest, afterwards Lord Forrest, and his brothers Alex
THE WOOLSHED AT BRICKHOUSE STATION
BRICKHOUS E, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


and David Forrest. His interests in Yardie, now Peeda-
mulla Station, 70 miles out of Onslow, were acquired
by his nephews, A. E., F. A., and E. A. Burt. He sub-
sequently purchased Mungarra Station of 1,000,000
acres, off which were sold the whole of
the flock of 20,000 sheep in one lot to
Mr. W. J. Butcher for £15,000, repre-
senting the largest individual sale of
sheep in Western Australia. "Phis sta-
tion is now split up into Yinnetharra,
Gifford Creek and Minnie Creek Sta-
tions, situated in the Gascoyne district,
and which are still owned by members
of the Burt family.
Mr. Burt resided at Brickhouse for
short periods, as he had other interests
in Perth, and his policy was to appoint
managers to attend to the working of
the run, one of the earliest being Mr.
Robert McNeil, who went to Brick-
house when Doorawarrah was sold to
Mr. Munro in about 1886. He was
followed by Air. Dan Matheson, under
whose skilful management from 1888 to January
1907 the property went through its most vital
phases of development. During that period the method
of shepherding flocks under the care of native boys
and gins gave way to fenced areas, and it was neces-
sary to provide watering places in the paddocks. Prior
INTERIOR VIEW OF THE FRONT VERANDAH
to that great care had to be exercised in safeguarding a
continuity of feed throughout the property, which was
often in danger of being eaten out in places under the
shepherding system. When Mr. Matheson took charge
in 1888, the whole of the sheep cut an average of 5j lbs.
per head, and when he resigned in 1907 the average
was IOJr lbs. per head. In 1908 it was 11 lbs., and in
1909 the average was 12 lbs., which were phenomenal
THE FRONT DRIVE: THE RIVER ROAD TO THE TOWN OF CARNARVON
weights for those days. In 1907 two of Air. Sept.
Burt’s sons, Archie and Reg., who had been taken in
hand by Mr. Matheson as jackeroos five years earlier,
assumed joint management of Brickhouse, and later Mr.
Reg. Burt managed the property for 14 years. He was
followed by the present manager, Mr. Stafford Currie,
who was appointed in 1922, following
the formation of the Brickhouse Com-
pany, of which the late Alec W. Edgar,
of Strathalbyn, Gingin, was managing
director up to his death in 1927. Dur-
ing this regime many alterations were
effected to keep pace with the trend of
modern development of the company’s
area, and the gratifying returns which
the station makes every year are to a
large extent the outcome.
Brickhouse is level country, with the
exception of some high sandhills beyond
the river in the north of the run.
Wattle and wangi are the best of the
edible scrubs, which also comprise other
good seed-bearing bushes, such as the
acacia, karara, snake wood, and a little
gidgie and some mulga. The gidgie is
most excellent for fencing material. Saltbush and blue-
bush grow in profusion in the southern areas, while in-
numerable herbage plants and succulent grasses arrive
with the rains. The great peculiarity of this district is the
BRICK HOUSE, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


ON THE FRONT VERANDAH AT BRICKHOUSE
THE RIVER ROAD. AN ENCHANTED SPOT WHERE WILD JASMINE GROWS RAMPANT AND WHITE COCKATOOS
SEEK SANCTUARY
BRICKHOUS E, IV ES T ERN AU STRA LI A


THE PRIDE OF THE HOSTESS
VIEWS OF THE DRAWING ROOM AT BRICKHOUSE
BRICK II OUSE. WESTERN AUSTRALIA


DATE PALMS GROW TO GREAT SIZE IN
THESE HOT NORTHERN AREAS. THIS
SPECIMEN IN FRONT OF THE BRICK-
HOUSE HOMESTEAD IS A FINE SAMPLE
BRICKHOU SE, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


THIS IS PART OF THE BEAUTIFUL
GARDEN AT THE BACK OF THE HOME-
STEAD. COTTON PALMS ALSO GROW
TO GREAT SIZE IN THE GASCOYNE
BRICKHOUSE, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


DIPPING SHEEP
marvellous strength in these varieties of ground and over-
head feed, for results have shown stock to hold their
condition in the worst years when properly managed.
The rainfall of an average of about 9 in. per annum
is relied upon for May, June and July, with occasional
heavy falls in summer, and after winter rains the river
comes down in great volume, often flooding the
surrounding low areas. The Carnarvon district is
blessed with an invigorating climate. Though bad sea-
sons have been rare, the first big drought occurred from
August 1890 until March 1892.
Through the sheep having to be shep-
herded, and the absence of fencing and
permanent waters, most of the station
holders thereabouts in that period lost
fully half their stock, and, while several
good seasons followed, the losses were a
severe handicap .to the progress which
up to that date had been going on so
well. The years 1911 to 1914, speci-
ally the last year, saw the next bad spell
of dry weather, but serious losses were
averted through the better conditions
prevailing in the improvements, and ex-
cept for odd years there was a succession
of good shearings through to 1924,
1925, and 1926, when the rainfall was
4.21 in., 5.45 in., and 3.91 inches re-
spectively. The owners of Brickhouse
and graziers in the district generally,
therefore, can be said to be better off
than many in the eastern States.
The maximum capacity of the Brick-
house run is about 60,000 head of sheep,
or about one sheep to 10 acres, but ow-
ing to the difficulty of providing fresh
water in numerous corners, the property
will be kept low in numbers until such
time as further water improvements are
made. Whilst the station to-day is rea-
sonably well watered, the management
is endeavouring to make smaller pad-
docks, and so bring into use some good
areas of country, specially in the
southern end of the run, and in other
parts away from the river, where good
water is more difficult to locate. Many
thousands of pounds have been, and are
being, spent in this and other directions,
and it will be only a matter of time be-
fore past and present difficulties ex-
perienced with salt water can be overcome. There are
to-day 34 main grazing paddocks with 30 wells, 2 large
surface tanks and 7 artesian bores of a depth of up to
3000 ft., with the accompanying equipment of miles of
reticulating drains and piping. In the past six years
many hundreds of miles of fences have been renewed and
cleared on both sides to enable regular inspection to be
made by car, also to act as fire breaks, whilst many sets
of permanent drafting yards have been put up to facili-
tate the working of sheep.
NO. 4 BORE AT BOODALIA
URIC KM OUSE. WESTER AUSTRALIA


POOLS ON COBURN CREEK.
A SUBJECT FOR A
LANDSCAPE ARTIST
BRICKHOUS E, W EST ERN AUSTRALIA


THEY HAVE JUST BEEN DIPPED AND CAN T GET AWAY FAST ENOUGH
In working large stations like Brickhouse, carts and
motor lorries are indispensable, and most essential of all
is the telephone. Each of the six out-stations is con-
nected up by ’phone to the homestead, the lines being
cleared of scrub, and in one case the ’phone runs in a
straight line for 35 miles from headquarters to the out-
station Boodalia, near the southern boundary, where the
wethers are usually held and shorn.
One of the first steps taken in recent years was to com-
plete this system of telephones which was commenced by
the Burt Bros, during their management, and included a
line into Carnarvon. There are few stations anywhere
better equipped in this regard to-day.
Other improvements are two substantial wool sheds,
one lying four miles east from the homestead, with a
complement of 20 stands and well-erected outbuildings,
and the other at Boodalia, 35 miles south, with 8 stands.
The Brickhouse homestead, which was rebuilt in 1918
of cement, is situated 10 miles east from Carnarvon,
in a most picturesque setting of white gums on the
southern bank of the Gascoyne River. Designed on
modern lines, it is an attractive home in every sense,
containing all the conveniences of a modern city resi-
dence, and such is the nature of the soil that fruit,
flowers and vegetables can be grown in profusion. Every
opportunity has been taken to make the homestead sur-
roundings both beautiful and useful, the vegetable gar-
den in particular, which is tended by an expert, being
noted throughout the district.
The flock on Brickhouse was built up from Hill River,
South Australia, blood with Canowie blood introduced
later, and of more recent times with Wanganella strains
from New South Wales. Since 1920, however, th?
owners have concentrated upon Koonoona, South Aus-
tralia, sheep in their endeavour to maintain a high stand-
ard, and with stricter classing and more progressive
methods all through they have been successful in raising
the flock to a very high level of uniformity, constitution
and development. With a May lambing, and the
shearers on the job the first week in each September,
Brickhouse produces a wool clip that is of strong comb-
ing quality, well grown, and of great substance, and
BRI CKH OV SE, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


A PORTION OF THE BRICKHOUSE VEGETABLE GARDEN. NOTE THE LUXURIANT GROWTH
is noted for its evenness, soft handle, preparation for
market and its big commercial value. The clip returns
a very good average price all through, despite the fact
that top lines rarely exceed 22d., as the country, being
soft and alluvial, tends to put rather more condition
into the fleece than would be desirable if “pricey” lines
were aimed at. It is the average that is important, and
this gives Brickhouse wool a high reputation, in common
with the usual run of the well-known Gascoyne Merino
wools.
1 he sale of sheep marked a bold change in policy from
1923 onwards, since which year 37,786 sheep have been
turned off the property at good prices. Included with
these were lines of 14,000 ewes of five years and over,
and in 1924 a line of 6100 wethers at 355. per head.
Another outstanding sale was a big line at Midland
Junction in May 1928 for over 40s. per head. It' is of
interest also to mention that when sheep were sold in
the district 20 years ago or more, the price paid was at
a rate per lb., and a line of 2000 4-tooth wethers sold
in 1904 averaged 63 lbs. per head. Other heavy weights
are recorded in the books, also that mutton was bought
at per lb., but the wholesale dealers of Perth soon
refused to pay over a certain weight per carcase, owing
to the excessive fat which could be loaded on the animal’s
ribs in good seasons, to the dislike of the consumer.
There has always been a thoroughbred stallion at
Brickhouse for breeding station hacks, of which there is
a mob of about 100 to-day, and at present, 1928, Stylish
King, full brother to Stylish, by One Away out of
Frigate, is the sire in use. The first stallion was the
South Australian-bred Telephone, one of the finest horses
that ever went to Western Australia. He sired some
good performers on the local turf, including William-
BRICKHOUSE, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


bury, a noted hurdler. Minnawarrah, by Malua, was next, both these
names meaning “wait a bit” in native and Maori languages respectively.
Other sires in their order were The Saint (imp.), Czarowitch, and Sir
Rhubarb, by Rhubarb, the former being well known to local turf lovers.
PERSONAL
It was with men of calibre such as the late Hon. Sept. Burt, K.C.,
M.L.A., taking a leading part that the State found ability to progress
in its infant stages, for not only was this honoured gentleman a success-
ful pastoralist, but was also distinguished in politics and at the Bar.
Born in 1847 at St. Kitts, England, he arrived in Western Aus-
tralia as a lad with his parents, his father, Sir Archibald Burt, becom-
ing Chief Justice of the State. Educated first at Meeksham, Wiltshire,
England, and subsequently at Bishop’s School, Perth, he studied law,
and was called to the Bar in 1870 and later was a foundation member
of M essrs. Stone
and Burt, bar-
risters and solici-
tors, of Perth.
The late Mr.
Sept. Burt was
first nominated
for the Legisla-
tive Council in
1874, and
amongst the re-
sponsible posi-
tions he held
during his bril-
liant career was
MR. R. BURT
MR. A. F. BURT
a seat on the
Colonial Confer-
ence in London
in 1887, in which
year he was made
Queen’s Counsel.
He represented
Ashburton in
Parliament until
1900, and when
the State was
granted self-gov-
ernment in 1890
he was made At-
torney - General
THE WELCOME SHADE OF THE PORCH
in the John Forrest Ministry.
His wife died early in 1929. Of their family of six sons and four
daughters, all are living except Frank and Theodore (Bob), who were
killed in action in the Great War in Europe in 1916. The eldest son
Archie F. G. Burt, with his brother Reginald George Edward Burt,
are directors of the Brickhouse Company. Mr. H. H. Wilson, of
Perth, one of the late Mr. Sept. Burt’s executors, is the
secretary.
Mr. A. F. G. Burt is also the owner of Kadji Kadji Station, on the
Murchison, and Mr. Reg. Burt owns Doorawarrah Station, a well-
balanced property of 600,000 acres on the Gascoyne, and another
brother, Mr. George H. Burt, is the owner of Yinnetharra Station, of
over 500,000 acres on the Upper Gascoyne.
BR 1 C KHOU SE, IV ES T ERN AUSTRALIA


MIDDALYA
The Property of Middalya Pastoral Co. Ltd.
MEEROGOOLIA
The Property of Mr. D. J. Hearman
EDAGGEE
The Property of Messrs. Morrell and Hearman
CARNARVON, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
PERHAPS no part of Australia savours more of
romance and tragedy in its development than
the great pastoral areas of the north-west of
Western Australia, where fortunes were lost and made
during the establishment of the valuable sheep stations
that form the heritage of that portion of the State.
one of the most advanced from a wool-growing point of
view, as well as being among the best of the pastoral
homes in Western Australia.
Occupying an area of 457,700 acres, with the home-
stead situated within 130 miles of the important seaport
town of Carnarvon, Middalya is owned by Mr. D. J.
A VIEW OF MIDDALYA HOUSE
M IDE) ALYA
Although Middalya Station is located along the
Minilya River, south of the North-West Cape, the dis-
trict is closely allied to the country on the north, and
embraces some splendid holdings, of which Middalya is
Hearman and family under the name of Middalya Pas-
toral Company Limited, Mr. Hearman’s son, Jeffrey
William Hearman, being the manager of the station.
The property was taken up about the year 1883 by the
late Mr. Maitland Brown, a celebrated man in those


ANOTHER VIEW OF MIDDALYA HOUSE
early days of the district. His brother, Mr, Aubrey
Brown, was responsible for establishing the first station
in the district, having taken out leases in 1876 for the
large holdings known to-day as Brickhouse. Mr. Mait-
land Brown disposed of Middalya to a group of Perth
men, led by the late Mr. Alex. Forrest, early in the
nineties, Mr. D. J. Hearman’s father being a small
shareholder. They carried on a business as woolgrowers
under the style of the Minilya River Squatting Company,
with a Mr. Mansfield as resident manager, until 1894,
when Mr. Hearman took over the management. Mr.
Forrest died in 1901, and the run was then acquired by
Air. H carman.
Mr. Hearman first went to Middalya in 1890 as a
jackeroo, and his knowledge of local conditions then
acquired helped considerably in his negotiations to ar-
range finance in the purchase of the run from the trustees
of the company in 1901. There were very few improve-
ments laid down at that time, fencing for sheep paddocks
being started shortly before this date, prior to which
the sheep were shepherded. Air. Hearman had there-
fore to start almost from bedrock to develop the country
into a payable proposition. No further evidence than
the present status of Aliddalya, both as regards sheep
and wool, is necessary to show that his management of
the difficult problems of development during the ensuing
years has proved successful.
With its combination of grasses and scrub, herbage
and spinifex, the run is endowed richly with natural
feed, and only during the late months of summer is there
ever any anxiety for the ewes, which drop their lambs
about April, and therefore have to depend upon early
THE COOL VERANDAH LOUNGE AT MIDDALYA
MIDI)A L Y A, M E ERO GOO LI A AA 7 D EI) A GGE E, WEST E RN AUSTRALIA


SPINIFEX COUNTRY ON MIDDALYA
MOTOR ROAD ACROSS MINIFYA RIVER ON MIDDALYA. THIS RIVER IS A DRY BED AND ONLY RUNS AFTER HEAVY
RAIN; THERE ARE POOLS, HOWEVER, THAT LAST FOR SOME TIME
MID DAL ) A. M EEROGOOLI A AN D EDAG G E E, W E STERN AUSTRALIA


MIDDALYA HOMESTEAD
IN 1895. ON THE LEFT
IS SEEN A PORTION OF
THE OLD WOOLSHED
AND BLACKSMITH’S
SHOP. THE RIGHT HAND
BUILDING IS THE HOUSE
seasonal rains for green feed.
A table of rainfall on Middalya from 1911 to 1927
will serve to illustrate the irregularities of the average
rainfall, which nevertheless has not retarded the sta-
tion’s progress:—l9ll, 553 points; 1912, 466 points;
1913, 491 points; 1915, 1253 points; 1916, 1553 points;
1917, 756 points; 1918, 2092 points; 1919, 514 points;
1920, 868 points; 1921, 1809 points; 1922, 699 points;
1925, 704 points; 1926, 515 points; and 1927, 1207
points. Of the registration for 1918, one of the wettest
years in the district, 11 inches fell in February, thus en-
suring a wonderful season.
The country is undulating, except where the Kennedy
Ranges outcrop near the centre of the run, and it may
be added that this range marked the sudden meeting of
Mr. C. S. Brockman and Mr. Aubrey Brown in July
1876, whilst the former was exploring the district for
suitable sheep country, and the latter was overlanding
a mob of 4000 Merinos from near Perth to the coastal
areas of the Gascoyne. This w r as probably the flock
with which he actually established the station now known
as Brickhouse.
All the improvements carried out on Middalya are of a
high order. This is apparent from the 250 miles of
fencing around the run and subdivisions, and also the
wells, dams, and windmills which water the stock.
Although fresh water is difficult to find throughout the
district, that on Middalya is quite good, even for domes-
tic use. The depth of the wells ranges from 80 to 145
ft., and at each of the watering depots there is a modern
mill, with tank and troughing equipment, in the con-
struction of which cement has been largely used. The
MOVING 80 BALES OF MIDDALYA WOOL BY CAMEL TEAM. 13-TON LOAD
M 11) D A LYA, M EERO GOO LI A AN D E DAGO EE, WEST E R N AUSTRA LI A


SUBSTANTIAL
STOCK YARDS
SECTION OF A
DAM THAT HAS
A CAPACITY OF
2,500,000 GALLONS
WINDMILL, TANK
AND TROUGHING
ONE OF THE STAN-
DARD OUTFITS
ON THE STATION
IMPROVEMENTS ON MIDDALYA
.1/ IDDA L Y A, M EERO GOO El A AND EI)AG G E E, IV EST E R N AUSTR A LI A


REFLECTION ON THE
STILL WATERS OF THE
MYALL POOL ON
MIDDALYA STATION
M 11) DAL Y A, MEEROG 0 O L I A AN 1) EDAG G E E, IV EST E RN AUSTRALIA


STUD MERINO EWES AT
MEEROGOOLIA WITH
EIGHT MONTHS' WOOL
AND REARING LAMBS
A COLLINSVILLE BRED
STUD SIRE USED IN THE
TOP STUD FLOCK AT
MEEROGOOLIA STATION
SIRES OF COLLINSVILLE
STRAIN AT MEEROGOOLIA
IN EIGHT MONTHS' WOOL
MIDDA L Y A, M EERO GOO LI A AND ED A GGE E, W E STERN AUSTRALIA


river runs for 27 miles through the property.
The new Middalya homestead was erected in 1926
under the personal supervision of Mr. Jeffrey Hearman,
and when the course of time allows the growth of shady
trees and gardens round it, it should be a picture. Built
of cement bricks made close at hand, of unconventional
bungalow design, its features include wide spacious ver-
andahs and commodious lounges, providing the greatest
comfort and rest during the summer. The house is com-
plete in every detail required by the modern home-builder,
being connected by telephone to Carnarvon, and having
a landing ground for aeroplanes within two miles of the
house. There is the usual complement of natives on the
station, and they are trained in various duties, both
household and out on the run. The men as a rule make
proficient stockmen and the women good domestics.
The outbuildings comprise the usual meat house, power
house, smithy, and a fully equipped garage and workshop,
whilst two miles away lies a well-built woolshed with an
excellent set of yards. Shearing commences in the first
week of September, at which time the lambs are about
four months old.
In aiming to produce a good, medium quality Merino
wool from plain-bodied sheep, Mr. Hearman has ad-
hered to a policy of careful classing, and this has resulted
in the Middalya clip earning the praise of wool buyers
and of their principals in the manufacturing centres. It
is a strict policy to refrain from mating ewes until they
are 4-tooth, thus ensuring the perpetuation of a big
robust type of sheep. Overstocking the run is avoided
by careful management of the different paddocks, which
are put down as having a capacity of one sheep to 15
acres, and the flock varies according to the state of the
weather throughout the year from as low as 15,000 to
27,000 head, besides a few cattle for station use and
horses. The type of sheep favoured are mainly those
bred in the Collinsville stud of South Australia, although
for many years prior to their dispersal, the famous old
Canowie and Hill River studs supplied the flock on
Middalya with rams. Mr. Hearman runs a very well-
bred flock to-day, which, for uniformity, size, constitu-
tion and covering is equal to the best in the State, and
compares favourably with the much longer established
flocks of other States. It is a fine tribute to his methods
that the annual wool clip from Middalya averages around
10 lbs. per head. Both camel teams and motor trucks
convey the wool to Carnarvon, whence it is shipped down
the coast to Fremantle.
Some details of the various clips in past years are
added to give some idea of this splendid property:—
That of 1916, one of the heaviest clips shorn, aver-
aged 12.58 lbs. of wool per head, lambs cutting 4.7 lbs.
The numbers carried were low as a result of the three
years’ drought which preceded that season.
In 1918 the clip, including ewes rearing lambs, aver-
aged 9 lbs. 3 ozs. per head.
In 1920, from 16,576 sheep, the average was 94 lbs.
of wool per head, the rams cutting 12 lbs. 12 ozs., hog-
gets 8 lbs. 3 % ozs., ewes 9 lbs. 11J ozs., 2116 lambs 2
lbs., the total clip being over 400 bales.
In 1921, 411 bales, totalling 76 tons, were shorn, the
rams cutting 13 lbs. 12.4 ozs., wethers 10 lbs. 10.8 ozs.,
hoggets 9 lbs. 3.7 ozs., ewes 9 lbs. 6.5 ozs., maiden ewes
10 lbs., lambs 3 lbs. 13 ozs.
In 1923, from 24,216 sheep, 527 bales of wool were
shorn, weighing 94 tons.
In 1924, the shearing count was 25,369, from which
431 bales of wool were cut, weighing 78 tons.
During the following three years of low rainfall the
numbers dropped to 17,679, 16,642, and 14,291 head,
which is a contrast to the largest shearing on Middalya,
when over 27,000 were put through the shed.
MEEROGOOLIA
At Meerogoolia Station, 40 miles east of Carnarvon,
comprising 64,396 acres of good sheep country, Mr. D.
J. H carman has established the foundation of what gives
every promise of becoming an important Merino stud.
The early history of the run goes back to the eighties,
when it was first taken up by Mr. Dan Powell, and then
purchased by Mr. Daniel Matheson, who was succeeded
by the French Bros., from whom the present owner pur-
chased the property in 1923. Currant bush, carara,
snakewood, and acacia bush are the principal edible
scrub, whilst after summer rains there is an abundance
of nutritious grasses, with a full array of herbage in both
spring and autumn. A little lucerne is cultivated for
the use of the stud. These assets are augmented by an
unlimited supply of fresh water. This is, in fact, a great
feature of Meerogoolia, and gives the run an advantage
as a stud property, for the district is not well off for
water free from mineral composites. Since 1923 the
owner and his able manager, Mr. P. R. Morrell, son of
Mr. J. Morrell, of Edaggee, have worked hard to adapt
the run for stud purposes, and have added seven new
wells of an average depth of about 90 ft., complete with
modern equipment for the safe watering of stock.
The subdivisions of paddocks into areas of about 34
x with permanent water depots every miles, the
reconstruction or erection of fencing and gates, extensions
to the old woolshed and outbuildings, planning of a first-
rate system of sheep and classing yards, and renovations
of the homestead are features of the vigorous policy of
the new administration, whose object is the breeding of
MIDD A L YA, M EERO GOO LI A AND ED AGG E E, JV ES T ERN A USTRA El A


THE HOMESTEAD AT MEEROGOOLIA
virile rams for Middalya and Edaggee flocks, also
for the use of other stations in these northern areas and
in the back country. The stud flock, registered as
No. 277 in the Register of Stud Merino Flocks of Aus-
tralia, was commenced in 1924 with 150 picked ewes
from the Middalya flock, the sheep being healthy,
robust and large units of Canowie blood. The rams with
which they were joined were two Canowie and two
Murray-Cappeedee, South Australian, sires, the result be-
ing most gratifying.
When the old Canowie stud was dispersed in Febru-
ary 1925, Mr. Hearman purchased 50 ewes, including
10 top stud ewes, and to these he added 25 ewes of a
very excellent type from the Woonderlin stud of Mr. E.
T. D. Barrett-Eennard, a Canowie blood stud of high
merit, located at Beverley, W.A. Since then there has
been an introduction of 196 Collinsville stud ewes, which
brings the present breeding flock up to 500 particularly
well-bred ewes. The sires in use are a bold masculine
type of great vitality, strong in bone, deep chested, and
attractively formed. It is in their covering that they
excel, for the wool is a true sire’s wool, displaying
magnificent character right through a fairly long staple,
and is bright, well packed on, and good to handle. Hav-
ing had good falls of rain in May 1928, the growth of
the young sheep was assured during the season, and it
seems to be certain that success will attend the 1927
introduction of Collinsville sires, which are being bred
on similar country to the old Canowie stud in South
Australia, and seem to do very well under the conditions
at Meerogoolia. An important addition to the Meero-
goolia stud was made through the purchase of a Canowie
blood stud ram at a high figure from the Southbourne
stud of the late J. W. Broun, Beverley.
It is the owner’s object to maintain a stud flock of
from 2500 to 3000 breeding ewes, and Mr. Hearman is
working to this end in a systematic way, concentrating
upon the needs for strong covering in the rams and plenty
MEEROGOOLIA WOOLSHED
MIDDA L Y A, M E ERO GOO L I A AN D E DAGG EE, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


ARTESIAN BORE AT EDAGGEE STATION; THE MAIN SUPPLY TO HOMESTEAD AND SEVERAL PADDOCKS
of size and constitution all through. The output of
wool from Meerogoolia includes some striking figures,
the rams running with the breeding ewes cutting an
average of 27J lbs. per head of beautiful, strong quality
wool, and going as high as 31 lbs. for twelve months’
growth. The stud ewes averaged 33 bales to the thous-
and, some of them cutting as high as 14 lbs.
EDAGGEE
Edaggee Station is owned by Messrs. D. J. Elearman
and Joseph Morrell, who originally took up part of the
run. Additional country was acquired from the With-
nell Bros., and adjoining stations in 1907 by Mr. Hear-
man, Mr. Morrell and Mr. E. H. Angelo, but the latter
in due course sold out to Mr. Hearman.
EDAGGEE HOMESTEAD
Ml DD A L YA, M EERO GOO LI A AND EDAGG E E. WEST E R N AUSTRALIA


THERE IS A DAILY FLOW OF
OVER ONE MILLION GAL-
LONS FROM THIS ARTESIAN
BORE ON EDAGGEE
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE
MYALL POOL ON
MIDDALYA STATION
A WELL KEPT BORE DRAIN
THROUGH THE SCRUB
MID I) AI.Y A , ME EROGO 0 L I A AN D EI)AG G E E, WEST E RN AUSTR A LI A


MR. D. J. HEARMAN
The area of Edaggee is 183,000 acres, and runs parallel
to the coast 55 miles south of Carnarvon, and its herbage,
grasses and dense covering of edible scrub support a well-
bred flock of about 25,000 Merino
sheep of Cappeedee strain when fully
stocked. When the above owners took
possession the country was virgin, and
it is chiefly due to Mr. Morrell that
Edaggee is in such a productive state
to-day. Mr. Morrell, assisted by his
son, J. M orrell, manages the property.
The improvements include all the
equipment necessary to handle the
flock and its annual clip successfully,
also a comfortable homestead and
quarters, and plenty of water. Ex-
cept for one well of 90 ft., the water
is obtained from three artesian bores
of about 1600 ft., one of which gives
a flow of nearly a million gallons per
day. From the bores water is run
out to the paddocks by drains, and
no trouble is experienced in keeping
up a supply to the stock even in the
driest times. From the Edaggee flock the satisfactory
return of around 9 Ihs. per head of wool is obtained
regularly, and the owners are aiming to
increase this yield.
PERSONAL
Mr. Douglas Jeffrey Hearman was
born in England in 1872, and came to
Australia with his father, the late Mr.
William Green Hearman, in the barque
“Lady Louise” in 1880. After going
back to England by the wool ship
“Helena Mena” to enter Brighton Col-
lege, Brighton, D. J. Hearman returned
to Australia, and finished his education
at the Roseworthy Agricultural College,
South Australia, and then turned his at-
tention to pastoral work in the West.
Mr. H carman is on the executive com-
mittee of the W.A. Pastoralists’ As-
sociation, and is looked upon as one of
the leading resident pastoralists, and his
advice is sought upon many matters con-
MRS. D. J. HEARMAN
MR. WILLIAM JEFFREY HEARMAN
cerning stock and station control. He married in 1887
Mary, daughter of the late Robert Miller, stock in-
spector, who was drowned in the wreck of a lugger at
Maud’s Landing in 1887.
Mrs. Miller, mother of Mrs. Hear-
man, was the second white woman to
go to Carnarvon, arriving by the
schooner “Sarah” from Geraldton
early in the eighties. The opening up of
these great northern districts could not
have been fulfilled but for the very real
help afforded by the courageous,
patient women folk who, in true
pioneering spirit, gave up the compara-
tive comforts of civilisation for years
of hardship. Mr. D. J. Hearman is
one who gives a great deal of credit for
his success to the inspiring companion-
ship of his wife during the years of de-
velopment of the properties in which he
is interested. Mr. and Mrs. Hear-
man’s family consists of one son and
two daughters, one of whom is the wife
of Mr. John Craig, of Yalbalgo Station,
on the Gascoyne River, the other daughter, Marjorie,
resides at the Middalya homestead with her parents.
MIDDA L Y A. MEEROG O 0 LI A AN 1) EI)AG G E E, WEST E R N A USTR A L I A


WOOLEEN via MULLEWA, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Also MARDIE AND BALMORAL via ONSLOW
The Properties of B. H. Sharpe, Esq.
WOOLEEN Station, the property of Mr. Ben-
jamin H. Sharpe, comprises an area of 460,000
acres of pastoral leaseholds, and is located near
the centre of the Lower Murchison district of Western
Australia, 120 miles north of Pindar railway siding and
420 miles from the capital of the State.
Surrounded by a district famed for its important wool
clips, Wooleen itself contributes substantially to the
of the Australian pastoral industry. A good judge of
country, and a qualified sheepman, he lost no time after
his arrival in the State in 1886 in deciding to settle on
the Murchison River, where in the preceding thirteen
years, such men as the Wittenooms, Burges, Little,
Pearse, and others, had begun to form stations.
The subsequent establishment of Wooleen as a sheep
property was gradual, and many years of good or indif-
THE WOOLEEN HOMESTEAD
State’s annual output by sending away every season to
the Perth sales a heavy clip of beautiful quality and high-
yielding Merino wool.
1 he property covered 240,000 acres when purchased
from Mr. J. H. Monger in 1886 by the late Mr. James
Sharpe, father of the present owner, and later 90,000
acres were secured from the Estate of the late J. Wil-
liams, the balance being taken up at subsequent intervals.
1 he late Mr. Sharpe will be remembered as one of the
ear ' settlers of the Alurch ison, the eventual settlement
of which presents one of the romances of the development
ferent seasons passed before the worst difficulties were
overcome, conditions of life which would be untenable to
the ordinary man, but to those enterprising, optimistic
pioneers merely handicaps which time and hard work
would eliminate. Among the hardships they endured
were the isolation, long journeys for supplies and distance
from market, low rainfall and difficulty in striking good
water, although later on an invaluable sub-artesian basin
was discovered. The light carrying capacity of the
country demanded a wide grazing area for the sheep.
The great asset of the property, however, was the extra-


FLOCK OF WOOLEEN MERINO RAMS IN A FIELD OF EVERLASTINGS
UNCLASSED EWE HOGGETS. A FINE SPECIMEN OF THE BLACK HEART TREE IS IN THE FOREGROUND
W OGLE EN, WEST E R N A USTR A LI A


A 10-FOOT WINDMILL ON A 30-FOOT TOWER, WITH TWO
5000-GALLON TANKS AND TROUGHING, ENABLING SHEEP
TO BE WATERED FROM FOUR PADDOCKS. EXCELLENT
WATER IS OBTAINED AT A DEPTH OF 97 FEET
WOOL EE N, WES TE R N A US T RALIA


ordinary quantity of top feed available, carara, acacia,
&c., and in following years the late Mr. Sharpe took care
to increase the run to provide a balance of this edible
scrub country with the good belts of nutritious salt bush
and herbage country which lay adjacent to the rivers
Murchison and Roderick, along which the station spreads.
THE SHEARING SHED
The character of the run is unchanged to-day, and
Wooleen, which passed into the possession of the present
owner in 1916, is safe, sound, drought-resisting sheep
country. At times of the year the ground is covered
with an abundance of g rass and herbage, the wild flowers
of spring being a special feature. The annual rainfall
averages about 8 in.
Towards the west of the run the Era-
biddy hills rise in a steep crumbling
granite eminence, and there are signs
from the water-worn boulders in the
valley through them of a great water-
course in the dim ages of the past. Near
the centre of the property is a belt of
picturesque white river gums, whilst ad-
jacent to the homestead lies a distinct
novelty in the form of an expansive
level plain, a sward of beautiful grass for
most of the year, but which after seasonal
rains holds the flood waters from the
river,, and forms a fresh water lake. A
large area of sandfire bush grows near
the lake, but the owner does not destroy
this apparently useless scrub, as he finds there is excellent
feed in the wide variety of leguminous plants which thrive
beneath it. Mt. Welcome also rises to break the con-
tour of the country, and is an historical landmark, in
that it was here that early explorers discovered a natural
supply of fresh water.
Since the acquisition of Wooleen, Mr. Ben H. Sharpe
has spent a considerable amount upon improvements, giv-
ing particular attention to the use of underground water
supply through wells. These are equipped with wind-
mills, tanks and troughing, by which good quality per-
manent water has been established in each of the 34 pad-
docks into which the run has been sub-
divided.
The Wooleen homestead was erected
in 1918. Of the comfortable bungalow
type, and built of cement bricks, it is a
commodious residence in which the
owner has combined the greatest com-
fort with utility. The installation of
electric light, fans and freezer, hot and
cold water service, and the most modern
conveniences, make it a compact home;
whilst a wide encircling verandah,
spacious lawns, around which is set a
large garden, add to the comforts. There
is a direct telephone connection with
Yalgoo. A large vegetable garden and citrus grove are
maintained, for there is a plentiful supply of fresh water
near at hand. Natives do most of the rough station
work, receiving good treatment from their employer, and
the majority of them have been at Wooleen all their lives.
The Wooleen flock has been developed very carefully,
ANOTHER VIEW OF WOOLEEN HOMESTEAD
the original blood in the ewes being of the Bungaree,
South Australia, type. From this strain a change vis
made to New South Wales blood, and of recent years
a further change saw the introduction of rams bred with-
in Western Australia. Mr. Sharpe finds the results of
this policy to fit in very well with the climate and comli-
WOOL EE N. WE S TE R K A U S ERA LI A


THE MURCHISON RIVER AT WOOLEEN
tions at Wooleen, where winter frosts and high summer
temperatures alternate with the seasons. Features of the
Wooleen sheep are their great size, evenness of covering,
and constitution. They move with freedom, and are able
to withstand the dry summers.
Lambing takes place in M ay and June, as the country
relies mostly upon a winter rainfall, and the seasons are
as a rule regular. Good marking percentages are usually
obtained. This natural increase is gone through in a
searching manner when the young sheep come up for
classing, a practice which has been in force for many years,
and if necessary, the owner does not hesitate to cull as
heavily as 35 per cent, in order to mould the standard of
the flock to his liking. From 1909, when the clip ran
24 bales to the thousand grown sheep, a steady increase
has taken place, and from an average of some lbs. the
weights have got up to over 11 lbs. in 1927. The wool,
which is sold in Perth, and runs into an average of about
600 bales each year, is of 60/64’s quality, and is of high-
yielding character, bright and well grown, long in staple,
full of substance and handles well.
The clip is carted away from Wooleen by camel teams
under contract, and is railed at Pindar for Fremantle.
The journey of 120 miles to the siding takes about 11
days, each load weighing about 124 tons. Whilst motor
transport is much quicker, it is dearer, and as the last of
Wooleen’s wool is in to the railway before Christmas, the
camel method of carting is a distinct saving without much
loss of time.
ir O OLE K N, IV E S TE R N A US TRA LI A


EASTERN CORNER OF
THE HOMESTEAD
NOTE THE STATELY
COTTON PALM AND
SALTBUSH HEDGE
WITH KURRAJONG
TREE IN THE CENTRE
COTTON AND DATE
PALMS OF SEVEN
YEARS' GROWTH
VIEWS OF THE WOOLEEN GARDEN
WOOL EE N, WE S TE RN A USTRA LI A


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE MURCHISON RIVER AT A POINT
9 MILES FROM WOOLEEN HOMESTEAD. BLACK HEART
AND WHITE RIVER GUMS LINE THE BANKS. THERE IS A
RIVER FRONTAGE OF 10 MILES ON THE STATION
W O OLE E N, WE S TE R N A US TRA LI A


SALT BUSH AND BLUE BUSH COUNTRY
MARDIE AM) BALMORAL
Air. Sharpe has interests in the north-west also, having
purchased Mardie Station in 1923 from Mr. J. A. With-
nell, and Balmoral Station a little later from the execu-
tors of the late S. P. McKay. These two holdings are
worked as one under the name of Mardie, and occupy
about half a million acres along the coast between Onslow
and Roebourne, about 1000 miles north of Perth.
In 1927 the 11 ock numbered 40,000 Merino sheep.
It is, however, anticipated that with the elaborate im-
provements carried out in all branches of the station’s
management, this number will be improved upon.
Both Mardie and Balmoral rely upon a summer rain-
fall of approximately 10 in., and the feed runs from scrub
and herbage on the coastal areas to grass on the plains,
which are beautifully shaded with black heart gums. Un-
dulating in nature, it is good sheep country, and some
particularly sound quality wools are sent down to market
every year. The rivers Fortescue and Robe run through
Mardie to the sea.
There is a landing 8 miles from Balmoral shed and 16
from Mardie. The despatch of the season’s clip is a
TYPICAL COUNTRY COMPRISING THIS STATION. MT. WELCOME CAN HE SEEN IN THE FAR DISTANCE TO THE LEFI
FRESH WATER WAS FOUND BY EARLY EXPLORERS AT THE FOOT OF THIS MOUNTAIN, HENCE ITS NAME
IV OOLE E N, JV E S TE R N A US ERA L I A


FULL MOUTH EWES AND LAMBS
THE LAMBING AVERAGE ON WOOLEEN IN 1928 WAS 81 PER CENT.
ILLAREEN-BRED FLOCK RAMS ON WOOLEEN STATION
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE WOOLEEN PLAINS
IV 0 OLE E N, IV E S TE R \ A USTRA LI A


BLACKSMITH S SHOP AND STABLES
THIS PICTURE ILLUSTRATES THE EXCELLENT, WELL CONSTRUCTED SHEEP YARDS AT THE WOOL SHED
TV 0 OLE E N, TV ES TE R N A USTRA LI A


HOSPITALITY ON THE MURCHISON IS PROVERBIAL
VEGETABLES GROW LUXURIANTLY ON THE RICH
CHOCOLATE SOIL AT THE HEAD STATION
ABORIGINAL WOMEN AND CHILDREN ON WOOLEEN
THE GIRLS ARE EMPLOYED IN DOMESTIC SERVICE ON THE STATION
W OGLE EN, wE S TE R N A USER AL I A


very rapid process, lighters carrying the bales from the
landing to the steamer. This work is done in calm
weather, and there is never any trouble.
Mardie is in charge of a resident manager, and visited
frequently by the owner. The recent importation of steel
building materials from Sydney for building purposes to
MR. B. H. SHARPE
combat the white ant trouble which is prevalent in that
district is typical of the progressive and energetic policy
of improvement that Mr. Sharpe is carrying out on Mar-
die ; also there is probably one of the finest sets of sheep
yards in the State, the posts being of concrete and the
rails of mulga. In the replacement of old tanks and
troughing and in construction of new, reinforced concrete
alone is used.
A neat, well-built homestead stands a little distance from
the ocean, and the outbuildings are further evidence of a
highly-improved property —a remarkable contrast to the
days of sixty years ago, when the first batch of settlers
began to set foot upon the Nicol Bay district, with years
of battling, privation and tragedy ahead of them.
Personal
Born at Coot Hill, County Down, in the North of
Ireland, in 1850, and arriving in Victoria in the sixties,
the late Mr. James Sharpe spent some time with his uncles
before starting out on his career, by the selection of some
country at Burramine on the River M urray. He then
tried the New South Wales country around Berrigan,
finally adopting the new country in the lower north-west
of Western Australia as his home.
Of his four daughters, two are still living, and his one
son, who assumed the management of Wooleen in 1910
upon his father’s retirement, and six years later purchased
the whole of the property and stock. In 1924 Mr. James
Sharpe died, leaving behind a splendid record of achieve-
ment. His wife, who was Susan Elizabeth Hall, of
Goorambat, Victoria, went to Western Australia with her
husband about 1886, and now (1928) resides at Guild-
ford in her seventy-second year. She still enjoys a mea-
sure of health and manages the estate of her late hus-
band with unusual skill.
Mr. Benjamin Hall Sharpe was born at Yarrawonga,
Victoria, in 1880, and received his education at Way Col-
lege in Adelaide. He left there in 1899, and in the
following year took up pastoral work on Wooleen.
Thanks to the rigid schooling in station management and
flock control under his father, and to his own ability, it
MRS. B. H. SHARPE
was not many years before he became a successful grazier
and woolgrower, in which he was assisted bv his wife,
M inilya, daughter of the late Charles Brockman, of
Brooklands, Balingup. Mr. Brockman was the second
pioneer of the Gascoyne district, who subsequently owned
Boolathana and Minilya Stations. The family of Mr.
and Airs. B. H. Sharpe consists of four sons and one
daughter. Mr. Sharpe is chairman of the Murchison
Road Board, and takes a keen interest in all affairs aim-
ing at the betterment of the district.
WOOLE E N, JV EST E R N A USTR A L I A


YANGET, GERALDTON, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Property of A. E. Grant, Esq.
YANGET Station lies about 22 miles inland from
the town and seaport of Geraldton, Western
Australia, 2 miles from Kojarena Siding, and
60 miles west from Mullewa. The property, which has
a freehold area of 22,000 acres, offers a striking example
of the fertility to be found amongst the ever-changing
types of country in Western Australia, for Yanget merges
for the Indian market, and the substantial stables erected
on Glengarry remain to this day, and form an interesting
link with the earliest pastoral settlement of this historic
part of the State.
In 1885 both stations, which extended for 100,000
acres, were purchased by the late Mr. McKenzie Grant,
one of the best known of Western Australia’s pioneers,
THE YANGET HOMESTEAD
s ddenly out of the scrub-covered sand plain west of
Mullewa into delightful grazing lands, for the most part
made up of undulating hills and valleys.
ft is portion of the well-known Newmarracarra and
filengarry holdings, the former taken up originally by
Maitland Brown, the then resident magistrate at
1 raldton, and the latter by Sir Frederick Barlee and Sir
f omas Major. The runs were used for horse breeding
who, on sth March, 1865, sailed from Portland, Vic-
toria, on the barque “Maria Ross,” as sub-manager of a
party of five friends to settle in the new lands mapped
out in the north-west regions of Western Australia by
the explorer, F. T. Gregory.
Arriving within a month at Roebourne, the party
selected Pyramid Station, one of the very first free stock
runs in the north-west, but four years later Mr. Grant


sold out his interests, and with Mr. Alexander Edwin
Anderson, the manager of the party, who also sold his
share of the run, resolved to leave the north-west owing
to the uncertainty of the future and the discomforts that
had to be endured. They set out overland towards the
Ashburton, but reached no further than the Fortescue
LEADING SIRES IN THE YANGET STUD
River, from whence, after several months of hardship and
privation, they turned back, and decided to take up the
De Grey Station, which had been abandoned by Mr.
Walter Padbury and his partner in
1867.
Mr. Walter Padh ury overlanded his
stock back to Perth safely in 1867 in
charge of the late Edward Roberts, of
Yatheroo, and the country lay idle until
the return of Messrs. Anderson and
Grant in 1869. They brought sheep
from Victoria and eventually made good,
combining sheep farming with pearl fish-
ing, the profits from the latter helping
them to carry on while their flocks grew
larger and the market for Merino wool
in London became more attractive—it
was then about per lb. The part-
ners were the first in the north to form
sheep yards and abolish shepherding,
and the successful development of the
De Grey Station gave to the north-
west the greatest impetus for settlement it had had up to
that time. The huge run gradually branched out into
nearly a dozen holdings, which ran for some 250 miles up
the De Grey River and tributaries, the first being Mulyie
Station, taken over by two of Mr. A. E. Anderson’s
nephews. The De Grey firm was enlarged to Messrs.
Harper, Grant and Anderson, and when Mr. Charles
Harper sold his share to the late John Edgar, and
the latter’s younger brother, the late A. W. Edgar, of
Strathalbyn, the firm became Grant, Anderson and
Edgar. For many subsequent years the
station was managed by Mr. A. W.
Edgar, whose sister married Mr.
McKenzie Grant, and who lived for
seven years on the De Grey. Later on
the firm changed to Grant, Edgar and
Co., who sold out in recent years to the
late Mark Rubin.
In 1883 Mr. McKenzie Grant came
down to Newmarracarra and Glengarry
to enjoy better conditions, and there
he died, leaving four sons to carry on
the estate. The subdivision of the pro-
perty took place upon the coming of
age of the youngest son, Mr. A. E.
Grant, in 1908, and the fine old station
was cut up into Moonyoonooka, owner
Mr. D. E. Grant; Glengarry, owner
Mr. J. G. Grant; Yanget, owner Mr.
A. E. Grant; and Newmarracarra, owner Mr. W.
McKenzie Grant, the oldest son receiving the homestead
block, where the late Mr. Grant’s widow resides in good
STUD MERINO EWES ON YANGET
health in this present year of 1928.
Mr. Alexander Grant’s share was slightly larger than
the others, owing to there being fewer improvements
thereon, and its appearance and condition to-day are a
YANG E T, WKST E R N A USTR A L I A


THE CLEAR WATERS OF THIS CREEK
RUN THROUGH THE WELL-
IMPROVED YANGET PADDOCKS
YAN G E T, IV ESTERN AUSTRALIA


THE UNDULATING COUNTRY ON YANGET SHOWING THE HOMESTEAD IN THE DISTANCE
tribute to the zeal of the owner in sparing neither labour
nor expense in adapting the property to carrying a pro-
ductive Merino stud, and to woolgrowing and agricul-
ture. Over 13,000 acres have been cleared of natural
timber—jam, york gum, white gum and wattle—and a
number of the outside blocks have been sold and others
purchased in order to square up the run and make it
easier to manage. Neat and strong netted fencing and
equipment, and the provision of an abundant supply of
pure and non-salinic water, are special features of the
improvements that have been carried out.
The presence of a readily accessible source of water
in the district, suitable for every use, is a wonderful
asset. Not only does it solve a great problem to settle-
ment, but as in the case of the areas surrounding Yanget,
which are suitable for mixed farming, it paves the way
for the prosperity of many families. Native oat and
barley grass, spear grass, crowfoot and clover burr grow
YANGET BRED TWO-TOOTH EWES
YAN G E T, WE S TE R N A U S TR A LI A


TYPICAL SALE RAMS
DISPOSED OF AT THE 1928
YANGET ANNUAL SALE
yANG E T, JV EST E R N AUSTR A LI A


SPECIAL FOUR-TOOTH STUD EWES
AGED STUD EWES WITH LAMBS
YA N GET, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


STUD RAM WEANERS
STUD EWES AND LAMBS
YAA' G E T, WEST E R N A U S TRA LI A


in abundance over the undulating country, the soil of
which is mainly red and chocolate, with outcrops of
granite here and there. The run is free from disease and
noxious weeds. About 20 in. is the annual rainfall, there
being, as a rule, no summer rains. The altitude is 800
ft. above sea level.
The owner has made effective subdivisions, with two
permanent drinking centres in every paddock, each well
being fitted out with first class pumping gear, tanks and
troughs, while full advantage is taken of several natural
springs and the Chapman River, which runs through the
property. Crops of wheat and oats are sown regularly,
with excellent results.
as its nutritive properties become more widely appre-
ciated. It is not an annual, and will choke out lesser
plants in surroundings suited to its growth. These in
the main are light soil and a rainfall of 18/20 inches.
Planted early in the year, lupin seeds about October, after
which it is fed off and the first crop is sufficient to ensure
prolific growth in following seasons. Although at Yan-
get lupin has grown to a height of 9 ft., it is more suitable
for stock at about 4 ft. in height, and its remarkable
feature is that the more knocking about it receives the
better it thrives. An instance of the value of this fodder
plant was demonstrated in 1924, when over 4000 drought-
stricken ewes were bought near Geraldton and depas-
TYPICAL YANGET COUNTRY WITH WOOLSHED IN BACKGROUND
With pasture improvement, one of Mr. Grant’s special-
ties, the carrying capacity of Yanget has been raised to
an annual shearing of over 11,000 sheep. From Decem-
ber 1927 to March 1928, the owner depastured over 900
wethers on a hundred acre block, which had been planted
in 1926 with blue lupin. 1 hese sheep realised 465. lOd.
in the metropolitan market. Other cultivated areas car-
ried at the rate of 3700 sheep to 700 acres, and 700
wethers to 100 acres. Mr. Grant is enthusiastic about this
legume as a fodder for stock, being of the opinion that
it will prove of inestimable value to Western Australia
tured on 700 acres of lupin. Within six months the
ewes were joined with rams and sent to the East Mur-
chison, \\ here they produced / 5 per cent, of marked
lambs. Only 120 head were lost.
Besides a \vell constructed woolshed and modern yards,
and the usual array of buildings, the station has one of
the most beautiful homesteads in Western Australia. A
better site could not have been chosen for a home, from
which wide views of wooded valley and pastures roll
away in the distance. Of stone and brick, the house
contains many large rooms tastefully furnished and fitted
YAN G E T, JV ES T ERN AU STRA LI A


ONE OF THE
YANGET DAMS,
KNOWN AS NO. 5,
PICTURESQUELY
SITUATED AMONG
NATIVE TREES
IMPORTED KOONOONA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA, RAMS AT YANGET
yANG E T, wEST E R N A U S TRA L I A


up with electric light. There is a freezing chamber, and
on the western side of the house is a well-kept tennis
court, with shady trees and gardens.
It is, however, through its Merino stud that Yanget
has made a name in the sheep world. As the climate is
somewhat similar to that of South Australia, Mr. Grant
in 1908 laid the foundation with Koonoona blood, a
highly productive strain which has suited Yanget condi-
tions in every way, and which has been used exclusively
in the stud ever since its inception. The Yanget stud
is registered in Vol. VI. of the Register for Stud Merino
Flocks of Australia as flock No. 207.
1 he policy of the owner is to breed the highest class
of sheep of the most profitable type for use throughout
the back country of Western Australia and only ewes
suitable for ram breeding are kept on Yanget. No flock
ewes are bred from, and no Yanget bred rams are retained
for stud uses.
In former years the classing was done by Mr. C. H.
Rowan, of Woorree, Geraldton, who spent a number of
years in New South Wales and South Africa, being at
one time a sheep expert for the South African Govern-
ment.
In striving to produce a plain bodied sheep, strong and
vigorous, and capable of foraging in the back country for
its livelihood, the owner has achieved considerable suc-
cess. The sires in use are of commanding masculinity,
symmetrical, large and broad, with all the desirable char-
acteristics for promoting a valuable medium to strong
quality wool, special attention being paid to the backs of
all the stud sheep, whilst anything tending towards hair or
harshness in the wool is discarded immediately. The fact
that the stud ewes particularly were in splendid condition
at the end of the long summer of 1927-28 shows them to
be sheep of no ordinary stamina, and although at that
time there was only six months’ growth of wool on their
backs, their uniformity and build were most attractive.
THE YANGET HOMESTEAD AS IT FACES THE TENNIS COURT
The breeding flock of 3500 stud ewes is maintained
to its standard by the importation of service rams and
ewes annually from Koonoona. The value of the stud
ewes and rams imported in this manner up to 1928 has
exceeded £1 1,000, and each year the progeny of the stud
ewes are submitted to a rigid culling of 30 per cent, to
33 1-3 per cent., after which they are classed with the
incoming draft of ewes into extra specials, specials and
studs, and the rams for mating purposes are selected ac-
cordingly. The whole of this important work is en-
trusted to Mr. A. J. McDonald, who has a high reputa-
tion as a stud master. He visits Yanget three times a
year, and his opinion is that the Yanget sheep at two
years compare very favourably for growth with any of
the eastern States bred sheep.
An annual sale of surplus Yanget bred stud and
selected rams and ewes is held during the early spring of
each year—usually the first week in October—in addition
to the ordinary sale of 5, 7 and 10 guinea flock rams and
special units. Ihe sale of surplus stock is unique
amongst the Merino studs of Western Australia, and has
been a pronounced and growing success since its intro-
duction in 1922.
At the annual sale it has been the practice to collect
from the shearing a number of fleeces which are displayed
on the shearing shed tables for the benefit of visitors.
1 hese comprise rams’ and ewes’ fleeces, and go to show
the class and type of wool that is produced at Yanget.
There are also a number of exhibition stud rams and ewes
available for inspection in the wool, so that intending
buyers can form an appreciation of the size and constitu-
yAN G E T, WE S TERN A U S T R ALIA


YANGET BRED
STUD EWE
STUD SIRE IN USE AT YANGET
YANG E T, WEST E R N A USER ALI A


tion of the sheep as well as the length of staple and weight
of fleece.
The stud has the largest output of any Merino stud
in the West at the present time (1928), disposing as it
does of about 1000 head of high grade rams annually.
The wool clips from Yanget are yet another feature of
this splendid property, high prices being the rule at the
Perth sales every year. The quality concentrated upon
is a super 60’s, a finer wool than this being unsuited to
the conditions. Well grown, of kindly handle and of
superb style, the wool is a credit to the owner.
Mr. A. E. Grant is also interested in portion of the
famous Yandanooka country near Mingenew, once owned
Yanget. Several thousand acres of this sound country
are cleared, and the balance, when cleared, will add
further good pastures to Yanget’s ramifications. It is at
present stocked with 5000 sheep and 180 head of cattle,
and the modern improvements have changed the original
state of the run into one of great productivity.
Personal
The late McKenzie Grant, father of Alec Grant, was
born at Strathspey, Scotland, in 1834, and his death in
1898 closed a career that was crowned with success and
full of the romance of pastoral pioneering in Australia.
His early days were spent around Harrow, in the Western
District of Victoria.
THE DINING ROOM AT YANGET
by M essrs. Phillips and Emmanuel, where on 5000 acres
of very choice land he and a brother run a herd of cattle,
ranging in number from 1000 to 1100 head. This block
was a grant made to the late Lord Forrest, who sold out
to the Wittenooms, who in turn sold to the late Mr.
McKenzie Grant. For years it was run by the Grant
Bros, as a farm, then by Messrs. W. A. and D. Grant
as a cattle proposition, and it finally fell under tender to
the ownership of Messrs. D. and A. Grant.
In 1926 Mr. Alec Grant purchased 11,000 acres of
Minninooka Station from Messrs. T. Readhead and Sons,
which he now calls Woolanooka, about 12 miles from
Idle present owner of Yanget was born at Newmarra-
carra in 1887. In 1922 he married Erla Evelyn, daughter
of Mr. C. H. Rowan, of Woorree, near Geraldton, and
there is a family of two children, Ronah Catherine, born
1924, and Alexander David, born 1927. Mr. Grant is
a moving spirit in the district and a leading sheepman.
For a number of years he has been president of the Vic-
toria District Turf Club, a member of the Agricultural
Society, and of the local Roads Board. He is, above all
else, a believer in the future of the State as a pastoral
countrv, and sets a good example of what can be done
by his own achievement on Yanget.
yas c; /•: r, west e r n a u s tra l i a


NARDLAH, BROOMEHILL, & PARDOO, PORT HEDLAND,
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Properties of Messrs. F. S. Thompson and Co.
NARDLAH Station, owned by Messrs. F. S. Thomp-
son and Co., and situated 15 miles from Katan-
ning and 3 miles from Broomehill, Western
Australia, on the eastern side of the Great Southern rail-
way, is distinguished amongst the various Merino stud
breeding establishments throughout the district on ac-
count of its location, splendid improvements, the high
standard of its small but select Merino stud and the out-
standing quality of rams turned off the property each
year.
pastoral life elsewhere, was in 1914, when he purchased
Nardlah from Mr. Steere. At that time the property
was heavily timbered, but well rung, and since that date
the present owner has effected a clearance of almost all
of it, with the result that to-day there are wide areas
of beautiful open sound pastures, undulating in formation
and most pleasing to the eye. Once denuded of super-
fluous timber, the land showed its readiness to respond
under special treatment, the soil being fairly heavy, with
few, if any, light patches, and the practice has been to
NARDLAH HOMESTEAD, SUPPLY TANKS AND SURROUNDING COUNTRY
Whilst the owners prefer to remain outside the notice
of the sheep world except per medium of the annual wool
clip and the yearly draft of sale rams, it is of special in-
terest to note what methods are being used on this fine
holding to further the reputation of Western Australia
as a Merino sheep-growing country.
Some of the finest stud properties in the State are to
be found in the Broomehill and Katanning district, which
is also a prosperous grazing and agricultural centre. Mr.
F. S. Thompson’s advent to the district, after a strenuous
break up virgin soil with the plough for the sowing of
wheat and oats and the cultivation of clovers, legume, and
suitable grasses.
Nardlah is purely a high-class stud breeding proposi-
tion, run on the best lines and under the safest policy,
with concentration upon the establishment of a Merino
stud.
At the time of writing, 1928, the improvements had
reached a stage where there seemed little else to do to
bring them to perfection for this class of country, with its


FIFTEEN MONTHS OLD SALE RAMS, NARDLAH BRED
17 in. of rainfall per annum, and its long, dry summers,
yet the work is perpetual where stud sheep have to be
considered, and whilst a highly-improved property even
now, the owner is busy laying plans for additional per-
manent advantages to the run. There are no rabbits,
hence there is no need for rabbit-proof boundaries. The
property is subdivided into 46 paddocks by 63 miles of
wire netting fences, but as it is not expected that these
will be adequate for all stud needs in the future, provision
has been made to extend them, an easy matter since water
is most easily obtained in surface dams. Over all these
paddocks the owner cultivates subterranean clover, and
gets a good growth of other clovers, wild oats and rye
grass, after the ground has been broken up, whilst lucerne
and Wimmera rye grass can be grown successfully over
natural pastures to sweeten them and carry some nutri-
ment through to the autumn rains.
Just before these seasonal downpours is actually the
worst time of the year, and sheepmen throughout the dis-
trict turn in these dry months to their fodder reserves.
There is, fortunately, no trouble with water, both surface
and for pastures, for the simple expedient of excavating
a 2000-yard dam to about every 2000 acres is considered
ample. Each of the main paddocks is provided with
water, whilst large catchment tanks at the homestead and
other buildings do their share of storage; the domestic
supply is pumped up to elevated tanks by windmill from
two concrete tanks of 60,000-gallon capacity.
Nardlah homestead was built in 1918 by Mr. Thomp-
son on a well-chosen site on a rise. Its neat design and
encircling hedges make the home stand out prominently,
and it can be seen by those passing along the road, which
skirts the homestead block, on the way into Broomehill,
3 miles distant. The telephone is connected with the
Broomehill Exchange.
It is evident from the class of homestead and from the
modern equipment built at convenient places about the
property that the owner is both particular and practical
in furnishing the needs to work his stud easily and econo-
mically. Excellent management is noticed in all the im-
provements, and it is not surprising to see the same signs
in the stud, in which there is a complement of about 2300
STUD EWES BRED IN THE NARDLAH STUD FLOCK
VARI) L A U A.V I) PARI) () 0. WEST E R N A US TRA LI A


ONE OF THE STUD
SIRES IN USE IN THE
NARDLAH FLOCK
NARDLAH AND PARDOO, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


FIFTEEN MONTHS OLD NARDLAH BRED FLOCK EWES
fully-grown sheep.
Mr. Thompson commenced to breed Merino rams in
1914 with a foundation flock of 200 4-tooth stud ewes
from M essrs. H. C. and R. M. Hawker’s Bungaree
(South Australia) stud. Both Bungaree and Canowie
rams were used, and the stud was guided along under a
very careful policy of classing and mating and strict cull-
ing. The South Australian type of sheep is favoured,
owing to its size, weight, and constitution, and at Nard-
lah imported sheep acclimatise readily and well. The
objective to which the owner breeds is a big animal of
commercial value, producing rams for the dry outback
parts of Western Australia. In pursuing this policy,
the Bungaree and Canowie sheep have been used almost
exclusively for several years, as they adapt themselves
readily to conditions on Nardlah and in all districts
throughout the State as far north as the Kimberleys.
Thirty-five stud ewes were purchased at the dispersal of
the Canowie Stud in 1925, and one ram was bought in
1925 from Koo-owie Stud, near the Burra, South Aus-
SIRES OF FLOCK RAMS BRED FOR SALE AT NARDLAH
NARDLAH AND PARDOO, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


A CORNER OF THE HOUSE AND GARDEN
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE NARDLAH GARDEN, INCLUDING THE TENNIS COURT
NARDLAH AND PARDOO, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


A STUD MERINO
EWE BRED IN THE
NARDLAH STUD FLOCK
NARDLAH AND PARDOO, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


A STUD MERINO RAM BRED IN
THE NARDLAH STUD FLOCK


tralia, which, however, was not a success, and was later
discarded with his progeny.
Jumbo, a Canowie-bred ram, was used with great suc-
cess, and it is worth noting his measurements. As a sJ-
year-old he cut 29 lbs., and at 10 years old cut 32 lbs. of
very good sire’s wool, strong and full of character, and
weighed 260 lbs. His girth was 6 ft. 1 in., length 5 ft.
1 in., and height from ground to back with full wool
2 ft. 10 in.
In 1927 at the Perth Royal Show sales, the owner pur-
chased from Messrs. John Collins and Sons, Collinsville,
South Australia, a good ram with 15 months’ wool on
trons of the stud, large and roomy in the frame, with
attractive heads and beautiful fleeces of 64’s quality wool,
in which their breeding is most pronounced.
Typical of sires in use at present is the ram Comet,
which Mr. Thompson inbred from selected Jumbo
parents. After his first season’s work as a 2-tooth in
1927 he cut 28 lbs. He is a shapely masculine type of
sire, long topped and deep in the sides, with strong arms
and well-developed thighs, prepotent, set well on strong
legs not too far off the ground, and the possessor of a
magnificent head. The face is open, the eyes and nostrils
wide set, whilst his covering is long, bright and shaftv,
A WHEAT CROP AT NARDLAH, SHOWING 3 MONTHS’ GROWTH
him. He is a grand animal for size and vigour, straight
hocks and masculine features.
The lambing on Nardlah takes place in the autumn,
and as seasons are generally dependable enough to ex-
pect plenty of green feed in those months and right
through to weaning time, the lambs come along very
well, with high percentages of marking. It is during
their hogget stage that they experience the trying time,
but once over that period they develop remarkably. The
breeding ewes are all of the one type, and are well-made
animals with a marked uniformity, true aristocratic ma-
showing in its growth the true characteristics of sire’s
wool.
Over a series of years the Nardlah-bred sheep have al-
ways taken high honours at the Perth Royal and country
shows whenever shown, including four grand champion-
ships and two reserve championships.
Every year a draft of Nardlah sale rams goes to the
North-west and Geraldton districts, the Eastern Gold-
fields, and to Air. F. S. 1 hompson’s Pardoo Station near
Port Hedland., and occasionally some surplus ewes are
disposed of. The sales in 1926 were 291 rams and 270
N A RDL AII AN D PARD O O. WE STE R N A USTR A L I A


ONE OF THE MEANS OF CONSERVING WATER
ADOPTED ON NARDLAH. A FENCED-IN
SURFACE TANK FROM WHICH THE WATER
IS LIFTED INTO TROUGHS BY A WINDMILL
NARD L A H AN D PAR D 0 O, WE STERN AUSTRALIA


A DRAFT OF TWO-YEAR-OLD FLOCK RAMS SOLD TO THE NOR'-WEST
ewes, and in 1927 356 flock and stud rams. The price
for ordinary flock rams ranges from 5 to 6 guineas, and
for selected rams from 7 to 1 5 guineas.
PARDOO STATION
The northern property owned by Mr. Thompson, and
managed by his son, is Pardoo Station, of half a million
acres, 8 miles from Port Hedland, in the Pilbarra dis-
trict, with some splendid coastal country. It is mostly
plains, with plenty of good soft edible spinifex grass on
it, and under its present ownership has been well im-
proved to cater for a flock of 30,000 Merino sheep of the
South Australian type. Except for a substantial wool-
shed, which is large and thoroughly equipped, the build-
ings are not elaborate, although they are comfortable and
sufficient for the work of growing profitable wool.
For some years, up to 1928, an absence of rain has
retarded progress to a fairly large extent, but neverthe-
TYPE OF STUD RAMS BRED FOR SALE
iY A RDL A H AN I) P A RDO O. WE STE R N A USTR A L 1 A


AFTER FELLING AND BURNING OFF USELESS SCRUB, AND
THEN WITH THE AID OF THE PLOUGH AND SCIENCE,
THE PRODUCTIVENESS OF ONCE CALLED WASTE LAND
CAN BE MADE TO YIELD GOOD RETURNS. A VIEW OF
IMPROVED COUNTRY ON NARDLAH
NARDLAH AND PARDOO, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


THE DRAWING ROOM, NARDLAH HOMESTEAD
less there have been good lambings and satisfactory wool
clips. There is an abundance of well water throughout
this country, which is good for stock drinking purposes,
although in some places it is mineralised. Up to the year
1925 the Pardoo clips were sent direct to England for
sale in London, but since then the owner has forwarded
the wool to Fremantle to be scoured, whence it is shipped
to London for sale. It speaks well for the local scourers
that the first parcel from Pardoo so treated realised 7ld.
per lb., which was a record for scoured wool from
Western Australia. In 1927-28 some of the season’s
clip, after being scoured, was disposed of at auction in
Perth, where it brought per lb. The balance, sold
in London, was purchased at prices ranging up to
per lb.
PERSONAL
Mr. Frank Snellgrove Thompson was born in the year
1866 at Haskewi in Turkey, and was educated in Eng-
land. His father, the late Mr. William Thompson, was
an engineer attached to the Turkish Government, and
had a distinguished career. With the spirit of adventure
that has characterised many of the pastoralists of this
country, Mr. Thompson came out to Australia in 1883
and was associated with a Captain Kirkpatrick in pearl-
ing and trading operations around New Guinea and the
Torres Straits for a time.
From that life he went to Wandoo, a cattle station in
Queensland owned by John Cook, and afterwards to Mt.
Spencer Station. He returned later to Wandoo as man-
ager. Amongst his experiences for several years before
leaving Wandoo was the task of overlanding the annual
draft of bullocks for sale. In 1893 a mob of 900 bul-
locks en route to M uswellbrook, in New South Wales,
was a task undertaken by him, but an outbreak of pleuro
forced him to inoculate the herd and sell the lot at the
Esk saleyards, in Queensland, where the beasts realised
an average of 40s. per bead—a good price as values were
in those days.
Mr. Thompson then moved to Western Australia, and
for nine years managed Warragine Station, then owned
by Messrs. Darlot Bros, and Co., now a sheep proposi-
tion owned by the De Grey Pastoral Company. Thence
he went to Pardoo, which property he eventually pur-
chased. In 1894 he married Cecilia, the daughter of
Mr. John Cook, and the family consists of one son and
two daughters, the son, Frank Finlayson Thompson, be-
ing born at Newcastle, New South Wales. He was
educated at Wesley College, from where he went to
Pardoo. He was there for six months when he enlisted
with the Australian Field Artillery, and saw active ser-
vice in France. After his return from the war he
took over the management of Pardoo and married the
daughter of Mr. Thomas A. Hardie, of Rosedale, Nar-
rogin, Western Australia. One of the daughters is mar-
ried to Mr. William Edward Rischbieth, of Woodyarrup.
A r ARDL A H AN D P A RDO O, If ES T ERN AUSTRALIA


TELYARUP, GNOWANGERUP, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Property of H. O. Timms, Esq.
TELYARUP is a stud property of 4800 acres of
secured lands occupying a convenient position 20
miles from Broomehill, Western Australia, on
the road to Gnowangerup, which lies 7 miles further on,
and 220 miles from Perth. It is the home of a valuable
stud flock of Merino sheep. The owner, Mr. H. O.
Timms, is a very well-known member of the Great
Southern Sheepbreeders’ Association, and since he pur-
chased Telyarup in 1920 has proved in no uncertain man-
ner that the magnificent stretches of grazing country that
extend through this part of the State not only lend them-
studs by breeding a type of Merino essentially suitable
for use anywhere within their home country.
Prior to the purchase of Telyarup, Mr. H. O. Timms
owned Glengarry Station further over in the south-east,
one of the oldest places in the Gnowangerup district,
having been settled by the Moir family and originally
taken up by the Spencers in the earliest days of Western
Australia. It was at Glengarry that Mr. Timms estab-
lished his stud flock, and when the present property was
acquired he transferred the sheep to the new and better
surroundings of Telyarup.
THE HOMESTEAD AT TELYARUP
selves ideally in many cases to closer settlement of the
land through the various avenues of farming, but they
offer untold opportunities as well for consolidating an
industry that is destined to become of paramount im-
portance to the wool clip of the State. That industry
is Merino stud breeding.
Until recently the western State has relied upon the
studs of its sister States for the preservation and improve-
ment of its own scattered flocks. To-day, such pro-
perties as Telyarup, and the men behind them, are steadily
and surely decreasing that dependence on the eastern
The early history of Telyarup goes back to the days
of the Quartermaine family of pioneers, who were re-
sponsible for clearing away the first of the dense vegeta-
tion which covered the run. Mr. Michael Corbett was
the next owner, and the present homestead was erected
by him. He also cleared and cleaned up the greater part
of the holding, leaving only some 1000 acres of Morrell
and York gum forest for the present owner to clear when
he took over in 1920.
It is a vastly improved property to-day. The natural
assets are embodied in a rainfall of 18 in. per annum.


running as high as 24 in.
and as low as 12J in., but
never actually failing, and
a sweep of undulating land
that contains a fairly heavy
soil all over the run. In
preparation for his flocks,
Mr. Timms foresaw the wis-
dom of augmenting the na-
tural pastures with clovers,
outside grasses and crops, a
work that is of the never-
ending variety, for while
there are more than 40 pad-
docks in which there is a
nicely balanced ration of
feed, new areas are broken, in
from time to time and a rota-
tion of crops practised as
well. The stud breeding
paddocks contain an abund-
ance of sub. clover, Wim-
mera rye grass and lucerne.
The property is watered by
dams. Well sinking is not a
success for various reasons,
and since the rainfall has
shown that excavations of the right size can assure per-
manent waters, the system finds full favour with the owner.
The lucerne is not irrigated in any way, but merely
sown to about lbs. per acre and grazed, the area of
1000 acres, which is at present down at Telyarup, being
split up into paddocks of from 80 to 100 acres. In this
way sheep can be moved about from one place to another
with no worry, and the tops of the stud cared for despite
the length of the trying sum-
mer months. Mr. Timms
believes in wheat and oats as
an aid to the proper feeding
of his flock, and cultivates
these cereals very often over
the lucerne pastures. Wheat
in particular can be grown
in this district with con-
siderable success, as witness
the 1927 season, when after
BJr ins. of winter rains—
May, June and July—and a
splendid fall in September
the crops throughout the
neighbourhood averaged 33
bushels to the acre.
The site for the homestead
is very well chosen, and liv-
ing loses none of its comfort
in the up-to-date appoint-
ments installed within Mrs.
Timms’ home. It has been
modernised by the present
owner, and given its pretty
garden by bis wife. The main
southern road runs past
the front of the homestead, which is connected by tele-
phone with Gnowangerup. A telephone also connects
the station buildings to headquarters.
Some little distance away stands a well-built wool shed
of five stands, all the shearing except some of the top
sires being done with machines, the work commencing
the first week in September, whilst the general structures
necessary to the economical working of a total flock of
THE ENTRANCE TO TELYARUP HOUSE
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD
T ELY A RU P, WE STERN AUSTRALIA


FIRST STUD EWES IN ONE OF THE STATION PADDOCKS
GROUP OF SALE RAMS BRED AT TELYARUP
TE L Y A R U P, WE S TE R X A U S TRA LI A


STUD MERINO EWE, TELYARUP BRED, GRAND
CHAMPION. PERTH ROYAL SHOW, 1928
about 3000 sheep, two-thirds of which are studs, are of
orderly appearance and kept in a thorough state of main-
tenance.
M r. Timms commenced to build up a stud flock In
1913, foundation being as given in Vol. VI. of the
Register of Stud Merino Flocks of Australia. 1 he ewes
were obtained at the dispersal sale of the Blackwood
(Hartwood) stud in New South Wales, and acclimatised
successfully at Glengarry. Further ewes were added
from Pewsey Vale, South Australia, and gradually, when
the stud was moved to its present home, the owner put
ONE OF THE LEADING SIRES IN THE TELYARUP
STUD IN 1928
in ewes from the Illareen, Langwell and Condeena studs,
near Katanning, Western Australia. The sires mated to
these sheep were purebred Wanganella, and the subse-
quent type Mr. Timms has evolved is one of great value.
The sires were imported from Deniliquin Stud Park,
Lamara, Uardry, Canonbar, Lucernedale and Willandra,
while a few stud rams were obtained from leading local
studs.
The most successful sire proved to be one purchased
at the Sydney sales in 1923 for 180 guineas from the
Uardry stud, Riverina. This ram is still in service
STUD EWES ALONG THE CREEK AT TELYARUP
T E L Y A R U F, WE S T E RN AUSTRALIA


(1929) and retains a remarkably fine condition. With
two of his daughters, Mr. Timms was awarded the
grand championship at the Perth Royal Show in 1925
and 1926, while at present there are four sires in use
from the Uardry stud, and results are very promising.
Mr. Timms also bred and exhibited the grand champion
Merino ewe at the 1928 Perth Royal Show, and the
grand champion ewe at Katanning, 1928, both ewes be-
ing by the Uardry sire.
MILKING
SHORT HORN
COWS ON THE
SWEET PAS-
TURES AT
TELYARUP
Another importation of merit was a stud ram from
Canonbar stud, New South Wales, bought in June 1926
at the Sydney sheep sales. This ram won first prize in
his class and was one of a pen of five rams judged to be
the best exhibited at the Sydney Sheep Show. His pro-
geny are coming along now in true style.
Mr. Timms aims to breed a bold medium sheep with a
covering that is not too strong —a 64’s spinning quality
being the objective—and his policy is mindful of the
A GLIMPSE OF THE HOMESTEAD ON A MISTY MORNING
T ELY A RU P, WE S T E R N A U S TRA LI A


SPECIALLY SELECTED SALE FLOCK RAMS
FOUR AND SIX TOOTH SALE RAMS
T K L Y A R UP. WK S T E R X A U S TRA LI A


TWO AND FOUR TOOTH SPECIAL STUD EWES
THE CREEK AT TELYARUP
T E L Y A R Ul\ WE S T ERN A USER ALI A


SPECIAL STUD EWE, 18 MONTHS OLD, GRAND
CHAMPION PERTH ROYAL, 1925
need for pronounced character in the stud rams, no less
than in the ewes, and strong constitution throughout the
flock.
Mr. H. O. Timms is recognised as a successful breeder
and a successful exhibitor at the annual Royal show at
Perth, which is a reputation gained only by sheepmen
who “produce the goods,” and his practice of thickening
up the stud from time to time with outside rams of best
quality, for which high prices are paid, is one of the
reasons the stud is able to turn out such uniformly good
lines of sale sheep every year. The two-tooth progeny
of a Willandra ram purchased in 1927 is an especial case
STUD RAM PURCHASED FOR £500
A LEADING SIRE IN THE STUD FLOCK. FIRST
IN HIS CLASS, PERTH ROYAL, 1928
in point, for they displayed good conformation and a
promise of a beautiful covering of the required type of
wool when seen early in the autumn of 1928.
From his breeding flock of about 2000 high-grade
Merino ewes, which are even in type and give the im-
pression that they are selected sheep, which in effect is
true, considering the strict classing and culling to which
they are subjected, the owner turns oft about 300 head
of flock and stud rams annually, some of which are sent
to the Katanning annual sheep sales, but the majority are
sold well ahead to north-west stations, such as Mardie,
owned by Mr. B. H. Sharpe. In the past Telyarup rams
FOUR TOOTH STUD RAM
T E L Y A RU P, JV E S T E R N A U S TR A LI A


MILKING SHORTHORN CALVES
A REFRESHING VIEW ALONG THE CREEK
T ELY A RU P, WE S T E R N A USTRALIA


A VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD GARDEN
have been used in the Kimberleys with success, and they
should do well in the new areas now opening up north
of the Eastern Goldfields. In breeding for these places,
however, Mr. 1 imms does not overlook the large de-
mand from local farmers, who are beginning to realise
the value of good rams. This trade is being developed
wi th confidence in the farmers themselves to improve
their flocks with the best blood.
Lambing has been regulated to commence in April
each year with the object of obtaining a better growth
THE SURFACE TANK AT THE HOMESTEAD
T E L Y A R UP, WE S T E R N A U S TRA El A


)f wool when the young sheep come up for shearing. The
lambs in 1927, numbering 1033, cut 6/8 lbs. per head,
CUPS AND TROPHIES WON AT PERTH ROYAL AND GNOWANGERUP SHOWS
and the average for the 2442 grown sheep put through
was over 12 lbs. per head. The wool was classed as
60/64’s, with some lines running higher, and realised
23Jrd. per lb. at the early sales held at
the latter end of 1927. In other years
up to and 30d. per lb. were ob-
tained.
Some awards won by Mr. Timms are
as follows:
Cup donated in 1920 by W.A. News-
papers Limited (to be won three times
in succession) for best 10 fleeces. The
cup was won outright.
Silver cup, donated by Royal Agri-
cultural Society of Western Australia,
and a wool trophy by “Western Mail”
for Merino ewe’s fleece, judged for com-
mercial value on appraisement lines. To
be won twice in succession or three times
in all. This was won in 1920 by Mr.
W. Fitzgerald, 1921 by Air. H. O.
Timms, 1922 again by Mr. Timms,
thus securing the trophy outright.
Cup donated by Pastoralists’ As-
sociation of Western Australia for
competition at the R.A.S. Show for two fleeces
of Merino wool of highest commercial value grown
in the State. Won by Air. H. O. Timms in
1923, Mr. A. E. Piesse in 1924, and by Mr. Timms in
1925, the latter securing the trophy outright.
Won four grand championships at
Perth Royal Show in 1925 and 1926
with ewes of his own breeding. The
ewes were exhibited in the medium
wool section. In 1927 several first
prizes were won, and many other prizes
for sheep exhibited in the medium sec-
tion, while in 1928 a Telyarup-bred
ewe by a Uardry sire was awarded the
grand championship.
Telyarup also supports a select herd
of Milking Shorthorns, founded with
pedigree cows drawn from the herds of
Tait and Black and Graham (Raleigh),
and developed with a Darbalara, New
South Wales, bull. The latter is a
magnificent animal, and a grandson of
Aleiba 15th. He was purchased for
AI r. Timms by Dalgety and Co. Lim-
ited, of Sydney, at the dispersal of the
renowned Darbalara stud herd in 1925.
At present there are about 10 head of
breeders, and a good high standard has
been reached, notwithstanding that the owner sells some
of his heifers each year. This herd is bred solely for
domestic use, the owner believing it is better to have
MILKING SHORTHORN BULL, BARON OF DARBALARA
high-class stock to supply milk and cream for the home
than inferior cattle. Mr. Timms has now discontinued
exhibiting these animals at the Royal Show.
TELYARU P. WE STEP N A USTRA LI A


P I'RSOXAL
Mr. H arry Oliphant Timms rvas born in 1870 at Mt.
Hesse Station, near Winchelsea, in the Western District
of Victoria, and is the son of the late William Fowler
Timms, Avho Avas one
of the early settlers
in Victoria. The late
Mr. W. F. Timms
made his second voy-
age out to Australia
from England in
1868, and became
part-owner eventually
in Mt. H esse Station,
a well-known pro-
perty now owned by
the Kininmonth
family.
Two of his brothers
also took up valuable
holdings in Victoria,
one, John Timms,
OAvning Mount Side,
and the other possess-
ing Gurack Station.
The present owner of
Telyarup thus comes
from true pioneering
stock.
Educated under the
late Dr. Mollison at
the Geelong College,
Victoria, he then
spent some two years
in a bank at Geelong
before striking out
into the country,
where on Barunah
Plains he gained his
early experience with sheep and wool. The Western
Australian goldfields then lured him from pastoral
to mining activities at the time of the Coolgar-
die boom in 1893, and for a while he found prospect-
ing a fascinating game. Mr. Timms left the fields
just in time, and joined up with Mr. A. R. Richard-
son at his property, Lowlands, at Serpentine, below
Perth. From there he went to Mardie Station, in
the north west, and purchased an interest in that property
in conjunction Avith Mr. A. R. Richardson and Mr. Sam
Elliott, and managed this huge property for 12 years,
after which Mardie Avas sold out to Mr. James Withnell,
who in turn sold it
after two or three
years to Mr. Sharpe,
of Wooleen Station,
in the Murchison.
Mr. Timms returned
to the more congenial
climate of the south-
east in 1909 and
bought Glengarry
Station. In 1903
he married Amy
Lucy Richardson,
whose father, Mr.
A. R. Richardson
of South Perth, is
one of the oldest
pioneers of the wool-
growing industry of
Western Australia.
His association with
the settlement of the
north-west in the
1860’s and with the
development of
numerous sheep sta-
tions on the Murchi-
son and elsewhere is
well known, and his
book of memoirs of
early north-west days
will be of great his-
toric value in years
to come.
It is interesting to
note in connection with the union of these two families
that Mr. Richardson “jackerooed” under the late
William Timms at Mt. Hesse during the two months
he was preparing himself for a pioneering life in the
north-west of Western Australia, whither he set forth
on the great adventure at the ymuthful age of seventeen.
Having lost their only son, the family of Mr. and
M rs. H. O. Timms now consists of four daughters.
MR. H. O. TIMMS
T E L Y A RU P, WE S T ERN AUSTRALIA


MIANELUP, GNOWANGERUP, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Property of O. P. Richardson, Esq.
MIANELUP is a beautiful stud property owned
and managed by Mr. O. P. Richardson, and
located six miles to the south of the town of
Gnowangerup, Western Australia, in the Great Southern
district. It is 275 miles from Perth, and is a freehold
run of between 5000 and 6000 acres, devoted to the
breeding of high-class Merino sheep on an elaborate
scale.
The property originally was owned by Mr. W. C.
Ball, and occupied a large section of the district. When
purchased by Mr. A. R. Richardson, father of the present
owner, in 1904, it still had most of its virgin covering
of York, Manna, Morrell (or poot) gums and jam,
necessitating a lot of improvement before the owner’s
hopes of agriculture and sheep raising could mature.
Mr. Richardson changed the name to Strathaven aftei
A CORNER OF THE MIANELUP HOUSE
Having an elevation of 900 ft. above sea level, and a
good climate, Mianelup is made up of natural and arti-
ficial pastures, which extend in an undulating formation.
The clear open slopes of cultivated paddocks in contrast
to the areas about them that as yet remain uncleared
indicate the great amount of pioneering entailed in the
past to prepare this country for the plough and for the
flocks which followed.
he entered into possession, and commenced to breed a
Merino stud flock in 1908.
His sons took over within a few years, and in 1918 a
division of the property and the stud gave one of them,
Mr. O. P. Richardson, the areas now developed by him
under the name of Mianelup, and a portion of the stud.
It is here that one can learn something of the methods
which are transforming miles upon miles of this country


and helping to build up the ram breeding business by the
aid of a combination of good blood, correct breeding and
systematic cultivation of the natural resources of the soil.
The Mianelup stud is registered as Flock No. 166 in
the Register of Stud Merino Flocks of Australia, but
before referring to its personnel it is well to
note the ideal improve-
ments on the property
for stud breeding pur-
poses.
In the first place the
country has been sub-
divided into 22 main
paddocks of a con-
venient size, with both
sheep-proof and rabbit-
proof wire netting sur-
rounding them, the
latter precaution hav-
ing been taken after
the sheep fences were
laid out, hence the un-
usual presence of a
double netting. The
result is that there are
no vermin except the
odd few which appear,
no matter what mea-
sures are taken to eradicate them.
The natural grasses, silver and corkscrew predominat-
ing, are ploughed out when new country is being broken
up, and as it generally takes several years for them to
come back properly, there is every encouragement to go
in for the cultivation of outside grasses on a wide scale.
Besides this the owner, taking full advantage of the
rich chocolate soil, which is nice and loose and easily
worked, crops wheat, oats and lucerne extensively, the
idea being to have a unity of green and dry feed for
the stud stock. This is an excellent plan, and is carried
out by planting lucerne about September and putting in
a crop of oats over it
the following year. In
1926 Mr. Q. p.
Richardson had 1000
acres of virgin land
under crops as well as
other areas already es-
tablished, both in the
lighter type of country
and on the more fertile
parts of the run. Ex-
periments have been
such as to justify the
area of 1200 acres
which is under lucerne
to-day.
Notwithstanding that
this versatile plant does
not perhaps grow as
luxuriantly as in the
agricultural areas of
other States, yet for
the purpose of rearing stud sheep, a sowing of
2 to 2~2 lbs. of graded seed to the acre does very
well, considering that the moisture depends upon an
annual rainfall of 17 in. Mr. Richardson put in his
first crop of lucerne in 1921, and intends to concentrate
upon this form of cultivation in preference to other well-
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HOUSE
FOUR-TOOTH SALE RAMS, WHICH SOLD UP TO 61 GUINEAS, TOP PRICE, KATANNING, 1926
MIANELUP, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


STUD RAMS, MOSTLY TWO-TOOTH, 10 MONTHS' WOOL
EWE HOGGETS, MIANELUP BRED
STUD EWES AND LAMBS, MIANELUP BRED
MIANELUP, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


known plants, such as subterranean clover, which he finds
makes poorer headway on account of the rainfall.
There are some 400 acres of oats altogether and a little
wheat, the latter cereal being cropped when new country
is broken in, in order to compensate for the cost of clear-
ing.
The water improvements comprise 15 surface dams
ranging up to 3000 cubic yards, whilst a further supply
is available from soaks. The Jackitup Creek runs
through the property, but is brackish. There is hardly
any evaporation, and the only time difficulty was ex-
perienced with water was in the exceptionally dry year
The Stud
Boonoke blood was chosen by Mr. A. R. Richardson
when he formed the Strathaven stud in 1908, and the
Mianelup stud, of course, has been worked from the
parent stud by Mr. O. P. Richardson. The original
draft was one of 500 ewes from the Boonoke stud in
New South Wales, the ewes being mated with strong
wool rams from the same stud. Canowie ewes and rams
were introduced two or three years later, whilst in 1913
Messrs. A. R. Richardson and Sons tried out a line of
200 Hartwood (New South Wales) rams and stud ewes.
These proved unsuitable to the conditions on Mianelup
A PRETTY VISTA ALONG THE CREEK WHICH TRAVERSES MIANELUP
of 1914, when the supply was derived solely from a few
soaks. All the buildings, fences, gates, windmills, sheep
yards and dip on the property are kept in good repair,
and these modern appointments are appropriately aug-
mented by a neatly built brick homestead of the bungalow
type, complete with “frigidaire,” lighting system, sewer-
age and other modern improvements. Around it are
trim gardens, which in course of time should make a
great showing, whilst a feature of the outlook over the
soft, well improved pastures is the topline of jagged peaks
of the Stirling range 35 miles away.
and were totally eliminated from the stud, the breeding
used thereafter being stud rams from Illareen, near
Katanning. The New South Wales type, with its ex-
cellent covering, was thus preserved, and when the
parent stud was divided and portion taken over for
Mianelup in 1918, Mr. O. P. Richardson launched out
wi th very definite ideals in an enterprising policy of
breeding, aiming to produce big, bold, hardy Merinos
for outlying districts. He is his own studmaster and
supervises the whole business from the point of view of
scientific sheep growing along conventional lines, and
MIANELUP. WESTERN AUSTRALIA


MIANELUP SALE RAMS SOLD AT KATANNING UP TO 50 GUINEAS PER HEAD
MIANELUP BRED STUD EWES


LOOKING NORTH FROM THE HOUSE
A VIEW TO WESTWARD FROM THE HOUSE


TYPE OF STUD EWES BRED AT MIANELUP
TYPICAL SELECTED SALE RAM


his prominence to-day amongst ram breeders is due to
constant application of these principles, and rearing his
stud under the best of conditions, with particular care
to the young sheep. In 1920, a son of the well-
known sire Lord Charles was purchased from Lamara
stud in South Australia, whilst for the past few years
Collinsville sheep have been introduced also from that
State.
Mr. O. P. Richardson keeps the size of the stud steady
surprise at the splendid condition, and the owner is in
the happy position of not being able to cope with the
demand for flock and stud rams and surplus ewes each
year. In fact, the whole of the output is booked up to
1934. As a rule about 300 rams are turned off an-
nually, the better class stud rams being sold to neighbour-
ing flock owners.
Typical features of the leading sires in the stud, all of
which are at the present time relations of Lord Charles,
VIEW OF THE CREEK AS IT PASSES THROUGH THE PROPERTY
at about 1000 breeding ewes, and their appearance is
certainly a great advertisement of their quality. The
lambing percentages are from 85 per cent, to 93 per
cent.
The drop of 1927 lambs inspected as hoggets last year,
1928, were in good fettle, running with ewes of all ages.
In fact, buyers from the north-west and elsewhere who
have seen these sheep in March or April, which is gener-
ally the worst time of the year, repeatedly express their
are their beautiful symmetry, magnificent heads with a
shapely twist of the broad set horns, strong jaws, deep
bodies denoting lung capacity and constitution, well sup-
ported frames and a dense fleece of true sire’s wool. I'hat
they have ability to produce true to type is shown in a
convincing way by the young stock, which are subjected
to a rigid culling before they are classed into the various
grades. The owner is thoroughly experienced, and be-
lieves in giving his closest personal attention to this im-
MIANELUP, WESTERN AUSTRA LI A


GROUP OF FOUR-TOOTH STUD EWES
TWO-TOOTH RAMS, WHICH WON FIRST PRIZE FOR GROUP, GNOWANGERUP SHOW, 1927
MIANELUP. WESTERN AUSTRALIA


TWO-TOOTH STUD RAM, SOLD FOR 150 GUINEAS
portant work, no less than to the care required in mating
the right sheep.
Only the local show at Gnowangerup has attracted
entries from the Mianelup stud, and the owner achieves
considerable success there every year. An expert and
leading authority on the Merino, he has been
invited to judge at the Adelaide Show, South
Australia, and since 1926 has judged Merinos
for the Royal Agricultural Society’s annual show
at Perth, where, however, he has refrained from
sending his own sheep.
It is worthy of mention that one of the three
stud Merino rams selected by a special commit-
tee of experts to represent the studs of Western
Australia at the Wembley Exhibition in London
was bred at Mianelup. Unfortunately, owing
to an outbreak of rinderpest, no rams were sent
abroad from Western Australia.
Following are some of the awards gained at
Gnowangerup:—l92o, champion and best W.A.
bred ram, for which a trophy was given; 1921,
special championship for ram, also champion
ram; 1924, champion ewe; 1925, special cham-
pionship ram; 1926, champion ewe; 1927, cham-
pion and grand champion ram.
The wool averages also are a feature of Miane-
lup, and some of the top sires cut exceptionally
good fleeces. The ram Progress, which was sold
to his brother, Mr. R. J. N. Richardson, for 300
guineas, cut 30 lbs. as a 4-tooth for twelve
months’ growth; whilst the ram purchased at the
Perth Royal in 1927 for 100 guineas, and
another for 400 guineas, cut 35 lbs. for 15
months’ growth. These rams are doing well
at the stud.
In 1926 the grown sheep cut an average of
14 lbs. of wool per head, which is near the re-
cord for Western Australia. The average was
for ewes only and 50 rams. The 1927 clip
averaged 13 lbs. per head for the grown sheep.
In 1919 the average was only lbs., and has
steadily increased year by year. The Mianelup
clip is sold in Perth, and in 1926 it \vas cal-
culated by buyers to scour 60 per cent., whilst
at the sales held on 14th February, 1928, the
fleece lines realised 27fd. and 28jd. per lb. The
wool is described as of excellent length through-
out the whole of the clip, not over generous in
condition, and of a quality ranging from a super
60’s to 64’s. It opens up showing a distinct type
in each description, containing the true char-
acteristics of a breeder’s stud, is bulky and broad
fibred, whilst it is also of a very kind handle.
The sheep are shorn by machine in October, only
a few of the top rams being shorn by blade.
In building up his wide connection, Mr.
Richardson has kept an eye upon the growing
demand for the best classes of Australian
M erinos, which is in evidence amongst South
African breeders and graziers, specially as the
conditions at Mianelup should suit that
Dominion’s requirements very well. The
main market for the Mianelup output, how-
ever, is within the home State, where wool grow-
ing is in a stage of rapid advancement both in size,
as witness the total clip of some 170,000 bales for
1927-1928, and in the quality of the general flocks,
STUD RAM SOLD FOR 300 GUINEAS,
GRAND CHAMPION, GNOWANGERUP, 1927
MIANELUP, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


GROUP OF TWO-
TOOTH STUD RAMS
EWES AND LAMBS
ON JACKITUP CREEK
FOUR-TOOTH
STUD RAMS
MI AN ELV P, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


GENERAL VIEW OF COUNTRY AROUND THE HOMESTEAD
as witness the splendid average price realised for that
clip at auction, viz., 16d. per lb., and the average
weight of fleece per sheep, which was nearly 8 lbs.
Although only a small part of the demand can be ful-
filled by the Mianelup stud, its importance is recognised
by flockowners, and the popularity of the sheep is left be-
yond doubt by the fact that leading stations are engaged
in contract for delivery years ahead.
One illustration of the adaptability of the stock is
instanced by a draft of 75 five-guinea two-tooth rams
sent to Tallerang on the Lower Murchison, where they
averaged 19 lbs. per head and cut up to 21 lbs.
Personal
Mr. Oliphant Pierce Richardson was born at Fre-
mantle in April 1884, and received his education first
at the Way College in Adelaide, and later at the Scotch
College, Perth.
The second son of a large family, he took up farming
at Serpentine, 32 miles from Perth, on his father’s pro-
perty and home. At a subsequent date Mr. O. P.
Richardson went up to his father’s Dalgaranga Station,
near Yalgoo, a fine Murchison woolgrowing property, to
manage it until one of his brothers returned from the
war, and from there entered upon his successful career
as a ram breeder at Mianelup.
His wife, whom he married in 1913, was Emily Ida
Bainbridge, daughter of Mr. J. P. Bainbridge, manager
of the Union Bank, Melbourne, and their family con-
sists of two sons, both of whom are at present attending
Scotch College, Perth.
The father of the owner of Mianelup, Mr. A. R.
Richardson, went to the West in 1865 from Portland,
Victoria, and his name will go down to posterity as
amongst the honoured pioneers of the vast pastoral lands
situated in the north-west country.
It is difficult, in this generation of swift transport, to
imagine a lad of 17 setting out with four companions in
an old barque, with a flock of sheep, some horses and
one or two head of cattle, and with provisions and para-
phernalia to last for a year, to try out their luck in the
hostile regions of a land thousands of miles away, and
almost uninhabited by the rvhite man, yet such was the be-
ginning of Vlr. A. R. Richardson’s life-long association
with the pastoral industry of Western Australia, having
sailed from Portland in March 1865, and arriving at
the Nicol Bay Settlement in the north-west a month
later. That he has been spared to look back upon the
marvellous development which has taken place in the
districts with which he and his wife were so closely
linked, and is still active and strong in the present year
1929, at the age of 81, must be gratifying to one whose
journey through life has been a gruelling but successful
tussle with nature. Amongst the properties he owned
was Mardie, near Onslow, now the property of Mr. Ben
H. Sharpe, of Wooleen, who was a schoolmate of the
present owner of Mianelup.
MIANELUP, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


PRIVETT, GNOWANGERUP, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Property of Dr. F. M. House
THE development of Merino stud breeding in West-
ern Australia largely owes its success to the
splendid studs which have been established in
the great Southern district of the State, amongst which
one of the most outstanding is the Privett Merino stud
flock, bred by Dr. Frederick M aurice House near the
township of Gnowangerup.
As early as 1850 the belt of country through which
House purchased other areas from Mr. Holding, increas-
ing the run to its present size of 2200 acres, which was
cropped and grazed with stock. His plans to work the
place up to a high standard for stud breeding purposes
were interrupted by the war, but nevertheless progress
was made in ensuing years. Though not of great size,
the property has been almost entirely cleared of its growth
of M orrell, Salmon, York gum, Sheoak and White gum,
and to-day unfolds in low rolling hills, sweeping away in
THE HOMESTEAD AT PRIVETT
now runs the Great Southern Railway from Albany to
Perth was considered to be a good agricultural district,
and events have justified those early predictions just as
much as practical stock breeders have proved the country
to be ideal for breeding sheep suitable to use in the build-
ing up of the flocks of Western Australia.
Privett in 1906 was purchased by Dr. House and bis
brother, M. R. House, from Messrs. Allardyce Bros., and
later on, in 1912, when the partnership was dissolved, Dr.
clean and pleasing formation, with sufficient timber left
standing to give shade and shelter to the stock.
Privett enjoys a healthy, bracing climate, with an
annual rainfall of 17 in., and whilst summers are long
and dry, the seasons for many years have never failed
to come along regularly, thus removing the bane of
drought. The property also lends itself well to the
cultivation of outside grasses to augment its sweet
natural pastures of Danthonia (wallaby grass), cork


screw, and others, and when the country is broken up,
the soil, which ranges from sand to heavy clay with
areas of diorite land, grows a profusion of clover plants,
wild geranium and barley grass. The property is divided
into about 24 main paddocks, well fenced with sheep-
proof netting, the size being such as to enable the stud
to be worked easily whilst allowing at the same time a
certain amount of cultivation. Rabbits are not trouble-
some on this property.
The owner has not used artificial manures very ex-
tensively, but where they have been applied the results
have been excellent, revealing an unusual capacity in the
soil for the growth of cereals, principally oats, which
are cropped and fed off by the sheep as required. Some
which he finds that the most important thing is to have
ample provision for the lambs in the form of good pad-
docks with a bit of green picking immediately they are
taken away from their mothers.
The Privett lambs are weaned when about \\ months
old, which would be early in the spring, seeing that as a
rule the lambing takes place in April, and an average
of 90 per cent, of lambs is marked. Occasionally, how-
ever, a few are dropped earlier, as in 1928, when some
of the ewes lambed in March. The practice of weaning
lambs early makes a great difference, particularly to the
ram lambs, the owner states.
The water supply is a feature of the property, a
shortage being so far unknown. It is provided from 14
A SUNNY WINTER'S MORNING
hundreds of acres are cultivated with both oats and
lucerne, the procedure for the latter being to put in
about 2 lbs. of seed to the acre in August to October,
according to the season, for it was found by experiment
that this valuable legume thus germinates early. Wim-
mera rye is another fodder grown with success on Privett,
but subterranean clover does not thrive so well, as it
seems to require a rainfall of 20 to 22 in. at least for the
best results to be obtained.
In establishing a nice balance of feed by means of
agriculture, the owner puts into practice the results of
a very close study of the needs of the Merino sheep, in
excavated surface tanks, the capacity ranging from 1200
to 2000 yards, and in addition there are numerous soaks.
The Privett homestead, situated just oft the main
Broomehill-Gnowangerup road, 34 miles from the latter
centre, and 270 miles from Perth, is a small but pleasing
cottage residence, set in pretty surroundings, and made
comfortable by the introduction of electric light, hot and
cold water service, modern sewerage and tasteful fur-
nishings. It is connected by telephone, and also contains
a well-filled and well-used library, besides a number of
trophies won by the owner with Privett Merinos during
the past few years.
PRIV E T T, IV EST E R N AUSTR A LI A


PRIVETT-ERED FOUR-TOOTH RAMS
GRAND CHAMPION, CHAMPIONS, AND FIRST PRIZE WINNERS, PERTH ROYAL, 1927
FIRST PRIZE WINNERS, GNOWANGERUP, 1927, 19 MONTHS AND UNDER
PR IVE T T, IV EST ERN AUSTRALIA


THE STUD
The foundation of the stud flock was laid in 1917
with a selection of 100 cast for age stud ewes purchased
from Mr. Cliff Anderson, of Narrawong, an offshoot
of the Illareen stud in the Katanning district, this flock
being developed from its foundation in 1905 on pure
Boonoke and later Deniliquin Stud Park blood, and
also 20 cast for age stud ewes and two rams obtained
direct from Illareen. This strain was added to sub-
sequently by ewes from the Condeena stud and the ram
Langwell from the Langwell stud, the latter being sired
by a Boonoke ram. Apart from the importation of a
Lucernedale, South Australia, ram, the male progeny
of which were never used, as they were not suitable for
stud purposes at Privett, although they were good from
were not culls, but a very “typey” lot, which brought
from to 10 gns. per head, and the owner was sorry
afterwards that he had let them go.
In proceeding slowly, Dr. House is making no mis-
takes, and as far as practicable aims to get the same
breeding into lambs as that of the sire or the ewe, care-
fully labelling and tabulating the young sheep. For the
first twelve months the young sheep show remarkable
growth, and once over the 2-tooth stage they develop
into magnificent animals very quickly. Dr. House has an
“eye” for a good sheep, and understands the principles
of breeding thoroughly, applying the methods of system-
atic culling and scientific mating with the inherent dis-
cernment of a stud master. His convictions are that
conformation and constitution are of primary importance,
TWO AND FOUR TOOTH PRIVETT-BRED STUD EWES
a wool point of view, no other blood than the above has
been used, and the stud flock has been built up by a
skilful mating of the best of the Illareen and Condeena
ewes with the Langwell sire, and the stud ram Curley
from Illareen. From their male progeny other rams for
use as sires have been specially selected.
The owner has established two families and breeds
them across, eliminating everything that does not reach
the required standard. The very heavy culling which
this entails is, Tiowever, more than compensated by cor-
rect uniformity in the flock, and is, moreover, largely
responsible for the strides which the sheep have made.
The breeding ewes mated in 1927-28 numbered 480,
after the owner had disposed of 160 ewes which were
considered superfluous. These, it is well to mention,
and that these cannot be achieved unless the sheep have
at least good mouths, broad noses, and strong heads, for
the essentials of good constitution in his opinion are,
first and foremost, deep breathing and adequate feeding.
It is therefore not surprising to see these features
characterising the Privett stud to-day, and it can be
claimed with certainty that the sheep, amongst which
there is not a crooked leg or a weak head, more than hold
their own relatively with any other flock. Performances
will bear out their merit apart from the popularity they
have won in the Gascoyne and Murchison districts, and
from the smaller sheep farmers, all of whom are begin-
ning to realise the wisdom of purchasing their require-
ments from local approved studs. In this respect Privett
rams are bred specially for improving flocks and making
PRIVET T. W ESTERN AUSTRALIA


PRIVETT-BRED
SIRE METEOR
Grand champion
Perth Royal Show,
1924; sire of grand
champions, strong
and medium wool
champions, and re-
serve ewe champion
at Perth, 1927;
champion and re-
serve champion
medium wool, and
reserve champion
strong wool, besides
5 firsts and 2
seconds for ewes at
Perth, 1928; grand
champion and re-
serve champion at
Gnowangerup, 1928
TYPICAL
STUD RAM
BRED IN THE
PRIVETT FLOCK
PRIVETT. TEES TERN AUSTRALIA


GRAND CHAM-
PION MERINO
EWE AT PERTH
ROYAL IN 1927.
AGED 18 MONTHS
STUD EWES AND LAMBS ON THE LUXURIANT PASTURES AT PRIVETT
PRIVET T, JV ES T ERN AUSTRALIA


A PRIVETT-BRED
FOUR-TOOTH RAM
SIRED BY METEOR
PRIVETT-BRED YOUNG RAMS AT ONE OF THE SURFACE TANKS
PRIVE T T, W ESTEEM AUSTRALIA


their wool of a higher selling value, and the proof of
their reputation for doing this lies in the fact that regu-
lar orders are placed for the surplus stock months ahead.
Dr. House is a well-known exhibitor at the leading shows
in the West, and the following awards which he has won
are indeed gratifying:—At the Gnowangerup Show,
which attracts considerable attention each year, he was
awarded grand championship in the open class with a
Privett ewe in 1920, 1921, 1922, and 1925, and also
gained the trophy in 1922 and 1923 for the best Western
Australian bred Merino ram. He was awarded first
strong wool and grand champion ewe, champion medium
wool ewe, reserve champion strong wool ewe, reserve
champion medium wool ewe, and eight firsts in twelve
ewe classes and one first prize ram.
The wool grown by the Privett Merinos is an almost
perfect type of 64’s on the ewes and a 60’s spinning
quality on the rams. Top prices at the sales are not
expected, for the reason that the owner, like other
breeders, is growing sheep for others to breed from,
and they must of necessity be in stronger condition
than sheep devoted to wool production only. Never-
PRIVETT-BRED STUD EWE, CHAMPION GNOWANGERUP, 1925
prize for best pen of seven 2-tooth ewes in 1922, 1926,
and 1927, and for best pen of five 4-tooth ewes in 1926.
At Katanning he gained grand championship in 1923.
At the Perth Royal Show in 1922 he exhibited the
champion strong wool and grand champion ewe; in 1923
champion strong wool and grand champion ewe, champion
medium wool ewe, and reserve champion strong wool
ewe; in 1924 champion strong wool and grand champion
ram; in 1926 reserve champion strong wool ewe and
reserve champion medium wool ewe; in 1927 champion
theless the Privett wool is beautiful and of great value
from a manufacturing point of view. At the 1928
February sales in Perth it returned the owner 273 d.
per lb. Of robust fibre, the wool has a well-defined
crimp at all points of the sheep, displaying character
from the base right out to the tip, which is firm and
clean, with the fleece densely packed on, whilst its even-
ness is a pronounced feature throughout the whole of
the stud flock and has been reached only after years of
patient work.
PRI VET T. IV ES TERN AUSTRA Ll A


A YOUNG PRIVETT-
BRED STUD RAM,
SOLD TO A SOUTH
AFRICAN CLIENT
DR. F. M. HOUSE HOLD-
ING A PROMISING
YOUNGSTER UNDER
18 MONTHS, WITH
THREE GENERATIONS
OF PRIVETT BLOOD
PR IVE T T, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


PRIVETT HOMESTEAD, SURROUNDED BY WELL GRASSED PADDOCKS
Perhaps no other breeder in the State has made more
rapid progress with sheepbreeding than Dr. House, and
this is partly due to his wide knowledge of anatomy,
and the influence of hereditary traits upon the succeed-
ing generations of animals.
The sheep are shorn early in September to avoid
trouble with the grass seeds, and for some years the
method of shearing has been by blades. These are pre-
ferred, specially in the case of lambs, because the work
is done better, although it is slower and more expensive
on account of the size of the sheep generally.
At the 1927 shearing the 2-tooth fleeces averaged
about 15 lbs. of wool per head, running up to the ex-
ceptionally heavy weight of 18 lbs., whilst the pen of
seven 2-tooths which won the prize at Gnowangerup in
1927 cut up to 22 lbs. for a little over twelve months'
growth. On the whole, an average of 12-13 lbs. of
wool per head is taken off the ewes, with correspond-
ingly high weights from the stud rams, hence flock-
owners may have every confidence in purchasing Privett
sheep for improvement purposes.
PERSONAL
Dr. F. M. House was born at Privett, Alverstoke, in
Hampshire, England, in 1865, and comes from a well-
known farming and stock breeding family.
The third son and sixth child of a family of 18, he
was educated privately, and afterwards going in for the
study of medicine, he spent some years at St. Thomas'
TWO-TOOTH EWES BRED IN THE PRIVETT STUD FLOCK
PRI VET r, WESTERN AUSTRALIA


A PRIVETT-BRED
STUD MERINO
EWE AND LAMB
PRIVETT EWE HOGGETS, SOLD BY AUCTION AT PERTH ROYAL SHOW SALES, 1928, FOR 20 GUINEAS EACH.
A RECORD FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIAN BRED EWES
Pkl VET T, IT EST E RN AUSTRALIA


ARISTOCRATS OF THE PRIVETT STUD FLOCK
Hospital in London.
Dr. House arrived in Western Australia in 1891, and
from 1896 to 1900 was resident magistrate and medical
officer in the Kimberley district, resigning from that
position to take up his profession at Katanning. In 1901
he joined the expedition organised by Mr. F. S. Brock-
man, the chief inspecting surveyor at that time, to ex-
plore the north-west Kimberleys beyond Mt. Leopold
Ranges, and in the role of naturalist and botanist gained
valuable knowledge of those regions for the benefit of
the State. Upon his return he became medical officer
at Katanning, and also, until 1908, resident magistrate
of that district. In 1915 he went to the war as medical
officer. Returning after two years with the A.I.F. in
Egypt and France, he disposed of his practice to engage
in sheepbreeding at Privett.
When not at Privett, Dr. House resides at his home
in the town of Katanning, 30 miles from the property,
and finds recreation in golf on the local links, the mem-
bers of which include a great many of the Merino breeders
of the district.
Mrs. House is an enthusiastic follower of the Royal
and Ancient game, and has for several years been the
holder of the country championship for women in West-
ern Australia, her collection of trophies rivalling those
of the Privett Merinos.
Dr. blouse has three sons, who are also engaged in
farming and pastoral pursuits.
TOP STUD EWES IN THE PRIVETT STUD
PRIV'E TT, IV EST E R N AUSTR A LI A


WOODYARRUP, BROOMEHILL, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Property of Messrs. Rischbieth Brothers
SITUATED 12 miles south-east of Broomehill and
some 200 miles from Perth, in the Great Southern
district of Western Australia, the station and
stud property of Messrs. Rischbieth Bros, ranks amongst
the best wool-producing holdings of the State, as well as
claiming distinction as a stud in a district already famed
for its ability to produce Merino sheep.
The property at present covers 14,635 acres freehold
of fine undulating country, of which in 1928 more than
11,000 acres had been won from their natural vege-
tation—forests of york gums, white gums, morrell, jam
and yate trees that until comparatively few years ago
covered the whole of this district.
were nearly 16,000 sheep grazing upon parts of this
territory. A mob of sheep was overlanded in the follow-
ing year, when Mr. J. Harris reported favourably upon
the country he traversed, and before long the Govern-
ment had established a chain of military posts along the
route. By 1840 the price of Crown lands went up to
12s. per acre throughout this section of the State, but
labour was very difficult to obtain for clearing, fencing,
mustering and shearing, and several years of stagnancy
followed. Despite these handicaps progress was made,
and by 1848, just two years before the new land regula-
tions were issued, there were reported to have been over
140,000 sheep in the south-west and south-east districts.
The late Mr. John Hassell, sea captain, purchased
THE WOODYARRUP HOUSE
It is not irrelevant to the purpose of these lines, in
describing the substantial progress made on Messrs. Risch-
bieth’s property, to add brief mention of the development
of the agricultural and grazing areas of the Great
Southern district, which was born to the State as a pri-
mary producing centre when on Christmas Day, 1826,
Major Lockyer landed at King George’s Sound and laid
the foundation of the settlement now grown into the im-
portant seaport of Albany. Here some of the earliest
flocks were brought ashore and pushed up into suitable
areas. As early as 1832 there were several small flocks
established out in the hills from Perth, from one of
which a small clip went to London in that year, grown
by Mr. Spencer Trimmer, and was sold for 26d. per lb.
The country from Albany to Perth gradually revealed
itself as ideal for pastoral pursuits, and by 1838 there
20,000 acres of forest lands in 1839, and was the first
large woolgrower in the south. Some years afterwards
a privately-owned railway was run through from Albany
towards Perth, and several thousands of acres of country
were conceded to the owners for every mile of line built.
Naturally the line wound in and out of the best class
of lands it was possible to locate, hut very little was done
to develop these concessions until the eighties and nineties,
when they were thrown open for private purchase.
With regard to the country now known as Woodyar-
rup, however, the railway company exchanged this in re-
turn for some land at Albany, the owner of which, the
late Mr. John Hassell, was allowed to pick out any coun-
try he liked along the line in consideration of his re-
linquishing his Albany land to make way for the present
railway station there. Mr. Hassell began a policy of


WOODYARRUP STUD MERINO EWES
improvement to Woodyarrup, a native name supposed to
mean good pastures and plenty of water, and carried on
sheep and wool growing with success up to the time of
his death, after which, in 1919, the trustees sold it to
the late Mr. Henry Wills Rischbieth. Trading as Henry
Wills and Co., Mr. Rischbieth founded the present
Woodyarrup stud in December 1920, and also effected
considerable alterations to the property for stud breeding
purposes. Upon his death in 1925 Woodyarrup passed
into the possession of his three nephews, Charles Row-
land Rischbieth, Arthur Newman Rischbieth, and Wil-
liam Edward Rischbieth, the last named being appointed
managing partner, with residence at Woodyarrup.
It therefore falls to the lot of this young pastoralist
to carry on the work so ably commenced by his uncle,
and in the task of improvement he has set himself there
is undoubtedly an alluring future, for the surroundings
have been made ideal for the stud, whilst the best blood
suitable to the country is at the bottom of the breeding.
The stock comprise normally from 8000 to 9000
Merino sheep, including lambs, of which some 3000 ewes
were lambed down in April and May 1928, which is the
usual time for lambing. About 1000 of these ewes make
up the breeding flock in the stud. The work of catering
for the welfare of these sheep, continually raising their
standard and enlarging their numbers, finds no better
expression than in the excellent type of appointments one
sees to-day on the property. Less than 3000 acres now
remain uncleared, whilst a great deal of this has been
partially rung and burnt, leaving just sufficient trees to
provide shade and shelter for the stock. These trees are
mostly white gum and jmrk gum. Those grasses which
are natural to the district are mainly the corkscrew and
wallaby varieties, and as this is a particularly well-
favoured property with regard to natural pastures, with
rich red loamy soil and practically no second-class coun-
try, it does not need perhaps so much nursing as other
parts of the district.
The obstacle to perfection, however, is the long, dry
summer, with hardly any rain, and the consequent ab-
sence of green feed for the young sheep coming on when
they most need it, and herein lies the hardest task of the
WOODYARRUP-BRED 2-TOOTH RAMS
IF O ODY A R R UP, WE S TE R N A U S TRA L I A


STUD EWES AND LAMBS
FOUR-TOOTH MERINO EWES ON WOODYARRUP
ir 0 ODY A R R UP, IV E S T ERN AUSTRALIA


management. The difficulty is partly overcome by grow-
ing lucerne, also outside grasses, subterranean clover, &c.,
and rotating crops to provide as near the natural balance
of green feed as possible. With an annual winter rain-
fall of 18 in. subterranean clover is not found very suc-
cessful, but other fodders, and lucerne in particular, do
very well, and the area set for same it is intended to ex-
tend year by year. Oats are sown to the extent of about
600 acres, and are either harvested or grazed, while
no running streams of permanency, but with properly
scooped-out surface tanks, neither the subsoil nor eva-
poration interferes with the excellence of the storage of
water. Only one of the dams showed signs of drying
up at the end of the 1927-28 summer, and this was due
solely to the large number of sheep put on during those
months. Most noticeable of the many features of Wood-
yarrup is the trim appearance of the station outbuildings
which dot the landscape.
A COLLINSVILLE-BRED STUD RAM USED IN THE WOODYARRUP STUD
wheatgrowing also forms an important part of the policy
laid down. About 400 acres of wheat were farmed last
year (1928) on the share farming policy, and the yield
will be about 20 bushels to the acre, conditions not hav-
ing been altogether favourable. In the case of oats, how-
ever, the practice is to feed off a big percentage.
There are 32 dams on the property, and in the driest
year no difficulty has been experienced in watering the
stock. Wells do not afford good waters, and there are
From the homestead are panoramas of cleared hills and
shallow valleys, with the Stirling Range in the distance,
resembling parts of the western district of Victoria, whilst
the immediate environs of the jarrah bungalow are laid
out in rose gardens, lawns, tennis court, &c. The house,
which was erected in 1921, is one of the show places of
the district. It is equipped with electric light and power,
hot and cold water service, modern sanitation and taste-
ful appointments, with every convenience for comfort.
W O O DY A R R UP, WE S T E R K A USTRA LI A


THE WOODYARRUP WOOLSHED
Nearby are the storerooms, sheds, men’s accommoda-
tion, shearers’ quarters, stables and woolshed, the latter
having been built in 1920 and having plenty of cover
and six stands of Cooper machines. Throughout all
these improvements, maintained as they are in clean and
orderly state, are the sure signs of good management.
Shearing takes place in October each year, and the wool
is sold now in Perth.
THE STUD
Commencing with 250 Bungaree ewes and stud rams
from the same source, the late Mr. Rischbieth introduced
in 1921 three special stud rams from Mr. F. S. Thomp-
son’s stud at Nardlah, Broomehill, and for the next six
years bred up with annual importations from Messrs. H.
c. and R. M. Hawker’s Bungaree Stud, South Australia.
These additions, from 1921 to 1925 inclusive, totalled
1654 ewes, and no other rams but Bungaree and Nardlah
were used until in 1927 the present owners purchased a
stud sire from Collinsville, South Australia, for which
they paid 350 guineas. This ram was introduced to the
Woodyarrup stud with a view to putting a little more
development into the stud flock, and it is hoped also to
breed more individual special stud sires for home use with
him than was possible in the past. With the first crop
of his lambs now coming along, it remains to be seen
whether these hopes will materialise.
About 1000 breeding ewes form the stud flock, and
these are culled and classed with such thoroughness under
the personal supervision of Mr. A. J. McDonald, and
mated so carefully, that indications point to a long and
successful career for Mr. Rischbieth as a stud breeder, for
DRILLING LUCERNE
w() 0I) Y A RRU P, WE S TE R N A USTRA LI A


WOODYARRUP-BRED STUD MERINO EWES
THIS PICTURE AND THE ADJOINING ONE GIVE A PANORAMIC VIEW OF WOODYARRUP COUNTRY


WOODYARRUP STUD MERINO RAMS
THE GREAT SOUTHERN DISTRICT, ONE OF THE FIRST TO BE SETTLED IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA, HAS BEEN SO
IMPROVED THAT TO-DAY IT IS IDEAL COUNTRY FOR BREEDING STUD MERINOS
IF OODYARRU P. WE S TE R N A U S TRA L I A


FOUR-TOOTH MERINO RAMS
A DAY OFF FOR THE FARM TEAM
THE JERSEYS AWAITING THE CALL TO THE YARDS
W 0 0 I) Y A RRU P, WE S TE R \ A U S TRA L I A


AN EARLY MORNING ROUND UP ON WOODYARRUP
the members of the stud are at present in admirable shape
and display the characteristics of typical woolgrowers and
lamb-getters.
One might be pardoned for expressing enthusiasm at
the high level to which the stud, and no less the general
flock, has been guided by the owners, considering the com-
paratively short time it has been in existence. Size and
constitution are the main objectives, combined with con-
formation and an even, well-packed-on fleece, while the
results of careful classing and heavy culling are to be
seen in the uniformity that runs through the stud flock.
Mr. Rischbieth is breeding flock rams suitable for use
in outlying districts, and has a regular market in the
Kimberleys for practically the whole of his output each
year, except outstanding rams which give promise of
becoming sires, are disposed of to the north-western
properties of Messrs. Watson and Evans, who regard the
type as ideal for their flock improvement, being as they
are readily adaptable to a hard life under trying
conditions.
SURFACE TANKS WITH DIVIDING FENCES
ir O O I) Y A R R uP. JFK S TE R N A U S TRA L I A


HOMESTEAD IMPROVEMENTS: TOP TANKS, MEAT HOUSE, &C. BELOW THE STABLES SHOWN IN TWO SECTIONS
rr o o d r a r r up, w e stern Australia


INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR
VIEWS OF THE HOME-
STEAD AT WOODYARRUP
A CORNER OF THE
LIVING ROOM
A GENERAL VIEW OF
THE HOMESTEAD
THE WESTERN END OF
THE DINING ROOM
IV O O I) YA R R UP, JVK S TE R N A USER AL I A


price was 42|d. in Perth, with the whole clip
averaging 20.35 d. per lb.
1925. —From 4017 grown sheep and 1192
lambs an average weight of 9.68 lbs. and 3.85
lbs. was recorded respectively, equalling 8.35
lbs. per head for all sheep shorn. Top price
in Perth was with an average price
15.9 d.
1926. —From 4575 grown sheep and 2391
lambs an average weight of 10.44 lbs. and
3.45 lbs. was recorded respectively, equalling
8.04 lbs. per head all through. Top price
was 23d. in Perth, with an average price
15.77 d. per lb.
UP-TO-DATE QUARTERS
Dealing with the wool produced, which is a 60/64’s
spinning quality, it is found that the South Australian
type tends to fine down a little on Woodyarrup, and high-
class rams are now being introduced to offset this, and to
maintain a nice density of covering, as well as to hold
the standard of the clip to the best quality. The clip
always commands favourable comment at the Fremantle
wool stores for its classing and preparation, and brings
high prices at the wool sales in Perth.
In view of the rapid progress which Woodyarrup is
making as a stud, it will be of interest to add details
of the wool clips since 1920, which are as follows:
1920. From 9147 sheep shorn the average weight, in-
cluding lambs, was 6.94 lbs.
1921. —From 7352 sheep shorn the average weight was
6.53 lbs., and the average price 15.2 d. per lb.
1922. —From 7817 sheep shorn the average weight was
6.45 lbs., while the top price was 29d. in London.
1923. —From 5937 grown sheep and 2765 lambs an
average weight of 8.11 lbs. and 3.21 lbs. was realised
respectively, equalling 6.52 lbs. per head all round. Top
price for fleeces was 28|d. per lb. in Perth, but the bulk
of the wool was sold in London.
1924. —From 5252 grown sheep and 1649 lambs an
average weight of 8.82 lbs. and 2.74 lbs. was recorded
respectively, equalling 7.11 lbs. per head over all. Top
1927.—Fr0m 5167 grown sheep and 2209 lambs an
average weight all through of 7.44 lbs. per head was re-
corded. Top price was in Perth, with an average
price of 21.36 d. per lb. for 177 bales, including 22 bales
of lamb wool.
The above figures include stud sheep which are noted
heavy cutters, and show that steady progress is being
made in the weights cut per head for the whole flock.
PERSONAL
The late Mr. Henry Wills Rischbieth was a well-
known resident in Perth. The managing director of G.
and R. Wills and Co. Limited, South Australia, is the
father of the present partners in Woodyarrup. William
Edward Rischbieth, the youngest of the three sons, was
born at Glenelg, South Australia, in 1899, and after com-
pleting his studies at St. Peter’s College, Adelaide, chose
pastoral work as his career, and spent some time on Car-
well Station, New South Wales, and at Bungaree, Clare,
South Australia, before he went to Woodyarrup. Of
his two brothers, one manages a property near Katanning
for his father, and the other has an important commer-
cial position.
In 1928 William Edward Rischbieth married the
daughter of Mr. F. S. Thompson, a successful Merino
stud breeder and the owner of Nardlah.
W 0 ODYAR RU P. WE S T ERN AUSTRALIA


TILLELLAN, WAGIN, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Property of G. A. W. Piesse, Esq.
NO record of the development of the Williams,
Arthur River, Wagin and Katanning districts
of Western Australia would be complete with-
out reference to the Piesse family. Their association with
the pioneering of the pastoral and agricultural industries
in that area traversed by the Great Southern railway,
and also with its earliest commercial life, assisted ma-
terially to lay the foundations of the prosperity that pre-
vails around Wagin and Katanning to-day.
the town of Katanning, 30 miles to the south.
All this country was thrown open in 1897, following
the purchase of the Great Southern railway by the Gov-
ernment at a cost of £1,100,000. As the line had been
built on the land grant system, and therefore threaded
through considerable stretches of land of varying quality,
from Albany to Beverley, its acquisition was a good move
on the part of the Government, and part of a far-sighted
policy of development that was laid down in those vital
THE HOMESTEAD AT TILLELLAN
The late Hon. Charles Austin Piesse, M.L.C., father
of the present owner of Tillellan, was the first to take
up country around Wagin, this town having been built
upon the eastern portion of the old run, whilst his brother,
the late Hon. Frederick Henry Piesse, M.L.A., with
whom he was in partnership in business at The Williams
under the name of F. and C. Piesse, general storekeepers,
was an original selector of the land at and surrounding
days when gold mining was at its peak elsewhere in the State.
Realising the tremendous efforts necessary to clear and
work this undulating scrub country, it must be said of
the Lands Department that they did everything possible
to help the new settler. Tillellan, which was very care-
fully picked as C.P. grazing leases, covered about 30,000
acres, extending from where Wagin is to the Arthur
River, about 18 miles north-west. It consisted of well


formed slopes and shallow valleys, heavily timbered with
jam. wattle, manna, &c., with an undergrowth of dense
scrub, and contained several thousand acres of poison
country.
Amongst other tilings, which included immediate oc-
cupation, the terms governing the purchase provided for
freehold title if all trace of poison were eradicated within
twenty years. Mr. C. A. Piesse lost no time in erecting
some 22 miles of fencing and stocking up with about 70
head of cattle and 2000 Merino sheep, and at the same
time he pushed ahead with ringbarking and burning off,
turned over —nearly all the land going under the plough
as soon as it was cleared to scarify it—and in fact the dis-
trict was regarded for many years as a chief fruit-growing
centre. Before Mr. Piesse made over the property to
his three sons in 1911. the town of Wagin was literally
surrounded with orchards. The property was run as a
partnership from 1911 under the name of Piesse Bros.,
who concentrated their energies upon the high-grade flock
of over 10,000 Merino sheep, which had been worked
up from an introduction of Booboorowie (South Aus-
tralia) ewes at 17s. Bd. per head landed at the property,
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD
and generally sweetening up the country. He made his
headquarters first at the Arthur River end, and when that
part of Tillellan was well established, went to the Wagin
end and built the commodious home which stands to his
memory to-day. Within a few years his labours had
transformed the whole countryside into beautiful graz-
ing pastures, and a great deal of the Wagin and Arthur
River lands were put under crops.
The suitability of much of Tillellan for agriculture
was discovered immediately the ground was cleared and
and at the same time upon the development of the agri-
cultural resources at Tillellan. In both of these avenues
they achieved outstanding success.
The death of the late Mr. C. A. Piesse occurred on
13th July, 1914, by which time valuable improvements
had been effected on the station. The shearing shed and
general equipment were of the highest order, and amongst
the finest of their size in the State, whilst attention to
water supply, fencing, subdivision and care of pastures
was such as to bring Tillellan into line with the most
T ILL E L L A V, WE S T E R X A UST R ALI A


advanced wool-growing propositions.
The bulk of the farming was carried on at the Wagin
end of the station. Upon the outbreak of war the
brothers offered their services, and two of them went
abroad, Vernon Frederick Piesse attaining a captaincy
with the 10th Light Horse, and Charles Oxley Piesse
gaining the rank of lieutenant with the 11th Infantry Bri-
gade, A.I.F. The former was killed at Gallipoli during
the famous engagement at Walker’s Ridge, whilst his
brother Oxley died in hospital at Rouen, France, in
December 1917 as a result of wounds.
The remaining son of the founder of Tillellan, Mr.
Gerald Austin William Piesse, the present owner, con-
tinues to run the place under the name of Piesse Bros.,
but confines himself now to Merino breeding and mixed
farming on a 3000-acre block
around Tillellan homestead.
The balance of the property
was disposed of at the end
of 1927.
Turning to the country
which has been retained, it
may be described as an almost
perfectly appointed group
of gently undulating pad-
docks overlooking the town of
Wagin, 2 miles away to the
east and 191 miles south of
Perth. The low hills running
through the stud farm are
most picturesque, and with
the exception of a small area
in front of the homestead,
are entirely cleared of scrub.
About 400 acres are cropped
regularly with oats and a
little wheat, whilst other areas
are sown with clovers and
lucerne. The property is subdivided into 37 small well-
fenced paddocks, and these grow the sweet natural grasses
of the district and are free of poison and vermin, whilst
the water supply is derived from dams and wells. These
improved pastures form ideal surroundings for stud sheep
breeding, for the owner can exercise constant personal
supervision over a small select stud of this nature.
Having worked through every branch of the business,
no one realises more than does Mr. Piesse the necessity
of storing feed against a long, dry summer, as, when on
21st January, 1922, he had a serious fire which destroyed
all the feed at Tillellan, he fed 760 sheep, 15 head cattle,
and 20 horses for 123 days from a paddock of 37 acres
of oats and peas which had been ensilaged in November.
TILLELLAN-BRED EWE
Grand Champion at Wagin Show as a four-tooth in
1925, and as a six-tooth in 1926. It was ewes of this
type that led to the establishment of the record mentioned
under the picture on page 8.
The annual rainfall occurs with wonderful regularity,
the average over 37 years, to 1927, being 17.52 in. per
annum. The months of May to August have averaged
261 points for the whole of those 37 years; September
and October, 160 points; whilst the summer months,
November to February, and the autumn of March and
April, consistently record about 45 points and 105 points
per month respectively.
In a shed capable of holding 500 tons of hay Mr.
Piesse keeps a quantity of this feed always on hand, as
well as having a reserve of two full silos of oats and peas.
Experiments are made with oats, the Department of Agri-
culture having planted on 12th April, 1927, four varieties
with the object of comparing the yields of the standard
varieties—Algerian (late), Guyra (mid-season), Burt’s
Early (early), and Mulga
(general purposes). The
plots were sown in duplicate
at the rate of 50 lbs. of seed
per acre and 100 lbs.
of superphosphate. The re-
sults were 26 bushels 36 lbs.,
30 bushels 24 lbs., 21
bushels 2 lbs., and 14
bushels 36 lbs. respectively.
Fhe Mulga variety unfor-
tunately lodged before ma-
turity, thereby preventing
all the grain being harvested.
Whilst no certain conclusion
can be drawn from one year’s
results, the Guyra oat seems
best suited to the district,
and also gives promise of a
high yield if harvested for
hay.
Basic slag and superphos-
phate trials were also con-
ducted, and showed definitely superphosphates to be of
great assistance to the oat crop.
In March 1928 Tillellan was stocked with 1400
Merino sheep of a high standard, besides 20 head of
cattle and 12 mares.
Prior to its sale recently, the owner possessed an ex-
ceptionally well-bred stud of Merinos, principally of
Canowie, South Australian, blood. Number 182 in the
Flock Register, Vol. VI., the stud was commenced in 1915
with Donald Dinnie ewes and rams bred by Mr. J. W.
Broun, of Beverley. They were augmented by 50 ewes
a year later from the lllareen stud of Mr. Ross Ander-
son, near Katanning, these ewes being mated with pure
Canowie rams, whilst from time to time the owner im-
TIL L E LEA N, IV E S T E R K A U S T R AEI A


FLOCK MERINO EWES GRAZING ON TYPICAL TILLELLAN PASTURES
ported rams or ewes direct from Hallett, South Aus-
tralia, the headquarters of the Canowie stud. He also
purchased high-class sheep at the Sydney ram sales, pre-
ferring to concentrate upon the South Australian type
as being in his opinion the best suited to his pastures and
climate. Besides improving his own flock with the pro-
duct of this stud, about 220 rams were sold annually to
the north-west, and altogether the stud comprised about
500 well-bred ewes. Many prizes were won at the
Wagin show, where the stud distinguished itself by gain-
ing grand champion honours on three occasions as well as
the prize for best Western Australian bred sheep.
Hence it came as a surprise to his friends when, with
the exception of 30 of the best ewes and a high-price Cap-
peedee ram purchased in 1925 from Mr. Walter Murray,
of Hallett, South Australia, Mr. Austin Piesse disposed
of the stud in 1927. The buyer was Mr. H. V. Piesse,
of Katanning, for Messrs. Henry Wills and Co., Wens-
leydale.
Mr. Piesse now intends to build up again on approved
scientific lines, aiming at a well-formed strongly constitu-
tioned sheep and a covering of 64’s quality wool. The
A VIEW OF THE TILLELLAN HOMESTEAD FROM THE FARM YARD
TILL E L L A N, IV E S TE R N A U S TRALI A


EWES AND LAMBS WATERING AT ONE OF THE TILLELLAN DAMS
nucleus of his flock contains all the characteristics for
which the breeder is aiming, and a great deal should be
heard of the outcome in the years ahead of the new
Tillellan Merino stud.
Of great interest are the figures dealing with the Til-
lellan wool prior to the dispersal sale. They reveal the
potential and real wealth that lies in the country here-
abouts, and they show that Western Australia has been
for a long time an important wool centre.
Over a period of many years the lambing was 85 per
cent. The 1922 clip sold by Elder, Smith & Co. Lim-
ited at Perth realised as follows:
27£d., 265 d., 26-i-d., 25£d.. and 25d. per lb. for the eight
lots of fleece offered, which totalled 107 bales, all the
wool being 60’s and 64’s spinning quality. In 1923 the
February sale included 6 bales fleece, 26^d.; 4 bales do.,
26d.; 3 bales rams, 24^d.; 13 bales pieces,
lambs, 18d. per lb. In 1924, the period in wool selling
referred to as the boom year, the Merino fleece wool from
Tillellan sold as high as 45>,d. per lb. in the grease —a
great record for Western Australia that will stand prob-
ably for many years.
The clip of that year averaged £52 per bale for 51
bales, and £47 16s. per bale for the whole of the 88
bales sent down. It was beautifully grown and well
liked for its manufacturing qualities, being a super 64’s
ONE OF THE LUCERNE PADDOCKS AT TILLELLAN IN WINTER
T I LLELLAN, WEST E R N AUSTRALIA


A CANOWIE-BRED EWE NOW IN THE TILLELLAN STUD
TROTTING STALLION., BEAU BRUMMEL
TILLELL A N, WE STERN AUSTRALIA


CHAMPION MILKING SHORTHORN COW, TREASURE OF SARNIA
CHAMPION MILKING SHORTHORN BULL, BRUCE OF SUNNYVALE
T I LL E L L A N, W E S T E R N A U S T R A LI A


top-making wool. Prices at the same sale were:—8
bales at
at 42d., 6 bales at 42Jd., 6 bales necks at 33Jd., 11 bales
pieces at 32d., 9 bales do. at 22d. per lb.
The 1927 wool clip, sold on 17th January, 1928, when
a catalogue of 11,050 bales was offered at the sale,
brought 28d. for the fleece lines of broad 64’s quality and
29d. for the top lines, with several lots at 27d. and
per lb. The AAW sold at 27d., AAE 27Jd., necks to
AA pcs. 24Jd., WH pcs. and EH pcs. to 21d.,
was born at the old homestead near the Arthur River in
1885. Upon leaving the High School at Perth, he went
direct to his father’s station and identified himself closely
with the closer settlement of the district, for ten years
he was a member of the West Arthur Roads Board,
and was mayor of Wagin for 3\ years. At the present
time he is a member of the Wagin Roads Board and of
the local municipal council, the Royal Agricultural So-
ciety, and the W.A. Merino Stud Breeders’ Association.
Also he presides over the Wagin Club, besides being a
DISPLAY OF WOOL ON BROKERS' SHOW FLOOR AT FREMANTLE, WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
Representing a portion of the third sale of the 1924-25 season, and held on 25th November, 1924. At this sale
Tillellan wool established a record for Western Australia—8 hales greasy super combing wool realising 45 1/2d.
per lb.
while locks brought 12Jd., and seedy pcs. 12Jd. The
whole clip averaged over £3O per bale.
Mr. Piesse is a keen lover of sport, and has owned
several trotting stallions, including Beau Brummel. One
of his horses won the Wagin Cup, 1924, but mostly the
All Style—Kitty sire is used to-day for breeding utility
horses.
Personal
Mr. G. Austin William Piesse is the eldest son, and
director of Malcolm and Co. Limited, late C. A. Piesse
and Sons, of Wagin. In 1909 Mr. Piesse married Ruby
Alice, daughter of Mr. George Watson, of Yornaning,
Western Australia, and late of Mt. Gambler, South Aus-
tralia.
The late Hon. Charles Austin Piesse, father of the
present owner of Tillellan, was born at Guildford,
Western Australia, in 1855, and was the second of eight
sons of the late Mr. William Roper Piesse, an English-
T ILL EL L A N, WE S T E R N A U S TRA LI A


A QUARTETTE OF TILLELLAN-BRED MERINO EWES
ANOTHER CROUP OF TILLELLAN-BRED STUD EWES
TILL EL L A N, WE S T E R \ A U S TRA L I A


man who arrived as a boy in Western Australia in 1842
with his uncle, the Colonial Treasurer. The death of
his uncle soon after left him to strike out unaided, and
he spent eight years on the land, but eventually went into
the Government service. He died in 1894, following his
retirement twelve months earlier.
At the age of 17 Charles Austin Piesse tried his
luck at pearling, but returned to Perth in 1874. He and
his brother, Frederick Henry, referred to early in these
notes, were devoted to one another, and possessed of great
pride in their country. They had been well educated,
Narrogin, Wagin, Katanning, and Perth. Trading as
F. and C. Piesse, they erected at Katanning, at a cost of
£BOOO, up-to-date roller Hour mills and granaries, aerated
water factory, winery and electric light plant, they being
the first users of this power in Western Australia. They
grew up in business with the spread of settlement, and
were big factors in that settlement.
Making Wagin his home, the late Hon. C. A. Piesse
financed lesser men to gain a footing on the soil of the
district and threw open much of his land for mixed
farming. A Justice of the Peace from 1893, he entered
THE LIGHTLY TIMBERED PLAINS OF TILLELLAN AS SEEN FROM THE HOUSE. THIS PHOTOGRAPH WAS TAKEN ON
A DULL WINTER’S DAY
and it was natural that young men of their calibre
and remarkable personality should carve out successful
careers.
The late Hon. F. H. Piesse, born at Northam in 1853,
entered the Government service in 1875, and was post-
master at The Williams until the end of 1880. This ex-
perience no doubt formed his mind as to the future of
the Great Southern districts, for in 1881 he and his
brother opened the general store which in due course
was a link in a chain of similar stores at Arthur River,
politics in 1894 as a member in the Legislative Council
for South-East province, which position he held for many
years. He was also a member of the old original Ko-
jonup Roads Board. As already stated, his death oc-
curred in July 1914.
His brother Frederick made Katanning his home, and
there is in that town to-day an impressive monument
erected to his memory as the founder of Katanning. His
lovely old home, Kobeelya, is now the Church of Eng-
land Girls’ Grammar School, standing in 32 acres of well-
TILL EL L A N, IT E S TE R N AT ST RAL I A


MR. G. A. W. PIESSE
THE LATE CAPTAIN V. F. PIESSE
MRS. G. A. W. PIESSE
THE LATE HONOURABLE
C. A. PIESSE; M.L.C.
THE LATE LIEUT. C. O. PIESSE
T I L L E L L A N, WE S T E R N A U S T R A L I A


appointed grounds, with private golf links and several
tennis courts, &c.
Throughout the district are many prosperous, well-built
portfolio of Minister for Lands in the Throssell Govern-
ment in 1900. During the reign of the Leake Govern-
ment in 1901, Mr. Piesse was Leader of the Opposition.
A CORNER OF THE TILLELLAN HOUSE AND GARDEN
homes where once stretched his orchards and vineyards,
for, as at Wagin, intense cultivation was carried out in
conformity with the general policy of development, both
commercial and agricultural. In 1890 Mr. Piesse was
made a member of the first responsible Government of
the State as a member for Williams, and his political
career was distinguished by a record of achievement.
Upon him was conferred the honour of C.M.G., and
his death took place in 1912.
His son, Mr. Harold V. Piesse, carries on part of the
estate to-day besides running his own stud farm, and
other members of the family are settled throughout the
district. Like Mr. G. Austin Piesse, of Tilltllan, they
are pursuing the ideals of citizenship and progress so
THE LIVING ROOM AT TILLELLAN
From April 1896 until 1900 he was Commissioner for
Railways and Director of Public Works in the Forrest
Ministry, was Acting-Premier for a time, and was offered
ably exemplified by the late F. and C. Piesse, and so
closely allied to the great possibilities of Western Aus-
tralia.
T ILL ELL AN, WE S TE R N A U S T R ALI A


KEAYANG, TERANG, VICTORIA
The Property of Colonel A. J. Staughton
SITUATED alongside the town of Terang, in the
Western District of Victoria, about 135 miles from
Melbourne, on the Terang-Warrnambool road, and
comprising an area of approximately 7000 acres freehold,
Keayang is one of the most fertile and most productive
properties of its kind in the State, being devoted prin-
cipally to fattening and dairy farming on scientific lines
by the owner, Colonel Arthur John Staughton. The
almost free from stone, such as to yield a great luxuriance
of sweet, soft, beautiful meadow lands under the influence
of a reliable rainfall which has averaged 27 in. per an-
num over a long period. There is plenty of shade and
shelter for the stock on the property, which in its natural
state was timbered fairly heavily, but partly cleared by
the early owners of a great deal of the timber to open
up more grazing land. Where these areas have retained
KEAYANG HOMESTEAD
property also runs a flock of some 5000 sheep of the Pol-
warth type, and a number of horses, including a stud of
thoroughbred blood stock. The number of cattle car-
ried for milking and fattening purposes varies from 1200
to 1500 head according to the conditions ruling through-
out the year, and they include a stud herd of Friesians.
All through this closely settled district, and on Kea-
yang in particular, the nature of the country is undulating
and hilly, the soil being of a volcanic composition and
little or no protection, however, new and well arranged
plantations have been provided, until to-day Keayang is
exceptionally endowed in this direction.
The holding was selected originally in the very early
days of the State by Messrs. Ayers and Nicholson, from
whom it passed to the late Mr. John G. Ware, of Bar-
widgee Station. Keayang was owned subsequently by a
Mr. O’Brien, and when that gentleman disposed of the
run in 1895 to the late Mr. S. T. Staughton, M.L.A.,


MOB OF 100 YEARLING FRIESIAN HEIFERS
40 TWO-YEAR-OLD MILKING HEIFERS
COWS FATTENING ON KEAYANG PASTURES
KE A YAN C, VICE OKI A


THE STABLES AT KEAYANG HOMESTEAD
father of the present owner, the area was 5028 acres
freehold. In 1900, a year before his father’s death, Mr.
Arthur John Staughton became the sole owner, and he
immediately enlarged its scope by the addition of an ad-
joining property, called Fine View, and owned by
McWilliams Bros., afterwards disposing of 1400 acres
for closer settlement. During the fifteen years prior to
his taking over Keayang not a great deal was accom-
plished in the way of improvements, and, relatively
speaking, the country on the whole was poor, and only
moderately productive.
Mr. Staughton possessed very definite ideas for increas-
ing the value of his land, not only for dairying, for which
this part of the State is adaptable essentially, but also
for fattening all classes of stock, and one of his initial
steps was to supplement the natural pastures with out-
side plants such as English rye grass, meadow foxtail,
strawberry clover and white clover, all of which struck
particularly well, and encouraged more intense experi-
ments in this avenue of management. To-day there is a
wonderful profusion of all kinds of succulent feed for
the stock, the value of which has been enhanced further
in the past few years since the application of superphos-
phates as a top-dressing has come into vogue. By this
means subterranean clover has taken firm hold through
many of the innumerable small paddocks into which
Keayang has been subdivided and fenced off, the largest
paddock being one square mile, and this nutritious legume
bids fair to outpace its rivals considerably in feed value
in the natural course of time. As an example of the
importance of subterranean clover on Keayang, which,
as well as containing some of the richest land in Victoria,
contains also some areas which are not very fertile,
paddocks purchased fairly recently for £l3 per acre, and
which have been ploughed, supered consistently at the
rate of about 100 lbs. to the acre and sown with sub-
terranean clover and a light mixture of English grasses,
have been raised in value to about £4O per acre. The
owner is concentrating upon the best parts of the property
and the dairying sections especially with the use of super-
phosphate, and there is ample evidence that his methods
are an inspiration to others in the heavy numbers of
stock carried and in the fact that Keayang has the re-
putation of being one of the best improved and most
successfully worked properties in the Western District.
For the water supply there are five waterholes in addi-
tion to wells and sub-artesian bores, and whilst the water
is mineralised to a certain extent, and therefore “hard,”
it is nevertheless of excellent drinking quality for stock.
About 20,000 gallons per day are pumped from one of
the wells for the homestead and gardens, the domestic
supply being augmented further by the usual catchment
tanks for rain water. In no case is it necessary to go
down far for a good flow from the sub-bores or wells the
average depth being in the neighbourhood of 200 ft. and
40 ft. respectively.
A' EAYA N G, VI CTO R IA


NO. 2 DAIRY FARM ON KEAYANG ESTATE
IN THE LUCERNE PADDOCK
KE A Y A N G, VICTORIA


The building appointments erected for the conduct of
the station’s business are efficient rather than elaborate,
and great use is made of the electricity scheme from
Geelong to Warrnambool, which runs right through the
property. Besides utilising this convenient and cheap
source of power for all lighting, pumping and other pur-
poses, such as wood and chaff cutting, throughout Kea-
yang, the five stands of machines in the woolshed
possess a dynamo to enable the shearing also to be done
by electricity. As can be expected, Col. and Mrs.
Staughton’s bungalow homestead is replete with every
modern comfort, and anyone visiting their home must
be impressed by the charming lay-out of the garden,
lawns, drive and old English foliage which surround it
on all sides. The house is connected by telephone with
the Terang exchange.
Between 700 and 1000 cows of the Friesian type are
milked daily over the whole property, which includes
four dairy farms let out to tenants on the share principle.
This is really a meritorious achievement for the owner,
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE PRETTY BUN-
GALOW HOMESTEAD, WHICH CONTAINS
EVERY COMFORT AND CONVENIENCE
and probably stands as a record for the State, for it is
doubtful if any other individual holding in Victoria can
exceed these figures.
In former years Keayang supported as many as 1000
South Devons and cattle of the Milking Shorthorn
type, but the difficulty in rearing these calves and
the small percentage of dairy cows produced by the
South Devons led the owner to make exhaustive in-
quiries into exactly what did constitute the most suitable
type of dairy cattle for the conditions on the property.
It was found that the Friesian would give the most profit-
able yearly butter fat returns, and in coming to this
conclusion the owner has been more than justified in
making the change in the herd in the year 1919. For
the purpose of maintaining the cattle at a high standard
of excellence Col. Staughton inaugurated a stud in 1920
by the purchase of pedigreed Friesian cows and bulls from
Messsr. Sewell and Flack, of Berwick, Victoria, and from
Mr. Oswald Syme, of Gisborne, Vic., as well as subse-
quently from other well-known successful Friesian stud
KE A YA N G, VIC T 0 R I A


EMU CREEK RUNS THROUGH
THE ESTATE, AND HERE IS
ONE OF THE WATERHOLES
breeders. This stud at Keayang has done well, and its
personnel reflect in their nice condition the care which
has been exercised in their breeding. He is now (1929)
experimenting further in crossing the Friesians with
Guernseys. As an example of what has been ef-
fected in the way of increasing the capacity of
some of the paddocks devoted to these stock, one
area of 400 odd acres alone carries 600 milking cows.
They are not fed on anything apart from their pasturage
and stay upon this area the whole year round, but come
in when they calve, which is in the spring and the
autumn, only some 20 per cent, calving in the last-
mentioned season of the year, the majority coming in to
milk in September.
In 1901 the owner established a stud flock of pure
Lincoln sheep, with which a considerable measure of suc-
cess was achieved, but in 1919 this flock gave way to the
Polwarth type, in which Col. Staughton had become very
interested on account of their growing reputation for all-
round utility. In that year he selected 800 pure Lincoln
stud ewes, and purchased 15 stud Merino rams from
Mr. Hugh R. Ileggs’ well-known Nareeb Nareeb Station
near Glenthompson, and also obtained the best class of
M erino ram from Mr. Shaw, of Wooriwyrite, near Dar-
lington, afterwards introducing a number of Polwarth
rams from Messrs. Dennis and Sons, of Eeyeuk, near Mt.
Noorat, and other Polwarth breeders, but principally the
bulk of the rams for building up the Keayang flock were
drawn from Messrs. George Dowling and Co.’s Jellala-
bad property, near Derrinallum, Vic., which is one of the
KE A YAN G, VI C TORI A


leading Polwarth flocks in the State. Ihe flock has
turned out to be an unqualified success under Col. Staugh-
ton’s direction, as witness the result obtained in 1927
(February), when 375. 4d. per head was the price paid
at auction for store ewe lambs sent down from Keayang.
This is understood to be the highest price paid in Aus-
tralia for store ewe lambs. During the 1927 season the
net return for ewes and lambs exceeded £2 per head.
There is no doubt that this breed is gaining more and
more in popular favour throughout districts in which
the conditions are too rich or too cold for the Merino.
The Polwarth is now a fixed breed, and resembles the
Merino in general characteristics, with the distinction of
having a longer and stronger frame, plain body, the capa-
city for maturing early, and at the same time yielding a
very long-stapled, dense, crimpy, well-nourished wool
of good commercial type. Ihe flock run by Col. Staugh-
ton includes about 2000 breeding ewes, which are lambed
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE RICH DAIRY-
ING LAND ON THE ESTATE, WITH
NO. 3 DAIRY FARM IN THE DISTANCE
down in May-June, and shorn and culled in November
each year. At the last shearing (1928) 121 bales of
wool were produced, and that the class of wool shorn
has more than ordinary value can be noticed from the
clip sold early in 1928, representing the previous Novem-
ber shearing, of which 67 bales returned the satisfactory
average figure of £2B 17s. per bale.
During his lifetime Col. Staughton has been interested
keenly in all branches of clean, healthy sport, and besides
polo and the turf, he kept and rode to his own pack of
hounds over the Terang and surrounding countryside for
a period of eight years. The polo ponies which he used
to breed became famous, and though this stud ceased to
exist some time ago, the owner continued to take an
active part in the games right up to the t r ear 1926, when
he was forced to curtail his activities in every way
owing to his pony falling upon him, crushing the bone
in one of his legs, and causing other severe injuries. He
KE A YA N G, V 1 C T 0 R I A


FOUR TOOTH POLWARTH EWES AND LAMBS
was recovered sufficiently by the end of 1928 to resume
his interest in horsebreeding, which had been a hobby
for many years.
Some of the racehorses owned by Col. Staughton since
he has been at Keayang have been Currandooley, winner
of a S.A. St. Leger and many other races; Poster, winner
in 1905 of the \ .R.C. Autumn Steeplechase, the famous
Onkaparinga Steeplechase in S.A., the V.R.C. Cup
Steeple, as well as hurdle and other races; Matouree,
winner of a great number of important races, including
the V.R.C. Handicap twice, being the only horse that
has done this so far; Aristaeus, one of his own breeding,
which ran second to Carlita in the V.R.C. Derby of
1914; and many others.
A horse stud was commenced in 1909 with a number
of mares and a stallion imported from England. The
sire was Mnemon, the magnificent three-year-old son of
St. Frusquin and Mneme, by Minting out of Arcadia,
by Isonomy out of Distant Shore, by Hermit. Mnemon’s
dam was a half-sister to Cyllene, the noted performer
which was sold for stud purposes to a South American
buyer for 25,000 guineas, and afterwards resold for 30,000
guineas, and which produced some valuable stock, in-
cluding several Derby winners (England). The mares
POLWARTH RAMS AT KEAYANG
KEA Y A A' G, VICTORIA


with which the stud at Keayang was founded were a
classic lot of matrons, and included Oracular, by Orme
from Wise Flower, by Wisdom out of Jessica, by New-
minster. 'The owner spared no expense to create a high-
class stud of thoroughbreds, and the granddaughters of
these mares referred to form the breeding strength at
Keayang to-day.
After the accidental death of Mnemon in 1919 Col.
Staughton began to send out his mares to sires in the
leading studs, and at the present time there are some
really magnificent fillies and colts coming along at Kea-
yang sired by Woorak, the noted aristocrat who is lord
of Mr. Gerald Buckley’s stud at “The Rock,” and by
the well-known sire October and others. This year
(1929) some of the mares have been to Verbius, at Mr.
S. Green’s stud.
Col. Staughton has an interest with Mr. C. B. Palmer,
of Dalvui Station, in Manana, a freehold property on
King Island, in the centre of Bass Straits, about 80 miles
from Port Phillip heads, and roughly half-way to Tas-
mania. They acquired this holding in 1913, and devote
it to fattening cattle and dairying exclusively. There
are 3000 acres of good land upon Manana essentially
suited for fattening purposes, and about 1000 head of
stock is the number carried in year out.
With characteristic enterprise the owners expended
£17,000 in an attempt to drain about 3000 acres of the
property, which comprised a lake, and whilst nearly one-
third of the reclaimed land turned out to be very sound,
the balance took on a dense growth of ti-tree and scrub,
rendering it valueless. There is a rainfall over the pro-
perty averaging 45 in. per annum, and from this generous
soaking it is possible to obtain clear, sweet water almost
anywhere at depths ranging from 3 ft. to 30 ft., and the
supply rises to within a few inches of the surface of the
ground. The whole of the property is made up of hills
and lightly-timbered undulating country, plus the drained
lake, and there is plenty of shelter for the cattle in the
natural hollows formed near the coastal frontage.
Spear grass is one of the main feeds, although in the
summer it is of no use owing to the seed, but away from
the seed country there is a wild profusion of strawberry
clover, lotus major, rye grass, and other varieties of ex-
cellent feed. More or less the whole island is under
English grasses and clovers, with wallaby grass, creeping
bent, and cocksfoot growing over the second-class land,
so, generally speaking, there is any amount of feed. A
certain amount of the country on Manana is equal in
productive value to any land in Australia, and the present
owners have carried out a progressive campaign of con-
ANOTHER VIEW OF EMU CREEK
KE AY AN G, VICTORIA


HEIFERS RUNNING WITH BULL
tinual improvement that must make it a very valuable
holding in due course. Up to the present the venture
has not panned out a success financially on account of
the heavy unremunerative costs involved in trying to re-
claim the lake and make it productive, but this disappoint-
ment is being offset gradually, and with good seasons the
outcome should prove satisfactory.
The markets for the fat cattle are Melbourne and
Tasmania, the cost of getting the beasts over being about
£2 per head either to Launceston or Melbourne, and a
little more for Hobart, and at the present time the price
realised for cows is about £l3 per head on the average.
It is not possible to improve the herd at Manana with
strains of the best Australian blood, owing to the fact
that there has never been pleuro on the island or in Tas-
mania, hence quarantine restrictions confine the importa-
tions to Tasmanian herds.
In connection with King Island, which occupies an area
of some 300,000 acres, of which one-third is first-class
land, one-third second-class, and the balance unproductive,
an interesting feature is the existence of what has been
described as the richest scheelite lode in the world. In
the war period from 1914 onwards this mineral brought
considerable wealth to the island, which had a population
then of about 1500, but it does not pay to mine it now
on account of the low state of the markets overseas. It
may be mentioned also in regard to King Island that over
400 of its inhabitants went to the war.
Another property in which Col. Staughton is interested
is Colona Station (Yalata Limited), in the west coast
district of South Australia, a wool-growing run extending
for about 1000 square miles from near Fowler’s Bay to
within a stone’s throw of the border of Western Aus-
tralia. This huge run was taken over by the present
management in 1924, since when large sums of money
have been, and are still being, expended to make the
country a safe and payable proposition for sheep. The
improvements chiefly 7 deal with the water supply, for the
country is subject to spells of low rainfall years, such
as the past four seasons, the total rain recorded at the
western end of the run during 1928 being less than 3 in.,
which is the lowest since 1902. Ihe distance Yrom east
to west on the whole of the property is about 120 miles,
and this takes in the Whitewell vermin-proof fenced dis-
KK A Y A NG, FI G T 0 RI A


TWO-YEAR-OLD FRIESIAN CROSS HEIFERS
trict and most of the Fowler Bay V.P. district. There
is a coastal frontage running for about 40 miles along to
the head of the Great Australian Bight, and altogether
there are four out-stations, viz., Whitewell, Nanwoora,
Pintumba and Tallawon, the head station being Colona,
situated 36 miles north-west of Fowler’s Bay.
Bores, wells, windmills and pipe lines are used for
watering the various subdivisions, and at the 1928 shear-
ing, which took place in August, a little over 20,000
sheep were put through the sheds. April, May and June
are the seasonal months, and the general average rainfall
of normal years is just short of 10 in. per annum. A
good class of wool is grown on this country, which is
made up of salt bush plains to the west, merging into
broken undulating country, growing sandalwood, myall,
quandong, chintagee, and mallee scrub, while there
is plenty of herbage and a sweet covering of grasses
in an average season. Bungaree blood is used through-
out the flock. The general manager of the run is
Mr. Thomas Butler, who has been on the place since
1880.
The present owner of Keayang was born on the family
estate on the Werribee, near Melbourne, in December
1876, and upon completing his education at the Mel-
bourne Church of England Grammar School, went
to Canoon Station in the Riverina district for a
COWS FATTENING ON KEAYANG PASTURES
KEAYAN C, VI C T OKI A


time to gain experience
before going to Kea-
yang in 1895, this pro-
perty having been pur-
chased by his late
father with the object
of handing it on in due
course. In 1901 Col.
Staughton married
Elsie, daughter of the
late Mr. W. I. Win-
ter-Irving, and the
family consists of five
daughters.
Col. Staughton has
never lost an oppor-
tunity of furthering
the interests of the
pastoral industry of
Victoria since coming
into possession of Kea-
yang. An active mem-
ber of district councils,
he is also on the com-
mittee of the Friesian
Cattle Society. When the war broke out he enlisted,
and was deputed to buy horses for the Remount
Department, and when this branch of activity was taken
over by the Indian Army he was appointed Director of
Remounts in India, with the rank of Captain, which post
he occupied until the end of the war. Upon returning
to Australia he joined
up with the Light
Horse, and at the
end of 1928 was pro-
moted Colonel of the
4th Light Horse, 2nd
Cavalry Division of
the Australian Mili-
tary Forces. He is on
the committee of the
Terang Racing Club,
whilst at Flemington
and Caulfield race-
courses his colours,
green with yellow
sleeves and cap, are
frequently seen. In past
years Col. Staughton
has captained the Cam-
perdown Polo team,
and has also played for
Victoria against South
Australia.
He is the only sur-
viving son of the late
Mr. Samuel Thomas Staughton, M.L.A., who was born
on 17th November, 1839, and died August 1901, his
life having been marked throughout by distinguished ser-
vice to his country, both in his successful pastoral career
and in his long period of association with the House of
Assembly.
THE SUNKEN GARDEN
THE DRIVE TO KEAYANG HOMESTEAD
KE A YAX G. VICTORIA


MERRANG, HEXHAM, VICTORIA
The Property of R. A. D. Hood, Esq.
MERRANG STATION, embracing an area of
7500 acres freehold within five miles of the
town of Hexham, which is 147 miles from
Melbourne by road in an exceptionally fertile section of
the Western District, is the home of one of the oldest
flocks of purebred Lincoln sheep in the State, the output
comprised 18,500 acres, almost all of which was rich coun-
try, timbered heavily with white gums and sheoak, and
containing valuable pastures of native grasses.
These lands were established under cattle prior to Mr.
Sceales by Messrs. Farie and Roger, and originally formed
part of the runs taken up in the initial years of the
A VIEW OF THE TERRACE AND GARDEN IN FRONT OF MERRANG HOUSE
of rams from this stud being a factor in the reputation
Merrang holds as a first-class property.
The owner is Mr. Robert Alexander David Hood, son
of the late Mr. Robert Hood, a successful and well-
known grazier and sheepbreeder, who entered into pos-
session o f M errang in 1856, shortly after the decease of
the previous owner, the late Mr. Sceales. The area of
the property in those days was about 23,000 acres, and
until well into the nineties, including land bought, it
settlement of the State by the Bolden family. It is under-
stood their country extended for many miles between
Hexham and Warrnambool.
Early in the eighties the present owner leased the pro-
perty from his father, and purchased it from the trustees
upon the death of the late Mr. Robert Hood in 1891,
carrying it on through the bank crisis of the next few
years, and subsequently disposing of some 5000 acres,
which used to be leased out to farmers for agricultural


MERRANG TWO-TOOTH LINCOLN SALE RAMS WITH 11 MONTHS WOOL
purposes, in addition to a further 6000 acres at various
times.
The present area has been reached only in compara-
tively recent years, and under modern progressive methods
has been improved to a capacity of one and a-half sheep
to the acre.
A considerable portion of Merrang is made up of
luxuriant undulating flats, through which flows the
Hopkins River, before it empties itself into the sea at
W arrnambool, whilst Musten’s Creek and other water-
courses help to provide the property with an excellent
supply of water for the stock. These natural sources are
augmented by a few dams and by sub-artesian bores and
windmills, and no trouble ever is experienced in keeping
the stock well watered. There is an average rainfall
of about 25 in. per annum. In 1928 over 29 in. of rain
were recorded on Merrang, and it is of interest that
despite this unusual downpour none of the sw 7 amps were
filled. The owner can attribute this only to a probable
change in the nature of the subsoil brought about by a
MERRANG TWO-TOOTH LINCOLN STUD RAMS WITH 11 MONTHS WOOL
MERRANG, VICTORIA


MERRANG STUD
LINCOLNS
A bove :—
FOUR - TOOTH
RAMS WITH 11
MONTHS WOOL
Below :—
STUD RAMS
WITH 11
MONTHS WOOL
AGED 3 YEARS
TO 6 YEARS
ME R RAN G. VIC T OR! A


SOME OF THE STATION HORSES
gradual clearing off of the timber on the property.
This country has not been able to carry Merino sheep
successfully for over fifty years, owing to the rich soil
and heavy soakage rendering the sheep liable to footrot,
and putting too much colour into the wool, but for the
coarser, hardy longwool type of sheep, such as the Lin-
coln, the conditions prevailing throughout Merrang are
ideal. The owner has used superphosphates extensively
in fostering the growth of new pastures, with the result
that to-day numerous kinds of outside grasses, and es-
pecially clovers, are in evidence over large areas. Sub-
terranean clover is said to have made its appearance in
the district many years ago, and without exciting any in-
terest as a fodder for a long time, continued to spread
through various parts of Merrang, until to-day, with its
value as a stock feed well recognised, it manifests itself
in a predominant manner. On the light country experi-
ments have been carried out for some years with Wim-
mera rye grass, and the success which has attended this
policy has led Mr. Hood to the belief that this grass
will prove just as efficient on Merrang as subterranean
clover from the point of view of all round food value.
There are more than 40 paddocks on the property,
including the smaller areas used for stud breeding, and
throughout these rolling picturesque subdivisions, with
their shady trees and luscious pasture, the improvements
are of a conspicuously high order.
The homestead, a comfortable stone bungalow, built
on the brow of a hill and encircled by a verandah, com-
mands a view of the charming park-like countryside be-
yond, and possesses all the home comforts of the present
age. There is a large garden with many ornamental
trees and a long, shady drive to the house, which is the
centre of a group of station buildings. There are twelve
stands of machines and a well built set of yards in and
around the stone woolshed, and as a rule shearing is
begun at the end of October. Lambing takes place to-
wards the end of May or in June. It is considered an
oft season if from 80 to 85 per cent, of lambs are not
marked, the figures for the 1928 season being 86 per
cent.
At the present time the property is carrying over 10,000
crossbred sheep and comebacks, as well as the stud of
purebred Lincolns, the total count at the October 1928
shearing being 10,500 head of sheep and lambs.
Next to the English Leicester the Lincoln type of
sheep was the earliest of the British breeds to enter Vic-
toria, and the origin of the Merrang stud of Lincolns
in 1872 was the outcome of introductions of these sheep
in 1865 by a few far sighted graziers west of Geelong,
ME R RAN G, VICTORIA


A VIEW OF THE HOME-
STEAD FROM THE CREEK
MERRANG,


STUD LINCOLN EWES AND LAMBS
such as the late Thomas Austin, of Barwon Park, and
others. Especially at Barwon Park were the conditions
similar to the heavily grassed flats on Merrang, and Air.
Austin was one of the first few to prove beyond doubt
that the longwool sheep were better doers than the
M erino on this class of country. The Austin Lincolns
were selected very carefully from the historic flocks of
AI essrs. Dudding, Kirkham and Alarshall, three of the
foremost breeders in Lincolnshire, England, and were
considered by experts to be of excellent merit, especially
in regard to the weight of the fleece bred on his impor-
tations and their descendants by Air. Austin. When the
late Air. Hood discarded his flocks of Alerinos and made
up his mind to go in for the longwool type, he chose 16
ewes and some rams from the Barwon Park Stud, which
by that time had made a great name for itself, and in the
following year, 1873, he deputed the late Air. John
Sanderson to select 11 stud rams and 33 stud ewes from
the Home flocks of Alarshall and Kirkham, these sheep
costing £35 and £25 per head respectively. 18 of the
33 imported ewes were in lamb to high-class English sires,
some of which were prizewinners.
A large number of Lincolns were imported to Victoria
at about the same time, and so great became the popu-
larity of this breed amongst flockmasters whose country
was not altogether suited to the Alerino, that arrange-
ments were put in hand almost immediately to inaugurate
an annual Lincoln sheep show at Hexham. At these fix-
tures and at other shows which were held in various
parts of the Western District, the late Air. Robert Hood
won prize money and plate to the value of £1630, in ad-
dition to three gold medals and over thirty silver and
bronze medals, with representatives of the stud flock he
had formed and bred, before he retired from the show
floor. The year in which the Alerrang Lincolns ceased
to be represented at shows was 1884, some twelve years
after the stud had been formed, and it was a meritorious
achievement for the breeder to have made such progress
in so short a time.
The late Air. Hood, who was one of the most pro-
minent breeders associated with the wool industry, set
out to breed a pure Lincoln sheep that would carry the
heaviest possible fleece of a type and quality that would
make the output of more than ordinary commercial value.
It was, and still is, understood generally that the Lincoln
is amongst the bulkiest framed sheep in England, and
this was a feature that commended their use in Victoria to
the early breeders. In packing on such wonderful fleeces
as they did, however, the type lost a little in the size of
carcase, and to-day the Australian Lincoln is more pro-
71/ ERR AN G, VICTORIA


THE DRIVE IN
THE GARDEN
AT MERRANG
THE EAST
CORNER OF
THE MERRANG
HOMES TEAD
MERRANG, VICTORIA


TWO-TOOTH POLWARTH RAMS CARRYING 11 MONTHS WOOL
nounced in type as a woolgrower than the English Lin-
coln, whilst the latter retains its superiority in the mat-
ter of frame. It was wool production first and fore-
most that influenced the policy of breeding in the Western
District stud flocks, and the late Mr. Hood paid special
heed to classing and culling with this end largely in view.
From 1872 to 1880 he bred from the Barwon Park and
imported sheep along in-and-in principles, preserving the
best of the progeny and discarding the rest. At the dis-
persal of the Langi Kal Kal flocks in 1880 —a stud of
repute, and descended from the same source in England
as the Merrang Lincolns —the late Mr. Hood saw an
opportunity of adding fresh blood to his own stud without
mixing the strain, and purchased the entire stud flock.
In 1885, about the time the present owner took over
the place on lease, two Lincoln rams were purchased
from Mr. Thomas Rutledge, of Farnham Park, near
Warrnambool, these sires also descending from Kirk-
POLWARTH STUD EWES AND LAMBS
THE START OF THE POLWARTH FLOCK AT MERRANG
M ERR AN G, VICE O RIA


A VIEW OF THE HOME-
STEAD IN ITS SETTING
OF TREES AND SHRUBS
M ERR AN G, VIC TOR IA


ONE OF THE WATER HOLES ON MERRANG
ham’s stud in Lincolnshire, through sheep imported by
Mr. Rutledge in 1865, and in 1889 the Merrang stud
was strengthened further by three rams bred by Black
Bros., of Mount Noorat.
By this time the Merrang stud had won an outstand-
ing reputation, and was supplying rams to many parts of
the State. The sheep were characterised by big, bulky
fleeces of true Lincoln wool of wonderful lock and sub-
stance, character, lustre and length, and when the pre-
sent Mr. R. A. D. Hood became the owner of the
property there was no departure from the objectives laid
down at the outset of the stud’s foundation.
Mr. R. A. D. Hood went direct to Kirkham’s stud
in 1902 for two more rams, and in 1906 purchased a
Lincoln sire from Messrs. Richardson Bros., of Newlyn,
near Ballarat. Again, when in England in 1909, Mr.
Hood selected three rams from the flocks of Messrs. F.
Ward and C. E. Howard, Lincolnshire. From that
date to the present year of 1929 only two other outside
rams have been introduced to the Merrang stud flock,
and these were also from Newlyn.
There are over 500 lambing ewes in the Merrang stud
flock of Lincolns to-day, and about 200 pure Lincoln
rams are turned off every year at good prices. As the
stud flock has been kept pure to the one line of blood
ever since its inception in 1872, there is plenty of breed-
ing to recommend the annual sale rams to farmers and
flockmasters, from whom there is a steady demand.
A stud flock of Polwarth sheep was commenced by Mr.
Hood recently with the idea of building up the general
flock sheep on Merrang to the greatest possible limits of
wool production, more or less keeping pace with the
capacity of the station as its pastures were improved.
The foundation of this new flock was laid about two
years ago with 500 ewes, the pick of 2000 Barunah Plains
ewes, to which were introduced stud Lincoln rams. The
progeny of this cross were culled heavily and the best
of them mated with Barunah Plains stud Merino rams.
M ERR AN G, VICTORI A


A REACH OF THE HOPKINS RIVER AT MERRANG
In due course the stud will be eligible for registration
with the Polwarth Breeders’ Association, for the policy
in force is in strict keeping with that association’s ideals
of breeding Polwarth sheep. In the stud, which is
dominated at present by two stud rams, the owner in-
tends to keep two families separate, and thus carefully
record the progress made in the future.
From a national point of view it is a great pity that
there are so many farmers in the State whose practice it is
to use nondescript rams when there are so many high
class flocks to draw from, irrespective of whether dual
purpose sheep are required for lamb raising, or whether
wool-growing is the objective. For improving carcase,
constitution and bulk of growth and quality of wool
grown per sheep, the Lincoln can be recommended on
country to which this breed is suited, whilst for de-
veloping a fixed type of comeback sheep such as the well-
known Polwarth breed, its value is unquestioned.
Since the earliest importations of Lincolns were made
60 years ago, breeders have doubled the weight of fleece
per head, and as the tendency in first class flocks like
the Merrang stud is to improve the carcase as well as
maintain the value of the wool, there is no danger of
this type losing its popularity for all-round general utility.
The annual wool clip from the station is sent to Gee-
long for sale. Of typical comeback quality, running from
58’s to 60’s count, it is very well grown and returns good
prices. The grown sheep and lambs in the general flock
average about 9 lbs. of wool per head every year, whilst
the Lincoln ewes in the stud cut over 14 lbs. per head at
the last shearing.
The cattle on Merrang are represented by a herd of
some 300 head of Shorthorns, which are kept for fatten-
ing purposes.
M ERR AN G, VICTORIA


Mr. H ood has given up breeding racehorses, which
used to occupy some of his leisure time as a hobby, and
contents himself with taking an active interest in the
turf rather than by keeping a blood stallion on the pro-
perty. He has held the position of president of the
Western District Racing Association ever since that body
was formed many years ago, and is also identified with
nearly all the principal racing clubs in the surrounding
districts. Outstanding amongst the horses he has owned
were the jumpers Mneon and Minato, the former win-
ing the Warrnambool Cup one year, and the latter being
a well-known performer in Melbourne, while Vanto and
Mr. R. A. D. Hood was born at Merrang on Bth
August, 1863, and attended the Geelong Grammar
School. From there he went to Burenda Downs and
Mitchell Downs, in Queensland, for some experience be-
fore going to Merrang, where he has worked hard to
make his association with the industry a success. He is a
recognised authority on the Lincoln, in which connec-
tion his services have been at the disposal of the Mel-
bourne Royal Show, where he has judged Lincoln sheep
during the past forty years. He takes an enthusiastic
part in promoting the welfare of the district, and since
1892 has been on the Mortlake Shire Council.
MR. AND MRS. R. A. D. HOOD AND THEIR FAMILY
One Too Many are horses which Mr. Hood has in train-
ing at the present time. Ihe colours under which the
owner raced were lavender and white until 1927, when
they were changed to black with pink quarters.
Mr. Hood’s activities embraced polo also, and he only
gave up this sport at the end of 1926, at the age of 63,
after 40 years of it.
During his connection with this pastime he bred some
beautiful ponies, and was a member of every leading Aus-
tralian polo team that was picked to visit New South
Wales, South Australia, and New Zealand from Victoria,
being captain of most of them. His home team was Cara-
mut, which absorbed his old Mortlake Club, of which
he was a foundation member.
In 1908 Mr. Hood married Miss Calvert, a sister of
Mr. Stanley Calvert, of Geelong, and some time after her
untimely death married Georgina Martha McCall,
daughter of the late Mr. A. G. Anderson, of Melbourne.
There was no issue of the first marriage, and the pre-
sent family consists of three daughters and one son.
The late Mr. Robert Hood, who died in 1891, was
president of the Australian Sheepbreeders’ Association in
1883. When that body was formed from the old Vic-
torian Sheepbreeders’ Association in 1877 to give wider
scope to the expanding activities of the industry, he took
the chair, and was one of the first vice-presidents. The
first show held by them, incidentally, was in August
1878 at Goldsbrough’s wool stores, Melbourne.
M ERR AN G, VICT O RIA


LANGULAC, PENSHURST, VICTORIA
The Property of Mr. E. R. Twomey
LANGULAC Station is a first-class wool-growing
property of some 5000 acres now owned by Mr.
Edward Rouse Twomey, and situated six miles
south of the township of Penshurst.
native grasses and herbs —and the whole country is sound
and healthy.
Members of the Twomey family have been identified
with the pastoral settlement of this section of Victoria
THE LANGULAC HOMESTEAD FROM THE WEST SIDE
It is made up of rich, black stony rises, with a large
area of beautiful plains country to the east of the run,
and the annual rainfall is about 20 in., falling principally
m the winter months, with occasional summer showers.
As these rains have been regular for many years, there is
always an abundance of natural feed for the stock—
since the early forties, when the neighbourhood was the
hunting ground of a tribe of aboriginals. John Twomey,
sen., and his four sons, John, Daniel, Edward and
Timothy, took up country, and Mount Rouse marked
the base of their operations. The lands were leased, but
afterwards converted into freehold and divided into three


A DRAFT OF STATION-BRED BULLOCKS
properties, Kolor, Banemore and Langulac, the latter
place coming under the ownership of Mr. Edward 1 wo-
mey, father of the present owner, E. R. "1 womey.
During his lifetime the late Edward Twomey enhanced
the value of his property considerably and raised it to a
high degree of production and prosperity, deservedly earn-
ing the reputation of being one of the ablest managers
of grazing country in the Western District of Victoria.
He was most successful in raising good flocks of comeback
and crossbred sheep, and also, being fond of and a good
keen judge of a horse, he was similarly successful in
that line, breeding and racing some good ones, notably
M ermaid, a celebrated performer in the seventies.
Mermaid's performances were as follows: —At the
Randwick Autumn Meeting in 1871, as a four-year-old,
won the Sydney Gold Cup (carrying 7 st. 5 lbs.—time,
3 min. 40 sec.), City and Randwick Handicaps, Four-
year-old and Autumn Handicaps, and ran second in an
SHORTHORN BREEDING COWS ON LANGULAC
LA.VGU L A C, V 1 CTO R 1 A


MUSTERING FAT WETHERS ON LANGULAC
A ROUND-UP OF BULLOCKS ON THE OPEN COUNTRY
LAKG ULA C, VICTORIA


ONE OF THE SIRES IN USE IN
THE LANGULAC SHORTHORN
HERD, AND BRED BY MR. A.
J. SIMPSON, OF CLIFTON
Australian Cup. Mermaid was by King Alfred from
Milksop, was trained by J. Wilson, sen., and ridden by
J. Wilson, jun.
Mr. T ‘womey died in 1907, leaving a widow and live
children, two sons and three daughters. In 1919 the
sons took over the management of Langulac, but in 1923
by mutual consent the partnership was dissolved and E. R.
Ewomey purchased his brother’s share. Mr. R. L.
Ewomey bought Kinvonvie, in the Hamilton district, the
LADY LANGULAC
WITH FOAL
BY DIBDALE
property of Mr. I). Munro, and E. R. 1 womey thus
became the sole owner of Langulac.
After completing his education at Xavier College, Kew,
Melbourne, he went to Kerarbury Station, New South
Wales, the property of the late J. S. Horsfall, and re-
mained there for five years under the management of Mr.
A. A. White. Ele left Kerarbury to volunteer for active
service in 1915, but was rejected and returned to Lan-
gulac.
LA N C UL A C, V I CTO R 1 A


COTTAGES AT THE HOMESTEAD
THE LAKGULAC WOOLSHED
LA N G LI L A C, VI CT 0R I A


THERE IS A WELL LAID OUT
GARDEN AT THE HOME-
STEAD. HERE IS A VIEW
ACROSS THE CROQUET LAWN
TO THE PLAINS BEYOND
LA N G UL A C. VI C T() R 1 A


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE
LANGULAC GARDEN
TAKEN FROM THE
LEFT SIDE OF THE HOUSE
LANGU L A C. V 1 C T() R 1 A


THE LAWN TENNIS COURT AND FLOWER GARDEN
I. A N G UL A C, VICT O R I A


ENTRANCE GATES
TO LANGULAC
HOMESTEAD
OVERSEER’S
COTTAGE
OM LANGULAC
LA N G ULA G. VI C T() RI A


THE BILLIARD
ROOM AT
LANGULAC
ONE OF THE
LIVING ROOMS IN
THE HOMESTEAD
LA A C UL A C, VIC T()R I A


THE LATE MR. EDWARD TWOMEY
Within the past years of his sole occupancy
Air. 1 womey has endeavoured to conform with
advanced ideas of station management, and to-day
carries a flock of about 9000 comeback sheep and
a herd of some 250 Shorthorn cattle, obtaining the
highest market rate when disposing of his surplus
stock.
His present intentions are to breed up a flock of
pure Corriedale sheep, for which purpose he has
secured Corriedale rams from Air. j. R. Moodie’s
stud at Nigretta East, near Hamilton.
At present there are on Langulac ten main sub-
divisions, all watered by surface tanks and wind-
mills, a few wells, and a sub-artesian bore, the
water being good for the stock and only slightly
unpalatable to humans. The homestead supply is
drawn from rain catchments, which will be aug-
mented by a large underground tank.
Another feature of Air. T womey’s methods
is the preparation of certain areas for pasture
improvement. 1 hese paddocks receive a generous
spread of top-dressing after being sown
down with subterranean clover, which has done
well.
1 he western boundary of the run is protected
from vermin with wire netting, but fortunately the
danger from rabbits no longer exists, and it is quite
a simple matter to keep down the odd few that
are to be found. The improvements on the station
consist of the usual permanent outbuildings, the
woolshed, which is situated a little distance from
the house, being typical of the rest of the home-
stead in its neat solid appearance. It is built of
iron and timber, with eight stands, and an oil engine
for power. Ihe men’s quarters and overseer’s cot-
tage are likewise modern and lie adjacent.
MR. E. R. TWOMEY
LANGU L A C. VI CT O RIA


THE SYDNEY GOLD CUP, WON BY THE LATE
MR. E. TWOMEY’S MERMAID, CARRYING 7 ST. 5 LB.
IN 3 MIN. 40 SEC. AT THE RANDWICK AUTUMN
MEETING, 1871.
The Langulac homestead is an attractive bluestone
house, and late additions have brought it up to date in
all respects. It is surrounded by well-kept lawns and an
extensive flower garden.
Mr. Twomey is very interested in the sport of racing
and has been president of the Penshurst Racing Club fo:
the past eight years. He has also been a successful ex
hibitor of ponies at the Melbourne and district shows.
MR. TWOMEY’S CAR
LA N G UL A C, VI C TOR IA


NARRAPUMELAP AND ROCK HOUSE, VICTORIA
The Properties of Gerald N. Buckley, Esq.
COMPRISING a freehold of 24,000 acres of beau-
tiful grazing country, Narrapumelap Station lies
in a district noted for the production of high
yielding, well grown, medium to fine quality pure Merino
wools, with the little township of Wickliffe and its post-
office a mile distant, and the Willaura railway station ten
miles from the homestead. Splendid roads connect the
property with Warrnambool, 60 miles away, and with
Melbourne, which is 145 miles off, thus Narrapumelap
enjoys an east-central position in the famous Western
District of \ ictona, and in these days of high powered
swing open only for an occasional horseman. The inter-
section of roads through the district —and one of these
passes the rear courtyard of Narrapumelap, and there-
fore serves as a more convenient entrance for the owner
and visitors, &c. —has been the means of robbing some of
the old country homes of their splendid isolation, their
marked community or family life, and their status of the
earlier days of pastoral settlement.
I ime by his gradual touch has in fact wrought a new
atmosphere into the life of the country, a change that
insists upon keeping pace with the trend of modern pro-
A VIEW ON THE TERRACE AT NARRAPUMELAP
cars is within easy reach of any of the important centres.
Mr. Gerald Neville Buckley purchased the holding in
the eighties from the late Mr. J. D. Wiselaksie, who
pioneered the country about forty years earlier, and who
brought distinction to the place by erecting in 1873 a
large single storey mansion surmounted by a tower, the
approach to these headquarters leading through an avenue
a mile long, with a wonderful array of gardens around
the house. I o-day these surroundings are more beautiful
than ever, but the old drive with its massive pine trees
is no longer used, and the imposing entrance gates, along-
:de of which is the lodge, used to accommodate employees,
gress, in which distance is annihilated by wireless, the
telephone, quick transport and a dozen other means. This
line old home, with its wide steps sweeping up to the ter-
race in front of the entrance, is to-day the practical head-
quarters of an essentially practical man, who has in-
stalled into it the needs of the age, and in his considerate
treatment of the employees has gone a step further and
extended the wireless and wireless gramophone music to
the servants’ quarters.
In character Narrapumelap is made up of well grassed
and lightly timbered undulating plains, in which there is
a pleasing scarcity of stone. It is questionable whether


TWO COLTS BY WOORAK AND TWO COLTS BY THE NIGHT PATROL
rock-strewn pastures make much difference to the well-
being of stock, but certainly their absence is more desir-
able, and there is no doubt that the Merino sheep run
here could have no better chance of thriving to perfec-
tion, for the conditions which the owner has enhanced by
excellent improvements are ideal for the purpose of grow-
ing a M erino wool of high quality.
The run is subdivided suitably, and is watered by sub-
artesian bores, windmills and surface tanks (or dams), in
addition to which the Hopkins River and Reedy Creek
thread through most of the main paddocks, forming some
rich flats. The annual rainfall is 24 in., which allows
plenty of scope for introducing new pastures, such as
subterranean clover, which Mr. Buckley believes to be
of incalculable value to Australia, and as rabbits are held
well in check there is no difficulty in providing the best
of rations for the sheep in addition to the indigenous root
grasses of the locality. Share farming used to be prac-
tised, but has been abandoned in late years for various
reasons.
It is of interest in connection with the name of the
property to note that it was given by the early black-
fellows to a large waterhole near which was the scene
of their corrobborees.
Narrapumelap has a normal carrying capacity of one
sheep to the acre, which is illustrated more clearly by the
number of sheep and lambs put through at the last shear-
ing in October 1928, namely, 24,000 head. This flock
is kept up to a high standard of excellence by introducing
rams bred on the property in a select stud, which was
formed many years ago with sheep purchased from the
late Air. James Gibson’s well-known Belle Vue Merino
stud in Tasmania, as well as from Mr. John Taylor’s
equally reputable stud flocks, the home stud being main-
tained with sires purchased by the owner from recog-
nised leading studs in Victoria, such as Air. Beggs’
Eurambeen stud, and others, whenever necessary. An
expert is employed to class the flock, which is subjected
to heavy culling. Ihe sheep as a result have a very well
bred appearance; they are plain bodied, of medium size,
FOUR FILLIES BY THE NIGHT PATROL
V A R R A PUME L A P AN I) R 0C K II 0 US A , VICT() R I A


uniform in conformation, and generally represent the true
type of Australian Merino, and it may he said that whilst
such methods are continued as at present, the wool in-
dustry of the State will have full support from Narra-
pumelap.
J'or the past 40 years, i.e., since the present owner
took over, there has been an average of 85 per cent,
marked lambs per annum, except only in very bad seasons,
the time for lambing being the months of May and June.
SOME TROPHIES
OF MR. BUCKLEY’S
BIG GAME HUNTING
The wool grown is typical of the quality for which the
Western District generally is renowned, being of 68’s
to 64’s count, and ideal for top-making purposes. The
weights are satisfactory, and average from 8 to 94 lbs.
per head of the grown sheep, although in 1928, an extra
good year for feed, the cut per sheep was a little heavier.
This clip sold at an average for all fleece lines of 24d.
pei lb. at the Geelong sales held in November. The
brokers' reports comment upon the excellent way in which
•V A RR A p U M EL A P AN I) R O C K II () US E. PIC T O RI A


WOORAK — A SUC-
CESSFUL SIRE IN THE
ROCK HOUSE STUD
the clip is classed and prepared for market, whilst valuers
praise it for the high yielding, soft handling, even quali-
ties of the wool. This is taken off the sheep under the
best of conditions in a spacious wool shed containing 20
stands, but since 16,000 acres of the property were dis-
posed of to the Government in 1914, only portion of the
shed is utilised to-day. This and other substantial build-
ings uphold the place as a first class property in every
way.
About 150 head of cattle are run to eat down the
rough feed, and there are also some 50 head of horses,
including the stallion Capesky, by The Welkin, for breed-
ing station hacks. Air. Buckley is a well-known en-
thusiast in all healthy kinds of sport, and part of his
pride in the station is a stud of English pointers,
which are kept for the annual quail shooting to which
the owner invites his friends every Alarch or there-
abouts.
THE NIGHT PATROL
ANOTHER OUTSTAND-
ING SIRE IN THE STUD
.V A R R A P UME L A P AN D R (J C K II O US E. VI C T()R I A


A VIEW FROM THE NARRAPUMELAP PORTICO
A CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD AT ROCK HOUSE
N A R R A P UME L A P AN I) R () C K II 0 US E. VI C TOR IA


STUD SHORTHORNS AT ROCK HOUSE
A VIEW OF NARRAPUMELAP FROM THE HOUSE TOWER
N A R R A R UME L A P AND R 0 C K II 0 US E, VIC TOR I A


ANOTHER PICTURE OF STUD SHORTHORNS AT ROCK HOUSE
ANOTHER ASPECT OF NARRAPUMELAP FROM THE TOWER
A r A R R A P U MEL A P AN I) R 0 C K II 0 US E, V 1 C T O RIA


THE ROCK HOUSE STUD
In 1924 Mr. Buckley sold his stud farm at The Manor,
Werribee, and transferred the stock to Rock House, a
AIRLIE, WARR NAM BOOL, THE SEASIDE RESIDENCE OF MR. BUCKLEY
valuable property of 600 acres freehold on the outskirts
of the town of Kyneton, 57 miles north of Melbourne.
It was the Argylls’ old estate, and is
composed of hills and flats through
which the River Campaspe winds for a
distance of seven miles. This stream
gives the run a great water supply, and
the combination of a 25-in. rainfall, an
invigorating climate, sweet sound pas-
tures which last well into the summer,
and rich fertile flats, makes Rock
House ideal for breeding thoroughbred
blood stock. For this purpose sub-
division and the erection of modern
buildings, yards, &c., have been carried
out by the present owner under the skil-
ful management of Mr. Thomas New-
ton, who resides at the beautiful home-
stead there, and no expense has been
spared to make the property an asset to
the bloodstock breeding industry.
Mr. B uckley, whose love of good
horseflesh amounts to a passion, and
whose colours, black, orange sleeves and
cap, are well known to patrons of the turf in Australia,
founded the present stud in 1920 with Woorak, the bril-
liant and successful son of Traquair, whom he purchased
from Mr. L. K. S. Mackinnon at the dispersal of his
Uhatsworth stud, and 12 mares and 5 yearlings. In
November 1925 Mr. Buckley purchased at auction The
Night Patrol for the sum of 10,000
guineas, and these are the twm sires in
use at present. The sire of Woorak
being out of Chelandry (one of the best
blood mares the world has ever seen),
and the dam of The Night Patrol
coming from the same source, gives a
double cross of this blood to the Rock
House stud, and as perhaps no two
better sires are in service in Australia
to-day than these two thoroughbred
stallions, Mr. Buckley has every reason
to be sanguine of turning out some note-
worthy stock. He has looked far afield
to provide them with worthy com-
panions, and forty odd brood mares in
the personnel of the stud represent the
best class of breeding material it is pos-
sible to find anywhere.
No young sire could have opened his
stud career under more favourable
conditions than Woorak. Possessed of
unfailing vigour, a light but compact build of most at-
tractive proportions, this flashing golden chestnut ran 37
A STUD HEREFORD BULL AT NARRAPUMELAP
races before going to the stud, and in the early part of
1929, at 17 years of age, he was as brimful of vitality as
ever. One has but to glance at his record as a racehorse
N A R R A P UME L A P AN D ROC K II 0 US E, VI C T 0 RI A


and as a sire to know that Woorak takes his place with
Bobadil, Maltster and Wallace amongst the most out-
standing sires bred in Australia, and it is a curious fact
that all of these were bred in Victoria.
Woorak (31), foaled 1911, is by Traquair from
Madam, by Pilgrim’s Progress (1) out of Madcap, by
MASCULINITY AND
QUALITY—A HEAD
STUDY OF THE
NIGHT PATROL
Robinson Crusoe from Giovanni, by Yattendon from Lady.
Pilgrim’s Progress was by Isonomy (19), from Pil-
grimage. Woorak’s sire, the great Traquair, was by
Ayrshire out of the famous mare Chelandry, by Gold-
finch (4), and traces back to Ormonde and Bend Or,
and through her dam Illuminata to Paraffin and Para-
ALERTNESS—THE
WIDE FOREHEAD
AND THE CLEAR
EYE OF WOORAK
A' A RRAR u M E EAR AA' 1) R () C R 11 () Us E. VICT() R I A


digm, whilst Ayrshire’s breeding brings in Hampton
(10), by Lord Clifden (2), by Newminster, and on his
dam Atlanta’s side Galopin (3), by Vedette (19), out
of Flying Duchess. There is no St. Simon blood in
W oorak, and but one trace of Galopin blood.
1 he chestnut had a wonderful turn of speed, and im-
parted his qualities liberally to his sons and daughters.
His greatest triumphs began with his first start as a two-
tear-old when he won the Gimcrack Stakes by five
lengths. Then followed the December Stakes by six
lengths, Sires’ Produce Stakes at Flemington by four
lengths, and the Champagne Stakes, in which he downed
on to further fame; Prince Woorak and others too numer-
ous to detail here, whilst his mares also achieved great
success.
The Night Patrol was imported and owned by His
Excellency The Earl of Stradbroke, ex-Governor of Vic-
toria. This brown English thoroughbred concluded his
racing career with over £20,000 in stake money to his
name, the highest of any imported stallion at present at
the stud in Australia. Of the No. 1 family, foaled in
1918, his pedigree in brief reads as follows:—By Sted-
fast (son of Chaucer, sire of wfinners of about £80,000)
from Dark Flight (half-sister to Traquair and to Popin-
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE NARRAPUMELAP HOMESTEAD
Carlita. He won the Chelmsford Stakes of 9 furlongs
in 1.52 j, the Craven Plate, of \\ miles, by four lengths
from a classic field in the time of the Spring Stakes
at Rosehill by six lengths, Epsom Handicap by six lengths,
All Aged Stakes of 1 mile in and was just beaten
by Eurobin in the Doncaster. He won an Oakleigh
Plate, carrying 10 st. 5 lbs.
w oorak’s get have proved almost without exception
to be brilliant gallopers. His sons include scions of the
turf such as Whittier, winner of two Caulfield Cups
and other first class races, having 1 mile in 1.36 V to his
credit; Accarak, winner of one Australian Cup and second
in another; also winners of a Doncaster, a Metropolitan,
a St. Leger, a V.R.C. Derby, besides the A.J.C. Sires’
Produce Stakes, breeders’ Plate, Caulfield Guineas, See.:
Sporak, who won his first five races with ease and went
jay, Chersonese, the dam of Heroic), by Dark Ronald
(a noted winner and sire of Son-in-Law, premier sire in
England in 1924, also the sire of Magpie, who sired
Windbag, Amounis, Boaster, &c.), out of Chelandry (win-
ner of 413,000 in stakes and the dam of notable stock),
by Goldfinch from Illuminata by Rosicrucian from Paraf-
fin (three-quarter sister to Lord Lyon, a Triple Crown
winner, and dam of classic performers), by Blair Athol
(winner of a Derby and St. Leger).
1 he Night Patrol won nine races at Home and ten in
Australia, downing such champions as Heroic, Pantheon,
Manfred, Sic., and undoubtedly has those sterling quali-
ties which go to make an outstanding sire. He is evenly
proportioned, has great loins and powerful quarters,
deep back ribs and legs like bars of steel.
His first yearlings, which were offered at auction in
-V A R R A R UME L A R AN D R 0 C K II () US E, VI CT () RI A


March 1029, show wonder
ful promise, the ten of them
averaging 416 guineas. The
brown colt out of Eumeralla
made 1200 guineas in a mar-
ket that was considerably
lower than last year.
Amongst the brood mares at
Rock House the following
will give some idea of the
discernment displayed by the
owner and his manager for
aristocratic breeding:—
Orford (by Tressady),
dam of Manfred, and from
the same family as Phalaris,
the leading English sire for
1928.
Radish (imp.), half sister
to the dam of Gay Crusader,
a Triple Crown.
Eumeralla (by T ressady
from Trinket, by Trenton),
whose third dam was Rose
of Lancaster, a full sister to
Bend Or, one of the greatest
horses of all time, and whose
dam 1 rinket was the mother of Westcourt, winner of
a Melbourne Cup.
I ressady Queen, a Champagne Stakes winner, by Tres-
sady from a half-sister to Soorak’s dam.
Sal (imp.) from the No. 16 family, tracing back to
Ormonde, by Bona Vista, the sire of Cyllene.
Waima, half-sister to the dam of Pommern, a Triple
Crown horse.
Queen’s flattery, full sister
to Artilleryman, and the
dam of Batteryman, Woor-
gun, &c., and from the Cross-
fire family.
Miss Langton, by Bobadil
from Phil, tracing back to
Yardley, the dam of Ring-
master.
Sumurun, half-sister to
Queen of Scots, by Bobadil
from Tortile, by Trenton.
Sweet Innocent (imp.),
bred by H.M. the King, by
Roi He rode.
Poyferre, sister to Poitrel,
whose dam was sister to Par-
see, a Derby winner.
Gaze, by Andrea from Ad-
miration, a half-sister to
Woorak’s dam.
Wish Wyn ne, Southern
Cross (imp.) (by Spear-
mint), Rosina (by The Wel-
kin), Red Streak (by Wal-
lace from Elsie, by St. Simon,
MR. GERALD N. BUCKLEY
MR. TOM NEWTON, THE STUD MASTER AT ROCK HOUSE,
ON HIS FAVOURITE HACK
and the dam of many win-
ners), Repulse (by The
Welkin), Red Roan (by All
Black from Banavie, by Wal-
lace from Fisherie), Oracu-
lar (imp.) (by Orme, the
sire of Flying Fox, Blankney
11. and The Welkin), Mar-
tina (imp.) (by Marajax
from Florentina, the dam of
Eleuriste, an Epsom win-
ner), Hispania (imp.) (by
White Knight), Heels over
Head (imp.) (by Spearmint
from Heedless, who brings in
the Paraffin family and the
Chelandry blood, and was
sired by St. Frusquin from
Float) and other equally
classic ladies. The owner
has three of the best Tres-
sady mares in Australia in
the above lot, and Australian
blood stock should be en-
riched considerably by the
activities of the Rock House
stud of thoroughbreds.
Personal
Mr. Gerald Neville Buckley is the son of the late Mr.
M ars Buckley, a prominent commercial man in the early
life of Victoria, and the founder of the well-known estab-
lishment of Messrs. Buckley and Nunn Limited in
Melbourne. He was born in 1855 at the family home in
Toorak, and was educated at
the Melbourne Grammar
School, after which he made
a close study of wool grow-
ing with very successful re-
sults. All his life he has been
an enthusiast, especially
where horses were concerned,
and in the nineties his team
of four-in-hand, with which
he won numerous prizes, was
a source of pride to him and
admiration to others.
As an expert with the rifle
he had no peers. In this
direction perhaps the most in-
teresting indulgences of this
versatile and able pastoralist
are the records of his big
game hunting expeditions in-
to the heart of the African
Continent, and his shooting
excursions to Scotland and
elsewhere, his prowess with
the gun equalling that with
the rifle. In his home at Nar-
rapumelap there are nearly
V A R R ARUM EL A R AX D R () C K II 0 US E. VIC T O RI A


SOME MORE OF MR. BUCKLEY'S BIG GAME TROPHIES
300 specimens of wild fowl and big game which he
brought down himself, his spacious billiard room and
halls, &c., resembling a museum. The art of the taxider-
mist is expressed to a nicety in the preservation of these
magnificent trophies, whilst the love of the connoisseur
is apparent in the way they are arranged and cared for.
Upon the floors are beautiful skins of lions and lionesses,
tigers, cheetahs and leopards, &c., whilst elsewhere in the
house the trophies range from deer to African buffalo,
warthogs, crocodile, zebra, &c., and do not exclude the
heads of a rhinoceros, hippopotamus and an elephant, an
elk and a moose, for besides three visits to African jungles
the owner made trips to North America.
Mr. Buckley is the owner of a town property at Warr-
nambool named Airlie, which is considered to be the show
place of the district, and in addition to other properties
he owns Glen Cairn, Dhuringaril and Kiota Stations, in
the fertile Goulburn Valley, about 100 miles north of
Melbourne, where he goes in for fat lambs, sheep and
bullocks on a scientific scale with the assistance of a resi-
dent manager.
Recently the curator of the Dookie Agricultural Col-
lege took a party of students over Kiota, and inspected
particularly two 25-acre paddocks of permanent pasture.
The mixture for these pastures was:—l4 lbs. of Western
District rye grass, 7 lbs. cocksfoot, 2 lbs. white Dutch
clover, 2 lbs. alsike clover, 2 lbs. giant colonial cow
grass (red clover), subterranean clover, and
strawberry clover. Despite having been eaten down
several times in their first season the paddocks retained
a splendid appearance. They fattened at the one time
800 lambs and 670 2-tooth wethers, which indicates the
great feeding value of such pastures. The rye grass is
planted with the clovers to give a better feeding value the
first year, after which the clover would beat it.
Wheat is also grown on Kiota, and an inspection of the
crops recently showed that it paid to practise correct
methods of agriculture. Ihe crops were free from weeds
and disease. Ihe above facts were announced in a re-
port made at the beginning of 1929 by the live stock
superintendent of Dookie College.
Mr. Buckley is known to his friends as a man of kindly
disposition and engaging personality, and many have been
the lame dogs he has helped over the proverbial style.
.V ARRAPU M E L A P AN 1) R 0C K II () US E. VIC T () RI A


EURAMBEEN, BEAUFORT, VICTORIA
The Property of the Hon. Theodore Beggs
EL RAM BEEN S 1 A I lON, which is owned by the
Hon. 1 heodore Beggs, is situated 6 miles to the
west of the town of Beaufort, in the Western
District of \ ictoria, about 108 miles from Melbourne.
Through the property, at less than a mile south from
of countryside that rolls away from the homestead to the
foot of the mountains.
Eurambeen has been in the hands of the present owner
since 1913, and its stud flock of Merino sheep represents
one of the best known and largest in Victoria at the pre-
EURAMBEEN—THE SOUTH END OF THE HOUSE
the homestead, runs the railway to Adelaide (the Trans-
continental line), and on the northern boundary of the
property is the main highway to Adelaide (“The Western
Highway”), whilst skirting it in half-moon formation
a few miles to the north stretch the bold crags and
wooded valleys of the Great Dividing Range, with Mt.
Cole prominent in the foreground, a beautiful panorama
sent time. It is also one of the oldest and purest stud
flocks in the State.
The establishment of the property began in the autumn
of the year 1839, when the brothers Alexander and Colin
Campbell arrived in William’s Town with a mob of
some 2000 Merino sheep and a few horses from Van
Diemen’s Land. Lhe price paid for these sheep was


EURAMBEEN SIX-TOOTH STUD MERINO RAM, 15-28
15s. per head. A few were lost coming across the straits,
and most of the remainder were suffering from scab when
they were put ashore. As the Act in force at that time
allowed sheep to be travelled inland only in the month
of February, the party were obliged to winter at Darebin
Creek, where they experienced a series of floods right up
to Christmas Day, 1839. It is rather interesting to ob-
serve that during this period flour in Melbourne was £7O
per ton, and the wages of shepherds and hutkeepers were
£4O per annum, with 20s. per week for extra hands.
The sheep were shorn in January 1840 (the wool rea-
lising Is. 6d. per lb. in Melbourne), and immediately
afterwards Alexander Campbell set out to locate a suit-
able run. After surveying the then barren plains on the
Loddon he discovered a large tract of unoccupied country'
in the vicinity of Mt. Cole, which he took up, adjudging
it to be the best grazing land available. After returning
to William’s Town for supplies and equipment, the party'
EURAMBEEN
FOUR-TOOTH
SALE RAMS
set out in February and camped at Fiery Creek,
a few miles from Mt. Cole, early in March
1840. In that year the country was under oc-
cupation only from Geelong to the 1 rawalla
Ranges, and was still in its virgin state to the
north and west of those hills, and also to the
south-west, where the plains were considered too
uncomfortable for settlement.
Within a year of their arrival at Mt. Cole
the owners had subdued the disease amongst the
sheep, and began to make progress, although a
few years later they reduced much of their hold-
ing and cut down their flocks. This apparently
was due to other settlers appropriating parts of
their run. The Campbells persevered with the
development of the property, enduring, like their
fellow countrymen, the hardships and monotony
of poineering with light and willing hearts for
the sake of constant occupation of mind and
body. They, no less than those who stepped
into their shoes, such as the Beggs family and our
pioneer graziers generally, with their nohle women-
folk, sowed the seeds of Empire in many a gunyah
or a slab hut, faring upon mutton chops served up in the
frying pan, with tea in the quart pot, and a slice of
damper three times a day, and sleeping the sleep of the
just rolled in a blanket upon the earthen floor, or in any
make-shift bed, to awake to a new day’s work with the
first flush of dawn.
About 1854 Messrs. Russell and Simpson leased Mt.
Cole from the Campbells, and later the run was pur-
chased by Messrs. George Beggs and H. Grattan. In
about 1860 the late Mr. Francis Beggs joined his brother
by acquiring Mr. Grattan’s interest, and the pastoral
license of the following year shows the name was changed
from Mt. Cole to Eurambeen. In a year or two the
run was carrying 30,000 sheep and a large number of
cattle, but not long afterwards the owners converted
EURAM B E E N, VICT 0 R I A


THE WEST SIDE OF THE HOUSE
THE NORTH END OF THE HOUSE AT EURAMBEEN
EURAJ\I B K E N, VI CTO R IA


RED POLL CATTLE
FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAMS BRED AT EURAMBEEN
EURAM B E E N, VI CTO R IA


THE DRIVE
THROUGH
THE GARDEN
FROM THE
HOUSE TO
THE STABLES
ONE OF THE
WALKS
THROUGH
THE EURAM-
BEEN GARDEN
K URA AI BKE N, VICT() R I A


A PORTION OF THE DRIVE TO THE HOUSE AT EURAMBEEN
17,000 acres into freehold and concentrated upon the
development of this area, and the establishment of a
Merino flock. They Avere both enthusiasts in fine avool
raising, and had unlimited faith in the future of the
industry. 1 heir dealings under the name of G. and F.
Beggs soon gave them a high standing in the sheep world,
and brought their liock into a prominence from which it
has never deflected. Upon the death of George Beggs in
1878 the property was divided into halves, and when
Francis Beggs died two years later his half-share in
the property and sheep was divided between his four sons
and five daughters; one daughter having received her
share in a money payment, each of the others of the
family received approximately 1050 acres.
1 he eldest of the sons eventually turned his inheri-
tance into St. Marnock’s Station, near Beaufort, Avhere
he died in 1921, whilst the others, 1 heodore, Robert and
Hugh, joined together to carry on the estate under the
old name of Eurambeen. They conducted the partner-
ship as B eggs Bros. with outstanding success, and acquired
various other holdings, such as Swanwater, Nareeb
Nareeb, Hopkins Hill, and a Mallee block of several
thousand acres near Beulah, before the partnership was
dissolved by mutual agreement in 1913. The interests
were then split up between the brothers, Mr. Hugh N.
Beggs retaining Nareeb Nareeb, Mr. Robert G. Beggs
taking Hopkins Hill, which he sold afterwards (subse-
quently purchasing Buln Gherin, his present home),
whilst Mr. I heodore Beggs remained at Eurambeen,
which he had managed, and which had an area after
the dissolution of about 6500 acres.
Far-sighted and cautious speculation, and sound im-
provements of their country, characterised the progress
of the Beggs Bros., and following similar principles Mr.
1 heodore Beggs has added outside blocks from time to
time to his holding until to-day (1929) the area of
Eurambeen has been raised to 11,226 acres freehold,
carrying approximately 10,000 head of purebred Merino
EURAM B E E N. I' 1C T 0 111 A


REFLECTIONS ONE OF THE DAMS SITUATED NEAR THE HOMESTEAD
sheep, including lambs, in a normal year.
These sheep are bred under conditions which approach
perfection, for besides an exceptionally well-planned sys-
tem of buildings, steading and general equipment, there
is an annual rainfall of 23 in., an invigorating climate,
and a combination of sound, healthy, and well-sheltered
pastures, which are very thoroughly watered. The auri-
ferous, or silurian, parts of the run are hilly, the buck-
shot, or basalt, areas are undulating, and in addition there
is a belt of land never having had natural timber. All
of it is of ancient volcanic formation. At the present
time there are about 200 acres cultivated under wheat
and oats on the share farming principle. Neither is the
soil over most of the run of sufficient fertility to promote
more than a fairly generous pasturage in normal years,
but nevertheless the capacity of the property of nearly
one sheep to the acre denotes its value for stud breeding
purposes.
In years gone by there was a good deal of honeysuckle
and sheoak on many parts of the run, but this has almost
disappeared. There is, however, plenty of red gum tim-
ber along the biery Creek, and the country hereabouts is
very pretty. The plantation of windbreaks across the line
of the prevailing winds has received studied attention
from the owner, with the result that there are to-day
many miles of shelter belts around the paddocks, which
are also free from rabbits. This advantage relieves the
management of great expense in wire netting the boun-
daries, but despite absence of the pest one man is engaged
constantly to check any intrusion. Areas are set aside
for the cultivation of pastures, these being treated with
superphosphates and sown with subterranean clover,
h rom the observations of a number of years this plant
appears to do very well at Eurambeen with top-dressing.
J he water supply is from dams, tanks and creeks, and
there arc no windmills on the place. All the water is
EURAM B E E N, V 1 CTO R I A


THE CHILDREN'S ROOM,
OR DAY NURSERY
ONE OF THE
SITTING ROOMS
THE LIVING ROOM
AT EURAMBEEN
EURAM B K E N, VI CTO R IA


SHEARERS' QUARTERS, SHOWING MEAT HOUSE AND HUT
fresh, as it has not been found necessary to go under-
ground, and running streams such as the Fiery Creek, as
well as surface excavations, place fresh water within easy
reach of the stock in every paddock, whilst for domestic
use the supply is drawn from a 14-ft. well sunk into an
old bed of the creek near the house. The homestead,
charmingly situated in the midst of English and native
trees, pretty walks and extensive gardens, and covered
with ivy, is a low rambling stone bungalow, and has been
developed by the present owner and his family into one
of the finest residences in the district. It is complete to
the last detail of modern convenience, and contains many
beautiful rooms, including a large and well-stocked
library. 1 he first part of the house was built in 1862
by the late Mr. Francis Beggs to replace the original
dwelling put up by the Campbells, and has been added to
in more recent years by the present owner. When the
k allourn supply of cheap electricity is made available in
these parts in a few years, it will mark another step for-
ward in the general management of Eurambeen.
In the big stone woolshed not far away from the home-
stead twelve stands of machines used to be employed in
THE EURAMBEEN WOOLSHED
EU R A 71/ BEE N, V 1 CTO R IA


THE HON. THEODORE BEGGS
WITH MRS. BEGGS AND
THEIR FOUR CHILDREN
shearing the station flocks besides other sheep, but some
time ago Mr. Beggs did away with machines in favour
of the blades, and to-day five or six shearers do all the
work necessary, and the sheep seem to do much better,
although more time is taken to cut out. The run com-
mences with the stud rams in September, followed by the
rest of the sheep about the Ist October, and at the last
shearing in October 1928 the number put through was
9441, including lambs, besides which a number of sheep
were sold in the wool.
From this clip the return of greasy wool was over 10
lbs. per head, which is a yield that has been reached for
some years over the whole of the flock, and which is be-
ing well maintained. Notwithstanding these good re-
sults the owner is working towards a denser fleece, with
improvement to the weights of all the sheep. The lamb-
ing takes place in April-May, and a very satisfactory per-
centage of lambs is marked each year.
All ewes in the flock are studs and used for breeding,
and their covering is a wool of from 64’s to 70’s count.
Although in some seasons a finer run is produced the
above represents the average quality throughout the bulk
of the whole clip, and the owner is satisfied that this
quality is the most suitable for the country, the sheep,
and the buyers who use Eurambeen flock or stud rams.
'I he wool is beautifully grown, and its popularity with
spinners in other parts of the world is reflected at the
Geelong sales, where in 1927 the clip was sold at an
average price of 26d. per lb. all round. The X sup.
lambs in that year realised sld. per lb., the bulk of the
lambs wool making 44d. The fleece lines sold at prices
varying around 33d., 313 d., &c., and this indicates
EURAM B E E N, VIC TOR IA


the excellence to which the sheep have been raised. The
figures for the 1928 clip were as follows:—Lambs, up to
33d. per lb.; fleece lines, up to 27j,d. per lb.; whilst the
average price for the clip was 22 l-10d. per lb.
Spout washing of wool was carried on at Eurambeen
for many years, and formed an interesting comparison to
the methods of preparing the clip for market in these
advanced days.
The Eurambeen stud, which is registered as Flock
No. 236 in Volume 7 of the Register of Stud Merino
Flocks of Australia, dates back to the early history of
breeding in Tasmania, for the Campbells drew the sheep
with which they crossed to the mainland from the best
stock to be found in that colony in 1839. The descen-
dants of the sheep were improved, and enhanced further
in type and robustness by Messrs. G. and F. Beggs, who
laid down their objectives and adhered to them rigidly.
MRS. THEODORE BEGGS
The rams used were obtained from leading studs, such as
Ercildoune, Jellalabad, Larra, and Wooriwyrite. In
1878 a stud was formed for the purpose of breeding rams
for sale, and with this the present owner has been as-
sociated all his life. The principal outside rams intro-
duced since the stud’s formation were from James Gibson
(Bellevue) and William Gibson (of Scone), two of the
THE HON. THEODORE BEGGS
best Tasmanian studs, in 1883, and the result was most
successful.
For 35 years the Eurambeen stud has been bred pure
absolutely by selection from within itself right down to
the present day.
The portion of the stud retained by Mr. Theodore
Beggs in 1913 has been moulded to his own ideals, the
classing, mating, culling and general care of the stud
having been bis direct personal responsibility, and his
methods stamp him as a born sheepman, with inherent
discernment for quality in a sheep. As already indicated,
no change of blood has been necessary for 35 years to
keep up the stamina and fertility of the sheep on Euram-
been, which have a splendid frame, plain bodies, with
just sufficient good folds on the neck, which the owner
likes to see, strong constitutions, and an even covering of
long, bright, dense wool, full of character, and display-
EURAM B E E N. VICT 0 R I A


ing beautiful crimp from the base to the tip of the staple.
Allowing nothing to be mated that does not conform to
high standards, the skilful selection of breeders is as es-
sential as the fixation and maintenance of type, whilst it
is imperative to eliminate the undesirable traits in both
male and female, and retain only those characteristics that
are desired. In the hands of experienced studmasters
such as the present owner of Eurambeen, a high degree of
all-round excellence is but a matter of time.
The sires in use in the stud at present receive no pam-
pering, nor has more than the minimum of artificial
feeding ever been countenanced. The rams have proved
themselves to be prepotent to the extent of imparting their
qualities to their progeny with unfailing certainty, and
this is borne out by the young stock turning out true
to type, and similarly passing on their qualities to the
flocks to which they are introduced. If the Eurambeen
stock have one feature more in evidence than another
it is that their covering runs true to all the points, and,
moreover, has a heavy scouring yield.
About 700 rams are turned off the property for sale
every year, and there are excellent facilities for despatch-
ing them to various parts, for the Adelaide railway
(Trans, line) supplies a siding at Middle Creek, three
miles away, hence orders can be filled from time to time
with ease. Most of the rams, however, go to local flocks
and to Tasmania, whilst several consignments have been
made to New South Wales and New Zealand, and even
in the past to Kenya Colony.
Mr. Beggs does not show his sheep, hut a steady in-
crease in the demand for the sale rams, and the satisfac-
tory reports that come in from the buyers year by year
are sufficient testimony to their quality.
The cattle at Eurambeen are represented by a herd of
Red Poll milkers, and altogether there are about 100
head on the property at present.
Mr. Theodore Beggs was born at Geelong in 1859,
and is the second son of the late Mr. Francis Beggs, who,
with his wife, sister, and brother George, left Ireland
in 1849 and settled at Gnarkeet Station, near Lismore,
Victoria. The eldest son was born in Geelong in 1850.
After nine years the family moved to Geelong, and rented
Dr. Stodard’s house, moving to Eurambeen in 1860. The
late Mrs. Francis Beggs died in 1914. In 1918 Mr.
Beggs married Agnes Jane, born 1893, a daughter of
Robert Seymour Walpole, of Melbourne, and the family
consists of four daughters.
In 1910 Mr. Beggs was elected to the Upper House
in the Victorian Parliament, and, after 18 years of useful
political life, retired in June 1928.
VIEW FROM THE HOMESTEAD LOOKING NORTH TO MT. COLE
EURAMfI E E N, VICT O R I A


BULN GHERIN, BEAUFORT, VICTORIA
The Property of Robert G. Beggs, Esq.
BULN GHERIN, comprising 8640 acres freehold,
and situated 9 miles from the important town of
Beaufort, in the Western District of Victoria, is
a property that has been “made” by its owner, Mr.
Robert G. Beggs, only within the past nine years, before
which time, in 1920, it formed part of Mr. Philip Rus-
covered with natural grasses. A site was chosen for the
homestead upon an elevation at the side of a large winter
lake, looking out over a pleasing panorama of open coun-
try, and the home built in accordance with the latest
improvements in both architectural design and interior
decoration on the bungalow principle. Of reinforced
BULN GHERIN HOMESTEAD
sell’s Mawallok Station. The latter was, and is still,
one of the best improved Merino wool growing properties
in the district, and consequently the early history of Buln
Gherin is that of Mawallok, which was taken up by
Messrs. Steel and Black in 1839, and sold to the late Mr.
Alexander Russell in 1846.
The part of Mawallok purchased by Mr. Robert Beggs
in 1920 comprised a good deal of volcanic stony rises,
besides a large area of plains and hilly country, well
concrete, large and artistic, and with a red tiled roof, the
Buln Gherin homestead is complete with its own electric
lighting and power plant, septic sewerage system, &c.
Hot and cold water is laid on to all bedrooms and three
bathrooms, and roomy and well-fitted servants’ quarters
are in a detached building. Large cupboards of nicely-
grained wood are built in from floor to ceiling in all
bedrooms and wherever else needed, such as linen and
broom cupboards, &c. Further, there are ideal culinary


BULN GHERIN TWO-YEAR-OLD SALE RAMS
appointments and all amenities that give to the well-
appointed country home the advantages of a city residence.
A striking feature is the native hardwood, a beautifully
grained timber, known in the trade as mountain ash, and
which is used for all inside woodwork.
An ample supply of water comes from a huge concrete
underground tank for household use, and from bore and
mill for the gardens; when time allows full growth of the
latter, also the lawns, hedges and ornamental trees which
the owner and his wife have laid out, it will be one of
the show places of the district. The telephone is con-
nected to the local exchange, the number being 43 I,
Beaufort.
An extensive vegetable garden is near by, also a first-
rate cement tennis court, whilst at convenient locations
are the station buildings and woolshed, the latter having
stands for six blade shearers.
Mr. Beggs has spared no expense in providing the best
class of improvements to the property, and having a
clean sheet, as it were, to work upon, had the advantage
of being able to erect everything on modern lines.
-The run is subdivided into 23 paddocks, each of which is
watered thoroughly by means of sub-artesian bores, mostly
of a depth of 60 to 80 ft. There is one bore of 200 ft.,
and with this exception, it being slightly brackish, the
underground supply is quite fresh, and excellent for the
sheep and gardens. The dividing range a few miles to
the north has an influence on the rainfall, which averages
about 20 in. per year, the extremes since the present owner
came to the property being from 17 to 38 in. in a year.
In 1928 the fall was 22.11 in., 28 points falling in the
month of August, as against an average for that month
of 4 in., and 244 points fell in September. It may be a
little on the dry side for the best results to be obtained
BULN GHERIN SHOW RAMS, YEARS OLD
II uL A r GIIER I N. VICT() R I A


A MOB OF TWO-YEAR-OLD MERINO EWES, UNCLASSED
BULN GUERIN STUD EWES AND LAMBS
BU L N G lIE R IN, VIC T O RIA


THE BULN GHERIN
DRAWING ROOM
BU L N G lIE R IN, VI CTO R I A


VIEW LOOKING EAST FROM THE HOMESTEAD VERANDAH
from subterranean clover, nevertheless the owner, who
is a firm believer in the benefits of pasture improve-
ment, and the value of this legume in particular, has
supered and sown down a number of paddocks with it
with great success, the seed being relished by the stock
after the clover browns off with the approach of summer.
The cost of preparing the ground and putting in the seed
is about 11s. per acre, which is more than justified by the
return.
The motor is used for all station work, this means of
power and transport being the most economic, as the
saving in time alone compared with horses offsets the
cost, for whereas a man with a team of horses would take
a day to go to Beaufort, several trips can be done in the
one day with the motor truck. When taking delivery
of superphosphates, for instance, as many as seven loads
were brought from the railway to the property the same
day.
Lambing takes place in April/May, and a good per-
centage of marked lambs has been obtained so far, the
ewes being of a type noted for their fecundity. They are
of very high quality, and of good Merino type, being
fairly large in the frame, symmetrical to a degree, and of
sound, robust constitution. In breeding them up to his
own ideals Mr. Beggs has displayed a masterly under-
standing of the Merino and its adaptability. The sheep
are of Eurambeen blood, and the country at Buln Gherin
is similar to that upon which the famous Eurambeen
flocks have been bred for the past fifty years by mem-
bers of the Beggs family, hence the sheep classed, culled,
and bred by Mr. Robert Beggs retain the features
of this well-known strain, in addition to acquiring
new characteristics which the owner may embody in
them.
The flock numbers about 9000 head, and is shorn some-
where about the middle of September. Ranging in quality
from 74 s to 64 s count, the wool is typical of the fine
Western District Merino type, and makes up a clip
that has become known already to manufacturers and
buyers as one of the best brands, commanding active com-
BU LN GIIE R I A r , VI CT O RIA


BULN GHERIN HAS A MODERN
HOMESTEAD AND IS FITTED AND
FURNISHED WITH EVERY COMFORT
BULN GUERIN, VICTORIA


petition at the annual Geelong sales.
At the sales held on 21st November, 1928, this clip
realised 27fd. per lb. for the ex sup. com. lines, and
27Jd. for the sup. com. lots, which figures were about sd.
per lb. below the returns for the previous year, owing to
a fall in the market and the wool being much heavier in
condition on account of the season. Lambs’ wool at the
1928 sales brought 32d. per lb., and for the whole clip
the wool returned the satisfactory average price of about
2s. per lb.
'l'he fleece wool, which opens up beautifully on the
sheep, and handles no less attractively, is a very stylish
type, well grown, long in the staple, showing a well-
serrated crimp full of character and breeding, whilst the
colour and tip leave nothing to be desired. Good weights
are cut regularly 1 , the rams in 1928 yielding 19/20 lbs. per
head and the ewes in the vicinity of 10 lbs. The sheep
are well and evenly covered on the points, and this
trueness of covering is one of the most important features
THE KITCHEN AT BULN
GHERIN, SHOWING
ALCOVE AND STOREROOM
of the whole flock.
In the stud, which is Flock No. 261 in Vol. 7 of the
Register of Stud Merino Flocks of Australia, there are
approximately 1000 breeding ewes, the pedigrees of which
are kept carefully to obtain the best results when select-
ing the sires for mating. This stud flock was formed
for ram breeding in 1904 at Hopkins Hill Station, near
Chatsworth, when Mr. Beggs and his brothers purchased
that property, and was managed by Mr. Robert Beggs
until it passed into his possession upon the dissolution of
the partnership interests in 1913. The foundation of
the flock comprised 673 stud ewes selected from 2594
Eurambeen stud ewes, and a number of stud rams also
from Eurambeen, and when Hopkins Hill was sold to
Mr. Neil Calvert in 1920 the stud was transferred to
Buln Gherin. In 1922 a further draft of 426 stud ewes
was purchased from Eurambeen, and with the exception
of one ram bought from James Sloane and Son, of Mul-
wala, on the River Murray, N.S.W., in 1927, no outside
nU LN GII ERIN , VI C T ORIA


blood of any kind lias been introduced, the sheep re-
maining pure to the Eurambeen breeding. The owner is
experimenting with the Mulwala ram, and believes that it
will be a successful outcross.
The stud flock therefore goes back in a straight line to
the formation of the Eurambeen stud in 1878. The sue-
SUN PORCH ON
THE WEST SIDE
OF THE HOUSE
cessive generations of purebred sheep which have been de-
veloped to the one definite policy have resulted in the
Buln Ghe rin stud Merinos, as well as the general flock,
being of almost perfect uniformity, and this is noticeable
at once on seeing a mob of the sheep in any of the pad-
docks to-day.
THE TENNIS COURT
nU L N GH ERIN, VI CT O RIA


MR. R. BALCOMBE BEGGS
MR. RALPH BEGGS
MR. ROBERT G. BEGGS
MR. ARTHUR R. BEGGS
MR. GEORGE BEGGS
P> UL N GH ERI N, VI CTO R / A


Other outstanding characteristics of the sheep, with-
out particularising, are their plain bodies with good
neck folds, open soft faces, wide nostrils and strong
frames. That the annual drafts of sale rams have car-
ried these qualities into their new surroundings, and have
improved the covering of the flocks to which they have
been introduced, is borne out amply by progress reports
from the buyers. Sales are mostly within the State of
Victoria, and most of the flockmasters who use the Buln
Gherin rams have been on the books for many years
prior to the stud coming to its present headquarters. Mr.
Beggs breeds about 200 rams for sale every year, and
these in fact are all that are left after they have been
culled and a few kept for home use. Old or new buyers
are always welcome at the property, which is easy to
locate, for the name is on the gate, and the mile long
drive turns in off the Skipton road to the right coming
from Beaufort. All visitors in fact are made welcome
in true Australian fashion, and they will find much to in-
terest them at Buln Gherin.
There is a milking herd of Red Poll cattle on the
place, hut otherwise no cattle are run, and the efforts of
the management are focussed wholly on the care of the
sheep.
In 1924 Mr. Beggs purchased Niawanda Station, near
Buln Gherin, and in 1928 handed this property over to
two of his sons, Arthur and Ralph. They work it in-
dependently of Buln Gherin, whilst also assisting their
father in the management of the latter place. Mr.
Arthur Beggs, who has been making a close study of the
scientific breeding of sheep and the improvement of pas-
tures, devotes a great deal of his time to research work
at Niawanda, under Professor T. Brailsford Robertson,
for the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, with
particular regard to the effect of environment and natural
pastures on the growth of wool and sheep. For some
time he has maintained a special flock of about 100 head,
which were started off as lambs, for the purposes
of observation. They are weighed regularly, and
are not fed except on natural pastures, and every three
months their wool is stained so that each stage of growth
can be measured and analysed. The object of this re-
WOOL SHED AND
SHEARERS' QUARTERS
AT BULN GHERIN
B ULN G lIE RI N, VICTORIA


A DISTANT VIEW OF THE
HOMESTEAD FROM
ACROSS THE LAKE
BU L N GII E BIN. VI CTO R IA


A FINE OLD GUM TREE
IN THE BULN GHERIN
HOME PADDOCK
search is to enable a close study to he made of Merino
sheep and to facilitate taking full advantage of present
day methods of sheep husbandry in effecting improvements
wherever practicable. This goes hand in hand with
careful feeding down of pastures and their cultivation.
In this respect the sons are like their father, who through-
out his career as a Merino sheep man and stud breeder
has always had the welfare and improvement of the breed
at heart.
The second surviving son of the late Mr. Francis
Beggs, the owner of Buln Gherin was born at his father’s
property, Eurambeen, in 1861, and was educated pri-
vately. His whole life has been associated with the
family’s interest in wool production and ram breeding,
and it is natural that he and his brothers, Mr. Hugh N.
Beggs, of Nareeb Nareeb, and the Hon. Theodore Beggs,
of Eurambeen, should have become experts in their busi-
ness, and recognised authorities and leaders in the wool
industry of Victoria.
In 1882 Mr. R. G. Beggs married Maria Balcombe, to
whom there was one son, R. Balcombe Beggs, now of
Smythesdale, Deniliquin, N.S.W. In 1905 he again mar-
ried, his wife being a daughter of the late Colonel P.
R. Ricardo, then Commandant of the Australian Mili-
tary Forces, and who was killed whilst hunting in 1906
There are three sons and two daughters in the family,
the third son’s name being George, after his grand uncle,
with whom the late Mr. Francis Beggs was associated in
the early history of Eurambeen. Mr. R. G. Beggs is
a whole-hearted worker for the progress of the district
in which he lives, and his wife also takes a very keen
interest in the advancement of the interests of the woman
on the land, being connected with the Country Women’s
Association, which, having linked up with the local In-
stitute, is doing great work in fostering the progress of
country centres.
BU L N GIIER I N, VICT O R I A


NAREEB NAREEB, GLENTHOMPSON, VICTORIA
The Property of Hugh N. Beggs, Esq.
NAREEB NAREEB Station and Merino stud are
situated in the Western District of Victoria
about 160 miles from Melbourne, and 9 miles
north of the town of Caramut, the postal address of the
station being Glenthompson, 14 miles to the north.
Roughly speaking, Nareeb Nareeb lies at the centre of
the base of a triangle formed by Hamilton, 30 miles west,
Creek, a reliable fresh water stream which Hows through
most of the run, and altogether there is very little poor
grazing land, what little there is being to the north of
the plains, and even this is made use of by putting the
weaners on to it during the summer months.
It has been found from experience that this part of the
State is not suited for anything other than the purpose to
EXTRANCE PORCH ON THE NORTH-WEST SIDE OF THE HOMESTEAD
and the above-mentioned towns, and is therefore in a
convenient location. It comprises to-day an area of some
12,800 acres freehold.
The owner of the property and stud flock is Mr. Hugh
N. Beggs, one of the leading pastoralists of the State, who
came into possession of the place in 1913.
Loose basalt plains of an undulating nature form the
greater part of the country, but these are balanced with
«rae areas of rich loamy soil in the vicinity of Gray’s
which it is put, namely, Merino sheep breeding and wool
growing. In this avenue capable men have given the
world an example of what the country can do in the
way of fine Merino wool growing and stud breeding
and the owner of Nareeb Nareeb is in this respect one of
the pillars of the industry.
In 1836 Major Mitchell reached to within 9 miles of
this country, but it was taken up by W. P. Scott on be-
half of Scott, Gray and Marr as part of Green Hill


Creek run in 1839. Charles Gray
arrived at the run a feu- months
later, and made his first camp by the
creek near where the Nareeb Nareeb
homestead now stands, in September
1840. This somewhat historic spot
is marked by an obelisk bearing an
appropriate inscription. Scott drop-
ped out of the partnership in 1845,
and in 1849 Gray and Marr sub-
divided, the former naming his por-
tion Nareeb Nareeb, where he even-
tually established a Merino stud
from which rams were sold for as
much as 150 guineas per head. Thus
Nareeb Nareeb has been the centre
of profitable sheep breeding for a
great number of years.
In the days when the whole country
was new the creek referred to was a
series of live ti-tree swamps, but as
they were drained and the scrub cut down some excellent
country with a good natural water supply was thrown
open, and has been the heart of the ever since.
Nareeb Nareeb, the original and the present name, was
officially altered in the early dat ? s to Nareb Nareb, and
frequently Narrab Narrab, and is the native mean-
ing for the Long-billed Cockatoo (Corella), flocks of
thousands of which screamed and flew about the locality.
Gray’s “depasturing license” got into the hands of
Flower, Lydiard and Co. in 1857, and remained in their
THE GARDEN ON THE EASTERN SIDE OF THE HOMESTEAD
A CORNER OF THE LILY LAKE
name till the late sixties. Subsequently the property
was acquired by a Mr. Simmons, who lived there
for about twenty years before disposing of it to
Mr. George Maslin in 1905. In 1909 Messrs. Beggs
Bros, purchased Nareeb Nareeb, and when this partner-
ship ceased in 1913 the present area became the property
of the youngest of the brothers, Mr. Hugh N. Beggs. He
disposed of the sheep, and stocked up afresh from the
flocks of Eurambeen, the family estate near Beaufort, Vic.,
and from these sheep the existing stud at Nareeb Nareeb
has been developed into one of the
leading fine wool flocks in the State,
both as regards size and excellence of
breeding, as well as the quality of
wool grown. Not only as the result of
supplying a high-class type of ram for
sale annually, but also through the
meritorious performances of the stud
at the principal sheep shows of Vic-
toria, a great name has been built up
by the owner as a breeder.
For the welfare of the flock gener-
ally, and in particular for the main-
tenance of the stud, Mr. Beggs ha>
improved the property very exten-
sively. It is subdivided to-day into
forty-five paddocks, well fenced and
watered, the latter supply coming
from surface excavations with wind-
mills, sub-artesian bores of a depth of
about 100 ft., some slightly brackish
NAR E E B NARE E B, VI CTORI A


NAREEB NAREEB BRED STUD SHOW RAMS, WHICH GAINED TWO FIRSTS AND ONE SECOND PRIZE AT
THE MELBOURNE SHEEP SHOW, 1929
NAREEB NAREEB BRED STUD SHOW EWES, INCLUDING THE CHAMPION FINE WOOL MERINO EWE AT THE
MELBOURNE SHEEP SHOW, 1929 (ON THE RIGHT), ALSO SECOND PRIZE FOUR-TOOTH EWE
MERINO STUD RAMS OF THE TYPE BRED IN THE NAREEB NAREEB STUD FLOCK,
NAR E E B NARE E B, VICTORIA


water springs, and Gray’s Creek.
There is never any shortage, and
the water is mostly nice and
sweet, although out on the tim-
ber it is mineralised to a certain
extent, but good for the stock
nevertheless.
A well-spread rainfall averages
23 to 24 in. per annum, but for
some years this has been ir-
regular, as the following particu-
lars will show:—l924, 17.6 in.;
1925, 24 in.; 1926, 20.46 in.;
1927, 15.72 in.; 1928, 22.97 in.,
and this has taken the district
through a period bordering on
drought. Climatic conditions
range from severe cold winters
to a long dry summer, and as the
stock depend on natural pas-
tures of grasses indigenous to the
district, and receive no pam-
pering whatsoever, the stoutest
of constitutions are possessed by all the sheep. Of late
years eight paddocks have been sown down with sub-
terranean clover with satisfactory results, oats and wheat
have been cultivated for home consumption under the
latest methods, whilst
the protecting clumps of
trees seen around the
paddocks to-day give the
sheep a measure of
shelter that was not pos-
sible years ago. Besides
the usefulness of these
plantations, which are
being extended from
time to time, they add
an attractive note to the
landscape. Otherwise
there is no timber of
any value on the pro-
perty out from the
homestead. Fifty years
ago sheoak, white gums
and red gums grew
rather densely on the
loamy portions of the
run, and honeysuckle
and blackwood on the
plains, but practically
the whole of this natural
A WEALTH OF BLOOM
CHAMPION FINE WOOL MERINO EWE AT MELBOURNE SHEEP
SHOW, 1929, BRED AT NAREEB NAREEB
timber, excepting the red gum,
long since has died out, and all
that remains now is a scattered
rearguard of the lastnamed.
The Nareeb Nareeb home-
stead is prettily situated amongst
gardens and ornamental trees.
It is constructed of wood and
concrete, and is furnished and
equipped most comfortably. One
of its many features is a Lam-
bertiana hedge, about 25 ft. high,
and over 12 ft. thick, the trees
being very old and very close to-
gether. This unique palisade,
resembling a high solid wall,
runs in semi-circle fashion
around an enclosure behind the
homestead, and which contains
the engine house and electric
plant. Other features are a
winding drive through a beauti-
ful miniature park, as well as
an asphalt tennis court, whilst from the home fine
views of the Grampians and Mt. Abrupt at Dunkeld are
obtained.
The neat and orderly outbuildings are built mostly of
stone, and their solid
construction is a monu-
ment to old-time work-
manship.
The manager’s cot-
tage, overseer’s dwell-
ing, engine room and
chaff house, vermin-
proof hayricks, silo for
grain, garages, stores
and all the rest of the
appointments common to
a first-class stud sheep
property reflect credit on
the management, especi-
ally the stone woolshed,
which contains eight
stands, the shearing be-
ing done by hand, com-
mencing with the stud
rams about the first of
September each year,
followed by the general
run starting about the
middle of the month.
NAR E E B NARE E B, VICT 0 R I A


STUD MERINO EWES AND LAMBS
-1 here used to be a second woolshed out on the
plains, a spacious stone building with a great system
of yards, reservoir, &c., but a few years ago it was
burned out completely, the fire being the work of an
escaped lunatic.
About 14,000 sheep and lambs are shorn annually,
which represents a carrying capacity of over a sheep to
the acre, this being considered the maximum that can be
held with safety in an average year.
The lambing takes place at Nareeb Nareeb in April
an d M ay, with a few stud lambs coming along in March,
and invariably the ewes return a high percentage of na-
A VIEW ACROSS THE HOME PADDOCKS FROM THE HOUSE
NAR K E B NARE E B, VICT O R IA


A DRAFT OF SALE RAMS BRED AT NAREEB NAREEB
A RESTFUL SCENE ON THE ESTATE
NAR E E B NARE E B, VIC T ORIA


MR. H. N. BEGGS, HIS
SON AND DAUGHTER
AT THE NAREEB
NAREEB HOMESTEAD
A VIEW OVER THE STATION BUILDINGS FROM THE HOUSE
NAR E E B NARE E B, VI C TORI A


A GENERAL VIEW OF THE NAREEB NAREEB HOMESTEAD
tural increase in both Hock and stud.
As already mentioned the sheep are based on pure
Eurambeen blood, and in the case of the general flock its
high standard is kept up with rams drawn from the stud,
and by culling, classing and mating with a strict eye to
uniformity of both frame and fleece. Outstanding in
their covering of fine wool are the top and underline of
the sheep, which on close inspection reveal even quality at
all points. The fleece “opens like a book,” to borrow a
coined phrase, showing the best of character and breed-
ing from the healthy looking skin to the well-formed tip.
The owner does not go in for a superfine wool, but con-
centrates on the perpetuation of a quality running to about
70’s count, this being best suited to the country. The
wool has a reputation for being well grown, and is bright,
long in the staple, has an elasticity that only nice crimp
can give, and is beautifully soft. It is sold at the Geelong
sales, and realises satisfactory prices always. As high as
5 per lb. has been reached with top lines in the clip,
which includes invariably a big proportion of fleeces,
while the average return per annum is in the region of
2s. 3d. per lb. Notwithstanding that this is a satisfac-
A DRAFT OF 4-TOOTH SALE RAMS READY FOR DESPATCH
NAREEB NAREEB, VICTORIA


A PLEASANT WALK
IN THE GARDEN
THE VIEW ACROSS
THE GARDEN AND
HOME PADDOCKS
FROM THE HOME-
STEAD VERANDAH
NAREEB NAREEB, VICTORIA


tory price from an average point of view, the top
price in the 1928 clip being Mr. Beggs is one
of the many stud breeders and growers of fine wool
who are convinced that buyers are not paying prices for
fine wool sufficient to warrant the breeding of sheep or
the development of flocks bearing a fine to superfine
quality wool. Ihe following top prices have been se-
cured by the Nareeb Nareeb clips during the past few
years:—l923,
30H; 1927, 31d.; 1928, per lb.
further drafts of ewes from Eurambeen, and these were
retained when the present owner acquired the property
for his own sole use in 1913. The breeding records dis-
close that the sheep on Eurambeen were bred for about
fifteen years by the Campbells, and when Messrs. George
and Francis Beggs became associated in the ownership
of the property in 1860 they continued to develop the
strain with the assistance of stud rams procured from
Ercildoune, Larra, Jellalabad, Wooriwyrite, and other
leading Victorian flocks of the day, selecting a number
LOOKING NORTH FROM THE HOMESTEAD GARDEN
The history of the Nareeb Nareeb Merino sheep is
identical with the establishment of the stud flocks at
Eurambeen, which, according to Vol. 7 of the Register of
Stud Merino Flocks of Australia, dates back to a founda-
tion in 1839. The stud under review is registered as
Flock No. 246, the foundation being laid when in 1899
Mr. Hugh Beggs took over the management of the
family’s Swanwater property, near St. Arnaud, Vic., and
transferred a number of stud ewes and rams from Euram-
been. When Swanwater was sold in 1909 the sheep
were brought down to Nareeb Nareeb and increased by
of the resultant sheep in 1878 with which to form their
stud for ram breeding. A few high-class Tasmanian
rams were introduced in 1883, and from that year to the
year 1922 (with the exception of a Barunah Plains ram
purchased in 1894) the sheep at Nareeb Nareeb were not
influenced by a single drop of outside blood. It repre-
sented a long and successful record of in-and-in breeding,
and only after thirty-seven years was it deemed neces-
sary to send a few ewes to an outside ram to test whether
satisfactory improvements could be effected in covering
and bulk, with a view to increasing the weights.
NAREEB NAREEB. VICTORIA


1 he ram chosen was a sire purchased by Mr. John
Moffatt from Uardry (N.S.W.) for 310 guineas, and
from the progeny only one ram lamb was retained, the
others being discarded. 1 his ram was used in the Nareeb
Nareeb stud in 1922, and proved a success, as well as
winning the championship in his class at the Ballarat
and have bulky bodies, and have proved to be a most
useful type of sheep.
Mr. lleggs, whose knowledge of the Merino has
evolved from an inherent understanding of them through
a wide field of experience amongst the sheep themselves,
and who has earned the name of a practical and efficient
MR. HUGH N. BEGGS
Show in the next year, and other important prizes later.
His progeny also did well in competition with other
leading studs.
In the stud flock at Nareeb Nareeb to-day, 1929, there
are 1400 breeding ewes of a standard and pedigree that
Avould be difficult to excel. They are strong in the frames
sheepman, lays stress upon the fact that success in breed-
ing depends upon patience and skill, and when a definite
type has been fixed, holding that type with an eye to
steady improvement by mating prepotent sires with the
highest quality ewes. In pursuing these ideals the owner
has aimed to perpetuate a type to accord with the climate
NAR E E B NARE E B, VIC TOR I A


and environment at Nareeb Nareeb, and to
produce a saleable, useful ram from which
flockmasters will derive the utmost bene-
fit. About 400 of these are disposed of
annually about the district or to Gippsland,
buyers from the latter centre usually com-
ing to the property to make their selections
in the months of January and February.
These and other buyers are met at the
railway at Glenthompson, and conducted
to the property, where they are made wel-
come whether they take any rams or not,
but rarely anyone leaves without a prac-
tical appreciation of the quality of the
sheep inspected. As a rule the prices vary
tant fine wool shows in the Commonwealth.
The present owner of Nareeb Nareeb is
the youngest of four sons of the late Mr.
Francis Beggs, and was born at Euram-
been in 1863. He attended Wesley Col-
lege, and afterwards spent three years with
the Bank of Victoria to gain an insight
into finance, from there going to his
father’s station, Eurambeen, to undergo a
training in pastoral pursuits. His wife
was a daughter of the late Mr. Palmer,
for many years Superintendent of Police
in the early days of the State, and there
was a family of four sons and one
daughter, one, Hugh Carleton, being lost
HISTORICAL MONUMENT TO THE LATE CHARLES GRAY, ONE OF THE ORIGINAL HOLDERS OF NAREEB NAREEB
STATION (THEN PART OF GREEN HILL CREEK RUN), ON THE SITE OF HIS FIRST CAMP IN 1840
from 5 to 10 guineas per head for the flock rams,
with the rates correspondingly higher for studs and
selected studs. The actual number of rams disposed of
in 1928 was 411, for which an average of £9 6s. Bd. per
head was obtained.
Following are particulars of Nareeb Nareeb rams sold
annually since 1923;—1923, 433 averaged £7 11s. 2d.;
1924, 387 averaged £8 Os. 7d.; 1925, 412 averaged £8
19s. 3d.; 1926, 411 averaged £9 10s. 2d.; 1927, 388
averaged £8 2s. 9d.; 1928, 411 averaged £9 6s. Bd.
In the various shows the Nareeb Nareeb Merinos have
shown their superiority time and time again, and during
the first eight years they were exhibited, i.e., from 1916
to 1924, they annexed 29 championships and five grand
championships at the leading fine wool sheep gatherings,
such as Ballarat, Hamilton and Melbourne. From then on
the sheep sent in from this stud have gained further repu-
tation by winning numerous prizes and champion honours,
particularly at Ballarat, which is one of the most impor-
in childhood. Ihe eldest son, Norman, died on active
service in the war (1914-1918), another son, Theodore
G. Beggs, is the owner of St. Marnocks Station, near
Beaufort, while the youngest, Sandford Robert Beggs,
who has attained his majority, owns a property (Mar-
inga) near Willaura, and is assisting his father in the
administration of Nareeb Nareeb preparatory to a pas-
toral career which has for its objective the continuation
of this important stud along the lines at present followed
by his father. Mr. Hugh Norman Beggs was elected to
the presidency of the Australian Sheepbreeders’ Associa-
tion in 1924-1928, the latter being the fiftieth year of ac-
tivity of this body, which grew out of the old Vic-
torian Sheepbreeders’ Association formed in 1853. He is
also on the executive of the Graziers’ Association of
Victoria and chairman of the Hamilton branch, and
is also a shire councillor, besides being a strong factor in
other directions in the progress of the district in which
he resides and of the pastoral affairs of the State generally.
NAREEB NAREEB, VICTORIA


GOLF HILL, SHELFORO, VICTORIA
The Property of Mrs. J. Biddlecombe
OLF HILL, vi Inch derives its name from a pro-
Jf perty so called in Scotland, was originally taken
up in 1836, and has been in the family of the
late Mr. George Russell ever since. The present owner,
Mrs. Janet Biddlecombe, is the youngest surviving
daughter of the late Mr. George Russell.
Mr. Russell, who was born at Clunie, in the County of
Fife, Scotland, was one of the earliest colonists. He
sailed from Leith on the 19th July, 1830, in the ship
“Drumore,” and after a voyage lasting seven and a-half
months, by way of
the Cape of Good
Hope, Mauritius
and Swan River
(now Fremantle),
reached Hobart
Town, Tasmania,
at the end of
February, 1831.
After several
years spent gain-
ing experience on
country which he
rented near Both-
well, Mr. Russell
sailed for the
mainland from
Georgetown dur-
ing March, 1836,
in the schooner
“Hetty,” which ran aground between Schnapper Point
and Red Bluff in Port Phillip Bay, and eventually be-
came a total wreck. There were sheep on board, which
were taken off the vessel in boats; thence, in the shallower
water, on men’s backs to the shore.
During April, 1836, Mr. Russell, in company with
Mr. Kenneth Clarke, explored the country between the
rivers Leigh and Moorabool. They were the first
white men to explore the region now known as the Leigh
district. It was during this exploration of over 200
miles on foot that Mr. Russell chose the site of the pre-
sent homestead.
Golf Hill is 72 miles from Melbourne, and 26 miles
from Geelong; Bannockburn, on the Geelong-Ballarat
railway, is 12 miles distant, and the village and post-
town of Shelford is one mile from the homestead.
The total area to-day is 28,000 acres freehold, which
includes Fall Tree, 8400 acres owned by Mrs. Biddle-
combe’s husband, the late Commander John Biddlecombe,
R.A.N., who, until a short time before his death, which
occurred in April 1929, took an active part in the manage-
ment of both properties. The country is mostly open
plains, undulating,
and in places very
stony. This is
sound sheep coun-
try. There are
river flats with
frontage to the
Leigh River. Ow-
ing, however, to
the effects of flood
washaways, only
about 800 acres of
the fiats (protected
from flooding) are
suited for cultiva-
tion and the grow-
ing of lucerne.
Most of the suit-
able area in river
flats is under
lucerne, which, in addition to yielding on the average
about four cuts per annum, is used for feeding off sheep
and cattle, mostly the latter.
The balance of the land consists of light country tim-
bered with red gum, manna gum and sheoak.
The homestead, a two storied bluestone structure with
part of the original wooden building attached, was com-
pleted in 1877. It is placed amidst charming surround-
ings at the head of the Leigh Valley, and is approached
by a drive which winds along the banks of a lagoon
bordered with willows, the originals of which were
brought from St. Helena. The drive, after passing
THE GOLF HILL HOMESTEAD FROM THE ROCK GARDEN


HEREFORD STUD COWS AND CALVES
through paddocks of lucerne studded here and there with
fine specimens of oaks, elms and red gums, eventually
leads up to the homestead through a large and well laid-
out garden, with terraced lawns. The garden contains
a wide selection of flowers and trees, amongst the latter
an old red gum under which the late Mr. George Rus-
sell first made his camp in 1836.
Spread around and adjacent to the homestead are the
necessary outbuildings, including men’s quarters and hut,
garage, power house, stables for both horses and cattle,
and six cottages for the married men. The construction
of the principal outbuildings is of bluestone and rein-
forced concrete, and for thoroughness in detail and effi-
ciency, they have probably no superior in the State.
A very fine bluestone wool shed (18 stands), together
with bluestone hut and necessary shearers’ accommoda-
tion, &c., is situate about two miles from the homestead
and almost in the centre of the property. There are four
boundary riders’ cottages at various points on the run, all
of which, and the wool shed, are connected by telephone
with the homestead, which also has direct automatic tele-
phone communication with Geelong.
The property is free of rabbits, the whole of the boun-
daries being rabbit-proof fenced, with further netted
subdivision fences inside the boundary. In all, there are
23 miles of netted stone walls, 50 miles of netting, and
32 miles of wire fencing. There are 42 paddocks
watered by 16 sub-artesian bores, varying in depth from
20 ft. on the river flats to over 350 ft. on the stony
plains. In addition, there are 32 earth and concrete
tanks of large capacity, besides the Leigh River, which
runs through the property. Most of the bore water is
CONCRETE STALLS AND YARDS FOR THE STUD HEREFORDS
GO L F 111 LL, VI C TORI A


AN HISTORIC GUM TREE IN
THE GOLF HILL GARDEN
GOLF HILL, V 1 CTO R I A


brackish, but good stock water.
The main homestead supply comes from a reservoir,
which holds about 9,000,000 gallons, with a further re-
serve supply of about 5,000,000 gallons. In addition,
there are large underground rainwater tanks. The
rainfall averages 21 in. per annum. As an insurance
against drought, silos, which each hold 450 bags of oats,
are placed at convenient parts of the property.
GOLF HILL
HOUSE FROM
THE GARDEN
It is interesting here to note that in December, 1836,
Mr. Russell brought a number of sheep from Tasmania,
the brig “Henry” having been chartered for the purpose.
The sheep were landed at Point Henry. A full cargo
comprised about 700 sheep. After six trips, which took
from 8 to 9 days each, the sheep, totalling about 4000,
were safely landed at a cost of ss. a head. In November,
1837, the first Golf Hill sheep were washed and shorn.
Between five and six thousand grown sheep and lambs
produced about 60 bales of washed wool, which was
shipped from Geelong to Launceston, thence to Eng-
land.
To-day the sheep are all comebacks. Prior to 1923
the Hock consisted of crossbreds, when Lincoln and
Merino rams were used alternatively. On the Merino
side the rams were from the studs of Barunah, Cobran,
and Bungaree respectively, whilst previous to 1913 Lin-
coln rams were used from the studs of Messrs. Forsyth
and Baker.
In 1913 the late Commander Biddlecombe established
a Lincoln stud at Golf Hill, Flock No. 253, Vol. 6,
British Breeds Flock Book. The ewes and rams which
comprised the foundation of the stud were selected by
the late Mr. Geoffrey Ritchie, of Delatite, Mansfield,
GOLF HILL. VICTORIA


THE IDEAL CONDITIONS UNDER
WHICH THE GOLF HILL HERE-
FORDS ARE BRED AND REARED
GOLF HILL , VICTORIA


PROGENY OF THE
STUD BULL
ROYAL RINGER
QUALITY AND CONTENTMENT ON THE LUXURIANT FLATS BELOW THE HOMESTEAD
GOLF HILL, VICTORIA


THE SUCCESSFUL
STUD HEREFORD BULL,
ROYAL RINGER
GOLF HILL MARSHALL LASS 30TH, A HEIFER OF QUALITY AND FINISH
IST MELBOURNE ROYAL 1928, 2ND SYDNEY ROYAL 1929
GO L F HIL L, VICTORIA


whilst in England, from the registered docks of Messrs.
Dean and Sons, Heath House, Lincoln—three rams and
45 ewes (the ewes served by picked English rams), also
46 ewe lambs from the Executors of the late H. Dudding,
Great Grimsby, Lincoln. These sheep were imported
direct, size and bone being the chief consideration when
selection was made.
The Lincoln stud was maintained for eight years, dur-
ing which period fresh blood was at intervals introduced
from the studs of Messrs. Baker and Sons, E. A. Porter,
P. Christie, French and Sons, and Richardson. In 1922
wethers, 12.54 lbs.; 6-tooth ewes, 13.83 lbs.; 8-tooth
ewes, 14.25 lbs.; 5-year ewes, 12.05 lbs.
At the Geelong wool sales in November, 1928, the
Golf Hill wool sold up to 25Jd. per lb. for comeback
deece, and up to 22fd. for lambs. The average price
for the whole clip was 19Jd. per lb.
The Hereford Stud Herd
The first cattle on Golf Hill arrived there in Sep
temher 1837. These comprised 100 head, mostly cows
which had been overlanded from New South Wales by
THE DRIVE TO THE HOMESTEAD
the Lincoln stud of 200 males and 300 females was dis-
posed of.
Since 1923 Merino rams from Nareeb Nareeb stud
have been and are in use. To-day there is ample evidence
of the headway which has been made from the above-
mentioned foundation from pure blood on both sides, and
a definite type of dual purpose comeback suited to the
nature of the country has gradually been established, viz.,
of large frame and well covered with wool of medium
to fine quality. The surplus sheep are sold each year
by auction at the Half Way House Off Shears Sale.
Last year five-year-old comeback ewes made up to 295. Id.
The clip is taken off towards the end of September in
each year, and the wool is sold in Geelong. From
25,000 to 30,000 sheep and lambs are shorn annually.
For 1928 the Golf Hill comeback grown sheep cut
1 1.97 lbs., and lambs 3.70 lbs. net per head. Some 1928
Hock details are as follows:—Hoggets, 8.47 lbs.; 4-tooth
Mr. John Gardiner, and were purchased from him at
£lO a head.
During the year 1838, a fat bullock and a fat cow
killed weighed 1300 lbs. and 960 lbs. respectively. A
few years later the first large draft of cattle sold off Golf
Hill, about 600 head, were overlanded to Adelaide and
realised satisfactory prices.
It was not, however, until the early seventies that Mr.
Russell had got together a herd of Herefords. These
included a number of cows of the old “Ercildoune” strain.
A high-class herd has been gradually worked up by the
judicious selection of both males and females, and to-day
Mrs. Biddlecombe is to be congratulated on the very fine
Hereford stud which is maintained at Golf Hill.
The stud herd was properly established in 1906, when
a number of stud book heifers, purchased from the late
Mr. W. H. 5 elland, were added. A few years later,
Mrs. Biddlecombe acquired several of the choicest females
COL F 111 LL, VICTORIA


A PRETTY SCENE ON GOLF HILL
at the dispersal sale of the late Mr. Henry Beattie’s
Mount Arthur stud. These were by Figaro (imp.),
one of the best bulls ever introduced to Victoria.
In 1918 half a dozen specially selected heifers were
acquired from the late Mr. Frank Reynolds’ Tocal stud.
These were chiefly by Wonder (imp.), their dams tracing
back to the Fancy and Constance families.
Impressed with the prepotency of the Tocal strain,
M rs. Biddlecombe in 1920 purchased the bull Advocate
for 800 guineas. Advocate had just been awarded first
prize in a very strong calf class at the Sydney Royal
Show. By Broadwood Waterloo (imp.) out of Match-
less, by Wonder, Advocate was an aristocrat in his breed-
ing, and was considered by many good judges the best
young bull seen up to that time. Six picked Tocal heifers,
specially selected by Mr. Darcy Reynolds to mate with
Advocate, were purchased at the same time. These
heifers were mostly by Lord Palmerston and Wonder,
and were descendants of the Last Day, Fancy, and
M inerva families.
In 1925 the bull Tocal Tewkesbury was purchased at
auction for 600 guineas, following his being awarded
first prize in a very strong six months old and under
twelve months class at the Sydney Royal Show. With
Tocal Tewkesbury Mrs. Biddlecombe won the champion-
ship at both the 1925 and 1926 Melbourne Royal Shows.
The doyen of the Golf Hill stud to-day, however, is
Royal Ringer, who was bred by Mr. Percy Reynolds at
Hobartville, Richmond. Royal Ringer was acquired by
Mrs. Biddlecombe for 1050 guineas just after he had won
first prize and champion at the 1926 Sydney Royal Show
when only seventeen months old; he also secured the
championship at the 1927 Melbourne Royal Show. He is
by Eyton Meddler (imp.) out of Wakeful 2nd, and is
considered one of the best Herefords in Australia to-day.
The Golf Hill stud was further added to in 1927,
when at the dispersal sale of the Tocal stud Mrs. Biddle-
combe purchased six show females, considered the pick of
the herd.
The principal sire in use at Golf Hill to-day, as al-
ready indicated, is Royal Ringer. Tocal Tewkesbury
was also used until very recently, when he was sold to a
well-known Queensland breeder. Another bull, Tides-
man, selected and purchased in New Zealand, may prove
G 0 L F 111 LL. VI C TORI A


a very useful sire in due course.
I he sires which from time to time have been used in
the stud represent some of the best Hereford blood.
Included in the list are such bulls as Majestic 3rd,
Admiralty, Monogram, Sheepcote Gladiator (imp.),
1 ocal Gladiator, Myall Decoration, Freetown Com-
mander (imp.), and Beresford. The last-named hull,
purchased in New Zealand, was a son of Mansel Jack
Far (imp.), -whose sire was by Starlight, who also sired
Ringer. Ringer was sold in 1919 as a four-year-old for
the record price of £9450.
It was not until 1923 that Airs. Biddlecombe ventured
into competition in the show ring. Since then, at the
Stdney Royal and Melbourne Royal Shows, 5 champion-
ships, 7 reserve championships, 12 special, 31 first, 14
second and 5 third prizes have been annexed —a remark-
mentioned above were;—First and second—bull, three
years old; first and second—bull, two years old; first,
second and third—bull, one year old; third —cow, four
years old and over; first—heifer, three years old; first
and third—heifer, two years old; and first, second and
third—heifer, one year old.
At the show sales which followed, young bulls under
18 months made up to 250 guineas.
At the 1928 Sydney Royal Show nine animals ex-
hibited won eight prizes, viz.: —Third—bull, three years
and under; first—bull, eighteen months and under two
years (41 entries in class) ; first—heifer, two years and
under three years; third—heifer, eighteen months and
under two years; first—heifer, under 12 months; and
special and cup for best pair of bulls under two years.
At the show sales which followed seven of the above
GOLF HILL ROYAL
GUARD, BY ROYAL
RINGER, OUT OF
GOLF HILL LIVELY.
1ST IN CLASS AND
RESERVE CHAMPION
SYDNEY ROYAL
SHOW, 1929
able performance, which has placed the Golf Hill Here-
fords right in the front rank.
Recent prizes won are worthy of mention. In 1927
four animals were sent to the Sydney Royal Show, and
first, second and third prizes were won, also a v.h.c.
The same year at the Melbourne Royal Show fourteen
entries were made in the various classes, and every one
secured a prize. The bull championship was won by
Royal Ringer, whilst Golf Hill Marshall Lass 24th was
reserve champion in females.
In addition, Mrs. Biddlecombe w T as eminently success-
ful in the group classes, scoring two firsts and a third.
The Frank Reynolds’ Memorial Trophy for the best pair
of Hereford bulls bred by exhibitor was annexed, also
the Job Smith prize for the most successful exhibitor in
this section. Prizes won at this show in addition to those
were sold at an average price of £l9O each, while the
bull Golf Hill Chieftain was sold for 575 guineas.
At the Melbourne Royal in 1928 ten animals were
entered. These won eight first, two second, and two
thud prizes, champion and reserve champion female, and
all the special prizes, whilst the winner of the male
championship, Golf Hill Chieftain, exhibited by the
Metropolitan Board of Works, was bred by Mrs. Biddle-
combe. Details of the awards are as follows, viz.:
1 nst bull, foui years and over; first—cow, four years
and over; first—cow, three years; first—heifer, two years;
first and third heifer, one year; and first, second and
third—bull, one year.
The female champion was Golf Hill Novelty 19th,
with Golf Hill Mannda female reserve champion, whilst
all the group classes were headed.
G 0 L /•' 111 LL. VICTO R IA


A GLIMPSE OF THE
TENNIS COURT
AT THE GOLF
HILL HOMESTEAD
A VIEW OF THE HOME
PADDOCKS LOOK-
IN G ACROSS THE
CROQUET LAWN
GOLF H ILL. VI CTO R I A


THE COMFORTABLE BILLIARD ROOM WITH ITS COLLECTION OF OLD WEAPONS
The team sent to the Sydney Royal, 1929, mostly by
Royal Ringer, were worthy representatives of the stud.
Eleven animals exhibited won eight prizes, viz.: —First
and second—bull, eighteen months and under two years;
first—bull, 6 months and under 12 months; third—heifer,
two years and under three years; second—heifer, eighteen
months and under two years; first—heifer, six months
and under twelve months; special and Australian Here-
ford Society’s Cup for best pair of bulls under two years;
Frank Reynolds Memorial Trophy for best pair of bulls
not exceeding twelve months. Golf Hill Royal Guard,
the bull placed first in the class eighteen months and
under two years, was also placed reserve champion.
At the show sales which followed eight of the above
were sold at an average price of £155 each, up to 400
guineas being obtained for Golf Hill Royal Guard.
The chief objectives of the Golf Hill herd have always
been type, quality and early maturity. This was ampdy
demonstrated at the 1927 Sydney Royal, when steers
entered for the £lOO prize gained second honours, after
giving away nearly nine months in age. At the Mel-
bourne Royal the same year in a similar class the herd
came out easy winners, notwithstanding that the repre-
sentatives conceded six months and more to several com-
petitors.
Although there is the last word in cattle sheds, con-
structed wholly of concrete, with concrete yards attached
and water laid on to every stall, practically all the herd
run out in the open. During the dry years from 1925
to 1927 inclusive, in addition to what they could pick
up for themselves, a ration of 7 lbs. of hay per day each
was fed out to the cattle. The condition of the cattle
at the end of this period was remarkably good, and
shows that they are possessed of a hardy constitution and
well able to fend for themselves.
In the stud to-day are eighty breeding cows, quality,
and not quantity, being the objective always.
By maintaining such a fine Hereford stud, in which no
expense has been spared, Mrs. Biddlecombe is doing
wonderful work so far as the future welfare of Aus-
tralia’s beef cattle industry is concerned. In this she
has been fortunate in having the practical advice of keen
and experienced Hereford breeders and judges who also
have the welfare of the cattle industry at heart.
G OLF 111 LL, V 1 C T ORIA


BARWONLEIGH, INVERLEIGH, VICTORIA
The Property of Mrs. A. M. Kelly
Barwonleigh station, the property of
Mrs. A. M. Kelly, is situated 21 miles due west
of Geelong, and 24 miles from Inverleigh (one
of the oldest townships in Victoria, and the postal address
of the station), the property deriving its name from the
fact that the run lies more or less in a wide bend of the
Barwon River, near its junction with the Leigh. Native
Creek runs into the Barwon at the apex of the bend.
The area of Barwonleigh, according to a re-survey
made in 1924, is 9785 acres freehold. It is devoted to
the three shiploads of sheep despatched, one was lost, and
a Mr. Murdie drowned whilst transhipping the stock to
the shore. Mr. Fisher made his head station near the
site of the present homestead. The V.D.L. Association
became the Derwent Company, and afterwards the Port
Phillip Association, and was a rival of the Clyde Com-
pany, which under Mr. George Russell took up country
along the Leigh River at Golf Hill, &c. To the south
of Barwonleigh in 1837 Captain Pollock occupied Mt.
Pollock, and the surrounding neighbours were Austin,
BARWONLEIGH HOMESTEAD
CLOCK GOLF IS LAID OUT ON THE EXTENSIVE LAWN
the production of a high quality fine Merino wool, and
for this purpose the run has been improved magnificently.
The close proximity to Melbourne, furthermore, and the
excellent roads throughout the district, add value to this
splendid holding as a country residence.
Barwonleigh forms part of the land taken up about
September 1836 by David Fisher on behalf of the Van
Diemen’s Land Association, which was created a year
earlier to exploit the possibilities of sheep farming upon
the new found grazing country “on the mainland.” Of
Murray and Lloyd, Learmonth and Watson, Dewing
and Barker. The two Learmonth Bros, landed their car-
goes of sheep from V.D.L. in April 1837. In that year
there was no country occupied further inland than about
30 miles from Geelong, owing to fear of the natives on
the part of settlers. A year later, however, when the
Learmonths moved their sheep north to Buninyong, pas-
toral settlement began to penetrate up the country steadily
and surely.
Barwonleigh was owned after the Derwent Company


WATER FOR THE BARWONLEIGH
GARDEN IS PUMPED FROM THE BAR-
WON RIVER, WHICH AT THIS POINT
RUNS AT THE BOTTOM OF THE GARDEN
n A RPV ON LEI GH, VICTORIA


STUD MERINO RAM NO. 74
BRED AT BARWONLEIGH
BA RWONLEIGH, VICTORIA


by Air. R. Cuthbertson Hope, a brother of the late
George Hope, of Darriwell, near Geelong, and later was
occupied by his son, the late Dr. 1 . C. Hope, whose wife
was one of the Golf Hill Russells. The late Dr. Hope
sold out to Mr. Lewis Robertson, one of the Struan
family Robertsons, and he in turn disposed of the run
to the McCrackens, from whom the late Dr. H. L. At-
kinson, of Bendigo, acquired it in 1897. The present
owner is his daughter. The size of the property then
was approximately 8000 acres freehold. In 1901 the
run was enlarged by the purchase of 16,726 acres free-
hold from the Trustees of the Estate of the late Thomas
Austin, of Barwon Park, the management of the whole
place having been entrusted to the late Air. A. F. Kelly,
son-in-law of Dr. Atkinson. To him entirely is due the
credit for the great and complete range of improvements
put on the property, for the late Mr. Kelly was a skilful,
far-sighted manager, the soundest of judgment marking
his career at Barwonleigh. His death occurred in
December I Q IS, at which time the capacity of the run
had been increased to over one sheep to the acre.
Under the will of Dr. Atkinson, who died in June
1915, a block of 7700 acres of the original Barwonleigh
section was transferred to his daughter, the wife of Mr.
A. F. Kelly, the balance being held in trust until 1918-19,
when it was cut up and sold. At this sale Mrs. Kelly
purchased about 2000 acres around and including Mt.
Pollock, thus making the present property compact and
easily worked.
After the late Air. Kelly’s death the property was
managed by Mr. George R. Murfitt, an experienced sheep
man, who had been in the employ of Air. Kelly since
August 1876. From 1918 to the end of 1922 Air. Her-
bert Austin, of Arrandoovong, near Hamilton, assumed
the management, Air. Murfitt returning in 1923 and
carrying on until his retirement at the age of over 70 in
Alarch 1928. Since then the property has been managed
by Mrs. Kelly’s son-in-law, Air. Reginald N. Campbell,
who commenced his pastoral career on Barwonleigh in
1922.
The class of country is chiefly volcanic stony plains,
beautifully grassed. On the western boundary, formed
THE NORTH-EAST CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD
BARW 0 N LEI G 11, VICTORIA


A FLOCK OF SIX-TOOTH MERINO WETHERS ON BARWONLEIGH
BARWONLEIGH STUD EWES AND LAMBS
BA R IVON LEI G 11, VICTORIA


MRS. KELLY'S DRAWING-
ROOM AT BARWONLEIGH
BARW ON LEI G 11, VI CTORI A


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE DRAW-
INGROOM, SHOWING THE EN-
TRANCE FROM THE LOUNGE,
A CORNER OF WHICH IS
SEEN IN THE LOWER PICTURE
BARIV ON LEI G 11, VICTORIA


LUCERNE FLATS ON THE BARWON
by the Inverleigh-Winchelsea road, there are a few sandy
patches, whilst around Alt. Pollock is perhaps the most
fertile part of the run, apart from the rich single and
double frontages to the river, which total about four
and a-half miles. On these flats lucerne is grown suc-
cessfully, the average yearly rainfall being 18 in.
The Geelong-Maroona railway cuts into the run here-
abouts, whilst the northern boundary is formed by the
main Geelong-Cressy-Lismore road.
I he homestead overlooks the river, and is typical of
the old single storey stone homes built in the early
dat r s, nestling in a prolific garden amidst high old trees
and w r ell cared-for foliage, and flanked by spacious lawns.
Grouped nearby are the main station buildings, includ-
ing the wool shed, built in 1901 by the late Mr. Kelly,
w ho made provision for 20 blade shearers. A few
months later he put in 14 stands of machines. In its de-
sign and in its efficiency it is one of the best wool sheds
throughout the district, and is always kept “up to the
mark.” I he whole of the improvements on Barwon-
leigh are maintained in proper order, this being one of
the outstanding principles that guided Mr. Kelly’s ad-
ministration, and a feature of the subsequent and present
management. This care of the property is noticeable at
once to visitors, and is characteristic of the attention be-
stowed upon the sheep.
1 here are twelve main paddocks, each with an abund-
ance of first class water, the sub-artesian bores having
a depth of about 150 ft. each. 1 hese, and several sur-
face tanks of an average capacity of 800 yards, in addi-
tion to the river frontages, where water is stored by
means of a serviceable weir, make the property indepen-
dent of rain water.
In place of the defunct native timber, plantations of
pinus insignis and sugar gums have been laid out, and
now in their matured state give a picturesque appearance
to the paddocks. Other improvements include w T ell made
silos for the storage of grain. Parts of the run yield
sound crops, while as much of the country as possible is
broken up and sown with new pastures.
The sheep are purebred Merinos and cut a beautiful
quality wool. When the run was purchased in 1897
without stock the late Dr. Atkinson gave carte blanche
to Mr. Kelly for the creation of a good flock. The
lattei exercised his judgment and bought his Merino
breeding ewes from the best recognised Merino flocks in
the Western District, his first purchase of rams being
from Barunah Plains.
BAR W 0 N LEI G 11, VICT O R I A


A FINE REACH
OF THE BARWON
A VIEW OF THE
LAWN, GARDEN
AND COUNTRY
BEYOND, FROM
THE VERANDAH
nARIV ON LEIGH, VICTORIA


THE LATE ALFRED
FETHERSTONHAUGH KELLY
No other ewes than those mentioned have been intro-
duced, so that the Barwonleigh flock has the advantage
of years of pure breeding. With the land bought in at the
1918 sale Mrs. Kelly
retained the wethers,
weaners and ewes
running on that part
of the property, and
purchased all the four-
tooth ewes from the
trustees.
In 1920 a stud flock
was formed by Mr.
A. McCallum and
has since been en-
tirely managed by him
—by selecting 50 of
the choicest of the
four and six tooth
ewes in the flock. A
Barunah stud ram
(No. 796) was
selected by him, and
this ram was the
principal sire in the
Barwonleigh stud un-
til in 1926 Mr. McCallum selected another Barunah
Plains ram, No. 224.
He has a magnificent even shape, typical of the fine
wool rams used at Barunah Plains, and
has proved a valuable sire. His wool
extends to all points in even fashion, is
very bright and full of character. As
a seven-year-old sheep in 1928 his fleece
weighed lbs.
The ram No. 796 was also very suc-
cessful as a sire, the last of his progeny
being a leading sire in the stud to-day.
He is known as No. 74, is beautifully
woolled, and cut 19 lbs. at the last shear-
ing (October 1928), the fleece being
notable for its long, soft, bright staple
and true quality. The principal sires
grow a wool running to about 64’s in
count, and the average fleece weights of
the two-tooth stud rams since 1923 have
been as follows:—13 lbs., 10 lbs., 10
lbs., 9 lbs., 13 lbs. A policy of in
and out breeding is practised from
two fine wool stud flocks, with sires
No. 224 and No. 74 heading the
MRS. A. M. KELLY'S DAUGHTER,
MRS. R. N. CAMPBELL
THE LATE
DR. H. L. ATKINSON
respective families. Both rams are members of the
“Prince” family, and in the opinion of Mr. McCallum,
an authority on the Merino, and for many years the
manager of the well-
known and long
established Mount
Hesse flocks, No. 224
is one of the best
covered rams he has
ever seen, while No.
74 has all the essen-
tial qualities of a sire.
Ihe stud ewes are
labelled, of good con-
formation, uniform,
and their wool ranges
from 64’s to 70's
quality. It would in-
deed be hard to find
a more uniform flock.
No rams that can
be used to advantage
in the flocks are dis-
posed of, hence the
sale of surplus rams
is small. Those that
are available, however, are bought readily by regular
customers for high prices. The classing of both stud
and flock is done by Mr. McCallum in July with
nARIVO N L EI GH, VIC TOR IA


ROSES AND WELL KEPT BORDERS ARE FEATURES
OF THE BARWONLEIGH GARDEN
heavy culling, and stud and general lambing takes place
each May and June. About 80 per cent, is the usual
average of lambs marked.
From the general flock, which numbers about 12,600
head, shorn each September-October, a useful manufac-
turing type of soft, fine, long stapled wool is produced,
which averages up to a 70’s spinning quality. It is
sound, true and shafty, and its value may be gauged from
the following prices paid at auction in Geelong for it,
namely:—l922, 38d.; 1923, 37Jd.; 1924, 50d.; 1925,
38d.; 1926, 3 Id.; 1927, 32d.; 1928, 26d. These are
satisfactory results and the natural outcome of conscien-
tious care in all branches of the business.
Personal
The late Dr. Atkinson was a well-known identity of
Bendigo, and had extensive pas-
toral interests, amongst the stations
owned by him being Ravenswood,
which he acquired from the Robert
Moffatt Estate, Auchmore, which
he bought from the Hon. Findlay
Campbell, and Terrick West,
which he purchased from Mr.
Younghusband.
Auchmore is to-day the property
of Mr. E. L. Atkinson, a brother
of M rs. Kelly, while the other two
holdings are owned by her sisters.
The late Mr. Alfred Fether-
stonhaugh Kelly, a first cousin of
the late Cuthbert Fetherston-
haugh, known far and wide
throughout the pastoral and
literary world of Australia, was
born at Funestown, Mullingar,
Co. Westmeath, Ireland, in 1849,
and was 68 years of age when he
died. He was the youngest son
of John Hubert Kelly, of Funes-
town, and came to Australia when
20 years old, his two brothers al-
ready being there, and on arrival
went to visit his brother Charles,
of Kamarooka Station. A. F. and
John bought Roto, in New South
Wales, but after two years sold it
and A. F. took over the manage-
ment of Kamarooka. Charles lived
for some years in Melbourne and
returned to Ireland on the death
of his father at Funestown, where he lived until he died
in 1924.
On his brother’s return to Ireland, Kamarooka was
sold, and Alfred Kelly then bought Terrick Terrick Sta-
tion, about 42 miles north of Bendigo, from Mr. Albert
Mack, and there he resided until he went to Barwonleigh
in 1897. Terrick Terrick formerly belonged to Dr.
Rowe, and later to Mr. Synnot, and it was here that
Mr. G. Murfitt was first employed by Mr. Kelly.
M rs. A. M. Kelly, whose marriage took place in 1895,
went two years later to live at Barwonleigh, and has
resided there ever since, taking a great interest in
station affairs. The only daughter married in 1923 Mr.
R. N. Campbell. The late Mr. Kelly was a skilful
horseman, an excellent judge of horseflesh, and in his
younger days was a keen follower to hounds.
THE BARWONLEIGH STABLES
BAR W ON LEIGH, VIC T O RIA


THE BARWQNLEIGH WOOLSHED
SILOS FOR STORING GRAIN
FALLOW LAND AND PORTION OF THE RIVER FLATS AT BARWONLEIGH
BARW ON LEI GH, VICTORIA


CLIFTON, HAMILTON, VICTORIA.
The Property of A. J. Simpson, Esq.
CLlb lON, situated five miles west of Hamilton, in
the Western District of Victoria, is the home of
AH. A. J. Simpson, one of the most noted Short-
horn cattle breeders in Australia. Simpson of Clifton
is a household name among Shorthorn enthusiasts, and
no man ever better earned high repute.
i he nucleus of what is now the Clifton Estate con-
sisted of about 500 acres, purchased by Mr. Simpson in
1895, but with the sundry additions that have been made
from time to time, less areas of some of the lightest coun-
1 he homestead is a “home” in the best sense of the
word. Built of bluestone, commodious, and fitted with
every convenience and comfort, it stands on a high rise,
giving a beautiful view of the surrounding district and
dominating a stretch of country, lightly timbered with
gum, to which plantations of pinus insignis, many single
specimens of lambertianas, Cootamundra wattles, See.,
have given an added beauty, besides furnishing further
shelter for the stock.
Clifton, as already indicated, is famed throughout the
A FRONT VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD
try in outside paddocks that have been disposed of, the
property now comprises a compact block of about 1200
acres, all rich undulating country and splendidly watered
by three never failing creeks. It is an ideal place for a
stud farm, absolutely sound, well drained, sheltered and
profusely covered with a great variety of grasses and her-
bage. Indeed, it would be difficult to find anywhere a
more suitable property for the purposes to which Clifton
is devoted.
Commonwealth and New Zealand for its Shorthorn
cattle. The herd was founded in 1899, when a few
females were purchased at the Noorat dispersal sale, and.
about the same time some others, also select females, were
bought from Belinda Vale. For some years Derrimut
hulls were used, the two best being Belinda Duke of
Derrimut 244th, champion both in Sydney and Mel-
bourne, and Lindenow Duke of Derrimut 40th. The
latter was bred by A. J. Webb, of Rathfarnham, Vic-


SOME VIEWS OF CLIFTON’S BEAUTIFUL GARDEN


WILD DAISIES AMONGST THE LUXURIANT PASTURES ALONG THE BANKS OF THE CREEK
toria, and was the sire of many prizewinners at Brisbane,
Sydney and Melbourne shows. His progeny also
brought top prices, selling up to 1000 guineas for young
bulls and the same figure for a heifer.
In 1920 Milton’s Rufus was purchased from Mr.
Anthony Hordern, of Milton Park, New South Wales,
and since then bulls from that stud only, with Scotch
blood predominating in them, have been in use at Clif-
ton.
Mr. S impson’s two sires at present are Milton’s
M ariner and Milton’s Cupbearer. Milton’s Mariner
was purchased from Mr. Hordern for 500 guineas when
15 months old. By the celebrated Masterkey (imp.),
and one of his best sons, his dam is Milton’s Marguerite,
by Grand Duke of Clifton 2nd, champion in Sydney in
1915 when two years old, and sold to Mr. Hordern for
800 guineas. With his breeding, together with great
individual merit, and not being too violent an outcross,
Milton’s Mariner has been an outstanding success as a
sire in the Clifton herd, his progeny having won innumer-
able prizes at Sydney and Melbourne Royal Shows, in-
cluding both championships, male and female, at 1928
Sydney Royal, and championship and reserve for females
in Melbourne the same year. As for himself, he was
champion a,t the Melbourne Royal in 1924 and 1925,
and winner of the “Sires’ Memorial” at the same show
for four successive years, 1925-26-27 and 28. A fine
performance.
In view of Mariner’s great record as a show bull and
a sire, his pedigree, worked out in full by Mr. A. Lang,
is well worth studying, and interest is lent to it by the
inclusion of all the different colours. It is shown overleaf.
CL I F TON, VIC TOFA A


GRAND DUCHESS OF CLIFTON 21ST, WITH CALF AT FOOT
CHAMPION, MELBOURNE ROYAL SHOW, 1926, 1927, AND 1928; SYDNEY ROYAL SHOW, 1928
A FAMOUS SHORTHORN SIRE, MILTON S MARINER
CHAMPION, MELBOURNE ROYAL SHOW, 1924 AND 1925
CL 1 / TO N, V I CTO RIA


0
o
Golden Hero
B
Royal Crown
0
CO
1C
Knight of Malta, 102716
0
Goldie 41st
B
no
o
Madonna
0
Bapton Tyrant
B
tc
.Missie' 177th
W
o
05
s
Lord Victor
11
Nonpareil Victor
0
00
CO
C/0
Whitehall Princess 2nd
0
Lady Lancaster 10th
B
W
Crystal Star
O
Knowefleld Butterfly Princess
()
&
()
Primrose Pride
O
Proud Champion, 100096
()
Bose Blossom
B
-
1
§
Beaufort Pride 4th
()
Boyal Star
O
_05
Beaufort Pride
()
Granite Rock
o
Granite City
B
Princess Missie 5th
K
Lady Tarves 5th
W
*
'5
()
Prince William
R
-
Mistletoe
O
Belinda Duke of Derrimut 322nd
()
Belinda Duke of Derrimut 128th
O
S3
Belinda Duchess of Derrimut 224th
B
;S
Lindenow Duchess of Derrimut 13th
w
Belinda Duke of Derrimut 190th
O
Belinda Duchess of Derrimut 104th
o
Belinda Duke of Derrimut 208th
w
Duke of York 2nd (imp.)
0
®
Belinda Duchess of Derrimut 75th
0
£
2
Belinda Duchess of Derrimut 123rd
X
Belinda Duke of Derrimut 29th
X
§
Belinda Duchess of Derrimut 23rd
0
o
Bapton Favourite
0
Bapton Emigrant
0
1
-
Golden Mascot, 95330
0
Cowslip
B
I
.S o
w -*
0
William of Orange
B
5 p.
Goldie 30th
O
j 5 ;
Star of Destiny
0
Star of Morning
O
I art
Vo
Martha
R
Dido 15th
X
Mary
x
Lord Melville
X
French Marigold
B
0=Roan; W = White ; B=Bed; X=Red and
White.
A RARE SCENE IN AUSTRALIA CARTING RYE GRASS HAY
CLIFTON, VICTORIA


AN OLD FAVOURITE
MR. A. J. SIMPSON AND THE STUD BULL MILTON'S MARINER
CLIFTON, VICTORIA


ROCK TERRACES IN THE
CREEK AT CLIFTON
In the sale ring Mariner’s stock have been as successful
as in the show ring, a yearling bull by him, Clifton
Viking, having been sold in Sjdney in 1927 for 1300
guineas, an Australian record for a bull of that age.
A number of this great sire’s heifers are now ( 1929)
breeding in the Clifton herd, all thick, square, heavy-
fleshed, good doers, with quality, excellent heads, oblique
shoulders, and good walkers. They have nicely shaped
udders and rear their calves well; in short, they are just
the class of cattle the owner has been always looking for
and striving to produce. Amongst them might be men-
tioned Grand Duchess of Clifton 21st, champion in Mel-
bourne in 1926, 1927 and 1928, also champion in Syd-
ney in 1928; Grand Duchess of Clifton 23rd, reserve
champion Melbourne, 1928; Clifton Lovely, first as a
yearling and also as a three-year-old at Melbourne Royal;
Clifton Missie, Clifton Ringlet and Clifton Winsome,
all prizewinners in Melbourne; Clifton Duchess of Derri-
mut 21st, a good breeder and one of the best cows in the
herd; Grand Duchess of Clifton 27th, the last calf of
Belinda Duchess of Derrimut 400th (one of the founda-
tion females), and a good breeder; Clifton Peeress, Clif-
ton Gem, Clifton Sunbeam, and others.
The other sire in use at present, Milton’s Cupbearer,
was first as a yearling in Sydney, and was then pur-
chased for 400 guineas. He has since been shown twice
at the Melbourne Royal Show, and was first in his class
and reserve champion on both occasions.
Of the foundation females the best was Belinda
Duchess of Derrimut 400th, purchased from Mr. Robert
Clarke, of Belinda Vale, Victoria, as a t'earling. She
lived to the good old age of 19, producing 14 living
calves, amongst them being champions and numerous
prizewinners at Brisbane, Sydney and Melbourne Royal
Shows. Her calves that were sold realised a total of
3085 guineas, and there are now 17 direct female descen-
dants from her in the Clifton herd.
Other foundation cows that merit special mention
CLIFTON, VICTORIA


SUCCESSFUL BREEDERS WATERING AT ONE OF THE WELL KEPT DAMS
IDEAL CONDITIONS ON CLIFTON
HIGH GRADE STOCK, WELL SHADED PADDOCKS, GOOD PASTURES AND WATER SUPPLY
CL I F T ON, VICTORIA


MISS MARY SIMPSON ON
HER FAVOURITE HACK
CLIFTON, VI C TO RI A


PEACE AND PLENTY
A VIEW OF THE SURROUNDING COUNTRY FROM THE HOUSE
CLIP T ON, VICTORIA


were:—Belinda Duchess of Derrimut 404th, who had
12 calves, those sold realising 1995 guineas, and
amongst them being Clifton Duke of Derrimut, Clifton
Duke of Derrimut 2nd and Clifton Duke of Derrimut
9th, all well-known sires; Belinda Duchess of Derrimut
449th, 12 calves, and those of her progeny that were sold
made 1460 guineas; and Cherry Queen of Clifton, who
also had 12 calves and realised 2920 guineas for those dis-
posed of. Coolart Matilda and Clifton Summerton were
also good breeders.
A brief list of some of the many bulls bred and sold
(this bull unfortunately met with an accident and was
lost before he was long in service) ; Clifton Duke of
Derrimut 2nd, sold to Dugdale and Creber, Victoria,
for 300 guineas and stud bull in their herd for a number
of years; Clifton Duke of Derrimut 9th, sold to Coughlan
Bros., New South Wales, for 675 guineas; Clifton Duke
of Derrimut Bth, to C. E. Parsons, Victoria, for 500
guineas; Clifton Cherry Colonel to Lord Bros., Queens-
land, for 1000 guineas; Clifton Cherry Crown, to Airs.
Campbell, New South Wales, for 275 guineas; Grand
Duke of Clifton 4th, to the late Roy Simson, New South
A VIEW ALONG ONE OF THE CREEKS
from Clifton will indicate the very general and, judging
from the prices paid in times when the market was far
from booming, very high regard in which Mr. Simpson’s
Shorthorns have long been held: —Clifton Duke of
Derrimut and Grand Duke of Clifton 6th, both great
bulls and sires in their day in Mr. A. J. Webb’s well-
known Lindenow herd, Victoria; Grand Duke of Clif-
ton, sold to A. R. Lomax, Queensland, champion Bris-
bane and other Queensland show’s and a great sire; Grand
Duke of Clifton 2nd, champion Sydney, 1915, and then
sold to Mr. A. Hordern, Milton Park, for 800 guineas
Wales, for 420 guineas; 3rd Duke of Ettrick, to the
late C. E. McDougall, Queensland, for 600 guineas;
and sth Duke of Clifton, to 1 . A. kield, New South
Wales, for 920 guineas.
In addition to the cattle, a pure flock of Shropshire
sheep is run on Clifton, all being descendants from im-
portations made in 1896 and 1897. Both cattle and
sheep are under Mr. Simpsons personal supervision. A
certain amount of cropping, oats and barley in the main,
is done to provide for the requirements of the stock, and
a quantity of rye grass hay is also made every year.
CLIF T 0 N. VI C r OKI A


STUD SHORTHORN COWS AND
CALVES GRAZING ON RICH
PASTURES ALONG THE BANK
OF THE CREEK AT CLIFTON
THE STUD BULL
MILTON'S CUPBEARER
AT THREE YEARS OLD
TWO WELL-BRED STUD
YEARLING BULLS
CL I r r() N, V 1 C T()R 1 A


GORRINN, ARARAT, VICTORIA
The Property of Gorrinn Estate Pty. Ltd.
IN the north central portion of the Western District
of Victoria, where beautiful park-like grazing lands
roll up to the feet of the Great Dividing Range,
and support a well-settled pastoral communitjy produc-
ing some of the best Merino wools grown in the State,
lie several noteworthy properties, amongst which Gorrinn
Station is one of the oldest.
Gorrinn originally was part of old Burrumbeep Sta-
tion, whose owners, M essrs. Ross and McGill, effected
the subdivision of the run into Langi-Gerren, Gorrinn,
Burrumbeep and Tatyoon Stations, about 1851. Robert
Richardson bought Gorrinn, after having sold Pirron-
Yallock, where he had been growing cattle with his part-
ner, H. Scott, assisted towards the last by his brother,
FRONT VIEW OF THE GORRINN HOMESTEAD
Run under the name of Gorrinn Estate Pty. Limited,
and comprising an area of 14,521 acres freehold, Gorrinn
is situated about 8 miles from the town of Ararat, 100
miles from Geelong, and 125 miles from Melbourne, the
main western highway and railway passing through the
property 2 miles from the homestead. There is a siding
2\ miles away named Dohie, which serves as the postal
address of the station, whilst the telephone is connected
to the Ararat exchange.
James Richardson. With Mr. A. Macready the latter
in 1851 went to the Ballarat diggings, where Robert
Richardson went to him and got him to come to Gorrinn
to work as a partner. The following year marked the
despatch of the first wool clip from Gorrinn to market.
This wool, which comprised good combing and clothing
qualities, was sent to London and realised a high price
there. Soon afterwards the clip from the property was
sent into Geelong, and was one of the initial brands


ONE-YEAR-OLD STUD EWES
TWO-YEAR-OLD SALE RAMS, SECOND GRADE
TWO-YEAR-OLD SELECTED SALE RAMS
SOME OF THE GORRINN MERINO SHEEP
GO RR IX .V, VI C T ORIA


TWO AND FOUR TOOTH MERINO WETHERS IN ONE OF THE GORRINN PADDOCKS
handled by the then firm of C. J. Dennys.
A few seasons later the late Mr. Robert Richardson
returned to England, where he died, and James proceeded
to work up the flock and the property into a first-class
Merino woolgrowing and stud proposition, in which he
was most successful. He established the system of keep-
ing elaborate records of the station’s business as a guide
to progress, and these records, covering all the important
details of the evolution of the flock generally, have been
kept by the Richardson family for a continuous period of
nearly eighty years, dating back to 1852.
The late James Richardson leased the property to Mr.
E. H. Austin from 1883 to 1889 inclusive, the adjoining
run, Langi-Gerren, having been acquired about 1873,
and during this period the second son, Arthur Herbert
Richardson, went to Queensland for experience, return-
ing to Gorrinn in 1890 to take control. The subsequent
disposal of 8000 acres reduced the property to its present
compact area.
The affairs of the station are now conducted by a
proprietary company composed as follows: —Mr. A. H.
Richardson, director and general manager; Mr. J. L.
Richardson, director and secretary; Mr. J. A. Richard-
son, director and overseer; Mrs. A. H. Richardson, direc-
tor.
The property is in an advanced state of improvement
to-day, and the owners have kept pace with the times.
The class of country ranges from undulating plains to
gentle hills, all sound, healthy, half-sheep to the acre
grazing country, with a 23-in. rainfall, and practically
the whole of it bears a generous growth of natural grasses,
besides having a good deal of red gum timber, which
grows more densely in towards the mountains. A lot of
the trees have been taken off, and still are being reduced
as the carrying capacity of the run is increased, but suffi-
cient are retained to preserve utility and beauty. There
are few, if any, rabbits, and with over 140 miles of
strong, well-constructed fencing the run is well sub-
divided, the paddocks for cultivation all being about 200
acres, others as near that as possible, and only tw r o com-
prise areas of 1000 acres. This enables up-to-date
methods to be employed in raising productivity to a
maximum, especially in regard to weight and quality of
wool.
For the water supply every paddock has one or more
surface tanks, whilst the Hopkins River rises on the pro-
perty, and furnishes a permanent flow. Of outstanding
interest is a big dam just below the house, two-thirds of
a mile long, with an extreme width of 200 yards and a
maximum depth of 20 ft., holding enough water for two
years’ supply. It was completed in 1873 for £173 10s.,
and broke about 1910, but the facings were reconstructed
with several tons of reinforced concrete, and no further
subsidence has occurred. During the summer months
about 9000 gallons a day are used from this source for
garden and domestic uses.
The cultivation areas are limited to some 80 acres for
oats, and about 20 acres for wheat every year for station
GORRI N N, V I C T O RIA


TWO-YEAR-OLD SALE RAMS, THIRD GRADE
TWO-YEAR-OLD SALE RAMS, SECOND GRADE
TWO-YEAR-OLD STUD EWES
SOME MORE PICTURES OF THE GORRINN SHEEP
G 0 R Rl\ N, V I G I' 0R I A


STUD EWES AND LAMBS IN ONE OF THE PADDOCKS
use. The hay is stacked, and the oats, after being
threshed, are stored in three silos, which hold up to 400
bags each, whilst over 6000 acres of the better class country
have been broken up and put under share farming. 1 he
custom here is rather out of the ordinary, the tenants only
being charged 10s. per acre for the crop, with no charge
for the fallow. It is so arranged that each tenant has
at least four times as much ground as he puts in each
year, the owners having the use of the ground from when
the farmer takes off the crop until the next time it goes
in. The owners do all their lambing on the stubble
paddocks. At present there are five tenant farmers, all
of whom are prospering, and while the system does not
pay the owners direct!)', they score in having the land
broken in and prepared for improved pastures.
The whole of the steading is constructed with an eye
to the utmost efficiency, is maintained in good repair, and
painted regularly, especially the tops of the gate posts,
which receive a coating of sand and paint to offset decay.
The stone woolshed, erected in 1867, contains ten stands,
and has a full complement of yards, pens, cover, a concrete
dip, and the best draining and sweating facilities, &c. A
feature of the improvements is the presence of self-feeders
for the sheep, designed in the main by the owners of
Gorrinn, and made in Ararat for £lO each. They each
hold 700 lbs. of two-thirds chaff and one-third crushed
oats mixed, which lasts about two weeks for 200 sheep,
the feeding costing not more than one penny per sheep
per week. It is intended to have at least one feeder for
every mob of lambing ewes, in order to feed them from
about one month prior to lambing to about one month
after the drop.
The Gorrinn homestead is typical of the old-fashioned,
rambling style of station headquarters, nestling amongst
trees and gardens, with creeper covered verandahs giving
it a cosy appearance. It was almost completed when the
Ballarat gold rush lured the workmen away to the dig-
gings, shortly after Gorrinn was purchased, and in the
years that followed, before the day of the railway, it be-
came well known as a haven of rest for friends or travel-
lers alike. Both the late Mr. Richardson and his genial
wife created an atmosphere of genuine hospitality, and
GORR I N N, VIGT 0 R 1 A


THE GARDEN FROM THE QUADRANGLE AT GORRINN HOMESTEAD
their successors have well maintained the standard they
created. Gorrinn has its own golf links, and near the
homestead, which has been brought thoroughly up to date,
is the house now occupied by Mr. J. A. Richardson and
his wife, and originally used by Mr. A. H. Richardson.
The Sheep
'The present Merino flock is descended from the sheep
purchased with the property in 1853, which were them-
selves bred by Mr. McGill from pure Spanish Alerinos
imported by leading sheepbreeders of the day.
For the next thirty years the late Mr. James Richard-
son reared the flock along sound lines with the use of
rams from Eurambeen Station. When Gorrinn was
leased to Mr. Austin the whole of the flock, together with
the Merino stud which had been founded in the seventies,
was taken over by him. He introduced some Austin-
Wanganella rams, and when the lease expired the sheep,
including the best of the studs, were re-purchased in
1889, and since then they have been raised to a high
standard. In 1890 Mr. A. H. Richardson came back
from Queensland and took over the management.
1 he stud flock has been kept select for the purpose of
breeding rams principally for the home flock, and with
the exception of a ram introduced from Carngham in
1914 no blood other than from the Eurambeen stud has
been used, as this strain has proved eminently successful
<tt Gorrinn. Ihe stud has been classed and culled with
great care in order to preserve evenness in the fleece and
uniformity of frame. In 1929 the stud flock comprised
200 breeding ewes graded into different flocks to cater
for a demand for a comparatively wide range of specially
selected rams.
I hat the sires are prepotent to a high degree is shown
by the excellent quality of their progeny. Taken as a
a\ hole, they are massive framed sheep with plain bodies
G ORRINN, VI C T 0 RIA


THE OLD SCHOOL-
ROOM AT GORRINN
G 0 R RIN N, VIC T ORIA


Above —-
A SPECIAL
SHEEP FEEDER
Right—
SILOS AND
HAYSTACK
Below —
THE OVER-
SEER'S COTTAGE
GOR R IN N, VICT 0 R IA


THE OLD BLUESTONE WOOLSHED
THE SHEARERS’ QUARTERS AT GORRINN
G()R R IN N, VICT() R I A


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD AND GARDEN
and bold neck folds, well sprung in the barrel, level on
the top, deep in the sides, and having good bone. The
heads are well formed and masculine, with a wide sweep
in the horns, the faces being soft, open, and
with wide set nostrils. They are a fine type of sheep,
well and evenly covered with a 60’s to 64’s wool.
For the past few years the sale of surplus rams has
been restricted to the following;—l923, 58; 1924, 50;
1925, 46; 1926, 47; 1927, 39; 1928, 60
—for which good prices have been paid.
Nothing under 4-tooth is disposed of,
but the 4-tooth flock rams have averaged
£ll for some } r ears. With the older
sheep included the average has been
about £9.
The owners have exhibited their stud
sheep for a long period of years, es-
pecially at Ballarat, with considerable
success, and the stock have a good re-
putation throughout the sheep world.
Lambing takes place in May, and it
is a bad year that does not produce
82 per cent, marked lambs, whilst as
high as 98 per cent, has been returned.
The practice is to keep the ewes until
about five years of age, and the
wethers until four years, and sell the 4-
tooth cull ewes. Specially attractive
in conformation and bulk of carcase are
the wethers, and very good prices are
paid by the trade for them when they
are offered.
Under the expert supervision of Mr.
J. Clough, who has classed the Gorrinn
wool since the eighties, definite progress
has been made towards perfecting the
t} 7 pe throughout the entire flock, which
cuts a super 64’s quality, ideal top-
makers’ wool. Strong constitution and
uniformity are the main characteristics
in the flock.
Following are the records of progress
since 1852, in which year 10,319 grown
sheep were shorn for an average of 3
lbs. 5| ozs. washed wool per head. The
wool oft 720 lambs weighed 1 lb.
ozs. per head.
In 1854 sheep and lambs totalled
13,745 and cut 30,726 lbs. washed wool
(116 bales), grown sheep cutting 2 lbs.
4 ozs. and lambs 2 lbs. \ \ ozs. This clip
sold at an average of 16|d. all round,
or £lB 6s. Id. per bale.
In 1872 sheep and lambs totalled 13,438, and cut
33,638 lbs. washed wool (130 bales), grown sheep pro-
ducing 2 lbs. 13 ozs. per head, and lambs 1 lb. 2\ ozs. The
average price per lb. was 2s. or £27 3s. 9d. per bale.
In 1892 sheep and lambs totalled 21,038 and cut
95,543 lbs. washed wool (324 bales) averaging 5 lbs.
34 ozs. and 1 lb. 7|- ozs., the average price being very
A VIEW OF THE LAKE
c; ORRI N N, VI CTO R I A


low that year on account of the financial crisis in the
State, viz., 9Jd. per lb. (£ll 4s. 6d. per bale).
In 1899, the last year of washed wool, sheep and lambs
totalled 13,530 and cut 48,019 lbs. (209 bales), averag-
ing 4 lbs. 6J ozs. and 1 lb. IOJ ozs. per head respectively,
and the clip sold for an average figure of 2s. 2d. per lb.,
or £25 Os. 9d. per bale. From 1852 to 1899 the total
number of grown sheep shorn was 558,873, cutting
1,815,995 lbs. washed wool, or 3 lbs. 4J- ozs. per head:
133,994 lambs cut 161,735 lbs., or 1 lb. 3J ozs. per head,
and 692,867 sheep and lambs in all cut 1,977,730 lbs.,
or 7393 bales of washed wool.
In 1900 the sheep totalled 10,937 and cut 7 lbs. 12
ozs. greasy wool per head, or 323 bales. The lambs cut
2 lbs. 13 ozs. All wool averaged 7Jd. per lb., the whole
clip returning £9 ss. 4d. per bale.
In 1910 grown sheep shorn numbered 7654 and cut 7
lbs. 10 ozs., and 1888 lambs cut 2 lbs. 15 ozs. The
number of pounds of greasy wool was 67,239, and the
average price was lljd. per lb., or £l6 2s. sd. per bale.
Ten years later grown sheep totalled 6314, and cut 7
lbs. 6J ozs., and lambs numbered 1602 and cut 2 lbs. 4
ozs., the clip amounting to 50,292 lbs. of greasy wool
(166 bales), which returned an average price of 2s. 44d.
per lb., or £35 16s. Id. per bale.
In 1924 6033 sheep cut 12 lbs. and £1 6s. 7d. per head,
while 1496 lambs cut 3 lbs. 8J ozs. per head, and the clip
totalled 76,389 Ihs. greasy wool, which averaged 23d.
per Ih. and £3O 3s. 9Jd. per bale.
The grown sheep in 1925 cut 9 lbs. ozs. and
returned 2s. 3Jd. per lb., the lambs yielding 3 lbs. 1J
ozs. per head for a return of Is. 9d. per lb. The clip
totalled 58,152 lbs., and the average price was 26Jd., or
£32 15s. 9d. per bale.
In 1926 grown sheep cut 9 lbs. 54 ozs., which sold at
23d., the lambs averaging 3 lbs. 8J ozs., which sold at
2ld. per Ih. The clip totalled 61,668 lbs. and returned
£3O 3s. 9d. per bale for 195 bales.
The figures for 1927 were 8 lbs. 13-| ozs. for grown
sheep, and 2 lbs. 5J ozs. per head for lambs. The clip
amounted to 54,891 lbs. greasy wool, all wool averaging
27d. per lb., 185 bales returning £33 9s. 3d. per bale.
In 1928 6125 sheep cut II lbs. 3 ozs. and £1 os. 3Jd.
per head; 1457 lambs cut 3 lbs. 124 ozs - J 74,124 lbs.
averaged 21Jd. and 245 bales £27 ss. Bd.
The cattle at Gorrinn comprise a few Shorthorns, which
the owners aim to work up into a first class stud.
Personal
4'he late Mr. James Richardson was born in 1828 and
died in 1908. His wife was Aliss Fanny Fisher, of
MR. A. H. RICHARDSON
Geelong, and of their family of five sons and six daughters
th ree sons and two daughters have died. Their lives of
useful pioneering at Gorrinn embraced the highest ideals
of citizenship.
Mr. A. H. Richardson is the second son and was born
in 1864. Upon leaving the Geelong Grammar School
he went into the London and Chartered Bank, Ararat,
before setting out in 1883 for Queensland, and returned
to Gorrinn in 1890, when he took over the management.
In 1896 Air. Arthur Herbert Richardson married
Eleanor Peerman, whose grandfather was Mr. John Gar-
diner, a pioneer of Melbourne, and a member of one of
the best known families of early settlement. He arrived
from Van Diemen’s Land in March 1836 in the “Cale-
donia,” and subsequently owned land from Kew down
to Brighton, as well as property in Bourke-street. Gar-
diner’s Creek and other places are named after him. Be-
G ORRIN N, VI CT O RIA


THE TENNIS COURT
fore he went to Van Diemen’s Land he had married a
M iss M ary Eagle, taking her out with him, together
with the Eagle family. John Gardiner and his wife left
the Eagles in Tasmania, and the latter did not cross to
the mainland for some years. The Gardiners, however,
made the sixth family to arrive in Melbourne, and for a
time camped in tents where the Church of England
Cathedral now stands. John Gardiner was the first to
take stock overland from Sydney to Victoria, Captain
Hepburn being with him, and it is also of interest to note
that when he first arrived in Melbourne from Van Die-
men’s Land he was accompanied by David Fisher, the
father of the girl who subsequently became the late James
Richardson’s wife in 1859.
The family to-day consists of four sons, the eldest,
James Lewis Richardson, going to the Avar with reinforce-
ments to the sth Battalion A.I.F. He was wounded on
30th September, 1917, and discharged Ist May, 1918.
The other three sons are John Arthur, Robert Halsey,
and Thomas Andrerv, each of AtTom takes a keen interest
in the continual development of the property. The
second named and James Letvis Richardson AA r ere edu-
cated at the Melbourne Church of England Grammar
School, and the latter two at Geelong Grammar School.
THE OLD PRIVATE CEMETERY AT GORRINN
Isabella Law Richardson, died 1869; Thomas Andrew Richardson, died 1869;
Robert Walter Homan Richardson, died 1869.
G O RR IN N, VI C TOR IA












