

PAST EXPLORATIONS IN NEW GUINEA
A \ I >
A PROJECT
FOR THE SCIENTIFIC EXPLORATION
OF THE GREAT ISLAND
E. MARIN LA MESLEE
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY .). L. HOLMES & CO., 315 PITT STREET.
1883.


The natives are good agriculturists,
and grow sugar-cane, bananas, and yams. ,
He found no trace of minerals, and does not ,
believe that they exist, unless in the interior,
which he did not explore. A large river was
discovered, named the Empress Augusta.
He thinks that a prosperous colony may be
founded. The first thing to do is to establish
steam communication with Germany, which
' Y
is now losing by emigration about 60,000
persona every year. He hoped to induce
some to go to New Guinea.
* • —- SSHtx :
DR. FINSCH ON GERMAN NEW
GUINEA A "
—— -...V 1
(By Telegraph Froh Oub Cokrebyowa-os^.J
ADELAIDE, Monday.
Dr. Finsch, the German representative
in New Guinea, is a passenger by the Iberia.
In reply to a representative of the South
Australian Register, who waited upon him,
he said that he had explored the whole of the
northern coast of New Guinea. He speaks
in favourable terms of the country, and com-
pares the climate to that of North Queens-
land. The coast land is rich, cedar is
abundant, and the country is suitable |
for agricultural and pastoral purposes.
The existence of a waterway between Macluer
Inlet and Geelvinkßay, in New Guinea, which
was reported by Captain Strachan, has now been
definitively disproved. Dr. A. Meyer was the
first to declare that there could be no such
waterway, and his opinion is now confirmed by
investigations instituted by the Dutch officials.
Lieutenant Ellis, who has been surveying in the
neighborhood, was also unable to find the re-
ported water connection, and his inquiries
among the natives satisfied him that it was a
myth. Dr. Host, another explorer, arrives at
the same conclusion. Captain Strachan himself
should now be satisfied that he must have made
a mistake
ox lw wuuic ui rue associated
TION.
[BY SPECIAL WIRE.]
(From Oub Correspondent.s
morning.
? 4“’ -
THURSDAY ISLAND.
SOFFIT «
- .A
THE NEW GUINEA EXPEDI-
SYDNEY, Friday.
The Geographical Society has received a
a telegram from Cooktown from the Plon.
John Douglas, the Government resident at
Thursday Island, ptoinising to afford the
New Guinea exploring party every possible
assistance. Captain Everill, the leader of
the expedition, also telegraphs his safe arrival
at Thursday Island on the 25th ult, Mr. H.
O. Forbes had not arrived, but 11
Malays engaged in Java by the society,
were there all right. The Queensland
Government steamer Advance had not
arrived, but was expected hourly. It was
detained at Cooktown at the request of the
Geographical Society, to take a special mes-
sage to the leader of the expedition, inform- ; .
ing him that he was not to cross the Gulf of ■
Papua,or run any risk in attempting to go up
the Aird River, but was rather to enter New
Guinea by the Baxter, or some other river
westward. The society was aware that the
entrance to the Aird River is somewhat difii
cult at this time of the year, in consequence of
the south-east monsoon, and in its instruc- 1 [ f
tions had arranged an alternative course
if the leader of the expedition found it un-
wise to attempt the Aird ; but the repre-
sentations made by Captain Williams, of the
■ Advance, were to the effect that the entrance
was not only difficult but positively danger-
ous. The society, therefore, thought it
prudent for the expedition to enter New
Guinea more to the westward, where the
coast is protected, although it would increase
the difficulty of reaching the high lands (
which the expedition is to explore.
THURSDAY ISLAND, Monday.
The German barque Myanbas is reported 1
to be high on the shore in Bramble Bay. No •
lives were lost. The weather at the time of :
the disaster was thick, and a strong south-east V
wind blowing.
Pearl shell is quoted at £9O to £95 per ton, '
beche-de-mer from £5O to £llO per ton, accord- f
iug to quality. ■
Wire.—From Our Correspondents,] :


AGaia-TiirKisKHC run uuiinnurjE ue nuinuaYiiiLE
PAST EXPLORATIONS OF NEW GUINEA
A SCHEME
FOR THE SCIENTIFIC EXPLORATION OF THE
GREAT ISL STD
Paper read before a Special Mbetin of the Geographical Society
of Australasia, in Sydney, b E. Marin La Meslee,
Hon. Secretary.
I. —PAST EXPLO hAl'iUx, *3.
IjrOHE subject which I have to treat this evening is one of
great importance, both to geographical science and to the
—‘ future of British Australasia. The news that the colony
of Queensland had annexed part of the great island of New
Guinea to the colonial empire of Great Britain, a few weeks ago,
took everybody by surprise, both at home and in the Australian
colonies.
The action of the Queensland Government has necessarily
attracted towards New Guinea a large share of public attention ,
people have all at once recollected that New Guinea, one of the
largest islands in the world, has remained up to this day a sealed
book to the geographer, and apart from some flying surveys of
portions of its coast, some important explorations within 20 to 40
miles from its shores, and the discovery of a few rivers, little
is known of the interior of the country.
The sailor who happens to pass within fifty miles from its
eastern shores perceives, on the distant horizon, a broken line of
high mountains, running parallel to the coast, the highest peaks
towering to a height of 12,000 and 13,000 feet above the sea level,
but beyond them no white man has dared to brave the unknown
terrors of the interior of the dark island. Two Europeans
have ascended the course of a mighty stream, which carries to the
sea the drainage of an immense watershed on the south western


DR. FI NSC H ON GERMAN NEWI
GUINEA A ~ "
— -»«> I
(By Telegraph From Oub Corresyom^^J
ADELAIDE, Monday.
Dr. Finsch, the German representative
in New Guinea, is a passenger by the Iberia.
In reply to a representative of the South
Australian Register, who waited upon him,
he said that he had explored the whole of the
northern coast of New Guinea. He speaks
in favourable terms of the country, and com-
pares the climate to that of North Queens-
land. The coast land is rich, cedar is
abundant, and the country is suitable %
for agricultural and pastoral purposes.
The natives are good agriculturists,
and grow sugar-cane, bananas, and yams, c..
He found no trace of minerals, and does not,
believe that they exist, unless in the interior, 1
which he did not explore. A large river was
discovered, named the Empress Augusta.
He thinks that a prosperous colony may be
founded. The first thing to do is to establish
steam communication with Germany, which * v
is now losing by emigration about 60,000 „
persons every year. He hoped to induce
! some to go to New Guinea.
l_ —===== ~
The existence of a waterway between Macluer
Inlet and Geelvink Bay, in New Guinea, which
was reported by Captain Strachan, has now been
definitively disproved. Dr. A. Meyer was the
first to declare that there could be no such
waterway, and his opinion is now confirmed by
investigations instituted by the Dutch officials.
Lieutenant Ellis, who lias been surveying in the
neighborhood, was also unable to find the re-
ported water connection, and his inquiries
among the natives satisfied him that it was a
myth. Dr. Host, another explorer, arrives at
the same conclusion. Captain Strachan himself
should now be satisfied that he must have made
a mistake.
or Stb wuujKj-ox tub associated omwamr muo
morning. f •<
k k. C.
THURSDAY ISLAND.
THURSDAY ISLAND, Monday.
The German barque Myanbas is reported
to be high on the shore in Bramble Bay. No
lives were lost. The weather at the time of
the disaster was thick, and a strong south-east
wind blowing.
Pearl shell is quoted at £9O to £95 per ton,
beche-de-mer from £6O to £llO per ton, accord-
ing to quality.
Wire.-—From Our Correspondents.]
sorter *—-
THE NEW GUINEA EXP ED l-
TION.
[BY SPECIAL WIRE.]
(From Our Correspondent.]
SYDNEY, Friday.
The Geographical Society has received a
a telegram from Cooktown from the Hon.
John Douglas, the Government resident at
Thursday Island, promising to afford the
New Guinea exploring party every possible
assistance. Captain Everill, the leader of
the expedition, also telegraphs his safe arrival
at Thursday Island on the 25th ult. Mr. H.
O. Forbes had not arrived, but 11
Malays engaged in Java by the society,
were there all right. The Queensland
Government steamer Advance had not !
arrived, but was expected hourly. It was I
detained at Cooktown at the request of the
Geographical Society, to take a special mes-
sage to the leader of the expedition, inform- .
ing him that he was not to cross the Gulf of
Papua,or run any risk in attempting to go up
the Aird River, but was rather to enter New
Guinea by the Baxter, or some other river
westward. The society was aware that the
entrance to the Aird River is somewhat diffi
cult at this time of the year, in consequence of |
the south-east monsoon, and in its instruc-]
tions had arranged an alternative course
if the leader of the expedition found it un-
wise to attempt the Aird ; but the repre-
sentations made by Captain Williams, of the
Advance, were to the effect that the entrance
was not only difficult but positively danger-
ous. The society, therefore, thought it
prudent for the expedition to enter New
Guinea more to the westward, where the
coast is protected, although it would increase
the difficulty of reaching the high lands
which the expedition is to explore.


m
S reat ioiportancc, both to geographical science and to the
future of British Australasia. The news that the colony
of Queensland had annexed part of the great island of New
Guinea to the colonial empire of Great Britain, a few weeks ago,
took everybody by surprise, both at home and in the Australian
colonies.
The action of the Queensland Government has necessarily
attracted towards New Guinea a large share of public attention ;
people have all at once recollected that New Guinea, one of the
largest islands in the world, has remained up to this day a sealed
book to the geographer, and apart from some flying surveys of
portions of its coast, some important explorations within 20 to 40
miles from its shores, and the discovery of a few rivers, little
is known of the interior of the country.
The sailor who happens to pass within fifty miles from its
eastern shores perceives, on the distant horizon, a broken line of
high mountains, running parallel to the coast, the highest peaks
towering to a height of 12,000 and 13,000 feet above the sea level,
but beyond them no white man has dared to brave the unknown
terrors of the interior of the dark island. Two Europeans
have ascended the course of a mighty stream, which carries to the
sea the drainage of an immense watershed on the south western


part, but they only ventured within gunshot of its banks, and
in many cases met with great hostility on the part of the natives.
More dangerous, perhaps, than the arrows of the Papuans, a
terrible fever reigns supreme on the low lands ; no one escapes the
effects of the malaria, and, if nature appears clothed in its most
brilliant tropical garments, inviting by its splendid aspect the
admiration of man, the poisonous air itself stands guard over the
islands treasures, and seems to forbid the explorer the entrance to
that magnificent garden of Eden. Not only is the country rich
beyond description with an admirable and varied flora, but insect
and animal life are both of a profuse character. Amidst the brilliant
foliage which shades the rivers banks, under the green dome of the
silent forests, myriads of insects and birds have their home. The
latter are among the most beautiful of the Almighty’s creatures,
so marvellous, that the first naturalists which described them,
in ecstacy before the exquisite colours and the splendour of
their gorgeous plumage, have deemed them worthy of a place in
Elysium , and have classed them under the generic name of “ Birds
ef Paradise.” Many are the speculations which at various times
have obtained credence as to the value of the natural products of
New Guinea. It has been currently believed that gold wmuld
be found in profusion, and the mineral resources of the island have
been spoken of as probably of an extreme richness; but so far
little is known which might tend to verify such assumptions.
New Guinea is now in the position of Australia when
Captain Cook hoisted the British standard on the shores of
Botany Bay. Little more is known of its coast than was known
of those of the Australian continent a century ago, and its interior
has yet to be explored. The time has come for an expedition of a
scientific nature to visit the dark island, and since, sooner or
later, its eastern portion will become part of the future dominion
Australasia, to which geographical system it belongs, such an
expedition almost becomes a national undertaking.
It may be well that I review before you to-night the history
of past explorations, and that I give you a general idea of their
results in a geographical point of view. The experience of those
who first had dealings with the natives, the information of a
varied and interesting character which they have obtained, as to
their customs and habits, and their observations on the climatic
conditions of the island, are of the greatest importance when it is
attempted to penetrate a country so completely unknown.


I need not describe the geographical position of New Guinea ;
any one who has cast a glance at the map of Australasia could not
fail to notice that large island very much longer than it is broad,
terminated at the south-east by a long narrow peninsula through
which runs a range of high mountains, and the extreme north-
west of which is formed of another peninsula, almost round in
shape, nearly cut off from the main land by a deep inlet on the
western side, and that great indenture of Gel wink Bay on the
eastern. It is situated opposite the extreme northern point of the
Australian continent, and, if York Peninsula was prolongated, it
would almost cut the great island in two equal parts.
From its extreme south-east to its north-west point, the
distance is nearly 1100 miles, and its greatest breadth is not less than
500 miles. The superficial area of New Guinea, as far as can
be ascertained from our yet incomplete geographical notions,
exceeds 300,000 square miles, being a larger area than that
of France, The population, composed of a great many different
races, among which the Papuan and the Malayan types are the
most conspicuous, is estimated by some at 8,000,000, and by
others at 2,000,000 only. This leaves a very large margin for
any possible error; but if we may rely on the descriptions of
the few travellers and naval officers who have visited its shores,
there is no doubt that the population will be found nearer the first
than the last figure.
The discovery of New Guinea is attributed to a Spanish sailor,
Alvaro de Saavedra, who sighted its coast in the year 1528. It
is however presumed that the Portuguese who had settled in the
Moluccas about the year 1512, had obtained a knowledge of its
existence. Long before the Europeans ever came to that part
of the world, the Malays and the Chinese had been in the habit of
communicating with New Guinea, and they have left undeniable
proof of their intercourse in the alteration of the original
characteristics of the native races. The Malays must have
circumnavigated the island at an early period, as the mixture of
Malayan blood is to be found amongst the coast tribes on both
the east and west coast, as well as near its south-easternmost point.
The island of Salwattee, which is separated from the mainland
by the strait of Galewo, is inhabited by natives of various
races, but the prevailing element is Malayan, and the political
power is in the hands of a Malay rajah. The intercourse


between the Malays and the natives of the north-west has been
constantly kept up from ages past, whilst the former have probably
long since ceased to visit the southern coasts.
Of all Europeans who have left records of their travels to
those parts of the Southern hemisphere, the next who saw New
Guinea was Luis Yaz de Torres, who has given his name to the
Straits which separate the island from the continent of Australia.
Seventy years elapsed before other European navigators visited the
shores of the great Papua, and in 1676 the Dutch sailors,
Schouten and Lemaire, recognised part of the south-western coast.
The French navigator, De Bougainville, in 1768, and the celebrated
English Navigator, Captain Cook, whose name is for ever asso-
ciated with the history of the discovery of Australia, followed in
1770, calling at some point of the coast, which was afterwards
visited by the Dutch officers in the first half of this century.
Among English navigators who subsequently came in sight of the
shores of New Guinea, I may cite Forrest in 1774, Edwards in
1791, Captain Bligh, of the “Bounty” in 1791, and Captain
Flinders, in 1799. The records left by them are, however, of very
small importance, as they do not go beyond a few notes entered
in their journals. The French navigator, Dumont d’Urville, who
made a voyage to the east coast, was really the first to give an inter-
esting account of the island. He landed several parties, and the
naturalists attached to his expedition made very complete zoological
collections, and wrote interesting reports on the natural history of
Papua.
The Dutch, who had annexed to their Malayan colonies the
northern part of New Guinea down to the 141st parallel, sent
several expeditions to visit and report on its apparent natural
resources. In 1825 and 1826, the Dutch man-of-war, “ Dourga,”
under the command of Lieutenant Kolff, reached the entrance of
what was supposed to be a large river, emptying itself in the
Timor sea, which he christened the St. Bartholomew. It is situated
by 8° 25' south latitude and 139° 2' 2" east longitude. He describes
the coast in the vicinity as low and covered with mangrove trees,
the sea being of very little depth, and great mud banks extending
far from the land. He pursued his course along the coast, and
after rounding False Cape discovered the entrance of another
river which he named the Dourga ; but it was afterwards found by
the expedition of the “ Postilion” in 1835 that the Dourga and the
Bartholomew were not rivers at all, but formed a strait separating
Prince Frederick Henry Island from the main land. The shores


of that island were so low as to be almost inaccessible on
account of the mud banks and the low mangrove vegetation,
already described.
Lieutenant Kolff proceeded along the coast in a northerly
direction, and between the entrance to Dourga Straits and the
Outernata River he traced the mouths of many large streams ; but
owing to the low formation already noticed was unable to approach
the shore. To judge from the number of villages seen from the vessel
the coast seems to be densely populated. On arriving at a point
opposite the island of Adi the land becomes very high. The
people of that part of the coast showed themselves very hostile.
The flying survey of Lieutenant Kolff was completed by the
two expeditions of the “Siren” in 1832 and the “Triton” in
1835 (the results of which Dr. Solomon Muller has published).
The coast of Adi Island, Nautilus Straits and several points
of the south-western coast were examined. This was the second
voyage of the “Triton,” as in 1828 that vessel had visited the
south-west coast, the Outernata River and Triton Bay, In
1858, the steamship Etna, also of the Dutch Navy, explored
the same region; the river Karoefa was examined and ascended
for many miles, the country which it waters being described
as high and covered with the most admirable vegetation.
The Dutch steamer subsequently visited Etna Bay and the Bay of
Caimans and made a survey of Humboldt Bay. The Dutch
expeditions were completed by scientific missions, that of Van der
Crab in 1871, and that of Teysman, Correngel, Langeweldt,
Hemert, and Swaan in 187 6, who examined the northern coast and
made splendid collections of natural history specimens, adding
greatly to our knowledge of that part of New Guinea.
We now come to the English expeditions and surveys,
commencing with that of H.M.S. Fly in 1842-46, to which the
discovery of the Ely River is due, and that of the Rattlesnake in
1846-50, in which Prof. Huxley took part. These expeditions,
however, did no more than survey part of the south-east coast,
and never ventured to send parties inland to explore the country.
Captain Owen Stanley in a paper read before the Royal
Geographical Society of London in 1851, spoke of a range of very
high mountains following the direction of the extreme South-east
coast, one of them attaining an altitude of 12,800 feet. This
mountain is the magnificent Mount Owen Stanley which forms so
conspicuous a background to the scenery of the coast at Port
Moresby.


We are now approaching a new period in the history of the
geographical exploration of New Guinea. The first English
missionaries made their appearance, and with them Christianity
and civilisation have dawned on the natives of New Guinea.
Until now, be it said to the great credit of the missionaries, their
efforts has been attended with the best effects ; the Papuans have
been made to understand the pacific intentions of the white mam
and the days of murders and cannibalism seem to have passed
away, unless perhaps at the beginning of a new era of colonisation
steps are not taken from the first to prevent any difficulties
arising between the natives and the early colonists.
In 1867 the Rev. Mr. Chalmers, together with Mr. Chester,
the same gentleman who recently annexed the island in the name
of the Government of Queensland to the colonial domain of
England, visited the South-eastern shores, and subsequently
the Mai Oussar River was discovered, which has been re-
christened the Baxter by the missionaries who visited it in the
steamer Ellengowan. Mission stations were established on the
coast, and they have flourished and done a great deal of good in
opening the country to the influence of civilisation.
We now come to the most complete explorations of the coast
made by English navigators ; I mean those of Captain Moresby
in 1871 and 1876. He left Sydney under orders from the
Commodore of the Australian Station, picked up en route the
remains of an ill-fated expedition, of which I shall speak further on,
anchored in Redscar Bay on the south-east coast, and
proceeded to examine the surrounding country. He found the
natives of the Malay type, small well-built people with a fine and
pleasing expression of countenance, living in large houses raised
on piles of the unusual height of 15 to 20 feet. He discovered a
wide estuary into which several rivers empty themselves, but
unfortunately unconnected with the sea by any navigable passage,
otherwise it would be one of the finest harbours in the world.
An exploration was made of the Edith and Usborne Rivers, which
are described as fine streams with a strong current, but which
would be easily ascended by steam launches.
The inhabitants, very shy at first, soon became friendly, and he
never had to complain of their conduct in any way. Below Redscar
Bay the coast was examined and the magnificent harbour of Port
Moresby discovered. Yule Island and Hall Sound were
afterwards visited, and Captain Moresby described the latter as a


perfectly land-locked harbour, in which hundreds of vessels could
lie in safety. Yule island is a very remarkable, highly mountainous
country, covered with magnificent tropical vegetation, and relatively
healthy. The inhabitants belong to the Malay group, but the
type is coarser than at Redscar Bay. They are also friendly and
well disposed towards traders. Iron hoop and scrap iron have the
greatest value as articles of trade.
Captain Moresby completed the survey of the extreme South-
East coast of New Guinea, which the early French navigators
Bougainville, d’Entrecasteaux, and the English captain Owen
Stanley had seen ; but they had not approached sufficiently near to
find the outline of the land. Milne Bay was completely surveyed,
and Moresby anchored in a small bay inside the greater one,
on the shores of which a beautiful village is situated. He
called it Discovery Bay. The natives were very friendly and
came alongside the English vessel in beautifully ornamented
canoes, from 50 to 60 feet long. A very curious custom of the
natives was observed along that part of the coast of New Guinea.
When the Papuans desire to extend a welcome to strangers, they
sacrifice a dog by dashing his brains out before them. That
ceremony was performed for the first time on board the vessel under
captain Moresby’s command, and the disgusted sailors very soon
cleared the deck from the intruders who had thus defiled it.
Rounding the easternmost point of New Guinea, captain Moresby
made a flying survey of the east coast, and expressed himself in
very glowing terms as to its aspect. “Between East and Vogel
Cape there is a coast line of about 100 miles; villages abound,
and the valleys, not seen from the sea, on account of the lie of the
hills, appear well cultivated. The villages are scattered on this
part of the coast on a plateau of park like land, which intervenes
between the shore and the mountains within, which, rising by
gradually higher undulations, terminate at a height of many
thousand feet above the sea. There can be no doubt, says
Moresby, as to the capabilities of this land if cultivated. On the
hills herds of cattle, and sheep innumerable; might find pasture ;
whilst from the cold summit to the hot plain, all the products of
of wide extent of climate might be grown. The climate of that
part of New Guinea would not be prejudicial to Europeans* high
land possessing every degree of temperature, abounds, and the
Europeans who inhabit the islands of Polynesia appear to enjoy
perfect health.” The English captain continued his survey of tha


east coast as far as Astrolabe Bay, and describes its aspect as
magnificent. He found, however, the natives of that part of New
Guinea seemed very much more savage and intractable than those of
the south-east coast and of Milne Bay. A meteorological peculiarity
which he observed, was that whilst the western part is exposed
during the months of March, April, and May, to very bad and
extremely hot weather, on the eastern shore, although the heat is
great, the air is always beautifully and clear.
Captain Moresby’s coast survey in 1876 is the last which I
have to record, although the “ Wolverene” made a flying trip
to the south-west coast in 1881, and the vessels of the Australian
stations have frequently visited portions of its shores within
the last few years. The sailors must now give place to the
naturalists, to whom is due most of the kowledge we possess of the
parts of New Guinea, extending at any distance from the coast,
which have ever been visited by Europeans.
To Wallace, who explored the northern coasts of New
Guinea, we owe most of our geographical knowledge of that
part of the island. The Italian naturalists, d’Albertis and
Beccari, in 1872, proceeded along the coast to Salwattee
Island, visited Tangior Bay, Kulokadi and Kapauer
Harbour on the north-west, where the people trade with
the Boughis merchants of Macassar. All along the Northern
Coast the country is splendid in its aspect. Hills beautifully
covered with vegetation rise from the sea, and behind them
higher hills, everywhere thickly wooded, form the background.
Round to the East the mountains become gigantic, and Mount,
Arfak measures 12,000 feet. The interior is completely unknown,
the natives are dreadful cannibals, very numerous and well armed.
Along that coast they appear to be a mixture of Malays and
Papuans, many of them have embraced the Mussulman faith,
and missionaries of that religion reside on the mainland. This
fact shows that little friendliness can be expected from them in
that quarter. Wherever the Malays have had dealings with the
Papuans, the result has been to render them, if it were possible, more
savage, and it is a fact too well known that Europeans have always
found great difficulty to establish relations with any kind of native
races, where Islamism has penetrated. The French in Senegambia
and in the Oayor have met with the greatest opposition on the
part of the Mahomedan blacks. The institution of slavery, dear to
every follower of the Prophet, necessarily implants itself wherever


this religious system has sway, and as the white man’s first
care is to put a stop to that horrible trade in human merchandise, he
can expect nothing but a most determined opposition. Dr. Beccari
and d’Albertis remained some time in the vicinity of Mt. Arfak
until the Italian corvette “ Yittor Pisani ” picked them up and
brought them to Australia. They touched at Orangerie Bay on
the voyage down and described that part of the country as very
beautiful, and the natives as very friendly. There they found
that the New Guineans of that region had not got beyond the age
of stone, as all their implements were made of beautifully polished
hard stone. Iron, however, under, the name of dim dim , seemed
to be in great requisition.
But the most important of d’Albertis’ explorations is that in
which, in company with Mr. Law Hargraves, as engineer of the
steam launch Neva which was lent to him by the Government of
New South Wales, he ascended the Fly River for a distance of
454 miles, and discovered its principal affluent the Alice Hargrave
River. He first visited Yule Island and Hall Sound, and on the
Ethel River made a flying exploration in search of specimens of
natural history. The Neva afterwards entered the Fly river,
which is described as running for a considerable distance from
its mouth, between mangrove skirted shores, very low and
unhealthy. The source of the river, which was not
discovered, probably lies at the foot of a long range, which seems
to cross New Guinea from the South-East to the North-West.
The river winds between low hills, gradually increasing in height
towards the North, and making a turn Westerly runs through a
large extent of low flat plains, admirably covered with vegetation,
forests of sago palms, nutmegs, etc., etc. The mouth is a wide
delta of numerous islands, Kiwai, the largest of them, being very
densely populated. The Italian naturalist’s opinion is greatly
against the possibility of Europeans ever being able to stand the
fearful climate of the low plains, but he thinks that on both sides
of the high Central Range, the mountainous regions would offer
chances of success. D’Albertis found the natives very savage,
and had several times to use force, in order to save the lives of
himself and those of his party. As they ascended more into the
interior the race became totally different, and the real Papuans
were met with, free from any admixture of Malay blood.
The explorations of d’Albertis and Dr. Beccari must have been
highly successful, as I see from a paragraph in the Proceedings of


the Geographical Society of London that they have brought home
about 5,000 species of plants and 100,000 of animals, of which
10,000 birds and 80,000 insects deposited by them in the Museums
of Genoa and Florence.
Besides Italians, naturalists of other nationalities have
visited the great island. In 1876, the French Government
sent Mons. Raffray on a scientific mission, and he visited the
Dorei Andrai Peninsula, and the natives *of the Arfak tribes.
His splendid collections of natural history specimens were
forwarded to the Paris Museums. New South Wales is also
represented by two expeditions ; that of the “ Chevert,” which was
equipped at the expense of the Hon. William Macleay, was
on a scientific point of view, eminently successful.
Geographically speaking, little new information was gained, as the
vessel visited spots already known, but natural sciences were
greatly benefited. In 1877, the trustees of the Australian
Museum sent Mr. Alexander Morton in search of specimens of
natural history. He landed at Pt. Moresby, in company with the
botanical collector, Mr. A. Goldie, and started for Redscar Bay.
The whole of the land round this district appears to belong
to the Pt. Moresby natives, but the next village called Momeara
is inhabited by another tribe. Mr. Morton relates that he found
great difficulty in obtaining natives to carry the provisions, owing
to certain laws which seem to have force in the whole of that part
of New Guinea between various tribes. The Pt. Moresby natives
were willing to carry goods as far as Momeara, but nothing could
induce them to go a step further. The Momeara natives were
also disposed to carry as far as the next village, but the same
difficulty was met with there, and as the villages became more
and more numerous, and the tribal boundaries narrower as the
travellers penetrated further inland, they found this curious
custom a great drawback to their explorations.
A new river was discovered at a distance of about 45 miles
from Pt. Moresby, emptying itself into the Laloki, and Mr. Morton,
named it after Mr. Goldie. This river runs very rapidly, with
many falls of great height, and as far as could be judged seems
to have its source at the foot of the Owen Stanley Range.
The explorers afterwards came across a village which was
built in the forks of trees, the natives of which were very
shy, but an incident occurred there which shows how very
beneficial an influence the presence of the missionaries has exerted


in the natives of that part of New Guinea. When the inhabitants
of the village had recovered from their fears, they became a little
bolder, and, approaching within speaking distance, one of them
inquired in his language if the white man was a friend of Mr.
Lawes, and on an affirmative answer being given they immediately
became friendly. The missionary referred to had never been in
this part of the district, but his name was known to the natives as
a bye-word of peace, and the simple fact that the white men were
his friends was sufficient to ensure a good reception. Mr. Morton
observed that the natives had a very good knowledge of tropical
agriculture; their gardens are neatly fenced, and they grow in
profusion yams, taro, sugarcane, bread fruit, and some extremely
fine tobacco. He and his party experienced great kindness
on the part of these natives. Prospecting was also tried both
along the Goldie Eiver and its numerous small tributaries, and
up to the point whence they returned, the colour was found
only in the river itself, but none could be found in any of the
tributaries; this seems to point to the fact that the gold has been
washed from the foot of the Owen Stanley Range where it is
surmised lies the source of the Goldie.
In 1871 the Russian corvette Yitiaz landed on the eastern
coast of New Guinea, a gentleman who has devoted his life to
the advancement of our knowledge of the natural history of the
great island, and who for over four years has resided among
the wild tribes of that inhospitable coast, collecting a vast
amount of scientific information and studying the beautiful
animated nature of that splendid country, I have named the
Russian savant, Baron Miclouho Maclay. The part of the
coast which he explored is situated on the eastern side of New
Guinea, between Dam pier Island and King William Gape. It
extends over a distance of nearly 200 miles, and the Russian
naturalist made numerous excursions inland, exploring the country
at an average distance of 40 miles from the coast. That part of
New Guinea is very high, and between the sea shore and the high
summits of the coast range the total distance does not exceed 50
to 60 miles. Beyond a certain height on the slope of the moun-
tains the country is uninhabited. Near the coast, however, the
natives are very numerous; they were very troublesome at first,
and the Baron often felt very insecure among his savage neigh-
bours, but his great energy, his just and kind treatment of them,
enabled him to pass safely through all dangers. That part of


the eastern coast is now named the Maclay coast, and the
Russian naturalist’s explorations are by far the most important
made hy any traveller in New Guinea. But Maclay did not
confine his labours to the east coast of the island. In 1874 he
visited the Papua-Koviay coast, which was formerly examined
by the Dutch, penetrated at a certain distance inland, and
discovered at a height of 1,500 feet above the sea level the
beautiful lake of Kamaka-Wallar.
Besides the vast amount of important geographical informa-
tion about New Guinea which Maclay has collected, the results of
his investigations in other fields of science, his anthropological and
ethnological researches in a country so admirably suited for such
studies, will be awaited for with impatience by the scientific world
After a residence of eighteen months on the Maclay coast in
1871-72, and excursion in 1874 on the Papua-Koviay coast, two
or more years’ travels in 1876 and 1877 in his scientific domain
among the Papuans of Astrolabe Bay, his explorations of the
south coast in 1879 and 1880, a trip on board the “ Wolverene” in
1881, and a last visit in 1883, three months ago, on his return from
Russia, to that admirable coast, which is so rightly named after
himself, the Russian savant needed rest.
He has now returned to Sydney, and is putting together the
results of his numerous experiences, in that little retreat at the
Biological station near Watson’s Bay, awaiting the time when the
work of twelve years passed outside the pale of civilisation
will have seen light, and ready again to return on his Maclay
coast among the savage races, who regard him no more as an
enemy—but as their friend and benefactor.
After the naturalists come the missionaries, and to them we
are indebted for the knowledge we possess of the customs and
habits of the natives of the inland tribes round Pt. Moresby.
They were the first to ascend the Fly River, a distance of over
200 miles, and the mission steamer “ Ellengowan ” has visited
many parts of the coast. The Revd. Messrs. Lawes and
Chalmers have at different periods visited the districts round
Pt. Moresby, Hall Sound, and Yule Island. In August, 1880,
Mr. Chalmers started from Pt. Moresby and examined the
district lying behind Redscar Bay, and Messrs. Chester and
Beswick started for an inland journey under the guidance
of the chief of Momeara. The year before Mr. Chalmers
had visited the country between Pt. Moresby and the foot


of Mt. Owen Stanley and went to the Elkiri district. He
tried but in vain to cross the Owen Stanley Range, and reach
the East coast, but on his return journey crossing the head
of the Laloki he traversed two districts at the foot of Mount
Astrolabe, and from the summit of a high spur obtained a splendid
view'of a country which he says has no equal in New Guinea.
It is a succession of green ridges between which are fruitful and
well-watered valleys • the country is densely populated, beautifully
cultivated near the villages, and the natives are very friendly.
In one of these excursions Mr. Chalmers came across a splendid
fall on the Laloki River, the height of which he estimated at
900 feet.
I have to record two more expeditions,—one of a commercial
character along the north-west coast and the shores of Macleur
Inlet, and the other in search of gold in the Port Moresby district
and near the Owen Stanley Range.
In 1877, Mr. Hartog, a Dutch merchant of Macassar, visited
in the “ Egerton ” the district situated in the vicinity of McOluer
Inlet, which the traders from Ceram have long been in the
habit of visiting at irregular intervals. The scenery on the
shores of the Gulf is magnificent. The hills, which rise from the
sea, are covered with virgin forests inhabited by the Alfuras
tribes, and about forty villages containing a population of 20,000
Papuans form a regular cordon of trading centres round the
bay. The coast tribes act as go-between the traders and the
Alfuras of the interior, and Mr. Hartog describes the people he
was in connection with as neither savage, treacherous, nor cunning,
but rather lively and energetic, and showing great eagerness to
trade. The commerce of the Gulf is estimated by him at a value
of £BO,OOO to £90,000 annually, and could easily be increased.
The merchants of Macassar, Ceram, and Goram, however, are
afraid of establishing regular communications with the country ;
but, according to Mr. Hartog, the fear is more one of tradition
than real insecurity. Sago forms the principal food of the natives*
and the land produces naturally and in abundance everything
desirable. Nutmegs grow wild and in profusion, and the soil is
of surpassing richness.
The results of Mr. Hartog’s expedition were both interesting
and useful, more so than those of the Australian expedition in
search of gold, which visited the country about the Laloki and
Goldie Rivers, and returned without having been successful in


their search for the precious metal. They left behind them their
horses which have considerably multiplied, and will probabb be
found very useful to an exploring party intending to start from
Port Moresby. This was about the only good result of that
expedition, which did not increase our knowledge of the geography
of that part of New Guinea the party visited. Since then, Lt.
Powell visited part of the east and south-east coast, and lately
published the results of his observations in a paper which he read
before the Geographical Society of London.
Such is in a brief resume the extent of the knowledge we
actually possess of the great island. Compared to what remains
to be known, it is very little indeed, but the experience acquired
by others is of the greatest importance.
lI._FCJTURE explorations.
Before entering upon any scheme of future exploration, it is
necessary to form as good an idea as possible of the extent of the
country to be examined, and of the probable difficulties to be
encountered. It plainly appears, judging from past experience
in New Guinea that nature and the natives have placed many
difficulties in the ways of small and ill-equipped exploring parties.
Isolated explorers cannot go very far from the coast, and fever
and ague would soon put a stop to the enthusiasm of the most
eager adventure seeker. But there are always to be found in the
world, inexperienced young men ready to jump at any chance
they may get of acquiring fame, without any definite aims, and
without calculating beforehand the risks they may run in rushing
into undertakings which cannot in any way bring any beneficial
results, either to the public or to themselves. We have had in
our own colony, and in connection with the very island which
is the subject of this lecture to-night, a sad and striking example
of the results that may be anticipated from ill-contrived expeditions
in search of adventures in a new land. The fate of the“ Maria ’’
expedition twelve years ago is still within the memory of many
of my hearers.


Captain. Moresby has related the rescue of the survivors of
that expedition. The “ Maria ” was wrecked on the Queensland
coast before ever reaching New Guinea, and almost the whole of
its passengers were drowned or killed by the natives, seven or
eight of them were rescued by the “ Basilisk,” and a few others
reached Cardwell in safety, whence they returned home. “ Thus,”
says Moresby, “ended this unfortunate attempt to reach New
Guinea, an attempt which is but one proof out of many that
Australian interest points to the possession of that great island,”
This last reflection of the gallant officer contained a hope which is
near being realised, and now that the atttention of everybody
in Australia is attracted towards that magnificent country,
the necessity of obtaining an accurate knowledge of
the features of the island, and of the distribution of natural
resources throughout its interior becomes almost a
National care. It would be an everlasting shame if we
were to allow others to perform a task which is so essentially our
own. One great difficulty to be surmounted will probably be
found in the hostility of the natives, who, on the banks of the Fly
River, and on many points of the coast, have shewn themselves
very much opposed to the white man’s intrusion. Wherever the
Malayan influence is great, this will be found to be the case;
in the far interior, however, where the true Papuan race will
probably be met with in all its purity, the difficulties may not be so
great. These people have never seen any white men, and their first
impression will be one of curiosity and possibly of fear if the party
have horses. It has been noticed that the natives were greatly
afraid of horses, and it is the opinion of Mr. Hargrave and other
New Guinea explorers that the presence of horses will be in itself a
great protection to any party that may attempt to explore the
island. The New Guinea blacks are afraid of those great
creatures which they have never seen, and acting on the thought
that “ discretion is the better part of valour,” they keep away
from them as much as they can. But we are now looking on the
bright side of the picture, and the facts may be found very
different. The Papuans of the interior may show towards a
party of white strangers the same hostility that the coast tribes
have evinced, and this opinion will find support if the narrative
of d’Albertis is not exaggerated. The Italian naturalist had
several encounters with the noble savage on the banks of the Fly
River, and found him more ready to deal in arrows than in birds
of Paradise.


However, difficulties of that sort have been met with in other
countries, and may be overcome in New Guinea, but those who
undertake to join an exploring party to the dark island must be
prepared to face great and unknown dangers. One who does not
possess great natural courage, a cool head, and sound judgment,
and who is not willing to bow, without the slightest hesitation, to
the authority of the head of the expedition, is unfit to be a member
of such a party and had better stop at home.
In dealing with native races, experience has taught the
necessity of acting with the greatest caution. Intending explorers
in New Guinea must be alive to the necessity of treating the
natives with the greatest kindness, avoiding any interference in
their affairs, respecting their customs, however barbarous they may
be. “Be just in all your dealings,” says Baron Maclay, “ and above
all, try to impress the native’s mind with the fact that you have
come for a special purpose, and that you will not interfere with
them ; they may then leave you alone.” I say may leave you
alone, as it would be foolish to neglect other precautions ; those
indicated above are only dictated by the experience of the past,
and, if acted upon in every point, they will probably afford
sufficient security; but, however just one may be towards savages,
they sometimes prove very treacherous, and it is often when they
appear the most friendly that they are most to be dreaded. The
fate of the gallant commodore Goodenough, the most humane of
commanders, has taught others that prudence must be exercised.
The greatest of other difficulties, which an expedition
will have to contend against, is the unhealthiness of the climate.
In the low lands on the coast, and even up to a certain height on
the mountain slopes, fever and ague reign supreme; but the
first white men who settled in the north of Queensland, and
those who now are colonising the Northern Territory of South
Australia, had to contend with the same climatic difficulties. At
one time the Queensland fevers were spoken of as the greatest
obstacle towards the colonisation of the northern districts by the
white man. No doubt a great many of the pioneers of those far
away districts succumbed to the effects of the climate, but
experience has taught their followers what precautions should be
taken against the fever. These precautions may be resumed, thus :
The utmost sobriety should be observed and the use of spirits
condemned from the first; no water should be drunk unless it had
been previously boiled, and this rule should be strictly insisted


upon ; no one should be allowed to sleep on the ground ; and an
exploring party ought to be well provided with Ashantee
hammocks; lastly the party should be accompanied by one or two
medical men, and carry a large quantity of sulphate of Quinine and
other medicines generally used to combat fever and ague. Should
these precautions against the possibility of hostility on the part
of the natives, and against the unhealthiness of the climate, be
strictly adhered to, prompt obedience to the orders of the head of
the expedition exacted from every member of the party, and care
be taken not on any consideration to interfere with the natives ;
then, some success may be anticipated.
The preceding remarks point to the necessity of an
expedition on a large scale. A party should be formed of
sufficient strength, properly equipped and armed, whose object
should be the geographical exploration of New Guinea. Such
expedition, placed under the command of a man having had
previous experience in tropical countries, would be composed of
surveyors, skilled collectors, and persons possessing special
knowledge in various branches of science. Men already
accustomed to tropical travels, able to turn their hands to anything,
and a few Malays well skilled in the preparation of sago, which
will be found of the greatest use as an article of diet, should
accompany the expedition as subordinates. Two medical men
should go with the party, and it would be all the better if they
happened to possess special abilities as naturalists. Although the
principal object of that first expedition would be the study of
physical geography of New Guinea, its results would be much more
important if the party was so composed. There is little doubt
that men of ability would be found both at home and in Australia
to form such an expedition. As to the task of selecting men for
an enterprise of that sort, the Administrative Council of the
Geographical Society of Australasia would probably correspond on
the subject with scientific societies at home, and appoint on their
recommendation such gentlemen as may appear most eligible-
The services of properly qualified medical men, surveyors, and
collectors could easily be obtained in the Australian colonies, as
there is no lack among us of men of the right stamp, who will be
ready to brave the dangers of the expedition ; but we may
have to look at home for specialists in the various fields of science.
The necessity of the formation of a party of sufficient strength to
be able to resist the possible attacks of savages is apparent;


although no doubt a great deal might he accomplished hy smaller
expeditions. But if it is considered desirable that the party be
so composed, it is essential that the services of the best men
be secured, as the results would necessarily be of the greatest
importance, not only to geographical science but also to all sciences
in general, and as a necessary consequence in view of the future
colonisation of the island, to those who may wish to settle in New
Guinea.
As to the route that such an expeditior might take, much will
necessarily depend on circumstances, but a scheme might be agreed
upon which would allow of the possibility of maintaining, in a
certain measure, correspondence from time to time with the
expedition, and affording it relief in case of fever or the hostility of
the natives had reduced its strength, besides relieving it of all
cumbersome luggage in the shape of large collections of specimens
which it would be most necessary to preserve intact, if possible.
The south-western watershed of New Guinea offers for that
purpose the greatest advantages, as the island is admirably watered
by numerous and large rivers, navigable to a considerable distance
with steam launches of little draught. In connection with the
expedition operating on the mainland, a second party might operate
along the coast, whose object would be to recognise the principal
features of the coast, the entrance of rivers, and which would
ascend the largest of them up to their highest navigable point,
exploring the country on either side. It might be agreed upon
that the two expeditions meet at certain given points. For in-
stance. should the main expedition start from Hall Sound, its
first stage would be thence to the highest navigable point of the
Aird River, which disembogues in the Gulf of Papua; then it
would meet the relief expedition, which would take back the sick
and those of the party who would not care to proceed further, and
also the correspondence and the collections of natural history,
specimens made during this first part of the exploration. The
main body might then be reinforced with men of the relief expe-
dition, and whatever provisions be needed, might be procured.
They would then separate, the main body proceeding towards the
interior, gaining higher levels as soon as possible, so as to escape the
effects of the malaria in the lowlands, and they would examine the
south-western slope of the main dividing Range, crossing on their
way the head of all streams and rivers which may have their source
in the mountains. They would then make for the confluence of the


Alice Hargrave and the Fly River, the position o£ which is approxi-
mately known, and meet there for the second time the relief party,
who, after descending the Aird River, would examine the coast
along the shores of the Gulf of Papua, ascend the Fly and
explore the country on its banks at a greater distance and in a
more systematic manner than was done by d’Albertis. There thev
would separate again to meet on the eastern coast, the main body,
after exploring the country on the western side of the main range,
might endeavour to cross the mountains and reach the opposite
coast. It is probable, however, that after crossing the main
dividing range, the explorers would come upon the source of that
large river, the mouth of which forms such an immense delta on
the north-east of New Guinea at the head of Gelwink Bay. It
might be deemed more prudent for the expedition to follow the
course of that river, either in canoes or on rafts, which could be
easily constructed, as there will be no lack of material at hand.
Should the state of the party permit of gaining the eastern shore,
and reach Humboldt Bay, the explorers might there be met by the
relief expedition and brought back to the nearest Australian port.
This, however, is only a sketch of what might be accomplished,
but circumstances may greatly interfere with the carrying out of
such a scheme, and much must necessarily be left in expeditions
of that sort to the discretion of the leaders. As to that part of
the country extending between Port Moresby and the extreme
south-east, the missionaries of the London Missionary Society
have already established many stations on the coast, and we may
leave to them the task of completing our geographical knowledge
of that part of New Guinea,
Thus important geographical and scientific information might
be gained as to the aspect and capabilities of New Guinea, and
the efforts to colonise the country might be in the future guided
by the results obtained. Experience of that sort in a country
offering great inducements to Australian trade and enterprise,
cannot be too dearly bought, and the first expense, although
probably large, would be the means of saving the expenditure of
much larger sums and preventing the sacrifice of many human
lives in attempts at settlements in places most unsuited for
colonising purposes. The necessity of obtaining information as to the
population of New Guinea, the customs and manners of the natives,
the probable reception Europeans might expect to meet at their
hands, are subjects of the utmost importance to future colonists.


A telegram the other day announced that the British Government
would simplly allow settlements to be formed at some point of
the coast facing Torres Straits. This information evidently
emanated from persons little acquainted with the character of the
country, and still less with that of the kind of colonists who
might be expected to cross over to New Guinea. The coast must
be the starting point of colonisation certainly, but is it reasonable
or even possible to expect that Europeans will remain in the fever-
stricken districts of the low coast lands, when greater and better
inducements may be offered to their enterprise in healthier and
more suitable localities, on the mountain slopes in the interior.
Large navigable rivers offer splendid natural highways to the sugar,
tobacco, sago, and nutmeg producing districts, and is it likely that
Europeans could be prevented from trading in those commodities
with the natives.
But we must bear in mind that the colonisation of
New Guinea will be very different to that of even similar
tropical parts of Australia. In the latter country , the white
man has had to deal with nomadic tribes, having no ' fixed
settlements, no plantations, and hardly any social order, besides
being neither numerous nor powerful. In New Guinea we
are brought in the presence of a very opposite state of affairs.
Not only are the natives numerous, but in most parts they have
attained a certain degree of rough civilisation, they live in large
communities, independent from each other and follow agricultural
pursuits. The fact that they cultivate all kinds of natural
products in their small, neatly fenced gardens, denotes that the
idea of property exists among them to a high degree, and it is
needless to say that they will resent any kind of interference with
their customs. If the white man does not take the necessary
precautions to ascertain the traditions of the natives in
that and many other respects, conflicts will certainly arise that
may ruin all efforts to colonise New Guinea, set the black and
white races at each other’s throats, and end in disaster to both.
It is of no use trying to put a stop to colonising enterprises
with a race whose genius itself lies in that particular direction.
Wherever money may be made, or gold found, nothing will pre-
vent the Anglo-Saxon race from emigrating to any part of the globe.
The rapid means of communication we now possess precipitate
events which, but for the advent of electricity and steam, might
not have occurred for the next two or three centuries. Wherever


a steamer can take them, if there is any chance of making money
Europeans will go, and it is useless hoping to preserve even one
spot on earth free from their intrusions.
But humanity has its rights, which, unfortunately, have not
always been respected in the past, and this, the present generation
has to atone for. It is the duty of the future governing power
in New Guinea to see that no harm should befall the natives in
their intercourse with Europeans. Attempts at exploration and
settlement will be made, and past experience in the islands of the
Pacific has shown, that in dealing with the black races, the first
settlers have in many instances acted in a most unscrupulous
manner towards 1 hem. It is to be hoped that the Government
will enforce a law, prohibiting the sale of fire-arms, powder, or
dynamite to the natives, under the most stringent penalties. At
the same time no necessary expense should be spared that will
help in affording us reliable information as to the geographical
features, the capabilities, and the actual state of the native races
in a country which is likely to be colonised from Australian shores,
New Guinea will have to be explored, and these questions settled,
before any attempt at colonisation is likely to be successful.
As for the means which will have to be taken to meet the
expenses of future expeditions, it is evident that the Geographical
Society of Australasia is yet too young to be in a position to
contribute in any other manner than in seeing that the funds
subscribed by the public, or the Australian Governments, are
properly used. Wilfrid Powell lately stated that a sum of <£6,000
would be sufficient to cover the expenses of an expedition to New
Guinea, and the Geographical Society of Australasia, besides
appealing to the public to subscribe, might make an effort to
obtain the financial aid of the Governments interested, and act in
conjunction with the Royal Geographical Society of London, of
which we would be proud, like our confreres of Bombay, to form
a branch. In any case £6,000 is a small sum when the
exploration of such a country as New Guinea is the object, and
the future of millions of our black fellow creatures is at stake.
I will terminate this long paper by making a fervent appeal,
in the name of humanity, to those who may first have to deal
with the New Guinea natives. Let the first care of the governing
power be to prohibit, under the heaviest penalty, the introduction
of spirituous liquors in any part of the country; and let future
colonists bear well in mind that they will bring upon the native


races, and upon themselves, and those that will follow them,
nothing but desolation and ruin, should they, in their desire of
excessive gain, introduce among them rum and other poisons. In
European communities, much of the misery which we observe is
due to the abuse of spirits; but with natives of hot climates,
such as New Guinea, spirits are the most terrible poison that
could be introduced, as their use fatally tends to procure the
wholesale deterioration and ultimate destruction of the race.
“ Di amonds in Ai'Rica. —The value of the diamonds j
The population of New Guinea was at first 3- f in g Ol1 th Africa from 1880 to the present tirnA
' absurdly exaggerated, and then it was unwar- ld believed to be about ,£13,000,000.
rantably brought down to an excessively low g EgT _ The sc hooner Griffin arrived at Cook-
minimum. The Germans estimated their share town w ; EI news from Sud Est to the 6th instant,
at only 110,000, while they generously conceded a There were twenty-three miners on board, and 2410 z
137,500 as the population of the British quarter. of gold. The passengers, though far from strong,
The items of evidence are certainly vague and i® were not as severely stricken wii n t 100-men
, . , , T 1 , , . ° of name in the last two boats. There are about IUU men
inconclusive, but I have had occasion from time ° g on Sud Est. They are beginning to work the
to time to call attention to some of them, which fc s cree ks, and blast the bars away with dynamite,
pointed to a considerably higher estimate. The Flour, tea’ and sugar have been very scarce ; and no
testimony of Mr. Millman to the “thickly le medicine was available. At St. Aignan there are
populated” country on the banks of the Fly r ? about 100 men; and coarse gol las Inn
River is the latest contribution to the favorable g prospectors (a
data, so that there is no necessity for resorting )y arty of Frenchmen) pegged out one mile and a half
to mere conjecture in arriving at a reckoning, 0 f the creek between them. The health is not bad ;
although any passable estimate must have a ae and there has been no grog on the island for eight
wide margin. The probability seems to be that I,weeks,
the population of British New Guinea is some-
where between 250,000 and 500,000. If the
German estimate be doubled the figures will not
be far from the truth, and then they are more J
likely to be too low than too high. The Ger-
mans may be right in their estimate of their
; °wn quarter, although it may be doubted if they
’ know much about it. The rectification of their
estimate, however, must be left to themselves. *
Among the natives of the south coast there is a \ \& ; | I
fair proportion of agriculturists—the materials j v
of which a prosperous country can best be con- £ - (■) /
structed. The savage races which are open to - f /<0 qJ ... y
the reproach of dying out are those which live 1 • ’
by hunting and fishing, or by the mere consump- 1
tion of the spontaneous fruits of the earth. It
is by industry alone that races survive.


TEE ALLEGED DISCOVERY OF
GOLD IN NEW GUINEA.
A PROSPECTING COMPANY FORMED.
An announcement was made in The Argus
of yesterday to the effect that a company had {
been floated with a view of fitting out an ex-
pedition to New Guinea, to prospect the 1
south-eastern portion of the island fongold, *
and now that the company has been formed 1
there can be no objection to the whole
of the particulars being published, so far
as the promoters think it wise that they
should be divulged. The statement that gold
had been found in New Guinea was first pub-
lished upon the authority of a young man,
Mr. Kerry, who formed one of an exploring
party which went to New Guinea. The
report was generally received with con-
siderable incredulity, which the sub-
sequent inaction of Mr. Kerry tended
to increase. However, the statement was
reiterated by Mr. Kerry when he appeared
a few weeks ago as a witness in the Su-
preme Court in a libel action which arose
in connexion with the same expedition, and
since then the matter has been brought pro-
minently under the notice of many leading
mining authorities and speculators. The ex-
hibition of a fine 6oz. nugget, which was
stated to be the largest of the pieces of gold
obtained, gave the affair at once an air of
reality.
The story related by Mr. Kerry as to the cir-
cumstances under which the gold was found
is somewhat extraordinary. It may be
stated that Mr. Kerry, who during the last
10 years has pursued a maritime life
in the South Pacific, occupied the
position of mate in the schooner which
carried the exploring party to the south-east
coast of New Guinea, and thence up the
Micassa River. It is stated that the party ji
proceeded for a distance of 120 miles inland,
and reached a spot about 20 miles distant j
from the head waters of the Fly River, which
is situated to the north of the Micassa. Here l
the expedition was attacked by natives, and ‘
the vessel had to be abandoned. Mr. Kerry
then accompanied the remainder of the party
in the return journey overland to the coast,
which was not reached for 11 days, after great
privation and suffering. The situation
was rendered much worse by the dissension
which had arisen among the party. Mr. Kerry
states that it was upon the third day after the ■
return march was commenced that the dis-
covery of the gold was made. He was walk-
ing at some distance behind his companions,
and becoming footsore he stopped at a creek
to bathe his feet. Whilst thus engaged his at-
tention was attracted to a bed of quartz on
the bank of the stream. The quartz appeared
to be an outcrop of a large reef, and the
exposed portion was about 20ft. in length
and 4ft. in width above the bed of the creek.
Gold could be seen freely, and with the aid of
a tomahawk, which he carried in his belt, he
had very soon knocked out several pieces of .
the, quartz, and obtained five nuggets, of '
which the one now exhibited was the largest. J
He concealed .the nuggets inside his shirt, |
k and followed on after the rest of the .party. _j
who had struck into the bush. The different i
members of the expedition were at this time '
scarcely on speaking terms, and Mr. Kerry <
says that he determined to keep the dis-
covery to himself. The situation of the i
party was also so desperate that he
did not attach the same importance to the j
matter as he would otherwise have done, it
being then a matter of grave doubt whether 1
the men would reach the coast alive. The lo- j
cality in which the gold is alleged to have been ,
found is between the Micassa and the Fly (
rivers, and about 80 miles from the south-
east coast. Upon his arrival at Sydney in Oc-
tober last, Mr. Kerry spoke about his discovery \
to General MTver and to Dr. Belgrave, j
a member of the Geographical Society
of Australasia. He states that two out
of the live nuggets have been lost, but
that they were not nearly so large as the
one which has been displayed in Melbourne.
The only real support which the report re-
ceives is contained in the nugget itself. This
is a fine specimen of crystalline gold, weigh-
ing 6021. sdwt.« 18gr., and so beautifully
formed as to give rise to the impression that
it has been manufactured. An examination
of the nugget, however, seems to prove the
contrary. Mr. Cosmo Newbery has sub-
mitted it to a careful microscopic test, and
has pronounced it to be without doubt a
natural production. The following are the
terms of a report which that gentleman has
furnished concerning the gold:—
“ The specimen of crystalline gold shown me by
Mr. T. C. Kerry has undoubtedly been derived from
a quartz rook, fragments of which may be detected
on the under surface. The crystalline surface has
been in contact with a sandy clay.”
The gold has also been shown to Mr. Regi-
nald Murray, the Government geologist for
Victoria, and he fully concurs in the opinion
expressed by Mr. Newbery. He believes that
the character and appearance of the speci-
men bear out the statement made by Mr. Kerry
as to the manner in which it was discovered.
It is the general opinion of mining authori-
ties that the gold was not obtained in Aus-
tralia, as it differs in colour and general
appearance from any yet seen ; and it this be
true, it affords a further prool of the truth of
Mr. Kerry’s statement. The promoters of the
company have made inquiries as to the relia-
bility of Mr. Kerry, with satisfactory results.
Replies have been received from New Zea-
land, where Mr. Kerry was well known,
to the effect that he belongs to a
respectable family residing at Auckland,
and that he is considered to be thoroughly
trustworthy. Dr. Belgrave has also been
communicated with, and he states that
Mr. Kerry showed him five specimens of
quartz studded with gold, which he said he
had brought from New Guinea. He added
that, although Mr. Kerry gave no proof of
his statement, he believed him.
The result of the inquiries made was that
on Monday last the prospectus of the New
Guinea Exploring Company Limited was
issued. The capital was fixed at £3,750, in
150 promoters’ shares, of which GO were
offered to the public. Mr. Kerry has been al-
lotted 30 shares, and is to receive £l,OOO if the
reef is discovered. The company was floated on
Wednesday, there being over 200 applications
for the 60 available shares, and the registra-
tion was effected upon the same day. Among
the directors are Mr. J. F. Levien, the
Minister of Mines; Mr. M. H. Davies,
M.L.A.; and Messrs. H. Byron Moore, Wil-
liam Orr. and C. W. Chapman. No time will
MBBgost in equipping the expedition. Mr.
HR-y will be placed in command, and the
BPparty will probably consist of about 10
Europeans, who will afterwards be rein-
forced by some of the natives on
the New Guinea coast. If arrangements
can be made in the Mining department, Mr.
Reginald Murray will accompany the expedi-
tion as mineralogist. Mr. Kerry hopes to be
able to leave Melbourne on Tuesday next,
and he will proceed to Torres Straits by one
of the China boats from Sydney. A schooner
will then be chartered or purchased to carry
the party to New Guinea. In February last
Kerry applied to Major-General Scratchley,
special commissioner for New Guinea, for
the necessary permission to lead an ex-
pedition to explore the south-eastern
portion of the island, in the vicinity of the
River Micassa. Sir Feter Scratchley has
replied that he has no objection to the
expedition under certain conditions, of which
the principal are—That full information
should be given to the commissioner as to
the movements of the expedition; that the
operations of the expedition are to be con-
ducted entirely at the party’s own risk ; and
that the expedition is not to interfere in any
way with the explorations undertaken by
the Geographical Society of Australasia
on the Aird River, or with the exploration of
Mr. H. O. Forbes, of the Royal Geographical
Society of England, who purposes to land at
Redscar Bay in order to explore the Owen
Stanley Range. The commissioner reserves
to himself the right to cancel the permission
“on proof that your proceedings are inter-
fering with the maintenance of good order
and government within the limits of the pro-
tectorate ; whereupon you will be required to
leave the island.” Compliance with the regu-
lations issued by Commodore Erskine in No-
vember, 1884, making Fort Moresby the sole
port of entry, and prohibiting the supply of
arms, ammunition, and intoxicating liquors
to the natives, is also enjoined.
The Germans in New Guinea and New
Britain —A traveller, writing from Ralune
under date of 20 th February, says : “Wo
passed through German New Guinea, New
Britain, and New Ireland, and found affairs in
those parts rather quiet. In Finch Hafen, the
capital, there is a large settlement. The pre-
sent Governor is on the eve of parting for Ger-
many to take home his children, and will be
; absent 12 months. The New Guinea Company
1 f aVe spent already about £250,000 in starting
the colonisation of New Guinea and adjacent
islands. They have erected a great many sta-
tions along the coast, started a local govern-
ment, and surveyed all the harbors. Besides,
: tfae J tave been having trials in agriculture, and
now, after this experience, have started large
plantations in New Guinea. This scheme, wa
believe, will be the success of the country
owing to cheapness and abundance of native
labor Already they have 500 natives from
the adjacent islands, and 200 Malays. The?
are employed in growing cotton, coffee and
tobacco. The company has forbidden home
emigration, and has thrown the country open
now, wishing the emigration to come from
Australia. The adjacent islands, New Britain
and New Ireland, are onlj two days steaming
from Finch Hafen, there live the old pioneer
traders, two German firms and one American
firm, who have been there these last 12 years
The firm of T. Parrel and Co. have bees trading
as well as planting. Their Raiuhe plantation
was started 5 years ago, and seems to be a
great success. They informed us that the labor
market is not expensive, as they recruit natives
Irom the next island, Bouganville ; that their
' small plantation was more r less oa trial of the , i!
soil, and that as they own hundreds of thou-
sands of acres of land in New Britain, the ■; mean
to enlarge it. They grow South Sea'island
cotton well, coffee, cocoanuts and broomccrn.
We saw three Wesleyan mission stations, too,
and a great many of their teachers. They seem
to have done a great deal of good amongst the
natives. We hope some of our enterprising
people of Australia will visit these islands and
help to colonise them.’—Sydney Daily Tele ■
graph.
------eVa wui trade with direct Dutcn
steamers,
It is now understood that the German
Government has taken over the administra-
■■ tion of German-New* Guinea. At the same
time the company will vigorously open plan-
tations, bringing labour from Java. I
M the steamer Balmain was slewing roiind


The reports recently furnished by
Dr. Macgregor, Administrator of
British New Guinea, to the Queens-
land Government, besides containing
much highly interesting matter, serve
to illustrate the difficulties which
lie before those who wish to develop
the resources of this little-known part
of Her Majesty’s dominions. It is now j
more than four years since the British
Protectorate was proclaimed over the
south - eastern portion of the great
island, and yet but very little has been
done towards turning the new posses-
sion to account. Partly from a climate
which has proved fatal to its first
High Commissioner and to other Euro-
peans who have attempted to explore it,
and partly from the objectionable habits
of its inhabitants, New Guinea has,
indeed, acquired rather a bad reputa-
tion among colonists. The expectations
of mineral and vegetable wealth that
were at one time formed of it have not
vet been realised ; and if it had not
been for the stir which its abortive
annexation by Sir J. MTlwraith
caused in 1883, it is possible that even
the attempts that are now being made
towards a closer acquaintance with it
would have been long postponed.
Now that the British and the
colonial Governments, however, have
put their hands to the tasK of
exploration and development, it is pro-
bable that the work will be carried on
either until something is accomplished
in the way of profitable settlement, or
until it is ascertained that all efforts in
that direction are likely to be wasted.
According to the agreement made at
the recent Colonial Conference, British
New Guinea is now to be provided with
an Administrator, a suitable steamship
supplied and maintained for three years
by the Home Government, and a
revenue of £15,000 per annum contri-
buted by the colonies of Queensland,
New South Wales, and Victoria. The
enterprise and energy required by the
pioneers of a new country will, no
\ doubt, be furnished in abundance from
a people which owes its existence as a
i nation to these same qualities shown in
I days gone by, and likely to be still
needed in days to come.
That the settlement of New Guinea,
however, will be a tougher job even
than the settlement of Australia is
made clear from a perusal of the Ad-
ministrator’s reports. The scene of
Jr. Macgbegor’s explorations was
anions' the archipelago of islands which
lie off the south-eastern extremity of
the continent. He had with him a
party of gold prospectors, who appear,
however, to have found little to gi' s
them encouragement. In St. Aignan,
the first island visited, gold was found
in three places, but not in payable
quantities. The formation of the
o-round in many places resembles
that of Sudest, where a certain
amount of gold has recently been
found. The population of the island,
estimated at about 3,000 souls, are
described as being active, energetic, and
industrious. 'I heir habits, however,
1 for an industrious people seem certainly
rather peculiar. There was apparently
no war all over the island, yet the in-
V habitants of one part could not go to
( another part for fear of being killed.
Jt would almost seem as if the un-
| sophisticated people of St. Aignan had
been trained in the school of Mr. G.lad-
. stone. who. as we know, at the time of
I the bombardment of Alexandria was
: able to deny that war was being waged
j there, though he was prepared to admit
I that military operations were in progress,
i In the case of the St. Aignan folk the
apparent discrepancy is, however,
capable of an easy and quite satisfactory
explanation. They were not at war, but
it seems that even in the piping times of
peace they have a fancy for human
skulls. “ I have no reason,” writes
Dr. Macgregor, with characteristic
Scotch cautiousness, “ to say that they
“ are cannibals, but it is quite clear they
“ are head-hunters.” The Adminis-
trator certainly had excellent grounds
for the latter conclusion, inasmuch as
i the islanders are in the habit of de-
corating the verandahs of their houses
with the skulls, and in some instances
with the right arms, of their
victims. They are, however, ready to
vary head-hunting with commercial
pursuits, and are very anxious to trade
with Europeans, especially for tobacco.
Unfortunately for the prospects of com-
merce, it seems that they have nothing
of any commercial value to offer in ex-
change. Yams, pumpkins, taro, sugar-
cane, some varieties of fruit, and a
very few fowls and pigs appear to con-
stitute their whole available capital.
And in these circumstances it is not
easy to see how a trade very profitable
to Europeans is in any way to be opened
«P-
The other islands visited by the
Administrator disclosed the existence of
a very similar state of things. In (
I some of them, such as Joannet and
iNorrnanby Islands, colours of gold were
I obtained in the creeks, but nothing
■ payable or in the shape of gold-bearing
I reefs was found. In Aiormauby Island
I intercourse with the natives was made
I difficult by the fact that four different
I languages were spoken, and that the
I only interpreters that could be procured
I would not venture out of their own part
I of the island for fear of being killed by
K their neighbours. It is evident that
among the inhabitants of the D’Entre-
casteaux Isles the notion of federation
has not as yet advanced much further
| than it has with us. In Normanby
Island, indeed, we learn that, though I
profound peace reigns over the land, I
the natives fight whenever they happen ||
to meet each other, and that, so far j|
from seeking to avoid them, in some in-
stances they take very good care that
these meetings shall occur. In other i
ways, however, they appear to be still
uncorrupted by the vices of civilisation.
Thus, when some tobacco was given
them in a bottle, they at ones added
water to it, and proceeded to drink off
the mixture. In other islands the
natives were far more knowing, and
knew the uses and virtues of the weed
as well as these who gave it
to them. Of actual hostility Dr.
Macgregor and his party met with
little or none, though in some in-
stances collisions with the natives were
only averted by timely withdrawal.
Many of the natives, though not exactly
hostile, were suspicious and unfriendly,
though some were accessible and
friendly in the extreme. The recent
murder of a European shipowner in
Chad’s Bay is alluded to by the Ad-
, ministrator, who regrets that he
had no force of native constabulary
wherewith to punish the perpetrators.
The incident illustrates forcibly some
I of the dangers which await the pioneers
lof New Guinea in their hazardous en-
terprise of opening up the country.
• But it is one of a class that is insepar-
l able from all undertakings of the kind,
and one also that has already been fre-
quently and fearlessly met. It is im-
possible to say whether New Guinea
will be the valuable acquisition to the
empire which at one time it was ex-
pected to prove. But it may be safely
asserted that its value, one way or
another, will in time be ascertained,
and that the process will be only de-
layed and not prevented by the dangers
land difficulties which Dr. Macgregor
[so honestly describes.
5-4
Cl
oo
OD


land opening up the colony must be rendered
more difficult. \ i
Nor are the reports from New Caledonia
I flattering for the administration. A firmer, a
more iron hand, is certainly required to be
| exercised over the convicts. But the latter are
i in some instances the creditors even of their own
Government; they have been promised grants
of land, &c., after purging their offences by a
few years’ confinement, and the authorities are i
not in a position to redeem their pledges. |
Hence there are bands of idle felons, who j
cannot be compelled to work, and yet must |
be kept in order and fed. M. Higgins, not j
unknown in your latitude, who organised some \
c< mpanies for farming New Caledonia, and at ;
one time the New Hebrides, by means of !
chartered convict labor, has sold all his rights
to the Rothschilds for an annuity of £5OO0 —
some say double. The Rothschilds chiefly
want the nickel mines, as they will thus com-
mand the raw material for the new coinage,
j the mcnctar’ lo w exacting that only French
I nickel must be employed.
NEW GUINEA AND THURSDAY
ISLAND.
[Bt Carls.—From Our Correspondent.]
THURSDAY ISLAND, Thursday.
Capt. Stracban, the well known New Guinea
explorer, has arrived at Somerset in the schooner
Julia, with 15 tons of wood, supposed to be
sandalwood; also a quantity of beche-de-mor
anti black lip pearl shelL He has a splendid
quantity of golden pearls of almost perfect
shape, which he has procured from the north-
west coast of New Guinea.
The Jumna, from London, has arrived out-
side, and signalled for assistance and hands to
work cargo. It is supposed that she is drawing
too much water to come up on a draught of 22
feet, which is all the channel allows for.
... l 0 . OfcL
Captain John Straohan, the Now Guinea
explorer, has received assurances from the
Colonial Office that the large tract of country
known as Strachan Island, embracing 750
square miles, equal to about 500,000 acres,
shall be transferred to him in fee-simple as
soon as he can guarantee the of
the same, provided he undertakes to deal with
the natives in a just and generous fashion.
The Imperial Government profess anxiety to
act in unison with the colonies in this matter,
but they have shown such strong leanings
towards Captain Strachan that the concession
mav be regarded as virtually granted.
Tta JLau, •" ‘ ‘ C U
03 —B
THE SOLOMON ISLANDS,
v/ \ H
A special meeting of the Royal Geographical
Society was held on Thursday evening in St
James’-hall, Phillip-street, for the purpose ol
hearing a lecture by Hr. C. N. Woodford,
j F.R.G.S., on “ The Solomon Islands: An
j account of their discovery and present
j condition.’’ Sir Edward, Strickland, K.C.8.,
j , president, occupied the chair, and there
f were present about 150 ladies and gentle-
men. The lecturer began by rapidly
j sketching the history of geographical discovery
, ia the Western Pacific in the early part of the
1 , sixteenth century. Two ships left Callao on
j . November 19, 1567, and early in 1568 they
I sighted what is now known as the Solomon
j - group. _ A journal kept by the purser of that
I . expedition was brought to light about 50 years
. ago, and is now in the possession of Mr,
Tyssen Amherst, of Diddlington-hall, Norfolk.
The lecturer has had access to that journal,
which occupies 300 pages of manuscript, ana
during his stay of three years in the group he
j has been engaged in identifying the places dis-
U covered- and named by the Spaniards, and in
taking photograohs of the people, their houses,
: | scenery, &c. He was successful in obtaining a
I splendid collection of zoological and entomo-
’f I logical specimens. These he exhibited before
the Royal Geographical Society of Great Britain
last year, on the of his reading
a paper on the Solomons, and he was publicly
thanked by the secretary of the English Zoologi-
cal Society for his valuable addition to the know-
ledge of the faun of the Western Pacific. In the
journal already referred to a vocabulary of
a words is given which were spoken by' ths
sr natives of over three centuries'ago, and Mr.
Woodford found this of great use to him, as it
19 appears the bush natives of to-day speak the
same tongue as their ancestors. It is worthy
d of remark that Mr. Woodford is the
ifc ; first white man who has penetrated into
j. !i the interior of the island of Guadalcana
to the mountains which rise to a height
(;. of 8000 ft. It was his desire to ascend to the
;o summit, but his native guides were afraid to ac-
L or company him and he was obliged to abandon
g his intention. Mr. Woodford’s description of a
native bird called “Negapode” was very in-
teresting. These birds, which are about the
t j size of a common fowl, lay a very large egg,
t which is much prized by the natives, and it u
1 the custom ofjthe islanders to clear thejtrees ofi
patches of the sandy beach to encou-
t rage the birds to deposit their eggs is
r these places. Mr. Woodford mentioned
r that the Spaniards found pigs.. fowls and
t j dogs in these islands when "they landed
I and he is firmly of the opinion that the dog oi
i the Solomons is of the same species aa °tha
J (Jingo of Australia. Ths lecture was illustrated
, by a large number of photographs shown by
means of the limelight. At the conclusion Mr.
Woodford, having replied to a number of
questions put to him by the audience, a hearty
vote of thanks was accorded to him by
acclamation. As Mr. Woodford intends to
settle in Sydney, it may be hoped that fatara
lectures may be given by him oa this i uteres*-
ing subject.


’
K ' '
