

ll©"®'
PAST AND PRESENT
RECORDS
or
| .
ifj NEWCASTLE,
NEW SO CJTI-3I wales.
0
r.Y
i / v r i xi
JOHN BIN. OLE.
NEWCAS'I LE:
BATLE.T, SON, AND HARWOOD,
FJ LOT OFFICE ttOmSK-HTHEET.
1873.
t f
- ■ - -
■


— 4 U —k—*-
O-
V (f' / 9io
JS
/S'*
A<U-*-cC
J>
tO~<-^~a->
/7
/3 'yjtr
<U-' Tu^un^LJej^
'Zltsx^C


:sent
lip
]v
■V" J
pi ' I « LE,
■< Kp c
\ J K-i A ,E&
o*p \h
Hp ifi
1 *5 \
*t 4 P i
** a-i | pi
it, f- I 01 j »
Pi »I In
3 ** * P


f —^
V
(As- c-cxl
s
f, <c .
• ■' : -’.A
tc> '-j'iuw ~hh.
J3 Lsyy^e^
tv
. 4.
tS)~*~*-cC- 7xjl*^s~c.
CjO -<_
7* oyi^
/ 3 7t? ex^^cst
C—
ex^xx — ,
C^ X ~ 4 o —»■<—«-


PAST AND PRESENT
EECOEDS
NEWCASTLE,
NEW SOUTH WALES,
JOHN SINGLE’
NEWCASTLE »
BAYLEY, SON, AND HABWOOD,
PILOT OFFICH, HUNTKB-STRIKT.


f
■


NEWCASTLE,
NEW SOUTH WALES
■t- ,o~go.
THE DISCOVERER.
A sketch of the discoverer’s career may be the means of handing
dow n to posterity the services of an enterprising seaman. The
following is from the voyage of Governor Phillip to Botany Bay,
published in 1789, page 183.
“We have been induced to subjoin tin this place a concise ac-
count of Lieutenant Shortland, as well because his experience as
an officer nas been fgi eat, as from the consideration that his journal
has been deemed g by those who best know its value, of very
serious importance.
“Lieutenant John Shortland, very early in life, had a
strong predilection for the Navy, and in 1755 ; at the age of six-
teen, he entered into His Majesty’s service on board the Anson,
a sixty-four gun ship, which went out in the fleet under the com-
mand of Admiral Boscawen. On the banks of Newfoundland
this fleet fell in with, and took the Alcide and Ly’s, two French
ships of seventy four guns. On his return from this expedition,
he went on hoard the Gullodtn, n seventy-four gun ship, and was
in the fleet under Admiral Byng, off Minorca, Shortly afterwards,
he went into the Hampton Court , commanded by Captain Harvey,
in which ship he was present at the taking of the Foudyroyant
and Arpg. On his arrival in England, he went on board the
Vanyuard, Commodore Swanton, to the West Indies, in the fleet
under Admiral and was present at the reduction of


Martinique, the Grenades, and tlie other islands which were then
captured. . In 1763, ho was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant
by Admiral Swanton, since which period he has always been em-
ployed in active and important services. During the late war,
and for some time afterwards, he was chiefly employed in going
from America, except in the year 1782, when he was appointed to
command the transports with the 97th iCegt. on board, destined
for the relief of Gibraltar, under convoy of FLM.S, Cerberus and
Apollo. He was not only successful in wetting all the transports in
Bafelv, but he also landed the men without any loss,
u On Lieutenant Shortland's return home from this service, in
endeavouring to get through the Gut of Gibraltar in the night, he
was chased by a Squadron of Soanish frigates, who took three of
the transports in companv, but he was so fortunate as to escape in
the Betsy transport, and arrived in England without either loss
or damage. In the vear 1786, he w<s appointed agent to the
transports sent bv the Government to New South Wales, at which
place he arrived in January 1788. After remaining six months
at the new settlement in Port Jackson, he was ordered to England
by way of Bitavia, by His Excellency Governor Phillip, who
honored him with the official dispatches foi the Government, and
he arrived in England on the 29th May, 1789.
(f This Rummarv recapitulation of Mr. Shortland's services suffi-
cientlv points out his merit and ability as an experienced seaman,
without any further enlogium, which, if it were wanted, might be
ftbundantlv supplied from the subsequent account of his passage
from Port Jackson to Batavia,”
DISCOVERT OP TII3 HUNTER RIVER.
discoverv of the Hunter River, by Lieut. Shortland of
H.M.S. Reliance. occurred on 16bh September. 1797. Lieut.
Shortland proceeded in his whale boat in search of some convicts
who had seized and run awav with one of the best Government
boats named the Cumberland, on her passage from Sydney t«
the Hawkesbury. Lieut. Shortland, thinking it likelv they might
f»eek shelter in Port Stephens, took that course in his open boat.
In this he was disappointed. u His pursuit, however, was not
without advantage ; for on his return, he entered a river which
he naro«J Hunter River, situated about ten leagues to the south-
ward of Port Stephens, He found there was three fatho ns of
water in the ahoalest part of the entrance, and that there was
deep water and good anchorage within. The entrance was but
narrow, but covers 1 by a high rocky island, lying right off it,


leaving a good passage round its north end and the shore. A
reef connects the south part ot the island with the south shore of
the main land of the river. In the harbour he found a very
■considerable quantity of coal of good quality, and lying so near
the water side as to be conveniently shipped, which gave it, in this
particular, a manifest advantage over that discovered to the south-
ward, Some specimens of this coal were brought up in the boat.’'
The lolloping is a verbatim copy from Collins’ account of the
English Colony of New South Wales trom the first settlement
1788 to 1801. Yol. 2 page 48.
September, 1797.—“ This month began with a very vexatious circum-
stance. A boat named the Cumberland, the largest and best in the Colony
belonging to Government, was on her passage to the Hawkesbury, whither
she was carrying a few stores, taken possession of by a part of the boat’s
crew, being at ihe same time boarded by a small boat from the shore, the
people in which seized her and put off to sea, first landing the coxswain
and three others who weie unwilling to accompany them in Pitt Vv ater in
Broken Bay. Those men proceeded overland to Port Jackson, where they
gave the first information of tins daring and piratical transaction. Two
boats well manned and armed were immediately despatched after them,
under the command of Lieutenant ;?h or bland of the Reliance.
“ One of these boats returned in a few days, without having seen any-
thing of them, but Lieutenant Shortlaad proceeded with the other, a whale
boat, as far as Port Stephens, where he thought it probable they might
have taken shelter ; but on the 19 A, having been absent thirteen days, he
returned without discovering the smallest trace of them or the boat. His
pursuit, however, had not been without its advantage, for on bis return he
entered a river which he named Hunter Hiyer, (in the margin 16th
September) about ten leagues to ths southward of Port Stephens, into
which he carried three fathoms water, in the shoalest part of its en ranee,
finding deep water and good anchorage within. The entrance to this river
was but narrow, and covered by a high rocky island lying right off it, so as
to leave a good passage round the north end of the island, between that
and the shore, A reef connects the south part of the island with the suuth
shoic of the entrance of the river. In this harbour was found a very con-
siderable quantity of coal of a very good sort, and lying so near the water
side as to be conveniently shipped, which gave it, in this particular, a
manifest advantage over that discovered o the southward, dome specimens
cf this coal were brought up in the boat.” 1
These are the only particulars which can be supplied respecting
the first discovery of the port of Newcastle. Not anything of im-
portance occurred until April, 1804, when it was established as a
penal settlement for the Colony fur second and third offences
committed by convicts tried and sentenced by the Supreme Court,
Sydney. The establishment was tint formed under the direction
ot a Commandant, Chas. Throsby, Esq., with a military staff, die,
&lq. In 1813 Lieut. Skottowe of 73rd Kegt., was the commandant,
with two Sergeants and 43 rank and hie. Assistant Surgeon Mr.
William Evans, and Mr. John Tucker, storekeeper. A flagstaff
RECORDS OF NEWCASTLE.


an <* coal beacon were also established on the hill, on which is now
situated the residence of the pieseufc Harbour Master Capt. Allan.
A gaol, iuiht,ny barrack, officers cjuarters, store, lumber yard or
rtockade, hospital, and other necessary buildings were in progress.
Hangs of convicts were sent up the rivers Hunter, Patterson, and
illiains, to cut cedar and other timber, and a settlement was
also made at LimebumeiV Cay as a secondary punishment, and a
bieakwatei commenced between Nobby’a and the main land, to
give employment to the worst characters. A coal shaft ’ was
opened upon the present site of the Market lately erected by the
Municipal Council, and by these means upwards of 1000 convicts
were profitably employed. Nobby's Island was appropriated as a
place of punishment for refractory convict women, similar to
Pinch gut in Sydney, used for a similar purpose. In 1814 Lieut.
Ibompsou of the 40th Regt. was commandant, and was succeeded by
Captain Wallis of the same Regt,, who, during his term of office,
caused many improvements to ba effected, and erected several
public buildings, including that of Christ Church, which was com-
pleted in 1821. In looking through some old Almanacks, under
the head of “abridgments of general orders, published by authority,”
there a:e some curious regulations respecting Newcastle, which I
think worthy of recording. They are stringent, and no doubt
■were necessary in those early days of the colony. I copy them
from the Almanack of 1813.
Ab> idgmeni of General Orders, Published by Authority.
“ Newcastle,—Regulations for vessels going to.—The coal and timber
the exclusive property of the Crown No vessel to proceed thither without
a license from the Governor’s Secretary. The owners to enter iuio recog-
nizances, themselves in £lOO, and two sureties in £25 each, to observe as
follows : hirst, to take a regular clearance from the Naval Officer . Second,
to procure cedar and coals as directed by ilie commandant, and not to
interfere witu people at public labour ; not to be troublesome or riotous,
not to disregard any order issued by the Governor or Commandant, on
pain of penalty levied, and vessel ordered to depart ; no person on arriving
to eave the vessel until entered, and the Commandant’s permission
received to load ; to use only one kind of basket, to contain 100 weight of
coah, for measuring in and out of the vessel by ; to give a daily account
to tne Commandant of coals and timber received ; not to sail without
giving him two days notice, and being provided with his certificate and
letters for tue Governor. Not to leave the harbour between dusk and
daylight; to laud at no other place ;han that pointed out by the Com-
mandant ; not to employ convicts without Commandant’s permission oil
pain of penalty being levied on the owners for each offence. Not to give
spirits to prisoners, nor to land any without Commandant’s permit : not to
take any person to or from that settlement without authority of the
jovernor or Commandant; and no excuse of the person’s swimming or
being secreted on board admitted.” ‘


RECORDS OF NEWCASTLE. 1
The Government colonial Elizabeth Henriette visited the
port in July, 1816, and was unfortunately upset at her moorinys
in the harbour ; a Mrs. Ross and one man were drowned. In the
same vessel in September, 1818, Governor Macquarie paid a visit
to the settlement, and inspected the Public Buildings and Convicts.
In 1819 the first vessel built on the Hunter, the “Princes* Char.
lotte ,” was launched, and in the January following Commissioner
®s9 e i who had been specially sent by the Home authority to en-
quire into the working and expenditure of Governor Macquarie’s
Government, paid the town a visit in the same vessel, and was
much pleased and astonished at the splendid discipline he found
under Major Morrisett’s Government. In the month of December,
1821, 1 first visited Newcastle in command of H. M. C. Sloop
bally, on a voyage to examine and finish the coast survey be-
tween Sydney and Torres Straits, especially Moreton Bay ; and my
report of its capabilities being considered favourable, Mr. Oxley,
the Surveyor General, was sent to select and establish the settle-
ment. Although upward of 50 years have elapsed since, there is
not effaced from my memory the impression then made. I had
never visited a Convict settlement, or seen arbitrary power carried
to such an extent. Perhaps it was necessary for the safety of the
settlement that such severe discipline and punishments should be
adopted, but to a stranger’s eye it seemed very un-English. Walk-
ing out with the Commandant to see the beauties of the harbour,
the splendid ocean view, and above all the magnificent and un-
rivalled prospect from the church close, and to give me an idea of the
awe in which he was held, I found no convict passed us walking ;
all drew up, head uncovered, long before we reached them, and
every coal cart drew up and stopped. Soon after this, the year
following, the Hunter River was thrown open to Free Settlers, and
the banks of both the Hunter, Patterson, and Williams were soon alive
with free emigrants, and as a matter of course, the great severity
of the establishment modified under the mild sway of Sir Thomas
Brisbane’s Government. In 1823, Sir Thomas Brisbane, paid the
town a visit in H. M. S. Satellite, Captain Currie, the first ship
of war that had honored Newcastle with a visit. At this time the
Hunter River District was famed far an 1 wide for locating the res-
pectable settlers, who were arriving in Sydney by vessels, entirely
loaded with goods and passengers direct from the United Kingdom,
and to meet their wants the Government had given permission to
the writer to build a vessel expressly adapted to the trade, which,
called the Eclipse, and commanded by Captain Livingstone, late
Harbour Master of the Port of Newcastle, was eminently suited to
the carrying of passengers and the trade of the Port, There was


thus opened up ;i regular means of communication with, and a sup-
ply ot coals, grain, and timber for, the Sydney market, under the
Government protection and patronage. In consideration of this they
granted to my partner and myself the first two town allotments
measured in the city, a survey at that time being made by Mr,
Surveyor Henry Hangar.
This document is of sufficient importance to have a place in
these annals. It speaks for itself, pointing out how few were the
free privileges enjoyed by Englishmen in this country at that
period of her history.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
* 23rd July, 1822.
Gentlemen', —I am directed by His Excellency Sir Tbos. Brisbane, in
reply to your Memorial, to convey to you his permission to build a vessel
of 50 tons in Port Jackson.
On your executing a Bond to observe the local regulations of the settle-*
ment at Newcast'e, the Surveyor General will be instructed to mark oat
and give you possession of town allotments at that place, to enable you to-
establish yourselves as Traders and Merchants.
I am, Gent emen.
Your sbedient servant,
F. GOULBURN,
Colonial Secretary.
To Messrs. John Bingle, and Robert Coran Dillon, Sydney,
In 1824 the Eclipse was cut out by a gang of convicts, and run
away with, and nothing was ever more heard of her, or her crew -
and the English cutter Lord Liverpool was employed under the
command of Captain Livingstone, to continue the trade, until the
arrival of Captain Biddulph in the steamer Sophia Jane at New-
castle, June 28th, 1833, which with the steamer lamar, arrived
from Tasmania and commenced a daily trade between Sydney,
Newcastle, and Morpeth. These were the Pioneer steamers convey-
ing the prodnce of the early settlers to Sydney. A company was
formed called the Australian Company, They bought the
steamers in 1833, adding the William IV to the fleet, and carried
on for a short time, when the Company merged itself into the
A.S.N. Company, established in 1841. This Company had built iu
England three steamers for the trade. The Hose, Shamrock, and
Thistle. These all ran successfully for years, and as they became old
■were replaced by others of larger dimensions. In 1844 another
company was formed called the Hunter River Steam Navigation
Company, They brought into the trade three powerful boats, built
in England, named after our river and its tributaries, viz, the
Hunter, Williams, and Patterson. They divided the trade with the
Old Company as they were called, and each continues their service
to this day. Both companies have introduced new and powerful


steamers as the trade increased. Newcastle has been most fortu-
nate in her steam fleet. The accommodation afforded to passengers
in all their vessels is highly creditable to the companies, and their
speed is far beyond what might be expected in so young a colony,
and quite equal to similar lines in th® mother country.
NAME.
I am not aware that the name of our city was first given by
any authority of the Government; and am inclined to think that
it was called Newcastle by the unanimous voice of the people. For
some time after its discovery it was known as the Coal River, but
as its trade increased it was necessary that a name should be given
and from the similarity of th© river with that of the Tyne, and the
mineral deposits also being alike, the name of Newcastle was
naturally suggested and adopted.
Mr. Surveyor Dangar, however, when marking out the town,
was not favourably impressed with the name by which it was gen-
erally known, and he, in a small work published by him, styled it
Kings Town. His authority, however, was not sufficient to over-
ride that of the inhabitants, and to few even now is either his book or
the projected name of King’s Town known ; and to show that no in-
tention was ever entertained of changing the name of the town, it
will be seen from the fact that the letters patent granted by our
most Gracious Queen to the present Bishop of the See was under
the style and title of the Lord Bishop of Newcastle.
THE EARLY AND SUBSEQUENT DEYELOPBMENT OF ITS MINERAL
WEALTH.
Up to the year 1827, the Government were the sole producers of
coal, but in that year they handed over the whole of the interest
that they had vested in the trade to the A. A. Company, who at
once commenced operations in a manner that was creditable both
to their management and means. A pit was sunk on the hill at
the back of their present loading staiths. A temporary shipping
place, where the vessels were moored to receive their cargoes
was constructed, and the means of communication between the pit
and place of shipment was by an inclined plane, and a wooden
bridge, which crossed the road a little to the eastward of the pre-
sent one, by which it was superseded in 1862. The conduct of
the English Government in granting the Company such an a.ea of
mineral land and a monopoly on its production was then, and
is now, the •subject of complaint. This monopoly of the coal
trade was, however, terminated in the year 1851 or 1852 by an
action in the Supreme Court.


following returns.
Tons.
Value.
In 1849, the total Coal raised was
... 48,500
. £14000
1857, ditto
ditto ditto
... 210,400 ..
. 148,200
1872, ditto
ditto ditto
... 505,691 ..
. 24S,911
The Pit generally called the A Pit was worked for many yeatfi ;
others were sank as the trade increased, h’o, 2 Pit, which is now
in full work, produces 600 tons of best screened coal for market
every working day.
The late Dr. Mitchell owned the adjoining properties and dis-
covered that it was equally rich in coal deposits, and that the upper
seams could be worked at a trifling cost and without the expense
of sinking shafts. The Doctor requiring a road to his Burwood
Smelting Works, he engaged or contracted with Messrs W. and J.
Donaldson, to bore a tunnel through the Hill as a means of reach'*
lug that establishment without the circuitous route round the
headland. Several persons at this time—Messrs. Donaldson, Brown,
Nott and Brown, rented part of Dr. Mitchell’s estate for the pur-
pose of supplying coal to the shipping in the harbour. Horse teams
for many months were employed in bringing it in for shipment,
until the aboye named gentlemen sold Iheir interest in the land
to a company, named the Coal and Copper Company, which com*
menced operations in 1853. Their funds, by expensive railways, cut-
tings, and mismanagement, soon became exhausted, and their affairs
wound up. The plant and expensive improvements fell back in-
to the hands of Dr. Mitchell in 1862. In that year the (Scottish
Australian Company was brought into existence by gentlemen re*
siding in Scotland, and they have carried on a profitable trade.
The Wallsend Company was started in Sydney, incorporated, and
the first coal delivered and shipped January, 1861. The coal
stands Al, and is in great demand in the foreign market. The
Waratah Company is also a colonial company and was incorpora-
ted in the year 1863. New Lambton Pit, belonging to Messrs. J.
and A. Brown, was opened February, 1868; their Co-operative
Tunnel in 1863, but did not realise the expectation of the
miners, who had embarked in the speculation, and it was sold to
Messrs. Laidley and Co. in 1869, who now profitably work it.
The A. A. Company I have already given. These collieries are all
directly connected with Newcastle, and the progress that has been
made during the last quarter of a century may be seen from the
EARLY RECOLLECTIONS OF NEWCASTLE.
So rapidly has the town grown, and its commerce increased, that
comparing the figures which we have just quoted, its export of


5G5,994 tons valued at £243,911 10s. with the impression which
its appearance in 1821 created when I first visited it, I cannot
venture to predict what a brilliant future there is for her yet in
store. Then most of the dwellings were huts, inhabited by “ short
sentenced,” men who had obtained their liberty by servitude, and
by ticket of leave holders, who obtained that indulgence for good
conduct. These were the only inhabitants, and obtained their
living by keeping small shops. At this time the settlement was
under martial law, and continued so until the land fronting the
river was taken up by settlers. The law was then modified so as
to suit and adapt its working to the habits which are so dear to
Englishmen, and also to bring it more into harmony with other
parts of the colony with which trade was being exchanged.
The appearance of the huts was most cleanly, for the inhabitants
were under the orders of the Commandant, and when he issued the
word that the building* were to be white-washed, the exterior and
interior of every building from Christ Church on the hill down
to the humblest hut underwent the cleansing process. One of the
oldest dwelling houses of that day, and at present standing, is used
as the Post-office. It was then occupied by the officer in charge of
the Commissariat, and not the slightest change has taken place
since I visited it in 1821, and at the present day the old iron
chest room remains secured as of old. It was built some time be-
fore that year, and considered a superior building. It is to be
handed over to the Municipal Council for their Mansion House
Offices, &c., &c., so soon as the new Post-office is habitable which
cannot be many weeks; The new Post-office is a handsome brick
building, and conveniently situated for the receipt and delivery of
the mails, both from the railway and steamers, and will be a great
acquisition to the commercial interests of the city.* Another of
the oldest buildings, now standing, is Christ Church, which was
commenced in 1817, and opened for Divine Service in the early
part of 1821.' Up to that time 1 can find no trace of any re-
ligions instruction having been given to the convicts or others ;
certainly if there had been, it was not by a clergyman. A third old
building is the dwelling house, known as Christ Church Parsonage,
now occupied by the Rev. Canon Selwyn ; it was built in 1820.
The Commandant’s residence, named the Government House, was
situated in the line of Watt-street, about one hundred yards from
the corner of the Barrack vail in Church-street. This building was
a convenient and pretty cottage, but was unfortunately destroyed
by fire some time after Major Morriset left to join his Regiment.
At the back of it, over the hill, the Major had made a pretty
* Since opened by the Hon. G. A. Lloyd, Esq., June, 1873,


walk called the Horseshoe, the only outlet even to the present
day, in the shape of i pleasant stroll, and on the rocks washed by
the sea he had a bath excavated for his own use, which remains
in its primitive state—called Morriset’s Bath. The three first
settlers who took up land were Mr. Platt, of the Folly, near New-
castle on the Hunter, near the property of the A. A. Company. Mr.
J. P - Webber, of Tocal, on the Patterson, and now occupied by VI r.
Reynolds; and Mr. Brown, ©f Bulwana, just above Maitland, an
estate now occupied by many families. I find in 1823, Capt. Gill-
man was the Commandant, and in the same year (the town having
been measured and marked out by Mr. Surveyor H. Hangar,) that
most of the free settlers had town allotments given them on a2O
years’ lease on the following terras : —That a building of a certain
value should be erected before title deeds were delivered, and the
land not transferable. A great portion of them never fulfilled
these conditions, but the land and the town owes its progress
to the purchaser's or present possessors, and became what it now
is ; a very pretty one for 50 years standing. Its small area soon
fell into private hands, and the Government had little or none of
its surface at their disposal. It is an injustice and a great mistake
which is every day becoming more and more apparent in marking
it out on so limited a scale in its first plans, but the second mis-
take is worst than the first, that is, the grant made of all the
land surrounding it to a company formed in England for purely
agricultural pursuits; and yet both surface and mineral wealth,
was handed to them, and our town hemmed in by them on every
side.
At this time there was scarcely any animal food—not even for
the Government House, —beyond a herd of goats, kangaroos, and
wild ducks. The kangaroos and ducks were in great abundance, as
the surrounding country was in its wild state, and afforded excel-
lent sport. l?ix gamekeepers were kept to procure a sufficient
supply for the Commandant and officers’ quarters. They were
constantly employed, two or three for ducks, and the others for
kangaroos. They were allowed so much ammunition, and ex-
pected to bring in daily a certain number of each kind of game, or
as much more as they could get. These men were convicts, and
considered it a mark of favor to be so employed ; and used every
effort to bring into camp (as the town was then called) above the
allotted task. They had been mostly poachers at home, and well
adapted to the work. Others who had been bred to farming pur-
suits were placed up the river at Wallis Plains (Maitland), Nelson
Plains and Patterson Plains, for the purpose of growing wheat,
maize, &c., for the settlement. They were called settlers, and, uuac-
12
PAST AND PRESENT


countable as it may appear, were not removed on the arrival of the
tree settlers, when the Hunter and its tributaries were thrown open.
They were visited frequently by the Commandant in his double-
banked barge, with a house in the stern sheets, similar to the city
of London barges, with the flogger and his triangles in the bow, to
administer punishment to the refractory, and those who rowed in
the barge who did not sufficiently exert themselves. These con-
victs so located, held these choice spots—the cream of the Hunter,
without any authority whatever from the Government, but a dirty
piece cf paper under the Commandant’s hand, so in like manner
those who were permitted to live out of gaol in the town, built
themselves huts on it, and were not removed by the Commandant,
to the cost of those free settlers, to whom the Government gave
the land on which these huts stood. All the annoyance that could
be given the free settlers was done by the Major, both in town
and country. He was jealous of both, as he considered they inter-
fered with his Government, not being under his immediate orders,
The convicts were kept on the land under his special protection,
and ultimately as year after year passed on, time created difficul-
ties, and they and their offspring retain the possession or the value
of it to the present day.
When 1 first visited Newcastle in 1821, there were two wind-
mills on Obelisk Hill, one on a large scale built of brick, the other
of wood, much smaller, which soon fell to decay and disap-
peared, The Obelisk, erected in 1850, stands on the site of the
brick mill which was, without due consideration, sold and pulled
down by the order of the Government in Sydney. They had be«n
forewarned of its utility, and the loss it would occasion to the navi-
gator and the surveyor as a landmark. These facts were duly re-
presented, but from some tangle in the red tape department, it
was disregarded, and, like many other similar mistakes, when too
late, it had to be remedied at the coss of erecting an Obelisk, an
expense which might have been avoided if only common sec. e and
attention had been paid to the representations of those who were
entitled to be heard. The Obelisk does not answer all the pur-
poses of the old mill which was perfectly distinguished from the
sumit of Mount Royal and was of great use as a fixed mark in
surveying.
Our parson, the Rev. G. A. Middleton, (who was an especial
favorite with the blacks) started with myself with the whole tribe
of upwards of one hundred (100) on a walking trip to Lake Mac-
quarie ; our necessary supplies, blankets, <kc., they carried on thair
heads. On arrival I was enchanted with its beautiful scenery, and
can never forget it, The whole surrounding country and lake were
13
RECORDS OF NEWCASTLE,


serene and still, solitude reigned, no tree disturbed, and no trace
of the white man’s civilization, but all in its natural wild state.
We enjoyed all the wild sports of Australian bush life in its primi-
tive state as the Aborigines of that day (before they were con-
taminated with our vices) were accustomed to enjoy them.
Shooting, fishing, kangarooing, and hunting—our game was ample
for us all. They supplied us also, by diving, with the finest mud
oysters, lor which the waters of the Lake are noted, these we scal-
loped on our bush fires, and we spent five or six days of as much
enjoyment as I ever had in any part of the world.
nobby’s island, beacon hill and shipping disasters.
The iron gang and convict establishments at Newcastle, was
broken up in 1855. They had been principally employed on the
breakwater, under the direction and control of Col. Ewen
McPherson, a fine old soldier, who died, after leaving, from okl
wounds, received in the first New Zealand war, in 1854, when
serving in H.M. 99th Kegt, He was a member of the Bench of
Magistrates, and much respected. On his leaving he was pre-
sented by the townspeople, with a farewell address, and some
handsome silver plate in recognition of his services.
The Government at one time acting upon the suggestion of Col.
Burney, of the "Royal Engineers, intended to remove Nobby’s by
blasting, but the citizens becoming aware of their design a public
meeting was held in the Court House, on the 21st June, 1854, to
petition the Legislative Assembly, to inquire into the particulars
of the intention, of the promoters, and with a prayer that the
ill-advised measure be frustrated. The citizens having taken this
public step considered that their prayer would receive the atten-
tion it demanded. However, it was a false delusion, for Col,
Burney, the promoter of the scheme, was not to be daunted, but
pushed on the excavation of the chambers for destroying the ill-
fated Island, as it was called, and throwing it into the sea.
Several of these chambers were completed, and filled with (I am
afraid to say bow many tons of) gunpowder sufficient not only
to blow up Nobby’s, but to seriously injure the city, and a day was
fixed for the great; display. Fortunately for the citizens the inten-
tion was known, but only a few days before it was to'Tiave been
an accomplished fact, Mr, Thorn, of Prince Alfred notoriety,
visited the writer, and entered fully into his views on the matter,
and on bis return to Sydney, at his request, called upon the
Governor, inducing him to postpone the day. By this at first
sight trivial incident the destruction of Nobby’s was abandoned,
14
PAST AND PRESENT


and it remains in the position and beauty that nature assigned it
But it was not long to remain in its original state, for it was soon
determined to strike off its crest by cutting down and levelling;
many feet for the erection of a Lighthouse on the summit ae
a useful beacon by day, and a splendid light by night, to warn
the mariner of his position, and guide him safely into the
desired haven. Had the Island, which had Weathered so
many gales been removed by the Royal Engineer fo * the
benefit and improvement oj the harbour, as it was teaned, it wou
have been looked upon by nautical men as an unpardouab e
mistake; they do not look through the Royal Engineers spec-
tacles, I have seen it afford shelter and pioteclion to many
vessels coming in, in strong southei ly weather, when tugn weie. •
nut in existence, or so numerous as now. Dear old unoffending
Nobby’s, you have frequently sheltered me, and if it had not been
for your friends you would have been cast to the winds, blown
up, scattered, and deposited at the harbours mouth or into the
sea; But, thanks to them, you still stand erect in your beauty,
capped widi a splendid lighthouse to warn the sailor of his
danger and direct him into the waters of security. In the very
early settlement of Newcastle, a coal Ore beacon (similar to the
primitive ones in Great Britain) was established on a hill called
the Beacon Hill, to be a warning and guide to mariners. This
Ore was continued nightly, until the present lighthouse was built,
and the last night of it for a long series of years terminated at
midnight, the 31st December, 1857. This hill *as also the
signal station to give notice to the townspeople ot what was
going on outside, and a neat sort of pagoda-diouse lor
the ° signal man and stoker’s residence was erected in
1822, by Lieutenant Close, of the 48th Regiment,
who was acting Engineer to the convict gangs employed
in constructing the breakwater. There were also seven (7) guns
placed on the point of the hill, in the shape of an earthern battery.
They were used for salutes on high days and holidays, King’s
birthdays, and other rejoicings, and on more than one ot those oc-
casions the gunners suffered mutilation in body or limb, and
it affords them no doubt a lively recollection of the memorable Fort
Fiddlestick for he remainder of their days. However, these for-
midable weapons will neither frighten our foes, nor prostrate their
gunners for the future. The flagslafi is the only relic remaining.
A neat cottage was built for the Harbour Master in 18G0, on the
site of the old Pagoda. It is a suitable residence, commanding a
splendid view of the harbour and the sea.
►Some time in the year 1830, I was in Sydney, and embarked
15
Records of Newcastle,


cm board the Governor Arthur for Newcastle, There were several
other passengers beside myself, the Revs. Mr. Adair and Sister,
Mr. Frank Allman, Mr. Jas. Scott, who was going to superintend
Col. Dumaresque’s estate in my neighbourhood, and many others.
Our passage was tedious, and during the last night of our voyage,
after retiring to rest, I felt the vessel strike heavily, and immedi-
ately ran on deck, when I found the captain and crew in the
greatest state of alarm and disorder, so much so that the Captain
entreated me to act for him and assume the command, as he was
perfectly unable to retain it, and he would willingly act under my
orders ; my only alternative was to do the best I could, the wind
had freshened during the night from E.S.E. and our position was
altogether unpardonable. After some difficulty 1 restored order
and immediately 6red guns of distress to attract the attention of
the look-out man on the hill, who, fortunately on the alert,
saw and heard them and immediately gave notice to the Pilots’
crew. During this time I had got the vessel’s whaleboat out,
and by the time the pilot boat could lay safely a short distance
from us, I succeeded in getting the females into our boat and
hauling her by line to the Pilot’s, and when they had as many on
board as they could carry ray orders were to land them on Nobby’s
Island and return for tnore. This went on until all were safely
landed, myself in the last turn and the last on board to leave. On
reaching Nobby’s we were all miserably wet and cold, and glad to
be taken by the pilot boat (our own being rendered useless the
last trip) to town, where we all landed after two
or three trips, just before daylight, and took up our
quarters at Mr. Clymont’s Inn, which stood on the site of the
present Great Northern Hotel. We were only just in
time, as by breakfast time, the Governor Arthur was no more.
She had entirely broken up, and the wreck washing on Nobby’s,
but thank God all were safe on shore without any serious accident,
beyond (if I recollect right) a broken or injured arm to Mr.
F. Allman, But the cream of the story is yet to come. After
comparing notes at the breakfast table, it appeared that as soon
as the vessel struck, all made a rush for the deck, and the minister
in the dark and hurry, put on a coat which he considered hia
black one, and never detected his mistake, until about the middle
of breakfast time, when to his astonishment, on being asked to
have it dried by the fire, he discovered that he had on a blue
frock coat, and that it was not his own. I at once recognised it
as mine, and to satisfy him, said that if it was mine, he would
find in the breast pocket, a pocket book, containing £2OO or
£3OO _ He did so, and I was amply repaid for all the exertions


used in saving him, and it was a standing joke against him unc
the day of his death.
Whilst referring to these early shipping' disasters we are re-
minded of those which occurred during a gale which raged with great
fury on July 19th 1866. it is generally known as the Cawarra
gale. Dreadful losses were sustained, five vessels wrecked
amongst which was the ill-fated Cawarra, Captain Chatfield.
Being partly disabled near Port Stephens on her wav to the noith*
ern ports, she ran for shelter (it is supposed) to our harbour, and
succeeded in crossing the bar ; at that time the sea was breaking
in frighttul rollers, but from her lameness, want of steam, and the
heavy fresh setting out of the harbour, was drawn back, in and
out of the breakers, for nearly an hour insight of the town.
Hundreds ot citizens lined the shores witnessing this awful tragedy,
and were powerless to render her or the crew and passengers the
least assistance. At length alter a very hard and manly struggle
she foundered with all her crew and passengers, numbering nearly
one hundred (100), one man excepted, who was picked up by one
of the lighthouse keepers in a small dingy. Thirty-seven bodies
were recovered, that of Captain Chatfield being one of the first
found,,and they were all deposited in the dead house of the hos-
pital, where a Coroner's enquiry was held. At a public
funeral which took place the lecovered bodies were buried
in a large grave known as the Cawarra grave. It was
a sad and solemn spectacle to to witness twenty-three
coffins placed in a circle round the door of the old church,
and as we looked upon them, we had but bo raise our
eyes, and see the spot where the ill-fated vessel foundered.
Never was our mind more affected than when the bodies wei’e
lowered into their last resting place, and theie was said the words
of our incomparable church service—" Earth to earth, ashes to
ashes, and dust to dust, iu the sure and certain hope ot the resur-
rection to eternal life through our Lord Jesus Christ.”
Other bodies were afterwards picked up, and buried in the same
grave, whilst those ot three were claimed by friends and buried in
Sydney.
On the Cawarra day there was wrecked the William Watson,
Seagull, Marg Rose, and Arthur.
For more ample particulars we refer the reader to the appendix.
VISIT OF PRINCE ALFRED.
The greatest event of the year 1868, was the visit to our city
of H. El. H. Prince Alfred, accompanied by His Excellency Earl
17
RECORDS OP NEWCASTLE


Bel more, the Governor. They arrived late at night on the 4th
March, 1868, and on the following morning, the sth, the public
landing took place, a triumphal arch of coal from our mines, was
erected, and other suitable preparations made to receive him. All
the public bodies were in attendance, and he was received with great
eclat, an address was read and presented to him on the Wharf,
after which, conveyed in a special train, he paid a hurried visit to the
coal mines. .Returning at noon, he held a levee at the Great
Northern Hotel, and any who liked to present themselves—the
washed and the unwashed—with cards and without, were received,
and as may be supposed there was a great rush, and put
poor Lord Belmore quite in the shade. After the levee,
the Prince and his suite went up the river in a
steamer to Morpeth, and returned to a late dinner at the hotel.
At night the town was partially illuminated, and a great
display of fireworks was made, accompanied by the con-
stant firing of guns and other suitable rejoicings. Early
on the 6th, the party started by special train to Maitland
to open the Agricultural Show, the members of that body
entertaining him and his suite at a public luncheon, given in
their best style. He also held a levee and then went on by train to
Singleton. Alter making a very flying visit of it, be arrived in
Newcastle by 3 p.m., and immediately proceeded to Sydney, where
he had promised to dine that evening with some public body,
Ouly six days after all this excitement, that is on the 12th, His Royal
Highness was struck down by the hand of an assassin at a pic-nic
given at Clontarf in aid of the funds of the Sailors’ Home.
WHARVES, AS THEY WERE AND ARE.
The only jetty in early days was situated at the botto m of Watt
street, and was but a poor specimen of engineering skill. Ic r«..
sembled those on the banks of the river, used for private landing
places for the settlers, and to which they moored their market boats.
Watt-street was lengthened by casting ballast into the river, and
the wooden jetty was extended to allow small vessels to load and
unload their cargoes. There was very little improvement in wharf
accommodation until the railway was begun, in 1855,
In 1858 it became necessary to reclaim the land on which to
erect the Railway Terminus, and to lay down the numerous sidings
to facilitate the shipment of coal. The sand from the Sand Hills
was trollied down the space over which the tide flowed, up to the
upper line of Scott-street, and was filled up in a line as far as the


Market Wharf. During the time these works were carried
•on, the front was being piled and planked, until the long me 0
wharf, which we now possess, was reclaimed from the harbour
Steam cranes were erected, a railway laid down, ships weie
enabled to lie alongside, perfectly protected from storms
with a depth of water ranging from 13 to 20 feet.
These improvements were all effected upon what may be termed
the low level ; hence every waggon or box of coal shipped, has an
must be lifted from the wheels upon which it is conveyed, and
placed over the ship’s hatchway before it can be emptied.
Staiths, at a great outlay, have been erected, to the west of the
wharf, but there is not such a depth of water there as at the
cranes These staiths may be styled the high level, high not only
in appearance, but in cost. This outlay is supposed by some to be
exclusively drawn from the general revenue of the colony. But
we are bold to say that most of the improvements which have been
made in the harbour of Newcastle, to improve our shipping facili-
ties, have been collected in tonnage and pilot dues, with other port
charges, made upon vessels visiting here, and, although thus a
orreat deal has been accomplished, yet it is lar
from being adequate. The facilities which we possess are inadequate
to supply the demand, which there is continually being made, and
it is imperative that immediate and energetic steps should at once
be taken 1 to render more easy the shipment of coal —cultivate
other branches of exports, and prevent that long detention, wine
large vessels have unfortunately to suffer, when they call upon us
to supply them with our staple commodity.
It has always been the opinion of the writer that more wharves
would be required for shipping purposes than the space now
devoted to them affoids, and he always thought from the tun
when our coals were first held in demand that the great To
between Bullock Island, and the ballast dyke, (a flat dry at low
water spring tides), that it should be converted into a wet uock.
Let it be excavated to the depth of 20 to 22 feet with wharves
around it capable of berthing as many ships as the harbour can
now contain. One portion could be devoted for the shipment of
coal, another to the export trade,-a trade by the way now
entirely neglected. Let warehouses be built similar to those
which grace the London, or West India, or Victoria Docks.
Complaints have been recently made of the want of harbour
room, and we have even heard of vessels being instructed not to
mme here because the harbour was full
19
RECORDS OF NEWCASTLE.


Here is a plan which would give us an increase of harbour
accommodation, to the extent ot 140 or 150 acres, berthing upwards
of 30 additional ships of 1500 tons register tonnage.
If it was considered necessary by the Government for the benefit
of the colony to make harbours, artificial piers, and Breakwaters
where nature has shewn neither design nor necessity for them,
and these at an enormous outlay, and if it was also considered
necessary by Government to construct miles of railway, at the
expense of millions, for which there is not, nor will be, for years,
a return, how much more is it their duty to form for us a dock or
basin, to carry on our trade nnd to rid our city already too limited
in area, of a nuisance which contracts it, and all of which could be
done without any loss to the colony whatever. If every consumer of
our coal, (for they are the proper persons to tax—not the producer,
who gives his wealth, nor the ship that carries it, but the con~
snmer who uses it), was taxed through our Custom House say 2d.
per ton, a revenue of £lO,OOO annually at our present rate of
shipment 25,000 tons per week would yield ample funds to pav
interest on debentures which might be issued, say from £200,000
to £250,000 as a commencement of the undertaking.
1 have given ray opinion freely on the wants and improvements’
of the Harbour, and recommend the construction of Hocks as a Go-
vernment undertaking. I feel myself called upon to suggest the fol-
lowing plan by which the Government would be reimbursed for so
large an outlay My proposition is this, viz., that Govern men t
debentures at a long date bearing 5 per cent, should be issued, the
interest on which would he paid by the small duty already referred
to, of one or two pence per ton on all coal exported collected by
the Customs, which would not be on the shipping, but on
the merchant who would sell accordingly, this trifling advance
could not be considered a hardship or detriment to the Port,
as this duty on 1000 tons at 2d. per ton would only amount to
£8 6s. Bd., and by this means, and as I have already stated, at the
present rate of shipment about £lO,OOO a year would be insured
to pay the interest on the Debentures issued. Such a sura would
certainly be a good start to begin with, and b 3 it remembered as
the work advanced, increased fjc lities would be afforded, and at
least 30 or 40 ships of the largest tonnage loaded as fast as the
miners could bring the coal to the surface. The duty would in-
crease every year, and as time went on and the high level shoots
fell into decay, the new basin accommodation would supply their
places. The shoots are a nuisance and disfigurement to the City,
and a partial failure, and their removal is to be desired.


Wo commend this proposal to those who ai’e in authority, ami
are convinced that it would not onlv be a boon to Newcastle, pur-
chased and secured by heroin wealth, without infringing upon any
of the privileges or any person; and would also, tie an undertaking
of which our Colony nvght bo proud, and would would win tor her
more renown than the engineering skill and money which has been
expended in the construction of a zig-zag.
INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
A stranger to the early history of Newcastle, and looking upon
it now with its increasing trade, would, perhaps, be led to condemn
the non-existence of such institutions as a Chamber of Commerce,
Exchange and Reading Room, &c., <fec., —institutions which ire es-
sential to a well regulated commercial community. But their ab-
sence-among us must not be attributed to any want of spirit o u the
part of early citizens, for a Chamber of Commerce was estab-
lished in May, 1856, and succeeded admirably in all its important
undertakings. At that time the trade of the port was in its in-
fancy, and required every effort of the Chamber to establish it in
the eyes of the world as a free port and commodious harbour, as
well as to regulate its internal commercial arrangements. Of
course there were jealousies of a rising port so near head quarters,
and it was no trifling matter to contend against these and other
difficulties. The Government were induced hy the Chamber to
grant the citizens in perpetuity (35) thirty-five acres of laud as a
recreation ground in the most delightful and picturesque part of
Newcastle from the top of Watt-street round the Horse Shoe to
the Obelisk. They also procured the site for the present Post-
office, and its adjoining allotment for an Exchange building, when
the subscribers were prepared with funds and the wants of the city
required it. The Government architect has been allowed by the
Mayor and Corporation (who were aware of the appropriation, as
well as from the officially published chart of the town from the
Burveyor-General’s Office) to build on the site a Telegraph and
Post-office, thereby depriving the city of what had been granted to-
it. The commencement of the wharves and many other mercantile
advantages originated with the Chamber of Commerce, and it also
exerted itself most strenuously to obtain a local Trinity or Pilot and
Harbour Board for the management of and to supply the local
wants of the port, so that it would be under their control and direc-
tion. They succeeded in obtaining this from the Government, and a
list of nautical gentlemen was forwarded from which they would
select thos; they considered best adapted to promote the welfare
21
RECORDS OF NEWCASTLE.


and interest of the port, but unfortunately at that juncture an un-
expected change in the Ministry took place; they resigned their
seals, and, with, their fall, all the expectations of the Chamber
vanished ; seventeen years have elapsed and we are still without the
necessary Marine Board (see note). The great advantage which
the city then derived in the possession of the Chamber of Com-
merce, was, I regret to say, of short duration for the building in
which the meetings were held, and in which the official documents
and papers were kept, was totally destroyed by fire in 1859, and
all records lost (except those in old newspapers) and no Chamber
of Commerce established since to take its place. 1 copy from
the Telegraph newspaper part of a letter sent by me to the Colo-
nial Secretary respecting the Pilot and Harbour Board and other
printed reports on the same subject :
Pilot and Harbour Board,
Chamber of Commerce, Newcastle,
June 30th, 1857.
Sir,—-As Chairman of the Newcastle Chamber of Commerce, and in confor-
mity with a resolution of the Committee of that body, I beg respectfully to
submit to the notice ol the Government the urgent recessity which exists of a
local board with power to direct the matters concerning the Port, in order to its
trade for the improved regulations of its pilotage and harbour generally.
Experience has diown that the intentions of the Government for the im-
provement of the port of Newcastle, have been hitherto rendered ineffective by
the difficulties which must always occur in directing and supervising the affairs of
an outport by a distant executive : a principle, the objections to which it is
unnecessary to detail and which the Committee from their knowledge of the
operation, feel warranted in stating has resulted here in a serious destruction of
life and property, which will continue to occur with a calamitous regularity
most prejudical to the character of the Port. It devolves on me to state, as the
■opinion ot the Committee, that these catastrophes are by no means beyond pre*
vention and that, under local direction precautionary measures might be success-
fully applied which are now urgently called for by motives of humanity and the
interest of Commerce; nor would, I am desired to say, the improvements such
a board would effect be confined to the prevention of shipwrecks only, but
would extend to every other matter under their charge connected with the
business of the port.
Note : Since closing these records a Marine Board has been
established; its very name implies matters connected with Harbour,
Lights, Shipping, &0., &c., and on looking over the names of the
nominees I see the majority of them are not what their style and
title implies. This is a grievous mistake, for the interest of the
nautical public and an injustice to the Port, The Minister under
whose patronage the Board is selected, has taken 1 presume his
cue from the acts of a former Government, who in their wisdom
appointed soldiers to preside as Water Police Magistrates in the
Sydney Court, thus our worthy swamps our Marine Board with
landsmen. The Trinity Board ot London is presided over by His
Royal Highness Prince Alfred, a Captain in the Royal Navy; and


the working Board are nautical men, mostly captains and masters
of the Royal Navy and of the H. E. [. Company and Mercantile
Marine. Also, in London the situation of Thames Water Police
Magistrate is, and always has been, filled by a Captain in the Royal
Navy. These precedents of the mother country should have
shown the Minister the necessity of selecting nautical men to do
nautical work.
Exchange.
The Exchange and Reading Room, with offices and shipping books
similar to Lloyd’s in London, was estab ished at the same time
as the Chamber of Commerce, May 1856, and destroyed in 1859
as I have just stated. The reading room was open to visitors,
with a secretary, Mr. J. Wright, always in attendance, and cap-
tains after introduction were allowed its use, and were supplied
with colonial and foreign newspapers, the periodicals of the day,
and other local information. The fire already referred to destroyed
all the maps, books and papers. It was a great loss to the town
and to the shipping masters, as it was intended to be a place of
meeting at a certain hour of the day for all the mercantile and
trading community, also a rendezvous for captains to facili-
tate their commercial transactions. If such a convenience
was considered necessary at that time, with a more limited
commerce than now, and such facilities were afforded the
citizens and their constituents through the influence of the
Chamber of Commerce 17 years ago—surely, now, our necessities
are greater, and it behoves our citizens to stir themselves. An
energetic movement should be made to establish a similar insti-
tution, as the requirements of the trade and shipping demand, have
increased to such an unprecedented extent. {Soon after the forma-
tion of the Exchange, and when in working order, they applied to
the Government to allot them a piece of land for the erection of a
suitable building, which was given at the same time the post-
office site was selected, and the adjoining allotment to it was
given as the site ot an Exchange, and was marked so on an official
Government chart, issued from the Surveyor General’s office,
Sydney, and dated July 1860. A number of these charts were
sent to Mr. Baker, the Clerk of the Court, to be disposed of to the
inhabitants of the town. On the first movement to erect
the Telegraph and Post-office the writer made it his business
to see the Mayor Mr. Haunell, and for him to bring it under the
consideration of the Town Council to protest against the land so
given and charted for Town purposes, being used for any other
than the_erection of an Exchange and Chamber of Commercz. No


steps were taken I believe by that body and thus a large portion of
the land belonging to the City has been mis-appropriated to the
injury of the commercial inteiests of the Town. The
Municipal Council were the proper authorities to appeal, for
when the Committee applied for the land to be placed
in the hands of Trustees, the Government of that day applied to
the Chamber to supply them with the names of gentlemen for in-
sertion in the grant. All this was attended to, but in the mean-
time the Municipal body was created, and then the Chamber was
informed that all public grants connected with the town would be
issued to them, thus no more was done. It was most unfortunate
when the building was destroyed by fire that all the papers and
documents weie burnt, those especially bearing on this subject
among the number ; but most fortunately the doings of the
Chamber were reported in the Telegraph, the local paper of that
day; and also three of the letters published in the Chronicle by
one ot the Aldermen will speak for themselves.
Letter addressed to the Newcastle Chwnicle, published 15th
March, 1865.
THE RECREATION RESERVE.
islß, —In compliance witli your request, I herewith enclose you the three
documents which I wish should be read by the Town Clerk, at the meeting of
the Municipal Council last Monday night. I stated that on their being read I
should move that they be received and referred to the Reserve Committee. Ob-
jections were made on their being read, and the Mayor having ruled that they
should not be, I consequently failed in making them the property of the Council
which 1 was very anxious to do, believing them to be important documents,
and that on public grounds they should be in the hands of the Municipality.
The first letter proves the origin and objects of the grant, and the reply to the
second proves who were intended as Trustees, viz., the Municipal Council. You
are at liberty to make what use of them you think proper, and then return them
to me. I have kept them for six years. Twice have I offered them to the
Newcastle Municipal Council, the third time 1 hope they will receive them—the
plot thickens.—Yours, &c.,
Thomas Adam.
Newcastle, March 14th, 18(55.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 10th September, 1856.
Gentlemen, —His Excellency, the Governor General, has laid before the
Executive Council your memorial, praying that the remaining unaltered portion
of the “ Newcastle City Extension Reserve” may be granted, and placed in
trust for the inhabitonts ol Newcastle, to be appropriated for the purpose of
recreation, and forming a reservoir. 2. His Excellency in .Council has, under
the report on the subject received from the Surveyor-General, approved of the
land in question, containing aboutthirty-five acres, being permanently dsdicated
to the public purposes named in the memorial, of which that officer has been
apprised. I have the honor to be, gentlemen, your most obedient servant,
W. Elyard.
To J< Wright, Esq., and other gentlemen signing the Memorial, Newcastle.


Qrp n , . ~ . , ' ewcsiot I *. 20i h KoDtember, 1836.
behalf «>f the Memorialists, lb:g{ o acknowledge the receipt of votlf
ommumoatiori of the lObh instant, announcing compliance by his Excellency
the Governor General in Council, with the prayer ol a memorial addressed to
him from here, for a grant of the unalienate 1 pot-el >n of the Newcastle City
Extension Reserve, for the public purposes therein mentioned. I am requested
by the memorialists to express the grateful sense they entertain of the enlndit-
ened liberality of his Excellency the Governor General and Council, which
lias induced this important public boon, which it is the earnest wish of the
inhabitants-of Newcastle, that they may he enabled to soon adapt to the im-
portant objects, for which it lias been so liberal;y granted • and in requesting
your conveyance of these feelings of the memorialist-; bo his Exc-dmuev! lain
desired to state their impression of the courteous manner in which you have
been pleased to express to them his Exceile icy’s determination. As his
Excellency s intention probably contemplates the no nin iniou from l>e r, e of a
number of gentlemen interested in the advancement of this city and' conse-
quentiy m the promotion of the objects of the trust, to be appointed trustees
m the deed. I am requested to name the undermentioned, who would act in
that capacity. The object in naming this number is to secure a more extended
int rest and efficient action in carrying out the purposes of the grant.—l have
the honor to be Sir, your most obedient servant,
(Signed) SaMuel Weighs.
Memo of names submitted, Messrs. John Bin vie, B. Hudson, George Tully
Benjamin Hislop, Simon Hemp. P. O. Boswell, Thomas Adam, and S. L. Wright.’
To the Honorable the Colonial Secretary, Sydney,
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
„ , Sydney, 21st October, 1856.
SlR,— With rmerence to your letter of the 20th ultimo, in which you submit
the names of certain gentlemen proposed as trustees to receive a grant of the
land, recently appropriated as an extension reserve for the recreation and
amusement of the inhabitants of the city of Newcastle, lam directed to inform
you, that, in contemplation of the establishment of municipalities it is con-
sidered proper to defer, for the present, the issue of a deed in this case. lam
directed to add that the papers on this subject have now been transmitted to
the Secretary for Lauds and Public Works, to whose department the business
belongs, and that any further communication which may be necessary, will be
m ide to you from the office of that Minister.— I have the hono tto bo‘Sir your
Inost obedient servant.
„ W. Elyard.
Samuel Wright, Esq., Newcastle.
'This correspondence does not directly apply to the Exchange
Gr mt, but to that ot the Recreation ground. They were both
made at the same time, and both dealt with in like manner—-
fnrrhe", these letters prove that the city was indebted to the
Committee’s exertions tor the Recreation land, and it is fortunate
that official letters have been preserved in private bands. The
time may come (it is to be hoped soon) when a suitable building
may be required for,- an Exchange and Chamber of Commerce,
When it does, the Government may fairly be applied to for another
allotment in the spare space reseived for the Custom house (as
they have no land elsewhere in the town at their disposal) to re-
place the original one purloined for the Telegraph office. This in


common justice they would feel bound to do, and redress the
citizens for a grievous and dishonest act that bad been perpetrated
on a former Government’s generosity. I have gone fully into the
subject knowing there are few who aie in possession of these
facts, Alter the fire the subscribers were disheartened, and no
attempt has since been made to replace it. However, it is never
too late to mend, so it is to be hoped that our influential com-
mercial men may throw all jealousies aside and bestir themselves
in carrying out the views and intentions of their former benefac-
tors.
To show the interest the Chamber of Commerce , took in this
matter.
July 9th, 1865. “ The Chairman was requested to address the Government
requesting the grant of a site in Hunter.street, for the erection of an Exchange
room for the present and future accommodation of the trading community of
Newcastle it appearing to the Committee desirablo that the site should be
secured while it was yet obtainable in a central and convenient position.”
October 27th, 1857. ‘'The proceedings of the previous meeting having been
read, a letter was read from the Under Secretary, Colonial Secretary’s Office,
acknowledging receipt of an application from the chamber for the grant of a
site of land for an Exchange, which the letter stated had been referred to the
Secretary for Land and Public Works. On this authority the Chairman said
that, at an interview which he had had with the honorable the Colonial Secre-
tary, when recently in Sydney, the latter had promised that the block of
unoccupied land in Hunter-street, from the Police Court to Watt-street, would
be granted for the purpose of an Exchange, a Post Office and Town Hall, and
that, as regarded the first named, the chamber, therefore, now waited the
promised communication.”
November 28th, 1857. “ The Chairman reminded the Chamber, that they had
the promise of the honorable the Colonial Secretary of the grant of a site of land
in Hunter-street, near the Court House, for the erection of an exchange, and
that as the last communication from the under Secretary, on this subject was
dated the Ist October, it would be proper for the Chamber to now apply for the
grant, which the Secretary was instructed to do accordingly,”
February 10th, 1858. “ The Chairman said that the promise made by the
honorable the present Colonial Secretary of a grant of land as a site for an
Exchange was in course of fulfilment as he (the Chairman) had been applied to
by the Colonial Architect on the subject who had since marked out the land.”
Harbour Pilot Board.
March 31st, 1858.—“ The Chairman said that the Chamber had again to ap-
proach a question, which, as a first cause was the most important of all, and
which formed the root of all the mismanagement and evils of which the port
had to complain ; he referred to the want of a local Harbour and Pilot Board.
They had been fully set forth in report of the special parliamentary com-
mittee two sessions since, and a local board recommended, yet nothing had been
done in it up to the present time. It was also admitted on every hand as the
only sufficient remedy for the grievances of which they had so long complained,
no Government being competent to that universal supervision which until now
appeared to have been the object of the legislature. While everyone condemns
the principle and admits the evils which’it has caused, an unaccountable delay has
occurred in initiating the remedy which local management would immediately
afford, and thus remove an unpleasant and serious responsibility from the Gover-n


merit. Our wharves are in the meantime going to ruin, and the port to general
decay ; everything is admitted to be either mismanaged or to be suffered to
remain without any attempt at management at all. The Tasmanian Marine
Bill now on the table of the Chamber, shows how easily legislation may provide
a remedy in a local board, and furnishes at the same time a useful precedent
measure ; the subject comes within the scope of those local measures contem-
plated by the Ministry for legislation this session, and there esin be none, the
importance of which better deserves their attention.”
Extract from a letter sent by the Chairman, J, Bingle, to the
hon. the Colonial Secretary, dated April 3rd, 1858.
“ It is almost unnecessary for me to ’refer to the general confusion and mis-
management, which has always characterized the direction of the affairs of the
port of Newcastle, and which must continue to occur under the principle of
distant supervision on which its business has been conducted. I principally
refer to this head here, because it points the remedy (that of local direction and
supervision) which the chamber would indicate, and which is specially recom-
mended for adoption by the reports of the select committee of the Legislative
Assembly and Legislative Council respectively on these subjects in 1857.”
HOSPITALS.
The old Hospital was one of the very earliest public buildings
in the town, and many years the only one for sick convict patients
in the Hunter River District, a distance extending beyond 100
miles north, west, and south. It was pulled down in 1864 to
give place on the same site to the present handsome and ornamental
stiucture which was opened to the public under very great diffi-
culties and squabbling in 1865. Its success may be attributed to
the good arrangements and management of the f-ecretary, the Rev.
Canon Fletcher, as without his unflinching perseverence and con-
trol, little would have been accomplished beyond paper plans and
hard words. It is so arranged that to complete its uniformity,
the south wing must be added to it at a future time when funds
and the necessities of the port and town require it.
SCHOOL OF ARTS.
After a lamentable display of ill feeling and unpleasantness which
lasted for several years, a School of Arts was instituted and a
suitable building erected in 1870, but it was never entirely com-
pleted Instead of being used for the original purpose, it appeared
to be fitted up for theatrical displays and other similar amusements
for the purpose, not of elevating the mind, but of raising money.
Thus abused and injured, it at last suffered a martyrdom by tire
in 1872, its bare walls only left standing. Vigorous steps were
taken to restore it, and many plans and much talk are the result ot
the meetings, with but very little progress up to the present time.


VOLUNTEER MILITARY FORCE.
A company of the Northern Battalion Volunteer Newcastle
Rifles was established in 1855 ; they are under the command of
Major Bolton, Captain Brown. Lieutenant Arnott and Ensign
J. D. Langley, and muster 100 rank and file, There is also a
company ot Volunteer Artillery Biigade which was established in
1855 No. 3 Battalion, now under the command of Captain Holt,
first Lieutenant Kirkaldy, and second Lieutenant Richardson, and
80 artillery men. A Naval Biigade Company, No. 5, estab-
lished in 1865 is under the command of Captain Allan and Lieutem.
ant Herbert Cross ; they muster GO and are a very able body of
men and have an excellent band.
the medical staff.
The first on the list is our old established friend, Dr. Bowker,
who is celebrated far and wide for his medical talent. Die has been
for many years a benefactor to the city. He commenced his
practice in Newcastle so tar back as 1841 and continues his repud-
iation to the present time. There are also Messrs. R. C. Knaggs,
R. Harris, Dr. C. U. D, Schrader, J. J. Hill, Hr. S. T. Knaggs—
A, Pickbnrn and Dr. Read, who practice their profession in the
city and district.
COURT HOUSE.
The Court House, situated at the corner of Hunter and Bolton
streets, attracts the attention ot every passer by.
The first Court House was built of wood in 1821. It was a two-
story building, and was considered a master-piece of architecture, it
was sun-divided into Government Offices, Post, Customs, Petty
Sessions, <fec., &c., for the special use and accommodation of the
commandant. In 1803 it was granted hv the Government as a
manse and school for the minister ot the Scotch Church and still
continues in his posseession. The present Court House was built
in 1839 , capable of holding criminal sessions, and is in every re-
spect a suitable and convenient building, and much superior to
most other Court Houses in the colony for the holding of Petty
Sessions, It is presided over at present by a Police Magistrate,
Mr. H. Scott, who is the senior magistrate of the colony (from
documents in ray possession). He was with myself, appointed a
magistrale of the territory in 1829, and it is remarkable that all
those who vere on the commission ot that date have passed away.
I ' truly tu»\ it be said “ Man that is l orn of a woman is of few
28
PAST A.ND PRESENT


days and full ot trouble ; he conieth forth like a flower and ig cut
down, he fleeth also as a shadow and contiuueth not.”—Job. xiv.
ver. 2.
The Court House is generally used tor public meetings and well
adapted for that purpose. A meeting was called on the 15th
August, 1862, on the news of the death of Prince Albert, the good
consort of our gracious Queen, and an address adopted, sympathiz-
ing with her Majesty on her irreparable loss, the following is a
copy of an address signed by the Mayor, bv order of the meeting ;
ADDRESS OF CONDOLENCE TO HER MAJESTY.
The followin *is a copy of the address of condolence to Her
Majesty, forwarded by the inhabitants of Newcastle by the last
mail.
To the Queen’t Most Excellent Majesty.
Wo, your dutiful and loving subjects, desire to approach your Most Gracious
Majesty with expressions of oui deep sympathy on the occasion of that heavy
bereavement with which it has pleased our God in his inscrutable counsels to
visit your Maiesty and our nation.
We have, therefore, assembled together in public meetings to declare our
heartfelt sorrow and condole with your Majesty, the Royal Princes and Prin-
cesses, and all our fellow subjects, on the untimely and unexpected death of
your Majesty’s late Koyal Consort. The vast distance of ocean which separates
this dependency ol the British Crown from our mother country, in no respect pre-
vents our enjoyment of those blessings which, emanating from our Heavenly
King, are distributed by your careful and powerful hand in every portion of
your Majesty’s empire.
The warmhearted sympathy of those of your Majesty’s subjects who are pri-
vileged to dwell under the shadow of your Royal Palaces, is not exceded by the
sympathy of ourselves, and whilst we are fully assured that the warmest spring
of earthly comfort must flow to your Majesty and your children from the hal-
lowed memory of the past, we also venture to believe that the united expression
of sympathy and love from the subjects of your Majesty, borne by every breeze
from every quarter of the world, to,be humbly laid as oi.e united offering before
your throne, will not fail to bear a part in comforting a bereaved heart, and
wiping away the tears of widowhood. It is with this hope that we humbly beg
your Gracious Majesty to accept this, our small offering of sympathy, and we
will continually pray that the protecting hand of heaven may ever support your
august throne and prolong your life, an exampde to rulers, and a blessing to your
loyal subjects.
Signed on behalf of the whole body of the citizens of Newcastle, New South
Wales, by
James Hannell,
Mayor.
August 15th, 1862.
MUNICIPAL AND MARKET.
By the voice of the people the City was incorporated in 1859,
and .» Municipality established. A Mayor and Alderman chosen
hy the Citizens compose the Council, who have the fixing of the
rate, —collection of the funds, —disposing of them and the patron-
age (especially in their own immediate neighbourhoods) of all that
concerns the City, and to supervise the vapid advancement of its
29
RECORDS OF NEWCASTLE.


improvements. The Government very liberally doubled the rate
raised by the Council for the first five (5) years, and since 1864
to the present time, 1873, they contribute one fourth—under the
circumlocution and red tape system, which is common to all public
bodies. The money passing through their hands has been in
round numbers at least £36,000, In walking through the City, a
stranger would naturally look round and ask where all this large
sum of money has been expended. Echo says, where ! !
James Hannell, Esq., was the first Mayor and has several times
since tilled the Chair. The wmt of a Market Building was felt
and a great outcry raised for its erection, but no sooi.er was it
completed in 1870 and the stalls open to public competition than
it proved a failure, the hawkers, and farm settleis preferring their
old practice of disposing of their Colonial produce from their boats,
at what is called or known as the Old Market Wharf, where up to
the present time the principal supplies of the town are sold. The
New Market is a handsome structure, built by the contractor
Thomas Smith, in 1870.
BANKS.
We ought not to be in want of money as no less than four Banks
have already been established in our City, and all appear to be
doing a prosperous business paying a good dividend (10 per cent)
to their respective shareholders \ large profits these, proving be-
yond a doubt they thoroughly understand the art of money lend-
ing, and being liberal to their customers.
The Bank of New South Wales was established in the year
1853, and at the present time carries on the largest business, they
have lately built a well arranged house. Soon after this Bank was
opened, the Bank of Australasia made its appearance and com-
menced operations in 1854. They have also built splendid premises,
which are an ornameiit to the City. Then followed the Australian
Joint Stock Bank in 1860. They have also erected elegant premises
and are in a flourishing condition, and in the year 1870 a branch
of the Commercial Bank of Sydney was established. Besides these
flourishing establishments, there is a Savings Branch Bank, opened
in 1857, and a Post Office Government Savings Bank opened only
last year. The business of these Banks is carried on in large and
csramanding premises, situated conveniently in the principal street
for the transaction of business, and can easily be found by the
greatest stranger to our City.
INSTITUTION FOR IMBECILES.
Part of the Garden belonging to Christ Church Parsonage was
bought by the Ordinance department in England, fur the sum of


£BOO. Ihe land was required by them for the Military Barracks,
which were built in 1840, the interest oo this sum forms a portion
of the iuemubeut of Christ Church’s income. On the removal of
the Military, the Barrack? became useless for the purpose for
which they were built, and were handed over to the Colony on the
establishment of responsible Government in 1856. They were
then by their orders occupied by the Police force {a most suitable
arrangement) for a time, after which they were converted (in the
year 1867), much against the wishes of the townspeople, as publiu
meetings were held to protest against it, into a Reformatory
and Industrial School for Females. This scheme not answering
the girls were removed to Sydney, and in the fame yeai there was
established in them an Asylum for Imbeciles—and remains so to
the present time.
CHURCHES , SCHOOLS, AND SCHOOL LANDS.
Christ Church was built by Captain James Wallis of the 46 th
Regiment Commandant, in the year 1816, and was opened for
Divine Service in 1821. The Rev. G. A* Middleton was the
first Government Chaplain. The church was originally built with
a lofty shingled spire, and formed a pretty object on entering the
port in bygone days, when there were so few leading objects to
attract attention, but from its exposure to the heavy gales along
the coast, and lightning, it was thought prudent to pull it down
to prevent its being destroyed, and a smaller one like an extin
guisher was substituted as a finish to ihe tower. Whether this
extinguisher was to exclude the pure light is not certain, but it is
certain it did not. The tower on which it stood was pulled down
in 1868, and, of course, the extinguisher was removed, perhaps to
admit a little of the new light which is so prevalent in our churches
just now in England and elsewhere. Its removal, and that of the
Tower was unnecessary if it was to increase the accommodation of
pew sittings in the church. All the alterations which have
been effected could have been accomplished without sacrificing the
appearance o* the old church, which had been so faithfully put
together, and which has caused it to be so disfigured, with a sentry
box placed on the stump of the old tower.
Christ Church was the only pariah church in the city for many
years ; but on the completion of St Johns in 1860 the Parish was
equally divided ; since then it has uqdergone another division,
and a new parish has been made, principally from that of St'
John’s.


St. John’s Church and St John’- parsonage were built with part
of a munificent gift sent to the colonv by several of the directors of
the A. A.. Company as a thank offering for benefits received.
T much regret not being in a position to place on record the names
of these truly good and Christian gentlemen. It was a large sum,
£7935 forwarded to the Bishop of Newcastle, for the purpose of
building two churches and two parsonages on the estates formerly
belonging to the company, one at Newcastle and the other at Peel
River. In pursuance of these instructions the Bishop commenced
building the church and parsonage of St John’s, which he states
cost £5701 10s, leaving for the Peel church and buildings the
remaining sum of £2234, which, with other sums in hand
and materials on the ground from other sources, ought to have been
sufficient for that purpose. Surely then this splendid gift was
enough in all conscience to complete and carrv out the directions
of the Donors. But no, it is not so, as the Bishop ignores it and
brings a claim against St. John’s to a large amount, and the parties
concerned with the management of the parish affairs have admitted,
therefore, St. John’s has a debt hanging ovei it, while at the same
time the parish is end .wed so far back as 1856 with £l.OOO with
aU the interest accruing from it io the present time. The Rev. H,
L' Rumsey held the first appointment in 1856.
The paiish of St. James’, Wickham, is of late formation, and
consists of the out *kirts taken from St. John’s including the river
islands, and extending even to Hexham. The new town, in which
the church is situated, is rising rapidly into importance. Iht
church was built and opened (or Divine Service in May, 1872,
under the indefatigable exertions ot die present minister, the Rev.
John Pixon. In this parish, in addition to the parish church,
there are four (4) others in which Divine Service is held every
Sunday, and also on week evenings A new commodious parsonage
is being built aud will be shortly "eady for occupation.
st. Andrew’s Presbyterian.
The land occupied by St Andrew’s Scotch Church, was origin
nally the site of the first Sold ers Barracks, and after their removal
the land was given to the Presbytery for their Chinch, which was
built in 1850 and opened for Divine Service in 1853. The Rev.
James Nimmo wis the first incumbent, and was succeeded by the
Rev. James Coutis.
Tqe Romish Church established themselves in Newcastle in
1838, their meetings were held in a room known as the long room
in Newcomen-street, aud continued to the year 1845, the meeting*


were then held in Father Dowling’s dwelling-house till 1849 when
the Government allowed the Priest to occupy the old store in
Watt-street, until it was sold in 1852. Then a temporary woodien
church was built in Church-street, where service was performed
until the present brick building was erected in 1864,
The Wesleyan Church -was built in Newcomen-street in 1844 ;
the first minister was the Bev. Mr. Lewis ; the new church was
built in 1863.
Primitive Methodist Chapel erected in 1855.
Baptist Chapel erected in 1865.
Free Presbyterian Church built in Hunter-street in 1863.
We have also a Newcastle Auxiliary Branch of the British
and Foreign Bible Society established in 1859, presided over by
James Corlette, Esq., J.P. The annual subscriptions are progress-
ing favourably, and a depository is established under the manage-
ment of Mr. W. Arnott.
GRAMMAR SCHOOL.
The first effort to introduce a Grammar School in the city was
made in 1853. A Mr. W. H. Wilkinson was appointed head master
by the Bishop of Newcastle, but no house or school having been
prepared, the vestry room of Christ Church was used for the pur-
pose, and only a few boys attended. A labourer’s cottage belong-
ing to the Bishop, at the corner of Church and Wolfe streets, was
appropriated as a dwelling for the master, but this hut, for it was
nothing more, (now standing) was in a most dilapidated state,
scarcely habitable, and in rainy weather the shelter of umbrellas
was necessary. This state of things could not be expected to last,
and the result was his resignation and departure for Sydney. This
was only a temporary arrangement as the Hev. W. H Savigny had
received the appointment by the Bishop’s commissary in England,
and arrived in Newcastle to commence his duties in November,
1853, and expected to find a school and suitable buildings, instead
of which there was no preparation, not even lodgings for him. He
was greatly disappointed and disgusted, and complained bitterly to
the Bishop of ihe treatment. The result was that he opened a
collegiate school. Jealousy, that bitter weed, sprang up; the Gram-
mar School was closed, and Mr. Savigny’s license threatened to be
withdrawn. He left the place and went into the Sydney diocese,
taking with him the regrets of the people. He was presented with a
splendid silver salver and a purse, containing 40 sovereigns. Being
talented, he stood high in his profession in England, and was a


splendid preacher. Similar circumstances drove away from the city
another highly talented clergyman, the Rev. Canon Fletcher, B.D.
Both these gentlemen were a severe loss to Newcastle, and, strange
to say, they are both located in Tasmania where their talents and
abilities are better appreciated.
In 1855 the Bishop applied and obtained a grant ot land for an
episcopal residence and Grammar School which he selected op«
posite Christ Church on the opposite side of the street, and, in 1859,
the Grammar School portion was marked out, and a suitable house
built for the original purpose, the Rev. E. K. Yeatraan appointed
head master. He very soon threw up the berth, returning to his
parochial duty. The house and school remained vacant until the
arrival, in 1865, of the Rev. H. S. Millard, in whose charge it still
remains.
Christ Church had its Primary School established in the vicinity
of the Parsonage, soon after the Church was opened. In 1850 the
School was held in a small cottage school room, in Church-street,
built for that purpose, and suited to the wants of the parish, until
the increasing population demanded more extensive premises, when
it was pulled down, and the present convenient structure ei’ected
on *its site in 1859. It was capable of accommodating a large
number of children. Since then it has been more than once en-
larged by enclosing the verandahs to meet the increasing number
of scholars, and the wants of the Master and Mistress who have
comfortable quarters under its roof.
■ St. John’s Primary School was built in 1856, a suitable and
ornamental one for the purpose, in which are apartments provided
for the Master,
PUBLIC SCHOOL.
Among the recent Public Buildings in the Town is one for the
special benefit of the rising generation,—a Public School built in
1862, to accommodate a large number of both sexes. It is under
able teachers, but the one thing needful is neglected, namely, the
teaching of the Bible. What makes Infidelity so rampant in our
day ? *The withdrawal of the Bible and the Fundamental Unsec«
tarian Truth neglected in our schools. The children from their
earliest years should be accustomed to its teaching, as its rejection
causes suspickn—and no indecision in Bible truth, ought to be
inculcated, or allowed to rest upon their minds, as our Blessed
Saviour said—“ Without me ye can do nothing. Our race and
Country, our households, and our posterity, if abandoning vhe most
important element of Christian Society must ultimately end in


despair. “ Heart wisdom is religion in its truest sense; lie alone is
wise whose heart has been operated upon by the spirit of God, so
that he discerns the superiority of eternal things, to temporal; and
sets himself in earnest to the securing himself happiness in a
world beyond the grave.” The Bible is the word of God. God in-
spired good men to write it, and, when read, it should not be con-
sidered a common book, but a lesson from God himself; in it he
says “ Suffer little children to come unto me,” and exhorted to
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. “It
has been a thousand times said, it will never be disproved that
education without religion is not a blessing, but a curse” and our
Colony by its vigorous support of Bible education might be one of
great prosperity. How truly might it be said as of old by the
Almighty “ Thera that honor me I will honor.” —Then let the
Parents and Guardians of the rising generation see distinctly their
responsibility, and not allow God’s word and the. necessity of Bible
teaching to be forcibly withheld by any act of Parliament, That
Blessed Book is the greatest boon with which mankind has ever
been entrusted, —the choicest gift of an all wise beneficent Creator.
It teaches man how to live and how to die, and happy is he who
can say with ot. Paul “ I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course; I have kept the faith ; Henceforth there is laid up for
me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge,
shall give me at that day ; and not to me only, but unto all them
also that love his appearing.” (2 Tim. iv, 7.8.)
The writer closes these remarks with a scrap copied from an old
newspaper.
The Bible exalts the faculties, expands the mind, developes the powers of
the will and of feeling, and opens more sources of intellectual and spiritual
enjoyment than any other book. A nation must be truly blessed if it were
governed by no other laws than those of this blessed book ; it is so complete a
system, that nothing can be added to it or taken from it ;
it contains everything needful to be known or done; _it
affords a copy for a king, and a rule for a subject ; it gives
instruction and counsel to a senate ; authority and direction for a magistrate ;
cautions a witness; requires an impartial verdict of a jury, and furnishes a
judge with his sentence. It sets the husband as lord of the household, and the
wife as mistress of the table ; tells him how to rule, and her how to manage.
It entails honor on parents and enjoins obedience to children ; it prescribes
and limits the ways of the sovereign, the rule of the ruler, and authority of the
master: commands the subjects to honor, and the servants to obey ; and
promise* the blessings and protection of its author to, all that walk by its rules.
It gives directions for weddings and for burials ;it promises food and raiment,
and limit* the use of both ; it points out a faithful and an eternal Guardian to
tho departing husband and father ; tells him with whom to leave his fatherless
children, and in whom his widow is to trust ; and promises a father to the
former, and a husband to the latter. It teaches a man how to set his house in
order ; and how to make his will; it appoints a dowry for the wife, and entails


all the rights of the first-born ; and shows how the younger branches shall be
left. It defends the right of all; and reveals vengeance to every defrauder
overreach, er- and oppressor. It is the first book, the best book, and the oldest
book in all the world.
. This is the Book rejected by an ungodly Parliament, and ex-
pelled from our National Schools,
CHURCH AND SCHOOL LANDS.
The particulars of the land at Honeysuckle Point, are as follows ;
A few gentlemen met at Newcastle, and, talking over the wants
of the town, agreed among themselves that a Proprietary Grammar
School was much required, and subscribed the sum of £303 15s.
for the purchase of a piece of land suitable for the purpose, they
selected a valuable property at Honeysuckle Point, and applied to
t re Government for the purchase ; but before the auction sale took
place, they found their funds were very inadequate for the purchase
of so large a property, and applied to the Bishop of Australia to
help them, offering him at the same time, a vested interest in the
land, and to be the visitor of the school. It so happened at that
time, that the Bishop had £SOO in hand belonging to the S.P.C.K.
Society, of London, which he agreed to lend them, and in the mean-
urae he would inform the Society of the transaction. The land
was measured by order of the Government by Mr. Surveyor
anc * described in the Government Gazette of that period
Ib-10, as containing about 35 acres, with the water frontage. It
was offered by auction in September, 1840, and sold for the sum of
i,, Un ? the deed of S raufc Was made in *avor of Dr.
Mitchell, one of the subscribers, and the trust deed from him to
Messrs. A. W, Scott, and W. Croasdel. In July 1844 the former
chosen by the subscribers and the latter appointed by the
Bishop as Trustee on his behalf, and the SPCK
who had communicated with the Bishop and confirmed the loan
into a gift for the purpose intended. The Society had a title to
five-eighths of tne land (as stated by Mr. K. James in his evi-
dence before the Assembly Committee), —their portion of the
purchase money £SOO. Nothing more was done with the land
and xt laid idle, until soon after the arrival of the Bishop of New-
castie, when he learned from Mr. Kerison James (the Bishop of
Sydneys Secretary and Registrar of all Church properties), that
the Honeysuckfe Pome property belonged to the Church. The
Bishop determined that it should no longer lay waste, but that his
Diocese should derive a benefit from it, so he had it marked out
into 52 allotments, and let from 35 to 40 of them, on a 21 years


lease, on reasonable terms, nominating Mr. Simon Kemp as bis
agent and collector. These leases were dated Ist January, 1851,
and the lessees improved them by buildings, cfcc., &c. Time went
on and a railway was projected. A company was formed under an
Act of Parliament, styled the Hunter Paver Riilway Company,
who had the power given them in one of the clauses to take any
land they required, and pay for it by arbitration. After obtaining
possession they availed themselves of the power and took possession
of the whole ot Honeysuckle Point, on the sth July, 1854, giving
a printed notice to the lessees and ejecting them forcibly. The rent
had been paid up to that time to Mr, Kemp, the Bishop’s agent.
Disputes soon arose and a meeting was held in the Court House,
22nd July, i 854, at which Mr. A. VV r . Scott, the subscribers’
trustee endorsed all the Bishop had done, but His Lordship finding
lie had acted without sufficient caution, ignored the leases, stating
that he was neither legally nor morally b mad bv them, and re*
fused all assistance to secure their rights to the Lessees. The
Company admitted their claim, and would have settled with
them by arbitration. Days were appointe I for that purpose, bub the
lawyers found flaws in the leases, and the matter was in dispute
when the railway was transferred to the Government. The Company
when they sold to the Government, -transferred the claim of these
lessees to them as still unsettled, admitting the right of these claims
for compensation. Disputes, correspondence, and objections were
raised by the Lawyers, when a Parliamentary enquiry was at
length obtained, and a Committee of the House of Assembly, ap-.
pointed in 1859. Long examinations and many witnesses examined,
who were in favour of the Lessee’s claims, Mr Kemp, the Bishop's
agent, in his evidence stated that he had received irom the lessees
about £I4C rent. He stated that that amount was still in the
Bank of New South Wales, and he was ready to give a cheque to
any person who could show him any legal authority to receive it.
The Government, after some years’ correspondence and considera-
tion, admitted the right ot the- Trustees to a compensation, and
agreed to an arbitration, leaving the Trustees to settle the claims
of the lessees, who would not allow them to be heard, however,
they sent a formal protest to the Miniate* - for Works, Mr Byrnes,
who pocketed it, but took no further notice of it. This arbitration
was held at the Great Northern Hotel in June, 1868, when the
Government had the laud remeasured by one of their Licensed Sur-
veyor’s (ignoring the grant from the Crown), curtailing it many
acres as the award was to be so much par acre. The following is
a copy taken from the Sydney Morning Herald of 13 th June, 1868;


Thb Honhtsucklb Point Claimants.—An inquiry before arbitrators has
been going on this week in reference to the land at Honeysuckle Point, near
Newcastle, taken by the Government for railway purpose*. The land in question
was held by trustees, in whom it was vested for the purposes of an endowment
for the church of England Grammar School, In the inquiry, which has just
closed, Mr Yindin acted as arbitrator for the trustees, and Mr Biden for the
Commissioner of Hallways, and these gentlemen selected Mr Colquhoun as um«
pire. Mr Davis, barrister, assisted by Mr Bradley, appeared for the trustees ;
and the Solicitor« General, assisted by Mr Jackson, of the
Crown Law office, for the Commissioner of railways The
hearing of the case, before the umpire as well as the arbitrators, com-
menced on Monday last, and the proceedings were opened by Mr. Davis, who
delivered an address on behalf of the trustees. Evidence was then given in
support of the claim, and this was followed by evidence on behalf ef the Com-
missioner, several witnesses being examined on both sides. The Solicitor-
General then addressed the arbitrators at some length on behalf of the Com-
missioner, and Mr. Bradley replied. The arbitrators have not yet given their
decision. This matter is one of considerable importance, the amount claimed by
the trustees being about L 40,000. After the arbitrators have given their deci-
sion there will still remain an important question unsettled,—the claim of the
lessees (under the Bishop’s leases) upon the trustees. Mr. Byrnes, who
attended during the proceedings as Commissioner for Railways, and gave evi-
dence, returned to Sydney on Thursday evening last.
I cannot trust myself to comment on all these proceedings, as [
consider them a disgrace to a responsible Government, and to all
concerned. The award, and how it has been disposed of, I know
noihing, but this Ido know, and that is, that no Proprietary
Grammar School has an existence, and the lessees have not received
compensation for their losses, time, and trouble.
Trade'and Commerce.
In the appendix will be found tables showing the wonderful and
rapid increase for the last ten years, of our shipping and local trade,
and all otheidbranches)connected with thejcommercial interests of this
city. The tables containing this information have been carefully
collected from the custom house papers, published in 1869, and
others kindly put together by their officers under the direction of
W. R. Logan, Esq , the present Collector of Customs, to whom,
from his politeness and ready desire to afford all the information
in his power the writer, is greatly indebted. In analyzing their
wonderful statements the results are so astounding that they can
scarcely be believed. They are as follow, viz. : In the year!Bs3
the export of coal amounted to 96,810 tons, conveyed from the
colony in 113 ships, measuring4l,B77 register tonnage, and valued
at£7B,loo. Now, in the year 1872, theexportof coal amounted
565,994 tons, and conveyed from the colony in 876 ships measur-
ing 342,5] 4 register tonnage and valued at £243,911 18s., ex-
clusive of home consumption. The total value of our exports in


1852, was only £78,000, but now we find in 1872, ttey realize the
enormous amount of £243,911 ; thus, in twenty years, the ships
visiting ihe port have incieased from 113 in 1853, to 876 in 1872.
The amount of coal is equally astounding. In 1853, 96,800 tons
were exported, and in 1872, 565,994 tons, exclusive of home
consumption, and the tonnage of coasters and steamers are not
included in these figures. On the 24th June, 1873, there were 69
ships of 39,811 register tonnage in the harbour, averaging 577 t
tons for each ship. These facts are almost incredible and there is
no limit to the extent of the coal fields, not only in Newcastle, but
they reach from the southernmost extremity of the whole line of
coast as far north as the boundary of New South Wales. The
advantage of the coal fields to Newcastle is enormous. They
require neither labour nor money to produce them, but have been
deposited there by a kind and wise Providence ready for the pick
and shovel to bring them to the surface. They are also the means
of bringing large fleets of ships into our harbour, with their natural
wants of meat, bread, vegetables, milk, poultry, <kc, and giving
employment to patent slips, tugs, lighters, wharves, cranes, rail-
ways and many other industries. The miners receive their wages
every fortnight, giving'life and vigour to the shopkeepers, especially
on pay nights, and to every other branch of the trading community.
They are a numerous body of men, at least 1600 strong. Their pay
is good and they are about the best paid men in the district.
Their prospects are still on the rise, as their earnings are regulated
on the sliding scale both just to masters and men. Withdraw the
production of coal, and all is cheerless, blank, and desolate and
every branch of trade suspended. The miners alone give remune-
rative employment ; therefore it behoves them to be true to
themselves and their families, and to continue a regular supply of
coal, without interruption, to the many ships that visit the port.
The great draw back at present is the want of accommodation at
the wharves, which can only be remedied by the wet dock basin
proposed in a former part of this work,
there be no more strikes, and moie wharf accommodation,
and I venture to prophecy that Newcastle will take the lead of
all the colonies; and if the consumption and increased demand for
coal to the eastward of the Cape of Good Hope continues as at
present, Newcastle must become me of the greatest cities in
the Southern Hemisphere , in wealth and prosperity. All machinery
is set in motion by coal, and it must be had at any price; for
without it, all commercial and postal contracts would be broken ;
and all industries be at a standstill, especially steamers.


The lives of miners and mariners are similar—the one doing
their business in great waters, in a treacherous and stormy ocean;
the other in the damp dark bowels of the earth. In both life is
held in jeopardy and uncertainty, not knowing what, an hour may
bring forth. As the Royal Psalmist says —“ Thou turnest man
to destruction. When thou scatterest them, they are even as in
sleep ; and fade away suddenly like the grass. In the morning it
is green and groweth up ; but in the evening it is cut down, dried
up, and withered. For when thou art angry, all our days are
gone: we bring our years to an end as it were a tale that is
told.”
TUGS,
The want of a Steam Tug was a great drawback to the port, and
every effort was made by the Chamber of Commerce to induce the
Government to supply the deficiency ; but they would not listen
to their importunity, or in any way assist. At length one was
introduced by Messrs Single and Son, the Lowestoft, a powerful
boat, which commenced her in May, 1855, but was unfor*
tunately wrecked September, 1864, between Newcastle and Sydney,
while proceeding to the latter port for the purpose of towing a
large ship to Newcastle. Other toats were soon found to replace
her, and a Company formed, called the Steam Tug Company, with
three powerful boats, besides others owned by private individuals.
At the present time, for the benefit of vessels trading to the port,
there are four powerful boats continually in attendance, and
realizing a successful harvest. A bell buoy was moored to the
eastward of Nobby’s, at the end ot the reef alongside the Big Ben
rock, to warn steamers and others of their proximity to the Hat-
hour, especially in foggy weather.
LIFE BOAT.
A large and cumbersome lifeboat was built in Newcastle in
1847 or 1848, ill adapted for the purposes for which it was in*
tended, and was often used for picnic parties up the river. On one
occasion going to a wreck it got injured, was sold, and made into a
splendid sailing vessel, to trade to Lake Macquatie. The boat
was replaced by another, built in 'Sydney, 1855, but from some
defect in the valves, and mismanagement, came to grief. Another
was ordered from England on the most improved principles ;it
does the work well, but finding one was not sufficient for the work,
another splendid boat was also ordered from England. They are
still at work, manned by paid crews, who are ready at a moment’s


warning. A Committee was formed for their management in.
1867, assisted by the Harbour Master. Sheds are erected near
Nobby’s, where the boats are always kept ready foi any emergency.
The first two boats were manned by volunteers, but that system
did not answer.
On the 19th March, 1864, in endeavouring to rescue the crew of
the Zone the life boat was capsized and three men drowned.
DREDGES.
The partial removal of the Flats up the river and other supposed
improvements in the harbour, caused new shoals and banks to
appear, and it was found necessary to deepen both the Horseshoe,
and the loading channels, so as to admit larger class vessels, which
were daily on the increase, and a steam dredge was deemed am
absolute necessity. The Hunter steam dredge was built »m
Sydney, and towed to Newcastle in 1809, and continued hei
work, both in the harbour, and the river, between Morpeth and
Newcastle ; but the woik being too much for her, another power-
ful one, the Vulcan, was built in Sydney, and commenced hei
work in 1864. They are both kept constantly at work, night and
day, and have more than they can do. Another dredge was
found to be indispensable, and is now being built in Sydney, and
will be shortly employed to assist in keeping down the accumulate
ing banks that are increasing in. the harbour, and in the river.
FIRE COMPANIES.
The Volunteer Fire Company, was established in 1855, and a
Fire Engine was sent from Sydney by the Liverpool and London
Insurance Company for their use. Their station-house is situated
in N ewcomen-street. At the present time there are two com-
panies with four engines, but their efforts in most cases, ate frus-
trated by the want of a good supply of water, and defective appli-
ances.
FOUNDRY.
Our late enterprising townsman, Mr. A. Rodgers, es tab lit bed
an Iron and Brass Foundry in 1854, where castings of large
dimensions in both metals were made. At the present time the
business is in the bands of bis sons, Messrs A. Rodgers and Co.,
who are carrying on an extensive trade, having added the
engineering branch to it, and steam boilers and engines are made,
and heavy castings of the largest dimensions executed.


It w as a great benefit and improvement to the city, the intro-
duction of gas. A company was incorporated in 1866, and the
town partially lighted. It is generally used in shops and private
dwellings but not generally in the streets. For this reason the
citizens object to an additional rate to the present extravagant one
of one shilling in the pound on all assessed lands and houses
so they are left in darkness, as far as gas is concerned, in the un-
Je Pt ! :eetB 0f the <%> "here %ht is more re-
q ed than in the main streets, where the shops afford light and
protection to the citizens. It is a flourishing company, and must
succeed, as the wants of the city are daily increasing.
RAILWAY.
Cantab Thorn"! ° f in the E thorough
Gaptam I hornhill, and commenced the Hunter Kiver Railwav
nfifeTT COm f an { beailn gthat name, which, after proceeding a few
r" way 6 7; the r lLy "'*** and 'interest Itn the
railway to the Government, who carried on the entermise
with spirit, re-uannng it the Great Northern Railway. The first
portmn was formal y opened on the 30th March, by his
Excellency, Sir William Dem«on. went off well with great
wavtraffi’-* eaSt ' ngS ’ “.IW 7 ° f bunfcin g. a »d so the first rail-
way tiaffi. was an established fact, which has, from year to year
newspapers.
Mr A M^r ( l" P A t d" ed The ?‘ l,was ,tarted in 1855 bv
- i ; he preBent t,me there a ™ two—the Newcastle
hlot and the Newcastle Chronicle- well supported. Aeucastla
TELEGRAPHS.
«f!i he p elf | gtapll o Wil ' eS were first set in m °tion in the year 1860
to the dTff Wa7 i Stat r K* ° ffice ) a lifted .cafe
to the different parts ot New South Wales and the adjoining
A Stat i oi ; r house was er ected and opened on 21st Auaust
1861, and every facility afforded the public. At the present time,’


1873, messages can be forwarded to all parts of the world :
England, Europe, America, China, India, and Hong Kong, in a
few hours, eclipsing all the wonderful scientific inventions of the
present age.
CEMRTERY;
The Government were applied to by the Municipal authorities
in 1866 for a suitable piece of /and in the immediate vicini y of
the town fora Cemetery. They obtained their request in 1868, and
Trustees were namedfor the preparation of the giant, but disputes
arising, as they always do in Newcastle, as to its locality and
suitableness for the reception of their departed friends, no Ceme-
tery to the present time exists, —to the great inconvenience and
necessity of the City ; and no relief to our over-crowded Burial
Ground. However, I hear the subject is again brought before tne
Government, who are in treaty with the A. A. Company lor the
purchase of 50 acres, situated between Hexham and Waiatah, but
whether its distance and locality may be approved of by the con-
tending parties time can only determine. This is another instance
of the folly of the Government granting the A. A. Company all the
land surrounding the City as I have mentioned in another page.
FLOUR MILL.
So far back as 1844, Mr. Steel, an old enterprising resident
erected a Flour Mill, the first and only one in Newcastle, and up
to the present time doing its duties satisfactorily to the public.
SMELTING WORKS.
Only a few months ago, at the beginning of the present year,
1873, the tin Stockton works were set in motion, and doing a
good business. Tin ore is being brought down in largo quantities,
and smelted into a marketable state leady for shipment.
PATENT SLIP.
Most intimately associated with the trade and commerce of
Newcastle, is the possession of a Patent Slip, upon which vessels of
1200 tons register tonnage ha' T e already been placed, and received
the necessary repairs and overhaul, The Slip is at Stockton, on
the north side of the Harbour.


A small Patent Slip on a primitive scale, without steam power,
was laid down in 1857, on the North Shore, adjoining the Salt
Works, only capable of taking up small vessels, which is still
rccasionally used. Some short time after Mr Scott rented land
further up the river from Dr Mitchell, and laid one down with
steam power, on a much larger scale in 1859. This slip was re-
laid, and further improvements added to it, and is now capable
of repairing ships of upwards of 1000 tons, a great advantage to
the port.
NORTH SHORE
Mr. A. W. Scott, one of the early benefactors to the Town,
erected very extensive and expensive buildings on the North Shore
about the year 1836 which gave employment to a large number of
men. One of the buildings was for the manufacture of salt on a
large scale, the other an Iron Foundry sufficiently extensive at
that early period for the wants of the Colony ; but the speculation
in both cases was unprofitable and abandoned—and the buildings
from neglect fell into decay. At the breaking out of the gold
mania in 1851, they were used as a hay store, and for other pro-
duce, as long as the Melbourne market required the agricultural
produce of our lands. After that to the present time they are let
for the purpose of manufacturing Sulphuric Acid. The Stockton
Tweed factory was first built on a very small scale, about the year
1834, by Dr. Mitchell, and in 1842 it was a prosperous and paying
establishment under the firm of Messrs Fisher, and Donaldson. The
Buildings, Machinery, and the whole of the airangements were of
the latest and best construction, worked by steam power. The
cloth manufactured was of the best description and realised the
best price in the Colony. Unfoitunately it was totally destroyed
by fire on the 3rd July, 1851, a serious loss to the proprietors and
to Newcastle ; not less than 300 hands, men, women and children,
were thrown out of employ and had to find other homes and em-
ployment. The buildings and machinery were totally destroyed,
and no effort has since been made to replace them. The shaft or
tall chimney of the engine house only remains to point out the
spot; and on the sth of the same month, only two nights after, the
old Stockade or Lumber Yard, rented as a store from the Govern*
ment by Messrs. Mitchell and Tully, was discovered in flames, and
entirely destro\ed, to the great consternation and alarm of the
inhabitants, as both the fires had the appearance of incendiarism
occurring as they did so close to each other. A man was brought
before the Bench suspected of the crime, but there was not suffi-


cient evidence to commit him, although, under very suspicious
ch’cumstances, and he being a lucky tellow got the benefit of the
doubt.
PUBLIC HOUSES.
Connected with the trade and commerce of our city, is the
prevalence of the drinking customs of Society. The town, a
quarter of a century ago, could not boast of more than half a dozen
pnblichouses ; and most of them without accommodation for either
man or beast, and little or no better than dram drinking pothouses.
But how great the change in the present day. There are now no
less,than 35 pnblichouses within our municipal boundary, and exer-
cising a most debasing and demoralising influence, which it ought to
he the earnest endeavour of every good man to counteract. The
Great Northern stands conspicuous, and is an ornament to the city ;
it is we'l situated, and commands the best run for family visitors, with
every convenience for their comfort. But how sad to contemplate
tiie effect produced by these houses—promoting intemperance
and its injurious consequences, both to the mind and body,
on all those who are led astray by their enticements. What was
considered a degradation and loss of cast, ago, when I was a
young man, is now, 1 am sorry to say, disregarded, and drinking
at the bar of a publichouse, now has no shame attached to it. It
is an every day, and many times in the day, a common practice of
even gentlemen, who indulge in nobblers, as they are called, and
inducing the young and unwary to follow in their footsteps. It
is what our fathers and grandfathers would have considered suffi-
cient loss of character to have banished them from genteel society.
CONCLUDING REMARKS.
The reminiscences of old times, are most refreshing, for there
was an amount of genial and kindly feeling existing at that time,
which does not, I regret to say, influence our citizens now, to work
the one with the other.
It is truly grievous the want of unanimity, ill-feeling, and
bickerings displayed at our public meetings. Even when we are
personally concerned. But call a meeting for any local display,
or especially tor a patriotic purpose. Then I am proud of my
tellow townsmen, who can, when the matter is properly brought
before them, throw off all bickerings and strife and join heart,
hand, and purse, for the advancement of either object. Take tor
instance the meeting called on behalf of the Patriotic Association,


1855, for our suffering countrymen in the Crimea, when no less a
sum than £557 was subscribed for their relief, also for the Indian
Relief fund in 1858, about £2OO, and last of all, for the British
Operative Relief fund in 1862 when £315 was collected. All
these suras were raised in Newcastle. Take another proof of the
sympathy shown by our city in an address to Her Majesty on
the death of H.R.H. Prince Albert, and also at an overflowing
public meeting on the 12th March 1868, when Newcastle was the
first town in the colony to condole with H.R.H. Prince Alfred, on
the same evening that he was struck down by the hand of an
assassin at Clontarf.
At times like these the good qualities of our townspeople are
brought out without a dissenting voice. At the call of the Patri-
otic Association, when our aid was required, our contributions
were equal, if not larger, in proportion to our population, than most
other towns either in the colonies or England. The Australiaa
contributed altogether more than India or the Canadas, with all
their great wealth and influence, and from the accounts we read,
is considered in England, at the present day, from these loyal
patriotic causes, the brightest gem in her Majesty’s crown. We
cannot permit the opportunity to pass over without pointing
out a few social, wants of Newcastle, several of which we
have already referred to, viz., the Chamber of Commerce and
Exchange. If these existed, temptation to close transactions in
the parlor of a public house would be lessened, the comfort of
both merchant and trader promoted, and the domestic life of
every person made much more bright and cheerful.
Another want, and one most keenly felt, by the seafairing popu-
lation, is that of a Sailor’s Home and Reading Room. It
was at one time suggested by the Rev, John Dixon to
establish such an institution, in connexion with the
Church of England, and an interesting article was published
by him in the Parish Magazine . But that sympathy and sup-
port which should have been accorded to the establishment of
such a “ Home” was not given, and the movement tell to the ground.
It is very desirable thut a Sailors’ Home should be built, so that
the seamen, whose comforts at sea are of a very limited character,
may, on their arrival in port, have protection thrown around them,
and thus be saved from the grasping power of crimps, land sharks,
and the baneful influence exerted by the low public houses.
Another most important desideratum, which ought to be supplied,
is that of a proper and copious supply of water. When our town


has been visited by fire, the result has been frequently disastrous,
and the efforts of many willing workers entirely neutralized by the
absence of water. Also for domestic purposes it is absolutely re-
quired, and we believe that many of the diseases which are preva-
lent amongst us arise from scarcity of good water.
The drainage of the town ought also to be commenced, and a
proper system of drainage carried out.
Then indeed with Docks, and increased harbour accommodation,
with additional facilities for loading and unloading of vessels, with
care and vigilance exercised in everything connected with our
port, with Exchange and Chamber ot Commerce and « Marine
Board composed of men understanding their work, with Homes
for Sailors and other institutions, tending to elevate the mind,
the possession of these, and the vast mineral wealth which :s
ours, would cause Newcastle to become the greatest and most
important city, not only in New South Wale* but the whole of
the colonies.
It requires us as citizens to bury all paltry jealousies and unite
for the advancement of our city, and as its progress is developed,
our interests, which are identical, will also go onward, and the
years in store for us will cause greater moral and commercial
successes to be achieved than have been chronicled in either the
Pant or Present Records of Newcastle.


APPENDIX.
WRECK OF T.IE STEAMER “CAWARRA.”
From he Newcastle Chronicle.)
Thursday, the 12th of July, 1886, will be a clay long to be sorrowfully re-
membered by the inhabitants of Newcast'e It will bo marked in the
Calendar as the day on which one of the most dreadful wrecks occurred tha
has ever taken place either here or elsewhere in the enure history of the
colony. The worst among the wrecks of former years are as nothing as
compared with this, if we except only the lass of the Dunbar and one or two
others, whilst in many of the elements of tragic horror, this going clown in
broad daylight, at the very mouth of our harbour, within a few hundred
yards of 'he shore, is the most dreadful, the most calamitous, and the most
heartrending of them all. We proceed to give an account of the loss of the
ill-fated steamer from the commencement to the close. The weather, which
for the past few days had been very fine, suddenly changed on Wednesday.
During the day it was not very bad, but as night came on the wiud fresh-
ened, aud throughout the whole of Wednesday night it blew' very hard from
the South, and rained almost without a minute's intermission. At daylight,
on Thursday morning, a stiff gale was still blowing, and a very heavy sea
was running outside the harbour. Between nine and ten o’clock the gale if
anything got worse, and the wind veered round to the > .K, and a brig
being signalled as mak ng for the port, her position was felt to be one of con-
siderable danger. A large number of persons went oh to the sand-hills and
over to the Lighthouse to watch her make the harbour, which she did in
safety, about half-past II o’clock. This vessel proved to be the brig Victory,
recently out from England, as we are informed, and quite a new vessel.
Shortly before this the Sydney steamer, the Coonanbarra, had, to the sur-
pr se of almost everybody, sailed, and her progress as she rounded Nobby’s
was watched with no little anxiety. She got safely out. and proceeded on
her voyage to Sydney. About tbe time that the Victory was nearing the
porta steamer was observed a consiierabledistance off, but whether making
for the port or no! could not he ascertained. For several hours, now and
again, as the squall cleared off, the smoke of the steamer could be seen. At
one time it was thought to be the Coonanbarra returning to port. It would
now appear, however, that this must have been the Cawarra all ihe time.
What the Captain’s object was in standing of the port so long before he at-
tempted to enter, is, of course, not known, and now that the" Captain him-
self aud all on board save one solitary individual, have perished, it is not
likely that it ever will be known. However, about one o’clock, rather later
perhaps, a steamer was signalled in the usual way, aud it was at once


peeked that the midday Sydney boat was coming in. From motives of
curiosity a great number of persons soon assembled on the wharf. We our-
selves arrived there just as what afterwards proved to be the unfortunate
Cawarra had rounded Nobby’s, and was abreast of the Light-house. It hay-
ing been noted that a tremendous sea was rolling on the bar, every eye was
turned towards the steamer to see how she would acquit herself in crossing
it.
The excitement at this time was intense; people were rushing in all
directions to the wharf, and to every place which commanded a view of
the steamer. Soon the vessel vas seen to be approaching the bar, and
already in the midst ef a terrific sea. For a few minutes after this she
continued to steam ahead. Up to this time scarcely any one dreamt that
she was in imminent danger, although her position was felt to be a critical
one. Suddenly she was noticed to come to a stand-still. This increased
the excitement, and the crowd on the wharf and sand hills increased
rapidly. After remaining in one position for several minutes, the Caw T arra
steamed with hsr jib and mainsail set, in the direction of Nobby’s. It was
now evident to everyone that the unfortunate vessel was in great danger.
Some asserted that she was losing ground and drifting to the Oyster Bank.
After again remaining stationary for several minutes, she was observed
palpably to be drawn back to her first stationary position. She remained
there roiling and pitching in a fearful sea for a short time, and then sud-
denly turned round and steamed ahead as if going out to sea again. She
made some little headway, but not much. Several tremendous seas struck
her in succession, and an impression prevailed among the spectators that
the water had got into the engine-room. Almost immediately afterwards,
she made a futile effort to get, into smooth water by steaming backwards.
The attempt, however, was made too late, and the unfortunate ship was
then discovered to be in a hopeless state. A few minutes more, and smoke
ceased to issue from her funnel, plainly denoting that the fires were ex-
tinguished. A rush of steam followed, and the worst fears of everyone
were realised. In about a quarter of an hour from this time, and about
half-past two o’clock in the afternoon, she was seen to be settling down,
head foremost. It is impossible to describe tne wild excitement which
prevailed at this moment. The lifeboat, it was expected, would be
launched every moment. On every hand persons were to be heard
anxiously inquiring the reason for the delay in launching the lifeboat.
On, however, sped the swift->wingad minutes, and no sign of the boat being
launched. The vessel, meanwhile, was settling down fast, and no sign of
a boat of any kind putting off to her assistance. About a quarter of an
hour aber the (Jawarra began to sink her funnel fell overboard. Some of
the people on Nobby’s fancied they saw at the same moment several
people washed overboard. It is very probable that such was actually the
case. This must have been about a quarter past three o’clock, at which
time the steamer had been fully an hour in a position of imminent danger,
without any attempt whatever having been made to launch the lifeboat.
By this time, some 300 people had assembled in the vicinity of the lifeboat
shed, and from that time out, group after group of people were observed to
be washed off the steamer, and still no sign of the lifeboat putting off. At
twenty minutes past three o’clock, the mainmast, around which some score
of people could be distinctly seen clinging, was noticed to be swaying back-
wards and forwards. A minute or two more and over it went with its
burden of human beings into the boiling, seething cauldron around. Even


at this juncture, late as it was, if the lifeboat had put out promptly, many
lives beyond all doubt might have been saved. But, no ! because the
proper crew were not at their posts, the boat could not be put off. The
sea was now making a clean breach over the steamer, which was rapidly
going to pieces. About a quarter to 4 o’clock the foremast, with another
mas# of poor drowning souls, went overboard. The bulk of the people
were, of course, washed off. Two brave fellows, however, managed to
cling to this spar for some ten minutes longer. As the mast was lifted up
and down by the sea, the forms of the two men could be plainly seen still
holding on—all, however, to no purpose ; a few minutes later and a huge,
remorseless looking billow rolled over the wreck, and the two men on the
foremast were never seen after. At last, when all but two or three poor
creatures on that awful wreck had perished, the lifeboat was launched, and
proceeded slowly in the direction of the wreck. Alas, it was too late.
Only a few were left on the vessel, and these had no chance of saving
themselves, for the lifeboat we oau positively affirm, never went within
several hundred yards of the main portion of the wreck. The harrowing
scene was now drawing rapidly to a close ; a few minutes more only, and
scarce a vestige (except floating pieces of wreck) was left standing to
mark the spot where the magnificent Cawarra, steamer, with her living
freight of over fifiy souls, had recently floated in all her strength and
glory npon the surface of the ocean. A boat belonging to the barque
Maggie V. Hngg put off to the wreck shortly before the lifeboat, but was
unable to do any good.
The sight which we have feebly attempted to describe above was one of
the most appalling it is possible to conceive of. Big, stalwart men, with
brawny arms and weather beaten faces, turned from it with tearful eyes,
whilst down the faces of many of the more tender-hearted of the spectators,
the tears rolled thick and fast. At length, when it was all over, shortly
after four o’clock, the concourse of people began to wend their way
homewards.
The following is a list of passengers and crew of the ill-fated Cawarra :
Passengers—For Brisbane : (Steerage)—Alexander Brash, John Marsden,
George Seaward, Michael M'Lennan, and seven Chinese. For Rockhampton :
Cabin—Mrs. Cramp and child. Miss Anderson, Mr. A. Anderson, and Mr.
Machefer. Steerage—Mr. and Mrs. John Paterson, Samuel King and six
Chinese. Crew list—Henry Chatfield, commander ; Joseph R. M‘Dowell,
chief officer; Thos; Burrows, second officer; Wm. Ray, carpenter,' Wm.
Freeman, boatswain ; Jos. Jenkins, Thos. Butler, Francis Hubert, Augustus
Coste, quartermasters ; Wm. Bland, Gabriel Hanson, F. V. Hedges (saved),
William R. Phillips, John Cullen, Edward Carey, seamen ; William
Manton, lamp trimmer ; John Fountain, chief engineer ; John Auchincloss,
second engineer ; John Barrett, Alexander Livingston, Peter Coley, Daniel
Rodgers, James Taylor, and James Leonard, firemen : David Auchinson,
coal trimmer; Robert M‘ Murry, donkey-driver j Edward Jones and David
Tohburn, trimmers; William Henry Morgan, second steward; Stephen
Goddard, pantryman; John Darvell, fore-cabin steward; J. Abrahams,
officers’ servant ; John M'Dermid, chief cook; James Fox, second cook ;
Hugh M‘Donald, third cook ; Catherine Crozier, stewardess. Most of th»
above have left widows, and some of them large families, to mourn
ftheir sadden and irreparable bereavement.


Later in the evening, one man named Hedges was picked np near the red
buoy by Mr. H. Hannell and others. We append his statement of how he
was washed from the wreck and succeeded in keeping afloat.
REMARKABLE COINCIDENCES.
Since our last publication, we hare heard of two or three remarkabJS
coincidences in connection with the loss of the unfortunate Cawarra ste&“
mer The first hns reference to the late Captain Chatfield, commander of
the Cawarra. Ten or eleven years ago, it appears Captain Chatfield wa*
in the port of Newcastle, in command of the Boomerang, at the time the
Eleanor Lancaster was wrecked on the Oyster Bank. On that memorable
occasion Captain Chatfield rendered signal assistance in rescuing from the
wreck of the Lancaster eeveral half-perished people. From that time to
this (Thursday last), one of the masts of the Eleanor Lancaster ha*re-
mained standing to mark the fatal spot where she was wrecked. Singular
to relate, that identical mast, which for so many years has withstood the
fury of successive storms, and served as an excellent beacon to mariners,
was washed away simultaneously with the loss of the Cawarra and the
drowning of Captain Chatfield. The coincidence is certainly a striking
one, and well worthy of placing on record.—The other coincidence which
has oomo nnder onr notice has reference to the chief steward of the
Cawarra, whose name is Newland. Mr Newland, wo are Informed, was
formerly chief steward of the Star of Australia, a vessel that left New-
castle some years ago and was never heard of afterwards. She is supposed
lo have foundered at sea. At the time the Star of Australia sailed from
Newcastle, Mr Newland had a sore foot, and on that aooonnt did not go
with his vesael. Strange to say, on Wednesday last, when the ill fated
Cawarra left Sydney on her voyage to Rockhampton, this same man New*
land again had a sore Joot, and on that account was prevented from pro-
ceeding to sea’with his vessel, thereby again saving his life—for there can
be but little doubt that had he gone he would have shared the same dread-
ful fate as the rest of the crew, except only one solitary man.
RECOVERY OP THE BODIES.—HARROWING SCENE.
We ftated in oar issue of Saturday that up to a late hour on Friday
night, the 13th instant, none of the bodies had been washed ashore. On
Saturday afternoon, the following day, the first bodies came ashore. Since
that nearly thirty corpses have been picked np at various points, the
majority having been washed or. to the beach on the North Shore.
Under the superintendence of Mr, Inspector. Harrison, as many bodies as
possible were brought over from the North Shore on Sunday and placed
in the Hospital. As soon as it was kaown that the bodies wore being
oast on shore, a number of shells were ordered to ho made, and the first
five or six bodies which were brought to the Hospital wore at once placed
in the coffins prepared for them. On Monday night eight or ten more
were taken to the hospital, but owing to no shells being in readiness they
were laid upon the struw in the large room on the ground floor of the
new hospital, The scene in the Hospital at this time, as one by one tho
corpses were brought in naked, and laid side by side upon tho straw, wat
awful in the Several of the bodies were much bruised and
mutilated, and all of them were without covering, except shoes and stock*
ings, and in one instance a pair of tranters.


Tho following is the list of bodies that had been identified ap to sit
o’clock on Tuesday night, making 37 in all Sophia Matilda Cramp, a
lady passenger. _ Body gone to Sydney per Morpeth, steamer. Joseoh
Abrahams, assistant fore-cabin steward. Body taken to Sydney*
Catherine Crozier, stewardess. Body taken to Sydney. Captain Chat-
field. Mr McDowell, chief o£Eo»r. Mr John Auchinolose, second engi-
neer. Mr Fountain, chief engineer. Mr Ray, carpenter, A sailor, name
unknown, Sandy, a fireman. Joe, alias Lavender Bill, quarter-master.
A Chinaman, named Ah Pooh, a nephew of Mrs Cramp’s, aged seven
years Alexander Livingstone, fireman, ident fied by his wife. William
Heston, lamp-trimmer, identified by his mother and sister. James
Leonard fireman, identifiedjby a fireman of the steamer Susannah Cuthbert.
Miss Andersen, cabin passenger on board the Cawarra. John Hyde of
the barque William Watson, Alexander Brash, passenger on board tho
Cawarra. The remainder of the bodies which may be identified, will
be found under the heading Latest particulars.”
INTERMENT OF THE BODIES.—PUBLIC FUNERAL.
Directly it was arranged that the numerous bodies lying at the Hospital
should have a public funeral, no time was lost in giving the matter publicity,
A large number of placards together with an announcement in our extra-
ordinary, of luesday, made the decision arrived at by the public meetiing,
pretty generally known by an early hour on the morning the funeral was
to take place. More publicity would doubtless have been given, had time
permitted, which it did not. However, every thing that could be done
under the circumstances, was done, and the immense concourse of people
who attended to witness the funeral obsequies performed, pointed very
conclusively to the fact, that the committee of management had done their
work well.
The morning of Tuesday broke cloudless and serene. A more beautiful
day is seldom experienced, even in the sunny clime of Australia. The sun
shone out resplendently from an unclouded sky, and the air was soft and
balnay—it was more like a spring day, in fact, than one in mid-winter. As
early as half-past eight or nine o’clock groups of people, many of whom
were clad in the habiliments of mourning, might have been observed wend-
ing their way in the direction of the Hospital. As every quarter of an hour
passed over the number increased, and by half-past nine o’clock an assem-
blage of persons, numbering in rouud numbers, somewhere about a thousand
had congiegated in front of the Hospital. The lime appointed for the
funeral procession to start, was ten o’clock, but it was fully half an hour
later than that, when the head of the cortege was first observed to be in
motion. At a quarter-past ten o’clock the first preparations were made for
starting, by the drawing up in front of the Hospital, the various drays and
hearses, in which the corpses were conveyed to the churchyard. It took
seven drays and two hearses to hold all the coffins, which were lifted from
the building on to the conveyances by members of the Naval Brigade, under
the superintendence of the gentlemen composing the committee appointed
by the public meeting held on the previous day. The whole of the coffina
having at last been placed upon the drays and the hearses, Mr. J.
Hannell, M.P., on behalf of the committee, ascended an elevated mound of
sand to the right of the Hospital, and announced the order in which the
procession was to move. It was as follows


FUNERAL PROCESSION.
The clergymen of the city, three abreast, consisting of the Revs. Mr. Mayue,
Mr. Coutts, Mr. Pri chard, Mr. Lane, Mr. Gainford and Mr. Bain.
The Committee of Management, consisting of Captain Allen, James Hauuell,
Esq., M.F., and Dr. Brookes.
Hearse No. 1, containing the body of the late Captain Chatfield, commander
of the Cawarra, and Mr. M'Dowoll, chief mate.
Members of the Naval Brigade on either side of the hearse.
Hearse No. 2, containing the bodies of Mr. Fountain, chief engineer of the
Cawarra and Mr. Auchinclose, second engineer.
Members of Naval Brigade on either side, same as first hearse,
Mr, J. R. Fox and Mr. Dagwell in command of the Naval Brigade.
Dray No. 1, containing four bodies.
Dray No. 2, containing three bodies.
Dray No. 3, containing three bodies.
Dray No. 4, containing two booies.
Dray No. 5, containing two bodies.
Dray No, 6, containing two bodies.
Dray No. 7, containing two bodiss.
Two members of the Naval Brigade on either side of each dray.
Relatives and friends of the deceased.
Captains and officers of ships in port.
Seamen belonging to vessels in port.
His Worship the Mayor (S. Kemp, Esq.).
Aldermen composing the Municipal Council and the Town Clerk.
Citizens, four abreast.
Having announced the order in which the procession was to go, Mr Han-
nell requested, on behalf of the committee, that every one would, to the best
of their ability, observe the arrangement decided upon. The gentlemen
composing the Naval Brigade had consented to act as pall-bearers, and also
to keep a line from the churchyard gate to the church. He trusted their
efforts would be seconded by the public generally, so that no accident or
confusion might occur when the funeral service was being conducted.
About this time the report of the first minute gun was heard, fired by the
Volunteer Artillery in Barrack-square.
The scene at this moment Was a most solemn and impressive one, and
brought tears to many an eye. Right in the front of the spot on which,
the balk of the people stood, could be discerned the fatal bank on which
the Cawarra was lost, —immediately at hand were no less than
two lifeless bodies, representing the forms cf as many human beings who,
but, a short time previously, wers in the enjoyment of their usual health
and strength,— to the right was the mighty Pacific, the fury of whose
wares had been the cause of so much bereavement and sorrow, but which
now presented the appearance of comparative tranquility and repose,—
on the left hand, in the distance, was the graveyard —the last,
long home, where the inanimate and mangled remains of the dead were
about to be deposited,—above, was a bright and unclouded sky, forming a
sharp and striking contrast to the day on which the calamity that had
brought together such an immense assemblage, happened —and then last,
though not least in impressiveness and significance, there were the upturned
faces of hundreds of human beings who were about reverently to listen to
the reading of the words of Him who permitted, doubtless for some wise
end, the occurrence of so fearful a catastrophe ; added to all this, there was


the booming of the minute guns, which breaking in upon, as they did, with
startling suddenness the impressive ceremony, tended materially to heighten
the general effect. Altogether, it was a mournful and affecting sight, and
one calculated to move the fe< lings of the most indifferent and callous. At
this time the number of people present had increassd probably to about
fifteen or sixteen hundred. Throughout the city, business was almost en-
tirely suspended, all the shops being quite closed. The flags from all the
vessels in harbour, as well as from a number of buildings in the city (includ-
ing the Custom House), were floating half mast high. The whole town wore
an aspect of gloom and sorrow.
The procession was then formed in the manner indicated above, and pro*
ceeded slowly up Watt-street, and along Church-street to the Christchurch
burial ground. On arriving at. the churchyard gates —the coffins were taken
from the hearses and drays, and carried on the shoulders of the men com-
posing the Naval Brigade, to an open space in front of the church doors,
which was kept clear by the committee, assisted by the police and members
of the Naval Brigade. I 1 pon the first three coffins being brought in, they
were met by the Rev. Mr. Bode, and the Rev. Mr. Millard, who preceded
the corpses, intoning alternately the introductory verses to the Church of
England Burial Service. The rest of the bodies were then brought in and
placed on the open space in front of the church, in the form of a semi-
circle ; all the coffins were covered with flags. This sad task occupied from
fifteen to twenty minutes. All this time the minute guns had continued
firing, and the bell of the church had been tolling. The whole of the coffins
having at length been brought in, the two clergymen before named, ascended
a temporary dais in front of the church doors, and proceeded to read Lhat
portion of the Burial Service usually read over the body inside the church.
The Psalms were read by both clergymen, Mr. Bode reading one verse, and.
Mr. Millard another, alternately, The lesson for such occasions, taken from
the Ist e.pistle of Corinthians, and Isth chapter, was read by the Rev. Mr.
Miilard in a very impressive manner.
dhe number of people present at this stage of the proceedings was very
large, much larger than before starting from the Hospital ; altogether
there must have been close upon 3,000 persons within the boundary of
the church yard. We are convinced that 3,000 was the outside number,
notwithstanding that opinions have been expressed to the contrary. We
heard the number variously estimated from three to six thousand. That
portion of the service which is generally read inside the church being
concluded, and before the bodies were removed to the grave, the Rev.
Mr, Bode then addressed the assemblage.
On Wednesday afternoon between four and five o’clock, nine more
bodies were interred in the Christchurch bnrial ground. The funeral
services weie oondnctod by the Rey. Mr. Bode. A considerable number
of persons witnessed (he interment of the bodies. Tho young lady pas-
senger (Miss Anderson) was buried previous to the nine thanks
to the Christian feeling and humanity of the Bev. Mr. Bode, her body was
placed in a coffin similar to that in which Captain Chaffield’s body was
inferred. A third interment took place on Thursday, on which
occasion three more bodies were committed to the dnst.
We had nearly omitted to mention that Mr. Archibald Hay had the
conduct of the procession, and was the undertaker for the funerals of
Captain Chatfieid and the officers of the Mr. Lewis Wood had
the contract for the shells in which the remaining bodies were interred.


Coal
Export from the
Port of Newcastle, from
1854 to 1863.
inclusive.
Increase
Decrease
Year.
■ Coastwise,
Intercolonial
and Foreign.
Total.
over
previous
over
previous
years.
years.
Tons.
Tons.
Tons.
Tons.
Tons.
1854
49,880
44 751
94,631
1855
65,870
47,101
112,971
18,340
1856
61,364
70.786
132,150
19.179
1857
60,998
84 553
145,551
13,401
1858
70,385
69,553
139,938
5613
1859
91 201
150,125
241,326
101,388
1860
3 04,383
179.453
283,836
42 510
1861
85 060
170 880
255,940
27,896
1862
127,613
.229,810
357,423
101,483
1863
140,387
229,856
370,243
12,280
1864
160,710
279,150
459,860
89,617
1865
159 640
302.362
462,002
2,142
1866
233 819
411,746
645 615
183 613
1867
194,011
398,022
592.033
53 582
1868
207,051
480,069
687,120
96,187
STATISTICS OF THE PORT OP NEWCASTLE.
By the courtesy ofT. B. Corbett, Esq., Collector of Customs, and the
•assisrlianoe of P. Nihiil, Esq., we are enabled to publish, in to-day’s issue,
•the usual annual statistics of the Port of Newcastle. The returns given
comprise the total amount of imports and experts, customs duties, tonnage
and harbor dues, the number, of vessels that entered and left the pon,
immigration and emigration returns, together with other important and in-
teresting statistical information respecting the port, for the year ending Slat
December, 1868. The tables als indicate the comparative increase or
decrease in the various items with the preceding year. it is highly
gratifying to be in a position to note that nearly all the returns show a
marked increase.
i.Statsjiknt of the Coal Exports for the past fifteen years, showing the in.,
crease and decrease during that period.
VESSELS ENTERING THE PORT.
A return showing the number and tonnage of vessels entering inwards,
at Newcastle, during the year 1868, exclusive of coasters.
Countries. . Vessels, Tons
Victoria ... ... ... ••• ••• 454 ... 169,930
New Zealand ... ... ••• ••• 285 ... 82,265
■ crt:b Mi'p’-stia .. ... ••• 72 ...
■Queensland ... ... ... ... 4£ .. 11,306
Tasmania ... ... ... ••• 6 ... 1,536
Cape of Good Hope... ... ... 1 570
Opara .. ... ••• • 1 464
New Caledonia ... ... ... ••• 5 ... 1,132
.South Sea Islands ... ... ... ... 1 411
Totals 871 ... 296 517


Victoria
165,715
... 79,516
10
0
New Zealand
86,207
... 42,226
0
0
South Australia ...
64,512
... 25,135
0
0
Tasmania
.. •••
...
12,450
... 6,019
10
0
Queensland
2 839
... 1,256
0
0
Phillipine Islands ..
2,320
... 1,160
0
0
China
60,995
... 29,530
10
0
New Caledonia
918
440
10
0
Guam
’ 775
367
10
0
Java
14 918
7,459
0
0
Japan
.
1,479
739 10
0
India
22,688
11,253
0
0
Singapore
855
342
0
0
Mauritius
3,919
1,959
10
0
Manila
5,737
2,868
10
0
United States ....
25,058
.. 12,333
10
0
Panama
1 638
816
10
0
South America
1,677
801
10
0
Opara
2,135
1,067
10
0-
Petropaulovski ...
3,239
1,548
0
0-
Total
.
470.169
.. 226,440
0
0!
Quantity
£ s.
d.
Brandy
9,542 gale.
4,771 18
11
Gin...
2,949
1,475 0
6
Liquors, &c. ...
532 ... ;...
266 13
10
Whisky
682
341 10
11
Enm
16,633
8,316 13
7
Wine ...
6,680
1,002 2
2
Ale and Porter (in wood)
6,795
73 5
3
Ale and Porter (in bottles
87
2 3
6
Tobacco and ennff
9,887 lbs
989 18
0
Cigars
1,130
169 18
7
Tea...
934
11 13
6
Coffee and Chickory ...
. .
315
2 13
6
Sugar (unrefined)
33 cwt..
8 7
6
Eice
• ..
2 cwt
1 5
0
A Statement showing the Exportation of Coal from the port of Newcastle
to foreign and intercolonial ports, during the year 1868.
To where Exported. Tons, Value,
£ a. d-
CUSTOMS I>UES FOR THE TEAK
The following is a Rbtubn showing the total amount of duty received at the
Custom House, Newcastle, during the year 1868, on the undermen-
tioned articles. The Return shows also the gross quantity of the
articles received.
Totals
£31,175 9 5-


VESSELS LEAVING THE PORT.
A return showing the number and tonnage of Vessels cleared from the P ut
of Newcastle, during the year 1868, exclusive of coasters.
Countries.
Vessels. Tons.
Victoria ... ... ... ... ... 431 ... 133 869
South Australia ... ... ... ... ... 133 ... 44,704
New Zealand ... .. .. ... ... 247 ... 68,645
Tasmania ... ... .. ... ... 46 ... 9,141
Queensland .. .. .. ... ... 14 ... 3,118
India ... ... ... .. ... 16 ... 17,315
Mauritius ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... 2,832
Ceylon ... .. .. ... ... 2 ... 1,114
United States ... ... .. .. ... 29 .. 19,782
China .. .. .. .. ... 107 .. 44,508
Guam i. ... ... .. .. 1 ... 522
Panama ... ... .. ... .. 2 ... 1,550
Christmas Island . ... .. .. 1 244
Petropauloyski .. .. ... .. 8 2,458
Callao .. .. .. .. ... I ... 490
Valparaiso ... . ... ... ... 1 ••• 502
Fiji Islands ... ... ... ... ... 1 .. 185
Java ... 27 ... 11.528
New Caledonia ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... 1,191
Manila ... ... ... ... ... 7 ••• 3,269
Philippine Islands ... ... ... ... 4 ... 1,669
Singapore ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 1,362
Japan ... ... . .. ... 3 ... 1,088
Opara ... .. ... ... ... 2 ... 1,634
Total ... ... .. ... ... 1100 372,718
The totals for the previous year were as follows ... 925 ... 303,504
The following statement shows the nationality of all vessels entering
outwards from the port of Newcastle, in the year 1868.
Vessels. Tons.
British Vessels ... ... ... ... 98 ... 68.498
British possessions ... ... ... 914 ... 276,737
Prussian ... ... ... ... ... 26 ... 8,187
American ... ... ... 24 ... 13,514
French ... ... ... ... ... 17 ... 6,234
Dutch ... ... ... ... ... 12 ... 5,291
Norwegian ... ... ... ... 2 ... 843
Swedish ... ... .. ... ... 6 ... 3,119
Danish ... ... ... ... ... I ... 304
1100 372.718
The totals for the previous rear
were... ... ... ... ... 925 ... 303,504
The numoer of men leaving the port in seagoing vessels during the
year 1868, was 16,7?1.
VESSELS BUILT IN NEWCASTLE.
During the year 1868; one vessel was built in Newcastle.


EXPORT OF LIVE STOCK, &C„ &C,
A rkturn embracing the principal items in the miscellaneous Exports from
the Port of Newcastle, during the year 1868,
Article. To where exported. Quantity. Value,
Barley ... Victoria 2018 bushels £347 0 0
Butter ... New Zealand ... 2100 lbs. ICO 0 0
Bones ... New Zealand ... 150 tons 220 0 0
Bull (one) .. New Caledonia ... 120 0 0
Cattle ... New Zealand ... 2714 head 15,329 0 0
Ditto ... Tasmania ... 160 head 1360 0 0
Ditto ... New Caledonia ... 202 900 0 0
Ditto ... Fiji Islands ... , 140 350 0 0
Coals This item is given in a separate table.
Coke ... New Zealand ... 126 tons 271 0 0
Copper ... India ... 13£ tons 1215 0 0
Cows ... Japan ..6 50 0 0
Flour ... New Zealand ... 30 tons 620 0 0
Fruit ... New Zealand ... 36 cases 24 0 0
Hay ... Victoria ... 35 tons 100 0 0
Ditto ... Other Ports ... tons 1158 0 0
Horses ... New Zealand ... 234 head 2104 0 0
Ditto ... China .. 3 head 90 0 0
Ditto ... New Caledonia ... 11 head 110 0 0
Leather ... China ... 2 bals 30 0 0
Ditto ... New Zealand ... 129 0 0
Maize ... Victoria ... 31,301 bshls 4361 0 0
Ditto ... New Zealand ... 12 470 bshls 1891 10 0
Ditto ... South Australia .. 1068 bshls 169 0 0
Meat (preserved) ... 30 cases 150 0 0
30 cases 150 0 0
Oysters ... Victoria ... 182 bugs 88 0 0
Personal effects ... New Zealand ... 15 pks 200 0 0
Pigs ... Victoria ... 696 871 0 0
Ditto ... New Zealand ... 301 342 10 0
Potatoes ... New Zealand ... 4 tons 16 0 0
Sfaele .. New Zealand ... 20 tons 60 0 0
Sheep ... Tasmania ... 570 366 0 0
Ditto ... New Caledonia ... 540 270 0 0
Ditto ... Queensland ... 260 85 0 0
Shooks ... New Zealand ... 94 casks 57 0 0
Soap ... New Zealand ... 4 tons 132 0 0
Sovereigns ... Petropaulovski . 20,000 20,000 0 0
Spokes ... Victoria ... 54,018 272 15 0
Sugar ... New Zealand ... 25 bags 50 0 0
Tallow .. China ... 5i tons 185 0 0
Ditto ... Manila ... 661 0 0
Tar ... New Zealand ... 15 casks 17 10 0
Timber ... New Zealand ... 24,000 ft. 30 0 0
Ditto ... Victoria ... 433 logs 265 10 0
Tobacco ... New Zealand ... 5 boxes J 7 0 0
Wine ... New Zealand . 58 gals. 210 0 0
Ditto (colonial) ... New Zealand ... 60 gals. 30 0 0
Ditto ... India ... 120 gals. 86 0 0
Wheat ... Dniied States ... 85 bshls. 850 0 0


VESSELS BELONGING TO NEWCASTLE,
An Account of the number of vessels belonging to the ports of Newcastle.
on the 31et December, 1868, registered in pursuance of Acts of Par-
liament, with their tonnage, and the number of men and boys by
whom they are usually navigated ; distinguishing such of the vessels
as have been lost, broken up, or otherwise destroyed, sold to foreigners,
or registered de novo since the last account was made up.
Year and No.
ef Certificate Official Names of Vessels, distinguishing Tonnage Tonnage Men ana
* . . , , -I 1 1 L 0_ _ TT„ J CA r.A
of Registry. Number
1 of 1857 32,320
•2 1857 32,-326
1 1858 32,693
3 1858 32,370
4 1859 31,864
1 1860 32,493
3 1860 31,644
2 1861 32,699
3 1861 32,700
4 1861 32,625
5 1861 32,702
1 1862 40,202
3 1862 40,921
1 1863 32.705
5 1863 31,869
6 1863 35,550
7 1863 22,835
3 1864
4 1864
5 1864 49,291
6 1864 15,537
7 1864 45,153
« 1864 31,993
2 1865 46,423
3 1865 23,182
4 1865 51,552
1 1866 32,589
3 1866 31,982
4 1866 45,390
1 1867 51,555
2 1867 51,516
3 1867 48,209
4 1867 52,367
5 1867
6 1867
7 1867 51,557
8 1867 51,558
9 1867 45,768
10 1867 £1,559
11 1867 43,230
12 1867 52,433
1868
1868 41,245
1868 31,777
1868
1868
1868 31,862
1868 52,347
1868 163
1868 25,733
such as have been lost, &c. Under 50 Over 50 Boys
Martha Ellen ... ... ... 124 6
Nancy 75 4
TVniotas ... ... ... 93 4
Douglas ... ... .. ... "3
T»eva 244 8
Deva ... .. 244
Notion ... ... ... ... 109
Notion 109 *
Venture ... ... ... ... H 7 . 5
Venture ... .... ... ... •*5
James’Paxton ... -61
Islander ... ... 106 2
Edmund and Alfred ... ‘ 17 ••• 2
Lavina ... ... ... ••• 3
Dooribang (s.) ... ... 35 ...
Pioneer ... ... ... ... ' 88
Pioneer ... ... ... ' *8
Ranger 43 ... 3
Triton ... ... ... ... 120 O
Triton 120 d
Mary Ann ... ... ... ... 134 6
P.lon 243 9
Eden 243 9
Royal Exchange ... 222
Bee ... 26
Ant ... 24 ... 2
Maid of Riverton*... 82
Alarm ... ... ... ... 195 8
Alarm ... _ ... 195 8
Rose of Australia ... 262 10
Pox 157 5 ]
Fox 157 5 5
Kathleen 7 227 9
P. C. E 291 9 (
Brothers ... 20 2
Aquarius (s) ... ... 19 •••
Highlander;... ... ... ... 196
Mary Francis ... ... ... 209 8
Rose of Eden ... ... 30 ••• 3
Nil Desperaudnm... ... ... 157 7
Stranger 249 9 J
Lismore ... ... ... ■■■ 8e o
Newcastle ... ... ... 36 2
Hunter ... ... ... 37 ••• 2
Waterman ... ... ... H 3 5
Waterman ... . ... ... UJ 5
Margaret... ... ... 16 ... 2
Prince Alfred (s) ... 83 8
Duke o[ Edinburgh 470 10
Bnngaree (s) ... ... 85 9
235 9
Flying Cloud .. 235
Collingwocd ... ...
Tell - 820
Ann and,Jane ... ... 262
Summer Cloud ... ... 365
bummer luouu ... ...
Ben Nevis ... ... ... 357
Amherst ••• 170
Southland (sj ... ... 87
William Ackers ... ... -99
Rialto ... ... ... ~~ 565
Transferred to Sydney, t Wrecked,
59
RECORDS OF NEWCASTLE.


AMOUNT OP REVENUE POR THE YEAR.
The following is the total amount
Newcastle, for the year 1868.
Ad Valorem
Duty
Tonnage
Pilotage
JDjjes
of Revenue collected at the Port of
£ a. d.
729 18 0
17,660 6 J
6,104 19 6
5.801 17 8
889 5 0
Total £31,175 6 9
emigration and immigration returns.
The following are the emigration and immigration returns for the port of
Newcastle, during the year 1868.
Adults, Children,
Males. Females. Males. Females. TotaL
Inwards 1250 115 71 51 1487
Outwards 769 90 44 30| 933*
The totals for the previoas year were as follows ; —lnwards, 431 4 ; Out-
wards, 3984.
VALUE or IMPORTS AND EXPORTS.
The following return shows the total value, in sterling, lot the Imports and
Exports of the Port of Newcastle, from and to each country, iu the
year 1868.
Countries. Imports therefrom. Exports thereto
£ s. d, £ s. d.
Victoria ... ... 15,847 411 .. ... 85.940 5 0>
Nsw Zealand ... 6,167 15 0 ... .. 66,009 0 0
South Australia ... 61,129 S 0 ... ... 25.314 0 0
Tasmania ... ... 127 2 9 ... ... 7.714 0 O
Queensland ... ... 1,016 17 0 ... ... 1.466 10 0
China ... ... ... ... 29,847 10 0
Petropanlovski ... ... ... 21 548 0 0
South America ... ... ... 801 10 0
Fiji Islands ... ... ... 386 0 0
United States ... 46 4 0 ... ... 12,883 10 0
New Caledonia .. ... .. 1,766 0 0
Phillipine Islands .. ... ... 1,160 0 0
Panama ... ... ... ... 813 10 0
Mauritius ... ... 7 0 0 ... .. 1,959 10 0
Manila ... .. —— ... ... 3,536 0 0
Guam ... ... . ... ... 367 10 0
Opara ... .. ... ~ 1,067 10 9
Java ... ... 145 4 0 .. ... 7,464 0 0
Japan ... ... ... ... 7&9 30 0
India ... ... ... .. 126 34 0
Singapore... .. ~ .. c 4 2 0 0
T0ta15....... £84,486 15 5
£283;/33 5 0
60
PAST AND PRiSENT


Port of Arrival
Inwards.
Number
Tons
£ s.
d.
Sydney...
... 2,053
388,684
... 1,545 7
0
Victoria
... 453
169,930
... 2,641 9
6
New Zealand
... 285
82,265
... 1,257 13
6
South Australia ...
72
29,163
396 10
0
Queensland
46
11,306
189 1
0
Tasmania
6
1,536
58 8
6
Cape of Good Hope
1
370
9 5
0
Opara ...
1
404
17 0
0
New Caledonia ...
5
1,132
South Sea Island*
1
411
10 S
6
Total ...
... 2,924
684,601
£6,104 19
6
Departure
Outwards.
Number
Tons
£ «,
d.
Sydney...
Victoria
... 1,835
315,782
297 4
S
431
123,869
... 1,035 2
8
New Zealand
247
68,643
546 4
4
South Australia...
133
44,704
259 4
0
Queensland
14
3,118
77 16
4
Tasmania
46
9,141
130 8
0
India ...
16
17,315
742 4
4
Opara ...
2
1,134
81 13
8
New Caledonia ...
6
1,191
57 0
8
Mauritius
9
2,832
81 3
0
Ceylon...
2
1,114
43 12
8
United States . .
29
19,782
710 0
0
China ...
107
44,508
... 1,698 3
0
Guam ...
1
622
... 19 3
0
Panama
2
1,550
60 13
4
Christianstadt ...
1
244
9 1
4
CHARGES ..ON VESSELS.
The following is a statement showing the number of ail vessels, inward
and outwards, at this Port; the ports of arrival and departure, ans
the charges actually paid for the year 1868.
Petropaulovski ... ... 8 2,458 ... 79 18 0
Callao 1 490 ... 17 16 f
Valparaiso .. .. 1 602 ... 18 9 8
8 18
Fiji Islands .. ••• 1 185
Java ... 27 11.528 ... 448 II 0
Manila ... ... ... 7 3,269 ... 120 9 4
Philippine Islands ... 4 1,669 ... 61 7 8
Singapore .. 2. 1,362 ... 49 8 0
Japan ... ... ••• 3 1,088 ... 38 8
£6,691 2 8
Total ... ... 2,935 688,500
3
4
3,269
11,528
61
RECORDS OF NEWCASTLE.


Inwards.
Year
No. of Vessela
Tons
£ s. d.
1868 ...
... 2,924 ...
... 684,801 ...
... 6,104 19 6
1867 ...
... 2.696 ...
... 588,256 ...
... 5,096 7 6
Increase for 1868, 228
96,345
1,008 12 0
Outwards.
£ s. d.
1868 ...
... 2,935 ...
... 688,500 ...
... 6,691 2 8
1867 ..
... 2.713 ..
... 595,290 ...
... 5,440 6 8
Increase for 18G8. 222
93,210
1,250 16 |0
Inwards.
Outwards.
Year
Cargo
Ballast
Total
No. of
No. of
No of
No of
Vessels Tonnage
Vessels Tonnage Vessels Tonnage
Vessels Tonnage
1862
25
6,551
494
130,989
519
137,54'
715
186,170
1863
48
14.919
438
106,318
486
121,237
672
170,447
1864
23
5,321
641
191,640
664
196.961
795
266,528
1865
22
6,033
654
183,587
676
189 620
872
248,769
1866
29
11,093
770
235 253
799
246,346
992
308,575
1867
44
15,090
644
213,974
688
220,064
925
303,504
1868
70
24,589
801
271,928
871
296,517
1100
372,718
1869
104
36,970
750
260,885
854
297,855
1084
386,176
1870
148
54,793
f 17
228,298
765
283,091
1046
383,248
1871
159
63 928
586
214,031
745
277.959
1040
376,375
1872
197
86,206
679
256,308
876
842,514
1092
427,842
Imports.
Exports.
Year
Amount
Year
No, Tons of Coal
Amount
1862
35,125 10
1
1862
239,810
174 275 5 0
1863
43.917 14
3
1872
565,994
243,911 18 0
1864
59,656 2
0
1865
78,355 17
0
1866
53,219 3
5
1867
98,083 6
I
1868
84,486 15
5
1869
151,410 4
5
1870
154,816 5
8
1871
203,168 2
7
1872
268,148 12 11
COMPARATIVE STATEMENT FOR 1867-68
STATISTICS OF THE PORT OF NEWCASTLE.


ADDENDA.
The following paragraph - was omitted from its proper place in
the body of this Work. x r r
Harbour.
A Northern pier or breakwater was considered indispensable,
and great results were expected from its formation by those in
power. The undertaking was begun in 1862, the stone ballast
landed from ships at a wharf constructed close at hand, was used
for the purpose, and it was conveyed to the spot by a line of
n U T y r bUt fr( ? m i the formation of banks in certain parts of
the harbour and deepening of it in others, the predominance of
evil overbalanced the good, and it was found desirable,
about two years ago, to abandon the work. Had the large
amount of labour and money been expended in extending the
bouthern Breakwater from the eastward of Nobby’s
to the extremity of the reef to Big Ben, it would have added pro -
teciion and shelter to the Harbour, and Vessels entering in heavy
Southerly weather, would have been better protected and much
sooner in comparatively smooth water and in case of difficulty
would have had a free course to the beach, which has otten proved
a rescue to the distressed. The Northern Breakwater being on a lee
shore, these advantages would have been fustrated if the plans for
its completion had been carried out, however, money and time haye
been expended and fooled away, the Breakwater formed, the Banks
m the Harbour increased, and the undertaking abandoned to
the great satisfaction of the seafaring community. There have
been several surveys of our harbour at different times; about one
of the first was in 1822, by Mr. J. Single. In about the year 1840
Mr. Surveyor G. B. White made a survey not only of the harbour’
but of the river as far as it was navigable ; then 1851 by Captain
Stokes of H M. S. Acheron, and, in 1861, by Captain Allan,
our present Harbour Master ; amd the last and the most elaborate
of the lot, by Commander F, W. Sidney, R, N., in


For the benefit of shipmasters and pilots, two small towers were
erected on the Hill adjoining the Roman Catholic and Wesleyan
Churches, as leading marks by day and with red and white lights
by night, directing the fairway entrance to the harbour. They
were built under the direction of the Harbour Master, Captain
Allan, in 1866,
[While this work was in the Press, the following appeared in
the Government Gazette of the 10th October, 1873.]
Department of Lands,
Sydney, October lOtb, 1873.
City or Newcastle.
A Lithograph of the City of Newcastle having been published by the
Goverment, the public are informed that copies may be procured at the
Surveyor-General’s Office, Sydney, and at the Crown Lands Office, at New-
castle, at the price of two shillings and sixpence each.
JAMES S. EARN ELL.
In this 'plan of the City the Exchange and Post Office lands
are charted as the one referred to at page 23.


ERRATA.
Page 10, line 29, for there read the.
P*ge 14, line 22, for Burney read Barney.
Page 31, line 17, for 1816 read 1817.
Page 32, line 17, for and read which.


INDEX
PAGE.
A, A, Company 9
Address to Her Majesty 29
Adams 24
Addenda ... ... ... . ... 63
Barney, ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
Banks ... ... .. ... ... .. ... ... ... ... 30
Beacon Hill 15
Bible Society ... ... ... ... 33
Biggs 7
“Cawarra” ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
Cemetery ... ... • ... ... ... ... ... 43
Chamber of Commerce ... ... .. ... 21,2
vuauiuei ui ... ... ... ... ~ ...
Christ Church ... ... ... ... 11, 34
Churches ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31
Church and School Lands ~. ... ... ... ... ... 36
Coal Companies... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Concluding Remark* ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... 45
Convict Settlers ... ... 13
Court House ... ... ... ... ... 28
Dangar, Hy 8, 9
Dredges ... ... ... .. 41
"Eclipse” 7
“ Elisabeth Henriette ” ... 7
Errata .. ... ... ... ... ... 65
Obelisk ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 13
Exchange 21, 23, 25
Fire Companies ... ... 41
First Settlers ... ... .. ... ... .. ... ... 12
Floor Mill 43
Fotltodry .. ~ 41
Gas... 42
Governor Arthur ... ... ... ~ ... 16
Grammar School ... ... ... ... ... .. ... .. 33
Harbour ... ... 63
Honeysuckle Point ... ... ... ... ... .. 36
Hospital 27
Institutions ... 30
Lake Macquarie 13
Life Boats ~ ... 40
Market „. 30
Middleton, G, A, ~. ~. ~ ~ 13
Macquarie 7
McPhersoq ... ... 14
MsdlOAl (ft (! 5K !TI »M !,? ffl Iff 98


Mitchell Dr 10
PAO»,
Municipal " ’ * " ’ 29
Name ... a
iName ... ### ### . 9
Newspapers ... ... .. 42
Nobby’s Island .. ’ .. .. ’ ’ 14
North Shore ... .. ... ... ... ... ’’ '44
Patent Slip ”* ” ‘ 43
Pilot and Harbour Board ... .. ... ... 21 26
Post Office ... ... ... ... ... ... ’ll
Prince Alfred ... .. ' 17
Princess Charlotte " " ... 7
Public«houses ... ... ... ... .., ... ... 45
Public Meetings ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45
Public Schools ’’ ... 34
Railways ” ... 42
Recreation Land 25
Sailor’s Home ... 46
Satellite ..." ... 7
Schools ... 31
School of Arts ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
Settlement established ... ... ~ ... ... ... ... 5
Shortland Lieut. . * ... 3, 4
Sir Thomas Brisbane ... ... .. ... ... • ... ... ... 7
Smelting Works ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... 43
Telegraphs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .., ... 42
Trade and Commerce ... 38
Tugs ... 40
Volunteers ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ~ 28
Wharves 1 ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ..18
Wind Mill ... ... ... ... ... : ... 13


