

PASTPRAL HOMES
OF
AUSTRALIA












PASTORAL HOMES OF AUSTRALIA




PASTORAL HOMES
OF
AUSTRALIA
Volume I.
(NEW SERIES)
Published by
THE PASTORAL REVIEW Pty. Ltd.
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, and LONDON
x 9 29


Wholly set up and printed In Australia by
McCarron, Bird & Co., Printers and Publishers,
479 Collins Street. Melbourne.


LIST OF PROPERTIES AND OWNERS
INCLUDED IN THIS VOLUME
PAGE
Anlaby, S.A. . . . . . . Dutton, H. H. . . , . . . 313
Barratta, N.S.W. . . . . Australian, Mercantile, Land and
Finance Co. Ltd., The . . . . 301
Bengalla, N.S.W Keys, J. H. 469
Boonoke, N.S.W. . . . . Falkiner and Sons Ltd., F. S. . . 253
Buckland Park, S.A Brooks Ltd., G. and E. A. . . 325
Buddah, N.S.W. . . . . McKillop and Sons, G. A. . . 409
Bundyulumblah, N.S.W. . . Bundyulumblah Pty. Ltd 385
Burrongong, N.S.W Maslin and Sons, G. E. . . . . 229
Cambalong, N.S.W Campbell, Ronald 217
Canonbar, N.S.W Goldsbrough, Mort and Co. Ltd. 505
Carwoola, N.S.W. . . . . Maslin, J. F. . . . , . . 73
Cavan, N.S.W. . . . . Roche, F. W. Castle . . . . 85
Cobran, N.S.W. . . . . Sims and Cooper, Mesdames . . 481
Coonong, N.S.W. . . . . McCaughey, Roy . . . . . . 37
Coree, N.S.W. . . . . McCaughey, Samuel . . . . 277
Cullingral, N.S.W. . . . . Macfarlane, Thos. B. . . . . 193
Derra Derra, N.S.W. . . Capel, Albert . . . . . . 433
Erambie, N.S.W. . . . . Magill, George N. . . . . 97
Foxlow, N.S.W. . ; . . Falkiner, Franc B. S. . . .. 1
Goolgumbla, N.S.W. . . . . Stuart Ltd., G. E.. . . . . . 349
Gunningrah, N.S.W. . . . . Maslin, J. C. . . . . . . 205
Haddon Rig, N.S.W. . . Falkiner, Franc B. S. . . . . 13
Hartwood, N.S.W. . . . . Patterson, Jun., J. Hunter . . 397
Khancoban, N.S.W. . . . . Chisholm, Colin J. . . . . 529


PAGE
Koomooloo, Sturt Vale and
Wahroonga, S.A. . . . . Warnes, I. J. . . . . . . 493
Linton, N.S.W. . . . . Carter, Trustees of the late O. H. 445
Merribee, N.S.W. . . . . Killen Ltd . . . . . . . . 169
Merryville, N.S.W. .. .. Merriman, Walter T. .. .. 133
Milton Park and Mungadal,
N.S.W. . . . . . . Hordern, C.8.E., Anthony . . 25
Mungeribar, N.S.W. . . . . Bragg, Estate of the late Thomas 421
Murgha, N.S.W. . . . . Murgha Pastoral Co. Ltd. . . 373
Nimagee, Moonagee and Gerar,
N.S.W. . . . . . . Killen and Sons Ltd., Edward . . 181
Noorilim, Vic . . . . . . Falkiner, Norman . . . . . . 517
Oakhurst, N.S.W. . . . . Robinson, Matthew J. McW. . . 157
Plumthorpe, N.S.W. . . . . Burdekin, Norman W. . . . . 457
Quiamong, N.S.W. . . . . Armytage, N. F. . . , . . . 361
Ravensworth, N.S.W. . . Merriman, E. J. . . . . . . 145
South Wangamong, N.S.W. . . Sanger and Son, C. D. . . . . 241
Springfield, N.S.W. . . . . Faithfull, A. Lucian . . . . 61
Tupra, Liewah and Gunbar,
N.S.W. . . . . . . Creswick, A. T. . . . . 289
Uardry, Pembelgong and
Burrabogie, N.S.W. . . Mills (Uardry) Ltd., Charles . . 337
Wanganella Estate, N.S.W. . . Falkiner and Sons Ltd., F. S. . . 265
Willandra, N.S.W. . . . . Willandra Pastoral Co. Ltd., The 49
Woodburn, Vic. . . . . Payne, T. H. . . . . . . 121
Yarra View, Vic. . . . . Payne, A. E. T. . . . . . . 109


INTRODUCTION
IF ever deeds deserved lasting remembrance, they were those which led to the founda-
tion of the great pastoral industry, on which rests Australia’s national existence and
hope for the future. In this volume, therefore, is set down history of the almost for-
gotten days of early Australian settlement, and of that subsequent period of development
and consolidation of what the pioneers had already won.
Those deeds may not be as dramatically recorded as they who hunger for sensation
might wish. Mostly it is a plain unvarnished tale of past and present that is told. Contrast
between the two eras is always obvious, but there is no graphic or detailed description of
the disasters that befell in those far off days; of the droughts that wiped out the early flocks;
of the difficulties—more or less unknown to-day—gradually overcome; of the discomforts
endured; of the toil and struggle so frequently brought to nought by tumbling markets
and financial chaos; and finally of the heart breaks of men and women who had given all,
endured all, and finally lost all in one of those catastrophes which in the first days of pas-
toral settlement men were less fitted, or rather less favoured, to withstand than are their
descendants to-day.
All of these things are sketched rather than actually depicted. For all their shadowy
outline, however, they were none the less real, none the less troublous. Metaphorical
flood, fire, and slaughter occur in the pastoral industry in these years of grace as they did
in its infancy, but those who suffer by them prefer to forget rather than cherish the
memory. So it is with most of the distant past. Few recorded their trials, and fewer still
remain who shared in the pioneering and can tell first hand of the hardships and
the fights against odds.
Their descendants to the second and third generation now occupy the old runs, or
more often still a stranger has taken over the work begun by the first settler and he pro-
bably knows little of what went to the first rough fashionings of the orderly, well-improved
property that is his.
Yet all these have done, and are doing, their part in the making of the history of
the Pastoral Homes of Australia. Inevitably, in the natural order of things, will their work
of to-day become part and parcel of the history of Australian development, for these
homes, or at least the majority of them, will sooner or later no longer exist as we know
them. The tide of closer settlement, a tide that will not recede, is advancing and sub-
merging them utterly, or leaving here and there surrounded by its flood an isolated island,
the homestead block of some famous old station. The names remain, likewise all that
they convey to those who can remember the beginnings of settlement, but with the growth


of new generations more and more of those old names become names only and the past
becomes less than a memory. It is, therefore, only through some such record as this aims
to be that the work of those who fashioned, and of those who developed and perfected, the
solid foundations which support the structure of our economic life can be held in deserved
remembrance.
Where to-day is a vista of ploughed earth or flourishing crops and all the other
visible signs of a farming community, not so very long ago stretched broad sheep pastures
cleared, fenced, watered and hewn from the rough. These have passed from man’s ken,
others are passing, and yet others will disappear in the future, but that the part they have
played in our national growth shall not be forgotten there are set down in the following
pages brief histories of some of them. Separately they tell of what men and women have
striven to do and have done for themselves and their descendants. Collectively they con-
stitute the story of the evolution of primary production from its raw beginnings to its
specialised and more or less perfected form as we know it.
No less important, though perhaps less spectacular than the task of establishing and
improving the general flocks and herds, has been the work, so often recorded in these
pages, of the stud breeders of Australia. Both in this book and in the columns of The
Pastoral Review is shown how they have made possible the later advance of the industry in
general, and that it is they who must always be indispensable to its continued prosperity.
By their perseverance, their long experience, their skill, and their money invested and
reinvested in their industry, favoured by, yet often despite, natural conditions, they
have established a level of quality, particularly in regard to the Merino, that has
no equal in the world. They founded and have maintained a source of pure
blood upon which the general flocks of the country are able to draw, without danger of
exhaustion, for the retention and steady improvement of a standard which it is vital should
not fall away in these times of increasing competition from other countries. Their
“essentialness” in the scheme of things is so obvious that it need not be stressed. That they
should continue to carry on their work, not only unhampered, but encouraged by every
incentive that is in the power of Governments to offer is a wish that must surely materialise.
The very best that the photographer’s and publisher’s art can furnish has gone to the
compilation of this volume. Many thousands of miles have been covered by train, by car
and aeroplane to secure the wherewithal for its makings, and our acknowledgments for the
use of many of the pictures are due to The Sydney Mail and the following photographers:—
Messrs. W. Hall and Co. (Sydney), J. A. Sears (Melbourne), and R. G. Illidge (Perth). It
is perhaps right, too, in a concluding word that there should be associated with its produc-
tion the name of Mr. Arthur Krone, for it is in a measure due to his advocacy of the
undertaking of the work, and to his keen interest in its progress, that its concrete emergence
from a nebulous idea is due.
Melbourne, February, 1929.


FOXLOW, BUNGENDORE, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Franc B. S. Falkiner, Esq.
F'VOXLOW, the property of Mr. Franc B. S.
Falkiner, is situated some 16 miles from Bungen-
dore, and 25 from the Federal Capital, Canberra,
therefore it possesses as a country home an attractive
social and residential advantage in addition to its pro-
ductive capacity as an estate for grazing sheep and cattle.
In shape the property is roughly rectangular, following
the course of the Molonglo River, and comprises 15,000
acres of freehold land in one block. Ihe homestead and
woolshed are conveniently placed in the centre.
On either side of the Molonglo stretch rich and fertile
Hats gradually rising to rolling foot hills. Ihe flats have
THE MAIN DRIVE THROUGH THE
GARDEN TO FOXLOW HOMESTEAD


A STATELY PORTICO. THE MAIN
ENTRANCE OF FOXLOW HOUSE
FOX LOW. NEW SOUTH WALES


THE MOLONGLO RIVER, BETWEEN WILLOW-LINED
BANKS, WENDING ITS WAY PAST THE PUMPING
STATION NEAR THE FOXLOW HOMESTEAD
/•' OX L 0 IV, XE W SOU T II IV AL K S


THE VIEW FROM THE PORCH, LOOKING ACROSS THE BEAUTIFUL GARDEN
a verdant sward of rye grass and white clover, whilst
the rest of the country is grassed by white topped root
grass, Danthonia, that well-known and nourishing fodder
grass, which is common to the red ground of Riverina.
The occurrence of this grass at an altitude of some 2000
feet surprises most pastoral visitors. Mr. Falkiner has
scattered large areas of the hills with the seed of Sub-
terranean clover, and is experimenting this year with
other grasses and a top-dressing of superphosphate which
it is anticipated will naturally increase their carrying
capacity. At the present time the property is carrying
12,000 sheep and 500 cattle, and judging by the sward
of “feed” in every paddock the run is not over-stocked.
Foxlow has a wonderful supply of natural water. In
addition to the Molonglo River there are other per-
manently running streams, the Ballallaba, Thurralily,
Bowman’s and Cronin’s Creeks. There are no springs
or soaks on the station, and the run is well drained and
healthy. A noticeable feature is the absence of rabbits
and weeds, the former having been exterminated by the
previous owner. All the fencing is rabbit-proof and in
excellent order.
fox loh\ a 'Err south wales


A WIDE ANGLE VIEW OF THE PORCH
AND COOL VERANDAHS AT FOXLOW
/' 0XL() W, NE IV S 0 UT H IV AL E S


A SHADY NOOK UNDER THE ENG-
LISH ELMS IN THE FOXLOW GARDEN
/' OXL () If' NE IV S()U T II IV AL E S


MR. GEORGE FALKINER AND MISS FAL-
KINER SETTING OUT FROM FOXLOW
FOR THE TIRRANNA PICNIC RACES
/•' OXL () IV, NK JV S 0 U rII IV AL E S


THE WELL-KEPT STABLES AND COACH HOUSE WITH THEIR WHITE WALLS AND RED ROOFS
The Foxlow sheep are pure Merino. Naturally only
Haddon Rig rams have been used during the present
ownership, and with the most beneficial results. The
sheep cut good weights and the wool brings a high price.
Cattle are a benefit in stocking here, and are required
in every paddock. Mr. Falkiner decided to keep on the
herd of Red Polls which he took over with the property,
as he found the hornless type gives no trouble with the
fencing. At the Rosebank Show, in South Africa, he
saw an exhibit of Red Polls by the Smartt Syndicate, and
was so attracted by their size and conformation that when
he was in England he purchased the famous young bull,
Horstead Artaxerxes, the first prize two-year-old bull at
the Royal Show, Cambridge; he also secured four heifers
from the King’s herd at Sandringham. The progeny of
these, with the pick of the Foxlow cows, would be hard
to beat in colour, shape and make, and their progeny,
this year’s calves, are indeed a very fine lot.
There is also an embryo Norman Percheron stud. The
stallion is by Rhum, the champion stallion of England,
which, Mr. halkiner says, is as handsome a horse as could
be seen. The imported mares are a beautiful lot of dark
dappled greys.
Foxlow, when purchased from the late Geo. Osborne
/•' OX L Q II 7 . XE ir SOU T II JV AL E S


ANOTHER PICTURESQUE CORNER IN
THE FOXLOW GARDEN, WHICH IS
BOUNDED WITH ELMS AND POPLARS
/ ox l o ir. nk jr sou r // jfa le s


IMPORTED MARES OF THE PERCHERON
STUD GRAZING ON THE RICH NATIVE
PASTURES AT FOXLOW
/•' ox l o rr. nk iv s o ur // wal e s


was 20,000 acres in extent, but shortly after the purchase
Mr. Falkiner sold an outlying block of some 7000 acres
on account of its proximity to the railway, and with the
handsome profit made on the resale he has squared up
the shape of the estate by buying two other blocks
v-.v _ _ , ■
adjoining the main one. Much work has been done at
the homestead ; the old house was razed to the ground
and a concrete bungalow, white walled and red roofed,
proximity to the house, have been demolished and a new
one built half a mile away. This shed is a miniature
copy of the famous Tuppal one Mr. Falkiner built long
ago.
The English trees, the shady drive, the hawthorn
hedges, and Lombardy poplars growing by the river,
where it runs close to the house, are features of Foxlow.
The old garden in new hands has arisen a place of great
TWO-YEAR-OLD PERCHERON STALLION BRED AT FOXLOW
erected on the same site, in order to save all the old
English trees which have been growing half a century
or more. The house as it stands now is charming—the
wide verandahs and pillared porch, trailing roses and
wistarias. The living rooms are panelled, ceilinged,
doored and furnished in oak. Every modern convenience
is installed. The original woolshed and dip, in close
beauty; all the sw r eet smelling flowers of old England
find a rooting space. It is good to see the lilies of the
valley, the cowslips and the primroses. Mrs. Falkiner
has planted plantations round about the homestead, and
there are growing well some hundreds of the best English
and foreign trees. Along the roadways leading to the
homestead poplars have been planted. These are already
EOXL () W, NE IV S 0 UT II WALES


A GROUP OF PUREBRED RED POLL COWS AT FOXLOW
15 ft. high and making a pleasant show of tapering
foliage. Willows have been put in along the river banks.
I he late Mr. Osborne’s old and spreading racing
stables have been repaired and stuccoed in white, gabled
and roofed in red. They gleam most attractively be-
tween elms, pines and willows. One can hardly leave
Foxlow without remarking the outbuildings. As a rule
on a station these erections are an eyesore; here they are
things of beauty. All rebuilt of concrete, white walled
and red roofed, they stand in order and precision to the
four winds of heaven. Rows of trees have been planted
always with an eye to the picturesque. It is pleasant
indeed to contemplate what effect the passing of time
will bring forth given this propitious climate and the
untiring energy of the present owner, whose mind is ever
bent on beautifying the practical.
FOX L () TV. NE TV S() UT 11 TV ALE S


HADDON RIG, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Franc B. S. Falkiner
H ADDON RIG, the property of Mr. Franc B. S.
Falkiner, is situated about 20 miles from the
town of Warren, N.S.W., about 362 miles from
Sydney, on a branch of the western railway line.
The homestead is in an artesian belt of country, and is
conveniently accessible to buyers and others interested
in stud stock breeding, the policy of making sales on the
station property itself having been particularly encour-
aged during Mr. Falkiner’s administration of the
estate.
Two isolated blocks comprised the property when pur-
chased by Mr. Falkiner, and these were widely separated.
The outside block of 13,000 acres was disposed of m
1917, following upon important improvements which had
been made in the water supply of the homestead block.
As a result of this disposal the area of the holding was
reduced to 28,000 acres, and to enlarge the area
Merrimba Station, of approximately 25,000 acres in one
block, was secured by Mr. Falkiner in 1922. This mag-
nificent property comprises a valuable belt of country,
myall, wilga, and buddah, about one-third black soil and
the rest red land, all of which is mainly open plain inter-
spersed with box and pine clumps.
Improvements are being carried out here on progressive
lines, a feature being the sinking of excavations and a
new bore that ensures water supply at 995 ft. 1 he dead
timber is being cleared by picking up and burning off,
and the park-like appearance that is characteristic of the
environs of Haddon Rig homestead is gradually taking
shape in these paddocks.
Wemabung property of 18,000 acres, which was
originally part of Jdaddon Rig, has now also been pur-
chased, without stock, and Bona, a property of 6000
acres adjoining Merrimba, making a total of nearly
80,000 acres altogether.
It is only a matter of a few years and Haddon Rig
will be one of the show places of all stud breeding
properties in New South Wales. The amount of work
put in by Mr. Falkiner during his comparatively short
regime in clearing up and burning off the dead timhei,
the thoroughness with which rabbits have been exter-
minated, the additional tanks and bores put dow n and
the extension of bore drains, and the reconstruction of
the old homestead and station appointments, typify the
energy and experience that have been directed unceasingly
in the interests of this stud property.
The Haddon Rig Merinos have long been noted for
their size and frame, and their resistance against drought
conditions. In fact, several 2-tooth rams sold in S\dne\
during recent seasons were amongst the largest framed
rams ever brought into these sales from any quarter of
the State. This exceptional size of frame is not only
due to the exercise of great care in breeding, but is also
due to the influence of the healthy wealth and variety
of summer grasses on Haddon Rig in normal seasons.
Climate plays a most important part in developing these
strong frames, but science also bears directly on this
point, inasmuch as the waters on the run have been so
carefully distributed as to ensure the minimum possible
distance between feed and water for the sheep.
The abundance of old man salt bush and cotton bush,
so evident in the early days, has now almost disappeared,
and in their place have appeared the better creeping salt
bush and the trefoil burr.
Haddon Rig Station was bought by Mr. Franc B. S.
Falkiner in 1916, “off the shears,” on the walk-in-walk-
out principle, from the trustees of the late Mr. James
Richmond, who resided in Scotland. The history of the
property extends over 80 years. It was first leased by the
late Mr. William Wentworth, and the station was then
known as Cullemburrawang and Inglebar, having a com-
bined area of 400,000 acres, and was stocked with cattle
for 45 years. About 1868 Mr. Wentworth formed a
partnership with a Mr. Christie, who died in 1879, but
just prior to this Mr. James Richmond purchased the
run from these partners.
One of Mr. Wentworth’s first managers, the late Mr.
C. Kirby, of Pillicawarrina, named the combined hold-
ings Haddon Rig. This was the name of a famous meet
for local hounds in Scotland, near the home of Mr.
Kirby, and it is understood that the name was carried to
these properties to commemorate the traditions of fox
hunting in the Old Land.


STUD MERINO RAM, BRED AT HADDON RIG, AND
WHICH WAS THE HIGHEST PRICED MERINO RAM
AT THE 1926 ANNUAL SYDNEY SHEEP SALES,
REALISING 1300 GUINEAS AT AUCTION
II ADI) 0 N RI G, NE W SOU T II M / A LE S


STUD MERINO RAMS IN
ONE OF THE MANY SHADY
BENDS ON HADDON RIG
II AI)I) 0 \ l\ IG, NE IV S()U T II IVA LE S


After acquiring the station, Mr. James Richmond set
out to stock it with selected sheep. His first manager
was a Mr. Bloomfield, then Mr. John Greives, and later
Mr. J. E. Pierce held this position. These men were
recognised first-class judges of sheep, and the execution
of their sound opinions, combined with infinite care, has
been the means of maintaining throughout the history of
the stud an exceptionally high standard in the quality of
Haddon Rig sheep.
The first sheep-classer was Mr. Jack Hughes, and the
work was then carried on for 32 years by Mr. D. Grant,
who had absorbed his tutor’s keenness for robust sheep
with length, colour and evenness of fleece.
Soon after entering into possession of Haddon Rig,
Mr. James Richmond made his first purchase of Peppin
Wanganella-Rambouillet blood, securing a consignment
of stud rams and ewes in 1882.
The present stud was formed on a line of 1900 aged
ewes, purchased with 30 stud rams, many of which were
sired by the famous old-time Wanganella rams, Premier
and Warrior. The best of these 30 rams was Wellington,
sired by Warrior. The ewes were taken delivery of by
Mr. J. W. C. Langhorne, who travelled with them to
Haddon Rig. Messrs. Austin and Millear, in a letter
dated 3rd September, 1882, supplied certain information
with regard to the rams, describing them as 13 by Pre-
mier, 5 by Warrior, 4 by Number 37, 4 by Number 30,
2 by P.E., and 2 by Number 12 P. All these sires had
been prize winners excepting No. 30 and No. 37, which
Avere not exhibited. All six sires, however, were repre-
sented at the Melbourne Exhibition of 1880 by their
fleeces, and in 1881 formed one-half of Austin and
Millear’s show prize case.
It will be seen that these foundation rams embodied
all that could be desired in regard to breeding and
avool.
In about 1883 a very high-class Wanganella stud ram,
Wool King, was purchased from Mr. C.
Greaves, of Booriyallock, by Mr. James Richmond, who
attended the dispersal sale of this flock for that express
purpose. Mr. Richmond paid 410 guineas for Wool King,
AA r as a good price in those days. In a letter dated
30th November, 1916, to his attorney in Australia, Mr.
Richmond described this ram as one of the best of the
Wanganella blood he had had the privilege of securing.
During Mr. Greives’ management, in 1885-86, he
selected a draft of 2-tooth stud from the double
stud 2-tooth ewes. In 1891 Mr. J. E. Pierce, the then
manager of Haddon Rig, purchased 1400 aged cavcs of
pure Wanganella blood, selected by Mr. D. Grant from
a flock of 2500.
In also, three high-class Wanganella rams were
bought for the stud. Their names were Wallace, Bobbie
Burns and Bruce. Of these valuable sires the best was
Wallace, who was of Premier blood.
Mr. Grant went to Wanganella again in 1894, and
purchased Mansie Waugh No. 1511. 1 his ram was by
No. 836 out of a double stud ewe, No. 836 being by No.
463, by No. 151, out of double stud ewes in each case.
No. 836 was first prize and champion at Deniliquin in
1884, while No. 151, a famous sire, produced numerous
prize-takers. Mansie Waugh No. 1511 was himself
entered in the Deniliquin scouring contest along with
others.
The outstanding feature of the Haddon Rig stud is
undoubtedly its uniformity of type throughout, and this,
of course, is ideal for Australian conditions. When it is
considered that a stud flock of over 10,000 ewes of true
evenness has been built up consistently through genera-
tions, since 1882, of careful and skilful mating and class-
ing, producing grand roomy frames, it is no small wonder
that Haddon Rig stands so pre-eminent in the pastoral
world to-day.
For the year Ist July, 1924, to 30th June, 1925, no
fewer than 3297 rams were sold. These realised the
handsome sum of £58,365, a result which probably has
not been eclipsed by any other stud in Australia. Only
the ordinary number of flock rams were sold, the magnifi-
cent result being due to the sale by public auction in
Sydney, when 141 rams realised £20,777. Thirty-five
stud and special stud rams at Dalgety’s sale that year
realised £15,513, out of their total sale of 590 rams for
£30,533. Rams from Haddon Rig were first offered in
Sydney in 1906, and topped the market. The stud also
topped the market in the season 1925-26, twenty years
later, with a ram for which 1300 guineas was paid.
Going back during other years they sold remarkably well.
Despite the adverse conditions through drought and the
Spanish influenza scare in 1919, the stud sold up to 430
guineas, 410 guineas, and 350 guineas. Out of a
formidable team of 181 special stud and selected rams
sent in during 1918 sales, 15 stud rams averaged £330,
the whole consignment selling for £10,070.
The Haddon Rig sheep have been shown in Sydney
only twice. Royal Hope won the champion and grand
champion unhoused, in 1922, and in the following year
this stud won the coveted prize for three rams publicly
shorn, branded with the society’s own private mark, and
judged a year later.
The colour and character of their wool and the even-
ness of their covering make the Haddon Rig sheep
eagerly sought after by buyers from all the States in the
Commonwealth, South Africa, New Zealand, and the
Argentine.
II AI)I) 0 A RI G, A T EIT S()U T II 11 AL E S


THE STUD MERINO RAM, ROYAL HOPE, BRED AT HADDON
RIG, AND WHICH WON THE GRAND CHAMPIONSHIP
AWARD FOR UNHOUSED MERINO RAM AT THE N.S.W.
SHEEPBREEDERS’ ASSOCIATION’S ANNUAL SHOW, SYDNEY,
IN 1922. THIS RAM WAS SUBSEQUENTLY SOLD FOR
1200 GUINEAS
// ADD O N RI G, NE JV S()U T // If AL E S


PORTION OF THE TEAM OF 35 HADDON RIG STUD MERINO
RAMS FORWARDED TO THE 1924 STUD SHEEP SALES IN
SYDNEY, AND WHICH REALISED £15,513 AT DALGETY
AND CO. LIMITED’S SALE, WHEN THE TOTAL CATALOGUE
OF 590 MERINO RAMS MADE £30,533
II ADD O N RI G, \E W SOU TII WA LE S


ANOTHER SECTION OF THE FAMOUS TEAM OF HADDON
RIG MERINO RAMS, WHICH REALISED £15,513, MORE
THAN HALF OF THE VALUE OF THE WHOLE CATALOGUE
OFFER ED BY DALGETY AND CO. LIMITED AT THE 1924
SYDNEY SHEEP SALES
II AI)D () X RI G, XE W S() I r T H JVA LE S


THE THREE HADDON RIG BRED MERINO RAMS WHICH
WON THE SPECIAL SHEARING PRIZE AT THE N.S.W.
SHEEPBREEDERS’ ASSOCIATION’S ANNUAL SHEEP SHOW
IN SYDNEY IN 1923 FOR THE BEST THREE MERINO RAMS
PUBLICLY SHORN IN 1922 AT THE SHOW, BRANDED WITH
ASSOCIATION’S PRIVATE MARK, AND THEN SHORN AGAIN
IN 1923
II AI)I) 0 X RI G, XK W SOU T II IF AL E S


HADDON RIG MERINO 2-TOOTH EWES
FOR THE SPECIAL STUD FLOCK
II AI)I) () N RI G, NK IV SOUTH IVA LE S


TYPICAL STUD MERINO EWES
IN THE HADDON RIG STUD
II IDDO V RI G, X E IJ 7 S OUT II 11 AL E S


THE HADDON RIG HOMESTEAD
HADI) O N RI G, NE W SOU T H IV AL E S


Mr. Falk iner is the eldest son of the late F. S.
Falkiner, of Boonoke and other estates, and he was
educated at the Church of England Grammar School,
Geelong, Victoria.
With his parents he went to Boonoke, in Riverina, in
November 1878, shortly after that property was pur-
chased, and first became acquainted with the Peppin
blood Merinos during the school holidays in July at the
Deniliquin Show. This show was then the premier
grass-fed sheep show in New South Wales, and his
association with the stud as a schoolboy, feeding and
watering the show sheep, was the foundation of the deep-
seated knowledge that has been developed to this day.
When 18 years of age his father gave him charge of
M oonbria, which was stocked by the surplus of Boonoke
stud. This important post brought him into contact
with many leading sheep experts of the time, including
Jonathan Shaw, and in the course of his experience he
has witnessed the evolution of long, fine, bright wool and
bare points to the introduction of the “wrinkly” craze,
with heavy neck folds and britch, then the controversy
which arose around the Vermont, down to the present-
day type of smooth bodies, good necks and thighs.
When in his early twenties Tuppal property was pur-
chased, and Mr. Falkiner was promoted by his father to
the management of that immense holding of 160,000
acres freehold, carrying 125,000 sheep. The purchase
price of Tuppal was £392,500. In this position Mr.
Falkiner remained for 24 years, and during that time a
total of 3,263,000 sheep were put through the shed,
whilst more than 800,000 lambs were marked. I he
annual shearing averaged 141,000 sheep, and to the
anxiety of managing this colossal undertaking was added
the supervision of other of the family properties as well.
Upon the death of his father, Mr. Falkiner was elected
managing director of F. S. Falkiner and Sons Limited.
This position was held until, for private reasons, he sold
out his interests in the company and afterwards acquired
Haddon Rig. During his reign with the company he was
vice-president and president of the Southern Riverina
Pastoralists’ Association, and its representative on the
Pastoralists’ Federal Council.
Wh en the Australian wool clip was purchased by the
Imperial Government Mr. Falkiner was nominated as
one of the two growers’ representatives on the Central
Wool Committee, the body appointed by the Federal
Government to carry out the details of this huge scheme
of wool marketing. Fie has also represented Riverina
and Hume (Eastern Riverina) in the Federal Parlia-
ment, and was for several the president of the New
South Wales Sheepbreeders’ Association.
For some time past Mr. Falkiner has made his home at
Sydney, and resides at Bellevue Hill. He was invited to
and accepted a seat on the directorate of the Bank of
New South Wales, a great compliment paid to a great
pastoralist, and he is also a director of several other in-
stitutions in Svdnev.
II AD DOS RIO. NEir SOUTH WALES


MILTON PARK AND MUNGADAL, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Properties of Mr. Anthony Hordern, C.B.E.
MILTON Park, Bowral, New South Wales, the
country home of Mr. Anthony Hordern,
C.8.E., one of the best known Shorthorn
breeders in Australia, has become noted as the location of
the famous Shorthorn stud which has produced some of
the finest sires and dams ever seen in the Commonwealth.
It is not too much to say that the imprint of the Milton
Park blood has immensely benefited the beef cattle breed-
ing industry. This is universally admitted by the Short-
horn breeders of Australia.
widely known and phenomenally successful Milton Park
Beef Shorthorn stud.
Milton Park is situated within easy distance of the
railway on the main Sydney-Melbourne line, and com-
prises rich undulating red basaltic country, which grows
all the best English grasses so requisite for stud stock rear-
ing. At an altitude of 2700 ft. the climate is particularly
healthy and has exercised a good influence on the con-
stitution of the stock.
Mr. Hordern’s objective has been the production of an
SOME MILTON PARK BRED SHORTHORN COWS
Mr. Hordern is recognised as one who has placed the
industry on the sound basis it occupies to-day. His liberal
expenditure upon sires and dams from the most noted
studs of Great Britain has had the effect of improving
many of the studs of the Commonwealth, the influence of
which will be in evidence for very many years to come.
Mr. Hordern founded his noted herd in 1910, when
he imported Uuke of Hampton, Pretty Pattie and Shen-
stone Rowena 2nd, which became the nucleus of the
animal with a perfect constitution showing the necessary
character, style and conformation, only those animals
which possessed these characteristics being retained in the
stud. His desire was to produce an animal embodying
(1) constitution; (2) early maturity; (3) good milking;
and (4) parallelogram type.
After careful study of the various types of Shorthorns,
Mr. Hordern determined to breed a beast with the fol-
lowing characteristics: —Sound constitution, deep and


A TYPICAL SCENE ON MILTON PARK
THE STUD SHORTHORN BULL, MILTON'S PROUD BROADHOOKS 6TH
MIL T O X PARK AKDMUXGA D A L, X E W SOU TII WAL E S


A NOTED MILTON PARK STUD
SIRE, MILTON'S PASTMASTER,
BY MASTERKEY (IMP.), OUT
OF MILTON'S MIRANDA
ANOTHER HANDSOME STUD SIRE,
MILTON'S GOLDEN MONARCH, BY
DOUNE MONARCH (IMP.), OUT
OF MILTON'S MARTHA 2ND
MILTON PARK SIRES
ANOTHER VIEW OF MILTON'S
PASTMASTER SHOWING "BEEF
TO THE HOCK”
MILTON PARK AND MUNGA D A L. NEW SOUTH WALES


wide through the heart, four square behind, meat to the
knees and hocks, short cannon bones and pasterns, a cover-
ing of deep flesh from shoulder to butt of tail, shoulders
well laid back, wide over the chine, well sprung ribs, hips
well covered, and a broad open face with a quiet tempera-
ment. This was the type he set out to develop, and it
has been mainly accomplished through the intermingling
of four types of bulls. The first to be introduced was
Duke of Hampton (imp.) No. 105345, from that great
cup at the Edgworth Show; first prize and reserve cham-
pion at the Southport Show; first prize at the Doncaster
Show; first prize and champion at the Bolton Show 7 ; first
prize and Shorthorn Society’s championship at A.L.A.S.,
and first prize at Padiham Show. Another great sire
introduced was Doune Monarch No. 155390 C.H.8.,
bred by that leading Scottish breeder and judge, Captain
John MacGillivray, of Calrossie Nidd, Ross-shire. I his
great sire, with his immense covering of flesh, fine skin
MILTON'S MARTHA 2ND
milking cow Fanny 108th, by New Year’s Gift No.
77323. Duke of Hampton was bred by that well-known
breeder, J. T. Hobbs, and as a yearling won first and
champion at the Bath and West Show, first, special and
Shorthorn Society’s prize at Gloucester, and first and
reserve champion at Hereford and Worcester Show; he
was sired by Hampton Bowling, a great winner, includ-
ing first and Shorthorn Society’s prize at Gloucester,
1908, and second at the Royal Counties Show.
The next bull to be used with success was Rockcliffe
Canning 2nd, a compact deep fleshed rich red animal by
Lord Canning from Rockcliffe Gem HI. Lord Canning
won the following trophies in Great Britain: —First prize
and cup at the Hebden Bridge Show; first prize and
and silky hair, was introduced to tone down any coarse-
ness that may have crept into the herd, and his introduc-
tion has helped materially in the development of the stud.
His progeny are all of the early maturing sort so popular
with breeders, and in addition have won many prizes at
the Sydney Royal.
In 1927 the high-priced calf, Collynie King Edward,
was purchased from Duthie-Webster, of Collynie, at his
annual October sale, for the top price, i.e., 1350 guineas.
A few calves by this bull have been dropped and show
great promise.
Lindenow Duke of Derrimut 69th was then purchased
from that well known and successful breeder, Mr. A. J.
Webb, Rathfarnham, Victoria. This bull was selected
MIL T 0 N P ARK AND M UN G A D A L, N E W SOU T H IV ALES


MILTON'S MIRANDA 5TH
MILTON'S MIRANDA 3RD
MI L TO N P A R K AN D M UN GAD A L, N E W SOU T II IV A LE S


THE WELL-KNOWN STUD SHORTHORN COW, MILTON'S MARTHA, AND ONE OF HER HEIFER CALVES
by the late Robert Clarke* who may well be considered
the Duthie of Australia, to mate with the Milton Park
females, and that great breeder’s judgment proved of
immense benefit to the stud.
Another bull introduced was the now famous Master-
key (No. 137896 C.H.8.), who has proved himself one
of the breed’s greatest herd leaders, having sired the win-
ning group of females at the Royal Show of England in
1920, the champion female in 1921, and the reserve cham-
pion in 1922. Since this bull’s importation to New South
Wales his progeny have won countless ribbons and created
many records in the sale ring.
To convey an idea of the influence and value of the
Milton Park blood, one need only glance at the follow-
ing statement, which contains a list of prizes that -were
won at the Royal Sydney Show 1928, by animals contain-
ing direct Milton Park blood or outcrosses of that
blood:
Class 210.—0 fl7 entries in that class, 12 were of Milton
Park blood, and took first and third prizes.
Class 211.—0 f 9 entries in that class, 6 were of Milton
Park blood, and took first, second and third prizes.
Class 212.—0 f 3 entries in that class, 1 was of Milton
Park blood, and took first prize.
Class 213. —Of 5 entries in that class, 2 were of Milton
Park blood, and took first and second prizes.
Class 214.—0 fl3 entries in that class, 3 were of Milton
Park blood, and took first and second prizes.
MILT ON PARK AND MUN GADA L, NEW SOUTH WALES


THE STUD SHORTHORN COW, MILTON'S SNOWFLAKE, A DIRECT DESCENDANT OF THE FAMOUS MARTHA (IMP.)
Class 215.—0 f 16 entries in that class, 9 were of Milton
Park blood, and took first, second and third prizes.
Class 216. —Of 46 entries in that class, 13 were of Milton
Park blood, and took first, second and third prizes.
Class 217.—0 f 39 entries in that class, 31 were of Milton
Park blood, and took first, second and third prizes.
Class 218.—0 f 2 entries in that class, 1 was of Milton
Park blood, and took second prize.
Class 219.—0 f 6 entries in that class, 2 were of Milton
Park blood, and took first and second prizes.
Class 220.—0 f 9 entries in that class, 4 were of Milton
Park blood, and took first, second and third prizes.
Class 221.—0 f 2 entries in that class, 1 was of Milton
Park blood, and took first prize.
Class 222.- —Of 13 entries in that class, 6 were of Milton
Park blood, and took first and second prizes.
Class 223.—0 f 8 entries in that class, 7 were of Milton
Park blood, and took first, second and third prizes.
Class 224. —Of 20 entries in that class, 8 were of Milton
Park blood, and took first, second and third prizes.
Class 225.—0 f 16 entries in that class, 8 were of Milton
Park blood, and took first and second prizes.
Of the 16 classes referred to above, animals of Milton
Park blood won 40 prizes, viz.ls l3 seconds, 8
thirds, 2 championships, and 2 reserve championships.
M I LT ON PARK AND M UN G A D AL, N E TV SOUTH TV A LE S


STUD SHORTHORN COWS BRED ON MILTON PARK
AN INSPECTION OF STUD COWS AND CALVES AT MILTON PARK
MILTON PARK AND MUNGADAL, N E W S () U TII WALES


MILTON'S MIRANDA 4TH
MILTON'S GAINFORD DUCHESS 2ND
M 1 L T O N PARK AND M UN G A D A L, NEW SOU T H JV A LE S


MUNGADAL
With the same wide outlook and keen enthusiasm that
characterise Mr. H ordern in all his undertakings, he en-
tered into another phase of stud stock breeding when he
purchased in 1923 the well-known historic Mungadal
sheep station in Riverina. Whatever commercial con-
siderations may have led him to determine upon the pur-
comprises 111,712 acres of freehold, and is situated in the
vicinity of Hay with a frontage to the Murrumhidgee.
Originally owned by Dr. Thomas Lang and Mr. Gideon
Lang it was purchased from them by the late Mr. Colin
Simson in 1865, and remained in the hands of the Sim-
son family until it was acquired by Mr. Anthony Hor-
dern.
THE MUNGADAL STUD MERINO SIRE, NO. 670
chase of this property there is one thing certain, and that
is that he will concentrate upon the improvement both of
the flock and the property until it has gained a reputation
as high in the Merino sheep world as his Shorthorn stud
herd has gained in the cattle world. Nothing short of
the best in stud stock will ever satisfy him, and to attain
this he has ever aimed at breeding up to the highest pos-
sible standard. His achievement in this direction must
have been extremely gratifying to him.
Mungadal, one of the largest stations in Riverina,
The Mungadal Merino flock comprised at the time of
Mr. H ordern’s purchase 30,000 sheep, and was regarded
as one of the hest flocks in Riverina. Founded originally
upon Larra, Victoria, blood it was strengthened later on
by the introduction of Ercildoune, Victoria, and Tas-
manian strains, and still later by Austin Wanganella
blood.
The flock now is under Mr. Hordern’s personal super-
vision, and receives his individual attention, while Mr.
W. J. McCarthy acts as classer.
M ILTON PARK AND M UN G A D A L, NE W SOUTH WALES


The Mungadal special stud flock is No. 230 in the
Register of Stud Merino Flocks of Australia, and con-
sists of 5000 breeding ewes. The flock during the time
it has been in Mr. Hordern’s hands has been most
rigorously culled, and is now generally regarded as
a magnificent flock of sheep, noted everywhere for
their long staple. Considerable attention has been be-
Since Mr. Hordern took possession of the property he
has made numerous improvements in many ways. He
has installed 27 additional windmills and built numerous
large tanks, and the stock, therefore, have very short
distances to walk for water.
A comprehensive system of irrigation has been installed,
connected with which are two 40 h.p. electric motors
ANOTHER MUNGADAL MERINO STUD SIRE, NO. 747
stowed upon the selection of sires during the past
five years. The following high priced rams were
purchased for use in the stud, one at 3000 guineas,
one at 2000 guineas, two at 1000 guineas, and two at
500 guineas.
The Mungadal flock are big plain bodied sheep with
open faces, and are in great demand in Queensland, where
large numbers of rams are sold. The reputation of
Mungadal sheep has reached South Africa, where many
of the rams and ewes have been sent.
coupled to two centrifugal pumps capable of delivering
250,000 gallons of water per hour. The power for
driving these motors is obtained by direct electric main
from the town of Hay.
There are 650 acres of cultivation, comprising amber
cane, lucerne and soudan grass.
The waste water from the irrigation channels goes over
the natural pastures, and in this way it is hoped to
minimise the troubles and difficulties arising from
droughts.
MILT O N P ARK AND MUNGADAL, NEW SOU TII IV AL E S


PLAN OF IRRIGATION SCHEME AT MUNGADAL
M 1 LT 0 N PARK AND MUNGADAL, NEW SOUTH WALES


COONONG, VIA NARRANDERA, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Roy McCaughey, Esq.
COONONG is located about 30 miles from
Jerilderie, on the Narrandera-Tocumwal line,
the nearest station being Coonong Siding, which
is about nine miles from the homestead. It is ten miles
north-west of Urana, a town on the Oaklands to The
Rock line, which junctions on the main Sydney-Albury
railway. The post-town is Narrandera.
Coonong was the first property owned by the late Hon.
Sir Samuel McCaughey, K. 8., M.L.C., who was one of
amount that had been paid and cancel the contract. 1 his
offer was refused, and it is perhaps as well for Sir Samuel
that it was, for a revival in prices brought better times to
the pastoral industry, and the disaster that appeared to
be so imminent was averted.
Shortly afterwards he was able to purchase the in-
terests of his partners in Coonong, and then commenced
a long life of success and achievement. The property,
which consists of 41,000 acres of freehold land, was sold
THE HOMESTEAD AT COONONG
the most progressive pastoralists in Australia. When
purchased by Sir Samuel in 1860, in partnership with the
late David Wilson and the late John Cochrane, it was
a cattle property. It was not long, however, before it
became evident that the plains were eminently suitable
for sheep, and a change was made in the face of a depress-
ing slump in cattle values, which required the most
dogged perseverance and hard work to avoid disaster. It
is interesting to note that about this time the position was
so acute that Sir Samuel and his partners approached the
vendors of Coonong, to whom a considerable balance of
purchase money was owing, with an offer to forfeit the
by Sir Samuel a few months before his death to his
nephew, Mr. Roy McCaughey, the younger son of the
late Mr. David McCaughey, who was the owner of Coree
Station, near Jerilderie, N.S.W. Mr. Roy McCaughey
entered into possession on 30th June, 1919.
Coonong is highly improved and is grassed in abund-
ance with all the varieties native to Riverina. It is
sparsely timbered and has a rainfall averaging 17J in.
per annum. During Sir Samuel’s life-time he subdivided
the property into about one hundred paddocks, con-
structed about 100 miles of channels, now used when
necessary for replenishing the numerous tanks on the


SPECIAL STUD MERINO EWES
WITH LAMBS AT FOOT BY THE
STUD RAM BALLYMENA
STUD MERINO RAM BALLYMENA,
PURCHASED FROM AUSTIN WAN-
GANELLA CO. FOR 5000 GUINEAS,
WORLD’S RECORD PRICE FOR A
5-YEAR-OLD RAM
C()ON O N G, NE W SOU T 11 WA LE S


run, built a substantial home and gardens with an arti-
ficial lake containing 1,000,000 gallons in front of the
house, extensive men’s quarters, stabling, engine sheds,
shearing and hut accommodation, and many other exten-
sive improvements. The willow and poplar lanes along
some of the watercourses, and the lake in front of the
house converted into a sanctuary for wild fowl, are
unique features of Coonong, and are prominent in an
otherwise plain landscape. The home buildings, with
the wide road leading to the homestead, give the im-
pression of a small but well ordered township. The
mantle of Sir Samuel for improving his country appears
to have fallen upon his nephew, Roy McCaughey, who is
year by year putting back into the property a large part
of what he is making out of it.
The sheep which first came to Coonong were a draft
from Mr. John Cochrane’s Widgiewa Station. They
were mated with rams from the stud of Mr. N. P.
Bayly, of Havilah, and other Mudgee strains, and were
considered a good lot of sheep. A stud was formed soon
after from a selection of the best ewes in the general
Coonong flocks, and putting to them a variety of rams
of pure blood to produce a hardy animal with a heavy
paying fleece. When the fashion veered towards the
breeding of the American Vermont type, at the time con-
sidered to be the truest type of Merino sheep, Sir Samuel
purchased in America the best sheep obtainable from the
Vermont studs and brought them to Coonong. The first
cross of these rams with his own ewes put density and
AN AVENUE OF POPLARS ON COONONG
A MOB OF STUD
SERVICE SIRES
IN 10 MONTHS’
GROWTH OF
WOOL
C O O N () .V G, N K ir S 0 U T H W A LE S


staple into the wool, and the Coonong stud became in-
vincible in the show ring. It became evident, however,
that the use of Vermont blood could be overdone, and
without any hesitation he disposed of the whole of his
American stud except 50 ewes, which he segregated.
1 hese were only kept as a curiosity, and they died out
during Sir Samuel's life-time.
He then formed a stud entirely with ewes and rams of
I eppin blood, which was the foundation of the present
stud. It was formed in 1907 with 1000 picked head of
long staple stud. It was not long before the sheep had
reached a high standard of excellence. The stud was
purchased by the present owner with the property, the
number of ewes then being 11,276. During the past
eight years he has maintained a place for the stud in the
very front rank of Merino breeding throughout Aus-
tralia, and his policy is to further improve and develop it.
Ihe Coonong sheep to-day represent the massive
framed, strong boned type of plain bodied Merino, open
faced and densely packed with wool and endowed with a
A MISTY DAY AT COONONG. ONE OF THE MANY TANKS ON THE RUN
ewes, 500 of which were from the Cobram stud, and pas-
tured at Goolgumhla, then owned by Sir Samuel. The
other half of the new foundation ewes were joined with
high class rams picked out specially from Boonoke stud.
They themselves were bred from Bundure ewes, bv
Boonoke rams, so that the line taken up with the latter
half of the stud was unbroken Peppin strain also. These
ewes and the pick of the ewe progeny have been kept
apart as a separate stud flock and always mated with the
same strain of blood, and are known as the Coonong
wonderful constitution, the truest type, upon which de-
pends the Australian wool industry. The rams particu-
larly are healthy and vigorous, prepotent and valuable to
Hocks in the far western district, where heat and dust are
the factors to be overcome in producing a well grown clip.
I he stud has been augmented with rams purchased from
the leading Peppin blood studs since 1919.
1 his stud, known as Coonong No. 1, is registered in
the Register of the Merino Stud Flocks of Australia as
block No. 25. No. 2 was formed in July 1922, and is
C 0 0 N 0 N G, N E IV S 0 U TII IV A 1. E S


THE STUD SHORTHORN BULL, MILTON'S MASTERKEY, A PROMINENT SIRE IN THE COONONG HERD
A FEW OF THE STUD COWS AND HEIFERS PURCHASED FROM MR. ANTHONY HORDERN, OF MILTON PARK, N.S.W.,
AND USED IN THE FOUNDATION OF THE COONONG HERD
c o ox o \ a. x e ir s o u r n ir a lk s


THE 4-TOOTH COONONG
STUD MERINO RAM NO.
5.173, SHOWING A DENSE
AND LONG-STAPLED COVER-
ING ON A LARGE AND
PLAIN BODY
C O O X () X C, XE ir S () U TII JT A L E s


THE TWO-YEAR-OLD COONONG
STUD MERINO RAM, NO. 5.78,
OF UPSTANDING APPEARANCE
AND PURITY OF TYPE.
CHARACTERISTIC OF THE
COONONG FLOCK
C O 0 N () NG. N K Jr S 0 U T// W A LE S


registered as Flock No. 244 in the same stud book. The
foundation ewes, 192, were purchased from Stud Park
North with 125 lambs at foot. Of these lambs ten rams
and 43 ewes were selected and retained in the stud, and
two foundation stud rams were purchased from Wan-
ganella Estate. In 1924 Mr. McCaughey purchased from
Austin Wanganella Company, Wanganella, the famous
stud sire No. 9.1, now known as Ballymena, at 5000
guineas, a world's record for a five-year-old Merino ram.
He was a proved sire, for during the two years prior to
his sale 22 rams sired by him were sold for £17,346, an
average of £7BB 9s. per head, of which eight specials
sold from 1000 to 3050 guineas (the latter figure being
a wo rid' ’s record price up to that time for a ram sold by
youngster about 18 months old, Mr. McCaughey re-
cently refused a very high offer, preferring to use him in
the stud, and there are many others of this progeny
promising well.
In 1923 one stud ram and 50 stud ewes were purchased
from Deniliquin Stud Park North, the ewes costing 50
guineas per head, and these, together wdth the two
lambings of respectively 103 and 39 lambs, the progeny
of the first lot of ewes, comprised the No. 2 stud when it
went to registration. On this foundation of Deniliquin
Stud Park North ewes and Wanganella Estate rams, a
line of breeding has been followed with success with the
addition of rams from Austin Wanganella, and rams
bred within the No. 2 itself. At the present time this
WELL-GROWN SPECIAL STUD MERINO EWE HOGGETS CARRYING TEN MONTHS' WOOL
public auction), averaging £1575, and 13 special and
stud rams averaged £1223 13s. Ballymena has done well
for Coonong, and there are now fully 200 of his get on
the property (218 actually marked), from which by
appearance great things are expected.
To look at this great sire to-day one would never
imagine that he is now fully eight years old. His appear-
ance, condition and action are more like a ram three or
four years old, which proves what a wonderful constitu-
tion he must have, and he would he a pessimist who says
that he will not beget a few hundred more lambs if pre-
sent looks count for anything. For one of Ballymena’s
sons bred at Coonong, a most promising outstanding
stud flock numbers about 2000 ewes and rams, having
been improved by the further purchase of about 1000
stud ewes of Eli Elwah blood. As the No. 2 stud was
formed in the first place more as an experiment, its
justification as a high class stud is now beyond doubt,
and the addition of a further 1000 ewes above mentioned
is evidence of the owner’s faith in it. These ewes will
be instrumental in assisting to increase and improve the
type of sheep for which the stud was originally formed.
Mr. McCaughey increased his breeding country some
little time ago by purchase of a property called Nulabor,
a portion of lllilawa, near Hay, N.S.W. The climate
being slightly drier than at Coonong enabled him to
C O () X O X G. X E If S O V T// jr A LE s


THE
FOUNTAIN IN
A PRETTY COR-
NER OF THE
COONONG
GARDEN
THE COONONG
HOMESTEAD,
OVERLOOKING
THE STILL
WATERS OF
THE LAKE
COOV 0 v G, S E lf r S()U T 11 JV AL E S


carry out his ideas of breeding greater constitution into
the sheep. 1 he ram weaners are now sent out to Nula-
bor, and it has proved a sound move, as they are already
showing larger and more robust frames. By thus giving
the young sheep a good start in life, with a large robust
frame, selling the Hock rams from Nulabor only, and
returning the balance to Coonong for breeding and dis-
posal of sale stud rams, the very best results are assured.
Lambing takes place during the months of March and
April. With the exception of very special rams, summer
of character. It brings excellent prices at auction, the
average price for the clip in the grease for the past
eight years being 19.43 d. About 17,000 grown sheep
and about 7000 lambs on the average are shorn each
season. The wool shed is large and well built, efficient
to the minutest detail, and contains 40 stands for blade
men. Machinery for machine shearing for 16 stands is
also installed and kept in first class order for use at any
time if required. The wool shed itself and a subsidiary
shed in proximity can cover 3000 sheep. New shearers’
LOOKING NORTHWARD FROM THE FRONT VERANDAH OF COONONG HOUSE
lambing is not favoured. The percentage of lambs
marked for the past eight years averages in the vicinity
of 75 per cent., which speaks well for the constitution of
the sheep and the healthy environment in which they are
bred and the care which is exercised with them.
The wool from Coonong is usually sold in October in
Sydney by the Commonwealth Wool and Produce Com-
pany Limited. Mr. McCaughey aims at growing a style
of wool of about 64’s spinning quality with the maximum
quarters have been built for the accommodation of 40
men. The shearing, as already indicated, is done with
the blades, and operations commence in August for the
general shearing, which generally takes 40 men about
th ree weeks to complete. 1 he stud rams and ram lambs
are shorn in July.
The sale of rams bred at Coonong now runs into over
1000 bead per annum, and steady improvement is shown.
There is a strong demand for high class (lock rams, the
C O 0 N 0 A G, NK W S 0 U T// WAL E S


THE SPACIOUS
ENTRANCE
HALL OF THE
HOMESTEAD
A CORNER OF
THE LIBRARY
AND SITTING
ROOM AT
COONONG
C () ON 0 .V G, NE IV SOU TII W A LK S


higher grade ones being booked up from one to two years
in advance. Ihe services of Mr. H. C. Pennefather are
requisitioned to class all rams and ewes and supervise the
mating, and much credit is due to him for the position
that the stud is in to-day.
1 oo many lower grade rams used to he bred before it
was found in the
best interests of
the stud to cut
down numbers,
and the standard of
the flock rams was
considerably im-
proved as the re-
sult of this cul-
ling. Whereas Mr.
McCaughey com-
menced with over
11,000 ewes, Mr.
Pennefather cut
the numbers down
in 1919 to 4500
stud ewes, and the
position to-day
amply justifies this
foresight; £4 3s.
Bd. was the aver-
age price realised
for 1061 flock rams
in 1920, and in
1926 flock rams av-
eraged £7 16s. sd.
A vast improve-
ment is obvious in
these returns.
Mr. McCaughey
does not send any
sheep to Sydney
for show purposes,
this practice hav-
ing been discon-
tinued when the
stud was owned
by Sir Samuel.
Neither have stud
rams been offered
for sale at the Syd-
ney sales, as the
policy adopted up
to the present was
rather to retain
the best sheep for
stud purposes un-
til a higher stand-
ard was reached, and the flock to-day fully justifies this.
An nual drafts of selected flock rams are sold in Sydney.
Amongst the top sires bred on the property are the
rams Coonong No. 8.18 and No. 4.1. Both are rams of
exceptional symmetry, and they fulfil the requirements
of the most fastidious as regards their beautiful fleeces,
their bold appearance and general outlines, which stamp
them as rams of the very highest class. At present there
are over 7000 stud ewes and about 3500 flock ewes on
the property, but under the improvement policy in-
augurated, the flock numbers are being reduced each year,
and the standard of the stud is steadily rising both in
numbers and quality.
Mr. Roy Mc-
Caughey also has a
high class herd of
pedigree Shorthorn
cattle, built up
from Milton Park
stud, and formed
in 1925 wi th the
purchase of twelve
cows and a stud
bull from Mr. An-
thon} 7 Hordern’s
famous herd. Up
to 500 guineas was
paid for the cows,
the price of the
bull Mil t o n’s
Masterkey being
1250 guineas.
With high class
pedigreed stock as
a foundation much
may be expected
from the Coonong
Shorthorns in time
to come. The
owner is breeding
along sound lines,
and his No. 1 sire,
Milton’s Master-
key, already men-
tioned, carried off
second prize at
Melbourne in 1926
in the three-year-
old class, and won
third prize at the
1927 Sydney Roval
Show in very
strong company.
Coonong’s Pay-
master, a roan bull
calf born on the
18th March, 1926,
by Milton’s Pay-
master out of Mil-
ton’s Strawberry
2nd, also obtained
third pnze a.t the Royal Show, Sydney, 1927, in a strong
class of over fifty entries, and was subsequently sold for
270 guineas, the highest price realised for a bull calf of
that age at the auction sales.
Mr. Roy McCaughey was born at Coree in 1898. and
takes an active part in all matters affecting the progress
of the district.
AN AGED GUM STANDS SENTINEL OVER THE STATION BUILDINGS
C () ON() N G, NE JV S O U T H ETA LK S


WILLANDRA, BOOLIGAL, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of The Willandra Pastoral Company Limited
WILLANDRA, the property of the AVillandra Pas-
toral Company Limited, lies 500 miles west
of Sydney, and extends over 436,000 acres, of
which 300,000 are leasehold, and the balance freehold.
It is composed of fertile chocolate plains, nicely sheltered
with box, is considered very strong country, and will carry
in normal times about 90,000 sheep, besides a number
of horses and cattle. The rainfall averages 12.75 in.,
with a maximum of 18 in., and in normal seasons there
is a wonderful growth of harley grass, trefoil, white top
and daisy weed, the latter being a good feed when dry;
cotton bush, annual salt bush, and convolvulus creeper also
grow well.
having inherited the rare intuition for selective classing
and mating from their father, who managed Glencoe in
South Australia and other properties in Victoria.
In former years the nearest trucking point to Willandra
was at Carrathool, over 100 miles away, but when the
western railway was completed to Trida in 1919 this ter-
minus was used, and now stock are trucked from AVee
Elwah, 14 miles north of the homestead, and a siding of
the new railroad from Condobolin to Menindie. From
there rams can be sent via Dubbo-Werris Creek direct to
Queensland, while from Hillston, which is 35 miles away
south-east, stock are trucked through to Victoria via
Riverina and Tocumwal.
A FRONT VIEW OF THE WILLANDRA HOUSE
Willandra was originally taken up in the early eighties
by Messrs. Whittingham Bros, and Haynes. It was
later on the property of the London Bank of Australia,
from whom the present owners, Messrs, hield and
Vickery, purchased it in 1912. Four years later, this
partnership was formed into the Willandra Pastoral Com-
pany Limited. Merrowie was added in 1915 and Boon-
darra in 1927.
For many years the station was managed by Air. Arthui
Laird, but since that well-known breeder went to Mima}
Downs in 1906, AVillandra and its high-grade flock of
stud Merinos have been under the control of his brother,
Air. Frank Laird. The Lairds are recognised experts,
The run is watered by wells, earth tanks, windmills and
troughs, with the Lachlan River on the south-east boun-
dary and Willandra Creek intersecting the whole of the
station. On the creek dams have been erected every
four miles, while near the homestead is a big weir, which
is now being enlarged.
The subdivisional areas total 140 paddocks, all of which
are netted. As this indicates, large sums have been ex-
pended on the rabbit trouble, but the result has been its
extermination, and the maximum is being got from the
country through the highly improved state into which it
has been worked.
The typical Australian homestead, standing by the creek


MERINO RAMS DRAWING INTO WATER
in a wealth of shaded gardens, w r as built some years ago,
and is a commodious wooden structure reinforced and
panelled with flbro-cement. It is cool during the great
heat of summer and contains the essentials for modern
comfort, including wireless, electric lighting, hot and cold
water service, sewerage, &c.
By taking Sunday night’s mail train from Sydney one
can reach Wee Elwah, via Condobch'n, the following
evening; here the station car
meets visitors, who may be sure
of w r arm hospitality from the
Lairds. Another route is via
Hillston, a daily service, while
the towns of Mossgiel and
Booligal, the latter being the
postal address for Willandra,
are nearby.
A fleet of cars and trucks
contributes to the station man-
agement, the telephone links
up the outstations, whilst all
outbuildings and woolshed
are up to date. The latter,
containing thirty stands, is
one of the largest in the
west, and besides covering
big numbers of sheep, has a
large drying shed. Shearing
takes place in July, and all
work is done by machine, Mr.
Laird firmly believing that this
enables a more even growth of
wool than when blades are
used.
The history of the Merino stud dates
back to about 1886, when a small flock
of Wanganella strain was bred by the
Whittinghams. With these sheep were
used three special stud rams, named
Wanganella, Boonoke, and Bungaree.
In 1894, several years after Mr. Arthur
Laird took charge, he selected about
150 of the old Wanganella ewes
of good even quality and mated
them with a Wanganella ram. At
the same time some Wanganella ewes
were purchased, and throughout the
subsequent years of its existence the stud
has been kept pure to that one strain.
When Mr. Frank Laird arrived in 1906
he continued to breed along the same
lines as his brother, aiming for large-
framed sheep, plain-bodied and robust, growing long,
dense, medium strength wool. In fact, he bred
especially for the outback country, where heat, dust, low
rainfall and long journeys between drinks call for the
hardiest type of Merino, and also a profitable one. That
he has achieved gratifying results for his principals can-
not be denied. Indicative of his skill has been the im-
provement of the stud, and his ability has been still further
TYPICAL WILLANDRA-BRED MERINO STUD EWES
WILLANDRA, NEW SOU T H WAL E S


A SPECIAL STUD
MERINO RAM
BRED IN THE
WILLANDRA
STUD. FIRST
PRIZE STRONG
WOOL, 1927
A SPECIAL
STUD STRONG-
WOOLLED EWE
BRED AT
WILLANDRA.
GRAND CHAM-
PION, 1927
JV IL L A NDR A, NE JV S O U T H JV A LE S


emphasised by the outstanding performance of Willandra
sheep at the leading shows.
The grand champion ewe and champion ram of the
1906 Hay Show came from his stud, and the following
year two third prizes were won at Sydney by four ex-
hibits sent down. These sheep were sold at an average
price of £l4O 9s. each. In 1908 the stud gained first
prize at Sydney for plain-bodied ram, and a third in the
open unhoused class, while eleven rams averaged £49 3s.
In 1909 ten of the stud’s exhibits averaged £123 18s.
each at auction. This progress has never slackened.
Under a strict policy of improvement the stud came on
rapidly in popular favour, and in 1918 was rewarded
with the grand championship of the Sydney Show with
Willand ra, a ram of marked prepotency, beautifully clad,
and of great size. In 1922 the stud’s Lord Jellicoe
gained first prize in the medium wool section at Sydney,
and the following year one of his progeny beat all comers
and was the grand champion ewe of the show. The
same year a Willandra ram was reserve to the grand
champion. Other honours won at that Sydney Show in-
ROSE GARDEN AND LAWN AT THE BACK OF THE
WILLANDRA HOUSE
cluded champion housed ram and ewe, champion fine wool
ram, champion medium wool ram, and champion strong
wool ewe, besides four firsts in all wool sections and three
MERINO STUD RAMS ON THE
BANK OF THE BILLABONG
JV ILEA N I) R A, N EM' SOU TII IV A LES


YOUNG MERINO
FLOCK SALE
RAMS LAMBED
AND REARED ON
WILLANDRA
IN A DROUGHT
SEASON
THREE SPECIAL
STUD MERINO
EWES BRED AT
WILLANDRA
WI LL ANI) R A , NE W SOU T II IV AL K S


A FEW WILLANDRA
SPECIAL STUD EWE
HOGGETS
SOME OF THE SPECIAL STUD
RAMS CORNERED ON THE
BANK OF THE BILLABONG
WI LEAN DR A, NE W SOU T H WAL E S


A GROUP OF MERINO
STUD RAMS, TWO YEARS
THE FOOTBRIDGE ACROSS THE
WATERS OF THE BILLABONG AT
THE WILLANDRA HOMESTEAD
W ILL AA r DR A, N E W S O U TII WAL E S


seconds in the medium and strong classes. In 1925 a
Willand ra ewe won the fine wool championship, and in
1926 another ewe gained the coveted honour of grand
champion.
At the record show of 1927 the Willandra stud in-
creased its high reputation, being reserve to the grand
champion with a medium wool ewe, and also winning
first and second in the two-year medium wool class, cham-
pion medium wool ewe, first in fine wool ewes under two
tion. For a pen of 25 ewes third prize was gained. Con-
sidering that the sheep had been on dry pasture for many
months, with hand feeding in progress, and therefore in
only fair condition, the success achieved was remarkable.
Moreover, good prices were realised subsequently at
auction on a weak market.
So consistently has Mr. Laird bred to a true type, at
the same time improving upon it, that it is not surprising
that the general characteristics of the stud are so pro-
A DEPUTATION TO "THE BOSS” ON THE LAMB ENDOWMENT ACT
years, and champion fine wool ewe. It gained second
prize with a pen of five rams to years old, and won
from strong opposition in the strong wool ram section
under two years of age, with a ram that had most beauti-
ful uniformity, his wool being bright, dense and long.
The stud also won the fine wool championship with a
ram under two years, and second prize in the medium
class two years and under three in verv strong competi-
nounced throughout the flock. Great improvements have
been made in recent years in both colour of wool and set
of horns, in the greater depth of body and better sprung
ribs. Ihe thigh has been broadened and the legs short-
ened to perfection, whilst care has been given to a closely
grown even fleece, especially on the back. Buyers who
visit the stud are greatly impressed with the all-round
uniformity shown by the sheep.
7L ILL AN DR A, K K W S 0 U T H If A LK S


A RISING FOUR-TOOTH MEDIUM WOOLLED RAM
A EOLD-FRONTED RAM
EIGHTEEN MONTHS OLD MEDIUM WOOLLED RAM
TYPICAL
MERINO STUD
RAMS AND EWES
BRED AT
WILLANDRA
YOUNG MEDIUM WOOLLED EWES
A FOUR-TOOTH MEDIUM WOOLLED EWE
A FOUR-TOOTH MEDIUM WOOLLED EWE.
RESERVE GRAND CHAMPION, 1927
JV I L L A NDR A, K E W S 0 U Tll IV A LES


In size the rams are very big, but nicely proportioned.
In their splendid heads, open faces, with broad soft silky
noses, strong bone, good feet, great depth through the
lungs, and broad backs, they have a breedy masculine ap-
pearance. The strength of the lower jaw and well-
dilated nostril stamp them as hardy animals. Their fleece
is a soft handling wool of true 60 to 64 quality, opening
up well at all points, and long in staple. These are
general features of the stud rams, whose ability to pass
on their own good qualities has been proved over and over
again.
up many flocks to the greatest commercial value.
In order to raise standards even higher some outside
blood of pure Peppin-Wanganella strain is introduced oc-
casionally. Royal Arthur was purchased from Haddon
Rig in 1921, and Herald or No. 802 was acquired from
the same stud later on. Both rams have been a success,
and much is expected from their progeny.
The annual sale of rams leaves no doubt of the in-
creasing demand for Willandra sires, and amongst buyers
are men from the southern tablelands, South Australia
and overseas.
A CORNER OF THE VEGETABLE
GARDEN AND ORCHARD AT
THE WILLANDRA HOMESTEAD
In many cases rams have measured 6 ft. around the
girth. Goliath, an outstanding sire in this respect,
weighed 240 lbs. off shears when four years of age, the
fleece cutting to 32 lbs. Of beautiful symmetry, he was
broad, long and deep, and he is typical of numerous other
rams at Willandra to-day.
It is probably the nature of the country that gives these
rams such a fillip with Queensland buyers, for there Wil-
landra sires have proved of inestimable worth in building
The company has never sought to make record sales
of high-priced rams. Its policy has been to retain every
sire of outstanding quality with a view to bringing the
influence of these high grade sires into the flock rams.
The benefits of this policy are so generally appreciated by
the company’s customers for flock rams, and it has been
such a prominent factor in increasing the sale of the
latter, that it probably now ranks as the second or third
largest in the sales list in Australia.
JV I L LA X D R A. XE W S O U T H JV A LE S


EXAMPLES OF FORESIGHT AND EFFICIENT MANAGEMENT ON WILLANDRA
Weights cut in 1922 from three show ewes were 16
lbs., 16 lbs., and 15 lbs. respectively, and from the special
studs as follows: —111 special stud ewes to Royal Arthur
averaged 16 lbs. 8 ozs.; 97 special stud ewes to Jellicoe
averaged 15 lbs. 5 ozs.; 84 special stud ewes to Willandra
111. averaged 15 lbs. 1 oz.; 74 special stud ewes to Major
General averaged 16 lbs. 1 oz.; 197 single stud ewes
averaged 14 lbs. 3 ozs.; 91 one-year selected No. 1 ewes
averaged 13 lbs. 9 ozs.; 58 stud ewe hoggets, lOjr months’
wool, averaged 11 lbs.; 72 No. 1 rams averaged 20 lbs.
8 ozs.; 916 No. 2 and 3 all ages averaged 18 lbs. 5 ozs.;
24 two-year-old special rams averaged 21 lbs. 5 ozs.,
and 2640 summer ewe lambs averaged 7 lbs. 5 ozs.
Of exceptional interest are details of three shearings,
indicating as they do the strength of the Willandra coun-
try despite its low rainfall.
Season 1924 ( Rainfall 12.38 inches)
No. 2 Ewes—
-1 year old averaged 13 lbs.
2 years ~ ~ 14 ~ 2 ozs. and lambed 40 p.c.
3 ~ ~ ~ 13 ~ 4 ~ ~ 88 p.c.
4 ~ ~ ~ 12 ~ 12 ~ ~ 66 pc.
5 „ „ „ 13 „ 2 „ „ 82 p.c.
6 ~ „ „ 11 ~ 4 „ „ 77 p.c.
7 ~ ~ ~ 10 ~ 6 ~ ~ 76 p.c.
8 ~ ~ ~ 10 ~ 13 ~ ~ 76 p.c.
9 and aged ~ 9,, 11 ~ ~ 85 p.c.
No. 1 Ewes —
1,2, 3, 4 years averaged 15 lbs. 15 ozs.
5,6, 7, 8' „ „ 13 „ 9 „
Stud Ewes—
-1 year old averaged 13 lbs. 3 ozs.
Aged ~ 13 ~ 12 ~
Season 1925 (Rainfall 14.44 inches)
No. 2 Ewes—
-1 year old averaged 13 lbs. 15 ozs.
2 vears ~ ~ 15 ~ 1 ozs. and lambed 45 p.c.
3 „ „ 14 ~ 0 „ „ 70 pc.
4 „ „ 13 „ 8 „ „ 103 p.c.
5 „ „ 12 „ 10 ~ „ 119 p.c.
6 „ „ ~ 12 „ 0 „ „ 129 p.c.
7 „ 11 „12 „ „ 114 p.c.
8 11 „13 „ „ 109 p.c.
9 ~ ~ „ 10 ~ 5 ~ ~117 p.c.
Aged ~ 11 ~ 4 ~ 90 p.c.
No. 1 Ewes—
-1 and 2 years ~ 15 ~ 0 ~ ~ 40 p.c.
3-6 ~ ~ 13 ~ 9 ~ ~ 114 p.c.
7-9 „ „ 12 „13 „ „ 129 p.c.
Stud Ewes—
-1 year old averaged 16 lbs.
Aged ~ 14 ~ 15 ozs. and lambed 75 p.c.
Season 1926 (Rainfall 10.49 inches)
No. 2 Ewes—
-1 year old averaged 12 lbs. 10 ozs.
2 years ~ ~ 13 ~ 8 ozs. and lambed 74 p.c.
3 „ „ 12 „ 0 „ „ 74 p.c.
4 „ „ „ 11 „ 7 „ „ 74 p.c.
5,6, and 7—away on agistment.
8 vears old averaged 10 lbs. 12 ozs. and lambed 86 p.c.
9 „ „ „ 9 „ 2 „ „ 77 p.c.
Aged ~ 9 ~ 0 ~ ~ 75 p.c.
No. 1 Ewes —
1 year old averaged 12 lbs. 10 ozs.
8,9, 10 years „ 11 „ 0 „ „ 77p.c.
Stud Ewes —
1 year old averaged 16 lbs. 8 ozs.
2 years „ „ 18 „ 8 „
WI L LA NDR A, NE W S OUT II IV A LE S


Since October 1926 the sheep have been on dry feed
with general hand-feeding. Nevertheless they looked
well in the autumn of 1927, which will have been a bad
year all round owing to the absence of rains.
The value of Willandra sheep is still further enhanced
by the performance in 1925, when 89,832 sheep were
shorn to an average cut of 13 lbs. 12 ozs. for all grown
sheep. Contrasting with this, and showing the improve-
ment made in the flock, was the average of 12 lbs. 8 ozs.
in 1911 from fewer sheep.
Included with 1926 shearing figures were 150 4-tooth
stud ewes, which averaged 18.45 lbs.; 44 pedigree ewes,
which averaged 18.48 lbs.; and 118 special studs, which
averaged 18.62 lbs. All these were dropped in 1924,
and the results probably are a record.
In conclusion, it is common knowledge that the owners
of Willandra have been identified with the development
of very large pastoral areas in the eastern States of Aus-
tralia, and it is generally recognised that their properties
are among the most highly improved pastoral propositions
in Australia. It would be hard to find a better illustra-
tion of this progressive policy than Willandra itself, man-
aged, as already stated, by Mr. Frank Laird, who was
born in Victoria in 1873 at Mt. Fyans Station, which his
father managed for the late Mr. W. B. Cumming. On
leaving school he gained experience on Katnook and Glen-
coe Stations in South Australia under his father’s tuition.
Later on he rose to overseer and manager, and after farm-
ing on his own for a time entered the most important
phase of his life at Willandra in 1906. Mr. Laird is an
ardent sportsman, a keen rider even now, and breeds a
few good picnic racehorses. His family consists of two
daughters and one son.
MR. FRANK LAIRD, THE MANAGER OF WILLANDRA
STUD RAMS ON THE BILLABONG
ir ILL AXD R A, XE W SOU TII JV A LE S


SPRINGFIELD, GOULBURN, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Property of A. Lucian Faithfull, Esq.
SITUATED in the Goulburn district of New South
Wales, twelve miles south of the town, along the
road to the Federal capital, lies the Springfield
homestead. It is an historic mansion nearlv 90 years
old, and at the present time it is occupied by Miss
Faithfull, while Mr. Augustus Lucian Faithfull, the
owner of the Springfield Estate, and of its pure Merino
stud flock, resides in a more modern house nearby. Both
homesteads rest in the shelter of a young forest of trees,
planted when but a shanty stood there to testify to the
and gum trees. The effects of improvements are evident
in the fact that it might well be said that on Springfield
there is nothing further to be done in the way of improve-
ments to the lands, for they are at their zenith of pro-
ductivity and they are being kept so.
The pure Merino stud was founded in the year 1838
by the late Mr. W. P. Faithfull. Its inception was
marked by the purchase of ten selected rams from the
late Sir William Macarthur, of Camden Pqrk, and ewes
from the stud of the late Mr. Hassell and the Winton
SPRINGFIELD HOUSE, THE HOME OF MISS FAITH FULL
pioneering influence of the late Mr. W. P. Faithfull,
who took up the property in 1827.
Springfield to-day covers an area of 14,000 acres of
well improved freehold grazing lands, and an abundance
of nutritious herbs and grasses covers the undulating
country. There is no lack of water and there are no
rabbits, whilst many miles of the best quality wire net-
ting fences separate the subdivisions into which the hold-
ing has been laid out. Running up from the rolling
stretches are ridges and hills covered nicely with box
stud in Tasmania. From the very first lambing Mr. W.
P. Faithfull laid down a policy of classing the young
sheep. Such classing and culling of the flocks in those
days was thought by many to be superfluous. The
methods of others, however, were not the methods of this
breeder, who set out to improve his sheep year by year.
In this connection an annual purchase of rams was made
from the studs of such renowned breeders as the late
Mr. George Cox, the late Mr. Edward K. Cox, the late
Mr. James Riley, and the late Mr. X. P. Bavlv.


1 he sheep have been bred pure for close on a century,
and as would follow naturally under the care exercised
by their breeder, the type has evolved itself through
several marked changes into the splendid sheep bred on
the estate to-day. I hey possess big frames and hardy
constitutions, are noted for their high cutting value per
fleece, have a good tip, and what is also important, thrive
well in the dry
- open plains coun-
try out west and
wherever else
they may go. The
present owner of
Springfield first
undertook the ac-
tive management
of the flocks in
the year 1871.
He had already
studied the breed-
ing of Merino
stud sheep in a
practical manner
under the wing
of one of the best
Merino sheep
judges then in
the land, the late Air. Richard Cox. Therefore he was
able to concentrate upon the achievement of two main
objectives from the moment he took up his duties, the
purposes being to breed a pure stud flock of the highest
class of Merino sheep, and also a pure stud flock of a
stronger woolled type of Merino.
To obtain the first of these distinct characteristics he
PINEA COTTAGE, THE HOME OF THE MANAGER, MR. W. A. HARRIS,
AT SPRINGFIELD
began with a selected Hock of 63 ewes. These were
drawn carefully from a Hock of 4500 ewes then on
Springfield. For the stronger woolled class a batch of
82 ewes was picked out of the general flock. Two
classes of wool and those two flocks have been carried
along the two distinct lines through to the present day.
The first lot, that comprising the 63 ewes, was mated
in the following
season with a
two-year-old ram
bred by the late
Hon. E. King
Cox. The ram,
No. 43, sired by
a Prussian Sile-
sian, was bought
by Mr. Cox as
a hogget from
Rawden in 1870.
Ihe female get
of ram No. 43
were mated in
1872-73 season
with a Lue ram,
which Mr. James
Riley sold to
Springfield. The
same ewes were mated in the season 1875, three years
later, to a ram bred by Mr. E. S. Antill, No. 01. The
dam of 01 was a pure Bayly ewe, and the sire was a St.
Johnstone (Tas.) ram, which cost Mr. Antill £lO5 at
Sydney sales.
It may be said here that the Springfield extra stud
flock now comprises 1281 ewes of the highest class of
SPRINGFIELD COTTAGE, THE RESIDENCE OF MR. A. L. FAITHFULL
SERIN GFI EL D , A' E W SOU T 11 WAL E S


PORTION OF THE EXTENSIVE GARDEN AT SPRINGFIELD
AND A VIEW OF THE PARK-LIKE COUNTRY, SURROUNDING
THE HOMESTEAD, IN THE DISTANCE
SPRI N G P I ELD, NE W SOU T II W A EES


wool, with relatively heavy fleeces, and 2255 ewes of
stronger woolled type and bigger frame.
In 1877 an important addition to the extra stud flock
was made by the purchase in Melbourne at auction of
20 stud ewes bred by Mr. David Taylor, of the St.
Johnstone stud, I asmania. Another important Tas-
manian purchase was made by Mr. A. Lucian Faithfull
the same year. This was the introduction of 20 stud
rams from Belle Vue, Scone, Mr. W. H. Gibson, and
Mr. H. Gatenb\ r . Iwo of the rams were used in the
first extra stud ewes, three were sold, and the remaining
fifteen were used with the second stud flock.
I he year 1879 saw the acquisition of the stud ram
Duke of Richmond, a long stapled, high qualitied woolled
ram, bred by a Mr. Foosey, of Tasmania, and bought by
Mr. Archer, and then resold to Messrs. W. Gibson and
Son, of Scone, from whom Mr. Faithfull made his
purchase. Duke of Richmond was placed second for
champion cup, Tasmania, and specially recommended
for his great length of staple, quality and quantity of
wool.
Duke of Richmond was the sole ram to come into
Springfield extra stud flock from the stud of W. Gibson
and Son that was not bred by them. Ever since 1879
the rams bred by these people have been used in the extra
stud flock. From this source also, in 1881, came that
magnificent sire Grand Prince. This ram was champion
at Goulburn in 1882, and then sold by auction to Mr.
R. C. Cooper for 490 guineas.
There was still another importation from Scone in
1883. Two high-class sires, Royal Duke 3rd and Prince
Victor, were purchased for the sum of 325 guineas and
225 guineas respectively.
'The heavier stronger woolled flock were mated in
1872 to ram No. 32, bred by the late Hon. E. King
Cox. He was a ram showing a stronger type of wool
than the ram No. 43, which was put in the first and
smaller flock. No. 32 was, nevertheless, of the same
breeding. In the year 1874 a son of No. 32 was used,
and in 1877 a St. Johnstone ram employed. This
last ram was the noted Trojan No. 5, which possessed
the largest frame and heaviest fleece of any Tasmanian
ram that year. His fleece turned the scales for three
years with the following weights, 16£ lbs., 16J lbs., and
1 7J- lbs., a splendid result from twelve months’ growth,
besides which he was grass fed in the open and used
largely in the stud. Sons of Trojan No. 5 were used in the
strong woolled stud in the years 1879, 1880, 1881, 1882
and 1883. Sons of Grand Prince were used in this stud
in the years 1884 to 1889 inclusive. Sons of Royal Duke
3rd and sons of Grand Prince were used in 1885 in
both the finer woolled class or extra stud flock and the
stronger woolled stud flock with extraordinary success.
An experiment was tried in 1885 which turned out
remarkably well. A ram from the estate of Mr. F.
Bullard, Yolo County, California, named San Joachim,
was introduced to the stud flock ewes. Sons and grand-
sons were then used for a very long time in the first stud.
The old sire carried a very heavy fleece of bright lustrous
wool, of good length and entirely free from kemp or hair
—his twelve months’ fleece weighed 264 lbs. Some
specimens of wool from progeny rams of San Joachim
were sent to Mr. A. Hawkesworth, then sheep and wool
instructor at the Sydney Technical College, and he
reported most favourably on the type, conformation and
colour of the fleeces of both of the rams, Premier No. 1
and Premier No. 2. The ram Premier No. 2 was used
with the first stud flock, and has sired some splendid
progeny. Sons of Premier No. 1 and Premier No. 2
were used also in the strong wool stud.
The Scone stud blood, of course, has been kept on
with the extra stud flock bred from original St. Johnstone
ewes, which were subsequently mated with Consul, by
Royal Duke 3rd out of a dam by Grand Prince. Consul
was a Springfield-bred ram.
Since the year 1893 no sheep from Springfield have been
exhibited. Mr. Lucian Faithfull thought the time could
be put to better use than in the extensive preparation
required for show, although prior to the year mentioned
he, and his father before him, had actually entered into
this phase. Amongst other awards secured by the stud
have been these:—Six firsts for wool at Sydney Metro-
politan Agricultural Society, N.S.W. Two seconds at
the A.S.N.S.W., and an honourable at Paris Exhibition
of 1878 for wool. Certificate of merit at Goldsbrough
Exhibition o f M erino wool, 1878, for the most valuable
fifty fleeces. Fifty-two first prizes and championships,
fifteen seconds and twenty specials were won by these
sheep at the Wagga Wagga Show, one of the principal
sheep shows in New South Wales then, between the
years 1882 and 1893.
Combined with the reason already given for ceasing to
show his sheep, Mr. faithfull was not a follower of the
fashion for wrinkly sheep, which at that time was coming
into vogue amongst some breeders. His own full grown
sheep certainly had their share of wrinkles and folds, but
nowhere else but on their heavv necks. His rams were
strong and thoroughly masculine in their constitution.
Having set his preference for this type he has bred it
consistently throughout the 55 years, 1871 to 1926.
In regard to sales it is impossible to note every year’s
average, but a record of the stud sale held at Goulburn
in the year 1882 mentions the following:—Springfield
ewe, 3 years, 80 guineas; ditto, 3 years, 90 guineas;
ditto, 2 years, 60 guineas; ditto, 10 months, 30 guineas;
ditto (five), 2 years, 15 guineas; ditto (five), 2 years,
SPRIN G F I K L 1). NE JV S OUT II WAL E S


10 guineas; ditto (five), 2 years, 5 guineas; Springfield
ram, Grand Prince, 490 guineas.
It is also of interest to include the undernoted sales of
extra stud rams at stud sales and privately between 1882
and 1890 :
1882 (privately)—Victor
Grand Prince, to Air. H.
Edwards, Bibbenluke, 200
guineas. 1884 Sydney
stud sales, Lustre Prince, to
Mr. J. L. Clough, 105
guineas; Royal Prince, ditto,
75 guineas; Lustre, 70
guineas; No. 3, 71 guineas;
9 rams averaged £55 Is. 4d.
1885 —Sydney stud sales,
Lustre Grand Prince, to
Mr. C. Coulter, N.Z., 262
guineas; Silky Lustre Prince,
65 guineas; Warrior, 55
guineas. 1886 —Sydney stud
sales, Grand Prince 2nd, to
Alessrs. Kent and Wein-
holt, 121 guineas; the eight rams averaged £43 6s. 3d.;
privately, Remus, to Air. E. K. Grace, 100 guineas.
1887—Sydney stud sales, No. 1 Lustre Royal Duke,
75 guineas; No. 01 Density, 70 guineas: the ten rams
averaged £25 16s. 1888 —Eleven sheep averaged £44 9s.
1889 Sydney
stud sales, Grand
Prince 4th, to
Air. H. E. Kater,
100 guineas. 1889
—Wagga Wagga
show, 1 ram, 76
guineas; 7 rams
averaged £36 9s.
1890-—Privately,
one ram to Mr.
F. Campbell,
£5O; at Sydney
stud sales, No. 1
Grand Prince
3rd, 60 guineas.
It has always
been Air. Faith-
full’s practice to
cull the flock
rams, which are to be offered for sale, twice. Each year
Hock rams are sold at good prices ranging from 3 guineas
upwards. Ihe double culling before they are offered for
sale enables those rams which are not up to a certain
standard to be rejected and put aside.
TYPICAL STUD MERINO SIRES BRED AT SPRINGFIELD
SPRINGFIELD-BRED STUD MERINO EWES
During the terrible drought experienced in 1899 the
Springfield sheep cut an average of 9 lbs. 14J ozs. net,
the money value per sheep being 11s. IJd. There were:
—2991 ewes, 4 to 8 years, and rearing lambs; 1060 ewes,
2 years old; 1967 ewe and wether hoggets, 13 months;
1901 wethers, 2 and 3 years;
and 223 rams, 13 months to
7 years, making a total of
8142 sheep.
Wool from the clip that
season, 1899, realised 164 d.
per lb. The average price
per lb. for fleeces, bellies,
skirtings, &c., was more than
13Jd. per lb. Considering
the conditions ruling and
the state of that year’s mar-
ket, these figures reflect
great stamina in the sheep,
and splendid breeding. The
wool from sheep sired by
Springfield rams has topped
the Sydney market fre-
quently, viz., A. Dalglish, Pomeroy, Lerida, Raeburn,
and many others.
Reverting to the sale of rams from the estate, a list of
disposals in recent times gives an insight into the class of
flocks to which the rams are consigned : —Leo 1 . W atson,
1 stud ram at
100 guineas, 2 at
50 guineas, 1 at
25 guineas, 120
selecteds at 7
guineas, and 100
flocks at 5
guineas; W.
Lamb, 1 stud ram
at 150 guineas;
M. P. A. Jamie-
son, 1 stud at 50
guineas, and 2 at
25 guineas; J. R.
Hall, 8 selecteds
at 15 guineas; G.
George, 2 studs
at 25 guineas, 2
selecteds at 10
guineas; H.
Stevenson, 20 selecteds at 10 guineas, 1 at 15 guineas,
and 1 selected at 20 guineas; A. A. Dalglish, 32 selecteds
at 10 guineas; R. H. Mackenzie, 20 at 10 guineas; W.
S. Hayes, 25 at 10 guineas; Geo. Kensit, 12 at 10
guineas; Fred Kensit, 20 at 10 guineas; S. Selmes, 10 at
.S’ PRIN G r IE LI ) , NE W SOU T H IV AE E S


A STUD MERINO
EWE BRED AT
SPRINGFIELD
10 guineas; C. M. Williams, 10 at 10 guineas; F. Gray,
4 at 10 guineas; J. E. G. Chisholm, 35 at 7 guineas;
Lerida Station, 40 at 7 guineas; W. Clements, 8 at 7
guineas; Laverty Bros., 6 at 7 guineas; Dr. Burkett, 10
at 7 guineas; Mr. Sutherland, 12 at 6 guineas; Invera-
lochy Station, 20 at 5 guineas; Id. Dunn, 2 stud rams at
50 guineas, and 10 selecteds at 10 guineas. Nearly 800
rams were consigned to the far western, northern and
southern districts of New South Wales, also to Queens-
land and to Victoria during the first eight months of the
year 1922.
One of the best sales of recent years was that of Grand
Commercial (by Commercial Junior, sire Commercial by
Admiral), to Mr. FI. Stevenson, of Gungewalla, Bur-
rowa, for £525, when 2 years old. Commercial Junior
has been a most prepotent sire, throwing into his stock
all his own good qualities, which are now being trans-
mitted by his sons, the chief characteristics being great
size of carcase, combined with a long fairly strong wool,
free from roughness, with decided character, evenness,
and softness.
It is significant to add that ever since 1888 only the
rams bred within the stud flocks have been put to the
special stud ewes. An experiment was conducted about
15 years ago with a ram bred at Murgha, N.S.W. This
ram was tried out with a few ewes, and the small flock
has been kept separate. It will he kept so until Mr.
Faithfull determines what degree of success the progeny
of this strain have in the 4th generation with the general
flock and the quality of wool grown.
The sires that have been used with the Springfield
Merinos since the year 1877 have been;—lB77—Noble,
bred by the late W. Gibson, of Scone, Tas.; 1879—Duke
of Richmond; 1882—Grand Prince; 1883 —Royal Duke
Third; 1884 —Sons of Grand Prince; 1885—Sons of
Big Grand Prince; 1886—Sons of Remus Royal Duke;
1887—Sons of Remus; 1888—San Joachim; 1889, 1890,
1891 —Sons of San Joachim and Royal Duke Third;
1891—Premier No. 1, Premier No. 2; 1892, 1893, 1894
—The General, Premier Ist and 2nd; 1895, 1896, 1897
—Field Marshal, son of Royal Duke Third; 1900—Sons
of Ihe General; 1908 —Admiral, sire The General,
Woolly Legs, Coronation; 1912 —Commercial, by
Admiral; 1915—Field Marshal, Jun., Commercial; 1919
—Centennial, Commercial Junior, Brigadier, Comet;
1922—Commander, Commodore, Commercial, Commer-
cial Senior; 1926—Commercial Junior (5 years old in
1924 and cut 31 lbs. 4 ozs. of wool) ; sons of Commercial
Junior and Commercial Senior.
For several years the Springfield fleeces were sub-
mitted to the Sheep and Wool Department of the Sydney
Technical College for examination, and the following
SPRIN GE IE LD, NE W SOU T II IV ALES


STUD MERINO RAM, COMMERCIAL JUNIOR
SECUNDUS, SIRE COMMERCIAL JUNIOR, BRED
BY MR. A. L. FAITH FULL AT SPRINGFIELD
STUD MERINO RAM, COMMERCIAL JUNIOR, BRED BY MR.
A. L. FAITHFULL. WEIGHT OF FLEECE IN 1924, 31 LBS.
4 OZS. SIRE OF GRAND COMMERCIAL SOLD AT TWO YEARS
OLD FOR £525 TO MR. H. STEVENSON, GUNGEWALLA,
BURROWA, N.S.W.
SPRING FI E L I). NE W SOU T 11 WAL E S


are extracts from the Lecturer’s-in-charge report dated
29th November, 1922: —
“Special Stud Ram Phenomenal. —This wool is an
excellent type of Merino combing. It is remarkable for
its great length, character and purity of colour. 'The
general texture leaves nothing to be desired from a
manufacturer’s point of view. The staple formation is
very well developed, with the full-bodied, compact build
typical of a robust, masculine sire. The wool of the
skirtings or points is of a very high standard, resulting
in singular evenness. The belly wool exhibits, to a
marked degree, the outstanding characteristics of the
whole fleece. Another noticeable feature is the quality
of the back wool. This compares well with the length
and general quality of the remainder of the body wool,
and with such phenomenal length some variation might
have been expected here. The wool from the apron,
throat, head and thighs exhibits a very high standard
of quality, and is free from any trace of gare or kemp.
The whole fleece is well nourished and yet is very free
from surplus yolk. It embraces all the valuable manu-
facturing properties for a wool of its type. The spinning
quality ranges from 64’s to 60’s.”
“Special Stud Ram Centennial. —This is a magnifi-
cent fleece of ram’s wool. It is, to my mind, one of the
best I have yet handled. The wool is finer than that
from Phenomenal. The character and high quality im-
mediately impresses one with its high breeding charac-
teristics. 'The quality is superb. It is, in short, a wool
possessing all the best qualities of a very high-grade
M erino developed to a remarkable degree. The staple
formation is beautifully even, distinct and compact
throughout, whilst the crimp and quality is splendidly
maintained throughout the entire length of staple. The
wool is richer in condition than Phenomenal, yet is quite
normal in supply. There is a very pleasing absence of
perished tip, and, for a five-year-old ram, and unhoused,
the staples show great freedom of growth and are wonder-
fully well preserved. The elasticity and tensile strength
of the fibres is of a very high quality. 'The colour and
texture is unusually good, and sufficient to satisfy the
most particular of users in this respect. The whole fleece
is very uniform, even the shankings and topknot giving no
evidence of the presence of any but true wool fibres.
This, combined with the other high qualities, is con-
ducive to the very best manufacturing results. The out-
standing features of the fleece are its good combing
length, remarkable character, softness, uniformity, and
dense compact growth. The belly wool, like the wool of
the other extremities, is of a very high standard, and
abundant enough to indicate that this part was well
covered. The quality of this wool ranges from 66’s to
70’s.”
“General Remarks. —1 have also examined the wool
taken from the predecessors of these sheep in 1892, and
find that the present day product reveals very great im-
provement in almost all features, but more noticeably in
length and general vigour. The 1922 fleeces show a more
regular, compact, and better defined staple formation.
Phenomenal’s wool indicates clearly the inherent like-
ness to the general character of the 1892 wools, but
Centennial’s wool is much more dense, compact, and truer
in build and general structure. It is also more stylish
and shows more breeding with excellence in all qualities.
The comparison of these wools provides a very interesting
object lesson in high-class Merino sheep-breeding and
wool production, and more especially as the very marked
improvement has been brought about from “within.”
These wools reveal qualities that command the greatest
amount of admiration from manufacturers because of
their very high spinning and yielding capacities. This is
in marked contrast to the rather too prevalent tendency to
subordinate true M erino qualities to heavy and bulky
wool production.”
On the 24th of November, 1924, the College again
made a favourable report on the Springfield fleeces, which
was as follows: —“Ram’s Fleece, A4.—This is a most
remarkable fleece. It is a magnificent specimen of a
pure Merino ram’s wool. The length and body of the
staple is exceptionally good. The character of the wool
leaves nothing to be desired. Indeed, in my opinion,
the character and breeding combined with its colour and
robustness are the outstanding features of this wool.
These features are all the more remarkable because the
whole fleece consists of typical wool fibres. There is a
noteworthy absence of any suggestion of that roughness
so prevalent with robust wools. The character and colour
is excellent. The crimpy formation is most even and
pronounced throughout the whole fleece. The silvery
brightness of the wool not only adds to the high develop-
ment of character, but gives the fleece a most attractive
appearance. It is not often one meets such high colour
in a Merino ram’s wool. This is certainly a very valuable
asset, for colour is one of the most essential qualities in
the make-up of a truly high class wool. The quality is
very even throughout. Whilst the shoulder and the bulk
of the fleece is a super 60’s count, it is difficult to find any-
thing lower excepting the extreme britch and on the neck.
Even here the quality is comparatively high, of good
character and an average 60’s. The belly wool is
abundant, of good length and showing high quality.
The fleece is well nourished, but there is no excess of
.S' PR IN GFI EL D, NE W SOU T II WAL E S


STUD MERINO RAM, ADMIRAL (1912),
GRANDSIRE OF COMMERCIAL JUNIOR.
BRED BY MR. A. L. FAITH FULL, CUT
29 LBS. 4 OZS. OF WOOL FOR TWELVE
MONTHS' GROWTH
SPRINGFIELD STUD MERINO RAM, IMPERIAL. SIRE,
COMMERCIAL JUNIOR. BRED BY MR. A. L. FAITHFULL
SrR I N G /■' lEL D, NE IV SOUTH IV AE E S


THE SPRINGFIELD COACH HOUSE, HARNESS ROOM AND STABLES
yolk. 1 he latter is clear and fluent. The wool indicates
that the animal is well covered throughout and is a
prolific wool-producer.”
“Ram’s Fleece, As.—This is also a magnificent fleece,
showing a wonderful length of staple and development
of quality. It is finer than the wool of A 4. The quality
in this case will range from 64’s to super 60’s. The
bulk quality is 64’s. The wool handles very soft and
pliable, and is also very even throughout the fleece.
Although finer the wool nevertheless shows plenty of
vigour and robustness —not to the same degree as A 4,
but still it is full of masculinity. The character and
texture is of a very high standard. The wool is richer,
that is, shows rather more yolk. This, however, is not
at all excessive, and it is of the right quality, viz., clear
and fluent. The great length, softness, and compactness
of staple are the outstanding features of this wool. The
colour is very good but hardly equal to A 4. This, too,
is an ideal type of Merino sire’s wool. It possesses all
the necessary qualities for improving the present-day tvpe
of M enno wool in some of the most essential manufactur-
ing qualities. It has length, body, and abundance, well
balanced with high quality. The wool from the belly
and points is exceptionally good in all respects.”
‘‘Ewe’s Heece.—This is a superb fleece. Without
detracting in any way from the quality of the rams’
fleeces, I must admit that I hnd it difficult to adequately
describe this wool. It seems as near perfection in all
respects as one could expect. Indeed it is beyond me to
detect any blemish. Ihe length of staple is phenomenal.
Notwithstanding the extraordinary length, the body and
substance of the wool is quite in keeping. The character
is beautiful. The crimps are not only well defined
throughout the entire length of staple, but they are most
even in formation. The fleece is remarkably even in all
i espects throughout. It is a super 64’s. Even the ex-
■S’ PR IN GPIE L D , NE W SOU T II IV A EES


A PERMANENT WATER HOLE NEAR
THE SPRINGFIELD HOMESTEAD.
THE SOURCE OF KNOWLEDGE FOR
MANY A SOUTHERN TABLELANDER.
THE SCHOOL AT SPRINGFIELD
.V PRINGP 1 A L D. NA U' SOU T H IF AL A S


treme britch reveals wool of very high quality. The
texture is excellent. The wool handles full and soft.
1 he colour is also extremely good. This wool certainly
embodies all the most desirable manufacturing properties
of high-grade Merino wool, which are still further
enhanced by the great draught and freedom of growth.
1 he supply of yolk is no more than is really necessary,
and consequently the proportion of pure wool is very high.
The belly wool here is wonderful, the length, character
and compactness being exceptionally good. No doubt
the growth of wool on this part of the body is unusually
good.”
"General Remarks. —After examining these fleeces I
am more than convinced that the high standard of quality
attained merits some special recognition. I am sure you
have adopted the right action in deciding to establish this
as a special strain. To my mind A 4, judging bv his
wool, is quite an exceptional sheep. He seems not only
to have inherited all the good qualities of his progenitor,
but has developed them to a higher degree of excellence.
His quality combined with the wonderful amount of
robustness and masculinity should enable him to still
further add to the lustre of this excellent family. A 5
is also a magnificent fleece, whilst that from the ewe is
undoubtedly the best ewe’s fleece that 1 have yet handled.
Judging by the wool produced by the three sheep,
Phenomenal possesses all the attributes of those highly
successful rams that occur at only rare occasions. In
addition to his splendid qualities he must be remarkably
prepotent. Such are the characteristics necessary for lay-
ing the foundation of a noteworthy strain.”
Mr. Augustus Lucian Faithfull is the youngest son of
the late Mr. W. P. Faithfull. Fie was born at Spring-
field in 1855, and received his education at the Sydney
Grammar School. On leaving school he went to
Rawden, Mudgee, the property of Mr. Richard Cox, and
under the expert supervision of this first-class sheepman,
gained much of the knowledge which he applied later
with so much success to the stud sheep at Springfield.
Mr. F aithfull returned to Springfield in 1871, and took
over the management of the stud flock. At the time of
his father's death in 1896 the whole of Springfield estate
came into his possession.
He married in 1895 Ethel, the daughter of the late
Mr. R. C. Joplin, manager of the Commercial Bank,
Goulburn, there being three daughters of the marriage.
SPRIX G E I E L I), XE IV S()U T II IVA LE S


CARWOOLA, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of James Frederick Maslin
CARWOOLA Station, comprising 28.000 acres of
freehold grazing lands, and stocked with 25,000
purebred Merino sheep, is the property of Mr.
James Frederick Maslin.
The property is situated in the Queanbeyan district of
New South Wales, close to the Federal Territory, and
some thirteen miles from the townships of both Bungen-
dore and Queanbeyan.
which he sought for the purpose of establishing a stud
property. Accordingly the estate, comprising 40,000
acres and carrying 12,000 sheep, passed into his hands
in 1907.
Carwoola to-day reveals well timbered rises and
stretches of rolling downs, with especially rich river flats.
The soil in the latter is of a sandy nature, whilst that
on the ridges and downs is a light loam. The w'hole of
BLACK POLLED COWS AND CALVES ON CARWOOLA
Originally Carwoola belonged to the late Mr. 1 homas
Rutledge, who took up the holding away back in the
forties. Mr. Rutledge showed his keen judgment in
choosing this expanse of well grassed undulating country,
set off with an occasional range of hills, upon which to
build up his flocks and his fortunes, for to-day these
lands are very valuable both for fattening stock and for
woolgrowing.
When Mr. Alaslin paid a visit to New' South
Wales from South Australia about twenty years ago, he
found upon Carwoola the climate and the conditions for
the lands are heavily coated with rich pasture, such as
trefoil, rye grass and white top. The trees are prin-
cipally red and white gum, yellow box, peppermint and
red box.
There is an abundance of water in every one of the 32
grazing paddocks into which the property has been care-
fully subdivided by the present owner. This water is
natural, being derived from the Molonglo and numerous
running creeks, which wind their respective ways through
many parts of the estate, and are therefore of inestimable
value to the safe watering of the sheep and cattle. He


sides this adequate supply the property lies in the 25-in.
rainfall belt.
I he homestead is a comfortable two-storied stone build-
ing situated in a position commanding a wonderful view
of rolling pasture lands flanked by a wooded ridge. The
house has 16 rooms in the main building, including a
magnificent billiard room. Every modern innovation
that creates the homely atmosphere of comfort is em-
braced in the equipment of the homestead. Wireless
enables the broadcasting of market reports from Adelaide,
Alelbourne, Brisbane and Sydney to be heard promptly
as required, as well as providing an extra medium for
satisfying the musical taste prevailing at the moment.
the bunya bunya, fir cone, &c.
The improvements undertaken during the past nine-
teen years have been many, the objective set out for by
Air. Alaslin when taking over the lands being, firstly, to
get the maximum productivity out of the natural grasses,
and secondly, to ensure the progress of a large line of
stud and flock Alerino sheep, besides other important
stock. The paddocks have been suitably netted, and
this has been followed up by unrelenting warfare against
the rabbit pest, the method of eradication being to dig out
and hunt with dogs. The costly work involved in ring-
barking, clearing, picking up and burning off has been
more than amply justified, for the carrying capacity of
A CORNER OF THE MODERN WOOL SHED WITH EWES AND LAMBS READY FOR SHEARING
All outbuildings on the estate that are important are
connected to the homestead by telephone. The lighting
is obtained from a home plant, which generates sufficient
voltage to drive varied electric machinery for household
use. The service of hot and cold water has not been
overlooked, nor the efficient sewerage system, all of which
combine to produce a high standard of comfort. Out-
side the home one finds pretty gardens laid out in striking
formation, above which tower beautiful English trees, in-
cluding the elm, oak, and many other grand old trees,
the country has been increased to practically one sheep
to the acre, a fact which stands in bold contrast to the
productivity of twenty years ago.
Aiming to secure high quality wool primarily, Air.
Alaslin brought with him to Carwoola from his late
South Australian property, Bundaleer, 2000 specially
selected stud Alerino ewes. The existing flock is all of
South Australian blood, and has been kept pure for the
last 20 years by the use of his own station-bred rams.
The stud now is quite famous for the type of sheep
CAR IV O O LA, NE W SOU TII IV A LES


STUD MERINO EWES AND
LAMBS ON RICH PASTURES
IN A PICTURESQUE CORNER
OF THE CARWOOLA ESTATE
(' A R /VO OL A , A' KIV S()U T 11 IV AL E S


BIG FRAMED
STRONG CON-
STITUTIONED
CARWOOLA
STUD MERINO
EWES
and quality of wool produced. The sheep themselves
are healthy, vigorous, large bodied and strongly sup-
ported, well grown, and having a nice open clean face,
with very strong constitutions. They are heavy cutters,
the wool being invariably bright and robust, broad in
character and showing an excellent long staple, in which
the crimp is well defined. Naturally this wool is bought
eagerly at the Sydney sales. The clip in 1923 was re-
presented by a total of over 400 bales, out of which nearly
250 bales of fleece wool averaged 35.42 d. per lb., or about
£44 per bale, over 140 bales of skirtings realising an
average return of 26.2 d., or £39 10s. per bale, and some
20 bales of lambs’ wool averaged 15.1 Id. per lb., or £2l
11s. Bd. per bale. 1 his clip was sold in January, and
shows the importance attached by buyers to the Carwoola
wool. It may be added, too, that for that season 15,821
grown sheep cut 386 bales of wool averaging per bale
£42 ss. 7d., and £1 Is. per sheep, and 5177 lambs cut
18 bales of wool averaging £2l 11s. per bale, and
per lamb an average of Is. 6d.
The following season 582 bales of wool went down to
Sydney, embodying 23 bales lambs, 236 bales skirts, and
323 bales fleeces, cut from 17,710 grown sheep and 5053
lambs. The lambs cut 23 bales and the sheep 559 bales,
and whilst the 1924 season marked a decline in the wool
market generally, the fine returns of £25 Bs. 6d. and £l4
19s. 6d. were realised on an average per bale for sheep
and lambs’ wool respectively. The top price obtained
by Mr. Maslin for fleece wool was 24Jd. per lb., for the
greasy AAA wethers, whilst the average was 21.78 d. per
lb. Skirts averaged 15.37 d., and lambs per lb.
I he clip was sold in July and August 1925.
The same consistency was shown in the 1925 clip, sold
at the Wool Exchange, Sydney, on 21st April, 1926.
Buyers from England, the Continent, Japan and America
were competing heavily for the good clips, showing a
preference for good quality wool of long staple that will
spin high quality tops. Nearly 600 bales were sold from
Carwoola, the top price for fleeces being 244 d. again, but
this time for the greasy super combing ewe hoggets. The
average, however, was slightly lower than for the pre-
vious season, viz., 21.58 d. per lb. Skirtings and lambs
were also a little lower, the former averaging 15.33 d.,
and the latter 9.58 d. per lb. To give an idea of the
high standard maintained over a period of years, the
average price secured for the 1916 clip was 28W., and
for the 1917, 1918, 1919, 1920 and 1921 clips" it was
24d.
A feature of the property is the modern wool shed
which was erected to the design of Mr. Maslin. Shelter
has been provided for a large number of “woollies,” be-
sides having the facilities for handling large flocks of
sheep and lambs quickly. There are 15 stands of
Wolseley machines. Shearing usually is carried out dur-
ing the early part of November.
With regard to lambing, which takes place as a rule
during August and September, stud ewes, including
maiden ewes, in 1926 marked up to 94 per cent, lambs,
" ith an average of 80 per cent. A general average is
in the vicinity of 85 to 90 per cent, of lambs. The
CARIFO 0 L A, XE IF SOU T II IF AL E S


MERINO EWES AND LAMBS IN
THE CARWOOLA WOOLSHED
YARDS, WITH A GLIMPSE OF
THE COUNTRY BEYOND
CAR W O OLA, NE W SOU TII W ALES


A LOAD OF CARWOOLA
WOOL READY FOR THE
ROAD EN ROUTE TO
THE SYDNEY MARKET
THE SHEARING MUSTER
ON A WELL GRASSED
STRETCH OF THE
TIMBERED RISES ON
CARWOOLA
CA R ll' oOL A, NE W SOU7’ II WAL E S


AT WORK ON THE
SHEARING BOARD WITH
ITS FIFTEEN STANDS
OF MACHINES
THE HIGH-GRADE CAR-
WOOL A CLIP IN ITS
NEXT STAGE AT THE
CLASSING AND WOOL
ROLLING TABLES
THE WOOL PRESS,
THE LAST STAGE
BEFORE THE WOOL
LEAVES FOR MARKET
cARIFO O L A , NE W S()U T II WAL E S


number of breeding ewes carried on the estate at present
is just under 6000.
Mr. J. F. Maslin was born at Barunga, South Aus-
tralia, and was the youngest of five sons. At an early
age he went to the Prince Alfred College at Adelaide,
and left there subsequently to take up the study of sheep-
breeding on his father’s property. In due course he
shared in the management of that important station with
his father, but towards the year 1912 conditions in that
part of South Australia induced him to dispose of his
interests in Bundaleer, which he shortly afterwards sub-
divided and sold.
several leaseholds. Mr. Maslin tried out the other
Stales before later on associating himself with Mr. R.
Barr-Smith, with whom the purchase of Koolunga, Hum-
mocks and Warrakimbo was made.
The late Mr. Maslin managed the Hummocks pro-
perty, and subsequently he and his partner acquired Bun-
daleer Station, the price paid being £250,000. This
partnership was dissolved by mutual agreement shortly
afterwards, and Mr. J. Maslin became sole owner of
Warrakimbo and Bundaleer. Mr. John Maslin died at
Mitcham, near Adelaide, at the age of 82, and it may
be said of him that he was a leading figure in the pas-
ST. THOMAS’ CHURCH, SITUATED ON CARWOOLA
The father of Mr. J. h. Maslin, the late John Maslin,
who was born in Wiltshire, England, sailed to Australia
on the barque “Agincourt,” arriving with his wife in the
early 1850’s. At that time the gold fever was at its
zenith in Victoria. The late Mr. John Maslin tried
his fortune at both the Bendigo and Loddon gold dig-
gings, and met with a certain measure of success, but the
life did not appeal to him, and journeying to South Aus-
tralia he became interested in pastoral pursuits in con-
junction with the late George Agars, and Messrs. Moore-
house and Swinden, who combined in the purchase of
toral life of South Australia. Twelve years before his
death he handed over Bundaleer to his two surviving
sons.
Although Carwoola is under the personal supervision
of Mr. J. F. Maslin, the property generally is managed
by Mr. Robert Douglas, who has been identified with
the pastoral industry for very many years, and it is the
knowledge and experience of Mr. Maslin, combined with
the expert understanding of Mr. Douglas, that are re-
sponsible for the high rank attained in the industry by
the wool from this estate.
CARIFO O L A , NE IF SOU T II JF AL E S


THE WELL-KEPT ENVIR-
ONS OF THE CARWOOLA
HOMESTEAD, SHOWING
THE MANY BEAUTIFUL
ENGLISH TREES
A PANORAMIC VIEW OF
THE HOMESTEAD AND
OUTBUILDINGS WITH TYP-
ICAL CARWOOLA COUNTRY
IN THE BACKGROUND
CA R If 7 00L A , NE TV S()U T II TV AL E S


MR. J. F. MASLIN
MRS. J. F. MASLIN
CARIVO 0 L A , NE IV SOU TII IV AL E S


THE COMFORTABLE SMOK-
ING ROOM OF THE CAR-
WOOLA HOMESTEAD
THE PANELLED DINING
ROOM WITH ITS ADAMS
FIREPLACE
THIS BEAUTIFUL BIL-
LIARD ROOM IS A RETREAT
AFTER A MANS OWN
HEART
CARWOOLA, NEW SOU TII W A LES


THE ENTRANCE HALL AND
STAIRCASE. THE PANELLING
AND FURNISHING ARE IN
KEEPING WITH THE RECEP-
TION ROOMS, EXPRESSING
COMFORT AND TASTE
CAR IV O OLA, A' EIV S OUT II IV ALES


CAVAN, YASS, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of F. W. Castle Roche, Esq.
ONE of the oldest holdings in that fertile belt of
country south of Yass, New South Wales, on
the Murrumbidgee River and adjacent to the
Federal Territory, is Cavan Station, a rich property
embracing 15,000 acres freehold, owned and managed by
Mr. F. W. C. Roche. Apart from a few good horses
and a small herd of beef Shorthorn cattle bred for
station use, Cavan is essentially a sheep grazing run.
Whereas in the more southern regions of the western
districts of New South Wales a reputation has been
gained, deservedly, by pioneers and their descendants for
sively on these lands, rugged country nearly all of it,
and invigorating for the sheep on it.
From open pasturing to grazing within improved areas
was a natural process, as was the disposal of less pro-
ductive sections from time to time. By the time the
property reached the hands of the Castle family, some
eighty years ago, long before the southern tablelands were
served by an efficient railway, much of the primary
holding had been reduced, and the rest put under a
scheme of sound development according to the ideas of
improvement which then governed the industry, and
A FEW CAVAN CATTLE ON THE RIVER FLATS
the very high type of strong constitutioned Merino sheep
and valuable wools evolved through generations of
breeding, no less a status has been won for sheep breed-
ing and pastoral development throughout the environs of
Yass.
The course of years witnessed a gradual change from
open country shepherding of docks, the grant now called
Cavan originally embracing about fifty thousand acres,
stretching from “river to river,’’ from the Goodradigbee
to the Murrumbidgee. Merino sheep were run exclu-
which form even to-day a reliable basis for progressive
sheep husbandry.
The best of the lands and the extensive river fiats were
marked off and divided by post and rail fences, which
later gave place to wire fences and eventually netting.
Timber that was prejudicial to the grasses was ring-
barked, and subsequently burned off. An effort also was
made to ward off the rabbit pest, which even then was
assuming alarming proportions. The period of manage-
ment entered into by the late Mr. F. W. Roche began


THE BEAUTIFUL CAVAN
HOMESTEAD AND GARDEN,
SITUATED ON A RISE OVER-
LOOKING THE MURRUM-
BIDGEE RIVER
A FLOCK OF 6-TOOTH STATION-
BRED MERINO WETHERS ON CAVAN
CAV A N, NEW SOU TII WAL E S


THE MOUNTAIN CREEK WENDING ITS WAY THROUGH
THE RICH RIVER FLATS ON CAVAN STATION
CAFA N. N E 11 7 SO U TII IF AL E S


in the eighties, from which time a steady progress has
been maintained. Mr. Roche was possessed of remark-
able vitality, and equipped all his undertakings with
thoroughness and finality that revealed extraordinary
capacity for work.
He married the daughter of Mr. J. F. Castle, and in
1881 assumed the management, while some four years
later, under the will of Mr. Castle, who had in the mean-
time died, he became part owner of the property. Small
holdings which had sprung up here and there were gra-
dually acquired from year to year, and a careful release
of less productive country made with the objective of
concentrating solely upon the choicest country and im-
proving it into a more compact and reliable run.
a good climate. It is timbered with white and yellow
box, gum and apple, with scattered kurrajongs. Geo-
logically the country is of unusual interest. Outcrops of
limestone rock of Devonian age, all standing on edge,
appear in many parts, folded into fantastic shapes and
abounding in fossils of various kinds. 1 his stone has been
availed of in the construction of all the important build-
ings with the exception of the woolshed, which, built well
up from the ground, provides cover for about 1 100 sheep.
It is equipped with seven Wolseley machine stands, which
are run from a seven h.p. Lister engine. Men’s quarters
are staunch and comfortable, and comply with the
numerous demands laid down in industrial awards and
bv the trades unions. Pise or concrete cottages, situated
BEEF SHORTHORN BULLS BRED ON CAVAN STATION
Mr. F. W. Castle Roche lived to see the results of his
life work established upon the soundest pinnacle of wool
growing, and his property considerably enhanced in merit.
He died in 1915, and Cavan was inherited by his only
son, Frederic William. Cast from the same mould, wi th
the same enthusiasm for hard work, the present owner
carries out the policy laid down by his father.
The estate is situated nineteen miles from Yass, and is
approached by the road which ran across the Taemas
Bridge, before that renowned structure met its fate dur-
ing the unprecedented flood in the Murrumbidgee in
1925.
The property is generally most picturesque, a pleasing
feature when combined with healthy hilly conditions and
at suitable points on the property and connected with the
homestead by telephone, form comfortable accommoda-
tion for each of the permanent employees.
The sheep are looked after by Mr. Roche, who is a
believer in a little too much care rather than too little.
In every paddock into which the series of vales and hills
have been divided is permanent water for the stock.
These running streams never fail. Added to the moun-
tain creeks and springs and to the broad waters of the
main river is a fairly generous average rainfall. In such
surroundings a rich variety of grasses and herbage pro-
vides the right nourishment for the stock, trefoil, crow-
foot, barley grass, rye grass and subterranean clover
thriving wonderfully well in practically every part of the
cAV A N, NE IV S OUT II IV AL E S


THE WOOLSHED, HUTS, ETC., AT CAVAN
THE CAVAN HOMESTEAD, SHOWING THE
RIVER AND CULTIVATION PADDOCKS


AN INTERIOR VIEW SHOWING THE
WELL-PROPORTIONED DINING ROOM
CAV A N, NE W S()U T II WAL K S


A CLOSED-IN VERANDAH
USED AS A CONSERVATORY


SOME OF THE STATION-BRED
SHORTHORN COWS AT CAVAN
twenty square miles of the Cavan country. Like other
progressive pastoralists, Mr. Roche intends to cultivate
the growth and spread of Subterranean clover.
The destruction of the rabbit has been a long, tedious
and expensive warfare, the methods employed being to
net into convenient areas, dig out and burn all harbour,
but as it was systematically carried out paddock by
paddock, commencing with the best country, it soon
amply repaid itself by increasing the carrying capacity
100 per cent. Cavan stands to-day absolutely free from
the pest with the exception of about 400 acres, which
is now being cleaned up. Two men are employed
throughout the year solely in patrolling the paddocks
with dogs.
On the river Hats is grown an abundance of lucerne,
which is cut and laid by for use in the drier years. On
some parts of these Hats the variegated thistle grows to
a height of eight feet, and this is found to be suitable
fodder for both sheep and cattle. The property is now
carrying about a sheep to the acre. 1 hey are hardy, with
fair-sized frames, good neck folds, wide backs and grow-
ing an even Heece; they offer a splendid carcase for either
the home trade or for the overseas market. The weights
of fleeces cut are generally amongst the best in the
district.
The Cavan clip goes down to Sydney every season,
and in its class as a good, fine wool for spinning, with
character, length and bright colour, clean throughout,
with less than average condition showing at the tip, it
sells well. Continental buyers have shown a marked
keenness for it.
Lambing takes place during August and September.
CAV A N, NK IV SOU T II IV AL E S


Invariably good results are shown in the dropping, and
a satisfactory marking is always assured. The percentage
of lambs marked each season —averaging from eighty to
ninety per cent. —speaks volumes for the class of country
and also for the methods of management. A factor in
the lay-out of the numerous paddocks, large and small,
is the fencing, miles upon miles of wire netting, broken
only by the iron gates.
As an instance of thoroughness, characteristic indeed
of Cavan Station and of its owner, an object lesson is
afforded in the strength of the stables and stores. This
building, which is of stone, limestone hewn from the
nearby hills, really belongs to those days when work was
done to last a thousand years. It contains seven stalls,
mangers, harness room, feed room, meat chamber, work-
ENTRANCE PORCH TO THE CAVAN
HOMESTEAD. NOTE THE BEAUTY
OF THE WHITE GRECIAN COLUMNS
shop, machinery store, &c., and all have been built of
correct and extra heavy materials, with cement casings,
and floors and wooden blocks set upon a concrete base
throughout the stalls. Mouse and rat proof, efficient to
a degree in every way, and lit throughout by electricity,
the Cavan stables are a great asset. Several hundred
paving blocks for part of the flooring, besides the posts
used in the stalls and mangers, were milled on the
station. Steel rails have been introduced for all the
major stresses, whilst 10 in. by 5 in. oregons form the
main beams for the principal roof. The employees’
quarters, too, is a stone cottage of seven rooms and
electrically lit throughout. The erection of these build-
ings was completed a short time ago.
The homestead nestles on the forehead of a hill some
CAI■ A N, NE ir SOU T II JV AL E S


THE STABLE, WORKSHOP,
MACHINERY SHEDS AND
STOREROOMS
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE CAVAN HOMESTEAD,
SHOWING A PORTION OF THE TERRACED GARDEN
C A VAN, NE IV S()U T II JV AL K S


MR. F. W. CASTLE ROCHE
MRS. F. W. CASTLE ROCHE
CAVAN, NEW SOUT H W A LES


A PANORAMIC VIEW OF CAVAN
two miles from the road that skirts the shores of the
Burrenjuck dam, connecting Canberra with that great
national work. Encircled by gardens which are equipped
with a never-failing and abundant water supply, which,
having a head of over 100 ft., is piped down from a
spring considerably more than a mile distant, and sur-
rounded by a wealth of trees of many and rare kinds, the
house looks over the bed of the river, between two huge
domes of hills, while picturesque lucerne flats are seen
away through the trees. A firm believer in electricity,
Mr. Roche has installed in the domestic equipment many
labour-saving devices, the plant being run by Lister
machinery.
In the mountain streams that abound near the house is
to be had excellent recreation with the rod, trout, bass,
cod, &c., being plentiful.
Born at Goulburn in 1888, Mr. F. W. C. Roche
received his early education at King s College, Goulburn.
This was followed by a course of wool classing at Sydney
Technical College to lay the foundation of the practical
knowledge of the pastoral industry—knowledge which
more fully was imparted to him by his father when he
commenced work at Cavan.
In 1921 Mr. Roche married the daughter of the late
Mr. G. H. F ox, a well-known Queensland pastoralist,
who prior to his decease, owned properties near Rock-
hampton, where Miss Fox was born. Her mother was
the daughter of the late Mr. John Badgery, of Ivy Hall,
Exeter, N.S.W. There are two children of the mar-
riage, William and Lorna.
Between Manilla and Barraba, north-east of the
former town and south-east of the latter, is Eumbra
Station, which is also owned by Mr. and Mrs. Castle
Roche, and managed by Mr. T. O. Littlejohn, who is part
owner as well. 'This is a station of 6500 acres freehold,
originally part of the Linton Estate, and for years it
belonged to the Carter family. In February 1925 it was
purchased from Mr. Nicholas, and runs all Merino
sheep. The first draft of ewes was acquired at Foxlow
from a selection from Mr. Franc B. S. Falkiner, of
Haddon Rig, N.S.W. These were mated with rams
purchased from Messrs. Merriman Bros., of Yass. For
breeding purposes on Cavan rams from the Coomoo
Coomoo Merino stud of Mr. Allison were used for some
seasons, but latterly the sires introduced have been the
finewool Merino rams from Mr. Merriman’s stud at
Yass.
The objective sought is a good, plain-bodied sheep
carrying a weight of first-class wool of good spinning
quality, and the combination of blood now being used
undoubtedly should give this result. It can only be a
matter of time when Eumbra, conjointly with Cavan,
will bear witness to the pluck and enterprise of their
comparatively young owner.
cAV A N, NE W SOU T II WAL E S


ERAMBIE, MOLONG, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Property of George N. Magill, Esq.
THROL GHOUT the ideal grazing lands of the
Molong district in New South Wales are
situated many small breeding and grazing pro-
perties, and here and there a particularly rich belt of
country marks a more important estate, but these larger
The area of Erambie is hardly comparable to the vast
holdings of the west and nor’-west of New South Wales,
but for this district, its area of 6000 acres of country
with a high carrying capacity compensates the owner in
this respect. The property can be said to be an ideal one
ERAMBIE HOUSE
holdings are comparatively few. In this latter category
is Erambie, probably one of the earliest settlements to be
made in this district, and now owned and managed by
Mr. George Neal Magill.
The history of Erambie dates back to the forties, when
the late Mr. Thomas Kite took up the grants which con-
stituted this property, and named them Kite s Swamp.
In 1890 the late Mr. G. H. Hebden purchased the hold-
ing and renamed it Erambie, which was the aboriginal
designation of the locality. In 1916, Messrs. Magill
and Mackay purchased Erambie from the previous owner,
and subsequently Mr. Magill bought out his partner’s
share.
for the successful breeding of stud stock, also for growing
wool of a high character, for although there are many
rich river flats of a black loamy nature, the low-lying hills
are composed of limestone, with an occasional outcrop of
basalt.
1 he pastures are made up of a wealth of rich grasses,
the varieties embracing white top or wallaby grass,
kangaroo grass, Mudgee grass, with some corkscrew and
barley grass, while during the winter months are to be
found a large number of edible herbages. The cultiva-
tion of grasses on an extended scale has not been per-
severed with, simply because of the generous supply of
feed bestowed on the land by nature, but on the black


A DISTANT VIEW OF THE HOME-
STEAD. THIS PICTURE GIVES AN
IDEA OF THE NATURE OF THE
COUNTRY COMPRISING ERAMBIE
soil Hats along the banks of the Molong River, lucerne
paddocks are well in evidence. 1 his fodder is conserved
for stock when seasons fall below normal, the storage
being carried out on very latest principles known to the
industry.
The water supply is unfailing. Apart from the annual
average of 28 in. of rain, the Molong Creek carries a
plentiful How of good water, whilst in many of the
paddocks dams have been thrown up and large tanks
excavated. In no case have the stock to proceed far for
their drink.
Where small areas of land respond to farming, crops
of wheat are successfully grown under the share-farming
system.
However, the main industry carried out by Mr.
Magill, and that upon which he concentrates, is the breed-
ing of stud stock. Erambie is well known as the home
of high-class studs of Suffolk Punch horses, Merino and
Romney Marsh sheep, and to a lesser degree Red Poll
cattle.
The Suffolk Punch stud was founded by the late Mr.
Hebden by the purchase of the very best available stock,
some sires and mares being imported from England.
This stud was sold with the property, and now the pre-
sent owner, in his turn, is continuing the same sound
system of breeding, with similar success and eminent
satisfaction.
The sire in use to-day is Erambie Nimbus (4498), by
Erambie Humbert out of Hasketon Nimbil (5580). All
the mares have been bred on the property, a policy that
is likely to be continued for some time. Both country and
city buyers are aware of the high standard and sound
ARAM B 1 E, NA W SOU T H IV AA A S


TYPICAL ROMNEY MARSH RAM
USED IN THE ERAMBIE STUD
THOUGH ALERT, THESE ROMNEY
MARSH SHORN EWES SHOW
CONTENTMENT ON THE NATIVE
PASTURES
ERAM B I E. NE W SOU TII WAL E S


constitution of the Erambie Suffolk Punch horses, and
consequently there is a keen demand for any surplus
stock.
In 1906 the late Mr. Hebden inaugurated a stud of
Romney Marsh sheep, and this was also included in the
sale in 1916, since when it has been carried on under the
personal supervision of Mr. Magill. The Romney
Marsh stud is registered as Flock No. 6 in the Aus-
high-class ram from Mr. R. W. Matthews’ Waioron-
gomai flock, Featherstone, N.Z.
The surplus stock find a ready market and are largely
utilised for the raising of fat lambs, an industry which
is rapidly expanding in these parts of the State.
When Messrs. G. N. Magill and Co. purchased
Erambie, the Merinos that had been kept for years at
Weilmoringle, under the direction of the late Mr. J. C.
RED POLL CATTLE AT ONE OF THE NUMEROUS WATERING PLACES
tralian Longwool Sheepbreeders’ Association Flock Book,
and was founded chiefly on strains of purebred stock
imported from New Zealand. Since then sires have been
purchased from Dairy, Cardington and Yarraview with
most satisfactory results, producing a wool carrying the
true characteristics of a purebred Romney Marsh, the
latest addition being a draft of ewes and an especially
Darke, were removed to Erambie, the owners seeing the
advantage of better rainfall and assured seasons. This
flock was founded on Havilah blood, and was added to
by the purchase of a number of ewes and rams from
Deniliquin Stud Park. The flock now at Erambie has
been principally kept for supplying an annual draft of
first-class flock rams for Weilmoringle.
ERAM B 1 E, NE W S O UT 11 WAE E S


SUFFOLK PUNCH STALLION
KING OF ROME (3563),
USED IN THE ERAMBIE
STUD FOR MANY YEARS
STUD ROMNEY MARSH
SHORN EWES DRAWING OUT
FROM WATERING
ERAM B I E, NE W S() UT II WAE E S


RED POLL CATTLE CROSSING THE
MOLONG RIVER AT ERAMBIE
ERAM B I E. N E //' S 0 UT II WAL E S


MUSTERING RED POLL CATTLE
IN ONE OF THE SHADY RIVER
PADDOCKS
E R A M 111 K. NE W S O UTH IV A LE S


SUFFOLK PUNCH
MARES AND FOALS
BRED AT ERAMBIE
SHORN ROMNEY MARSH EWES AND LAMBS MUSTERED FOR DIPPING
ERAM B I E, NE W S() UT II WAL E S


MRS. G. N. MAGILL
MR. GEORGE NEAL MAGILL
ER. A M 111 E. NE W S 0 UT II IF AL E S


THE ERAMBIE HOMESTEAD EN-
TRANCE HALL, WITH ITS BOWLS
OF WELCOMING FLOWERS
THE BALLROOM A TRULY
BEAUTIFUL ROOM IN ITS RE-
STRAINED SIMPLICITY
ERA M B lE, NE IF SOU TII JV A EES


Nothing but Wanganella blood has been used, several
Haddon Rig and Deniliquin Stud Park rams being sub-
sequently purchased. As a result the Weilmoringle clip
always commands keen competition in the Sydney market,
and the surplus stock are much sought after. The
wethers are readily purchased by New England buyers,
being big sheep and great wool cutters of a high grade
quality.
Erambie being of an undulating nature, and having
sound pastures and an excellent water supply, the lamb-
ing naturally is good, especially in favoured seasons.
Between 80 and 90 per cent, is a common average, and
occasionally considerably higher. Although nature
greatly assists in this excellent result, some credit for it is
due to the management.
Nothing very extensive has been done yet in regard
to enlarging the herd of Red Poll cattle, but great care
has been exercised in the selection and mating, and only
purebred males and females have been used in the breed-
ing paddocks. The stock have been selected for purity
of breeding, size, conformation and colour, and an eye
has also been kept for early maturity as well as milk
production, for it is well known that the Red Polls are
to-day one of our best dual purpose breeds of cattle.
Erambie is one of the best improved properties in the
Molong district. The estate has been combed for rabbits
and other pests, while the timber has been thinned out,
just leaving adequate shade and shelter belts for the stock,
and at the same time giving the paddocks a park-like
appearance. The homestead is one of the many luxurious
THE TASTEFULLY FURNISHED AND
WELL-APPOINTED DRAWING ROOM
ER A MBI E, NE W S 0 UT H W A LE S


THE CONSERVATORY
country homes seen to-day, being one of beauty and com-
fort, and containing in addition to the ordinary household
rooms an elaborate ballroom, conservatory and lounge.
Mr. George N. Magill was born at Ballymena in
Ireland. After completing his education there, he
migrated to Australia in 1881, bringing with him an
indomitable spirit that greatly assisted him to win to the
success that he has achieved during his time in Australia.
His jackarooing days were spent on Goolgumbla under
the expert tuition of the late Sir Samuel McCaughey,
and it is to this prominent pastoralist that he largely
attributes his success as a grazier. On leaving Riverina
Mr. Magill took up land in the nor’-west district of
New South Wales, which he sold prior to purchasing
Weilmoringle, in conjunction with Messrs. Mackay
Bros. He was also associated in a Queensland property
with the same partners. Though keenly interested in
his stud stock breeding, Air. Magill is now spending
some of his leisure time in travelling about the world, but
still finds time to take an active interest in public life,
for he is on the board of directors of Winchcombe, Carson
Limited, Sydney, a member of the Pastures Protection
Boards’ Council of Advice, and a councillor of the
Graziers’ Association of New South Wales. For many
years he has been a member of the A.J.C., also of the
Warrigal and Australian Clubs, Sydney.
ERAM H I E, NE W S 0 UT 11 WAL E S


YARRA VIEW, LILYDALE, VICTORIA
The Property of Captain A. E. T. Payne
ONE of the best improved stud properties in Aus-
tralia is Yarra View, Lilydale, Victoria, the
property of Captain A. E. T. Payne, who pur-
chased the holding in 1905.
Yarra View is situated five miles north-west of Lily-
dale, and on the southern bank of the Lpper \ arra, a
clear, deep and wide running stream with wattle-lined
banks, while through the western portion of the property
is found the course of the Brushy Creek.
steam tractor and plough, so that within a month of
taking over the property, a foundation was laid of what
was eventually destined to be one of the leading stud
farms, not only in Victoria, but in Australia.
Right from the commencement up to the time of
penning these notes, systematic and substantial improve-
ments, irrespective of cost, have been made on every sec-
tion of the property and in the stud stock.
The land has been cleared and subdivided into small
THE YARRA VIEW HOMESTEAD
The area now comprises 900 acres freehold of highly
improved land, made up of rich black soil flats sur-
rounded by fertile slopes and well grassed hills, the soil
of which is of a yellow clay nature over an ironstone
subsoil.
When taken over in 1905 the country was practically
in its virgin condition, being very poorly grassed, sour in
nature and very heavily timbered with stringybark,
ironbark, box and some river-oak timber, while the flats
were nothing else but black ti-tree swamps.
Fronted with an almost impossible problem, Captain
Payne and the then manager, Mr. Thos. T. Grigg, in
the autumn of 1906, immediately set to work with axe,
paddocks, each substantially and securely fenced and
adequately watered, and with sufficient shelter and shade
for the stock. Roads have been made and culverts con-
structed ; earth works with flood gates raised along the
river frontage to guard against flood invasions; swamps
drained by open ditches, and sour lands made sweet by
miles of tile drains; valuable agricultural lands reclaimed
from the river and the Brushy Creek; areas cropped
and sweetened ; useless native pastures eradicated, and the
areas laid down under a well-balanced mixture of highly
nutritious grasses; plantations of shade and shelter trees
planted throughout the property; while those lands suit-
able have been graded and laid out so as to be fit for


A CORNER OF THE DRIVE AND OF THE PRETTY GARDEN
irrigation from the large and modern private plant
erected on the river hank. I his plant also generates the
electric power and lighting for the homestead and the
farm, and in addition pumps the water for the large
concrete reservoir built on the hill at the back and over-
looking the homestead.
In regard to the tile draining, the highly successful
results obtained on Yarra View have demonstrated that
instead of a total cost of <£l4 10s. per acre for ditching
and laying the pipes, &c., the expenditure has been re-
duced to approximately 375. 6d. per acre by the use of a
ditcher, obtained in Australia at a cost of £35. With
this implement the trench is sunk, pipes laid and the
trench filled in whilst the land is being prepared for
sowing.
Shearing shed, drafting yards, dip and stud sheep pens
have been built at a convenient distance from the home-
stead, also a large silo, hay sheds and implement barns,
while in the farmyard is seen a model dairy with all
modern conveniences, including an electric freezing plant,
hygienic milking bails with feed stalls attached, and also
adjacent silos and hay sheds, loose boxes, horse and cattle
stalls and calf pens, pig sties of the latest hygienic de-
sign, poultry runs, and what is seldom seen in Australia,
a correct and large manure pit connected with the bails
and stables by overhead trolleys. In this pit is stored the
farmyard manure, and it has been so constructed that
artificial dung can, with the aid of culture, be manu-
factured out of old straw.
I he homestead is of the bungalow design, having wide
RESIDENCE OF THE MANAGER AT YARRA VIEW
VARR A VI E IV, VICT() R I A


ROMNEY MARSH STUD RAM,
PAYNE’S 178 OF 18
A highly successful sire in the Yarra View flock,
and a direct descendant of pure English blood.
Won first place at Melbourne Royal in 1919, ’20,
’21 and ’22; also Champion in 1919, 1921, and
1922.
Left—
TYPICAL EWE’S HEAD AT
YARRA VIEW
Right —
TYPICAL RAM’S HEAD AT
YARRA VIEW
ROMNEY MARSH STUD EWE,
PAYNE’S 125 OF 18
The dam of many a notable stud sheep and a direct
descendant of pure English strain. Won first place
at the Melbourne Royal in 1919, ’20, ’21, and ’22;
also Champion in 1921 and 1922 and Reserve
Champion in 1920.
TYPE OF ROMNEY MARSH RAM AND EWE, BRED IN THE YARRA VIEW STUD FLOCK
YARR A VI E JV, VICT 0 RI A


ROMNEY MARSH EWE HOGGETS ON THE SWEET PASTURES OF YARRA VIEW
verandahs on all sides, while the interior has been planned
to provide the maximum of comfort and convenience. It
is electrically lighted, has a continuous hot and cold
water service, is connected with Melbourne and the
manager’s residence by telephone, and equipped with
wireless, bringing in all parts of the world.
Surrounding the house is found a large garden filled
with a wealth of charm and beauty, so planned that it
is as near to nature as it is humanly possible to be. This
section is under the personal supervision and care of Mrs.
Payne.
Adjoining the flower garden are found the vegetable
and fruit gardens, while adjacent to these is seen the
comfortable and pretty residence of the present manager,
Mr. J. M oses, whose wife has been responsible for
the development of a charming garden around their
home.
Adequate quarters have been erected for the single em-
ployees, while at the entrance gates, in the centre of the
property and on the western portion, have been erected
comfortable cottages of modern design for the married
hands.
TYPICAL ROMNEY MARSH STUD EWES BRED AT YARRA VIEW
YAR R A VIE W. VICT() R I A


The beauty of Yarra View is not only revealed all
these improvements and their well-cared for mainten-
ance, but also by the high-class stock depastured thereon
and the wonderful and charming views obtained from
the homestead of the reaches along the river and of the
mountains in the background.
In endeavouring to obtain the best results from the
land, numerous and extensive experiments have been
carried out with various artificial and farmyard manures,
including the method and time of their application, and
the results have been highly successful. These experi-
ments have demonstrated that the land and the pastures
can be brought to increase their yield two-fold, also that
A FAMILIAR
SCENE IN THE
YARRA VIEW
ROMNEY MARSH
FLOCK STUD EWE
AND TWIN LAMBS
minerals and chemicals lacking in the soil can best be
supplied through these channels.
Experiments have also been conducted with the object
of obtaining the most suitable and profitable pasture for
the district, and in this work and the previous mentioned
experiments, Captain Payne has achieved results of great
importance.
As an assurance against dry seasons, a large irrigation
plant has been erected on the river bank. From this
source the water is pumped into channels, from which
suitable areas, all graded and systematically laid out, are
irrigated. In addition to the channel system, a spraying
plant is utilised for watering crops and pastures on the
A FLOCK OF TPYICAL BREEDING EWES AT YARRA VIEW
VAR R A VIE JV, VICT O R 1 A


HEREFORD STEERS FATTENING ON THE RICH PASTURES OF YARRA VIEW
A GLIMPSE OF THE HOMESTEAD FROM THE WATTLE-LINED BANKS OF THE RIVER YARRA
YARRA VIE MV VI C TORI A


STUD EWES AND LAMBS GRAZING ON LUCERNE IN EARLY SPRING
A SCENE ON THE CRYSTAL CLEAR AND DEEP WATERS OF THE RIVER YARRA AT YARRA VIEW
YARR A VI E IV, VICTORIA


TYPICAL GUERNSEY
COWS BRED IN
THE YARRA VIEW
STUD HERD
slopes. With this irrigation and the adequate storage
of ensilage and hay, droughts are not feared at Yarra
View.
Being an advocate, staunch supporter and lover of
good stock, Captain Payne founded studs of Romney
Marsh sheep, Guernsey cattle, Berkshire pigs and Clydes-
dale horses.
I nfortunately, chiefly owing to interference with pri-
vate enterprise by Government legislation, the Clydes-
dale stud was dispersed in 1925. Although this was
regretted throughout Australia at the time, it made
available to interstate breeders some of the best blood
ever imported into Australia. One of the imported sires,
The Intent, a handsome black stallon with white points
and markings, was purchased by a well-known breeder
in Queensland, and this proved sire and his stock have
won honours in the Royal National Show ring, Bris-
bane, while some of his progeny sired in Scotland have
won honours at some of the leading Scottish shows.
The Romney Marsh stud was founded in 1906 on the
best available strains of pure Elham, England, origin
in New Zealand and Victoria, while in 1908 an exten-
sive importation was made direct from the stud of the
late Charles File, of Elham, Kent, England. In the
years 1909, 1912, 1913 and 1917, further direct im-
portations were made from the Elham, England, stud.
Since 1917 no outside infusion has been made.
As all the stud sheep are tattooed, and pedigrees re-
corded, it will be of interest to furnish particulars of
the importations from England. In January 1908 six
special stud ewes bred by the late Mr. Charles File, and
one special stud ram, File’s No. 15 of 1906, bred by the
late Mr. John File, were imported. In February 1909
were purchased the stud ram Elham No. 45 of 1906,
and Elham No. 88 of 1907, both bred by the late Air.
Charles File; the former ram was the champion Romney
Marsh ram in England in 1908. In 1912 the stud ram,
Elham No. 30 of 1909- bred by the late Mr. Charles
File, was imported. In 1913 were purchased seven
special stud ewes and four special stud rams, Elham No.
112 of 1910 (champion Romney Alarsh ram of England
in 1912), Elham No. 25 of 1911 (first in the class for
best woolled ram at Ashford ram show in Kent, 1912),
Elham No. 53 of 1911, and Elham No. 13 of 1912.
In 1917, the last year of any outside infusion, the stud
ram, Elham No. 98 of 1912, was purchased from Mr. G.
F. Syme, of Dairy, Victoria, who had purchased the ram
previously from the late Air. Charles File, of Kent,
England.
From the above statements, it is seen that the present
PURE-BRED GUERNSEY CALVES BRED AT YARRA VIEW
YAR R A VI E IV, VICT O R I A


AN AERIAL VIEW OF THE YARRA VIEW HOMESTEAD AND ADJACENT PADDOCKS TAKEN IN THE WINTER
YAR R A VIE IF , VIC TOR I A


day (1928) Romney Marsh stud at Yarra View is pure
Elham, England, strain, and this fact is still more ap-
parent in the general appearance and uniformity of type
of the sheep. I hey exhibit a large and square carcase
with a well sprung rib and set evenly on strong legs, the
head showing the true characteristics of the pure English
Romney, while the covering is of a good commercial wool
of a 44’s to 46’s spinning quality, with an average staple
length of about 8 in.; the crimp is even and well defined,
the colour a clear light gold, whilst the tip is clean,
blocky and free of all fuzziness. The style of the sheep
is excellent; they are active, alert and carry their well-
made aristocratic heads in an attractive manner, whilst
their coal black muzzles and hoofs and general character-
on pure stock imported from England. The nucleus of
the stud was the stud bull. Trengwainton Acorn, by
Itchen Royal out of Hayes Olive, and seven stud cows.
In 1912 a valuable addition was made by the purchase
of the entire stud herd of Guernsey cattle from Mr. F.
Coleman, of Saddleworth, South Australia, this purchase
included three imported cows and their progeny. Later
on the stud bull, Royal Sequell lE, was imported, and
this bull, in addition to siring a large number of high-
class stock, made a high reputation in the Victorian Royal
Show ring by annexing four championships. Then two
stud bulls, Milton’s Golden Dream and Milton’s
Dictator, were purchased from the Milton Park, New
South Wales, stud herd.
THE STUD GUERNSEY BULL, YARRA VIEW BONNIE BOY 2ND. CHAMPION SYDNEY ROYAL IN 1926, CHAMPION
MELBOURNE ROYAL, 1926, 1927, AND 1928
istics denote the trueness to type and hardy constitution
for which these sheep are famed. Contrary to all early
teachings, the Yarra View Romneys have proved to be
early maturers; the ram lambs at the age of six and a-half
months have turned the scales at 150 lbs. live weight,
while the ewe lambs of the same age weigh on an average
134 lbs. in anything like a normal season.
The Yarra View Romney Marsh sheep have had a
remarkably successful show ring career, while large sales
have been made to breeders throughout the Common-
wealth of Australia, New Zealand, South America, South
Africa and Japan.
No expense was spared with the forming of the Yarra
View Guernsey cattle stud, which was founded in 1910
In July 1923 the stud bull, Gem of Meadow View,
was imported from the Island of Guernsey, being bred
by Mr. J. Carrington, of Castel, Guernsey. He was
sired by Angulosa’s Gem of Lilynale, a direct descendant
of the noted bull, Governor of the Chine, a grandson
of Valentine 3rd, which had a record of 15,477 lbs. of
milk and 783 lbs. butter fat. The dam of Gem of
Meadow View was Belladonna Star, the highest testing
cow in the Island of Guernsey in 1922, when she gave
14,244 lbs. of milk and 722 lbs. of butter fat. Her
sire, Honorias Sequell 2nd, won the King’s Cup in 1913,
and was the champion Island bull in 1914, also winning
the Challenge Cup for progeny in 1915. The dam of
Angulosa’s Gem of Lilynale was Angulosa of the Hull,
yAR R A VI E IV. VICT 0 R I A


YARRA VIEW
HECTOR, A YOUNG
STUD BULL
IN THE HERD.
FIRST MELBOURNE
ROYAL, 1927. FIRST
AND RESERVE CHAM-
PION, MELBOURNE
ROYAL, 1928
YARRA VIEW
BELLA, A TYPICAL
GUERNSEY COW
BRED IN THE HERD
YARR A VIE W, VICT O R I A


who had a record of 11,343 lbs. of milk and 593 lbs. of
butter fat, and was sired by Raymond of Preele 13th.
The dam of Honorias Sequell 2nd was Sequell’s Honoria,
which had a record of 12,428 lbs. of milk and 640 lbs.
of butter fat. From the above it will be seen that the
imported bull, Gem of Meadow View, came from an ex-
tremely high testing family on both sides. Since 1923
no outside infusion had been
made up to 1928.
The Yarra View Guernsey
cattle have secured honours
at both the Sydney and Mel-
bourne Royal Shows, while
sales have been made far and
wide.
In the milking tests, the
cows have yielded extra-
ordinarily high returns of but-
ter fat, while the quantity
of milk has been maintained
well above the average for the
breed.
To substantiate the above
statement, individual records
of an aged cotv, a middle-aged
cow and a heifer, are ap-
pended. Yarra View Bonnie
Jean at 14 years of age in
1927 gave 7311 lbs. of milk
with a 5.6 test and 412.53
lbs. of butter fat. She was the dam of Yarra View
Bonnie Annie, the stud cow which was sold to Western
Australia, where she made quite a name for herself.
Y arra View Golden Cup in 1924 yielded 7423 lbs. of
milk, testing 5.8, with 434.44 lbs. of butter fat. In
1925 she gave 8623 lbs. of milk with a test of 5.8 and
491.80 lbs. of butter fat. In 1926 she gave 7651 lbs.
of milk with a test of 5.8, and 443.75 lbs. of butter fat.
In 1927 she returned 8413 lbs. of milk, testing 5.9 per
STUD RAM HOGGET, PAYNE'S 2 OF 27, WHICH
CUT 24 LBS. OF WOOL AND WEIGHED 218 LBS.
WON FIRST AND RESERVE CHAMPION, MEL-
BOURNE ROYAL SHOW, 1928
cent., and gave 493.36 lbs. of butter fat. 4 arra Golden
Rose, before the age of two years and nine months, gave
5690 lbs. of milk testing 5.5 and 312.95 lbs. of
butter fat.
The stud of Berkshire pigs has been maintained on
animals of undoubted purity of strain, all outside in-
fusions being direct importations from the best avail-
able families in England.
Right from the commence-
ment of operations at Y arra
View, Captain Payne has at all
times exercised a personal
supervision over all the numer-
ous activities, and it is due to
this untiring and close per-
sonal touch that such sound
progress and highly satisfactory
results of national importance
have been achieved. In these
great accomplishments, Captain
Payne has been assisted and
supported by the earnest, con-
scientious and competent man-
agement of Mr. J. Moses, his
manager, who, with his early
“Home” training, backed up
by a lengthy and sound ex-
perience in New Zealand and
Australia, has been capable
of putting into practice,
with successful results, the aims and ambitions of the
owner.
Captain Payne is one of the oldest members and coun-
cillors of the Royal Agricultural Society of Victoria, and
has at all times taken a very keen interest in the horse,
sheep and dog sub-committees, while through his gen-
erosity this society has been able to offer one of the most
sound and fair competitions for the testing of the actual
milking qualities of a dairy cow.
A SECTION OF THE WELL KEPT UTILITY FARM BUILDINGS
Y ARRA VIE W. VICTORIA


WOODBURN, KILMORE, VICTORIA.
The Property of the Hon. T. H. Payne.
WOODBURN stud farm, the property of the
Honourable T. H. Payne, and the home of
studs of Red Poll cattle and Ryeland sheep as
purebred as any in Australia, is situated three miles west
of Kilmore, an old-established town nestling amongst the
hills on the southern border of the north-central district
of Victoria.
The soil is of basaltic foundation, having red and
black loams with some heavier black land predominating,
intermixed with a light coloured clay, the former soils
making fair natural grazing and good agricultural lands,
while the latter, under special treatment, has been brought
up to yield quite a profitable production for the outlay.
The native pastures under natural conditions are in
WOODBURN HOUSE
This property, comprising 2050 acres, was purchased
in 1906 by the present owner, and at that time presented
a much-neglected appearance, being badly fenced and
over-run with rabbits, practically void of essential build-
ings and had no permanent -water supply.
The general lay of the country is undulating with some
level land in the centre of the estate, while in the dis-
tance can be seen spurs of the main Dividing Range.
keeping with the general average found in a district in
a 1250 ft. altitude. The timber, of which there is only
a small quantity, consists chiefly of what is locally termed
“White Sugar Gum.”
The average rainfall is in the vicinity of 27 in. per
annum, falling fairly evenly over the year. There are no
permanent rivers or creeks on the property, but a few
natural and permanent springs, which with the aid of


sub-artesian bores, wells, dams, tanks, and a five-acre
artificial lake maintain an adequate water supply through-
out the farm.
The owner being possessed of unusual foresight, and
realising the necessity of systematic, thorough and scien-
tific management for the success of any venture of this
nature immediately, on taking over the estate in 1906, be-
gan a series of improvements, all of which will eventually
give an adequate return for their cost.
One of the first improvements was the re-fencing of the
property with rabbit-proof fences on the boundary, and
subdivisional fences of 4 plain galvanised wires and a
at the lake, and over the wells and bores, while in each
paddock have been installed reinforced concrete water
troughs filled automatically from the numerous water
supply tanks situated on the property. 4he homestead
supply comes from the lake, while rainwater is collected
in various concrete tanks for household consumption.
With the water assured, steps were then taken to im-
prove the lands. Useless timber was rung and cleaned
up, areas ploughed and sown with oats, barley and various
other crops, so as to sweeten the soil. 1 hen when this
was accomplished English grasses and clovers were sown
down on those lands suitable. This work is still (1929)
THE RESIDENCE OF THE MANAGER
barb on top —18 ft. panels—2 wooden droppers—posts
4 ft. out of the ground—marsupial netting tied on to the
plain wires.
As the original natural water supply was inadequate,
steps were taken to improve it. A large earth dam
was thrown across the' head of a valley adjoining the
homestead, and this bank throws back water covering an
area of five acres. Later on smaller dams and surface
tanks were constructed throughout the run. Then wells
were sunk, and still later on sub-artesian bores were put
down in which good water was struck at from 75 ft.
Windmills ranging up to 18 ft. wheels have been erected
being carried out, and in order to provide a fodder supply
for home use, a small area is cultivated, the chief cereal
crop being oats, which with Mortgage Lifter variety has
yielded 4 tons of hay per acre, and up to 75 bushels of
grain per acre. Ihe hay is conserved in large and well
built hay sheds and barns, while the grain is stored in
vermin-proof sheds.
In addition to the above, further provision is made for
dry times by the making of ensilage in a twin brick silo
300 tons capacity, the crop grown for the purpose being
a mixture of Tasmanian white oats, peas, beans and tares.
Two sowings are made so as to provide for the first fill-
//■ O 0 D BUR N, VICT 0 R I A


THE WOODBURN PASTURES, STUD RYELAND HOGGETS IN FOREFRONT
ing, and then one for topping up.
As some of the land was found to be in need of drain-
ing, this work has been undertaken with marked success,
the method being to plough open the drains with a special
implement, lay the agricultural pipes and cover in with
the same implement prior to ploughing the field. Drain-
ing to some may appear a costly work, but in those dis-
tricts with a heavy rainfall or of a swampy nature, it has
been the means of converting once sour lands into areas
of high production, and it also goes a long way to stamp
out many diseases and ailments common to stock in those
parts.
With the subdivision of the large original paddocks
into smaller areas for the more convenient handling of
the stud stock, adequate shade and shelter is being pro-
vided by the planting of belts of suitable timbers, which
if found to become too dense for their original purposes
can be thinned out and the timber sawn into posts, rails
or building materials.
Other improvements include a small but adequate
RYELAND-MERINO CROSSBRED SHEEP BRED AT WOODBURN
W()0I)B U R N, VICT O R I A


TYPICAL WOODBURN BRED RYELAND RAM
shearing shed, yards and dip, draught horse stables and
loose boxes, cow shed, dairy, calf pens, bull boxes and
exercise yards, engineer and blacksmith shops, and a most
modern fowl run.
So as to house the married hands, the old homestead
and the old single men’s quarters have been remodelled,
while new single men’s quarters have been built of con-
TYPICAL WOODBURN BRED RYELAND EWE
crete. A new manager’s residence has been constructed
on a modern design on a site overlooking the lake. Ihe
homestead house is situated nearby and is surrounded by
a beautiful garden, orchard and stables, and is the resi-
dence of the owner and his family, Air. Payne and his
son spending nearly always three days a week at Wood-
burn.
RYELAND RAMS BRED IN THE WOODBURN FLOCK
WO 0D BU RN, VICTORIA


1 he entire homestead and farm buildings are lighted
with electricity, generated from a model power house and
plant under the personal supervision of the owner’s only
son, Mr. N eville Payne. 1 his plant also supplies all
the power for the refrigerator, and is an economical and
valuable asset to the successful working of the farm.
In all the improvements, the policy has been to adopt
a dual purpose design, thereby utilising buildings, shed
and yards throughout the year, and not only for a set
period. Substantiality has also been a keynote in all the
construction.
which have not only made a prominent reputation at the
Melbourne Royal Show and the Australian Sheep-
breeders’ Association exhibition, but also amongst those
breeders throughout Australia and New Zealand who
have purchased or handled the Woodburn bred stock.
Although Red Poll cattle have been maintained at
Woodburn since 1917, it was not until 1920 that the
foundation of the present (1929) stud herd was laid.
In that year were imported from England one stud bull,
Hatton Gerald, and two stud cows, Plumstead Permain
and Plumstead Pip, both being in calf to the famous
RED POLL CALVES BRED IN THE WOODBURN HERD
M r. Payne, being a lover of animals and a staunch
supporter of purebred stock, has been connected with
the ownership of such almost throughout his entire life-
time, commencing as a boy with his ponies and dogs. His
love for horses is still one of his foremost traits, there
not being a happier moment than when, with the ribbons
in his own hands, he sets out for a drive behind his famous
four-in-hand or is astride one of his favourite cobs or
hacks.
Put it is not only horse flesh that catches the owner’s
eye, for he has at Woodburn founded a high class stud
of Red Poll cattle and one of Ryeland sheep, both of
English stud bull, Sudbourne Hercules. In 1923 a
further importation was made in the purchase of the
stud bull, Easton Liberator 12232, from the Easton Hall
stud herd in Suffolk, England; this bull was sired by
Sudbourne Albion, out of Easton Liberty.
Then followed further importations from the Knepp
Castle stud herd at Horsham, England, of the stud cows,
Knepp Meadow Dell Ist and Knepp Prudence, two cows
which, like all the Woodburn importations, had won high
show honours at the leading English shows.
From the Earl of Stradbroke’s stud herd at Henham
Hall, Wangford, England, were imported the stud cows.
IV OO D BUR Nj VICT 0 R I A


THE DRIVE FROM WOODBURN HOUSE
THE LAKE ON THE BANKS OF WHICH THE HOMESTEAD IS SITUATED
WooI)B U R N, VICT 0 R I A


WOODBURN BRED RYELAND EWES AND LAMBS
RED POLL BREEDING COWS
IV O0I)B U R N . VICT 0 R I A


THE DAIRY WITH THE HOMESTEAD WATER SUPPLY
Henham Dorcus and M anor Tiarella, both daughters
of the well known stud bull, Henham Dairyman.
Another imported stud cow was Necton Effigy, bred in
the Necton Hall stud herd, Norfolk, England, a daughter
of Sudbourne Croesus, out of Necton Ena, and in calf
to the stud bull Marham Armistice.
Mr. T. H. Payne being determined to build up the
Woodburn stud herd with only the purest bred, most
typical and best available strains in England, made a
still further importation in 1927, by the
purchase from the Whiteway stud herd
in Gloucestershire, England, of the stud
cows Whiteway Wildberry, by Necton
Gloucester out of Manor Holly 2nd,
and Whiteway Wilful, by Necton Gol-
conda, from Whiteway Wayward; also
from the same breeder was purchased
the stud bull, Whiteway Wiseman, by
Necton Gloucester out of Framlingham
Proud Lass.
With importations of such quality and
purity of breeding, it will be seen that
the Woodburn stud herd of Red Poll
cattle has been founded and maintained
on direct descendants of some of the
best blood in England—strains that
have not only won the highest honours
for type in the English and also Aus-
tralian Royal shows, but have also
achieved remarkable success in the yield of
milk and production of butter-fat, while
at the same time the steers have on the
block clearly demonstrated the early
maturing beef qualities of this popular
dual purpose breed of cattle.
In 1928, the sires in use in the Wood-
burn herd included the two imported
stud bulls, Easton Liberator and White-
way Wiseman, and the home bred stud
bull, Woodburn Standard. The former
sire, Easton Liberator (imp.), which
was placed first at the English Royal
Show in 1922, sired in addition to many
successful females the bull Woodburn
Liberal, champion at the Melbourne
Royal Show in 1927, and later sold to
a well-known and successful Victorian
breeder of Red Poll cattle for 300
guineas. Woodburn Standard, which
won the championship at the Mel-
bourne Royal Show in 1928, is also
a son of Easton Liberator out of Woodburn
Meadow Lea. His grand-dam, the imported cow Knepp
Meadow Dell Ist, was the champion cow at the Mel-
bourne Royal in 1923, and again in 1925. His grand-
sire was the famous English stud bull, Gressenhall Mar-
quis, a son of the celebrated stud cow, Gressenhall Molly,
which at the English Royal Show milking trials in 1921
won first place against all breeds and produced just on
2000 gallons of milk for the year under test.
A SECTION OF THE DRIVE
WOODBU R N, V/CT O R IA


SINGLE MEN’S QUARTERS
THE SHEARING SHED
MILKING SHED, CALF PENS AND FOWL RUN
IV OODB U R X, VICT O R IA


TYPICAL RED POLL BULL IN THE WOODBURN HERD
The other imported stud sire, Whiteway Wiseman,
was sired by Necton Gloucester, the unbeaten
champion of England and Scotland in 1922, while
his dam, Framlingham Proud Lass, yielded for three
lactation periods an average of over 560 lbs. of butter
fat.
The stud herd at Woodburn in 1928 comprised a
total of 35 breeders, all being either imported or direct
descendants of importations. With all the stock, most
careful records are filed of the entire career of the
animals, both males and females, thereby making avail-
able the good points as well as any faults in the animals
kept either for stud purposes or those disposed of as sur-
plus stock. In all the stock the breed-
ing is entirely pure, coming only from
stock eligible for entry in the English
herd book and in the main section of
the Red Poll Herd Book of Australasia.
And it is on this account that the Wood-
burn stud of Red Poll cattle can justly
lay claim to being one of the purest bred
herds in the southern hemisphere.
Mr. Payne has only exhibited his Red
Poll cattle at the Melbourne Royal
Show, and since the stud’s formation in
1920 he has won in addition to numer-
ous reserve champion awards and class
prizes the following:—ln 1921, cham-
pion bull with Hatton Gerald (imp.),
and champion cow with Plumstead Pip
(imp.) ; in 1922, champion bull with
Woodburn Earl, and champion cow
with Daffodil; in 1923, champion bull
with Woodburn Earl, and cham-
pion cow with Knepp Meadow Dell Ist (imp.) ; in 1924,
champion bull with Easton Liberator (imp.), and cham-
pion cow with Woodburn Pearl; in 1925, champion bull
with Easton Liberator (imp.), and champion cow with
Knepp Meadow Dell Ist (imp.) ; in 1926, champion cow
with Woodburn Effigy; in 1927, champion bull with
Woodburn Liberal, and champion cow with Woodburn
Gratis sth; and in 1928, champion bull with Woodburn
Standard, and champion cow with Necton Effigy (imp.).
In all seven championships for males and eight for
females in eight years, a wonderful record.
Honours in the show ring have not been confined to
the direct exhibits from Woodburn, for both bulls and
cows sold to clients have won high honours, Woodburn
Earl winning a championship for Mr. Graves, Mt. Bat-
tery, and Woodburn Laureate, exhibited by the Warragul
High School, at the Melbourne Royal Show in 1927,
securing the reserve bull championship. This fact de-
monstrates that the stock sold from the Woodburn stud
herd have the same high qualities as are found in the
animals used in the stud itself.
Ryeland Sheep
Being a staunch supporter of pedigreed stock of ab-
solute purity of strain, Mr. Payne has also exercised these
views in the formation and the maintenance of his stud
flock of Ryeland sheep, founded in 1926 on direct im-
portations from England and New Zealand of only the
best available rams and ewes.
The English importations, which were specially
TYPICAL RED POLL COW IN THE WOODBURN HERD
WO ODBU R N, VICTORIA


A GENERAL VIEW OF THE FARM BUILDINGS
A DISTANT VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD
WOO D B U RN, VI CTORI A


selected by Mr. T. Mclntosh, a noted stud breeder in
the homeland, and father of the present manager at
Woodburn, included the stud ram, Thomas’s Idol, cham-
pion at the Hereford show and sale, where he was pur-
chased, bred by Mr. D. J. Thomas, of Monmouth,
Wales; 1 ram, 5 ewes, 1 ram lamb and 5 ewe lambs from
Mr. 1 . L. Martin, of Ashe Warren, Overton, Hamp-
shire, England; 10 ewes and 5 ewe lambs from the
Right Hon. Lord Cawley, of Herrington Hall, Leo-
minster, Herefordshire, England; and 10 ewes and 3 ewe
lambs, including the champion and reserve champion at
the English Royal, shown in pens of three, from E. W.
The Woodburn Ryeland sheep carry the true charac-
teristics of the parent sheep, which have acclimatised re-
markably well. This purity of breed, correctness of
type and its early maturity have gone a long way to
popularise the Ryeland in Australia. Its readiness to
nick with the Memo ewe promises a new avenue for
the production of an almost ideal crossbred export lamb,
while the blending of the two wools results in a most
profitable crossbred fleece—should it be desirable to hold
over the lambs. This first cross ewe promises to de-
velop into a popular dam for mating with the Ryeland
ram with the view of producing a blocky, solid and early
SOME OF THE FARM BUILDINGS
Langford Limited, of Wye Bridge, Herefordshire, Eng-
land. Before leaving England these ewes and rams
were all prize winners at the leading English shows, while
since they have been in Australia they and many of their
progeny have annexed the highest awards at the Mel-
bourne Royal and Australian Sheepbreeders’ shows, hav-
ing won all the first prizes, champions and reserve cham-
pion awards at the above-mentioned shows during the
past three years.
maturing lamb in those localites where it has been found
necessary to utilise the first cross dam in the place of
the Merino ewe.
In all the stud stock maintained at Woodburn, purity
of breed and trueness to type have been the constant aim
of the owner and his manager, Mr. John Mclntosh, who
was, before leaving England, in charge of the stud herd
of Red Poll cattle owned by Lord Folkstone, of Long-
ford Castle, England.
WOOD BURN, VICTORIA


MERRYVILLE, YASS, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Property of Walter T. Merriman, Esq.
The m erino stud of Walter Thomas Merriman is
carried on at M erryville and other properties
owned by Mr. Merriman in the Yass and ad-
jacent districts, the total area of them being about 22,000
acres.
Merryvil le is situated from 7 to 13 miles south of
Yass, adjoining the Yass to Canberra road, and contains
M erryville is subdivided into about thirty paddocks, the
boundary of which is wire netted, and also several
division fences. The country is clear of rabbits, so that
it is able to produce its maximum, and is watered by
surface tanks, wells and creeks.
Merryville is part of the original Ravcnsworth
Estate, secured by the late Geo. Merriman about the
MERRYVILLE SPECIAL STUD RAM, NO. 10
Grand Champion at Yass (N.S.W.) Show, 1922, 1923, and 1924. Sired by Sir Francis.
an area of about 5000 acres of freehold land. The type
of country comprising the estate is mostly undulating,
with gently rising chocolate ridges here and there. The
timber is chiefly yellow box, appletree, and blue gum.
It is very sound, healthy country, with a rainfall of 25 in.
Subterranean clover, sheep’s burnet and rye grasses, &c.,
grow well on Merryville, besides which the natural
grasses are of good quality, and sheep thrive on them.
year 1865 and added to in succeeding years. One por-
tion of Merryville was the first selection taken up in the
parish of Nanima, the late Francis Garner, a great uncle
of Mr. W. T. Merriman, being the original owner.
This land was purchased by the late Geo. Merriman,
and added to his Ravcnsworth Estate in February 1897.
A few years after the acquisition of Ravcnsworth a
pure Me rino stud was established on Mudgee and Tas


manian blood, the early purchases being made from the
late Mr. Richard Rouse, of Mudgee, and the Hon. F. C.
Grubb, of Tasmania, and a few years later purchases
were made from the late Mr. J. D. Cox, Cullenbone,
Mudgee, and the late Hon. James Gibson’s Sir Thomas
and Glasslough studs, and later from Mr. Thomas Gib-
son, Esk Vale, Tasmania. The Ravensworth stud at-
tained very great distinction, winning many champion
and other prizes at various shows, including first prize
at the New South Wales Sheepbreeders’ Association
Show for two ewes under eighteen months old, to be
shorn under the supervision of the committee and re-
turned and shorn again in twelve months’ time, and their
fleeces taken and valued in the grease. The Ravensworth
ewes secured an easy win, the average weight cut by
these two ewes, machine-shorn each year, being a little
over 15 lbs. 11J ozs. Two pens of Ravensworth ewes
also secured first and third prize at the Wagga scouring
test, with an average greasy cut of 18 lbs. 3J ozs. and
15 lbs. 15J ozs. respectively for each of the two pens.
On several occasions the Ravensworth clip has made the
record price of the State for the season in New South
Wales.
In 1915 this fine stud was divided under the will of
the late Mr. George Merriman between his three sons.
Mr. W. T. Merriman started his Merryville stud in a
small way in 1903 with the purchase of a special stud
ram and a number of cast-for-age special stud ewes from
the Ravensworth stud. He also received a gift of a num-
ber of stud ewes from his father, who owned the Ravens-
worth stud. These, together with those purchased, were
taken to the part of Ravensworth which was allotted to
him as his share of the estate, and which he called
Merryville. When the balance of the Ravensworth stud
was divided in 1915 the owner of Merryville received
one-fourth of the stud ewes and rams. He exchanged
a number of the rams received for stud ewe weaners,
allotted to his younger brother. Those, and his share of
the Ravensworth stud, were added to the Merryville
stud.
Mr. W. T. M erriman is a firm believer in the value
of consistency when applied to policy and constitution
where sheep are concerned.
Many of the best features of the Merryville stud are
due to the influence of the special stud ram Density,
purchased from Mr. J. D. Cox, of Cullenbone, for the
Ravensworth stud in 1895. This ram had a deep front,
grew a bright 4-in. staple of medium fine wool of very
even quality, and carried a dense level tip of the cauli-
flower type. His best cut was 24 lbs. of high-yielding
wool. He had a good, clean, soft, silky face, and was
entirely free from wrinkles around the eyes. He sired
many prizewinners, including the pen of test ew r es before
mentioned that secured first prize at the Sydney Show.
The cast-for-age ewes purchased for the Merryville stud
in 1903 were the progeny of this ram, Density.
The next great sire purchased for the Ravensworth
stud was The Joker, bred in the Glasslough stud, Tas-
mania. The outstanding feature of this ram was his
wonderful covering, his belly wool being quite equal to
the wool on his body. He was a little finer in quality
than Density, and had a dense, level, cauliflower tip.
He was very bright in the wool, and was as evenly
covered as it is possible for a sheep to be. The Joker
won several grand champion prizes and sired many prize-
winners. He was used chiefly with the Density blood
ewes, and the result was everything that could be desired.
The winners of the Wagga scouring test prize and also
the third prize pen were his progeny. These ewes were
shorn at Wagga with the other pens of ewes competing,
and were sent to Widgiewa, Narandera, and all grazed
in the same paddocks until the next Wagga Show, when
they were again shorn under the supervision of the com-
mittee, and the fleeces taken and scoured. The winning
pen of three Ravensworth ewes, the finest in the lot for
quality, being super 70’s, averaged, as already stated, over
18 lbs. in the grease.
Mountain King, the first ram purchased by Mr. W.
T. Merriman from the Ravensworth stud, was sired by
The Joker, his dam being a Density ewe. This ram was
shown by Mr. Merriman at the Yass Show in 1904 in
the open class against all comers, and was awarded first
prize. Mountain King was also shown at ten other shows
in the plain body class, and secured first prize each time.
He was used in the Merryville stud until he died of old
age, and without doubt laid a wonderful foundation. He
was a very big sheep, plain-bodied, with large neck folds,
and carried a dense cauliflower tip, growing a 4-in. staple
of bright, high-yielding wool of about 70 spinning quality.
His average cut for four years in succession was 27-| lbs.
of wool.
There are many excellent sires on Merryville to-day,
direct descendants of The Joker. These are known as
the “Number Nine” family. They have wonderful con-
stitutions and size, and are extremely even both in quality
and covering. The high prices secured for Merryville
wool for many years past is largely due to this family,
and they are very highly prized by Mr. Merriman.
In 1911, the first Wanganella ram was introduced into
the Merryville stud by the purchase of the special exhibi-
tion stud ram, Snowball, from the late Mr. Albert
Austin, Wanganella. His was the highest-priced ram
MER R Y VILLE, NE W SOU TII WAL E S


sold at the Sydney sales in 1911, the price paid by Mr.
Merriman being 410 guineas. His reason for introduc-
ing the Wanganella blood was to try and produce a sheep
of medium to fine medium quality that would find favour
in the districts where the finer types, largely through
prejudice, were not favoured.
Mr. Mer riman contends that many breeders are pro-
ducing sheep that are too broad and strong in the wool
and not sufficiently even in quality, and his aim has been
therefore to produce a sheep without these defects, and
at the same time to be a hardy, active, good mutton sheep,
carrying as much wool as possible without injury to the
constitution; a sheep that will thrive in the hot dry dis-
tricts as well as in the more temperate zone, and pro-
ducing a quality fleece in keeping with the requirements
of the wool trade. Mr. Merriman’s efforts in this direc-
tion have been highly successful, as will be shown later
on.
In 1912 Silver King was purchased from Mr. I homas
Millear, of Stud Park North, for the sum of 100 guineas,
while in 1917 Sir Francis was purchased as a five-year-
old for 1000 guineas from F. S. Falkiner and Sons
Limited, Wanganella Estate.
Sir Francis was the special exhibition stud ram from
Wanganella Estate at the Sydney ram sales in 1916, and
was valued as a young sheep by Mr. Falkiner at 2500
guineas. Each of the foregoing three rams, which were
the very best that Mr. Merriman could find for his
purpose, turned out to be excellent sires, and they laid
the foundation of the medium wool sheep in the Merry-
ville stud. Since 1917 all the medium wool sires used in
the stud have been bred on Merryville, but those three
THE SUBSTANTIALLY BUILT WOOLSHED. THE
HOMESTEAD IS SEEN IN THE DISTANCE
MERRY VILEE, NEW SOUTH WALES


W anganella blood sires produced some notable stock,
especially Silver King and Sir Francis.
Silver King sired Silver Prince, who won first and
champion in the fine wool class at the New South Wales
Sheepbreeders’ Show in 1916. At the same exhibition
Princess, also sired by Silver King, won first and cham-
pion in the fine wool ewe class, and was awarded the
prize for grand champion ewe of the show.
Silver Prince proved himself a splendid sire, and was
used in the Merryville stud until he died of old age. He
cut lbs. of wool as a yearling, with twelve months’
growth, and 26, 26, and 27 lbs. in the next succeeding
three years. Silver King’s best cut was 25 lbs. the year
he was purchased, the next year he cut 22-jr lbs., and each
year afterwards he cut a little over 20 lbs., until he was
eight years old. "Phis ram was the finest of the three
W anganella blood rams purchased, and he also grew the
longest staple and was the heaviest sheep.
In his report on a sample of this ram’s wool, Mr. S. B.
Hollings, wool expert, Bradford, England, says:—“ Ihe
samples of wool from the special stud ram Silver King
show very high-class breeding. The wool is simply de-
lightful, both for quality, serration and length. In fact,
for a stud ram I have never seen better wool.”
Sir Francis was a very beautiful sheep, as will be seen
by the photograph opposite, and as soon as Mr.
M erriman saw him he was greatly taken by him. He
examined him thoroughly, and failed to find a fault or
even a weak point in either his conformation or his wool.
He was most even throughout, carried a dense, level tip,
and a true medium, well-crimped, high-yielding wool.
No trace of hair on his breech or elsewhere could be
found, and Mr. Merriman came to the conclusion that
Sir Francis was the very sheep to produce what he re-
quired. He inquired from Mr. Falkiner if the ram
was for sale, but was told that nothing less than 2500
guineas would buy him. This was more than Mr.
Merriman could afford to pay at that time, but Mr.
Falkiner intimated that probably less money would buy
him after they had received further service from this
sire in their Wanganella Estate stud. Later on, as
already stated, Mr. Merriman purchased him as a five-
year-old for 1000 guineas on the station, after he had
finished the season. The ram was landed at Merryville
towards the end of February, and in the next two months
he sired 180 lambs, and in the following year 300 lambs.
His lleece was not weighed while at Merryville, as he
was never shorn with twelve months’ growth. He sired
some great stock and left many notable sires, one of the
best being No. 10, who won grand champion at the Yass
Show three years in succession. He in turn sired many
great sheep and numerous prizewinners.
Merryville No. I, who was awarded grand champion
two years running at the 5 ass Show, was the piogen\ of
No. 10. This ram also won two years in succession the
50-guinea gold cup presented to the V ass Show by Mr.
f. R. Alston for best ram under four years, open to all
comers. In 1926 Mr. Merriman showed him in Sydney,
and he was awarded first and champion in the open hne
wool class and also reserve grand champion of the show.
The progeny of Merryville No. 1 are showing great
promise, and he is one of the leading sires on Merryville
to-day. His last fleece when shorn with twelve months
growth weighed 263 lbs. He carries a dense, level tip,
with a very pronounced body in his wool, which is very
bright and full of quality, the class of wool that will
stand up under all conditions. He has a beautiful open
face and a very masculine horn, which is beautifully
shaped. He is a very active sheep, with a big bold front,
is most even, the wool all over him being as near the same
class as is possible for a sheep to carry. His belly wool
is an eye-opener to anyone who has seen it.
Mr. Merriman, as already indicated, has been very
successful in the show ring with his stud sheep, and has
won between eighty and ninety champion and grand
champion prizes, although he has only exhibited at about
two shows on the average each year. Some of his most
meritorious wins have been as follows; —
Five champion prizes and a grand champion at the
Sydney Sheep Show in 1916. Two champions and a
reserve grand champion at the same show in 1924, in-
cluding the champion medium wool ewe and champion
grass-fed ewe, which has also a medium wool, and was
six years old at the time. Champion fine wool ram and
reserve grand champion at the Sydney Sheep Show in
1926, and a 50-guinea prize presented by Mr. A. B.
Triggs for the grand champion ram at the Yass Jubilee
Show in 1913, open to all. This prize had to be won
two years in succession, or three times altogether. Mr.
M erriman annexed it two in succession. Another
prize of note was the 50-guinea gold cup presented by
Mr. J. R. Alston for best ram exhibited at Yass Show
under four years, open to all, to be competed for not less
than five years, the exhibitor who carried it off the first
three times to become the owner. M erryville rams won
it the first three years in succession. On twm occasions
the Yass P. and A. Society held a competition for sheep
to be publicly shorn at one show and judged at the show
in twelve months’ time. Merryville sheep won first and
second prizes on each occasion against strong competition.
As prices are a true indication of the value of wool
to those whose business it is to secure the best for their
.1 /ER R Y V ILL K, NE W SOU T H WAL E S


purpose, it will be of interest to quote some figures.
Parcels of the 1923 Merryville fleece wool sold at 404 d.
and per lb., and the lowest price for the station’s
fleece wool that season was 37d. per lb. That year
M erryville wool made records up to the date of sale for
fleece, pieces, bellies and locks.
The 1924 clip realised up to per lb., followed by
50|d., 49|d., two lines at each, and another lot at
49d. The lowest price for fleece wool of the clip was
47d. Hogget pieces that year sold to 40d. per lb. and
lambs’ wool to 42d., both of which stand as records for
New South Wales.
and consistency of the Merryville wool, which has always
been prepared for market directly under Mr. Merriman s
supervision, and classed by himself personally. The
whole of Mr. Merriman’s stud and flock is also classed
by himself.
The great hulk of the Merryville clip consists of a
3 to 4 in. staple of beautiful character, attractive colour
and consistent warp of about 70 to 74 spinning quality,
a few very fine parcels spin to 80’s and better, while
the balance of the fleece wool consists of a 66 to 68
spinning quality, this wool being shorn from the Merry-
ville medium wool stud. In 1913 a request was made
SPECIAL EXHIBITION STUD MERINO RAM , SIR FRANCIS
Purchased for the Merryville Stud from F. S. Falkiner and Sons Limited, Wanganella Estate,
N.S.W., in 1917 for 1000 guineas as a five-year-old
The 1925 clip sold to 39d., which was the highest
price obtained in the Sydney market for greasy Merino
wool during the 1925-26 season. This price was followed
by
Merryville clip and 20 lots of fleece wool out of 23 lots
offered sold from 30d. upwards.
The 1926 clip sold at 39d., followed by 38d. and two
lines at 37gd. each. Seventeen lots of fleece wool out of
20 lots offered sold from 30d. upwards, while the lowest
price paid for fleece wool of the Merryville brand was
These prices prove conclusively the super quality
to Mr. M erriman by Mr. S. B. Hollings to forward
some hand samples of the forthcoming clip. After hav-
ing received the samples, he wrote as follows:
“The five samples of Merryville ewes’ wool are the
finest in the lot for quality and make a beautiful display;
they show breeding sufficient to fill the mind of the most
fastidious woolman. I have never seen better bred wool
in my life, and they fill all the requirements of fine wool.”
In concluding his report, Mr. Hollings wrote: —“Let
me say what pleasure I have had in looking at these
samples, as they are simply perfection, and if you live till
.1 1 ERRYr I L L E, NE W S 0 V TII IV AL E S


MERRYVILLE SPECIAL STUD
EWE. SIRED BY NO. 10
First and champion fine wool
owe at Yass Show, 1923. First
for ewe publicly shorn at Yass
Show, 1924. First for fine
wool ewe, two years and under
three, at Sydney Sheep Show,
1924
SPECIAL STUD RAM, MERRYVILLE NO. 1
Grand champion, Yass Show, 1925 and 1926. Winner of 50-guinea Gold Cup, Yass, 1925 and 1926 for best
ram under four years. Champion fine wool ram and reserve grand champion, Sydney Sheep Show, 1926
MERR Y VI LEE, NEW SOU TEI WAL E S


MERRYVILLE SPECIAL STUD
RAM, SILVER PRINCE
Champion fine wool ram, Syd-
ney Sheep Show, 1916.
MERRYVILLE SPECIAL STUD EWES. ALL CHAMPIONS
MLR R Y V ILL E, NL IV S 0 U TII IV AL L S


you are 100 years old you cannot expect to improve on
their general characteristics.”
Subsequently he wrote to Mr. M erriman in April
1924, asking for a further batch of samples. These were
sent, and in due course Mr. Rollings wrote: —“Many
thanks for last batch of samples. They have been care-
fully and fully written up and placed in my permanent
collection. There is only one word that can adequately
describe your wool, and that is ‘perfect.’ if 1 write for
a month I could not say more than that. You are grow-
ing something superior in wool, and I hope you will
continue to do so.”
In a testimony to the weights produced by using
M erryville rams, Mr. K. S. Clift, of Werris Creek, wrote
in February 1925 with regard to his own and his
brother’s clip of that year as follows: —"hours to hand
re wethers. My brother shore 1573, and myself 1897,
average age three years, average weight 14 lbs. 6 ozs.
Mr. Clift and his brother had been using Merryville
fine wool rams for the past ten or twelve years, about
300 rams being purchased during that time from Merry-
ville by these breeders.
Mr. Merriman has ample testimony from other prac-
tical men, such as the well-known breeder and classer,
Mr. W. R. Raleigh, Mr. J. Waugh, of Queensland, and
others, as to the adaptability of Merryville sheep on new
country. Mr. Raleigh wrote in “Country Life’ recently
as follows: —
“I have read with much interest Mr. W. 1 . Merri-
man’s letter in one of the daily papers recently on hne
wool, and I indorse every word of it, and I cannot let a
statement go unpassed that breeders of the proper kind
of fine wool have not made a financial success of their
business.
“I have been a breeder of the right kind of fine wool
for over forty years (but unfortunately not on my own
account), and I can point my finger to a good many men
who have been fed on fine wool all their lives and have
thrived on it, and have become very prosperous and
happy.
“If breeders will take a hint—who find their wool get-
ting too strong, and that the price per lb. is lowering
year by year and the uniformity of their fleece is not
what it used to be—to try a course of Mr. W. 4'. Merri-
man’s anti-strong wool rams, this will be the means of
giving more wool of better quality, a bigger sheep,
uniformity of fleece, and last, but not least, a much
better price per lb. all round.
“I have no hesitation in saying that Mr. Merriman’s
sheep are some of the best that stand in New South Wales
to-day. I have been using his rams for many years, and
the results have been simply marvellous; they produce big
sheep, evenly covered (which is their strong point), a
very good staple 3to in., which is long enough for
anyone, and a beautiful crimp right to the tip, with no
waste on top. It is common talk the price his wool makes
in the open market, and the weights his sheep cut would
astonish most breeders.
“I have maintained all my life that you cannot have
your wool too fine, as long as you do not lose sight of
weight of wool per head, density, staple and carcase. In
conclusion, 1 think it won’t be amiss if 1 quote what I
wrote last October in ‘The Pastoral Review’: —Tor
twenty-five years I bred a flock (Tasmanian foundation),
and after using that blood for a few years 1 worked off
my own bat, that is to say, used my own bred rams, and
it is on record in ‘The Pastoral Review’ where 7000
4-tooth ewes with 70 per cent, of lambs at foot averaged
15 lbs. 2 ozs., and their wool nearly topped the Mel-
bourne market in 1906, and 10,000 4-tooth wethers of
the same drop cut an average of 16Jr lbs. When these
wethers were sold to a freezer they averaged 60 lbs.
frozen weight.’ 1 merely mention this again to show that
fine wool can be grown to big weights, and the frame
maintained.”
Mr. Merriman also received excellent testimony from
Mr. J. Waugh, of Rockwell, Daymar, Queensland, who
wrote with reference to a draft of eight-guinea rams
supplied in February 1923: —“The rams arrived safely,
and I am very pleased with them—just the rams 1
wanted. They have been greatly admired, and I am
keeping them in the wool for a while to allow all the
neighbours to see them. 1 may state that 1 have handled
rams from most of the chief studs, and can safely say
that the Merryville rams stand alone—beautiful fine
wool, long staple, and faultless frame; they are the ideal
sheep.”
On the 25th June, 1923, which was a drought year,
Mr. Waugh wrote, in concluding a long and eulogistic
letter: —“As for acclimatising your rams they are doing
much better than the district sheep, will eat any old
rough feed, and, as 1 stated in my previous letter, are
the best sheep 1 have ever handled, and sheep have been
my special hobby as well as business.” Two years later,
on the 6th April, 1925, Mr. Waugh wrote: —“I am
enclosing some samples of rams’ wool shorn a few days
ago from the first rams I got from you. They cut up
to 20 lbs. and averaged 16J,- lbs. These rams have done
particularly well here in all seasons, and except for a
little dust on the tip, you would think these samples had
been grown on Merryville. The quality and staple have
not depreciated at all.”
MERRY VIL LE. NK W S 0 U TII Jl r AL K S


MERRYVILLE SPECIAL STUD EWE.
Sired by the stud ram No. 15, and
medium wool champion ewe at the
Sydney Sheep Show, 1924
MERRYVILLE SPECIAL
STUD RAM, MOUNTAIN
KING, WHEN 6 YEARS
OLD (amateur picture)
The founder of the
Merry ville Stud. Won
10 first prizes as a
plain-bodied ram, and
was never beaten in his
class. Cut an average
of 27½ lbs. of wool four
years in succession
MERRYVILLE SPECIAL STUD EWE,
PERFECT LASS
Champion grass-fed ewe and reserve
grand champion of the show, Sydney
Sheep Show, 1924, also grand cham-
pion at Yass, Gunning and Quean-
beyan Shows
M E RRY VI LEE, NE W SOU TII WA EE S


Replying to statements circulated amongst woolgrowers
early in the 1925 season that the broader Merinos return
a higher cutting of wool per head than the finer light-
cutting types, the owner of the Merryville flocks wrote
as follows:—“In the Wagga test prize, where the sheep
were all grazed in the one paddock at Widgiewa for
twelve months, our sheep cut the highest weights and
highest scoured value per sheep, 2-tooth ewes averaging
over 18 lbs. weight in the grease, and being of 70’s
wethers was 12 lbs. 8 ozs., and the hoggets cut an
average of 10 lbs. 12 ozs.
“Upon other country of mine I shore 1600 two and
three-year-old stud ewes rearing lambs, and they cut an
average of I4j lbs. This was the wool, incidentally, that
realised up to 50|d. per lb. 1500 flock ewes, including
2-tooths and five-} r ear-olds, being the whole of three
flocks, rearing up to 86 per cent, of lambs, cut an average
weight of lbs. of wool.” These particulars prove
THE LATE MR. JAMES MERRIMAN
quality. In Sydney they also came out on top, cutting
up to 17 lbs. 10| ozs., and averaging nearly 16 lbs. for
2-tooth ewes.
“In 1924, on a small area of just fair grazing country
13 miles from Yass, 1 had it stocked with fine wool dry
sheep, some 1300 wethers, and over 1700 wether hoggets.
The latter were shorn with eleven and a-half months’
growth, and the average cut for the whole place was
5 bales of wool to every 100 acres. The net cut of the
that fine wool sheep are not necessarily light cutters.
Mr. Merriman has established in his stud and flock a
type of wool with great body and exceptional yield, which
has been an eye-opener to both buyers and brokers and
the wool trade generally. He has always maintained
that excessive yolk is produced at the expense of wool;
it creates a false density, and is a drain on the constitu-
tion of the sheep, and his aim is to produce a sheep
cutting a good weight of high-yielding wool. In Novem-
MERRY VILEE, NEW SOUTH WALES


THE LATE MR. GEORGE MERRIMAN
MR. WALTER T. MERRIMAN
.1 /ER R Y FILL E. NE W SO U TII WAL E S


her 1925 Mr. Merriman sent down three fleeces of wool
from ordinary breeding ewes with lambs at foot. The
average weight cut from those ewes was 11J lbs., and
their fleece wool was scoured by Messrs. William
Haughton and Co. and yielded as follows: —No. 1
parcel, 72.02 per cent.; No. 2 parcel, 68.86 per cent.;
and No. 3 parcel, 69.95 per cent, in February 1926
Mr. M erriman submitted two more fleeces to the scoured
test. Phis time they were treated at the Sydney Techni-
cal College, under the supervision of Mr. Cowley, who
wrote as follows:—“1 have submitted samples of your
fleece wool which you left with me to a careful test to
determine the proportion of foreign matter present. The
result has been exceptionally good; the wool, however,
is particularly dry and clean. The following result does
not, of course, include any allowance for the small per-
centage of vegetable matter present:—
Greasy Dry 10 Per Cent.
Cot. Weight. Weight. Kegain Yield.
Treated. Hot. Added.
Xo. 1 .. 325 grins. 211) grins. 254 grins. 78.15%
No. 2 .. 300 „ 201 „ 233 „ 77.66 %”
For many years the demand for Merryville rams has
far exceeded the supply. They have been sold to a great
many districts in their own State, and also to clients in
Queensland, Victoria and Tasmania, and the results have
been highly satisfactory, bringing repeat orders. Mr.
M erriman undertakes the selection of rams personally for
his clients if they wish to avail themselves of his services.
For the last five years the whole of the rams sold off
M erryville averaged as follows each year: —Season 1923,
average £8 12s. 4d.; season 1924, average £lO 2s. Id.;
season 1925, average £ll 2s. Bd.; season 1926, average
£lO 10s. Bd.; and 1927, average £ll ss. per head.
Mr. Walter Thomas Merriman was born at Ravens-
worth, Yass, on the 18th May, 1882, and is descended
from an old English family. He is the second son of
the late Geo. Merriman, of Ravensworth, his father,
who was born in the Berrima district in 1847, marrying
M iss Dowling, the daughter of English parentage, in
1866, and residing at Ravensworth until his death in
1915. He devoted the greater part of his life to the
formation and breeding of a pure Merino stud flock. He
was a Justice of the Peace and a member of the Yass
P.P. Board, to which he was elected at the top of the
poll. He was a keen show man, and was awarded
many prizes for his sheep, winning championships as far
back as 1879. He was assisted throughout his married
life by his devoted wife, who outlived her husband many
years, and eventually passed away in 1927 at the age of
80 years.
Mr. W. T. M erriman’s grandfather was also Geo.
M erriman, being the son of Captain Merriman, an
Englishman, who was lost at sea, together with his ship,
shortly after taking up his residence in Sydney. Mr.
W. T. Merriman’s grandfather went to Lambing Flat
gold diggings on their discovery, and died at an early
age, leaving four young children. His brother, James
Merriman, who was born at Parramatta in 1817, was
elected alderman of Gipps Ward in 1868, at that time
the largest and most important in the City Council. He
was elected Lord Mayor in 1873, 1877, and 1878, and
died in 1883.
Mr. W. T. Merriman married Miss Kate Sleeman, of
English parentage, her father, Samuel Sleeman, going to
America as a young man, where he became manager of
large gold mining interests. After spending about
twenty years in the United States, he came to New South
Wales and settled in the Yass district, where he carried
on grazing pursuits, and had many other interests. There
are two boys and four girls in the Merryville family;
the elder boy, Ronald, is being educated at The King’s
School, Parramatta, and the four girls at Frensham
College, Mittagong. The younger boy, George, is still
an infant.
Mr. W. T. Me rriman received his early training in
sheep and wool and things appertaining to station life
generally under his father at Ravensworth. He was
educated at Murrumbateman Public School under Mr.
C. G. Dyce, who was a son of an old pioneering family,
and Mr. Merriman maintains that much of his success in
after life is due to his early training, to the knowledge
imparted to him by his father and his teacher.
Mr. W. T. Merriman was elected to the Goodradigbee
Shire Council at the first election of that body, and again
at its next election. He did much useful work as a
member of that council, and at the end of four years’
service as a councillor retired in order to devote more
time to the building up of his Merryville stud. He has
been for many years a committeeman of the Yass P. and
A. Society, and during 1923, 1924, and 1925 was presi-
dent of that association. Under his leadership a large
debt, which had been owing for many years, was paid off
the show ground. He has also on several occasions
represented the Yass graziers at the annual conference of
the Graziers’ Association of New South Wales, and was
a member of the council of that body.
Mr. Merriman is a prominent mason, having filled
the highest positions in his lodge. He was appointed
District Grand Inspector of Workings for the Goulburn
district by Grand Lodge in 1912, and during that time
was deputed by the Grand Master, Dr. Carruthers, to
open a new Masonic Lodge at Boorowa.
Mr. Merriman is a keen sport, is on the committee
of the Yass Picnic Race Club, and is an enthusiastic
tennis player and golfer.
.1 1 ER R YVI LL E, NE W SOU TII WAL E S


RAVENSWORTH, YASS, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Property of E. J. Merriment, Esq.
The m erino stud property of Mr. Ernest Joseph
M erriman is situated in the Yass and Young
districts, and consists of 17,500 acres, 13,500
acres being in the Yass district.
Ravensworth, which is conveniently situated about
12 miles from Yass, 15 miles from the Federal Territory
share of the estate, which consisted of half the stud sheep
—the original homestead and plant and the adjoining
country, consisting of 6300 acres of well-grassed undulat-
ing land, watered by four permanent creeks, the banks
of which are lined with weeping willows. The timber is
chiefly box and gum, and has been judiciously treated,
FRONT VIEW OF THE RAVENSWORTH HOUSE
of Canberra, and about 3 miles east of the Murrum-
hidgec River, was originally acquired by the late Mr.
George Merriman, father of the present owner, about the
year 1865, and he at once set to work to improve the
property and develop it into the sound wool-growing
country that it is to-day.
Under his father’s will, in 1915, Mr. E. J. Merriman,
who had managed the Ravensworth stud for some con-
siderable time prior to his father s death, was allotted his
so that enough has been preserved to provide adequate
shade for stock.
M archmont, an adjoining property (portion of which
was a grant to Hamilton Hume the explorer), Mr.
M erriman purchased from the Hume family in 1920.
It consists of 5000 acres, and, added to Ravensworth,
makes it one of the best properties in the Yass district.
M archmont borders the town of Yass for about 2 miles,
and comprises about 3000 acres timbered with box and


gum, the balance being plain country with limestone
ridges and heavy black soil flats. The flats (being laid
down with English rye, subterranean clover and lucerne)
are some of the best fattening paddocks in the Yass dis-
trict. Some of the land adjoining the town Mr. Merri-
man subdivided for residential areas, which sold re; idily
to meet the growing population of Yass.
Mr. Me rriman’s properties in the Young disrict con-
tain an area of about 4000 acres, which are extensively
and is situated about 12 miles from Ravenswortb, and
about 15 miles from Canberra.
All of these properties are under the personal super-
vision of Mr. Merriman, and are carried on from Ravens-
wortb, in which old homestead he was born in June
1885. 'Phe house, which has been extensively enlarged
and modernised, is built of stone (quartz porphyry), its
tennis court and grounds being most attractive.
The Ravenswortb pure Merino stud was established in
STUD MERINO RAM, ROYAL HOPE, GRAND CHAMPION
SYDNEY SHEEP SHOW, 1922. BRED BY MR. FRANC
B. S. FALKINER, HADDON RIG, N.S.W. PURCHASED
BY MR. E. J. MERRIMAN FOR 1200 GUINEAS
improved and divided into twenty odd paddocks, the
greater number being subdivided with netting fences.
Cooyong is permanently watered with running creeks,
and has about 500 acres of well-established lucerne, and
is a very suitable property for a stud Merino Hock. It
was purchased from, and was the home of, Mr. George
Pring prior to bis retirement to Sydney.
Waratab, another property purchased by Mr. Merri-
man in the Yass district, contains an area of 3300 acres,
1865 by the father of the present owner, on Mudgee and
Tasmanian blood, the first purchase being made from the
late Mr. Richard Rouse, of Mudgee, and the Hon. F. C.
Grubb, of 1 asmania. Ihe keenness of this young pioneer
who set himself to study the breeding of stud sheep in
a scientific manner, and the execution of his sound judg-
ment, soon established the Ravensworth stud on a solid
basis, and it was not long before his name appeared as
one of the principal prize-winners at the country shows,
R A VENS W O R T //, NE W S O UT II IV AL E S


A VIEW OF THE HOME PADDOCKS
FROM THE FRONT OF RAVENSWORTH
HOUSE LOOKING ACROSS THE GARDEN
R A YENS W ORTH, NEW SOUTH WALES


BelOw-
A CORNER OF ONE OF THE
SHADY STUD PADDOCKS
NEAR THE HOMESTEAD
Right—
THE SOUTHERN
WING OF THE
RAVENSWORTH
HOUSE FROM
THE GARDEN
Left—
A GLIMPSE OF THE HOME
PADDOCKS FROM THE
MAIN DRIVE IN THE
RAVENSWORTH GARDEN
RAVENSW ORTH, NEW SOUTH WALES


with the progeny of these first purchases.
The next purchase was made from Mr. J. D. Cox’s
Cullenbone stud, of Mudgee. It was a special stud ram,
Density, and proved one of the most successful sires used
in the Ravensworth stud up to that time, being a fine big
sheep with a deep front and beautiful open, soft, silky
face. He was evenly covered with dense long staple of
bright crimpy high yielding wool, on the fine side of
medium, and cut 24 lbs. of wool when three years old.
He sired a great number of prize winners, and trans-
mitted his good qualities to his progeny to a marked
extent (a very essential feature in a good sire). Amongst
this particular ram’s progeny was included a pen of three
ewes, under l\ years, exhibited in the first Sydney fleece
test in 1901, for the greatest money value; the conditions
were that the ewes had to be exhibited at the Sheep-
A STUDY IN EQUINE
BEAUTY. THE HEAD
OF "NAUTY GEORGE,"
A FAVOURITE AT
RAVENSWORTH
breeders’ Association Show in 1901, publicly shorn under
the supervision of the committee, and fleeces to be re-
tained by the association until the following year—the
ewes to be marked for identification purposes and re-
turned to exhibitors, two of the same ewes to be exhibited
at the association’s show in 1902, shorn under the super-
vision of the committee again, the fleeces to be taken and
compared with the previous year’s, and then weighed and
submitted to experts for valuation. The two fleeces
showing the greatest money value were to be declared the
winner. The exhibits were shorn on the 29th June,
1902.
The Ravensworth ewes distinguished themselves by
winning this very important prize, and when shorn the
second year were 1 year 11 months old, and cut the
splendid average of 15 lbs. 11J ozs. of long, bright, high-
RAVENSWORT H, NE W S OUT 11 WAL E S


A VIEW OF YASS TOWN-
SHIP FROM THE
RAVENSWORTH PADDOCKS
R A VENS W O R T 11, NE W S O UT II W A EES


ANOTHER VIEW SHOWING
THE NORTHERN HALF OF
THIS PRETTY TOWNSHIP
RA YENS WORTH, NEW SOUTH WALES


yielding wool. One ewe of this pen cut an exceptional
fleece weighing 17 lbs. 10J ozs.
The Ravensworth ewes also secured second prize in the
100-guinea Sydney Scouring Contest in 1905, and the
Ravensworth fleeces were the only ones specially com-
mented upon in the judge’s report, as being an excellent
sample of wool, with a request that they be presented
to the Technical College, Sydney.
This great old sire, Density, sired many sires, and
Hon. J. Gibson, Glasslough Stud, Tasmania, and Ster-
ling, from the Cullenbone Stud, Mudgee. Unfortu-
nately the latter ram died after one year’s service, but
The Joker proved himself to be one of the greatest sires
introduced into the Ravensworth stud. He was a direct
descendant of President, a beautiful type of ram, with
heavy folds on the neck and an even covering of dense,
bright lustrous wool. A special feature was that his
belly and thigh wool was equal to any part of his body.
LOOKING ACROSS THE SOUTHERN WING OF THE HOMESTEAD, SHOWING THE WOOLSHED IN THE DISTANCE
was used in the Ravensworth stud until he died of old
age. He transmitted to the general flock through his
progeny some of the biggest wethers ever exhibited at
any show. The Ravensworth first prize pen of five fat
Merino wethers at Yass Show, fed on natural grasses
only, averaged lbs. live weight, and one Merino
wether was exhibited for the best fat sheep and weighed
103 lbs. when dressed.
The next sires purchased were The Joker, bred by the
He won many grand champion prizes, and produced
many sires and prize-winners. The winners of the £SO
Wagga Scouring Sheep Test prize, and also the third
prize pen, were his progeny. These ewes were shorn at
Wagga Show in 1905, together with the other pens com-
peting, which had to be not less than six, and were sent
out to Widgiewa, Narrandera, where they were grazed
in the same paddock for twelve months, until the next
Wagga Show, and again shorn under the supervision of
R A VE N SWOR TU, NE W S O UT II WAL E S


MR. AND MRS. E. J. MERRIMAN
WITH THEIR SUNBEAM CAR
the stewards of the association. The fleeces were taken
and scoured under the supervision of the Director of the
Technical College, Sydney. The money value of the
fleeces of each exhibit was ascertained by experts on a
40-bale parcel basis. One pen of three Ravensworth
ewes cut the wonderful average of 18 lbs. 3f ozs. each,
and the fleeces were described by the valuers as being
a most useful type of fine Merino combing, with nice
character and soft touch, a good fine warp wool, with
plenty of body, average spinning count of 70’s.
The other Ravensworth pen averaged 15 lbs. 15J ozs.,
and was described as an excellent type of medium comb-
ing wool, very compact and full of quality, a most useful
warp wool, with average spinning count of 60’s super to
66’s. These pens had the distinguished honour of win-
ning first and third prizes in the competition. The
descendants of The Joker have been used extensively in
the Ravensworth stud ever since, and the above results
are proof positive that the Ravensworth sheep will cut
heavy weights of the highest class wool under these acid
test conditions.
There have been many high-priced sires introduced into
this stud, including Jubilee V., purchased from the late
Hon. James Gibson for 500 guineas, and Benbow, pur-
chased from the late Thomas Gibson for 700 guineas.
These were heavy wool cutters and were very successful
show sheep. Benbow was awarded grand champion,
Campbell Town Show, Tasmania, in 1907, and was
awarded many grand champion prizes at various shows
in New South Wales.
RA VENSWO RT H, NEW SOUTH WALES


Since the above sires were purchased, nothing but pure
Peppin blood has been introduced, the most notable intro-
duction of recent years being the Haddon Rig ram Royal
Hope, grand champion at the Sheepbreeders’ Show,
Sydney, 1922, and purchased at that time by Mr. Ernest
Merriman for 1200 guineas. With such a sound founda-
tion and limited outside infusion, the Ravensworth stud
has been built up to one of the leading fine to medium
Merino stud flocks of the present time. It is a stud
his Ravensworth wool clip. This wool is eagerly sought
after at the Sydney auction sales, and has held many
records in the New South Wales market for the past
twenty years, most notably in 1920-21 season, when the
E. J. M. Ravensworth/Yass clip exceeded all previous
records in the Sydney market, realising per lb. for
32 bales, being the three top lines. That price was
per lb. more than any other clip realised in that season
in New South Wales, was per lb. more than any
THE LATE MR. GEORGE MERRIMAN
which reflects great credit on the founder and the pre-
sent owner, and one from which the surplus stock has
always found a ready market.
Mr. Merriman is essentially practical, and from his
boyhood days has taken a keen and active interest in stud
sheep, and his expert knowledge in this direction has been
availed of by many of the leading shows of the State,
where he consistently acts as judge. He personally does
his own classing of the stud and supervises and classes
other clip on that day’s sale, and was described in the
market report as the best clip sold that season.
This record was not beaten until the 1925 season,
when the Ravensworth clip was passed in, in a declining
market, but was sold privately to a buyer, on cable advice
from his firm, for 52d. per lb. for the top line. In
1926-27 season the “pieces” realised per lb., being
the record for that season.
The next season, 1927-28, brought forth a further
RAVENS IV O R TH, NE W SOU TII JV AL E S


MR. AND MRS. E. J. MERRIMAN, WITH THEIR SON AND HEIR, OWEN BUNBURY MERRIMAN,
AT EIGHT MONTHS
RAVENS WORTH, NEW SOUTH IV AL E S


record, for the Ravensworth “fleece wool” realised 38d.
per lb. greasy, which represents the second highest price
for the Sydney sales, while the “pieces” made 27J-d. per
lb. greasy, being the record price in Sydney at the sales
held up to that date.
Ravensworth fleeces have been acquired for exhibition
and instructional purposes at the Hawkesbury College,
and described by their sheep and wool expert as being
equal in fineness and character to any fleece in the world.
The Australian personal history of the Merriman
family commences with the birth on the sth April, 1795,
in Sussex, England, of a George Merriman, son of Cap-
tain Merriman, and who at the age of 22 years migrated
to Australia and
settled at Parra-
matta in New
South Wales.
From his mar-
riage came two
sons, George and
James, who had
the great misfor-
tune to be left
orphans very
young, for their
mother died, it
is said, from a
broken heart,
mourning the un-
certainty of her
husband’s fate,
for it was never
known how his
young life ended. He just suddenly disappeared, and as
the native blacks had been troublesome for some time, it
was surmised that he had been killed by them.
These two lads, in spite of this handicap, being full of
grit and determination, qualities so prominent in those
early pioneers, soon set out to make good their own way
in the world. James entered the Mercantile Marine,
and later on adopted a civil life in Sydney, eventually
being elected Lord Mayor in 1877, and again in 1878,
while later on he represented West Sydney in the New
South Wales Parliament for three years. Finally, after
a severe illness, he died in Sydney on the 13th May,
1883.
The other brother, George, grandfather of the present
owner of Ravensworth, adopted a pastoral life, but died
very young. He, however, left a family of three sons and
one daughter, one son, George, being the first Merriman
to settle in the Yass district, where he eventually pur-
chased Ravensworth. He was the father of the present
owner.
Ernest Joseph Merriman was born at Ravensworth,
Yass, on 7th June, 1885, and married in 1919, Kathleen,
daughter of the late J. S. Ringwood, of Neutral Bay,
Sydney, and grand-daughter of the late Henry Bunbury
Ringwood, of Sunbury, Howlong, he having taken up
land there shortly after his arrival in Australia, whence
he landed from the sailing ship “Comet” in the year 1841.
He was born at the Vale of Avoca, Ireland, his father,
Colonel Ringwood, having married Martha Bunbury, a
direct descendant
of Sir David de
Bunbury, who
married Mar-
garet de Stanney
in 1388.
The Ringwood
family originally
came from
Credilston,
Hampshire, Eng-
land, where at
the Herald’s visi-
tation to Hamp-
shire they were
allowed the fol-
lowing armorial
bearings:— “Ar-
gent, a chevron
chequy or, and
sable between three moorcocks proper beaked and legged
gules.” The first Ringwood to settle in Ireland crossed
with Sir Walter Raleigh from Hampshire to Ireland.
M rs. Merriman’s mother is a daughter of the late
Robert Heron, born South Shields, Newcastle-on-Tyne,
England, and a grand-daughter of the late George
Emerson Heron, who fought under the Duke of Welling-
ton in the battle of Waterloo. The Duke was pas-
sionately fond of music, and though an “Iron Duke” on
duty, he spent much of his spare time with his musical
officers. Young Heron was a gifted violinist, and was
the recipient from the Duke of a valuable violin, which
is still in the family.
Mr. and Mrs. E. J. Merriman have one son, Owen
Bunbury Merriman, born at Ravensworth, Yass, on 12th
June, 1924.
PORTION OF THE TENNIS COURT
R A VENS W O R TH, NE W S O UT H WAL E S


OAKHURST, WYALONG, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Matthew J. McW. Robinson, Esq.
OAKHURST Station, the property for the past
16 years of Mr. Matthew John McWilliam
Robinson, is situated 18 miles north of Wyalong,
near the south-eastern corner of the Condobolin district
of New South Wales. It comprises some 28,000 acres
of freehold lands, with an additional area of 2000 acres
leasehold, made up of open plains with shelter belts of
yellow box, belah and myall timber, while along the
eastern boundary is found the Bland Creek, and on the
north and north-west and western sides the Back Creek.
used solely as a cattle run by the first owners, the Gibson
family, of Goulburn.
The exact date on which the holding was taken up has
been lost, but in 1848 a large area of these plains was in
the possession of Mrs. Alice Gibson, and it was known
as Bland Plains, the name being taken from the creek
then watering the property. This, as well as the other
creeks in the neighbourhood, was really only a water-
course, being shallow, with odd deep holes scattered along
its course, and it was only during heavy rains or floods
THE OAKHURST HOMRSTEAD
The soil is chiefly a red loam intermixed with black, and
the natural pasture consists of a wide variety of summer
and winter grasses, as well as winter herbages, both of
which in normal seasons give a carrying capacity of
a sheep to lj acres. The average rainfall is 19 in.
Lambing takes place in April and May, while shearing
is carried out in September.
Oakhurst is to-day considered to be a sound Merino
woolgrowing property, as well as good fattening country
for both Merino sheep and cattle, a very different pro-
position to what it was in its early days, when it was
that there was any running stream of water. Being so
uncertain in regard to an assured water supply, the
station, in those days, was not held to be of much value.
Later on attempts were made to improve the supply by
conservation in dams and tanks, but really thorough
endeavours in this direction did not take place until
about 25 years later, when the property was acquired
by Messrs. A. E. and E. V. French, who came over from
the Western District of Victoria in the early seventies
and called the station Oakhurst.
Being sheepbreeders, they naturally turned their atten-


APPROACH TO THE HOMESTEAD SHOWING
THE MAIN ENTRANCE GATES
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HOUSE TAKEN
FROM THE WINDMILL TOWER
0 A Kll UR S T, NE IV SOU T H WALE S


MERINO EWES AND LAMBS DEPASTURING ON
THE HEALTHY PLAINS WITH THEIR HEAVY
GROWTH OF NATURAL GRASSES AND HERBAGE
0 A KII U R S T, N E W S O U TII IF A LE 5


tion to considering the advisability of developing that
industry in their new home, so at once commenced fenc-
ing operations and set about improving the water supply
by putting down more tanks and by sinking wells. Wells,
however, were doomed to failure, because of the salt
strata struck within a short distance of the surface, so
dams and surface tanks comprised the means of con-
servation.
The old cattle huts along Back Creek, on the western
portion ot the run, were put into use and suitable yards
were erected for the handling of the flocks, the founda-
tion of which were overlanded from Victoria. The
owners then commenced to develop the country and
established a policy for the building up of a high grade
flock of Merinos, which soon proved their suitability to
the locality.
On the marriage of one of the partners, Mr. A. E.
French, to a daughter of the late Mr. A. Wilson, of
Victoria, improvements to the original homestead com-
menced to take shape, and a new house of pise was built,
a material that in those days was popular, not only on the
score of cheapness, but because of the coolness during the
EWES AND LAMBS WATERING
AT THE HOMESTEAD TANK
hot summer months. This house stands to-day, though
it has been enlarged during later years.
Within a few years of the Frenchs’ advent, and when
it was known that sheep would do well on this country,
selectors commenced to make their appearance, so the
Messrs. French Bros, were compelled to buy up consider-
able areas around their station, and to convert into free-
hold. On the death of Mr. A. E. French the property
reverted to his widow, who carried on for a time, but
subsequently sold to the late Sir Samuel McCaughey.
Fie held the station until 1910, when it was purchased
by the present owner.
Being essentially a practical station man, Mr. Robinson
did not alter the policy of breeding Merino sheep and
fattening stock, but he further improved the water sup-
ply by sinking bores which penetrated through the salt
strata, and formed a sure and good permanent supply.
Rabbits, which had invaded the country just after the
big drought in 1902, were fought by him with various
methods of eradication, and the run was subdivided into
wire-netted paddocks. The shearing quarters were
brought up to the standard required by the Act, and a
O A K H U R S T, NEW SOU T H WALES


sheep dip was built, not because ticks were prevalent,
but as a preventive. Here it may be mentioned that this
belt of country is remarkably free of stock pests and
diseases, a tribute to the owner’s foresight and good man-
agement, though the country itself is naturally healthy
and sound.
The Merinos now run on Oakhurst were originally
founded on a draft from Goolgumbla, with a later in-
fusion from Haddon Rig. They have been bred with
the object of growing a good type of medium, long stapled
wool suitable for withstanding the heat and dust of this
locality during the summer months, and at the same time
being capable of producing a carcase of the right sort for
the butcher. The objective has been successfully achieved,
and it is flocks of this nature that have won the world-
wide reputation of Australian Merino wools to-day—
wool that can only be grown on large tracts of country
and by experienced breeders. Such Hocks are assets to
our country that should be regarded with approval and
MERINO EWES AND LAMBS
DRAWING INTO THE TIMBER
treated with sympathy by every kind of Government,
for where would be the finances and prosperity of Aus-
tralia to-day were it not for our Merino wool clip and
the skill and the country responsible for its quality?
As these notes are being embodied in what really
amounts to a history of many of those who have
played a part in building up our greatest primary in-
dustry, a few personal notes on the life of the present
owner of Oakhurst are essential. Mr. Matthew John
McWilliam Robinson comes from the north of Ireland,
having migrated from that land in 1881 to Australia,
going direct to Coree Station, Jerilderie, N.S.W., which
was then managed by the late Mr. David McCaughey.
H e soon “found his feet” by sheer grit and determination
to make good, qualities that were common amongst the
Ulster-born migrants of those days. In 1884, only three
years after his arrival in Australia, Mr. Robinson was
promoted to the managership of Goolgumbla and
Singorimba Stations, both of which lay to the northward
o A KHU R S T, N E W SOU TII W A LE S


A ROUND UP OF MERINO EWES AND LAMBS
MUSTERING ON THE PLAINS
THE OAKHURST OPEN PLAINS
OAK 11 URS T, NE JV S O UT H IV AE E S
0 A KII UR S T, NE W S 0 U TII // A L E S


THE SCOOP
IN ACTION
TANK SINKING.
PLOUGHING IN
PREPARATION
FOR THE SCOOP
THE COMPLETED
TANK
0 A KII UR S T, N E W S 0 U TI I IV A LE S


GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD
SURROUNDINGS AND OUTBUILDINGS
O A KII UR ST, NE IV SOU T H IV A EES


A DRAFT
OF 2-TOOTH
MERINO
RAMS ON
THE ROAD
TYPES OF
MERINO
RAMS USED
ON
OAKHURST
OAK II UR S T, NE W S 0 U TII IV A LE S


SHEEP WATERING AT ONE OF THE
NUMEROUS TANKS ON OAKHURST
OAK II UR S T, N E W S OUT II IF A LES


of Coree, and were then owned by the late Sir Samuel
AlcCaughey, who in 1890 transferred him to the manage-
ment of another one of his properties, Dunlop Station,
on the Darling River. This place he managed until 1897,
during which time he witnessed the country’s passage
through some of the worst crises in Australian history.
In 1897 Air. Robinson undertook the additional man-
agement of Toorale Station, another of the late Sir
Samuel McCaughey’s big ventures, and situated on the
Darling, adjoining Dunlop. Here his energies were em-
ployed until 1909, when he was entrusted with the
general supervision of Sir Samuel’s pastoral holdings.
During the year 1910 Mr. Robinson, as stated before,
launched out on a private venture and purchased Oak-
hurst, but at the same time he continued to carry out
his duties for the McCaughey interests.
In 1912, however, in conjunction with Mr. T. W.
Vincent, arrangements were made to purchase outright
the three stations, Dunlop, Toorale and Nocoleche, which
they had been managing. These holdings extended for
hundreds of square miles out in the western portion of
New South Wales, the two former, as previously men-
tioned, being on the Darling River, with Nocoleche at
the back, or on the north-western boundary, with the
Paroo running through it. These three properties em-
braced an area of 2,800,000 acres, and under the new
ownership, Mr. Vincent managed Dunlop and Nocoleche,
whilst Mr. Robinson undertook the control of 1 oorale,
but by mutual arrangement all of them, three of the most
important and largest stations in the State, were disposed
of in 1925 to Australian Sheep Farms Limited at a satis-
factory figure.
Other pastoral properties held by Messrs. Robinson and
Vincent were Bonus Downs and Cytherea Stations, pur-
chased in 1914, and situated in southern Queensland.
They worked them to a great extent in conjunction with
their Darling River stations, and sold them in 1925 to
Mr. Fletcher.
Although he had to a certain degree retired from
active pastoral pursuits, Air. Robinson devotes most of
his time to-day to Oakhurst, and still has the interest of
the pastoral industry at heart. He is a member of the
Union and the Australian Clubs, both of Sydney. He
married Miss Marie Louise AlcCay, a daughter of the
Rev. William AlcCay, of Mount Pleasant, Garvan,
North Ireland, and a niece of the late Sir Samuel
AlcCaughey. There is one child, a daughter, Miss
Kathleen Robinson.
BREASTING THE HILL
O A KHU RS T, N E W SOU T H IV A LE S


MERRIBEE, BARELLAN, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Killen Limited.
MERRIBEE, purchased in 1908 by Mr. William
Wilson Killen, and now carried on with other
properties in the name of Killen Limited, of
which Mr. W. W. Killen is governing director, is one
of the outstanding stud sheep breeding properties and
stock fattening runs in New South Wales.
This comparatively large holding of well grassed pas-
from the sou’-west boundary of the run. Ihe country
generally is typical Riverina plains and low hills, and
through the holding run two picturesque ranges of hills.
These carry a fair amount of timber, the whole area of
the estate being well looked after in this respect. About
50 per cent, of the property carries boree, the remainder
bearing yarran, kurrajong, cypress pine, and white box.
AN AVENUE OF GUM TREES LEADING TO THE HOMESTEAD
ture land comprises an area of 22,000 acres, all of which
is secured under freehold title. Some 3000 acres were
disposed of about ten years ago, hut otherwise the estate
has remained unaltered for very many years.
The township of Barellan lies 15 miles east from Mer-
rihee homestead in the heart of Narrandera district,
whilst the Murrumbidgee River scheme of irrigation, cul-
minating in the great dam at Burrinjuck, is a few miles
An abundance of feed for the stock is offered by the rich
growth of natural grasses. These include indigenous
varieties such as crowfoot, corkscrew, white top, barley
grass and trefoil.
A large sum has been put into improvements, particu-
larly water. The mean yearly average of rainfall is
about 16 in., and several bores, besides a well-planned
system of wells, dams and tanks, have been sunk or con-


WARRAWIDGEE
STUD MERINO
EWES
MERRIBEE
MERINO RAM
WEANERS
STUD MERINO
SIRES AT
WARRAWIDGEE
STUD MERINO
EWES AT
MERRIBEE
ME R RIB E E. N E W S O U TII IF A LE S


FLOCK OF MERINO EWES ON WARRAWIDGEE
structed. There are a number of windmills to do the
pumping, and through the many paddocks into which Mr.
Killen has had the place subdivided and freed from rab-
bits, one sees to-day an unfailing supply of water con-
venient to all the stock. Strong fencing is a feature in
every section, and it can safely be said that Mr. Killen
has made of Merribee a highly improved property pro-
ducing to the top of its capacity.
The first owner of this area of country, then called
North Gogeldrie, was the late Mr. Godfrey McKinnon,
who also owned North Goonambil to the south-east. The
former estate, its name having been changed to Merribee,
was purchased by Mr. W. W. Killen in September 1908,
after he had his property in the Corowa district of New
South Wales, known as Bull Plain, cut up into closer
settlement areas.
Mr. Killen has been a stud breeder for very many
years, and he possesses a wide and practical understanding
of the business. The stud flocks which he bred on Bull
Plain carried their lineage through from a foundation of
Wanganella, Quiamong and Wangamong blood to the
introduction of South Australian rams in the early nine-
ties. Two importations of ewes were made in following
years from the Murray blood of Rhine Park and Cappee-
dee, whilst some splendid rams likewise went to Bull
Plain from the two above-mentioned South Australian
studs, as well as from Mt. Crawford and Wirra Wirra.
The squire of Merribee was a firm believer in the
M urray blood for producing the type of sheep he required.
This was the large-framed, roomy, plain-bodied type,
bearing long staple wool of medium to strong combing
quality. The sheep evolved from his methods of breed-
ing were most satisfactory from all points. The right
strain was struck in accordance with Mr. Killen’s ideas,
after giving exhaustive trials, which embraced the intro-
duction of South Australian Pitt-Levels blood. With
these rams the flock was actually started, but later on the
Mu rray strain was mainly adhered to. At the time
therefore that Merribee was purchased Mr. Killen
retained about seven thousand of the best ewes and
weaners, besides a few rams, that were grazing on Bull
M E RRI BE E, NE W SOU TII IF AL E S


MERRIBEE
HOUSE
A CORNER OF
WARRAWIDGEE
HOUSE
MERRI B E E. N E If 7 S 0 UT 11 WAL E S


A MERRIBEE STUD MERINO EWE
Plain, and brought them to their new
home, where they thrived well; in
fact, they seemed to do better on the
new country.
The season of 1926 saw approxi-
mately nineteen thousand sheep and
lambs pass through the shearing
sheds. These, of course, were all
pure Merino, the stud to-day ranking
high amongst the first-class flocks of
the pastoral industry.
Mr. Killen, together with his sons,
pursues the policy of classing all the
sheep, and the same method is ex-
tended to the selection and acquisi-
tion of fresh sires for the stud. There
appears right through the flock a
pleasing evenness of type, a note-
worthy symmetry in the frames and
a good heavy fleece. The sheep also
yield a very profitable carcase, the
importance of weight of mutton not
having been overlooked. Mr. Killen
has been anxious always to learn the
methods of the other fellow, yet has
never departed from the ideas in his
own mind for securing the maximum
production and return.
As a result he has made a success
with strong wool on plain bodies
right through that period when judg-
ment differed so widely concerning
the wrinkly sheep of the Vermont
strain. It seems never to have
entered his mind seriously that plain-
bodied sheep would die out of fashion.
Instead be bred with renewed zeal
and put a constitution into his sheep
which gave them and their strong
wool a character that was not to be
passed by. To day his firm convic-
tions of former years have proved
correct, and whatever the consensus
of opinion about sheep fashions, Mr.
Killen is satisfied with his achieve-
ment, for there could be no stronger
proof of success than the satisfied and
increasing clientele for the sale rams
bred on Merribee to-day.
The output of rams for the sea-
son of 1926 totalled over 3000. A
notation of weights of wool cut from
station-bred rams mentions that tops
have yielded 32 lbs. of wool of ex-
cellent quality, the average for ewes
under ordinary conditions being 13
lbs. 5 ozs. for one year’s growth.
Lambs have given a relatively high
yield as well, growing up to 5j lbs.
of wool up to shearing about
A MERRIBEE STUD MERINO EWE
M ERRI BE E. N E W SOU TII W A EES


PRODUCTS OF THE WARRA-
WIDGEE MERINO STUD
STUD MERINO EWES
ON WARRAWIDGEE
MERRI B E K. N E W S OUT II WAL E S


STUD MERINO EWES
BRED IN THE MERRI-
BEE STUD FLOCK
WARRAWIDGEE
WOOL TEAM
MERRI B E E, N E W S 0 U TII JV A LES


TYPICAL COUNTRY ON WARRAWIDGEE
five to six months after they are born.
Shearing operations, which commence early in spring,
are conducted on lines rather different from the orthodox
manner of these days, when most flocks go under the
machines. Mr. Killen reports that his practical experi-
ence with machines extending over two seasons some years
ago was less satisfactory, so it is interesting to learn
that up to the present he has not departed from the
practice of shearing all his sheep on Merribee by hand.
For some years the Merribee clip was sold in London,
and its characteristics became well known, particularly
the great length of staple, its strength and its breeding, but
of late it has been offered in Sydney. The clip usually
runs into about 500 to 600 bales, and it bas topped the
market in Sydney for its class and always realises a good
return per head.
There was also a first-class herd of Shorthorn cattle
on Merribee, and though only small, it consisted of pure
blood of long pedigree; it was originally brought from
Bull pla in, coming from the renowned “D in diamond”
herd, while of recent years Derrimut bulls were intro-
duced. Some time ago the herd was transferred to
Blowering Station, owned in conjunction with Mr. Arm-
strong, and to-day it numbers one hundred head.
In view of a portion of the country being of proved
value for crops, this form of agriculture occupies a place
THE HOMESTEAD AT WARRAWIDGEE
M ERRI BEE, NEW SOUTH WAL E S


in the general running of the station to-day, wheat, oats,
barley and lucerne being grown in a limited way, mainly
for hay and ensilage. 1 he area cultivated is over three
hundred acres, much of it lying in the north-western
corner of Merribee, near which runs the main canal from
the Burrinjuck reservoir. The above crops are grown
with the definite purpose of storing a supply of feed in
dry seasons.
I here is also a number of ensilage pits, each holding
about 120 tons, and their size is 20 ft. wide by 80 ft.
long by about 7 ft. deep. Their construction allows for
the quick handling of the fodder with carts or drays or
motor transport. These can be driven in or out at each
is joint managing director of several holdings run under
the style of Elsinora Limited, the company comprising
Elsinora, Wanaaring, Thurloo Downs and Urisino, all
lying adjacent to each other in the Wanaaring district,
and Mooculta, which is situated near Bourke. The area
of these runs totals about one and a-quarter million acres.
Elsinora was the first of the group to be taken up, and
Mr. W. W. Killen went out to this unimproved, un-
stocked. waterless region from his father’s estate near
Jerilderie over 40 years ago to develop it. Pilsinora
lies west of the Paroo beyond Bourke, whence a trek of
160 miles had to be made. At that time the new hold-
ing of leasehold country of a quarter of a million acres
A DISTANT VIEW OF THE MERRIBEE HOMESTEAD
end, and when filled the pits are covered with the ex-
cavated soil. The conservation of a pit full of fodder of
the above size means an expenditure of about 10s. per ton,
but feed is cheap at this figure in drier times when neither
love nor money could make it grow naturally.
Upon the even slope of a low hill facing the distant
view of Mount Binya, and almost in the centre of Merri-
bee, stands the homestead, a two-storey and tower edifice
built from the near-by sandstone outcrops in 1910. It is
indeed a beautiful and up-to-date residence in a pic-
turesque environment of gardens, lawns and shade trees.
Mr. Killen possesses wide interests in other parts of
New South Wales besides Merribee, which to-day is man-
aged by his son Harold Charles. The former, with his
brother, Mr. Edward Killen, of Homebush, near Sydney,
was more than 250 miles from any railway. Within
seven years the place had been improved, watered and
stocked with 70,000 Merino sheep. The brother, Ed-
ward, then assumed the management and developed the
run on successful lines. Subsequently the other four
properties were embraced in the venture.
In the same district the firm of Messrs. Killen and
Co. owned Willara and Talyealye, two adjoining pro-
perties, which carried about 20,000 Merino sheep and
about 1000 Shorthorn cattle in 1926. These two hold-
ings have now been sold.
The Merribee Company Limited controls Warrawidgee
Station in the Hay district, with about fifteen thousand
Merino sheep and a few cattle, and this property is under
the management of Edward Cecil Lyle Killen, second
M ERRIBE E, NEW SOUTH WA LE S


SIDE ENTRANCE TO
MERRIBEE HOUSE
AND GROUNDS
son of Mr. W. W. Killen. Mollee and Togo Stations
in the Narrabri district are recent acquisitions by the
firm, and the latter are managed by another son, William
Bertram Sydney Killen.
On the purchase of Warrawidgee, some 1500 Alerino
stud ewes were bought from the Bringagee Alerino stud
flock, the originals of which came from Wanganella sta-
tion. About 1000 of these with their ewe progeny were
selected to form the foundation of a Merino stud flock at
Warrawidgee. With these ewes were mated Pembel-
gong stud Merino rams, purchased at the Sydney ram
sales, the prices running up to 400 guineas. The Warra-
widgee Merino stud flock will be maintained at this
station and bred pure to the parent strains.
In the Gundagai district of New South Wales, near
the township of Tumut, lies the relatively small but
important property called Blowering. Mr. W. W.
Killen is partner with Mr. Armstrong in this compact
run, which is used for grazing cattle and also the stock
of other properties during abnormally dry seasons. In
1926 there were about one thousand head of Shorthorn
cattle on this property. Goobragandra, near Tumut,
and Wyora, on the Goodradigbee River, between Tumut
and Canberra, are two other properties, comprising about
27,000 acres of summer countn r to which stock from the
Riverina properties of the firm are taken in dry seasons.
Other properties have been in the hands of Mr. Killen
from time to time, hut the foregoing fully occupy his
attention, and the Merino stud flock at Merribee is es-
pecially a credit to his enterprise. The stock running on
the stations of the firm generally have been selected very
carefully, so that the cardinal features in his policy could
be developed profitably, viz., the production of big fleeces
of clean wool and a good carcase.
Born in County Antrim, Ireland, Air. William Wilson
Killen received his early education at the famous Belfast
Academical Institution. With his parents and brother
Edward he came to this country in 1876 and quickly
adapted himself to the new conditions of life here. His
father owned Carnerney Station, near Jerilderie, which
has long since been cut up into small holdings, and at
this place the subject of these notes acquired a sound
knowledge of sheepbreeding. When at an early age his
father entrusted him with the responsibilty of opening
up Elsinora, as mentioned in a preceding paragraph, his
opportunity for displaying his ability came, and was seized
with good results. After leaving Elsinora he went to
Pirillie Station, on the Warrego River, a large estate
M K R R I li EK. N E W S O U TII W A LE S


STUD MERINO SIRES USED IN THE WARRAWIDGEE STUD
TYPE OF MERINO EWE BRED IN THE MERRIBEE FLOCK
ME R R IBE E. N E W S () U T H W A LE S


owned by Goldsbrough, Mort and Co. Limited, manag-
ing there for three and a-half years. In 1893 the Bull
Plain holding at Corowa, N.S.W., was leased with a
partner, Mr. R. E. Young, but ten years later he pur-
chased some 16,000 acres of that estate, where he carried
on business until it was cut up and sold and Merribee
purchased in 1908.
Mr. Killen married in 1891. His wife was Marion
Young, the third daughter of the late Hon. Charles
Young, who represented Kyneton in the Victorian House
of Parliament for some twenty years. Of the family of
three sons and one daughter, one son, Edward, saw active
service with the Royal Flying Corps during the European
War of 1914-18. Another son, Harold, also served with
the R.F.C., and at the conclusion of hostilities was at-
tached to a R.F.C. training squadron in England as fly-
ing instructor.
M iss Marion Alice Killen, his only daughter, is now
the wife of John Stanley Leitch. Mrs. W. W. Killen
died in September 1926.
Mr. Killen lately married Myra, second daughter of
Mrs. Dean, of Bellevue Hill, Sydney, and the late
Edward Dean.
Always sharing in any movement to improve pastoral
conditions and to further local development, Mr. Killen
has been associated with many public bodies, and served
on the Council of the New South Wales Graziers’ As-
sociation, Farmers’ and Settlers’ Association, and the
Stockowners’ Association. In addition he is a member
of the House of Representatives in the Federal Parlia-
ment, representing Riverina.
The S vdnev residence of Mr. W. W. Killen is at
M anly, and is named Burnham, a lovely home overlook-
ing the ocean. His second son, Edward, married Miss
Margaret Rice, and his son Harold, now manager of
M erribee, married Miss Marion S. Balfour, while Wil-
liam B. S. Killen married the daughter of Archdeacon
w eir, of Warragul, Victoria.
W. W. KILLEN.
WARRAWIDGEE STUD EWES
1/ E RRI BE E. N E W S 0 U T H WAL E S


NIMAGEE, MOONAGEE, GERAR AND WEE JASPER
The Properties of E. Killen and Sons Limited
AL 1 HOIGH Mr. Edward Killen has been con-
nected with the pastoral industry in New South
Wales and Queensland nearly all his life, it was
only a few years ago that he formed his interests into a
company, styled E. Killen and Sons Limited, comprising
himself, as managing director, and the members of his
family. This pastoral company took over the control of
Nimagee at Nymagee, Moonagee and Gerar at Nyngan,
and Wee Jasper at Yass, all being stations previously
held by Mr. Edward Killen.
composed of native grasses, trefoil and other herbages,
with a quantity of saltbush and other edible scrubs.
The run is well watered, for besides having a double
frontage to the Gunningbar and Belar Creeks, the Bogan
River and Duck Creek and several “cowals” are situated
within the boundaries. In addition, there are numerous
surface tanks, dams and wells, all the latter being
equipped with windmills. The average rainfall is about
17 in.
The permanent improvements include the netting of
THE HOMESTEAD AT MOONAGEE
Of these properties, Moonagee and Gerar are perhaps
the two of the most importance, on account of the stud
Merino flocks maintained, while Nimagee is utilised
principally for grazing purposes and Wee Jasper as a
summer depot.
Moonagee, which after passing through several hands
was purchased by Mr. Killen in 1922 from Mr. L. L.
Agnew, is situated 17 miles north of Nyngan, on the
Gunningbar Creek, and now comprises 41,000 acres of
freehold land, made up of typical flat country of open
hlack and red soil plains and some timbered area, all of
which is first-class grazing. The pastures are mainly
the run into five sections, with the consequent eradication
of the rabbit pest. The original homestead was some
years ago destroyed by fire, so a new one has been erected
on the Moonagee Cowal.
In 1924, at the dispersal sale of Austin Wanganella
Company’s Bringagee stud flock of Merinos, Mr. E.
Killen purchased 1105 stud ewes and 18 stud rams, and
with this draft formed the Moonagee flock, which has
been bred on consistent lines, fulfilling the requirements
of the demand for this particular type of Merino.
A small but good qualitied herd of beef Shorthorn
cattle is also maintained on Moonagee, the object being


THE WOOL-SORTING
TABLES AT MOONAGEE
SHEARING SHED
MERINO WETHERS
WATERING ON
MOONAGEE COWAL
NIMAGEE, MOON AGEE, GERAR AND WEE JASPER, NEW SOUTH WALES.


to raise an early maturing type of beast suitable for
Flemington, and at the same time keep the pastures from
becoming too coarse in good seasons.
Gerar adjoins Moonagee and comprises 10,000 acres
of country similar to that already described, with the
exception that the timber belts are lighter. It was pur-
chased by Mr. Killen in 1903, when it was practically in
an unimproved condition, but under the new ownership
and the expenditure of a large sum of money, it has been
converted into a first-class grazing proposition, well
kept ever since. It produces a medium type of wool on
a large plain and robust frame, and a sheep now well
known throughout Australia for its dual qualities of
wool and mutton, as well as for its hardy constitution.
The wool is about 64 to 70 spinning count, carrying an
even and well defined crimp, a staple length of about
4 inches for the twelve months’ growth, a bright colour
and sufficient density to guard against the dust of the
western country entering the fleece.
The stud was commenced with 150 ewes, but has now
REFLECTIONS ON THE
MOONAGEE COWAL
watered and free from rabbits, though, of course, odd
ones still continue to make an appearance.
Here also is maintained a stud flock of Merino sheep,
founded at Nimagee in 1901 on principally South Aus-
tralian strains, chiefly Murray, Bungaree and Koonoona,
with an infusion of Austin Wanganella and Boonoke
blood. This stud was kept at Nimagee for some years,
and was then transferred to Gerar, where it has been
some 2500 breeding ewes in the flock. Each year a heavy
culling of about 35 per cent, is made, so with this drastic
expulsion of anything inferior the Gerar stud has reached
a very high standard. The surplus sheep find a ready
market throughout Australia, being absorbed annually
by permanent clients.
Being firm believers in the use of blade shears, the
owners when possible shear the special stud sheep by this
N IMA GE E, MOON AGE E, GER A R AN D WE E JASR E R. NE W SOUTH W A EES.


GERAR STUD MERINO EWES
MOONAGEE TWO-TOOTH SALE MERINO RAMS
N IMA GEE, MO ON A CEE. G ERA R AND WEE JASPER. NEW SOUTH WALES.


method, but with the decrease in number of blade
shearers, a difficulty is being experienced in securing
efficient labour for the work. The general shearing is
now done mostly with machines, there being no choice,
for the reason just given.
Although the district is practically free of ticks and
lice, the dipping of the sheep is undertaken as a precau-
AN EARLY
MORNING MUS-
TER OF MERINO
EWE HOGGETS
AT GERAR
tion, especially in connection with the sheep brought on
to the property from outside. The general lambing takes
place in the autumn, and in normal seasons about 80 per
cent, of lambs are marked.
Nimagee, the other western property owned by this
company, was purchased by Mr. E. Killen in 1900 from
the late Hon. Chas. Young. It is situated 72 miles
DRAFTING MERINO SHEEP
IN THE MOON AGEE YARDS
NIM AGE E, M DON AGE E, GERARANDWEE J A S P E R, N EW SOU Tll IF ALE S.


MERINO SHEEP MUS-
TERED AT A PERMANENT
WATERHOLE ON GERAR
SHEEP DRAWING OUT OF A
BOX GROVE ON THE RANKS
OF MOONAGEE COWAL
N IMA GEE, MO ON A GEE, GERAR AND WEE JASPER, NEW SOUTH WALES.


A GROUP OF
MERINO EWES
AT GERAR
A TYPICAL TWO-
TOOTH SALE RAM
AT MOONAGEE
NIM AGE E, MOON AG EE, G ERA RANDWEEJ A S P E R. NEIV S O U TII WA EE S.


STATION-BRED
MERINO
SIRES ON
MOONAGEE
THE MOONAGEE COWAL
NIM A GE E, M O ON A GE E, GERA R AND JV E E J A SPER, NE W SOU T H WA LE S.


south-west of Nyngan, and comprises some 50,000 acres
of both freehold and leasehold lands.
1 he general lay-out of the country is undulating, and
it was originally heavily timbered with box and cypress
pine, but since then has been judiciously ringbarked and
suckered. The whole property is adequately watered by
a series of surface tanks and dams, while the average
rainfall, over a long period, is in the vicinity of 17 in.
naturally has a certain amount of drought resistance.
The stock run on Nimagee are Merinos, bred on the
same sound lines as those at Gerar, and in fact they come
from the same foundation stock. They are of the large
plain bodied type, with strong legs, and a covering of
medium quality, long staple and bright colour, having an
even crimp and sufficient density. They are of a type,
uniform in character, which thrives under the hardest
ANOTHER VIEW OF MOONAGEE HOMESTEAD
As is well known, the whole western belt of country
is subject to droughts at times, so on Nimagee about
100 acres are cultivated for the sole object of conserva-
tion of fodder for lean years. Lucerne, wheat and oats
are the main crops grown, and the products are converted
into hay and stacked in readiness for droughts. The
natural pastures consist of native grasses and numerous
herbages, making an excellent combination, and one which
of conditions, and has the great faculty of acclimatising
quickly in all parts of the Commonwealth.
Wee Jasper, the property situated thirty miles south of
Yass, now comprises about 25,000 acres, made up of some
freehold, C.P., and C.L., and the balance leasehold. It
is used chiefly as relief or summer country, and being
situated in a safe zone is a valuable asset to the company
for its western stations. Although acquired in the first
NIM AGE E. MO ONAG E E, GER A R AND WE E JA S PER. NE W SOUTH WAL E S.


REF LECTIONS
ON THE CUD-
GEGONG OR
MUDGEE
RIVER AT THE
PINE PARK
HOMESTEAD
THE HOME-
STEAD AT
PINE PARK
KIM A GEE, M O ON A G EE, GERAR AND lEEE JASPER, NEW SOUTH WALES.


place as “relief” it has been found that the young sheep
bred in the west benefit considerably by spending a sum-
mer at Wee Jasper.
E. Killen Limited in 1914 purchased Pine Park,
situated in the Dubbo district, and after holding it for
several years, sold out to Messrs. Killen and Marr. It
is managed by the former, Mr. Eric Lyle Killen, who is
the elder son of Mr. E. Killen, and who is interested in
E. Killen and Sons Limited.
Wanaaring and Urilla Downs, while Mooculta has been
added recently.
It is interesting to note that these holdings in the
early days carried sheep, but were converted into cattle
stations, and now again they are being utilised chiefly
for growing Merino wool and fattening Merino wethers,
but at the same time some 2500 head of Shorthorn cattle
are depastured.
Yet another company trading as graziers, under the
TERYAWINYA HOUSE, THE TOWN
RESIDENCE OF MR. EDWARD
KILLEN AT HOMEBUSH
In addition to having the foregoing interests, Mr. E.
Killen is, with his brother, Mr. W. W. Killen, co-
managing director of Elsinora Limited, a company formed
in 1925 to run a group of western New South Wales
stations which were purchased from Sir Sidney Kidman.
These comprise Urisino, 4 hurloo Downs, Elsinora,
style of Marra Limited, with Mr. Edward Killen at
the head, has been formed to operate the large leaseholds,
M arra and Clifton Downs, situated in the north-west
corner of New South Wales, and used for both Merino
sheep and cattle.
Mr. Edward Killen is the second son of the late Mr.
NIMAGEE. MOON AGEE. GERAR AND WEE JASPER, NEW SOUTH WALES.


Edward Killen, who hailed
from County Antrim, Ire-
land. He was horn in 1865,
and arrived in Australia in
the early part of 1876, hav-
ing celebrated his tenth birth-
day off the African coast.
On arrival in this country
he, with his two brothers,
Mr. W. W. Killen, of
Merribee, and the late Mr.
T. Y. Killen, of Killena,
Boomi, settled with their
father at Carnerney Station,
in Riverina.
On the completion of his
education at Scotch College,
Melbourne, Mr. Edward
Killen assisted on his father’s
station, receiving a ground-
ing which greatly assisted
him in after life. Later on
he took over the management
of Elsinora Station, which
was originally taken up by
the late Mr. E. Killen. In
1896 Messrs. W. W. and
E. Killen purchased W3 r ora,
a large leasehold in Queens-
land, and which they even-
tually sold to Messrs. Bull
Bros, in 1910.
In the year 1900 Mr. Edward Killen purchased
Nimagee Station.
In 1891 he married Miss
Annie Young, one of the
daughters of the late Hon.
Chas. Young, who was mem-
ber for Kyneton, Victoria,
but she died in the spring of
1915, leaving a family of two
sons and three daughters,
Eric Lyle Killen, of Pine
Park, being the eldest, and
who married Miss Irene E.
Henderson, of W rotham
Park Station in Queens-
land, and Hopetoun, Ryde.
The others are : Isobel
Annie, who married Captain
J. R. Marr, partner in Kil-
len and Marr, of Pine Park,
and who was formerly with
the A.U.S.N. Company Lim-
ited, and who also served on
H.M.A.S. “Brisbane” and
other vessels during the
war; Violet, who lives wi th
her father at their town resi-
dence, Teryawinya, Home-
bush, Sydney; Barbara
Winifred, who married Mr.
A. B. F. Rofe, solicitor, of
Sydney; and Geoffrey Lyle,
of Moonagee, the youngest,
who married Miss Una Phelps, daughter of Mrs. R.
Suttor by a former marriage, and granddaughter of the
late J. K. Doyle, of Miowera, Nyngan.
MR. EDWARD KILLEN
A PERFECT SPRING DAY
A T IM AGE E, MOON AGEE, G ERA R AND IF EE J A SEER, NE IF SOU THIFA L E S.


CULLINGRAL, MERRIWA, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Thos. B. Macfarlane, Esq.
CULLINGRAL is the old historic station property
selected by Mr. Gregory Blaxland, the explorer,
nearly a century ago, and retained by that family
for over half a century. From the Blaxland family it
became the property of Mr. P. A. Cooper, who held it
for many years, and later sold it to the Cullingral Pas-
toral Company. It was from the latter syndicate that
without altering the old original design. Electric light-
ing and hot and cold water services are installed through-
out the house, and fly-proof gauze encloses the whole
building.
This property, the home of one of the leading flocks
of Corriedale stud sheep in Australia—registered with
the Australasian Corriedale Society, Flock No. 2—is
CULLINGRAL HOUSE ON A WINTER’S MORNING
Mr. Thos. Hogan purchased it in 1925, and in that
same year Mr. Thos. B. Macfarlane purchased from
Mr. Hogan the homestead block comprising 8321 acres.
During the time the property was owned by Mr.
Charles Blaxland, the grandson of Mr. Gregory Blax-
land, the original homestead was erected by convict
labour, and was built wholly of masonry 24 in. thick,
with all the internal wood-work of cedar. Mr. Mac-
farlane has abstained from any vandalism in this old
home, but has improved the building very considerably
situated in the famous Upper Hunter district, and is
about two miles from Merriwa, the railway terminus,
midway between M uswellbrook and Mudgee.
That portion of Cullingral owned by Mr. Macfarlane
consists of gently undulating country with an occasional
hill. The soil varies from rich river Hats, suitable for
lucerne growing, to red and chocolate soils, while the hills
are of basaltic formation. The grasses comprise plain
grass, prairie, white top and many other indigenous kinds,
while the herbage consists of trefoil, crowfoot, variegated


CORRIEDALE 8 MONTHS OLD RAM LAMBS OF 1927 DROP, SHORN AT 4 MONTHS OLD
CORRIEDALE STUD EWES, RISING ONE YEAR OLD
CULLING RA L. NEW SOUTH WALES


CORFUEDALE STUD YEARLING
EWES AT CULLINGRAL
cullixcr.il, ne ir south if ales


SPECIAL STUD CORRIEDALE RAMS IN 10 MONTHS' WOOL
thistle, &c.; Wimmera rye and subterranean clover are
now being established, and other grasses are being ex-
perimented with.
The property has been subdivided into 24 different
paddocks, many of which are netted, and all are per-
manently watered by bores, wells, springs and creeks, with
a frontage also of about 4 miles to Merriwa River. All
the external and internal fences, gates, &c., are in excel-
lent order. The wool shed has accommodation for 3000
sheep and is fitted with eight stands of Wolseley shearing
machines, driven by a 6 h.p. steam engine, while the
shearers’ huts are complete with shower baths and other
accessories.
Mr. Macfarlane has, since his occupancy, established
CORRIEDALE STUD EWES UNDER ONE YEAR
A QUARTETTE OF SYDNEY SHEEP SHOW WINNERS, 1926
CU L LIN GRA L. NE IF SOU TII WA LK S


CORRIEDALE STUD BREEDING EWES AND LAMBS AT CULLINGRAL
SPECIAL STUD CORRIEDALE EWES AND LAMBS, ALL CULLINGRAL BRED
CULLING RA L. NEW SOUTH WALES


SPECIAL STUD CORRIEDALE EWE.
RESERVE GRAND CHAMPION AT
SYDNEY SHEEP SHOW, 1 927
SPECIAL STUD CORRIEDALE RAM.
RESERVE GRAND CHAMPION AT
SYDNEY SHEEP SHOW, 1926
THE TENNIS COURT AND
HOMESTEAD OUTBUILDINGS
CULLINGRAL HOMESTEAD, WITH ITS
SETTING OF LAWNS AND SHRUBS
CUELIN G R A L, NE W SOU T II IV AL E S
CVLLIN G R A L, NE IV S()U T II W ALES


QUEENSLAND
BRED STEERS
ARRIVING ON
CULLINGRAL.
over 100 acres of lucerne, and another 200 acres of land
are now being prepared for sowing this autumn. He is
a strong advocate of the conservation of fodder, and be-
sides making pit ensilage from natural grasses and her-
bage, he grows—apart from lucerne—oaten and wheaten
hay and Sudan grass, all of which is cut and stacked or
converted to ensilage and kept in readiness for dry times,
nature’s way of making some parts of Australia the finest
sheep country in the world.
This strain of Corriedales, besides being famous
throughout Australia, where its descendants are used by
50 per cent, of the Corriedale breeders of the Common-
SPECIAL STUD CORRIEDALE RAM LAMBS
CULLINGRAL, NEW SOUTH WALES


STUD CORRIEDALE RAMS, SHOWING WELL-DEVELOPED HINDQUARTERS
wealth, is also noted throughout New Zealand, Argen-
tina, Japan and South Africa, whither extensive shipments
have been made.
The history of the flock dates back to 1874, when the
New Zealand and Australian Land Company mated stud
Lincoln rams and stud Merino ewes at their Levels
Estate, Canterbury, N.Z., and thus established the oldest
Corriedale flock in existence. This flock so established
was bred within itself and nothing but pure Lincoln-
M erino blood has ever been used.
At the dispersal sale of the Levels stud Corriedales in
1904, Mr. Donald Macfarlane, father of Thos. B.
M acfarlane, purchased 800 stud ewes, which he took to
Teviot, Otago, N.Z., and later to Claremont, Canter-
bury, N.Z., and in 1909 an addition was made to the
stud from the New Zealand and Australian Land Com-
pany’s Moeraki Estate, Otago, whither the remainder of
the Levels stud had been transferred after the dispersal
sale. In 1911 a selection from Mr. Donald Macfarlane’s
stud was sent to Wairoa, Narrabri, N.S.W., where the
stud remained and increased under the personal manage-
ment and supervision of Mr. Thos. B. Macfarlane until
the property was sold in 1925. In that year Mr.
M acfarlane purchased Cullingral and took with him
from Wairoa a selection of 1012 stud Corriedale
ewes over one } r ear old and 66 stud rams, and in
TYPICAL SALE FLOCK RAMS, ONE YEAR OLD
CULLING RAL, NEW SOUTH WALKS


THE
ENTRANCE HALL
A VIEW OF THE
RIVER FLATS
FROM THE LAWN
THE LOUNGE
VERANDAH
CULLINGRAL HOMESTEAD
CULLIN G R A L, NE IT SOUTH WAL E S


1926 he went to New Zea-
land and personally selected
and purchased from the
New Zealand and Australian
Land Company’s Moeraki
Estate 101 stud ewes in
lamh and 7 stud rams, which
along with a further ship-
ment from Moeraki in 1927
of 100 stud ewes in lamb
and one stud ram were
added to his Cullingral stud.
The object of the original
founders of the Corriedale
was to breed a dual purpose
sheep, and it was after much
thought and devotion to the
fixing of a type that the
Lincoln- M erino cross was
evolved, and that cross has
ever since been kept pure
and uncontaminated by Mr.
Macfarlane in his flock since
its inception, as it was in the
the parent flock for over half
a century. Mr. Macfarlane
is a firm believer in line
breeding to acquire and fix a
type, and it is interesting to
note that as in most famous
flocks of any breed of sheep
he has adhered to this idea and kept his flock pure, having
used sires only of Macfarlane blood or from the parent
flock; the latter up to the time of Mr. Macfarlane’s last
purchase in New Zealand had also rigidly adhered to the
use of sires only from its own blood.
Besides proving itself an ideal stud property, with its
different indigenous grasses
and herbage, Cullingral’s
proximity to rail makes it
most suitable for fat lamb
raising, and in this industry
the Corriedale is claimed to
have proved itself the most
profitable of all sheep for
fat lambs.
Where New Zealand once
stood as foremost in its
records of achievements with
its Corriedales, Australia is
fast overtaking it, and the
Cullingral stud has helped in
no small degree to its repu-
tation in this respect. The
demand from oversea in-
creases each year, as the
popularity of this stud makes
itself felt by tbe attractive-
ness and quality of the sheep
sold.
The Corriedale, being a
dual purpose sheep, should
have a good carcase as well
as a good covering of wool,
and the Cullingral Corrie-
dales are noted for these valu-
able qualities. The object
aimed at and maintained is a
well-proportioned carcase on short legs, set well apart,
and carrying an even quality of wool over all, good
staple, dense, plenty of character and breeding, and of
50-56’s count. Corriedale rams having these qualities,
and when mated with first cross Lincoln-Merino ewes,
produce one of the earliest maturing and most valuable
THOS R. MACFARLANE, ESQ.
GENERAL VIEW OF CULLINGRAL COUNTRY, WITH SMALL MOB OF HERD CATTLE
CULLING RAL, NEIL SOUTH WALES


lambs it is possible to breed.
1 he lambs in average seasons
mature at to 5 months
old, and produce not only
the highest possible quality of
meat, but also skins of the
greatest commercial value.
During the past 15 years
fat lambs bred by Mr. Mac-
farlane have invariably com-
manded highest prices. In
drought years, when it is
impossible to fatten lambs,
there is no better proposition
to carry over than the Cor-
riedale cross lamb.
1 he first shipment of Cor-
riedale ewes to be imported
into the Soutli Island of
New Zealand (the home of
the breed) has just been ac-
complished by Air. Macfar-
lane, who recently shipped 14
stud ewes to Mr. Leonard
White, Balrazie, Rakaia,
Canterbury. Included in
this consignment were four prize winners at the 1927
Sydney Sheep Show.
Amongst Mr. Macfarlane’s clients are the New Zea-
land and Australian Land Company, who in 1927 pur-
chased three rams from his Cullingral stud, these being
the first rams purchased by the company since its
A SYDNEY SHEEP SHOW WINNER-FIRST PRIZE
CORRIEDALE EWE UNDER ONE YEAR, 1926
inception of the breed in
1874. Of these three rams
one went to Moeraki Estate,
Hampden, Otago, N.Z., and
two to Dromore Estate,
Chakola, N.S.W. It is a
recognised fact by most Cor-
riedale sheepmen that the
most sought after awards at
any sheep show in the Com-
monwealth are those of the
Sydney Sheep Show, and Mr.
M acfarlane claims to have
been successful during the
past eight years in securing
more prizes at that show
than any other breeder
in the Commonwealth, and
all with sheep of his own
breeding.
Mr. Thos. Macfarlane is
the third son of Mr. Donald
Macfarlane, late president of
the Australian Corriedale
Sheepbreeders’ Association,
and was born at Kurow,
Otago, New Zealand, where from his early boyhood he
worked among stud sheep on the different stations owned
by his father, who very sensibly foresaw that if his sons
were to become practical and expert sheep men, they must
begin at the lowest rung of the ladder and work up
through all the different stages of the job.
UNDER THE SHADE OF THE TREES
CULLINGRAL, NEW SOUTH WALES


GUNNUNGRGH, BOMBALA, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of J. C. Maslin, Esq.
THE district of Bombala, comprising much of the
Southern M onaro Tablelands, lies near the
south-eastern corner of New South Wales, and
is in fact the most southerly district in the State, extend-
ing from the Snowy River regions of the Victorian bor-
der to roughly the vicinity of the town of Cooma, while
between it and the coast is tucked away part of the
earlier pioneers of these tablelands were men of stout
courage and long vision, men who journeyed from Syd-
ney for months in bullock waggons to lay the foundations
of pastoral settlement. There was much to contend with
from the natives, but gradually some fine properties
evolved, and those hardy families have left a heritage
to-day in the form of well-improved Merino sheep runs,
THE GUNNINGRAH HOMESTEAD IN ITS BEAUTIFUL SETTING
Eden district. The pretty township of Bombala rests
among timbered hills, some fifty miles from 1 wofold
Bay and Boyd Town, Eden, at a height above sea level
of more than 2300 ft.
Although the history of the Bombala district runs back
barely ninetv vears, to the thirties of last century, wonder-
ful progress has been made, and still more remarkable
will be the development with the acquisition of hydro-
electric and other resources that time will demand. '1 he
that bespeak the application of mind and man to the gifts
of nature.
Amongst the first class estates in the district to-day,
beautiful properties set upon the rounded boldness of low
hills that are mostly treeless, and running through ver-
dant flats that are timbered lightly, is Gunningrah,
owned by Mr. John Charles Maslin. This property has
a climate ranging from summer heat to extreme winter
cold, which calls for the hardiest types of sheep and cattle


to withstand its rigors, and the dry spells which occur
at rare times.
Gunningrah covers an area of 12,000 acres of country
classified as undulating basaltic plains, all of which is
secured by freehold, and the homestead lies fourteen
miles north-west of Bombala. The soil is mostly black
and the pastures composed of the usual varieties of
summer and winter herbage. These include barley,
crowfoot and trefoil plants, rye grass and spear grass,
of understocking, rather than run the risk of impoverish-
ing the paddocks through overstocking.
There have been practically no grass experiments
adopted, although subterranean clover and a little super-
phosphating have been tried. The former has not had
a chance of proving itself to date, and the latter, though
of an admitted advantage under some conditions, does not
claim great attention owing to the generous endowment
of natural feed. Gum and peppermint trees serve to
HEREFORD CATTLE ON
ONE OF THE PERMANENT
WATERHOLES ON ASTON
all of which afford the stock an abundance of good
nutritious feed. To a certain extent lucerne crops are
cultivated, that grown on the rich flats being stored for
emergency rations. The full carrying capacity of the run
as determined by a normal season has been slightly more
than one sheep to the acre, but the general policy of
management laid down by the owner is to err on the side
provide shade and shelter, and along the river banks and
creeks stately willows grow. The only other trees on the
property are the shade trees around the homestead, of
which there is a large plantation.
Merino purebred sheep are the principal stock on the
estate, which also supports a herd of purebred Aberdeen-
Angus cattle and a number of horses.
GUNNI N G R A 11, NE W S()U T H IV AL E S


AVENUE OF PINES LEADING
TO ASTON HOMESTEAD
GUNNIN GR A H, NE W SOU T II WA LE S


PINES AT
THE ASTON
HOMESTEAD
A RUNNING STREAM WENDING
ITS COURSE THROUGH ASTON
G UNN IN GRA 11. NE W BOU T 11 WA LE S


A PRETTY SCENE
ON A SECTION OF
THE PERMANENT
WATER SUPPLY
AT GUNNINGRAH
MUSTERING EWES
AND LAMBS
ON ASTON
GUNNINGRA H, NE IV SOU TII WAL E S


FOUR-YEAR-OLD HEREFORDS ON ASTON
Early lecords show that Gunningrah has passed through
many hands since it was first established between 1840
and 1850 as a grazing area by the Graham family.
Subsequently Mr. William Graham sold out to a Mr.
Lomas, and then later on the country became the pro-
perty of Messrs. Gilchrist, Watt and Co., of Sydney.
This firm conducted the business of grazing there for a
period which ended by the transfer of the deeds in 1911
to Mr. James Frederick Maslin, the well-known owner
of Carwoola Station, in the Bungendore district, and
which was recently cut up and sold. Mr. Maslin carried
out many improvements of a permanent and valuable
nature, sparing no expense in developing the resources of
the run. He stocked up with the proved strain of the
Carwoola stud and flock Merino sheep, and laid down a
conservative policy of breeding. The active management
was in the hands of Mr. Maddox until March 1917,
when Mr. Maslin’s eldest son, Mr. J. C. Maslin, went
over from Carwoola to manage. The following year the
latter became absolute owner of Gunningrah, and under
his guidance, in the comparatively short time of his
ownership, less than ten years, the property has advanced
into very high repute.
There are at present some twenty-two paddocks of
convenient area, all of which are subdivided and netted
against rabbits. The old timber has been burnt off and
cleared away, leaving a clear field for grazing under the
best possible conditions.
I he waters of Cambalong Creek afford a permanent
supply, and actually they provide water for the whole of
the property, which has an average annual rainfall of
22 in.
The Merino flock numbers approximately 14,000, the
quality of wool being medium to strong. These Gunnin-
grab sheep, which are virtually a continuation of the
Bundaleer strain carried down through the Carwoola
flocks, and therefore of pure blood throughout, are being
developed with the aim of securing a pronounced wool
clip and prime fat wethers.
It is important to note that the stud Merino flock,
which was brought to Gunningrah when the run changed
hands in 1911, entirely superseded the Merinos with
which the property was then stocked, the latter being
disposed of in due course.
On the class of country comprising Gunningrah,
medium wool is the type aimed at. The wool has
GUNNI V G R A 11. NE IV S()U T II WAL E S


DISTANT VIEW OF
GUNNINGRAH
HOMESTEAD
STOCK WATERING AT ONE OF THE WATERHOLES ON ASTON
GUNNI N G l\ A 11, N E ll' SOU T II WAL E S


THE BILLIARD
ROOM
A CORNER OF THE
DRAWING ROOM
THE
DINING ROOM
INTERIOR VIEWS OF GUNNINCRAH HOMESTEAD
GUNNINGRAH, NEW SOUTH WALES


A CORNER OF THE
ASTON HOUSE
AND GARDEN
A GROUP OF STUD HEREFORD
COWS ON THE ASTON PASTURES
GUNN IN GRA H, NEW SOUTH WALES


a good length of staple, a nice density, is full of
character, bright, robust and clean, notwithstanding the
prevalence of a little trefoil burr on tbe run. The wool
is carried well over the whole frame, a characteristic of
the strain. 1 he type in fact has proved its commercial
worth, embracing as it does formation and symmetry
with a sound healthy constitution, for the sheep have
plenty of vitality as a result of the invigorating climate.
There are two even neck folds covering the deep chest,
an evenness of wool on the back and belly, and no objec-
tionable body wrinkles. Being vigorous animals their
power to transmit these characteristics to their stock is
marked to a high degree.
Long, soft, bright wool grows on the flock ewes. It is
of good character throughout, and shows no yellow yolk,
nor are there any body wrinkles. Strict culling is carried
THREE-YEAR-OLD BULLOCKS ON THE BANKS OF CAMBALONG CREEK AT GUNNINGRAH
Of the standard of excellence reached with these flocks
it can be said advisedly that this is the result of building
up from a sound beginning, and through guiding the
development in a sure way along lines that lead to
conformity with the objectives desired.
The stud rams used are a picture of masculinity, strong
and large bone being a feature. They stand on sturdy
legs set well apart, a long body with level top and well
rounded barrel, face open and wide, showing no wig.
out, only those being retained that show the best
characteristics and that are good breeders. When as near
full fleece as possible the maiden ewes are classed and
then put to the rams. The lambing, which takes place in
August, returns a very satisfactory percentage of marked
lambs.
Shearing begins early in November each year.
Planned so that there is ample light at all times
of the day, the roomy wool shed enables the wool to
GUNNINGR A H, NE W SOU T II TV AL E S


be worked forward from
the board. There are four-
teen stands.
The dip and draining
pens are a model of easy
working, and so are the
whole series of drafting
yards. The sheep are
dipped usually about one
month after shearing.
After leaving the bath
every precaution is taken
to see they are well drained
before drying off in the
shade, thus eliminating the
chance of scalding.
A herd of Aberdeen-
Angus cattle running into
about 400 head occupies an
important position on the
estate. All of these beasts
show breeding of a high
order, similar to the herd
that was run on Carwoola
when owned by his father.
They are well known and
well liked, having the true
characteristics of the pure
breed.
The young owner of
Gunningrah is also an ar-
dent admirer of a good horse, and though he does not breed
any on the station, for several years past he has purchased
a few racehorses. With
these he has done a little
racing with successful re-
sults, and has also gone in
for showing, principally at
local shows, where he has
gained many prizes.
At the close of 1926 sea-
son a very good mare,
Malt Fly (Malt King—
Golden Fly), 6 years, win-
ner of many prizes, includ-
ing Pega Town Plate, &c.,
was sent to Topgallant to
be served. This sire is
owned by Mr. A. P.
Wade, and he was a good
performer, running Vali-
care to a place at Rand-
wick in the spring of 1926,
besides being a Futurity
Stakes winner. It is the
intention of the owner to
get in a few more good
mares and gradually work
up to a small stud.
During the process of
evolution of the station im-
provements generally, a
great deal of attention was
paid to the old homestead.
This has been preserved in its entirety, but the weather-
board bungalow has been added to considerably, and
MR. J. C. MASLIN
PERGOLA IN FRONT OF GUNNINGRAH HOMESTEAD
GUNNING RAH, NEW SOUTH WALES


brought into the rank of comfortable modern homes.
Much artistry is displayed in interior decoration, panel-
ling with local woods, See. A lighting plant has been in-
stalled for home power, whilst the latest in neutrodyne
radio sets keeps the home posted with current news.
Apart from the main house are several buildings
abutting on to a spacious courtyard. These are quarters,
guest rooms and offices, garages and billiard room. The
latter is fitted out with rare luxury and accommodates a
full size table, while the panelling and furniture and
sliding cupboards have been fashioned out of local black-
wood. The garage holds three cars and is thoroughly
equipped.
Facing the end of the courtyard lie the general
stabling houses, whilst
on the other side of the
billiard room, to which
a conservatory and
verandah have been
built on, is a mag-
nificent tennis court.
Visits are made often
by grade players from
the cities, Mr. Maslin
being an enthusiastic
follower of the sport.
In 1924 Mr. Mas-
lin purchased from
Messrs. R. and D.
Wilkinson Aston Sta-
tion, comprising 9000
acres of freehold hilly
country, lying six miles
out of Bombala, along
the road to Delegate.
He took delivery in
December 1924, and since then, without neglecting things
on his home station, has put in considerable work in
improving Aston. The timber has been rung, leaving
belts for shelter, while fencing has been erected and
rabbits dug out. The latter have been completely
exterminated from Aston, which is first class wool-
growing country, safe and sound. Permanent creeks
afford an ample water supply, the rainfall being the same
as at Gunningrah. The latter is heavier carrying than
Aston, but the absence of burr makes the new property a
cleaner one for wool. The paddocks into which the run
is now subdivided number twenty.
The number of Merino sheep which passed through
the shed at 1926 shearing was 8000, the same Bundaleer
strain as on Gunningrah. The same rigorous policy of
management is in force, and Aston should have a good
future. The wool grown is of finer quality than that
produced at Gunningrah.
The Gunningrah stud, as well as the whole of the
Carwoola Merino stud, which was purchased at the dis-
persal sale, has been transferred to Aston. It is under-
stood this breeding flock will be kept pure in every
detail. Aston also runs cattle, all Herefords, purchased
from the well-known property, Boroomba, in New South
Wales, the bulls being from Tocal.
Mr. J. C. Maslin is the only surviving son of Mr. J.
F. Maslin, whose other son was killed in action at the
war. Born at James-
town, South Australia,
on his father’s pro-
perty, Bundaleer, in
the year 1895, John
Charles Maslin showed
at an early age an
adaptability to the
work of handling
sheep. He was edu-
cated at Kyre College,
Mitcham, South Aus-
tralia (now known as
Scotch College), and
on leaving in 1912 at
the age of 17 years,
went to New South
Wales to join his
family in their new
home at Carwoola,
near the Federal Capi-
tal, where for five
years he threw himself into the work of sheep breeding
with the utmost keenness. His tutor spared no pains
during the process, and at the age of 22 he went to
Gunningrah to assume control. The following year the
property became his own, and the young owner embarked
upon his career with plenty of optimism, which the
ensuing years have justified. He takes no great part in
the affairs of public bodies in the district, although its
general well being is taken to heart, and helped along in
ways other than through the limelight. In 1923 he
married Rajs daughter of Mr. Henry Rose, of Cooma,
well known in pastoral circles there, and they have a
family of one son and one daughter.
MR. MASLIN'S PRIVATE OFFICE AT GUNNINGRAH
GUNN IN GRA H, NE IV SOU T II IV A LES


CAMBALONG, BOMBAIA, NeW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Ronald Campbell, Esq.
LINKED closely with the opening up of the southern
tablelands of New' South Wales is the name of
Cambalong, known originally as Bombala Station.
The estate is the oldest in the district of Bombala, as it
was the first country to be selected in those rich parts,
and for nearly one hundred years has been in the posses-
sion of the “Campbells of Cambalong.”
Captain Ronald Campbell, of the Indian Army, came
to Si'dney in 1834 in charge of convicts and a detachment
of the 4th Infantry in the convict ship “John,” which
run became known as Bombala, and then in the fifties as
Cambalong, an aboriginal name, by which it is known
to-day.
With Captain Campbell was associated his brother,
Doctor John Breadalbane Campbell, and both of them,
keen, adventurous and progressive men, saw great possi-
bilities for the business of fattening sheep and cattle and
wool growing. During the first few years of their tenure
plans were made for developing the estate, which com-
prised 20,000 acres. Then the Captain went to the
THE CAMBALONG HOMESTEAD
was commanded by Captain Baldwin. Shortly after his
arrival Captain Campbell sold his commission, and the
following year found him at the end of a long journey
south, in unexplored regions of fertile country, and he
decided to take up a large area of grazing land there, and
to stock it with cattle and sheep.
Along the route taken tribes of aborigines were en-
countered, which fortunately were friendly. The pro-
perty was named Campbell’s Station, and as the trickle
of white population filtered through in course of time the
sparsely populated Goulburn district, where he met and
afterwards married the widow of the late Lieut. Edwards,
of Bangalore, leaving his brother to select suitable sites
and commence the various station buildings. After his
marriage Captain Campbell resided at Bangalore, and
freed the property from mortgage, and later transferred
the holding to his two step-sons —W. J. and H. T.
Edwards.
Some years after his marriage Captain Campbell took
his family to Cambalong to live, and by 1841 a number


of properties had been taken up in the neighbourhood,
including country previously held by the Ben Boyd
Syndicate. That syndicate held under lease from the
Crown extensive areas in the Monaro district.
All the streams in the district flow into the Snowy
River, passing through good grazing country with rich
alluvial flats, which is characteristic of the Cambalong
Estate. Small wonder then that the pioneering Camp-
bells were destined to promote rapid progress. In a few
years’ time their holding had become well improved, and
other long-visioned men were attracted about them.
1 hese included William Bradley, to whom not a few
prominent graziers to-day owe their early start in life.
The sheep on Cambalong have always been Merino, of
a type most suitable to the climate and general condi-
tions, and they were supervised by Captain Campbell
until his death at the homestead on 4th November, 1871,
at the age of 85 years. The estate then was divided
between his only son, Ronald, and his sister, Annie, the
former having managed the property for some time.
Subsequently Miss Annie Campbell became the wife of
Mr. And rew Gibson, of Tirranna, Goulburn.
The late Captain Ronald Campbell belonged to an old
Scottish family, and was born at the ancestral home near
Loch Tay, Perthshire, in the year 1786. He served his
country as an officer in the British Army in India, where
he conducted himself with such bravery that he was
awarded the Silver Medal for Gallant Service. He was
a participant in the terrible sufferings caused by the
destruction by fire of the “Kent” East Indiaman in
1825, and was at Dinapore in India shortly afterwards
with the 31st Foot Infantry during the outbreak of
cholera, which resulted in ten thousand deaths. His ad-
vent to the then new founded colony of New South Wales
in 1834 in the ship “John” has already been referred to.
His son, Ronald, was born at Bangalore, near
Goulburn, in 1842. He was taken to England by
his parents, with his sister, to receive his education,
and returned to New South Wales at the age of
17. For several years he served his apprenticeship to
the pastoral industry on the family estate at Cambalong,
and eventually was promoted to the position of manager.
This post was held successfully until his father’s death
in 1871, when the property came under his sole super-
BULLOCKS ON THE RIVER BANK
CAMBA L O A r G, NK W SOU TII IV A LES


A SECTION OF THE GARDEN SOME FINE SPECIMENS OF FIR TREES
vision. Soon after his sister’s marriage with Mr. Andrew
Gibson, Mr. Campbell purchased her share and became
the sole owner of the estate. Besides the Cambalong
property, Mr. Campbell at different times also
owned the Mila, Summer Hill, and Burnima Stations,
all of which lie afterwards sold. He also owned a
half-share, with his sister, in the valuable property
Yaranung, in the llega district.
At the age of 28 years, in 1870,
he married Elizabeth, the youngest
daughter of the late Andrew and Jane
Cunningham, of Lanyon Station, near
Queanbeyan. She was a woman of
exceptional charm and nobility of
character, her loving and gentle nature
endeared her to all who knew her, and
from the first day she entered into her
husband’s interests she assisted him in
all his plans for improving and
beautifying the home which she loved
so well. Her death occurred on 6th
February, 1925.
There were nine children of the
marriage, six girls and three boys, who
are as follows:—Nina A., who is un-
married; Jessie A., who married D. K.
Shannon, of Lismore; she died in
1915, leaving one daughter (Eliza-
beth Jean) ; Ethel De V., married C.
H. Stiles, of Bulong, near Cooma; Mabel M., married
R. A. Holmes, district surveyor of Goulburn; Ronald
8., who lives in Sydney; Bruce C. G., married Heather,
daughter of late R. T. Keys; Jean R. H., married W.
Bassett Christian, of Brindingabba and Maranoa Stations
in the Bourke district; Brenda 8., who died when a
child; and Douglas Gordon, who served in the Great
THE DRIVE TO THE STABLES
CAMBA L 0 N G, VA ]V S()U T // JV AL A .S'


THE AVENUE
LEADING TO
THE CAMBALONG
HOMESTEAD
War. He enlisted in 1914, and was Captain in command
of the sth Australian Artillery Brigade when he was
killed in action at Ypres in 1917.
Bruce Campbell was born at Cambalong in 1880; he
was educated at the Church of England Grammar School,
North Sydney, and on leaving school went to the station
to gain experience in wool growing and general manage-
ment under the expert tuition of his father. He also
gained pastoral knowledge on other stations, principally
in Riverina. His present task of assisting in the manage-
ment of the estate commenced in 1925. In 1909, as
already stated, he married Heather, the daughter of a
well-known pastoralist, the late Mr. R. T. Keys, of
Bengalla, Muswellbrook. For some time Mr. and Mrs.
Campbell lived at and managed Bengalla, afterwards
returning to Cambalong, where they have made their
home. Mr. B. C. G. Campbell also owns a property of
a rich nature about seven miles from Quirindi, which is
at present under lease.
Mr. Campbell is a well-known identity in the Bombala
CAMI!A L 0 N G. A E If’ S()UI' 11 IT AE E S


and Muswellbrook districts, and has taken a keen interest
in general affairs affecting the localities. His three sons,
Robert Richard Bruce, Ronald Colin, and John Bruce,
are at the present time attending Cranbrook School,
Sydney.
Reverting to Cambalong and its management, Mr.
Ronald Campbell introduced high-class methods into the
control of his flocks and the breeding of cattle, concen-
trating upon the all-important policy of breeding to a
definite objective, discarding the obsolete and adopting
ANOTHER VIEW
OF THE AVENUE
LEADING TO THE
HOMESTEAD
the most advanced knowledge of animal husbandry, and
maintaining definite progress with the quality of wool,
mutton and beef grown under his supervision. In 1919
he formed a limited liability company to carry on the
business of the station, and became managing director of
the company, which, under the name of Cambalong
Limited, is made up of members of his family. The
estate is at present under the management of Mr. Arthur
Blake, who is well known in the west as a first-class sheep
judge.
cAMnA LO N G. N K 11' S()U T II IT AL E S


STATION-BRED CATTLE ON THE BOMBALA RIVER
FAT BULLOCKS BRED ON CAMBALONG
PANORAMIC VIEW OF CAMBALONG STATION-ROLLING
DOWNS, DWNS WATERED BY RIVER AND CREEKS
THE HOMESTEAD IS SEEN AMONG THE FIR
TREES AT THE RIGHT OF THE PICTURE
C A 71/ UAL() N G, A EIV AOU T II IT AA E S
C A 71/ BAL() N G. NE IT S()U T II IV AL E S


STATION BULLOCK TEAM CARRYING LUCERNE HAY
Camhalong to-day comprises 20,000 acres of freehold
lands, all open and improved country of an undulating
nature, intersected by ridges and alluvial flats, and is the
same in area as it was when it was taken up nearly a
century ago. Strange would it have seemed to the first
selector of the run to have known that four generations
of his family within the ensuing ten decades would live
on the property, yet such has been the case.
The topography of the place has lent itself to con-
venient subdivision, and the thirty odd paddocks into
which the whole estate is divided have been made proof
against invasion by rabbits, of which the run has been
freed. Further, in every paddock there is running water,
the Bombala River, Camhalong Creek, and Back Creek,
as well as springs, providing the supply. The annual
rainfall is 23 in. The thermometer readings for a num-
ber of consecutive years show a mean maximum tempera-
ture of 68 degs. and a mean minimum of 40.8 degs.,
denoting an ideal climate.
The areas for grazing are designed so that portions of
the run can be spelled when necessary. Indigenous pas-
ture plants for every season of the year afford a wealth
of good nourishing feed, and the rich summer grasses
include kangaroo, plains grass, crowfoot, and native
clover, the autumn and winter varieties including plains
and barley grass. Experiments have been undertaken
with the cultivated clover, and mixed grasses have been
tried, and whichever tends to increase the carrying
capacity will be developed to its full resources. There
have been light trials of superphosphate.
The main timber on the property is white and ribbony
gum, although there is a certain amount of box. Timber,
however, is on the whole sparse.
The woolshed is a modern building, and is fitted wi th
14 stands of Moffat-Virtue machines, with Lister hand
CAMr>AI A) X C. NK ir S()U T II IV AL E S


LOADING WOOL AT THE SHED
pieces. All the adjoining pens and dip are of up-to-date
design.
The present homestead is an imposing structure, con-
structed in 1883, and stands on the side of a hill com-
manding an extensive panoramic view. The rooms are
large, with every comfort of a modern home, hot and
cold water service, &c. The house is surrounded by
beautiful gardens, grand old trees affording plenty of
cool shade. These trees are mostly English, all of which
were planted by Mr. Ronald Campbell many years ago.
They include some rare varieties, which in their present
age and great foliage lend a most picturesque aspect to
the homestead.
Part of the original homestead built in the forties was
demolished and the remaining portion, situated about half
a mile away from the present buildings, which were the
old spacious offices built by the late Doctor Campbell,
have been improved to accommodate the station manager.
Telephonic communication connects the various build-
ings.
The station carries at present some 22,000 Merino
sheep that form a particularly fine flock, growing wool
that is classified as medium to fine. It is sold in Sydney,
and always returns a high price. A great deal of atten-
tion is paid to getting it ready, and the Cambalong clip
is recognised as being consistent in its classing and baling,
and has regular bidders at the auction rooms on this
account.
'The present flock was founded on a strain of Wanga-
mong and Boonoke blood, and of late years there has
been an introduction of rams from Uardry. The result
of the blend has been excellent, suiting the climatic con-
ditions of this part of the Monaro. The sheep show
marked vigour and robust constitution, which is reflected
THE GARAGE AND STABLES
cAMBAL () N G , N E //’ .V OUT 11 WAL E S


A TWELVE-FOOT VERANDAH
AT THE FRONT OF THE HOUSE
THE DRAWING ROOM AT
CAMBALONG HOMESTEAD
THE CAMBALONG DINING
ROOM, ALSO USED FOR
BILLIARDS
CAMBAI. () N G. N E If’ S()U T II WAL K S


THE LATE CAPTAIN RONALD
CAMPBELL, THE ORIGINAL
HOLDER OF CAMBALONG
STATION
MR. RONALD CAMPBELL, THE
PRESENT HOLDER OF CAMBALONG
THE LATE MRS. ELIZABETH
CAMPBELL, WIFE OF MR.
RONALD CAMPBELL
CAMBA L O N G, A T ETV S() UT II WAL E S


in the lambs, helping very considerably to an early
maturity and a subsequent good even fleece.
Besides the Merino flocks some prime fat Shorthorn
bullocks are reared on the property, and the introduction
of New Zealand bulls of first-class breeding vindicated
the owner’s judgment that they would suit local condi-
tions very well, there being some magnificent beasts
grazing now on the pastures. One of the bullocks pre-
pared for the 1926 show in Sydney could not on account
of his height fit into the truck. His live weight was
2600 lbs.
In past seasons both cattle and sheep have been
exhibited at various local country shows with success.
Especially was interest taken in the shows held annually
by the Bombala Pastoral and Agricultural Society, which
has been in existence for 54 years. On four occasions
only was the show not held, and March 1927 marked its
fiftieth anniversary.
Mr. Ronald Campbell resides in Sydney, and until
recently enjoyed the best of health, but a few years ago he
THE THREE SONS OF MR. BRUCE C. G.
CAMPBELL AND GREAT GRAND-SONS OF
THE LATE CAPTAIN RONALD CAMPBELL
had the misfortune to suffer from a stroke. Although in
his eighty-fourth year, he has not relinquished the active
control of the company, and maintains to a remarkable
degree an interest in many affairs concerning the country.
On the sth November, 1903, the residents of the town
of Bombala presented him with a handsome illuminated
address in recognition of his services to the district, prin-
cipally with regard to his efforts in connection with the
selection of Bombala as a proposed site for the Federal
Capital. This site was in the first instance favoured by
members of the hederal Parliament, but afterwards
rejected in favour of the Canberra site, which is situated
about 100 miles to the north.
For many years Mr. Ronald Campbell has been a
justice of the peace, and was also president of the local
agricultural society. He took an active part in all pro-
gressive measures which the local people brought forward,
and holds their esteem to-day as the senior living repre-
sentative of a family of distinguished pioneers, the
“Campbells of Cambalong.”
GAMBAL () N G, XE IE .S' OUT II TV AL E S


BURRONGONG, URANA, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Property of Messrs. G. E. Maslin & Sons.
BURRONGONG Station is located in southern
Riverina, New South Wales, some 400 miles due
south-west of Sydney, and is the home of the Bur-
rongong Merino Stud. The township of Urana lies
twelve miles north, and Corowa, on the Victorian border,
is forty miles away south. Melbourne is about 200 miles
ideal for breeding purposes, and immediately set about the
establishment of a stud. To develop it into a stud flock
of the highest calibre engaged the whole of his energies,
and its subsequent progress and present high standard re-
flect the soundest principles of breeding from which he
worked up.
THE BURRONGONG HOMESTEAD AND A CORNER OF THE GARDEN
distant. The postal address of the station is “via The
Rock.” New South Wales, the telephone connections are
through both Urana and Oaklands, whilst rail facilities
are afforded by the Coorabin Siding, which is on the pro-
perty near headquarters. Burrongong was purchased
from Mr. Philip P. Gell in 1914 by Mr. George Edward
Maslin, an experienced pastoralist, well known in Vic-
toria and South Australia. He perceived the run to be
The business is run as a private company under the
control of Mr. George Malcolm Maslin, the eldest son,
who first managed the station in 1918. The area of
Burrongong is 20,000 acres freehold, of red and black
soil plains, and in normal years, with a rainfall of 18 in.
per annum, the country is covered with a luxuriance of
native grasses and herbage. The timbered portions of
the property, which are on the north and eastern boun


daries, consist of belts of grey box, bull oak and boree,
whilst the plain areas, which stretch back from the Billa-
bong Creek, are of the black puffy nature, broken here
and there with stretches of good red plain. These three
different kinds of
country afford
great changes for
the stock.
Originally taken
up by the pioneers
in the sixties, the
present holding was
once part of North
Goonambil and
Burrongong Sta-
tions. When he
became owner in
1914, Mr. Maslin
was faced with the task of converting an almost
unimproved run into an efficient stud property, and
spared no expense in the reorganisation process, which has
been carried out with system and thoroughness. This
work was continued after his retirement, with the result
that the property to-day is an exceedingly valuable one.
ing water, and in all parts of the run, in close proximity
to the stock, are large surface tanks and sub-artesian
bores. Troughing and windmills play their part, but
to increase still more the efficiency of the supply,
channels have been
constructed leading
from the Billa-
bong to many parts
of the interior of
the run to which
an ample supply of
water can thus be
pumped. For this
purpose several
good dams have
been made. Al-
though the policy
is an expensive one
it is considered justified, as indeed are all permanent im-
provements of a sound nature. The absence of good
buildings when the run changed hands gave the owner
scope to embody the most recent ideas in the new erec-
tions, the consequence being that the enlarged woolshed,
with 18 stands, men’s quarters, huts, sheep yards, dip,
SELECTED 4-TOOTH BURRONGONG MERINO RAMS
FOUR-TOOTH BURRONGONG SALE MERINO RAMS
Subdivision has been confined to twenty-five suitable
grazing areas, apart from the small home paddocks. Two-
thirds of the run are enclosed with rabbit-proof wire net-
ting, and on the balance, being open black plain, rabbits
are practically unknown.
The management pays great attention to stock drink-
sheds, outbuildings and the homestead, gates, fences, &c.,
were made as efficient as possible.
In 1925 the homestead and contents were destroyed
by fire, and a new one, of the popular bungalow type,
made of concrete and pise, was erected in 1926. It is a
charming home, compact and containing all the essentials
BURR ON G ON G, NE W SOU TEI WAL E S


SPECIAL STUD MERINO
EWES AND LAMBS IN ONE
OF THE BURRONGONG
TIMBERED PADDOCKS
to modern comfort, besides being easily worked. Abut-
ting on a bend of the creek, it is surrounded by a garden,
shade trees, hedges, vines, and a tennis court, while the
rest of the homestead buildings are in keeping with the at-
tractive general layout. All parts of the run are linked
to the homestead by five telephone lines, and altogether
Burrongong is very highly improved. The management
aims to place the stud upon a status equal to the best
Merino stud properties in Australia.
The carrying capacity of Burrongong is from 12,000
to 15,000 sheep, including from 6000 to 8000 lambing
ewes. M arch and April are the lambing months, when
a high percentage of natural increase is added in normal
times. Even in dry seasons the marking is good. This
was the case during the dry spell of 1927, when, de-
spite absence of green feed and very little hand-feeding,
the figures did not drop below the seventies. One lot
of 1400 5-year-old ewes marked 75 per cent., and this is
BURRON GON G, NE W SOU T H WA LE S


A CORNER OF THE DRIVE TO
THE BURRONGONG HOUSE
proof of the sound holding character of the country.
Another feature of the company’s policy is the system
of fire breaks on vital parts of the run. These are the
usual graded tracks varying from half a chain to a chain in
width, and running in two mile sections. With an efficient
motor truck equipment the most menacing of summer
fires can be reached quickly and dealt with effectively.
1 o the conservation of fodder a great deal of thought
has been given, and to be prepared for emergency is a
strong point with the owners. The method used is to
cultivate a quantity of fodder during a good season, press
it with a power press and store the bales of hay in iron
preserving sheds until required. In this way it keeps
indefinitely. It is scattered through the paddocks in dry
times after a soaking in molasses. Some nuts are used
also, and that the method adopted is satisfactory was well
proved during the very drv months of the first half of
1927.
With regard to the main business of the station, that
of breeding stud rams of the highest quality, a working
policy was laid down by Mr. G. E. Maslin in 1914,
having very definite aims. Combined with the rules for
strict classing was the practice of culling to the greatest
extent, and of course selective mating was imperative, the
objective in view being the type of commercial Merino
best suited to the needs of the low rainfall areas
of Australia. Air. Alaslin, whose keen judgment was
widely known, bred constitution into his sheep and char-
acter into their wool, and succeeded in placing his stud
on an excellent footing. No variation in the cardinal
points of the breeding policy has ever been made by the
present studmaster, who has inherited the art of correct
B UR R ON G O N G, NE W S 0 U T H JV A LES


breeding from ids father.
The Burrongong sheep to-day are large and shapely,
well sprung in the ribs, attractive in their carriage, and
have good heads, horns and legs. They are widely
known for their beautiful even fleeces, the wool being of
medium quality.
In founding the nucleus for the stud flock, Mr. Maslin
followed up the disposal of the stock acquired with the
run by the purchase in 1914 of the tops of stud and special
stud ewes and rams from Cocketgedong Stud, Urana,
when that flock was dispersed by the owners, the late
M cssrs. D. and W. Gibb. All of these sheep were pure
Peppin strain, largely infused with the Sir Charles blood
of Bundemar Stud, and to them was added an additional
number of special stud rams of pure Peppin blood pur-
MERINO EWE WEANERS
DRAWING INTO THE SHADE
ALONG THE BANK OF THE
CREEK
chased at the Sydney sales the same year. The latter
were from the celebrated Boonoke stud, which, four years
later, was again drawn on to the extent of 3000 stud
ewes. The sum of £IO,OOO went into this purchase, and
from that date, 1918, the stud flock has consistently gone
ahead.
In 1926, in order to cope with the numbers of good
ewes available as the result of the foregoing purchases,
two rams of class were chosen at a cost of 1000 guineas
each. Of these one came from the Pembelgong stud of
Charles Mills (Uardry) Limited, Hay, New South
Wales, and the other from F. S. Falkiner and Sons Lim-
ited’s Boonoke stud.
The Pembelgong ram, No. 4.1, is the son of sire No.
21.1 out of a Pembelgong special stud ewe. As a ram
B U R R () N C 0N G, NE W S 0 U TII JV A LE S


A GROUP OF SELECTED MERINO
RAMS ON THE CREEK BANK
BURRONGONG STUD MERINO
EWE WEANERS. EVENING
SHADOWS ON THE BILLABONG
BURRO N G ON G, N E I V S O U T H IV AL E S


A SMALL LOT
OF SPECIAL
STUD EWES
ON TYPICAL
COUNTRY
STUD EWES AND LAMBS
ON THE BILLAEONG
BU RR ON G 0N G, NE W S O UT H WAL E S


A GENERAL VIEW OF BURRONGONG HOMESTEAD
lamb in 1925 No. 4.1 was awarded highest honours in his
ciass at the Sydney Sheep Show. Since then he has
grow n out into a well balanced animal of splendid mascu-
line appearance, nice and straight in the
hocks and clad with firm strong wool
of excellent length and colour. He is
the acme of good breeding, and is sure
to have a good influence on the stud
flock, having served 138 selected ewes
in the spring of 1926. The other ram
is No. 814, a magnificent sire in all
respects. His breeding is from a
Boonoke special stud ewe by sire No.
82, and when shorn in August 1926 he
cut 28 lbs. of wool. He was put to
service on Burrongong with 130 selected
ewes.
The lambing from these new top sires
was well advanced early in 1927, the
youngsters already giving evidence of
turning out well. Despite the hard sea-
son only one ram lamb was lost. It is of interest to note
that both No. 4.1 and 814 were on exhibition at Sydney at
the 1926 Sheep Show, the latter being one of a pen of five
A TYPICAL THREE-YEAR-OLD SELECTED BURRONGONG RAM
B U R R 0N G 0N G, NE W S 0 U TII WAL E S


EWES AND LAMBS AT ONE OF
THE TANKS ON BURRONGONG
TYPICAL BOREE AND
BOX COUNTRY WITH
SPECIAL STUD RESERVE
EWES IN FOREGROUND
B UR R 0N G 0N G, N E W SOU TII WAL E S


STUD MERINO EWES AND LAMBS DRAWING INTO WATER
rams shown by Boonoke. This pen won the leading
award for best pen of five grass-fed unhoused rams. No.
814 is a finer woolled sheep than 4.1, but the combina-
tion is designed to produce a good medium strength super-
combing style of wool right through the Burrongong
sheep.
Amongst the sires which were responsible for the sound
progress of the stud, were two rams from the Messrs.
Gibb’s stud flock, named Sir Samuel and Cocketgedong
125. The latter died half way through his season with
the ewes, but nevertheless left behind some good progeny.
Sir Samuel was a very high quality woolled sheep, cutting
31 lbs. as a three year old, and he sired an outstanding
ram named Sir Joseph from a Cocketgedong special stud
ewe. Born in 1916 Sir Joseph was worked with great
success among the fine wool special ewes, showing re-
markable prepotency in his ability to beget progeny true
to type. Many of these were very useful high class and
selected stud rams, and one in particular, No. 205, is
with the head sires to-day. He is a bold masculine type
with shapely head, and carries a fleece, even, heavy, and
of excellent handle. Also Nos. 5.14 and 5.38, sired by
205, are now taking an active part at the head of the
stud.
AN EARLY MORNING DRINK. EWES AND LAMBS WATERING
BURRON GONG, NEW SOU T H WA LES


Besides a breeding flock of stud ewes numbering 2000,
and the stud rams, Burrongong also runs an ordinary
flock. These, however, are being dispensed with gra-
dually, as it is the intention to devote the property in due
course exclusively to stud breeding.
The annual sale of rams off Burrongong runs into
about 500 head as a rule. Their disposal is so regulated
that tiie progress of the home flock will not be jeopardised
for the sake of making high individual sales, although big
prices are paid frequently for the selected rams that are
available. Mr. Maslin attends personally to the class-
ing. and has been rewarded by an ever-increasing demand
for the output. For the three years 1924, 1925 and
1926, the figures obtained were amongst the highest prices
AN INTERIOR VIEW OF
BURRONGONG HOUSE,
SHOWING THE DINING
ROOM, LOUNGE, AND
DRAWING ROOM
in the district, but even more gratifying has been the high
reputation which the rams have gained for themselves,
and the new buyers who come along each season.
The wool clip arrives early at the sales annually and
brings good figures. It is known as a typical Riverina
stud wool, bright, dense, and well bred, and the brand,
GEM/Burrongong, is recognised as one of the best clips
in New South Wales. On two occasions top lines of
fleece have brought 39d. at auction.
The following details will convey some idea of the
quality of wool from this property; —The top prices per
pound for fleece, brokens and skirtings 1916-17 season in
586 bales were respectivelv 19d., 15d., 1 Ifd.; season 1917-
1918. 525 bales. 22fd., 144d.; season 1918-19, 580
SPECIAL STUD MERINO EWES AND LAMBS
BURRO VGON G, .V E W S O I' TII WA LES


bales, 24-2 d., 18d., 15d.; sea-
son 1919-20, 492 bales, 24|d..
ls|d.; season 1920-21,
465 bales, 39id„ 21|d., 9sd.;
season 1921-22, 440 bales,
19Jd., l5Jd., 10Jd.; season
1922-23, 511 bales,
22-2-d. IBfd.; season 1923-24,
381 bales, 26Jd„ 23 Jd..
201, d.; season 1924-25, 340
bales, 39d„ 31Jd., sea-
son 1925-26, 375 bales, 21|d.,
18id, 14^d.
In spite of the very hard
season the 1927 clip had a
good appearance. There was
no break in the wool, which
was very bright and well
grown from a Riverina point
of view. It was somewhat
lighter on account of the dry
spell, but there was more
quality, while the weights
were good.
At the Sydney wool sales
held on 10th October the
1927 clip averaged 19.8dper
lb. all round. Fleeces sold up
to 26Jd., brokens to 22-2 d.,
pieces to 20J,d., bellies to 16d.
per lb. These prices topped
the market at that day’s sales.
Except for a few head of
station cattle, the energies of this young stud breeder are
concentrated upon the pure Merino. His father is one of
two surviving sons of the late Mr. John Maslin, who
will be remembered as owner of Bundaleer Station, South
Australia, some years ago. He was brought up at this
estate near Clare, S.A., and married Catherine Russell
Young, daughter of Mr. J.
Young, of Mount Templeton,
South Australia. Of his
family of three sons, the pre-
sent manager, George Mal-
colm Maslin, is the eldest. He
was born at Clare in 1897, and
spent his early years on Bun-
daleer, afterwards attending
Geelong Grammar School. In
1916 he left school and went
to Burrongong, and from his
father acquired the grounding
in sheep breeding which is now
being developed so well. In
1918 he took over the man-
agement of the run, and in
1922 married Mary Ainslie
Mills, daughter of the late
Mr. Ainslie Mills, of Uardry,
H ay, New South Wales. The
family consists of John
Ainslie and Catherine Mary
Ainslie.
Mr. G. Malcolm Maslin
takes an energetic interest in
all matters affecting the wel-
fare of the district around
him. For several years he
has been a member of the
local shire council, and until
recently was a member of
the Pastures Protection Board.
His wife also has the welfare of the district at
heart, whilst both are enthusiasts in all local sporting
bodies.
Mr. George E. Maslin and his wife now reside on
their property some few miles outside Melbourne, Vic-
toria.
GEORGE MALCOLM MASLIN
ALL READY FOR THE "ROUND UP”
BURR 0 V G 0N G, NE W S O U TII IV A LE S


SOUTH WANGAMONG, COROWA, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Property of Messrs. C. D. Sanger and Son.
AMONGST the foremost of the Merino stud Hocks
in Australia to-day is that of South Wangamong,
owned by Messrs. Charles D. Sanger and Son.
It has its home in that rich, healthy belt of country, the
plains of Riverina, which stretch between the waters of
the Murrumbidgee and the Murray. The nature of its
South Wangamong is roughly 7000 acres freehold, in ad-
dition to which a number of small adjoining properties
are leased. Open plains form about one-quarter of the
country, the rest being heavily timbered plains, mostly
box country interspersed with myall and some saltbush.
There is an abundance of natural pasture, barley grass.
A GLIMPSE OF THE HOMESTEAD THROUGH THE PEPPER TREES
soil, the comparatively rainfall, and the luxuriance
of its pastures in normal seasons, combine to give Riverina
the reputation for which it is noted, namely, for produc-
ing a magnificent type of Merino sheep, big, strong, pro-
lific and profitable.
South Wangamong Station lies in the eastern sector of
these plains, in a locality more than usually favoured by
nature. The town of Corowa lies some 30 miles south-
east of the property, and is the railway centre, while Oak-
lands is about twelve miles to the north. The area of
blue grass, clover and trefoil burr, but from November to
the end of March, during the hot months, the grasses dry
off and green feed is absent. The average rainfall is
15 in., and there are no permanent watercourses on the
property. This, in fact, is the great difficulty out on
these wide plains. At South Wangamong the obstacle
has been overcome absolutely by a series of tanks, wells
and bores, the latter reaching a depth of 150 to 200 ft.
I he property has been known by its present name since
1907, but prior to that it formed the southern half of the


TOP-SALE MERINO RAMS
ON SOUTH WANGAMONG
AWAITING DELIVERY
RIGHT SPECIAL STUD RAMS
MUSTERED FOR SHEARING
BELOW FOUR-TOOTH STUD
MERINO RAMS BRED ON THE
STATION


famous Wangamong Estate, which was taken up in 1850
by the late Mr. John Mildred Sanger, father of the pre-
sent owner. It was one of the first properties acquired
in Riverina, and it was characteristic of the late J. M.
Sanger to back his judgment of local conditions by trying
it out. His name is linked with the early development
of the district, in fact, he may be regarded as one of its
pioneers. He came from Cirencester, Gloucester, Eng-
land, where he was born in 1816. After a vigorous early
career in commerce in London, he became interested in
overseas development, and as a member of the Royal Geo-
graphical Society, worked for the construction of the pre-
sent Panama Canal. In 1837 he came out to South Aus-
tralia in the barque “William Barrett,” and went in for
mining, and was the first to smelt copper ore there. Later
on he became well known in business in Melbourne, until
finally he gave his energies to the pastoral industry.
For several years he managed sheep properties, and at
the age of 34 struck out on his own with the objective of
breeding high class Merinos. The Wangamong holding
YOUNG MERINO EWES
MUSTERED ON THE BANK
OF A SURFACE TANK
was run successfully and was placed under the manage-
ment of Mr. C. D. Sanger, the younger son, in 1889.
Ten years later Mr. C. D. Sanger joined with his brother,
Mr. W. B. Sanger, in leasing the estate with an option
of purchase, which was exercised in 1907. During those
eight years the stud flock was looked after by the two
brothers. When they bought out their father’s interest,
the stock and property were divideu, Mr. C. D. Sanger
receiving the southern portion. The sheep were classed
and selected turn for turn.
For many years the country has been very highly im-
proved from its original state. Much work over more
recent years has transformed it into a compact and easily
worked stud property, especially with regard to clearing
up the old ringbarked timber, and ringing further areas,
leaving judicious belts of trees for shelter purposes for the
stock. The paddocks to-day present a very clean appear-
ance. The water improvements comprise numbers of ex-
cavated tanks, and in no case has any stock to travel more
than one mile for underground water.
SOUTH WANGAM ON G . NE IV SOV T H WAL E S


A SHADY CORNER
OF THE GARDEN AT
SOUTH WANGAMONG
THE HOMESTEAD
WITH ITS WIDE COOL
VERANDAH ALMOST
OVERHUNG WITH
GIANT PEPPER TREES
N O UT U IV ANc;A M O N (I. NE W S()U T El IV AL E S


'The run contains about thirty subdivisions. The fenc-
ing has been improved from time to time, the old style
of six wires with barb on top, posts 15 ft. apart with iron
droppers between, having given way generally to the more
efficient three plain wire type, with barbed top and net-
ting. Rabbits have been almost thoroughly exterminated.
What are left are kept down by digging out the burrows,
clearing and burning all cover. Netted areas are more for
the protection of the stud stock than to guard against
rabbits. As provision against droughts, which occasion-
ally visit Riverina, a considerable area, each season, is
sown with wheat and oats, grain and hay being harvested,
while a certain amount of the green crop is converted into
ensilage. In 1928 some 2000 acres will be under crop,
the work being done with motor tractors, these having
taken the place of horses, which were once bred by Mr.
Sanger.
No cattle are kept on the estate except a few milking
cows.
A feature of Mr. Sanger’s regime is the observance of
the daylight saving system, whereby time is thrown back
one hour, to allow advantage being taken of the early
mornings.
The homestead is a comfortable dwelling built of pise
on the bungalow style. Spacious verandahs surround the
front and sides, while the rooms are large, and electric
light has been installed throughout. A well laid out
garden extends over an acre, buffalo lawns and shady
trees completing a very fine setting for the home. A short
distance from the homestead is the wool shed, an efficient
building of wood and iron. There are eight stands, and
the shearing is done by hand.
On Ist July, 1922, the present company was formed
to carry on business in the nature of a family partnership.
Its stud Merino flock was founded by the father of the
present owner in 1853, and comprised in that year 1000
ewes purchased from the famous Camden Park flock,
and some rams bought from the late Mr. Learmonth’s
flock of pure Merinos at Ercildoune, near Ballarat, Vic-
toria. Thirty of these rams were introduced in 1856.
Both these strains have good histories, and both lines will
be found to have been the fountain head of other studs
MERINO EWE HOGGETS WATERING AT A TANK ON SOUTH WANGAMONG
SOU T H IV ANGAM O N G. A K W SOU T 11 WAL E S


A DRAFT OF SOLD FOUR-TOOTH
MERINO RAMS BRED IN THE SOUTH
WANGAMONG FLOCK BY C. D.
SANGER AND SONS
A MOB OF GOOD OPEN-
FACED LAMBING EWES
SOU T H WANGA M 0 N G, NE W S 0 UT H WAL E S


ANOTHER PICTURE OF A GROUP
OF FOUR-TOOTH RAMS SOLD BY THE
SOUTH WANGAMONG BREEDERS
PART OF THE GARDEN WITH ITS
WELL KEPT LAWNS AND FOOTPATHS
50U T II WA N G AMONG. NE W S OUTH WALK S


which are in the front rank of breeding. The Camden
Park sheep came from an introduction of Cape Colony
stock in 1797 for Captain Macarthur whose name is
prominent in sheep breeding history. He added blood to
his flock from the Royal Stud of King George HI. in
1804, so that the foundation ewes for Wangamong were
of a high order.
The Ercildoune rams owe origin to the selected sheep
which were brought out to this country in 1832 by the late
good mutton. Mr. J. M. Sanger in the 60’s introduced
ten stud ram lambs, which were sired by Messrs. Peppin
and Son’s imported Rambouillet ram, The Emperor, out
of pure Wanganella stud ewes. These ten rams were
amongst the pick of that drop, and possessed all the char-
acteristics for which their sire was famed. In due course
these same features were noticeable throughout the Wan-
gamong sheep, and have continued to dominate the young
sheep ever since. The chief traits in Ihe Emperor were
A PROMISE OF RAIN
1 homas Henty and the Circular Head Company, in the
barque “Fourth.” These flocks grazed on Mr. Samuel
Bryan’s estate at Southmore, Victoria, where annual sales
attracted most of the prominent breeders of the day. Mr.
Learmonth was a regular buyer. His stud was acquired
later by the late Sir Samuel Wilson.
From such a good combination of strains it was to be
expected that careful breeding and sound country wmuld
produce a successful type of Merino that would fill the
bales with long profitable wool, and the freezers with
his large deep frame and strong support, great constitu-
tion, vigour and prepotency, plain body and heavy cutting
fleece, which cut to 25 lbs. of very bright, dense, strong
wool. The ten rams chosen by Vlr. Sanger brought
£IOO, which was thought a high price 60 years ago, but
a trivial expenditure when the results of their work be-
gan to show. 'The Wangamong sheep went ahead very
quickly after this introduction, and became well known
everywhere. 'There has never been a departure from the
policy of breeding laid down as above, the strain has
S' OUT II IV ANGAM () N G. NE W S()U T H IV AL E S


THE ORANGE
GROVE
A FAMILIAR
SCENE AT THE
HOMESTEAD
N<)U T II rr ANGAM O N G, NE IV SOU T H IV AL E S


been kept pure, and the type improved.
It is well to mention that the late Mr. Sanger bred
to very definite rules and bent all his knowledge upon
breeding large square frames with constitution. The
latter was especially his aim. IT is sheep possessed bold
heads of pronounced character, pure open faces, deep
fronts and plain bodies. Their wool showed excellence of
quality, strong, bright and shafty, and well packed on.
Upon the flock being divided between the two sons in
1907, Mr. C. D. Sanger continued along the same sound
lines of breeding, and strove to improve the quality each
season. That he has succeeded is borne out by the re-
putation of the South Wangamong stud flock to-day as
prepotenr getters of sturdy, healthy and profitable sheep.
very old sheep, some aged 14 years. Ihe size of carcase
grown is indicated by records showing station bred 4-tooth
wethers yielding up to 70 lbs. dead weight dressed, with-
out fat.
The annual clip now goes to Sydney and brings high
prices. In 1925 top fleeces were knocked down at 38d.
per lb. Special care is taken in preparing the wool for
market to see that it is accurately classified in the bales.
The fleeces cut up to 27 lbs. of wool from rams, and
average 14 lbs from the stud ewes. In the annual dis-
posal of rams, buyers for the most part are content to
leave the selection of their purchases to the entire dis-
cretion of Mr. Sanger, who is a leading authority on
Merino sheep. The total number of rams sold nowadays
THE BUFFALO GRASS LAWNS AND SHADY TREES OF THE HOMESTEAD GARDEN
For man}' years the percentage of marked lambs obtained
has been in the neighbourhood of 87.
In 1918, through the generosity of Mr. Otway Falkiner,
ten South Wangamong ewes were sent to the stud at
Boonoke North, and in the following year a further eight
ewes went to the stud sire, No. 301, at Boonoke. The
lambs proved to be of great benefit to the stud in general.
In 1926 C. D. Sanger and Son purchased the stud ram
No. 762 from F. S. Falkiner and Sons Limited, Wan-
ganclla Estate. This sire is being used now with success.
For years past the return of wool from all grown sheep
on the estate has been approximately 11 pounds. This in-
cludes 80 per cent, of breeding ewes, besides 2-tooths and
is only one-half of what it was 15 to 20 years ago, but
the explanation lies in the fact that more and more at-
tention has been paid each year to the improvement of th?
sheep. For instance, fleeces are as absolutely even as
possible, and heavier culling each year has been practised,
particularly with regard to the neck folds, britch wrinkles,
shape of horns and width between horns. The heavier
culling is designed to bring the quality of the stud flock
up to the highest character. For these better sheep the
prices realised compensate for the less number sold now,
which is about 500 head each season. The South Wanga-
mong rams are offered at prices ranging from 5 to 25
guineas per head. They go to regular buyers all over
SOU T H IV ANGAM 0 V G. NE W SOV T H IV AL E $


THE LATE MR. J M. SANGER
THE LATE MRS J.M. SANGER
MRS. CHARLES
D. SANGER
MR. CHARLES
D. SANGEK
MR. CT.C. SANGER
MISS JEAN.L.SANGER
THREE GENERATIONS OF THE SANGER FAMILY.
S O UT H WANGA M O N G, NE W S() UT H WAL E S


Australia, as well as to South America, New Zealand
and South Africa.
Mr. Sanger belongs to the school which has no support
for artificial feeding or pampering sheep in any way. The
best results have been proved to be from naturally fed
stock, such as his own, especially in the case of rams going
to very dry, dusty and hot regions, where constitution
means everything and sound backs are essential.
Charles Dunsford Sanger was born at Wangamong
homestead in 1870, and at the age of 19, after completing
his school education at Geelong Church of England
Grammar School, he was entrusted by his father with the
management of the property. He has been regarded as an
eminent judge of Merino sheep for a number of years, and
his services have been requisitioned frequently at various
shows, notably Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Perth.
Mr. Sanger is also a well-known identity in sporting circles
in Riverina, being vice-president of the Corowa Picnic
Race Club, and he has owned several good horses. He
is a member of the Coreen Shire Council, and takes a
keen interest in the furthering of the district in which he
resides.
In 1899 he married Charlotte Rebecca, daughter of
Benjamin Crosthwaite, a well-known pastoralist. His
family consists of one daughter, Jean Lena, and one son.
Charles Thomas Crosthwaite, who was born at South
Wangamong in 1902. Mr. C. T. C. Sanger was edu-
cated at Geelong Church of England Grammar School,
after which he entered a rigorous period of training at the
estate in pastoral business and stud sheep breeding under
his father. Since 1924 he has judged Merino sheep at
some of the leading country shows.
A GROUP OF RIS-
ING 4- TOOTH
SELECTED
SALE RAMS
S 0 UT H If’ ANGAM O N G, NE W S O UT 11 WAL E S


BOONOKE, RIVERINA, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of F. S. Falhiner and Sons Limited.
THIS property, the home of the largest Merino sheep
stud in the world, is situated in southern Riverina,
New South Wales, and is owned by F. S. Fal-
kiner and Sons Limited.
Founded ori-
ginally by the
Peppins in 1861,
and having had
no outside blood
introduced into
the flock since
then, the Boo-
noke stud pre-
sents one of the
greatest examples
of line breeding
in Australia. Its
evolution was the
life work of a
very able pioneer
of the pastoral
industry, namely,
the late Franc
Sadleir Falkiner,
the father of the
present owners.
Mr. F. S. Fal-
kiner was 20
years of age when
he came out to
this country from
Ireland in 1853.
With hardly any
capital, but pos-
sessed of keen
business foresight,
courage and
energy, in a few years he had amassed a small fortune
and had turned his attention to pastoral activities.
His purchase of Boonoke, in partnership with the late
John Russell Ross, and the late M. McKenzie, in the
year 1878, from Messrs. Peppin and Sons, of Wan-
ganella, embraced 26,788 sheep, being half of the Peppin
Hock, 290 cattle, 60 horses, and 31,484 acres freehold,
and some 44,000 acres of Crown lands. In 1882 this
partnership was dissolved and Mr. Falkiner purchased
the whole of the
property at auc-
tion, devoting all
his life from then
onward to the
task of breeding
high class rams.
In 1899 he
formed the busi-
ness into a limi-
ted liability com-
pany under the
name of F. S.
Falkiner and
Sons Limited, by
which it is known
to-day.
The wise policy
of giving his five
sons a thorough
pastoral training
early in life con-
tributed largely
to the successful
development of
the stud. As each
son left school he
was placed in a
position of re-
sponsibility, and
each became na-
turally a capable
sheep man.
The board of directors by whom the vast interests of
this company are controlled at present is composed of: —
Mr. Otway Rothwell Falkiner, chairman of directors;
Mr. Leigh Falkiner (who is also secretary) ; Mr. Ralph
S. Falkiner; Mr. John R. Carse (the eldest grandson);
THE BOONOKE HOMESTEAD


A DOZEN OF THE BEST
AN EVEN LOT OF SALE RAMS AT BOONOKE
BOON O K E, NEW SOU T H W A EES


A GOOD MOB OF SALE RAMS ROUNDED UP FOR INSPECTION
and Mr. Charles Leslie Falkiner, eldest son of Mr.
Otway Falkiner. Mr. Franc B. S. Falkiner (after his
father the first chairman of directors of the company),
and Mr. Norman Falkiner retired from the concern some
time ago.
Whilst all have done valuable work for the continua-
tion and development of the stud along the lines laid
down by the late Mr. Falkiner, it is perhaps to Mr.
Otway Falkiner that the Boonoke stud chiefly owes Its
progress.
His father recognised his natural gift for classing and
mating stud sheep as far back as 1890 when he was only
16 years old, and from that time onward gave him an
ever-increasing share of this work. By the time the
company was formed in 1899 he was doing practically
the whole of the stud sheep work, and when Mr. F. S.
Falkiner died and Mr. Franc B. S. Falkiner became
managing director in 1909 Otway was given full control
of the stud. This was done in accordance with his
father’s wish and with the unanimous consent of his
brothers. A born sheepbreeder, with an immense capa-
city for work and tireless energy, he has long been es-
tablished as one of the foremost Merino stud masters in
Australia.
The cardinal features of breeding laid down by the
late Mr. F. S. Falkiner were robust constitution, big
frames and profitable fleeces. He foresaw the need for
hardy rams which would suit the great back country of
Australia, with its dry, hard conditions, and he bred
definitely to produce this type of Merino. The same
BOON 0 K E. NE W SO UT H IV A LES


policy has been maintained consistently to the present
day. Boonoke rams are bred to withstand the wear and
tear of any climatic conditions, hence they have been
most successful in building up flocks in all parts of the
sheepbreeding world.
They have large shapely frames with well sprung ribs
and deep sides, their backs are wide, level and soynd,
and they are particularly good across the loin. Good
heads and horns, bold fronts and splendid underlines and
bone all combine to give them a general appearance with
which little or no fault can be found.
Their covering is equally as good as their looks, and
they are noted for the way in which they carry their
wool into old age even in hot dusty districts. Strict at-
For over half a century there has never been any
change in the breeding of the Boonoke sheep, and no
outside blood has ever been introduced. Even the pur-
chase in July 1927 of the ram David from Mr. F. D.
McMaster, of Dalkeith, cannot be regarded as an ex-
ception to this rule.
David was bought for 5000 guineas (with the right
to send 50 ewes to him), and is of pure Boonoke blood.
His sire was the Boonoke bred ram F 2, who was sold
to Mr. McMaster at auction in Sydney in 1924 for 1600
guineas, and who is a descendant of the famous Boonoke
No. 1, and his dam was a pure Boonoke stud ewe.
David gained first prize in his class at the N.S.W.
Sheepbreeders’ Show in Sydney in 1926, and again as a
ANOTHER LOT OF BOONOKE SALE RAMS
tention has always been given to the maintenance of a
high charactered wool, combining quality and colour with
length and density. Consequently to-day their fleeces
are of as profitable a type as can be grown. Ewes
frequently cut up to 24 lbs. per head, and rams to
32 lbs.
All the essentials of a sound constitution and great
prepotency have been secured by careful mating and
judicious inbreeding over a period of many years, so it is
no wonder than Boonoke rams have earned a high re-
putation as vigorous and dominant sires, and never fail
to impart their own characteristics into any flock into
which they have been introduced.
2-year-old in 1927, also first and champion and grand
champion at the same show in 1928. It is worth re-
cording that he cut in 1927 lbs. of wool for twelve
months’ growth.
It was the practice of both the late Mr. Falkiner and
the company to employ an independent expert at the
annual classing. The late Mr. J. C. Darke carried out
these duties from 1891 until his death in 1917, and the
stud owes much to his great skill and experience. Mr.
W. J. McCarthy succeeded him and filled the position
until 1926. Since that date this important work has
been entrusted to Mr. Charles Leslie Falkiner, who has
been thoroughly trained by his father (Mr, O. R. Fal-
BOON O K E, NE W SOU T H IV A LES


kiner), and has inherited his natural aptitude for sheep-
breeding.
Registered as Stud No. 7 in the Merino Flock Re-
gister, the Boonoke stud totals nearly 100,000 stud sheep
at the present time (1929). This enormous flock is bred
at Boonoke, Boonoke North, Moonbria and Puckawid-
gee. 1 he company also own the Wanganella Estate, the
home o f Mr. I Mgh Falkiner, which is devoted to the
breeding of the Wanganella Estate stud flock. This
well-known stud is kept entirely separate from the
Boonoke stud flock, and is run by the company as an
independent business.
The most recent acquisition of the company is Zara,
32,000 acres were added in 1912. It lies 42 miles north
of Deniliquin and 28 miles north-west of Jerilderie, and
is composed of lightly timbered red boree and brown
cotton bush plains. The average annual rainfall is 16
in. It is in a highly improved state and is managed
by Mr. J. R. Carse.
Adjoining Moonbria on the east, and with Boonoke on
its western boundary, thus forming a solid block of the
three properties, is Puckawidgee, which was bought in
1916 from the Exors. of the late Thos. Shaw. It had an
area of 98,000 acres freehold, which has since been
reduced by the sale of the homestead block with 8000
acres, and the outlying portion of about 36,000 acres free-
SALE RAMS OF THE TYPE THAT HAVE MADE BOONOKE A HOUSEHOLD WORD
which was purchased in May 1927 from the Executors
of the late William Officer. Comprising 65,000 acres
freehold, Zara lies on the Billabong, near Wanganella
township, a few miles west of Wanganella Estate. It is
composed of typical Riverina plains, and will be brought
up to the highest level of efficiency for stud breeding,
upon which the whole of the company’s energies are con-
centrated on all of their properties.
It is the intention of the firm to dispose of the whole
of the Zara sheep and stock up the property with Wan-
ganella Estate sheep.
M oonbria was purchased in 1884 from Messrs. H. B.
Patterson and Co., and comprised 65,000 acres, to which
hold. The run is worked in conjunction with Boonoke,
under the capable management of Mr. Joseph Thompson,
who has been in the company’s service many years, having
managed Moira Station, since sold, prior to his arrival
at Boonoke in 1914.
The latter property, which is the headquarters of the
Boonoke stud flock, comprises belts of red gum along the
Billabong, which forms the southern boundary, rich brown
flats growing native box and bull oak, and sandy ridges
of pine running parallel to the creek, whilst the balance
of the run is mostly “The Old Man” plain, growing salt-
hush, cotton bush, native grasses and herbs. From Octo-
ber to March the grasses dry off, thus leaving the plains


bare of green feed during the hottest months of the year.
This is one of the reasons why the country is so sound.
It is also one of the reasons why the Boonoke sheep are
such hardy animals. With only dry feed, and without
protection during this severe period, and then exposed to
the rigours of winter, none but the most robust type of
sheep could pull through and thrive. Pampering has no
support from the Falkiners, whose most valuable sires
have to fend for themselves, and are only artificially fed
when absolutely necessary.
The rainfall of 15 in. is augmented by a thorough
system of tanks, wells and sub-artesian bores, and several
overshot dams on the Billabong. No rabbits exist on
the run, which is enclosed with wire netting. The wool-
shed, built in 1913, is one of the most up to date in Aus-
tralia, and reflects the sound policy of improvements car-
ried out all over the property, upon which over £70,000
has been expended. The Boonoke homestead is a large
red brick bungalow, containing every modern comfort,
and was built to replace the original dwelling which was
destroyed by fire in 1888. It stands in a beautiful shel-
tered position on the Billabong Creek, surrounded by ex-
tensive grounds and old pepper trees.
Mr. Otway Falkiner moved to Boonoke North in 1914,
where he resides to-day. This estate lies 30 miles south
of Narrandera, on the Narrandera-Tocumwal railway,
with the Widgiewa Siding close to the homestead. The
run was bought from the late J. S. Horsfall in 1909, and
has an area of 84,000 acres freehold of sweet, sound
BOON O K E. XE JV S 0 UT 11 W A EES


THE FRONT ASPECT OF THE HOMESTEAD AT BOONOKE NORTH
country, bearing light timber and a wealth of native
grasses and herbage, which dry off in the summer months.
It is watered extensively by sub-artesian bores, tanks and
dams, besides having a double frontage to Colombo
Creek, on which are several concrete dams. 'There are
no rabbits, the management in fact having left nothing
undone to make it a perfectly improved and valuable
holding.
The Boonoke North homestead, which is a modern re-
sidence in all respects, set in picturesque grounds of
natural beauty, is connected to Urana by telephone, whilst
private lines link up all the other stations to it. In
addition to stud breeding, Boonoke North is used as a
distributing depot for the large number of rams sold
annually. It is easily reached from either Sydney or Mel-
bourne. Anyone can make the trip there and back in
three days and have a full day on the property. Mr.
Otway Falkiner is always pleased to welcome anyone
interested in sheep, whether buyers or not.
No influences, other than drought and financial depres-
sion, have ever interfered with the steadily increasing de-
mand for Boonoke rams from all over Australia and
abroad. They have been sought after as the best type
of commercial Merino solely on account of their merit.
The grand constitutions of these sheep have been the re-
sult of healthy natural environment and good breeding,
and their influence on so many of the important Queens-
land clips especially is evidence of the value of the blood.
It is the policy of the company to breed big lines of
selected and flock rams, and to retain the best stud rams
for home use, in order that the high standard of ex-
cellence and uniformity of type in the general stud may
BOON 0 K E, NE W SOU T II WAL E S


THE WINNING PEN
OF 25 ONE-YEAR-
OLD BOONOKE EWES
AT THE SYDNEY
SHEEP SHOW, 1927
SPECIAL STUD SIRES
AT BOONOKE, THE
PROPERTY OF
F. S. FALKINER AND
SONS LIMITED
STUD EWES AND RAMS
BOON 0 KE. NEW SOUTH WALES


be maintained. The stud does not feature the sale of
high-priced units, but from their first entry in 1911, the
Boonoke special stud rams have frequently brought either
the highest price or the best average at the Sydney ram
sales, and have never been far from the top.
Not only are big lines of rams sold each year, but the
company have innumerable small buyers on their books,
and the constant repetition of the same names amongst
the purchasers is ample proof of the popularity of Boonoke
rams.
The extent to which the stud has been developed will
be seen from the fact that between 1882 and 1899 71,771
rams were sold. The average was 4222 over those 17
years, and the monetary return £17,645 per annum.
From the end of 1899, when the company was formed,
to the end of 1926, the Boonoke stud was responsible for
the sale of 190,857 rams, showing an average annual
output of 6816 over a period of 27 years. The annual
average monetary return was £44,898. In 1922 the
output was 8157 rams, which averaged £6 18s. 9d. per
head. In 1923 an average of £7 13s. was obtained for
7991 rams, in 1924 the average was £9 4s. 3d. for 9101
ROONOKE RAMS ON
THE COLOMBO CREEK
rams, and in 1925 10,305 rams realised an average of
£9 6s. 6d. each. The following year was influenced by
drought in Queensland, which caused the demand from
that large market to fall away considerably. Only 5379
rams were sold in that year. These included two rams
at 1000 guineas each, one at 2000 guineas, and one at
3000 guineas. The latter was bought by Mr. Anthony
Hordern, of Mungadal, Hay. The average for the year
was £ll os. 7d. per head.
The highest total reached was in 1925, when the sales
amounted to £96,084. In 1920 the satisfactory average
of £lOOO each was returned from 20 Boonoke rams sold
oft the property. The total of 8259 averaged £8 6s. 3d.
per head. During the same year a total of 9099 ewes
was sold at an average price of four guineas. Until re-
cent years it was not the policy of the company to dispose
of any ewes, but certain lines are now available. The
sale of ewes mentioned above is recorded on account of
the remarkable figures obtained by the stud that year,
1920, for both its rams and ewes, the total being over
£107,000. This must easily stand as a world’s record
for the output of stud sheep for one year.
UOON O K E, NE W S 0 UT H W A LES


TWO SPECIAL STUD SIRES AT BOONOKE
Prior to the year 1895 many prizes were won by the
Boonoke sheep, but from then to 1925 the policy of show-
ing was discontinued. In 1926 the company re-entered
the show ring at Sydney with a small team and secured
first and second prize for best pen of five grass-fed un-
housed rams, also the special prize for a pen of 25 one-
year ewes.
The following year Boonoke showed again and met
with remarkable success with their ewes. Thirty-one
were exhibited and they won in all their classes, viz.:—
Pen of 25 ewes, pen of 5 ewes and medium wool 1-year
ewes. The two pens of five 1-year rams both won in
their classes, and Boonoke also secured the much coveted
group prize.
Personal
The late Franc Sadleir Falkiner was born at Beech-
wood, County Tipperary, Ireland, in 1833, and was the
third son of Daniel Falkiner, of Beechwood, and Re-
becca, daughter of Thomas Sadleir, Esq., of Castletown
and Ballinderry, Co. Tipperary. The founder of the
Falkiner family in Ireland came from Leeds, England, in
the 17th century, and was a pioneer of the once flourish-
ing Irish woollen industry.
Fortunately for himself and Australia the late F. S.
Falkiner’s father was one of the many Irish landowners
who were ruined during the fifties of last century, and
so he emigrated to this country.
Mr. O. R. Falkiner was born at Ararat, Victoria, in
1874. Owing to ill-health as a boy he was privately
educated at home.
He remained with his father at Boonoke until his
marriage, when he went to live at and manage Perri-
coota, but without relinquishing his stud sheep work. On
his father’s death he returned to Boonoke, and in 1915
moved to his present home, Boonoke North.
He has always taken a keen interest in all matters re-
lating to the welfare of his district and industry, and
takes a prominent part on the many bodies associated
with these interests.
He is a well-known personality on the Australian turf,
and has won many successes on it. He is also an en-
thusiastic supporter of polo and picnic racing, being a
past president of the Southern Riverina Picnic Turf Club
and other clubs.
Mr. Charles Leslie Falkiner, eldest son of Mr. O. R.
Falkiner, was born at Melbourne in 1900, and was
educated at the Geelong Grammar School.
On leaving school in 1917 he went to his father at
Boonoke North and received a thorough training in sheep
breeding and station management there and at Boonoke.
He managed Wanganella Estate for the two years dur-
ing Mr. Leigh Falkiner’s absence abroad prior to 1927,
when he was appointed to the management of Zara,
and he has lately been entrusted with the important work
of classing the firm’s sheep.
H e is a keen polo player and has played successfully
with the Narrandera and Southern Riverina teams.
nOON 0 K E, NE W SOU Tll JV A EES


A PEN OF FIVE WINNERS AT THE SYDNEY SHEEP SHOW
A FEW SALE RAMS BRED AT BOONOKE
BOON O K E. NE JV SOU T II W A LES


Ralph Sadleir Falkiner was born in 1877, and was
educated at the Geelong Grammar School. He left
school to become the first secretary of the company, and
lived at Boonoke and assisted his father in the manage-
ment until his marriage. He then went to Moonbria
and managed that estate until 1910, when he retired from
the active management of the firm’s stations, and bought
in succession Groongal, Toogimbie and Kilfera Stations
in N.S.W ~ and Melville Forest and Glendinning in
Victoria. All these properties except Glendinning were
subsequently sold.
Of an inventive turn of mind he has always been in-
terested in machinery, and was the first to invent the
electric sheep-shearing machine. He has also recently
perfected a cane cutting machine after years of experi-
ment. This machine promises to revolutionise the har-
vesting of sugar cane. While retaining his interests in
Ids activities in this direction include two terms as presi-
dent of the Southern Riverina Picnic 'Fur-f Club.
Mr, John R. Falkiner Carse is the eldest son of the
late Samuel Carse.
He was born at Yanko Station, N.S.W., in 1884, and
educated at the Melbourne Grammar School and Trinity
College, Melbourne University. Abandoning law for the
land he went to Moira in 1907, and after experience
there and with his uncle Otway at Perricoota was at
Boonoke North for ten years, the latter half as manager.
Since 1920 he has managed Moonbria, and also has acted
as secretary of the company on several occasions.
Like his uncles he has done his share of public work
and is a member of the Conargo Shire Council. He is a
supporter of picnic racing and served a term as president
of the Southern Riverina Picnic Turf Club.
The late Mr. F. S. Falkiner’s two elder sons, Mr.
THE HOMESTEAD AT BOONOKE NORTH
the company and his seat on the board he nowadays de-
votes most of his time and energies to this important in-
vention.
Leigh Sadleir Falkiner is the youngest son of the late
Mr. F. S. Falkiner, and was born at Geelong, Victoria,
in 1880. Like his brothers he was educated at the
Geelong Grammar School.
He succeeded Ralph as secretary to the company, and
was associated with his father at Boonoke until the latter’s
death. He then went to live, at Wanganella Estate (at
that time just purchased), and has managed that pro-
perty and stud ever since, except for two years (1925-
1927), whilst abroad, when Mr. Charles Leslie Falkiner
was in charge. He gives much of his time to local in-
terests, and has been president of the Conargo Shire
Council. He is also interested in all outdoor sports, and
Franc B. S. Falkiner and Mr. Norman Falkiner, retired
from the company in 1915. The former managed the
huge Tuppal Estate (since sold) for many years, and
succeeded his father as managing director.
For a time he took a prominent part in Federal politics
and sat in two Parliaments. He was also a member of
the Central Wool Committee. He now owns Haddon
Rig and Foxlow Stations, and is a director of the Bank
of New South Wales and other important institutions.
On his retirement from the firm Norman owned Tup-
pal for a time, but soon sold that property and bought
Noorilim Estate, in the Goulburn Valley of Victoria.
Here he has developed one of the largest and most suc-
cessful thoroughbred studs in the Commonwealth. The
foundation of the company’s Shorthorn and Clydesdale
studs and their great success were largely due to him.
800 NOK E, NE W SO UT H JV A EES


WANGANELLA ESTATE, DENILIQUIN, N.S.W.
The Property of F. S. Falhiner and Sons Limited
AMONGST the outstanding Merino studs of the
Commonwealth, the Wanganella Estate, owned
by F. S. Falkiner and Sons Limited, is part of
the first of. the great Riverina studs, the historic Wan-
ganella Hock founded by Peppin and Sons in 1861. Both
Peppin and Wanganella are names that every sheep man
the true type of Merino it produced, until they dissolved
partnership in 1894. It was then decided to divide the
Wanganella property and the stud sheep equally between
them. The station was sold by limited auction.
The late Mr. Millear took the eastern half of the run,
comprising 28,000 acres freehold and leasehold, and
WANGANELLA ESTATE HOUSE
knows, as representing the hall mark of Merino sheep
breeding.
When the Wanganella Station was sold in 1878 by
the Peppins and Messrs. Austin and Millear became
joint stud masters, the change of ownership did not alter
the policy of selective breeding which had been in force
for the preceding seventeen years. They maintained the
development of the stud, which had become famous for
named it the Wanganella Estate. This area has since
been increased to 37,000 acres freehold by purchase of
adjoining lands. The sheep were divided as equally and
fairly as possible. Mr. Millear’s share of the studs was
as follows:—77l double stud ewes of various ages, 8248
single stud ewes of mixed ages, 191 double stud rams of
mixed ages, 31 first stud 2-tooth and 4-tooth top rams,
1881 stud ram weaners, and 244 flock 2-tooth rams.


The late Mr. Albert Austin obtained the portion of the
run with the homestead, and his property subsequently
became known as Austin-Wanganella. Thus it will be
seen that the two studs running from then onwards on
adjoining properties, were of the same type, quality and
breeding. Furthermore, there was no interruption in
their direct descent from the original Wanganella stud.
1 he late Mr. Millear persevered with the established
New South Wales, in a vast belt of country composed of
red and black soil plains, framed by the rivers Murray
and Murrumbidgee, a locality which always will be the
home of Merino sheep breeding on account of the un-
paralleled nature of its soil and climate.
Along the northern boundary of the run flows the
Billabong Creek, with its good deep holes and concrete
overshot dams, whilst the Piccaninny, Eight Mile and
TYPICAL SELECTED SALE RAMS BRED BY F. S. FALKINER AND SONS LIMITED
policy of breeding with his half of the stud, and made
considerable headway until his death in 1895. His
executors carried on the business with care until 1910, in
which year the property and the whole of the stud sheep,
numbering 6688 ewes, 876 rams, and 3578 lambs, were
purchased outright by the present owners.
Wanganella Estate lies 17 miles north of Deniliquin,
Forest Creeks provide double frontages elsewhere. The
estate is thus well watered naturally, and is nicely tim-
bered alongside these creeks with belts of eucalyptus, cooba
and box, with sandy pine ridges further away. For the
most part the pastures are composed of slightly undulat-
ing black soil plains, wind swept and open, extremely
hot in summer, and cold during winter months. Their
WAN GAN ELLA ESTATE, NEW SOUTH WALES


TYPICAL WANGANELLA ESTATE STUD EWES
ONE OF THE LEADING SIRES ON WANGANELLA ESTATE, NO. 700
WANGAN E L L A ES T A TE, NE W S OUT 11 WAL E S


comparatively light carrying capacity is a great factor in
the health and hardy constitution of the Wanganella
Estate sheep. The average rainfall of fifteen inches
brings forth in normal times an abundance of the
varieties of grasses and herbage native to Riverina, with
an absence of noxious weeds, and as these grasses dry off
from about October to March, between the spring and
autumn, the stock are called upon to prove their stamina.
the creeks already mentioned.
Wanganella Estate house was erected by the late
Thomas Millear, and, as the picture on the first page
of this section indicates, it is a very fine building, designed
on Tudor lines. The spacious and well-proportioned
reception rooms on the ground floor open on to a really
magnificent, lofty hall, with its beautifully carved stair-
case and gallery. Mhe house is situated on horrest Creek,
TYPICAL STUD BREEDING EWES
F. S. Falkiner and Sons Limited have accomplished a
great deal of improvement work to the run during their
regime, especially with regard to permanent water, fenc-
ing and subdivision. There are at present some forty
main paddocks of varying size, and these are watered
by more than twenty good sub-artesian bores with wind-
mills and troughs, and by many surface tanks as well as
and with its setting of beautiful gardens, protected by
plantations of English trees, &c., and native gums, is very
imposing. It is the home of Mr. Leigh Falkiner, who
manages the Wanganella Estate and is also a director of,
and secretary to, the Company. The homestead contains
every modern requirement for comfort, and is connected
to the Conargo and Wanganella telephone exchanges, and
WANGA N E L L A ES T A TE, NE W SOU TII W A EES


A GROUP OF YOUNG
WANGANELLA ESTATE
EWES
SPECIAL STUD MERINO
RAMS ON THE FRINGE OF
ONE OF THE HEAVILY-
GRASSED SWAMPS
WANGA N E L L A ES T A TE. NE IV S 0 UT 11 WAL E S


SIR FRANCIS
A TRUE REPRESENTATIVE
OF THE SIRES USED IN THE
WANGANELLA ESTATE STUD
ir ANGAN E L L A ES T A TE, NK W S 0 UT II WAL E S


HIS MAJESTY
A TYPICAL WANGANELLA
ESTATE SIRE SOLD TO
SOUTH AFRICA
JV AN G A NELL A ES T A TE, NE W S 0 UT H WAL E S


also to the other properties of the company. 1 he rest of
the station buildings are also modern, but although
there is a woolshed on the property, all the shearing
operations are done at Boonoke, from where the clip is
sent to Melbourne for sale.
Since the acquisition of the stud in 1910, it has been
worked up into a flock of tbe highest merit, numbering
at the present over 16,000 head of stud sheep. In both
tvpe and general character the stock have been improved
steadily from the high standard of excellence which
judgment. But for the experimental introduction of one
Boonoke ram some years ago, the progeny of which were
discarded, there has been no infusion of foreign blood
into the stud. Thus generation after generation of true
sires have come down through one line, each repeating
the performance of the other. I here is no connection
between the Boonoke and Wanganella Estate studs as
they are bred to-day, although both strains emanated
originally from the one Peppin-Wanganella source.
The stud is bred entirely from within itself, and by
PEACE AND CONTENTMENT AMONGST THESE SALE MERINO RAMS
characterised the old Wanganella-strain, so that nearly
seventy years of straight line breeding from within the
stud itself lies behind the present Wanganella Estate
sheep. It is largely due to the inherent discernment of
Mr. Otway Falkiner, controlling stud master, that the
stud has been developed with so much success. He has
followed closely the breeding methods first laid down
by Peppin in 1861, and continued by Austin and Millear,
and has seasoned those principles with his own skilful
heavy culling and careful selective mating of the best
sires with the best females, tbe characteristics of growth
and quality of wool aimed at, together with evenness of
type, are absolutely assured.
The Wanganella Estate’s stud rams are typical of the
true Australian Merino, so much desired as the best
paying sheep for the outback stations. In appearance
they are full of breeding, and their conformation is large,
bold and shapely. They possess good heads and horns,
IV AN G A NELL A ES T A TE, NEW SOU T H WAL E S


MARMION
AN ARISTOCRATIC YOUNG MEM-
BER OF THE WANGANELLA
ESTATE MERINO STUD
SOLD TO SOUTH AFRICA
WAN G A N ELLA ES T ATE, NE W SOU T H W ALES


silky broad noses and clear eyes. Their wide fronts carry
heavy, even folds, whilst deep sides and broad level backs,
strong thighs and well-made hocks, are features of these
plain-bodied sheep. They are well known for their
covering of even, robust Heece, lustrous and soft, the
wool growing to a good length at all points, and being
beautifully crimped out to the firm, close tips. It is a
true type yielding a particularly high percentage of
scoured super combing wool.
tnilia and in other parts of the world.
Amongst some of the more prominent sires bred in the
stud was a magnificent ram named Majestic, who as a
7-year-old in 1913 cut 21 lbs. 12 ozs. of greasy wool
for 368 days’ growth. The yield of clean wool when
scoured amounted to 1 1 lbs. 7 ozs., representing 52Jr per
cent. This sire was grass-fed with the rest of the stud
rams on the weather-beaten plains, and also had been put
to heavy service during the season. Mr. A. Hawkes-
FOUR-TOOTH MERINO RAMS DISTURBED AT ONE OF THE SURFACE TANKS
In quality the stud wool runs from fine to strong
and the sheep have earned a high reputation from the
way in which their wool is carried well into age. This
has been proved, particularly in the dry interior of the
continent, where natural surroundings and a low rainfall
are most exacting, and demand the strongest constitu-
tions. This hardiness is bred so well into the rams (for
the Falkiners believe in plenty of room for the sheep and
no pampering), that it is not surprising to find them
exerting a beneficial influence upon flocks all over Aus-
worth, late chief sheep and wool instructor, Sydney
Technical College, said of his Heece “that it was one of
the most perfect types of Merino wool, dense, full of
quality, compact, shafty, free and even from base to tip,
wi th well-formed massive staple. On the belly was the
same high character in evidence.” These facts are
mentioned at the risk of repetition, as it is precisely this
type of sire that is pronounced throughout the Wanga-
nella Estate stud. That reproduction of these qualities
through successive generations has been maintained, and
WAN C A N ELLA ESTA T E, NEW SOU T H WALES


A PLAIN-BODIED AND LONG-
STAPLED SIRE, NO. 300, ONE
OF THE LEADING SIRES ON
WANGANELLA ESTATE
improved, reflects the greatest credit upon those
responsible. This high percentage of scoured wool is
typical of the whole flock.
' M armion was another good ram in all respects, and
was sold about twelve years ago to a South African
breeder for 1000 guineas. In 1920 the Wanganella
Estate’s stud ram No. 774 was sold to the same source
for 3500 guineas. He was a typical stud sire of great
size, make and shape, and full of breeding. In that year
20 odd stud rams were sold for a total of some £20,000.
Another sire of merit was His Majesty, sired by
Majestic, and sold to South Africa a few years ago for
2500 guineas, which was then the record price for
Australia. Sir Francis, a well-formed ram with un-
usually good points, was sold to Messrs. Merriman
Brothers, the noted fine wool breeders, as a five-year-old
sire for 1000 guineas, and has proved most successful.
The stud is registered as Flock No. 84 in the Stud
Merino Flock Register for Australia.
The number of young rams retained in the Wanga-
nella Estate stud flock each season is only about 5 per
cent. Very naturally these include the most promising
for sires in due course within the stud. The balance And
a ready sale, and as the main object of the company is
to breed rams suitable for all kinds of country, the
greatest care is exercised when culling and classing.
Frequently the whole available output is disposed of early
in the season. The sole retarding influence on sales has
proved by experience to be the occasional depression
caused by drought. The run is stocked lightly as a rule,
and this enables the young sheep to become well grown
out. At the annual lambing during each April and May,
the figures have averaged for many years 70 per cent,
of marked lambs.
A limited number of ewes is sold, and from 1911 to
1925 the returns have averaged a few pence under £4 per
head, which speaks for itself; they have been sold up to
150 guineas.
WAN GAN ELLA ESTATE, NEW SOUTH WALES


1920
1,697
,£24
5
2
1921
1,581
7
8
0
1922
1,245
7
3
7
1923
1,777
6
17
4
1924
1,388
8
12
4
1925
1,995
9
8
9
1926
1,491
10
0
0
Total . .
. . 23,666
£226,500
0
0
Ram Sales, 1911-1926.
Rams.
Average
Per Head.
1911-12 ..
3,174
£7 4 6
1913
1,313
7 0 0
1914
1,620
7 3 0
1915 (drought year)
355
6 11 6
1916 .. ' ..
1,306
7 3 0
1917
1,525
7 14 4
1918
1,466
12 5 0
1919
1,733
12 12 0
From the relatively small number of rams sold each
year, an average of some 1600 head, it will be apparent
that quality is not sacrificed for quantity, which would
be unavoidable if the total inquiries for rams were met
fully.
A summary of the sales since the stud came into the
hands of the present breeders, as appended below, will
provide the strongest evidence of the remarkable pro-
gress which has been maintained throughout:—
WANGANELLA ESTATE SALE RAMS
The average is £9 11s. 6d. per head. It will be seen
that sales were restricted during the severe drought
which gripped Riverina in 1915, whilst the highest
average was made in 1920. In that year 20 rams made
an average of 1000 guineas per head.
The estate has been supervised since its purchase by
the company in 1910 by Mr. Leigh S. Falkiner, the
youngest son of the late F. S. Falkiner. He resides at
Wanganella Estate, and in conjunction with his brother
Otway, controls the stud.
WAN GAN ELLA ESTATE. NEW SOUTH WALES


COREE, DENILIQUIN, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Samuel McCaughey, Esp.
COREE Station lies eleven miles east of Jerilderie,
New South Wales, forty miles north-east of
Deniliquin, and thirty-six miles north of 1 ocum-
wal, the last-named town being on the Victorian border.
The property is therefore in the heart of Riverina, yet
easily accessible from all parts.
Coree has had an interesting history dating back to
This hand of settlers struck out west from i umut,
and Coree was one of the first large runs to be developed
in New South Wales. The De Sailly Bros, used the
property for cattle grazing, and a few years later they
sold out to Messrs. Mackinnon and Lydiard, who in turn
sold to the late Sir Samuel Wilson in 1865. At the time
it carried an outstanding herd of cattle, but these r\eie
A FRONT VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD AND GARDEN IN WINTER TIME
1852. In that year Messrs. Frank and George De Sailly
purchased the run, which extended for 220 square miles
(140,800 acres), with a long frontage to the Billabong.
It stood as one of the largest individual holdings in
Riverina, its wide stretches of lightly timbered plains, its
climate, and its wealth of native fodder giving it a great
reputation as stock-raising country. The pioneering of
all this sector of Riverina fell to the lot of the Kennedys,
Brodribbs, Broughams, De Saillys and Huons, whose
possession of country took in the grazing lands on both
sides of the Billabong for many miles.
sold by the new owner and the run stocked up with
M erino sheep.
In 1872 the owner sold out to his brother, Mr. John
Wilson, and his nephews, Messrs. Samuel and Alexander
Wilson, jun., and they held the property for nine years.
They bought an adjoining place named Tongaboo, which
they added to Coree. This area the Wilsons set about
transforming into an efficient woolgrowing property. The
improvements they made included miles of fencing, and
nearly 200 excavated tanks and dams, the erection of a
large wool shed and numerous yards. Ihe latter were


A FEW OF THE MERINO SIRES USED IN THE COREE STUD
placed on many parts of the station to facilitate bringing
in the sheep. Coree at this time carried about 90,000
fully grown sheep, and was noted for its unique sheep-
washing plant, and the method of “spout” washing the
clip.
In 1881 the late Sir Samuel McCaughey took over the
property. At that time he had as partners his two
brothers, Mr. John McCaughey and the late Mr. David
McCaughey, who were also interested with him in
Toorale and Dunlop Stations, on the Darling River,
N.S.W., and Rockwood Station, Queensland. In
November 1885 the partnership was dissolved, Mr. David
McCaughey purchasing from his brother the Coree pro-
pert}'. It is interesting to note that the opening entry in
the late Mr. David McCaughey’s books set out the pur-
chase as 120,898 acres 2 rds. freehold at 40s. per acre,
80,000 sheep, mixed ages and sexes, at 10s., and the stud
(no numbers given) for a lump sum of £IO,OOO.
After the death of Air. David AlcCaughey at Coree
on 9th February, 1899, the estate was carried on by his
trustees, the late Sir Samuel McCaughey, Mr. John
AlcCaughey, and Air. Alfred Cell, his brother-in-law,
who in 1911 disposed of about 73,000 acres in mixed
farming and grazing blocks, being the southern part of
the property. In 1919 Air. Samuel AlcCaughey, the
elder son of the late Air. David McCaughey, purchased
the remaining part of the estate, consisting of 65,000
acres, from the trustees, and went into possession on Ist
A DRAFT OF SALE RAMS, MIXED AGES
CO REE. NEW SOUTH WALES


A MOB OF WETHER HOGGETS ON TYPICAL COREE COUNTRY
SHORTHORN HEIFERS ON THE BILLABONG
C O RE E. NE IV S O UT II EVA E E S


January of that year. Later he purchased the Tongala
Estate of 9000 acres, which was originally part of Coree,
as a settlement on his wife, and this he now leases and
works in conjunction with Coree.
The Coree country comprises red and black soil plains,
with belts of native trees, box, pine, bull oak and boree
cropping up here and there and providing ample shade for
the stock. In all respects the property is mostly open
plains typical of Riverina. It has a double frontage to
the Billabong and Yanko Creeks, and is divided into
about sixty-two paddocks, the outside boundary being
netted, with the exception of a sector in the south of the
run. In every paddock there is an adequate water supply
venience, large and roomy inside, and has the best of
wireless equipment, billiard room, conservatory, &c. It
is connected by telephone with Jerilderie. The Billabong
flows past the house, and a wealth of native trees and
beautiful gardens set it off. There is also a first rate
tennis court in the grounds.
For many years Coree has been noted for the excellent
type of Merino bred thereon. The history of the sheep
has been one of steady progress, the stud, which was on
the estate when Mr. Samuel McCaughey came to Coree
in 1919, having been developed carefully and thoroughly
along the soundest lines of breeding. From the earliest
days a steady improvement has been in evidence with re-
MUSTERING SHORTHORN COWS AND CALVES ON YANKO CREEK
derived from numerous sub-artesian bores, with an aver-
age depth of 100 ft., ensuring a supply of water even in
the most prolonged dry times.
1 tie stands at the wool shed have been reduced in re-
cent years from 59 to 24, though the size of the shed has
not altered, and there is room to house 2000 woolly sheep.
The 3'ards are maintained in sound condition, having
batten floors to prevent dust and dirt getting into the
fleeces. The station buildings around the homestead are
up to date and well kept, and the Coree homestead itself
is a most charming bungalow of stone and brick, modern
to the last detail, equipped with every comfort and con-
gard to the weights cut by grown sheep and the quality
of wool sent to market. This has been responsible for
the name of Coree being one of the best known in Aus-
tralia.
Before stud breeding was gone in for, and during the
regime of the Wilsons, the blood used was chiefly Havilah,
which had an important influence on the fleece weights.
With their spout-washing methods the Wilsons managed
to double the weights of cut fleeces within a few seasons,
and later on, when the late Mr. David McCaughey came,
the fleeces were heavier still. He was a follower of the
Vermont in common with other well-known breeders, but
COK E E. NE W SOU T 11 IV AE E S


A GROUP OF
COREE STUD
MERINO EWES
TWO-TOOTH SONS
OF THE STUD RAM
BALLYMENA
Below- STATION
RESERVE RAM
HOGGETS
CO REE. NEW SOUTH WALES


notwithstanding the introduction of some noteworthy
American sires about 1900, which secured for Coree many
high awards at shows in New South Wales and Victoria
on account of the excellent fleeces with which the sheep
were clad, it became apparent that rapid progress with a
section of these wrinkled sheep meant too much variation
from the general type.
Mr. Cell, the managing trustee, realising that the
Vermont had fulfilled its usefulness in putting density
into the fleece, transformed the stud by replacing the heavy
wrinkled sheep with high class, plain bodied rams of pure
A REFRESHING GLIMPSE OF THE
GARDEN FROM THE COOL SHADES
OF THE VINE-COVERED VERANDAH
Peppin blood. The stud is registered in the Register of
Stud Merino Flocks of Australia as Flock No. 27, and
its steady improvement by Mr. McCaughey has placed it
in the high position it now occupies. The popularity of
the rams is such that at the time of writing there is not
a 4-tooth sale ram on the property.
Amongst other additions Mr. McCaughey secured at
the sales in Sydney in 1926 a Wanganella ram No. 4.78
for 1200 guineas, and sent six of his top ewes to that cele-
brated 5000-guineas sire, Ballymena, at Coonong Station,
the property of his brother, Mr. Roy McCaughey. From
C 0 RE K, NE IV S 0 UT II IV AL E S


these he now has three ram lambs and a ewe lamb, from
which good results are certain.
The average weight of wool cut by 4-tooth wethers in
1926 was 14.3 lbs., and that of the ewe hoggets 11.1 lbs.
From the 2-year-old sheep 12.8 lbs. were cut. The whole
of the stud ewes, including hoggets, cut 11.8 lbs. in the
same season; the average for rams was 15.7 lbs. hiom
the total of 34,110 grown sheep on the station in 1926 an
average of twelve and a-half pounds of wool was cut. 1 he
lambing at Coree starts in April, whilst the shearing is
done in August, except for the studs, which are shorn by
hand in July. The clip which went to Melbourne in
1926 comprised 1202 bales, and secured the satisfactory
THE ROSE PERGOLA AND TENNIS COURT
IN THE EARLY MORNING SHADOWS
average of per lb. all round. None of tins clip
was sent to the scour.
The progress of the Coree clip may be seen from the
following record of sales since 1920. In that year the
wool average was £23 18s. 3d. per bale.
In 1921 the average was £l9 3s. 7d. per bale.
In 1922 the average was £3O per bale.
In 1923 the average was £32 16s. 2d. per bale.
In 1924 the average was £44 7s. Id. per bale.
In 1925, the slump year, the average was £24 2s. 2d.
per bale.
In 1926 the average was £26 2s. lid. per bale.
Mr. McCaughey successfully exhibited his sheep from
COR E E. NE W SOU T 11 WAL E S


1922 to 1925 at the Albury show, and gained the grand
champion ram award every year.
Coree carries a very fine herd of Shorthorn cattle, the
breeding cows being descended from purchases made in
the nineties from \ arrabee Park, then owned bv the late
Mr. Robe rtson. In 1899 the Count of Summerton was
bought by Mr. Cell f rom Mr. Tweddle, of Gisborne,
Victoria, and as the seasons passed other purebred bulls
were introduced from leading studs. The herd to-day
comprises about 110 cows, which have been kept up to a
very high standard, and include some of the best blood
in Australia. Owing to the slump in the cattle market
Mr. McCaughey has not been breeding bulls for a few
years, but as soon as conditions warrant it this part of
similar area this }'ear (1927).
When the lease was taken over there was a herd of
some 2000 cattle on the run, but to-day in addition there
are 9000 station bred Merino ewes which Mr.
McCaughey purchased from Messrs. Ellis Bros., Burra-
bogie, Hay, New South Wales, 2000 ewes bought in South
Australia, and 2000 sheep purchased in the West.
The kind of country which he has taken up can be
described as ironstone and limestone in formation, un-
dulating for the most part, while outcrops in the form
of ridges break the contour here and there. The timber
consists of open mulga scrub with gum and other native
trees following the watercourses and a chain of lakes
running through the property. The largest is known
STUD MERINO EWES AND LAMBS ON THE EDGE OF THE PLAIN
the business will be continued. Some recent introductions
of hulls have included blood from Eli Elwah stud.
Some good horses are run at Coree as a side line, and
to-day there is a mare with a foal at foot by David. Mr.
McCaughey, however, has no stallion on the property at
present.
The possibilities of Western Australia have long ap-
pealed to the owner of Coree, especially in regard to wool
growing, and in 1926 he purchased the lease of one mil-
lion acres of good, sound unimproved country at Wiluna
from M essrs. Tweedie, Ward and Ward. He named
the station Lake Violet, and within the past few months
has fenced in 200,000 acres. It is proposed to fence a
as Lake Violet, which is fresh for the greater part of the
year. A few intermittent watercourses find their way
down from the ridges, and the rainfall is about 10 in.
per annum. The main supply of water is from the great
sub-artesian source at a depth of about 40 ft. from the
surface.
I he top feed consists mainly of saltbush and mulga
scrub, with spinifex and some long rooted and dry grasses
in abundance. In one sector of this property of 1600
square miles is a stretch of saltbush plain extending in a
belt forty miles long by about three miles wide.
Within the shoit space of a year the erection of improve-
ments has proceeded rapidly, and besides the fencing al-
C 0 REE, NK IV SOU T H WAL E S


A SOU'-WESTERLY BREEZE RIPFLING THE
BILLABONG AT THE COREE HOMESTEAD
THE BOATSTEPS ON THE BILLABONG AT THE HOMESTEAD
C O RK E. N E ir S () U TII IV A LE S


THE NEAT AND WELL-ORDERED STABLES AT COREE
FLOCK MERINO EWES AND LAMBS AT ONE OF THE PERMANENT WATERHOLES IN THE BILLABONG
CORE K, A' E W S O UT II IV A LES


STUD MERINO EWE HOGGETS ON THE WATER
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD AND WELL-KEPT GARDEN
COR E E, VK w S 0 UT II IV AL E S


SHEARING SALE RAMS WITH THE BLADES
ready mentioned a number of subdivisions have been en-
closed with post and wire fences, whilst forty wells have
been sunk. The whole of the subdivisions and watering
has been so arranged that each well will water if neces-
sary about four paddocks, and the sheep do not have to
travel long distances to water. Ihe nearest railway is
140 miles distant at Meekatharra, but the extension
of the line to Wiluna is looked for in the neai futuie.
Lake Violet Station is managed by Mr. R. McMillan.
The sheep are thriving exceptionally well, being appar-
ently thoroughly suited to the conditions of their new
life. In due course it is the owner’s intention to go in
for stud breeding there.
Mr. Samuel McCaughey was born at Coree on 27th
November, 1892, and was educated first at Geelong
Grammar School, Victoria, and later at Cambridge, Eng-
land. He returned to Coree to take up sheep husbandry,
but when the war broke out went to England early in
1915 and enlisted in the Royal Field Artillery, subse-
quently joining the 46th Battery, Ist Division, in France.
He saw service in France and returned in 1919. On the
3rd February, 1917, he married at Fondon, k na,
daughter of the late Duncan McKellar, of Kirkella,
Stawell, Victoria, and their family consists of L nity, born
on the 12th December, 1918, Patricia, born on the 6th
August, 1920, Michael, born on 2nd October, 1921, and
Anne, born on 11th May. 1927.
THE LAKE AT THE COREE HOMESTEAD
CO REE, NEW SOUTH WALES


TUPRA, LIEWAH AND GUNBAR, RIVERINA, N.S.W.
Properties with which Mr. A. T. Creswick is associated.
FOR many years the name of Air. A. T. Creswick
has been closely associated wdth pastoral properties
in south-western Riverina, and it is the aim of
this article to shortly describe the properties with which
his name is associated. In 1924 Mr. Creswick disposed
of the whole of his New South Wales pastoral interests
to Tupra Pastoral Company Pty. Limited, of which he
is the managing director. This company works Tupra,
cattle and 85,000 sheep, and 120,000 sheep are shorn an-
nually. The Juanbung portion, where the cattle are
mostly run, contains the greater part of the famous Lach-
lan reed beds. This remarkable piece of country, even
last year when the flood water did not spread beyond
the river banks, grew a wonderful growth of luxuriant
reeds on which cattle fattened, while the rest of the coun-
try was drought stricken. A large portion of Juanbung
THE HOMESTEAD AT LIEWAH
Merrihindinyah, Yarrara, which includes Copabella, and
Arthursleigh properties in New South Wales.
TUPRA
The Tupra run is situated in the western division of
New South Wales on the lower Lachlan and Murrum-
bidgee Rivers, and comprises 681,000 acres, including
I 15,000 acres of freehold land. It normally carries 5000
consists of heavily timbered country subject to flooding
from the Murrumbidgee, and is ideal cattle country.
Much of the timber has been ringbarked. The Tupra
and Duckshot portions are mostly red and grey grassed
plains with trefoil, barley grass, white top and corkscrew,
and some areas of saltbush. The northern portion known
as Tarwong, of about 250,000 acres, is almost entirely
saltbush plain country.
Despite the frontage to the Lachlan and Murrumbid-


CATTLE IN THE REED BEDS AT JUANBUNG
gee Rivers, the problem of providing water on this huge
area for the large number of stock has always given great
concern. The late Mr. James Tyson had large cuttings
made to fill Duckshot and Bocathan Lakes, and the Duck-
shot Lake is now practically permanent. Since the Water
Commission improved the Merowie Creek, Tarwong
Lake is also more or less permanent water. But Mr.
Creswick was not satisfied with this and installed a large
pumping plant on the Lachlan to carry water out through
channels by gravitation to various tanks. When the
Avater has gravitated about ten miles it is again lifted by
another pumping plant, and from there gravitates for
many miles. It is estimated there are 70 miles of chan-
nels which fill tanks with a total capacity of at least
120,000 cubic yards on the pumping system alone. But
on the portion of the run to which the channels do not
reach, the work of well sinking, boring and tank sinking
has never ceased, until at the present time one can say
that Tupra is for its size a very well watered run. But
the annual cost of maintaining all these water improve-
ments is very great. Windmill work, tank and drain work
is always going on. During the last dry summer the dust
storms were constantly filling in the pumping channels.
The property is worked with a head station at Tupra,
sub-stations at Juanbung and Tarwong, and outstations
at Duckshot and Blue Hill. The sheep are shorn at the
GUNBAR EWE HOGGETS WITH EIGHT MONTHS’ WOOL
TUP R A, LI E W AH, AN D G UNBAR. NEW SOU TEI WAL E S


BULLOCKS ON TUPRA
LIEWAH EWE HOGGETS BEFORE CLASSING, WITH EIGHT MONTHS’ WOOL
TUPRA, LIE IV A 11, AND CUN PAR, NEW SOU Til WALES


VIEW OF GUNBAR HOMESTEAD
Tupra shearing shed, built 25 years ago, a few years after
Mr. Creswick acquired the property. The shearers’ and
shed hands’ accommodation for 100 men was rebuilt last
year to conform with the new Rural Workers’ Accom-
modation Act at a cost of £6OOO. There is another large
shed at Tarwong which is now only used for crutching
in the autumn.
MERRIBINDINYAH
This station, a group of properties situated near
Bethungra, is also worked by the Tupra Pastoral Com-
pany. It consists of 23,500 acres of secured lands, and
has for many years carried 30,000 dry sheep, and at odd
times a large number of cattle. Being in the good rain-
fall belt —it has an average of 26 in. per annum—it
THE HOMESTEAD AT TUPRA
TUPRA, LIEWAH. AND GUN BAR. NEW SOUTH WALES


PUMPING STATION AND CHANNEL ON LACHLAN RIVER AT TUPRA
A CHANNEL MAKERS'" CAMP ON THE BANKS OF THE LACHLAN RIVER AT GUNBAR
TV PR A, LIE W A 11, AND GUN BAR, NEW SOUTH WALES


TUPRA STUD EWES AND LAMBS
OLD STATION BRIDGE OVER THE LACHLAN RIVER AT TUPRA
TUP R A. LI EW A 11. AN D GUNB A R, NE W SOUTH W ALES


TARWONG WOOLSHED AND AN ARM OF THE LAKE
STUD MERINO EWES AND LAMBS AT LIEWAH
TU P RA, LIE WA H, AN D GUN BA R. NEW SOU TII W A EES


NO. 2 PUMP ON TUPRA WATER CHANNEL, 10 MILES FROM LACHLAN RIVER
makes a very safe place for large numbers of sheep when
properties further west are suffering from drought. Dur-
ing the last season, when the country as far west as Tupra
was suffering from a severe drought the Merribindinyah
country was in a good state, and enabled the company to
save a large number of stock that would otherwise have
had to be sold. The country consists of hills —some
of which are light carrying—red pine country,
much of this having at one time been cultivated,
and also very rich lucerne flats. It is all good
sound sheep country and suitable for breeding
M erino sheep of good size. When opportunity occurs
it is intended to keep a large flock of ewes at Merribin-
dinyah, but it was its suitability for growing lucerne
that interested Mr. Creswick in the first place. The
lucerne flats at Merribindinyah and Wambidgee have
produced thousands of tons in the last five years. Here
the lucerne grows freely without irrigation, and is cut as
many as six times a year. The lucerne is pressed and
baled in the field by the latest machinery, and then carted
to large stacks near the home station, where it is stored
until required. It is Mr. Creswick’s idea that in time
of drought it is better to bring the sheep to where he has
the fodder than send the fodder to the sheep. This
general rule wull not always work, however, and during
the last drought Merribindinyah was loading trucks
daily at Bethungra Siding to feed sheep on other proper-
ties over which Mr. Creswick has control. His opinion,
however, is that it has paid him to find a property where
lucerne grew easily without irrigation rather than to
pump and irrigate further west. There are at Merribin-
dinyah and its outstation, Wambidgee, 700 acres of the
best lucerne which is suitable for cutting, baling and
TUPRA STUD RAMS WITH EIGHT MONTHS’ WOOL
TV PR A, LIE W A 11, AND GUN BAR, NEW SOUTH WALES


THE THOROUGHBRED
STALLION, ALL PRINCE
(IMP.), AT LIEWAH
THOROUGHBRED MARES
AND FOALS AT LIEWAH
GUNBAR CLYDESDALE
STALLION, WINDERMERE
RAY KENNEDY (IMP.)
TUPRA, LIE W AH. AND GUN BAR, NEW SOUTH WALES


stacking, and 1000 acres which are kept for grazing only.
But of late years, since a large reserve of lucerne has been
put in the stack, much of the 700 acres is also grazed.
Yarrara and Arthursleigh
Two properties worked by the company must now
TUPRA WOOLSHED AND HUTS
briefly be described. These are commonly referred to as
“summer country,” though both carry stock throughout
the year, and carry them well, both places obtaining a
very high price for the wool shorn there.
The first one known as Yarrara, which also includes
Copabella, where the home station
is situated, lies in the hills about
25 miles east of Holbrook. It is
hilly, heavily timbered country,
though most of the timber has
been destroyed and cleared. In
this run there are 31,000 acres of
secured lands and 4000 acres lease-
hold, making a splendid run for
dry sheep in summer time, and also
carries 20,000 sheep through the
winter now that the rabbits have
been cleared out of the greater
part. This work of rabbit de-
struction is still continuing in 1928,
as Mr. Creswick is determined to
get rid of them on the small por-
tion still remaining to be cleared.
Arthursleigh, a property of
13,000 acres, near Goulburn, held
on long lease, consists of hilly
country, which was at one time
timbered, but which has been dead
and cleared so long that it is hard
to realise it. Arthursleigh is
used to carry about 15,000
Tupra wethers. The usual practice is to send
young wethers off shears from Tupra and shear
them for two years at Arthursleigh, after which
they are sold in the fat stock market. These two proper-
ties, Yarrara and Arthursleigh, are of inestimable value
in dry times, but are worked in such a way that they
are not only a standby in time of drought, but are an
income-producing part of the company’s estates.
LIEWAH
Liewah is a run of 35,000 acres of freehold land
situated between the Edward and Wakool
Rivers, 30 miles west of Moulamein, in south-
western Riverina. It is between the two
rivers just above their junction where they are
close together, and this enables every paddock
on the run to have a permanent river front-
age. It consists of heavily ringed box coun-
try and open well grassed plains, with small
areas of salt and cotton bush country. It is
ideal for sheep, and here Mr. Cres-
wick has kept his stud flock since it was
formed.
Purchased from the Msin family by the late
Mr. Henry Creswick in 1873, Liewah was
given in 1912 by Mr. A. T. Creswick to his
son, Mr. H. F. Creswick, whose country home
it now is. At the same time the Merino stud
flock and stud of thoroughbred horses on Lie-
wah were given to his son.
Liewah is highly improved, and the old wooden home-
stead is prettily situated on the bank of the Edward River,
surrounded by a garden. Mr. H. F. Creswick regards
it as his home, and is taking pains to see that everything
connected with the station buildings is brought thoroughly
A SUNNY CORNER IN THE LIEWAH GARDEN
up to date. The men’s quarters and dining room and
married men’s cottages have been built in accordance with
the latest ideas and with the comfort and health of their
occupants in view.
Mr. H. F. Creswick, like his father, is an enthusiastic
breeder of thoroughbreds, and maintains a select stud of
TUP R A, LIE IV A 11. AND GUN BA R. NE W SOU TII IV AL E S


STUD EWES AND LAMBS ON LIEWAH
about fifteen mares, and incidentally breeds a great many
winners.
A few years ago Mr. A. T. Creswick and the various
members of his family owned or controlled companies
owning the group of stations Liewah, Moolpa, Mooloo-
moon, and Keri Keri, which totalled 250,000 acres of
freehold land in one block. But with the advent of the
border railways from Victoria it was necessary to part
with the greater portion of these, and Liewah, consisting
of 35,000 acres, is now all that is held of the 250,000
acres gazetted by the Closer Settlement Board as required
for subdivision. As Liewah was the first property owned
by the family in New South Wales, though they had been
squatters in Victoria from the earliest settlements, Mr.
H. F. Creswick is hopeful that the Closer Settlement
Board will leave him Liewah to keep as a home where
he may continue to breed the Merino rams required by
the many properties under his father’s control.
GUNBAR
Gunbar, a run of 117,000 acres secured land and 7000
acres P.0.L., lying south of the Lachlan, to which it has
a short frontage, about 30 miles below Hillston, is worked
WESTERN SIDE OF JUANBUNG LAKE
TUPRA, LIE WA H. AND GUN BAR. NEW SOUTH WALES


by the Gunbar Pastoral Company Pty. Limited, of which
Mr. A. T. Creswick is managing director. The run ex-
tends south of the Lachlan for a distance of about 20
miles, and consists of myall and box country with large
open plains, mostly red soil and well grassed, and some
salt and cotton bush plain in the south-west corner. The
plain country is nicely broken up by clumps of box suit-
able for sheltering stock. The whole run can be con-
sidered as ideal Riverina sheep country, which grows
Merino sheep of very large frame and splendid constitu-
tion.
Apart from the short frontage to the Lachlan River,
Gunbar is watered by surface tanks, wells and bores.
There are, however, more wells than bores, as wells are
considered better than bores where possible. These wells,
which all provide good stock water, are splendidly
equipped with windmills, large supply tanks and trough-
ing, and in addition are all well fitted with extra pumps
worked by petrol en-
gines for use in calm
weather. This makes
a very safe water sup-
ply, but Mr. Creswick
is never satisfied if the
supply of water for
stock can be improved,
and a water channel
from the Lachlan to
the homestead, a dis-
tance of 18 miles, is
now being completed.
This will enable a
great many of the sur-
face tanks to be filled
regularly by pumping
from the Lachlan, and
the water can be sent
to the extreme south-
western corner by
pumping once at the
river, as there is a na-
tural fall all the way.
A description of the stock on all the above properties
has been purposely left until the end because the descrip-
tion of the stock on one is practically a description of the
stock on the whole.
There are thoroughbred stallions on Liewah, Tupra,
Gunbar, and Merrihindinyah, and great attention is paid
to the breeding of light horses suitable for station work.
The supply of draught horses is kept up from Tupra and
Gunbar, on both of which places Clydesdale stallions are
kept. Mr. Creswick is an enthusiastic breeder of Clydes-
dales, and his St. Helens stud on the Darling Downs
in Queensland has great success at the Queensland
shows.
The supply of bullocks for fattening is kept up by the
purchase of station-bred lines in Queensland rather than
by breeding them, but on all properties there are a few
cows kept solely for domestic use, and Mr. Creswick,
liking these cattle to be well bred, insists on the use of
CHANNEL MAKING ON GUNBAR STATION
STOCK
pure Shorthorn bulls. For the breeding of these bulls a
Shorthorn stud was formed at Gunbar, and the other
properties are supplied with bulls from there.
But it is as a woolgrower that Mr. Creswick has made
his greatest success. That he is a successful pastoralist
few will deny, and he owes that success to hard work
and a wonderful sense of values, but most of all to his
knowledge as a sheepbreeder.
Going to Liewah in 1873 he was soon manager, and
succeeded Mr. Denbeigh Hall in the classing and mating
of the stud flock there. As Mr. Creswick obtained
control of other properties he introduced his Liewah blood
wherever he went. He has always bred his own rams,
and on all the properties he controls the sheep are of
one type. This type is a big plain-bodied Merino, a heavy
wool cutter, growing a fleece of about 64’s quality, or
rather better, of good length and soft handling. Mr.
Creswick has never followed “fashion,” but has insisted
always on a big sheep
of good constitution,
summing up the es-
sentials to his sub-
ordinates in the three
words “size,”
“length,” “character.”
A stud ram is never
sold and flock rams are
only sold when his own
requirements have been
filled, though the sur-
plus rams always meet
with a ready sale. De-
spite the prejudice
against the Tasmanian
sheep, Mr. Creswick
has never wavered in
his belief in them, con-
stantly “refreshing”
the Liewah stud by
the purchase of the
best Tasmanian rams
available.
All the wools for
which Mr. Creswick
is responsible are branded with the three letters H C k .
Twenty years ago when the “Pastoral Homes” was pre-
viously published, the brokers wrote; —
“The three letters H C k , when appearing under the
various brands of Liewah, Tupra, and many others, are
recognised by the trade as representing a standard of ex-
cellence of few equals, and certainly no superior, for the
size of the clips.
“These wools have established an all-round reputation,
the main features which appeal directly to the manufac-
turer, no matter of what country, being their length and
softness, combined with fineness and general good breed-
ing-
“ Their appearance in the sale room is the signal for the
keenest competition, and the general handling and pre-
paration for market leave nothing to be desired.”
The brokers write that the above is as true to-day as
when it was written twenty years ago.
TUPRA, LIE W AH, AND GUN BAR, NEW SOUTH WALES


BARRATTA, DENILIQUIN, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of The Australian, Mercantile, Land & Finance Co. Ltd.
BARRATTA has been in the possession of the Aus-
tralian, Mercantile, Land and Finance Company
Limited since 1905, and is located in one of the
soundest parts of Riverina, New South Wales, being
34 miles west of Deniliquin. It now comprises a compact
block of 90,000 acres, in which there is a predominance
of red soil over black soil plains, nicely sheltered with
small to heavy clumps of timber on the north-eastern and
south-western boundary. The open plains, with their
both grass and herbage, and the most drought-resistant
are the Dillon, Cotton and Creeping Saltbush, of which
there are large quantities throughout the open plain
country that comprises the larger area.
The average rainfall is 16 in., and the water supply, in
addition to the frontages to the Edward River, Billabong,
Forest and Clarke’s Creeks, is further augmented with
numerous surface tanks and a number of sub-artesian
bores.
THE BARRATTA HOUSE AND GARDEN
scattered timber, are the main characteristic of the
country.
The property has a five mile frontage to the Billabong
Creek on the north, also 10 miles frontage to the Edward
River on the southern boundary, h orest and Clarkes
Creeks also run through the property, and along them
are nice fringes of timber.
The pastures comprise the best variety and quality of
The run is divided into about 60 paddocks, ranging in
size from 50 to 5000 acres. It is rabbit netted on the
western, northern and south-eastern boundaries, with a
division netting fence, leaving 12,000 acres of country
bounded by the Edward River not netted. This stretch
of country is periodically under heavy flood, and provides
excellent cattle feed when the water subsides.
In the vicinity of the principal stud paddocks, an


A GROUP OF BARRATTA STUD MERINO SIRES
irrigation area of 20 acres has been laid out on the
Billabong Creek, fenced, ploughed, levelled and chan-
nelled, lying in fallow ready for sowing with lucerne, rye
grass and other fodders considered most suitable. The
water supply for this scheme will be held by a substantial
dam on the Billabong, recently constructed of reinforced
concrete, in which it is anticipated sufficient water will
be held to carry out successful irrigation. A 27 h.p.
Hlackstone crude oil engine and a 10 in. centrifugal
pump have also been installed.
The homestead is situated about a mile from the
Edward, and is a commodious building, well built of
brick, and standing in a very fine flower garden, with a
nice fruit and vegetable garden, surrounded by a variety
SOME YEARLING SPECIAL MERINO RAMS BY NO. B.1
B A RR A T TA. KE W S O U T// IV A LE S


of large ornamental trees and English hedge. Ihe water
supply is pumped from a lagoon a short distance from the
homestead; this lagoon fills from the Edward.
The woolshed is a substantial structure, fitted up with
20 stands of Wolseley machines, with shed room for about
1200 sheep, and the huts are fitted up to accommodate 40
men. The huts are practically all new buildings, having
recently been renovated, and water is laid on from a
lagoon close by.
The outstation, Kerribirri, is situated about twelve
miles north of the homestead. There is a comfortable
house, with all necessary outbuildings, as also a woolshed
with 10 stands and hut accommodation, recently re-
modelled, for 20 men, with water laid on to all buildings
THE BARRATTA LAGOON
WITH THE WOOLSHED
IN THE BACKGROUND
from a large earthen tank. The tops of the stud are
shorn by blades at this shed.
Barratta was acquired by the company, as already
stated, in 1905, and the foundation of the existing Merino
stud was laid by purchases of high-class stud ewes and
rams from Wanganella, Wanganella Estate, Deniliquin
Stud Park, Murgha and Haddon Rig. The foundation,
therefore, was of the very best, and ever since its incep-
tion the stud has been maintained with pure Peppin
blood.
The characteristics of this wonderful strain, which has
been of such inestimable worth to Australia’s progress,
have been preserved right through the Barratta sheep,
with the result that those responsible have built up a
B A R R A T TA. NE W S 0 U TII IV A LE S


FOUR-YEAR-OLD
SPECIAL STUD
MERINO RAM,
NO. 1802
A FLOCK OF ONE-YEAR-OLD
SPECIAL MERINO STUD
EWES "ON THE ROAD"
BARRA T T A. X E //' .S’ 0I r Tll IE AE E S


type of Merino that is a credit to the pastoral world for
its uniformity, size and style.
The Barratta clip has for many years been noted for
its excellence. It is a wool considered by buyers to
possess first class manufacturing properties, and is de-
scribed as of true medium super combing quality, long
in staple, even, dense and bright. With any of the other
important Riverina wools it holds its own for value and
weights, as an illustration of which, at the 1926 shearing,
the average for the whole of the grown sheep was 14 lbs.
ozs.
The sheep are the true type of Australian Merino, and
throughout the several grades into which the stud is
divided for breeding purposes, marked uniformity is
apparent. This conformity to one distinct type is a
feature of the Barratta sheep, and the natural result of
a policy to breed for quality.
In general appearance the ewes are large, long and
deep. Their erect carriage, with faces clean, silky and
alert, stamps them as aristocrats and shows them to have
great constitution. Well sprung ribs give conformation
to wide, straight backs. Legs are strong and carry a
heavy, roomy carcase and a well grown fleece. No
wrinkles appear on the body, but the neck and front are
nicely shown off with good folds.
The characteristics of Barratta rams include big, well
formed plain bodies, heavy neck folds, level backs, deep
sides, good thighs and sound legs, while there is an
unmistakably masculine bearing. They have beautiful
heads and shapely horns, silky noses, open faces, showing
character as sires, and are of robust constitution. These
have been predominant features right through the stud’s
upbringing, and set an example of correct and painstaking
line breeding.
A MOB OF 2000 STUD
MERINO EWES AND
LAMBS ON BARRATTA
n A R R A T TA. N E W S 0 U T H W A LE S


TWO TO FOUR YEAR OLD
SPECIAL STUD MERINO
RAMS AT BARRATTA
TWO SPECIAL STUD MER-
INO RAMS USED IN THE
BARRATTA STUD FLOCK
n A R R A T rA, NE W S 0 U TII IV AL E S


TYPICAL STUD
MERINO EWES
ON BARRATTA
A GROUP OF FIVE
SPECIAL STUD
MERINO RAMS
AT BARRATTA
BARR A T TA, N E W SOU TII ERA LE S


THE KERRIBIRRI OUTSTATION ON BARRATTA
A beautiful fleece is put on the sheep and wide demands
for variation can be met, so that the rams can take their
place in any flock. Under the belly, on the head, at the
britch, upon the back, there is a wonderful, true and sur-
prising evenness of quality.
Amongst leading sires is Barratta No. 1. A ram of
magnificent appearance, he was acquired from Austin
Wanganella Company Limited at the Sydney Sheep Fair
in 1924 for 3050 guineas, a price which is claimed to be
the world’s record for a Merino ram put up at public
auction. No. 1 is a five year old and a creditable pro-
duct of Peppin blood. 1 he first of his progeny arrived
between Alarch and June 1925, comprising 55 ram and
51 ewe lambs. The following summer 23 ram and 34
ewe lambs by him were dropped, whilst the ensuing
drops have been equally successful. All these young
sheep show a disposition to mature early and grow out
into the same type as their sire, and when seen had great
bone, good heads, handsome bearing, massive frames and
beautifully covered points. That the ram progeny of
No. 1 have the same ability to transmit their most desir-
able qualities to their own progeny in due course can be
safely expected.
Barratta has not been represented in the show ring
since 1922, but between 1912 and that year 93 prizes,
including many championships, were won at the Mel-
A FLOCK OF SPECIAL A. MERINO EWES
BAR R A TT A, N K Jf T SOU T 11 WAL E S


A GROUP OF 3 AND 4 YEAR OLD
STUD MERINO EWES WITH
THEIR LAMBS AT FOOT
nA R R A T TA, NE If S O U TII IE A LES


SPECIAL MERINO STUD EWES
A CORNER OF THE PRETTY GARDEN AT THE BARRATTA HOUSE
BARRATTA,N E IF S O U T II If 7 A LK S


STUD MERINO EWES AND LAMBS
ROUND AN EARTHEN SUPPLY
TANK, SHOWING MILL AND
WATERING TROUGHS
B A R R A T TA, N E W SOU TII W A LES


THE BARRATTA WOOLSHED
bourne Sheep Show in the strong and medium wool
classes. In 1922 at Melbourne the stud won the ram
championships in both of those sections, the sheep in each
case being grass-fed and unhoused.
Mr. Charles John Campbell Cameron, the manager of
Barratta, was born at Byron Station, Inverell, New South
Wales, his father, Mr. Robert Cameron, one of the best
judges of sheep in his day, having managed that pronerty
before acquiring land of his own, and to him the son owes
a great deal of his early experience and tuition. As a
boy he studied under Mr. John Sinclair, of Waterloo
Station, and upon leaving school went to Bullerawa Sta-
tion, near Narrabri, managed by a Mr. John Campbell,
a well-known sheepbreeder. When 17 years of age he
went overlanding, and as a drover much useful know-
ledge was acquired, especially during the 1888 drought.
Later he managed Glendon, near Glen Innes, and for
further training went as overseer to the famous Welltown
Station, Queensland, where Mr. D. M. Cameron was
manager. In 1899 he joined the Australian, Mercantile,
Land and Finance Company Limited, and managed their
Charlton property, near Brewarrina, N.S.W., thence
going to the company’s Dunumbral Station, in the Wal-
gett district.
Mr. Cameron was appointed pastoral inspector to the
company’s Sydney office in 1906, and for the next fifteen
years also supervised at Dunumbral the classing and
mating of the stud flock which he had formed there.
This stud is now bred on Charlton. Since 1908 he has
done the classing and mating of the sheep on Barratta,
and took up residence there as manager in 1921.
As a capable breeder and judge, Mr. Cameron is
widely known, having judged at many of the leading
shows, besides acting frequently for Merino buyers,
not only in Australia, but from Argentina and South
Africa.
B A R R A T TA, NE W S 0 U T H W A LE S


ANLABY, KAPUNDA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
The Property of H. H. Dutton, Esq.
Anlaby , one of the historic stations of South Aus-
tralia, 11 miles from Kapunda, and 63 miles
north of Adelaide, was taken up originally in
1841 by the late Frederick H. Dutton, grand-uncle of
the present owner, to whom the property passed in 1908.
In its earliest history Anlaby extended from near
Kapunda to Tothill’s Creek, close to the head of the
River Light, in a block of 160,000 acres —25 miles long
In 1851 the second transfer to freehold was effected,
when areas under lease were made available by the
Crown for private purchase. Mr. Dutton judiciously
selected the best of his country, and within a few years
was the owner of 70,000 acres. With his tenure of the
land secure, nothing was allowed to hinder progress to-
wards breeding a type of Merino sheep which subse-
quently attained prominence. To-day Anlaby, although
THE BEAUTIFUL HOME OF MR. H. H. DUTTON
by 10 miles wide. Near its eastern limits lay the town
of Eudunda, and along its western boundary ran the
main Kapunda to Burra road.
The first lot of freehold was an 80-acre section, upon
which in 1843 a log hut was erected to serve as head-
quarters for the huge run, and for the manager, the late
Alexander Buchanan. Soon after this Mr. Frederick
Dutton changed the aboriginal name of Pudna, by which
the property was then known, to Anlaby, and laid plans
to build up his leases into first-class wool country.
of considerably diminished extent, is one of the finest
properties in South Australia.
The gradual reduction in area began in 1905, when
24,000 acres were sold to the Government for closer
settlement purposes. In due course blocks of 15,000,
9000, and again 6000 acres respectively, were subdivided
and sold to wheat farmers, and in 1917 the present owner
cut up 4000 acres for sale to ex-service men. The last
dispersal of 4000 acres took place in 1922.
What remains of this once extensive estate —8000 acres


—is now devoted to stud Merino breed-
ing and share farming, and there is
nothing lacking on the score of improve-
ments. The resident general manager,
Mr. C. De N. I mcas, went to Anlaby
in 1895, and assumed the management
of the estate in 1905. Mr. C. Camp-
bell, who was born on the property in
1869, is overseer and strdmaster. The
administration of Anlaby is thus in first-
class hands, and is conducted with
method and skill, befitting the high
ideals set down by the owner.
Admirably subdivided, and immune
from vermin, the undulating pastures
of Anlaby support a flock of 5000 pure
M erinos, which move about in the
shade of wisely preserved natural tim-
ber. Three good bores, ranging in
depth from 50 to 200 ft.—the latter
having been sunk in the side of a hill—
provide an excellent supply of stock
water, while the River Light, on the
southern boundary, assures the estate of
at least some permanent storage. With
the advent of the mid-north electricity
scheme, water is pumped from one paddock to another, and
this is a great boon, specially in dry times. Favoured by
an annual rainfall of 18 in., the climate and natural
conditions are almost perfect for stud sheepbreeding.
Some years ago Mr. Lucas suggested that the heavily
timbered areas that were supporting only about a sheep
to two acres should be cultivated for wheat, and eventu-
ally 10,000 acres were cleared, broken up, and leased on
shares. The crop from the first year’s operations yielded
57,000 bags of grain, and when this land was offered to
farmers in 1914, 90 per cent, of those who had cleared
and worked the land bought it. They had been supplied
FROM THE TERRACE OF ANLABY HOUSE
with seed wheat, graded on Anlaby, and 50 per cent, of
the superphosphate required. As an outcome of this wise
move the value of the estate was enhanced considerably.
Excluding the drought year of 1914 the return over a
period of 15 seasons from the whole of the farms averaged
18 bushels, ranging up to 42 bushels to the acre.
Latterly difficult labour conditions have made it im-
practicable for the estate to farm more than about 800
acres, and to-day only 1000 acres are sown under cereals
on share farming principles. The average yield for 1927
was 8-| bags to the acre. During 1928 a further section
was sown, after which it is proposed to let some of the
THE MANAGER'S HOUSE
AN L A UY. S O UT II AUSTRALIA


REFLECTIONS. THE WATER
TOWER IN THE BEAUTIFUL
GARDEN AT ANLARY
A N LAB Y, S 0 UTH AUSTRALIA


VIEW FROM THE HOMESTEAD LOOK OUT
land revert to grazing.
The methods adopted to improve the pastures are to
top-dress about 500 acres each year with 1 cwt. of super-
phosphate to the acre. Where suitable, subterranean
clover is grown, and this proves a great standby, for not
only is it good spring feed, but also an excellent late
summer fodder. In addition, there are 250 acres under
lucerne grown on rich flats.
Anlaby wool is of a medium type, with a tendency to
strengthen on the sire’s side. It is a long shafty staple,
showing plenty of character. Shearing is done in Sep-
tember by hand blade shears on seven stands. The wool-
shed, which is a quarter of a mile from the homestead
buildings, has in the past been the scene of 30 stands
getting through a tally of from 50,000 to 60,000 sheep
at one shearing.
Anlaby Merinos date back to 1838, when the late F.
H. Dutton bought 5000 mixed sheep from New South
Wales, and put them on his Koonunga run. In 1841 the
flock was removed to Anlaby, and for many years was
bred up from Rambouillet, and later Saxony rams im-
ported by Mr. Dutton. Subsequently the Levels Stud
supplied a sire or two, and the fixation of a definite type
was effected by the introduction of Murray blood. The
standard aimed at was a large framed, plain bodied
M erino with the highest possible average of quality in
the general flock rams, specially in regard to heavy wool
production per head. At the annual classings this objec-
tive caused all inferior units to be weeded out, and the
stud became identical with the best of the Murray
(Cappeedee-Mount Crawford) blood.
There was no interruption to this breeding policy until
about 1915, when it was observed that the type was not
being held. Before fresh rams were introduced Mr. H.
C. Pennefather, the noted classer, was called in to give
his opinion as to wTat constituted the best strain for the
altered conditions on the estate. Acting upon his advice,
Mr. Lucas sought the approval of Mr. Dutton to change
over to Wanganella blood, which proved to be an ideal
type for the Anlaby country. As this blood was procur-
able at less cost in South Australia, a number of ewes
and rams were purchased in 1916 from the flocks of
North Bungaree, and the Hercules strain, which was pre-
dominant in the blood introduced, soon brought about
most desirable effects in the character and density of the
wool. Mr. Pennefather was entrusted thenceforward
with the classing and mating of the stud ewes, which
were graded into firsts and seconds, embracing long and
dense wool, special long and special dense, and covered
by pure North Bungaree rams only. The addition of
ewes, also from North Bungaree, gave the blood both on
the male and female side.
AN LA BY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


DISTANT VIEW
OF MR. DUTTON'S
HOME
THE MOTOR
YARD AND OFFICE
ON THE RIGHT
THE MAIN
ENTRANCE
ANLABY HOMESTEAD
AN LA BY, SOUL H A USTRA LI A


A ROCK GARDEN AND PLANT HOUSE IN THE CONSERVATORIES
AN LA BY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


A WONDERFUL WEALTH OF BLOOM. THE TOP PICTURE SHOWS A PORTION OF THE TERRACED GARDEN AND THE
LOWER A CORNER OF THE HOUSE, WITH THE BILLIARD ROOM ON THE LEFT
AN LA BY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


After two or three seasons the advance towards per-
fection was most noticeable, and although still in its
youth in 1928, an improved type has been reached, and
is being maintained by most careful breeding methods.
It is well to stress the point that the policy" is not to
go in for breeding fancy sheep, but to concentrate upon
the most useful lines of flock and selected rams. Also
with regard to the wool, the old style of line to medium
quality has given place to a medium to strong combing
wool, long, soft, and of beautiful texture, with character
right out to the tip, and evenly put on.
Until this standard was reached the owner had con-
siderable anxiety, for the change from an already proved
strain of blood might have ended disastrously. Now that
the management has secured what it set out to do, those
responsible are content. Moreover, they have formed a
good connection for the sale of rams.
The salient features of the sheep are their clean, well-
bred faces, unwrinkled bodies, and tremendous frame.
sidered that this animal proved to be probably one of the
best sires ever seen in the stud. He is of the Hercules
family, and noted for his prepotency, while to all his
progeny he imparts the characteristic qualities of his
blood. No. 96 is the leading sire for the present. Like-
wise of the Hercules strain he carries an extremely dense
fleece of real sire’s quality of exceptional character, and
carried well down to the points and under the belly.
A long, deep, plain-bodied sheep with the imprint of his
family in unmistakable evidence, he is magnificently
horned, and well set up. Some of his 4-tooth sons showed
outstanding qualities, while other stud rams also give
promise of begetting high-class stock.
Mr. Dutton disposes of between 500 and 700 flock
and selected rams each year to flockmasters in Queens-
land, New South Wales and Western Australia, as well
as within South Australia, and experience has proved that
the Anlaby rams are well suited to their new environ-
ment. The grades of prices into which the stud is classed
THE PINE DRIVE, BEING THE APPROACH TO THE HOMESTEAD FROM HAMILTON
Some exceptionally large hoggets were put through at the
April classing in 1927, when the general size of the sheep
was commented upon favourably by Mr. A. J.
McDonald, the expert. Credit for the splendid uni-
formity of the ewes and rams, and their robust constitu-
tion, is due to the efforts of the management and Mr.
Pennefather, and when an inspection was made at the
beginning of 1928—probably the most inopportune time
to get a good impression, owing to the dry season and
poorness of feed—the sheep left no doubt as to their
promise for the future. The 2-tooth stud ewes, in par-
ticular, gave every promise of making good, strong,
fecund matrons, and a pleasing note of evenness
characterised the flock. The ewes generally have deep,
well sprung barrels, large plain bodies and sound backs,
and carry dense and robust fleeces of pronounced
character and beautiful quality—a shade on the strong
side of medium.
Typical of the sires at Anlaby is one that came from
North Bungaree in 1924 as a 6-tooth. Mr. Lucas con-
are five, seven or ten guineas and over, according to
quality, and a popular demand has responded to the un-
tiring vigilance of the manager and classer to raise the
stud to higher levels.
No cattle are now bred at Anlaby outside a few special
Jerseys for domestic use. With their advent recently the
stud herd of Shorthorn cattle was disposed of, and onlv a
few head of mixed animals are now kept for fattening.
During the first week of 1928 a draft of paddock-fed fats
brought up to £29 ss. a head at the local market.
Those whose good fortune it is to visit Anlaby in the
spring will always remember the profusion of flowers that
bloom in the terraced gardens at the homestead. Away
from the beds of fragrant roses, beyond tiers of lawns and
shady pergolas, there opens out a valley of wooded lands
beautified by native trees from all parts of Australia, and
flanked by an avenue a mile long. Both Mr. and Mrs.
Dutton are keen students of landscape art, as is revealed
in the beauty of Anlaby’s surroundings.
One of Mr. Dutton’s favourite hobbies is collecting
AA r LAB Y, S O UT II A U S T BALIA


HERE IS A GROUP OF ANLABY STUD MERINO RAMS,
SHOWING AN EVEN TYPE OF LARGE-BODIED, WELL-
COVERED SHEEP. THIS PICTURE ALSO INDICATES THAT
THE OWNERS HAVE PRESERVED MUCH OF THE NATURAL
TIMBER ON THE PROPERTY
4 NLA BY. SOUTH AUSTRALIA


ANOTHER VIEW OF ANLABY HOUSE TAKEN FROM THE OUTLOOK
first editions, with which he is equipping a hne library at
Anlaby homestead—a home with an atmosphere of charm
and comfort. Mr. and Mrs. Dutton and family are at
Anlaby during the winter, and spend the summer at
“Ooraminna,’' a delightful home on the shores of the
Southern Ocean at Victor Harbour, and for a few weeks
at their bungalow at Rocky Point, Kangaroo Island,
where excellent fishing is obtained. Like his father, Mr.
Dutton is a lover of the sea as well as the country. His
father’s steam yacht, “Adele,” of 350 tons register, was
one of the best known pleasure vessels in Australian
waters a couple of decades ago.
UNO STATION.
Mr. Dutton’s back country is 70 miles west of Port
Augusta, where 450 miles of saltbush and mulga plains,
known as Uno Station, are devoted exclusively to sheep.
This property was acquired in 1922 with 7000 Merino
sheep. A vigorous policy of improvement was entered
upon, and to-day the flock totals 15,000 sheep, most of
which are of Anlaby strain, and of high standard.
Although for 14 months prior to January 1928 the
rainfall on Uno was only 2 in., the average is 8 in., and
the sheep grow a clean, bright, soft handling wool, which
tends to the fine side. In 1925 it sold up to 36d. per lb.
in the Adelaide market. In 1926 the grown sheep,
numbering 11,418, cut 11 lbs. a head, and the lambs
4 lbs. —results which demonstrate the readiness with
which Anlaby rams acclimatise to the hot, dusty country.
Uno is watered by several old wells, which have been
deepened, sub-artesian bores, and a number of dams, rang-
ing from 12,000 to 15,000 yards. Across the run
a range of rugged and rough stone crops up for five
miles, beginning and ending in a bluff. An engine is
used for pumping water to an elevation of 250 ft. across
the range through two miles of lap-welded pipes, from
where it gravitates to several paddocks five miles further
on. The manager, Mr. H. B. Edkins, lives in an impos-
ing homestead, while there is a full complement of up-to-
date station buildings.
The lambs are dropped in May, and shearing is begun
in July. From Iron Knob, to where the wool is carted,
it is trucked to Whyalla, and shipped to Port Adelaide.
At the southern end of Uno, towards Kimba siding, is
excellent wheatgrowing land, but under the provisions of
the Pastoral Act its use for agriculture is prohibited, and
so a large area of valuable country cannot be developed
to its utmost productiveness.
Personal
Mr. Henry Plampden Dutton, who is a son of the
late Mr. Henry Dutton, was born at North Adelaide on
13th February, 1879. Having first attended St. Peter’s
College, Adelaide, and subsequently Lancing College,
Essex (England), he proceeded to Magdalen, Oxford,
where he took his Arts degree. He was a member of the
Oxford crew, and rowed bow against Cambridge in 1900.
Mr. Dutton has travelled extensively, both abroad and in
Australia. In 1906, when motoring was not so ad-
AN LA BY, S OUTH AUSTRALIA


ANLABY-BRED STUD RAM
ANLABY-BRED STUD EWE
AN L A BY, SOU TII A USTRA LI A


vanced as it is to-day, he attempted an overland trip
from Adelaide to Darwin, but was compelled to abandon
the car near Tennant’s Creek in the Northern Territory.
ANLABY-BRED STUD RAMS
In 1908, in company with Murray Aunger, a second
journey was made, this time with success. Thirteen years
later, in 1921, Mr. and Mrs. Dutton motored from
Oodnadatta to the Katherine, Mrs. Dutton having been
the first woman to make this trip. At the outbreak of
war Mr. Dutton offered himself for active service, but
owing to an old leg wound he was rejected.
In 1905 Mr. Dutton married Miss
Emily Martin, daughter of the Hon.
James Martin, of Gawler. The family
comprises three sons and a daughter
■ —John Hansborough Dutton (born
1906), Richard Hampden Dutton (born
1908), and Geoffry Piers Dutton (born
1923), and Bryony Helen Dutton
(born 1919). The two elder sons, hav-
ing left St. Peter’s College, are complet-
ing their studies at Oxford.
Family records show that Mr. Dut-
ton’s great grandfather was a distin-
guished officer of the British Diplomatic
Service in Holland. Of his family of
three sons, Frederick Hansborough Dut-
ton, Francis Stacker Dutton, and Wil-
liam Hampden Dutton, the last-named
was the first to take up pastoral activi-
ties in Australia. He owned large
estates in New South Wales, and it
was at his suggestion that his brother,
Frederick, came to South Austral ia about 1838.
The latter was a partner with Captain Charles
Bagot in Koonunga Station until Anlaby was taken
up, and right up to the time of his death in 1890
he was a moving spirit in the pastoral life of South
Australia.
Mr. Francis Dutton was likewise an
outstanding figure in South Australia,
whence he came from Brazil. With
Captain Bagot he discovered the rich
copper lodes at Kapunda in 1842. He
was a member of the first House
of Assembly, and was Commissioner of
Crown Lands in the Hanson Ministry;
subsequently he became Premier of
South Australia, and in 1865 had the
title of C.M.G. conferred upon him.
He was appointed Agent-General in
London, and died there in 1877.
The late Mr. Henry Dutton, popu-
larly known as the Squire of Anlaby,
was the only son of William Hampden
Dutton. Born at Richmond, Victoria,
in 1848, and educated at St. Peter’s
College, he was associated with the
Bank of South Australia until the death
of his uncle, Mr. F. H. Dutton, in
1890. Having inherited Anlaby, he
carried out extensive schemes of improve-
ments, and with Mr. John Melrose
acquired North Booboorowie Station.
In addition to his properties he had other
interests, but Anlaby was his cherished possession, and
the surrounding district owes much of its prosperity to
his ideals.
1 o the memory of his wife, uncle, and his only
daughter, who fatally slipped off the rocks while painting
at Granite Islands, Victor Harbour, the late Mr. Dutton,
who died in 1914, erected a beautiful church at Hamilton,
ANLABY-BRED STUD EWES
near Anlaby, and presented it to the parish. He was a
noted breeder of Clydesdales, and a keen fox terrier
breeder and fancier.
ANLABY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


BUCKLAND PARK, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
The Property of G. and L. A. Brooks Limited
SI PUATED near the mouth of the Gawler River,
within 23 miles of Adelaide, South Australia, is
the beautiful property known as Buckland Park.
G. and I'.. A. Brooks Limited are the owners of this
historic place, which comprises 20,000 acres of freehold,
extending from a frontage of 15 miles to St. Vincent’s
Gulf and back along the Gawler River to the vicinity of
the townships of Iwo Wells and Virginia.
Ihe coastal areas are composed of lighter country,
including a large area of saltbush—a rare sight so far
chose the fertile river frontages. It is not recorded
whether stock were carried or not, but in 1838 Capt.
Alien and Mr. John Ellis purchased the right of title
to the property, which in those days was known as Port
Gawler Station. Ihe former pioneer brought out his
own ship and a cargo of bricks, and built a nice home-
stead, the remnants of which still stand as a reminder of
his enterprise.
Ihe Brownes took possession in 1856, and Ur.
William John Browne and his brother, Dr. John Harris
BUCKLAND PARK HOMESTEAD
south, and so near to the capital. The remainder of the
property is made up of plains and rich river Hats, where
magnificent old red gums, natural herbage, and grasses
grow with luxuriance characteristic of deep, alluvial,
well-watered flats.
What is termed the homestead block was taken up in
the earliest days of the State by George Milner Stephen,
a son-in-law of Capt. Hindmarsh, the first Governor of
South Australia, in 1836. Mr. Stephen was granted a
special survey of country to be selected by him, and he
Browne, subsequently became prominent figures in the
early history of the pastoral industry. Their notable
careers embraced fifty-four years’ tenure of Buckland
Park, besides the opening up of the famous Booboorowie
and Moorak Stations and cattle runs in the Northern
I erritory. Dr. W. J. Browne’s son, Leonard Gilbert
Browne, acquired Buckland Park in 1885. He left three
years later to reside in England, and his cousin and
attorney, Tom Landsdowne Browne, took over the pro-
pcit\ until 1610, when it was sold to Air. Edmund A.


BULLOCKS FROM G. AND E. A. BROOKS LIMITED'S NORTHERN PROPERTIES FATTENING AT BUCKLAND PARK
Brooks and his father, the late George Brooks.
Under the present ownership consistent progress has
been made. The enterprising pastoralists have increased
the productivity of the run by the development of the
whole of its resources. So soon as Mr. Brooks decided
that Buckland Park was naturally adapted to fattening
stock—it is quite handy to the metropolitan abattoirs and
other markets—he proceeded to improve and irrigate all
the low-lying areas near the river. Mr. Edmund Brooks
is a keen student of Australian fodder grasses and plants,
and has tried out many suitable varieties in the flood
area. He has succeeded also in controlling the inunda-
tion of the larger area involved in this fine proposition.
The submersion of these paddocks could be regulated
only by the erection of flood gates that would hold and
throw back the river. After many setbacks success was
at last attained. Hundreds of tons of concrete and sheet
lead were used to hold the banks, while numerous piles
CATTLE OVERLANDED FROM QUEENSLAND FATTENED ON BUCKLAND PARK
BU CKLA N 1) PAR K, SOU T H A USTR A LI A


A GLIMPSE OF BUCKLAND
PARK HOMESTEAD
B UCKLA N D PAR K, SOUTH A US TRA LI A


SOME FINE OLD
TREES ON THE
FLOOD AREA
were driven 25 ft. into the bed of the river on the down-
stream side, with an immense sunken apron on the other-
side of the floodgates.
Mr. Brooks was then in a position to flood more than
3000 acres of some of his richest land every year, and
this has set the seal of quality on the stock now turned
off the property. In former years no stock could be sent
away after November at the latest, especially in dry
years, but now sheep, lambs, and cattle are fattened well
into January and February, and with a little hand-feeding
to follow, both beef and mutton can be sent to the mar-
kets all the year round. The difference that this has
made in cattle alone is the margin between 300 and 400
before the floodgates were built, and more than 1700
head a year from the improved pastures. Subterranean
clover does best at the fringe of the flooded area, w T hile
couch flourishes after the other grasses die off. Prolific
growth is noticed in Wimmera rye grass, clovers of many
kinds, and barley, wallaby, spear, and canary grasses.
Buckland Park draws its water supply from the
Gawler River and from artesian and sub-artesian bores.
The latter are a feature of the district, and it is only in
recent years that this great shallow basin of water under
the Adelaide plains has been discovered and harnessed.
In every paddock there is a permanent supply of good
drinking water at a depth nowhere of more than 500 ft.
In subdivision, fencing, hut accommodation, woolshed,
and yarding, Mr. Brooks has left the imprint of
thoroughness, and not the least important improvement
was the planting of thousands of native trees. Further-
more, there is nothing more beautiful than the majestic
old red gums on Buckland Park. Beneath the shade of
these Mr. and Mrs. Brooks entertained members of the
Empire Press Delegation in 1925 in a large marquee
erected on the spot. In the same delightful surround-
ings in 1901 the present King and Queen of England
spent a pleasant day’s shoot when Their Majesties, as
Duke and Duchess of York, visited Adelaide.
Bird protection has converted the woods into a sanc-
tuary, which abounds with white cockatoos, galahs, and
other welcome feathered friends, while peacocks, strutting
about the homestead drive and river paddocks, enhance
the picturesqueness of the place. It is splendid hunting
country, and the “red coats” derive great pleasure in
running the fox to earth and securing the coveted brush.
Field shooters frequently also have a good day with the
gun as guests of the squire of Buckland Park.
Buckland Park homestead stands on a loamy rise
immune from flood, about a mile from the river and two
miles from the sea beach. It is a pretty red brick build-
ing surrounded by well-kept gardens, and buried in a
wealth of trees.
In a good season some 2000 head of fully grown
cattle and 12,000 sheep and lambs are carried on Buck-
BUC K L AND PAR K, S O UT II AUSTRALIA


POLWARTH SHEEP OF MR. E. A. OWN STRAIN AT BUCKLAND PARK
ANOTHER MOB OF POLWARTHS ON BUCKLAND PARK
B UCKL AN D PAR K. S O UT II AUSTRALIA


TWO INTERIOR VIEWS OF THE BUCKLAND PARK HOMESTEAD, THE DRAWING ROOM AND THE HALL
BUCKLAND PAR K, SOU T H AUSTR A LI A


THE KANGAROO AND DEER PARK
PORTION OF THE BEAUTIFUL GARDEN AT BUCKLAND PARK


land Park. After years of perseverance Mr. Brooks has
evolved a distinctive type of sheep. His original efforts
were aimed at the creation of a breed that would prove
most profitable for the prevailing conditions, for, sub-
ject as the flooded areas are to footrot, Mr. Brooks saw
the need for an animal that could withstand this disease.
In the achievement of this endeavour Mr. Brooks has
been successful. PI is ewes, used for the purpose of ob-
taining fat lambs, are a cross from the Suffolk ram on to
the Polwarth type of ewe, and the latter has been ob-
tained from a Merino-Romney Marsh cross, in which is
retained seven-eighths Merino and one-eighth Romney
Marsh blood.
of the drop were retained to build up the new breed, and
further mating to stud Merino rams produced the type
sought after.
For some years the trials were disappointing, but with
unflagging energy and patience Mr. Brooks weeded out
the “scrags,” and mated and classed the flock with in-
finite care until from the 1922 season the percentage of
culls has been negligible. To-day these sheep are wonder-
ful doers, robust, symmetrical, of good frame, and early
maturing. One strong feature is that they carry a fleece
of Merino count, the value of which can be gauged from
the fact that in 1923, before the rise in the Adelaide
market, top lines of this wool sold to 26d. per lb. In
BUCKLAND PARK PADDOCKS INUNDATED BY MEANS OF FLOOD GATES ON THE GAWLER RIVER
In 1912 a special stud Romney Marsh ram was pur-
chased from Captain Payne’s Yarraview Estate, Vic-
toria, and simultaneously first-class Merino ewes were
purchased from Bungaree. The union produced a Rom-
ney Marsh crossbred. Later a Boconnoc Park stud
Merino ram was mated with the Romney-Merino cross-
bred ewes. This particular ram was the progeny of a
Merino ewe which won a champion ribbon for Boconnoc
Park at the Adelaide Royal Show, 1913, and his sire was
a son of the Canowie Stud’s famous Donald Dinnie.
Ultimately a comeback Merino was evolved, and the best
September 1927 the wethers cut 37 bales to the 1000,
and averaged 13 lbs. a head. The wool has plenty of
character, is evenly serrated, and varies from 60’s to 64’s
quality.
For the production of the best class of fat lambs for
the home and export trade the introduction of Suffolk
rams has given excellent results, the lambs possessing all
the qualities demanded by the respective markets. In
view of their early maturity they can be supplied locally
all the year round, and invariably command top prices
in keen competition. In the show pen the sheep have
BUCKLAND PA RK, S O UT II A USTRA LI A


GROUP OF SUFFOLK
EWES IMPORTED
FROM ENGLAND
won leading awards for fat lambs, and special prizes for
pens of ten export lambs.
Early market lambs are dropped in March, but the
general lambing takes place from April onwards. About
4000 ewes are lambed down, half of which are used for
breeding, and the remainder for export or the fat lamb
market. Often 100 per cent, of lambs are marked, while
the average is seldom below 80 per cent. Wethers and
cull ewes, which are good doers, fatten readily into excep-
tionally well-muttoned sheep. A stud of Suffolk Down
sheep is bred on Buckland Park from 70 stud ewes, some
of which, together with a ram, were imported from
England.
In 1927 a consignment of 700 6-tooth wethers averaged
50s. 2d. a head at the Adelaide market, and in the same
year 275. a head was the average for lambs. The rejects
of this lot were shorn, and later in the year the lambs
realised 295. a head. One of Mr. Brooks’ rigidly-
followed policies is to handle every sheep and lamb in-
dividually in a special race before they are sent to
Adelaide. By the time the reject lambs are fattened and
turned off, the new drop is about ready, and plans have
been so well laid that a supply of sheep and lambs, and
also cattle, is in practically every market of the year.
Although Mr. Brooks’ name has not yet figured on the
turf, he has a nice stud of 18 blood mares and a sire,
Pistol’s Pride, a son of the illustrious Pistol (by Carbine).
One of the mares is Star Robe, sister to Molly’s Robe,
winner of the Newmarket Handicap in 1919. The stud
provides horses for Mr. Brooks’ cattle runs and his
Western Australian sheep stations. A blood stallion is
retained on Kanowana, a big leasehold of the company’s
in the north-east. He is Buckland, a full brother to the
St. Anton-Lady Dudley horse, Lord Setay, who was sold
to an Indian sportsman for 2000 gns.
A stud of Black Polled cattle contains fine specimens
BUGKLAND PAR K, S O UT H AUSTRALIA


Polwarth Rams at Buckland Park
of the Aberdeen-Angus breed. In 1927 Mr. Brooks paid
a big price in Sydney, N.S.W., for the imported bull,
Dandaleith Ermesco. The young bulls from the stud
are sent to Clifton Hills and Kanowana cattle stations,
whence fortnightly throughout the autumn and winter
mobs of about 400 head of fats are brought down for
sale.
Flood Gates on the Gawler River, flowing
through Auckland Park, by means of which
approximately 3000 acres can be flooded
Lake Letty, 440 miles north of Adelaide, embraces 416
miles of country, and is the receiving depot for the stock
before trucking. The poorer conditioned cattle from
these mobs are sent to Buckland Park, where they are put
on the lighter country to acclimatise, and later topped up
on the rich pastures before being sent to market as
paddock-fed fats.
It has proved a colossal task to work up this important
business, and the path of progress has by no means been
strewn with roses. 1 ucked away in the far north-east
of South Australia, near the Queensland border, and more
than 700 miles from the Adelaide market, Clifton Hills
and Kanowana cover a big stretch of country. Ihe for-
Artesian Bore with a flow of 2,000,000 gallons per
day on Lake Letty Station
mer station, which is on the Uiamantina, has an area of
5100 square miles, while adjoining is Kanowana, on the
Cooper, comprising 5333 miles. All these leaseholds
bear the brunt of an exceedingly low rainfall, which
averages barely 5 in. annually, and are subject to
periodical droughts. One-fifth of the country is occa-
sionally inundated by floods from the Cooper, Diaman-
tina, and Georgina Rivers, which brings up sufficient feed
to make the holdings worth while on the whole. Alto-
Load of Wool leaving the shed at
Munarm Station, W.A.
B UC K LAN D PAR K, S O UT II AUSTRALIA


gether about 25,000 head of cattle and 1000 horses are
run on the above-mentioned stations. They are watered
by holes in the rivers and by artesian bores. The latter
range in depth to 4800 ft., giving a flow of about a
million gallons a day, and in some cases the water reaches
a temperature of 2 degs. below boiling point at the mouth
of the bore. Ihe edge of the artesian basin is at Lake
Petty, where four bores average a depth of 1400 ft.
Kanowana and Clifton Hills are interesting in their
formation of stony tablelands, sandhills, and flood
country, the only timber being coolabah trees on the
low areas. The tablelands grow cotton and salt bush,
Flinders grass, and Mitchell
grass, while spinifex, buck-
bush and parakylia are found
on the sandhills. On the
wide open flood country
grow native sorghum, cane-
grass, yellowtop, Colombo
(commonly known as Dia-
mantina clover), and a little
bluebush, which springs up
after a flood, spreading out
long tendrils, and providing
excellent feed. Sudan grass
and South African sheep
bush have been planted, but
the latter, which is supposed
to grow well in semi-arid
country, has not proved a
success.
This country, which is
more than 10,000 square
miles in extent, is, as already
stated, subject to severe
droughts, which almost anni-
hilate the herds from time to
time. In 1915, for instance,
only 3500 head of cattle
were saved out of a total of
23,000, and in the 1925-26
drought the losses exceeded
11,000 head. The only
means of communication
with these stations is a fort-
nightly mail coach, while the nearest rail head is Marree,
300 miles distant.
South of Oodnadatta is Nilpinna and Cootanoorina
(3300 square miles), which Mr. Brooks recently acquired
to work in conjunction with his other holdings.
In Western Australia Mr. Brooks has taken up a lot
of country, which is being well developed for the produc-
tion of a robust type of Merino wool, and in this respect
remarkable progress is being made. The wool is broad
and strong and full of character. Mr. Brooks is con-
centrating upon big frames and strong constitution, his
aim being to get size and weight, and then tone down
the wool to the required medium to strong quality.
Exclusive of about 1000 head of cattle, the Western
MR. EDMUND BROOKS
Australian runs are stocked up chiefly with sheep of
Bungaree blood. One of these stations is Dandaraga
(about 850,000 acres). This is a beautiful stretch of
mixed country in the Sandstone district, and includes
big, open, ironstone plains, covered by herbage and
grasses, soft and hard spinifex, bogada bush and mulga,
with carara growing in the creeks. A good variety of
top and ground feed flourishes in every paddock, and
water is obtainable anywhere at an average depth of
about 50 ft. The carrying capacity is a sheep to 20 acres,
and the country is considered to be drought-resistant on
account of the permanent top feed. Munarra and Mount
Fraser Stations are near Meekatharra, and aggregate just
under a million acres.
In 1928 Mr. Brooks ex-
pects to shear 25,000 sheep
on Dandaraga, besides rear-
ing 10,000 lambs, while from
the other runs about 25,000
sheep will be shorn if con-
ditions turn out favourable.
These results are truly re-
markable, seeing that they
have been achieved in a few
years on country which was
hitherto considered only
suitable for cattle.
PERSONAL
The late Mr. George
Brooks, who died in 1926,
had a life-long association
with the pastoral industry,
and owned many pastoral
properties in South Aus-
tralia. Buckland Park was
merged into a limited lia-
bility company, and is known
to-day as G. and E. A.
Brooks Limited. Surviving
members of the family are
three sons and four
daughters.
Mr. Edmund Albert
Charles Brooks, the manag-
ing director of Buckland
Park, was born in 1877 at
Inkerman (South Australia), and married Miss Freda
Bretag, of near Vectis, Victoria. Incidentally Mrs.
Brooks owns Wootoona property, out from Hammond,
near Quorn, S.A.
Their family consists of two sons —Hector and Malcolm
—and two daughters, the Misses Barbara and Rosemary
Brooks. The elder son is associated with his father, and
Malcolm, after finishing his education at St. Peter’s Col-
lege, entered the firm of Elder, Smith and Co. Limited.
Mr. Brooks is ex-president of the Stockowners’ Associa-
tion of South Australia and of the Graziers’ Federal
Council. He is chairman of the District Council of Two
Wells and Port Gawler, and is a member of the pastoral
committee of the State Council of Science and Industry.
B U CKLA N D P ARK, SOU TII AUSTRALIA


MISS ROSEMARY BROOKS AND
HER FAVOURITE PONY
THE WOODSHED AT BUCKLAND PARK
BU CKLA N 1) PAR K, S 0 UT H A U S TRALIA


UARDRY, PEMBELGONG AND BURRABOGIE,
HAY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Properties of Chas. Mills ( Uardry ) Limited.
UARDRY, situated 30 miles due east of Hay, and
on the northern bank of the Murrumbidgee
River, is one of the oldest and best known stud
M erino sheep stations in Riverina, in fact Australia.
It was first taken up as a leasehold in 1840 by the
late M essrs. Edward Rae and Henry Angel, who utilised
the property as a cattle station. Some time during the
fifties this fine property, on which the chief feed was
“old man” saltbush, was sold to the late Messrs. Wragge
kirkshire, Scotland, in 1832, and who was brought up on
his father’s sheep farm, was the son of the late Mr.
George Mills, a well-known sheep farmer of Horsburgh
Castle, Peeblesshire, Scotland. After having some years’
experience in sheep breeding on his father’s farm, the
late Mr. Charles Mills, in 1863, came out to Victoria,
and gained his first colonial experience on Mount Pleasant
Station in Northern Gippsland, Victoria, at that time
owned by the Mackenzie family.
THE UARDRY HOMESTEAD
and Hearne, who decided to eliminate the cattle and go
in for sheep. So in 1864 these two partners purchased
direct from the late Messrs. Peppin Bros., of Wanganella,
5000 4-tooth Merino ewes and a number of stud Merino
rams, the actual delivery being taken in January 1865.
From that year until the present day the stud has re-
mained absolutely pure Peppin.
The late Mr. Charles Mills, who was born in Sel-
Adapting himself readily to the conditions, as most of
the early pioneers did, he, in partnership with the late
M essrs. Andrew Neilson and J. J. Smart, bought Mor-
ton Plains and Watchem, two large leaseholds on the
fringe of the Mallee, from the Messrs. McCreadie Bros.,
and successfully worked these properties until 1872, when
Mr. Mills sold out his interests and took a trip home to
Scotland. Whilst there he married, in December 1874,


GROUP OF SPECIAL SALE RAMS
a daughter of the late Mr. John Ainslie, another long
line of successful Scottish sheepbreeders, of Fairfield
Estate, Edinburgh.
In 1875 he returned with his bride to Australia, and
then, with the late Messrs. Andrew Neilson and William
Smith, purchased Uardry, a native name meaning yellow
box tree, the delivery of the station and of the Merino
stud being taken after the shearing in 1875.
The late Mr. Charles Mills, who was always very
keenly interested in stud sheep, took control of the pro-
petty and made the stud flock his personal care. By care-
ful selection and mating, he soon established a stud
M erino flock which to-day ranks amongst the leading
M erino studs in Australia.
On the death of his partners, the late Mr. Mills
bought out their shares, and continued personally to
manage the property and the stud. As soon as the
eldest son, the late Mr. Ainslie Mills, had completed his
education, his father trained him thoroughly in sheep-
breeding, and a few years later he was able to relieve
YOUNG SPECIAL STUD EWES
UARDRY, PEMBELGONG AND BURRA BOGIE, NEW SOUTH WALES


A NOR' EASTER BLOW-
ING THROUGH THE
ELMS AND WILLOWS
AN IRRIGATION
CHANNEL PASSING
THROUGH THE GARDEN
IN THE PICTURESQUE
GARDEN SURROUND-
ING THE HOMESTEAD
THE UARDRY HOMESTEAD


him of much of the “rougher” work of the management.
In 1900 he finally took over the practical management
of Uardry, while his father acted in an advisory capacity.
Unfortunately in 1908 he died, so the late Mr. Charles
Mills immediately set to work to train the third son,
Mr. N eilson Mills, who, having the love for sheep and
constant association with his father, was very well adapted
to manipulate the reins of management, which he suc-
cessfully did.
With a close bond of friendship between father and
son, ideas and knowledge were unconsciously transmitted
from the elder to the younger, who was able to put into
A PRETTY VISTA
THROUGH THE
COOL SHADES
OF THE BURRA-
BOGIE GARDEN
AFTERNOON
SHADOWS IN
THE GARDEN
AT UARDRY
practice the precepts handed down. 1 his transmittance
can only take place when the father makes a pal of his
son.
In 1916, on the death of his father, Mr. Neilson Mills
was appointed managing director of Charles Mills
(Uardry) Limited, the name under which this well-
known firm of sheepbreeders now trades.
Uardry is one of the most highly improved stud stations
in Australia, and comprises 81,000 acres, which have been
subdivided into 120 paddocks, and which are watered by
the Murrumbidgee River, 19 sub-artesian bores, 8 wells
and 25 ground tanks, many of the latter being filled by
UARDRY , PEMBELGONG AND BURRABOGIE , NEW SOUTH WALES


channels from the river. The average rainfall is 144 in.
The boundary is netted, and the special stud paddocks
have a fox-proof fence surrounding them. There is a
straight across country frontage of 84 miles to the
M urrumbidgee River,
which, with the run
extending 24 miles
north of the river, gives
a compact block 24
miles by 8.
As all important stud
sheep-breeding proper-
ties find that they must
be able to carry on their
special stud work even
during the very driest
periods, it was found
necessary to go in for
irrigation at Uardry,
and this work, which
was begun over 34
years ago, has now de-
veloped into quite a
big proposition. On
the many irrigation paddocks which surround the home-
stead, and which are laid down with various grasses, a
large number of the best ewes can be grazed and lambed
during the driest times, a facility which is absolutely
essential to a modern stud sheep property.
In the good seasons quite a lot of hay is cut and stacked
for use during dry periods, and this has been found to
be a great help in feeding the lambing ewes over those
times.
Uardry is situated
on the edge of the salt-
bush country, and is
fortunate in that it has
a splendid mixture of
good grasses and the
various salt weeds, and
this is one of the
reasons why it is so ad-
mirably adapted for the
breeding of stud Mer-
ino sheep. Much of
this country was cov-
ered with “old man”
saltbush fifty years ago,
but it has since almost
disappeared.
The country to-day
consists of about a third
open plains, a third lightly timbered, and a third well tim-
bered. North from the river for five miles it consists of
heavy red soil of a clayey nature, with light ridges running
east and west, which would carry on an average about a
A WELL DEVELOPED STRONG WOOL STUD RAM, PEMBELGONG BRED
SHOWING TYPE OF COUNTRY ON WHICH THE UARDRY SHEEP ARE BRED
UARDRY, PEMBELG ON G AND BURRA BOGIE, NEW SOUTH WALES


FOUR YOUNG SPECIAL RAMS
sheep to 3 acres. The middle portion farther north con-
tains, in addition to the red ridges, some nice loamy de-
pressions, and would carry a sheep to acres, while
“outback,” still farther north, consists of the same kind
of country with some red sandy banks in addition, and
would average a sheep to 4 acres. The timber is chiefly
yellow box, cuba, boree, wilga, apple bush, belah and
some clumps of needle wood and pine.
As already stated, the Uardry stud is absolutely pure
Peppin blood, bred within itself, and on the same lines
as originally laid down by the late Mr. Charles Mills
many years ago. The selection and the mating have never
been interfered with by sentiment, nor changed in any
way. The flock having always been pure Peppin blood,
A SPECIAL STUD RAM
UARD R Y , rKMBE L G 0 N G AN D BURRAB () G I E , NE IF SOU T II IF AL E S


A GROUP OF YOUNG SPECIAL SIRES
A FAMOUS STUD RAM AND SIRE, PEMBELGONG NO. 1
UARDRY. PKMBELGONG .1X1) BURR A BOGIE, NEW SOUTH IT ALES


it has been the aim of the father and then the sons to
maintain that purity, and that all progress should be made
by careful selection and mating, and not by any intro-
duction of outside blood.
For some years the late Mr. j. C. Darke advised and
assisted in the classing and mating of the stud. Since his
death Mr. W. J. McCarthy has done this important
work, and he has been of the greatest assistance in bring-
ing the stud up to its present high standard.
In normal years the stud flock comprises some 26,000
sheep, including about 14,000 breeding ewes, which are
carefully graded into first and second specials, double
few stud flocks which stand square on their legs. 4he
rams’ heads are strong and masculine and the horns well
turned, this always having been a feature of the Uardry
sheep.
For many years, commencing in the eighties, Uardry
sheep were exhibited at the Hay Show, which in those
days was a centre of the big Merino sheep country. At
this show the Uardry flock secured 104 champions and
first prizes and 60 seconds. Subsequently Uardry did
not show anywhere, but in 1925 it exhibited at the Royal
Sydney Sheep Show, and won with the stud ram No.
3.38 the grand championship for the best Merino ram.
SELECTED RAMS FOR SYDNEY SALES
studs, and first general studs, these classes being carefully
checked each year, so as to maintain evenness and high
standard throughout each grade.
The Uardry sheep are well known throughout Aus-
tralia, where a large number of rams and ewes are annu-
ally sold to buyers in Queensland, Western Australia,
Victoria and New South Wales, whilst a number are
purchased each year by South Africa. The sheep have
large frames and are densely covered with medium to
strong medium wool of high character and good colour.
They are well covered underneath, and are one of the
In 1927 it again entered at the sheep show, and secured
the grand championship for best Merino ewe, also the
first prize for pen of 25 Merino ewes, over \\ and under
2 years old—a much coveted prize. Again in 1928 the
Uardry sheep were shown at Sydney and secured high
honours.
The managing director, Mr. Neilson Mills, makes his
headquarters at Uardry, from where he also controls Pern-
belgong and Burrabogie, and keeps a watchful eye
on the careful handling and working of all the
special stud sheep, and is ably assisted in this work by
UA R DRY , /> EAI BELC, O N G AN D BURRABO G 1 E , NE W SOU TII // AE E S


AN AUTUMN SCENE IN
THE UARDRY GARDEN
UJRI) R Y , pEMBE L G 0 N G AN D BUR RAB O G lE, NE IF SOU T II IF AL E S


STUD RAMS GRAZING IN THE RIVER PADDOCKS
Mr. Harold J. Watson.
Mr. Neilson Mills is always anxious to help the young
breeder, and for this reason he generally has six to eight
jackaroos, who assist with all the various station work,
especially at classing time, when they have a splendid
opportunity of learning first hand the working of a large
stud sheep property.
PEMBELGONG
There is no stud that has come into prominence so
rapidly or gained such a wide reputation in such a com-
paratively short time as Pembelgong, which is owned by
Charles Mills (Uardry) Limited, and which is run quite
apart as a complete stud of its own, being kept absolutely
pure.
The Pembelgong stud flock is of pure Wanganella
blood, and was formed in February 1921 by the pur-
chase, at the dispersal sale of the Murgha stud flock at
Murgha, of a number of high-class rams and ewes, in-
cluding many of the best of the special labelled stud ewes
A GROUP OF STUD RAMS
UA R DRY. PEMBE L G O N G AN I) BURRAB O G I E , XE W SO VT II If AL E S


in lamb, the tops of the
special stud ewe hoggets and
some double and single stud
ewes, also a number of the
best of the young special stud
rams.
It now comprises 7000
sheep, including some 4000
breeding ewes, which are
carefully graded into first
specials, second specials, silky
wool specials, double studs
and first general studs.
Although the Pembelgong
stud is as yet young as re-
gards years, it has neverthe-
less made a very sound repu-
tation for itself, and each
year quickly disposes of its
surplus specials, studs and
flock rams, also any ewes
that might be for sale to
buyers in all the States of
the Commonwealth and in
South Africa.
The Pembelgong sheep are very large framed, and are
well covered with medium to strong medium wool of
very high character and good colour. They are well
furnished underneath, and have good necks and thighs.
The Pembelgong rams’ heads are good and their horns
strong, whilst the faces are clean and open.
In 1923, at the Royal Sydney Sheep Show, the Pem-
belgong stud was awarded the grand championship for the
best Merino ram exhibited at the show. Also this ram,
Pembelgong No. 1, secured
the championship for the best
grass-fed ram of the show,
the champion award for best
unhoused medium wool ram,
and was also first in his class.
Two years later, 1925,
Pembelgong No. 3.1, who was
a son of Pembelgong No.
1, was shown at the Sydney
Sheep Show, and won the
championship for medium wool
ram and the reserve grand
championship of the show,
having to lower his colours
only to the Uardry stud ram
No. 3.38, which secured
the higher award. In 1928,
Pembelgong again showed
in Sydney and secured high
honours.
At the dispersal sale of
M urgha in 1921, when the
Pembelgong sheep were selec-
ted and purchased, and ever
since, Mr. W. J. McCarthy has been of the greatest
assistance in advising, selecting, mating and classing the
flock, and much of the credit of the rapid rise of this
young stud is due to his sound judgment.
Pembelgong Station is situated on the southern side
of the Murrumbidgee River, some 15 miles east of Hav,
and has a frontage to it of about 5 miles.
The property, which is managed by Mr. George
McDonald, who has been associated with the owners for
HEAD OF AN IDEAL PEMBELGONG STUD RAM
A VERY DENSE, WELL DEVELOPED STRONG WOOL RAM
A WELL COVERED MEDIUM WOOL STUD RAM
UARDRY, FEME ELGON C AND BURRA BOGIE, NEW SOUTH WALES


very many years,
now comprises about
26,000 acres of first-
class stud sheep coun-
try, nicely grassed
with white top and
other sweet grasses
and creeping saltbush.
It is well sheltered
with good clumps of
timber and edible
scrub.
Pembelgong is sub-
divided into some 30
paddocks, all of which
are well watered by
either the river or
with bores, windmills,
and supply tanks and
troughs. Also, in
keeping with the
Company’s policy of
conserving hay in the good years for use in dry times,
there is now a collection of stacks on Pembelgong which
will be a very great help in dry seasons to come.
It is proposed shortly to lay out an irrigation scheme
similar to that at Uardry, but, of course, on a much
smaller scale, so as to make sure that the top stud ewes
may be grazed and lambed without any loss during dry
times.
BURRABOGIE
Early in 1926 the old Burrabogie Station was for sale,
and as it lay alongside .Pembelgong, and was between
Uardry and that property, it was decided to purchase all
the river frontage with the original old historic Burra-
bogie homestead, be-
ing a total area of
21,000 acres, thus
adding to Pembelgong
an excellent piece of
stud sheep country
and a particularly
fine homestead and
garden, where Mr.
W. A. Mills lives,
and to which the
members of the family
resident in Melbourne
may come for the
winter months each
year.
The Burrabogie
country is eminently
suitable for stud
sheep, being nicely
grassed with a large
variety of the best
Riverina grasses, and is beautifully timbered. It also
has four miles frontage to the Murrumbidgee, and is
divided into 28 paddocks, all of which are splendidly
watered, either by the river or bores, windmills, supply
tanks and troughs.
There is a small irrigation scheme now at Burrabogie,
but this it is proposed to remodel on similar lines to that
at Uardry. The purchase of this additional area of land
on the south side of the river will permit giving the
young sheep more room, which is so necessary for the
growing out of young stud Merinos.
Burrabogie, like Pembelgong, comes under the direct
control of Mr. Neilson Mills, but is supervised by Mr.
W. A. Mills and managed by Mr. Ken. Betts.
A SPECIAL STUD EWE
THE HOMESTEAD AT BURRABOGIE
uARI) R Y , PEMBEL G O N G AN D BURRAB 0 G 1 E , NE W SOU T H HALE S


GOOLGUMBLA, JERILDERIE, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of G. E. Stuart Limited.
GOOLCjL MBLA Station, the property of G. E.
Stuart Limited, extends over an area of 50,000
acres freehold, of typical Riverina country. It was
purchased in 1913 from the late Sir Samuel McCaughey
by Mr. George Ernest Stuart, who in 1922 formed the
business into a limited liability company, with himself the
managing director.
Goolgumbla is located about 30 miles south of Darling-
ton Point, on the Murrumbidgee River, and about 35
miles north of Jerilderie, which is the nearest town, and
given to the water supply, for whilst the former owner
was renowned for his water schemes, there was still room
for improvement. Perhaps the greatest asset in this dis-
trict is the shallow underground supply, which, although
slightly on the brackish side, is good stock water. Since.
1913 the present owner has increased the supply from six
bores and wells to fifteen, whilst surface tanks now num-
ber 43. In sizes these excavations range up to 20,000
cubic yards. There are no running streams on the pro-
perty, but permanent water is ensured, and a feature of
SINGLE STUD MERINO EWES ON TYPICAL BOREE COUNTRY
is the postal address of the station, the telegraphic ad-
dress being Conargo. Originally one of the most exten-
sive holdings in this part of New South Wales, it ranks
to-day amongst the finest stud properties in Australia.
The western part of the run is mostly composed of red
and black soil open plains, but elsewhere nicely balanced
clumps of boree and box provide shelter for the stock,
while there are several miles of sandy ridges covered with
pine, giving the country a beautiful park-like appearance,
especially around the homestead. The average rainfall
is 16 in., and the grazing capacity is kept at about 2>r acres
to a sheep.
When Mr. Stuart took charge, all this country under-
went a thorough reconditioning, particular care being
' the supply is the old homestead well from which water
can be pumped out if necessary and run in drains to a
distance of ten miles, filling the intervening tanks. This
old well is 104 ft. deep, and has a 5-in. bore. From a
6-in. pump driven by a steel wings mill with a spread of
25 ft, 3000 gallons per hour can he withdrawn and yet
make hardly any impression on the well. An auxiliary
steam engine is installed with a capacity of 30,000 gallons
per hour.
Root grasses are the mainstay of the feed, white top,
barley grass, and trefoil predominating, with a fair
amount of old man salt and cotton bush. It is intended
to cultivate some imported grasses. Wheat is sown
on about 100 acres each year and stored over the


run, but rarely have the stacks been drawn upon, though
the droughty conditions of the season of 1927 were re-
sponsible for hand feeding of the stock with hay drawn
from stacks on the station that are nearly fifteen years
old. These stacks are roofed with iron sheeting, and
fenced with plain galvanised iron as a protection against
mice.
The paddocks number 44, and are fenced strongly,
wire netting being used on all important sections and
boundaries. Rabbits have been exterminated, and every
precaution is taken to keep the country clean.
In 1926 the owners ploughed and graded over 300
miles of fire breaks, running the system also through
ONE OF THE CHIEF TIMBERS
OF RIVERINA CYPRESS PINE
GROWING ON A RED SANDY
RIDGE ON GOOLGUMBLA
their late Singorimbah property.
The comfortable old homestead, built about eighty years
ago, has been altered and added to to conform to modern
requirements, but at the same time its original rambling
charm has been preserved. Encircled by trees and well-
kept gardens, the home is aptly named Goolgumbla, mean-
ing in the aboriginal “house of rest.”
Some 40,000 sheep and lambs go through the shed as a
rule in July and August, the lambing taking place nor-
mally in April and May. Invariably a high percentage
for this type of country is obtained. Included with the
1925 marking was an average of 83 per cent, amongst the
stud ewes for a single drop, the highest being 86 per cent.
TWO-YEAR-OLD STUD MERINO EWES
GOOLG U M B LA. NEW S 0 U TII IV A LES


A FLOCK OF TYPICAL
GOOLGUMBLA-BRED
MERINO EWES
SOME OF THE RESERVE STUD
MERINO EWE HOGGETS IN A
PATCH OF TIMBERED COUNTRY
O()L G I ' .1/ ULA,NKJV S () U TII IGA LE S


FLOCK MERINO EWES AND LAMBS AT LAKE PADDOCK TANK
BEEF SHORTHORN CATTLE ON GOOLGUMBLA STATION
G () 0 L G UM B LA, NE W S 0 U T H JVA LE S


DRAUGHT MARES AND
FOALS SEEK SHELTER
AMONGST THE TIMBER
In 1926 flock ewes alone registered per cent, of
marked lambs, and studs 80 per cent. Ihe highest that
year was 91 per cent. Considering the dry spell in 1927,
the marking turned out well, seeing that 6500 flock lambs
and 2700 stud lambs were marked, showing 72 per cent,
all round. In one paddock 3000 maiden ewes marked
64 per cent.
The best idea of the progress made by Mr. G. E. Stuart
may he obtained from the records, which show that
whereas in 1913 an average of 7 lbs. 3 ozs. of wool per
head was grown, within the next thirteen years the
weights were nearly doubled, for in 1925 the average
per grown sheep was 12 lbs. 9| ozs., and in 1926
31,000 grown sheep cut an average of 12 lbs. 4 ozs. per
head.
In view of the fact that very few wethers are kept,
these figures are astonishingly good, and are undeniable
evidence that the Goolgumbla sheep are heavy cutters.
The clip has commanded attention every year at the sales
in Sydney, and the values returned have been high. In
1924 and per lb. were secured; in 1925 a
lot of 24 bales of S.C.E. reached 26|d. per lb., one of the
best prices of that season, and also in 1926 a lot of 26
bales S.C.E. brought 25|d. on the comparatively low'
market.
With anything like a decent season this clip can hold
its own for attractiveness, preparation and value with
any other of its class in the State. It is of true medium
type, about a super combing 64’s quality. It is very well
growm, long enough in staple to be ideal for manufac-
turing, and has a well-defined crimp and a fully nourished
tip not too dark.
From experience the percentage of scoured wool yielded
has been above the average. Bright and dense, it opens
GOOLGU M B L A, NE W S O U TII JVA LE S


THE MAIN
HOMESTEAD
AND PART OF
THE FLOWER
GARDENS
A PRETTY PICTURE TAKEN
ON A MISTY DAY NEAR THE
GOOLGUMBLA HOMESTEAD
GOOLGUM B L A , .V EIF S() UT II If AL E S


THE BUNGALOW
AND PART OF
THE VEGETABLE
GARDENS
AN IDEAL SURFACE TANK WITH
ADEQUATE SHADE, CLEAN BATTERS
AND PLENTY OF GOOD WATER
(r oOL G U 71/ BL A , A' KJfS () U TII IVA LE S


like a book, and is an ideal type for flock owners out on
the scorching plains of the interior, besides growing pro-
fitably in any climate. This wool is produced by a splen-
did type of sheep, a type which has been bred in the Gool-
gumbla Merino stud since its inauguration. Plain
bodies, strong heads, big frames, robust health and fleece
evenly put on are the main characteristics which have been
developed with so much success from the formation of the
stud in 1908 by the late Sir Samuel McCaughey until the
change of ownership in 1913, and by Mr. G. E. Stuart
down to the present day.
The original stud flock was an admixture of the best
blends of Haddon Rig, Wanganella, Boonoke, Willandra,
Kulki and Cobran blood, the best of the sheep being kept
by Mr. Stuart and the balance culled out. Only the
highest grades of medium wool and strong wool types
survived the heavy weeding-out which occurred, with the
result that the new stud went ahead rapidly.
In 1915 eleven stud rams were added from Murgha,
and in 1923 a high price was paid for the Haddon Rig
stud sire No. 537. Unfortunately this ram died with-
out being used at Goolgumbla, but he was replaced by
No. 672 from Haddon Rig, and though smaller in make
he turned out some wonderfully good stock, large and
shapely, and beautifully clad.
To-day the stud is in a flourishing state, a high stan-
dard of quality having been attained in both the rams
bred for sale and the wool grown. It was classed by
Mr. Arthur Laird from 1915 to 1924, but he had to give
it up in 1925 owing to pressure of work at Murray
Downs, which he is now managing, and the classing was
handed over to Mr. Frank Pennefather. Mr. Leslie
Stuart, a nephew of Mr. G. E. Stuart, manages Gool-
gumbla, with Mr. Kenneth Douglas as overseer.
The composition of the stud embraces extra special stud
ewes, specials and single studs. In general type these
A GENERAL VIEW OF
THE GOOLGUMBLA
WOOLSHED AND YARDS
GOOLGU M B L A , NE IF S()U T // IVA LE S


A FEW FLOCK
EWE HOGGETS
WATERING AT
ONE OF THE
DAMS
ANOTHER
PICTURE OF
FLOCK EWES
AND LAMBS
COMING DOWN
TO WATER
( 7 OOLGUMBL A, NE W S 0 U TII IVA LE S


stud ewes are large and plain-bodied, with bold fronts,
deep sides, wide straight backs and roomy frames, are
good in the hocks and have open and soft faces.
As for the stud rams there are quite a number which
claim notice, an outstanding example being the sire No.
435, who was shown at the Sydney Sheep Show in 1924.
As a 4-tooth he cut 27 lbs. of wool, his grandsire, the
Haddon Rig ram No. 313, also cutting 27 lbs. as a two-
year-old. No. 72 is the sire of No. 435, and he dis-
played his quality in cutting lbs. of soft, bright wool
at ten years of age. No. 435 is a large sheep with a plain
a grandson of 166, who was on show in Sydney in 1920.
Like his sire, who cut 28 lbs. of medium wool in 1920,
the grandson has a tremendous body of even wool. No.
336, by 175, is another sire who has done good work in
the stud, and is a ram of splendid make, shape and vigour,
with long bright medium wool.
It is Mr. Stuart’s policy to discard the progeny from
any new ram if not up to the required standard, and his
culling is very strict. Amongst the qualities for which
he looks are good thighs and strong wide jaws.
In 1926 a medium wool ram was introduced from Pem-
TANK NO. 21, ONE OF THE MANY WELL-KEPT TANKS ON GOOLGUMBLA
body, standing well on firm short legs, has a free carriage,
an open and soft but masculine face and carries a bold
medium type of wool, which is dense, long in staple,
and the crimp nicely defined. He has proved a sure and
prepotent sire.
In No. 331, seven years old in 1927, of strong wool
type and striking appearance, the stud has another valu-
able asset, and already some of his matured sons are mak-
ing a great impression. Especially vigorous and high
quality rams are Nos. 490, 499, 502, and 508, sons of 331,
and they are particularly noticeable for their great frames
and even fleeces. An exceptionally large ram is seen in
belgong stud at a cost of 1200 guineas, and already his
young progeny are displaying creditable qualities.
Amongst the station-bred rams some leave nothing to be
desired in conformation, constitution and covering. They
are deep set and sound on the back, and have good neck
folds. Ihe two-year-old stud rams showed great condi-
tion during the past winter. 1 heir horns are nicely
turned and open, barrels well sprung, top lines uniform
and shapely. On the strong side of medium, the char-
acter and length of the wool is maintained to the points
and belly. The return, year after year, to Goolgumbla
of buyers wbo know these excellent sheep, and the new
GOOLGU M B L A , NK If S 0 UT // WA LK S


MR. GEORGE E. STUART,
MANAGING DIRECTOR OF
G. E. STUART LIMITED,
OWNERS OF GOOLGUMBLA
MRS. GEORGE STUART
GO O ECU M B LA, NEIf S 0 U TII If AL E S


SHADY BOREE NEAR THE
GOOLGUMELA HOMESTEAD
business which is opened up, prove that the judgment and
industry of Mr. Stuart are being rewarded in a practical
way.
For station use a number of good horses are bred, and
a splendid lot of draught horses are also reared. The
stallion at present is Benkel Major Dale, and the breed-
ing mares number sixteen.
Born within seven miles of the northernmost part of
Ireland, in County Antrim, in 1865, Mr. George Ernest
Stuart came to Australia as a youth to seek his fortune.
He joined three of his brothers in Queensland, and in
the course of years of patient toil, the four of them, in
conjunction with the late Sir Samuel McCaughey, ac-
quired interests in a number of pastoral holdings. The
owner of Goolgumbla can now review his life’s work with
pride in the knowledge that he has shared largely in the
consolidation of Australia’s wool industry.
Rockwood Station and Ludgate Hill Station were pur-
chased by Stuart Bros, and McCaughey nearly half a cen-
tury ago, and the area of the two was over two thousand
square miles. Cattle and sheep were run on them and
they formed what were probably the world’s largest dual
stations. On these two properties in the Hughenden
(Queensland) district, as many as 320,000 sheep were
shorn in one year, the whole of the shearing being done
in the one huge shed. It constituted the third largest
shearing in Australia, the clip amounting to some 3000
bales of scoured wool, and being worth a quarter of a
million pounds sterling. It was no light task to brave
this wide outback countrjq isolated and lonely, but to
those who did it the greatest credit is due, and they well
deserve to rest on their laurels with their fortune won.
Barenya and Tower Hill Stations were added to the
brothers’ interests after the first two places were estab-
lished, and later on Antrim Station. Barenya was sold
in 1910 to Mr. Alex Hay, while Antrim Station, also in
the Hughenden district, was sold a few years ago, and is
now owned by Messrs. C. K. and E. Peel.
In 1912 most of Messrs. Stuart Bros, and McCaughey’s
country was bought out by the Rockwood Pastoral Com-
pany, after which Mr. G. E. Stuart, went for a trip to his
native land. Returning in 1913 he bought Goolgumbla
and an adjoining run named Singorimbah, selling the
latter place of 34,000 acres in November 1926 to Mr.
John Bostock, of Mansfield, Victoria.
His nephew, Mr. Leslie lon Stuart, Avho, as already
stated, manages Goolgumbla, was in Queensland with
his uncle. Born in Canada in 1888, he received his edu-
cation in England, and lived for some years in the north
of Ireland, but came out to Rockwood in 1910 and joined
his uncle at their present home in 1913. He gave his
services to his country during the great Avar, holding a
commission in the North Irish Horse.
GOOL G U M B LA, A 7 EIFS O U TII IF AL E S


QUIAMONG, CONARGO, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of N. F. Armytage, Esq.
OUIAMONG, a very highly improved station pro-
perty lying adjacent to the little township of
Conargo, and 22 miles north of the town of
Deniliquin, New South Wales, was taken over from Mr.
Percy Landale on Ist November, 1925, by Mr. Neville
Fairbairn Armytage and Mr. Robert Hunter Noyes
Landale.
The property comprises 23,000 acres of freehold lands
made up of typical Riverina red plains, intersected by
Mundiwa, a grand area of country on the Edward River,
and which Mr. Landale purchased in 1861. Upon his
death in 1903 these two properties came under the control
of Mr. Landale’s two eldest sons, until in 1926 Mr. N.
F. Armytage went into possession. One of the sons of
the late Mr. R. H. Landale, as already stated, joined him
in partnership, and at the same time continued the
management of Mundiwa, leaving the sole control of
operations at Quiamong to Mr. Armytage.
convenient belts of native timber, making it one of rich
pastures and high fattening qualities, and ideal country
for developing large, robust Merino sheep. It is in the
centre of a well settled and progressive district, notable
for the excellent type of sheep produced, a type that has
proved of great value to Australia.
Quiamong was established in the seventies by the late
Mr. F. L. Parker, from whose executors the estate was
purchased in 1894 by the late Mr. Robert Landale. It
was then worked to its full extent in conjunction with
A VIEW OF THE HOME-
STEAD FROM THE CREEK
The property derives its water supply naturally from
the Billabong and Yanco Creeks on the north, and from
the Forest Creek, which runs right through the centre of
Quiamong. Along the creeks a number of dams had been
constructed, and these are now in an efficient state. To
the few wells on the property have been added five sub-
artesian bores, obtaining a good flow of suitable stock
water at an average depth of 150 ft. In two paddocks
only is there an absence of natural running water, the
mills and surface tanks being of a quality to provide a


FOREST CREEK AT QUIAMONG
THE OVERSHOT DAM ON THE BILLABONG AT QUIAMONG.
QUIA MONG,N E IV SOU T H WAL E S


A MOB OF
4-YEAR-OLD
MERINO EWES
ON QUIAMONG
2-TOOTH QUIA-
MONG MERINO
EWES ON FOR-
EST CREEK
GUI AMONG, NEW SOUTH WALES


good supply at all times. There are several of the latter,
well made and kept in good order, the excavations rang-
ing up to 4500 cubic yards. After a severe drought in
1914 the owners saw the necessity of laying down an
adequate storage of water, and since thousands of pounds
were expended, and more money has also been spent by
the present management on these vital improvements,
there is at least no danger now of Quiamong ever suffer-
ing from a shortage of water for any requirement. 1 he
rainfall averages 16 in. per annum.
Although Quiamong once ran a stud Merino flock, it
was dispersed at the time the property was purchased by
Mr. Armytage. But at this dispersal sale, the new
owner of the station purchased a large number of ewe
weaners, and these, with some aged ewes, formed the
foundation of the present Quiamong Merino flock, which
now totals about 13,000 sheep, and which is bred and
maintained for the production of an attractive wool clip.
The young members of the flock show all the signs of
good uniform wool producers, whilst characteristic of
the general flock are nicely proportioned sheep, set firmly
on short legs, plain bodied, strongly constitutioned, and
producing a large percentage of healthy lambs, which are
dropped during April and May.
No stone is being left unturned to maintain a high
standard of quality throughout the general flock, and for
one of the younger school of pastoralists the impression
gained by an inspection of Mr. Armytage’s sheep is that
he is on the right road to success.
In the short space of two years he has done a great
deal to offset the lack of proper facilities over the run,
and has erected twenty-four miles of new fencing. The
whole of the rabbit netting on the boundaries has been
restored, and the ingress of the rabbit combated absolutely,
leaving the natural pastures of barley grass, trefoil, and
other herbage free from spoliation. Ihe run itself has
had a general clean up, much time having been given to
burning off the old dead trees and stumps, and othenvise
clearing out superfluous timber. This has given to the
paddocks an orderly and well-kept appearance.
A small number of horses is carried. These come
from a very good Arab strain and are well bred into
large-framed animals. Some years ago a stud of Beef
Shorthorn cattle of Belinda Vale strain was also kept,
TYPICAL PINE
RIDGE COUNTRY
QUI AMONG, NEW SOUTH WALES


SOUND GRAZING
COUNTRY ON THE
BOREE PLAINS
THE GARAGE AND MEN’S HUT


A PRETTY GLIMPSE
OF THE HOUSE
THROUGH THE PINES
THE BEAUTIFUL
QUIAMONO GARDEN
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE
HOUSE FROM ACROSS
THE GARDEN
QUIA MONO, NEW SOUTH WALKS
QUIA MON G, NEW SOU TII WA LE S


but Mr. Armytage has gradually worked this breed out,
and now confines his energies to the maintenance of a
herd of purebred Ayrshires.
Shearing on Quiamong commences at the end of July.
At the first shearing put through by Mr. Armytage in
1926 the count was 13,000 grown sheep, and the clip
amounted to 405 bales of wool that was commented upon
as exceptionally well grown and of good free style and
handle.
The woolshed, which was recently renovated, con-
tains sixteen stands of Wolseley machines driven from a
6-h.p. Marshall steam engine, and is now a compact and
easily-worked shed.
Of a charming bungalow design the Quiamong home-
stead was built in 1904, and a considerable sum has been
spent by the Armytage management since 1926 in order
to bring it up to an adequate standard of comfort. It
has been equipped throughout with electric light, hot
water service, hygienic sewerage, and other modern con-
veniences, whilst the inside appointments are tasteful and
beautiful.
Standing in delightful gardens amidst many varieties
of English and Australian trees the homestead is one of
the prettiest to be seen, and a feature of the grounds is
the newlv constructed tennis court. Under such modern
conditions station life possesses many of the advantages
and few of the disadvantages of residence in the city, and
as Melbourne is only a day’s run via Deniliquin, there is
nothing in the nature of isolation, with yet all the
pleasure of life away from the turmoil of town.
Mr. Neville Fairbairn Armytage is the son of Mr.
Norman C. Armytage, of Afton Downs Station, Queens-
A FLOCK OF MERINOS WATER-
ING ON YANCO CREEK, THE
BANKS OF WHICH ARE
LINED WITH RED GUMS
GUI AMONG, NEW SOUTH WALES


A PAGE OF BUSH-
MEN’S FAVOURITES
SPINOPUS, A SUC-
CESSFUL PICNICKER
MR. ARMYTAGE'S TEAM
OF POLO PONIES
BONILDA, ANOTHER
FAVOURITE AT THE
PICNIC RACES
QUIAMONG, NEW SOU T H W A LES


A VIEW OF THE
HOUSE FROM
THE SUGAR
GUM DRIVE
ONE OF THE PRETTY WALKS IN THE QUIAMONG GARDEN


A CORNER OF
THE LOUNGE
VIEW OF THE GAR-
DEN FROM THE
VERANDAH
ANOTHER INTERIOR
VIEW OF THE
QUIAMONG HOME
GUI AMONG, NEW SOUTH WALES


land, an important property which has been in his posses-
sion since 1882. It has, however, been earmarked by
the Queensland Government for resumption in 1928, and
Mr. Norman Armytage has therefore settled down at
South Yarra, Melbourne.
H is son was born at Toorak in 1896, and was educated
at Melbourne Grammar School, and afterwards at the
Geelong Grammar School. On leaving school he became
overseer at Mundiwa, under one of the Landales. In
1916, at the age of 20 years, he enlisted for active ser-
vice abroad in the Great War, and was attached to the
13th Battery of Australian Field Artillery in France and
Belgium.
Upon his return he resumed the overseeing at Mun-
diwa for a period of 18 months, and then went to Queens-
land for a year. In October 1922 he purchased Gulpha
Station at Mathoura, New South Wales, but this place
was sold in 1926, and Mr. Armytage established himself
at Quiamong.
In April 1923 he married Joyce Constance, a daughter
of the late Mr. R. H. Landale, of Mundiwa, and they
have a family of one son. Mr. N. F. Armytage is a keen
polo enthusiast, and does a great deal to assist the pro-
gress of his district in a practical manner.
THE BRIDGE OVER FOREST CREEK
GUI A MONO, NEW SOUTH WALES


MURGHA, DENILIQUIN, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Murgha Pastoral Company Limited
MURGHA, owned by Mr. John Baldwin Howe,
and conducted under the name of the Murgha
Pastoral Company Limited, is situated on the
north side of the Edward River in Southern Riverina,
New South Wales. The head station lies 44 miles west
of Deniliquin, -with the town of Moulamein 22 miles
away on the western side, whilst Hay is nearly 80 miles
to the north-east.
In area the run covers 40,000 acres, of which 36,000
that between the Murrumbidgee and the Murray “for
stud breeding and for fattening wethers and bullocks in a
normal year.”
The station originally was a cattle run owned by the
Gwynne family. It was acquired by the Macks for sheep
breeding, and later was purchased by the partnership of
Austin and Millear, who in 1885 laid the foundation of
the original Murgha stud flock. This was formed of the
surplus stock from their famous Wanganella stud. As a
A WINTER GLIMPSE OF THE HOUSE FROM THE GARDEN
acres are freehold, made up of red and brown soil plains,
growing annual, old man, and creeping salt bushes, dillon
bush and some blue bush, as well as barley grass, trefoil
and other grasses. Though the trefoil burr is a little
troublesome to the wool, it is with judicious management
one of the best native fodders.
There is plenty of natural shelter, comprising clumps
of red gums, bulloaks, cypress pine and boree, which are
scattered over the plains. This, with an average rain-
fall of 14 in., justifies the oft-repeated saying that there
is no better country in western New South Wales than
first-class stud it was carried on until these historic
breeders dissolved partnership and divided their Wan-
ganella stud in 1894. Mr. Albert Austin purchased
Murgha at public auction and worked it in conjunction
with his share of Wanganella, but later transferred the
former flock to two of his sons, the late Mr. A. J. Austin
and Mr. H. L. Austin, the present owner of Eli Elwah
Station in the Hay district. The stud was supervised by
these brothers until 1912, when Mr. A. J. Austin became
sole owner. Upon the untimely death of this pastoralist
in 1915 the estate was carried on by his widow, who, in


A TYPICAL MURGHA SIRE,
STUD RAM NO. 2.4, BY
NO. 16.12, BY NO. 8.38
ONE OF THE MURGHA TOP SIRES,
STUD RAM NO. 4.1, RESERVE
GRAND CHAMPION, STRONG WOOL
CHAMPION AND FIRST IN CLASS,
3 YEARS AND OVER, SYDNEY
SHEEP SHOW, 1927. CUT 33
LBS. OF WOOL LAST SHEARING
MURG 11 A , NE W S OUT II WALES


1921, sold out to Mr. J. B. Howe and Mr. James T.
Horton, and dispersed the stud.
At the sale Messrs. Howe and Horton purchased 2300
stud ewes, a number of special stud ewes and some double
studs, besides the hulk of the single studs aged about
three years. They also retained thirty special rams, in-
cluding the stud sire No. 16.12, a son of No. 8.38, which
was purchased from Austin-Wanganella stud in 1915 for
the late Air. A. J. Austin by his studmaster, Mr. A. D.
stud master, and in July 1926, following upon the sale
of Bundyulumblah to his nephew, Mr. Ronald Horton,
Air. J. T. Horton retired from the firm. The whole of
his interests were then acquired by Air. Howe, who con-
tinued to run the property as a company.
It is indeed a highly-improved stretch of country,,
watered by the Edward River on the south and by tanks,
wells and sub-artesian bores, in which good water is ob-
tainable at an average depth of 120 ft. In carrying
EARLY MORNING SHADOWS
Wigan. From these numbers Messrs. Howe and Horton
commenced to breed up again, and worked the Alurgha
stud in conjunction with their Bundyulumblah stud Hock,
which property and stud they had bought in 1918. Both
flocks were kept separate, and for the classing of each
of them the services of Mr. Wigan were engaged.
In 1925 the Murgha portion of their business was
formed into the Murgha Pastoral Company Limited, with
Mr. J. B. Howe as managing director and Mr. Wigan as
capacity the run holds a sheep to 3 acres, but is never
fully stocked. Including irrigation areas, the station
has been cut up into 57 paddocks, all of which are wire-
netted and practically freed of the rabbit.
A policy of continual improvement has been carried
out by the new owner, and one of the first undertakings
was to provide for the cultivation of sorghum, lucerne
and hay. A 15-in. centrifugal pump a mile or two from
the homestead is in use at present, and as time goes on
MURGHA, NEW SOUTH WALES


A FEW OF
THE MURCHA
CATTLE AT
ONE OF THE
TANKS ON
THE STATION
MURGHA
SPECIAL STUD
EWES BEING
CLASSED
MURCHA STUD
MERINO RAMS,
MIXED AGES
MURGHA, NEW SOUTH WALES


most of the river frontage
will be given over entirely
to cultivation purposes.
These paddocks near the
homestead also will be
used for lambing down
the special stud ewes, as
is done on the existing
irrigation.
The homestead was
erected by the late Air.
Austin in 1907, and is a
substantially and artisti-
cally built residence of
red brick, designed to
withstand extremes of
heat and cold. Between
the roof and ceilings
special material has been
built in, and the main
hall is panelled with
native pine. Replete with
all modern conveniences,
the house stands in ex-
tensive gardens beside the
Edward River. The telephone connection is with Moula-
mein, and up-to-date wireless is installed. All adjoining
buildings are maintained efficiently, the manager and his
family residing a short distance away by the river.
Some years ago the late Air. Austin purchased a
large number of ostriches from Captain Cairns, Nardoo,
Coonamble, N.S.W., and acclimatising well, a lot of
these birds are to be seen on Murgha to-day in a wild
state.
One and a-quarter miles from the homestead is the
woolshed, a compact structure containing five stands of
AN OPEN FACE, WELL SET WIDE HORNS AND A
BOLD FRONT. NO. 2.4, A TYPICAL MURGHA RAM
machines only. About
12,000 sheep and lambs
are shorn each year, the
bulk of the work follow-
ing the shearing of stud
rams and lambs, w hich
are done by blades early
in July. The clip has
never failed to bring a
high price at Melbourne
sales.
Lambing takes place in
March and April, run-
ning into May in adverse
seasons, and generally the
percentage marked is
satisfactory, rarely drop-
ping below 75 per cent.
As Mr. Howe’s mana-
ger and stud master, Mr.
Arthur Douglas Wigan
can claim intimate know-
ledge of the Murgha
sheep extending over many
years of association with
the stud. He hails from Tasmania, and after three
years in Eastern Riverina became manager of Brae Springs
Station, near Albury, at twenty years of age. He held
that post for twelve years, was manager at Goolgumbla
Station, Riverina, for nine years, and with the exception
of two years at Bundyulumblah, has supervised the Mur-
gha stud since 1913, in which year Air. Austin secured
his expert assistance in classing, mating and selecting rams
for buyers. A recognised authority on all stock matters,
Air. Wigan devotes his skill to establishing the Alurgha
stud upon a high plane, enhancing to the utmost the pres-
A GROUP OF ONE-YEAR OLD STUD MERINO EWES
MU RG 11 A, NE W SOU TII WAL E S


AT THE DRAFTING YARDS
M U R GII A, NE W SOU Tll W ALES


THE EDWARD RIVER AT MURGHA HOMESTEAD
MURGHA, NEW SOUTH WALES


THE MURGHA STUD RAM, NO. 6.1,
15 MONTHS OLD, SIRED BY NO.
16.12, CLIPPED 2½ LBS. OF WOOL
FOR 12 MONTHS' GROWTH
TWO-YEAR-OLD MURGHA
STUD RAMS SIRED BY
NO. 16.12
THE 25-MONTHS-OLD MURGHA
STUD RAM NO. 5.1, SIRED BY
NO. 16.12, 3RD PRIZE MEDIUM
WOOL CLASS, SYDNEY SHEEP
SHOW, 1927, CUT 29 LBS. OF WOOL
FOR THE 12 MONTHS' GROWTH
M URG II A, NE IV SOU TII WAL E S


tige which the sheep have won through their merit.
1 he stud Merino ram purchased from Austin Wan-
ganella in 1915, No. 8.38, was regarded as one of the
best sires in Aus-
tralia, and was
noted for his long,
soft, good scouring
wool, and for his
beautiful sym-
metry. He proved
himself one of the
most prepotent
sires ever bred in
the W anganella
stud. Many of his
descendants were
prolific and true
breeders, but of
them No. 16.12
stands out promi-
nently as a won-
derful ram.
Of his sons a
most attractive ram
is the stud sire No.
2.4, five years old
in 1927. Stand-
ing well, he pos-
sesses a massive
strong frame of
splendid mascu-
linity, growing a
bold type of wool with a well serrated crimp. He is
exceptionally well covered underneath, and to give an
instance of his remarkable growth 4J lbs. were cut from
his belly during service in 1926.
Typical of many other sires is No. 5.1, a 4-tooth lambed
THE LEADING SIRE, NO. 16.12, NOW 11 YEARS OLD, ENJOYING
A HANDFUL OF OATS FROM HIS OWNER, MR. J. B. HOWE
in May 1925. Attractively made, his fleece is a delight
to handle, being very bright, strong, soft wool.
With such fine leaders in the stud, the annual output
of rams reaches a
high standard of
quality all through.
It is primarily to
the great sheep
centres of Queens-
land that Mr.
H owe looks for his
main demand, and
no greater testi-
mony to the suita-
bility of his rams
can be had than
that of the grow-
ing list of new
buyers year after
year.
Prior to the
world war the
Murgha stud had
a large selling con-
nection in South
Africa, as many as
1300 ewes and 600
rams being ex-
ported in one year.
This former trade
is again being
sought by the pre-
sent owner, and in 1926 his shipments amounted to
30 ewes and 6 stud rams. Judging from the inquiries
to hand from South Africa and the good prices breeders
there are paying for the best Australian Merinos, that
centre will afford an excellent market for Murgha.
YOUNG SONS OF THE STUD RAM, NO. 16.12
MURGHA, NEW SOUTH WALES


Shows have failed to attract this stud in the past, but
during 1927 Mr. Howe decided to send one of his
top sires to the Sydney Stud Sheep Show. This was the
first time a sheep from Murgha had been on exhibition.
Although the season had proved a disappointment owing
to the exceptionally dry conditions prevailing all over
Riverina, Mr. H owe was confident of making a good
show, and his enterprise was rewarded by the ram gaining
the reserve grand championship for rams and the cham-
pion honours against keen competition in the strong wool
section. This ram, No. 4.1 , was lambed in May 1924
from a special stud ewe, by the top sire No. 16.12, then
eight years old. No. 4.1 represented a perfect type of
strong woolled Merino ram. Of massive frame and
great constitution, he displayed all the character and
breeding desired in a sire. His wool was even through-
out the unwrinkled fleece and at all points, being dense,
very bright, with a bold crimp and of excellent handle, a
type in fact ideal for manufacturing purposes, as well as
ENTRANCE HALL
AND LOUNGE,
MURGHA HOUSE
for toning up weaker wools in any flock. He is the
kind of sheep which the owner of Murgha is aiming to
breed uniformly throughout his stud. An attractive offer
was declined for 4.1 after the show, the owner preferring
to keep him for improvement purposes within the stud.
Running on Murgha is also a mixed herd of cattle,
bred successfully for sale and station use.
Mr. J. B. Howe was born near Bendigo, Victoria, in
1859. As a lad of 15 he journeyed to Queensland, where
he worked hard through the various avenues of sheep and
cattle raising. Those days of the seventies and the
droughts of the eighties brought out the very best in the
pioneers and young men engaged in opening up the great
outback country, and to many it gave their chance in
life.
During thirty years spent in Queensland Mr. Howe
acquired an interest in Haddon Downs Station with a
partner, afterwards selling out to purchase Arrabury Sta-
tion in the Thargomindah district, which he worked with
MURGHA, NEW SOUTH WALES


THE GARAGE
AND STABLES
A PORTION OF THE
BOARD AND WOOL
ROOM IN THE
SHEARING SHED
STUD MERINO EWES
AND LAMBS BEING
DRAFTED IN THE
WOOL SHED YARDS
MUR GII A. NE W S O UT II W ALES


a partner, Mr. Lindsay, un-
der the name of Lindsay and
Howe. That station, adjoin-
ing H addon Downs, and
comprising over 600,000
acres, is now run as Arra-
bury Pastoral Company. Mr.
Howe went in for horse
breeding for the Indian mar-
ket on that run, besides run-
ning cattle and sheep. Out
on the Georgina River,
south-western Queensland,
Mr. H owe also has cattle
interests on Cluny Station,
near Bedourie. This run of
over 1000 square miles of
well-grassed country is
worked with others as the
Cluny Pastoral Company.
In 1904 Mr. Howe re-
turned to his native State and
married Mabel, the daughter
of the late Edward Silke, of
Mount Moliagul district,
Victoria, settling down on a
compact property on the
Loddon River, near Bendigo.
At this place, Alemsie Sta-
tion, which he purchased from
the late Mr. John Catto, Mr. Howe devoted a lot of
time to breeding stud Lincolns and Suffolk sheep. He
made Memsie his home for twenty-one years, transferring
to Murgha when that stud property came into his hands
in 1926.
His strong influence upon the welfare of the Korong
Shire during his stay in Victoria was reflected in the
handsome illuminated addresses with which he was
presented in 1926 by fellow
councillors of the shire and
by numerous friends.
The Memsie property is re-
tained by him, besides other
estates which include Boo-
roorangie, near Swan Hill,
on the New South Wales
side of the Murray. Of an
area of 8000 acres freehold,
this station is used mainly
for fat lamb raising. At his
other property in Victoria,
Bama Park, near Echuca,
Mr. Howe breeds a very
fine stud flock of Border
Leicesters, and has achieved
the reputation of being a
first-class judge of British
breeds, as well as an author-
ity on the Merino such as are
bred at Murgha.
Mr. Howe’s family con-
sists of one daughter and
three sons. His youngest
son is at Ballarat Grammar
School, Victoria, at which
school his other sons were
also educated. His eldest
son had a distinguished
school career, being a leading scholar and gaining the
sports championship of the school in 1922 with highest
points for all distances from 100 yards to one mile.
Although approaching his seventieth year, Mr. Howe
is still an active force in the management of his pro-
perties. A tireless worker all his life, of high character
and sound judgment, he is the type of pioneer pastoralist
to whom Australia owes much of her progress.
THE SQUIRE OF MURGHA, MR. J. B. HOWE
MISS JEAN HOWE AND HER PETS
MURGH A, NE W SOU TII WAL E S


BUNDYULUMBLAH, DENILIQUIN, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Property of Bundyulumblah Pty. Ltd.
BU N I )\ L LUMBLAH is one of the oldest Riverina
holdings, and comprises to-day 48,000 acres of
freehold country which is typical of the vast
plains of that section of New r South Wales. It is owned
by the Bundyulumblah Pty. Limited, which was formed
in 1926, and is under the management of Mr. R. J.
Horton.
It is intended to experiment with some outside varieties
of grass.
Only an intersecting ridge of sandhills crops up to
break an otherwise level contour, this sandy undulation
bearing the übiquitous native pine. In the wide belts of
timber there are box swamps, with red gum near the
creek, and apple bush, wilga and some boree on the red
A FRONT VIEW OF THE BUNDYULUMBLAH HOUSE
Composed of mixed black soil and red soil plains, ade-
quately sheltered, Bundyulumblah, or “Bundy” as it is
more commonly called, affords an ideal proposition for
the breeding of high-class Merino rams.
The rainfall is a comparatively low one, having for a
number of years an average of 14 in. The run is well
provided with grass and herbage, and amongst these
trefoil is very much in evidence, while barley grass, white
top, crowfoot and curly grass, &c., take their place accord-
ing to season. Also there are several saltbush paddocks.
country. An open stretch breaks away from the tim-
bered area to the north and forms a wide saltbush plain,
with here and there an outcrop of lignum and cane
grass swamp.
I aking everything into consideration the run has a
capacity of one sheep to four acres. Ihe manager be-
lieves in giving sheep plenty of room, preferring to under-
stock rather than risk being on the wrong side, hence
every provision is being made for relieving paddocks for
use in adverse seasons.


The present owners purchased Bundyulumblah on Ist
June, 1926, from Messrs. Howe and Horton, who had
acquired the property in 1917 from the Exors. of the
late Mr. D. M core. This pastoralist had evolved a very
high grade flock of Merinos during his lifetime, and it
was regarded highly as a stud, having been continued
carefully from the foundations laid down by the late Mr.
Stoddart early in the seventies. Old records show the
flock to have been formed from a selection of Cunning-
ham Plains ewes, presumably of Havilah blood, and by
first things he did was to secure some rams from Wanga-
nella Estate, which property he had managed for the late
Mr. Thomas Millear. Thus he kept the Bundyulumblah
stud pure to the Wanganella-Peppin type. His know-
ledge of these sheep had a marked influence upon Mr.
M core’s stud, and during the seventeen years there pre-
ceding his death, he bred only sufficient rams for home
use and a few odd ones for sale to neighbours. Surplus
rams were offered to the public occasionally, and being
sheep of quality they were purchased readily.
A TYPICAL BUNDYULUMBLAH MERINO SIRE
the introduction of a pure Rambouillet ram to the most
even of these ewes. The progeny were culled heavily to
make a stud of character and uniformity, and it was
developed with striking success along these lines, the first
introduction of outside blood being rams from the old
Wanganella stud purchased in 1892.
The late Mr. G. O. Smith, a skilful judge of sheep,
was placed in charge of the stud in 1901, and one of the
Upon Messrs. Howe and Horton entering into posses-
sion in 1917, the supervision of the stud was entrusted to
Mr. A. D. Wigan, and under the expert classing and
mating of this stud master, the stud was raised consider-
ably in size and merit. At his suggestion a high class
Wanganella Estate ram was purchased from F. S.
Falkiner and Sons Limited in 1919, turning out remark-
ably well.
BUNDYULUMBLAH, NE W SOU TII IF AL E S


A MOB OF SINGLE STUD MERINO EWES ON THE STATION
TWO-TOOTH BUNDYULUMBLAH
BRED STUD MERINO EWES
BUN I) Y ULUMBLAH. NK W SOU T // if AL K S


From then onward no outside rams
at all were used, the selection of sires
being made with skilful judgment from
within the stud. As a consequence of
the progress made, the Bundyulumblah
rams claimed a lot of notice from flock
owners in the far west of New South
Wales, Queensland, Victoria, South
Africa, &c., and Messrs. Howe and
Horton were rewarded, especially in
1924, with some sweeping achievements
at the Melbourne Sheep Show. Their
stud was exhibited from 1920 to 1924
in Melbourne, being successful, but in
the latter year it received its greatest
advertisement by carrying off both the
medium and strong wool championships
for rams and ewes, all the reserves in
those sections, and the bulk of the first
prizes in the various classes in which
they were entered. These exhibits from
Bundyulumblah were admired very
much and were responsible for the enhanced popularity
of the stud which followed. In 1926 four championships
were secured.
BUNDYULUMBLAH STUD RAM SIR PATRICK, AGED 1 YEAR
In 1920, following upon previous shipments, a draft
of stud rams and selected rams and ewes was sold to
South Africa to a Mr. Perry. They were well received,
FIVE OF THE LEADING SIRES IN THE STUD
At the annual sales these rams have been well sought
after, and when first offered in Sydney an average of 119
guineas was realised for ten, whilst up to 300 guineas
has been paid for individual sires.
and considered to be ideal sheep for the South African
climate owing to their medium to fine evenly grown wool
and large strong build, but this connection was allowed
to wane eventually, the owners of the stud desiring to
nV N D YULU MB L A //, NE W SOV T II WAL E S


A DRAFT OF BUNDYULUMBLAH
BRED SALE RAMS READY FOR
DESPATCH
BUNDYVLU M H L A H. NE lU S 0 UT H JU AL E S


PURE NYINGAY BLOOD
SHORTHORNS ON BUN-
DYULUMBLAH
A MOB OF SPECIAL
STUD MERINO EWES
BRED ON THE STATION
BUNDYULU M B L A //, NE IV S 0 UT II WAL E S


LIGHT AND SHADE
FROM THE HOME-
STEAD VERANDAH
A FINE LINE OF
MERINO WETHERS
SEEK THE COOL
SHADE OF THE BOX
TREES
B UNI)Y U L U M BLAH. NE IV S() UT H WAL E S


MERINO WETHERS MUSTERED
ON THE BANKS OF ONE OF THE
BUNDYULUMBLAH TANKS
concentrate more upon central Queensland and other
home centres.
The type which characterised the stud is best described
as large framed, thick set, well made rams, having a
smart upstanding appearance with breeding written all
over them. They had wonderful heads and well rounded
horns with open faces, whilst the chest was deep, denoting
plenty of heart room. The back was straight and level,
well sprung ribs formed a good barrel, and their legs
were strong. A great deal of care had been taken to
cover them with an even fleece. Generally speaking the
wool was of bold medium quality and very bright, show-
ing a well defined crimp and a light close tip. Amongst
their best features was a hardy constitution, which helped
them to acclimatise readily in any new surroundings.
After the property changed hands a dispersal sale was
held in July 1926, at which the Bundyulumblah Pty.
bought in 420 special stud ewes, 310 single stud ewes and
5 selected stud rams to form the nucleus of a new breed-
ing flock. To augment these they purchased from the
well-known Pembelgong stud five special stud rams, two
of which were sons of Pembelgong No. 1, the sire which
won at the Sydney Sheep Show in 1923 the grand
championship for Merino rams.
One special stud ram was acquired also from the
Uardry stud, and with the five from Pembelgong, was
joined with the special ewes. The selected Bundyulum-
blah rams retained were mated with the single stud ewes.
The ewes purchased at the sale had at foot 240 ram
lambs and 250 ewe lambs, all of which were by rams of
the old stud, including one leading sire, Bundy No. 8.
The beginning of 1928 sees this recognised stud
assuming a most promising outlook. Although Bundy-
ulumblah to-day is a reconstruction from the cream of
the old flock plus the purchases, its owners have preserved
a direct line of descent through nearly sixty years of
breeding from the true pure blood of old Wanganella.
The services of Mr. H. J. Watson, late of Uardry, have
been retained to assist in the classing and mating opera-
tions, and this should prove beneficial, as Mr. Watson is
BUNDYULUMBLAH, new south walks


A FLOCK OF ROTO BRED
WETHERS MUSTERED ON
BUNDYULUMBLAH
n UNDYULUMBL AH, NE IV SOU T II IV AL E S


a capable sheep man, whose judgment is acknowledged
to be very sound.
I'he Bundyulumblah Pty. Limited were fortunate in
securing 1600 ewes from the well-known Uardry stud,
and these have now been joined with twenty stud rams
leased from Charles Mills (Uardry) Limited. This
Hock will be kept distinct from the Bundyulumblah stud,
and nothing but pure Uardry blood used in it.
The aim of the present owners is the robust type of
large frame and a fine quality wool of good length
showing plenty of character. One of the stud’s most
outstanding units at present is the twelve months old
ram, Bundy No. 1. Sired by Bundy No. 8, he was
lambed from a special Bundy stud ewe in June 1926,
and is of pure Peppin blood. That he should display
such a long staple of fine wool, most evenly put on, at
his age, without the vestige of a wrinkle, and moreover
possesses wonderful conformation, predicts a great future
for this ram. Large framed, he has a stately head, open
face, wide low horns of beautiful shape, a well developed
front, massive thighs, whilst between the shoulder blades
there is good heart and lung room denoting constitution.
One of his best features is the perfect setting of his hind
legs. Altogether he represents the type of sheep it is
hoped to breed in large numbers, being a magnificent
masculine animal.
Amongst the stud in the late autumn of 1927 were a
number of 2-tooth rams, all of which showed a good
growth of fine wool. This extended right over the sheep
and displayed a nice crimp running out to a light close
tip. Other batches to come under particular notice left
the impression that infinite care was being taken to ensure
uniformity throughout the stud to a high standard of
quality and good breeding. This was noticeable with the
ewes also, which were a fine, evenly made lot, having
deep roomy bodies and strong heads.
When taken over, the property was very poorly im-
proved, hence a great deal of reconditioning and construc-
tion faced the new owners. In order to put it into a
state capable of supporting the class of sheep to be bred
and to provide room for expansion, a large sum had
to be earmarked for new fencing, new subdivisions, new
bores, an extensive irrigation plant, machinery and
material of all kinds. The work of twelve months has
A MOB OF HERD CATTLE
MUSTERED ON
BUNDYULUMBLAH
BUNDYULUM BLA H. NE W S() UT II IV AL E S


A MOB OF MERINO EWES
DISTURBED AT THEIR
MID- DAY DRINK
BU N DYULU M BLAH. NE W S O UT LI WAL E S


DRAWING ROOM AT
BUNDYULUMBLAH
transformed the run into something like modern efficiency,
and it can be only a matter of time before it ranks
amongst the best improved holdings in Riverina and
becomes a distinguished integral part of the Australian
wool industry. There are 40 paddocks and subdivisions
surrounded by a netted boundary, while new gates are
being put in gradually. As the rabbit problem was over-
come in the past, the owners are fortunate in missing this
worry now.
The water supply is obtained mainly from the Billa-
bong, which runs along the southern boundary for seven
miles, being dammed at the convenient places. There are
also good dams and deep holes in the Delta and Box
Creeks, which, though intersecting the run, are not per-
manent streams, and the supply is completed by twelve
bores, two wells and twenty tanks, with a full com-
plement of windmills and troughs. As rapidly as labour
will permit the stock drinking water is being augmented
with further bores, which can be sunk with success prac-
tically anywhere.
The old woolshed, equipped with 12 stands of
Wolseley machines and situated 44 miles from the home-
stead, is being remodelled to come into line with the
most up-to-date sheds, and all the adjoining huts have
been supplanted with modern buildings, which are well
made and which more than comply with the Act. Shear-
ing follows two months after the April-May lambing,
and last July-August some 1 1,000 sheep and a number of
lambs were put through.
Also running at Bundyulumblah is a fine stud of Short-
horn cattle. Mr. Horton formed this herd by the pur-
chase of 65 stud cows and two stud bulls from Mr. Phil
Locke, of The Manor, Werribee, Vic., who obtained
them at the dispersal sale in 1925 of the well-known
Nyingay herd. With this collection of pure blood Mr.
Horton is proceeding to breed some high class bulls, and
some typically fine youngsters are to be seen on the run
to-day.
The homestead, standing on a rise opposite the Billa-
bong, commands a sweeping panorama of the surrounding
plains. It, too, has been reconditioned, and in due course
the older portion will give way to a residence more
fitting to the advance in home building. It is connected
by telephone to Wanganella post-office.
BUNI)YUL U M B L A H, NE IV S()U T II IV AL E S


HARTWOOD, CONARGO, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Property of J. Hunter Patterson, Junr., Esq.
AL 1 HOUGH Hartwood is situated in the heart
of Riverina stud Merino country, it does not
participate in that branch of the industry, but
is used exclusively for the production of high grade
Merino wool. The property has been since 1613 the
home of Mr. John Hunter Patterson, jun., and his wife,
About one half of Hartwood is composed of typical
open plains country and the remainder is rung box coun-
try. It is all very healthy and thoroughly sound, being
free from disease and richly endowed with both water
and feed.
The result of a strict campaign of extermination in the
THE FRONT OF THE HARTWOOD HOMESTEAD
and they have made it one of the show places of that
part of New South Wales.
Hartwood runs across the Jerilderie-Deniliquin road
over a compact area of 41,000 acres of freehold land,
with the town of Jerilderie lying 18 miles to the east and
Deniliquin 36 miles away to the south-west. These
centres provide the nearest rail heads for New South
Wales and Victoria respectively, whilst Conargo is the
postal and telegraphic address of the station.
past has been an almost complete victory over the rabbits,
and every care is being taken to prevent them getting the
upper hand again.
The property is watered b} r a double frontage to the
Billabong and single frontage to Yanko Creek, in the
former of which four concrete weirs have been con-
structed and in the other three earth dams. The owner
is fortunate in having this never-failing supply of natural
water, which is augmented throughout the 35 paddocks


WOOLSHED AND QUARTERS
AT HARTWOOD STATION
into which Hartwood is divided by ten sub-artesian bores,
equipped with modern mills and a number of surface
tanks. These excavations range up to 4000 yards. The
bore water, though slightly brackish, is good for the
stock, and is obtained freely at depths varying from 45 ft.
to 200 ft.
Hartwood was taken up originally by the Brougham
family, who in 1859 sold to the late Richard Blackwood,
who converted it into a sheep station and established
a stud which was eventually carried on by his sons
under the name of Blackwood Bros, until in 1913 the
property changed hands, when Mr. J. H. Patterson, jun.,
took it over as a going concern.
The new owner set out to further improve the run and
RED DEVONS GRAZING ON
THE BANKS OF YANKO
CREEK, WESTERN END
II A R TW 0 0 1). NE W S O UT H IE A LE S


HERBACEOUS BORDERS
AND SHRUBS IN THE
HARTWOOD GARDEN
lIA RTWO O D, NE W SOU TII IV A LES


its Hocks, but gave up the stud. Mr. Patterson, like his
father, belongs to the practical school which has learnt
from experience that money sunk in improvements is the
best investment. The clearest example of this is to be
seen always in a station’s water supply, which in the pre-
sent case, as already indicated, is adequate to meet any
crisis.
The grasses are those native to the open and timbered
plains of this district, affording sweet pasturage for the
stock, and the timber is mainly box, red gum, pine and
bulloak. Judicious ringbarking has thrown open a lot
of extra country for grazing, giving a heavier carrying
capacity. Throughout a normal season the place supports
a flock of 18,000 high class Merino sheep, besides cattle
and horses, and despite the very dry months of the greater
part of 1927, over 25,000 sheep and lambs were put
through at the last shearing.
The flock is bred to the Wanganella strain entirely.
As a whole there is pleasing uniformity about the sheep,
which are large robust animals grown out into handsome
proportions, and yielding a splendid carcase and a profit-
able heavy fleece, the average weight of wool for 1925-26
being slightly over 11 lbs. per head of grown sheep.
Mr. Patterson also breeds a few studs of Wanganella
blood, and the male progeny are used with the general
flock to maintain a consistent first-class quality in all
respects. This high standard, already established, forms
the basis of a steady effort to enhance still further the
value of the flock, the young sheep, with that end in view,
being heavily classed each year by Mr. H. C. Pennefather.
The lambing takes place in April and May, and the
young sheep get a good start after the autumn in any-
thing like a favourable year.
In 1914 Mr. Patterson reconstructed the woolshed.
A VIEW OF THE WOOL-
SHED ACROSS THE
BILLARONG CREEK
H ART W O OD, NEW SOU T H WA LE S


SHORN MERINO SHEEP
DRAWING INTO WATER
ON THE YANKO CREEK
HA R TWOOD, NEW SOU TII WA LES


A PRETTY GLIMPSE
OF HARTWOOD
FROM BENEATH AN
IVY-COVERED TREE
THE GARDEN IN
FRONT OF HART-
WOOD HOUSE
lIA RTWO 0 D, NE W SOU TII W A LES


A VIEW ALONG
THE KURRA-
JONG WALK
MERINOS GRAZING ON
THE PARK-LIKE COUNTRY
ADJOINING YANKO CREEK
II A R TW 0 OD, NE W SOU T H W A LES


-1 his is now a line structure, situated 3 miles from the
homestead and containing 18 stands (machines). There
is cover for 2500 sheep at one time, while the adjacent
yards, dip, shearers’ accommodation, &c., are solid and
well built.
A small herd of Ayrshires is kept on the property.
The units comprise pedigreed animals, and Mr. Patter-
son secures the best bulls from various studs with which
to keep up the standard.
He also breeds a few red Devon cattle, and has 40 head
on the place at present. No trouble is being spared to
obtain the best quality of prepotent bulls, and he hopes
eventually to have a purebred herd.
Mr. John H unter Patterson, the father of the present
owner, was born in 1841 in Australia, and although at
the present time, 1928, he is in his eighty-seventh year,
he is still wonderfully active. With a brother, Mr.
M vies Patterson, he in 1862 purchased Boonoke Station
from Messrs. Dutton, Simpson and Darlot. Boonoke
was then a cattle run, and later sheep were brought over
the ranges from the Monaro, and depastured on the run.
The sheep then cut an average of 6J lbs. per head.
In 1871 Mr. J. H. Patterson left the partnership, and
released his interests in Ulonga Station, near Hay,
N.S.W. Soon afterwards Myles Patterson sold Boonoke
to Messrs. Peppin Bros., and it came subsequently under
the regime of the Falkiner family.
Setting out on his own, the father of the present Hart-
A VIEW ON THE
SOUTHERN END
OF HARTWOOD
II A R TIV GOD. NE IV SOUTH W A LES


THE HARTWOOD GARDENS
APPROACH TO THE
WESTERN SIDE
OF THE HOUSE
THE FRONT DRIVE
ARCH LEADING TO
THE ORANGE GROVE
HA R TW O O D, NEW SOU TII IV A LES


wood owner acquired holding after holding, which he
worked, improved, and eventually sold.
His early connections were at Bynya Station, near
Narrandera; Golgol Station, near Balranald; Topar
Station, near Broken Hill; and Yandama Station, near
Milparinka; and later on he joined his brother-in-law,
John Ettershank, in East Loddon Estate, near Bendigo,
Victoria. Bynya he only held for a few years, and the
remainder were sold between 1909 and 1914, Golgol,
where he mainly lived, being sold to his only son in 1911.
He then retired altogether from pastoral pursuits, and
now resides in Melbourne, and is the chairman of direc-
tors of the Standard Brick Works at Box Hill. His
son has the remaining controlling interest in this
company.
Mr. John Hunter Patterson, jun., the present owner of
Hartwood, was born at East Melbourne, and started his
pastoral career under an uncle, Mr. Wm. Rodier, at
BILLABONG CREEK
AT THE BACK OF
THE HOMESTEAD
Tambua. This was followed by three years with Dalgety
and Co. in Melbourne, and in 1905 he left for England.
Recalled from the trip owing to an accident which befell
his father, he took over the supervision of all his father’s
properties until he purchased Golgol, but this place was
resumed by the Government in 1918.
In 1916 he married Matilda, the daughter of the late
Dr. Alfred Finch Noyes, of Deniliquin, and they have
made a most beautiful home out of the old homestead
and environs which have been in existence for nearly
eighty years. The old dwelling was remodelled to con-
form with modern home building without altering the
look of the original homestead, and contains everything
pertaining to city comfort.
Both Mr. and Mrs. Patterson are lovers of nature,
and in the beautiful expanses of gardens and shrubberies
around the homestead full expression has been given to
their individual botanical leanings. Considering the
II A R T WOOD. NE W S O U T H WA LES


WOOLSHED WEIR ON THE BILLABONG CREEK
DIVERSION WEIR ON THE BILLABONG BY WHICH THE CREEK IS HELD UP AND DIVERTED INTO FORREST CREEK
H A R TWO O D, NE W SOU TII IV AL E S


MR. JOHN
HUNTER
PATTERSON,
JUN.
withering nature of a Riverina sun the skilfully laid out
flower beds, lawns and groves are a revelation, and the
unremitting care and attention entailed in creating this
wealth of Horal beauty under difficult conditions leaves
a result of which the owners may justly be proud. There
is also an excellent tennis court.
Mr. Patterson retains an interest in part of old East
Loddon Estate, Victoria, which, as already stated, origin-
ally belonged to an uncle and his father. It has an area
of 2200 acres and is used for farming.
In all matters affecting the progress of the district in
which he lives Mr. J. H. Patterson, jun., takes an active
interest. He has been a member for a number of years
of the Southern Riverina Pastoralists’ Union, having been
its president since 1925, and is also one of the Conargo
Shire councillors.
He participates in the picnic race meetings held in
Southern Riverina, and has been president of the S.R.
Picnic Turf Club, of which he now is on the committee,
and some of his horses have been successful in open racing.
He also breeds a few yearlings, from which he hopes to
derive a lot of pleasure at the picnic meetings.
ONE OF THE BRIDGES CROSSING BILLABONG CREEK TO THE NORTH PART OF THE RUN
11 A R TW O OD, NEW SOU Tll WA LES


BUDDAH, NARROMINE, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Messrs. G. A. McKillop and Sons
FORMERLY known as Buddah Hall, and now
named Buddah, this fine pastoral holding situated
14 miles from Narromine, and comprising 13,300
acres freehold, is the property of Messrs. George A.
McKillop and Sons, a private company of which Mr.
Roy G. McKillop is the managing director.
It was purchased in 1864 by the late Mr. Duncan
McKillop from the late Mr. Charles McPhillamy, who
took up this area, then comprising 90,000 acres, some years
prior to that date. Ihe general lay-out of the property
was flat, extending for miles along the river by a fairly
deep frontage from a point some 8 miles from the town
of Narromine. Mr. McPhillamy turned off several
finally made up the owner’s mind to concentrate upon
fattening, and when, in 1907, Mr. Roy McKillop first
took up the reins of management, he devoted the whole
of his time and the whole of the property to fattening
sheep and cattle.
The Buddah country is eminently suited for this pur-
pose, possessing some beautiful river flats, fairlv thickly
timbered with yellow and white box, myall, and
“Buddah” trees and growing a wealth of succulent native
grasses and herbage during the season.
As a safe means of augmenting the supply of water
from the 4 miles of the broad reaches of the Macquarie
River, which often floods the frontage areas, the ground
THE BUDDAH HOMESTEAD
hundreds of cattle every year during his term, but three
years after it was bought by the late Mr. Duncan
McKillop, grandfather of the present head of the firm, a
flock of purebred Merino sheep was introduced. These
sheep were procured from Collaroy and leading Mudgee
Cox studs, but gradually as time wore on the idea of
continuing as a stud proposition was abandoned, and the
richness that was most marked throughout the run was
then taken advantage of to fatten stock.
The late Duncan McKillop lived on his Terrabella
Station above the town of Dubbo, which he acquired in
the forties, and had Buddah Hall in the hands of a
manager. In due course the leasehold portions of the
property were resumed until the present convenient work-
ing area was reached in recent years.
Up to the time of the 1902 drought some very good
sheep were bred, but the devastation wrought in that year
has been tapped in several places to obtain storage from
the inexhaustible underground supply. This water is
reached at a shallow depth, and there are three wells
besides the five hores and twenty tanks, each of the latter
having a capacity of up to 5000 yards. Special elevated
iron tanks and troughing have been constructed around
the bores, and the water is pumped up by the latest mill
machinery.
Rabbits have been exterminated from the twenty-five
paddocks, which are all strongly fenced, and grouped
into five netted areas for easy working.
As a general practice about 12,000 head of mixed
sheep are carried, although in 1927, at the end of the very
dry winter, there were only 9000 sheep of all ages. On
the other hand, during the abundant season enjoyed in
1926 the management stocked up with 14,000 sheep and
about 1700 head of mixed cattle. Between the spring of


that year and the win-
ter of 1927 the turn-
over in fat cattle
amounted to 1300
head, all of which went
away either to Sydney,
Melbourne or Broken
Hill, where good prices
were realised for every
consignment. Even
during the dry months
of the latter period
over 700 fat bullocks
were trucked away,
which speaks for the
holding nature of the
Buddah country. For
the seasons 1924, 1925
and 1926 some pad-
THE ORCHARD MANAGER'S RESIDENCE
THE WOOLSHED
docks ran two sheep to
the acre, this capacity
being reduced to one
sheep during the dry
season.
The breed of sheep
favoured for fat lamb
production is a cross
between Corriedale
rams and station-bred
Merino ewes, the lat-
ter being generally of
about five years of age,
the ewes being used
once and then fattened
off for sale.
Mr. Roy McKillop
has had long practice
and experience with all
THE WESTERN END OF THE ORANGE GROVE
BUDDA H, NE W SOU TII IF AL E S


THE RISING GENERATION
LEND A HAND-THE
YOUNGER CHILDREN OF
MR. ROY MCKILLOP
BU DDA H, NEW SOUTH WA LES


branches of wool and sheep production,
and spares no expense or trouble in
keeping the efficiency of the station up
to a high scale. This is noticeable
especially in the improvements and the
amount of cultivation that goes on year
in and year out. The annual output of
lucerne from about 160 acres of very
rich flats is turned into fodder and
stored, about 500 tons being kept in
reserve to meet the emergencies that
arise in doubtful seasons, whilst five
ensilage pits, each of 100 tons capacity,
are kept fully stocked up.
The lambing, which takes place in
M arch and April, returns a good per-
centage of marked lambs, while shear-
ing begins about the middle of August,
running into September.
THE FRUIT GRADING AND PACKING HOUSE
A CORNER OF THE
PRETTY GARDEN
AT THE BUDDAH
HOMESTEAD
BUDD A 11, NE IF SOU TII WAL E S


Ihe woolshed 1S about 5 miles from the homestead
and is equipped with ten stands of Wolseley machines,
it is a good shed in every detail of its complement of
yards, dip, board and cover, the latter providing for the
protection of about 1400 head. Built in 1908, additions
or alterations have been made from time to time, and
recently new and elaborate hut accommodation was added
for the men.
1 here are two homesteads, one, built in 1858, and
reconstructed later, in which reside Mr. R. McKillop
of over 50 acres which is devoted in a scientific manner
to the cultivation of fruits. 1 his orchard is a particular
feature of Buddah, and affords a splendid example of
the fertility of the soil adjacent to the Macquarie River
in these parts.
It was commenced in 1912 by Mr. Roy McKillop,
and acres were planted with healthy orange
trees. I hese came along so well that the irrigation plant
comprising a 56-h.p. engine and pump with a capacity
of 1,000,000 gallons per day was extended, and in due
A LOAD OF THE FAMOUS BUDDAH ORANGES ON THE ROAD TO MARKET
and his family, and the other, which was built for Mr.
McKillop’s brother, being now used by the orchard
manager, Mr. Lane. Both are built of red brick to the
popular bungalow design, and, architecturally, are very
attractive. Electric lighting is supplied from a home
plant, whilst all modern ideas have been incorporated to
make them comfortable residences.
Between these joint homesteads, standing in pretty
grounds on a high angle overlooking the river, is an area
course Mr. McKillop realised that he had dropped upon
a most profitable asset. Although he had had no pre-
vious experience in citrus fruit growing, he very quickly
perceived the advantages to be gained by commencing
the industry, and set to work with the remarkable energy
which characterises his management all through Buddah.
From this commencement the orchard has developed
into one of the most important in the State, and though
only a side line to the ordinary business of the station
BUDD A H, NE W SOUTH WAL E S


A GLIMPSE OF THE MACQUARIE RIVER AT BUDDAH IN SUMMER TIME
A HARVEST SCENE IN AN ORANGE GROVE
APPLE TREES IN BLOOM IN THE FOREGROUND
THE EASTERN END OF THE ORCHARD AT BUDDAH
BUI) D A 11, NE W SOU TII WA LES
BUD D A 11, NE W SOU TII IDA LES


A TYPICAL SAMPLE OF
BUDDAH-GROWN
ORANGES, GRADED AND
PACKED FOR MARKET
is nevertheless a big factor in the company’s annual turn-
over, and in the supply of fruit to the Sydney and New
Zealand markets, where for some years now the output
has been disposed of at highly remunerative rates.
The varieties principally grown are late Valencias and
Washington Navels, whilst a number of mandarin trees
and grape fruit are grown also.
In conjunction with the citrus varieties, some 15 acres
are under Granny Smith apples, and according to the
season these meet with great success on the Sydney mar-
kets. The crop in 1927 was light on account of the
thrip infestation, but the prospects are bright for the
future.
It is, however, to the citrus varieties that Mr. McKillop
is devoting his main energies, and in 1928 a further 30
acres will be planted, the ground for this extra produc-
tion having been prepared already and lying now in
fallow.
Fumigation and very careful attention to the health
of the trees are precautions which are exercised on most
scientific lines, for in this way only can the best progress
be maintained.
The annual crop returns something like 12,000 cases
of oranges, and these are graded in a well-built two-
storey brick packing shed, which is constructed on up-to-
date lines, thoroughly ventilated, and includes a multi-
plicity of equipment, from special graders, worked on the
conveyor belt principle, down to storage chamber, and
the special case assembling plant.
The crop after being graded into the various qualities
AN INTERIOR VIEW OF
THE SPACIOUS AND
UP-TO-DATE PACKING
HOUSE AT BUDDAH
BU DDA H, NEW SOUTH WA LES


is packed in Canadian bushel cases of the regulation size,
each case containing from seven to ten dozen choice
oranges.
M essrs. McKillop and Sons were the first growers in
New South Wales to adopt the standardised pack with
regard to oranges, despite the fact that other packing
CATTLE GRAZ-
ING ON THE
RICH LUCERNE
FIELDS AT
BUDDAH
houses had been in existence for a considerably longer
period.
The number of men employed on the orchard regu-
larly throughout the season, including pickers, packers,
and pruners, is about twelve, and all of them are special
workers.
A VIEW OF THE HOME-
STEAD FROM THE
LUCERNE PADDOCKS
B UDD AH, NEW SOU T H IF A LES


A CORNER OF BUDDAH HOUSE VERANDAH
So conveniently situated is Buddah to the Narromine
rail-head that transport worries do not exist. Motor
trucks convey the fruit to the railway, and in some days
as much as seven tons are despatched,
the trucks returning with the special
“Shook,” which are the sides, tops and
bottoms of the cases in bundles, already
cut to size for prompt assembling. Two
hundred of these boxes can be nailed up
in a day by one man.
M any prizes have been awarded to
the well-known “Buddah” brand in the
past few years. Included in these
awards was the 10-guinea cup presented
by the New South Wales Central Citrus
Association, and known as the Isaac
Chapman Cup, which was won in 1926,
with a record of 95 points out of 100.
This cup has been competed for regu-
larly since 1924 by all the important
packing houses in the State. From the
fruit on the open floor of the Sydney
market two cases were selected from
each entrant and sent without being
opened to Gosford, N.S.W., where they
were examined by the committee. The
leading packing houses were entrants in
1926, and the winners, Messrs. McKil-
lop and Sons, gained 2 points more than the second prize
winner for freedom from disease and blemishes and the
other 2 points for quality, the second place being gained
A WINDBREAK OF SUGAR GUMS AROUND THE ORCHARD
B UDD AH, NE W SOU TII IF AL E S


THE LATE MR. DUNCAN MCKILLOP
MR. GEORGE MCKILLOP
MR. ROY MCKILLOP
MASTER DONALD MCKILLOP
FOUR GENERATIONS OF THE McKILLOP FAMILY
BUDD A H. NE W SOU T H W A LES


CROSSING THE MACQUARIE RIVER ON THE WAY TO SCHOOL
with 91 points. The winning fruit was most favourably
commented upon, and was composed of Washington
Navels.
In 1927 the Royal Agricultural Society, at its Spring
Fair, held on 27th September, inaugurated a competition
for the associated packing houses, and out of many
entrants drawn from six districts, Alessrs. AlcKillop
and Sons gained third prize, being 6 points behind the
winners, despite the very poor season that had been ex-
perienced. In 1920 AI essrs. AlcKillop and Sons were
also successful in winning the cup presented by the
Country Promotion League for navel oranges packed for
export, in which competition there were over forty
entries from all parts of the State.
The original member of the family to take up Buddah,
Air. Duncan AlcKillop, came to Australia from Scotland
in the thirties, and for a time settled in Alelbourne. He
took up property in the town of Orange shortly after-
wards, then one of the main inland towns of New South
Wales, and known in those days as Blackman’s Swamp.
It is of interest to record that on the occasion of the
Governor of New South Wales’ first visit to that centre
about the year 1834, he asked Air. D. AlcKillop to alter
the name “for goodness sake,” with the result that the
town was rechristened.
In the forties he went in for grazing on Terrabella
Station, and was connected with the industry up to the
time of his death in October 1877. He was in his day a
great identity around the Dubbo district. His son,
George McKillop, who was born at Summer Hill,
Orange, in 1849, was brought up to the pastoral busi-
ness, and was associated with the late Air. Donald
Cameron in the large central western station named
Buddah Lake.
In 1906 the partnership between Cameron and
AlcKillop was dissolved, the former taking The Lake,
as it was called, and other property of the firm’s at the
Trangie end of the run, and Air. AlcKillop securing
Buddah Hall.
He 1 ived for the most part on the Blue Alountains,
but in due course his son, the present head of the firm,
took over the active control. For some years now, since
the death of his wife, Air. George AlcKillop has made
Buddah Hall his home, and intends to spend the remain-
der of his life upon the property he was responsible for
building up so well.
Of a family of three sons, Air. Roy AlcKillop con-
tinued on with the property and gained his knowledge
from his father and from experience.
In 1913 he married Violet, the daughter of Air. Francis
Crago, of Sydney, and there is a family of three sons and
a daughter—Donald, who is attending The King’s School
at Parramatta, Francis, Alarion and Bruce.
He takes a keen interest in the welfare of the Narro-
mine district, and is a delegate to the Graziers’ Annual
Conference.
BUDD A H, NEW SOU TII WA LE S


MUNGERIBAR, MUNGERIBAR, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of the Executors of the Estate late Mr. Thomas Bragg
ONE of the romances of Australian settlement is
written into the history of this property, situated
half way between the towns of Narromine and
1 rangie, New South Wales, in a locality which, forty-
two years ago, in 1886, was nothing but flat country
covered with dense scrub. To-day it is one of the wheat
gardens of the State. This transformation is due to the
life work of the late Mr. Thomas Bragg, who, with his
wife, pioneered the wheat industry in this part of the
central western plains. He was twenty-seven years of
age when in 1884 he called in at the Dubbo District
home in a waggonette, in which they camped until a clear-
ing was made to erect a dwelling. This consisted of a
rude split slab cottage of two rooms, but when it was
learnt that each selector had to occupy his or her own
property, the structure was moved, so that when the
inspectors and surveyors arrived the very next day they
found the house exactly on the alignment, with Mr.
Bragg living in one half and his wife in the other.
In 1888 a pise dwelling was erected, and Mr. Bragg
named his new abode “Allington,” but in reply to a
request from the Railway Commissioner in 1893 the
THE MUNGERIBAR HOMESTEAD
Lands Office to take up a selection of land. With him
were his brothers, Messrs. Arthur and William Bragg,
his wife and her father, Mr. A. G. Keith, of
Cootamundra.
As their visit coincided with the opening of the rail-
way through to Bourke, they were obliged to wait until
the following Thursday, on which days only could land
be selected. Eventually an area of about 15,000 acres
was taken up in blocks of 2500 acres each, and the part
taken over by the Braggs was so thickly timbered that,
as the saying goes, a dog couldn’t bark in it.
Mr. and Mrs. Bragg arrived on the site of their future
name Mungeribar, meaning “Footprints,” was chosen
and adopted.
Mungeribar was one of the first selections taken up in
the Dubbo district, and the nearest other selection was 20
miles away to the south. There were no roads, barring
the railway, on both sides of which Mungeribar extended.
It was a colossal task which faced the young settlers,
for not only had they to clear every inch of land around
them, but they had to search out a supply of water. In
fact the start had to be made from scratch to throw open
the areas Mr. Bragg intended to cultivate with crops, for
he foresaw the possibilities of wheat growing, which until


CLYDESDALE
MARES AND
FOALS
A FLOCK OF CROSS-
BRED LAMBS FATTEN-
ING FOR MARKET
A FEW OF THE
TROPHIES WON
BY THE LATE MR.
THOMAS BRAGG
FOR AGRICULTURE
MUNGER I B A R, NE IV SOU T II WAL E S


then had not been tried out beyond Dubbo and Welling-
ton, and despite ridicule and discouragement he proved
by actual results his contention that the wheat belt could
be taken out to the Trangie areas.
Not only were his experiments successful, but his very
first crop of ten acres sown in 1888 gave a gratifying
yield. That year has never since been eclipsed for dry-
ness, only nine inches of rain falling. The drought of
1902, which is cited as the worst year known to the State,
brought 13 in. at Mungeribar, but in 1888 the rain fell
at an opportune time, when water was being carted five
miles, and the crop grew to 3 ft. in height. The imple-
ments used to thresh his crop were primitive, a wooden
flail and a crude sieve having to serve the purpose.
When, however, these trials proved that the soil and
DIPPING
SHEEP AT
MUNGERIBAR
CATTLE AT
ONE OF THE
TANKS
climate were satisfactory, the development of the pro-
perty went on at a steady pace, and Mr. Bragg and his
brothers entered more fully into the business of mixed
farming and grazing under the name of T. and A. Bragg.
Their operations included Landgrove, near Cootamundra,
and another property in the Nyngan district, but at
Mungeribar, under the leadership of the late Mr.
Thomas Bragg, nothing was allowed to interfere with
the gradual working up of the country into a prolific
farming centre. The improvements necessary seemed to
outsiders obstacles of an almost insuperable nature, but
enthusiasm and perseverance cast aside the effects of
labour scarcity, climatic conditions, bush fires, plagues of
insects, distance from market, and complicated land laws.
Whilst fencing and water were being handled, the cleared
MUNGERIBAR, NEW 7 SOUTH W 7 ALES


PLOUGHING WITH STATION TEAMS
A PORTION OF THE FODDER RESERVE ON MUNGERIBAR
TRACTOR DRAWING THE HEADER
MUNGERIBAR, NEW SOUTH WALES


areas were growing larger, and in 1889 a crop of 40
bushels to the acre was gathered as well as two crops
of lucerne. To-day it is difficult to visualise the open
park-like countryside round Mungeribar as having
been originally nothing but dense bush land.
The rapidity with which the country was cleared and
improved could not be illustrated better than by the fact
that in 1891 Mr. Bragg was awarded the first national
prize for the best mixed farm in New South Wales of
more than 640 acres in size. In the year following the
Department of Agriculture awarded him first prize for
the best cultivated area in the State, whilst in 1893
Mungeribar was awarded first prize for best acre of
wheat. The yield was lbs. to the bushel, and the
best bushel of Hard Federation wheat.
From 1900 until his death he carried on experimental
plots for the Department of Agriculture, and had as
many as 300 varieties of wheat in at one time for the
use of the late Mr. William Farrar. His samples were
always of the best, and so highly was his work regarded
that when the proposal was made to start a Govern-
ment farm at Narromine leading experts said that this
was quite unnecessary while Mungeribar existed.
From the date of sinking his first well in 1887 and the
erection of the first split pine post and rail fence right up
to the time of his sudden death in 1921, Mr. Bragg
worked to a policy of systematic progress. He was one
of the first two graziers in the west to net against the
PORTION OF 10-ACRE PLANTATION OF KURRAJONGS, 10 YEARS' GROWTH. APPROXIMATELY 1000 TREES
variety was Ward’s Prolific. The crop was grown
where the present homestead stands.
Mr. Bragg purchased the adjoining holdings, which
were selected and worked by his brothers, and brought
the whole area under his own ambitious plans. By 1902
he had 1500 acres under crop, but did not strip a sheaf
of wheat from them on account of the bad season. In
1903, after twelve months in which the ground lay prac-
tically fallow, there was a yield of 40 bushels to the acre,
and in subsequent years many silver cups were won. In
1920 Mr. Bragg won the field wheat competition con-
ducted by the Royal Agricultural Society of New South
Wales, and in 1921 gained the society’s same award for
rabbit. Tbe western side of Mungeribar was done first
to hold back tbe invasion which came in 1889. In due
course the problem was solved, and for many years now
tbe run has been absolutely free of rabbits.
Mr. Thomas Bragg lived to see his dreams come true,
and has left behind him a monument of industry that is
both an example to agriculturists all over the world, and
an inheritance such as few families have the good fortune
to receive. He welcomed sharefarmers, and, from their
advent in 1914, assisted them to become prosperous by
placing tbe latest types of machinery and the best of
horses at their disposal, as well as building for each man
and his family a brick cottage with its own water supply.
MUNGERIBAR, N EIV SOUTH WALES


A BEAUTIFUL
GARDEN SUR-
ROUNDS THE
HOMESTEAD
SURFACE
TANK WITH
WOOLSHED
AND HUTS
IN THE BACK-
GROUND
AND SURROUNDING PADDOCKS
VIEW OF THE MUNGERIBAR HOMESTEAD
MUNG E R I B JR, NEW SOU TII WAL E S
MUNGERIBAR, NEW SOUTH WALES


In working up his resources into what has been recog-
nised for a long time as a model farming and grazing
property, he earned the reputation of being one of the
State’s most experienced agriculturists, an expert in
primary production, and an authority on farm and station
management.
1 he secrets of his success were first and foremost clean
seed, also clean horse feed, intelligent spelling of pad-
docks, fallow and thorough cultivation.
Flis capacity for detail was reflected in the clean state
of everything on the station, an orderliness which at once
spoke of expert management. He believed firmly in fal-
lowing as the surest means of keeping the land clean and
Lucerne and maize .growing and the introduction of
outside grasses were not persevered with, although at one
time there were 200 acres of Sudan grass and up to 100
acres of fodder crops. Mr. Bragg’s great aim was
“wheat,” and he gave a trial to every new scientific
principle that came along, and visited America to study
the methods over there.
Out of unfenced green forest land he had attained
the production at the time of his death of 47,050 bushels
of very high quality wheat from about 2500 acres, the
average being that year 20 bushels to the acre and 2
bushels 53 lbs. for the whole number of bags.
In 1912 he built for himself and his family a two-
THE WOOLSHED SHEEP YARDS WITH HOMESTEAD IN THE DISTANCE
sweet, and of grading seed wheat to secure the best
samples. No wheat for seed was allowed off the place
unless it was graded, and he was one of the first to do
this.
Fertilisers have never been used on Mungeribar, as the
soil is rich enough without them, and the paddocks broken
in to the plough in the nineties have been used ever since,
every two years out of three.
It was Mr. Bragg’s practice to employ the latest
implements for farming, but he did not hesitate to dis-
card anything which could be improved upon, which was
a policy that reduced working costs in the long run to
a minimum.
storey red brick residence situated on the main road 10
miles from each of the towns Narromine and Trangie,
and, roughly, 300 miles from Sydney. It is surrounded
with shrubberies and a wealth of blooms, a very fine
orchard and vegetable garden, avenues and plantations
of trees. Roses, which thrive to perfection in this soil,
were cultivated by Mrs. Bragg, who had as many as 146
varieties at one time in the ground.
On the western side of the homestead was planted an
area of 10 acres of kurrajong trees, 100 trees to the acre,
and this young forest is an unexpected surprise to the
visitor to Mungeribar to-day.
The house is lighted from an electric plant, and six
MUNGERIBAR, NEW SOUTH WALES


ABOVE IS THE BILLIARD
ROOM, WHILE ON THE
RIGHT IS THE DINING
ROOM, WHICH IS ALSO
ENTERED FROM THE
HALL
ON THE LEFT IS THE
DRAWING ROOM, ENTERED
FROM THE ENTRANCE
HALL, WHICH, WITH ITS
PANELLED STAIRCASE, IS
SHOWN BELOW
INTERIOR VIEWS OF A BEAUTIFUL HOME. MUNGERIBAR HOMESTEAD
MUNGERIBAR. NE IV SOU TII IV AL E S


A LOAD OF CHAFF BEING DRAWN BY THE STATION BULLOCK TEAM
lines of telephones connect the main parts of the property
as well as various rooms throughout the house, which is
on to the Narromine Exchange.
A reserve of timbered land is set aside for recreation
purposes nearby, and this, besides being a sanctuary for
the wild birds of the bush, is used at week-ends by
numerous visitors. Adjoining it are private golf links
and tennis court.
The estate has been carried on for Mrs. Bragg since
1921 by her eldest son, Mr. Clarence Keith Bragg, who
has maintained the standard set by his father, and con-
tinued the never-ceasing items of improvement to the
property. A big factor in the smooth working of the
business is his close unity with the station men. Under
his regime 6 miles of new steel post fencing have been
erected near to headquarters, and he has renovated some
of the station buildings to conform with more advanced
ideas.
Being a mixed farm, the wool is of a medium to strong
quality, and is cut from an annual shearing of about
10,000 Merino and crossbred sheep, the latter being kept
for fat lamb raising. The woolshed, which is near the
homestead, can cover 2000 sheep, and the railway siding
is right opposite, so it is an easy matter to get the clip
away, three men being able to load a full truck in three
hours. The twelve stands and other machinery in the
shed are driven by a steam engine, now forty years old,
and as good as new.
One of the best studs of Clydesdale horses in New
South Wales is to be found on Mungeribar, and about
forty mares are bred from annually. The stallion is a
pedigreed champion from New Zealand, who incidentally
LOADING WOOL AT THE WOOLSHED RAMP
M UNGERIBA R, NEW SOUTH WALES


THE LATE MR. THOMAS BRAGG
MRS. THOMAS BRAGG
MR. C. KEITH BRAGG
MR. T. MILTON BRAGG
mungeribar. new south wales


has created widespread interest in his choice of com-
panions. 1 his is an old male emu, who guards his “pal”
wi th a zeal known only to the animal world.
It is a sight to remember to see a total of as many as
forty teams of these heavy horses breasting the harness
at harvest time on M ungeribar, and offers yet another
example of the change which has been wrought in the
course of years. Besides horses, motor tractors also play
their part in the farming work.
Mr. C. K. B ragg also breeds great numbers of prime
Berkshire pigs on scientific lines, feeding them on grass
and herbage only, whilst turkeys and other poultry are
run on the same principles which govern the whole
property.
4 o-day Mungeribar, watered by tanks, wells and six
sub-artesian bores, improved magnificently, and having
yielded in 1926 an average of 46 bushels of Hard Federa-
tion and \ andilla King wheat off 153 acres—this crop
winning the district competition and being part of the
3000 acres under wheat, which yielded about 15 to 20
bushels—with fodder stored in picturesque round stacks
in various paddocks, with huge stacks of reserve firewood,
with its big complement of farming plant costing
thousands of pounds, and supporting as it does over its
15,000 acres no less than eight well-to-do share farmers,
is one of the most productive holdings in the State, and
is the objective of leading overseas agriculturists who
visit New South Wales, as well as of officials of the
Department of Agriculture.
Born at Camden in 1857, the late Mr. Thomas Bragg
first took up land near Cootamundra, and his untimely
end on 13th August, 1921, deprived the State of an
earnest and serious minded benefactor. A member of
the Dubbo Land Board for many years, and on the
board of the Council of Agriculture, a Justice of the
Peace, and a member of the Masonic Order, he also took
a keen interest in the Church of England, and every
year brought the children of all denominations from miles
around to his special picnic grounds. During the war he
gave valuable and practical assistance and did much to
help the progress of local affairs. His wife was M iss C.
L. Keith, of Cootamundra, to whose companionship
during the early years of struggle he owed much of his
subsequent success.
Associated in the management of the station from 1886
to 1909 was his cousin, Mr. Oliver Whittle, who resides
on his own farm adjoining Mungeribar.
Mr. C. K. Bragg was born in 1892 at Mungeribar.
Educated privately, and later attending a college in
Sydney, he gained all his practical experience from his
father. He eventually took over the management of the
estate and his share of Mungeribar, which he has named
“K.D.,” and where he resided after his marriage until
1921, but now lives at the main homestead. He takes
an active interest in all district affairs, and has taken
his father’s place on the Council of Agriculture in Sydney.
His brother, IVIr. I homas IMilton Bragg, who managed
the Nyngan station, and afterwards spent two years in
America, now has his share of Mungeribar, which is
named Bungarly, where he resides with his wife.
The second eldest daughter, Sadie Ella, is the wife of
Mr. John Maynard, and they live in their new home,
Willydah, whilst another daughter, Alice Bertha, is
married to Mr. Percy Leeds, and has named her portion
of the estate Ceres, which has its own railway siding.
Another daughter, Beryl Aimee, resides with her
mother at Mungeribar, and will receive a portion of the
property in due course.
All these divisions of the main holding are worked
independently, and the whole represents a monument to
the courage, skill, ambition and determination of a re-
markable man.
MR. C. KEITH BRAGG
MUNGER 1 B A R, NE W SOU T H WAL E S


DERRA DERRA, BINGARA, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Albert Capel, Esq.
IN that portion of the northern area of New South
Wales of which the town of Bingara is the centre
lies Derra Derra Station, 16 miles west of that
town, and comprising 15,000 acres freehold, owned by
a nephew of the late Mr. Austin Mack, it was origin-
ally taken up by the Cox family about seventy or
eighty years ago, and, as already stated, is a most pic-
turesque area of country surrounded by heavily timbered
Mr. Albert Capel, a member of a well-known pastoral
family of those parts.
The station is a notable one because of the highly
improved nature of the run, its natural beauty, and the
quality and quantity of wool, mutton and beef turned
off each year.
In conjunction with his brothers, Mr. Albert Capel
purchased Derra Derra in 1901 from Mr. R. J. Austin,
A CORNER OF DERRA DERRA
HOUSE AND GARDEN
ranges with undulating, sound grazing land in the basin,
and a long sweep of rich river flats fronting the Horton
River, which has its source in the Mt. Lindsay region,
and joins the Gwydir River lower down.
1 he timber on the ranges and on the low-lying hills is
chiefly apple tree, ironbark, and box, with some pine and
kurrajong, and the soil, which is of a red composition,
produces a luxuriance of green grass and herbage in


THE DERRA DERRA
WOOLSHED
SHORN SHEEP ON
NATURAL PASTURES


average years, responding very quickly to the rainfall,
which is about 28 in. per annum. In average years the
property carries up to 16,000 sheep and some four to six
hundred head of cattle.
A far-reaching policy of improvements has been prac-
tised throughout the entire Capel regime, with the result
that to-day Derra Derra has all the essentials of a well-
managed station, and is maintained at a high standard of
working efficiency.
1 he practical mind of Mr. Albert Capel is manifested
in the way his property has been freed of rabbits, which at
one time presented such a serious problem that the
owners despaired of ever increasing the stocking of the
country to anything like its full capacity. It took years
of persistent digging out to reduce the rabbits to the
stage where they could be cleaned up, but with the aid
of gangs of men and as many as ninety dogs at a time,
the vermin were eventually got under control. For
some time now there has not been a rabbit on the place
and the boundary riders examine the netting fences twice
a week for any attempt at intrusion. This freedom from
the pest has saved the country in dry years such as the
first part of 1927, for before the rains fell in October of
that year there was an abundance of dry feed all over the
run, and very little hand feeding was necessary. In
the water improvements care has also been exercised to
distribute a permanent supply in each of the 24 paddocks
into which Derra Derra is subdivided. The natural
springs and river frontage have been augmented by wells
and tanks, water in the former being struck at about 15
to 50 ft. Latest windmill equipment has been installed,
and nowhere on the run have the sheep or cattle to walk
long distances to water.
The fencing erected some time ago, split post and
three strands, with two barbs along the top, has been
maintained in good order. This type of fence was put
up at a cost of £125 per mile, but to-day the same fence
put up under contract would cost about £9O per mile
for erection and posts, and about £l6O per mile for the
complete job.
STORE BULLOCKS WATERING
AT THE HORTON RIVER
DERR. A DERR A, NEW SOUTH WALES


A PRETTY SCENE ON
THE HORTON RIVER
AT DERRA DERRA
WILLOWS ON THE RIVER
WHERE IT WINDS PAST
THE HOMESTEAD
DERR A DERR A, NEW SOUTH WALES


THE MANAGER'S RESIDENCE
WETHERS FATTENING ON THE NATURAL PASTURES
DERR A DERR A, NEW SOUTH WALES


COWS AND CALVES GRAZING ON
THE BANK OF THE HORTON
RIVER AT DERRA DERRA
A TYPICAL PASTORAL
SCENE ON THE
PICTURESQUE RIVER
PANORAMIC VIEW OF THE DERRA
DERRA COUNTRY AND THE
SURROUNDING HILLS. THE
HOMESTEAD IS ON THE RIGHT,
AND THE WOOLSHED NEAR
THE CENTRE OF THE PICTURE
DERR A DERR A, NEW SOUTH UNI EE S
DERR A DER R A, NE IV S 0 U TII WA EES


TYPICAL RIVER
COUNTRY
2400 FAT WETHERS
MUSTERED FOR
THE MARKET
GRAZING COUNTRY
AWAY FROM THE RIVER
I) ERR A DERR A. NEW SOUTH WALES


1 hese improvements, together with numerous others,
have brought the property up to a high pitch of produc-
tion. Before the extermination of the rabbit the shear-
ing count was about 8000 head, but in 1927, with only
a low rainfall, after taking into consideration the sale of
several thousand fat wethers in the spring, the number
of grown sheep and lambs put through the shed totalled
16,000 head. Shearing is generally carried out during
the early part of September, while lambing operations
take place in July.
The woolshed, which was built by Mr. Capel some
years ago, is of modern design equipped with eight stands
A PRETTY CORNER IN THE
DERRA DERRA GARDEN,
SHOWING WELL-TRIMMED
HEDGES AND LAWNS
of machines.
I he wool, which is sold in Sydney, is a medium to
strong quality, and has for years returned satisfactory
prices, as well as a good yield. In the course of only a
few years the weights have responded to greater atten-
tion to culling and classing the flock, to the extent of
increasing the weight from lbs. in 1907 to 10£ lbs. in
1926. In other words, within twenty years the amount
of clean scoured wool realised from the clip has been
made to equal the amount of greasy wool cut from the
sheep in 1907. The sound management alone of Derra
Derra is responsible for such steady progress.
SHORT BUT SWEET PASTURES ON THE HILLSIDE
DERR A DERR A, NEW SOUTH WALES


SHORN SHEEP ROUNDED UP FOR INSPECTION
The flock of sheep is purely Merino, and the blood for
many years has been drawn from the Uardry stud
exclusively. Mr. Capel is a firm believer in procuring
only good rams, and he has the faculty of knowing
exactly the type to select for his country. The latest
addition to the flock was a promising ram purchased at
400 guineas, but unfortunately he died as the result of
an accident half-way through his first season.
Mr. Capel, who is of the old school of experienced
pastoralists, having brought the flock up to a high
standard of excellence, has now left it in the hands of
two of his sons. Although he still supervises the run-
ning of the station, he has retired from active manage-
ment, but not before he had given his sons a thorough
training in all branches of sheep husbandn r .
A system of cultivation, which was carried out exten-
sively some years ago, is again being adopted, and opera-
tions will be confined to the growing of lucerne for
fodder conservation.
In addition to wool growing and the sale of fat
MUSTERING 6-TOOTH EWES ON THE LOWER END OF THE RUN
DE R R A D E R RA, NE W S O U TII IV A EES


CATTLE CROSSING
THE HORTON RIVER
AN APPROACH TO
THE HOMESTEAD


wethers, the fattening of cattle is conducted with a very
good herd of Durham Shorthorns, maintained with bulls
purchased from outside. The cattle are sold in the
Sydney market.
MR. ALBERT CAPEL
The homestead, having been built in the sixties, does
not conform to the modern ideas of architecture, yet its
old rambling style loses none of the charm of its rela-
tion with the past. It is surrounded by a pretty garden
and hedges, whilst the river winds past the back of it.
Mr. Albert Capel is the fifth son of the late Mr.
Daniel Capel, of Piedmont Station, Barraba, where he
was born in 1854. He received his education at the
Sydney Grammar School in the time of the late Sir
Edmund Barton, one of the school’s noted scholars, and
on leaving Avent to Piedmont to take an active part in
pastoral pursuits. He then went to Woolamut Station
in Queensland, and eventually settled at Gorian Station
in the north-west of New South Wales. 1 hen in 1901
he took up his residence at Derra Derra, where he has
been ever since.
In 1880 he married Christian Mary, the daughter of
the late Mr. David Farquhar, of Clarence 1 own,
N.S.W. 'There was an issue of seven sons and four
daughters, of which six of the former and all the latter
are living. All the sons were educated at Ihe King’s
School, Parramatta, while four, Messrs. Sidney Vivian,
Bruce Farquhar, Clive Ross, and Kenneth Christopher
Capel, served with the Australian Fight Horse in the
Great War. Mr. Kenneth Capel, after being Avounded
on Gallipoli, joined the Royal Air Force and served in
France for four years, retiring with the rank of captain.
Four of the sons noAv live in south-west Queensland —
Messrs. S. V. and K. C. Capel, at Etona, Morven; Mr.
C. R. Capel at Mt. Feinster, Dalby; and Mr. R. C.
Capel at Faguna, Yandilla.
MRS. ALBERT CAPEL
Mr. Capel and his two sons at home, Bruce and Colin,
take a keen interest in the general affairs of the district,
and are well known throughout the north of the State
as enthusiastic supporters of all practical ideas on flock
and wool improvement.
DE R R A DE R RA, NE W S 0 U T H IV A EE S


LINTON, BARRABA, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Property of the Trustees late O. H. Carter.
Henry Doidge Braund, Solicitor, Sydney. Thomas Garden Carter, Linton.
THE Barraba district of New South Wales, embrac-
ing as it does the high ranges which form part
of “The Great Divide,” and boasting a rare
composition of soil and climate, enjoys what is probably
a unique reputation as a woolgrowing centre. For it is
on the principal station properties around Barraba —
within a radius of perhaps thirty miles or less —that some
of the best fine wool is grown, and year after year the
wool clips sold in Sydney that have come down from these
north-west slopes have made a strong appeal to overseas
buvers.
old estate —Ironbark Station —which was taken up in the
early days of New South Wales by a Mr. Mortgage.
His leaseholds and secured lands stretched for miles over
the heavily timbered range, and took in Crow Mountain,
where gold was discovered in 1858. 1 his naturally drew
attention to the district, but since those diggings petered
out the interest has been sustained by the valuable wools
which have been developed.
The notorious bushranger Thunderbolt worked on
Ironbark Station in the sixties, breaking in horses, and
later frequented the hills near the present Linton home-
A CORNER OF THE LINTON HOUSE, THE RESIDENCE OF MR. P. J. CARTER
The resources of the surrounding country are not only
ideal for the production of high-grade wool, but some
notable herds of cattle are to be found on the represen-
tative holdings.
Linton estate lies 22 miles east of Barraba. The road
follows the course more or less of the Nangarah Creek,
and rises into fairly steep country passing practically on
to the northern tableland, the altitude of which is put
down at about 3000 ft. Most of the property, which
extends for 26,000 acres, is composed of this bold forma-
tion intermixed with valleys and sweeps of fertile Hats.
All of this country was at one time portion of a famous
stead. His exploits, however, were staged further afield.
Mr. Mortg age sold his holding to the late Mr. W. L.
Spencer, and in 1888 the late Mr. O. H. Carter, his
brother-in-law, Mr. Joseph Scholes, and Mr. C. F. Car-
ter selected portion of the Ironbark leases, this being the
start of Linton. Within a few years the late Mr. O. H.
Carter and Mr. C. F. Carter bought Mr. Scholes’ in-
terests and in 1898 Rear-Admiral A. W. Carter acquired
Mr. C. F. Carter’s interests and went into partnership
with his brother. This association ceased in 1911, when
Mr. O. H. Carter, buying out his full share, became the
sole owner. He carried on the business of growing fine


Merino wool and the guidance of a select little stud of
Tasmanian blood until his death in 1923, when the pro-
perty and the stud went to his two sons, Mr. Thomas
Garden Carter, the elder brother, being general mana-
ger, and Mr. Philip James
Carter the joint manager and
stud master. Both are keen
experienced graziers of the
younger school, and have had a
rigid training.
Practically every part of the
run is in a state of advanced
improvement. It was no mean
task to raise the productivity of
such broken country, owing to
the enormous amount of timber
on it, but the qualities which
stamped so many of the men
to whom the industry owes
its existence, and which are seen in their successors, over-
came the difficulties and made possible the work that is
going on to-day.
When the present brothers commenced their regime it
was necessary to net and subdivide the whole of the
property, and areas of two to three thousand acres were
it has been money well spent, as witness the dry times of
1927, when the country at Linton, being in great condi-
tion, stood out in marked contrast to neighbouring pro-
perties which had been unable to cope with this problem.
A splendid natural supply
waters the property, the mam
stream being the Nangarah
Creek, already referred to.
This creek takes its head on
Linton and runs into the
Manilla River. The Welsh
Creek and numerous perennial
springs contribute to a thorough
system of water storage, which
is completed by several dams on
the main watercourse and fif-
teen wells equipped with the
latest up-to-date windmills.
These wonderful facilities were
not available to the earlier owners, it being, in fact,
of recent years only that such a valuable asset as water
within 30 ft. of the surface was found out. It is an
inexhaustible supply, and the utmost is being made of it.
Ringbarking on a big scale has thinned down the timber
on many of the hills, and certain areas are being treated
SPECIAL TWO-TOOTH STUD MERINO RAMS
PERA HOMESTEAD, THE RESIDENCE OF MR. T. G. CARTER
fenced off in preparation for a total extermination of
rabbits. In due time the gullies and hills were combed
out, all harbour was destroyed, and the rodents syste-
matically killed off. To-day there is no trouble with
rabbits, and whilst the work has cost thousands of pounds,
now. The timber mainly is appletree, box, stringy bark,
ironbark, and some gum, with a good supply of kurra-
jongs.
I be varieties of grass are those natural to the district,
and the pastures do not need the introduction of outside
LINTON, NEW SOUTH WALES


LINTON STATION BRED TWO-TCOTH MERINO WETHERS
STUD MERINO EWES AND
LAMBS ON LINTON
LINT ON, NE IV S O UT 11 W A LES


plants, for the growth on the mixture of
chocolate, red and black soil is most
luxuriant. After a fall of rain this
country responds in a marvellous
fashion, and even in a drought retains a
good amount of nutritious feeding. The
rainfall over Linton averages about
28 in.
The Carter brothers are as progres-
sive as they are keen, and use every
possible part of the flat lands for the
cultivation of lucerne. At one time
wheat and oats used to be grown, but
lucerne gives by far the best results.
During 1927 20,000 Merino sheep
were carried besides several hundred
head of cattle, all of which were in for-
ward to fat condition all the year. This,
considering the absence of rain, was
remarkably good, but is only the result
of careful administration and good
country. The lambing results further
prove the country, the October-Novem-
ber drop returning consistently 88 per
cent, of marked lambs every year.
The cattle, which are pure Durhams, are not bred as a
stud, although the breeding is from picked cows by
selected bulls. The animals are conspicuous by their
TWO-TOOTH LINTON STUD MERINO RAM NO. 6-28
splendid conformation and vigour, are a good size and
very nicely coloured. Bulls have been introduced to the
herd from the stud of the late Capt. Dangar, of Gost-
wyck, in the Armidale district.
GROUP OF STUD MERINO EWES
LIN TO N. NE IV S O UT II IV AL E S


LINTON BRED STUD
MERINO EWE NO. 24-53
LINTON BRED STUD
MERINO EWE NO. 24-62
LIN T 0 N, NE W SOU T II W ALES


THE PERA HOMESTEAD FROM
THE HOUSE PADDOCK, WITH
ITS WEALTH OF LUXURIANT
NATIVE GRASSES
LIN T 0 N, NE W S 0 UT II WAL E S


ON THE ROAD TO LINTON IS SEEN
THIS GUM TREE. GNARLED AND
TWISTED WITH AGE, IT STANDS
SENTINEL OVER THE RUNNING
WATERS OF NANGARAH CREEK
LINT O X, NE W SOU TII WAL E S


1 he owners established a Merino stud many years ago,
first under the management of Mr. David Sutherland,
who was appointed overseer in 1898, and general mana-
ger in 1907, retiring on account of age in 1913. Mr.
h. I). Cox, of Mudgee, then became manager, and held
that position until 1923, leaving to take a similar posi-
tion at Gostwyck. Ihe stud, although only small in
numbers, is very good. For a number of years rams were
used fiom the Brindley Park stud, when thev were pure
Tasmanian blood, and after the dispersal of that
stud the Linton sheep were maintained by rams from
Zara stud, being also pure Tasmanian blood. Since then
The wool is sold in Sydney, where it attracts strong
competition, for it is well grown, bulky, bright and long
in the staple, with a clean tip and pronounced character.
The number of bales is usually about 600, and there is
no doubt whatever that properties such as Linton deserve
to the full legislative encouragement and considerate
treatment, for upon them is the country mainly dependent
for its prosperity.
In 1917 it was found expedient to erect a second
homestead on Linton, and a pretty bungalow type of
residence was built, encircled by a spacious verandah.
Mr. T. G. Carter and his family live there. The new
CRUTCHING SHED
AND YARDS AT PERA
it has been found unnecessary to purchase rams from
outside.
i he stud are a shapely lot, showing uniformity, wide
backs, square hocks, and soft open faces. They grow a
true medium wool of great character, and the progeny
are worked to produce in the general flock a wool of fine
quality and long staple.
As weight cutters the Linton general flock sheep have
been improved by scientific handling from 6 lbs. 6 ozs.
in 1897 to 9j lbs. average per year since 1910, while the
1927 average was 9 lbs. 10 ozs. The clip is classed and
baled under the supervision of both Mr. T. G. and Mr.
P. J. Carter, who also do their own classing and mating
of the stud.
house is named Pera and rests on a well-chosen elevation
about 6 miles from Linton homestead. The nucleus of
a trim and beautiful garden has been formed by Mrs.
Carter, who is a keen horticulturist, and the house is
htted with everything required for modern comfort, while
from its windows a wonderful panorama of valleys and
bold bills is obtained.
'l'he Linton homestead, the residence of Mr. Phil
Carter and his family, is likewise situated overlooking a
glorious expanse of country. It was added to in 1905,
and has been kept up to a modern state. It has the latest
electric light plant, hygienic sewerage, and a large vege-
table garden, which supplies both homesteads. Quite a
noticeable feature about the environs of both homes is
LIN T 0 N, NE W SOU T II WAL E S


TYPICAL COUNTRY AROUND
THE PERA HOMESTEAD, WITH
LUCERNE FLATS IN FOREGROUND
LINTON COUNTRY, WITH WOOL-
SHED IN THE FOREGROUND
LINT O N, NE W S O UT II WAL E S


THE LINTON HOMESTEAD
LOOKING NORTH FROM PERA HOMESTEAD
LIN T 0 N, NE TV SOU T II TV AL E S


MR. T. G. CARTER
the orderly array of outbuildings, garages, &c., and the
white painted gates, fencing and telegraph poles. The
telephone is on to Barraba exchange.
Some little distance from Linton homestead is the wool-
shed, with its spacious floor, 12 stands of machines, and
cover for a large number of sheep. The new shearers’
quarters, dip and draining pens are all stamped with the
hallmark of efficient management. The shearing com-
mences about 19th September.
Mr. Thomas G. Carter, born in 1892 at his grand-
parents’ home at Tara, Woolbrook, on the Macdonald
River, was educated at The Armidale School before
beginning a pastoral career as jackeroo on Mt. Lindsay
Station under Air. Wilson. He spent two years there
and then went to Linton. In 1915 he enlisted with the
7th Regiment of Australian Light Horse, transferring to
infantry in Alay 1916, and went to France with the 46th
Battalion. Lie was made Ist Lieutenant and won the
Alilitary Cross for conspicuous bravery. Air. Carter
married Leila, daughter of Mr. W. C. Higginbotham,
of Armidale, in 1921, and the family consist of June
Llewellyn and Nancy Gwynneth. A member of the
local P.P. Board, he also takes a lively interest in the
welfare of the district.
His brother, Mr. Phil Carter, was born in 1897, and
went to the same school, going straight from there to
Linton in 1915 to take his brother’s place. Under the
able tuition of his father and Air. Fred Cox, he looked
after the stud and the property, becoming a proficient
sheepman. In 1926 he married Iris, daughter of Arch-
deacon and Mrs. Woodde, of Newcastle, and has a family
of one daughter, Helen Ann.
The late O. H. Carter and Rear-Admiral A. W.
Carter were sons of the Rev. T. G. Carter, vicar of
Linton, near Maidstone, England.
The first-named arrived in Australia early in 1878,
and spent two years at Gordonbrook Station on the
Clarence River. From 1880 until 1888 he was a member
of the staff of the Bank of New South Wales, rising to
the position of branch manager.
His brother, Rear-Admiral A. W. Carter, who had a
distinguished career in the Royal Navy, went to Linton
in the evening of his life, more for the peaceful surround-
ings than anything else. Joining the Navy on 15th
January, 1870, he was made Sub-Lieutenant on 20th
June, 1875, and full Lieutenant on 13th December, 1879.
MR. P. J. CARTER
LIN TO N, NE W SOU TII IV A LES


TYPICAL COUNTRY
He was promoted to Commander in 1894 and Captain in
1899, and retired with that rank on 28th January, 1905,
just thirty-five years after commencing his service. He
was made a Rear-Admiral on the retired list on sth
November, 1908. He maintained his association with
Linton until 1911, when he sold his interests and returned
to England, where he married, and now lives in complete
retirement at Bournemouth,
His life was marked with many events. He served
with the Naval Brigade in the Soudan and Nile Expedi-
tion for the relief of General Gordon in 1884-85, and
was awarded the Egyptian Medal with Nile Clasp, and
the Khedive Grand Star. He was also a Lieutenant in
EI.M.S. “Calliope” when that historic man-o’-war fought
her way out of Apia harbour in 1889, during a great
hurricane, by a splendid piece of seamanship on the part
of crew, and so escaped the fate of the other warships
caught by the hurricane. Lieutenant Carter received
special mention from the Admiralty for the part he played
in this epic feat.
PANORAMIC VIEW TO WESTWARD OVERLOOKING THE LINTON HOMESTEAD
LINTON, NEW SOUTH WALES


PLUMTHORPE, BARRABA, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of N. W. Burdekin, Esq.
THE production of finest quality Merino wools in
Australia has been a subject of controversy for
many years between those engaged on the manu-
facturing side abroad, and particularly in England, and
those concerned on this side. While the bone of conten-
tion seems to be that it is not as profitable to grow fine
Plumthorpe is located in undulating country, ten miles
west from Barraba, and comprises an area of 18,700 acres
freehold, the formation being mostly basalt and limestone,
which, combined with a healthy climate, a rainfall
averaging 24 in., and an altitude running up to 2200 ft.
above sea level, on the top of the Nandewar range, is
THE HOMESTEAD
as broader wools, the fact remains that out of an annual
total Australian wool clip of up to 3 million bales the
percentage of superfine qualities is very low.
This important phase of the industry is in the hands of
a comparatively few growers, some of whom own pro-
perties around Barraba, an important town lying about
320 miles to the north-west of Sydney. Amongst the
more prominent of these superfine wool producing
stations is Plumthorpe, owned by Mr. Norman Weekes
Burdekin.
ideal in every respect for growing superb superfine
M erino wool.
The property came into Mr. Burdekin’s possession in
1916, when he purchased the freehold from the executors
of the late Mr. Plumpton Wilson, his brother-in-law, a
successful grazier, who took up the area originally from
the Crown in a number of selections many years ago.
These he consolidated and devoted to sheep grazing, and
ran a few cattle to eat down the excess feed as well.
When the country changed hands it required a lot of


treatment before the maximum produc-
tivity could be reached, specially with
regard to clearing off superfluous timber
and the eradication of rabbits, which had
become a serious pest in the district.
Mr. Burdekin has since expended
many thousands of pounds on the im-
provements, but was spared the neces-
sity of ringbarking the larger areas.
That work had been commenced prior to
1916 and only called for the cleaning-
up process, which has been very
thorough.
In dealing with rabbits the owner,
after many years of trapping,
poisoning, fumigating, digging,
&c., and being no further ahead
in exterminating, decided to
make a clean sweep of all har-
bour. The property has now
been subdivided into convenient
netted areas, about 20. A
start was made by clearing a
block in the centre of the run,
and taking lines of netting from
that to the boundary, cart
wheel fashion. As each section
was cleared the burrows were
dug in. The improvement in
pastures and stock has been
most marked, the run now
being quite clear of the pest.
Plumthorpe is exceptionally
well watered by natural springs,
TYPICAL STUD EWE
GROUP OF FINE-WOOL RAMS
GROUP OF STUD EWES
which course their way down
the gullies, as well as by part
of the Upper Manilla River, a
never-failing stream that flows
past the homestead and through
Barraba into the Manilla and
Namoi Rivers. This surface
supply is augmented by several
wells and sub-artesian bores,
from which permanent storage
is obtained by means of trough-
ing and iron tanks, equipped
with up-to-date mills.
Naturally the flock of
Merino sheep is a very high-
class one. It was formed
originally by Mr. P. Wilson
upon the finest wool type of
Alerino it was possible to secure
to suit the country and to grow
the desired quality of wool. The
original blood used was the old Havilah
type, and the sheep were in a progres-
sive state when taken over rvith the
property. Mr. Burdekin continued on
the same lines, and the stud and flock,
now self-contained for over 30 years by
careful selection, has never lost the good
qualities and fineness of staple charac-
teristic of the old-time Havilah, though
the heavy wrinkles and dark tips have
been mostly eliminated, the dominating
type being plain bodied with an open
face and a AA’ell-folded neck. At present
there are in the stud about 800 eAves of
FEU MTIIO R F E. NE W S() UT II WAL E S


A PASTORAL SCENE
TEN MONTHS OLD RAM LAMBS
PLUM rIIOR P E, NE W S O UT II W ALES


all ages, and a good turnover each year is obtained from
the sale of flock rams.
1 hroughout the stud as well as the flock there is a
most marked uniformity, the conformation of the sheep
being good, the carriage graceful, while the strong legs
and good heads are prominent. The fleece is of a fairly
long staple type, very bright and soft, free and full of
character, and the tip carries just sufficient condition to
protect the growth.
85 per cent, of marked lambs. The shearing commences
during the second week of September each year.
The woolshed, which is situated a mile from the home-
stead, contains ten stands of machines. There is a large
area of cover, in and under the shed, while all the en-
closures and, of course, the engine room are kept in perfect
order.
The provision of new shearers’ accommodation was
completed in 1927 to come under the requirements of
VIEW FROM THE WELL-LAID-OUT PLUMTHORPE GARDEN, WITH ITS SHOWING OF SPRING FLOWERS
About 18,000 sheep are put through at shearing time,
when most satisfactory weights are averaged every year,
fhe 1926 shearing at Plumthorpe averaged 8-j lbs.,
which is a good performance when it is taken into con-
sideration that the percentage of young sheep included
was heavy.
Lambing on Plumthorpe takes place off shears about
the beginning of October, and invariably results in 82 to
the Act, and very comfortable quarters were built of
iron, wood and cement; the pity is that they must remain
idle for about eleven months out of the }^ear.
Mr. Burdekin dips the sheep soon after they are shorn,
great caie being taken m this branch of work. Ample
provision is made for draining and cool shaded yards are
available for drying.
In Mr. W. Simpson, Mr. Burdekin has the services
FLU M rII O R FE, NE W S O U T H WA EES


A GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD
TYPICAL GRAZING COUNTRY ON PLUMTHORPE
461


A BEAUTIFUL PICTURE OF THE
UPPER MANILLA RIVER AS IT WENDS
ITS COURSE BELOW THE HOMESTEAD
P L UMT II O R PE. NE IV S O UT I! IF A LE S


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE UPPER
MANILLA RIVER AS IT FLOWS
ON THROUGH THE STATION
PLUMTHORPE, NEW SOU TEI WALE S


and assistance of a very capable overseer who started as
a boy on the property, and has been there for upwards
of 30 years. Mr. B urdekin gives preference to the em-
ployment of returned soldiers wherever possible, and in
as practicable a manner as he can, looks after the welfare
of all his employees. As there are about one dozen
married men on the place, a school has been provided for
their children, while each family possesses a comfortable
and well-built home.
homestead to conform to more modern ideas, and has
installed a hot and cold water service, electric light, and
the most up-to-date conveniences. The furnishings are
exquisite, and a feature of the interior of the home is the
choice collection of old china, carved ivories and valuable
pictures, in oils and water colours purchased by Mr.
Burdekin in various parts of Europe. He also retains
many of the treasures from the old family home in
Sydney.
A VIEW OF MR. BURDEKIN'S HOME
The homestead has been built on a commanding site
overlooking some charming scenery with parklike sur-
roundings. The neat and compact group of buildings is
surrounded by lawns and gardens, hedges and shade trees.
M rs. Burdekin takes a keen interest in maintaining the
wealth of blooms and foliage, which in springtime make
a wonderful showing.
Mr. B urdekin added to and rebuilt portions of the
In further reference to the clip, the wool is known to
buyers as super wool of very fine quality, well grown,
invariably in good condition, opening up nicely, free, soft
and attractive, and of a general trend of 74’s to 80’s
upwards spinning quality, while the crimp is beautiful.
A feature of the clip is its evenness of quality, whether
locks, bellies or pieces, the whole of the offerings coming
through on the superfine grade. Frequently record prices
FLU M THOR FE, NEW SOU T H WALES


TWO VIEWS OF THE TASTEFUL DRAWING ROOM IN THE PLUMTHORPE HOMESTEAD
FLU M TII O RPE, NE IV SOU T H WALES


ANOTHER PICTURE OF THE GARDEN, SHOWING THE NORTH SIDE OF THE HOUSE
have been made in all lines.
As season succeeds season the Plumthorpe Hock be-
comes even more uniform, and a corresponding increase
in quality takes place. Despite what is said to the con-
trary about finest wools being unprofitable, Mr.
Burdekin, as well as others, are demonstrating in the
clearest way that the production of fine wool does
pay.
“The Sydney Morning Herald” reports 4/12/26: —
“The Plumthorpe clip from Barraba, of world-wide re-
pute owing to its usually superfine quality, changed hands
at:—Fleece
pieces, 24^d.; bellies, 2Qd.; locks, Is£d.” At this sale
152 bales of fleeces averaged over per lb.
Mr. Norman Weekes Burdekin was born at Sydney in
1868, and is the second son of the late Mr. Bossley
Burdekin, and the eldest surviving of a very well-known
family. He was educated privately and spent the early
part of his life abroad. Returning to Australia in 1900
he began his career as a grazier with the purchase of a
property near Grabben Gullen, N.S.W., and in 1906
acquired Malvern Downs Station and adjoining pro-
perties in Central Queensland, which covered 1500 square
miles of country. He sold these properties in 1914 to
Messrs. Scott Bros., Victoria.
It was largely the effects of indifferent health that
prompted Mr. Burdekin to realise his Queensland pro-
perties in 1914. He came to Sydney in that year, living
at Point Piper, and in 1916, as above mentioned, became
the owner of Plumthorpe. In 1908 he married Marjorie,
youngest daughter of the late Mr. W. A. Wilson, of
Rosedale, Murrurundi, N.S.W.
Mr. Burdekin takes an interest in the welfare of the
district, but specially does he concentrate upon his hobby,
the production of superfine wools, and out of knowledge
gained in the hard school of experience he has developed
a type which can claim to be one of the best classes of
Merino wool grown anywhere in the world.
PLUM THOR P E, NEW SOUTH WALES


THE DINING ROOM AND VERANDAH
PLUM Tll 0 R PE, NE W S O UT 11 WAL E S


THIS BEAUTIFUL OVERMANTEL
SETS OFF A FEW OF THE ART
TREASURES IN THE POSSESSION
OF MR. N. W. BURDEKIN
P LUM TIIOR P E, NE W SOU T H IV AL E S


BENGALLA, MUSWELLBROOK, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Property of J. H. Keys, Esq.
BENGALLA STATION occupies a rich section of
the Hunter River Valley near the town of Mus-
ellbrook, New South Wales, being situated
two miles down the river and four miles by road. The
approach to the property is via the Wybong-Merriwa
road.
Intersected by the railway line from Muswellbrook to
Merriwa, and flanked by the deep broad reaches of the
Hunter River, Bengalla comprises 8000 acres freehold of
alluvial river flats and undulating country in which out-
crops of sandstone are in evidence. It is timbered with
galla from his father, the late Mr. John Hudson Keys.
The run was built up from a grant of 2500 acres made
by the Crown to the late Captain Wright earlv in the
twenties, and had reached a total area of 14,000 acres
when the late Mr. J. H. Keys purchased the freehold in
1853. Subsequently the father of the present owner
brought up the area still further until the property com-
prised 20,000 acres of most beautiful fattening lands,
these, however, being released partly in 1911 for closer
settlement purposes until only 8000 acres are left.
In the days of Mr. J. H. Keys’ grandfather, a property
BENGALLA HOUSE
ironbark, kurrajong and native gum trees, the majesty
of the ironbark being a feature of the run, and splendidly
grassed with clover, crowfoot, couch and prairie grasses,
and a little Kentucky blue grass and paspalum. The
whole of the country being highly improved, Bengalla is
devoted successfully to the fattening of cattle, besides
carrying on a first class dairy industry.
The present owner, Mr. John Hudson Keys, came into
possession of the property upon the death of his father in
1909, the late Mr. R. T. Keys, who was one of the
State’s most progressive graziers, having inherited Ben-
of 10,000 acres named Rossgoll was attached to Bengalla,
and worked in conjunction with it. This section became
the property of one of the late Mr. R. T. Keys’ brothers,
Mr. Irving Blain Keys, who disposed of it and resided in
Sydney, where he died in 1919.
The amount of constructional work that has been
carried out on Bengalla is extensive and of a high order.
Moreover, the appointments are well maintained, whilst
no opportunity is missed that will lead to the introduc-
tion of new ideas in the interests of the irrigation or
dairying section of the property.


A GENERAL VIEW OF THE RIVER FLATS FROM OLD BENGALLA HILL
A VIEW TOWARDS MUSWELLBROOK
OVER THE IRRIGATION FARMS, SHOWING
NEW PUMPING PLANT ON RIVER BANK
BE N G ALLA, NE W SOU T H W A LES


A RELIC OF THE OLD DAYS-THE STONE STORE AT BENGALLA,
WITH THE DAIRIES IN THE DISTANCE
The late Mr. R. T. Keys initiated a scheme of dairy
farming in 1897 on the share system, and five years later
introduced one of the first pumping stations on the
Hunter River, a 20 h.p. Ruston Proctor steam plant,
with centrifugal pump, this irrigating plant being capable
of raising 90,000 gallons of water per hour from the
river. The land was graded and set out into blocks, and
a drainage system established,
so that any block could be
watered by flooding, and
through the succeeding seasons
lucerne was grown with splen-
did results. About an average
of nine cuts per year has been
attained, and the yield has
panned out at the rate of \\
tons to the acre ever since the
plots were established.
There are two farms now
irrigated and in full swing, the
original farm having been re-
duced to about 20 acres and the
other containing about 25 acres.
Mr. Keys conserves the lucerne
hay for the dairies, and keeps
on hand a supply of something
like 200 tons all the year round,
but selling a portion from time
to time when the market and
situation warrant it.
After a quarter of a cen-
tury’s excellent service, Mr.
Keys discarded the 20 h.p.
steam engine and centrifugal
pump in 1927, and has sub-
stituted an up-to-date 66 h.p.
crude oil Tangye engine, with
the latest pumping equipment,
intending to operate the irri-
gated areas on more scientific
lines.
Elsewhere on Bengalla there
is a plentiful supply of water,
for this property has still a six-
mile frontage to the Hunter
River, and also there are six
large iron tanks all equipped
with troughing and windmills.
Further, in places good dams
have been constructed, from
which a syphon system fills the
adjoining troughs.
Rabbits having made their appearance about 25 years
ago, the problem of keeping them in check has been
firmly tackled, and every known means of eradication
has been tried, so through all that time the place has
been kept fairly free of the pest. Although fortunately
the vermin have never been a very serious menace, Mr.
Keys has shown that he shares the views of many others
BEN G A L LA, NE JV SOU TII IV A LES


that the total extermination of rabbits from country
which is required for pastoral purposes is a question
which must be tackled thoroughly and in earnest. His
father did a great deal as a member of the Advisory
Committee of the Rabbit Destruction Fund to aid Dr.
Danysz, of the Pasteur Institute, and his son, M.
Latapie, in their experiments at Broughton Island,
N.S.W ~ which were commenced in 1906.
Since his father’s death, Mr. Keys has replaced nearly
all the old split fencing on the property with the modern
design of top rail and wires, and in some places steel
corkscrew posts are now being tried out. The boundaries
are all netted and the estate has been subdivided by net-
ting fences.
ably by the late Mr. R. T. Keys, and is surrounded by
well-kept lawns, shrubberies and shade trees.
There have been seven dairy farms on Bengalla on the
share system since 1915, each dairy milking on the average
about seventy-five cows. Ihe Muswellbrook Co-operati\e
Dairy Company Limited, of which Mr. Keys is a dilec-
tor, absorbs the output from these dairies, and is fast
becoming a great institution and a big factor in the
supplies to the metropolitan markets, for besides turning
out nearly 20 tons of butter every week, it is maintaining
the despatch of milk to Sydney and Newcastle.
The herd reflects credit on the owner in its splendid
all-round high quality. He has gone in both for pure
Jerseys and Dairy Shorthorns, and although a number
DAIRY COWS GRAZING ON THE FERTILE FLATS
In the erection of housing for separating plants, bails,
yards, &c., the requirements of the Act have been carried
out to perfection, water laid on to each dairy, and ample
provision made generally for the production of cream
under hygienic conditions. Each dairyman is provided
with a comfortable six-roomed cottage, with verandah,
most of them having their own garden plots.
Bengalla possesses an imposing brick homestead, erected
in the rambling bungalow style by the late J. H. Keys,
and can be seen from the Denman-Muswellbrook road,
standing on a splendid elevation overlooking a wide ex-
panse of the Hunter Valley. It was added to consider-
of stud Jersey bulls were introduced some time ago,
experience has caused him to go in more now for Dairy
Shorthorns, and some magnificent animals are numbered
among the stock on Bengalla to-day.
Mr. Keys takes advantage of the good seasons to fatten
cattle, and it speaks for itself that around about 400
head can be supported in good seasons in addition to the
seven or eight hundred cows which are carried regularly.
Also each year numbers of pigs are fattened on the pro-
perty, the strains favoured being Tamworth and Berk-
shire, with a preponderance of the latter breed.
Mr. John H udson Keys is the only son of the late Mr.
BENGA L L A , NK W SOU T II JV A EES


A GROUP OF DAIRY COWS ON
THEIR WAY TO THE PASTURES
A VIEW THROUGH THE WILLOWS
OF THE PUMPING STATION
NEAR THE HOMESTEAD
BENGA L L A, NE JV SOU Tll WAL E S


THE HOME-
STEAD AND
OUTBUILDINGS
A VIEW OF THE BENGALLA
COUNTRY FROM OLD BEN-
GALLA HILL, LOOKING
TOWARDS EDINGLASSIE
BEN G A LEA, N E IV SOU TII IV A LES


GENERAL VIEW
OF THE FLATS
A FRONT VIEW OF THE BEN-
GALLA HOMESTEAD FROM
THE HOME PADDOCKS
BEN G A L LA, N E W 8 0 U TII IV A LES


HAYSHED AT THE HOMESTEAD
Richard Thom Keys, and was born at Bengalla in 1880.
After attending The King’s School, Parramatta, he spent
two years of study at the Hawkesbury Agricultural
College, N.S.W., and went to the property at the end of
that period to undertake the active management under
the supervision of his father.
He finds time apart from the affairs at Bengalla to take
a lively interest in the welfare of the district, and is on
the committee of the local hospital and of the Returned
Soldiers’ Club, besides being an enthusiastic supporter of
local sporting bodies. He is also vice-
president of the Upper Hunter Pastoral
and Agricultural Association.
His main efforts, however, are direc-
ted to the practical and progressive
management of the property, besides
which he has followed the progress of
the chilled meat trade overseas, believ-
ing firmly that this method has a
decided advantage over frozen ship-
ments.
In 1893 the late Mr. R. T. Keys took a
trip abroad to England and America.
He was much impressed with the won-
derful market for beef and mutton in
densely-populated Great Britain. The
Argentine and other countries, with
their chilled meat, found a ready sale
for their products. He recognised the
great disadvantages under which Aus-
tralia lay, chief among which was the
great distance and the tropics to cross, which
made it imperative to have the beef and mutton
frozen.
Fat cattle were selling in New South Wales in those
days at about £5 per head, so on his return he, with other
pastoralists, attempted to found a live export trade. A
trial shipment was made, and though some magnificent
show animals were sent, the experiment was not alto-
gether successful, chiefly owing to the want of proper
shipping accommodation and the long sea voyage, though
A PLEASANT
PROSPECT FROM
THE SHADE OF
THE FRONT
VERANDAH
BENGA L L A, NE IV SOU TII WAL E S


VIEW FROM THE SITE OF THE OLD BENGALLA HOMESTEAD, NOW A STOCKMAN’S COTTAGE
A CORNER OF THE GARDEN, SHOWING SUMMER HOUSE AND BOTTLE TREE
B EN G A LEA. N E W SOU T H W A LES


TWO VIEWS OF
THE BENGALLA
HOMESTEAD
DRAWING ROOM
BEN G A L LA, N E W SOU TII TV A LES


the cattle sold up to £3O
per head in England. It
Avas considered a smaller
and younger class of
steers would be more suc-
cessful, if handled. An
attempt was made to get
Queensland breeders to
handle and breed for ex-
port. However, after a
few more shipments the
experiments were eventu-
ally discontinued.
The late Mr. R. I'.
Keys was born at St.
Helliers, Muswellbrook,
in 1850, this property
then being managed by
his father for the late
Colonel Dumaresq, who
was one of the first superintendents of the A.A. Com-
pany Limited. He was educated first at Muswellbrook
and later at the High School at West Maitland, from
which he entered the local branch of the Bank of Austral-
asia. Completing this commercial experience, he under-
took a thorough training in pastoral affairs at the direc-
tion of his father, and soon became identified with any
movement set on foot with the idea of pushing ahead,
through the pastoral industry, the general progress of
his district and the State. His active enthusiasm had a
lot to do with the betterment of conditions for the man
on the land. As a member of the Pastures Protection
THE LATE MR. J. H. KEYS
OLD BENGALLA HOUSE IN 1870
De Loitte, of Balmain, Sydney,
and their family comprised the pre-
sent owner of Bengalla and three
daughters, M rs. Bruce Campbell,
of Cambalong Station, Bombala,
N.S.W.; Mrs. C. J. Withycombe,
Barwon Vale, Walgett; and Miss
Mattie Carruthers Keys.
Since the death of the late Mr.
R. T. Keys in Japan on 17th April,
1909, the citizens of Muswell-
brook have erected handsome
memorial gates at the entrance to
Gerald Park, Muswellbrook, in
recognition of the valuable services
rendered by him to the district.
The late Mr. John Hudson
Keys, grandfather of Bengalla’s
present owner, hailed from County
Fermanagh, Ireland, and arrived
Boards’ Council of Ad-
vice, the Stockowners’
Association of New South
Wales, the local Shire
Council, and the com-
mittee of the Rabbit De-
struction Fund, president
of the Upper Hunter P.
and A. Association for
nineteen } 7 ears, and of the
M uswellbrook Hospital
and P. and A. Society’s
Union, and occupying a
seat on the Licensing
Board, the late Mr. R. T.
Keys, J.P., enjoyed a wide
respect throughout the
country, and as a judge
of cattle he was a recog-
nised authority.
He also helped to pioneer irrigation of the fertile
environs of the Hunter River, where large numbers of
small farmers are settled to-day.
Throughout his connection with the affairs of agricul-
tural and pastoral associations, the late Mr. R. T. Keys
was a strong advocate of a policy to compel judges to
state their full reasons when casting a decision at shows,
with the idea of giving these exhibitions a more educa-
tional character than they possessed. Single judging at
shows was also one of his most outspoken opinions.
In 1877 the late Mr. R. T. Keys married Emily
Margaret De Loitte, the daughter of the late Captain
THE LATE MR. R. T. KEYS
BENGA L L A, NE W S 0 U T H WA LES


in New South Wales in 1837. He married a Miss
Hetherington, whom he met on board the vessel bv which
he travelled, and who was making the journey to keep
house for the late Reverend Irving Hetherington, the first
Presbyterian M inister in the Singleton district, then
known at Patrick’s Plains.
There was a family of four sons, and one of his
daughters married Rev. J. D. Langley, late Bishop of
Bendigo, retired. Now in his ninety-second year, Bishop
Langley was for over thirty years incumbent at St.
Phillip’s, Sydney, and now lives in Melbourne.
The late Mr. J. H. Keys owned Bonshaw Station, on
the days before railways, so he found his way up the
valley of the Hunter per horse-drawn vehicle, eventually
settling at St. Helliers with Colonel Dumaresq.
In the management of the latter’s various properties,
the only means of transit was by horseback, so he often
had long rides from one place to another of 200 miles or
more. The country was all open in those days, and he
would camp out when night fell. Bushrangers roamed
the country then, but as far as is known he was un-
molested.
Many years ago he was instrumental in assisting the
immigration to this part of New South Wales of many
A COPY OF INSCRIPTION APPEARING OVER THE GRAVE OF THE LATE LIEUT.-COL. H. DUMARESQ
the Maclntyre River, called such after the home of a
connection of his wife’s people in Scotland, Bonshaw
Towers, the seat of the Irving clan. He also became
interested in other station properties besides Bonshaw
and those he managed for Colonel Dumaresq, Goonyan
and Mundowie being two large holdings which he pos-
sessed in conjunction with his brother-in-law, the late
Mr. William Hetherington.
On his arrival in the colony, then in its infancy, he
proceeded to Morpeth, on the Hunter River, a town of
some importance as the head of navigation. This was in
families from the north of Ireland, and the descendants
of these people are to-day to be found amongst the
prosperous settlements along the Hunter Valley.
The late Mr. Keys also tried to establish trout in the
Hunter, and introduced quantities from the north of
Ireland, but the result was not altogether successful.
The death of the first owner of Bengalla took place in
1887, a pioneer of the best type, to which Australia owes
so much. Thus three generations have combined to
maintain an important place in the primary production
of the State.
BE N GALL A, N L IV S O U T H WA LLS


COBRAN, BEABULA, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Mesdames Sims and Cooper
COBRAN Estate, the property of Mesdames A. M.
_ Sims and M. Cooper, is situated on the banks
of the Murrumbidgee River, at Beabula, 23
miles east of Hay.
1 he onginal Cobran was located near Deniliqum, and
was purchased by Mesdames Sims and Cooper in 1918,
but upon the completion of the Moama-Balranald line this
property was subdivided for closer settlement, and the
owners had to seek a new home for the stud.
Cobran comprises a rectangular block of 32,000 acres,
in which there is a slight predominance of red over black
soil plains, the chief characteristic of the country being
the open, sparsely timbered plains, typical of Riverina.
On the southern country the property has a 4-mile
frontage to the Murrumbidgee River, heavily timbered
with red gum and grey box, which affords excellent
shelter during the summer months.
Idle pastures comprise the best of grasses and herbage,
THE HOMESTEAD
In seeking a fresli property most careful consideration
was given to the selection of country that would still
further enhance the high reputation which the stud had
then attained, and it was considered that no better land
could be secured for this purpose than a portion of
Illilawa station at Beabula, adjoining Uardry.
Towards the end of 1926 the entire stud was removed
to its new home, which is now known as Cobran, the
owners having decided to retain the name under which
the stud has been so long and favourably known.
the principal varieties being barley grass, trefoil, white
top, crowfoot, and wild oat, while summer varieties in-
clude umbrella grass, &c., in addition to salt weed and
cotton bush. The district rainfall averages 14 in.
1 here were very few improvements on the property
when it was purchased by the present owners, but a
considerable sum has since been expended on fencing,
woolshed, yards, homestead, and the various other im-
provements necessary to the efficient working of a stud
property.


THREE STUD SIRES
USED IN THE COBRAN
STUD-ALL SONS OF
THE STUD RAM 16.10
The estate is subdivided into 35 paddocks, ranging in
area from 2700 to 100 acres, the whole being securely
enclosed by a wire netted fence. In all, 86 miles of
new fencing have been erected by Mesdames Sims and
Cooper, comprising 36 miles of wire netted fencing, and
50 miles of subdivisional fencing. To minimise fire risk,
iron “H and “ 1 posts have been used in the erection
of the whole.
In addition to the frontage to the Murrumbidgee
River, the water supply is augmented by 13 wells and
bores, eight of which were sunk by the present owners,
a permanent supply of fresh water being obtained in each
case at an average depth of 97 ft. The bores are equipped
with Alston windmills, and each bore waters from two
to three paddocks, thus every paddock on the property is
supplied with permanent water.
On the frontage country an area of 1200 acres has
been subdivided into 12 small stud paddocks, in each of
which a 500-yard tank has been excavated. These tanks
are filled by means of channels from the river, where a
10-in. steam driven centrifugal pump is installed. This
plant will also be used to irrigate an area situated in the
vicinity of the stud paddocks, which has been surveyed
and ploughed ready for levelling.
STUD EWES ON IRRIGATION CHANNEL
COBRA V, A r EIE SOU TII IV AL E S


CYPRUS PINE COUNTRY
RESERVE MERINO RAMS BRED IN THE COBRAN STUD RETURNING FROM WATERING AT THE MURRUMBIDGEE
C()BR A N. NK ir S 0 UT // IV AL E S


GROUP OF FOUR-TOOTH COBRAN-BRED STUD RAMS
1 he homestead, which is just completed, stands on a
slight eminence facing the Murrumbidgee River, and is a
commodious modern dwelling, well built of concrete
brick, and equipped with septic system, and hot and cold
water. It is connected by telephone with the Hay Ex-
change. Ihe refrigerating and lighting plants are housed
in one block, contiguous to the main building. The water
supply for the homestead, garden, and men’s quarters is
drawn from the Murrumbidgee, while rain water tanks
are also provided.
At some little distance from the homestead, comfort-
able quarters of concrete brick have been erected for the
permanent station hands, and a weatherboard cottage has
been provided for the overseer. In passing it may be
GROUP OF FOUR-TOOTH COBRAN-BRED STUD EWES
C()BR A N, NE W S()U T 11 JV AL E S


TYPICAL RIVERINA COUNTRY
A GLIMPSE OF THE COBRAN WOOL SHED ON THE BANK OF THE MURRUMBIDGEE
C()BR A N, NK IV S() U7’ II IV AL E S


PLACID WATERS
OF THE MURRUM-
BIDGEE RIVER
A FLOCK OF YOUNG MERINO EWES ON THE FRONTAGE AT COBRAN
C()BR A N. NE IV SOU T 11 IV AL E S


THIS STATELY RIVER RED GUM HAS
ACTED AS A LAND BEACON FOR MANY
A RIVER STEAMER MAKING THIS
BEND IN THE MURRUMBIDGEE
C()nR A N. NE IF S O UT II IF AL E S


WOOLSHED AND SHEARERS' QUARTERS
noted that the concrete bricks used to build the home-
stead and men’s quarters were made on the property from
the river sand.
A boundary rider’s cottage has been erected on the
northern end of the run at a distance of twelve miles
from the homestead, to which it is connected by telephone.
A set of yards has been built to facilitate the handling
of sheep on this portion of the property.
The woolshed, which is situated on the river frontage,
is fitted with ten Wolseley machines driven by an 8 h.p.
kerosene engine, and has shed room for 1200 sheep.
Sheep yards of suitable dimensions are provided, also
foot-rot bath and “walk-in” sheep dip, both of concrete
brick. Huts provide accommodation for 20 men.
A set of yards and a shed containing the necessary pens,
vermin proof bins, &c., for the housing and feeding of
stud sheep have been erected in a position convenient to
the stud paddocks.
Stock is trucked at Beabula siding, on the south-west
line, which intersects the property about four miles
north of the homestead.
The present Cobran stud was formed by taking over
portion of the original Cobran stud when the property
was purchased hy Mesdames Sims and Cooper in 1918,
since which date the classing has been under the control
of Mr. W. C. Carrodus.
In 1919 two stud rams were selected at Murgha, viz.,
Nos. 16-10 and 16-44. No. 16-10, who was a direct
descendant of “838,” was a magnificent sheep, of great
size, shape and constitution, carrying a splendid fleece of
true strong wool, perfect in character, length, colour and
style, and he has stamped himself on his progeny. A
number of the leading sires in use in the stud to-day
were sired by No. 16-10, notably Nos. 23-6 and 23-36,
these two rams being very like their sire in every way.
Also in 1919 650 guineas was paid at the Sydney sales
STATION HANDS’ QUARTERS
COBR A N. NE W 8 0 UT II IV AL E 8


NORTH SIDE OF THE HOMESTEAD, WITH RIVER GUMS IN BACKGROUND
THE OVERSEER’S COTTAGE
C()IIR A N, NE IV S 0 UT II JV AL E S


TYPICAL COBRAN-BRED STUD
RAM, ANOTHER SON OF THE
STUD RAM 16-10. NOTE
NEAT AND SUBSTANTIAL
YARD FENCE AT BACK
for “500” from the Austin Wanganella consignment.
This was the highest price paid at the sales that year.
“500” was used for a season in the stud, and was then
sold to Haddon Rig, from where he was repurchased a
year later. Unfortunately he died soon afterwards. He
left some excellent progeny.
A high price was also paid for a Boonoke ram at the
Sydney sales in 1920. This ram was known as the
Prince’s Exhibition ram, having been shown by the pro-
prietors of Boonoke at the special exhibition show at
Melbourne in honour of the visit of the Prince of Wales.
He was a very compact sheep and carried a beautiful
fleece of great density, colour and style, with wonderful
character. He has left his mark in the stud, and every-
thing sired by him carries the same excellent covering.
In 1924 two high class rams were purchased from the
Haddon Rig consignment to the Sydney sales, and also
an extra special ram was purchased at Haddon Rig, for
STUD EWES IN THE RIVER PADDOCK
C()nR A N, N K //' 6’ () UT U IF AL E S


THE ASPECT
FROM THE SUB-
STANTIALLY-
BUILT FRONT
VERANDAH
COBRAN'S MODERN HOMESTEAD, BUT RECENTLY BUILT
THE PANELLED
ENTRANCE
HALL USED
AS A LOUNGE
C()BR A N, NE W S 0 UT H IV AL E S


MR. W. C. CARRODUS
which 1000 guineas was paid. Since then other high
class rams have been purchased, notably, a Bundemar
ram carrying a beautiful fleece, and an extra special
Austin Wanganella ram.
All these rams were specially selected for their length,
character, colour and style of covering, in order to keep
up the reputation which Cobran has always had of being
one of the best Riverina clips, while at the same time,
conformation has not been neglected.
Of the sires bred in the stud in use at present, Nos.
23-6 and 23-36, both by No. 16-10, are very big sheep
with good fronts, broad level backs, and carrying excel-
lent fleeces of true strong wool of high character, good
length, colour and density.
No. 24-1 is by Murgha No. 16-44. This is a big
sheep, with excellent front, of great constitution, and
carries a true medium fleece, of good length, great density,
and very high character.
No. 24-40 is by No. 20-17, by No. 16-44. He is also
a big sheep, long, with good front, level back and great
constitution, with a true medium fleece, excellent in
every w T ay.
COBR A N, NE IV S() UT H IF A LES


KOOMOOLOO, STURT VALE AND WAHROONGA,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The Properties of I. J. Warnes, Esq.
BLRRA BL RRA district of South Australia, which
flourished in the sixties as the first copper mining
centre in the Commonwealth, has long since been
noted as a leading centre of the State’s pastoral industry.
Around Kooringa and its neighbouring old settlements
are some noteworthy holdings, among which Koomooloo
Station is not only of interest as a wool-growing proposi-
prising son, Mr. I. J. Warnes, the present owner of the
property.
Koomooloo embraces 650 square miles of good pastoral
plain country to-day, and all of it is within a 10-in. rain-
fall area. The chief obstacle all along to a better carry-
ing capacity than a sheep to 10| acres has been a scarcity
of water, for while the run now is safeguarded in that
WAHROONGA HOMESTEAD, LEIGHTON, THE RESIDENCE OF MR. WARNES AND FAMILY
tion, but its history is written deep into the pages of self-
sacrifice, set-backs, courage, enterprise, and success.
Truly, factors which were the foundation of Australia’s
biggest primary industry.
Fhe progress made from a humble start with ten
M erino ewes and a ram on the leasehold, Ihe Royal,
in 1862 to the production of 1306 bales of purebred
Merino wool— nearly half a million lbs.—off 40,800
grown sheep in 1927, is surely a fine record of achieve-
ment worthy of the late Thomas Warnes and his enter-
respect, a tremendous amount of silt and salt has im-
peded boring operations of the last forty years.
The late Thomas Warnes took up Koomooloo in 1867
at a rental of 2s. 6d. an acre. In 1869 it became a
pastoral lease, and in due course the Dustholes and Sturt
Vale were embraced by the one run. After the Resump-
tion of Lands Act took its toll in 1888, when the large
estates were cut up in 15,000 and 20,000 acre blocks—
but to fail in its purpose, for many of the areas reverted
to the old ownership—only portions of the above-men


tioned leases were re-
tained. These were
squared up, and a vigor-
ous policy of improve-
ment embarked upon.
Princess Royal was
sold to the McCulloch
family a few years
before the death of
Thomas Warnes in
1884, and following
upon two } r ears of
trustee management
Mr. I. J. Wa rnes took
over the running of
the property. In 1897
the wool clip amounted
to 67 bales of wool,
which realised £lO a
bale, and the sheep
cut an average of 8 lbs.
In 1922 Mr. Warnes and his brother, who died in
1927, went into partnership, and until recently the
firm was known as Koomooloo Limited. That company
has been wound up voluntarily. Mr. Warnes has taken
his sons into partnership, and the firm in future will be
known as Messrs. I. J. Warnes and Sons.
On those big spaces of saltbush, bluebush, spear grass,
and edible scrub, known as the eastern plains, activities
must be conducted on a big scale, for long distances are
the rule, and water for stock demands prolonged atten-
tion. Dams, wells and bores are the source of supply,
but frequently one or
the other gives out.
The bores at Koomoo-
loo are sub-artesian,
and vary from 20 to
500 ft., giving fair
to good stock water.
There are 10 wells, and
9 in. of rain is about
the annual average.
For fattening pur-
poses the country is not
considered very good,
but it grows a wool of
bold type and charac-
ter, while sheep thrive
to perfection. Mr.
Warnes has put more
than £60,000 worth
of improvements into
Koomooloo, which has
been made vermin-proof, and subdivided into over 110
paddocks of about three miles by three.
At Sturt Vale, an outstation 40 miles away from
Koomooloo, there is a woolshed, sub-manager’s residence,
and every convenience at a group of fourteen buildings.
At headquarters the buildings include a ten-roomed
homestead for the sub-manager, men’s quarters, well-
equipped motor works, blacksmith’s shop, and modern
woolshed and shearers’ accommodation. The Lagoon is
another outstation, and over the lot Mr. Warnes exer-
cises active control.
THE FIRST HOMESTEAD ERECTED AT OLD KOOMOOLOO, IN 1869
OLD KOOMOOLOO HOMESTEAD IN 1928
KOOMOOLOO, STURT VALE AND WAHROONGA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


KOOMOOLOO HOMESTEAD IN 1928
Not the least important adjuncts to working the
station is a fleet of motor lorries and trailers, which are
used mainly to cart the wool to the railway at Burra—
-40 miles from Koomooloo, and 80 from Sturt Vale.
The journey there and back takes one and two days
respectively. Mr. Warnes has used these massive trucks
since 1912, and it is reckoned that 70 miles separate the
north-east from the south-west corners of the run. The
convenience of the motor for general station work
amounts to a necessity, especially when stock have to be
moved in times of drought.
Under a policy of investing the profits each year in
further developing the run, and concentrating upon
gathering all his holdings around him rather than taking
up additional interests in other States, Mr. Warnes pre-
dicts an even brighter future for Koomooloo.
The type of sheep grown is a hardy one, suited to any
dry country, and buyers of flock lines show their satis-
faction by returning repeatedly for more. The Merino
stud at Koomooloo does not supply rams for sale. These
are bred solely to improve the quality of the flock.
The foundation of this stud was laid by the late
MANAGER’S RESIDENCE AT STURT VALE
KOOMOOLOO, STURT VALE AAA) WAHROONGA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


1 homas Warnes from the well-known old Canowie stud.
Among the noteworthy sires bred was the ram
Wahroonga, which cut 21 lbs. at 1J years, 24 lbs. and
sired 98 lambs at 2\ years, 224 lbs. and sired 152 lambs
at 34 years, and 23 lbs. of wool and sired 75 lambs at
44 years. The old South Australian type of bold comb-
ing wool has been adhered to throughout, and since this
has proved profitable Mr. Warnes does not intend to
change from it.
1 he wool is classed each season by a team of students
from the School of Mines under the direction of the
instructor at that institution, Mr. A. H. Codrington.
A feature of the clip is that it is shorn entirely by
blades. The shearers put through their 100 and more
ing his sheep and wool freely at all the leading shows.
The first to attract his entry was the inaugural fixture
of the Burra and North-Eastern Agricultural Society at
the Burra in 1875. The records of that well-patronised
event disclose Mr. Warnes as a good prize winner. At
Sydney in 1886 Koomooloo was the only competitor to
bring honours to South Australia. The station gained
first prize for “Merino wool unwashed off saltbush
country, held under Crown lease, for best and most
valuable six M erino fleeces, unskirted, for ewes of any
age”; first prize for a similar exhibit of rams’ fleeces; and
third prize for the “best bale of fine combing wool, un-
washed, off saltbush country, weighing not less than 300
lbs., from not over 100 fleeces, from ewes of any age.”
COUNTRY SURROUNDING WAHROONGA HOMESTEAD
a day as in days of old when machines were unheard of.
In this respect Koomooloo is probably one of the few
remaining large blade sheds in Australia. Beginning
with Sturt Vale, shearing takes place early in May at
the head station, and Mr. Warnes intends in due course
to work up to an even earlier start, and still to lamb
after shearing. The lambs at present are dropped in
August and September, and formerly the hoggets were
shorn in July and later. Since 1889, when the Koo-
mooloo clip topped the market, the wool has been sold
in Adelaide, and on many subsequent occasions top prices
have been realised.
The late Thomas Warnes, who was a skilful flock-
master, and one of the first South Australian pastoralists
to class the whole of his clip, made a practice of exhibit-
The above ram fleeces weighed 97 lbs. for 374 days’
growth—equal to 15 lbs. 12J ozs. per fleece for twelve
months. The ewes’ fleeces went 83 lbs. for 372 days, or
an average of 13 lbs. 9 ozs. a head for twelve months’
growth. The sheep were all 4-tooths.
At the 1887 Jubilee Exhibition in Adelaide, rams’ and
ewes’ fleeces from this station were awarded the diploma
and gold medal.
Koomooloo fat wethers hold the distinction of having
been the first to be sold by auction at the Adelaide
abattoirs market, nearly twenty years ago, when Mr. C.
Clifford purchased the draft for 265. a head. They were
a good even yarding, and a credit to the breeder. In
1913 a draft of 6129 hand-shorn wethers realised what
was then considered the phenomenal price of 20s. Id. a
KOOMOOLOO, STURT VALE AAA) WAHROONGA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


THE MUSTERERS' RETURN
TYPICAL 6-TOOTH WETHERS IN THE SHEEP YARDS AT SHEARING TIME
KOOMOOLOO, STURT VALE AND JVAHROONGA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


TEN MONTHS OLD LAMBS ON BLUE BUSH COUNTRY
A SUB-ARTESIAN WELL ON KOOMOOLOO STATION
KOOMOOLOO. STURT TALE AND WAHROONGA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


THE WOOLSHED AND DAM AT STURT VALE
THE SHEARING SHED AND YARDS AT KOOMOOLOO
KOOMOOLOO, STURT VALE AND WAHROONGA. SOUTH AUSTRALIA


GROUP OF KOOMOOLOO MERINO WETHERS
head—a record for the State at the time. To-day
Koomooloo sheep are represented regularly at the sales,
and bring good prices.
WAHROONGA.
Wahroonga, a beautiful freehold property comprising
4000 acres—a quarter of which is ideal for lucerne —is
situated at Leighton, 12 miles from Kooringa, and there
Mr. I. J. Warnes has erected a fine homestead. The
first block of this property was bought in 1900, and addi-
tional land was acquired as the business at Koomooloo
improved. Simultaneously Air. Warnes carried on an
extensive cultivation of wheat, barley, and lucerne. To-
day there are 300 acres under lucerne, as well as about
700 acres let out on share farming. Wahroonga, how-
ever, is the depot for sheep when conditions on the
pastoral country are dry, and for this purpose is worked
in conjunction with Koomooloo. An instance of this is
given by the 1927 drought, when 17,000 sheep were
travelled or brought in by motor lorries to Wahroonga
and saved. Elaborate improvements have been effected,
and there is plenty of water, while the annual rainfall is
17 in.
Wahroonga homestead, built by Mr. Warnes in 1908,
is an imposing stone semi-two-story structure nestling in
the folds of hilly country overlooking a verdant stretch
SHORN 10 MONTHS OLD MERINO RAMS
KOOMOOLOO, STURT VALE AND WAHROONGA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


LUCERNE FIELDS IN WINTER
A STRING OF POLO PONIES AT WAHROONGA
"DARBY AND JOAN” HAVE A DAY OFF
KOOMOOLOO, STURT TALE AND WAHROONGA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


of lucerne. Modern appointments include a hot and cold
water service, Lister lighting plant installed in 1915, a
line billiard room, and many other conveniences. Sur-
rounding the homestead are 12 acres of tree plantations,
4 acres of orchard, and an extensive vegetable garden.
Water is laid on
everywhere. The wool-
shed, men’s quarters,
yards and dip are of
up-to-date design.
Ten miles north of
Leighton is the home-
stead block of old Boo-
boorowie Station, which
Mr. Warnes purchased
for lucerne growing.
Further on, he has a
block of 1000 acres
called “Wynyard,”
which has running
water, and is well improved. It is not surprising that the
results off these rich areas are remarkable when their
value has advanced from £35 an acre in 1915 to £6O an
acre in 1925—prices paid by Mr. Warnes.
1 hese paddocks allow fullest use to be made of the
stock off Koomooloo, which when old are put on the
lucerne to fatten for market. Several cuts are obtained
during the season, and more than 1000 tons of pressed
lucerne and are kept on hand as further insurance
against drought. Mr. Warnes claims to have been one
of the first to introduce the lucerne press in South
Australia.
Wah roonga is linked by telephone to Koomooloo,
Old Koomooloo (7 miles from the head Station),
Sturt Vale, and other out-stations, and also to a
neighbouring property, Quandong. This telephone
line of 130 miles was erected in 1907 by a syndicate con-
sisting of Messrs. I. J.
Warnes and his two
brothers, the late C.
B. and T. W. Warnes,
James Gallagher, and
J. Barker. It was the
earliest private tele-
phone line of any
distance to be put up
in South Australia.
Personal
Born in 1838 in
Norfolk, England, the
late Thomas Warnes
saw service at the Crimea before settling in South
Australia. By dint of unremitting labour and thrift
he gradually acquired the lease, the Royal, which
gave him bis start in 1862. All was not plain sailing,
but once established he met with good fortune. No
small measure of credit was due to bis wife, a daughter
of Mr. I. FI ower, of Bristol. In later years Mr. Warnes
owned a good horse or two, which did well at the annual
picnics, and he became a leading identity at the Burra.
He also was a devotee of yachting as a member of the
Old Austral and Holdfast Bay Clubs. He died on the
15th July, 1896, at the age of 58 years.
PART OF THE SEASON'S CLIP READY FOR THE ROAD
ENGINEER'S SHOP AT KOOMOOLOO
KOOMOOLOO, STURT VALE AND WAHROONGA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


“WOOL AWAY”
A SCENE ON THE
SHEARING BOARD
AT STURT VALE
A TEAM OF SCHOOL OF
MINES STUDENTS AT
WORK IN THE WOOL
ROOM, SKIRTING AND
ROLLING FLEECES
PREPARATORY TO
BEING HANDLED
BY THE CLASSER
THE FINAL OPERATION
—THE WOOL PRESS AT
WORK BALING FLEECE
WOOL FROM THE
BINS ON THE LEFT
KOOMOOLOO, STURT VALE AND WAHROONGA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


MR. I. J. WARNES
is president of the local women’s branch of the Liberal
Federation, president of the Burra and District Country
Women’s Association, country representative of the
Victoria League in South Australia, country women’s
representative of the National Council of Women, a
member of the Council of St.
M ary’s Church of England,
Burra, and president of the Leigh-
ton Guild. There is a family of
three sons. The eldest, Rex
Clement, was born in 1908, and
began his pastoral career at
Wahroonga at the age of 19. He
AA r as educated at Leighton and
St. Peter’s College, Adelaide, at
Avhich he was captain of the first
football eighteen. He is a mem-
ber of the Mid-North Polo Team.
James Fullarton, born in 1911,
and Thomas Murray, born in
1916, are attending St. Peter’s
College.
Mr. Warnes, who has travelled
extensively abroad, believes in this
as a form of education, and pro-
poses to send his sons on a Avorld
tour before they settle doAvn. To
his broad-minded outlook is due
many progressive works through-
out the district in which he re-
sides - the fine memorial halls
at Leighton, Booboorowie, and
Mount Bryan, while he was also
a practical contributor to the fine
It is only fitting to add that
the late Mr. Warnes was
amongst the first to propose to
stockowners that a paper should
be published in the interests of
the pastoral industry, and the
outcome of this Avas the found-
ing of The Pastoral Review in
1891.
Mr. I. J. Warnes is the third
surviving son, and AA r as born in
1871. After having completed
his education at the Burra and
at Adelaide, he undertook pas-
toral Avork under his father,
and became an acknowledged
authority on sheep and wool.
In 1900 Mr. Warnes mar-
ried Mary, daughter of the late
Thomas Fairbrother, of Ful-
larton, who came to South Aus-
tralia from Leicester, England,
in the ship “Irene” in 1857,
and died in 1913. Airs. Warnes
THE LATE MR. THOMAS wARNES
MRS. I. J. WARNES
soldiers’ monument at Kooringa. Every branch of
sport can count him as a sponsor. At the Burra
hospital, of which he is a member of the board, he in-
stalled an X-ray apparatus and an efficient hot-water
service.
He has been chairman of
the Mount Bryan District
Council since 1910, and of the
Burra district committee of the
Stockowners’ Association of South
Australia since 1913. He was
president of the parent body for
two years, and of the Graziers’
Federal Council for a year. Dur-
ing the war he Avas associated with
thirty-three different committees.
He is vice-president of the Koor-
inga branch of the Liberal Federa-
tion. For some years Mr. Warnes
has been a member of the Council
and the Pastoral and Wool Com-
mittee of the Royal Agricultural
Society of South Australia. Since
1914 he has been president of the
Burra Burra Show Society. In
1923 his public spiritedness made
it possible for the society to take
possession of their fine slioav
grounds near Burra railway sta-
tion. ihe show committee pre-
sented Mr. Warnes with a framed
gallery of photographs of its mem-
bers as a token of appreciation of
his valuable services.
KOOMOOLOO, STURT VALE AND JVAHROONGA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


CANONBAR, MIOWERA, NEW SOUTH WALES
The Property of Goldsbrough, Mart Co. Ltd.
ORIGINALL\ about 800,000 acres, reduced by
resumptions to about 600,000 acres in 1889, and
further reduced at subsequent periods until to-
day the area of the holding is 73,223 acres secured lands,
and 210,539 acres leasehold, Canonbar comprises two
distinct types of country, the line of demarcation being
From the nature of the country, its situation (there
is a private trucking yard and siding at Miowera a
quarter of a mile from the woolshed and classing yards,
and three-quarters of a mile from the homestead) and
the extensive nature of the improvements that have been
effected and well maintained, the property may be con-
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF WALES INSPECTS SOME OF THE CANONBAR STUD RAMS
the Bogan River, which runs through in a north and
south direction.
The East Bogan country consists of 73,223 acres
secured, and 22,7-19 acres of leased lands, and this
country is entirely reserved for the stud flock.
The soil contains considerable quantities of lime, and
besides the many grasses and herbage indigenous to the
country produces many of the better varieties of saltbush.
sidered as being ideal for the production of stud Merino
sheep of the type necessary for the maintenance of flocks
suited to the wide areas of Australia.
At one time the whole country was badly infested
with rabbits, but it is now completely boundary netted
and further subdivided by netting, and on the stud
country particularly all fallen timber has been picked up
and burnt off, and burrows dug and ploughed out, with


TIMBERED COUNTRY ON CANONBAR STATION
the result that rabbits are non-existent on this area. 'The
heavy expenditure so incurred has been amply justified
by the growth of more and better kinds of grasses and
the increase in carrying capacity.
Certain small areas of scalded country have been re-
claimed by roughly ploughing the surface and throwing
up check banks to prevent the water running off, with the
result that land that was once valueless is now growing
saltbush and the better types of grasses.
In the comparatively dry area in which the property
is situated (the average rainfall being in.) supplies
of permanent natural water do not exist, and this fact,
coupled with the very large surface evaporation in our
hot inland districts, has led to the policy of sinking large
CANONBAR STUD MERINO EWES
CAN ON BAR, NEW SOUTH WALES


Boonoke No. 1, purchased in 1913 for
1600 guineas
Box Cowal, Head of Another Notable Family
No. 170 (by Miowera), Grand Champion,
Sydney, 1921
Left —Marvel (by No. 1), Grand Champion,
Sydney, 1916. Right—Young No. 1 (by
No. 1), Grand Champion, Sydney, 1917
Miowera (by Box Cowal), Grand Champion,
Sydney, 1919
Big Ben (by No. 170), 2 Years Old
NOTABLE RAMS, PAST AND PRESENT, IN THE CANON BAR STUD
CANON B A R, NE W S O UT II IV AL E S


tanks, nothing less than 5000 cubic yards on good catch-
ments being considered of much value.
In recent years this source of supply has been aug-
mented by the sinking of sub-artesian bores and wells,
with the result that ample supplies of water are now
available throughout the most prolonged drought.
The West Bogan country, which is all leasehold, and
the area of which is now reduced to 187,790 acres by
resumption, is of a lighter character. The main feed is
whilst in Australia in 1920, and he spent four days on
the property.
The Stud Flock.
In 1906 it was decided to make Canonbar stud flock
the one from which to supply the company’s require-
ments of flock rams for its Queensland and New South
Wales properties, and later, in order to strengthen the
flock the whole of the Mathoura stud, from near Denili-
PINE COUNTRY ON CANONBAR
corkscrew, which has a high drought-resisting capacity,
and thrives in light rainfall country.
At one time the whole of the property was somewhat
heavily timbered with pine, box, belar and wilga, and
a very large amount of money has been expended in
ringbarking and suckering large areas, leaving only the
necessary shade, fire break and fencing timber, and all
indigenous edible scrub.
It might be mentioned that Canonbar was one of the
station properties selected for the Prince of Wales to visit
quin, was transferred to Canonbar. Mr. H. C. Parker,
who was manager of Mathoura at the time of the
transfer, was entrusted with the supervision of the breed-
ing of the Canonbar stud, and he and the late Mr. A. E.
McLeod, both enthusiastic sheepbreeders and stud
masters, are mainly responsible for the high reputation
which the stud now holds.
The stud flock now numbers about 12,000 breeding
ewes, 1000 of which comprise the top stud, and are
specially mated. The card system is adopted with these
CANON B A R , NE IV SOU T II W ALES


YOUNG STUD MERINO
RAMS ON THE RICH
PASTURE LANDS
STUD MERINO EWES
GRAZING ON SALT
BUSH COUNTRY
CANON B A R. NK W S()U T 11 WAL E S


SALT BUSH COUNTRY
YOUNG STUD RAMS ON SALT BUSH COUNTRY
A VIEW OF CANONBAR HOMESTEAD
CA\O N B A R. NE IF S OUR II IF AL E S
CANON B A R. NK W S() UT II WAL E S


top ewes, each ewe having her own
special card, and a record of her mating
and progeny is kept thereon. At class-
ing time these cards are turned up, and
each ewe, as she comes into the classer’s
hands, has her record read out. The
system has proved invaluable for breed-
ing and mating purposes.
In the Boonoke ram “Number One,”
purchased in 1913 for 1600 guineas, an
outstanding sire was procured, several
of his progeny making great names for
themselves as sires and prize winners,
amongst the most celebrated being Mar-
vel, who was grand champion in Sydney
in 1916, and reserve grand champion in
1917. Marvel was also champion plain
bodied ram of the show, and though he
was defeated for the grand champion-
ship in 1917, this prize was secured by
another son of “Number One” called
“\oung No. 1.” This sheep had tre-
mendous frame and great covering, and
besides carrying off the grand champion-
ship out-weighed any other sheep at the
show.
Several of “Number One’s” ewes won
championship honours at the Sydney Show, and it may
also be noted that “Number One” was the sire of General
Grant, the grandfather on the female side of David, who
CANONBAR-BRED SPECIAL STUD MERINO EWE
By AT. 1, and Grand Champion, Sydney, 1924
was sold during the 1927 Sydney Show by Mr. F. D.
McMaster, of Dalkeith, to F. S. Falkiner and Sons
Limited for 5000 guineas.
YOUNG STUD
MERINO RAMS
CANON B A R , NE W S() UTH WAL E S


THIS PICTURE SHOWS WHAT IS BEING DONE TO
RECLAIM CLAY-PAN LANDS AND SCALDED COUNTRY
ON CANONBAR. ON THE RIGHT CAN BE SEEN THE
UNRECLAIMED COUNTRY, WHICH, BY PLOUGHING
AND CHECK BANKING, HAS BEEN CONVERTED
INTO SOUND GRAZING AS SEEN IN THE LEFT
HALF OF THE PICTURE
cANON B A R, NE W S O UT II IV AL E S


THOROUGHBRED
BROOD MARES
AND FOALS ON
CANON BAR
“Number One,” when purchased, was five years old.
He lived to the good old age of twelve years, and his
great constitution can be realised when it is known that
there are on record over 1200 of his own progeny going
through the classers’ hands.
Another very notable family originated from a ram
WOOLSHED AND YARDS ON CANONBAR STATION
CANO N B A R, NE I V S 0 UT H IVA L E S


Ewes.
Rams.
Total
Grand champion
5
4
9
Reserve champion
. . 5
7
12
Champion
. . 13
12
25
First prize
. . 33
55
88
Second prize . .
. . 23
25
48
Third prize . .
. . 11
13
24
Totals
.. 90
116
206
THE DAM AT THE BOX
COWAL HOMESTEAD
called Box Cowal. This ram was the sire of Miowera,
reserve grand champion in Sydney 1918, and grand
champion in 1919. Miowera followed up his show suc-
cess in siring ram “170,” who was grand champion in
Sydney in 1921. “Number 170” has proved himself a
great sire, and although now just on ten years old is still
strong and vigorous. One of this ram’s progeny, out of
a purebred Boonoke ewe, is called Big Ben, and whilst
only a twowear-old sheep, stands out for frame, covering
and nobility of carriage.
In the building up of the Canonbar stud many rams
have been obtained from the Boonoke stud, the last
notable purchase being “A 20,” whose stock, though as
yet only weaners, show great promise. Drafts of high-
class ewes have also been obtained from this stud, one
of which was the Boonoke first prize pen of 25 2-tooth
ewes at Sydney in 1926. The flock can now be regarded
as being of almost pure Peppin blood, the major influence
coming through the Boonokes.
The following list of prizes gained by Canonbar-bred
sheep from 1911 to 1927 at the Sydney shows emphasises
the value of these sheep:—
During the same period 23,431 stud and flock rams were
disposed of.
In addition to the Merino stud, the property has
CAN ON BAR, NEW SOUTH WALES


GRAPE VINE TRELLLIS AT THE
CANONBAR HOMESTEAD
carried on its West Bogan country large numbers of
flock sheep, and although it has never been the policy
of the company to go in extensively for cattle and horse
breeding, limited numbers of both are bred. The excel-
lent quality of the cattle has always led to their com-
manding high prices at Flemington, and horses bred on
the property have found a ready market for remount
purposes.
CANON B A R, NE W SOU T H W ALES


NOORILIM, MURCHISON EAST, VICTORIA.
The Property of Norman Falkiner, Esq.
NOORILIM shelters undoubtedly the best class of
thoroughbreds in Australia and New Zealand
at the present time, and owing to its scope and
well-planned administration is also probably one of the
foremost horse studs in the world.
The property was purchased by Mr. Norman Falkiner
in 1917, with the object of transferring his stud from
Pranjip Park, since when he has left nothing
undone in an effort to produce the very best of young
blood stock.
very little of this class of country m Australia, which is
the reason why this stud is so valuable; and in this respect
Noorilim compares with the rich limestone areas in Ire-
land, where many leading studs are to be found. Noorilim
is served by the railway at Wahring, 3 miles away,
Murchison East, 4 miles, and by its private siding half a
mile from the stables; both the railway line and the main
road run parallel with the eastern boundary of the pro-
perty. Fourteen miles of double frontage to the River
Goulburn divides Noorilim into two sections, the eastern
NOORILIM HOUSE
Pronounced Noo-ri-lim, with the accent on the second
syllable, the property is situated 87 miles north of Mel-
bourne in as rich a piece of country as there is throughout
the length and breadth of the Goulburn Valley. Ihe
area of just under 5000 acres is made up of undulating
river flats, all beautifully soft and sweet country, contain-
ing a great deal of limestone in its formation. From a
horsebreeder’s point of view this is an acquisition which is
of inestimable value for the production of strong bone
and great muscle in the young thoroughbreds. There is
side being subdivided into numerous small paddocks, 27
of which are devoted to the brood mares and young
horses, forming the stud headquarters, whilst on the
western half, through which runs from north to south
the National Canal which carries the water from the
Goulburn Weir to the Waranga Basin, a stud of 2000
Border Leicester sheep is run. This section of 2300 acres
was purchased in 1923, is worked separately, and is named
Castle Hill. It has been highly improved with sub-
divisions and strongly netted fences, and is watered most


thoroughly by canal and river. The Border Leicester
stud was founded in 1925, and from time to time addi-
tions were made to it with ewes and rams from leading
Victorian and New Zealand studs. The rams in use as
sires were purchased from Starritt Bros., and a number
of rams bought in Janu-
ary 1427 from Mr. Wm.
Kennedy included two good
prize winners which are
sure to be of advantage in
the future welfare of this
select stud.
Noorilim itself, through-
out its 2600 acres, is
watered by several sub-
artesian bores of a depth,
roughly, of from 84 to 147
ft., each fitted with its
windmill, 5000-gal. con-
crete tank and concrete
troughs, as well as by
natural lagoons and the
winding river. These flats
are a great asset, and ap-
pear over a large frontage
area —Noorilim being the
native name for “many
lagoons”—but to overcome
abnormal swamping some
acres of rich pasturage were
reclaimed permanently by
the simple expedient of
erecting a wall across the entrance to the largest depres-
sion. A recently acquired block of 430 acres, known
formerly as Hackney’s Paddock, adjoining Noorilim, and
considered to be the pick of the Goulburn Valley, is now
subdivided into seven paddocks for horses, with post and
rail netted fences and yards. Once heavily timbered,
much of the land
has been cleared
entirely, forest
devils making
short work of
stumps, whilst the
fencing along the
road, as level as a
die like all the
other fences, was
put up at a cost of
no less than £3OO
per mile, including
posts, top rails,
wire and netting.
Throughout the
stud property the
improvements are
on the best scale. In setting out to do things properly,
expense has been a secondary consideration, consequently
there is a characteristic completeness in the accommoda-
tion provided for the stallions and yearlings, in the
general lay-out of the beautiful paddocks, each with its
THOROUGHBRED MARE VOCAL PRINCESS,
WITH FOAL AT FOOT BY SPEARHEAD (IMP.)
A GROUP OF YEARLING THOROUGHBRED FILLIES AT NOORILIM
own yard, the storage and protection of chaff, oats
and lucerne, and in the manner trees have been planted
and timber left standing to shelter the brood
mares and their foals. Around a neat square of
lawn, twenty-seven solidly-built, well-ventilated loose
boxes give housing for
the yearlings, and each has
its own water supply laid
on. Close by are further
stables for the stud sires, as
well as an array of vermin-
proof feed sheds, the whole
resembling a small village.
Both silos hold 200 tons
of oats, and chutes convey
the grain straight into a
machine crusher. When
the Yallourn electric power
reaches this district the
current will be used to
drive the whole of the
machinery on the property,
and will supersede the pre-
sent power plant at the
residence.
Out in the lovely pad-
docks, lucerne, rye grass,
and subterranean clover
grow luxuriantly, whilst
every paddock has its own
solid, safe yard. The
greatest care is taken
with both fencing and netting to avoid injury to the
animals, and this is of vital importance, as the brood
mares are never housed and no foaling boxes are
used. Ably maintained by a staff of experts, under
the supervision of that very competent stud groom,
Terence McCabe, the personnel of the Noorilim
stud lack nothing
in their perfect
surroundings, the
attention that is
bestowed on them
being reflected in
the excellent con-
dition in which
the yearlings are
brought to the an-
nual sales. Here
they reveal their
good foundation to
breeders and train-
ers who look for
this quality in a
young thorough-
bred colt or filly.
With its perfectly appointed residence standing back
from the road on a high angle of the river, with its mile
long avenue of Westralian gums, and surrounded by
gardens and verdant foliage, Noorilim, which is visited
by noted sportsmen from all parts, can lay claim to
N 0 ORILI M, VI C T ORIA


2. Spearhead
1. Comedy King
2 Ornamentation
5. David
SIRES AT STUD
ON NOORILIM
N 0 ORIL I M, VI C T ORIA


all the attributes that human energy can conceive for an
ideal stud farm. It is, moreover, held in the highest
repute throughout the Commonwealth on account of its
association with some of the best known names of the
Australian turf.
THE BLOOD STOCK
Noorilim is the home of Comedy King, Spearhead,
Crowdennis, Ornamentation, and David, which are the
sires standing to-day, 1928. It is also the home of
veritable gems of the stud book on the female side.
When Mr. Falkiner set out to form the stud his desire
from the very first was to produce long distance stayers,
and in acquiring absolutely the best blood procurable in
the world, he showed that price was no bar to his objec-
tive. He chose his brood mares with the keen discern-
ment of one who knows good blood stock, and purchased
stallions of equal merit which had worked their way to
the top through sheer courage and consistency.
The first introduction of mares were the yearling fillies
Joyeuse, Makarini, Nicolette and Polylogy, bred at
HORSE YARDS AT
NOORILIM, DESIGNED TO
SERVE FOUR PADDOCKS
Messrs. Robinson and Clark’s Old Buckenham Stud in
England. They were of blood very much sought after
at the time in England, and they may be said to have
established the safe foundation of the Noorilim stud.
Subsequently other first-class English mares were brought
out, which included Palena, Nicotelea, Ellen Graeme,
Ramson, Yippingale, Berylium, Maison de Blanc, King
Cup, Marcelle, Afterglow, Sweet Innocence, Yaffle.
Nicotelea (imp.), a three-quarter sister to the wonderful
grey colt The Tetrarch, a phenomenal racehorse and
famous sire, was of the same line of blood as 1 etrabbazzia,
a mare who realised 9000 gns. at the Newmarket De-
cember sales of 1923, while Yippingale, a half-sister to
Traquair, has proved one of the most valuable mares in
Australia. A number of locally-bred mares have aug-
mented the breeding strength of the stud, and in the
following list of the brood mares which comprise
Noorilim stud to-day, the sound breeding upon which it
has been built up will be sure to appeal to breeders and
trainers. Particularly should be noted the strength of
Chelandrv and Cross Batterv blood in the stud.
VIEW FROM
THE TOWER
OF NOORILIM
HOUSE
N 0 ORILI M, VICTORIA


LIST OF BROOD MARES
Imported
♦ Afterglow f Sunstar CBred by His Majesty the King.
(Imp.) ■{ Dam of Even Tide, Epilogue,
£ Marie Legraye Gleamlight.)
•Joyeuse ( Bayardo (‘Bred by Messrs. Robinson A’ Clark
(Imp.) ■( in Eng. Dam of Joy Bells,
(Joie de Vivre Mimetic, Joy King. Xyamba, etc.
Purchased from breeders.)
♦Polylogy (Polymelus (*Bred by Messrs. Robinson A-Clark
(Imp.) s in Eng. Polylogy is the dam of
C Bill and Coo Sonora,Royal Charter,Royal Joker
and 1300 gns. Crowdennis Yearl’g.)
♦Ramson f Radium (*Bred by Mr. L. de Rothschild in
(Imp.) -i Eng. Imported to Australia in
(Monarda 1916.)
♦Kuningada (The White Knight (*l!red in England by the late Capt.
(Imp.) -j W.R.Wyndham. Dam of Sultan,
(Sal Paravane. Three Kings, Court
Jester (X.Z.)
♦Yippingale (William 111. (‘Bred by Lord Rosebery. Bought
(Imp.) in Eng. in 1915. Dam of Even-
( Chelandry (1) song.)
♦Circus Queen f Black Jester (♦Foaled 1921. Purchased and im-
(lmp.) 4 ported in 1924. Half sister to
(Glaze Wheel dam of Hotnight. 2nd E. Derby
and Leger.)
♦Lady Victoria (St. Frusquin (♦Bred in England by W. Astor.l
(Imp.) 4
( Lady Cynosure (Is sister to Polymelus.)
♦King Cup f Amadis (♦Bred by His Majesty the King in
(Imp.) s 1921. Purchased and imported
(Flowerjug in 1924.)
♦Maison de Blanc (White Eagle (♦Bred by J. H. Dawson in Eng. in
(Imp.) 4 1921. Imported in 1924.)
( Slave Trade
Lausanne (Decision
(Imp.) <
( Blather
♦Archeress (19) (Happy Warrior (♦Bred in England in 1922. Im-
(lmp.) ( ported in 1926.)
( Ardmark mare
( Stepniak (♦Bred by J. B. Reid, X.Z., in 1902.
♦Cross Battery (7) -J Cross Battery is dam of Artillery-
(Firecross man.)
(Martian (Imp.) (♦Bred in X’.Z.)
♦Battlescene 4
(Edna May Going back to Trenton's dam.
(Martian (Imp.) (♦Bred in X'.Z.)
♦Starlike -(
L Edna May
{St. Alwyne or Queen Comedy ( Comedy King
Cardinal Beaufort L Pendant
Wakeful Switch ( Flippant
Lucina (The Welkin (Flay
(Regality (Imp.) ♦Mist Maid (All Black
Evensong (1) (Land of Song (Breva
(Yippingale (Imp.) (♦Sister to Maid of the Mist.)
Sonora (Land of Song Soporific (All Black
( Polylogy (Imp.) ( Sans Kepos
Beryllia ( Land of Song Imoto f Spearhead
( Berylium (Imp.) ( Mousme
Vocal (Comedy King (Imp.) ♦Cyden ( Cyklon
Princess (1) (Yippingale (Imp.) (Deneb
Koanie (1) ( Spearhead (Imp.) (♦Winner of Ascot Vale Stakes,
(Yaffle (Imp.) Mimosa Stakes, A.J.C. Sires’
Zulannah (Comedy King Produce Stakes, Albury Sires’
( ♦Xicoletea (Imp.) Produce Stakes.)
♦Three-quarter Sister to The Tetrarch. Cyfrac ( Cyidon
Queen of ( Comedy King (Refraction 4
Florence (Florentina (Imp.) (♦Sister to Gloaming.)
♦Glowworm (Comedy King Queen Thaura (spearh a l
( Afterglow (Imp.) ( Queen Comedy
(♦Sister to Epilogue.) Micology (Eurythmic
♦Battery ( Comedy King (Polylogy (Imp.)
Queen (7) (Cross Battery (Eurythmic
(♦Sister to Artilleryman.) (Camilla
Greek Girl ( Comedy King ♦Valotto (1) f Valais
( Medilli y Otford
Queen of Xight ( Comedy King (♦Sister to Manfred.)
(Yaffle (Imp.) ♦Royal ( Comedy King
Queen of the (Amanus Romance (Polylogy (Imp.)
Follies (7) (♦Folly Queen (♦Sister to Royal Charter.)
(♦Sister to Artilleryman). Swansong ( Comedy King
Queen Carnival f Comedy King (Lucina
(Makarini (Imp.) Gigolette (Comedy King
♦Queen’s Cross f Comedy King ( Xlcolette (Imp.) 4
(7) (Cross Battery (♦Closely related to Ferry, Let Fly,
(♦Sister to Artilleryman, but never Sansovino, Tranquil, Selene.)
trained.)
THE STALLIONS
Among the stallions the first acquisition was the chestnut
horse Land of Song (imp.) (14), by Llangibby—-Aliena, a
high class English performer and winner of the Irish Derby.
After a successful turf career on Australian courses and only
two seasons at Xoorilim he met with an accident and had
to be destroyed. Soon after, in 1918, the imported stallion
Comedy King (7) was offered at the dispersal sale of the
Shipley Stud, and was secured by Mr. Falkiner for 7300
guineas. This magnificent son of Persimmon (7)— Tragedy
Queen, bred by the late Mr. J. Simons Harrison in
England in 1907, needs no introduction to the racing world
of Australia.
COMEDY KING commenced his career as a three-year-old
by winning the Y.A.T.C. thirteenth Caulfield Futurity Stakes
of 7 furlongs (£1350). beating a good field. The following
year, 1910. he won the A.J.C. Spring Stakes of U miles,
w.f.a., at Eandwick, beating Trafalgar, Prince Foote (winner
of the Melbourne Cup, 1909), Parsee; &e., and won the V.E.C.
Melbourne Cup of 2 miles, beating Trafalgar by a neck. At
Caulfield he won by six lengths from Trafalgar, Alawa, The
Parisian (1911 Melbourne Cup winner), Ac., in the .A.T.C.
St. George’s Stakes of 9 furlongs, and won the V.E.C. Essen-
don Stakes of U miles, w.f.a., in 2.311, finishing a good
length in front of Trafalgar, Alawa, &e.; the 1 .E.t . All-
aged Stakes, 1 mile, w.f.a., from Alawa, Broadsword, Ac.,
and the A.J.C. Autumn Stakes of 1911, 11 miles, w.f.a., beat-
ing Trafalgar, Lady Medallist, Ac. At the same meeting at
Eandwick he ran ' third to Trafalgar in the Cumberland
Stakes of 2 miles. As a five-year-old he won the 1 .A.T.C.
Eclipse Stakes, w.f.a., 1 mile and 3 furlongs, and ran second
in the Y.A.T.C. Memsie Stakes, second in the Y.A.T.C.
Caulfield Stakes, V.E.C. C. B. Fisher Plate (to Trafalgar),
Y.A.T.C. St. George’s Stakes, Y.B.C. Essendon Stakes (to
Trafalgar) and Melbourne Stakes (to Trafalgar). Comedy
King won £12,945 in stakes in three seasons, with a
record of eight firsts, second in seven races, and third on
four occasions. He was retired to the stud, where he has
proved himself a high-class sire.
His stock became very popular, and justly so, for not only
was Comedy King a great performer, but he is the best St.
Simon line sire in the world. His pedigree runs past his
sire, Persimmon, who won £34,726 in stakes, and headed the
English sires list for four seasons, to his grandsire St. Simon
(11), who produced winners of over £554,500 in 24 seasons,
and to Gallinule (19), whose produce have won stakes
amounting to nearly half a million sterling; Ben Battle,
winner of an Irish Derby and four Queen’s Plates,
Massinissa, a successful winner in France, and so on.
Comedy King is the sire of such noted racehorses as Artil-
leryman, 1919 Melbourne Cup winner, and who ran dead
heat with Eichmond Main in the A.J.C. Derby the same
year; Biplane, one of the fastest gallopers ever bred in Aus-
tralia or New Zealand; King Ingoda (Melbourne, Williams-
town and Adelaide Cups), Fiscom, Harvest King, Eoyal
Charter, King Carnival, Comique, Heir Apparent, Star Come-
dian, Gleamlight and Sum King. Biplane, it may be men-
tioned, won three races at 2 years, and two at 3 years in
New Zealand, and five races the same year in Australia, and
was sold privately for 3000 guineas.
Comedy King has sired the winners of close on £300,000,
and to-day at 20 years of age he looks as virile as ever,
retaining all his kingly bearing like the aristocrat he is.
His brief table reads:—
.V OORILIM, VICTORIA


THE ENTRANCE HALL OF
NOORILIM HOUSE, SHOWING
THE BEAUTIFUL STAIRCASE
THE SPACIOUS
DINING ROOM IN
NOORILIM HOUSE
VIEW OF NOORILIM FROM THE TOWER, SHOWING CITRUS
GROVE AND VIEW OF SOME OF THE STUD HORSE PADDOCKS
NOORILIM, VICTORIA
NOORILIM, VICTORIA


A PORTION OF THE BEAUTI-
FUL GROUNDS AROUND
NOORILIM HOUSE
SPEARHEAD (imp., 3) is an exceptionally handsome
brown stallion, possessing all the qualities of a good sire, and
all the great strength and galloping power of his illustrious
ancestry. A beautifully ribbed up, grand topped creature,
evenly built, a wonderfully headed horse with massive
shoulders and great muscular quarters, and sweet tempered,
Spearhead, by Spearmint, out of Baroness La Fleche, is a
direct descendant of Carbine and La Fleche, respectively
probably the best horse. that Australia has ever produced
and the best mare ever known in England. He stands to-
day as the most fashionably bred Carbine line sire in Aus-
tralia, and has proved an outstanding sire of distance horses
in the Commonwealth. His sons and daughters include
Spearfelt, winner of the Y.R.C. Melbourne Cup 1926, Spearer,
Shrapnel, Smoke Bomb, Bombard, Spearmaidcn (King’s
Cup), &c., and his progeny won 23 races and £27,855
in stakes during 1927 racing season, prior to the November
carnival. Spearfelt’s time in the Melbourne Cup which he
won equalled the Australian record of 3 min. 22J sec., and
is next to the world’s fastest time for the distance put up
in England in 1920. Spearhead’s pedigree reads briefly:—
Running back through his pedigree, which is almost per-
fect, one finds such renowned names as Ladas, La Rleche,
Minting, Carbine, St. Simon, Lord Lyon, the winner of the
N O ORILI M, VICTORIA


A bove —
QUEEN OF FLOR-
ENCE AND FILLY
BY SPEARHEAD
(IMP.)
Above —
GREEK GIRL AND FILLY
BY SPEARHEAD (IMP.)
THOROUGHBRED
BROOD MARES
Right-
BATTERY QUEEN
AND COLT BY
SPEARHEAD
(IMP.)
KING CUP (IMP.) AND COLT BY SPEARHEAD (IMP.)
YIPPINGALE (IMP.) AND COLT BY CROWDENNIS (IMP.)
NOORILIM, VICTORIA


Triple Crown, and his immortal dam Paradigm, Rosicrucian
and his dam Paraffin, Galopin, Toxophilite, Musket, Lord
Clifden, Hampton, Vedette, Longbow, Thunderbolt, &c.
His grand dam, La Fleche, was purchased as a yearling
for 5500 guineas, and as a brood mare at seven years of age
was sold for £13,330. She is the dam of the successful
English sire John o’ Gaunt, and amongst races which she
won were the Champagne Stakes, The One Thousand, The
Oaks, The St. Leger, and as a three-year-old the Cambridge-
shire with 8.10. She ran Sir Hugo to a head in the English
Derby. As a four-year-old she won the Liverpool Autumn
Cup with 9.6, and at five years old the Ascot Gold Cup and
Champion Stakes. Five of her yearlings aggregated 17,600
guineas; another son, Bowman, won the Derby, Gold Cup,
&c. Spearhead’s third dam is a three-quarter sister to
Musket, and the family which he comes from is full of
prolific sire producers. llis dam, Baroness La Fleche, was
the best two-year-old of her year in England, and realised
5500 sovs. as a brood mare, while Spearmint, his sire, was the
best class Derby winner of recent years, and sire of winners
in six seasons of stakes valued at £50,000.
Spearhead appeared on the English turf only five times
as a three-year-old, and won the Newmarket Chippenham
Plate of II miles, w.f.a., before coming to Noorilim. With
such wealth of Carbine blood in his breeding he should
preserve an imperishable name as a sire at Noorilim stud.
CROWDENNIS (imp., 7), by Tredennis out of Crowden,
was one of the fastest horses of his day in England, and his
yearling progeny sold recently up to 1300 guineas. He goes
back to the same mare as Comedy King’s dam, which was
one of the reasons Mr. Falkiner Avas keen to have him at the
stud. He has a good eye, Avide sensitive nostril, strong
courageous head and sound constitution.
His pedigree in short is as follows: —
Tredennis was sire of winners of over £133,000 in stakes,
including Bachelor’s Double (winner of £10,537 in stakes,
and sire of winners of over £120,775 in stakes), Golden Myth
(one of the best stayers of recent years, winning Ascot Gold
Cup, &c., and £15,255 in stakes), Soldennis (£8682),
Bachelor’s Wedding (winner of the Irish Derby, and a cham-
pion performer in India, winning King Emperor Cup, Viceroy
Cup twice, &c.), Hornet’s Beauty (champion sprinter of his
day), &c. Crowden, a winner herself, and half-sister to
Offaly (winner of £2065 in stakes as a two-year-old), and
Land Lady, dam of Bright Land, Bright Maid, and Alleto;
Bushey Park, son of Hampton; Aideen, dam of Flying
Aid, Ossoric, Silver Roi, A.A., Land Agent, and Red Girsha;
Hackler, son of Petrarch; Aida, dam of Athel (winner of
22 races), Yictrix (winner of ten races), and Love Letter,
dam of Love Lost, Stormy Hill and Girl Graduate, dam of
Hackler’s Girl, Lady Anna, Lady Low, &c.
In ORNAMENTATION the stud has another ideal sire, a
splendid example of the English thoroughbred. He was
bred in 1920, and is by Tracery (19) from Document (26),
by Spearmint (1) from Doctrine, by Ayrshire (8). He is a
good looking bay horse with black points and one of the
highest qualitied horses to arrive in Australia in recent
years, with a sweet temper, perfect head and quarters that
reveal immense driving power. Ornamentation won many
races before leaving England, including the Edinburgh Gold
Cup II miles, at both 4 and 5 years old, finishing up by win-
ning five races straight —the Ayr Montrose Handicap of one
mile three furlongs, Ayr July Handicap same distance, Red-
car Handicap II miles, Edinburgh Gold Cup II miles, and
Newcastle Autumn Handicap of one mile one furlong. His
sire produced winners of £135,802, one of his sons, Papyrus,
being a Derby winner, and another, Abbot’s Trace, now a
leading sire in England. His dam is half-sister to Sun
Worship, the dam of Solario, who won the St. Leger and who
is full for 1927, 1928 and 1929 at 500 guineas. The dam
of Ayrshire is a half-sister to No Trumps, the grand dam
of Gloaming, the record stake winner of Australasia. With
such good breeding Ornamentation is sure to prove an ac-
quisition to Australian blood stock.
His abbreviated table reads: —
The remaining stallion is DAVID (1), the soundest stayer
that has graced the Australian turf for many years. Foaled
NATIONAL CHANNEL RUNNING THROUGH CASTLE HILL
NO ORILI M, VICTORIA


A bove —
SPEARFELT
Above —
ARTILLERYMAN
A PAGE OF
WELL-KNOWN
THOROUGHBREDS
Right-
KING INGODA
Below—
MURRAY KING
Below —
BIPLANE
NOORILIM, VICTORIA


IN THE NOORILIM GARDEN
in 1917, David had a wonderful career as a racehorse,
winning £31,410 in stakes and beating classic fields. Out of
124 starts he has to his credit 20 wins, 15 seconds and 13
thirds, and was retired to the stud at nine years of age. A
quiet dispositioned brown horse, he is full of the highest
breeding, and contains more bone than a Clydesdale. No
bandage has ever been round his leg, and he never missed
a morning’s work through leg trouble. At Noorilim to-day
he appears to have thickened out considerably, and is pro-
bably the heaviest thoroughbred in the country. Soundness
and stamina are his great qualities, and those who have seen
his foals speak most highly of them.
By Baverstock (9) (1911) out of Linotype (1912), by Linad’e
■ —Zenta, his lineage runs through an
extraordinary combination of great
stayers and proved sires, St. Simon (11)
appearing twice in the fourth section
of his pedigree, also Barcaldine (23),
with Musket, Eobinson Crusoe (13),
Isinglass (13), and Goldsbrough (13)
in the same remove. Zenta, Linacre
(imp., 8), Wakeful and Maltster (21),
the latter running second in a Mel-
bourne Oup, are the grand sires and
grand dams on both sides, whilst right
back are found Galopin (3), Hermit
(5), Toxophilite (3), Ormonde (16),
Sylvia (13), and Chrysolite (13).
Noorilim therefore possesses material
of unsurpassed quality, and should
enjoy a big future as a thoroughbred
stud, for with the value of high-class
thoroughbreds never higher than it is
to-day, breeders may be sure of obtain-
ing their heart’s desire from the pure
blood stock bred at Noorilim. In the
following list of yearlings to come up
for sale in 1928 will be recognised all
the attributes of thorough breeding,
and they should make a wide appeal.
YEARLINGS FOR SALE 1928
Crowdennis— Spearhead—
Ramson (bay filly) Starlike (bay filly)
Kuningada (brown colt) Gigolette (bay filly)
Regality (bay filly) Queen of Florence (brown colt)
Battlescene (bay filly) King Cup (bay colt)
Saintie (brown colt) All Black-Sans Repos (bay filly)
Vocal Princess (brown filly) Comedy King—
Circus Queen (bay filly) Camilla (brown filly)
Greek Girl (chestnut colt) Evensong (bay colt)
Siris (chestnut filly) Switch (bay filly)
Glowworm (bay colt) Imoto (brown colt)
Spearhead— Maison de Blanc (brown colt)
Polylogy (bay colt) Pistyll (bay filly)
Afterglow (brown colt) Lausanne (brown colt)
Lady Victoria (bay colt) Valais —
Queen Comedy (brown colt) Queen of Night (bay colt)
Beryllia (bay filly)
VIEW SHOWING STUD STABLES AND PADDOCKS
NOO R IL IM, VI C TORI A


KHANCOBAN, UPPER MURRAY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Property of Captain Colin J. Chisholm.
ONE of the most interesting and, at the same time,
attractive properties on the Upper Murray is
Khancoban, the home of Captain Colin J. Chis-
holm, situated up the river on the New South Wales side
about 110 miles from Albury, and 13 miles from Corry-
1 he property comprises 9000 acres of freehold and
7000 acres annual lease. It has a double frontage to
Swampy Plains River, also a double frontage to Swamp
Creek. It is divided into about thirty paddocks,
each being permanently watered, and all are wire
MRS. COLIN CHISHOLM IN FRONT OF KHANCOBAN HOMESTEAD
ong, Victoria. The homestead is 21 miles as the crow
flies from Kosciusko. It stands out as one of the most
valuable properties in the district.
Khancoban has been in the family for three generations,
and was originally purchased from Messrs. Charles and
Henry Douglas by Captain Chisholm’s grandfather, the
late Mr. Thomas Mitchell, and was inherited by Captain
Chisholm in 1921 from his uncle, Mr. J. F. H. Mitchell.
netted and free from rabbits. Considerable money has
been expended on the fencing, and Khancoban can pro-
bably claim to be one of the best fenced properties in
Australia. When in these days noxious weeds are spread-
ing so rapidly in many districts, it is much to be able to
say that the area under Captain Chisholm’s management
is free from every class of noxious vegetation.
The river flats are some of the richest in Australia, as


FAT HEREFORD BULLOCKS ON THE PROPERTY
all English grasses, rye, strawberry clover, &c., can be
grown there, also all kinds of garden produce. The
creek flats grow excellent lucerne, of which crop there
are two established paddocks. The average annual rain-
fall is about 30 inches.
The homestead, which has been rebuilt during the
past four years, is constructed of reinforced concrete, and
consists of twenty-two rooms, all lighted throughout from
a hydro-electric machine. The whole scheme is based
upon the principle adopted at Niagara, and is run on a
low head turbine.
In addition to improvements made to the homestead,
Captain Chisholm has during his occupancy of the pro-
perty built eighteen loose boxes, feed rooms, two stallion
VIEW OF KHANCOBAN HOMESTEAD
KII A N C O B A N, NE W S() UT H WAL E S


FACING THE CAMERA-STUD HEREFORD CATTLE ON KHANCOBAN
FAT BULLOCKS IN PATHFINDER’S PADDOCK
K II AN C O B A N, N E I V S 0 U TII IV A L E S


boxes, stud groom’s house and garage, all of reinforced
concrete. He has also installed a gravitation water
supply scheme, which provides an unlimited flow for
every conceivable purpose.
Captain Chisholm is deeply interested in the breeding
of stud blood stock. The three stallions he has in his
stud are Dignity (imp.), which was the first Gains-
borough horse in Australia; Red Dennis (imp.), the sire
of the Melbourne Cup winner Sister Olive; and Cam-
cows. It is founded on local blood, and a number of
the leading animals are registered in the Australian Here-
ford Herd Book. Although essentially a cattle property,
Khancoban always carries a few sheep, and frequently
large numbers are taken on agistment or as a fattening
proposition.
Captain Chisholm represents four generations on both
sides of his family who have been closely associated with
the pastoral industry of Australia, and is the descendant
DEHORNED SHORTHORN BULLOCKS ON KHANCOBAN
huscan, who is by Paddington (imp.). The blood mares
comprise, amongst others, All Serene; Wedge’s half-sister,
Rcdside; Mercenary Mary (imp.) ; Emelie, half-sister to
Valiant, and dam of the Tasmanian champion, Probity.
Khancoban is a very fine fattening property. It car-
ries about 2000 head of cattle, and about 1000 bullocks
are turned off each year. These bullocks are well known
in the southern markets, and very frequently top the mar-
ket at Melbourne and Ballarat.
Captain Chisholm also runs on Khancoban a herd of
pure Hereford cattle, consisting of over 200 breeding
of those fine old pioneers who in the face of hardship and
difficulties succeeded in placing Australia in the forefront
of the world’s pastoral activity. Wollogorang, in the
Goulburn district, now owned by Mr. Leo Watson, was
originally owned by his grandfather, the late Mr. J. W.
Chisholm. Captain Chisholm is the son of Dr. William
Chisholm, late of Macquarie-street, Sydney, and was edu-
cated at the Sydney Grammar School. At the conclusion
of his studies there he proceeded to England and entered
Trinity College, Cambridge, where he toook his B.A.
degree. From Cambridge he passed on to the array, and
K II A A' C () n A X, A' K If S 0 U TII IT AL E S


MRS. COLIN CHISHOLM
ON HER PONY CALLS
A HALT BEFORE FORD-
ING SWAMP CREEK
K // A N C 0 B A \. N K JT S O U TII WAL E S


ANOTHER VIEW OF KHANCOBAN
HOMESTEAD, SURROUNDED BY
TREES AND WITH STUD HERE-
FORD COWS AND CALVES
IN THE FOREGROUND
KIIA N C O BA N, NE W S 0 U TII TV AL E S


A SCENE OF CONTENTMENT
AMONGST THE FAT BULLOCKS
DEPASTURED ON THE RICH
PASTURES OF KHANCOBAN
A' II ANCOB A N, NE W SOU T H W A LES


LOOSE BOXES
FOR THOROUGH-
BRED YEARLINGS
KHANCOBAN
HOMESTEAD IS
OF BUNGALOW
STYLE WITH COOL
WIDE VERANDAHS
KIIANCO n A N, NE JV S O UT II JV AL E S


THE THOROUGHBRED STAL-
LION DIGNITY (IMP.), A NOT-
ABLE SIRE AT KKHANCOBAN
KII A N C () B A N, N E W S OUT II IF A LES


SUMMER STORM
CLOUDS OVER MOUNT
ELLIOTT-A STOOKED
CROP OF OATEN HAY
IN THE FOREGROUND
LUXURIANT NATIVE
PASTURES ON
CLAY BROOK, PART
OF KHANCOBAN
A WIDE STRETCH
OF THE SWAMPY
PLAINS RIVER
K II A N C O B A N, N E JV S O U TII IF AL E S


A VIEW OF THE
INDI VALLEY
A ROUND-UP OF FAT
BULLOCKS ON THE
RICH RIVER FLATS
KIIANC 0 B A N, A r EIF S()U T II WAL E S


A PICTURE OF THE SWAMPY PLAINS RIVER FROM THE COOL SHADE OF A EUCALYPTUS TREE.
held a commission in the Ninth Lancers, with which re-
giment he served throughout the war. He was twice
wounded, at Ypres in 1915 and at Roisel in 1918, and
was mentioned in despatches. He went on the reserve of
officers in 1919 after twelve months with the army of
occupation in Germany. He returned to Australia in
1920 and took up the active management at Khancoban.
Captain Chisholm takes a great interest in local affairs.
He is a member of the local Tumbarumba Shire Council
and a Justice of the Peace. He is also president, 1928,
of the Towong Turf Club, and has for the past five
years been President of the Corryong and L T pper Murray
Agricultural and Pastoral Society. Recently he was
elected a life member of the Albury Racing Club in
recognition of his services in endeavouring to raise the
standard of racing in the country.
KII A XC 0 B A X, X K JV S 0 U T H WAL E S












