

Pastoral Letter
OF THE
CARDINAL ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY
To the Clergy of the Diocese.
Very Reverend and Dear Fathers in Christ,
It becomes my pleasing duty to invite your hearty
co-operation and that of your generous parishioners
in aid of St. Mary’s Cathedral Building Fund.
St. Mary’s has many claims, not alone on this city
and Archdiocese, but on all the Faithful of the
Australian Church. It is the Mother Church of
all our Australian Colonies, the tirst sacred edifice
erected beneath the Southern Cross by Catholic
hands to the glory of the Most High. It links the
Clergy and our Catholic people of to-day with the
first zealous missionaries and the pioneers of the
Faith in this fair land. Many of the worshippers
in old St. Mary’s were exiles from their native land,
whose only crime was religion and love of country.
Surrounded as the Faithful were in those days by
countless difficulties, they nevertheless persevered
in the practice of religion, and handed down to us
the traditions of their piety. They sowed the spiri-
tual seed in tears amid scenes of moral desolation
and depravity that have seldom been surpassed. In
the present season of comparative peace, whilst the
blessings of religious equality are diffused through-
out the length and breadth of the Australian Colonies,
we enjoy as a heritage the fruits of their labours and
the happy results of their unswerving fidelity to the


Faith. We owe it to their heroic constancy, to the
traditions of the piety of our fathers, to the dignity
of the Catholic Church to which we belong, to the
grand future which awaits this great Australian
Commonwealth, that St. Mary’s would be as perfect
a religious shrine and as complete a Cathedral as
our means may permit.
Four years ago, during the festive solemnities
which marked the first centenary celebration of this
colony, our Catholic community engaged in the task
of bringing to completion the Sanctuary portion of
St. Mary’s. This important work was inaugurated,
in the presence of the assembled Australian Gover-
nors, at a public meeting in the Cathedral, that for
its numbers, enthusiasm, splendour, and success, was
second to none of the many joyous celebrations
which marked that historic occasion. The work
thus inaugurated has been happily completed, and
this completion of the Cathedral Sanctuary was
duly commemorated by a solemn festive celebration
every way worthy of the Australian Church.
The purpose of the present appeal to your gene-
rosity is to enable our Building Committee to pay
off the debt which still remains on the works thus
completed, and to carry on some minor works with-
out which the interior decorations cannot securely
be proceeded with.
It may not be inopportune to here insert some
extracts from the Circular issued in connection with
the opening ceremony of the Cathedral Sanctuary,
as they present several particulars which cannot fail
to be interesting to your devoted parishioners :
“ Old St. Mary’s leads back our thoughts to the
dark and dreary days when the first Priests, officially
recognized by the Government, landed on the
Australian shores. Its foundations were cemented


with the tears of many a poor, suffering exile. So
manifold were the difficulties which, at every step,
beset the progress of the work, that nothing less
than the indomitable energy and the heroic
devotedness of Father Therry could inspire the
faithful with courage to proceed with the building.
St. Mary’s was as yet unfinished, the walls were not
plastered, and the pillars, giant trees of iron-bark
from the Illawarra forests, were unfurnished with
their cedar mouldings, when, on the 29th June, 1836,
the Cathedral was dedicated to Divine worship by
the Eight Eev. Dr. Folding, then bearing the title
of Vicar Apostolic of New Holland. Men at that
time murmured at the ‘ audacious pretensions ’ of
Father Therry in presuming to design so vast and
so imposing a structure for Catholic worship. How-
ever, the rapid growth of the colony and the genuine
religious spirit of the people very soon more than
justified his expectations, and within twenty years
from its dedication, it was deemed expedient to
enlarge St. Mary’s, and at the same time to add to
its exterior decoration. Considerable sums were
expended in this reconstruction of the Cathedral,
and the work was far advanced towards completion,
when on the night of the 29th June, 1865, a
destructive fire reduced the whole sacred edifice to
ruin.”
“ This terrible disaster so far from lessening the
ardor of the citizens seemed rather to confirm them
in their resolve that the Mother Church should he
worthy of Australia. Without delay they declared
their resolve that a New St. Mary’s should arise,
phoenix-like, in redoubled splendour, from the ashes
of the Old Cathedral. The Protestant citizens vied
with the Catholics in contributing to the great work,
and within a fortnight a sum of £15,000 was placed
in the hands of Archbishop Folding as a pledge and


presage that the generosity of Australia’s sons would
enable him to complete St. Mary’s in a manner
worthy of the Catholic worship, and worthy of
Australia’s glorious destiny.”
“ New plans for re-erecting the Cathedral in richly
decorated Gothic style were furnished hy Mr.
Wardell, one of the most distinguished architects of
Pugin’s school. The difficulties connected with the
foundations were gradually overcome, and the
ceremony of the Solemn Blessing of the foundation
stone was performed hy the Most Bev. Dr. Polding,
Archbishop of Sydney, on the Bth December, 1868;
whilst, at the same time, a Special Blessing and
Indulgence was granted by the Sovereign Pontiff,
Pius the Ninth, to all who would contribute towards
the great work of building up this Mother Church
of Australasia under the invocation of our Blessed
Lady The Help oe Christians.”
“ There is one feature in the erection of St. Mary’s
Cathedral which it may he well to recall to mind.
Though in a material way it may he looked upon as
a new building, yet, in the religious point of view,
it must rather be regarded as a resurrection or
revival of the earlier sacred edifice. As far back as
the 6th of July, 1865, only one week after the
destructive fire, Archbishop Polding, addressing the
assembled faithful, used the following words: —
‘ Our dear old Cathedral of St. Mary is now in ruins. About
that building were many sweet memories sacred thoughts which
may not be uttered, associations of those that are no longer amongst
us mingling with those that still are with us. These, these, my
friends ; of these what shall we say? No human work is a mere
material thing. It has associations which can never be destroyed.
There does exist a unity between the past and the future. There
are those still living who were present when the foundations of
St. Mary’s were laid. The memory of the good Father Therry
has not yet faded away. There are other memories also connecting
the past with the present, and which will connect them with the


future. Resurrection is not a creation; and though St. Mary’s
now lies lowly, as it were, in her tomb, yet she shall rise again
more glorious and more stately than heretofore. In the meantime,
these sweet thoughts and sacred memories shall remain undecaying
within our breasts. Though always dear to us, they are now
more dear than ever we thought until this calamity befel us.
Those sacred thoughts and sweet memories will remain when we
shall see the new building rise; they will entwine themselves
about each stone of it and hallow to our minds the glorious
structure. Not one link of the connection between the former
St. Mary’s and the future St. Mary’s will ever be broken.’
“ These words accurately express the sentiments
of the clergy and faithful of the present day no less
than of the past generation; and when St. Mary’s
shall stand arrayed in all its complete perfection, not
one of the endearing reminiscences of the first
beginnings of the sacred structure shall be forgotten.”
“ Before the close of Archbishop Folding’s Epis-
copate in 1877, something over £46,000 was expended
in preparing the foundations and carrying on the
Cathedral works. The late illustrious Archbishop,
Dr. Vaughan, devoted his giant energies to the same
great cause, and after an additional expenditure of
£55,000 on the main building, or in the internal
fittings, lie had the consolation of dedicating the
sacred edifice, in a temporary way, for Divine wor-
ship on the Bth September, 1882. The opening
ceremony on that occasion was celebrated with an
eclat and religious splendour which gave joy and
consolation to the whole Australian Church.
“ During the past years further contracts have
been entered into, completing the North Gable and
Sanctuary, and the main arches of the central
Tower ; which contracts, together with the internal
fittings, involved an outlay of £11,500, Thus,
twenty-one years from the blessing of the founda-
tion stone by Archbishop Folding, thanks to the
generosity and untiring exertions of the clergy and


faithful people and to the unwearied devotedness of
the Cathedral Committee, a considerable portion of
the great Cathedral has been completed, and the
Sanctuary of St. Mary’s has been dedicated to
Divine worship.”
The present debt on the Cathedral Building is
about £6OOO, and further instalments amounting to
£2600 have to he paid within two years.
I avail of this opportunity to intimate to the
Clergy of the Diocese that a School-Council, presided
over by my venerated Auxiliary Bishop, has been
formed, having special reference to the parochial
schools of this city and the suburbs. I trust that
the successful results attendant on its proceedings
may soon justify the enlarging of its sphere of duties
so as to embrace all our Diocesan schools. A Circular
will he addressed to you in a few days setting forth
the work assigned to this School-Council. I desire
at present merely to mention that it was my parti-
cular request to its members that they would not
give any intimation of their intended visits to the
schools of their respective districts, to the intent
that their reports may thus the more accurately
represent the everyday working of those excellent
schools.
Considerable emulation has been shown by the
pupils of several of our parochial schools at the
examinations for the Diocesan prizes offered during
the past year. Similar prizes will he offered for
competition before the close of the current year.
All the children attending the parochial schools
may compete for those prizes, hut the prize-winners
of last year, though they will receive due honourable
mention, shall not he entitled to a prize in the same
subjects in which they have already been crowned
with success. As regards the limit of age and other


regulations, special instructions will be forwarded to
the schools in due course.
In conclusion, I beg to remind the Venerable
Clergy that the usual Diocesan collections are to be
held in all the churches of the Diocese on the
prescribed days;
(a) The Collection for the Diocesan Mission
Eund, on the first Sunday of Lent.
(h) The Collection in aid of the Missions to the
Aboriginals, on the first Sunday of May.
(c) The Collection for the Peter’s Pence, on the
Sunday within the Octave of SS. Peter
and Paul.
(d) The Collection for the Diocesan Education
Pund, on the first Sunday of October.
Wishing you an abundance of every Blessing, I
remain
Your faithful Servant in Christ,
f PATRICK ERANCIS CARDINAL MORAN,
Archbishop of Sydney.
St. Mary's Cathedral,
24th January, 1892.
N.B.—The next Conference will be held on Wednesday, 27th of April.
Subject: De Sacramentis Baptismi, Confirmationis et Eucharistiae : et De
Rubricis Missae. Sacred Scripture : Evangelium S. Matthaei. Catechetical
Instruction : Duties of parents in regard to their children.


ORDER OF VISITATIONS
1892.
April 30 Milton
May 8 Yatta Yatta
„ 5 Nowra
„ 9 Kangaroo Valley
„ 11 Berry
„ 13 Gerringong
„ 14 Kiama
June 1 Clifton
ORDER OF VISITATIONS
IN THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT.
1892.
Sept. 1 Braid wood
„ 5 Corong
Oct. 13 Pambula
„ 17 Eden
„ 7 Mongarlow
„ 8 Major’s Creek
„ 10 Araluen
„ 19 Rocky Hall
„ 20 Cathcart
„ 21 Bornbala
„ 24 Delegate
„ 13 Reidsdale
„ 15 Moruya
„ 19 Nelligen
„ 27 Nimitybelle
„ 21 Bateman’s Bay
„ 22 Mogo
Nov. 2 Adaminaby
„ 23 Bodalla
„ 4 Cooma
„ 26 Eurobodalla
„ 29 Cobargo
Oct. 3 Coloml >o
„ 5 Candelo
„ 7 Bega
12 Wolumbla
IN THE SOUTH COAST DISTRICT,
May 17 Jamberoo
„ 19 Sbellharbour
„ 21 Albion Park
„ 21 Dapto
„ 26 Wollongong
„ 30 Bulli
„ 8 Michelago
„ 11 Queanbeyan
M 14 Hoskinstown
„ 16 Captain’s Flat
„ 18 Bungendore
„ 29 Buckley’s Crossing
„ 31 Moonbar
