

PATRIOTIC SENTIMENTS
THE CHINESE
AND
POLYNESIAN QUESTIONS
3B TcT
A FUTURE LEGISLATOR & PROBABLE PREMIER.
(So Sir Henry Pakkes and Sir John Robertson may bk on the look out for
A FRIENDLY RIVAL.)
PRICE, SIXPENCE.
Published by the
124 ELIZABETH STREET, SYDNEY.
/ .
BRITISH-AUSTRALIAN PUBLISHING COMPANY,




DEDICATION.
To His Imperial Majesty, the Emperor of China,
Sire,
Your Majesty recollects the well-known maxim of
the sublime Con-foo-tse, of happy memory, or of one of the other
numerous immortal sages of your Celestial Empire,—“ Where you
are welcome, go but seldom : where you are not welcome go
not at all.”
It affords me great pain to have to quote this in reference
to your Majesty’s industrious subjects • but circumstances
render it, in the opinion of many of us, dangerous to accord them
an unrestricted welcome at present.
I would, therefore, make so bold as to approach your
Majesty’s exalted throne, with a view of suggesting, in a most
friendly spirit, that the undeveloped resources of your extensive
dominions be opened up, and thus not only afford ample employ-
ment to your subjects, in their own flowery native land, but also
increase their trade with other nations, to the pleasure and profit
of all.
I have the honor to be, Sire,
Your Majesty’s Subjects’ Well-wisher,
The Author.




PATRIOTIC SENTIMENTS
ON THE
Chinese and Polynesian Questions.
0X8000c?£oCOC8-«i« —
Most great men have their favourite pastimes. I have mine;
but few would guess it. Such being the case, I have no objection
to enlighten the public. It is to gaze,—sometimes for hours at a
stretch, —upon the map of Oceania, and to people it, or, at least,
the Australasian part of it, with a mighty nation of confede-
rated states, chiefly of Anglo-Saxon origin, but wholesomely
mixed by a fair proportion from other civilized stocks. I love
to transplant into this confederation of mine the whole of
Anglo-Saxonia of the British Islands, including, of course, our
beloved Sovereign and every member of her august family ; thus
converting the United Kingdom into a mere outpost of our Greater
Britain here, or handing it—the United Kingdom—over alto-
gether to such as may prefer to cling to the climates, supersti-
tions, &c., &c., of the old world. I love to see my empire, in
this most favoured part of our planet, not over-populated, but
possessing a sufficiently powerful British element to enable us,
without danger of being supplanted or swamped by any other
nation, or enslaved by any irresponsible commercial or spiritual
association, to offer a welcome and a home amongst us to all who
may desire and deserve it, for many generations to come.
But, alas ! the Mongol and the Kanaka are throwing their
dread shadows upon my brilliant picture, and make my eyes sore
and heart ache. It is nonsense to argue that they are but a
species of machinery. Take a threshing machine, put a sufficient
number of Mongols or Kanakas in its place, and calculate the
difference. The machine gives employment in its manufacture and
working to Europeans, whilst the Asiatic and Kanaka deprive
them of it. The machine cannot procreate or invite over other
machines when not wanted. The Mongol and Polynesian can and
do, to an alarming extent. The machine can be put away or
destroyed at pleasure. The Mongol and Kanaka cannot. The
machine makes food more abundant. The Kanaka and Mongol


consume it. The machine costs nothing for police protection,
neither does it encumber our charitable institutions. The Mongol
and Kanaka do. The machine cannot be used by any Grand
Llama, or any other man-god for our enslavement. The Mongol
and Kanaka can and will, as soon as the races become somewhat
balanced. The arch-enemy of the human race and modern
progress is watching all this with the greatest complacency. To
the Mongol and Kanaka his crafty, unscrupulous, and insidious,
fat-headed, rolling-eyed agents will appear as beings of a super-
human order ; and, woe, woe, woe unto us if they become imbued
with his spirit and enlist under his banner. But I must forbear,
lest I furnish him and pseudo-liberals with a catch cry.
With regard to the Mongol supplanting the European artisan,
I have seen it argued, in the papers : “ Who but the great bulk of
the community would gain by it ?” Extend this argument a little
further and say :
1. —We pay European policemen 7s. a day, we could get
Mongols for perhaps Is. Who but the great bulk of the com-
munity would gain by it ?
2. —We pay doctors a guinea a visit. Chinese medical gentle-
men would be content with fourpence. Who but the great bulk
of the community would gain by it ?
3. —We pay two or three shillings for a small advertisement in
an Anglo-Saxon paper. In a Mongolian journal we could get the
same for three farthings. Who but the great bulk of the com-
munity would gain by it?
4. —We pay our Anglican bishop about two thousand a year,
and’the Roman archbishop I don’t know how much. We could
get his Man-godship, the Grand Llama himself, for probably as
much as either of those gentlemen pay their cooks, butlers, grooms,
or footmen. Who but the great bulk of the community would
gain by it ?
5. —We pay European governors seven or eight thousand a
year. We could get a first-class mandarin for less than their
excellencies pay their valets. Who but the great bulk of the com-
munity would gain by it ?
And so on with regard to every walk and position in life.
But who or what, I ask, would the great bulk of the community
be, who would benefit by all this ? Who or what would they be ?
I answer, with indignation and palpitating heart, — Chinese !
“Yes ; but then,” say others, “ there is no fear of that. The
European can hold his own against the Chinkey any day. It
would be an insult to him to suppose otherwise.” Let me ask, in
reply : “ Can a European cabinet-maker or market-gardener do
so ? Can the American washerwoman compete with the Chinese
washerman ? Can the British nurse-girl, in Queensland, compete
with her rival the black nurseman, footman, coachman, and wood-
man combined, at 2s. 6d. per week ?


True we might to a certain extent, —and, for various reasons,
to a certain extent only,—hold our own against Mongolian and
Polynesian competitors, by submitting to the same treatment and
contenting ourselves with the same pay. I would sooner an Asi-
atic cholera would not only decimate, but absolutely annihilate all
my European fellow-colonists in one night, without leaving me
behind, than that they should be reduced to that necessity.
Surely no one possessing a heart at all could wish them
brought down to that level! Almost any European treatment is
an improvement on the Mongol’s or Polynesian’s home life; but is
that the case with most of us ? Is it for this British pluck and
energy procured us these noble regions % Is it for this Britons
and other Europeans have torn themselves from those nearest and
dearest to them, and crossed the wide sea 1 Is it for this natives
were born and reared in this country 1 ? “Oh !” I say again, “ may
none of us live to see the like ! ”
“ But,” it is asked, “ is it right to check the ingress of the
Chinese, when our Imperial Government is forcing British and
Indian trade upon their country ? ” My answer is, let us induce
the Imperial Government to relinquish its acquired trading rights
in China, and compensate it for its losses in that respect. I, for
one, would willingly consent to be taxed for that purpose; especi-
ally, when taking into consideration the most princely and lovable
manner, in which we have been treated by the generous Home
Authorities. But I feel perfectly persuaded that, even without
compensation, our countrymen in Great Britain would sooner
forego their trade with China than suffer these lovely shores, this
grand property of theirs, this greater land of promise for them and
their children after them, to be Mongolized or Kanakaized.
Well, then, what are we to do with the Chinese of Hongkong,
who are British subjects % Are they not to be allowed to come
and go as they please ? That difficulty could easily be got over
by handing Hongkong back to China, or by granting it independ-
ent sovereignty. It has always seemed to me a mistake to force
the glorious privilege of British citizenship (how dearly bought by
our valiant and noble ancestors !) upon those who are not suffi-
ciently developed to appreciate them. The idea of forcing that
inestimable boon upon the Chinese ! In any case, it is of far more
importance to maintain the British character of this future Greater
Britain, than retain that little Mongolian island. For my part, I
would .sooner be a British artisan in Australia, than be king of it.
My vote is therefore for emphatic restriction. Let the Chinese
who are here already be well treated, without however being too
easily allowed to acquire political rights; but let their immigration
be forthwith greatly checked. Nay, I would even consent to
authorize the Government, to help as many of the Chinese as
might wish to do so, back to their own country, even with some
thing in their pockets to land with. This would, of course, run


up the piice of certain, vegetables ; but I would much rather pay
a thousand per cent, more for my cabbages, or even do without
them at all, and have prosperous Caucasian neighbours about me,
than swim in cabbages and turnip-tops, even at less than nothing
per bushel, at the price of seeing free and enlightened Europeans
reduced to the necessity of competing, for a wretched subsistence,
with Chinese or Polynesians.
Let the reader place himself, as I have done, at the corner of
Pitt and Hunter Streets, or at any other busy corner in the city,
and watch the passengers. He will be surprised at the large pro-
portion of Celestials, who will pass in review before him. I should
say that, taking male adults, between twenty and fifty years of
age, he will find one out of six or seven Chinamen.
“ If,” to use the language of Sir Henry Parkes,—and indeed
my own language, long before the honourable gentleman was
reported as having uttered it; —“ if the Chinese came in twos and
threes, and were lost in the great bulk of the community,” very
few of us would object, as long as they behaved themselves. But,
since the great trading companies of China have their hoses turned
on upon our fair land, and threaten to deluge us with their slaves
and bondmen, we most emphatically do object.
In fine, use any argument you may in favor of the Chinese
or Kanakas, we decline to be supplanted or swamped by them.
The most philanthropic advocates for the unresti’icted importation
of these two classes of immigrants would object to b© themselves
supplanted,—ay, 1 may venture to say,—even by archangels.
%*"* k * *
Perhaps, in the present state of affairs, the following papers,
on the Chinese and Polynesian questions respectively, may not be
without interest to my fellow-citizens.
The first, —that on the Chinese Question, —was written for the
Sydney Mail , at the end of ’7B, just before the conclusion of the
seamen’s strike. I was commissioned to write a series of articles
on the subject; and that was my first. Knowing how thoroughly
the Herald and Mail differed from me in the matter, I wrote in
the first person singular. It could, therefore, have been published
without identifying those papers with my views; and I was not
without hope of converting my employers. With this object, I
sent a little note to the editor to the effect, that if, after reading
the production, he saw fit to “ tack” a little, 1 knew how it could
be done with honor and increased popularity. My contribution
was promptly declined, —in kindly and courteous terms, however,
—and another writer employed, who took the other side—John’s.
I was the dismissed Balaam, (It is just possible some may prefer
to consider me more like that gentleman’s ass.) I was hired to
curse ; but lam blessed if I could. The patronage of such dis-
tinguished journals as the Mail and Herald would indeed have
been of immense assistance to me, at the time ; but, really, I don’t


think I could have had the heart to help to ruin my fine jack-
tars, and bring poverty, want, and degradation upon their wives
and little ones even for an Empire; let alone a mere Herald, Mail,
or female. I don’t, for a moment, wish, in the most indirect man-
ner, to hint that the proprietors of the Mail had any such inten-
tion, The patriotism and philanthropy of Messieurs Fairfax are
perhaps almost as well established as my own. The only differ-
ence between us is, that, owing to various circumstances, it was
given to me to see, two years and a half ago, that which is forcing
itself upon their vision now. For they are “ tacking;” and more power
to them for it. All who have ever, in the first instance, refused
my contributions, or declined to enter into my plans, have invari-
ably, in the end, come to see as I saw.
The second paper,—signed Timothy Wobblechops,—was to
have been the first of a series of articles on the Polynesian ques-
tion, for a Queensland journal. The proprietor, though of my own
way of thinking on the subject, took fright, and returned my pro-
duction with compliments and thanks. Poor things to fill a
hungry stomach with ! He, soon after, went into the matter in a
more business-like style ; that is, by abusing certain employers of
Kanakas by name. The result was glorious. Not exactly the
abolition or even the restriction of Kanaka labor. No ; some-
thing better than that; —writs and lawyers’ letters from various
directions. 1 went to ray friend’s office, and patted him on the
back, on the appearance of his first article on the subject.
The third paper is a letter I addressed to a public meeting,
in the same town, on the Polynesian Question. This was published
in the journal just referred to.
No. I.
Prince Cagliastro on the Chinese Question*
“ I am in a place, where I am demanded of conscience to speak
the truth ; and, therefore, the truth I do speak ; ” so help me
the Melbourne Argus, would say.
Had I thought, Mr. Editor, that you wanted a mere flatterer,
a mere sycophant, a mere humbug, I could have recommended you
to plenty, who would have done the job far better than I,—and,
probably, for less than half the money ; —-as I have, unhappily,
always been but a sorry liar. But it was impossible for me to
think so, on your requesting me to supply you with nothing but
facts; —“hard, stubborn facts” were, I think, your exact words.
Nor am I in the least afraid of your treating me as Gil Bias was
treated by his employer the archbishop, on bis hinting, in the


most delicate language, a “ hard, stubborn fact.” Perhaps some
of your readers are a little rusty on the story. It may, therefore,
not be much out of place to tell it them. Well, Gil Bias was
particularly requested, by his most reverend master, not to hesitate
to let him know when his sermons began to deteriorate, as he was
most jealous, that his reputation as a preacher should go down to
posterity undimmed. The time arrived, when poor Gil Bias
thought it his duty to do so. What was the consequence 1 The
archbishop took him by the shoulders, told him he lacked nothing
but better taste to enable him to make his way in the world, and
turned him out of his service.
No, Sir; I am not afraid of your treating me in that manner.
The proprietors of your journal have as much stake in the country,
in every conceivable way, as any person or persons in it; —not
even excepting the A. S. N. Company. If I were given my
choice, I would much prefer to be the owner of the Mail, Herald,
and Echo, to possessing every scrap of property of the A. S. N.
Company. In short, —“ not to put too fine a point on it,” —there
are few, if any, in all these colonies, who have greater interests in
Australasia, than the proprietors of your journal. You will, there-
fore, on their behalf, not only refrain from subjecting me to the
fate of Gil Bias, but, on the contrary, applaud me for supplying
useful “hard, stubborn facts,” though at first somewhat unpala-
table.
Hear some of my experience, in connection with this question,
amongst the lower and middle classes. I have not yet pumped or
fathomed the upper few. For, to tell you the truth, Sir, although
a prince, I am at present without a principality;—the rightful
owners keeping me out of my possessions. It will, therefore,
require some skilful manoeuvring to gain admission into Upper
Tendom. So, at present, please to accept my gleanings amongst
the lower and middle classes ; including, of course, the chief actors
—the strikers.
Shortly after the strike began, I found myself, one Saturday
afternoon, near the entrance to the A. S. N. Company’s wharf.
As I was about to pass through, a young man seized me by the
arm and asked me where I was going. I replied that I was just
strolling in to have a look round, if there was no objection. He
strongly advised me not to go to work for the Company, and
handed me a printed circular bearing on the subject. I hadn’t
been long on the wharf, when I was asked, by some one in the
Company’s livery, whom I was looking for, and informed that no
stranger was allowed inside the gates during the dinner hour. I
forthwith counterwheeled and had a long chat with a group of
strikers outside. There was no objectionable language used by
any one of them. They said that the strike had been forced upon
them, in consequence of the unmistakeable intention of the Com-
pany entirely to supersede them by Asiatic slaves.


I returned to the wharf on the following Monday,—not
during the dinner hour, —and managed to stroll about, for a few
minutes, watching the chinkeys and “ blacklegs ” at work ; but, as
soon as I was spotted by the aforesaid liveried worthy, I was
kindly informed that there was plenty of room outside.
A few days later, I found myself among the u tars,” under a
balcony near the Flagstaff. It was wet; and no meeting had been
held that morning. Most of the jacks were already gone home.
I joined the remainder in conversation, on the all-absorbing topic.
One man only spoke in favor of violent action. He was evidently
a silly, ignorant fellow. He said he had been in the Crimean war;
but he would be glad to see the Roosians come here. He would
assist them to get possession of the country, as he knew the Roosian
Government would treat the seamen a great deal better. This
strike made him ashamed of the name of Englishman,—of which
he had once been proud;—since it was the most harmless adjective
strike he had ever been in or heard of. In fact, the valiant striker
was in favor of striking, in a literal sense; that is, of violence,
slaughter, and I don’t know what. We tried to laugh it off, as
foolish joking; but he, with many oaths, assured us there was no
sanguinary mistake about the matter. He also recommended that
we should adopt the Females' Journal, as the favorite paper.
Listen : A few days after the disturbance in George Street, I saw
a fellow very much like hirfi with a very broken head. I earnestly
hope he was the man.
On the day on which the mediators announced the result of
their mediations, I went up the Flagstaff Hill and found the
strikers playing at rounders and leap-frog with a number of boys.
Poor fellows! they looked like children themselves. The games
ceased on the president mounting one of the benches. We sur-
rounded our “ dread commander,” and, on his giving the order,
we fell into procession for the Protestant Hall. I at first kept
them company, at a little distance, on the footpaths ; but, being
requested by a jolly old salt to fall in, so as to enable him to get
under the lee of my broad-brimmed hat, 1 instantly complied.
Why not? I have been in worse, though perhaps grander society.
The vexy best humor prevailed. The only violence we con-
templated was, impressing the German Band. Better counsels
prevailed; and we left them to blow their whistles and collect
their small coin till further orders. The meeting at the Hall
was most enthusiastic and orderly.
I was present at the meeting in Hyde Park, on the occasion
of the adoption of a petition to Parliament. A great deal of
twaddle was certainly indulged in by some of the speakers; but,
in other respects, it was very creditable. Some women there in-
formed me, that certain larrikins had made assaults upon some
Chinamen; which they strongly condemned, although they hoped,
in scarcely coxirtly language, that no more would be allowed to


land in the colony. If I spoke to one, lam sure I must have
done so to at least twenty different individuals, in various parts of
the Park ; and the verdict, in every instance, was emphatically
anti-Chinese. One or two seemed to think, that the slowness of
Parliament might necessitate more direct measures; but not one
was ready with a violent plan, that had the remotest sense or
coherence in it.
I don’t, as a rule, like to be lectured by ladies. I would
sooner be kissed by them any day; ugly as some, with insuf-
ficiently cultivated tastes, may consider me. But I, nevertheless,
went to hear Mrs. Britton’s lecture, a few Sunday evenings ago,
on the Chinese Question. I hope the fair orator, who, by the
way, announced herself as the daughter and sister of British
seamen, I hope she will forgive me; but, really, her discourse
appeared to me a long rigmarole, delivered in an unsweet manner.
Yet the theatre was densely crowded ; and the applause would
have been incessant, had the lecturess not shown repeated and
unmistakeable objections even to laudatory interruptions. The
lady must have made a good round hundred by the speculation.
How clearly this proves the great interest taken by the public
on the Chinese Question. Several ladies and gentlemen,—foreign
as well as British, —who were sitting near me, were most
emphatic in their condemnation of the conduct of the A. S. N.
Company. This was before the lecture commenced. After it
was over, a large portion of the audience formed themselves into
small groups, for further discussion of the subject. I joined one
of these knots, and asked how the strike was going to end. A
tall thin man replied, that it would terminate, like all such things
in New South Wales, in smoke. He asserted that half of the
men were sneaking back, and that the remainder would soon not
be wanted at any price. He was very bitter against the men ;
but I do not remember any argument he made iise of in support
of his case. I wonder who and what he was. Perhaps the .
I have had two or three conversations with a very intelligent
storekeeper, in one of the subiu-bs. He at first condemned this
agitation against the Chinese in strong terms. He said the next
thing that would be taken up would be the native cry; that is,
to exclude all but natives of New South Wales from the colony.
Then there would be some other grievance; and there was no
knowing where such nonsense would stop. For his part, he did
not care if a hundred and fifty thousand Chinese landed the very
next day, provided a hundred thousand became his customers.
These were actually his own words. On my suggesting, however,
that amongst the hundred and fifty thousand there might be
found some storekeepers, who might take a good many of his
customers away, by underselling him, —which they could easily do
through the mode of life, —his chops fell. My friend is not yet a


philo-striker; but his anti-striking utterances are becoming more
and more “ toned down.”
A wine and spirit merchant in this city, as also his cellarmau,
were great anti-strikers, until the possibility of competition in their
lines was hinted. Indeed, Sir, I can safely assure you that, in the
vast majority of cases, the favorers of Chinese immigration are
only such as fancy, that their respective trades or callings are not
likely to be injured thereby ; and even of such I have, I am thank-
ful to say, so far encountered but very, very few. I move about a
great deal, —in ’buses, steamers, restaurants, &c., &c.; —and the
almost universal verdict, amongst males and females, old and
young, most decidedly is against Chinese immigration.
It is also entertained as a decided opinion, that certain snob-
bish masters and mistresses are anxious to supplant European
employees altogether by Asiatics ; —the former on account of their
jealousy of European men, their equals; and the latter on account
of their being hurt at their inability to make attractive European
servant girls hide their charms, keep their places, and refrain from
competing in the beauty markets with their “ betters.” It pains
me to have to say, that there is more truth in these suppositions,
than one may, at first, be willing to believe.
The three most unpopular gentlemen in Sydney, at present,
are Mr, , Mr. , and the managing proprietor of the
Herald, &c. With regard to the last-named gentleman, the feeling
does not appear to be bitter. The impression seems to be, that he
is hoodwinked by a certain number of what are known, in the
grades below, as “ swells,” who have access to the office, and whose
brayings are mistaken by him either for philanthropy or advanced
public opinion. Of course you are in a better position than I, to
judge as to the correctness or otherwise of this. People seem to
be under the idea, that the “ old man,” as they affectionately call
the late lamented Mr. John Fairfax, would have acted differently.
Many assert, that the proprietors of your journal would find it
rather less profitable and agreeable to reside in the colony, if they
succeeded in inundating it with Chinese. Ah ! can any one really
doubt that for a single moment % Can you, Sir ?
It is frequently suggested, that some ought to start a penny
morning paper, in the interests of the working classes.
The case is different with reference to Mr. and Mr.
man, in this city, distinctly told me that, as far as the moral guilt
of the action was concerned, he would have no hesitation in send-
ing Mr, , pack-horse, to regions even warmer than the
tropics. The would-be exporter sternly asserts, without, for a
moment, allowing his assertion to be treated as a joke, that Mr.
is, by his course of conduct, daily committing greater
crimes; and that, therefore, he would do a positive good by rid-
ding the world of, and peopling the “ other place ” with, him.


Very nice and Jesuitic, I must say. But my friend has not yet
fixed a day for giving effect to his justifiable-homicidal principles,
because he cannot as yet relish the notion of wearing, even in the
cause of humanity, a tight hemp cravat. It is to be hoped that,
when he is ready, the becoming necktie may not be out of stock.
As to Mr. , a foreign barbar assures me that, in his
country, that gentleman would be served as the noble and heroic
Ehud served King Eglon. I shall not repeat my barbar acquaint-
ance’s exact words. They would scarcely sound euphonious in our
simple English. Let us hope, that the silly man’s tongue is the
worst part of him ; else it may, with all fairness, be doubted
whether it would be such a very great loss to the colony, if the
likes of him were supplanted by—almost anybody.
All this, and more that I could tell you, shows that we have
turbulent and blood-thirsty spirits amongst us. Very little would
set them going. There do exist people who seem to think, that
killing, slaying, hacking, tearing, burning, destroying is the proper-
mode for obtaining redress for anything. Such, for the most part,
do not in the least understand either the constitution of our
country, or the theory of government at all. Others do, but think
violence more expeditious, or have a natural craving for it. The
vast bulk of the strikers and anti-Chinese-immigrationists, how-
ever, are peace and order-loving people, and are quite convinced,
that they possess ample legitimate weapons, wherewith to carry on
and gain their battle. Many of the strikers much regret, that
they were forced to break their agreements with the Company,—
although those agreements were one-sided, and entered into under
different circumstances from those existing at present; —but ask,
“ What else were we to do 1 ” In fact, their excuse is much the
same as that made by Macaulay for the glorious revolutionists of
1688. The noble historian’s excuse for some of their acts is,—
that it was a revolution. The strikers’ excuse for breaking their
agreement is,—that it is a strike.
The same illustrious writer, (if I am not mistaken), points out
that, whilst an unjust execution was frequently witnessed with
comparative indifference, an illegal tax of a few shillings was often
sufficient to set the whole country, from one end to the other, in a
blaze of rebellion. Now why ? Because, in the latter case, a
common chord was touched. Everybody felt the injustice, in his
own proper individual person. It is so with the action of the
A. S. N. Company. Had they starved or cut the throats of all
the European seamen in their service, a thrill of horror would have
wrung every heart. Their widows and orphans would have
been liberally provided for ; and the cry for severe and immediate
punishment would have been loud and universal. But there
would not have been that uncertainty and alarm that people feel
now. No one is safe. No one knows what trade or calling will
be supplanted next? It is believed by many that the company


contemplate gradually superseding even the engineers and officers
by Chinamen, in the event of their coming out victorious of their
present struggle with the seamen.
The general impression is, that the action of the A. S. N.
Company in bringing the Mongolian sailors here, will prove a
Frankenstein one, and involve them and theirs in irretrievable
ruin. I remember telling the story of Frankenstein, some years
ago, to an audience consisting of a young mother and others, who
had not gone through an extensive course of reading. On its con-
clusion, the young matron sagely observed, that poor Frankenstein
committed a great blunder in not commencing by manufacturing
a little boy, instead of such a big ugly monster; because, the minor
creation could easily have been uncreated, if he had turned out
nasty. Well, Sir, the moral of this is, that, if the introduction of
Chinese here is a mistake, let it be stopped now, before it overmasters
ns. I tell you all this, Mr. Editor, as the genuine reflex of the
public mind of Sydney, as far as I have been able personally to
fathom it; and this public opinion your most obedient servant
most heartily endorses. Let us take proper action before more
vested interests are created.
I shall conclude this paper by a narration of ray adventures
amongst the strikers, &c., last Saturday. I got to Flagstaff Hill
at about ten in the morning. I chatted with the lads in groups
and individually till about twelve. They whiled away the time
in playing cards, reading books atid papers, talking, and, of course,
smoking. Much might be written on the use and abuse of the
weed; but you will excuse me from entering on the subject
present, as this is scarcely the place for it. But this I will say,
that, although I do not, in any sense, “solace myself with puffing,”
I would sooner see the community wade up to the chin in tobacco,
than venture even ankle deep in rum. However, as already hinted,
that’s neither here nor there just now. The chaps seemed cheerful
and happy. I learnt that they receive their allowance from the
Union regularly, and that they manage to keep the wolf from the
door with it. The single men, as you are aware, receive 17s. 6d.
a week, and the married ones 21s. The vast bulk of the men are
not Scandinavians, as has been asserted, but pure English. Of
course there is a fair admixture of natives from other parts of the
United Kingdom and of Australia. The foreigners,—-who are but
a very small minority,—are practically English; and the greatest
cordiality seems to subsist between them and the rest of the
strikers.
At about twelve o’clock, the president mounted a bench; and,
after cracking a few jokes with the men, read a letter offering work
for fifty or sixty of them, at eight and nine shillings a day. A
good few names were at once handed in ; but I was sorry to
observe, that there were some who showed a preference for making
forth er draws from the funds of the Union.


1 took part in the meeting in the Park, at three in the after-
noon. What a concourse ! After the speechifying was over, a
dispute ai’ose amongst the managers about the procession. But we
were not to be done out of it. No jolly fear, Harry B
wouldn’t see us wronged. So we formed I don’t know how many
deep; some going in one direction, and some in another. We
joined, however, somewhere. At the corner of King and Mac-
quarie Streets, we came across an omnibus at a standstill. A
celestial was sitting near the driver. He turned his head away,
with a look of the profoundest contempt. Some of the blackguards
accompanying the procession hissed him. We had been particu-
larly requested by our orators, before leaving the Park, not to take
the least notice of any Chinaman we might happen to meet. Just
past Mr. Friedman’s Clothing Factory, we met our delegates
returning from Government House. They ordered us to the
Haymarket. We wheeled down some street. When we got
opposite the Herald and Mail office, we gave, as in duty bound,
three hearty groans, with one more added. I had become so
hoarse listening to the orators on the monument, that mine were
rather feeble ones. Excuse me this offence, Mr. Editor. The
spirit was willing, but the flesh was weak. Never mind, I’ll make
up for it next time. See, if I don’t. We of course cheered the
Evening News. We then proceeded, with our band in our midst,
—(how we got hold of it I have no more idea than the King of
the Cannibal Islands), —up some other street, and marched thence
twenty thousand strong into G-e-o-r-g-e Street.
Hurrah ! hurrah! we sounded the jubilee !
Hurrah ! hurrah! Tom W carried the flag that’s to set us free !
As we went a-marching up G-e-o-r-g-e Street!
Oh, the bright eyes that beamed upon us from windows,
balconies, and doorsteps, as we went a-marching up G-e-o-r-g-e
Street !
Oh, the waving of handkerchiefs and the kissing of hands. It
was immaculately delicious !
In George Street we met two more buses with Chinamen.
In the first one, Johnny was sitting alongside the driver. He was
evidently a philosopher. He bowed, laughed, waved his hat, and
appeared to enjoy the sight, as if it had been got up for his especial
delectation and honor. We cheered him. I maintain he deserved
it. In the next ’bus, the Chinaman was inside. A ruffian spotted
him, jumped up on the step, pulled the poor fellow’s hat off, threw
it in the mud, and valiantly jumped on it. This noble action was
of course to be considered as emblematic of what the wretch would
have done to the owner, if he had dared to go a little fui'ther in
his patriotic bravery. Some one in the crowd picked up the hat,
threw it back into the ’bus, and placed himself in a fighting atti-
tude, with his back to the door. This English action effectually
cowed the coward, whoever he was.


Traffic went on at less than funeral pace. In fact, it was
almost suspended.
When we reached the Market, there was more speechifying
and a little dissension amongst the managers. There was a good
deal of trash indulged in about a native band, a native this, a
native that, and a native t’other.
Mr. Editor, I am much afraid that, when the Chinese Question
is settled, my anti-strike storekeeping friend’s (mentioned above)
prediction will be fulfilled; —that the next will be the native cry.
The ex-Premier started that nonsense, in connection with the crick-
eters. Just let the natives reflect, that there would have been
very few of them to enjoy the undisputed honor of their Austra-
lian birth, were it not for their non-native progenitors.
But, to return to our sheep, the huge meeting broke up in
peace, concord, and harmony, at about a quarter past six ; —some
following the strikers back to the Flagstaff. As for me, I had
barely strength enough to crawl back to my mansion. By some
means, my carriage did not meet me in time.
I almost fox-got to mention, that I was present at the monster
gathering at the Victoria Theatre, a few Saturdays ago. I also
spent a whole Sunday afternoon in Hyde Park; where, in spite of
all the preaching that was going on, the chief subject of discussion
was the Chinese Question ; and, on each and all of these three
occasions, the verdict most unmistakably was anti-Chinese.
Cagliastro.
P.S.—The commonly expressed opinion is, that Mr.
is acting as he does, out of spite for his defeat at the late parlia-
mentary election.
Cagliastro.
p.p.S.—-1 meant to hear Mr. Melville’s answer, from the
Bible, to the Rev. Mr. Jeffries’ lectux-e on the Chinese Question ;
but, unfortunately, I reached the Park yesterday afternoon,
(Sunday, 29th December, 1878), just as he was dismounting fx-om
the pulpit. There was an enormous concourse. Harxy
made us laugh and cry altex-nately, for nearly half an hour, with
his wit, logic, and grammar. The ordinary preachers seem quite
overshadowed, since the strike began. Let them—
‘ ‘ Receive what cheer they may ;
“ The night is long that never finds the day.”
I don’t often quote poetxy; but the above line and a half
seemed to come in so pat, that I could not x-efrain from giving
them room. Excuse me this also.
Cagliastro.
P.P.P.S. —1 have already said good-by three times ; but you
see I find it hard to tear myself away. I wish, whilst I think of
it, to express my disapproval at the allowances being paid to the


strikers in public houses. What I witnessed last Friday afternoon,
in consequence of the practice, did not exactly “fill my heart with
joy.” Many a shopkeeper would be but too' happy to have the
money given out at their establishment, free of all charge.
I am really|off this time. C.
No. 11.
The Kanaka Question.
The Kanaka Question should be dealt with immediately on the
reassembling of Parliament. The matter is already assuming
serious dimensions. British subjects and other unfortunate “ pale-
faces ” are roving about throughout the colony, seeking work but
finding none. The sugar manufacturers, planters, and other em-
ployers of labor are getting rid of the objectionable whites as fast
as possible. In one mill alone, in this neighbourhood, no less
than between thirty and forty of the ill-favored Caucasian race
have been paid off. Many of them have had to migrate to the
sister colonies, to earn the bread they are debarred from earning
in Queensland, —the “ gem of the Australian group !” {the black
gem of the future, if we don’t mind).
Now what is the cause of all this ? What is the curse, —the
plague,—that produces this state of affairs 1 The answer is simple
and obvious. The curse, —the plague,—that causes all this, is—
Kanakaism.
The employer, unable to extend his obscure vision beyond his
nose, —beyond the immediate present,—resorts to Polynesian labor,
to the almost exclusion of the white. He argues thus ;
“ A white man expects five or six shillings a day ; the negro
I can get for as many pence. True, in addition to this, I have to
feed and clothe the latter; but who is to see, that I give him the
allowance of food and clothes prescribed by law. In any case, I
can have at least half-a-dozen naked savages for the price of one
fellow-subject,—one brother European.
“ Again, the white will leave me as soon as I break faith
with him, or he can better himself; the negro is almost helpless
in my hands.
“ Above all this, the white man thinks himself as good as I,
and, perhaps, a great deal better. In this there is often much
truth ; which makes it all the more unpalatable.
“Whereas the black, besides toiling almost for nothing,
regards me as a being of a higher order, and thus makes me feel
grand and important; which, of course, is very nice and pleasant;
especially to a vulgar-minded snob like me.”


These are the considerations, no doubt, which influence many
Queensland employers of Kanaka labour. The shallow-minded
fellows do not give themselves the trouble to think, that, by driving
away an industrious white population,—-which costs the country so
much trouble and money to bring here, —they are lowering the
value of not only the article they produce, or in which they trade,
but also that of their landed property. Nor do they take into
the least account the drawback they are causing to the formation
of a respectable nationality, by their introduction of hordes of
ferocious naked savages into our midst. They willingly tax
themselves to bring up an enlightened generation ; and yet they
do not hesitate to adulterate, —nay, even to drown, —it by the
fierce cannibalism of Polynesia.
True it is that, as yet, the Kanakas can be kept in subjection.
Hitherto they have confined most of their quarrels and riotings
amongst themselves. But wait a wee. Just let them increase,
for the next few years, at the same rate they have been
multiplying for some time past, and begin to feel their power ;
then ! Nearly every one of them is already provided with
fire-arms. At present they use them for destroying or torturing
harmless birds, and for the extermination of game of every kind.
But, bye-and-bye ! Why, they will make game of us, in
every sense of the word. Thank goodness I still possess a share
in a cemetery beyond the length of their tether.
I hardly relish the business of a prophet of any kind; much
less, of one of evil. That is scarcely a fortune-making business.
The second-hand prophesy trade pays much better. Still, I cannot
help fortelling, that the European planter or business man, who
employs the Polynesian to the exclusion of the white man, or the
European woman, who affects him as the nurse of her babies pr
the assistant in her kitchen or wash-house, will yet rue the day
when, through parsimony or jealousy of the mental or physical
equality or superiority of their white brethren and sisters, they
discarded them in favor of the sable cannibal.
I intend to continue the subject in future papers; in which
I hope to be ,able to point out an antidote to the bane, with
which we are afflicted. But, before concluding this one, I
desire to express my doubt as to the legality of the Kanakas’
wholesale slaughtering of birds, beasts, and fishes, “ without let
or hindrance,” or of their being permitted to collect fire-arms in
such large quantities as they do, —often forty .or fifty rifles in
one hut or shed. Perhaps the gentlemen of the law could throw
some light on the subject.
Timothy Wobblechops.


No. 111.
Letter tQ a PuMie Meeting &n the P&lynesMn
Quesii&at
“Mr. Mayor and Gentlemen, — I much regret that circum-
stances prevent my being present at your meeting, as I take the
utmost interest in the Polynesian Question. I beg to he permitted
to put the case in a light, in which I do not remember to have
seen or heard it discussed. Is the cheapness of the labor and the
certainty and regularity of its supply the great object gained by the
employment of the Kanaka ? Why not, then, revert to the old
convict system. That will be both cheaper and more regular. Is
tractability on the part of the employee the great aim ? Again,
the convict is preferable ; because, being a convict and a prisoner,
he can be punished with greater ease and more severity than the
free and independent Islander. Is the British and Irish convict
not to be brought into our midst, on account of his past crimes, for
fear of his polluting us with his foul moral atmosphere 1 What
have most of these convicts ever done ? Some have, under the
pressure of great want, deprived their fellow-citizens of some
trifling bits of property ; others have, in moments of great tempt-
ation, imitated the signatures of money lenders; the worst have,
perhaps, when beside themselves with anger, deprived a fellow-
creature of life. Most of us, in the ordinary course of business,
commit, directly and indirectly, quite as serious offences against
life and property as a large number of the home convicts ever do.
Many of them, again, are suffering for the offences of others.
•Have any of our unfortunate fellow-subjects from the United
Kingdom ever feasted on human flesh ? Have any of them ever
licked their lips and fingers after glutting themselves with the
hearts and livers of their fellow-men ? Who shall say how many
of the Kanakas now in the bosom of our families have not done
this 1 Who shall say how many of them will not do it again,—
only upon white instead of black human fare, —when they dare 1 ?
when they feel their feet 1 when they think they can do it with
impunity ?
Is the Kanaka more able for his work than the white 1 How
is it that, in this very neighbourhood, there are small planters
paying high rent for their plantations and supporting large fami-
lies by the profits of their farms, without the aid of a single coolie?
Do we want to Christianize and ameliorate the condition of
the strange savage ? Let us first improve the wretched state of
our British and Irish countrymen. Let us first put porridge into
the pot of the man of Scotland, a dumpling into the pot of the
man of England, and a potato into the pot of poor Paddy in Ire-
land, before we bother ourselves about putting a fowl, —or, alas !
perhaps a white baby, —into the pot of the cannibal of Polynesia.


When slavery was abolished in the British dominions, twenty
millions was granted to the slaveholders. Should it be decided to
do away with Kanakaism, I would suggest, that a fair compensa-
tion be given, by the country, to the employers or leaseholders of
Polynesians. That would be nothing but just; seeing many of
them would be great losers by the change, and that they engaged
them under sanction of an existing law.
I have the honor to be,
Mr. Mayor and Gentlemen,
Yours obediently,
EmQQ
I must encore myself, if no one else will, to make a few
additional remarks.
Some argue that, as the effect of Polynesian and Chinese
immigration will be to cheapen labor, the country will gain by
it. I have, in substance, already expressed my dissent from such
ridiculous suppositions. Let me now point to the history of other
nations :
Question I.—What did cheap labour do for Egypt?
Answer I.—Why, brought upon it the well-known Ten
Plagues, &c.
Question 2.-—-What did it do for Carthage ?
Answer 2.—lnvolved it, for years, in dreadful mercenary wars.
Question 3.—How did it affect Italy ?
Answer 3.—Afflicted it with all the horrors of servile revolts.
Question 4.—Sparta and Athens 1
Answer 4.—Bead the history of Greece.
Question s.—The United States ?
Answer s.—ln the late disastrous Civil War.
What country under the sun is as prosperous under cheap, as
under fairly-remunerated labor ? We had cheap labor in the
fine old convict times. There certainly are some who would not
object to revert to it ; nor would I so much, if I could make
those who would bring such a state of affairs about, be the convicts.
A former governor of one of the Colonies is reported to have
said, in the palmy days of that Colony, that half-a-crown was
quite enough for a laboring man. If His Excellency really made
such a cruel remark, he clearly demonstrated, that half-a-crown was
more than he was worth as the representative of the Crown. I
hope the story is not true. It is, however, true that his present
successor employs in his whole establishment none but Chinamen,
with the exception of a maid for his daughter. He boasts that
there could not be a better-ordered household. It seems to me it


would become him better to give a chance to the people, in whose
houses he lives, and whose bread he eats.
A clergyman, in one of the Kanaka districts of Queensland,
some years ago, preached, in my hearing, to the following effect:—
“ Fear is expressed that we shall not have bread enough, if our
brethren from the islands are brought into competition with the
whites. Bread enough, indeed ! What is worldly bread, as
compared with the lamp of salvation, with which it is our divine
privilege to illuminate the souls of these children of Nature?”
(He hardly put it quite so elegantly.)
The reverend gentleman was in receipt of an income, which
enabled him to enjoy the society of an accomplished wife, who
dressed with good taste, according to the latest fashions. He could
drive about with her, on charitable errands, in a comfortable
buggy. He could feast on all the delicacies of the season. He
could send his children to costly schools. In fine, he lived like a
gentleman ; because it was considered, by the white population,
whom he was, —unintentionally perhaps,—preaching away, that
the “ laborer was worthy of his hire.” Let us suppose, that a couple
of schooners full of black naked parsons were all at once landed
in his harbour, who would be ready to do his work at six,—not
sixty,—pounds a-year and their rations, and an occasional old hat
and a pair of superannuated one-legged pants, how would his
“ lamp of salvation ” shine then 1 Rather dimly, I imagine.
How well a dentist can bear the pain of pulling out a tooth !
Not many can so philosophically bear the extraction of any of
their own. We are funny creatures, —we human beings !
Some have asked me this question,—“ Will you prevent me,
—a British subject,—from employing whom I like ?” My answer
is, that the State is perfectly justified in preventing its citizens
from doing anything that is proved injurious to the common
weal !
Others say, they take a broader view of the question; that,
this being a free country, everybody has a right in it. Yes ; but
how long would this remain such a free country, if the Anglo-
Saxon element,—the apex of creation, —were swamped ? May
grass grow over us first!
In conclusion, I beg to be permitted to say, that these
papers are not presented to my fellow-colonists as tests in compo-
sition. They are, —what they profess to be, —“ Patriotic senti-
ments on the Chinese and Polynesian Questions.” lam not
attempting to regale the public with what is termed “ fine
reading.” Those who desire such a repast are not under the
necessity of coming to me for it, whilst Sir Henry Parkes is in the
flesh. I mention that gentleman, because, in his election remarks
on immigration, he so thoroughly expressed my sentiments, —nay,
my very words,—that I literally mean to hand down his speech,
set in diamonds, as an heirloom to my family. That is, as soon


as I have the family and the diamonds. The speech lam already
possessed of, in clear type.
Whoever thinks a faultless piece to see,
Thinks what never was, nor is, nor shall be.
In every work regard the writer’s end,
Since none can compass more than they intend
And, if the means be just, the conduct true,
Applause, in spite of trivial faults, is due.”
Applaud, then.
S 9 B&wsardiii
“ The various coffee palaces, which have become successfully
established in Sydney and Melbourne, are not copies of the less
pretentious institutions of the same name, in England. The
English coffee palaces are public-houses, in which intoxicating
drinks are not allowed to be sold. Most of them are got up in
imitation of the gorgeously decorated spirit-shops, which abound
in the great cities and towns. There are the same glittering bars,
huge mirrors, massive chandeliers, and other showy and attractive
adjuncts of the gin temple, not omitting, [perhaps the chief fea-
ture,] the bright-eyed, [white-teethed, red-lipped,] neatly attired,
[smiling, lisping,] barmaids ; but, in the place of a “ nip” of
brandy or whisky, the visitor must rest content with a steaming
cup of hot tea or coffee, [and, no doubt, cocoa and chocolate too.]
He may lounge about as long as he pleases, the same as in an
ordinary public-house. The tariff is very low. A cup of tea or
coffee is a penny, a slice of plum-cake a ha’-penny, a thick slice of
bread and butter a ha’-penny, and a bottle of ginger beer a penny.
The articles are all of the best quality; and so great is the popu-
larity of these places, that, in Birmingham and other towns, they
have seriously affected the business of the public houses. Such
establishments in Sydney ought to prove extremely remunerative
ventures, if properly managed [especially, with the addition of
reading, debating, concert, and chess and draught rooms ; ay, even
respectable dancing-saloons.]. —Sydney Mail.
Oh that all the publicans would convert their establishments
into the like !
The author of this pamphlet,—“ Patriotic Sentiments on the
Chinese and Polynesian Questions,” —fully agrees with the writer
of the above, that such places would pay, besides doing immense
good. He,—-the author, —pledges himself to spend Five Pounds
in the first establishment opened in Sydney, before the end of the
year, on the principles set forth, -inclusive of the low tariff. He
will also do a good deal of “ touting” on its behalf. He will help
it to drown Bacchus, that infernal deity, miscalled the Jolly God !


Qpimans &£ the Press*
We have just enjoyed the treat of reading a nice little
pamphlet entitled “ Patriotic Sentiments on the Chinese and
Polynesian Questions,” by a “Future Legislator and Probable
Premier,” and have the pleasure to declare it “ modest, graceful,
and convincing.” We have laid out sixpence to worse advantage.
Our readers will find, that in purchasing, for that sum, a copy of
this truly patriotic and philanthropic well-written production,
they will, by no means, “ pay too much for their whistle.” Dr.
Franklin himself would agree with us in that. —lmpartial Critic.
We owe the authoV of “ Patriotic Sentiments on the Chinese
and Polynesian Questions” many thanks for putting the case so
clearly, “forcibly, patriotically, and, withal, kindly. In our opinion,
it beats all the stump-speeches that have been uttered on the
subject. The public will no doubt show their appreciation by
forcing the publishers to issue another edition forthwith,—lnfalli-
ble Guide.
Ad v&Ft£sQmont 9
We have much pleasure in announcing, that we purpose
bringing before the public, at an early date, a nice little educational
work, to be entitled,-
“ THE ROYAL ROAD TO GRAMMAR AND ANALYSIS :
A SUBLIME SCHOOL COMEDY.”
BRITISH-AUSTRALIAN PUBLISHING COMPANY
PfJx urcMstU Ol&J.
Omm, BhALLARD, & Co., Printers, Pitt Street, Sydney
