

A Boarding and Day School for Young Gentlemen,
gi|*ittgc> lifted tl, txtnt€ §|ytU*c^
&ruste:
REV. JAMES COSH, M.A. JOHN FRAZER, ESQ.
REV. JOHN McGIBBON, M.A., LED. ROBERT GRAY, ESQ.
REV. ROBERT STEEL, D.D., Ph.D. JOSEPH PAXTON, ESQ.
Jftikrim S-Ctrdurn
REV. JAMES COSH, M.A., Balmain.
Interim (Treasurer
JOHN FRAZER, ESQ., York Street, Sydney.
Visitor;
THE MODERATOR OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
It is proposed to establish this Collegiate Institution for the purpose of affording a first-class education to
young gentlemen, to prepare them for commercial pursuits or for the University.
The property consists of between six and seven acres of freehold land, with a house containing
nine rooms and offices, all in good repair and partly new, in an agreeable situation commanding an exten-
sive view. The ground is laid out in lawn with flowers and shrubbery, kitchen garden stocked with fruit
trees, and paddocks.
Mr. Joseph Paxton has generously offered this property, valued at ,£3,500, at half-price—namely,
jC ! ,750 —and has further appropriated ,£l,OOO of the half-price to found two Scholarships, to be held by
young men who have attended the Institution for two years, and who propose to prosecute their studies at
the University of Sydney, with a view to the Ministry of the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales.
The Scholarships are to be tenable for two years.
The Management of the Institution is to be under a Committee of twelve gentlemen, to consist of
the six Trustees ex officio , and six others, of whom four laymen are to be elected by the subscribers to the
Institution, and two, clerical or lay, to be elected by the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of
New South Wales. The half of those elected are to retire annually, but to be eligible for re-election.
The Moderator of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales is to be
Visitor of the Institution, with power to enquire into its working, and to report to the Committee of
Management.
The Trustees have accepted Mr. Paxton’s offer, and a Deed conveying the property to them has
been made out in the proper form. The Trustees believe that such an Institution has been long wanted by
Presbyterian families in the colony, in order to secure to young men the advantage of a first-class modern
and classical education, combined with domestic superintendence and religious instruction in accordance
with the principles of the Church. Though thus associated with the Presbyterian Church, the Institution
will be open to all who choose to avail themselves of its advantages.
The Trustees propose to raise by subscription a fund of ,£3,000, to enable them to pay the half-
price to Mr. Paxton, to make the necessary additions to the buildings, and to establish the Institution.
They therefore confidently appeal to the liberal members of the Presbyterian Church throughout
the colony to assist them in accomplishing their object. Subscribers of ,£5 will have one vote in the elec-
tion of the Committee of Management; of ,£lO, two votes; of three votes; of ,£5O, four votes; of
,£lOO, five votes; with an additional vote for every up to ,£x,ooo given by one subscriber. The
whole ,£3,000 must be subscribed, and per cent, paid before the Committee of Management can be
elected. Subscriptions may be paid at once, or by instalments within two years.
It is to be hoped that there will be little delay in securing the sum required.
The Trustees are now endeavouring to obtain the services of a thoroughly qualified gentleman to
be Head Master, who must be a member of the Presbyterian Church.
\9J$


SUBSCEIPTIONS.
-HJ^£SE?S^K —
£ S. d.
Mr. John Frazer ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 100 0 0
„ Alex. Learmonth ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 100 0 0
„ Robert Gray ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 100 0 0
„ George Bowman ... ... ... • ••• ••• ••• 100 0 0
„ Charles Smith ... ... ... ■ - ••• ••• ••• ••• 100 0 0
Hon. S. D. Gordon ... 100 0 0
Mr. J. B. Hoare 50 0 0
~ Alex. Dean ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 25 0 0
„ J. S. Adam 20 0 0
m


Subscribers to the funds of this Institution are respectfully requested to fill up and return to the
Secretary the accompanying Form, stating particularly whether the money is to be paid on demand or by
instahnents of one fourth on demand; and the remainder at twelve and at twenty-four months from the
date of Subscription.
FORM OF SUBSCRIPTION.
/c S]S.
aay/on
Py SpP on demand j and **2s
mon/Pid* j and Jd~F_. ad mon/Po lorn diuo dade.
(^dt^naduie^
Odlddie&fiy
a/ /undue


