

peace Übanbsgiving.
“LAUS DEO.”
BY
Rev. PROFESSOR R. G. MACINTYRE, d d . o b e
Preached in St. Stephen’s Church, Sydney,
on 6th July, 1919
(Printed by request.)




peace tTbanfcsGtvnnc}.
“LAUS DEO.”
BY
Rev. PROFESSOR R. G. MACINTYRE, d d , o b e
Preached in St. Stephen’s Church, Sydney,
on Bth July, 1919
(Printed by request.)


peace (Xbanfceghnng.
THE terms of the Royal Proclamation calling the
Empire to devout thanksgiving on Sunday, July
6, were a fitting acknowledgement of our national
obligation to the Divine mercy and of our duty to God
at so important a crisis in the world’s history. The
proclamation ran:—
Whereas it has pleased Almighty God to bring
to a close the late widespread and sanguinary
war in which zvc zvere engaged against Ger-
many and her allies.
We, therefore, adoring the divine goodness,
and duly considering that the great and general
blessings of peace do call for public and solemn
acknowledgement, have thought ht, by and with
the advice of our Privy Council, to issue this
our Royal proclamation, hereby appointing and
commanding that a general thanksgiving to
Almighty God for these His manifold and great
mercies, be observed throughout our dominions
on Sunday, the sixth day of July.
And for the better and more devout solemnisa-
tion of the same, we do advertise and exhort all
spiritual authorities and ministers of religion in
their respective churches and other places of
public worship throughout our United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland, and in all quarters
of our Dominions beyond the seas, to take part as


it may properly behove them to do in this great
and common act of worship.
And we do strictly charge and command that
the said public day of thanksgiving be religiously
observed by all as they tender the favour of
Almighty God and have the sense of His benefits.
Given at our Court at Buckingham Palace this
first day of July, in the year of our Lord one
thousand nine hundred and nineteen, and in the
tenth year of our reign.
GOD SAVE THE KINGI


LAUS DEO.’’
Laus Deo —praise be to God. Some months
ago, in the British House of Commons, Mr. Lloyd
George, Prime Minister, rose to make the simple,
but momentous announcement, “the Armistice has
been signed,” and closed a brief speech with the
words, “it is fitting on this historic occasion, and in
the hour of victory, that we should adjourn to St.
Margaret’s Chapel and give thanks to Almighty
God for this so great deliverance,” and straighway
passed to the chapel near by, followed by all the
members of the House. It was a right worthy and
fitting act on behalf of the nation.
And now, after many months of anxious and
weighty counsel on the hardest task ever set to
the representatives of nations, we meet to say “it
is peace,” and to lift up our hearts in devout thanks-
giving to Him to Whom belongeth all power, and
in Whose hand is all nations, Who raiseth up and
Who casteth down, as Sovereign Ruler over all.
Brethren, it is well; well that in such an hour
as this we should not boastfully say, “mine own
arm hath gotten me victory.” We have many
mercies to thank God for, and many wonderful
deliverances, and not the least of these, that in
the decisive hours of August, 1914, we did not play


traitor to the cause of humanity, nor to our own
plighted word. We were not disobedient to the
heavenly vision, which called us to stand in the
fore-front of battle for right and truth and justice.
“Once to every man and nation,
Comes the moment to decide,
In the strife of truth with falsehood,
For the good or evil side.
“Some great cause, God’s new Messiah,
Offering each the bloom or blight,
And the choice goes by for ever,
Twixt that darkness and that light.”
There were men who feared for the spirit of
the nation, lest we had grown soft; there were men
who feared for their profits, lest the balance of
trade should go against us. But the race of Drake,
of Cromwell, and of Pitt was not going to be
traitor to its own great past, nor to count the cost
where duty and honour called. Could we have stood
idly by—even for a season—while a helpless people
were battered into enslaved obedience, who of us
to-day would have been proud of that flag under
which we have been the Trustees of Justice and
the Apostles of Constitutional Liberty. We fought
Philip of Spain, and 'Napoleon of France, for the
same cause that we have finished the fight with
William of Germany, and in all these crises of our
national life we were instruments of God for the
liberties of the world against a military despotism
which would give the law to Europe with a mailed
fist. Among the things for which we thank God


to-day I place first that momentous decision to
take the hard road of duty and sacrifice; that in
the day of our testing we were not found wanting.
Laus Deo.
Of the mercies of God from that hour to this,
we may say, “If I would reckon them up unto 'Thee
they are more than can be numbered.” Yea, Lord.
“Thy mercies endure for ever.” There were many
dark days, how dark we are only beginning to learn,
days when it seemed that nothing could save us
from disastrous defeat; such days as when a mess-
age from France came to the War Cabinet in Ses-
sion, and as its doleful story was read, one of the
leading members of Cabinet bowed his head in
despondency, and said, “God help us”! It was the
word needed, and the Prime Minister answered,
“Yes, God help us, let us kneel and ask His help!”
Men and women, God has helped us, and your pre-
sence in God’s house this day is evidence that you
believe it, the witness to your faith that “He giveth
power to the faint, v and to them that have no
might He increaseth strength.” Take only two
concrete instances as illustrative of the divine
help, and would any man, whose soul is not irres-
ponsive as a clod, say that God was not in these?
One was at the early stage of the war, ere Aus-
tralian troops had left these shores, but when the
fate of this continent was in reality hanging in the
balance. It was those days in late August, 1914,
when the unstaying march of German armies was
sweeping south upon Paris, and nothing could turn


them aside; when the armies of France were herded
as sheep for the slaughter, and the little flock of
British troops, every man a hero, could only be
saved, so it seemed to some of the experienced
leaders of our army, by a retreat to the coast and
embarkation from French shores. Wearied, batter-
ed, defeated but not conquered, they determined
to do or die rather than surrender. Suddenly the
counsels of the enemy became confused, and the
masters of military strategy made that colossal
blunder which gave to Joffre and French the one
opportunity they had not dared to hope for. The
tide of battle turned, and by the first week in Sep-
tember the mighty hosts of Germany were retreat-
ing north faster than they had advanced south.
The victory of the Marne fatally upset the whole
scheme of Germany’s war plan, and made her final
defeat possible —Laus Deo.
The other instance I select has special interest
to Australia. Yesterday I re-read General Monro’s
dispatch regarding the evacuation of Gallipoli.
Our own army, your sons and brothers, was in an
impossible position, practically on an open beach,
whence advance was beyond their power, and re-
treat was barred by the sea. To remain where they
were was to be cut off from supplies by a wild,
wintry sea, and eventually to be battered into sur-
render by Turkish guns, when only a remnant was
left. To evacuate an army where the enemy
trenches were nowhere more than 300 yards away,
and enemy guns commanded the shore, was an un-


heard of task, except with such a casualty list as
would have plunged Australia from one end to the
other into an Egyptian night of sorrow, when
“there was a great cry in Egypt, for there was not
a house where there was not one dead.” What was
needed to save your sons in that dread night?
There was needed that without which the skill of
Monro and Birdwood would have been of no avail.
There was needed an enemy strangely blind and
deaf, a calm sea where seas were rarely calm at
that season, a clear night, and yet not too clear,
lest the shimmering light of the moon should dis-
close the passage of the boats. And it all hap-
pened. As General Munro says, “the night was per-
fectly calm, and a full moon, with a light haze over
the moon, an additional stroke of luck.” O, brave
son of Scotia’s race, was it “luck” or God? By the
morning of 20th December every man of the Anzac
Corps, who did not already lie in a hero’s grave,
was safely on board the waiting transports, with
every gun except nine which were, destroyed at the
last moment. It was a feat unparalleled, in military
history, and the chiefs at the War Office waiting
and dreading, could hardly credit the news. Even
that is not the end of the story! Three weeks later
the miracle was repeated at Cape Helles, the blinded
Turk, though watching against a repetition of the
adventure, a clear night, and a few hours of com-
paratively calm sea, and as the last boat-loads
reached the ship’s side the men looked back to see
the rising storm breaking up the piers and smash-
ing the landing stages. A few hours more and


escape would have been impossible, for the new
heavy guns from Germany were being fitted into
their concrete emplacements. If there are any in
our midst who still see no cause to shout —Laus
Deo, they are not the men who had that wonderful
experience, and they are not the fathers and
mothers of these brave lads to whom God was good
with a great kindness.
It has been a long and testing experience,,
borne with splendid courage by the men who fought,
by the fathers and mothers who gave their sons to
their country’s need, and by the sisters who toiled
in hospital ward and Red Cross depot, but these all
join with us to-day, saying “not unto us, O Lord,
not unto us, but unto Thy name be all the glory,”
for what we gave we first received from Thee. By
sacrifices which have ploughed deep furrows of
sorrow through many hearts, victory has at last
crowned our arms, and peace is once more re-
turning to a stricken world. We thank God for a
victory- so complete, that even if the tiger be still
there it is a tiger cowed and helpless. If the Peace
Treaty be a stern and humiliating document to-
those who reeked not the groans of a crushed and
bleeding humanity, over whose broken body they
marched to the military lordship of the world, its
terms are those of justice and not of vindictiveness.
It is short of punishment, for its leading principles
are safety for the future and reparation for the past.
It is a peace which has cost us and the world heavy
sacrifices, but even these will have been worth the-


cost if the world learns to hate war and to trust
in truth and justice between nations. If only the
nations of the world had acknowledged God in in-
ternational politics this bloody chapter in our his-
tory need not have been written. We had the name
of God upon our lips, but His law was not within
our hearts. Europe was no better than an armed
camp, and men would not cease to believe in war
till it was seen in its ghastly nakedness, where it
applied the weapons of the most advanced science
with the brain of a genius and the heart of a tiger.
It was “hell” said our soldiers, or again, “it was
hell with the lid off.” And yet it will have been in
vain unless we, and especially we of the Christian
Church, seal with our most solemn determination
the resolution, “Never again.” There are those who
speak contemptuously of the League of Nations
as another “scrap of paper.” But the greatest, be-
cause the most Christian outcome of these months
of conference in Paris was not the peace between
us and our foes, but the League of Nations com-
pact, for the one merely tried to right the past,
while the other seeks to safeguard the future with
a “Never again.” That is the true treaty
of peace, which if it owes its origin to the
most Christian President of America, owes its
form to Lord Robert Cecil and A. J. Bal-
four. It has been called, and with justice, a
great experiment, but behind it is the weight of the
democracy of the two great English-speaking
nations of the world, and the Christian idealism of
that compact these nations will not allow to be


shattered by the selfish paganism which still rules
lesser nations. The moral leadership of the world
lies with Britain and America, since Teutonic
obedience has given place to Anglo-Saxon freedom,
and the calm voice of justice is no longer drowned
by the beating of the war-drum. It is a great and
high responsibility. God grant we may rise to it.
We may not yet have “rung out the thousand
years of war,” nor “rung in the thousand years
of peace,” but I believe that on that compact for
the peace of the world there is set the sacrificial
blood, not only of our own beloved dead, but the
sacrificial blood of Him who will “reconcile both
unto God in one body by the cross, having slain
the enmity thereby; and came and preached peace
to you which were afar off, and to them that were
nigh.” Your sons fought, not alone to defeat Ger-
many, or even to save the Empire. These were
symbols of a greater conflict and a higher purpose,
a regenerate world where Right and not Might
should give the law, and they knew, and you know by
many a sad experience, that no great evil is ever
beaten but by a great sacrifice. It was a world given
over to an irreligious philosophy of the mailed fist
and the superman, where the scales of justice were
weighted with the sword, and where lasting peace
could not come but with great drops of blood; not
because God would have it so, but because not
otherwise would men learn to love peace till they
had learned to hate war. Peace is ours to-day, and
we fought not for our own day but for our child-
ren’s children. That was the vision of a French sol-


dier who undertook a task of unusual danger, and
did a deed of great daring. The captain of his com-
pany said to him, as he crawled back to cover,
wounded, “ why did you do that, who have five
children to think of,” and received the answer from
the parched lips, “I did it for them.” Yes, Aus-
tralia salutes her heroes in this day of thanksgiv-
ing. O, noble band of crowned and martyred dead,
ye did it for us, for the children yet unborn, for an
Australia free and freedom-loving, for a world that
will the sooner beat her spears into pruning hooks
because ye have died; and from the heights ye
smile down on us to-day, well-pleased with your
reward. We say “peace,” but let us never forget
that it is a peace bought with a great price, and we,
the heirs of that blood-brought heritage, must
guard it carefully and use it worthily.
It is the lesson of the cross all through history,
the great things are by sacrifice. You remember
the words of Jesus on the day before Calvary, “Peace
I leave with you, my peace I give unto you,” and
straightway passed within a few hours to the
agony of Gethsemane, for the peace was ours be-
cause the agony was His. And when we sing our
hymn of peace to-day, and sound our paean of vic-
tory, let us remember with reverent and grateful
hearts the beloved dead whose broken bodies lie
far from homeland and kindred, let us remember
the maimed who pass painfully along our streets,
and the others happily restored in health but who
endured hardness as good soldiers, and let us re-


member with loving sympathy the homes that are
stricken and the hearts that are sad. “Peace”! Yes,
but not without its Gethsemane, though, maybe, it
be neither yours nor mine. Yet even they for whom
the garments of sorrow have been woven on the
shores of the Aegean, on the hills of Judea and
the plains of Flanders, join with us to-day in-“a new
song,” Laus Deo, for “peace on earth, goodwill to
men.”
The grim reality of war has ended, and the
shadow of an unthinkable bondage has passed, but
the day of victory must be more than a day of
thanksgiving; it must be a day of renewed conse-
cration to the high tasks for which we are now
made free. These men have not died merely that
we may live, but that we may have opportunity to
live as God’s freemen, doing God’s work for the
oppressed, for the poor, for the outcast; and we
must see to it that the Australia, consecrated in
the blood of her noblest, shall be a land where
poverty shall not crush the spirit, and where no
man shall wring gold at the cost of another’s soul.
God grant that we may not have endured the sac-
rifice only to miss the salvation. That sacrifice has
not been endured that this land may be the slave
of the drink-traffic, the home of the gambler, or the
victim of the profiteer. Our soldiers have saved the
nation from destruction. Who will save it from
relapse into irreligious secularism and moral decay?
We are heritors of a noble history, sons of a great
race which has once again, in the hand of God,
proved its mettle. But if ye are heritors of the past


and guardians of the present, we are trustees of the
future.
“0 Spirit of that early day,
So pure and strong and true,
Be with us in the narrow way
Our faithful fathers knew;
Give strength the evil to forsake,
The cross of Truth to bear,
And love and reverent fear to make
Our daily lives a prayer.”
“Blessing the Cottar and the Crown,
Sweetening worn Labour’s bitter cup,
And, plucking not the highest down,
Lifting the lowest up.”


1 ZXllo
