

EMPIRE LITERATURE SOCIETY
ADDRESS BY
The Right Rev. Dr. Radford,
Bishop of Goulburn
ENTITLED:
Pe ace Problems of
European Nationalism
On Tuesday, 10th December, 1918
Sydney:
Vale & Pearson, Printers
2 Castlereagh Street
19 19


EMPIRE LITERATURE
SOCIETY
Patrons:
His Excellency Sir Ronald Munro Ferguson K.C.M.G.
Governor-General
His Excellency Sir Walter Davidson, K.C.M.G.
Governor of New South Wales
The Hon. Sir William Cullen, K.C.M G.
Chief Justice. Chancellor of the University of Sydney
President:
The Hon. George Earp, M.L.C.
Committee:
Major-General G. L. Lee, C.M.G., D.S.O.
The State Commandant
His Honour Judge Backhouse
Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart
Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney
Colonel J. Lamrock, C.8., V.D.
Camp Commandant, Liverpool
Colonel R. E. Roth, C.M.G., D.5.0., V.D.
The Hon. Sir Thos. Hughes, M.L.C.
Major J. H. Strong, V.D.
Captain Chaplain Colwell
Mrs. W. A. Holman.
Professor W. E. Cooke, M.A.
Government Astronomer
Mrs. George Earp
Mr. John Sulman
Mrs. G. L. Lee
Mr. William Gillanders, B.A.
Gen. Sec. Y. M.C.A.
Mrs. W. McMurray
Mrs. John Waugh
Captain H. G. Grace, V.D.
Mr. H. C. Macfie, F.C. P.A.
Professor J. T. Wilson, M.8., F.R.S.
Hon. Secretary:
Major J. H. Strong
Asssistant Secretaries:
Miss M. E. Hannah Mr. L. P. Curnow


Peace Problems of European
Nationalism
Address by the Right Reverend Dr. Radford,
Bishop of Goulburn, to members of the
Empire Literature Society, on Tuesday,
10th December, 1918.
The Hon. G. F. Earp, m.1.c., in the chair.
Behind all the problems of the present lie the experiences
of the past. Beneath the particular factors of any given
problem lie the general principles of which the facts as they
stand are exemplifications or contradictions. In other words
there is a background of history and philosophy which must
be surveyed before we can consider probable solutions of spe-
cific problems of European nationalism.
The first thing is to define our terms. Nationality, nation-
alism, nationhood, are not synonyms ?they are distinct or
distinguishable stages or phases of a process of evolution in
the history of humanity. Nationality is a word often used
loosely as a synonym of nation, or more correctly as denoting
the status of an individual; but for our present purpose it
must be taken strictly as meaning the sum of the characteris-
tics and conditions which qualify a community to be de-
scribed as a nation. Race, language, government, tradition,
literature, history, combine in varying degrees and propor-
tions to produce a distinctive unity in the life of a people.
The two main conditions of nationality are this unity of life
within the nation, and also a distinctness of existence apart
from or alongside other nations, or even within the life of a
nation which has itself expanded and developed into the more
complex type of nation known as an empire* or a federation.
Nationalism on the other hand means the growing conscious-
ness of nationality, a consciousness usually taking shape and
finding expression in active effort, whether constitutional or
convulsive, to secure the recognition of this nationality; and
nationalism is a general term which covers types of move-
ment or tendency as different and remote from each other
as the things called nationalism in Ireland, India, Austra-
lia, South Africa, and Poland. Nationhood, again, a hy-
brid word only pardonable because it does stand for some-


thing quite different from nationality or nationalism, means
the conscious adolescence of the soul of a nation, the realisa-
tion of a people that it has come of age in the family of na-
tions. There is no note of agitation, no insistence upon rights
and claims, in the true sense of nationhood. It is a blend-
ing of the thrill of pride with the tremor of responsibility.
It is the shouldering of a burden as well as the unfurling of a
banner. Anzac Day was the birthday of Australian nation-
hood because it was the entry of Australia as a nation into
the comradeships and conflicts' of the older nations of the
world. Australia made for the first time friends and ene-
mies of her own among the Powers of Europe. Neither Turk,
nor German, nor Frenchman will forget the new discovery
of Australia.
The next step is to define a nation. Nationality is a
stage in the evolution of humanity. Between the individual
and humanity there lie two ?intermediate forms of organised
life,? viz., the family, widening out into the clan, or tribe, or
race, and the nation, widening out into the empire. And the
progress both of the individual and of humanity has been
historically bound up with the development of the family
and the nation. What then is a nation? A nation is not the
same thing as a State. A State has been defined as ?a nation
provided with a self-protective organisation,? protective against
internal or external danger. The definition is incomplete.
The organisation which makes a nation a State is not merely
self-protective. It is self-expressive through legislation, and
in some cases self-expansive through colonisation. It is
positive rather than negative in character and activity; it is
an organ of progress, and not merely of protection. On the
other hand, though a nation tends inevitably to become a
State, and the ultimate causes and necessary results of this
war are concerned with the claim of certain nations to be
recognised as States, yet all States are not nations. Empires
are States, but not nations. Empires like the Austrian and the
Turkish are doomed to disintegration because they are co-
ercive governments holding down rather than together a com-
plex of racial or national elements, which they cannot as-
similate or conciliate into a national unity. An Empire like
the German is almost entirely a national State; yer its eastern
and western and northern fringes are alien elements which it
will not conciliate and cannot assimilate. Our own Empire,
which has grown in the most diverse ways out of the most
diverse materials, bids fair to become the most successful of
complex States, simply because it bids fair to become the
mother or the foster-mother of nations within its own bor-


ders. British in Australia and in New Zealand, Franco-Bri-
tish in Canada, Boer-British in South Africa, Hindu-Moslem
in India. To return, however, to the relation of State and
nation, nothing is more remarkable than the different ways
in which the nation and the State have acted and re-acted
upon each other. In Italy the nation made the State. In
Switzerland the State has made or is making the nation. In
America, where the United States were described not many
years ago as a trans-Atlantic Europe with the frontiers wiped
out, we have realised at last that the State is making out of
the most amazingly heterogeneous materials a nation as na-
tional in character and purpose as any nation of the Old
World. In Germany the nation made the State and the State
has marred the nation. In Britain the nation and the State
have been making and remaking each other for centuries, and
the process is still in progress.
The difference between nation and State comes out again
vividly in the most cursory glance over the history of the mo-
dern Europe which began with the Reformation. Through-
out the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries it was the State which
was the problem of controversy and conflict in the world of
thought and action. Nation after nation was convulsed in the ef-
fort to solve the problems of the State, problems of religious
unity or liberty, of autocratic of aristocratic or democratic go-
vernment. In the nineteenth century the problem of nationality
came to the front, partly to complicate and partly to simplify
the problem of the State. There is a whole volume of in-
struction to be read in the failure of the scheme of peace for
Europe so elaborately planned by the allied statesmen who
met at the Congress of \ienna in 1814-16 to reconstruct the
map of Europe after the defeat and destruction of Napoleonic
Imperialism. The failure was due to the fact that they
made two tremendous mistakes, dhey ignored two vital fac-
tors and forces. They ignored the rising tide of political de-
mocracy, Ihey restored and re-adjusted dynasties and go-
vernments without reference to popular and liberal move-
ments. And they ignored the submerged but insuppressible
current of racial nationalism. They confirmed the partition
of Poland; they forced Belgium into union with Holland in
a vain effort to convert the battle-scene of centuries into the
buffer-state of the future; they tore up the project of a
Southern-Slav federation, which was one of Bonaparte?s mas-
terpieces of far-sighted statesmanship. Within half a cen-
tury, however, political democracy had won its decisive tri-
umphs in England, France and Italy. Germany and Aus-
tria rejected the opportunity and repressed the claim of popu-


lar liberty in 1848, and remained to be convinced seventy years
later by the bitter logic of defeat and disaster that even a
popular autocracy is the negation of a people?s true life. The
triumphs of nationalism tarried longer on their way. Belgium
regained its independence early in 1830. Italy fought its
way to national liberty and unity a generation later. In fact
the great wars of the nineteenth century were all wars of na-
tionalism. The Crimean War and the Russo-Turkish War
arose ultimately out of the struggles of the Balkan peoples
for national existence. Germany?s wars, even the Franco-
Prussian War, were from one point of view part of the strug-
gle of the German peoples for national unity. For forty
years after 1871, Western Europe was at peace because the
cause of nationalism had won the day. With the exception
of Alsace-Lorraine and Schleswig-Holstein, there remained no
problem of insurgent or resurgent nationalism in the West.
The nations were States, and the States were nations. In the
East and the South-east there still remained the problem of
Slavonic nationalism. The immediate occasion of the world?s
greatest war was the conflict between the Austro-Hungarian
project of supremacy over all Southern Slavs and the Serbian
dream of primacy over a free Southern Slav federation.
Among the results of victory will certainly be the liberation
of the Slavonic peoples in the north and south of the Austrian
Empire.
The war, however, has brought to a head all the other pro-
blems of nationalism which have been the sores in the body
politic of Europe. And its results will probably vindicate
the principle of nationality all round. Poland will be re-
united, and Italy, Roumania, France, and Denmark will re-
gain the territories inhabited by peoples who are theirs by
race or choice. Yet this very vindication of the principle of
nationality will be one of the most difficult of the problems
of peace. The statesmen of 1919 must not commit the same
sin as their predecssors of 1816, or they may be sure their
sins will find them out. In 1816 political democracy was
refused and repressed; in 1919 industrial democracy is knock-
ing at the doors of the peace conference or agitating at home
in every nation concerned. In 1816 nationalism was sacri-
ficed to the balance of power. In 1919 nationalism is con-
versely in danger of being pressed home by its claimants
and advocates to the neglect of subsidiary interests which have
claims of their own. Nationalism must not refuse to give
what it expects to get. There are conflicting claims in the
very field of nationalism. The principle is simple enough in


theory. It is that the State must rest upon a national basis.
But here lies the difficulty. The national basis on which the
State must be organised, the national character which rightly
claims to find freedom of expression and development in the
form of a State, is itself the product of two or more of a
number of factors. Race, language, histofy, religion, are
found in all sorts of permutations and combinations. It is
rapidly becoming a truism that divided peoples like the
Southern Slavs or the Roumanians must be given the na-
tional unity which they desire, and subject nations like the
Poles must be given some measure of autonomy or liberty.
The trouble begins when peoples of one race and language
are held apart by religious cleavage or by divergent political
experience. We may well at this stage look more closely
into the question, what constitutes a nation?
(1) Racial unity is not enough or even necessary.
Acton, the greatest of modern historians, treats nation-
ality as though it were almost entirely a racial question.
Yet facts forbid this view. Alsace and Lorraine are
mainly German by race. Holland is Dutch through-
out, but Belgium is compact of Flemings akin to the
Dutch and German race, and Walloons akin to the
French. England and France are both racial mixtures
fused into nations by the discipline of a common his-
(2) Religious unity again is not sufficient or essential;
the Poles are Roman Catholics, but the Southern Slavs
are divided between the Roman and the Greek Churches,
and Switzerland between the Papacy and the descendants
of Calviij and Luther.
(3) Nor is unity of language necessary or sufficient.
It is indeed, perhaps, the most potent single factor of na-
tionality. And a recent Polish sociologist has elaborated a
theory which would make language the one determining fac-
tor of nationality. On this theory there are four stages in
the evolution of the nation, viz., the atom, the cell, the hu-
man individual, the nation. The two principles which lead
to any one of the higher stages are differentiation of function
and co-ordination of action, and this twofold process depends
on mental contact betwen individuals, and this mental con-
tact again depends on language. Therefore it is language
which makes a nation, for it is unity of language which is the
bond of unity of life between the lives of individuals. But
this theory suffers from the weakness attaching to all attempts
to treat sociology as a branch of biology. Human experience


is too complex to be stated and explained in terms of biological
analysis or analogy. No doubt language does exert a power-
ful influence in promoting national sympathy. It has been
often observed that the centripetal influence of political life
in Switzerland is discounted largely by the centrifugal influ-
ence of language; French-speaking Swiss gravitate in sym-
pathy towards France, German-speaking Swiss towards Ger-
many. On the other hand, Belgian patriotism rises trium-
phant over the bilingual problem of Flemish and French
within Belgium; and there is a Swiss patriotism which finds
equally keen expression in the four languages, German,
French, Swiss-German, and Romansch, which divide be-
tween them the cantons of Switzerland.
The truth seems rather to lie here. Community of thought
is the bond of national unity. But community of thought
depends not so much on language as the ?common medium of
thought,? but rather on a ?common body of thought,? in
other words, on a common experience of life, partly the tra-
dition of a common history, partly the present influence of a
common and mutual effort, which is even more potent than
tradition in cases where tradition involves the memory of
earlier antagonism between the racial elements included within
the nation. In Switzerland, for example, the common experi-
ence of sacrifice for freedom s sake has welded French and
German, Catholic and Reformed, into a nationality intensely
Swiss. Great Britain has united English, Scotch, and Welsh
into British patriotism without destroying the interior patriot-
ism of England, Scotland, and Wales. Ireland still remains
the one perilous problem of nationalism within the United
Kingdom. Yet even here, if Ireland could bury its memories
of cruelty and counter-cruelty, silence its fanatical extremists,
and give its apostles of local co-operation in industry and
agriculture a decade of clear space for mutual effort and re-
ciprocal education, Ireland might yet agree upon some scheme
of Home Rule which would complete its national unity. Even
now the new comradeship of trench and hospital between
Connaughts and Inniskillings, between the Royal Irish and
the Munster Fusiliers, may help to heal the enmity and re-
concile the hearts of the Magees of Londonderry and the Ma-
gees of Limerick. There is magic power in union to pro-
duce unity v . The Northerners and the Southerners of the
United States abate not a jot of all that was positive in their
respective traditions, but they are both fiercely American to-
day. And the America born of sacrifice on opposing sides
within its body is going to assimilate the recent medley of
European immigrant life into a yet richer variety of national


life than the variety of the original contributing elements of the
first-born States of the Union. There is typical promise in
the proud avowal of an U.S.A. private:??l, Georgios Con-
stantinopoulos, citizen of New York, born Greek, now United
States soldier.? To return to one more example in Europe,
the intensification of Southern Slav nationalism during the
latter part of the nineteenth century was due not merely to
the substantial unity of language, but to the advance of edu-
cation and the consequent diffusion of literature, which re-
vived the memory of Slav poetry and its embodiment of epic
tradition, and linked all heirs of a glorious past in a new
movement towards a great future for the sundered fragments
of a racial unity. Roughly then it would be true to say with
Gilbert Slater, that ?Nationality is the result of the posses-
sion of a common body of thought which inspires a common
emotion, and that a man is of the nationality to which he
thinks he belongs.?
This conclusion is confirmed by the fact that the re-awak-
ening of the national idea in Europe began with the French
Revolution. It was due largely to the idea of the sover-
eignty of the people. The keynote of true democracy is not
majority rule but corporate consciousness. It is a signifi-
cant fact that the movement for the reunion of the two prin-
cipalities of Wallachia and Moldavia into which the Rou-
manian people had emerged from their almost blank past of
subjection was inspired and fostered by the influence of
French political thought. Perhaps the best definition of na-
tionality ever given in brief is that of Lavisse: ?Nationality
is the work of history ratified by the will of man.? It is this
definition which seems to be the probable source of President
Wilson?s emphasis, not upon racial character or any other
factor of nationality, but upon the ascertained choice of the
people of any disputed territory as the determining factor
in the decision of the Allies as to the restoration of a ?terra
irredenta.? These severed and submerged fragments of Ser-
bian or Roumanian or Polish or Italian or French or Dan-
ish peoples have lost racial purity as well as political liberty
in the course of their chequered history under other flags and
governments. In some cases there are rival claimants, espe-
cially round the northern coasts of the Adriatic. But the
proposal of some form of a referendum or plebiscite is not
merely a convenient escape for a Peace Conference from an
awkward and perhaps ugly dilemma. It is sound political
philosophy. Race, religion, language, history, are only con-
tributing factors in the problem of nationality. The decid-
ing factor is in principle, and must be in practice, the de-


liberate choice of the people, which reveals the direction of
the corporate consciousness resulting from the interaction of
all other factors.
The foregoing study of nationality as a problem of history
and philosophy has absorbed perhaps an undue proportion of
our time; but it will not have been wasted time if it puts a
background of principle behind the particular peace prob-
lems of European nationalism. It will at least help us to
realise more vividly the complexity of the group of problems
which now confront the Allied Powers. Complex as any
one of the problems may be in itself, as a question of nation-
ality, it is complicated still further by the question of the
historical or economic or diplomatic interests of one or more
of the adjacent great Powers. These further complications
we must note as they occur.
The Peace problems of European nationalism fall into
three groups:?
(a) The first group consists of the claims of rectification
on the borders of the historic nations of the N.W. half
of Europe. Germany holds by comparatively recent
conquest Schleswig-Holstein, taken from Denmark, and
Alsace-Lorraine, taken from France. But the avowed
purpose of the Allies is not the reversal of conquests as
such, but the revindication of nationality. The Peace
Conference has no mandate or right to make' any or every
enemy Power give back everything that it has ever taken.
Its task is to vindicate the principle of nationality as the
basis of the organisation of European and other States,
and to secure the peace of the future by doing justice to
severed or oppressed peoples. There is only one way in
the long run, and that is to let the peoples decide their
own destiny by their own choice. In any case, by one
method or another the principle of nationality must be
vindicated all round.
(1) Denmark, for example, may claim Schleswig-
Holstein back from Prussia. But Holstein is as pre-
dominantly German as Schleswig is Danish. Justice to
German nationality will probably require that the South-
ern part at least of Holstein should be left to Germany.
The problem of the Kiel Canal, which lies across Hol-
stein, must not tempt us to place a German community
under Danish rule. The Kiel Canal peril must be re-
moved in some other way, by internationalising its con-
trol and neutralising its use.


(2) The case of Alsace-Lorraine is another problem.
There is no doubt there of the intensely French sympa-
thies of the overwhelming bulk of the population. The
million and a half of natives of the double province,
whether German or French originally by descent, are
French in spirit. But there are three hundred thousand
German immigrants. There are parts of the two pro-
vinces in which a local vote would probably yield a ma-
jority in favour of Germany. Strict justice requires us
to recognise in fact that the problem of Alsace-Lorraine
is so difficult that the International Peace Congress at
Geneva in 1884 was almost evenly divided between the
proposal to restore the two provinces to France and the
proposal to make them an independent and neutral State.
And as recently as 1915, Mr. Seton Watson suggested
that they should be constituted an autonomous province
and linked in federal union with Belgium and Luxem-
bourg. Mr. Arnold Toynbee, in his book on ?Na-
tionality and the War,? suggests separate referendums
in different parts of the two provinces. This suggestion,
however, would mean disintegration into districts attached
to France and Germany respectively, districts bounded
by unworkable frontiers and crossed by railway . systems
which cannot be run under dual control as a whole or
under divided control in different sections. A more
practicable suggestion would be an international protec-
torate for a limited period of time, and then a general
referendum of the whole population still residing in the
two provinces. Such a referendum would probably
then be almost unanimously in favour of union with
France. But it is almost certain that Allied sympathy
with France will assign the provinces at once to France,
and of course France can be trusted to deal both justly
and generously with the civil and human rights of the
patches of Germanism therein included. Yet the keen-
est sympathy with France must not blind us to the fact
that what the Peace Conference has to do is not simply
to right a past wrong by reversing the annexation of
1871, but to vindicate the principle of nationality so
completely in Alsac-Lorraine that no festering sore of
unsatisfied nationalism shall remain there to imperil the
future peace of the world. The aim of the Peace Con-
ference is not revenge, but justice.
(3) The third rectification of the frontiers of Ger-
many lies in the East, where more than three million
Poles have for generations been subjected to the harsh-


est policy of oppression and expropriation intended to
Prussianise the Prussian share of the dismembered Pol-
ish nation. These Poles in the Provinces of Posen and
Silesia must be re-united to the Poles of Russia and
Austria in a new Poland. But Polish voices are claim-
ing also the Lower Vistula, including the port of Dant-
zig, on the ground that they were part of the old King-
dom of Poland. The principle of nationality, however,
forbids such annexation. Dantzig was a free German
city even under Polish suzerainty, and is German in
character and feeling to-day. The new Eastern fron-
tier of Germany must do justice to German as well as
Polish nationality.
(b) The second group of Peace problems is presented
by the inevitable disruption of the country loosely called
Austria, strictly the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Mr.
Lloyd George spoke prematurely in 1914, when he de-
scribed the big Slav brother, Russia, as ?pulling the
ramshackle Empire to pieces? in defence of the little
Slav nations. But the description was not inaccurate,
and the Empire has fallen to pieces in part already. It
remains for the Peace Conference to complete the pro-
cess which the Czecho-Slavs of the North and the Jugo-
slavs of the South (Jugo means Southern) have begun
by emerging lately as armies insistent on vindicating the
claims of their own nationality. Of the Austro-Hun-
garian army in 1914, 29 per cent, were Germans, 18 per
cent. Magyars, 5 per cent. Roumanians, 1 per cent.
Italians, and 47 per cent. Slavs, the Slavs including 15
per cent Czechs, 9 per cent. Poles, 8 per cent. Ruthenes,
5 per cent. Slovaks, 3 per cent. Slovenes, 7 per cent.
Serbo-Croats. Roughly speaking, nine million Germans
were ruling 15 million Slavs, and ten million Magyars
were ruling from seven to eight million Slavs. Already
the Czechs of Bohemia and Moravia, and the Slovaks of
northern Hungary, are proceeding to constitute themselves
into a nation; and the Slovenes in Istria and Carniola
and the Croats in Croatia and Slavonia and Dalmatia
are taking steps to unite themselves with the other Jugo-
slavs of Serbia, Bosnia, Herzegovina and Dalmatia. Prob-
ably both northern and southern Slavs will be represented
as nations at the peace conference. The Poles of Galicia
will probably claim and receive a place in the reunion of
the Poland which for over a century has been divided
between Russia, Prussia and Austria. But the problem
is not so simple as this forecast might indicate. To


begin with Galicia, the province so-called is Polish in
the west, Ruthene in the centre, and Roumanian in the
east. The Roumanians of Bukowina (eastern .Galicia)
will be united to Roumania. The Ruthenes are the diffi-
culty. These four million Ruthenes (Red Russians) are
brothers to the twenty-six millions of Little Russia, the
southern province of Russia known as the Ukraine or
Borderland. And already Ukrainian and Pole, both Slavs
though they are, have come into actual conflict over the
destiny of Lemberg. It is a revival of the conflicts of
earlier centuries, when the Polish kingdom extended over
part of S.W. Russia. The peace conference will probably
have to reconcile this conflict. Russia as a whole must
be omitted from this paper. But in passing we must
face the possibility that the Russia of the future may
have to be a Russian federation, in which distinct sub-
nationalities like the Ukrainian Slavs will have to be
given a measure of autonomy to satisfy their sense of
distinctness as a people, alongside the Great Russians
of the centre and the east of Russia. To return to the
Austro-Hungarian empire, the Magyars of Hungary will
have to surrender the Slovaks of the north and the Rou-
manians of the south (the part of Hungary known as
Transylvania, where there are three millions and a half
of Roumanians, half as many as there are in Roumania
itself), but will gain for their own kingdom a complete
independence, which may well compensate them for the
loss of the Slovaks and the Roumanians, upon whom
they have striven harshly and unsuccessfully to force
their own ways. But what of the nearly ten millions
of Germans who constitute what is roughly called Aus-
tria, the western half of the Empire? They will have
to give up the Italians of the Trentino to Italy, and the
southern Slavs to the new Jugo-Slavian nation or federa-
tion. But what of their own destiny? They must receive
justice, as well as be compelled to render justice. They
may wish to form a German state in union with the
federation of German states into which the present Ger-
man empire may resolve itself. If they do so wish, the
principle of nationality requires that they shall, however
much the Allies may shrink from the prospect of en-
larging ?Germany? by an addition of a population more
than twice as great as the population that Germany will
lose in Alsace-Lorraine, Schleswig and Posen, etc., or
from the prospect of strengthening enormously the Roman
Catholic vote in Germany. Further, there is an important


German element in Bohemia, and there are staunchly
Saxon colonies in Transylvania; and though these minori-
ties may have to be left under Czech and Roumanian
governments respectively, provision will have to be made
for justice to be secured to their civil rights and linguistic
sympathies.
(c) There are other minor problems in the redistribu-
tion of Austro-Hungarian provinces. But we must pass
on to the third group of peace problems. These are the
problems of the Balkan Peninsula and the Adriatic coasts.
Here, again, we can only note typical difficulties in the
way of a final settlement. (1) Working from west to east,
we have to note first the difficulties in the way
of giving to Italy all that some Italian statesmen
seem to demand. In spite of historical associations, the
north coast of the Adriatic cannot justly be given to
Italy. Dalmatia is predominantly Serbo-Croatian by race
and choice. Trieste must be a free port, even if it is pre-
dominantly Italian in population, and is to be under
Italian suzerainty; the freedom of the port is required by
international interests, and by justice to the trade of
Central Europe. We need not anticipate dispute, how-
ever, for Italy has already shown signs of a wider vision;
it has, for example, virtually pledged itself to recognise
the predominance of Jugo-Slavian claims in the north
Adriatic. There may be difficulty further south over
Albania, where Italy has during the war tightened its
hold on the port of Valona as a naval base for self-pro-
tection. Italy?s danger, however, will disappear with the
Austrian navy. The real difficulty here will be to reconcile
Italian interests with the desire of greater Serbia for such
a port as Durazzo, and with the growing tendencv of the
Epirote people of, southern Albania for closer intercourse
and identification with Greece. Incidentally, here we
must note that ultimately the Allies will have to deal with
the intensely Greek nationalism of the islands off the
coasts of Asia Minor, including Cyprus. (2) Passing
east from Albania, we have to face a grave problem in
Macedonia, where Serbia and Greece hold or claim terri-
tory already, which in a map coloured on racial lines
is patched and stippled with towns, districts and villages
of Serbian, Albanian, Greek, Turkish, and Wallachian
population, while historically and racially the strongest
claim of all is Bulgarian. Yet the Bulgar, who is not
a pure Slav, but only a ?Slavonicised? conqueror of Slav
peoples, has imperilled his claim to consideration by his


failure again and again to ?play the game? by his Slav
neighbours and half-kindred, or by his Greek ally in the
anti-Turkish war of 1912-13, and finally by his cynical
opportunism in the great war. (3) Our last illustra-
tion of the complexity of the problems of nationalism
must be the future of Jugo-Slavia itself. Behind the
present problem lies in the far distant past the division
of the Roman Empire between the two Romes, the old
Rome of the west and the new Rome of the east, Con-
stantinople. The line of division between the two halves
of the empire drawn in 395 A.D. ran from the Belgrade
of to-day to the Durazzo of to-day. West of this line, the
empire was, or became, Latin and ?Catholic?; east of
this line, it was, or became, Greek and ?Orthodox.? The
cleavage was sharpened and perpetuated by the schism
between the Roman and the Greek Churches in the
eleventh century. The Slavs east and west of the line
of division received their Christianity from ?Orthodox?
and ?Catholic? missionaries respectively. To-day Jugo-
slavia is a complex of three religions. The Slovenes,
Croats and Serbs of the west are staunchly Roman Cath-
olic; the Serbs of the east and the Montenegrins are
staunchly Orthodox, with the added pride of national
church life. , Bosnia is the crux of the problem, for
there between Roman and Orthodox Christians lies a
wedge of Moslem Serbs, descendants of forced converts
under Turkish dominion, and more Moslem than the
Turk. The future of Jugo-Slavia depends on the ques-
tion whether race or religion is the stronger factor. The
war has probably decided this question in favour of race.
But only time can prove. A similar problem lies across
the future of Albanian unity. Italian missions in the
north and Greek education in the south have to be recon-
ciled with each other, and with the Moslemism of the
Ottomanised Illyrians that have furnished Turkey with
its finest soldiers. An Italian or international protec-
torate might give Albania time and room to find itself
as a nation. At present it is a ?no man?s land? between
Italy and Serbia and Greece.
These are only typical points of a complex grouping of
difficult problems. Such solutions as have been suggested
by the way are only tentative. The main purpose of the
paper has been to sketch the historical and philosophic back-
ground on which the whole problem of nationality and the
particular problems of European nationalism rest and depend,
and to indicate some of the factors to which attention has


not always or already been given in recent discussion. The pur-
pose of the paper will have been fulfilled if it serves to create
an intelligent interest in the proceedings of the peace con-
ference, and a sense of the responsibility which rests upon
all thinking citizens of a commonwealth which has already
learned at a great cost the lesson that no nation lives or
dies to itself alone, and that in its own simpler and happier
progress towards nationhood it must not forget the compli-
cated and troublous problems of other nations.
