

PEACE v. WAR
and
Other Essays
(The stability of England Is the
security of the modern world.
—Emerson.)
By “Nemo.”
Kogarah, Sydney.
1914.
Price Sixpence.


If 1 had had to choose my birth place
I would have chosen England.
—Voltaire.
“The five self-governing Dominions are as the
five stretched fingers of a great hand. Thev are all
free, they are all vitally related, and they all
close towards the palm.
That great hand has sometimes wearied of the
burden and sometimes been stained with blood.
But to-day it sweeps over the Seven Seas, not the
mailed fist of aggression or tyranny, but the right
hand of human fellowship, the open hand of human
helpfulness, the strong protecting hand of human
liberty and peace.” p. 45.
Till time may come when robbed of all her charms,
The land of scholars and the nurse of arms,
Where noble stems transmit the patriot flame,
Where kings have toiled and poets wrote for fame;
One sink of level avarice shall lie,
And scholars, soldiers, kings unhonored die.
—Goldsmith.






v.WAR
and
ADDENDA- lo pp. 33-4
From Memoirs &c., written by ladies of title
as from Lord B.’s novels, one ouite gets the im-
pression that the masterword in the language of the
English aristocracy is “dinner.”
The Roman Legions were the ‘chosen’ ones;
lego lectus, to choose; the picked men —and we
have —elections.
War will cease when it and its chief causes
greed and deceit have ceased: when all three are
abhorred alike: not before. from off the earth:
War is Hell: its causes above —hkew’se.
For Peace on earth, let us read R’«jht Conduct,
Truth and Honestv on earth. Peace will follow.
Cne strain runs through them all p. 114*
A Model Family for the British Empire io its
own Royal Family—six children. Contrast tins with
“One per Fam lv” — p. 11 5 a bv. .
Royalty or Pluto-Democracv —Which shall it be.
Man’s moral progress —D. 114. _ Behold Bdjpum
Cave- -and Stone Age men,— seen m Aust abong s.
Aust. larrikin first cousin to Aust. blackfelov .
Drunkenness is pardonable in aboriginals: brings
others below ab ’s by what they sh d be above sam .
Price Sixpence*


Say be spent tough.


PEACE v. WAR
and
Other Essays
(The stability of England to the
security of the modern world.
—Emerson.)
By “Nemo."
Montgomery Street, Kogarafc.
SYUftiiiY.
1 9 1 3*
Price Sixpence.


The ground plan of the world is tic i -ea
of Duty.—Fichte.
The world is ruled by God, through a
heroes and pre-eminent persons.
—Martin Luther.
CONTENTS
Preface.
Peace v. War.
Britain and her Dominions.
England and Englishmen.
Duty.
It’s a Lie— You’re a 1 —. Why do these always
mean fight?
Sundries.
England, the Chief Constable of Europe, and the
steadfast protector of the rights of mankind.
Signor Ministrelli. (i.e. C.C. of the world.)


When a strong man armed Keepeth his palace his
goods are in peace. But when a stronger than he
shall come upon him he taketh from him his armor
wherein he trusted and divideth his spoils.
•—Luke xi, 21-22.
The common notion that peace and the virtue:;
of civil life flourished together I found to be wholly
untenable. Peace and the vices of civil life flourish
together; peace and selfishness, peace and sensu-
ality, peace and death. . . I found that nations
were born in war and expired in peace.—Ruskin.
The dull man, seeing only a fraction of the ques-
tion, says in a sweeping generalisation—War is
horrible, away with it!—Carlyle.


What is the Flag of England?
Winds of the World declare!
(The East Wind.)
Never the lotos closes,
Never the wild fowl wake,
But a soul goes out on the East wind
That died for England’s sake.
Man, or woman, or suckling,
Mother, or bride, or maid;
Thus on the bones of the English.
The English Flag is stayed.
(The South Wind.)
The basking sun-fish knows it,
The wheeling albatross,
Where the lone wave fills with fire,
Beneath the Southern Cross.
What is the Flag of England?
Ye have but my reefs to dare,
Ye have but my seas to furrow.
Go forth, for it is there.
—Kipling.
A gi cat Empire and little minds
go ill together. -Edmund Burke.


“It’s only a flimsy fabric,
It's only a tattered rag,
But don’t one’s eyes grow brighter
At the sight of the British Flag.”
The stability of England is the security of the modern world. —Emerson
Take hold of the Wings of the Morning,
And flop round the Earth till you’re dead,
But you’ll not get away from the tunes that they
play,
And the bloomin’ old rag overhead.—Kipling.
A great Empire and little minds go ill together. —Edmund Burke




PREFACE
Some readers of this booklet will likely term the
writer an advocate of War. He claims to be an
advocate not of war, but, and next to the Moral
Sense of Patriotism; and though herein he may be
thought presumptuous, he will say that the ideas
contained in the words of the illustrious Edmund
Burke, next page, have been largely his too.
The portion of the book which he considers to be
most worthy of Australian readers’ attention* is on
p. 43, a quotation.
Our national dangers are so self-evident, and have
been by our different public men pointed out and
emphasised so often, tha t to be doing so any further
seems superfluous.
Still there are times when the smallest chance,
etc., and there is also a chance re something else,
and which the writer has hopes of too, viz., of leav-
ing upon some one—
, “a trace
Of kinship with the deathless dead,
And faith in all the Island Race.”
The words on cover by one of America’s best men
can be commended to those amongst us to whcm
almost the very name England is an offence.
The writer begs to thank Mr. Rudyard Kipling
for his permission to use the many extracts made
here and elsewhere from his works.
—also for his special permission re music.
not . of his own country Emerson spoke thus.
TUo cfoKlUfw r> f Fn(rl"nJ ic flic r-i4-, r
modern world/’, is answer to all the anti-British
utterances of modern times, American especiallv


I.
“Public calamity is a mighty leveller, and there
times when any, even the smallest chance of doing
good must be laid hold of, even by the most incon
siderable person.” —Pdmund Burke.
Peace and War are generally regarded as being,
the one the greatest blessing and good in the world,
and the other the greatest curse and evil in same.
These views which at least in Anelo-Saxondom
are very general, and have prevailed there for a
very long time, are yet this writer thinks, capable
of being called in question.
War though undoubtedly a very great evil, is
not of itself a primary or original thing—it is the
result or effect of other things, evils, which pre-
ceded it; and which spring from, if indeed they
are not an integral part of human nature itself.
These are hatred, jealousy, greed and grab, etc.,
extended from individuals to whole nations.
All the evils which accompany strife at any time,
occur in the case of strife between nations on the
largest possible scale, and are for that reason all
the more glaring, repulsive, etc., appealing very
strongly to the outward senses.
The chief opposition to war has always come
and always will come from the female sex the
half of the human race—and quite naturally too.
Of all wars evils perhaps its greatest is its
being the cause of many bereavements, and by


these women are, and ever will be the chief suf-
ferers.
Ordinary lying and dishonesty, individually and
nationally, are evils as °reat as war.
Wilful perjury, calling upon the Deity to witness
as being true something that is false, a lie, is in point
of sinfulness nothing behind wilful murder; yet
perjury is of such frequent occurrence that it has
almost ceased to be noticed even by those whose
business it is to do so. The resulting effects of
this upon the community are much worse than
those of any war, however disastrous. How differ-
ent it would be if perjury or even theft was accom-
pamed by very visible “horrors.”
Opposition and aversion to war is by no means
a tiling of modern times.
In the oldest of the world’s writings, the Jewish
Scriptures, the time is foretold when men shall beat
tlieir swords into plough shares and their spears
into pruning hooks, when nation shall not rise up
against nation, neither shall tney learn war anv
more, when the wolf and the lamb Shall lie down
together, and a little child shall lead them.
This may be said to have been the be'nnnmrr ot
the War against War, which we now often hear
aoout —since then much has been written upon
the same subject; but the words above are in a
class of their own —classic, unapproachable—and
v, ill remain so.
(So too is the lament or dirge of David over the
death of King Saul, his deadly enemy. Some of
the words of same, written 3000 years ago and
before the days of Homer, ar e part of our language


to-day. How are the mighty fallen —Tell it not in
Gath.)
it is generally assumed and as being something
above criticism, that universal peace following
upon the abolition of war, can be only cn unqualified
blessing. . , , .
Peace, plenty, and prosperity are no doubt very
.rreat blessings; but even these blessings, and the
accompanying virtues of thrift, industry etc., can
be and too often are productive of evil—it is
from corruption of the best that the worst comes
any time . . , , •
Apart from experience—a priori —as the logi
ians say, we know that if individuals or commu-
nities have for any length of time enjoyed peace
plenty, etc., this will also afford them means anc
opportunities for leisure. Following this, and
only too easily, there can come idleness, selF
uuigence, etc., etc., and the above great blessings
mav in the end, become correspondingly great
curses—and which experience—a postenon—only
too abundantly confirms—the downfall of indi\i
duals and nations as the resu t of prosperity, i-
one of the common places of history and e^ery-
If the individual members of each generation in
this commercial age, could be made to start from
somewhere near the same mark as did their fore
bears it would be all the better for them.
For their own self preservations sake, nations
,jj ve t be compelled to take some action m
matter (p ) even though it should mean further


interference with that semi-sacred thing the liberty
of the subject—to bring about the ruin of the
State —although the very word subject suggests one
whose ‘liberty’ is mainly that of obeying orders.
Ke International Arbitration. In recent years, a
great deal has not only been said Lut done, to-
wards the settling of disputes between nations bv,
as above, and it is certain that even more will yet
be done in this way, and no doubt with much
benefit to all concerned.
Yet there will always and ever remain some
matters which men and nations as we know them
now, would not consent to submit to arbitration
—articles of nationaj belief, faith, and religion—
our own of White Australia being about the
latest such to be propounded to an attentive uni-
verse.
Millionaires like Nobel and Carnegie have taken
a great practical interest in the above matter, do ng
much to further it; but it would have said more
for them as business men if they had gone a little
below the surface, towards the root of the trouble.
This will be found to be what is the final cause
of all sin and evil besides war, any time and any-
where, viz., a deficiency of the Moral Sense
—“the drop which balances the sea” —and
it is by working for and effecting if possible an
increase of the Moral Sense, that all sin and evn,
war included, will be abolished or abated
Universal peace is by no means the world’s great-
est desideratum; universal truth and honesty are
these very much more so, and upon attainment


of these latter universal peace will follow nearly
automatically. And whatever may be tiie nan?',
oi it which Drings us universal truth and honesty,
socialism or what not, let us have it.
Peace is good and blessed, but Kignt or H/glituess
or Kigbteousness and Justice are better, aim more
blessed.
A. Carnagie has, and truly enough spoken of
war as being a blot upon our civilization —very
fine landscapes are sometimes to be seen disfigur-
ed by prisons and penal establishments —but same
Loot is only ilie outward effect of something in-
ward aforesaid: it is this latter that most needs
to be dealt with, but this the«army at weil-meanmg
people actively engaged in the war against war seem
not to think of.
As regards America, what have most need of
being warred against are corruption, lawlessness,
etc., compared with these blots, cancers rather,
their great civil war with horrors enough and to
spare was but as a surface pimple.
The inimitable “Mr. Dooley,” in his account of
how A. Carnegie entertained the Peace Delegates
who visited America, mentions what especially
filled A.C. with horror. Whether “Mr. D.” had in
mind the current and misplaced ideas re "the hor-
rors of war,” is not quite clear —anyway he has
helped to show up and ‘take off’ same.
“Well Sir,” said Mr. Dooley, “it’s wondherful
what that man Andhrew Carnagie can do.”
“What’s he been up to of late?” asked Mr. Hin-
nesy, “He’s been abolishin’ war,” said Mr. Dooley.
“Be all accounts there’ll be no more war. Peace


hangs over the wurruid. i'iddy ’ Roosevelt has
tain a his colt’s forty lour into a flute an’ plays
u unciher the moon. Hie imperor William is
iearnin’ the game iv crokey. They’re goin’ to
disband the armies lvrywhere, an’ sind the sojers
back to wurruk in the arts iv Peace.
An Andhrew did it all. A great man, a great
little man; finest advertisemint iv oats, Laledonya’s
favorite son, an a product that Pittsburgh ought
to be glad she turn’d out. He done it all, the
fine little man. Pie got a grudge again war as
a pursoot. He pitcherd in his mind thousands iv
young men throwin’ down the useful pick an’
shot el and takin’ up tiie rifle, an’ in degradin’
khaki and yellow boots and slouch’d hat with
sabres cross’d on it, goin’ off in a thrain without
payin’ any fare, an’ the thought fill’d, him with
norror. . ,'n
So he wrote a letter to all the crown’d heads,
an’ asked them to sind dillygates to a Peace Con-
ference.
The dillygates gathered from far and near.
Andhrew paid .their fares. Andhrew met them at
the boat and gave them spindin’ money.
What was done at the meetin’ ye’ve read in the
pa-apers. The French riprisintative crept round
behind Andhrew an garotted him with the Legion
of Honor.
The dillygates pledged themselves *to call upon
their respective nations to beat their swords into
plow shares, which Andhrew promised to float
< n the market as soon as money got a little aisier,
c tc., etc.”


“Mr. D.” could have added that from Pittsburgh
to Skibo and thence all round the world and back
again, there would be now all the more time to
devote to the great game of dollar hunting.
Besides the causes of war already mentioned,
another very probable cause would be race pre-
judite, but less so than the others being only par-
tial.amongst mankind. Yet when race piejudice
'becdme a thing of the past in America or
Australia say, and the whites intermarry freely
with negroes, greed and grab maj, as causes oi
war, be'as potent in the world as etfer, and universal
peace be as far away as ever.
(Marriage is the chief thing in life any time.)
into war, “Mr. Dooley’s” countryman Emerson,
had a deeper and truer insight than most, but E.
was a seer, one who “sees”—to most who do him
the honor of speaking of him at all, he was a mys
t i c ” — w ell then mystics are just what we want.
“I shall always respect War hereafter. The
cost of life, the dreary havoc of comfort and time,
are overpaid by the vistas it opens of Eternal Life.
Eternal Law, re-constructing and uplifting Society;
breaks up the old horizon and we see through the
rifts a wider. The dismal Malthus —the dismay
De Bow, have had their night.” -
“In the war it was humanity that showed itself
to r advantage, the people still demanding the more
gjTous measures, and giving them sons and
estates as we had no example before. We were
profta of the people, and believed they would not
come down from this height.
“But Peace came, and every one ran back to


his shop again, and can hardly be won to patriot-
ism more, even to the point of chasing away the
thieves that are stealing, not only the public gold,
but the newly-won rights of the slave.”
Emerson to Carlyle—Letters 153, 155.
VV e sometimes see calculations as to the money
spent and wasted upon actual war and warlike
preparations in peace time—this no doubt being
a tiuy sum and all that might be done with same
in the arts and works of peace, etc. ’ :
But we do not see anything similar re other
kinds of waste of which there is unhappily no lack
any large city’s wilful waste would easily sup-
port all the charities in same.
Which is or stands for the greatest evil—mdney
acquired as at ‘Thieves’ Row, 1 (p. ) ,or,same spent
in war, or war itself? (“Things Social and'Pofe*; TL
What too about private warfare, li'tigtftfdn*—
between ‘going to war’ and ‘going to Ik’ifrf'* there
is in the general view considerable l ,- resefh'Mance;
but owing to the ‘horrors’ of the - * latter? being
somewhat the milder of the two, it may b£-‘reason-
ably expected to persist the longer.. s<>l r• •
• Could the grand total of what changes hands
in the world through the multitudinous methods
cf dishonesty, direct and indirect,, be ascertained
it would make another very tidyisum—doing this
would make a fitting task for the
most mathematicians, if even they would be equal
to it.
“The great corporations lied to you, the smali
tradesmen lied to you, from top to bottom, *it was
nothing but one gigantic lie.” —Upton Sinclair.


Employees in a certain industry in Sydney have
stated publicly that what their employers
the public by fraud is sufficient to pay wages —
and which seehis to surprise no one—except per
iiaps that anyone should be surprised at same.
it dishonesty was to be found existing amongst ihose
employees, it would not be thought surprising.
Even where there is no dishonesty, the differ-
ence between promises and performances, expec-
tations and realisations as regards work and com-
modities, afe in the aggregate very considerable.
But what before everything else is to-day mak-
ing for the abolition of war, is something which
is not directly working towards that end at all.
viz., international trade and commerce.
This latter has brought into international re-
lationships, changes nearly as great as those that
have been brought into modern warfare by scien-
tific inventions.
No two things can be more incompatible with
each other than international strife and interna-
tional trade; and it looks as if the world had now
got to make its choice between the two. Any-
way. the utilitarian motive of enlightened self in-
terest; (this expression which has been going
‘out of print’ latterlv, is now gettin- restored t
a higher place than ever it held) has seemingl *
done more for the cause of Peace in half a centur
or so, than did the religious ones through all th.*
centuries previously.
The author of “The Great Illusion, Mr. Nor-
man Angell, essays in same to prove—and seem


ingly does so— that military and political power
give the nation possessing them no commercial
advantages over other nations; but methinks he
ignores the large part which sentiment even in
tnese commercial days, plays and ever will play
in human life. .
(Cicero was unwilling that the same people
should be at once the lords and the factors of the
whole earth. “Nolo eundem populum imperato-
rem portitorem esse terrarum.” For, as he said,
this world be indeed to suppose that every
individual in the State, and the whole State col-
lectively, had their heads constantly filled with
grand views and at the same time with small ones,
which is a contradiction. —Montesquieu.)
Homer Lea, U.S. Army, in his work, “The
Valor of Ignorance,” treats of the matters
of war arbitration, etc., not only from the view-
point of a professional soldier, but also as a world
philosopher might; and if Mr. Lea as a man
of action is equal to same as a man of thought,
his country is doubly fortunate. Between America
and Japan lie considers a war to be inevitable and —
if then she is as at present—with certain defeat
for America.
Any nation’s greatness rests less upon its large
tA oalation or its great material resources, than
upon its own great men —the aristoi, the best the
few, the ologoi, born to lead and rule the many
the polloi— men of thought and men of action, and
above all possessing a high degree of the Moral
Sense. It can be affirmed that to the nation pos-
sessing the highest degree of the Moral Sense


will the future of the world belong—and in a
really great nation, between its aristocracy and
great worldly possessions, there would be little
or no connexion—or whatever such there was it
would be as trusteeship for the nation rather than as
private ownership.
Another of our aristoi and men of action is our
own Lord Wolseley. in his “Story of a Soldier’s
Life” we read “.National greatness can continue
to thrive, onlv when it has fighting strength for
its foundation. War, thought it may mean a hard
struggle lor national existence is tne great pun-
ner oi tne race that has reached the verge of over
refinement, of excessive civilisation. 43 That verge
is the edge of a precipice at whose base lie mil-
lions, in everv form anu ''base of mental a.*tl Lcc!.jj 4
decrepitude.”
In “The Valor of'lgnorance” aforesaid we read:
"The first and most difficult task of statesmen is
the preservation bf'the national or military in-
stinct intact in the virtues of the people.
However disagreeable the thought may be,
militancy is alone responsible for the creation and
preservation of every State —only when, this mili-
tancy deteriorates is the State doomed.”
It is always alleged, and sometimes quite rightly,
by those who make war that they do so for some
right reason —to effect a good or moral purpose,
and when they do so and allege so wronglv. their
right punishment generally results. The brench
Communists, 1871, murderers of the Archbishop
of Paris, declared that they fought for the Rights
of Man.


(“Many of the French Communist prisoners
were tried in this way. Their right shoulders
were bared —if the sxin showed the mark made by
the kick of the Chassepot rifle, the Court pro-
nounced the single word Classe. If there was no
mark of discoloration, the President said Passe and
the man was released —those to whom Classe was
said were shot. One hundred and htty were thus
snot at day-break this morning.”)
--bir W. F. Butler.
( In N.W. America just after the close of the
Civil War, military officers of high rank were so
plentiful, that on one occasion as Sir W. F. B. was
told, when a stick was thrown at a dog but missed
the dog, it hit five Major Generals —“and that was
not a good day for Major Generals either Sir.”
‘Fighting is a touch of Nature which makes the
whole world kin.’ —Sir W. F. L .).
Calling life generally a struggle for "existence
men’s ideals and standards of conduct, honor, etc.,
will be greatly affected by the conditions of said
struggle.
When same is mainly a pugilistic one of races or
tribes against each other, the prime virtues will
of course be strength and courage, and the prime
\ ices the opposites of these.
put when in the course of time the conditions
of the struggle have become altered, we will find
some alterations too in the standards etc., aboyt
mentioned. In a later industrial and commercial
age, truth and honesty, untruth and dishonesty,
will not stand precisely where they did in a prc-


vious fighting uncommercial one. Chivalry wa*
a much more natural product of warlike Japan than
of industrial China. Amongst a people so unwarlike
and effeminate as th e Hindoos, we see that deceit
and dishonesty are like second nature almost—
“ Silent sullen peoples, half devil and half child.”
For the Japanese being, as a rule less honest
in business than are the Chinese, there is a fairly
plausible reason advanced.
Under their feudal system the upper class,
Samaurai, was the military, and following many
gradations down, the lowest of all was that of
traders, business people —these in return for be-
ing looked down upon by everyone, quite naturally
took their revenge when opportunities offered, and
as same often did.
Between the refined and cultured Greeks of old
and their conquerors the Romans, there was a
strong moral contrast. ,
At that period of their history, the Greeks’ love
of the true by no means corresponded with same
of the beautiful, and for their own lack of culture
and refinement the Romans consoled themselves
by sayinp- that these seemed only to make people
cowards, liars, and slaves.
But the brave Romans’ turn came too, and tha>
through what do you think —peace, plenty, and
unprecedented prosperity.
For centuries the Romans were true as they were
brave, and no people were ever more faithful to
their engagements —with them virtus, manliness,
comprised the whole duty of man.


But in time peace plenty and prosperity, and
which in practice mean generally make money—
eat drink and be merry—when unrestricted mak-
ing in the long run for national destruction, racial
extinction, at length did their evil work for the
Romans too; and even more disastrously than in
the case of the Greeks.
“Where from the west the Danube flows
To find its Euxine home:
Where from the north the tempest blows,
To bend the woods and drive the snows,
Where swarm the fierce and rugged foes
Who hate the name of Rome.”
Peace plenty and prosperity seem to belong to
that class of things which contain within them-
selves the seeds of their own destruction.
The Romans’ success as empire builders and
ruler of inferior races, was largely due to their
honesty in their dealings with the latter; as in all
such cases it ever was and will be. Yet this char-
acteristic and secret of success was itself due to
something else, viz., to the Romans’ be ng endowed
by Nature with a high degree of the Moral Sense:
a proof of this is that they were perhaps the only
nation of antiquity to practise Alonogamy— this lat-
ter Kurope largely it not entirely owes to them.
Europe’s superiority over Asia' is m no small de-
ow*n £ *-° institution of Monogamy: traces
of the Romans are now few and far between; this
remains and will remain while Europe remains.
1 is this aptitude of the monogamous family to
be the great nursery of morals that gives it its hold
upon the world, and which by conferring a superior-
ly upon every nation that mantains it mav well en-
snrc its permanence.’—Carveth Read.


When after a victorious campaign a Roman Gen-
eral was accorded a triumph, behind him in his tri-
umphal car there was always one placed to whisper
in his ear, “Memento qma pulvis est.” Remem-
ber you are but dust.
Wnat an insight into the Roman mind, etc., does
this small circumstance afford; the mind of a people
not likely to tolerate polygamy
The Romans, while duly honoring their great
men, had the wisdom to try and ward on uoiii
same the fatal malady of “swelled head”—pap-
pose that the French had done similarly tor Napo-
leon). this was early in Roman history, and be-
fore peace, plenty, and unprecedented prosperity
had wrought their ruin—later when the Decline and
Fall were preparing, we read of Divus Caesar.
Corresponding to their comparatively greater moral
superiority so was the Romans’ pol tical insight ai d
foresight, as compared with that of others; as Carlyle
pointed out, their Republic had so long a day because
on emergencies the constitution was suspended by a
dictatorship.
In those old days conquered cities have been ex-
empted from tribute and given especial privileges, in
return for or for the sake of the M.SS. of some
writer or writers, or copies of M.SS.—and the pos-
session of same was a measure of private citizen s
wealth.
An interesting story has come down re an expe-
dition from Athens which sailed for and attacked
Syracuse in Sicily, but was defeated. Of the cap-
tured Athenians the Syracusans are said to have
spared the lives of all who could repeat any of the
poetry of Euripides.


Later, the Greeks under Alexander the Great
conquered most of the world, obtaining thereby
peace, plenty, and unpiecectciiied prosperity —for a
time.
At the present time 1-11-12, Servia and the Slavs
are much heard of.
Servia is the land of the Servii, plural of servus,
Latin bondsman—the Servians repudiate this and
call themselves Serbs, now and as from their be-
ginning.
But there is another significant word and ety-
mology in this connexion, viz., the well-known word
slave.
Servia is part of what was formerly Slavonia, the
land of the Slavs—to the north of same were the
Germans, Goths, etc., to the south the Roman
power, and betwixt these the Slavs were figuratively
between the hammer and the anvil—with result that
the entire race almost were in bondage; and Slavs
were so plentiful everywhere as bondsmen, that
the word Slav got to be used in a joking way as a eu-
phemism or milder term for bondsman —then in time it
acquired that meaning fully, and same it retains to-
day in some European languages—but not in
branches of the Slavonian—there they have serf,
serfdom—there too the word Slav itself is said to
mean great, glorious, and Slavery military glory.
If the words slave and slavery were dropped out
of the English language and serf and serfdom used
in their stead, it would be proper and becoming.
Suppose it was not Slav, but Briton or Scot that
everywhere stood for a bondsman, a chattel—>


cowards, liars, and britons —cowards, liars, and
scots! What a world tragedy is hidden
m that little cjymology slave
But time brings changes —the Slavs now about
equal if they do not exceed in numbers their
former oppressors combined —of Russians alone
there are about 100,000,000, and of other Slavs nign
40,000,000.
The historv of the Slavs is by no means closed
yet—Kirk Killisse and other places little known of
before will be so no longer.
Roumania adjoining Servia was colonised by
Roman freemen (Romanii must on no account be
confounded with servii). The ordinary termination
of the name of a country was in the Latin language
—ia, hence when a name was Latinised thus, it wa-
made to end in ia—Britain Britannia, England
Anglia, Ireland Hibernia, Scotland Caledonia,
likewise Scotia; Wales Cambria, Holland Batavia,
Baiern Bavaria, Bohmen Bohemia, Osterreich
Austria, Preussen Prussia, Russland Russia,
Westfalen Westphalia; Hindostan Latinised is
India. Australia is Latin for Southernland.
The Romans named northern Europe Scandinavia,
and Mid or Central Europe was to them Germania,
hence Germany: to the Germans themselves it is
Deutshland; to the French it is Allemagne; the Ger-
mans call France Frankreich.
The Romans called Africa Ethiopia, and that part
of Asia which they had included in their Empire,
Asia Minor: this at the one end, to the Euphrates,
Britain at the other: also North Africa from
Suez to the Atlantic.
The Greeks’ name for Africa was Libva.


The ancient name of Greece was Hellas; this in
Latin was Graecia; the title of the King of Greece
is lvmg of the Hellenes.
The old world civilization was based upon bond-
age, serfdom, slavery. It has been estimated that at
the year A.D. 1, fully three-fourths of the human
race were in bondage—to the other fourth.
Bondage is as old as the human race itself nearly;
the word- slavery is but of yesterday in comparison
Some of the old philosophers had spoken against
bondage, but their words were academic merely—
even St. Paul did net seem to see anything amiss
in it.
C hrist’s words, “1 am come to preach deliverance
to the captives,” used by him when announcing
his own ministry and message were not merely
academic, no more than they were re a mere theory.
Of little account as they seemed then, they were
yet as the insertion of a rootlet into a crevice in the
foundation of a massive building, and which in time
resulted in the disintegation of same.
The original word servus remains also in our
word servant, and a trace of its old meaning can
be seen in the dislike to its use still sometimes
observable—in America it is not tolerated at all
IVi that land/£: liberty democracy what n»t
rial servii v/er : to be/foun| till not soivery 1 cpg
aap. But (he irords lam dome to preach deliver-
ante to the ca )tive£, were lthere for time
movlv/unhearcL tymeeded—ltilT they had the can-
non#^iceompanWent.


7-11-12
“If Lord Roberts’ universal military training
scheme was earned out on the German plan, the
cost would amount to an additional £IO,OOU,UUU
to £l5 01)0,000 per annum. Such a scheme, i r.
Acland declared, would be horribly provocative as
VV lU S thTs n re C Tpeople who spend perhaps above
SU Defence any kind must be provocative there-
fore cease all expenditure upon same., leaving a
the more for cigarettes, etc. .
If England follows Acland guioance above,, let
her take all she may get.
See the very latest, re the fruits of peace,
plenty, ana prosperity. "Doomed lslanders-Na-
lives dying out— War fare a preventive .- - Savage
warfare made the people alert, act.ve, wary and pro-
vident—these qualities were not now called °
the women did the most of the gardening, and there
being no fighting now for the men to do they had grown
t and flabby There was no incentive to rear child-
ren for the strengthening of the tribes or the protec-
don of the parents in case of war. . . the nat.ves w.ll
surely die out.” Daily Paper, -
The obvious remedy would be to teach t e naive
habhs of industry, etc., but before they had learned
or acquired same, they might be ail gone: sudden
interference any time with what is second nature.
Steven wtJn it is a bad habit, needs to be done
wisely, carefully^


It has been supposeo that the carrying of a shield
in his left hand by primitive man lor the greater pro-
tect.on ot his lett side, the ‘heart’ side, has causes ine
enure race, with here and there exceptions, to be
ngni hanaed; the right oeing thus necessarily tnc
fighting hand, and fighting our first and foremost
activity.
The word servus itself had an orig.n, derivation
viz., servare to keep, to preserve. When men were
entirely barbarous, pr.soners ot war, if not hilled on
the spot, were later killed —to be cooked and eaten.
when leei'ings of humanity had maue a l.ttle growth,
such were spared, Kept tor bondsmen.
in 1313, nearly 500 years previous to American
Declaration ot independence, houis X., Xing ol
France, issued an edict beginning thus
“Considering that all men are by nature free,
and that our nation is called the kingdom of Franks
or Freemen, and desirous that it may be so in fact
as well as in name, with the advice of our Grand
Council, we ordain that Slavery snail cease over all
our kingdom.”
Methmks that the old Franks will bear compari-
son with later Yanks., i.e., English; even if that was
the dark age of superstition, and not the enlight-
ened modern one of the Almighty Dollar.
In that land of liberty democracy and what not.
real servii were to be found till not so very long
ago. But the words I am come to preach deliver-
ance to the captives, were there for a long time
mostly unheard, unheeded—till they had the can-
nons’ accompaniment.


lx.
4 ar is a game whicn men play bastiy or lioit.y
As themselves are base or nome.
we cannot yet make war as we make love.
Carry a citadel by a serenade,
or nue into a fortress on a sign.
ror war is war—us cnromeics at then' .
ureadiui —and at tneir worst, au j
Of all that is in Hell.
—Wm. Watson.
The background of wrath which lies in evury unman
creature, ought to blaze out as seldom
and then as nobly as possible.
It may be defined as no otner than the genera! ras-
cal fire wnereoi hie itseif js composed, ui uj
elaborated shape; as the glance of motner s tore a„u
all other intermediate warmths and energies and geni-
alities, are the same element better elaborated,
—early le.
On behalf of N.Z. a prominent New Zealander
has promised that in the event of England going
under to Germany, N.Z. will next day hoist the
Stars and Stripes.
It may well be doubted if the U.S. would consider
even God’s own country to be worth a fight with
a Power which had just smashed up the British
N av y —besides there is another and nearer Power
that would certainly seek for a share of the spoil
in case of a dividing up of the British Empire.


Like school boys who might have locked out
their teachers, and have ciiauenged them and all
else to ‘ come on, so have we with like andacity
and impudence, but witnout the boys’ excuse,
ciiallenged ail the colored races in the world to
"come on” —tour challenging eight hundred mil
dons —and going beyond childishness we nave
ottered personal insults to multitudes of indi-
viduals of those colored races whom at any time
ue have the most reason to dread. Well did the
ancients say —Quern Deus vult, etc., whom the
gods wish to destroy they first deprive of reason.
Our national Defences, and which really means
our national existence, are largely a matter of
jQ s. d.—and the above re ‘come on’ is only 01 a pieci
with the fact that our expenditure upon Defence
was, till but recently, equalled by that upon Cigar-
ettes.
Of the world’s “White” countries, it is ours that
is in most danger of being conquered and perman-
ently occupied by non-whites; which means that
of all countries Australia is the one that needs
most to look to its defences.
Even were all our avoidable expenditure from
cigarettes to Melbourne Cups—Alcohol alone takes
per ann. ; Betting and Gambling, two to
one bar one, perhaps double or treble this—devoted
to defence , it would not be one penny too much.
Long ago “Chinese” Gordon, who knew his sub-
ject, estimated the possible Chinese army of the
future at 60,000,000.
To have to meet an army even the one thou-


sandth part of this, would be serious enough <.
The Chinese h?ve now become so far Western-
ized as to declare for a Republic, after -hruwing out
L heir imperial house.
And not only have they and of themselves made
such an immense national and public revolution,
but also a national and individual one equally so,
viz., cutting ott tlieir queues. The queue was a
part ot their nationality and of the nature of a
religion with the Chinese —let the westernization
process go on at this rate for a few more years
and we may expect to see things.
Of the Boer War the proximate cause was the
rush of Uitlanders to the newly d.-scovertu Ran..
Gold Field. Suppose that the Boer Government
had at that time said, in effect—
We will suitably reward the discoverers of this
goldfield, but with the gold itself we will do as the
English Government would do with gold found
similarily in England, viz., retain it as being Crown.
National, property—not even our own burghers
will be allowed to mine for it on their own ac-
count, skilled miners of you who choose to remain
and work for us will receive good wages; but all
you other exploiters, from London to Melbourne,
New York to Jerusalem, clear out quick as you can.
Gad something like this been said and
done, and this writer never could nor can till this
day understand why it was not—the Boers would
have had their gold and country both.


To this part of the Empire, the cost in life and
money of the Boer War has been repaid many
times over.
in the years preceding same Australian patriot-
ism was at a very low ebb, and such a feeling as
lo anything extending beyond our own shores, ot
our being part of a world-wide empire, or of a
feeling of loyalty to its head was with the majority,
Republicans, now largely under the flag of
•‘Labor,” non-existent.
The war altered this for the better considerably,
and the good process thus begun was furthered
greatly by the unlooked-for result of the next big
war —Jap.-Russian.
Speaking of the latter Mr. T. S. Knowlson has
said:—
“The bulk of the people in the land ot the Ris-
ing Sun have a profound State consciousness,
wnich exercises a most real effect upon their lives.
What is the effect? It is this —they live and work
aim cie for Japan hrst, and for themselves after-
\ aids. They would rather add to the power of
the Empire than put money in their own pockets.
The English ideal is usually the reverse—the
personal element is supreme—self-aggrandise-
ment uppermost the honor and glory of the State
being an item kept in reserve, and only brought
out after a declaration of war.
The nation’s success is purely secondary—
sometimes it is not even that, for I have heard a
man bitterly regret having fought for his country
in South Africa, the reason offered being that he
got but 25/ a week when his work was worth 30/.”


(Had the Boers offered him 32/6 per week he
would likely have gone over to them and certainly
ior 35/ or £2.)
The individual just referred to, can be taken as
being a very fair type or sample of a little Lmg-
ianoer, or as earlier he wuold have been of an
Australian republican. Of the latter there are
still only too many, and in highly-paid office too.
(See “Things Social and Political,” p. 45-)
So the more we work and the less we t alk,
The better results we shall get;
We’ve had an Imperial lesson,
it may make u? an Empire yet. —Kipling.
The leehngs of the average Japanese towards
Ins country, are something similar to those which
one might have towards one's lather or mother,
oi whom, m addition to natural affection for, one
haa good reason to feel proud.
Let tne immense dnlerence as regards public
and patriotic feelings between the Japanese and
the Loutish, including ourselves, is methinks cap-
able oi being lessened; these feelings on our part
being increased, and even made equal to those of
the Japanese.
i heir name for same is Bushido —what we term
public spirit—and that in its highest possible de-
gree —■ ’tis the soul of the Japanese nation in fact.
(‘japan is a militant paternalism where aught
that belongs to man is first for the use of the
State: the U.S. is an individualistic emporium
where aught that belongs to man is for sale. In
the one is the complete subordination of the in-
dividual, in the other his supremacy.” -Homer Lea


It has not been much mentioned in print, but it
is wcu = mown what, when there were thousands
to pnsoners oi war m japan, thousands
Japanese, women consented to, with the view
v : "„__ng to some extent,, the stature of the
race.
the trophies, flags, etc., taken by the Japanese
in the war are not allowed to be exhibited iri
any public place, to spare the feelings of any
of their former owners who might happen to see
them.)
How it will likely be asked are patriotic feel-
ings, etc., on our part to be increased?
By the few, the ologoi, the aristoi, the best, .set-
ting the example, giving the lead which will be
followed by the many —the polloi otherwise, or
failing the right example being given them by
the few, the many will not so much remain wnert;
they are, as go backwards, downwards.
If all the rent of. land in England were paid into
the War Office to-morrow, this would be in effect,
but a return to the original terms of tenure.
No doubt such a thing being done is almost
unthinkable—the slump in real property would be
too awful to contemplate.
Yet the nobilitv upon occasion think nothing of
stopping the enemies’ bullets, anci when necessaij
are amongst the foremost to be doing so—an. in-
finitely greater degree Y sacrifice than that above
suggested would be.
Suppose such a thing was to happen occasionally


and the sight thereof to become a familiar one,
it could scarcely fail to have a beneficial effect upon
those for whom making money is man’s chief ena,
and as before said, would be much less in
the way of sacrifice than stopping the enem.es' bul-
lets would be.
(“You are not true soldiers if you only mean to
stand at a shop door to protect shop boys who
are cheating inside.”
—Ruskin at the R.M.A, Woolwich.)
One of the first to fall in the Boer War was
the son and heir of the Most Noble the Marquis
of Dufferin and Ava —and that as a volunteer, un-
attached.
The story re the landowner and tramp, the latter
having been ordered off by the former, illustrates cor-
rectly the ultimate fact re land ownership and titles.
L.O. I do not permit trespass upon my property.
Tramp. How did this land become your property?
L.O. I inherited it from my father.
Tramp. And how did he get it?
L.O. From his father, and he from his father, and
he from his father, and he from his father.
Tramp. And how did the first of you get it?
L.O. He fought for it and won it.
Tramp, making ready, Then I will fight you for 't.
Lord Wolseley in his work already referred to,
speaks almost pathetically, and in Dart poetically,
of his soldiers’ valor and self-sacrifice as enabling
home tradesmen —


To make fortunes,
Live at ease,
/.lid marry their sons and daughters
Into gentle families.
and here methinks there could be found a clue to
England’s “way out.”
Suppose a home tradesman beginning life with
ambitions as above mentioned, and attaining to
same—
“Master at two and twenty,
Married at twenty-three,
Ten thousand men on the pay roll,
And forty Lcifditers at sea.”
then made over his business to the nation, retain-
ing for himself the position of chief manager at a
moderate wage, and receiving a position of honor
in the State.
Such though at first a novelty would find imi-
tators, and in time to have even one’s landed pro-
perty nationalised would be considered an honor.
There is no greater spur to exertion than the desire
tor honor —we know what some will give and do
for the chance of being able to write M.P. after
their names: and how much similarilv for a peer-
age, or the chance of one?
When the British aristoi and captains of industrv,
have become in their aims and ideals as national-
istic, as in general thev now are individualistic, in
result, the British oeonle will soon become as na-
triotic as are the Japanese—and if the man l ' are
ever to be taught in this wa ir worth
while, it can be safelv affirmed that same will be
done, only by the example being thus set them by
the few.


The, higher natures amongst us should be unwill-
ing, and the lower made unable, to aggrandize
tnemselves.—Aristotle.
Above is more to the purpose to-day than two
thousand vears ago: political reform ver-- secondary
to this.
(Carlyle’s well-known fiction re another aspect
of this matter is only too well founded upon fact.
“Noble spinners we have made one hundred thou-
sands pounds, wherein 1 mean to dwell and plant
vineyards. The hundred thousand is mine: the
three and sixpence per day yours. Adieu, noble
spinners, and drink my health with this groat which
I give you each over and above.”)
In a novel by an English ladywriter, and in
reference to one who had died suddenly, we read:
“What a pity—had £12,000 a year —did not dine
at my club—dined deuced well though.” etc., e
This, though fiction, is true to life and fact; that
after his death same should be the most note
worthy thing to be said of the owner of such •
income contains the elements of national tracedv
almost: is in close connexion not with England’s
greatness but littleness, and if ever it hapoer.s.
downfall.
Deducting say £IOOO a year for living ex-
penses, what might not be done with the re-
mainder of such an income in the way of reclama-
tions —or desert places—and the submurged tenth
(or if the owner had lived in this countrv. pro-
moting the filling up of our huge waste places bv
means of irrigation works etc. If Australia re-
mains with its present owners, the day will come
when surplus incomes will be so used—but then


the basis of national existence will not be em-
ployees’ wages.)
Give every man what is his, the accurate price
of what he has done and been. —Carlyle.
JSio less a personage than the Archbishop of
York attributes much of the present social unrest
to "the selfishness and luxury of the idle rich.”
Excessive luxury on the part of the few artificially
raises the standard of living for the many, and has
a demoralising effect generally. Much of same
luxury is in point of vulgarity nothing behind what
would say, be lining their clothes with banknotes;
indeed, personal expenditure beyond about £IOOO
per annum is in general much like same—
(“Have you seen the Shah? Have you seen the
Shah?
With five pound notes he lines his coats,
Which is very pe-cul-iah.”
This was much in vogue in London in the
seventies.)
“So and so is such a nice fellow, but he has no
money.” . .
Dining and dinner belong to the necessities of our
animal nature which must be attended to, but in
general the more quietly the better eating to
live and living to eat are not equivalents, however
much thev may someth be made so, nor is
animalism the supreme thing in life. Very often
dinner is made a ceremonial affair and of the na-
ture of a sacrament —such often means the feed-
ing of people already over-fed, and to whom
would be a much greater kindness to be put upon
low diet for a time. Pages of Lord BeaconsfieJd s


novels are almost punctuated with “dinner” and
“dine.” Would not “take tea” look and sound much
better any ume. Dinners costing £3 a mouthful
are not unknown in the science oi gastronomy.
When the Franco-German War, 1870-1, was in
progress, the newspaper correspondents used some-
times to tell us of how upon critical occasions the
French officers seemed often to be most concerned
about refreshments, cuisine, etc. —with what results
we know.
The writer has often been reminded of this by
different things he has come in contact with since
then, about the latest being in the London letter
of a titled correspondent of a Sydney journal.
“The result was a complete victory for the Thun-
derer which was fitted with the ‘director’: she made
five times as many hits as the Orion. . . . The
gunnery lieutenants from both ships afterwards
went over to th e Admiralty yacht Enchantress and
spent the rest of the day, both lunch and dinner,
with Mr. Churchill.”
Had he gone a little further and given full par-
ticulars re cuisine, diners’ appetites, etc., it would
have been but little more amiss.
(A letter by this correspondent without mention of
luncheon or dinner is a rarity.)
“In peace you can always find a journalist whcic
there is a free lunch; and in war you can alwavs find
him with the commissariat wagons.” T.W.H.C.
We have been told that Englishmen from their
innate love of liberty, etc., and money being no ob-


ject, would submit to any amount of taxation sooner
than to compulsory military service.
W ell, if this be true so much the worse for
Englishmen and England. YY e will next be told
that being so well provided with money English-
saouid cease altogether from the highly dan-
gerous business of fighting—either with other
people or with Nature in the Polar Seas, etc., and
instead pay poor hard-up foreigners to do these for
them; or when a foreign fleet sails for London, to
go out and meet it with a ship load or two of
money, and ask the invaders to take same and re-
turn home.
In some other language, that of Crete mc-
thinks, love of country and a mother’s love for her
child are, or were, both expressed by the same
word. Our language has no single word to express
either of these —suppose we got that word and used
it —doubly.
We read in a very old book of a people re-
building their ruined city, each man working with
one hand and holding a weapon in the other, or
having a sword girt by his side—same people and
city remain to-day, though they are not together
as such, and as they ought to be.
In general it can be affirmed that a people who
are not prepared upon occasion to use equally, and
with equal heart and spirit the implements of work
and of war, need but expect to go under.
Suppose that the Chinese had as much heart
for the one as for the other —above —perhaps it is
just as well that they have not.


Peace is blessed, peace arising out of chanty. But
peace springing out of the calculations of selfishness
is not blessed. If til- /rice to be paid for peace *s .ms,
that wealth accumulates and men decay, better far that
every street in every town of our nob»e country should
run with blood.—F. W. Robertson.
The death roll of the Boer War, including those
permanently disabled, was nearly 28,U0U men.
if a roll could be prepared of the deaths in
the British Empire during the same time cue di-
rectly and indirectly to drink, methinks that the
drink roll would be much the greater—that of the
U.S. is said to amount to 680,0U0 per annum.
Re money expenditure —during the thirty months
or so that the Boer War lasted the British people
were spending upon drink almost double of what
the war was costing —same is always with us, and
the necessary part of same expenditure is infini-
tesimal.
The indirect money loss thereby, to say noth-
ing of what is sheer drunken waste, is beyond com-
putation, while compared with the moral loss, the
direct and indirect money loss, is insignificant.
For the loss of life and money due to war in
the British Empire to be equal to that due to drink
in same, it would require two Boer Wars and per-
haps nearer three, to be going on continually. •
Were a division made of the world’s evils into
major and minor, methinks that war would find its
right place amongst the minor ones—when we have
reached the stage that war has become the greatest
of them all, millennium will not be far off.


Not unlike the talk about the horrors of war,
but with silence as to what war is the result of,
is similar talk re our dreadful burdens of taxation,
the overburdened shoulders of the taxpayer, etc.,
but with silence re alcohol, cigarettes, etc —our
really heaviest taxation burdens are the self-im-
pws£(l ones.
\,ar, notwithstanding its evils, before every-
thing teaches and requires from the those taking
part in it self-sacrifice ,(does drink do this?) With
same the occupations etc., of many of our citizen
soldiers are not at all in harmony, and for some
of them there could hardly be anything better than
twelve months or so of active military service, under
Lord Kitchener, say. To be a few days
and nights in the trenches at Wenener or Eland’s
River say, or a few hours in the firing line on
the Modder River or the Tugela, would affect one’s
ideas re the proportions of things greatlv.
Though for those whom Nature has especially
fitted for same there can hardly be a better career
than a military one, yet in regard to this as to any
other matter, it is always well to hear anything
that is to be said per contra.
A well-known public man who has had prac-
tical experience of military life, and very active at
that, the Right Hon. W. S. Churchill, tells us that
military life disappoints all who follow it—that they
leave the army soured by disappointment and a
•ense of injustice.
Realisations but seldom correspond with ex-
pectations—some amount of disappointment »s un-


V 3 f
tary enterprise, quite as much as upon anything
else, depend—the fate of any army without any
faith in its leaders can be too easily predicted.
But besides faith, even love will be found to
have an important place in military matters.
Suppose a regiment where the feelings of the
men towards their officers were such that obedience
had become as much a matter of love as of duty,
and much more so than from fear of punishment
tor disobedience, methinks that same regiment
would when put to the proof, be worth perhaps
tw o others where the feelings between officers and
men were different, all other things being equal;
or perhaps be worth three or four regiments whose
officers were hated by their men.
The value of a regiment, or an army as a fight-
ing force is not to be estimated by numbers alone;
nor on a battlefield might the dangers most to tv
dreaded by some, be the enemies’ bullets.
“Trooper 3809” relates how in his regiment
a number of men had sworn together in the even
of war, to shoot their officers —nor is this surprising
if all that he tells be true.
According to same French military training
is, or was, “a sordid degrading experience for men
possessing any self-respect —to be remembered
with loathing, forgotten if possible. ■
Of Australian military training, it is to be hoped
that such as this will never have to be said—also,
that our forces will not contain even one most
promiscuous murderer in the world.”
(“The most promiscuous murderer in the world


is an ignorant military officer. He slaughters his
men by bulleis, by disease, by neglect; he makes
cowards of them and deserters and criminals. The
dead are hecatombs of his ignorance, the survivors
melancholy spectres of his incompetence.”)
Homer Lea.
Of officers of above class present in the Union
armies 1860-3 General Lea speaks very specially.
(‘ I knew the officers well who were the 'Quar-
termaster-Generals of two of the five divisions of
our army in the Crimea, and they were not men
uhom i would have entrusted with a subaltern’s
picket in the field—had they been private soldiers
i don’t think any colonel would have made them
coiporals. . . • ihe surprise at Inkermann was a
disgrace to all the staff concerned, but the good
fighting qualities of the soldiers and regimental
officers were so conspicuous, that we have been con-
rent to forget the culpable ignorance of the com-
manders.) Lord W olseley.
Lord Wolseley says, in effect, that the person-
ality of an army officer should be such that his
men would follow him as surely as iron filings do
the magnet.
For those v/ho would command others, a prime
necessity is self-command.
(Lord Wolseley’s death has been just announced,
27-3-13, aged 80. It is something awful, tragical, to
think of an army whose high officers were not fit to
be corporals—Lord W. did perhaps more than anyone
to put an end to the scandalous system then existing—
making hosts of enemies for himself at the same time,


avoidable in all human affairs—seems to be almost
a necessary accompaniment of same, and perhaps
tis best that this is so; yet to such an extreme ex-
tent as that above stated, it might surely, one
would think, be avoidable.
As the world now is and is likely to be for a
very long time to come, to secure peace for itself
a nation must be prepared for war, be able and
willing to fight; but above all nations in the world
that one which has challenged half the human
race to fight. Outside of comic oper a methinks that
nothing at all resembling this has yet been seen
or heard of in this earth.
Ihe word haith is much used in connexion
v\ ith religion. St. Paul places it amongst the three
cardinal virtues, the others being Hope and Love.
Of the three Paul names Love as being greatest —
it is the greatest thing in the universe.
But faith, i.e., trust, enters largely into all
secular affairs; in fact, so largely that without it
existence, to say nothing of business, would be
well nigh impossible. It has been well said that
Probability is the very guide of life (Bishop
Butler) and if we were never to take anything upon
trust, nor go upon anything that we had not first
verified for ourselves, we would practically never
move.
Into military matters we will find that faith
enters largely, for upon the soldiers’ faith in their
officers and leaders does the success of an)' mili-


for long ‘‘the Wolseley gang” was a common expres-
sion re certain army officers. At above time (Crimea;
there used to appear advertisements in the papers —
‘‘Wanted Generals for the British Army—old women
preferred. ”
In reference to the standing contest between
good and evil, some of the writers of the Bible
make frequent use of figurative military language.
St. Paul's epistles abound in same—he com-
pares the Christian’s career to a warfare, speaks
of a good soldier of Christ, and in stating same’s
requirements or necessary equipment, one would
almost think that his words had been addressed
to world conquering Roman soldiers by one of them-
selves —helmet of salvation, breastplate of right-
eousness, loins girt about with truth, shield of
faith, sword of the Spirit which is the Word of
God. Part of the Apostle’s last words were—l
have fought the good fight.
Our everyday language abounds similarly in
military metaphors, and not seldom do writers and
public speakers when they wish to be effective, go
as did St. Paul, to the language of camps and battle-
fields for their words —the battle of life, plan of
campaign, on the tented field, in the firing line, hit
the mark, crossed swords, opened fire, stood to his
guns, hold the fort, no surrender, gone into action,
nailed his colours to the m~st, etc. Lord Rosebery
has spoken eloquently of the medical profession
as being ‘the forlorn hope of humanity.’
Between the words “a forlorn hope” and what
they signify there is not much apparent connection.


The phrase was originally a Low German one,
verloren hoep, a lost band or company; hoep being
akin to our "heap;" but it easily and suitably be-
came "hope,” and a linguistic error which might
Dimg a ray hope, if only in name where sorely
needed, can well be overlooked.
The corresponding French term is
les enfants perdud’une armee, the lost lads of
an army, or briefly, "enfants perdu."
Let me of my heart take counsel,
War is not of life the sum:
Who shall stay and reap the harvest
When the autumn days shall come?
But the drum echoed —Come;
Death shall reap the braver harvest,
Said the solemn sounding drum.
Bret Harte.
"The story of five hundred years
Writ on the parchment of a drum.”
Re “Thieves Row,” p. 12, G. A. Sc la told us long
ago of a street in Philadelphia consisting of rich
peoples’ houses, being popularly known as “thieves’
Row.”
These two words speak volumes, and such
volumes! worse than what the record of ten Civil
Wars would be; signifying corruption individual
and national almost; and meaning more of evil for
America than what arbitration treaties and peace
with all the world would mean of good.


A Japanese author .vrites:—
“What has the northern th.rd cf Australia lo show
as the result pf fifty years ox so-called British coloni-
sation? A few towns, hospitals, schools, say a
thousand miles of railway, and a population of per-
haps two men to each hundred square miles. A
noble result, surely. In a tenth of that time —five
years—we of Japan increased the population of
Formosa by three millions, erected two hundred
hospitals, and opened up the country by construct-
ing a thousand miles ot roads. We have proved
that we can colonise as we have proved that we can
fight. The need of our nation is room, room. In
Japan every nine thousand square yards mifst sup-
port a family, and here at our very door, these vast
fertile tracts lie idle.
“The Australian army and navy will for years be
mere toys. Treaties after all, are but paper. The
Australian aborigines were expelled or extirpated
because they faded to make full use of the land
they claimed. Are their successors prepared to be
judged by the same standard?”
“A little time ago the Dutch Government had to
accede to a polite but determined pressure to admit
Japanese into Java. Several of Japan’s best war-
f.V.os appeared off Samara ng the day the formal
request was made to the authorities. Our turn will
come as sure as night follows dav.” —E. J. Brady,
in “5.M.H.,” 22.i0.i2.
In which would intending emigrants find most
room, widest field, etc. —Java or Australia?
Had the result of the battle of Trafalgar been
different, the ownership of Australia, to-day might


have been different—and many other things in the
world besides. The anniversary of Trafalgar, 21st
Oct., is, outside ol naval circles, hardly noticed in
Sydney—that day two weeks previous, 7th Oct.,
Eight Hours Day—public holiday by Act of Parlia-
ment.”
Till our great empty continent has been fairly well
filled up, populated, all, or the greater part of ex-
penditure upon superfluities, amusements, etc.,
should be forcibly stopped, and the money so em-
ployed directed towards furthering the above end,
those whose occupations were thus interfered with
being found new occupations under the new scheme
of things.
If this be too much to ask or expect from Aus-
tralian patriotism, then let Australians take all they
may get. .
Our great undertakings, new Federal Capital,
Trans-continental Railway, underground railways,
etc., etc., may all be but so much more added
money—au grand prix.
All the naval power ol the British Empire cannot
suffice ultimately to save a remote comma . . . >
neither breeds men in plenty, nor hCviy imp . -•> • -m.
• -Admiral Mahan.
“We must either people this continent or
pDrish.’ s —Joseph Cook, M.P.
Our posterity will be the slaves of the yellow races
within two centurhs. Prof. Macmillan Brown.


not human life. Certainly our Governors belonging
to it nave upheld the hign natations of their order;
yet tne presence in tne community oi these with
tneir wives and families as an elevating, improving,
I'j.mmg miiuence, counts tor no more with “Labor"
Lxian wnat it does with the aboriginals.
“An Australian democrat is as good as any
English lord or lady." (and an A. aboriginal,
as good as any A. democrat.)
it wiil be noticed that “Labor" Ministers who
have iiad to come into personal contact with differ-
ent Loveuiors are less Keen re this “plank" than is
pleasing to their following: the latter know of no-
thing on earth higher than cash, bread and butter
and plenty of it; yet a Governor’s salary for
a year represents but five days of talking expenses,
not counting exDenses of actual government at all.
But the hour cf every, &c., doth arrive.
E. 87, to follow “Dr. Borghetti"—
Which ideal is highest; to serve the State, to bring
up children, above; or to make money, get rich
quick ?
Though bringing up children is impossible with-
out also making money, yet the latter is but the
means towards the above ends: education re these
along with all pertaining to the family is the high-
est education.
In Lord Wolseiey’s “Story of a Soldier’s Life" we
read—Captain Brackenbury is “a first rate man of
business; had he adopted some less noble but more
paying occupation in life than the Army he would
have made a fortune."
in Rnsk n’s “Unto This Last" we read—
“ The merchant’s function is to provide for the
nation; it is no more his function to get profit for
himself out of that provision than it is a clergy-
man’s function to get his stipend. This stipend is


a due and necessary adjunct, but not the object of
his life if he be a true clergyman, any more than
las roe, or honorarium, is the object of his life to a
true physician: neither is his fee the object of his
life to a true merchant.”
For so far the above by Ruskin has received but
scant attention, vet when “serve the State” has
taken the place of “make money,” at least with the
aristoi and captains of industry, this will be differ-
ent. Civil and military life require to be brought
into line; serving the State should be the end and
aim of both almost equally; personal enrichment
beyond a certain sum, “the funds necessary to
bring up a family,” being forbidden in either and
everv case.
In the Anglo-Saxon world of business and com-
merce this would mean a revolution nearly as great
as what a century has seen there in locomotion,
telegraphing, &c. If ever effected it will have been
not so much by any precepts, as by examples on
the part of the wealthy: it may be expected along
with the ending of democracy, and to John Ruskin
will 'hen be accorded the praise and credit due to
the one first to point out the way leading to his
country’s regeneration. Before our eyes we can
see going on the ending process, above.
In their essences civil and military life are, at pre-
sent. as the poles asunder; that of the one, self-
enrichment, of the other, self-sacrifice. Lord Wol-
seley speaks of his soldiers dying that England may
be great, and dying without a murmur, “and yet it
is their valor and their self-sacrifice which enables
home tradesmen to make fortunes, live at ease, and
marrv their sons and daughters into gentle fami-
lies.”
The writer apologises for so much herein being
disconnected: in a later edition he hopes to correct
this.


BRITAIN AND HER DOMINIONS.
What is the Flag of England?
Winds of the World declare.
lake hold of the Wings of the Morning,
And flop round the Earth till you’re dead,
But you’ll not get away from the tunes that
they play,
And the bloomin’ old rag overhead.
—Kipling.
“The five self-governing Dominions are as the
five stretched fingers of a great hand. They are all
free, they are all vitally related, and they all close to-
wards the palm.
That great hand has sometimes wearied of the
burden and sometimes been stained with blood.
But to-day it sweeps over the Seven Seas, not the
mailed fist of aggression or tyranny, but the right
hand of human fellowship, the open hand of human
helpfulness, the strong protecting hand of human
liberty and peace.”
Dr. J. A. Macdonald, Editor “Toronto Globe.”
Admiral Fisher wrote in the visitors’ book at
the Hasrue Peace Conference, to the effect that the
supremacy of the British Navy was the seturu,
for the peace of the world.


For our new Dreadnoughts and super-Dread-
noughts, appropriate names would be nieihinks,
“Pax Britannicas,” A.8.C., etc., and which would
come to be familiarly known as the Pax A. 8., ere.,
o\er the Seven Seas, as above.
Could the new German Dreadnoughts be simi-
larly named “Pax Germanicas”?
What Britain did for America.
Mr. Bryce, British Minister to Washington,
was the chief speaker at the celebrations held at
Jamestown, Virginia, on 13th May, 1 1 >U7, in memory
of the founding of Jamestown (from King James
1.) —3GU years before.
During his speech he said: “On this day three
hundred years ago two small ships and a pinnace
from England anchored here and landed their pas-
sengers, being about one hundred and twenty per-
sons in number, upon this island.
About twenty years previously this part of the
Continent had been taken possession of for Eng-
land by Sir Walter Raleigh, and named by him
Virginia, in honour of Queen Elizabeth.
The land whence the emigrants came was one
fitted to give birth to great and noble enterprises;
though measured by population England was but
a small country with only some five millions of
inhabitants.
But measured by what it was doing for the
world, it was a great England, with great poets
great thinkers, and strong men who did great deed-.
Never before and never since has such con-
stellation of brilliant names shone in the English


sky. In London, which tuese settlers had just left
Shakespeare was then living—some of them may
have keen him, with perhaps Ben Jonson beside
him watching the first performance of Hamlet four
or live years before. Erancis Bacon was living
though not yet Lord Chancellor; some of them ma>
have heard him pleading in the courts. Milton was
born the next year; Sir Walter Raleigh was a man
of fifty five; Sir Philip Sidney was a man of forty-
nine; Pym a youth of seventeen; Hampden a boy
of seven; Oliver Cromwell a boy of eight.
"Ihe oa k of English dominion on the continent
of i\orth America lay hidden in the acorn that was
planted on this island in the James River, this dav
three hundred years ago; just as the germ 01 hng-
lish dominion in the Jc-asi was to be tound in the
charter that had been granted by yueen Elizabeth
to the East India Company, seven years before this
very settlement here.”
The early experiences of the Jamestown
settlers has furnished one of the most interesting
romances in history.
The leader of the party, Captain John Smith,
a man after Sir VV. Raleigh’s own heart,” was
eaily captured by the Indians, but was saved from
eaUi and restored to liberty by the intervention
ot the Indian chiefs daughter, Pocahontas.
Iho mas Rolfe, an Englishman of good birth
married Pocahontas; they came to England, where
she died—their descendants exist to-day—one of
them is Admiral Rolfe.


The principal coaling station of the British
Navy in the West Indies is in the mountainous
island of St. Lucia. In the 18th centur- r France and
England disputed the possession of same, and of
much else besides; there were exchanges of owner-
ship, but in 1794 St. Lucia was finally taken from
the French, and re same F. T. Bullen, “Back to
Sunny Seas,” says: “It presents a standing series
of puzzles, as to how mortal men could ever succeed
in taking its heights from an enemy, fortified as
they were by every device then known to keep out
an invading force. But we have after expressing
our wonder, to fall back upon the accomplished
fact, the thing was done ana English soldiers did
it. . . . they hold those heights to-day.” Why not
say British soldiers?)
In the case of a nation with a history worth
remembering, and which nation is also well equip-
ped with educational establishments, etc., the ex-
tent to which such history is taught in same marks
about the extent to which they are worth having.
God of our Fathers known of old,
Lord of our far-flung battle line;
beneath whose awful hand we hold
Dominion over palm and pine;
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget—lest we forget.
Kipling.


ENGLAND AND ENGLISHMEN.
The stability of En<?nd is ibj security of the modern
world. Emerson.
“Nature held counsel with herself—‘My Ro-
mans are gone—to build my new empire 1 will
choose a rude race all masculine, with brutish
strength. The sea shall disjoin them from others
and knit them to a tierce nationality. ... A century
later (following Norman Conquest) it came out
that the Saxon nad the most bottom and longevity,
had managed to make the victor speak the language
and accept the law and usuage of the vanquished,
forced the baron to dictate Saxon terms to Norman
kings. . . . they are a family to which a destiny
attaches, and the Banshee has sworn that a male
heir shall never be wanting.
Ihe Teutonic tribes have a national single-
ness of heart which contrast with the Latin races
The moral peculiarity oi the Saxon r-
arms it with the sceptre of the gl she, is us com-
manding sense of K;ght and Wrong (i.e., the
Moral Sense).
Their practical power rests on their sincerity—
tneir very felons have their pride in each other’s
t.nglish stanchness.
Alfred, whom the affection of the nation makes’
the type of the race, is called by his friend Asser—*
iiie truth speaker—Alveredus veridicus.
In the power of saying rude truth, sometimes
m the lion’s mouili, no men can surpass them. On


the King’s Birthday, when each Bishop was ex-
pected to offer the King a purse of gold, Latimer
gave Henry VIII. a copy of the Vulgate, with a
mark at the passage:
‘Whoremongers and adulterers, God will
judge '; and they so honour stoutness in each other
that the King passed it over.
When they unmask cant they say: ‘The Eng-
lish of it is this,’ etc., and to give the lie is the
extreme insult. The pharse of the lowest people
is—‘honor bright,’ and their praise, ‘his wore
as good as his bond.’ ....
Solvency is in the ideas and mechanism ot
an Englishman. The Crystal Palace is not con "
sidered honest till it pays; no matter how much
beauty, or convenience, or eclat, it must be self-
supporting. ... if they cannot pay they do not
buy, and say without shame I cannot afford it. . . .
They are rather manly than warlike —the two sexes
are co-present in the English mind. . . . They have
more constitutional energy than any other people
They think with Henri Quatre that rnanly exer-
cises are the loundation of that elevation of mind
which gives one nature ascendency over another:
or with the Arabs, that the days spent in the chase
are not counted in the length of life.
The have a wealth of men to fill important
posts; and the vigilance of party criticism insures
the selection of a competent person. . . .
In England property has reached an ideal per-
fection —it is felt and treated as the national life
blood. The laws are framed to give property the


securest possible basis, and the provisions to lock
and transmit it have exercised the cunningest
heads in a profession that never admits a fool. The
rights of property nothing but treason and felony
can over-ride —the house is a castle which the
King cannot enter. Vested rights are awful
things, and absolute possession gives the smallest
freeholder identity of interest with the duke.
(With English-Irish troubles this homage to
property has much to do.)
The Catholic Church thrown on this toiling
serious people, has made in fourteen centuries a
massive system closely fitted to the manners and
genius of the country, at once domestical and state-
ly. In the long time it has blended witu every-
thing in heaven above and in the earth beneath.
It moves through a zodiac of feasts and fasts,
names every day of the year, every town and mar
ket and headland and monument, and has o •
itself with the almanac.
Loyalty is in the English a sub-religion.
The “Times” has the national courage, not rash
and petulant, but considerate and determined; when 1
see the men reading its columns they seem to me be-
coming every moment more British.
A civility of trifles, of money and expense takes
place, and the putting as many impediments as we
can between the man and his objects. Hardly the
bravest among them have the manliness to resist it
successfully. Hence it has come that not the aims of
a manly life, but the means of meeting a certain
ponderous expense, is that which is to be considered


by a youth in England emerging from his minority. A
large family is reckoned a misiortune; and it is a con-
solation in the death ot tne young that a source oi
expense is closed.
(Re America much the same might now be said.)
Whatever surly sweetness
possesion can give is tasted in England to the
dregs.
i lie doctrine of the Old Testament is the religion
of England. They are neither Transcendentalists
nor Christians.
They put up no Socratic prayer, much less any
saintly prayer ror the yueen’s mind; ask neither
lor ligiit nor light, but say bluntly. Grant her in
health and wealth long to live.”
—i* rom Emerson’s “English Traits.”
ihs work should be as lamii-ar to Britishers as
in general it o iiol.
“Your English watchword is fair play—
Your English hatred foul play.”
—Ruskin.
An Englishman, F. Martyn, who served in the
French Foreign Legion, tells us that while there
his word as an Englishman was always believed.
The Legion -4#&~etranger€. is said to be the finest
fighting unit in the world. It consists of about
14,000 men, and excepting the ofkeero, none a-:o
all are volunteers-, -and aliens--at that--
conscription exists not for ‘the Legion’ ; only about
one per thonsand are English: in F.M.’s tent there
were ten men all of different nationalities. It was


mainly by the Legion that France’s foreign con-
quests were made, and bv it they are held.
Above about means that an Englishman’s word
was equal to 999 others ! Who would not be an
Englishman alter that? Anyhow, should not that
solitary man be proud of his nationality, and feel a
call to ever uphold its high honor, and keep it and
111 s inheritance untarnished. And has not every one
of us the same inheritance, and should we not every-
where the world over feel a similar call, and gladly
respond to it? And so we will too some day, please
God, when our national religion is no longer that of
money worship.
Every British youth attending the humblest
school the highest University, and all between,
should be taught and told of the above.
“The Legion was first in the fort of the Redan in
the Crimea. . i remember a ae;achment or
iooo men bemg sent to ivitmagascar, ana oniy 1/5
returned, but on a uau tor volunteers every man uu
parade stepped forward. . . Fay in the Legion
vvas lourpence every live days!”
Should not “Redan” above be Malakoff? ’Twas our
men ,aio stormed and took the Redan after a many
mulltns' bombardment, but not bemg supported weie
uii.en out again ‘like a lot of scnoolboys out oi an
orcuard' ; the Trench were supported, and held what
Uiey look: that night the Russians evacuated Sebas-
topol.”
The Tranks were a Teutonic tribe, who crossed
the Rhine and gae their name to France, previously
called Gaul. \\ e unconsciously honor them ev /
time we speak of frank and frankness —there —y


even be sometimes heard English frankness, and
which, as Ruskin has pointed out, means no other
than English Frenchness.
The French may yet return us a compliment,
by speaking of anyone truthful and honorable as
being an “Engl sh man,’’ something like oar own gen-
tleman
Olive Schreiner speaks of some who ‘ May be
English, but they are not English men.”
If I had had to choose my birth place,
I would have chosen England.
—Voltaire.
There are only two nations, France and England;
the rest are nothing. If I had had an English army
I would have conquered the world. Napoleon.
Praise from an enemy, and untruthful, is highest.
Forensic Oratory v. Halting Speech.
“In the English House of Commons I heard one
of the best speeches to which I ever listened —
fluent, well-phrased, and well delivered. I said to
myself: ‘That man must carry the House with
him.;
When he sat down a member rose upon the
opposite side, and spoke for perhaps ten minutes.
He stumbled along, hesitated, grew confused; he
had nothing to recommend him but a knowledge
of the subject and a great sincerity.
But it was perfectly evident that the first speech
had no weight with the House, and that the second
convinced everybody. The first speaker was
Whiteside, a brilliant Irishman and Solicitor Gene-


ral; the second a country member, whose name
I never knew. The House thought Whiteside
merely an advocate, and his speech forensic. it
was character that carried the day, and you will
find that it generally does with the English.”
—R. H. Dana.
Forensic oratory is greatly discounted by such as above.
“Foreigners of distinction often visited Eton
College. 1 saw in the school yard, Daniel Webster
with his brow and port of jove. 1 saw Marshal
Soult, who looked the war worn veteran that he
was. Soult when the boys recognised him and
rushed to him, was half afraid that they were going
to mob their old enemy, and was surprised at re-
ceiving a British ovation.’
—Prof. Goldwin Smith.
• Till time may come when robbed of all her charms,
The land of scholars and the nurse of ahns,
Where noble stems transmit the patriot flame,
Where kings have toiled and poets wrote for fame;
One sink of level avarice shall lie,
And scholars, soldiers, kings unhonored die.
—Goldsmith.


DUTY.
The masterword in the English language is Duty.
This covers everything, including Religion. Let
us hear what some have sa d about it.
The ground plan of the world is the Idea of Duty.
—Fichte.
Duty, stern daughter of the voice of God.-
- Words worth.
If men do their Duty glory will follow.
Duke of *« ellington
England expects that every man will do his duty.
—Lord Nelson.
Duty means justice, fidelity, manliness, loyalty,
oatriotism: truth in the heart and truth in the tongue.
—J. A. Froude.
My Duty is my God. —Frederick the Great.
There’s life alone in duty done,
And rest alone in striving.—J. G. Wh ttier.
I dreamt and thought that life was Beautv:
I woke and found that it was duty—Ellen S. Hooper.
O righteous doom that they who make
Pleasure their only end,
Ordering their whole life for its sake,
Miss that whereto they tend.
But they who bid stern Duty lead
Content to follow, they
Of only Duty taking heed,
Find Pleasure by the way.
—Blanco Wh te.


Do the Duty which lies nearest thee, which thou
knowest to be a Duty; thy second Duty will already
have become clearer. . . . We do not come into
the world with rights which we are enru.ieu co, Oui
with duties which we are ordered to do. Rights men
have none, save to oe governed justly. Duties wait
for us everywhere, our business is to find out what
those duties are and faithfully fulfil them. Much
has been heard in the world about the Rights oi Man.
the Duties of man might now iairly cla.m some a.-
tention. —Carlyle.
For my part the deeper 1 go in my own conscious-
ness and the more simply 1 aDandon myself to it,
the more it seemt, to tell me that i have no rights at
all, only duties So it is unsafe and mis-
leading to say that our children have rights against
us; what is true and safe to say is, that we have du-
ties towards our children.
But who will find among these natural duties, set
forth to us by our consciousness th • obligation to
leave to all our children an equal share in the enjoy-
ment of our property?
Or though consciousness tells us we ought to
provide for our children’s welfare, whose conscious-
ness tells him that the enjoyment of property is in
itself a welfare t —Matthew Arnold.
In discussions upon economics the expression “pro
perty has its duties as well as its rights” is, ore may
say, never heard now.


The writer well rememuers when this expression
was as much to be heard as any other. in those
Uays property was the supreme thing; it mignt even
consist in human flesh, and that in a Republic; it and
its rights were everywhere paramount—it could aim
even still may be unlimited.
To-day things are tending all the other way about;
and r guts ol ail kinds are getting put in their proper
piaces, ichowing duties.
The most radical or revolutionary reform that this
wrder would propose woula be that people learn to
be content with enough ; and nowhere more than ho. -
would be seen the good effect of good example on
the part of the few upon the many; supposing same
to te set by the few, the rich. The general adop-
tion of above as a law or rule of society, would mean
the automatic extinction of perhaps half its ills ana
woes.
"From skylight lift to furnace bars,
Back’d, bolted, braced and stayed,
And singing like the morning stars
For joy that they are made,
Now all "together hear them lift
Their vo ces, theirs and mine,
Law, Order, Duty and Restrain.,
Obedience, Discipline."
Last two l : nes above from Kipling’s "Mac Andrew’s
Hymn” (Mac re his engines) go very war to‘ sum-
ming up, if they do not do so altogether, The Whole
Duty of Man.


In that part of the Oid Book written by that
ancient pessimist Ecclesiastes, we read: —“Fear God
and keep his commandments, for this is the whole
duty ef man.” ihis marks a very high plane of
thought any time; and considering the age and time
thereof, same is raised correspondingly to the very
highest plane.
" lhe head and the hoof of the Law and the haunch
and the hump is—Obey.”—Kipling.
There is one law and a brief one, which covers or
takes in the greater par! 01 Tiuman affairs, viz.,
Do as you would be done by.—
known also as the Golden Rule.
An interesting object lesson is afforded by the
sight of a crowd of people being kept in order by a
few uniformed men.
The latter are obeyed not because of their superior
strength, but because of what they represent law, or-
der, duty, etc. It is of these that at bottom the blue
coat is the livery, and this the people, litde as they
may ever thing of such, by their obedience acknow-
ledge.


IT’S A LIE—YOU’RE A L ,
Why Do These Always Mean Fight?
From our ancestors, human and other, we have
uianv inheritances. ... j
aooul the latest of these discovered is the supposed
existence in our blood ot certain salts, in the same
proportions in which they are present in sea-water— a
supposed inheritance irom our jeiiy-fish progenitors,
whose circulatory medium was sea-water entirely.
Let us now take a very long step lorward. vvher
two are having a talk, not quite friendly, and the woiu
“liar” happens to be made use ot, words then become
ows. generally. Though telling a lie is, except upon
oath, a comparatively venial offence, and it is un-
doubtedly most common, yet, at least amongst Eng-
lish folk, to be called a liar is nearly the greatest insult
possible —as if seemingly, telling a lie was the greatest
crime to be guilty of possible.
Calling another a liar is invariably intended as a
challenge to fight, is so understood by the other party,
and is generally followed by a fight; whilst using such
terms as thief, drunkard, or even murderer, conveys
or carries with it nothing similar.
This peculiarity and speciality attaching to the use
of the word liar, is a rtlic or survival of something
belonging to an older time, viz., Trial by Combat.
In pr nitive times fighting was the main business
of life, and the sole method of settling disputes; and
its use for same purpose is by no means extinct yet-


As sociai evolution, etc., slowly proceeded, the Slate
gradually took over 'his irom the individual; but tor
a long mile .slate Socialism and individualism ran
partly siOe by side here —trial oy Jury along vvnn
and beside 1 rial' by Combat.
Almost everyone llien carried a weapon, and liavs
to be able to use it too, ll be wanieu to live at all.
Kuskin says mac lor ceniunes, whatever ei ngin
life there was in tiurope, depended upon the necessity
ol every man being able to "ince (with t rapierp
It is not so very long since a sword was a recog-
nised part 01 a gentleman’s dress, and it forms even
yet a part of official Court dress.
As already stated, 1 rial by Combat was a part o;
our old legal system. When brought before a Court,
the accused, when his plea was to be not guilty, re-
plied to the accuser, in effect, if he did not use the
actual words —"it’s a lie,” or, ‘You’re a liar.” The
evidence might easily be such that ;he Court could not
decide between them, oath against oath, and might
order that a decision be arrived at in the old way, or
il might do so without hearing evidence at all.
In regard to certain offences and cases, it was tht
law then that a majority or a certain number of wit-
nesses carried the day. Here there was a fine field
for perjury.
lhe losing party could, and in a fighting age when
every man wore a weapon very naturally would, there
and then challenge the winner, by perjury, and the
Court could order the winner to fight, or be the loser
One result of all this was, that to call another per-
son a l ar at any time, or to give the lie direct, was


understood by ad parties as being a challenge to light,
and remains so to this day.
In the writer’s school ways, when one boy used me
words he or liar towards another, the correct answer
was —‘Are you able to follow your lie?” i.e., follow
it up in the usual way.
Irial by Combat has long been entirely abolished,
but it may well be questioned if this has been an en-
tire blessing. It would have been so it what tooh.
the place ol Trial by Combat had been periect, with-
out fault or flaw, no crime nor criminal ever going
unpunished; but how far this is from being the case,
everybody knows.
(A self-confessed • murderer, Carpentaria Downs.
Queensland, and whose sanity was never questioned
was, when tried before a jury, found to be ‘‘not
guilty.” On reading the account of trial etc., one
would be inclined to ask—Was it a jury of aborigi-
nals? In that and in many another case it might as
well have been. Above took place about 1909.,
Jurors and J.P.s should be identical.
If is said that in Am rica about 9000 murdtrs are
committed annually, nearly one pei hour, and that
but a little over one per cent, of these are punished
There, where in point of corruption the legal runs the
political system close, the old method of settling dis-
putes is being largely resumed.
The climax of crime is, methinks, the corruption
of Justice —the* corruption of the best always gives
the worst.
One of the most serious of crimes is also one of the
commonest, viz., Perjury—and as regards public


opinion, about the least thought oi—the old-new Ame-
rican way at least gets riti oi this curse.
the number oi punishments ir'erjury co actual
commitments of same, is not one in a million, and the
iaw on the subject is practically a dead letter. But
suppose that a portion of our old legal system dealing
with this had been retained, we can wed believe that
n a would-be perjurer knew beiore-hand that he might
have to face his adversary with a weapon, he would
be more careful in the matter oi swearing.
But such awful things as blows and hard knocKs
must not be thought oi, must be discouraged, and
such trilling things as perjury, deceit., etc., encour-
aged as much as possible.
Like so many other things connected with our im-
perfect human nature, a choice of evils is involved;
but compared with committing perjury, a fair light
according to rules, and with weapons not necessarily
deadly, would Lj a veniai' trifling thing.
Lven as it is a great deal could be done, and very
simply, too, to check this crime.
Suppose that when a verdict had been given the
jury could be asked whom, if any, they believed to
have been guilty of perjury, the latter there and then
to be punished for same, and with' something approach-
ing the maximum (the writer when once present in a
Court heard a sentence of five years’ penal servi-
ture passed upon a perjurer). Suppose that such hap-
pened not once in a lifetime but .requently, and
right along with the commission of the offence, not
only would perjury be lessened greatly, but also would
litigation itself —would-be litigants, would-be perjurers*
etc., would often decline to face such risks.


Contempt of Court is an offence very seldom com-
mitted, and why? Because of the known certainty
and swiftness of die punishment—instantaneous 50.i.0-tnnes,
tnnes, or like an exchange of pistol shots; the second
shot always being best. None of the law’s delay here,
nor of the advantage to the accused of a trial before
a jury, or it may be of the assistance of counsel
Suppose that some approach to similar expeditiousness
were made in re Perjury, the infinitely greater crime
of the two.
But if an oath is required by the State, the State
should previously have given instruction to everyone
as to the nature and meaning of same. The under-
lying fact of an oath is belief in the existence of a
Higher Power, to whom 'finally we must all be ac-
countable for our actions here. Taking an oath
means calling upon this Higher Power, God Almighty
and Omniscient, to witness that what one says is true,
that the promise one makes or gives will be kept cr
fulfilled. (The writer well remembers his surprise on
first learning the above —when an adult.)
An oath is said to be binding upon the heart and
conscience, and to rest upon, or have behind it, a
religious sanction.
Another survival of the days when every man car-
ried a weapon is the familiar hand-shake.
This was another way of saying, "I am not going
to draw my weapon on you this time.”


In the familiar expression “How do you do?" the
second do is a quite diiferent word from the first, it
is the old verb dow —co be able, 10 thrive, to get on—
it survives in doughty.
“Ho as well as you dow”—that is, as well as you
can, is a north country expression.
Another survival of the old lighting days is to be
been in the coat-of-arms, consisting of shield, crest,
etc., possessed by almost everyone aspiring to any
social distinction.
When a warrior was armed cap-a-pie, from head to
ioot, and with visor let down, his features were in-
visible ; and for one such to receive a blow that was
meant for another, was a likely enough thing to hap-
pen.
io avoid mishap of this sort, conspicuous devices
were worn, generally figures of particular animals or
plants, or both. The wearing thus of Span sh broom,
pianta genista, gave its name to the royal house of
Plantagenet. The Wars of the Roses were more than
a Battle of Flowers.
The lion has ever held a regal position in the ani-
mal creation, and we find it used as a symbol of
strength and power since the very earliest times, from
days of the lion of the tribe of Judah down to those
ol the lion of the north, Gustavus Adolphus, the lion
of the Punjab, Runjut Singh, or the British lion. Some
other European countries, Holland, Sweden, etc., use
the lion similarly upon their coats of arms.


The death roll' of the Wars of the Roses was over
100,00 men, including eighty princes of the blood and
many thousands of the English nob lity. This was
then a much larger proportion of the total population
than same would be to-day:—these wars lasted thuty
years, and ended with the death of Richard 111.
“He reigned till 14-8-5.
On Bcsworth Field was killed,
And the throne of the Plantagenets
By a Tudor Prince was lii'led.”
Frv m the Royal Mint of that early time there was
issued a gold co n value for 6s/Bd, stamped with a
rose, and called a ‘rose noble’; it no longer exists,
but the usual legal fee is a survival of it.
After the conquest of Wales the supporters of
the shield upon th e Royal Arms were, till the Union
with Scotland, the Lion and the Red Dragon (of
Wales). James I. replaced the Dragon with the
Unicorn, and unless the Leek is entwined with the
Rose, Thistle, and Shamrock, Wales is entirely ig-
nored in our national insignia. The dragon and the
unicorn are animals both about equally fabulous.
The Union Jack is correctly the Union James,
from James 1., under whom two crowns and flags
were united; but it was the French for James, Jac-
ques, that was used, and this very easily became
Jack. Jack seems to have more to do with Jacques
anytime than with John And so it has too;
the correct diminutive of John is Jock.
The Latin Jacobus was rendered into French as
Jacques, into German as Jakob, and into English
both as Jacob and James.


Of the Plantagent Kings the second was Richard
Coeur de Lion, the lion-ffearted who chose as his
device a lion painted upon his shield, and which in-
creased to three lions remains to this day on the
quartering oi the Royal Arms of England.
One ot Richard’s wars was with Philip, king ot
Prance, re a town which Richard claimed —Gisors,
and in asserting his claim Richard made use of the
words Dieu et Mon Droit—God and my right —these
words were aiterward adopted-as the motto on the
Royal Arms, and where they also remain to this day.
the other Prench words upon same surrounding
the shield —Honi soit qui mal y pense —Evil, or shame
to him who evil thinks, are the motto of the Order
of the Garter which was founded by Edward ill.
these words are said to have been uttered by him
when he picked up a garter which a lady had just
dropped, Lying same upon his own knee and originating
the Order of the Garter. the King had noticed
some sniggering amongst those present and took th s
way of reproving it. Norman Prench was the iang'
uage of the Courts in those days, and the words Horn
soit, etc., are an abbreviation of —in Engl sh —Shame
be to him who thinks evil of this incident.
The Order of the Garter is now the h.ghest Order
of Knighthood in the world—it includes several of the
Sovereigns of Europe, and is denoted by the
K.G. Different changes have been made on
the Royai' Arms at different times, but these mo.tas
remain—
“At Gisors in 11-9-8.
False Phii'ip frightened fled;
At Chalus in 11-9-9.
The lion-hearted bled.”


Originally a coat of arms was part of its own-
er’s hghting gear, shown on his armor as a recog-
nition, his face being covered; now the owned shows
it, if not as above, in various other ways.
In the reign of Henry VIII. the executions in
England numbered about 2000 annually. Did the
same ideas and laws re crime and. criminals exist
now as then it would mean about this number per
month, 24,000 annually, instead of as actually
about one per month.
Prior to the Norjnan Conquest surnames were un-
known in England; a survival of this is the signing
of only the Christian name by a member of the.
Royal Family. -
In those days too, being able to write one’s name
was the exception, and making a mark or sign the
rule: do we not still say ‘sign’ your name, he
‘signed’ an agreement, &c.
“The Barons who signed their Charter by dipping the
points of their steel gauntlets in tne ink, had
more virtue, manhood, practical force, and wisdom
than any of their successors.”—Cariyie.
In those days too 2 form of punishment was
being run between two rows of mail-clad men re-
ceiving blows from their steel gauntlets. We no
longer have this, but we say of a man or a ship :
that is fired on from different points when trying to
escape, that he or it runs the gauntlet.


SUNDRIES.
Note to p.*3B—“enemies’ bullets.”
Wnen tiie t ranco-German War was over, it be-
came wen Known tnat not a tew merman olticers,
Prussians especially, nad tailen therein hy the bul-
lets or tneir own men. , , _
soon alter the oeatn of Herr Bebel, the German
Socialist lecuer, /vug. 1913, ms runeral it was said
was tne largest ever seen m Berlin, ms Lite ap-
peared. 1 nerein tis told ot Bebel s lather,
wno was a sergeant, saying to his wite, \brau, it
war comes, the hrst bullet i will hre will be at a
Prussian othcer.”
me Labern affair shows very plainly what some
Prussian olhcers’ ideas re themselves and their class
still are: and it would not be surprising u Bebel
senr's. ideas and intentions were equally common
amongst his class: in 1870 Socialists were mucn
less numerous in Germany than they are now. Une
can well believe that many Prussian otncers to-day
are not very desirous tor another war.
Note to p. 43-
Perhaps nothing better has happened to the Eng
lish people for a century than the challenging or
their naval supremacy by Germany, and tne pre-
sence of a fleet nearly equal to their own and nearly
openly hostile, withm a day or two's sail ot London;
it has given them something to attend to and think
about besides make money, eat drink and be
merry.


Re both England and Australia, the fruits of
peace plenty and prosperity have been oniy too
evident; and as regards ourselves, very snimar to
above stated has been Japan's proot ot ner ngncmg
capabilities: for both peoples both ot these outside
happenings may be fairly regarded as being provi-
dential.
vVe are now spending 225. 6d. per head upon
Dexence; perhaps as much as what we do upon
cigarettes, picture shows, etc., etc.; was sucn heroic
sacrifice ever heard of before?
there is no sacrifice on our part, but plenty or
self-indulgence, and of sickenmg cant re our sacri-
fices.
Wordsworth, who could see beneath the surface of
things said truly when he wrote
* taod’s most perfect instrument in working
out a pure mtent
is man arrayed lor mutual slaughter;
iea, carnage is uod s daughter.
It is to tie hoped that in both cases the being
arrayed will suitice; if it does not, then tne car-
nage will follow,
London has never known an invasion; but judg-
ing Irom what we near, a very small part oi tne
wnoie, the “horrors’' ot one might not greatiy ex-
ceed those of one year there any time.
* Universal peace and universal truth and honesty
will all arrive about together: when armies and
soldiers can be done away with so too can policy
and prisons, and easiest of all, politicians and
parliament: as it is this is dosed half the year


In 1866, when Denmark lost nearly half her ter-
ritory to Prussia, if England had assisted Denmark,
as Lord Palmerston, men Minister wanted to, and
got himself into trouble by saying that she would
uo, to-day England might not nave the good reason
to dread Germany that she has.
Following the ueieat of her navy, Germany would
be much as berore she had one and till Berlin, Dres-
den, Frankfort, <kc., &c., were taken: the defeat
of the British navy wouid mean the end of the Brit-
ish Empire.
Germany has said, in effect, We are the strongest
nation in Europe upon land, and we mean to be the
same upon the sea, and you can shut up about uni-
versal peace. Japan has said similarly, You whites
think that we are fit only to be insulted, but we
mean to show you differently, and you can shut up
about arbitration and peace. Australia too has
sppken, biggest of ail, not having “cut the painter”
just yet. We mean to keep tins as a white man’s
country against 800,000,000 of vou, and you can all
shut up about arbitration and peace.
What’s brave, what’s noble, let’s do it; after the
high Roman fashion 1 * Shakespeare.
The word brave is not English but French; in its
own language it means more than what it does with
us; un homme brave, i.e., an all-round fine fellow:
the Scottish form “braw” more nearly approaches to
the original in meaning.
Though the Normans did beat them and upon
their own ground too, yet our Saxon forefathers
were not without bravery, or a word of their own to
express same, and their word which corresponded


to the French brave was, v«ight; ‘the Wallace wight,
liut the 'Conquest'' extended to wight too, and in
time it sank tu mean what such as enstur, cove &c.
uo now; then nnany, and properly too, it -disap-
peared.
Wnat's brave, what’s nobie? let s do it.
nad the Moors, Moslems, conquered France as
well as —tney were beaten back at lours,
A.u. 732 —instead ot a iNorman there would more
likely have been a Moorish Conquest oi England,
me eastern Koman empire would nave fallen be-
lore the lurks much earner than wnat it did, and
ail Europe would probably, n not certainly have
been iurkey-in-Europe.
bince above date all Western Europeans have
been to this day to the Moslems all alike Franks.
it is not too much to say that the old Franks were
the Saviours ot European civilization.
In 1313, nearly 500 years previous to American
Declaration ot independence, Louis X., King ot
France, issued an edict beginning thus
“Considering that all men are by nature free,
and that our nation is called the kingdom of Franks
or F'reemen, and desirous that it may be so in fact
as well as in name, with the advice of our Grand
Council, we ordain that Slavery shall cease over all
our kingdom.”
Methinks that the old Franks will bear compari-
son with later Yanks., i.e., English; even if that was
the dark age of superstition, and not the enlight-
ened modern one of the Almighty Dollar.


7 . # *v
“Toronto, 16/1/14.
General Otter said that the militia was ill-equip-
ped, and neeaed quadrupling; eighty per cent, oi
me men were born m the British Isles; people were
too concerned with business matters to devote any
time to tde defence of their country."
imr "business matters" above, read dollar-hunting.
“A nation not proud of its defenders will prob-
ably in me end reel ashamed of them."
\es ana ur used too, as \_anaaa, will some day
lO' me average money-maker his country's pres-
tige and history are matters ol indifference; are
nougnt in comparison to getting rich quick, getting
something tor nothing: tne few who tnmk and act
otherwise are to the many only as so many poor
silly billies.
G. Agassiz when offered a large sum for a lec-
turing tour in America replied mat he could not
waste 'any tune making money beyond what, he
needed to live on.
To have solved the mystery of the Great Ice Age
would have been more to L.A., than getting all the
money in America.
If an Ice Age comes again, and there may be
another, Northern Europe and N. America will be
as abandoned stations, selections; and worse.
In any community the highest service is that of
the State ("the duty of the male population, &c.")
and the moneys paid to those in higher branches
thereof should be the measure of incomes permit-
ted, with a maximum of to £2OOO per an-
num tor any income, public or private. The col-
lector and protector of all incomes is the State.
As it is incomes are obtained outside of the State’s


service much larger than tne largest in the same,
and often exist in return ror no service at all: the
evil example -ox nones with idleness is too oxten
seen (p. 33 “Archbishop or Yoik." p. 42. “inicves
Row' ; a raise impossible standard ot living is set
up; those having -moderate incomes are lorcea to
“Keep time" with others having excessive uiies and
nothing to do but spend them; lining then coats
with five pound notes: the best men are withdrawn
rrom their country's service to take part in the
scramble for thousands a year.
A list of holders of high military appointments,
with salaries attaching, sometimes to be seen m
the press, looks anything but well; not unlike as
would a list of bishops’ names with their salaries.
Suppose the enemy were to offer them more money,
there are many who would say that same should be
accepted. “Every man has a right to go where he
can get the most money," is about democracy’s,
“Labor’s" highest belief; is the highest they
wot of.
To Goldsmith’s “sink of level avarice.” and the
depths of dishonor, democracy and plutocracy are
fa-t sending England; and will so any country.
io find the keenest would be plutocrats upon
this earth, and perhaps the lowest birthrate there-
on, let one look amongst our most advanced de-
mocrats: re Carlyle’s Moneybag of Mammon see
“Things Social and Pol." p. 74.
Suppose “make money” replaced by “make good.”
Men do not naturally co-operate for work; they
prefer to shirk that; ’tis danger and war not peace
and plenty, that bind them together info nation-
hood and brotherhood.
“But the money=bag of Mammon, for that in these
days is what a respectable republic of the middle
classes will signify, is still worse while it lasts.”


Nations are built up, integrated, by struggle and
adversity; too oiten are they disintegrated, or at
the least deteriorated by plenty and prosperity.
According to Carlyle, Scotland had when he was
an old man one hundred times more wealth, so-
called, than when he was a boy, “but not a hun-
dredth part of the real worth.”
A measure of distance and its word common to
most European countries, is—the mile; its source
ing everywhere the same.
i'he Romans measured distance by thousand
paces, mille passuum, shortened to mille; (one thous-
and thousand, with us, one million) —from the cas-
tra. camp, on the Rock, Rochester, to Execastra,
Exeter, so many mille (passuum), so many “miles.”
The passuum was five feet, two military paces,
hence every country's mile is near to 5,000 feet.
Mile is mille, or millia, passuum abbreviated:
every time we use the word we recall the legions
whose marches from Mesopotamia to Caledonia
were measured per thousand paces.
We oftener say five hundred or five thousand a
year, than five hundred pounds or five thousand
pounds a year; words re money filling about the
same amount of space in our speech perhaps, as did
words re marching and fighting in the Romans’
--this in their earlier days of struggle and adver-
sity, not the later of plenty and prosperity, wealth
and luxury, decline and foil.
The chiefs of the Roman Republic were the
Consuls—two chosen annually from the patrician
families, the plebeians having votes therein. Next
came the Praetors, and ’twas from these that the


provincial governors we;o chosen, one such being
styled Proconsul or Propraetor. Do we not some-
times speak of .our own proconsuls? And if we have
now no proprateors or praetors, we have a Pretoria.
In the days of old Rome one of her armies in
N. Africa ' was defeated « the General, Regulus,
captured by the Garthagenians.
f rOm motives of policy his life was spared, and
later Regains -was. sent home to. negotiate a peace
with the Roman Senate: but first he was made to-
swear, m> his. own manner, that if his mission proved
a failure he would return to Carthage., Theie was
much cuteness-here, the lives of Regulus and
most of his army being thus involved.
His mission was a failure, but like a true Roman
Regulus, kept his oath and returned to captivity
and deafcfi^-! '
“prom the chaste kiss and last embrace
Of wife and babes he turned his face,
- A man self-doomed to die.”—Horace.
Regulus was to us an idolater, but if he had been
a Christian would his oath have had a greater
sanctity, or have been better kept? Such a religion
was not an utterly false , one. And if war is
less barbarous now than then is personal honor any
greater? Has moral kept pace with material pro-
gress? Has increase of invention and wealth
meant increase of truth and honesty? (See
“Nature and Some of Her Ways,” p. 30.)
We feel some pride in our heroes; but if our history
contains a record of heroism greater than the
above, or our literature any lines having more pathos


than those above, this writer does not know thereof.
No historical lesson is more worthy than this one
of a place in our school books, but from most of
which methinks it is absent.
Reguius was a typical Roman; such a people
deserved to conquer the world. The bedrock of their
State was the family, and marriage was to the
Romans a life-long fellowship of all rights human
and divine”; to the Jews and Greeks it was but a
temporary union; the Roman Family and State were
models for all ages.
lhe Jews’ tenth commandment classed a man’s
wife with his ox and ass: got rid of as easily.
If at the end of their long struggle Carthage and
not Rome had triumphed, European civilisation
would never have been.
Rome was in its best days a res publica, a republic
m the true sense of the word, not a democracy,
nor “a multitudinous res privata with everyone for
himself and devil take the hindmost.” ‘‘The duty
of the male population was to serve the State of
the female to bring up children” (now mostly of
the one making money, of the other spending).
the nation that will be the greatest in the
modern world will be the one that will make these
o old Rome its ideals also—public service without
personal aggrandisement, and as free from this
as hom bribery and corruption; with little of this
m private life either. See p. 32, “Ari~*otle.”
Rome was and to-day Britain is much less a
C \?7L. <^uer in or than a civilising power
Whatever there may be in Bntam : s history to her


discredit, yet some things are to be found per con-
tra; and one of tfySse is, that different Asiatic and
African peoples have at different times petitioned
to be brought under British rule. They had seen
enough of it to know the good 01 it, and pernaps
European peoples could be found to-day, g l ad if the;,
were under it: our Irish Fenian Australian Re-
publican “Labor” rabble are beginning to have
glimmerings corresponding.
Something similar to above was often seen in the
davs of old Rome: (petitions from outside peoples)
When one thinks of that, old word Senate in its
original application, Senatus Populus Que Romani,
and the grand cypher S.P.Q.R-, and then of a certain
‘Senate’ and Senators,’ a smile or more arises.
If all the States of Europe, of N. and S. America
and Japan were united into one sovereignty, the
central authority of same would about cor-
respond to-day, to what the S.P.Q.R. was in its
day. Now these stand for “small profits, quick re-
turns” —and Australia has a Senate,
Re the cheapness of human life to the ancients
let us be silent. ’Tis not so very long since we
punished thefts of 2/6 and upwards wit.i death
—below that sum by transportation to B yB y.
In 1802 a proposal to raise the death minimum from
2/6 to 5/- met with great opposition in the House
With all her thieves either hanged or transported,.
England should easily have been the honestest coun-
try in the worlds


Rj Napolaon.
“The greatest soldier, and tne greatest adminis-
trator in history”—Gladstone.
‘Europe’s last great man”—Carlyle.
Napoleon would have been the first man m the world
if ins ends had been purely public.—Emerson.
“The greatest understanding that the world has
ever seen” —Goethe.
“He raised himself by the use, and ruined himself
by the abuse ol superhuman faculties. He received
tne most smgular and subhme honor that has ever
been awarded to humanity: he was known m France
not as General, nor Emperor, nor even by his name,
but simply as The Man,’ l'homme.”— » *
His son was —the son of the man.
in all the offices of State he knew everything,
guided everything, inspired every thing. His finan-
cial management, by which he sustained a vast em-
pire with power and splendour, but with rigid
economy and without a debt, is a marvel and a
mystery.”—Lord Rosebery.
“I had succeeded in restoring order in a king-
dom torn asunder by faction and deluged with
blood. I came not as your Cromwell did or your
third Richard No such thing. I found a Crown
in the kennel. I cleansed it from its filth and
placed it on my head.”
There are only two nations, France and England;
the rest are nothing. If 1 had had an English army
1 would have conquered the world. Napoleon,
t’raise from an enemy, and untruthful, is highest.
The first quality of a soldier is fortitude in en-
during fatigue and hardship; bravery is the
second. Napoleon i


On the subject of ielig.on the writer has seen
nothing better than some thmgs said by Napoleon:
‘Everything proclaims the existence of a God, that
is beyond a doubt; but all religions are clearly the
outcome of men. It is all a matter beyond our
comprehension, and people should remain in that
religion in which they have been brought up. If
God interferes in men’s dealings with each other,
it is to fight upon the side of the b.g battalions.”
Which means that He does not so interfere. He has
given us Reason and Freedom, a knowledge of
Right and Wrong, ways and means innumer-
able, and left us to ourselves. Re praise and
thanksgiving we can hardly go wrong, re prayer
we may very easily.
We no longer appeal to the God of battles;
our Dieu et mon droit recalls the old t me idea.
Some day another Napoleon will be given to the
world, one whose ends are unselfish and purely pub-
lic: some idea can be formed of what same may
do for his country and the world by looking at what,
as it was, Napoleon did for France.
According to Lord Wolseley, Napoleon could not dis-
tinguish right from wrong—to Herbert Spencer he
was, “that transcendait criminal.”
After Napoleon had become Emperor, a commis-
sion which he had appointed to choose a coat of arms
etc., recommended for same, a lion resting. When
their report was presented to Napoleon, he drew his
pen across these words and wrote above them, “an
eagle soaring” with for motto, “Braver la mort et
le destin”; To face death and destiny.


At Erfurt in 1808 Napoleon addressed Kings to
whom he had dictated terms, “Gentlemen, when 1 was
a lieutenant of artillery at Brienne.” Enlarged this
could have been, “Gentlemen, when I was a lieuten-
ant of artillery at Brienne, and a very impecunious one
at that, you were kings in your different countries,
now f am king of my country, and over you and youf
countries as well.”
“The word impossible is not in my dictionary.”—
Political necessity represents the destiny of the
ancient drama.—Napoleon.
With neck outthrust you fancy how,
Legs wide, arms locked behind,
As il to balance the prone brow,
Oppressive with its mind. —Brownings
“Napoleon would have been the first man m
world if h s ends had been purely public. ’’—Emerson.
And departing leave behind us,
Footprints on the sands of lime.
This metaphor is said to have been first used by
Napoleon in a letter to one of his Ministers —“We
should endeavour to do something while here, to leave
some impress of our lives upon the sands of Time. ” -
Napoleon himself made impressions on the sands
of Time; but methinks that this idea of his as ex-
pressed by Longfellow will outlast them all —it was
idea or thought worthy of a great mind.
Yet Time’s sands often consolidate, the impressions
received becoming part of itself.
In the German States which formed the old Con-
federation of the Rhine, the law existing to-day in re-
gard to inheritances is not German law, but that of
the Code Napoi'eon; and in general the laws of Hol-
land, Belgium, Switzerland, and Italy are to-day those
of the C.N.


Yes, Napoleon would have been the first man in
the world if his ends had been purely public.
it is said that years before the Duke of Welling-
ton, then Sir Arthur Wellesley, took the field
against Napoleon, he prophesied that Napoleon
would fail, would be put down. Why? Sir A.
was askea. "because his despatches are full 01
lies.”
How far ir St. Helena from the field of Austerl-tz i
You could not hear me if 1 told you, so loud the
cannons roar;
But not too far for people living by their wits,
Gr go up means, Gay go down, the wio ; world
o’ef.
How far U St. Helena from Beresma’s ice?
An ill way, a chill way—the ice begins to crack,
But not too far for gentlemen who never took advice —
When you can’t go forward, you must e’en turn
back.
How far ir St. Helena from the Capes of Trafalgar?
A longish way, a longish way, and ten more years to
run.
It’s south across the water, underneath a setting star;
What you can not finish you must leave undone.
How far t' St. Helena from the Field of Waterloo?
A near way, a clear way, the ship will take you soon,
A pleasant place for gentlemen with little left to do,
Morning never tires you till the afternoon.
—Kipling


The shield of the coat of arms of the Washington
family, Northamptonshire England, of which George
Washington was a descendant, Pore Stars and Bars.
When the United States were lounded, same increas-
ed in number were transferred to and became in ef-
fect the new national banner —the Stars and Stripes,
t he animal chosen was an eagle, and a very tierce look-
ing one at that—with for motto, E pluribus unum —
One from many.
It is said that in the old parish church of the Wash-
ington family Northamptonshire, the armorial bear-
ings above are still to be seen.
When the Confederate States revolted in 1861
they chose for their flag the old original Stars and
Bars, and ror their Great Seal an equine portrait
General Washington, same surrounded with wreaths
of cotton and sugar cane, and for motto, Geo V ; ndice
'—With God for our leader we will conquer. Re the
idea contained in these words the following is to the
purpose:—
‘Painful it is to read, and yet cne reads again and
again, ol citizens who have united in close league
against some proud invader; with enthusiastic de-
pendence upon the justice of their cause the invinci-
ble force of their patriotism, and the protection of
Providence; when justice has been found weaker
than power, and enthusiasm than numbers, and Pro-
vidence has coldly taken the side of the stronger bat-
talions.” —Sir J. Seeley.
Since Australian Federation 1901, the coats of arms
of the Commonwealth and of the different States have
been officially declared by the College of Heralds.
1 hat of New South Wales has for supporters of the
shield a lion dexter, right-hand, and a kangaroo sinis-


ter left hand—crest, the rising sun —motto —Orta
recens quam pura mtea —now brigiitly <i
snines tnough out receniiy arisen —it mean-
ing sunny i\iew bouth Wales. Victorias motto
is "Peace and Prosperity,” supporters two iemale fig-
ures. The Commonwealth coat of arms has under-
gone alteration recently, wattle leaves have been ap-
propriately introduced, and the emu after standing tor
nearly tw Ive years upon one leg has now been per-
mitted to do so upon its two legs. lhe motto ‘‘Ad-
vance /* 'stralia” has been shortened to “Australia.”
Does this mean that Australia is no longer to advance,
but to remain a fixture, with about five auuits 10
eight square miles?
Every experiment made whether by multitudes
or by individauls, which has a selfish sensual aim,
will fail; the pacific Fourier will be as inefficient
as the pernicious Napoleon.
So long as our civilisation is essentially one of
property, of fences, of exclusiveness, it will be
mocked by delusions. Our riches will leave u
sick, there will be the bitterness in our laughti
and our wine will burn out mouth. Only that good
profits which we can taste with all doors open,
and which serves all men.— Emerson.
What is vulgar and the essence of all vulgarity
but the avarice of reward? The man whose eyes
are fixed not on his work but on his wages, whe-
ther it be money or office or fame, is almost equally
low as these.—Emerson.
Society can never prosper but must be always bank-
rupt, till every man does that which he was created
to do.—E.


Note to “England and Englishmen.”
It was Carlyle’s belief that England could never
have grown to be what it was if there had been no
more sincerity <n Englishmen, no more hold on fact
and truth, than he perceived in his own contemporaries.
England as he saw it was saturated with cant, dosed
to surfeit with doctrines half true only, or not true at
all —doctrines religious, doctrines moral, doctrines
political; till the once noble, and at heart still noble
English character was losing its truth, its simplicity,
its energy, its integrity. Between England as it was
then and England as it once had been, and as it might
yet rouse its If to be, there was to Carlyle visible an
infinite difference.
There was not a statesman who could do honestly
what he thought to be right and keep his office ; not
a member of parliament who could vote by his con-
f-cnnce and keep his seat; not a clergyman who could
hope for promotion if he spoke what he really believed;
hardly anyone of any kind in any occupation who could
earn a living if he tried to do his work as it should
be done; and the result of it all was that the very
souls of men were being poisoned with universal men-
dacitv.
The ‘progress’ so loudly talked of was progress
downwards, and rapid and easy because it was down-
wards.
The Barons who signed their Charter by dipping
the points of their steel gauntlets in the ink, had more
<-irtue, manhood, practical force and wisdom than any
of their successors. —J.A.F.
We cheat ourselves with words when we conclude
out of material splendor an advance of the race.


Fixgress in material wealth creates perhaps more
evrts uian it relieves; but suppose this aithcuity
solved, suppose the wealth distributed and every
peasant living hxe a peer, what then.'* ii this is air,
one noule soul outweighs the whole oi it.—
spiritual regenciauon comes hrst —moral alter
it —political and social last. —J.A.F.
llie noblest part of our existence is based on
sentiment. Fatnotism is sentiment; Conscience is
sentiment; honor, shame, reverence, iove ot beauty,
love ot goodness, every high aspiration which we
entertain are ail sentiment. Ail are unpractical
according to the pront and loss philosophy, yet
without them mail is but an animal, lower not
higher, than Ins ieilow animals.—J. A. Froude.
“Sir Chas. Adderly deprecated the continuance ct
the discussion re the Colonies on a matter purely sen-
timental.
1 doubt if Sir C.A. in the least knew the meaning
oi sentnnentaf. It is, e.g., a purely sentimental ques-
tion whether Sir C.A. shall or shall not eat his mother
instead oi burying her.”—Ruskin
According to Mr. Galton the people of ancient
Athens, taken as a whole, were as much above the
English people of the present day, as the latter
are above the Australian aborigines.
Out of thirty men of absolutely first rank in the
ancient and modern world, twelve belonged to an-
cient Greece, and eleven of same to Athens alone.
These were Aristotle, Socrates, Plato, Flomer.
Aeschylus, Phidias, Demosthenes, Pericles. Thucy-
dides, Hippocrates, Euclid —the twelfth was Alex-
ander the Great.


The other eighteen were —Christ, Moses, St. .Paul,
Buddha, coniucius, Mahomet, Caesar, Cicero, Han-
nibal, ivant, ueeuioven, Goethe, Shakespeare,
i\ewton, uante, Raphael, Michael Angelo, i\apo-
leon.
ut men of second and lower ranks in the world,
Ancient Greece furnished not tens, but hundreds,
if not thousands.
Soldiers appear to be capable of seli-sacr.iice, but
merchants not —which singular tact is the real reasuu
ox the general lowness oi estimate in wh'ch the pro-
lession of commerce is held compared with that oi
arms
bor the soldier’s trade verily and essentially is not
slaying, but being slain; and this without well knowing
its own meaning the world honors u. .
ri uravo s traue is slaying, hut the world has nevei
respected bravos more than merchants: the reason i
honors the soldier is, because ne noids his hie at Uu
service of the State. Reckless he may be, fond ot
pleasure or adventure, all kinds of bye motives and
mean impulses may seem to affect him, but our esti-
mate of him is based upon this ultimate fact of which
we are well assured, that put him in a fortress breach
with all the pleasures of the world behind him and
only death and his duty in front oi hirn, he will keep
his lace to the front. . . - • • - - • * •
A good soldier wishes mainly to do his fighting well.
He is glad of his pay, very properly so, and justly
grumbles when you keep him ten years without it.
Still, his main notion of life is to win battles, not to
be paid for winning them. So of clergymen, they like
pew rents and baptismal fees, of course; but if they


are brave and well educated, the pew rent is not the
sole object of their lives, and the baptismal fee is not
the sole purpose of the baptism. So too of doctors,
they like fees no doubt, yet if they are brave ana
well educated, the entire object of their lives is not
fees. . . . And so of all brave and rightly trained
men, their work is first and their fee second; lee very
important always, but still second.
But in every nation there is a large class who are
ill-educated, cowardly, and more or less stupid; and
with these people just as certainly fee is first and work
second, as with brave people work is first and fee
second. . .
God means all thoroughly good work to be done for
nothing. .....
—Ruskin, “Crown of Wild Olive/”
—Cap., “Work/”
Ancient warfare was well nigh pitiless —modern soU
diers mix pity with their valour. Have they lost any
of their valour by doing so?—Sir John Seeley.
Men accustomed to place the idea of sacrifice, ot
the voluntary holocaust, at the summit of their
thoughts, will surpass others even in the arts ot in-
dustry.—de Maistre.
In the old epic poem “Orlando Furioso,” one whose
travels had extended as far as the moon, relates h w
he found all the waste, loss, and failure of the earth
collected upon her satellite. Wasted talent and time,
wealth and opportunities, abortive attempts, broken
promises, shattered hopes, fruitless tears, etc., etc.
Methinks that by this time all the mcon’s available
space must be occupied thus.


WORK v. PAY.
1.
As a good soldier puts his work
Beiore his pay, so i
Will do the same, tor the noblest work
that’s done beneath the sky
Knows naught ot pay ; tike real wealth
Which money cannot buy..
2.
But if with Greed and Grab and Take-down
One is often face to face;
And getting gain at another’s loss
Is counted no disgrace;
Small wonder if ’twixt work and pay,
Work should take second olace.
3-
But nowhere in God’s universe l
Gan such the order be:
Nay—work is ever ever first,
And second pay or tee.
The higher, nobler too the work,
Pay ranks less in same degree.
4-
Then let me cease of my wage to talk ,
And about my pay to whine;
Let me feel towards what I’ve got to do,
Let such heart for my work be mine,
As a sailor has in the fighting tops,
Or a soldier in the firing line.
Of boasting more than of a bomb afraid,
A soldier should be modest as a maid;
Praise is the world’s debt to deeds of high degree,
But if you praise yourself the world is free.
—Pope.


St. Paul made use of figurative military language
in reference to things sicred —the following is an ex-
ample of something similar taken from modern, as
Paul’s was from ancient warfare; in fact by some whcv
may read these lines the original speaker may have
been seen, heard or known —at Chievely Camp, South
Africa:
“The preacher stood close to the graves of fallen
British soldiers. No one who looked upon the neat,,
strong figure in the plain khaki uniform of a private
soldier, at the clean shaven, square-jawed face, at the;
fearless grey blue eyes, could doubt either his honest
or earnestness.” Press Correspondent.
‘‘l’ve come to tell you all about a General whose;
armies hold the City of Eternal Life, and if you’re
wounded he’ll send "his red cross ambulance of love,
and his adjutant whose name is iviercy, to dress your
wounds.
If you’ve committed any cnsobedience of orders,
throw down your rifles and surrender. No rebels can,
hope to enter the City of Eternal Life —you can’t storm,
the walls nor take them at the point of the bay’net, nor
by a night surprise, nor anyway else —there is no night
there, it is always clear, bright day, the ramparts are:
mounted and guarded, and the gunners and sentries
never sleep. There is only one way to get in there, and
that is to know the pass word.
But you can’t fool with my General nor think
that he’ll pass over disobedience of orders, and his,
own orders —he’d be a very poor General if he would.
When the bugles sound the last reveille that you’)
ever hear,, and the orderly officer whose name is Death
has come with the order to march-, you’ll have nothing
to fear about if you know the pass word, if you can re-
turn the countersign. The pass word is Repentance,,


the pass word is Repentance, and nothing else will do.
Your uniforms may be ragged and you may not have
so much as a corporal’s stripe to show, but if you can
pass the sentries fearlessly, you’ll find a General s coir
mission waiting for you just inside the gates.
The sentry on duty will see you coming and wiu
challenge you—“ Halt, who goes there”—A friend—
“ Advance friend, and give the countersign. *ou
might say you forgot to get it, or you might give it
wrong—it’s no use—you H find a bay’net up against
your chest; but if you say loud and clear, Repentance,
he’ll lower his bay’net and say: Pass friend, al s
well.”
Education not evrytiling.—Herbert Spenser.
•‘There is a perennial delusion common alike to
Radical and Tory that legislation is omnipotent, and
that things will get done because laws are passed to
do them, society being misconceived as being some-
thing manufactured by statesmen. No cunningly de-
vised political arrangements will of themselves do any-
thing ; no amount ol knowledge respecting the use o!
such arrangements will suffice, nothing will suffice but
the emotional nature to which such arrangements are
adapted, a nature which during social progress has
evolved the arrangements But you say
will not education and the diffusion of political know-
ledge fit men for free institutions? No; it is essen-
tially a question of character, and not of know edge—
by everyday happenings this would be sufficiently clear
to you, but for the universal delusion about Education
as a panacea for political evils.
Of Prince Eugene of Blenheim days and fame, Pope
said that he “took cities like snuff.”


If the lower races should be left as they are,
then a good case has been made out for universal
suicide.—W. S. Churchill.
Re Prisoners of War: All military pride, all
independence of spirit must be put aside; these
may be carried to the grave, but not to captivity.—
W.S.C.
When the time comes that nations are not obliged
to enforce their own laws with a power superior
to that of individuals and communities; when
courts and penal institutions are put aside; when
the thief arbitrates with the man he is about to
rob, or the murderer with is victim, then only can
we hope to substitute International Arbitration for
the power of armies.
Industrialism is only a means to an end and
not an end in itself.
Only so long as national wealth remains en-
tirely subordinate to public honors and aspirations
can it be utilised to increase the greatness ot a
nation; and only so long as the chivalry and virtue
of a people are held aloof from it, can a country
be considered as either free or rich. When wealth
becomes the master no words can describe the
povery of the state
Opulence instead of being a foundation of na-
tional strength, is liable to be the most potent fac-
tor in its destruction.
A nation can become so rich that its wealth will
bankrupt it in a war with a country that is poor
but frugal and warlike.—Homer Lea.


Whos3 work is greatest?
Of the many workers and classes of workers
in the world, it would be a very pertinent ques-
tion —which of them all is chief—whose work is
of the greatest value to mankind?
Metninks it might be answered that it is the
writer of something worth remembering and which
is remembered; so much so that it has become part
of the nation itself almost—e.g. O God, our Help in
ages past —Home, Sweet Home—Auld Lang byne- -
Cheer, Boys, Cheer.
Or it might be only one or two lines—
Do as you would be done by.
God of our Fathers known of old,
Lord of our far flung battle line.
Do the duty which lies nearest thee, which thou
knowest to be a duty.
One touch of Nature makes the whole world kin.
Butchered to make a Roman holiday.
Ihe child is father of the man.
And departing leave behind us,
Footprints on the sands of i ur.e.
Re foregoing the following by an American au-
thor, Ambrose Bierce, is apropos —
‘‘l should say that the greatest man is the man
capable of doing the most exalted, the most lasting,
and most beneficial intellectual work —and the high-
est, ripest, richest fruit of the human intellect, is
undoubtedly poetry.
The great poet is the King of men —compared
with his work any other man’s work is a joke.
If there had ben no Washington, American Inde-


pendence would nevertheless have been won, and
me American Republic established.
i-»ut suppose that lie alone had taken up arms
he was neither indispensable nor sufficient. With-
out Lincoln the rebellion would have been subdued
and slavery abolished. What, kind of greatness is
that— to do what another could have done—what
was bound to be done anyhow? I call it pretty
cheap work. * J
kiistory lias always elevated to primacy in
greatness that kind ot men—statesmen and soldiers
In my judgment neither of the men mentioned
is entitled to the distinction, i should say that
t le greatest American that we know about, if not
Henry VY. Longfellow, was Edgar Allan Poe.
Great statesmen and great soldiers are as com-
mon as fleas, the world is lousy with them—we re-
cognize their abundance in the saying “the hour
brings the man.” We don’t say that of literary
emergency; there the demand is always calling for
the supply, and usually calling in vain. Once or
twice in a century it may be the great man of
thought comes and makes the glory thereof all
his own, by saying what none but he could say
delivering an immortal message which none but he
could bear.”
In old England ham meant the abode or place ct
anything almost, animal, vegetable, or mineral—
• Beecham, Buckingham, Durham, Horsham,
Nottingham Stoneham, etc., etc.,
In later t-.mes it acquired a more particular significa-
tion, and as home it came to be confined and applied
to a residence or dwelling place. But for centuries


and till but recently, it was without the special asso-
ciations which belong to it now; and what above ever}
th.ng eise gave it these was the writing ot Home,
Sweet Home, by John Howard kayne. these simple
verses, timed with the popular teehngs that had long
been growing, and with their correspondingly
simple and pleasing music have had the effect of sur-
rounding a home or dwelling place with the tenderest
and dearest of our associations, making the word
home the premier word of the English language .
‘ Ihe artificer in ideas is the chief of workers,
who out or nothing will make a piece of work that
wiu stop a child irom crying or lead a nation to
higher things. 1 ' .
Of poetic and fanciful ideas there are few prettier
ones to be found anywhere than that of the Arabs
re their favorite pastime, that the days spent
in the chase are not counted in the length of lue.
it is not to be expected that everything which
an author may write will be perennial, lasting —
aome of his work may not be worth anything. But
in gold or diamond seeking, a large quantity of
dross generally has to be sifted for one precious
grain or carat. .
Someone has said: “Let me make the nation's
songs and I care not who may make the laws/’
ft this could ever have been correctly said by
anyone, methinks that would have been Rudyard
Kipling, who in his own land has wielded a power
equal to that of many lawmakers combined.
As a per contra to what Kipling may have written
that is inferior rather than superior, and as an an-


swer to the unfavorable criticisms of him that are to
be met with, the writer would put forward but two
of K-.’s own lines, and short ones at that—
What is the Mag of England,
\vmas or the world declare?
The greater potency of a nation’s songs over its
laws sometimes, is due to their operating in a higher
sphere or part of man s nature, viz., the emotional.
Magic may or may not exist or be true, but songs
have sometimes had a power that might well be
termed magical, e.g., the “Marsellaise.
But a song in our own language having, me-
thinks, a better history than the hrench one, ana
a nobler and higher position in the world of such,
was —“John Brown’s Body.” _
Its author is hardly known; the original of it was
but a negro camp meeting melody doggerel, if
you like.
My poor body lies a-mouldering in the grave,
But my soul goes marching on.
Glory, glory, hallelujah,
My soul goes marching on.
Following the execution of John Brown for hi»
attack on H arper’s Ferry, the arsenal of the State
01 Virginia, the stronghold of slavery in the
U.S., someone altered these lines to—
(See “Nature and . . Her Ways, p. 40).
It possesses the necessary requirements io<- a
popular soul-stirring song or hymn to be sung
by men in earnest about something that they be-
lieved worth fighting for, viz., simplicity and sin-
cerity, with music corresponding, and it became
the marching and battle tune of the Northern a.


mies in the American Civil War (1861-63), witli
what results the world knows., .
i'he boutherners made parodies on it John
Brown’s donkey, knapsack, etc., but they might
equally as well have tried to answer or silence the
iNorthern artillery with popguns.
‘ Uld John Brown, Osamawattomie Brown,
Will trouble you more than ever,
When you’ve nailed his coffin down.
Re John Brown Emerson wrote:
“Brown is a romantic character; without any
vulgar trait, living to ideal ends the truest hero
man I ever met. It is an encouragement to know
there could be found twenty men to dash them-
selves against the walls of our Bastille, as a folorn
hope of what they believe to be an army of liber-
ation. We think better of the country and of
the race because of them.” This was in 1859 or
>6o—in 1861 came the army of liberation.
“What they hanged was riot John Brown, but
Slavery.”—Victor Hugo.
“A hero’s life is incomplete ending
on the scaffold or otherwise tragically.” —V.H.
No higher testimony was ever given re anyone,
nor methinks could possibly be given than that
by Emerson re John Brown, above —“the truest
hero man 1 ever met,” and Emerson himself was
as one in a million among men.”
Nor a higher ideal, aim, or ambition, methinks,
could one have or place before one’s self than
would be —“When my poor body lies a mouldering
in the grave may my soul go marching on’ —show-
ing, leading others on the way to something higher,
nobler —being one ‘of the immortal dead who live
again in minds made better by their presence,'


The rebellion was launched in whisky.
“I was in the Congress preceding the Civil War.
It was whisky in tne morning, the morning cock-
tail, then whisky all day, whisky and gambling ah
night—drinks before Congress opened its sittings —
drinks before it adjourned. The atmosphere was
redolent with whisky —nervous excitement seeking
relief in whisky, and whisky adding to the nervous
excitement.
Yes, the rebellion was launched in whisky.
If the French Assembly (this was in the seventies)
were to drink some morning one half the whisky
consumed in any one day by that Congress, Fiance
would declare war against Germany in twenty
minutes.”—Genl. E. D. Sickles.
The immediate cause of the war was the revolt of
the Southern States against the Federal Union, and
the suppression of this revolt the Northerners ob-
jective.
In the second year of the war President Lincoln
issued a proclamation—abolishing Slavery, and au-
thorising the enlistment of colored men, ex-slaves, as
soldiers—following this the conflict took a higher
tone, and the Union cause acquired a moral dignity
which is no small factor in any war.
During a debate in the English Parliament on the
abolition of slavery in W. Indies, a member remark-
ed that while it was a certainty the slave owners
would be compensated, there was a total silence re
compensation for those most entitled to it, the
slaves themselves.
Note to p. 74, “the money bag of Mammon.”'
Re the money market in a large British city being
ruled by a clergyman. See “Things Social and Polit-
ical, ”p . 13.


“i.P.’s Weekly,” 18.7.13, reports the result of
a referendum taken amongst its readers as to the
appointment or Toet Laureate, there
vvere sixteen candidates,” and out of 40,749 votes
oust erector nad ten votes), Kudyard Kip-
ling received 22,030; Mrs. Meyneil came next with
0000 less two; Mr. Masefield, 3,267 third. Ur.
bridges who actually got the appointment was
eigfuh, with 710 votes.
tne result or a referendum taken also by the
‘ journal of Education” re “ifie three greatest liv-
ing tLngiish poets,” was—1, R.‘ Kipling; 2, Wm.
Watson; 3, Dr. Bridges.
For the whole Empire Kipling has been something
like what Burns was for one part of it.
the reason why Kipling did not get the Laureate-
ship can be found without the aid of clairvoyance,
oee tilings Social and Tolitical,” p. 105.
io ioilow “scramble for thousands a year, p. 74.”
Serving one’s country is often but a thankless job,
bringing more kicks than halfpence: see p. 37.
“W.S.C.”—serving one’s self wins all the more
easily.
When after “Majuba Hill” a British official was
explaining to a Zulu chief, that the British Govern-
ment had restored the Transvaal to the Boers be-
cause it was the latters’ country, and to give them
back same was an act of justice, etc. —Said the
chief—“ Then why don’t you give it back to us? it
was ours first.”
Aii classes have joined in a mad race for pleasure
and leisure. Ihe result was that the birth rate wav.
going down, and defectives were being left to pro-
duce the race of the future. Our posterity will be
the slaves of the yellow raceswithin two centuries.”
Prof. Macmillan Brown,


“Amid the virile comfortable four meals a day
population of N.S. Wales, Victoria and New Led-
iana, the birth rate nas diminished by nearly naif
in the past thirty years.” —Sidney Low.
\ r'eace, plenty, and unprecedented prosperity.)
“In the last ten years Japan has increased its popu-
lation by as many as are in Australia to-day.” Daily-
paper, 14/5/13.
“Australasia is not fixed, in the sense of racial or
national security, upon the bed of its ocean. It is
fixed only so long as it is anchored to the British
Empire. Whenever these chains are broken it is
adrift like a derelict upon a sea of storm.’’Homer Lea
But that great name to Milton dear
Of England’s ocean circled isle,
The voters greet it with a jeer,
The witling sniffs it with a smile. • —A. Lang.
For “voters” above read Labor voters; for
“witling” read Labor member: their loyalty, if any,
is but so much self interest .
Note tp page 74 —“Salaries attaching.”
How would such as this look in war time? we often
see much the same in peace time.
General A. was killed in action; his salary was
a year: Lieut. Genl. B. succeeds him receiv-
ing £llOO a year; the latter had £9OO a year, his
successor will receive Also the pay of all
arms has been considerably increased, to avoid a
threatened general strike in the presence of the
en HS2fring so much about their higher officers’ pay,
what wonder if the men were to think more about
their own pay than of beating the enemy.
To promote the jeering, above, dislovaltv amongst
blue jackets say, make them voters wholesale.


Addendum to p. 75 —“According to Carlyle, &c.”
i\ot a little 01 the “huncirea times more wealth'"
couia he lairly credited to Carlyle s own teaching or
the tiospei ol W ork. ’ iis a pity he did not go a nttie
rarcner ana deal with the disposal 01 me, m general,
result ol work and mcrease of worK, viz., increased
wealth —nearly the most important part 01 the whole
matter.
Alter a living, a competence has been secured,
ait over and ahove that should he ror tne nation;
the nations good being ever in the worker’s mind;
also that his own good and welfare come to him only
through that of the nation, and he being part of the
nation: even now he will upon occasion give his life
tor the nation.
But this does not mean the nationalisation of
everything and the ending of ail private enterprise:
the ending of the latter means also the ending of all
public encerpnse. (pp. 30 —31.)
Only so long as national wealth, &c. p. 92.
It ma) yet be that a nation desirous hcime
thmgs oi preserving continuing us existence, whi
permit only selected persons to have the spending of
money beyond that needful for a living: also, size of
family would be a prime factor re every income and
salary.
To precede “Every experiment made, &c.,” p.
84, the whole to come under “Re Napoleon,” p. 79.
it was not Bonaparte’s fault. He did all that m
him lay to live and thrive without moral principle:
it was the nature of things, the eternal law of man
and of the world which baulked and ruined him; and
the result in a million experiments will be the same.
Every experiment, Sic Of Napoleonic literature
Emerson’s Essay is easily first.


Napoleon would have been tfte first man in the world
if his ends had been purely public.—Emerson,
—and the R.C. Church would be the first power in
the world to-day, and equally a power for good, if its
ends had ever, always been purely public: of the one
and of the rulers of the other, the ends were and
nave ever been mainly selfish.
Napoleon said that there were only two nations
France and England. In his day this was largely
true; and it will be more so hereafter if these new
put away those two things,.one political and the other
social, now present with them, making for national
destruction more than do lost battles, viz., govern-
ment by means of count of heads of the multitude;
of the mob, the rabble ; of the idlers, loafers, wastrels,
vagrants; of everybody not actually in gaol;
and birth restriction, race suicide.
Also, enforcing it that making money means before
everything “the acquirement of the funds necessary
for bringing up a family.” (Herbert Spencer) the
money the means: this the end.
Government by the people is in its working, gov-
ernment by the mob; and democracy mobocracy;
betwixt fairly even parties the mob turns the scale:
The votes of
a lawless mob whom practically a Prime Min-
ister supported it their attempt to ‘hold up’ Brisbane
are as good as those of its best citizens: an Aus-
tralian naval stoker’s vote is as good at hustings
as the Admiral’s; with equal reason it should be so
on board the Flagship.-
One man one vote one woman one vote, one bey one
vote one girl one vote, one aboriginal one vote,
(See “Things Social and Political,” pp. 105, iog.
x Doubtless as a citizen he would not have done so
but he could not fall out with his masters. A world
example this was of Democracy, flower and fruit.
When we are fit for universal, adult suffrage, we
will hardly need even police. The Moral Sense above.
Of such, c r Herbert Spencer, ‘Labor’ knows nothing


As our refuges ol lies fall to pieces one by one,
the hearts of men, now at last grown serious, will
turn to refuges of Truth.—Carlyle.
Refuges of lies, lies, lies.
For both the English and French nations this
great war may be the beginning of new life.
War is a relic of barbarism, but to neglect its pre-
cepts on that account is to liana over trie conauct or
the world to bamarians. —Sir lan Hamilton.
Re Parnell Commission.
Cleared in the face of all mankind,
Beneath the winking skies.
Like phoenixes from Phoenix Park
And what lay there, they rise.
Go, shout it to the emerald seas,
Uive word to Erin now,
Her honorable gentlemen
Are cleared —-and this is how.
My soul—l’d sooner he in gaol
For murder plain and straight,
Pure crime i d done with my own hand,
For money, lust, or hate;
Than take a seat in Parliament,
By fellow lelons cheered.
While one of those non-provens
Prov*d me chared- you are cleared
If black is black and white is white.
In black and white it’s down.
You’re only traitors to the Queen,
And rebels to the Crown.
If print is prmt and words are words
The learned Court perpends,
We are not ruled by murderers,
But only by their friends. —Kipling.


Writing the above kept kipbng out of the Poet--
laureatesiup. (in-a referendum he got more votes
than hi teen others put together. “P. v. War. p 99).
If he had got this the donors would have got
their dismissal. Such are the ways of Office.
Four lines, first half last verse above, do
almost apply to some here who swore really
to the Queen, and King—for a consideration: same
were, are m principle below the aboriginals. bee
“Thingi Social and Pol.” pp. 45. 10 9-
Ihe writer well remembers hearing one he lung
a responsible position and who ordinarily woie
the Queen’s uniform, singing sem.-pubhcly a song
about the Austral.an Republic that was just about
to be. He was fairly typical of the leaders of tnc
republican rabble, about the most centemptib e poli-
tical party that has ever existed- now practicroiy
changed in title to “Labor.” Had they stuck t) then:
guns and colors foliowmg the Jap-Russian wai, they
would have shown themselves to be as good as the
best and not cowards and crawlers: the moment
thev scented danger afar off they were back under
the Flag that they were no better than traitors to.
Is a traitor allowed the privilege of being shot r
“I cannot describe to you the disgust f bnve al-
ways felt with those meetings, knowing as 1 d:d how
hollow and wanting in sincerity everything con-
nected with the movement was.” n>Q ,
C. S. Parnell to Mrs. O Shea.
Home Rule a self-confessed sham: by its own Chief!
T E Redmond in Ivg heart of hearts, likew.se.
To Mrs. Parnell the world owes > thanks here.
let above be engraved on Parnell’s monument,
and over the main door of Dublin’s new Parliament
(What the ladies have done since Helen of Tro\J)


For every drop in her veins a Grecian’s
life hath sunk; for every scrapie of her weight
a Trojan hath been slam. Since she coulcf speak
Siie natb not given so many good words breath,
As tor her Greeks and Ticjans have suffered death.
“ i'roilus and Cressida,” Act IV. Scene 1
In this play occurs Shakespear’s best known line,
One touch of Nature makes the whole world kin-
(See “Nature and . . . Her Ways,” pp. 16, -±~. y
Ulysses to Achilles: famous names, a lamous Lnc.
rvchiiies 1 heel * and Myrmidons, Ins men, are now
English words: so too Hector, Mentor, Nestor, Sten-
tor: Homer’s Ajax and Agamemnon are both
heard to-day, to some purpose; if not Andromache
and Penelope, wives of two above. Yet a classical
education is now ‘tabu’; Shakespear will be next so.
“He fought, or worked, like a Trojan” : “The
Palladium of our liberties”; whilst its statue of
Pallas was safe, so too was Troy : “ Dead as Hec-
tor”: “Achilles heel, etc” above. L ttle as the
world thinks about it, Homer’s il ad has stamped
itself upon the world’s speech ; next to the Bible.
“Job’s com orters,” “The driving of Jehu,” “Thou
art the man” “The Wings of the Morning,” etc.
Re Ulysses, Penelope his wife, Ajax Agamem-
non, and Achilles further, see pp. 17, 18, 36
“Nature and Some of Her Ways.”
To some rulers a treaty, scrap cf paper, is binding
—when favourable to themselves only.
Peace is good and blessed, but Right and R.ghi
ness or Righteousness are better and more bless.
Emerson*3 ‘The stability of England, &c., true
in 1850 how much more so in 1914! In 1950, 2014.
Aye, and in 21 — , 22 —, 2314, as in 17 —, 18, & 1914
Hi 3 stafeUty of Ertg&nd! is tfcs secMfify of the modern wor?_
Cod Savo The King.


Addenda
“One of the saddest sights, and one that is of
daily occurrence, is the great number of ‘our boys,’
wearing the King’s uniform, and shortly going to
represent us in foreign lands, who can be seen stag-
gering about the streets of the city under the
influence of liquor.”— Daily paper, 12/9/14. Sydney.
Young fellows must dose themselves with a stupi-
fying paralysing drug mat is sutetiy forbidden in
any otner “training.’ But can’t they plead the ex-
ample they get everywhere? facilities everywhere.
Alcohol causes one to feel warmer and be colder,
like as does a blush, t here is no better promoter
of heat nor a better restorative after fatigue, than
a hot-hot drink of tea or coffee.
Alcohol is a sapper and under-mmer: its use in
cold, fatigue, or hardship is suicidal.
Alcohoi kills certain microbes no doubt, as may
strychnine &c. “Intoxicated,” i.e.. poisoned.
As much flour or meal as can lie on the point
of a table knife is more nutritious than n.ne quarts
of the best beer. Baron L.ebig.
Beer ike. may check waste but less so than does plain
water: any alcoholic stimulant promotes waste.
3d. or 6d. spent on beer means same for so much
water, & food equal to two or three crystals of sugar.
The vendors of food have but light profits and
heavy delivery exes ; not so the beer vendors.
“In going my round of wards in the London
Hospital to-day, seven out of every ten cases there
owed their ill health to alcohol.”
—Sir Andrew Clark, M.D.
If Sir A. C. had said this re somebody’s Cocoa or
Tonic say, what an uproar there would have been!
Questions m Pam. leading articles, and what not.
Proprietor would have known re an outraged public,
Is not any work a using of, wearing of, our
muscles, etc., in a less degree only than athletics?
noisonect. —doubly mind and bod l '.
The prohibition above stated exists not for noth-
ing: other Proh bition wou'd be but this extended.


On the part of the users of alcohol, knowledge of
its action and oi the blushing process are about equal.
Alcohol is good as a febrifuge ; 'tis often better
so than quinine. It may in some cases aid digestion,
but there are many other and safer aids here.
When leverishness is felt whisky will check same.
(Only then was ever the writer the better by taking
whiSitv: any, every other time the worse.)
A cniid lives for its mouth only. A crowd of child-
ren m a ioliysh p are child-like: another crowd
around a public-house bar are childish. Childlike,
i.e., as a cnud acts and rightly; childish, an adult
acting so and wrongly. We have all been children
and sometimes for long remain so, and a little
childishness is permissible; but re alcohol this more
often goes the length of imbecility and criminality.
When childhood has been passed, the mouth can
come—would last be too far?
For the mouths of both alike, drMren and adults
and as extras, confectionery and fruit will well suffice
a mouthful of cold water often tastes well following.
Some jams dissolve well in boiling water, making
a drink better than some wines; quince, blackberry,
raspberry, e.g., chutnee is good thus too. Tomato
sauce dissolves in cold water, and is second to none
thus. Molasses and water has a port wine flavor
and is little inferior to same.
Many temperance drinks only give one irritation,
inflamation of the mouth —mouthitis ; this, not
thirst, is the more frequent. During great heat,
mouthfuls oi water not swallowod, are best.
All same tobacco smoke: 'twere well if some other
mouth cravings were dealt with so: at the best of
times perhaos half one’s drinking is fictitious—and
much of one’s eating too. Smoking can be of great
help here; or confectionery: “miss a meal” is often
the best medicine. (To but two meals a day the writer
owes what health he has.)
During hot weather water in which maize steeps
becomes in about 18 hours almost beer: tuns at
price of the water: nearly its first cost anytime.
For swiping, 3/4ths of all, above equals the best.


Hospitality is one of life’s best things, but ’tis
very easy to err in regard to same.
Alcohol’s use herein and re friendship generally,
is as religious as these themselves almost; with
a championship attaching to being poison-proof.
Is it not tragical to see men brought to beggary,
and women to worse, and all ror what ? Something-
ror the mouth, the poor child might cry else**
honor name, wife children, house home, all swal-
lowed up thus. But what matter, when it makes for-
tunes and produces millions of revenue?
One wrecked career outweighs billions of such, and
every shilling of the revenue means a loss of
perhaps j£i; never to speak of loss not thus cal-
culable. The money loss here is the least part of
the loss; and with drunkenness anytime.
The measure of alcohol consumed in a district is
the of the degradation of the people.—
Baron Dowse, Irish Judge.
Of 3J miles of cells in Milbank prison, Eng.,
the occupants of 2\ miles came there through drink.
As a destroyer of self respect it has no equal.
To a woman what does this loss mean?
But what matter when it makes fortunes?
We must either people this continent, or perish.
Suppose but one year’s drink money *s 14,000,000,
perhaps half of all food and other drink monev put
together, directed towards as above end.
Which a/c. will likely be greater here, as above,
or the War? Latter may equal half vear of former.
Drink bill for U.K. one year, -f
ting and gambling, £ 100,000,000. *• These might
pay War a/c. Of above millions spent as freely
as water almost, the,necessary part is fractional.
Suppose these spent upon opium: op. dens, “hotels."
War makes perhaps less total waste both of life
and money than what Drink does, and it certainly
finds more employment, p. 36.
For the loss of life and money due to war in
the British Empire to be equal to that due to drink
in same, it would require two Boer Wars and per-
haps nearer three, to be going on continually.


WAKE UP f ENGLAND 1
King George as Prince of Wales.
The medical response to this kingly advice is,
Abolish the drink trade. Sir Victor Horsley, M.D.
(As His Majesty’s cousin the Tsar has just done.)
Alcohol is a paralyser and more. Besides para-
lysing the nerve centres which operate the reason
and self-control, the higher parts of our nature, it
excites, stimulates the lower baser parts; it works
for evil both ways; when most needed, reason and
self-control have vanished, and evil becomes almost
natural. Upon the poisonous fluid that acts so, we
spend 15, and the U.K. £160,000,000 pei annum.
A party of Alpine tourists had to pass a night
above the snow-line, unprepared, except with flasks
of spirits; whereof some partook freely, some
moderately, and some not at all.
Morning came and found the “free” drinkers
frozen dead; the “moderates” were badly frostbit
*en, and were helped down by the abstainers.
Whisky, Usquebaugh. Water of life; how could any-
one have too much of it? Water of death oftener
The (mis) use of alcohol is the result of world-
old custom, and this of world-old ignorance; both
duly exploited bv greed.
Perhaps the chief cause of its long time misuse
is its brain action in causing exhilaration and forget-
fulness of trouble. Opium, hashish likewise.
Custom leads man everywhere by me nose.—
Carlyle.
As it is the State takes, commandeers much of the
gains of the liquor trade: suppose it took over the
whole trade and ran it for a minimum of sale profit
and human degradation, and not as is now for a
maximum of these —its ending being aimed at.


Good as it is to-day, suppose that the British race
had never suttered from alcoholic deterioration
—as it undoubtedly has. But what matter, &c,
In an average of 16 trades, out of every £1 spent
therein Os. 03d. goes to Labor: re Beer thus 35..
Spirits is. 4d. If latter figures obtained everywhere,
seven out of every nine workers woulc oe workless:
or payless: if Beer's, half. Yes it does make fortunes.
But how? Out of others’ loss, degradation, ruin,
A trade monopoly is of itself a compensation,
if the trade be thrown open or suppressed.
From liver disease pubneans d.e 6f Lines as fast
as do ail others; ana oetween 25 ana 45 their mortal-
ity is just double the average. Seme Life Offices
entirely ret use them Insurance.
An illustrated whisky advt. entitled Cupboard
Love, appears in (perhaps) all Sydney’s chief
papers, ix that be Act I, Act 2 would be the pan-
emptying the bottle; Act 3. — It is practically an
advt. for a double “hcensea trade' 5 : but what matcer
when it makes fortunes? Ke race suicide, our
‘national 55 journal is not alone. “Things Social ano
Political. 55 p. 15 Une must be fair all rouna
Ke N.Z. —“a childless nation, 55 p. 14,
London “Daily News, 55 “Manchester Guardian”
and others, refuse advts. re even the single “lice„o~. •
trade, 55 iosmg thus many thousands out of the
£160,000,000 per annum—but gaming what is worth
infinitely more.
What might capital value of above turnover be?
Well might Ruskin ask, “What Egyptian worship
of garlic or crocodile was ever so damnable as
modern English worship of money? 5 ’
New York has been spoken of as a city one half


whose people live by seibng liquor to the other half:
yet even N.Y. respects its women too much to per-
mit them to be bemnd the bars.
“it’s a pity to see such a mce woman behind a
bar.” tins may be heard: said by those who know
m the U.S. and Canada, there are 47,000,000
people, nearly hail ol tne wnole (Canada 0,000,000;
living without strong drink.
Population oi U.,b. U.K. 45,000,000,
S. Airica 0,000,000; Australia and N.Z. 5,500,000.
Australia, Canada, iM.Z.. and S. Atnca 19,300,000.
As alter about hrty years’ contest the drink
trattic has been ended m nearly the third of the
Anglo-Saxon world, a century more mav see it
ended, or nearly so, in the entire. A.S. world.
N-S.W * , “Labor” vote is mainly a Drink vote.
“Things Social and Political,” p. 107.
Pay day, drink day, crime da;.
Drink is not a political matter; ’tis a social domes-
tic one: popular vote all right here.
Between the blackfellow’s “turn bacca pleece’*
and the other’s “Arn’t you going to shout,” where
is the difference? If any be, ’tis m darkie’s favor
A lick of fine salt off one’s fingertip will meet
the mouth craving quite as well as any.
Many infants are not sober from birth till they
are weaned: mothers’ milk charged with alcohol.
When these grow up how are they hkely to turn out?
But what matter when it makes fortunes?
Our “sacrifices”—re beer, cigarettes, consultations.
For every i/- for hospitals, etc., £i for swiping.
Commandeer all swiping money in war trine
ours would about feed the ruined starving Belgians-
Its own swiping w’d soon make Labor the Capitalist.


pp. 39-40.
About the most empty-headed fellow that the
writer ever knew had his career spoiled before ever
it began by the abolition of “purchase” in the
British army.
PP- 54, 79-
There are only two nations, France and England:
the rest are nothing. If I had had an English army
I would have conquered the world. Napoleon
If his shade can but revisit his beloved France,
and see what an English army is doing there now?
I warred with the world, which vanquished me only.
When the meteor of conquest allured me too far;
I coped with the nations which dread me so lonely,
The last single captive of millions in war.
Lord Byron, re Napoleon (at St. Helena).
Re his title, we acknowledged him as Emperrr
when there was something to be gained bv it; when
not —not. Lord Roseberry
England, a nation of shopkeepers; France, of
dancing-masters; Germany, of sausage-eaters;
Italy, of organ-grinders; Australia, of— ——?
America, of everything.
0. 10!
“If I had £l,OOO, or £l,OOO a year,” should be.
“If I were fit to have £l,OOO, or £l,OOO a year
and had it.” Only a small minoritv thus fit.
Not to have to work for one’s living; to be an he r
or heiress; more often a curse.
p. 105.
Philip of Macedon s 'nt message to the rulers of
Lacedemonia, Laconia —If I enter your city (Sparta*
I will level it to the ground. Their replv was the
single.word “If”: and to this day do we speak of
Spartan fortitude and laconic answers.
Yet a classical education - r n w ‘tabu,’ p. 105


Why is not our Military Commander styled say,
Captain General, instead of Inspector General?
Inspectors everywhere: does he inspect the lot?
John Churchill. Duke of Marlborough, Captain
General of the British Army in Flanders; 1702-12.
The parents of Horatio Nelson, Garnet Wolseley,
Alfred Tennyson, Cecil Rhodes, to name but four
out of many such “sons of the parsonage,” were
worth more to England ten thousand times over,
than all the celibate priests, monsignors, bishops,
cardinals that have ever been seen under her flag.
The term “militarism” is much in vogue at pre-
sent: why not use “Prussianism” instead? There
is no need to cast odium thus upon what is hon-
orable and indispensable, the military profession.
P.’isms basis , Might is Right; also Head-hunters’
Frenchness, frankness; but Prussianism, barbarism,
‘vandal,’ after 1000 years ousted now by ‘german.’
Our use of the word slave, Slav, is an insult to
this people, p. 19 abv. “Rule Britannia,” last word.
Cowards, liars, siaves;Co—, l—. britons; or scots!
“English frankness” i.e. English Frenchness! p. 54.
AMERICAN SHIPPING.
The condition of American over-sea shipping would
be amusing were it not so pathetic. Our exports to
Brazil for the year ending June 30, 1911, amounted
to 26,431,857 dollars, of which English ships carried
19,437,855 dollars, and American ships, 136 dollars
—one hundred and thirty-six dollars. We did tetter
with Argentina, where 577,954 dollars was carried in
American bottoms, and 39,120,509 dollars in British,
Of our imports from Brazil for that year 93,191,117
dollars came to us in British ships, and 620 dollars
—six hundred and twenty dollars—came in American.
How the British ship owners must smile when they
see us raving over the Monroe doctrine!
-“The Public” (Chicago.).
Celibacy by a country’s best is about as bad as
what same by its worst would be good.


Not the Individual but the FamiJv is the unit of
the State: for the Individual to be this it would
mean pr . See “Nature . . . Her Ways,” p, 7.
Man’s moral progress since Stone Age compara-
tively small. Conduct the 3/4ths of life. Science
and Art 1 /4th; 1 /Bth each. “Nature” pp. 30, 46, 12.
All our senses modifications of sense of Touch,
Civilisation rests upon the Family. Monogamy and
the Family we owe to the old Romans, pp. 25, 36-
One strain runs through them all, men and nation
whoever is shipwrecked is shipwrecked on conduct.
Conduct is the three-fourth’s of life. Matthew
Arnold. Of a soldier’s life perhaps more.
Perhaps the worst result of war is, that the
loss of life which it entails means also the loss of
the picked men. But this to some extent would
be met, counteracted, if most of the soldiers, the
officers especially, were married: the families of
those who fell would be the care of the nation^
Losing possible offspring about doubles the loss.
‘Better married a minute than die an old maid.”
Yes, the world will be kept peopled; even the
little maids insist on it.
“Either unknowingly or in spite of themselves
Nature leads men to fulfil her ends,” p. 3 above.
The writer again apologises f.or so much herein
being disconnected.
England, the Chief Constable of Europe, and the
steadfast protector of the rights of mankind.
Signor Ministrelli.


By Same Author,
PEACE v. WAR.
THINGS SOCIAL AND POLITICAL.
Sixpence each.
NATURE AND SOME OF HER WAYS.
Price Threepence.
See “Things Social and Political,” p. ioi,
"‘When power and riches are thrown hap-
hazard into children’s cradles as they are in Eng-
land you get a governing class without character
or experience.” G. B. Shaw (“The vigorous poker
of the mental fire of our generation.”)
There may be something in the “children’s cradles”
(it’s bad when they’re empty like G. B. S’., poor
fellow). But when political power is given hap-
hazard to the mob, you get infinitely worse.
Till its (practically) aboriginal suffrage system
has been ended, Australia as a nation will be Nil.
The natural development and outcome of Democ-
racy any time anywhere is Mobocracy, with in this
age, a Plutocracy—“the money bag of Mammon,
—p. 74 ' *‘T. S. & P.” p. 81
the ending of democracy and plutocracv will be the
re-birth of aristocracy, rule of the best: best of brain
and best of heart; perhaps titled, perhaps not
Has not white Democracy constituted itself the
world’s Aristocracy, with “libertv” to insult all
others? (especially the Japs) In return for insults
they have escorted our transports and given us Yap
etc., for our surplus population.
White Australian aristocracy makes of the blacks
the Australian democracy, p. 114 abv.
Austin. Pluto-Democracv— One par Family, p. 52.
Australian “Labor” with its, perhaps, world’s lowest
birthrate, but certainly the world’s record for
ingratitude, selfishness, and would-be pluto-
crats with their breeches-pocket loyalty, stands
to-dav for national decay, downfall, extinction.
