

PEACE OU& NAMIDS*
EJiQ, other tjoems
V. WILLIMS.


■ ■
f
.
?
_
/*
\
-
•
t.
- ,
\
... . \ *
*
* ■, • •


CONTENTS
She will be Free *
fa* * Psaco in our Hands *> I
The Price of Blood 4.
i* • v
® ;r Sloaplass Nights (5
Sold let- becomes kochanic
* want a Homo
%•
I*7 bcbv Cries j^o
■' • *
r ~y ?e'»plo jbj
\
Pe„.ce above All Scone 1 ‘
£ |
)
» Peace ’be vo All Scene 2 xh
, Banjo Bill A
}
Prisons of the poor 26
1 i
A world-wide Stalingrad
battle* with a Song eg
i
Stop~work’ Speech 23
Tho Dispossessed ,
«
v • r - t > . . .. ..




SHE WILL EE FREE!
As I lay sleeping
on Bakery hill
I hoard, her calling;
the 3daves vvaro 5t13.1.
Hsr words were warn coals
in ciy dreams and me;
%t t an Australia.®
cone set xe free."
Black night and the redcoats
slunk in retreat
for the fires of the diggers
bloomed at her feet..
Qa the naked hilltops®
in her red ram sof-Lp
our freedom c loss on s
frcci our fruitful toil*
We are standing night--sat ch
for the peace re won;
no dollar war-cloud
will blind our sun.
The boots of the jailors
tramp the hills in vain
for the stars of Eureka
now burn again.




PS AGS IN OUR HANDS.
( A young pan and girl walk on hand' in hand under street light.
Girl, tfhat can I do but, droatiV
Droac* for a little, while as we watch the screen;
big hotios, and cars and love and securityl
Oh, lot do hold ay droops for a little longer
like the sDCko nestling on the shoulders of the rr/y A
against the questioning wind.
Oh, yes, I know;
no house, no car and no security*
Qyp love stretched thin at parting finger**tips,
for Da, it*s waiting, and for you, conscriptionl
- L an. Qh. to boll with Hollywooll Haven*t suns,
isn't our river spray when tne yacht heelo
cleaner upon our eyes than their Dusty stock o± droa ue7
• And what if our house is scc-owhere down in the forest
' with the sap still throbbing its v&y tp the hungry leaves i
lihat is a year or two when our new Australia
grows undorfootV
Grows, yes, though henzies seys- it Dust not grow?
Grows) yosl «feu* honzies tries to suck it's blood for war
Are not Dy hands do re alive than dreqDs or fears r
Girl. Yes, when they hold DeJ But in the black Didnigfrt
the talons of war tear Dy defenceless dreads,
droans sweet for peace.
Peace is a creaD house with wide windows,
only half hidden in a lace of leaves;
peace runs with little feet on a winding pathway
calling tis forward. Peace is the flooding sea
cliDbins throhgh sand until It greets the sun.
££ SU to our finger-tips • But dare I dreaD oven?
Bill* Bill* there Dust be no acre war.




Man* f’eaca is iiaar our hands, darling, peace as strong*
Whan prison walls between us and Australia
fall at our feat; whan locked doors open
bolts bur-nod before the lightning cf our words,
and our land wakens in the workers arus;
peace then is certain*
She will laugh and arise with peace
her grey face, seocied with erosion.
will ripen like apples, her skin glow ororm with wheat,
and her rivers* now waste like tears* will shine In her eyes
Oh, eighty hands of Australia, year coal and your ore
break free from the prisoning earth, and we will should you
stronger than war, drive war’s talons froa our skies*
( A police an a walks on, shine s torch in their faces*)
police. Break it up. Keep aoving. (Goes off.)
(&rT, Can’t we* talk or aake love any longer?
Ie this the foretaste of uurV
Tall cie the way, for I &ust fight for po *ss!
Man* Jlo conscription for Malaya i Fight fer the right to spa ok I
To say to Spender., Malaya is only vital
to the fence. of profits cf Australian rubber kings.
To say-to Sir falter Massey Greene,
if you - would guard your millions in Malayan tin-fialds
go thsra yourself.
And say to Menzios,
say it with leaflets, with strikes and with doioinstrationsj
DOfN oTTH CONSCRIPTION FOR. MALAY.-1!
hands off our golden youth*




TIE PRICE OF BLOOD.?
Truoan looked from the White House 5
Tr’Jinan looked at the world-
"That can wa buy with dollars,
\/hat is the price of the world?”
"Liarshall Aid for Europe
Thera the bosses grip grows thin.
Cur dollars are hooked and baited
To rope their factories in.”
"Your dollars may strip our vineyards.
Or claw our planes.from tho sky;
•Diay may smother the English shipyards.
But our blood they cannot buy,”
Truman reached for China,
"Treasure rich as the sea. *
Dollars and guns for'Chiang
Till buy it all for me
“Your dollars may buy the traitors.
Your bombers turn rivers rad,
But your dollars will drown in China
In- the blood our sons have shed.”
Trunan beckoned Australia.
"I want your steel and your ora •
I must have your land for a war—base,
I will buy your sens for war.”
"Ask thu Japs, did they get our scrap-iron?
Ask the Dutch, is Java free?
Dollars won*t buy Australian sons
To strangle liberty•"




Truman counted his army
Bogged in Korean mud.
“fifliat is the price of soldiers?
tfhat is the price of blood?"
"Buy me e. gang of Nazis#-
Half-price for the Chanyguard;
Buy me soma Turks who sat on the fence
Chen the fascist beast was barred;"
“But buy me the best of fighters
To thrcre where the cannons thud.
Ibll mo the cost in dollars,
■Chet, is the prico of blood?"
Out of the Paris rod-belt, *
Cut of the Shanghai street.
From fart* and mins and factory
The anchor floods to his feet.
r Our blood has flowed like rater,,
It has boon 4s cheap as the sea-
But nt?a? the cost of every drop
Is the death of tyranny*"
"Stop* stop," said Canute Tnsaan,
"It*s a price I will not pay."
But tike answer drowned his shouting
As his prisons broke like clay.
•For our voices screep like the ocean.
Tike the waves that will not cease.
"There is only one prxco that we demand,
And the name of it is peace.**


'.r:
t*
• _ • ■
: r • 4- ■ ' ‘ ‘ ’ * • V ■ S': .
v
. V-
■ *' ' 's’-' . .
T
#<►
v ■
:.v- •
; vU“.
*V* -rUf- ■ tv>*.
"j • ■' ■>• < -■.
* ♦ *.*.■*
■J •


CUR SISEFLSSS NIGHTS.
Ciii. sleepless nights fought ths persistent rain
sneaking through city our hands wiped back
long h->urs and stjse t that blurred and stung our ©yes;
our anger scrolled., a great stream underground.
Keen drills of thought bored down to search the flood
moving beneath the city’s, concrete skin;
touched it and freed it; and the city shook
as the cold streets rolled up with fighting men.
Our city rose- and split the prisoning. husk*
the hearing pavements “/renc>sed the banks asunder*,
showering their hoarded seeds on our cold slums.
Grc it city, breath i and live* your buildings sing
in our carre ss lag your at rests will floesr
with eager fucos of triumphant man.




SOLDIER BSGCiLSS LECHANIC
Now the machines aro changed beneath uy hands.
No longer shuddering bra- ns spit; out destruction,
no longer tanks grip me in steel compulsion;
this turbine's power iwfore my finger bends!
Gi'-r.rds and parades are snapped and tripled wires-
not? time is mine when the five whistle blows;
orain sorts through the scrap-heap of the war
my hanas control tbs current of my life „
No longer wanton* power will purr for us
sleekj.y in lathss to cut our purpose clear,
flame S' we direct turn and devour the dross;
-is wmte iron waits tho impress of our will,
Xn pulsing tnunder all the world con feel
-hs ringing hansiors shape our plans in steal.




*Z3 \7ANT A HCLS.
yoEan. «e want a home
How much is aaidwfth that!
Man. How many times we’ve said i'tt i
How many nights we've sat on this dark verandah,
iaCw oianv Questions asked, and spares ly p, nswe ro d ,
how much of hope and anger, pain and promise
crowd on us with those words.
TToman
How many nights I g ve whispered them,
as if they would bring my soldier husband home,
as if the bricks would settle into walls,
until the cream walls waited for my hands!-
Kow many plans they hold
crumpled like homes of sand before tfca crowding sea.
la.tin
; 3fe want a house. J*ve seen the matire 3 build
rcofs out of palm leaves, timber from the forest,
floors out of limbos; home for a fat brown wife.
And X must sit at night
on a verandah pushed into the street,
to be an hour alone with you, my wife.
Woman. Dad does his best; we have a little room;
you know the kids are parked in every corner.
Man.
Sven the birds are wiser.
Each pair a nest, each pair their territory,
not crowded in like fowls within a coop, -
not perched in cages on a bare black street.
SOman. Dad doesn't growl because we have to stay;
he doesn't grudge us roan.


* ' v
* . • * * • •• . .n ■ ;• i Vi
• • V r ’ * ■■ ’ ■ • ■ . •
V" N ' V f;
•X- . <*
\ ... i ' „„ • , . ■ . ’


Lan.
Sven the birds are wiser.
Up from the hungry land ton aillion wings
wave with ironic gesture as they go,
searching for wingspread* searching a place to rest.
Why should I stay?
Have I not ranged the world,
’desert and jungle passed beneath my foot?
What is to stay me now?
'.Toman, Have you come back to me ton thousand miles,
have you come back after so many years,
so many hours and words of whispered hopes
to leave me now*
kan. Don’t bry, donH cry beloved
Hold to me, all is well.
{Toman, lot us hold what we have of happiness,
not to surrender rashly.
Build on the faith we havs c
call back in memory all that we have heard
how we can get a home.
Man. There was the timber worker -
Voice. Timber for houses? When it suits their purpose.
Short serves for hungry markets, that’s their line.
They have a chain around the living forest,
a web of contracts spun frea mill to mill,
all-gripping leases jam production’s wheel:
your house is still green timber.
Ten thousand houses wait behind that wall
and we who work to free them
are paid so little, now men will not coma
to shiver in the hovels we call home.
Slash down those wrongs, jostling"our lives like
hushes




burst their linked rings that hundcuff man and tree,
and we will cut for homes and not for profits;
we*ll sat those houses free.
Houses need more than timber* more than bricks,
there must be men to make them.
Before the war they made us keep our distance,
using a few when many more were needed;
we stood with empty hands.
Now they will train ycu, tools are in your hands.
True* not enough, but even the birds oust build
twig upon twig- You know my father said
the unions shift the logs that bar the road.
Your father said that coal
feeds the machines that lift and cut and mould
and join the limbs of every growing house.
i?e must have coal, even this street is dari.
sjhils hungry boilers «lt for tteir blnck food
while in the dark we grope towards the
The light will come, even as’ the miner said.
Jq must hew for power
the hard black river flowing up from hell,
we fight the caving roof, the gaseous fire;
the day-long dangers finger at our.throat,
our blood is on the coal.
Around the pit-top lurk the bosses ring,
tightening their grip to squeeze us from tho sun,
lockout if stocks are high and coal is cheap,
and the whole battery of press and court and police
strikes when we protest.
have come upward to the light;
wo in the dark have fought with pain,
known all our mates by their soothing hands;
do they think they can force us again*




You who want houses, join with us t
you who want peace, we* 11 set yeu free;
all who want peace, your fists and ours
tear off their cloaked monopoly.
Blackouts are lifted; iuon walk with eager steps,
are free to win a hope for .-ion;
pen of the underground, salute the sun.
•,opan. That's what uy father says, that unions grow
stronger with patoship, fire, with the htpian hands
that clasp our own across the continent.
kan. Ho says the unions fight for what we need
better when pen are joined fur hupan good,
bettor when thoughts are sinews in their hands.
But where's the be-up that we can follow hope?
’ihat is this light? ’ihy, horses your father now.
Old Pan.
. ihy sit in the dark ail night.
Now the doer's open,listen, "A Coppunist Speaks."
Voice. Houses are short. That's why the people wear
the cast-off shells abandoned by the rich,
the slapped up boxes piled to save the land;
that's why we're crowded in the breathless roods,
to take pore rich the harvest of the rent.
/hy should we pay this price?
why can they drip the houses on our thirstV
They -loli the land, they lock the bricks, the tipber,
they sit on coal and parcel out the stool;
keep down production or the profit drops.
They do not build for use.
Open this narrow door. Yes, it will open
before the shoulders of parching pen
forcing it wider with every house we build.
Build the unions, build the people*s power
fight for jobs, for hopes, security.
Plan with our party, shatter with harper blows
the pig-iron body of ponopoly.


< ,


Old i-on
n I know that's right; our union won
huts for the fe tiers on our run;
our party led thoci.
Man.
Yes, I can fool it.
tho boat of wings within tho people's lives.
Oh, we will rise,
not for a flight into a distant land,
not to split -out in pairs to seek a nest;
we*ll stom tho heavens and strike the vultures down*
.rOCian. It is a £*illiJn hoaos I arena of now.
Peace will surround tho happy children there:
give Liu your hands, lot us go forward now.
Man.
Look, all the street is lit, the power is on;
come, now it calls us cut into the street.
Call to our friends and neighbours, call a meeting,
call them to protest.
call on cankind to build his socialist hoee.




JjT BABY CRIES -
. hy little baby cries
and sucks her thumbs*
There *s little comfort there
when hunger comes.
She cries, and my hands clench
for her voice tells
How many millions starve
while Profit stalls.
ky little daughter drinks;
her small hands cling
TO tbs fingers feeding her
and her eyes sing..
I*ve seen men gaunt sitb doubt-
spit out the lies?
Eat of the strengthening truth
with glowing eyes*
ky little warm one laughs
as flowers of red
Nod to her searching hand
and toss their head.
Our people run with joy
and call us when
The rod flags toss like flowers
on streets of men*




TO MY PEOPLE-
I cannot sleep for the crying of your hoart,
for all the dead are speaking ’onrough the etu --n 9
burdening my ears with dreams they could nob live,
calling me fill their hunger with the need.
I cannot sleep for the silence in your heart;
t?e are the living, lonely with irosty eyes,
groping for words to thaw in toucmng hands.,
hungering a molten song to warm our blcccu
Our time will come. Grey flickering, »--
whisper -along the edges of the night,
and fenin B s words are leaping througn
Into the empty limbs the keen words run, m
and we break free, and stride as wind t.j© rCKI i v-a-
sweep the blue sky with fiery flogs of sung.




nUJCbj ABOV£ ALL.
(7?jrso from a Living ffewspapar, Peace Above All, Time,
*' * X92O* Open space overlooking city, blocks of stone around
juary e whose husband has been killed in the pur, aits on
block of stone.)
J&wn-y. Ponce, peace above all, oh hold mo close I
Out of the flood and ruin wo drag our limbs,
for the black tide, the choking tide sinks down.
The bllnd ruins of six long years grope upward,
blind, broken, blooded, grope out from war.
Peace should be sweet as streams in a sunny valley,
soft as the first grass on a shadowy bank.
Peace is salt with tears,
peace grits with sorrow.'
peace did not float with doves, nor fly with angels;
nor white like stones she is blue fee ned. with blood and
striving,
her ironshod feet have tramplei the throat of war;
she marched with soldiers with red flags over all.
ky little son sleeps soundly
As many sleep tonight.
The stars come back through the war aaoke
Till the dewed grass is bright.
Come back 0 come back my lovor,
Xf net to life, to me.
idle same stars you showed us
*lait c as I wait, for thee.
Over the gulf of ruined years I see you,
brown hands and browner hair
(Bill comes into shadows on £ar side.)
Bill. Like to come out tonight?
Lury. I cay put my head through the window,
‘ ! \
Bill. X may put my foot through your door.




Mary. (Gets up, rims up stage) Not if I gat there first*
Bill. I will open the gate for you* a gate to a new world.
You have never seen the river melting beneath the moon,
you hi vo never heard the gum leaves (Bill fades off)
May
Mary. Bill ..o Bill .». 6ono 0 gon-j forever.
Oh, Jiaay 0 he has gone,
Oh, this is uar,, the gaping pits of war*
Oh, tty son, the sons of uany aethers,
there aust bo no more war.
Lot us raise peace os a rampart above the stona~clouds,
where the guns and the planes and the drums will crash in vain.
Not a white arrow of stone to pierce .the night,
as a memorial to our dead.
but peace*aliva and green in the hearts of millions,
peace is an. arrow, of green shearing the deesrt of ware
Peace is hitter today 8 but it will sweeten,
for peace is lifu, life to your eons your husbands,
life to ay sleeping son*




jVocm PBAGZ ABOVS ALL.
Y-jjrse scene from Living Newspaper Peace Above IM. Tine,
x iust before 22 June 1941. War manorial overlooking ciuy.
4rv and son Jim come on. March referred to is demon-
si ration for release ox Th'oas ana. rlatlifi.)
Jici» Do you come here often* mothers
l&ry* Yes r to read your father's namec-
To read again in my heart the row i took
so many years ago.
To work for peace in memory of our dead,
to work for peace that my son would know no war.
Jim. But su ch a night,-, mother,, «a such .i night.
Rain batters on the roof cv T *he riv^r,
the sea thuds at its door.
The dark night, the wet night blindfolds the wind'
that should smile on us from there.
Store screams its threat in morse
in the jagged wires of tbs wind.
- Oq such a night, how could you speak cf peaces
Lary. At such a timo c son-,oven at such a time
± still will speak for peace,
ffnr burns the roofs of London,
fins move in with our tide.
They have blacked out our papers, the bright windows
that look out upon the new,
out they burn on underground.
; At such a time, even at such a time
when tidal waves of war mount even higher,
slowly, slowly, but surely we'll grope our way to peace
Sven now the bent back of Australia tautens
to wrench Lenzies from our back.




Then we will stand and say.
"Ue’ll go OUR way to peace."
scn, you were with them when they marched in Sydney.
Say, are wo strong enough'/
X wae mere full ox doubt than the sea wxtn
split from my mates by the batoning of the wind.
Ly thoughts fanned out like fingers for a hold,
waiting for us to march•
But when we marched, my mother- when wo march id
then os were clenched into a mighty iito®
kayba sene sang, but that i can’t rcmeGDor..
But how our drummod in that windy street,
beat out our message to the silent factories,
listening to hoar us:
tapped out cur call through all the prison '.calls,
eager tc hear us?
rolled out cur challenge to the steel kings, rne war -
ns xg s $
silent to hear us.
Yes, wo are strong. , +. A f
wor the fed-ries answered us, no., wxtn the
x q ngxne s.
hut with the voices and the foet of men.
The prison walls beno and quivere ,
P aot with gun-firo. but with tto wrath cx «£*;
The high buildings of tto nar-gods swayou anu
and high-priest Images looked on us wrou four.
Yes, mother, we are strong.
Nor storms, nor wars, nor handcuffs
will stop us taking peace.




hJ*ATI
BANJiJ PILL.
Ly mates all call me Banjo Bill,
and sing this song as we throw and fill;
our backs are bent but our ams are strong,
and swing in time to our drawling song.
Banjo Bill, Banjo Bill,
shovelled for years and shovelling still;
Whore a railway runs or a building stands
the hard hills split in his driving hands 0
The Japs came south with cast-iron schsmes;
they thought bbM stoke trrjir puffed up dreams.
They called for strong and willing slaves,
but W 3 blocked their road and dug their graves.
Banjo Bill, Banjo Bill,
soldiered for years and shovelling still;
their armies cracked, but our coast stands
where he shovelled them back with work-strong hands.
The bosses bang the drum for war,
they maka big dough and plan for more;
wo *ll .hammer our shovels like a gong,
call on our mates to sing this song.
Banjo Bill, Banjo Bill,
changed the world and wo *ll change it still.
Our spades will cut through the roots of par
and ponce will blossom from shore to shori.
N
\
P
\




PRISONS OF THE POOR,
Wa 9 who are called by iragss inched and pegged
are cramped within the prisons of the poor.
Chained down by clanking hours to the job,
i7e taste our freedom through a shouldered door.
The binding pavement of tradition spreads
on eyas that search like hungry leaves for light;
feat stir end voices call: on every hearth
the red ecal springs into the throat of night.
Red coals have bloomed to torches in our hands,
scuntlc-cs as gr 4 ass-*bladss, flowing street on street,
to cleave that curtain* the billowing night of war.
The barred doors burst bofora our fists of stool,
for w© are ■ marching, armed with fire and iron
to the last Bastilles, the prisons of the poor.




A WORLP-*ItE STALINGRAD.
Out of steel of the Rhineland
The eagles of Hitler screafliing
Blackened the skies of Europe r
Clawed at the skies of the world.
Omar tha flesh of millions.
Over the steppes of Russia,
The tanks rolled down like If—packs'
At the throat of Stalingrad.
to the shores of the red Volga
They shattered the wings of the eagles,.
Slashed the herd- ,s of Hitler
In a bloody Stalingrad,,
Jjx the jungled nests of the islands,
to tbs treeless hills of China,
The vultures of Nippon shuddered
Froas the hurricane Stalingrad.
For they dug the grave of To jo
£n bloodstained Stalingrad.
Gut of the Ohkridgc- hell-nest
Tho atomic eggs of Tnsr.coi
Swell till they burst with eagles
To roost on the rin of tha world*.
Over the wide Atlantic,
Over the warn Pacific
Their droning eagles gather
To their dooci at a Stalingrad.
I
i
{
*
l
I
'v
i
V




On the shores of tho Atlantic
At karsaillus, at Maplea e
Tho workoia will pluck their eagles
In a bloodless Stalingrad *
Tho soas will shallow thsir belabors
In a world-wide Stalingrad*
On the shores of tho Pacific,
At ’Frisco, at Sydney.
SJo will pluck the winge of their eagles 3
They will meet their Stalingrad.
And the seas will feast on their bombers
In a acrid-wide Stalingrad.
INTO BATTLE tTITH A SONG.
K I am going into with a songi*
rat they told ee, "Tor? Id bettor watch your step,
u'e are at with profit. Art is too frail
‘And bout if ul to face the mud and slimo.
Hereto a petition, a pamphlet or a strike.
But you mustn’t go into battle with a song.”
•"Can I go up to the front lines with a song?"
But they told bq', "No, we do not need you there.
Sing to or sick and the children behind the line:
To tho drawing rocas where they fear the working e
Snare back their hands with doubt before they sir:
TSliat could you do in battle with n song£ ,SJ
But a man with a spado came by and called to te.
"Give us a song to lift our leaden feet.
Sparks from our lips to leap across the dark. 5 *
I will go into battle with a song.
X will make a song to hurl in Profit’s faco.
H& will Barch into battle with a song.


• ■■■ .. a ■ ' ■
•‘ • .


STOP WORK SPEECH,
&Ein wa go back to work where his blood is wet?
Can we ©waller r the old bait that holds the deadly hook?
Lot- us ramamberS
Let v-s remem bar the day that the clean white notice
asked us to trxkG a bonus as production was so high«
boy, hov7 cur hands went, cut I
Bill, the Gocfcio told us
-This is danger j, this la the whip~lashu
Hidden until we grasp itn
This is for this is for wage-cuts.
Refuse this incentive pay,*
But ue laughed and took tin money, for we could do with
the tin*
Then the second srhito notice on the board a aonth later..
K The bonus sill be aaaller, as -production has gone dc-rad*
‘fhsn drove the wheels Paster e and we chalked for the
next shii't c
»Keap the fifty pipes rolling., the boys have gone to iox7n„ n
We rolled the pipes out faster, and shored the tallies up*
The boss paid high and handsome, and premised us. a cup..
w Xt s s bound to be a tin orj3 9 n Bill the Cos&o warned us then,
"The boss will cop a fiver, every quid he pays us icen.
This bonus le like hurley- it trill step when re are in,
lake them pay it all In rages c or ua get it cn the chin** 1
The old man JListoned, for their ©yes wsro rjjaDied;
And ycriig men sat before they dressed to go?
*s3 reed tho iaoney c ." was our o:.Iy answer,
Alt he ugh our jarred hands shuddered hr cm the steal,
Flinched from tha sheared and anipry e ,ge of stool.
t
\
But tho pace wont on again- and rhges nearly doubled.
Then they said, “ST© *ll jut the bo nub, for your wages are
' too hi trVi t*
Tho machines jumped and rumbled, no t
The oranes croaked, tho wheels gpaed.
spare to fix thorn.
r stared us in
the eye.
"Fight new for lives,’* said Bill.




’’Strike now and stop this speed-aipo*’ and many backed him.
Too aany'for the boss, so they tramped him.
f
We should have struck* we.should have saved that blood.
Only this aftornooru this warm afternoon
swung; on the crane the steel plates sighed©
sighed like sheoaks., sighed 3ike shocks cna warn aftsracoa.
to the smooth grass by-the water calling for sloop -
Look out., look out. for a ton of death swings ovoxdieacU
Only this afternoon the machines surged and rumbled
dhile .'seas on the .summer beaches purred on the silky sand,
While the waves rolled bask ia its throat till a green wc-ve ■ grew
Higher and' higher and higher, and towered and crashed?
Crashed from the crans 0 the gaping crane,
the plate strong, tilted- and slicsd 0 sliced like a guillotine 0
They carried him. out, feet first? the machines are dead:
And we are here to decide waht ws udlX do*
Our union leader here told us ha 9 11 settle the scatter..
*Go 'pack to work, go back to Arbit re: tied.-.
fon*t follow the Reds, a strike Sa J t settle spasl -iiDo*
And*his blood? Throw sawdust on his blood?
j;o 0 no. If you base my aa^r o re will twist the girders
buckle the plates like tin with our bare, hands
before we will touch their bloody incentive pay*
If you have my anger
Aa I a you ask. lam fresi today*
And are you a bosses 0 man? gfe' J il say you are*
If you hawo my anger you will am ah vheir stea’thy voaron.
Ban this icnentivo pay that aat& our bones and bleed.
■ They have cade this factory &irc prison,
coining cur blood for v».ali-h 3 and mt as
steel giants and sly W to-kaop us bound forever,
bet our anger cist through the strings, that make us jig
A frsasled dance to the tuna of racing simps.
Tjet us strike to ban this speed-un, demand our *ages ft
us strike now go w.ean work.like sen* % \




THE DISPOSSESSED*
h-yra I fen Xandless on the dusty road,
dragged iron the soil by banker®s paper ropes f
sucked sapless- by their ever hungry books.
They closed a gate spea -the fstml made*
chained a barbed gale on twenty years of life •
srsnehed ny inheritance out of ay heads.
Brown paddanswer icel
have X not brought the green life to your face*
haws you not kissed my herds hard smooth wheat?
Wznt hivo S done
that Gy old feet should, wumder landless now?
Call up the stern, it gathers in our hearts,
storm that will swoop tbair barriors ewuy,
stem that will plant us ? heme in earth again.
® rs 5B c*re facmeloss on the glittering street,
glistening with rain and blurred with our own tears:
mother and children, needled by the wind,
barrod by wet glass from warmth of fire-lit roens.
Ibis bend and home 'wore swept into the night,
matchwood in gutters scoured by stoics of war.
Kct? many watch tonight
the hated landlord take the fullest plate,
the listed rent, choking in room by roop,
bailiff of profit., chewing us the door/
How many on the ct’octs
stare through the wallet landlords the fire,
• ily people, shield us, \
gi»ard the young future against the witaring wind,
a Will of bodies wedging through the rain,
- v
’ , • X


5■- ’} ■■■■ • . ; ,
- *' i


•' * (
Now is the time.
trample th-3 fences, thunder at the door,
kick out- th-3 snarling landlord s_u the cold:
hearth of aan c s herd is v-ids to waiu us all
9 O O •*•)»> » 0
Hem we are strikers at the factory gate.
IVork-fawurs like cogs have ripped our morning sloop„
High prices once that nibbled in our cupboards
now big and bolder fatten at our plates.
Though our eyes sting with smoke they still can soe
the arbitration Judge slide froa his stacked dock
small cards for us, andacas far the boss;
ard goo his elbow pushed by their fat ringed hands
trie, doim our wages to feed hie loafing Profs.t.
Vo have made the world’s wonlthj wo wi3J. step
hunger
with the slice the cuts for bis ravenous Profit
low wo have- struck.
shcrt £ at their wind and cope in closer;
our fists are bartering at bis factory gate,
the Iren gate between us and who world.
The stem has gathered, knotted in our heart;
our storm his gripped the hot dry* throat of drought.-.
Deep through the silence roll our songs, our thunder,
our marching feet clang on the roofs, tbs pavement?
the iron gate swings back Iron rods of-rain.
/ Oh storm, our storm, the barriers are broken.
all wq have’made is in our hands again.
/ <
/
■■i ! ■ !
S'


