

2-
PEEPS INTO
THE PAST.
PIONEERING DAYS ON THE
MANNING.
BY
F. A. FITZPATRICK.








“Dr.” William Allan, of Wingham, now well in his 94th year
(From a photo token name years ago).




PEEPS INTO THE PAST
REMINISCENCES OF THE BLACKS.
Pioneering Days on the Manning.
Men and Women who “Blazed the Track,” and
prepared the way for present day prosperity.
From Information collected from various people,
by
F. A. FITZPATRICK
(“The Wanderer.”)


AUTHOR’S NOTE.
I desire now to thank all those who contributed
articles and information regarding the Old Days on
the Manning. To Mr. G. S. Hill, of Bungay, the
writer’s best thanks are due, and are unstintingly
given, for that gentleman has rendered assistance
that is very keenly appreciated. The “Wingham
Chronicle” and its proprietor (Mr. W. C. Williams)
come within the sarner category, as also Mr. John
Allan, J.P.
It seems to be somewhat of a popular superstition
that the days which are dead and gone should be re-
garded as days to be forgotten—that the Golden Age
is ahead of, and not behind us. That we give up our
idols too slowly, and do not think, do not read, do not
investigate—and hence that we become mere slaves
to the flimsy figments of a too kindly memory. It
may be that this is so. Still, there is some sort of
merit attached to the maintenance of a warm rever-
ence for the hallowed recollections of the Past; and
surely there is a world of pregnant meaning in that
simple human sentiment of Charles Dickens’ when he
wrote: “We must not think of the old times as sad
times, nor regard them as anything but the fathers
and mothers of the present.”


CONTENTS.
Days gone by .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2
Author’s Note .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
Peeps into the Past .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
One of the Old School .. .. .. .. .. 7
A Manning River District Pioneer .. .. .. .. II
From E. Dawson’s Records .. .. .. .. .. 19
Magnificent Marlee .. .. .. .. .. .. 20
The Good Old Days of Wingham .. .. .. .. 21
The Early Days on the Manning .. ... .. .. 25
Bungay .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 76
The Bight 80
An Old Letter .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 85
The Dingo Creek .. .. .. .. .. .. 87
The Contribution of Mr. W. W. Bird, Killawarra .. 88
An Exciting Incident .. .. .. .. .. .. 99
Contributed by Mr, ex-School Inspector Lobban .. .. 103
Wingham Municipality .. .. .. .. .. 11l
The Upper Manning Presbyterian Church .. .. .. 113
The First Newspaper on the Manning River .. .. 117
Aboriginalities .. .. .. .. .. .. 124
Worthy Pioneers •. .. .. .. .. .. 130
Mr. John Abbott, Sen. .. .. .. .. .. 134
Aboriginal Ceremonies and Names .. .. .. .. 139
Krambach Pioneers .. .. .. .. .. .. 142
Expedition along the North Coast .. .. .. .. 144
Old Identities .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 160
Church Progress .. .. .. .. .. .. 161
Our Australian Aborigines .. .. .. .. .. 163
District Pioneers .. •. .. .. .. .. 170


DAYS GONE BY.
HERISH well their memories — the misty Past now scan,.
They’re nearly all “departed” who pioneered “the
ficjp van”;
They paved the way for others —forgetful do not be;
They “blazed the track,” my brothers, for men like you and
me!
With thrifty hands that blistered, the men and women worked;
Dissension never whispered—their duties never shirked;
A tribute to their straightness, my humble pen decrees,
Their deeds were lined with greatness—for noble folk were
these!
This booklet may be humble —it’s none the less sincere—
To many minds recalling old memories that are dear;
The Past is oft forgotten —the missing link connect,
And let us all pay to it a tribute of respect!
ILLUSTRATIONS.
“Dr.” William Allan.
Dorothy Falls, Comboyne.
A Glimpse of Wlngham Brush.
Giant Fig Tree, Wlngham Brush.
Dudley Cascades, Comboyne.
The Lagoon, Wlngham Brush.
Manning River at Wlngham.
Cedar Party Bridge, Wlngham.
Cream Boat at Wlngham Wliarf.
The Punt approach from Wlngham side of River.
Road through Wlngham Brush.
Approach to Punt from “The Bight” side of River.
Isabella St., Wlngham, leading to wharf.
Killawarra Bridge, over Manning River.
Government Wharf, Wlngham.
Manning River at Wlngham.
Hotel of the Early Days.
Mr. John Abbott, senr.
Mr. & Mrs. Joseph Woodward, sen., Nabiac.
The late Mr. and Mrs. R. Hardy, Nabiac.
Mr. Jas. Bowers, Nabiac.
Mrs. Laurence Gallagher, Krambach.


PEEPS INTO THE PAST.
The Jackson family ranks amongst the first
settlers on the Manning. With Mr. and Mrs. Jackson,
senr., came to this State (then termed a Colony) in
1858: Mr. J. Jackson, Mr. Thomas Jackson, Miss Mary
Davidson Jackson, Mrs, Middlemis (who recently
died at Tinonee), Mr. Robert Jackson (now in New
Zealand), and Mr. William Jackson (at present, year
1913, Post and Telegraph Master at Wyong). Mr.
and Mrs. Jackson, senr., have long since set up their
everlasting rest. The former died rathel suddenly on
the morning of the 24th of June, 1871—“ passed out”
in his sleep, Mrs. Jackson died on 20th January, 1892
—and thus went two of the links connected with the
early days of settlement on the Manning.
Chatting with Messrs. J. and Thos. Jackson on Sat-
urday, November 8,1913, writer was informed that, in
1858, there were three centres on the Manning at
which the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia
had places of worship. They were: Wingham,
Tinonee, and Redbank. During all the years that
have since elapsed, only three clergymen have minis-
tered to the steadily increasing flock of this denomina-
tion. They were: Rev. Allan Mclntyre, Rev. Duncan
Mclntyre, and Rev. S. P. Stewart (still vigorously
ministering to the spiritual requirements of his flock).
Mr. William Jackson started the “Wingham Advo-
cate,” the first paper printed in Wingham, eventually
selling out to Mr. George Else’s father—George then
being on the staff of the paper. The “Advocate”
later on ceased to exist, and the “Chronicle,” which,
under Mr. E. Rye, had been its solitary antagonist,
took up the running on the Upper Manning. It still
breathes the breath of prosperity.


Both Messrs. J. and Thos. Jackson are now well
advanced in years, and though not as active as in
days of yore, they are none the less industrious.
From the “Manning River News,” dated Tinonee,
Saturday, May Bth, 1869, secured from the Jackson
family at Winghanq the following items are reprinted.
The “News” was published by Mr. Horace Dean:—
“Dr. Markey complains piteously that the people
won’t bring their children to him for vaccination. He
says they seem to imagine he should keep a horse and
a boat for their accommodation —not a very unnat-
ural inference in the case of a medical man wlio ex-
pects to succeed in a country district.”
“Mr. Poole continues to turn out excellent sugar—
that made during the present week being quite equal
to the sample taken to the Sydney Exhibition. At the
time we write nothing has been heard from the metro-
polis, but we feel confident Manning River sugar will
be highly commended by those who are competent
judges of the article. And by the bye, we may re-
mark that the cultivation of sugar is now attracting
great attention at home. The old idea of making
beetroot pay has been revived, and as much as six
thousand pounds have been expended in experimental
works and machinery erected at a place in Suffolk.
There is also mention of similar works to be erected
elsewhere, the movement being accelerated, accord-
ing to the ‘ Herald V correspondent, by the advancing
price of sugar. It is ascertained that the crop is a
partial failure in the West Indies on account of the
prolonged drought, and that Mauritius will supply
40,000 tons less than it did last year. It is a great pity
that a larger number of our farmers are not in a posi-
tion to take advantage of this rise, and to net profits
which should be exceptionally large during the pre-
sent season.”


ONE OF THE OLD SCHOOL.
When a man has reached the 80th milestone on life’s
journey, and still retains most of his mental and a fair
amount of his physical vitality, it can generally be
taken for granted that, in the heyday of youth he
possessed a vigorous and healthy constitution. Such a
man is Mr. Robert Herkes, of the Little Dingo. On
Monday, November 10, 1913, in company with Mr.
G. S. Hill, writer had a chat with Mr. Herkes about
the early days on the Manning.
“Yes,” said Mr. Herkes, “I’ve been in the district
a good many years. I was born in Jalnieson-street,
Sydney, on the sth December, 1833, and was 14 years
of age when I first came to the Manning. My father,
the late Robert Herkes, came out to Australia as an
immigrant, in Dr. Lang’s ship.
“Yes, I’ve seen some ups and downs, and many
changes here in my time. When I first came to
‘Chester Hill” the Dingo was all scrub.
“I remember a number of blacks being poisoned at
Upper Gangat. Their graves were fresh when I first
struck that locality. It appears the blacks had been
giving trouble to a couple of stockmen—had attacked
them, in fact, and the stockmen had barricaded them*
selves in a hut. They had a supply of poison, with
which to poison native dogs. Dampers were made,
and some of this poison was evidently mixed with the
dampers. Some of these were thrown out of the hut.
Several of the blacks demolished them, and speedily
died. The remainder took to their heels, and left the
scene.
“The first man ever buried at Woodside was one
by the name of Owen McGann.
“Old Dick Windsor used to run a boat to Wing-
ham called ‘The Emma.’ He built the first hotel in


Tinonee —eventually selling out and erecting one in
Taree.
“Yes, I remember the girl who was employed by
the noted Miss Kelly, and who mysteriously disappear-
ed —in fact, I was one of those who spent several days
looking for her. She was killed, I feel certain of that
—but whether by a blackfellow or *whitefellow ’ it’s
hard to say. The girl or her remains were never
found. Yes, there are some ‘black’ waterholes about
Brimbin. Miss Kelly always had a pistol handy, and
could use it if necessary.
“The only man that I remember being on the Little
Dingo when first I knew it was Johnny Martin, who
lived at ‘Wombatina’ —on the opposite side of the
creek.
“It wasn’t easy to get household supplies those
days, for you couldn’t rely on the boat. I was sent
oflf once by the late Mr. Andrews to Stroud for a bag
of sugar, and other articles. I rode one horse, and
led a pack horse.
“The traffic all came down the Barrington those
days. Old Mr. Breeze and Mr. Geo. Watson were then
the mailmen. They used to go from Stroud right
through to the Macleay.
“Cooplaeurripa was then owned by Dick and Wil-
liam Den. The Mackays bought it after.
“The Super, at Gloucester, in my early days, was
a man named White, and he had a chap known as
‘Darby’ under him. Johnny McMillan was the work-
ing overseer, and Tom Lemming was his clerk. The
Gloucester herd was always a good one—better than
it is now, I believe. I’ve seen them killing cows
weighing 800 lb. They kept no bullocks those days.
“I remember once that 12 or 14 settlers were com-
pelled to travel over to Port Macquarie to answer a
charge of occupying Crown lands without paying
rent. They were all fined.
“You had to take what you could get for stock in
the early days, and be satisfied. I took 100 head to


Maitland once for Mr. Charlie McDonell (Mr. D.
McDonell’s uncle), and they realised 10s per head.
“Yes, I’ve seen some lively fights with the blacks.
The most exciting one I remember witnessing took
place on Ashlea Flat, when several aboriginals were
killed. There must have been fully 400 or 500 blacks
engaged in the warfare. I narrowly escaped being
speared myself on one occasion. I’d been to Bungay
and on returning came suddenly upon two blacks
roasting a calf. I pulled up my horse some litt-
distance from them, and as soon as their attention
was attracted to me they gave me orders, in their own
way, to clear out.’ I hesitated for a while—but not
for long. One of the blacks poised a spear, and sent
it whizzing through the air towards me. It went too
high. I made myself scarce, however.
“Messrs. Croker and Hawthorne used to milk two
or three hundred cows on the Manning, and went in
for cheese-making. Mr. Andrews used to make a good
deal of cheese also.
“I remember an old chap mysteriously disappear-
ing near Broomfield’s. He was probably killed by a
blackfellow known as ‘Bungay Bobby.’ I know three
.or four blacks that he also ‘did for.’
“McLean was the first storekeeper that I remember
at Wingham, and Tom Barker was the first Member
for the district. The latter used to live at West
Maitland,
“The flats on the Dingo used to be all under wheat
in the early days, and I remember three of the first
settlers were the Cants, also the Johnstons.
“I’ve ham-strung bulls while riding along on horse-
back, with a big knife I had for the purpose. People
have doubted my word when I told them so, but I once
heard old Bob Easton (father of the present Mr.
Robert Easton) say: ‘l’ll swear what Herkes says is
true. I’ve seen him do it—not once, but scores of
times.’
“Yes, I believe a man known as Jacky Davis was


the first person to find a track over the Bulga. Ho
was in the service of Major Innes, but mostly lived
with the blacks.
“Robert Johnston, when alive, was full of interest-
ing reminiscences of the early days, and was always
pleased to recall them.
“Dr. Benjamin used to practice at Chatham.
“Jack Lewis and Jack Wise were cutting timber at
Charity Creek when I first remember them. Jack
Lewis (now dead) was father of Mr. Owen Lewis and
others of that ilk. The late Henry Wynter was also
one of the first settlers.
“I’ve seen some droughty times on the Dingo. One
summer I had to drive stock right across to the big
Dingo for water.
“Few clergymen were seen in my early days, and
schools were mostly conspicuous by their absence. I
went to a school at Dunraore for a time, but Mrs. Joe
Andrews taught me more than anybody else. She was
one of the finest women that ever settled in this dis-
trict, or the colony, in fact.
“No, some of the flash young fellows of to-day
don’t know what hardship or hard work is. They
ought to have been battling 50 years ago.”


A Manning River District Pioneer.
An Interview with Dr. Allan, on Easter Monday, 1913.
The hand of Time brings changes, but the past is well worth
Good roads across the ranges now lead to the River Manning;
By bridle track “around The Spout” (where now the tram
goes steering)
Came men to carve our futures out —and do our pioneering.
Too prone we are to overlook the services they’ve rendered;
The task, we know, they undertook was one with hardship
But Hf? to-day is easy, and we ought to all be cheering _
The men who cleared our forest land, and did our pioneering.
That is to say, those who remain, who’ve climbed well up
Life’s Steeple; , . . , .. •
They toiled with hand, as well as brain, and helped their
The/‘'bllzedThe ’track, ’’ and forged ahead, they worked long
hours at clearing —
God bless all those, alive or dead, who did our pioneering.
Few there are in the Manning district to-day who
are not acquainted with, or have not at least heard of,
Mr. William Allan, of “The Brush,” Wmgham.
Better known, perhaps, he is as “Dr,” Allan, and in
the years that have gone, ere Father Time had suc-
ceeded in planting his hand so firmly (but, withal,
kindly) upon the old gentleman referred to, he minis-
tered'to the sick of this district with all the prompt-
ness and skill at his disposal. Little wonder was it,
then, that he was much sought after in those days on
the Manning—when the nearest duly qualified medi-
cal man only came as far as Gloucester. Though Dr.
Allan in his early days was of a studious disposition,


and gave a deal of study to medical works and medi-
cines, he was not what to-day is styled “A Duly
Qualified Medical Practitioner.” However, that is
merely mentioned by the way, and it is scarcely neces-
sary to say that Mr. Allan, with that modesty and
genuine uprightness so characteristic of the man,
never claimed to possess credentials or qualifications
which had not been secured in the usual way—pos-
sibly, because they were not sought after. He, never-
theless, did his work nobly and well, and strove at all
times to relieve suffering humanity.
Through the courtesy of Mr. G. S. Hill, of Bungay,
writer was on Easter Monday morning last introduced
to Dr. Allan —the actual object of the visit being, not
only to have the privilege of making the acquaintance
of a man who has fought the battle of life, and fought
it well, but to also secure a few reminiscences of the
past—the rather mystic past—the actors on the plat-
form of which have done so much towards making
life worth living for those in the prime of health’s
vigor to-day.
Though with hair like the snows of winter, Dr.
Allan is yet fairly active, and his memory is, on some
matters, as keen as the edge of a Bengal razor.
“Yes,” said the old gentleman, in his introductory
remarks, “I have seen many changes since I first set
foot on Manning soil some sixty odd years ago.
“I was born at Chesham, in Buckinghamshire, and
came to Australia in the barque ‘Harpley,’ a sailing
vessel. But sailing vessels they all pretty well were
in those days. It took five months to accomplish the
voyage to Australia. When I was first setting out on
my voyage, preparations were being made for the
great English Exhibition of ’5l. In fact, the work-
men were then engaged in erecting the buildings for 1
same. The trip by sea out was a fairly pleasant one,
and the first stopping place in Australian waters was
Adelaide, S.A.”
Did you remain long at Adelaide?


falls
.GTr.boy r>e.
[Hif\ (Copyriyjt t) E M%AHi(i Yf inghA/n.


and shot several birds. Always keen on all matters
associated with Nature study, it was my intention to
have the birds skinned and preserved. But the most
surprising thing to me wag that, such fearful weather
was it, the results of our shooting expedition were
putrid in no time.”
Was the weather exceptionally hot?
“Well, I did not feel it to such an extreme extent
as others; but I well remember going to an hotel, and
no sooner did we open the door to enter than we were
shouted at to close it, so as to keep the heat out. Bush
fires were raging throughout the country, and they
were responsible for devastation and destruction thaf
is still recounted. Talking of hot climates, I might
say that I was once offered a lucrative position by the
East India Co. in the East Indies. I refused, but could
not help thinking during my stay in Melbourne that
if the Indian climate was no hotter than that of Vic-
toria on its Black Thursday, I would have been able to
stand it admirably.
“Yes, it was the year ’5l that I landed in Melbourne;
and the diggings •were just coming into prominence.
The river Yarra was not the busy stream it is to-day,
and from the bay we had to take another smaller
boat.* In due course the voyage to Sydney was en-
tered upon, and safely negotiated. My father and
mother were in Sydney, as also was a brother, Mr,
John Allan.”
How long did you remain in Sydney?
“Only a couple of days, and then my father and
myself came on to the Manning for the purpose of
securing land on which to reside.”
They were rough roads, were they not, in those
days ?
* The Harply did net come to Sydney and we were trans-
ferred to the “Dart" (Capt. Collins), and had a fine trip to
Sydney. The Harply went to “Calio" with cargo when she
could get hands, as most of tho old ones bolted to the diggings.


“Yes, in ’sl only a bridle track existed, and we
came by way of Raymond Terrace, Stroud and
Gloucester, thence by the Spout to the Manning. And
I shall never forget my first journey by the Spout.
We stayed at Mr. Joseph Andrews’ place at Woodside..
Mr. Andrews is, of course, dead some years, but he has
left behind descendants who will always keep green,,
creditably and well, the memory of one of the Man-
ning’s earliest and most respected pioneers.
“My father returned to Sydney—to bring my
mother and brother to the Manning with all our house-
hold goods. It was about three months before they
could get a vessel for here.
Boats traded to the Manning now and again, even
in those days, did they not ?
“Yes, and I have a clear recollection of our first
experience of the Manning Bar. While at Woodside,
word was brought to us that the boat, by which my
mother had consigned all our household property, had
been wrecked on the bar. The worst of it was that
while we had insured our property when in transit
from the old land, no insurance could be secured for
it to the Manning, on account of the bar harbour.’’
Did the report regarding the wreck prove to be
true ?
“Yes, too true. I immediately came down from
Woodside; got a boat at Tinonee and started to pull
to the Manning Heads. It was both a novel and try-
ing experience to me, but I accomplished the task.
Arriving at the wreck, I found that all the hands were
safe, but the property of passengers and consignees-
was being thrown overboard, and those who were not
handy to try and secure it stood a good chance of los-
ing most of it. I got a good portion of ours, some
damaged, of course.
And where did your father eventually settle?
“As soon as he could arrange things we settled
down at Kimbriki. We had brought out from the Old
Land wellnigh everything that we thought would be


needed for carving out a home in the Australian bush
—from a hammer to a shingle nail.
“The slab house, the home that sheltered us in the
days of youth and early manhood, was burned down
two years after we came to Kimbriki.”
What area of country did your father take up?
“The farm, in the first instance, comprised 210
acres, but additions were periodically made, and the
holding now comprises a much greater scope of coun-
try. ’ ’
“Yes, my father lived to a ripe old age—he had
reached his 87th year when he died; and my mother
was 67. The remains of them both now rest at Kim-
briki.”
Was there any Wingham at all when you first came
to the Manning?
“Very little. In fact, there was only one inhabitant
here, as far as I can recollect. He was a blacksmith,
and had a shop somewhere near where the butter fac-
tory now stands,
“Why, the Court was held at Bungay, in a slab hut.
I used to ajudicate on the Bench in after years, and
eventually a building was erected in Wingham for the
transaction of Police Court business.”
But there would not be a great deal of police court
work in the early days?
“Well, I might say that I found that there was too
much —so much that it interfered with my own pri-
vate work, and I resigned my commission. It was
Air. Rowley, Mr. Hawthorne, Mr. Joseph Andrews and
myself who were commissioned to take charge of the
New Court House at Wingham. Of course, this build-
ing was renewed, altered, and rebuilt several times
since.
“Yes, reverting to the actual site on which the
town of Wingham to-day stands, reminds me that
Renwick’s store stood somewhere about where Mr, J.
Skinner’s old shop now stands. There was an hotel
kept by a man named Stacey; then later on another


was started by Mr. Gyse—which later again was con-
ducted by Mrs. Brown (mother of Mr. James Brown),
The building now occupied by Mr. A. Black was after-
wards opened as an hotel also.”
Some fine wheat used to be grown on the Manning?
“Yes, but at the commencement of operations there
was no mill in the district to grind it. Later on, a mill
was started by Mr. Pool, at Tinonee; while several
settlers on the Dingo installed a water-wheel, through
the medium of which a lot of grain was treated. Rust
eventually prevented wheat being cultivated profit-
“ Yes, I remember the murder of the blackfellow at
Wingham, and his body being thrown over the high
river bank, just above the punt. I conducted the in-
quest afterwards held on the body, but the crime could
not be sheeted home to the guilty party or parties—
there being no reliable evidence forthcoming.”
How did the cost of living those days compare with
the cost to-day?
“Well, it was not so very dear. Beef was cheap.
We always bought a bullock. Mr. Joseph Andrews
used to drive a fat bullock into the yard when we
wanted one, for which we paid thirty shillings. The
beef, of course, was salted down, and salt beef was the
general thing in those days. Fowls were reared, and
pigeons, turkeys, and fish were plentiful.”
“Yes, I’ve seen some big floods since I came to
reside in this house. The flood-waters have been just
up to the edge of the property there.”
Well, you’ve had a lengthy and useful career, Dr,
Allan, writer remarked, in concluding the interview.
“I’ve at least had a long life,” he answered. “On
the 2nd of next August I shall have completed my
93rd year—and the prime of it has been spent on the
Manning.”
They belonged to a brave old race did those men
who have, like Dr. Allan and his confreres, helped—


and helped materially—to make Australia a nation.
They worked without watching the clock, and Wages
Boards and eight hours a day were problems that
were not even dreamed of.
The Wingham Brush, with its bright plumaged
birds of various sorts and sizes, has always been one
of Doctor Allan’s favorite spots. He, in conjunction
with others, has always jealously guarded one of the
Upper Manning’s most picturesque public domains —
an area, in fact, that might well be termed “Nature’s
Own Park.” Too little prized is this area of virgin
forest by some people—with its coiling creepers and
its flowering shrubs and trees. The people have
grown up with it blooming before their eyes—and,
just as familiarity breeds contempt in other walks of
life, so it often does where Nature herself is the
Artist.
Regent and other birds daily come on to the veran-
dah of Dr. Allan’s abode and eat feed which is placed
there for them; and those members of the rising
generation who sometimes feel that they must go
forth and slay something, should take a hint from the
lesson of kindness taught by a gentleman now in the
fulness of years, and at least spare the feathered
songsters in the Wingham Brush, over which he has
for many years exercised a kindly care.
And here it might also be said that one of the most
loyal workers for the best interests of the Upper Man-
ning District has, for many years, been Mr. G. S. Hill,
of Bungay. Unassuming always, Mr. Hill has worked
hard in the interests of various public movements and
institutions. If he was not present at meetings, his
purse was always open to assist any and everything
worthy of assistance. The Wingham Brush and Rec-
reation Reserves have always been carefully guarded
by him for the people. In other respects—charitable
and otherwise—he has “done good by stealth, and
blushed to find it fame.”
It is public-spirited men of this type who help the


■district along, and the pity of it is that the Upper
Manning has so few like him.
In conclusion, as far as old times and those associat-
ed with them are concerned, it might be aptly said:—
Let Fate do her worst, there are echoes of joy,
Bright dreams of the past, which she cannot destroy,
Which come in the night-time of sorrow and care,
And wear the bright features that joy used to wear.
FROM R. DAWSON'S RECORDS.
South of Port Macquarie is a river called the Man-
ning, so named by myself in honour of the deputy
governor of the Australian Agricultural Company.
The entrance of this river was supposed to be imprac-
ticable, even for boats, until in the year 1827 I ascer-
tained the contrary to be the case. The sand bar at
its mouth prevents any but very small crafts from
going in, and in rough weather it cannot be approach-
ed even by them. There is, however, an indentation
of the coast a little to the north of the river’s mouth,
called Crowdy Bay, where vessels of almost any size
can lie safely at anchor, excepting when the wind
blows from one point. In still weather they can un-
load into boats which can be taken over the bar, and
proceed up the river, which is thus navigable for
twenty or twenty-five miles only. This river forms
the northern boundary of the Australian Company’s
grant, and on its northern bank there is a narrow slip
of fine country consisting of open forest hills of good
quality and lightly timbered, and several good flats
by the river’s side.
The vale through which the river flows is narrow,
and the poor, elevated forest hills which bound it on
the north side are only distant about three miles,
leaving a very confined, undulating surface between


them and the river, and which is the only part where-
a settler could find land fit to be located. Of the first-
class soils both forest and low land, I should not con-
ceive there can be more than thirty thousand acres y
and of the second quality, over which it would be safe
to depasture sheep, there may perhaps be from fifty
to seventy thousand acres. The remainder of the
country on the north between it and Port Macquarie-
is of little value, consisting chiefly of sandy and low
swampy lands in the vicinity of the shore, and fur-
ther in the interior generally of poor brushy and
almost impassable hills of considerable elevation. The
same is the case on the west from the heads of the
river (about thirty miles in a direct line from the
shore) to the barrier ridge of Blue Mountains, from
which the waters descend through innumerable deep
dells and chasms between the intermediate hills till
they unite in one stream which meets the tide about
twenty miles from the sea.
MAGNIFICENT MARLEE.
Where hills and dales look fresh and green.
And Nature smiles her brightest;
Where wattles add to beauty’s scene,
And flowering shrubs are whitest.
It’s such a sight that one sees on
The Dingo road when driving;
When traces of a drought have gone,
And everything is thriving.
The cattle graze in grass knee-high—
The sight would please a drover;
And waterholes that once were dry
Are all then running over.
The Marlee flats are tilled and cropped—
At least, that’s so in places;
The golden grain, in furrows dropped,
Soon fills the vacant spaces.


Paspalum’s thriving, thick and tall,
Gillogly Bros, grow it;
When writer gave the place a call,
'"Twas high enough to mow it.
It’s grand to be alive and see
The lansdcape at its brightest;
With blossoms on the wattle-tree,
And flowering shrubs the whitest.
The Good Old Days of Wingham.
Mr. Donald Brown, father of Mr. Jas. Brown, of
Wingham, was one of the early-day settlers on the
Manning. A native of Scotland, he came to N.S.W.
when in the prime of life, and for a considerable
period ran a Balmain ferry boat for Messrs. Perdriau
and Hunt. It is interesting to note the late Mr.
Brown was the first man to bring a steam drogher to
the Manning—the Pyrmont—about 47 years ago. He
steered it over the Taree Estate in the ’66 flood. Mr-
Brown eventually settled down in Wingham, buying
a hotel business from one Giss (or Gyce, as Dr. Allan
says). The building then utilised as an hotel is identi-
cal with the premises in which Mr. Albert Worthing
now conducts his bakery business. Mr. Brown after-
wards erected a building on the site where Mr. E.
MeC. S. Hill’s business premises are to-day, the old
structure being demolished by Mr. W. Fotheringham
in order to have it replaced by the present up-to-date
building, which is far and away ahead of anything
else on the river.
A man named Stace used to conduct the hotel re-
cently acquired by Mr. E. Cross, and though the
building of to-day occupies a position on the original
site, it has been practically rebuilt and renovated
many times since the days when Stace ladled out the


liquor that “rejuvenates and also inebriates.” After
Stace, a man named Moss had it, and adjoining the
hotel was also a blacksmith’s shop and a pattern-
maker’s and wheelwright’s establishment. These
were conducted by Messrs. Stroud and Menzie. Later
on, Mr. Carey bought into the hotel business, and Mrs.
Carey is still a resident of Wingham—or rather, she
resides on the Wingham-Taree road. Mr. George
Cross also had the Wingham Hotel, and after him
came Mrs. Worthing; then Mr. John Allan; later,
Mr. Geo. Cowan; after him came Mr. Watty Braith-
w’aite, of whom, when he was a boniface in the sultry
town of Bourke, Henry Lawson wrote:
■When the kindly hours of darkness, save for light of moon
and star,
Hide the picture on the signboard over Doughty’s Horse
Bazaar;
When the last rose-tint is fading on the distant mulga scrub,
Then the Army prays for Watty at the entrance to his pub.
Now I often sit at Watty’s when the night is pretty near,
With a head that’s full of jingles audi the fumes of bottled
beer,
For I always have a fancy that, if I am over there,
When the Army prays for Watty I’m included in the prayer,
Watty lounges in his arm-chair, in its old accustomed place,
With a fatherly expression on his round and passive face;
And his arms are clasped before him in a calm, contented way;
And he nods his head and' dozes when he hears the Army pray.
And I wonder does he ponder on the distant years and dim,
Or his chances over yonder, when the Army prays for him?
Has he not a fear connected with the warm place down below,
Where, according to good Christians, all the publicans should
go?
But his features give no token of a feeling in his breast,
Save of peace that is unbroken, and a conscience well at rest;
And we guzzle as we guzzled long before the Army came,
And the loafers wait for “shouters,” and they get there just
the same.


It would take a lot of praying—lots of thumping on the drum—
To prepare our sinful, starving, erring souls for Kingdom
Come;
But I love my fellow sinners, and I hope, upon the whole,
That the Army gets a hearing when it prays for Watty’s soul!
Then came Mr. Barry; afterwards Mr. Bunyard
(whom the grim Reaper cut short soon after settling
here), though the hotel business was for some time
carried on by Mrs. Bunyard. After Mrs. Bunyard
Mr, Conrick bought into the business, and held sway
for some time; then followed “the only Ernie”—to
be correct, Mr, Ernie Cross, who holds the license to-
day.
Mrs. O’Neill, mother of the respected proprietor of
the Australian Hotel, for some time conducted an
hotel in the premises now occupied by Mr. and Mrs. A
Black.
Mr. Donald Stewart, senr., of the Bight, used to
have a butcher’s shop close to where Mr. J. Brown
now resides. The road past Mr. Brown’s residence
in those days was used by vehicles, being the direct
road to the wharf. At the “shingle-bed,” near by,
the produce used to be placed on a drogher, and con-
veyed to the steamer.
The first Post Office was in Isabella Street, near
what is known to-day as “The Hawke Property.”
The office was in what was then properly dubbed
“The Goat House,” and, according to what one is
told, “The Goat House” invariably wore the imprint
of the four-legged animals after which it earned its
name. Goats were plentiful those days in Wingham.
The next Post Office was located at Mr. Joshua
Cochrane’s store; and later the postal business was
transferred to Duff’s store, practically identical with
the establishment over which Mr. P. N. Dark acts as
the “guiding star.”
The first telegraph office occupied a position in a
building between Mr. Cross’ hotel and Mr, Turk’s
store, and was presided over by Mr. Hodgins, a name


that is still remembered with respect the Manning
district over.
Mr. James Brown came to Wingham something like
45 years ago, and he is still going strong— and is also
an Alderman. When he first came here, constable
Davis had not been long drowned, that officer losing
his life at the ford, just below Wingham punt.
One of the first policemen was Constable Emerson;
then Constable Osborne (Mr. Jim Gann’s father-in-
law) who is now spending the winter of life in Wing-
ham ; others followed, and the latest were; Constable
Dowsett, and the present occupant of office, First
Class Constable Moore, who reigns supreme here to-
day, and has a very able lieutenant in Constable
McLean.


The Early Days on The Manning.
Manning River Blacks and their Customs.
(Reminiscences secured from Mr. John Allan, J.P.)
You gave considerable study to the customs of the
Australian Aboriginals on the Manning in the early
days, Mr. Allan, did you not ?
Yes, he replied, and I have seen such a lot of non-
sense written in the newspapers and in books that I
am sure only a very vague idea can be formed of
what the black natives were really like, and what
their old, original customs were.
You came to the colony in 1851 with your people
and settled down at Kimbriki?
Yes, and now we are well advanced in 1913. All the
genuine blacks are dead in this district. The last of
the race, as far as I remember, was “Bungay Billy.”
He died a few years ago, and is buried in the Bungay
Cemetery. ‘ ‘Bungay Billy ’ ’ was, I suppose, about 12
or 13 years of age when we first came to Kimbriki.
Another one (known as “Little Fellow Darby”) was
alive a few years ago on the Hastings. He was a man
long before we came to the Manning—a long, stupid
-sort of blackfellow. I remember a good many years
ago meeting “Darby” at Tinonee. He was extremely
pleased to see me, and promptly proposed that we
should “go to the pub. and have a drink”—for “old
friendship sake,” as he termed it. He had picked up
that custom, I presume, from some of the whites, and
he was most pronounced in his desire to let me know
that “the art of lubricating at the hotel was going to
cost me absolutely nothing.” He had “plenty
money,” he said, and evidently desired to spend some


of it. “Darby,” whatever other qualifications he
possessed, had no burning desire to secure more than
a nodding acquaintance with hard work.
Other aboriginal identities on the Upper Manning
were: “Paddy,” “Peter,” “Jimmy,” and “Old
Gangat Jackey.” “Gangat Jackey” was a fine old
fellow, and had at all times a great respect for my
late mother. Here is a little incident in proof thereof:
I remember on one occasion after my mother’s death,
he pulled me up, and came up to the side of the horse
I was riding, put his hand on the pummel of the
saddle, and looked me in the face. Then he sorrow-
fully rem arked, ‘ ‘ Old Missus dead, John ?” I replied,
“Yes, Jackey.” The old chap then walked away to a
log near by, sat down, and had a good cry. This
instance in itself is sufficient to disprove the too often
repeated theory that the old original blacks were all
devoid of feeling and genuine sympathy as the whites
know it. Jackey had four sons—George (Tommy
Steel), who died soon after we came to the Manning,
and was buried not far from Gore’s (about where Mr.
Fred. Richardson’s house was); Jimmo, George, and
“Cowruck,” The latter never had a white name, and
died in the camp in the Kimbriki brush, opposite
where Mr. William Policy lives.
I shall never forget seeing poor old Jackey just
after his boy “Cowruck” died. I went to the camp,
and found him minding the corpse, for some reason,,
but what Ido not know. They could not bury the
body, it seems, until “Old Gohanna” came. How long
the corpse had to be kept for the arrival of this mys-
terious person or native spirit, memory reeordeth not.
One thing Jackey told me Avithout hesitation was that
he could not eat any of “the blackfellow’s patter,”'
and he asked me to send him up a bit of bread. He
had not eaten a bite for a couple of days, and had
tightened his belt of ’possum string around his loins
until he bore the appearance of being nearly cut in
two. The bread, of course, was promptly sent along


to the old chap, and the pangs of hunger were ap-
Another blackfellow my mother empfoyed was nne
reioieing in the name of “Ogle-eyed Jimmy. Jimmy
liid a most awful squint, and to this affliction the
name which he carried through life. He went mad
at the finish, and amused himself foraUme throwmg
snears at the blacks and gins at the camp. Bl *n g a y
Billy ’ ’ however, put a spear through Jimmy, and kil U
ed him. thus ending his dangerous and murderous
pranks. This happened not far from Tmonee
When my father and mother lived at Mount George,
in Miss Kelly’s house (Miss Kelly, by the way, was a
woman with a history), while a residence was being
built for them at Kimbr.ki Jimmy used to collect
firewood and carry water for us. He, apparently,
was not altogether devoid of humor, and certainly
was not amiss in regard to cunning. He served my
mother a nice trick one day. Do you know what
“dogwood” is? . . .
(Writer acknowledged his ignorance.)
Well proceeded Mr. Allan, it has almost disappear-
ed altogether now. It was plentiful in the old days.
When being burned, it produced a most objectionable
sme ll like putrid horse —and that is about the worst
smell I know of. Jimmy was engaged getting a sup-
ply of wood, but wanted to get away. As there was
plenty of dogwood about, he brought that, and was
paid for it. I was over at the house that day, and my
mother could not make out what was causing the
stench •«
On looking at the wood, however, I soon saw the
cause of the trouble. Jimmy took care to make him-
self scarce before my mother found out the trick he
used to be another blackfellow of note
Johnny Martin. He was the doctor of the tribe—a
stumpy, one-eyed blackfellow, with a great corpora-
tion and when talking his remarks were punctuated


by giunts. He was the only man I have known who
could eat native dog. I cannot say how this was, but
they told me only old men could indulge in dog, so
that it was evidently considered a luxury. Ido not
know of any other class of food that was only to be
eaten by old men, though I fancy that eagle-hawk was
also on the old men’s menu only. I remember Johnny
Martin being sent out by my mother with my gun to
shoot pigeons on one occasion. He soon returned,
however, threw the gun down on the verandah and
lemaiked, That fellow no good.” JVXy mother asked
“What’s the matter?” The reply was to this effect:
lou see, missus, I bin see um pigeon; I bin put urn
up gun; that fellow bin snap; I bin take um down, and
that fellow bin go off behind; that fellow bin hit my
belly. ’ ’ The truth was that the gun hung fire, and as
he was letting it down it went off, and the recoil hit
him in the stomach.
When I first knew Johnny Martin he had a fearful
gash in his shoulder. Another blackfellow had in-
flicted the injury with a tomahawk—one of the No. 2
blacks, X think it was. Soon after this, Johnny and
another known as Tonyata (a fine, big black, who
spoke good English) met the wielder of the toma-
hawk somewhere in the vicinity of Charity Creek, and
killed him. Tony used to describe the slaying of this
dusky son of the soil in this way: “Here he°is. We
bin meet him in the bush, me and Johnny Martin.
Well, here he is. We bin talk a little bit, and I bin
bin piallow: Baal got bacca? Me bin piallow: Here
bin piallow: Baal got bacca? Be bin piallow: Here
he is, I got bacca. That fellow bin cut him up, fill
him pipe. Johnny bin make little fellow fire; that
fellow bin go fire, and when he put him head down,
along to light him pipe, Johnny bin come behind, and’
hit him on head with nulla nulla, and knock him
down. Then we bin kill him, and leave him for the
native dogs and eaglehawks to eat him.” Strange to


Giant Fig-tree in Wingham Brush


I'ja'c i Cascade*
™
Copyright e.ms.c.s Hill Wingha.


'say, too, he always wound up this yarn with, ‘ ‘ Damn
and blast him.”
We often heard of blacks being killed but did not
take much notice of it. There was “Crammering
Mickey.” He was killed about Flash Plains, near the
Bo Bo Creek, but what for Ido not know. Perhaps
he had bewitched someone, or had told some woman
the secrets associated with the “Cabra Stones,” or
had let some woman or boy see the “Cabra Stones”
—any of these crimes were punished with death. We
got Mickey’s skull, and the last time I was in Sydney
I saw it in the Museum, I recognised it at once by the
peculiar mark of the tomahawk that killed him. Ha
was a great thief, and would even steal from' the other
blacks, a failing for which they all seemed to despise
him.
A blackfellow known as “Bony” was a splendidly-
made man, but possessed a most sulky disposition. I
nearly had my head split open through him on one
occasion. It appears that the rascal had coaxed away
the gin belonging to another blackfellow, and the lat-
ter came after her. “Bony” was clearing off the
brush near the house, and the gin was planted in a
big fig-tree near by. After a lot of talk between them,
well punctuated with abuse, Henry (the complaining
one) let fiy a boomerang at “Bony.” I was standing
near him, and just ducked in time. I left them to it,
but Henry did not find his woman. “Bony” lived to
be an old man, and died about ten years ago. He was
a good worker, and did a lot of work for us. He also
felled about 30 acres of land for the late Mr. Joseph
Andrews for 2s 6d and rations and a pair of moleskin
trousers. Rations, tobacco and a few shillings was all
they usually received or expected for working.
Old Gohanna was the king or head man of the tribe.
He had another name, but it was never used—Sciplo.
He wore a brass plate someone had given him, bearing
the following inscription: “Gohanna, King of Gan-
gat.” He was very proud of it. I think it was only


because he was one of the last of the old blacks that
caused him to be a sort of head man. Johnny Martin,
the “ doctor, ” had far more influence—the doctors
were always thought more of than any of the others.
Then there was Paddy, a really good worker, and
mostly my man. His native name was Deilbah. How
he got that name was owing to the fact that he was
sentenced to three months in Maitland Gaol. He was
originally known as Jailbah, which eventually was
twisted to Deilbah. I often thought it was a great,
shame to put this blackfellow in gaol at all. It ap-
pears somebody had got Paddy to go down to the
Hunter with him, driving horses, and coaxed him to
stop there with him. That arrangement worked all
right for a time, but Paddy eventually got homesick.
One day, when riding out in one of the outside pad-
docks the craving to get back to the Manning district
came on him so strong that he determined to go. He
started off. and made his way up to Larry’s Flat (now
known as Krambaeh), put the saddle up in a tree and
hoppled out the horse.' The man who employed him
sent the constable (old Tippin) after him. The limb
of the law traced Paddy to the Flat—to the blacks’
camp there. As soon as he came Paddy produced the
horse and saddle, and then Tippin arrested him, with
the result that he was awarded three months, as be-
fore stated. Paddy had no intention of stealing either
horse or saddle, but merely desired to get home again.
Paddy once found a £1 note on the Big Hill road, and
Mrs. Joseph Andrews rather foolishly gave him its
value in rum (rum was only 2s 6d per bottle then).
Prior to this the blacks had very little idea of the
value of money; but from that time onward they
wanted a £1 note for any big job they undertook.
Paddy felled about 29 acres for us for £2, and used to
go out splitting with me. He was a good fellow, and
reliable.
Peter, another of the dusky tribe, I did not care
much about. He would work well sometimes. Mrs.


Joseph Andrews used to employ him as a washer-
woman” now and then, and she said he did not
make a bad fist of the work at all. Peter’s name was
Tooagumi, given him because of the fact that he had
once been speared in the neck (“tooa” the neck or
throat, and “gumi” a spear).
Another one, Darby, was called TWenbah (from
“towen” a canoe). When quite a young man, Darby
frequented The Taree Estate, and I suppose he
and other darkies had been stealing corn or something
else, and the whites were hunting them away. At any
rate, they made a bolt for the river, and Darby jump-
ed into an old canoe. Unfortunately for him his feet
went clean through the bottom, and there he remained
fast for a time, and through the medium of this epi-
sode he derived his nickname of “Towenbah.”
There was also Billy the Bold, who was slightly de-
formed, and Long Jacky, a man over 6ft. in height
and well built. I never remember having seen him
with any clothes on. He seldom came near any house,,
but kept to the bush and the camp, living on what he
could get by hunting. Down the Manning River the
blacks were numerous, and there were some fine fel-
lows amongst them, though I knew very mt!e about
them, as they did not often come up our way. Down
on the salt water they mostly lived by fishing. There
were more down the river, I believe, than at Kimbriki.
On the Dingo was another tribe, among whom was a
black known as Laughing Charley. I have never seen
a mouth on any other human being like Charley’s—
in fact, I doubt whether there was ever another such
mouth made before or since. Billy, asked his name,
he would reply, “Billy—tas all” (that’s all). Thus
he got his name. At Larry’s Flat was another tribe,
and up the Manning, about No. 1 station, was another,
prominent in the ranks of which were Old Bill, Jacky,
Long Jacky, Big-headed Micky, and others; but we
did not see any of them. Nor did the Gloucester
blacks often come this way. The latter used the same


language, but lower down there was a slight change
: —about Dungog and the Paterson. The language fur-
ther north than the Manning was different also, even
on the Macleay River.
The “dress” of the blacks in those days consisted
of a belt made of ’possum wool, strung round the
waist. In front was a tassel of native cat skin, cut
into strips. They wore nothing else, excepting a net,
knitted from very fine string, which occupied a place
on the forehead. They were very fond of getting
■coarse thread for this purpose, which was always
made red with raddle, which they procured some-
where up the Lansdowne or John’s Rivers. The gins’
dress was a blanket and nothing else. They made the
nets for the men, and also made bags out of a stronger
string, knitted in quite a different stitch from that
which white women adopted. I have seen them
carrying big loads in the bags thus made. The gins
also used to spin the ’possum wool for the men’s belts,
though I have often seen the men spinning that also.
They used a small stick, with a hook at the end. This
they kept turning round between the thumb and fin-
ger of one hand, feeding the wool with the other.
When they got to the length of their arm, they twisted
the yarn round the stick, and started again,' until all
the wool was twisted up.
The gins allowed their hair to grow any way—a
regular mop—and pads were unknown to them or
anyone else those times. On the other hand the men
took great trouble with theirs. First they drew the
hair tight back from the forehead and up from the
back of the head. Then, in the centre of that, right
on the crown of the head, they put a pad of ti-tree
bark; next they cut a good-sized bunch of tussocky
grass, and placed that on the ti-tree bark pad, drew up
all their hair, and bound it tight with ’possum wool
string. This was the fashion in vogue when they were
in full dress. At other times the hair was allowed to
grow in a mop, though the forehead net was always


worn. I have seen “Bony/’ who was a great swell,
w r ith his hair done up in this way, towering nearly
three feet above his head. He would have a daub of
raddle on his nose, from the bridge to the point, and a
patch of red on each cheek; he carried a tomahawds, a
nulla nulla, and a boomerang or two in his belt, and
a womera or spear or tw r o in his hands. He was then
prepared for a friendly visit or a fight—whichever
turned up.
Used the blacks in the early days be armed ? writer
asked Mr. Allan.
I never saw a blackfellow in those time unarmed r
he replied. They alw r ays had a tomahawk in tfieir
belts, no matter what they were doing, and mostly
had a nulla nulla also. The latter w r ere of different
shapes. The sort they generally carried on the Man-
ning was called “contra.’ ’ They at least three
feet long, made of wdiite myrtle, and generally
about one inch in diameter at the handle—swelling
out gradually to, say, one and a half or tw T o inches ;■
then tapering off to a point. The end of the handle
part was bound round with string, and covered over
■with grass-tree gum, so as to form a knob, and so pre-
vent the weapon from slipping out of the hand. There
were always three or four grooves, longitudinally
drawn down the swelling part of the “contra.’ ’
These weapons, however, had other shapes. One
w r as a beastly looking concern, like a mushroom, with
a long stalk, sharp at the edges. On another the end
was pear-shaped—the thick end being two or three
inches through, a regular club. You can just imagine
vhat a hard head the average black had to withstand
a ‘tap” from an instrument of this character—for,
be it remembered, that one black would hit another
as hard as he could, the head being held in position
for it to be hit forcibly and fairly. That was the w r ay
the blacks fought, it might be mentioned. They took
turn and turn about, as far as I could learn. When
one got knocked dow r n (they term it “knocked out”


in the pugilistic ring to-day, I understand) that ended
the head-battering contest. T’other fellow, whose
skull had stood the test of the onslaught, was then
regarded as the “best man.” He certainly had the
thickest head. I once saw “Paddy” the aboriginal
with an awful gash on his head, but it didn’t trouble
Paddy to any great extent. In fact, he was extremely
proud of it, and remarked, “That fellow couldn’t
knock me over.”
The blackfellows’ spears were made of the stem of
the small kind of grass-tree flowers that grow on the
sandy places near the coast —that is to say, when they
could get them. If they could not obtain these, then
they fell back on the long thin stems of what we call
“brown knrrajong.” These were not nearly as good
as the grass-tree. The spears were pointed with hard
ironbark, about 18 inches long, the point being hard-
ened in the fire. This was fitted into the shaft of
grass-tree, and bound round with kurrajong string,
being also covered with grass-tree gum. About a foot
o fthe ironbark point of the fighting spears was al-
ways covered with the grass-tree gum, which, the
blacks said, would come off, and inflict a very nasty
wound.
The hunting spears had no gum on the point. Some
of the blacks had very nasty looking spears for fight-
ing. They were made like the others, excepting about
a foot of the point, and this was flattened and had
five or six barbs on it. These barbs were fully three-
quarters of an inch in length; so that the unfortunate
who got one in him could only get rid of it by cutting
the spear off, and passing the broken part through.
To say the least of it, they were nasty looking con-
cerns, but I don’t think the blacks used them very
much, I fancy they were more for show than any-
thing else, and I never heard of a darkie being speared
with one.
For fishing the blacks used quite a different spear.
It was much longer, and had three points. On the


Upper Manning they were simply made with three
ironbark points fire-hardened. The shaft was much
the same as the others, but stouter, as they were in-
tended more for use at short range. On the Coast and
Lower Manning, however, where the blacks lived
mostly on fish, they were always pointed with a piece
of flint or quartz. The three points were fixed into
the shaft after the same style as the other spears, and
then bound together (two or three inches from the
shaft) to keep them from spreading. One of the iron-
bark points was longer than the other two, and in
striking a fish, was usually kept on top. The fish, if
not too large, got jambed in between the points,.
The ordinary spears were called “gummi,” and the
fishing spears “mutti.” It was rather interesting in
those days to be on the Manning in a boat about Goat
Island (the native name of which is Goolan Goolan-
githe—having ‘‘plenty of bats,” from “goolat,” a
bat), in the vicinity of which were splendid fishing
grounds. In those days one would see a number of
canoes on the river, with a black and his gin in each.
They would have a small fire in the middle of the
canoe, and the blackfellow would be at one end,
standing up with his spear ready for action. The gin
would be sitting at the other end of the canoe. The
man would paddle with the spear a bit, and when the
identical moment arrived, he would make a thrust
into the water with his spear. Generally he would be
successful, and would bring up a big mullet. This
was promptly toppled into the canoe to the gin. The
scene was certainly a pretty one on a fine evening,
with the waters of the broad Manning sparkling like
glass, with the beautiful green of the trees in the back-
ground—for, be it remembered, there was some fine
timber on the banks, the trees not having been tam-
pered with by the axes of white men. Added to this
picture, painted by Nature, the blacks moving oyer
the watery bosom of the river in their canoes, com-
pleted a most interesting scene.


I often think of those old times, and how beautiful
our river was in those days.
The blacks had another nasty-looking fighting im-
plement, but I fancy that this also was more for out-
side show than for any other purpose. At any rate,.
I never heard of anyone having been hit with the con-
cern. It was shaped something like a boomerang, of
about half-an-inch in thickness, and was sharp at the
edges. Its width was about four inches. The boomer-
ang shaped edge was sharp like the other, which was-
square. They were by no means common. The shield,
as far as the Upper Manning blacks were concerned,
was made always of an oval shape, and was construct-
ed out of a piece of fig tree, split off one ©f the butts
of a good big tree. It was always pipe-clayed, with
two lines of red from top to bottom, about one and a
half inches apart, down the centre of the shield. Two
more lines of red crossed them from side to side. In
the centre was a handle. The shield was convex, so
as to turn a spear off from the blackfellow holding it.
It was about 2ft. by 8 or 10 inches. When making
one of these, they used to set it up against a tree and
throw a spear at it. If it split when struck, it was
promptly thrown away and another one was made. It
is many years now since I saw one. The blacks al-
ways used to get them ready before a “Cabra
Ground,” as there was invariably a fight after that;,
but at ordinary times we did not often see them.
The “womera,” or throwing-stick, was about three
feet long, and about half an inch in thickness. At the
small end it was about half an inch wide, but two or
two and a half inches wide at the handle part. At the
small end a piece was spliced on to form a hook, and
was firmly bound on with string and wax. In other
parts of the colony they were made differently, but
on somewhat the same principle, and for the same use
to throw spears with.
The womera was held in the right hand, with the
thumb and first finger free. They held the spear. The


shaft of the spear had a small shallow hole in the end
of it, which was bound round with string, to prevent
it from splitting. The hook at the small end of the
womera was placed in this, and the spear was sup-
ported by the left hand. The blacks always gave the
spear a kind of tremulous motion before throwing it.
The womera gave a longer leverage to the arm, and a
spear could be thrown a long way with it. The
blacks’ idea of the refraction, when spearing a fish,
was that “water bin makem spear come up and
eatchem fish.” They could throw very straight. I
have seen them practising by cutting a piece of bark
round, and trundling it along the ground. They
threw at it with spears and “paddymelon sticks,”
The latter were made of some heavy wood—myrtle
or timber of a similar nature. They were about two
feet long, and pointed at each end, and the blacks
were adepts in the art of knocking paddymelons over
with these sticks.
The boomerang, no doubt, most people have some
idea of. The “fighting boomerangs,” however, were
not made like the “come-back” ones. They were
for one thing, broader and heavier, and only intended
to be thrown straight. An awful gash would be made
by one of them on the person who was sufficiently un-
fortunate to be struck.
There was one of the sort referred to stuck up in a
tree for years after a fight at what was called “Allan’s
Flat.” The “fighting boomerang” was made out of
white myrtle, being split out of the spurs, which were
a good shape for this particular purpose. It was
heavy, but easy to work, I never heard of the blacks
using any poisonous spears. The tomahawk they all
used was made of iron by the local blacksmith. A
blackfellow was never met without one stuck in his
belt; even if he had no other weapon, he was never
minus this one. These tomahawks were about two-
inches on the face, not heavy, and had a flat handle,
about 18 inches long. The handle was thinner at the-


part which had to be held, so that the tomahawk
could be easily slipped out of the belt when required.
The blacks kept these tomahawks very sharp, and de-
pended on them to a great extent for a living. For
instance, they used them extensively for cutting out
’possums from the hollows of trees, the robbing of
bees’ nests, etc.
There were no English bees in the bush when we
first came to the Manning district, but they came into
evidence some time afterwards. As a matter of fact,
Mr, Joseph Andrews brought a hive up from the
Hunter, and they soon multiplied and got about in the
bush.
But the big grub was a choice item on the menu of
the average blackfellow. If you happened to be
walking through the bush with a dusky son of the soil,
and his sharp eyes saw a tree with signs of grub in it,
out came the tomahawk, quick and lively. The grub
was cut out and eaten raw. If he happened to strike
it rich, then those he did not feel inclined to eat
straight away were taken to the camp and roasted.
Truth to tell, nicely roasted, they were not had eating.
Then you have tasted them? writer asked.
Yes, replied Mr. Allan, and I well remember the
first time I did so. I happened to be felling a wattle
tree, and discovered a beauty in it—much bigger than
your first finger. I was by myself at the time, and
as there was a nice fire burning near by, I thought I
would test the culinary qualities of “Mr. Grub.” I
roasted it to a turn —a beautiful brown; then took it
up and had a good look at it.
You hesitated a trifle, I suppose?
Yes, I hesitated a good deal, and then had a bite—
and really it was not at all bad. I have eaten them
since roasted, but I never could prove equal to the
task of negotiating them “blackfellow style”—in
other words, in their original raw state. The
grubs out of the wattle trees are the best
by far; those out of the fig trees I did not like at all,


they tasted too much like fig tree. One need never
starve in the Australian bush if he has a tomahawk,
& strong stomach, and a healthy appetite—that is to
say, providing grubs are to be found. The A.A. Com-
pany’s manager at Gloucester in those days used to
send the blacks out to collect those grubs, and con-
sidered them a luxury when roasted. Anyhow, he
used to have them brought on to the dining table. He
was the only white man I ever heard of doing that.
Before the white people came, the blacks’ toma-
hawks were made of stone. They were merely water-
worn stones, such as you can find in the river bed.
When they became blunt they were promptly thrown
away. We used to plough up lots of them, and I never
came across any that bore the appearance of any at-
tempt having been made to sharpen them. However,
I have seen stone tomahawks from the Barwon and
Namoi which were beautifully polished and also
had the edge well sharpened. The handle of
the stone implement was bound tightly with string
to the stone, and was covered with grass-tree gum, if
it could be secured. If not, the blacks used native
beeswax. The stone tomahawks, to say the best for
them, must have been clumsy instruments, and the
blacks must have had their work cut out to climb big
trees with them.
I suppose you knoAv how they did their climbing to
•get ’possums and so forth ? Mr. Allan asked.
Writer replied that he had an idea, having read
something about their climbing proclivities.
Well, continued Mr. Allan, they accomplished their
climbing feats—some of them of a most hazardous
character—by cutting a notch for a step, then another
notch on the opposite side to the first. Step by step,
they thus practically cut their way up the perpen-
dicular barrel of a tree till the branches were reached.
Steps were cut left and right.
That was the men’s way of ascending a tree; but
most of the women used a vine. They held the two


ends in their hands, keeping the bight, as the sailors-
call it, round the small of the back, and jerking the
vine up, keeping their feet fast against the tree. By
this means they really walked up the tree. The
women could climb a much larger tree by this means
than the men could in their way.
The young blacks were a merry lot of fellows, used
“to look on the wine when it was red” whenever op-
portunity offered, or rather, on the rum. “Black-
fellows’ rum” was then only 2s 6d per bottle. They
used to have great rows at times—quarreled, it
seemed, “for the love of one another.” However,
there was never anything mean about them, or
greedy, as far as sharing their food was concerned.
They freely shared their food with one another —a
drink, if they happened to have it, and “bacea” the
same. One of their first salutations to the a's erage
white man was: “You give me bacca?” I have many
times, knowing their failing in this direction, called
out as soon as I met one of them: “You got plenty of
bacca?” They always looked flabbergasted at such
a question, but if they had any, would immediately
proceed to share it. So it was if they had a “bottle.’
They would press you to sample it. On one occasion
I was up at the crossing place at Kimbriki when I
saw “Paddy” the blaekfellow carrying a bottle, and
he was also accompanied by a black apostle named
“Peter.” They were crossing the river, but had im-
bibed not wisely but too well, and consequently
tumbled about in the river in a style that was cal-
culated to amuse an onlooker. The spectacle, anyhow,
was of such a ludicrous character that I could not
help being both interested and amused with the whole
performance. When, eventually, they negotiated the
stream, and came to where I was, they insisted on me
having some rum—and I should drink it out of the
bottle" at that, mind you. Despite all his acrobatic
feats in the river, “Paddy” had taken fine care that
whatever else might get broken, the bottle of rum


would not bo included in tbs list. I objected to drink-
ing out of the bottle. “All right, said Paddy, we
got ’im tinder box—you drink ’im out of that.”
I don’t suppose you ever saw one of those tinder
boxes. I have not* seen one for many years. They
were made of brass, about one inch in diameter, and
.about three inches long. One end was closed by a
tight fitting lid; the other was closed by a sliding end
—this could be slided up to push the tinder up to the
pipe. We all used them—blacks and whites alike.
The two ends were connected with a short, fine chain.
We used to use the punk of the grass tree for tinder.
But, to hark back to Paddy and the bottle. He and
his mate produced the tinder-box in due course, and
started to fill out a “bumper” for me; but, no sooner
did they pour the rum in at one end than it escaped at
the other. I was enjoying the performance, when
suddenly Peter slipped up behind me, caught my
arms, and held them back, so that all I could do was
kick. Paddy then began to pour the rum down my
throat. I could not keep my mouth shut for laughing,
and consequently got a fair dose of the concoction.
Most of it, however, was splashed over my shirt, with
the natural result that for some days I had a most
pronounced alcoholic aroma about me.
Another peculiar custom the blacks had was that
of making long cuts on the upper parts of their arms,
and on the chest and back also. I do not know how
they did it, but this I do know, when these cuts healed
up, big “ridges” were left behind, which always
showed out plainly. These peculiar marks, however,
were only to be seen on men who had grown up be-
fore we came to the Manning. The blacks, from that
time onward, began to advance in the Way of en-
lightenment—or go back, whichever you desire to call
it. As a matter of fact the old blacks used to say,
with a certain amount of scorn, that none of the young
blacks were game to mark themselves in a similar
way to their forefathers.


The gins were not cursed with cleanliness, and evi-
dently wasted very few moments indeed in going
through their toilet. Their only “dress” was a ’pos-
sum rug or blanket. They fastened the blanket with
what they called a “currapah.” It was really the
bone of a paddymelon’s leg, ground down to a fine
point. It thus acted as a skewer. This was stuck
through the blanket or rug at the neck. The young
gins, however, were a trifle more particular, and all
wore petticoats as well as blankets. The old gins
used to look well after their children, and forage for
odds and ends for them to eat. They made nets for
fishing and dug “towruck” (the root of a vine that
grows in brushes). It was not bad to eat, but pos-
sessed but little flavour. When cooked, it was very
white and flowery. The blacks always roasted it.
The task of securing it must have been a hard one at
times, as the holes that had to be dug to accomplish
the task were in many instances deep ones. The gins
dug out the roots referred to with pointed sticks,
which were commonly known as “Yam Sticks.” If
the women happened to have a row—and they could
row when the spirit moved them—they used these
yam-sticks to fight with, in much the same way as
singlesticks are used by white people, only * less
scientifically.
There was often a row amongst the gins, particu-
larly when some rascally darky had the chilled cheek
to take unto himself two wives. The men let them
fight it out, and did not interfere. The women used
to make use of the young tubers of the Arum—what
the white folks call “cunjavoy” (native name, “bean-
tuck”). It is a root possessing much acid, but they
used to roast it and pound it up between stones until
the acid matter was removed from it. Then it was
really like chewing a bit of indiarubber. They used
to dry up other roots and eat them.
But they were not particular in their eating habits.
For instance, I have seen a blaekfellow, after he had


singed off the wool from a ’possum, open it, take out
the inside, remove the kidneys and eat them raw. I
think they all did that. I have also seen a black-
fellow roast the inside of a paddymelon and eat it.
These customs were in vogue in the earlier times, of
course, when we first came to the district. If they
were hungry, they made no ceremony about starting
operations on a ’possum or paddymelon. As soon as
the outside was done, they commenced on it, then
stuck it in the fire again until more of it was cooked.
Their principal food was ’possum, bear, wallaby,
kangaroo rat, bandicoot, porcupine, flying fox (kan-
garoo was almost extinct about the Manning), lizards,
etc. I never knew them to eat frogs or mushrooms.
Porcupine was the greatest delicacy on their exten-
sive menu. I cannot say that I ever tasted it. They
never extended an invitation to me to try it. It was
evidently too good' to give away. It was interesting
to see a blackfellow cooking a porcupine. First he
w r ould singe it so as to remove the sharp quills. Then
he would take it off the fire, scrape it well, and remove
the inside. He would have, during this delicate opera-
tion, a piece of well-chewed bark in his mouth, and
with this bark he would sop up the gravy. The porcu-
pine was then put in the fire again, and left till it was
well cooked. Then it was skinned, no gravy going to
waste during that operation, thanks to the moisture
holding qualifications of the chewed-up bark. Yes,
they dubbed the porcupine as “marook” (good).
Paddymelons and ’possums were thrown on the fire,
the fur singed off, and they were then lifted off and
the inside removed—as small an opening as possible
being made to accomplish the latter task. The car-
case was then skewered up as securely as possible,
and put on the fire again and cooked to a nicety.
When done they were full of gravy. The blacks took
care at all times not to lose any of that—they drank
it all. Bandicoots and wallabies were treated in a
similar manner. It was a strange thing that dogs


would not eat bandicoot, although half-starving; but
if scalded like a pig it was not at all bad to eat. If
cooked like sucking pig it much resembled that tooth-
some article.
Paddymelon was not bad eating. We often used
them when we first came to the river. Diamond
snake was a favorite luxury with the blacks. I have
tasted it, but cannot say that I liked it. Turtles were
roasted, while their eggs were eaten raw. There was
not much wild fruit to be got, but what was avail-
able included the following: Raspberries (known as
“kipuck” here, and as “maroo” down the river);
Myall lemons, the fruit of a caper tree, black apples
(“woombuck”). There really was no nice fruit.
“Kipuck” was the only one we ever used in tarts; but
down the river there were two of a much better des-
cription. One, a kind of blackberry, was quite as
good as mulberries in a pie; the other one resembled
a bright red “blackberry.” but possessed very little
taste. The fruit that grew in the bush that we made
general use of was the Cape gooseberry. It was the
plant introduced by a boat-builder employed by Mr.
Wynter, When we came here, it was growing in
most centres of the district. As soon as a brush was
felled and burnt off. Cape Gooseberry plants came up
in thousands. These gooseberries made splendid jam.
The Myall lemon had a peculiar flavor. When quite
ripe they were not at all bad, and I used to like them.
Care had to be taken, however, not to bite the seeds,
which were very hot. The seeds of what the natives
called “mo” were utilised. It is better known all
over Australia by the name of “burrawoug.” From
the sound of it I take that to be the name given to the
plant by some of the southern tribes—perhaps the
Sydney or Botany tribes. They took the ripe seeds
and removed the shell, then gave them a slight pound-
ing between two stones. When smashed up they put
them into one of the nets or knitted bags made by the
women. Then they were put into a running stream.


The Lagoon, Wingham Brush.


.Wv, 1
;*■ 5 TVte f^iv'ei^
" V Wino«<v-i ‘
• -y •« .is 1 ?'


.or in one of the falls of the river, with a stone on the
bag to prevent it from being washed away. The
water thus passed through the net and removed all
the poison from the seeds. This process occupied
.about nine or ten days. If eaten raw these seeds were
poisonous. There is a much larger variety called
■* ‘kineybuck, ’’ which grows on the John’s River, and
also at the head of Killabakh Creek. What food the
gins collected was mostly eaten by themselves and the
children. The men generally looked to their require-
ments by hunting.
How the blacks caught small fish before the white
people came I do not know. They had ordinary fish-
hooks when we came; fiut down the river, in the salt
water, they used hooks made from the strong rib that
forms the outside of the ordinary “ear shell.” When
fishing for jewfish from a canoe, they would make the
line fast to a light piece of wood. When they hooked
one, the wood was thrown out of the boat, and the
jewfish pulled it about the stream until exhausted.
Mullet were speared, but how they caught cat-fish
and perch before the advent of the whites I know not.
The fish when caught were promptly thrown into the
fire—not cleaned in any way. I must say that fish
cooked like this are very nice. The inside comes out in
a ball, and the skin peels off clean. I have frequently
cooked fish in this way when camped on the salt
water. The blacks had an abundance of fish on the
■coast, and in the river where the water was salt—
plenty of o} T sters, pippies, cockles, crayfish (lobsters,
as they call them). The women got these by diving
about the rocks at the headlands.
All the old women had the first joint of the little
finger of the right hand taken off—as also did some
of the middle-aged women. None of the young girls,
however, were marked in this way. This operation
was said to be performed so as to enable the women
■to throw out their fishing lines better; but many gins
-explained that it was a custom adopted to show they


were “game.” The finger joint was removed in this
way: A strong piece of cobweb was bound round it
firmly, and remained there till the work of removal
was complete. The operation must have been a par-
ticularly painful one, as the finger had to mortify
before it came off. The gins always had a lot of dogs
following them—nasty, mangy-looking animals. If a
person desired to get rid of them, all that had to be
done was to set his dogs on to theirs, and they would
clear out promptly.
After some years the blacks did not hunt with their
one-time energy. They got into the ways of the
whites, and appeared to desire to be “like a white
fellow.” I remember a lot of blacks being camped at
Bungay on one occasion, and they agreed to keep up
Christmas, like the white people, and have plum pud-
ding. So “Bobby belonging to Kobert” bought some
flour, sugar, plums, etc., and Mary undertook the task
of making the pudding. They borrowed a three-
legged pot in which to boil the Christmas luxury,
but, somehow or other, Mary forgot to put a cloth
round the pudding. When Bobby went to see if it
was cooking well, the contents of the pot resembled
pea soup. Bob showed his appreciation of Mary’s
pudding-making experiment by promptly kicking the
pot over, and there was a general row instead of a
feast. The children always looked fat and well, but
I never saw them play any games. Their only pas-
time appeared to consist of throwing paddymelon
sticks, spears and boomerangs. The men were very
kind to the children. When moving camp, the women
carried all the household traps, and the men merely
shouldered the fighting and hunting implements.
They kept the gins in fear of a stick pretty well, and
used to give them a hiding now and again. The
women and boys were kept in complete ignorance of
what took place at the “Cabra Ground.” It meant
certain death for a blackfellow to divulge anything
about it or to let a woman see the “Cabra Stones.”


Betty, a half-caste woman we had at Cooplacurripa r
once told me that when she was ai little girl on the
Macleay, and was at the camp with her mother (who
was a full-blooded gin) the old man took one of the
gins away into the bush from the camp. He killed
her, skinned her, and brought the skin into the camp.
This was done as a warning to all the gins, that they
would be served in a similar manner should they try
to coax their men to tell them anything that was for-
bidden. This woman’s crime was that she had en-
deavored to coax her man to show her the “Cabra
Stones.” He was killed as well. Probably the woman
had told some of the other gins that her man had
given her the forbidden information, and it had got
to the ears of the old men. They were also very par-
ticular about not letting a boy or a woman see or even
hear about those concerns we used to make and call
“bullroarers.” It was a thin piece of wood, with
notches all down the edges, and tied on to a long piece
of string. When whirled round the head it made a
roaring noise. They were not to be seen by a woman,
under pain of death. The darkies called them 11 devil
devil.” They were greatly used in the blacks’ “man-
making ceremony,” or “Cabra.”
I do not think there are any restrictions at to what
a woman should eat, like there was as far as men were
concerned. The men always cooked what they cap-
tured themselves. They filled their own stomachs,
first, and what remained was passed over to the
women and children to operate on. They did not keep
anything for the next day. They believed implicitly
in the old adage, “Let the morrow provide for itself.”
I have read in some books and papers that the blacks
were given at times to cannibalism, I very much
doubt this, though I have heard “Bony” talk about
his father in the following terms: “My word, that
fellow murry wild. One time that fellow bin go camp
murry hungry; bail got any patter. That fellow bin
kill little fellow piccaninny, and bin roast him, and


■eat him.” I once read in a book that cannibalism
played some part at the “Boora,” or “Cabra,” as we
■called it. In fact it was asserted that it was of the
“man-making”—a kind of human sacrifice. That is
.all rot. Had this practice been adopted at such times
we would have missed some of the blacks, but we
never did so. At the death of any relative the gins
used to get a tomahawk and gash their heads about,
inflicting some awful injuries. When “Gangat
Jacky’s boy died, his mother made some big cuts on
her head.
No man was supposed to die a natural death. The
supposition was that he had been “bewitched” by
some black, and the guilty black had to be killed. Be-
fore I tell you how this was found out —that is, who
did the bewitching—l must try and explain one of
their customs. This is a rather difficult task without
using the word “totem.” Each family had a particu-
lar “totem.” One family would have native cat for
its totem; another native dog, another bear, another
wombat, and so on. Now, when a man died, at night
one of his near relatives lay down with his head on
the corpse. The first animal he heard make a noise
on such an occasion solved the problem. It was a
man of that totem who had killed the chap who had
gone hence —and consequently one of that totem had
to be killed by one of the dead man’s relatives. If,
un the other hand, the watcher by the corpse heard no
noise, the solution arrived at was that one of his own
relatives, of the same totem, had bewitched him.
Often blacks were killed, and we never could find
out the reason of it. When we had Cooplaeurripa an
•old blackfellow was killed for something, but we
■could never find out what. He left the camp in com-
pany with the other blacks, but never returned. They
killed him, and placed his body in a hollow log, so it
was eventually ascertained, but why he was killed re-
mained a mystery. No doubt he broke some sacred
law.


With regard to totems, they had a bearing on the
marriage law of the blacks, and those laws were ex-
tremely strict. A man was compelled to select a wife
from another “totem,” and any black breaking that
law was killed, as was the woman. When a man had
broken the law, what was known as a “blow up” was
held. The accused had to stand at a tree, and one of
the head men hurled spears at him. It depended on
the gravity of the charge as to how many spears were
thrown. I went up Stony Creek one day. There
were a lot of blacks camping there, a large number
being in from Larry’s Flat. Amongst them was one
named “Bobby, belonging to Robert.” There-were
two Bobbies in that tribe. One always worked for
Mr, Robert Easton. The other, “Bobby, belonging to
George, ’ ’ always worked for Mr. George Easton, and
so got that name. 4 4 Bobby, belonging to Robert ’ ’ was
a fine built, intelligent blackfellow. He had offended
against some law, and was just going up to the tree
when I arrived on the scene. He had a shield and a
womera—nothing else. He threw the shield away,
and walked up to the tree, where he stood quite still.
Old 44 Henry,” one of the Larry’s Flat head men, was
to throw spears at him. Henry stood some time pois-
ing the spear, and taking it down, and fixing it in his
womera. This was repeated several times, and at last
he let one fly. Bobby gave it a neat tip with his wom-
era, and sent it wide. He then began to abuse old
Henry, calling him “rantoocal” (big nose), “wollon-
toocal” (big head), and “wollon tappit” (native dog
head). Old Henry got wild and sent in another spear;
but Bob gave that a tip and saved himself again.
Then, as quick as lightning, he picked up the spear at
his feet with his big toe—he had been quietly manipu-
lating it while abusing old Henry. He fixed the spear
in his womera like a flash, and sent it straight at old
Henry. I never saw a man jump like that old chap
did. The spear would have gone through him had
he not given the leap. As it was it passed between


his legs while he was in the air. I did not stop to see
the finish of this exciting proceeding. Old Henry re-
tired, and a young black took his place. No harm, I
Afterwards learned, was done to Bobby. There never
was a great deal of harm done at these “blow-ups.”
It was rather funny to see the custom adopted
when visiting blacks happened along. Say a black
and his gin turned up. They would sit on a log or
on the ground, away from the camp for some time.
Not a word would be spoken. Then a gin from the
camp would sing out something, and the visiting gin
would answer. Later on, she would go over to the
camp, and then the women would have a yarn. Then
the man at the camp would go over to the visitor on
the log, and sit down, but not close to the visitor.
After a bit, the silence would be broken, and then
they would have a great talk.
The canoe was not much used on the Upper Man-
ning by the blacks—in fact, it was practically only
used for crossing the river when it was too high to
permit of them wading through. Among the down
the river blacks, however, canoes were in great re-
quest, being utilised extensively for fishing. The
blacks’ canoes were constructed after this fashion;
A nice, straight stringy-bark tree was selected, and
the bark carefully stripped off—great care being ex-
ercised not to crack it. It was cut pretty long. The
bark was then turned down, and a fire was made
under it. This fire was kept going until the bark
became pliable. It was then turned over, and all the
loose bark was removed, and the two ends gathered
up. These ends were then bound round with a strong
vine, and a good lump of worked clay was also stuffed
in so as to prevent the water from getting in. Two
sticks were next cut the proper length, and put in
position to keep the top of the canoe open, and clay
was placed in the centre, on which the blacks used to
make a fire. These canoes were what one might truth-
fully term **very cranky things. ’ 5 I never attempted


to steer one, but various white people have informed
me that whenever they tried to do so, they were rather
unceremoniously capsized into the river. However,
I fancy that some of the earliest sawyers on the Man-
ning did make use of canoes, as there was an old saw-
yer called “Tullembah” by the whites—and that is
a corruption of “Towenbah.” “Towen” was a canoe.
Until we secured a boat, we used two cedar logs,
fastened together, to cross the river, when it was too
high to cross in the ordinary way.
I never saw any of the blacks use anything to re-
lieve or cure them when they were ill. That fact
might, perhaps, be traceable to the circumstance -that
they had nothing in which to boil water in the early
days. All they had in that line were known
“Coolamans.” I do not know how that word or title
was derived. It was not the term used by the Man-
ning blacks. I take it that it originated from the
Southern tribes. There were a lot of words used in
talking to the blacks in those days that the Manning
tribes never used in speaking their own language.
Baal ’’ for ‘ ‘ No. ’ ’ ‘ ‘ Mundoee ” for “ Foot. ” ‘ ‘ Pat-
ter’' for “Food.” “Piallow” for “Talk.” And
“Caboun” for “Big,” These were all introduced
words, but understood all over the colony. When
the whites were talking to the blacks, these expres-
sions were invariably made use of. I have heard them
use an odd word of the “Commellaroy,” That was
used by all the blacks over the range.' They were al-
ways very proud if they could speak “Camelroy,”
as they called it. It was freely spoken all down the
Aamoi and Barwon.
But, to revert to the “Coolamans.” They were
made out of those big growths or excreseuces that are
frequently found on gum trees. These were almost
always hollow; but if not were easily scooped out,
and were used for carrying water. I have seen some
coolamans” that would hold a good-sized bucketful
of water; but they could not boil it in them.


For bad cuts, or similar injuries, the blacks used a
leaf of the “Arum”—“ Gunge voy,” as the whites call
it. They used to bind it on to the cut. For dealing
with a boil, Ido not know of anything so good. It
acts as a poultice. Some people will tell you that one
side applied to a sore limb will “draw” it—while
the other side, if applied, will heal it. All rot! No
one would be so foolish as to place “the other side”
to an injured limb. I have sometimes seen the blacks
with a vine that grows in the brushes twisted round
their necks. They called it “Moquat”—the white
myal potato. It had the tubers on the root, which
they used to eat. When asked what they had them
round their necks for they would reply: “Got him
murry bad cold!” When anyone had side ache —or
any other ache—the person so afflicted used to lie
down, and the doctor used to rub and stroke the pain-
ful spot, and groan and spit, and generally speaking,,
make a great fuss. The doctor usually commenced
operations about the neck, and worked energetically
until the patient’s feet were reached. By that time
the “bad devil” that was supposed to be torturing
the patient was glad to clear out —at least, so the
doctor said. Old Johnny Martin made a great fuss
regarding it. For a very severe cut, to stop the bleed-
ing, the blacks made free use of cobweb, and that soon
had the desired effect.
I never knew of any games played by the blacks at
the camp. The men “spun yarns” at night, when in
camp, and they never wandered about after dark. I
do not think they had any other form of amusement
at the camp. They composed songs, sometimes in
broken English, and some of them were very funny r
I will give you one they used to sing:—
“Billy Birable’s got a very pretty pussy cat. That
fellow bin piallow, Mew! Mew! Mew!”
Then they would give a yell, and then the song over
again. “Billy Bimble” was Mr. William Startin. lie
lived on the bank of the river, above Tinonee, in those


days. There was another song they had, which went
something like this: “Tee-tah, carpintah,” finishing
up with something about the row he made with the
saw. This was about the only sort of amusement they
indulged in, with the exception of the “corroboree.”
Now the corroboree must not be confused with the
“Man Making” ceremony. But that I will come to
later on. The corroboree was only a dance. It had
no religious meaning. The words were not under-
stood, and were passed from one district to the other.
I was told always from the North to the South. This
is the legend I have been told by the darkies when I
have been talking to the blacks a long time ago: -
There was a wonderful man who came from no one
knew where. He composed songs and dances, and
taught the blacks to sing and dance; but when they
had learned them, they were obliged to take them on
to the next tribe, and they had to do the same all up
the coast. What became of this gifted individual no
one seemed to know. He may have been killed. But
no new corroboree was introduced. I have given you
the legend as I received it. I was under the impres-
sion for a long time that all corroborees came from the
North, until the late Mr. Wynter told me of others.
I have seen two or three. They were always held at
night. Fancy a fire, to give light, and two old gins
sitting, or rather squatting down, in front of it, with
two hard sticks, or two boomerangs, which they kept
beating together—keeping correct time, and singing
a kind of “chant.” The words used were what were
taught with the dance. What dialect it was all in no
one knew. It might have been from Cape York, Vic-
toria, or from the Barwon. It was sung in a mono-
tonous kind of way, commencing with high notes, and
then getting lower and lower. This was repeated
over and over again. The tone of the voice was some-
times changed. The best corroboree I ever saw was
one in which the men were ranged up in a line, on the
opposite side of the fire to the gins. Their faces were


painted in fancy patterns, all with white pipeclay
(“Milbah”), broad stripes were made down their
thighs and legs, down their arms, and across their
chests and sides, marking out the ribs. They held a
boomerang in one hand and a nulla-nulla in the other.
These they held up over their heads, with their arms
extended; their legs were extended full stretch, so
that they almost touched each others’ feet on each
side, and gave their legs a tremulous motion —hard to
describe —and giving a jump in the air every now and
then —not very high, but all in correct time and ex-
claiming “Ough!” so correct that it sounded almost
like the voice of one man. Then, all at once they
would w r heel round, and, as they had no pipe-clay on
their backs, and were not close to the fire, they all
suddenly seemed to disappear. This weird ceremony
was kept going half the night. They had another
corroboree ceremony which I never witnessed. In
this there was a post put up, and the top was cut some-
thing like the shape of a man’s head, with the eyes
and mouth, and ‘‘raddled” over. Another I did not
see was danced about Martin’s, at “tulcre” (a hollow
log or tree). In that a stage was erected of saplings.
I don’t know what for. Ben Ford, who went from
here overland to the Tweed River, said he saw the
remains of these stages, all the way up the Tweed. I
think that was about the last brand of corroboree
that was introduced to the Manning. I never met a
white who had seen it danced. The “corroboree” is
a thing of the past now. There are no natives to
dance it.
The gunyahs were constructed in a simple manner,
by putting up a fork or two, and leaning a sheet or
two of stringy bark against them. If stringy bark
could not be secured, the blacks fell back on tea-tree
(ti-tree) bark. The average black’s gunyah was not
at all an uncomfortable concern.
On one occasion, I remember, there was great ex-
citement amongst the darkies. Some of the young fel-


lows had been up the Little Dingo, about the Big Run,
on the ranges in the vicinity of Johnston’s Peak.
Why, I do not know, but for some reason the old
blacks were always very shy of going up in the local-
ity mentioned. The young blacks returned, and re-
lated a rather strange tale regarding what they had
seen. They had, they said, found a camp—one made
in a much different way from what their own camps
were. At this strange camp they had also discovered
fighting implements, and these, too, differed from
their own, and included spears, nullah-nullahs, etc.
They saw no strange blacks, however, and I expect
the truth of the whole thing was that they got fright-
ened and cleared out.
Some time before we came to the Manning, some of
the Johnston family had discovered cattle killed, and
although suspicious of the darkies, could only find
traces of one blackfellow in the locality concerned.
They soon found out that he did not belong to any of
the Manning tribes. A fire was often seen on the
mountain, and they also found trees bearing marks of
this blackfellow’s climbing capabilities. No wdiite
persons, other than the Johnstons, ever went up in
the wild locality under discussion, and they only did
so at times, in search of cattle, and, as previously
stated, the old Manning blacks kept religiously away
from it.
Some years after we settled on the Manning, one
of the Johnstons—l forget no wwhich one it wras—
was riding after cattle up the Big Run and Johnston’s
Peak way, when he suddenly came across a strange
black. This dusky son of the soil was actually en-
gaged erecting a sort of stockyard—and he was not
making a bad fist of the task, despite the fact that he
had only a tomahawk with which to accomplish it.
When asked who he was the blackfellow promptly
replied that his name was “Tommy.” He had a spear
ready, and showed an inclination to fight; but John-
ston retired, and left the black (Robinson Crusoe-


like) the “monarch of all he surveyed.’ _ The stock-
yard was never completed, but for some time after the
fire of this lone black was often to be seen glistening
on the rugged mountain side.
Some cattle were found speared later on, and in-
formation was, in due course, given to the police. The
services of a black-tracker were secured, and the
mountain black was tracked to his camp. When he
was asleep, the party sprang iipon him, handcuffed
him, and brought him into Wingham. There were
only a couple of houses in Wingham at that time in
addition to the Court House, the hotel, and a store
or two. The suspect was eventually brought before
the Court, but there was no direct evidence forthcom-
ing that he had actually killed any cattle. Conse-
quently the case was dismissed.
The suspected black was again given his liberty.
From appearances, the blackfellow was mad. He
said nothing, but appeared to understand English
well. When the authorities liberated him, they gave
him a blanket. As soon as he got outside the pre-
cincts of the Court House, this mountain black gave
a good look round, as if getting the lay of the country
(it was dark when they brought him into Wingham).
Having done this, he threw the blanket on the ground,
and then made a bee line for the Peak. Ido not think
he was ever seen again—though his fire periodically
glowed on the mountain side as previously.
I was once in company with Mr. Kobert Johnston
and Mr. Edward Donkin, and the conversation turned
on to this particular blackfellow. Mr. Donkin then
remarked that he recollected a white woman being
killed at Cooley Camp (Woodville), on the Hunter,
by a blackfellow named'“Tommy.” He was never
apprehended, though he was traced up Gloucester
way. The time this tragedy occurred was about iden-
tical with the time the Johnstons first saw the signs
of a solitary black on the Dingo ranges.
Now a word or two about the honesty of the blacks.


We never used to hesitate to leave tools or anything
of like character about in the bush. They were never
interfered with. The dusky denizens of the bush also
.came about the house, but never interfered with any-
thing. They certainly did sometimes help themselves
to green maize in the fields. This they roasted and
oalfed “Mitti.” Perhaps they did not regard the
matter of helping themselves to maize as stealing, as
it “grew.” I had a direct experience of a blackfel-
low’s honesty at the first “Fire Place” that I was at.
A darky had come from Larry’s Flat to ask me about
a horse that was then running in the vicinity of Kim-
briki. I knew where it was likely to be, and went out
with him to try and find it. The blackfellow was rid-
ing a young horse, and when he had proceeded some
distance, he asked me to lend him my knife to cut up
some tobacco. However, I had no sooner handed him
my knife than the horse on whcih he was seated “went
to market”—commenced to buck in right down earn-
est. The blackfellow put the knife into his pocket,
.and the result was that it was eventually forgotten.
I thought no more of the lending transaction till I
returned home. I then gave the knife up for lost, as I
did not even know the darky’s name.
However, at the “Cabra Ground” some months
.after, a blackfellow, who was smothered in pipeclap
from head to foot, walked over to me and said, “You
•don’t know me? You mind you bin lend me knife
when horse buck? I bin put’im in pocket. Baal lose
’im. I bin bring ’im you. I give ’im you when Fire
Place done.” He did so—had the knife carefully
wrapped up in a piece of rag.
I never knew any of them to steal from one ano-
ther—with the exception of “Crammering Mickey,”
who was afterwards killed on the Bo 80. They had
a feed of cheap beef sometimes. On one occasion
Robert Herkes and myself came across a lot of blacks
•at the back of the Big Hill. The women then had
their nets full of fresh beef. They all made off as


soon as they saw us, but we were quite close before
they actually sighted us, and plainly saw what they
had got. The Dingo had very few people living on it
in those days, and the country was pretty rough and
thickly timbered.
The blacks would often come to my brother for
“little fellow physic” if they were unwell. One day
a blackfellow called “Cobler” came. He hailed from
the other side of Walcha, tmd spoke good English.
In fact, he had been a blacktracker in the native po-
lice up North, and used to boast that he could talk
“Comleroy.” He said on this occasion that he was
“murry bad”—had a bad pain in his side. My bro-
ther William gave him a good overhauling, and then
prescribed two pills for him to take at night. Next
morning the patient was still “murry bad.” That
night a blister was given him to put on his side,
and the following morning my brother went to attend
to the blistered part. However, when he examined
the spot where the blister should have been, no trace
of it could be discovered —it hadn’t been used. He
questioned Cobler, who made out that the spot was
still “murry sore.” My brother could not make it
out, as the blister given the darky was a particularly
strong one. During the day I noticed something
white sticking in the bark of a tree not far from the
homestead, near the stockyard. On closer investiga-
tion I discovered that it contained the two pills, just
as they had been handed to the “murry sick” black.
The blister, unused, was later discovered in Cobler’s
belt. Cobler was promptly given “marching ord-
ers,” and went over Wingham way. The blacks there
soon after killed him, and threw his body over the
rocks into the river, just above where the Wingham
punt now is. Why he was killed no white person ever
knew. “Cobler” was the last to be killed in this way
on the Manning,
Now about the names of various places that the
blacks had. It must be distinctly understood that


thev had no name for the river, or f or any creek—it
was always the name for some piece of the banks that
they o-ave anyone in search of such information, this
has caused considerable confusion to the names of
places given since by surveyors and others, there
were frequently two places of the same name. Most
of those names w r ere derived because of some pecu-
liarity—or, as in many instances, from the trees that
grew plentifully; but it was very hard to arrive at a
meaning, unless you got a blackfellow to pronounce
the word—the the whites twisted them into such form
that it was hard to make them out. It is so to-day.
In spelling these names I have endeavoured to give
the full sound to the vowels. All names ending in
“bakh” signified the name of a tree, and that they
grew in the locality so named. “Beet (twisted by
the whites into “bit”) was the plural oF* bakh, and
was applied to a clump of saplings, or a number or
trees of one variety. “Bah” was applied to a gap, or
pass—strictly, an open mouth. If a word was repeat-
ed, it signified that whatever was referred to was very
plentiful in that particular place. Many words
were repeated, but to make the two words flow into
each other fluently, the first was pronounced with a
kind of “n,”or “ng ” sound. Take, for instance, the
“Gloucester Buckets.” The correct name was
“Buekan Buckut” (“buckut” was a stone) ; Repeat-
ed, it stood for ‘ ‘ very stony, ” or “ rather a big stone.
The same with “Tappin Tappin Creek,” “Tappin
was a dingo. Repeated, it meant that they were plen-
tiful there.
The other termination —very common in their
names of places—was “kite,” or rather “kithe.” It
signified “having.” The white people cut nearly all
the natives names short. Take Kimilriki as a case in
point. It was “Kimbrikithe”—that is, “having
Kimbri” (a long, grass-like weed, that grows in the
river). “Croki” was “Crokithe,” having “crow”
—their name for the bullrout (stinging fish, of the


perch .variety). “Yankingkithe” denoted having
“ yankin’’ (a long-leaved plant that grows on the
river bank). The blacks used these long leaves to
coax lobsters (Yengah) out of their holes. ‘ ‘ Cokundi-
kithe” (having ferns), “Bummingithe” (having
leeches). This, by the way, was well named—it was
the brush part of our farm. ‘ ‘ Taree, ’ ’ from the word
“Tareebit”—in many eases the termination was drop-
ped—was the fruit of the rough-leaved fig tree.
“Brimbin” was, correctly, “Borembut” (a lot of
stringy bark trees). “Killawarra” was derived from
“Killawarrbakh” (the forest, or shingle oak).
“Kundibakh” (the apple tree). “Corakh” (the
lignumvite), “Tigrabakh” (ironbark). “Tugra-
bah” (a cold place or gap). “Marlee” (from “Mar-
leebakh”). I don’t know the English name. “Gan-
gat” is the name of the white-breasted fish hawk, as
we call it; but the old blacks have told me that
“Gangan” was the right name, and that was applied
to a precipice. “Karaak Flat” was “Coram” (a
sandy, flat place). J. J. Martin’s was “Tulere” (a
dead tree or hollow log).
Many of the names of places, as given by the
blacks, are hard to make out. There are two places in
this district that bear the same name—“Beatung
Porapey.” On the Dingo, one of the places, it is ealh
ed “Peter Pompey”—and the other one is called
“Pipen-Pingey.” “Beatung Pompey” refers to a
platypus and to an eel. “Bucka Wauka” was to lay
down with your knees up, and “Strike-a-Light” was
twisted from “Strikelet” (the soldier bird). Wang
Wauk, lam doubtful of. Wang Wauk was not the
blacks’ name for the flying fox, as many white people
contend. “Walangat” meant having a head; “Koo-
rinhat” meant having a skin, or skins; “Coppingat,”
having honey. Those three names, correctly spelt
ended with ‘‘ githe, ” not “ gat. ” “Coolongolook ’ ’ is’
correctly, “Goolongolongithe” (having plenty of bats
—from “Goolet,” a bat). “Bucklebah” was from


g BKJOCt W«(jH
I Di«»tn4fu>oo T
■ • , n A (K« 1908
W H»H *


C«z*nS(Nir


•“buckle,” a brown snake. “Tyrill Creek” was
named from “Tyrill,” a tick. Burrell Creek derived
its name from some place on it called “Burrill” (red
or yellow); “Moto,” a black snake; “Bootawaa”
(from bootowo, water rat). “Cundle ’’ was so named
from a small vine growing in the bush. It bears a yel-
low fruit, with three black seeds, called “cundel.”
“Bungwahl,” from the ferns the blacks dug up in
the swamps in that locality. Water was, with the
blacks, known as “bahto”; fire, “eoyal”; “buek-
•eela” meant sleep; “cotah,” angry; “curry curry,”
be sharp or quick; “kah-koo,” the laughing jackass;
‘ ‘ toocal, ’ ’ large; * ‘ midgey, ’ ’ small; ‘ ‘ niyah, ’ ’ mother;
“payah,” father.
As for counting, the blacks had only two words,
‘ ‘Moculbo, ’ ’ one; and ‘ ‘Burrenbo, ’’ two. They would
make anyone understand by counting on their fingers
up to ten; but had no words in which to express what
they actually meant.
I shall now try and tell you all I know and all I
-could find out about the Man Making Ceremony of the
early blacks. It was called “Cabra Ground” here;
but in some books you will find it referred to as
■“Bora,” or “Boora,” I experienced the greatest
difficulty in securing what information I have at my
disposal. All that was done at such ceremonies was
kept a profound secret from all women, boys, and
white people—not so much from the whites as from
the black women and boys. The last ceremony of the
kind was held at Kimbriki, and it was only a very
poor imitation of the first I had the privilege of wit-
nessing. At this there were a large number of blacks,
from Port Macquarie down to Forster. A few years
back the blacks made an attempt to conduct one of
these ceremonies at the back of Purfleet; but it was a
poor effort indeed. The outsiders would not attend,
and there were not enough blacks left on the Manning
to go through properly with the programme. One


reason of the failure, I think, was that the remaining
blacks had got too much into the ways of the whites.
At the last ceremony at Kimbriki I must admit
that I got “pulled up” by a blackfellow. I never was
so treated by one of them before. It happened this
way. I had asked the Headman (Lame Mickey) if
they would let me take a photo, of the “Fire Place/ r
as they call the “grand finale.” Mickey said “All
right, you take ’im.” Naturally, I thought it was all
right, so I went up with a camera and twelve plates.
But I was promptly met by a deputation of three
“yellow fellows.” They told me that I would not be
allowed to take a photo. As far as they were con-
cerned, they said, they would like it, but there were
some old blacks down from Walcha, who would not
allow it under any circumstances, and I must be
stopped. Accordingly, I put the camera down at the
foot of a tree, and told them I would not attempt it.
They were satisfied. Then I informed them that I
was going to look on at the ceremony, and they made
no objection to that.
As I went further up the flat, I came to a camp of
strange blacks. A big lump of a darky came forward,
and could speak good English. The following con-
versation then ensued between the blackfellow and
myself:—
“Where are you going to?”
“To see the Fire Place,” I replied.
“My word, if you was in my country we would
soon put a spear through you if you came about us.”
“ You are a bit of a Myall, ’’ I replied. ‘ ‘ The blacks
down here are a civilised lot. They don’t mind me
seeing it.”
“Well,” he replied, “all I have got to say is that it
is not fair. If I was to go to any of your Lodge meet-
ings they would soon kick me out, and this is a black-
fellows’ Lodge.”
I said; “What are you making a fuss about? I


know lots about the ceremony, from beginning to
end.”
“Do you?” he queried. “When does my colour
come on?” he next asked.
“Your lot? Oh, you have got to go and bring in
the boys from the bush.”
This reply seemed to surprise him, and he rather
excitedly exclaimed, “You know too much.’
Then he retraced his steps to the camp, and per-
mitted me to go on.
I knew, from the paint on his face, and on the oth-
ers with him, what part they had to perform. \ou
will understand from the above brief dialogue how
particular the blacks were regarding all matters con-
nected with the great ceremony of their time. It was
only by pretending to know that I could ever get any
information from them on the subject. I am, I be-'
lieve, the only white person in the Manning district
who has taken the trouble to find out anything on the
matter. The late Mr. Win. Wynter, who spoke the
language of the blacks fluently, has often told me
that he could not secure any information from
with the exception of something about “two spirits. ,r
As to the origin of the spirits, the blacks could tell
him little. All they could say, when pressed for in-
formation, was practically that they were following a
custom handed down to them by the old blacks, and
I could never discover that any information was given
to the boys by the old blacks.
I think myself that the custom is tlm remains of
some old Fire Worship, in some form, which has been
completely lost. I thought for a long time that the
blacks in and around this district were not up to the
mark, as in other districts. At the Man Making the
front tooth of the boys was knocked out. It was not
done on the Manning since the white people came;
but I find there is a tradition here that long ago, at
Man Making, the Head Man made a bungle of the
business and from that time it was discontinued. The


tooth, as a matter of fact, had to be removed at the
first blow—no second blow was allowed. This cus-
tom applied to the blacks living on the coast, from
Port Macquarie to Seal Rocks.
The late Mr. Wynter once told me that what may
be termed “The Grand Pass” was for a darky to
break two pieces of stick, to show that he had been
initiated. I have at various times asked them about
that, but could get no information, except that it was
connected in some way with the “two spirits”—and
that “blackfellow always did like that.” The mean-
ing of it, evidently, was quite lost. From reading,
and from what I have heard from the blacks, the cere-
mony was conducted much the same all over Aus-
tralia. Ido not know' if the Tasmanian natives prac-
ticed it, but in the North and West circumcision w r as
adopted as part of the Man Making. It was not done
on the Manning, however. A black w-ho had been up
in the Gulf country—about Cape York—described to
one of our “Yellow Fellows,” wdio w 7 as properly
initiated, how the rite was performed up there, and
the latter informed me of it. All through, it is a trial
of the fortitude of the boy, who is starved and fright-
ened, until he will do anything and believe anything.
In the first place, when a boy was about 14 or 15
years of age, the old men of the tribe settled it that
it was time he was “made a man.” The tribes all
round were accordingly notified a “Cabra Ground”
would be held at a certain place. The blacks next
began to prepare for the important event, by making
two rings—one on top of a low ridge, and the other
on a level place at the bottom. This latter was estab-
■lished in a roomy place, so that all the gins could
camp there, close to the ring. The trees all around the
top ring were carved in a fantastic manner. The bark
was cut through and bore peculiar marks—waving
lines (diamond-shaped), and all sorts of fancy pat-
terns. The women and children, it might here be
pointed out, were forbidden to approach near the top


ring. They were told that the marks on the trees
were made by the “Devil Devil,’ or Spirits. The
rings were formed by clearing off the surface soil, and
piling it round in ring-shape. The two rings were
connected by a pathway. The remains of these rings
were to be seen for many years at Kimbriki, but the
marks on the trees soon were overgrown, as they were
only bark deep. We often came across them in the
mountains, up at Cooplacurripa, where, judging by
their number, the blacks must have been numerous in
the long ago. The top ring was made very smooth,
and was then carpeted with leaves. A fire was made
in the centre of it, and was never allowed to go out.
And this reminds me that I have quite forgotten to
describe to you how the blacks obtained fire before
the advent of the whites. The first time I saw them at
it was when we were wrecked at the Bar, in 1851. No
one had a match that would strike —as far as that
was concerned, matches were not at all plentiful then.
The blacks in the vicinity then started to make a fire.
They got an old spear, and used the grass tree shaft
of that. First they broke it into two pieces—one of
the pieces longer than the other. Then a shallow hole
was made about the centre of the long piece. The
short piece (about 1 foot or 18 inches long) th«y
rounded off at the end to fit in the hole; then they
“teased” out some fine, dry stringy bark, and packed
it round the hole referred to, putting some powdered
charcoal into the hole, and also sprinkling it amongst
the bark. Then two blackfellows sat down opposite
each other, and put their legs out on to the long piece
of grass tree, so as to keep it firm on the ground; one
then put the short stick in the hole, vertically; then,
with the piece between his two hands, he made it
revolve as quickly as he could, working his hands
downwards, so as to give as much pressure as possible
on the bottom piece. When his hands got to the bot-
tom. the other darky started at the top, and the first
man had a spell, being ready to take up his turn again


in due course. Thus they took turn and turn about,
never allowing the operation to cease. After a bit
the charcoal began to smoke. Then, through the in-
strumentality of one ortwo judicious puffs,the stringy
bark caught fire, and all was right. I do not know
whether the same system of getting fire was adopted
in other parts of the colony. Here they always used
the grass tree, if it was to be had. They have told me
that other woods answered the purpose just as well,
but I never saw others used. They got fire by the
process mentioned much quicker than one would
imagine. However, the blacks nearly always carried
a firestick about with them.
Now to hark back to the Man Making Ceremony.
When all the preliminary arrangements in connection
with the ring had been made, the strange blacks com-
menced to arrive. On arrival the men went direct to
the top ring, while the women and children went to
the bottom ring, and set up their camps near it. When
a fresh lot of blacks arrived, the “bullroarer” was set
to work. The women were told this was the “voice
of the spirit, or spirits,” and what then took place I
could not find out. I have an idea that the two sticks
were broken to show that they were men, or duly
“initiated.”
When a sufficient number of blacks had gathered
together, a start was made with the ceremony. All
the women were mustered at the bottom ring, and
placed all round it. They were lying on the ground,
and covered up with blankets or ’possum rugs, so that
they could not see anything. The Head Man then
took one of the knitted bags that the women carried
their “household” goods in, and filled it with gum
leaves, and placed it in the ring. Then the boy was
brought into the ring, and made sit down on the bag.
He was ordered to bend his head, and told that, in the
event of looking up, he would be killed. Then men
next formed up outside the ranks of the women, and
the “bullroarer” was brought into requisition. The


old men tell the boys that it is the “voice of the
spirit/ ’ and caution them not to look up, or the spirit
will kill them. The old man next puts his hands
under the boy’s arms, and lifts him up, bending his
head down again; he is then allowed to look up, and
he sees the blacks all round him, holding green bushes
in their hands. Then he is taken away up to the top
ring by some of the old men, and the women are allow-
ed to get up, the children are uncovered, and they are
told that the spirit has taken the boy away.
From the time the boy is shifted from the bottom
ring to the top one until the final “FIRE PLACE,”
no woman or boy is permitted to see him, and he is
most carefully guarded so that he will not see a
woman. The boy is placed, as previously stated, in
the top ring, and the men then come up howling like
native dogs. The old men say, “What is this? This
boy has been looking. Hark, the Spirit has sent
native dogs to kill him. Let us put him up in the fork
of a tree. But, look, look! The Spirit has been here;
how he has marked the trees. We must take him
away. ’ ’
Then the boy is removed to a camp made expressly
for him in the bush—in a direction that the women
are strictly forbidden to go under pain of death. The
old men to whose care the boy is entrusted, never
leave him from the start of the ceremony until it is
completed. He is kept at this camp for some time,
the length of which depends greatly on the strength
of the boy. He is not allowed to move or talk. The
men gather at the camp and hold a sort of corroboree
'every now and then. A blackfellow would come up,
staggering about, and throwing his hands up. After
a while, he would fall down, as though dead, and the
old men would say: “What’s the matter with this fel-
low? He has been doing some wrong, and the Spirit
has killed him.”
Then another man will come up and go through the
same performance, and will eventually fall crossways


over the first blackfellow. My informant asserted
that he had seen a pile of blacks several feet high like
this. One day they would howl like native dogs; on
another they made a noise like cows; and on another
day they would imitate the laughing jackass—and so
on.
When the boy has got so weak from being starved
(he can only be fed on certain foods), he is lifted up
by the old men, and taken outside. Here he finds the
blacks all ranged up each with a “cabra stone’ ’ in
his mouth, held by the lips, so as to permit it being
seen by the boy. One of the number has a “bull-
roarer” in front of him, suspended by a piece of
string, which is fastened round his neck. The boy is
asked: “Did you ever see things before?” Then he
is informed that the “bullroarer” is the Devil Devil,,
or Spirit; and the stones in the mouths of the men are
the “Cobra Stones.” The lad is cautioned thus: “If
you ever tell any woman or boy about them, or show
the “Cobra Stones” to a woman or a boy, you will be
killed, not easily, but roasted in a big fire.” His hair
is cut short and singed with a fire-stick. This, the
women are informed, is the work of the spirit.
This is about all I could find out regarding the pre-
paration for this ceremony of the blacks, through
which the boys had to go before the final “FIRE
PLACE”—which I have witnessed, so am able to
speak correctly of it. The “Cobra Stones” were long
crystals of quartz. Each black received them when
they were “made men.” If they jFound a small
crystal, it was swallowed directly. They believed that
by so doing they were made “murry strong fellow.”
They never mentioned the name of the stones before a
woman, black or white. I now come to that portion
of the ceremony that I can vouch for, as I saw it twice.
The main “Cabra Ground” was over on Stoney
Creek, That, and the FIRE PLACE, were at what is
called “Allan’s Flat” (“Kooka Burrah”). Some dis-
tance separates the two places. Ido not know exact-


ly where the boy was kept by the old men—some-
where, I fancy, on the ridges about Limestone Flat
(Woombe). The women all shifted camp from Stoney
Creek and brought the children over. They made
their camps so as not to be in the way of the blacks
bringing in the boys to the FIRE PLACE. Here they
dress, or rather undress, and paint themselves. Their
bodies are daubed over with raddle, as also are their
faces—dots and stripes, and all sorts of patterns are
adopted. When I saw them they were stripped to the
waist. At another camp were ten or twelve men, who
were engaged in painting their faces red and white,
with yellow patches, and putting cockatoo feathers in
their hair. Prior to this, they and the women had
made a fire in the centre of the flat—a really big fire,
enght or ten feet across. This gradually burnt down,
but there were plenty of embers left.
The women take a very big part in this final act
of the ceremony. When all is ready the leader among
the women takes a spear, and on the point of it sticks
one of the tassels worn by the men. With two other*
women on each side of her, and with all the rest of
them behind (four deep), the fire is then proceeded
to. They go round by a series of jumps, three times,
crying “Ough! Ough!” at every jump, and giving a
loud “Coo-ee” now and again. Having gone round
the fire three times they retrace their steps to the
camp. After a spell, each one went with a tomahawk
to a gum tree, stripped off a piece of bark, about two
feet long, and made for the fire again. When all had
arrived there they all formed up again, the leading
woman having the spear as before, but no bark. They
jumped round the fire three times, as previously des-
cribed, carrying the bark on their extended arms.
Then the pieces of bark were placed down round the
fire, each piece a little way from the other. The camp
was again returned to, and another spell taken. Then
they started again to the outside of the Flat, and each
came back with a small green bush. They again form-


ed up at the fire, jumped round it three times, then
laid their bushes down on the pieces of bark, and re-
turned once again to the camp. There was a long
spell after this.
Then the men who were painted with the yellow
markings came up to the fire, fully armed with shields
and spears, and ran round the fire three times, at a
smart trot. Then they went away up the flat, single
file. They returned in about half-an-hour, full trot,
folio w-my-leader fashion, and again ran round the fire
three times. They next went over to the women’s
camp, and sent them over to the fire, each carrying
her blanket or rug. All the children were taken over
to the camp of the old men, which was located on the
opposite side of the flat to that of the women. The
women laid themselves down around the fire, outside
the bark and bushes. Then men next covered them
up, and if any part of their bodies was exposed, the
offender got a prod with a spear. The men kept walk-
ing round so as to safeguard against any of the gins
becoming uncovered, or being in a position to proper-
ly see anything. The children, too, were all covered
up by the old blacks, blankets being used to accom-
plish this task. Perfect stillness reigned supreme.
Then a loud “Coo-ee” broke the stillness. Next I
heard a strange noise up the flat. I can only describe
it, or express it by the words: SMASH! SMASH!
SMASH! I soon discovered that it was caused by a
lot of men beating on their shields with their worn-
erahs. These men were smothered in pipeclay from
head to foot. The shields and womerahs were the
same. The hair of the blacks, I should explain, was
not pipe-clayed, though I have just used the stereo-
typed expression “from head to foot.” They pre-
sented a rather strange sight, as they came down the
flat, full trot, over logs, and over bushes, if not too
high. They followed their leader, and kept splendid
time. The procession looked like an immense snake
coming down the flat. On the lower portion of the flat


was a similar noise, and a similar string of blacks.
The two parties met at the fire. Then the two leaders
(Old Johnny Martin and Old Gohannah) made signs,
and ran round the ring of prostrate women three
times, but not all the same way, with the result that
they crossed, and went in and out. It is very hard to
properly describe the performance. The effect, how-
ever, was very pretty. Then, at a shout from one of
the leaders, they all took hold of hands and formed a
ring. Their arms were stretched out, and their feet
were placed in such a position that they almost touch-
ed, thus straining the ring as tight as they could. The
boy formed part of this ring, but his head was bowed
down on to his chest. The women were next uncov-
ered, and they came away to camp. The guards came
out of the ring, and the children were uncovered.
Next came a stranger item, I thought, at the time.
The mother of the boy threw off her blanket and went
up to him as he stood, forming part of the ring made
by the pipeclayed blacks. She put her hands on his
shoulders, and with the sole of one of her feet stroked
him down as far as she could reach. She then came
away crying. The boy’s aunt next did the same thing.
Was this a form of blessing? You must understand
that, from this out, the boy’s mother has nothing to
do with him. He will be a MAN!
Old Gohanah then went into the ring, with a shield
and womerah, and commenced beating on the shield
and singing, dancing round all the while. I asked
what the song was, but the only answer I could get
was “Blackfellow always like of that!”
After he had done, the men forming the ring began
to sway slightly to the right, then to the left, all sing-
ing out “OUGH!” at every sway, contracting the
circle all the time, until they were shoulder to shoul-
der. Then all of them rushed into the fire, holding
the boy in the middle, so that he did not touch the
fire. They jumped up and down a number of times,"
shouting “OUGH! OUGH!” at every jump, and then


drew the boy away. Four or five of them then went
away with him, being careful not to go near where the
women were. They were told that the spirit had
taken him away, as he had not done with him. The
remaining men rushed into the fire again. Then the
same over again, until it was stamped out. After this-
he (the boy) is never allowed to go about by himself
and can only eat certain foods. He generally has two
darkies always with him, and must not see or go near
a woman. This goes on for nearly six months. The
old men seem to have given up charge to the young
fellows.
I went up to the “Cabra Ground” one day, as I
wanted to see some of the blackfellows. There was
no one at the time about “the ring,” and as it looked
clean and inviting (with its carpet of gum leaves) I
ventured inside. I had been there some time, having
a smoke, when old Gohanah appeared on the scene.
He appeared to be both surprised and annoyed when
he saw me. His annoyance was caused by the negli-
gence of the other blacks in leaving the place un-
guarded. Shortly afterwards two blackfellows came
up, and they were severely reprimanded. The “fire ,r
was nearly out, and that fact in itself gave Gohanah
great trouble. My horse was feeding at the time near
the side exposed to the camp of the women, and old
Gohanah sent one of the men to remove it to the other
side, out of sight of the women. When I was leaving,
two men were told off to escort me clear away. They
did not exactly order me out of the ring, but one
blackfellow took my horse and led him down a gully,
and the other kept by my side. They would not per-
mit me to mount the horse until I was some distance
away from the important centre.
I was working up the Flat a day or two after, with
a blackfellow known as “Paddy.” We were cross-
cutting a log, and had got the saw about half through
it, when suddenly we heard the “bullroarer” going
at the Cabra Ground.” Paddy looked up quickly,.


and exclaimed, “Coco! Coco! John. You hear him?
Toeal Coore Bungi” (a lot of blacks come). I must
go.” And off he went. I did not see him for a couple
of days.
There was another ceremony that took place about
six months or so after the “Fire Place.” This, I
think, was the concluding act in the Man Making
Ceremony. I could never secure an explanation of it,
or make it out. It was called by the blacks “Mimie
Mimie ’Possum.” All the members of the tribe, and
some of their neighbours, would assemble, and I was
for a long time under the impression that it was a
kind of “setting up” the boys in life. Some gave
spears, some boomerangs, and so on. However, I
afterwards discovered that these articles were not
given to the boys, but to the old men who had charge
of them throughout the Man Making Ceremony.
Whether these articles w T ere regarded in the light of
the payment to the old men for their trouble I know
not. But from this time onward the boy who had
gone through the ordeal was considered a man and
could take unto himself a wife.
The last “Cabra Ground” held in the Manning dis-
trict was a very poor affair. There were only enough
blacks at it to make up one lot to bring the boys—so
that the prettiest and most interesting part of the
ceremony was conspicuous by its absence—that is,
when the two parties of blacks met. No mother went
to stroke her boy with her feet (which, I suppose, was
the custom adopted to give a blessing); and there was
no big fight at the finish, which I omitted to mention
as having taken place at similar ceremonies carried
out on an elaborate scale.
The blacks often gave white people names. For
instance, there was a sawyer here when we first came
to the Manning known as “Tullumbah.” I never
heard any other name for him. It was twisted by the
whites from “Towenbah.” Another sawyer, “Old
Breeket,” was called “Tinna Coyal.” Mr. Wilcox


was known as ‘‘ Coyenbah. ’’ Mr. Rowley, of Bungay,
rejoiced in the title of “Beutichuch.” Mr. Simpson
(Mr. Hugh Murray’s brother-in-law, who lived on the
Bo Bo) was named “Woolong Papo.” Mr. Buchanan,
who was a storekeeper at Bunga}', was called “Towe-
bah” (storeman). Mr. Robert Easton, who was very
bald, was known as “Cobra Bald.” There is a creek
on the Nowendoek named after him, he being employ-
ed there by the A.A. Coy. Daintrey’s bothered the
blacks, so they made it Teatree,”
I was talking to a young blackfellow on one occa-
sion, and he discoursed on what is known as the
“Milky Way.” The black’s belief was that it was a
big “Tonget” (diamond snake), but how it got into
the heavens they apparently could not explain. The
black’s idea of a change in the weather, after a thun-
derstorm, was not bad. “Bony” once said to me:
“You see that fellow thunder bin go beach; that fel-
low bin call him out; cloud bin come up (referring to
the “scud” coming up to meet the storm from the
South, as it often does).” They had a great idea of
the value of a letter, and on one occasion Mr. Dele-
more Wynter was awakened at night by an old black,
who wanted him to give him “pape news,” as he
termed it. Mr. Newton, who kept a store at Pelican
Island, once told me that on one occasion a blackfel-
iow came to his store, carrying a good sized cedar
board. He threw it down, and Mr. Newton asked
what it was. The aboriginal replied promptly “Paper
News.” When Mr. Newton examined the board he
discovered an order written on it with chalk, for tea,
sugar, and other rations, for some sawyers, who were
cutting cedar in the bush.
Another word about the “Cabra Ground.” I can-
not help thinking that this ceremony was originally
some sort of fire or sun worship. One point I have
particularly noticed. All the old rings had the path-
way to the west of the top ring, and the lower ring to
the west. Now, does this circumstance point to any-


thing connected with the setting of the sun? Every
evening at sunset, the blackfellows ran down from the
top (east) ring to the bottom (west) ring. Then the
fire at the top ring was never allowed to go out; and
again, the final stamping out of the fire, does not that
look like some old rite associated with the form of
Fire Worship? I was talking to Mr. H. Gordon, one
day (ex-proprietor of the Wingham “Chronicle”),
and he asked me whether I knew anything about the
blacks using or making round balls from a sort of
concrete, as some had been found by a person when
sinking postholes on the Dingo. Three or four of
them had been found, as also some blackfellows"
tomahawks. However, Mr. Gordon had given them
away. About this particular time Mr. Vernon brought
me some photographs from his brother John, in order
to ascertain whether I had heard of or seen anything
like them amongst the blacks here. These photo-
graphs depicted peculiar shaped stones, made of some
sort of concrete, and had curious marks scratched on
them. They were found in the graves of some of the
blacks out West, and were supposed to have some con-
nection with the Man Making Ceremony.
1902. —I desire to add to my reminiscences. I have
been reading a book written by Mrs. Gunn, entitled
“The Little Black Princess of the Never Never.”
Mrs. Gunn writes about the ways of the blacks in the
far north, about the Roper River, and I notice a great
deal that is identical with their customs here. How-
ever, I think the lady referred to made a mistake in
calling the “Man Making” a “Corroborie.” The cor-
roborie, as we always used the term (and I think it
was the same all over the colony) was merely a dance.
Nothing was taught by the Old Men at it. It was
simply a form of amusement. The “Cabra,” or
“Boora,” was quite another ceremony.
One custom Mrs. Gunn mentions I have never
heard of. That is, that when the blacks met any one


closely related to them, they had to shut their eyes,
and not look at them, or speak to them, or listen to
them. If they looked, “ Debbie Debbie will take away
eye.” If they spoke “he would take away tongue.”
If they listened, “he would take away ear.” I never
heard of this before reading Mrs. Gunn's book; but
all the rest contained in the volume corresponds, for
the most part, with the customs of the blacks on the
Manning in the early days; but a Manning black must
not talk with his mother-in-law.
BUNGAY.
Bungay Estate, the property of Mr. G. S. Hill, has
associated with it a history all its own—a history
that no doubt would, if one had the literary material
at hand to properly write it up, prove interesting in
the extreme. This property was originally known
as “Bungay Bungay,” and was taken up in the first
place by a syndicate, consisting of the following
gentlemen: Mr. Rowley (who was a West Indian
sugar planter), Dr. Douglas, Dr. Buchanan, and Mr.
New. Mr. Rowley had a cattle and sheep station in
the vicinity of No. 1, some 30 miles from Wingham.
Rowley’s River, in the locality, is named after the
gentleman in question. From this station sheep used
to be regularly sent to Bungay to be shorn.
During the course of an interview, Mr. G. S. Hill
said:—
There were a fair number of Government men
settled about the Manning in those days, and the
greater portion of the Bungay Estate was cleared by
assigned servants. The only lock-up on the river
then was situate at Bungay, as was also the first Post
Office.
After Mr. Rowley left Bungay, Mr. Vernon (father


The Punt Approach, from Wingham side of River.


r«OM> thhoum* i <
* (YwOMArt '
Oumxf Hood *“n»f not.
H9H ''


■of Mr. Vernon, late chairman of the Land Board)
lived there for a year or two; and it was to Mr. Ver-
non, at Bungay, that Ben Ford (so well-known all
over the river for his obliging nature and know-
ledge of all animal and vegetable life pertaining to
the bush) first came on his arrival from England.
Captain Creagh (father of the late Mr. J. A. Creagh,
Police Magistrate) also lived for a time in a cottage
at Bungay. After Mr. Vernon left, a Mr. Waugh kept
si private school there for a time. Mr. Waugh was
■connected by marriage with the Johnston family at
Wherrol Flat. The only school, in those days, as
other writers have already pointed out, was at the
Bight. Croaker, who lived at Belbourie, and my
father, got a lady named Mrs. Mackay, as a teacher.
She lived in a cottage at Bungay. Mrs. Mackay had a
daughter, who afterwards, on the Hunter River, mar-
ried a man named Doyle—and was the mother of Miss
Bessie Doyle, who took a very high rank as a violinist.
She is known as Madame Eileen O’Moore.
The school at the Bight was in charge of Mr. Board
(father of the present head of the Education Depart-
ment). The first public school at Wingham stood
where Mr. A. Tetsell is now living, and the first school
master was Mr. Mills. Some four or five years ago he
was keeping a small country store a few miles from
'Quirindi. Amongst the first boys I remember who
attended the school were:—John and Willy Wallace,
George and Henry Scriviner, J. Walker, J. Weekes,
and Dave Lewis.
We arrived at Bungay, after Mr. Waugh’s de-
parture, in 1859.
Mr. Croaker was a man of commanding presence,
and took a leading part in public matters, as also in
his church (Church of England). He removed from
Belbourne to Woodville, on the Paterson River, and
there took the same prominent position in public and
church matters as he previously did on the Manning.
He met his death through a buggy accident. His


youngest son, Henry, still lives at Woodville, and is
Vice-President of the Hunter River Agricultural As-
sociation.
Canon O’Reilly, of Port Macquarie, used to hold
service at Bungay, and after that at Belbourie.
In the early ’6o’s the question of sugar growing
largely exercised the minds of the farmers. Mills
were erected at Wyoming by the late Mr. Richardson
(father of Mr. Alderman J. B. Richardson, of Wing-
ham), at Woodside by the late Mr. Joseph Andrews;
and at Kimbriki by Messrs. Allan and Kent. How-
ever, the frosts eventually proved too severe for the
cane, and its cultivation was abandoned. Only a few
months ago I saw the last of the machinery of the Old
Wyoming mill—where it had lain, resting for up-
wards of fifty years. It was then being carted to the
Mount George Railway Station.
On the Lower Manning, cane was grown for some
years longer, and I believe that Mr. R. Malcolm was
the last man to grow cane on the Manning.
Mr. Andrews loomed large in public affairs in those
days, and used to foretell the time (or attempt to do
so) when a train would travel down to Barrington.
The train then, though now an accomplished fact,
was regarded as an ideal dream. I still have in my
possession the original requisition to Mr. Andrews
that lead to the public meeting at which the present
M.R. Agricultural Association was launched.
The traffic from Woodside used to go via Kimbriki
those days, on to the chief centre (Tinonee). Tinonee
was then the leading township. This was traceable
largely to the personality of Mr. H. Dean, an able
man, who owned the first paper published on the Man-
ning. Some years before the first Agricultural Soc-
iety at Taree was formed, a Show was held at Tin-
onee ; but the district was not ripe for the experiment
If I remember rightly, at the end of the day the visi-
tors (or at least some of them) ate the jams and every-


The late Miss Kelly.
A noted figure on the Manning in the early days.
(From a photo taken in 1863.)




thing else exhibited that really was eatable—includ-
ing the Swede turnips.
In a shipping way the great event on the Upper
Manning used to be the arrival of the “Esther ; and
I well remember Captain Roberts, with his red, pock-
marked face, in connection with those early times.
Another sailing vessel that ought to be mentioned,,
though she did not trade to Wingham, was “The
White Cloud,” in charge of Captain Gittens. The
“White Cloud” was a very smart vessel, with an able
commander, and made some very quick trips between
the Manning and Sydney.
Some five or six years ago, I was sitting beside an
elderly gentleman, on a seat in Sydney, and got into
conversation with him. He told me that his name
was Larnach, and that he was wrecked on the Man-
ning bar, in’the “Gipsy Queen.” This was before
my time, but perhaps some of your readers may re-
collect it.
No records of the early residents of the Upper
Manning would be complete without a reference to-
the celebrated Miss Kelly, and pages might be written
on the stories connected with her. Miss Kelly had a
number of horses and cattle, and lived part of her
time at Mount George, where her memory is still kept
green by the river crossing, which is known as “Miss
Kelly’s Crossing.” The other part she resided at
“Waterview,” Brimbin. It was at the latter place
that Miss Kelly, riding to Cundle one day, left a ser-
vant girl in charge of the house. On her return, the
girl was missing, and although the country round
was scoured for days by a large number of searchers,
not the slightest trace of her was ever discovered.
She disappeared for ever from mortal ken. There
were different theories as to her disappearance. How-
ever, I think myself that the possibilities are that
she was murdered by some straggling blackfellow,
and then thrown into one of the deep, black holes in
Brimbin Creek. Stories are told how Miss Kelly once


marched two convict servants before her to Port Mac-
quarie to be flogged. She had, in her time, many law-
suits, and was finally imprisoned for perjury. In a
short time afterwards it was discovered that she was
innocent of the charge. Miss Kelly was then released
from prison, and was also given one thousand pounds
as compensation. On receiving that sum of money
she went to England for the purpose—so she said—
'Of placing her diary in the hands of the late Charles
Dickens, so that he might write a novel with the.
material. I do not know that she did so; but Miss
Kelly returned toi Sydney some time later, and was
seen shortly before her death, living in extreme pov-
erty, by a relative of my own.
While the railway was in course of construction,
.a skeleton ivas dug up near Mount George, and none
■of the present residents of the neighbourhood had any
idea as to whose remains it was; but Mr. R. Herkes,
who is now about the oldest inhabitant of the Upper
Manning, sajs he has no doubt that those remains
were those of a groom who was in Miss Kelly’s em-
ploy. He was kicked in the stomach by a horse and
killed. Miss Kelly had a celebrated horse named
Calendar, and in my boyhood days a horse tracing
his descent from “Calendar” was always hiehlv
prized. J
THE BIGHT.
The following interesting article emanates from the
pen of Mrs. George Murray, widow of the late Mr.
George Murray, who passed away at “Pigeon Grove,”
Redbank, about three years or so ago, at the age of
72 years. Mrs. Murray is well on in years, and is a
hue stamp of the early day pioneers—kindly hearted
generous, and respected by all who know "her. The'
Murray family is a fairly large one, while the name


is represented in nearly all centres of the Manning,
Mrs. George Murray’s family comprises the follow-
ing:—Mrs. J. Northam, eldest daughter; Mr. J. W.
Murray, of Wingham; Mr, H. J, Murray, of Taree;.
Mrs. James Stitt, Killabakh; Mr. A. Murray, school-
teacher. Mittagong; Mr, D. Murray, Wingham; Mr,
Oliver Murray, school-teacher, Pampoolah; Mr. V,
Murray, “Pigeon Grove,” Pampoolah.
Here is what Mrs. Murray has to say about The
Bight and Wingham, as they were in the days when
she was young:—
Among the first settlers to purchase homes on the
Manning in 1852 were the late Mr. Alex Lobban, of
“Parkhaugh,” opposite Wingham, and the late Mr,
William McLeod, of “Dunvegan.” Mr. Lobban pur-
chased his property at auction; and Mr. McLeod, who-
was anxious to settle on the Manning—which was
then regarded as a “Land of Promise”—bought his
farm from the late Mr. Alexander Laurie. The two
pioneers, accompanied by their wives and families,
and flocks and herds (like the wandering Israelites
of old) started from their home at LeAvinsbrooks,
in the Hunter district, towards the end of May, 1852,
and arrived on the Manning on the sth June, The
first sight of the Manning was viewed at Tinonee,
on a drizzling wet winter day. The broad sheet of
water seemed to the juveniles, who had only seen
small streams before, like an ocean.
The party, tired from their long journey, were kind-
ly invited by the late Mr. William McLean, then living
at Mondrook, to make his home their resting place
until they could fix things up a bit for themselves. On
the next day the men folk of both families went to cut
a track over the Mountain Brush to allow the drays
and cattle to pass. Those who knew that brush in its
natural state can realise what such an undertaking
meant. A road led through the forest from Tinonee
to the hill. Kind Mr. McLean piloted Mr. Lobban’s
family to their new home at The Bight. No one of the


present generation can have any idea of how The
Bight looked then. It was bush and brush on every
side, and a feeling of loneliness appeared to exist
everywhere. At night the weird calls of unknown
birds, and the cries of native bush animals, almost
made the youngsters’ hair stand on end.
At that time there was only one bark hut in Tino-
nee, and that was the home of the Rev. Mr. Carter, a
truly good man, who had been sent to the Manning
by Dr. Lang. Three of the Wynter family lived at
Tilkah, near Tinonee. The next settlement was Dun-
vegan ; then Mondrook; then Parkhaugh.
There was then not a house at all in Wingham—
only the part of a frame of one, built on wheels, near
where the Court House now stands. Beside it was a
little grave, with rosebushes growing on it.
Bungay was the next place of settlement. It was
the centre of civilisation in those long-gone days.
There religious services were conducted every three
months, in a little slab room, by the Revs. O’Reilly
and Carter. The Post Office was there also, and the
mail came once a month. Rather a contrast to the
present day service. Opposite to Bungay, across the
river, was the property of the late Mr. Searle. Each
homestead stood by itself, miles from any other. The
early settlers, however, were most agreeable and kind-
hearted neighbours, always ready to assist each other.
When one killed a beast for meat, for home use, it was
customary to send a huge roast to the surrounding
neighbours.
This practice was general, and was continued until
closer settlement extinguished it, as it did other
thoughtful customs.
The native blacks at this time roamed about in hun-
dreds, and used to spear some of the cattle. They did
not often molest the whites, but still were a source of
danger. The narrator has seen 300 or more of them
camped on the flat near the brush, close to Parkhaugh,
and they made night hideous with their yells. Surely


a kind Providence watched over the early colonists!
One Sabbath a number of the young people were
walking out to the church at Bungay. One of the
gentlemen wore a “bell-topper.” About a mile along
the road from Wingham was a very large camp of
blacks; when they saw the gentleman wearing the
fashionable hat they made a rush for the bush—all
but one old gin and a little piccaninny. Talk about
yelling! Those two did yell and gesticulate. Whe-
ther it was because of us, or because the others ran
away, we could not find out; but on our return from
church the camp was deserted.
As time went on, things began to improve. Mr.
Surveyor Carmichael, along with Messrs. T. and J.
Hall, was sent to survey The Bight farms, and an
auction sale was held. I think the south side of the
river was sold at Dungog, but the sales were after-
wards held at Port Macquarie. The late Mr. Alex.
Lobban and the late Mr. Joseph Andrews did much
to assist in opening up the Manning district. Both
kept open houses, their hospitality was a household
word, and they were warm friends. They were always
willing to show strangers over the district.
There was only one small ketch at that time trading
to the Manning, she being known as “The Emma.”
and was in charge of Capt. Mclntyre. The farms at
The Bight, and some on the Dingo Creek were sold
about the end of ’53 or ’54, and large numbers of
settlers came from the Hunter, the Allyn, and the
Williams Rivers. The very best class of’ settlers
mostly Scotch, and Highlanders at that, secured hold-
ings in The Bight—the Camerons, or “Loehaber,” as
Mr. Cameron was called, MeDermids, Macdonalds,
Stewarts, Sommervilles, Boards, and other worthy
ones. Mr. Peter Board, Under Secretary for Educa-
tion, was born at The Bight. His mother was Mar-
garet Cameron, sister of the late Mr. Arch Cameron,
of Inverell. His grandmother and Uncle Peter lived
at Sunnyside, and dear, good people they were.


When the land was ready for sale, the late Captain'
Creagh was appointed Clerk of Petty Sessions. He
and the Rev. Allan Mclntyre both lodged at Mr. Lob-
ban’s residence. The genial Captain used to travel
between Parkhaugh and Bungay daily till the Court-
house was built at Winghara. He was a thorough
gentleman and a very kind friend. The friendship
betAveen the Lobban and Creagh families never at any
time waned; and in a later generation two sons of Mr.
District Inspector A. Lobban married two of the
daughters of the late Mr. J, A. Creagh, P.M.
Mr. Tom Smith was the first blacksmith in Wing-
ham ; Mr. Stace was the first publican; and Mr. Higgs,
Mr. Green, and Mr. John Cameron ranked amongst
the first storekeepers.
How different was the scene about four years i p ter
the settlers got to Avork! The Avoodman’s axe had
then laid low giant trees that had previously adorned
the alluvial flats; mighty fig trees, with spurs nearly
as high as the house, Avere cut doAvn; fire lent its aid
in the clearing operations; and comfortable homes
sprang up on every side. No matter what people noAV
may think, those Avere indeed happy times, notwith-
standing the hard fights to get supplies from Sydney,
and produce to market; and often settlers lost their
hard-earned crops on the bar. All water carriage was
by little sailing vessels—no steamers or steam tugs.
In those days all the young people married, and
generally early. They did not wait till they were as
well off as their parents before accepting matrimonial
responsibilities. They all “married for love, and
worked for siller.” Cedar was plentiful in the
brushes, and many men Avere engaged in cutting it.
They used to haul the logs to the river’s bank, and
float them down on rafts. It Avas a dangerous occu-
pation.
Mr. Miller was the first school teacher, and the
school building was situated half-way between Wing-
ham and Belbourie. The surroundings of Wingham


were then clear of undergrowth, and one could see for
miles. The view of the country in its primitive con-
dition was a very pretty one. The Manning district
has made splendid advancement since ’52. Who would
then have thought to see such a flourishing town as
Wingham grow so soon? The people regarded it as
a great step forward when a punt was placed at the
crossing. Wingham now has its banking institutions,
post office, churches, superior public school, up-to-date
railway service, and a live newspaper to watch the
interests of the town and district. Long may the tide
of prosperity continue to flow.
AN OLD LETTER.
We have had the privilege of perusing a letter
written on the Ist June, 1881, and which makes most
interesting reading, writes the Ulmarra correspond-
ent of the “Clarence and Richmond Examiner.” The
letter was written from Raymond Terrace (Hunter
River) by Mr, S. Osborne, father of Mr. S. A, Os-
borne, of the Tucabia Public School, to his sister in
England. The letter in question was recently for-
warded from the Old Country by Mr. Osborne, Tuca-
bia, by whom it is naturally much treasured.
The communication goes to show the immense diffi-
culties the early settlers on the coast had to contend
with, especially in the matter of transit. The method
of transit, and time taken, as described in the letter,
is in marked contrast to the present transit facilities
between Taree and the Hunter. After a brief intro-
ductory sentence or two, the writer goes on to des-
cribe the journey of 150 miles between Raymond Ter-
race and the Manning. He says;—
“I started on the 9th April, 1844, with a dray and
two pairs of bullocks, my companion being a man
and his wife and two children; we were ten
days on our journey. The first night we had
to sleep in the bush; the second at a place called


The Boorell; the third at Tiligary; fourth at Haven
Creek; the fifth at a place called Talagarra; sixth,
seventh, and eighth in the bush; ninth at Bundy Creek
and tenth in the bush.
‘‘ On the eleventh day we reached our station. Dur-
ing the journey I saw no more than 100 acres of cul-
tivation land. The most of the land was utilised as
cattle and sheep stations, and most of them were
owned by the ‘Australian Coy.’ On the last 50 miles
of the journey there was no road—merely a number
of marked trees. So we were obliged to get a black
to show us the way over the 50 miles, some of which
was so bad that we had to cut trees down, and tie
them behind the cart, and also tie the wheels, whilst
going down some of the awful hills. On the way I
saw a tombstone, and on it were the words: ‘Here lies
the body of J. Henderson, who was killed by the
blacks, May 31st, 1833,’
“When we reached our destination, we found there
was no house to live in. We set to work and made
two houses in a day. I will leave you to guess what
kind of buildings they were. We next began to clear
the land. I worked on for five weeks with nothing to
eat but bread. Later I set out for the Hunter, about
150 miles away. At only one place on the road was I
able to buy anything. I walked 25 miles, and did not
see a human being or a house. I covered 50 miles of
the journey without having any road and without a
shoe to my feet. On one occasion I had to secure
a black to show me the track, and for going with me
about two miles I had to give him the shirt off my
back. However, at last I arrived on the Hunter.
“I might tell you the price of some things here;
Flour is Is per cwt., potatoes Is 6d per cwt., corn lOd
a bushel, meat (beef or mutton) y 2 d to %d per lb.
‘ ‘ The nearest place of worship is 80 miles away, or
if anyone wishes to be married they would have to
travel that distance, and also carry their provisions,
and pots to cook anything in as well.”


THE DINGO CREEK.
The following lines were written by the Rev. Anson
Smith, in the year 1888, he then being Presbyterian
clergyman at Wingham. The copy of verses has been
kindly supplied by Mr. Henry Turner:—
Oh! bright is the beam of the morning star,
And dear is the moon’s silv’ry streak;
But brighter and clearer than aught from afar
Are the waters of Dingo Creek.
They came from the mountains, so rugged and steep,
Away on the hills, cold and bleak;
The cockatoos scream, and the wallabies leap
O’er the waters of Dingo Creek.
Across rocky scours and deep gullies down,
’Neath boulders and moss-stones they seek,
They sweep round the curves, where precipice frown,
On the waters of Dingo Creek.
Now rushing, now roaring, in turbulent foam;
Now gliding so gently and meek;
Now shallow, now deep, still onward they roam,
The pure waters of Dingo Creek.
Bright is their sheen, as past Bobin they go,
Through Marlee they wanton and freak,
By Ashlea, Bowhill, and Belbourie they flow
The clear waters of Dingo Creek.
Green, green are the banks, and shady the bowers,
Where lovers in fond whispers speak;
The peach and the fig, and the lemon tree flowers,
By the waters of Dingo Creek.
Oft let me muse by the clear, limpid stream,
Like Plato, the old learned Greek;
Disturb not my thought, disturb not my dream,
As I sit by the Dingo Creek.
And when I have passed from this mortal scene,
This spot for my rest would I seek;
Oh! lay me low, ’neath the willows so green
Of the beautiful Dingo Creek.


THE CONTRIBUTION OF MR. W. W. BIRD,
KILLAWARRA.
You are an old identity of the Manning, I under-
stand, Mr, Bird?
Yes, I have been here a long time, he replied. I
was born in Barnstaple, Devonshire, England, in the
year 1848; was baptised in the Exeter Cathedral, and
came out to New South Wales in 1851, with my par-
ents and two brothers. We all came out in a sailing
ship called the Julinda, and the voyage occupied three
months. My father was a blacksmith by trade, and
the first person he worked with on his arrival was a
Mr. Portus, of Morpeth, on the Hunter. We lived one
year at Maitland, and then about six years at Wood-
ville, Dunmore, My father carried on his trade as a
blacksmith. There being no means of crossing the
river, he purchased a punt from Mr. Sandy Graham,
of Hinton, and worked her across the river at Wood-
ville, for the convenience of the general public. He,
of course, levied the usual tariff. Many an old
pioneer of the Hunter, Paterson, and Williams Rivers
(and now living on the Manning and Hastings Rivers)
were well acquainted with my father when he was
in business.
I arrived on the Manning from the Hunter, per
bullock dray, 55 years ago. The party consisted of
my brothers, myself, and two others. We left Dun-
more one bright morning for the Manning, and our
cargo consisted of farming implements and provi-
sions. We crossed the Wallarobba Mountain, which
is now pierced by a railway tunnel, through which
daily thunders the iron horse from Taree and Wing-
ham, thus providing rapid transit between the Man-
ning and all important centres of the State. We
passed through Dungog, which then only had a few
houses. The Karuah River was crossed at the Wash-


pool, near where the railway line now crosses it.
Thened we wended our way through Gloucester,
which boasted of two houses. We then had to leave
what was called “a road,” and branch off for the
Manning. There was practically no road—only a
bridle track.
Two of the party had to go ahead with axes, and
cut trees and logs out of the way of the team. We
climbed up, by a leading spur, on to the top of Tug-
gerabark Mountain. The Manning side was very
steep—so much so that we were compelied to fell a
fairly large tree and to chain it to the axle of the
dray. This was done to ease the dray down, as the
bullocks were powerless to “pole” the dray in its
descent, the grade being so steep.
We made our way through the bush to Larry’s
Flat, now known as Krambach. The blady grass was
three feet high at the time all over the Flat. A day
was spent at Larry’s Flat, for the purpose of resting.
Tinonee was the next place towards which we direct-
ed our footsteps—or, as it was then called, “The Old
Wharf.” Tinonee was then the metropolis of the
Manning. A road had next to be made over the
Brushy Mountain, to the Bight, which was to be our
destination. We were going to a brush farm that my
father had purchased at auction in Maitland, without
having seen it, or knowing what it was like. I thus
came to the Manning as company for my elder
brother, and to also assist him to civilise the farm.
Though only a lad of tender years, I had to turn to
and do my share of the pioneering. We had to bake
our own bread and butcher our own beef —that is to
say, when we could get a beast to butcher. The
journey from Dunmore, on the Hunter, took three
weeks to accomplish. At this time there was only a
once-a-week mail to the Manning. The mail was car-
ried on hoseback, right through to Port Macquarie,
which was then a penal settlement.
The late Mr. Robert Breese’s father used to be mail-


man; and later, Mr. Robert Bryant, who is still in the
flesh, and a resident of Wingham, There were no
roads in the district then, and no punts plying across
the Manning. Many a time I have swam the river on
horseback (opposite Mr. D. Lobban’s residence, which
is commonly known as “The Falls”) in order to get
our mail.
The first Member for the Manning electorate was
a Mr. Broughton; then the late Mr. Henry Flett
(father of Mr. Henry Flett, of Taree). Next came a
smart Yankee, by the name of Dr. Dean, who was a
storekeeper at Tinonee. He served a term in Parlia-
ment, and on the second occasion that he sought the
suffrages of the electors he was opposed by Mr. R. B.
Smith, who, though defeated, later unseated Dr. Dean.
The Yankee, apparently, was not smart enough to
know that he could not hold an office of profit under’
the Crown, and occupy a seat in Parliament at the
same time, Mr. R. B. Smith found out that the Doc-
tor drew a small salary for presiding over the des-
tinies of the Post Office at Tinonee, and on the
strength of that he succeeded in unseating him, as
stated above.
The doctors on the river in the early days were:—
Dr, Stephenson and Dr. Benjamin, who practised on
the Lower Manning. Mr. William Allan, then of Kim-
briki, who had an excellent medical training, attend-
ed well to the sick of the Upper Manning—and did
it gratis. Many a Manning River family can testify
to-day to the value of Mr. Allan’s advice to them in
days gone by, for he saved them many a doctor’s bill
—and what was still of much greater importance, he
saved the lives of many. To show their practical ap-
preciation of his services, the people on several occa-
sions presented Mr. Allan with a handsome purse of
sovereigns. I can remember Mr. Allan on one occa-
sion crossing the river at Killawarra, his mission
being to see a sick person on the other side. The river
was quite low when he went over early in the even-


ing, but on returning on his homeward journey, a few
hours later, there was a good body of water coming
down. It then being dark, and there having been no
rain, Mr. Allan rode straight into the ford. Before
he had time to fully realise the state of the stream,
his horse was swimming. Only that the animal was a
good swimmer, and Mr. Allan stuck to him, he would
no doubt have been drowned. The horse struggled
out with him on the Killawarra side. The secret of
the river rising so rapidly and unexpectedly was that
the snow had melted at the head of the stream, as it
often does now in the spring time.
The first Circuit Court held in the Manning district
was conducted at Bungay Bungay, and was presided
over by Judge Francis. Bungay, as it is now called,
was then owned by Mr. Rowley (before the late Mr.
Hill purchased it). The late Mr. Hill was the father
of the present respected owner (Mr. G. S. Hill).
Divine service was held in a private house at Bel-
bourie (the residence of Mr. Croker). The officiating
clergyman was the Rev. Mr. O’Reilly, C.E.
There were no public buildings in the district at
that time. The residents would erect a rough slab
building, at their own expense, and then select from
among themselves a suitable person to teach the child-
ren. Then the Government would grant such teacher
a small salary. There was no Education Department,
as far as lam aware, then. The old school building
on Mr. Pollock’s property at the Bight was for years
a standing monument to the old days on the Manning.
Within its four walls I received a part of my educa-
tion, under the tuition of Miss Bella Lobban, Mr. John
Mclntosh, Mr. W. W. Board (father of the present
Under-Secretary of the N.S.W. Education Depart-
ment), and Mr. John Cameron, of North Shore, Syd-
ney.
There were no punts or bridges spanning the river
or creeks. If you were travelling you would be com-
pelled to swim your horse over behind a boat or cross


at the various fords. The first punt which did duty
on the Manning was installed at Tinonee, somewhere
m the ’6o’s. The first sea-going steamer that ran to
the river was the “Mollouse,” but she could only
negotiate the Manning as far as Taree, as the river
above Taree was in places very shallow. All produce
had to be taken to Taree by drogher. Mr, Henry
Baker, senr., of Taree, was Captain of one of the
dioghers that used to take our produce down and
bring goods back. The residents of the district agi-
tated for years to get a dredge, to clear out the shoals
in the river. At last the agitations of the people were
successful, for a sum of twenty-six thousand pounds
was put on the Estimates, with which to build a
dredge for the Manning. In the course of time a first-
class dredge, known as the “Ulysses,” was built. She
in due course, dredged a channel from Taree to Wino--’
ham—the said channel being ninety feet wide, anri
nine feet deep at low tide. Any vessel that could
then cross the bar could come right up to Wingham.
k e^ev . e y o ’- 1 ran k amongst the oldest pioneers on
the Manning, Mr. Bird? remarked writer, by wav of
paving the way for further information.
nr S ’ re P^ “I claim to have pioneered the
Manning district longer than any other man.”
There are many others who have rendered yeoman
service in making the district what it is to-day, but I
came here when quite a lad, 55 years ago, then being
only 10 years of age.
My brother built a slab and bark house to live in
We then began to clear the brush awav, and until
that task had been accomplished we could not see any
oistance, unless it was by looking skyward. We had
to do our own cooking, mending, and so forth, and
did not see anyone else for a month at a time. When
provisions were required, we had to walk to Wind-
ham, and crossed the river in a flat-bottomed boat or
punt the property of Mr. Pollock. Water carriage
was depended on for all provisions. I have known


Approach to Punt from “The Bight” side of the River,


Isabella St., Wingham, leading to Wharf, shewing Wingham Brush on each side,


three months to elapse before a vessel arrived from
Sydney.
Yes, provisions would then run short, and there was
not a bag of flour on the river at times. Flour was
30s per 1001 b. Sugar was not obtainable, and people
had to live on hominy in place of bread. It was noth-
ing strange to see a farmer walking off to his neigh-
bour’s steel mill with a bushel of corn on his back, to
get his hominy ground for the family. There being
no sugar to eat with it, honey had to be brought into
requisition as a substitute. The securing of honey
meant going out into the bush, and finding a bees’
nest, falling the tree, and removing the honey. There
was plenty of honey in the bush those days, and the
bees were quite healthy. I have found three English
bees’ nests in one tree.
I remember on one occasion the Rev. W. C. Haw-
kins (C.E.) going out to the Wallamba to baptise some
children. The good mother had carefully put away
a small parcel of tea and sugar, expressly for the
•clergyman, both being scarce commodities. The
children, however, found the plant, and ate the lot.
The visiting clergyman, when he did arrive from the
Manning, was naturally somewhat in neecf of refresh-
ment, and the hostess of the house had to find some
way of catering for his requirements. She hied away
to the barn and got a cob of corn, put it in the fire,
and when roasted, grated the charred tops off the
grain, and put it in the tea-pot. Thus a cup of tea
was made—or at least a substitute for it; this was
sweetened with honey, and (with a plate of hominy)
the tired clergyman was refreshed. In fact, he said
he enjoyed the repast. The same cleric has often
roughed it on the Manning, He used to pull a boat
from the town of Taree to Harrington, in order to
conduct service; and also used to ride from Taree to
the head of the Manning for the same purpose—at-
tending to the whole district himself.
I assisted to clear four farms. The brush was felled


and then a ‘‘running fire” was put in the felled tim-
ber; then the corn and pumpkin seeds were planted
between the logs. When ripe, I have crawled over
the logs, pulled the corn, and carried it in bags to a
slide. The only thing I can compare a “slide” to is
a dray without wheels, and it was drawn by two or
four bullocks to the barn—or straddle, as they were
called in those days. A “straddle” was built of
rough poles, often with the bark left on them. Some-
times it was 20 x 20 feet, or say, 30 feet by 15 feet,
covered with bark. The floor was made of small
poles about the size of clothes-line props. The corn
was then husked, and when the farmer intended to
market it, he would place some sheets of bark under
the straddle, which was built for the purpose—the
floor being built two or three feet above the ground.
The farmer would get into the straddle with a flail,
i.e., two pieces of wood joined together with a piece
of greenhide, forming a swivel. He could then thresh
away until he had enough for shipping, the grains
dropping right through the openings in the floor dur-
ing the threshing process. It would next be cleaned
through the medium of a hand sieve. When ready
for the market, a team would be secured to convey it
to the wharf, or the shipping place. That was the
gravel bed at the foot of Farquhar-street; it was con-
veyed from here by drogher to the sea-going vessel;
but, when sold, it would often only realise 15 pence
per bushel.
The first Agricultural and Horticultural Show to
take place on the Manning, was held at Tinonee, and
it was a very fair show. The largest pig I ever saw
was exhibited at that Show, by the late Mr. Francis
Longworth, of Ghinni Ghinni Creek, on the Lower
Manning. It was over six cwt. (that was the live
weight). It was a cross with a Berkshire and a Pol-
and China.
The first Highland gathering was held at Tinonee,


and was promoted by the late Jock Murray, “Bonny
Face,” Tinonee.
The first newspaper printed in the Manning dis-
trict was issued in the 50’s, and was edited by Dr.
Dean, a Yankee. It was known as “The Manning
River News,” and was a very creditable paper.
The first flour mill was opened at Tinonee, in the
50’s, and was conducted by Mr. Morgan Poole.
I supplied the plank for the tug, “John Gollan,’ r
built by Captain Gollan at Tinonee. It was the best
flooded gum plank procurable. The ketch, “Maggie
Gollan,” which subsequently traded to the Manning
for years, was also built at Tinonee.
Constable Collins was stationed at Tinonee in the
early days, and Constable Creed was the first police-
man stationed at Wingham. He was succeeded by
Constable (now Sergeant) Coady, who had charge of
Wingham for a long time.
It was in the 50’s that I saw George Ray first. He
was then a shopman at Mr. Walter Renwick’s store,,
built just about where the old Shamrock Hotel build-i
ing now stands. He was a fine stamp of a young man
then, and a good specimen of the Celtic race.
Over 30 years ago the people of the Manning form-
ed a Railway League, to agitate for a line to be con-
structed to this district, and through the North Coast.
I was appointed one of the delegates at Wingham to
visit the other branches, and travelled up and down
the river, from Kimbriki to Cundletown, for years,
assisting in the agitation for a railway. Some people
those days would shake their heads, and remark,
“You will never get a railway here.” Others would
say, “You will be sorry when you get it—if you ever
do. Freight and passenger fares will be double thS
amount you pay by water.” However, the band of
railway agitators fought on for years, and success
has now been achieved. The Government of the day
said at first that it would take five million pounds to
construct a line from Maitland to the Tweed River.


A trial survey was at last granted, and Mr. Surveyor
Lloyd was sent along. He found that a good grade
could be got through the North Coast, but the whole
matter was held up for a while. The old Leagues
were in due course resuscitated, delegates were sent
to Sydney, and an interview was secured with the
Minister controlling such matters. The outcome was
that Mr. Surveyor Kennedy was sent along. He made
a permanent survey, securing a grade of 1 in 60.
There was then no money available, and the work was
again hung up. Thanks to the Liberal Government,
under the leadership of Mr. Wade, Mr. Surveyor
-Jamieson was later sent up. He not only improved
the route, but he secured a grade of 1 in 80, and saved
a power of money in construction work—in one in-
stance avoiding a tunnel on Mr. Kennedy’s proposed
route which would at least have cost three thousand
pounds. Mr. Lee was then Minister for Works,
The following gentlemen were foremost in the agi-
tation for the North Coast Railway thirty years ago:
Mr. Hugh McMaster, J.P. (Wingham), Mr. A. P. Gil-
Jogly (Marlee), the late Mr. Joseph Andrews, Mr.
Adam Herkes, Mr. C. Boyce, J.P., Mr. John Belford,
the late Mr. W. Wynter, Mr. J. J. Martin, the late Mr.
Angus Kennedy, Mr. J, Allan, Mr. Saxby, Mr. R. B.
Smith, Mr. G. S. Hill, Mr. W. Fotheringham, and my-
self. The late Mr. J, J. Herkes was secretary to the
movement, and after his demise ex-Sergt. Lagerlaw
was appointed secretary. To the old pioneers of the
railway connection movement is traceable the running
of the trains to Wingham and Taree to-day, and they
worked loyally and unassumingly for years to benefit
the district in which their lot was cast.
Mr. Rye, now of Gloucester, was another of the
railway pioneers.
In the 70’s and 80’s, before Local Government or
Municipal Council were dreamed of, we had well-man-
aged Progress Committees formed in different parts
of the Manning district, and through their medium


were made known our wants to the powers “that
were,” It was said that we had no status; but des-
pite that circumstance, we got our public wants at-
tended to as well then as we do now. If memory
serves me correctly, it was in the seventies that the
Government granted a sum of money to open a dray
road from Wingham to Nowendoc—a distance of 57
miles. The road was then under the control of trus-
tees, who never received anything for their services,
and gave their labor free. Tenders were called for
six contracts, and a date was appointed when the
trustees would point out to the intending contractors
the work recpnred to be done.
On the date appointed, 19 intending contractors
turned up, and also two trustees to point out the work
which was to be done, making *2l of a party. The
trustees were: The late Mr. Joseph Andrews, Wood-
side, and the late Mr. Thomas Broomfield, Bow Hill.
We camped at Kangaroo Flat the first night, and the
following night at Ward’s Creek, half way up Hungry
Hill. It being dark when we got there, no oppor-
tunity was afforded for cutting any poles to pitch our
tents. However, the night was fine, and we camped
in the open, making a long fire, along a big log. Thus,
with nothing but our clothes to cover us, we slumber-
ed under the broad and brilliant canopy of Heaven—
in the month of May. Having risen to an altitude of
500 feet above Wingham there was a sharp frost in
the night, and in the morning the frost lay thick and
heavy on our beards—more especially on those of the
aged trustees, who were both in their 60’s. The third
night we camped at the Tiri.
The weather changed and it rained through the
night. The trustees had camped in the one tent, and
in the morning the rather unpleasant discovery was
made that they had been lying in a pool of water
the tent having been pitched over a slight depression.
Compare these trustees of old with the feather-bed
engineers of to-day. The former had to travel on


horse-back, and carry their equipment on pack-
horses; camp out for three consecutive nights; live
on beef and damper, and got nothing for their trouble
—unless it was rheumatism. Compare these men, I
repeat, with the Shire Engineers of to-day. They
draw, with their salaries and travelling expenses, over
£4OO per year; then they must have an assistant, who
does nearly all the field work. Also an assistant clerk.
Then they must be supplied with a motor bicycle, so
as they can get over the road quick, to enable them
to get home at 5 o’clock. If not, overtime must be
paid. Then a month’s holiday, on full pay, is another
present-day advantage.
The greatest drawback to the Nowendoe Road is
the number of crossings—there being no less than ten
between Wingham and Nowendoe, and two of these
are very dangerous. Life has been sacrificed in at-
tempting to cross them. They are the Rocks Crossing
and the Nowendoe.
Over 30 years ago the writer constructed a rocky
deviation, of two miles in length, which made it pos-
sible to avoid two of the most dangerous crossings—
Caffery’s Flat and the 26 Mile. In accomplishing this
task, it might be stated that rocky bluffs had to be
cut through, and one portion in particular is the
heaviest rock-cutting in the district—the railway in-
cluded.
A few years ago, through application made by the
Progress Committee, a grader was sent up to" this
road, and a deviation was graded higher up the river
from the Rocks Crossing to No. 1. The grade was fit
for a railway, and avoided five crossings of the river.
With the advent of wet seasons, this deviation must
be made.


AN EXCITING INCIDENT.
With reference to the spear-throwing episode wit-
nessed by Mr. Allan on Stoney Creek, the following
incident (taken from the long since defunct “Illus-
trated Sydney News, ”in the 60’s) is of a somewhat
.similar character:—
This day we were witnesses to one of the most ex-
traordinary methods of punishing culprits that has
perhaps ever been heard of in Her Majesty’s do-
minions. We camped last night, without being aware
of it, however, within a few hundred yards of a
blacks’ camp. This morning we woke at daylight,
and had hardly ceased to rub our eyes, when the
stockman, who was standing up, warned us to be
silent, and after we became more accustomed to the
light, we could distinctly see the faces of a number of
blacks on the opposite side of the creek to that on
which we stood. This was anything but welcome, as
some terrifying accounts of the bloodthirsty nature
of the Dawson aboriginals had been dinned in our ears
oontinually, prior to leaving Queensland. We hastily
prepared our rifles and pistols, and, without any great
relish for it, managed to swallow some bread and beef,
and drink a pannikin of scalding tea. Our stockman
-desired to reconnoitre the camp before we left, and,
seizing his rifle, he walked cautiously towards the
bank of the creek. It was his intention to get near
the camp, if possible, without being seen, and bring
us word whether there were any friendly natives with
the rest. My wish was to get away at once—the fur-
ther the better—from such unfriendly neighbours;
but I was overruled by some of the younger members
of the party, who were all for adventure. We waited
patiently for upwards of half-an-hour, and then, find-
ing that Jim Woods (the stockman) did not return
we suspected something was up, and, gathering to-
gether our firearms, three of us (the party consisted


of five) followed on liis trail, leaving one well-armed
old Irishman with the provisions and the horses.
We had not proceeded above two hundred yards
when we met Woods returning. He stated that he
could not cross the creek, as some 20 gins were bath-
ing and paddling about with their piccaninnies in the
water; but he had seen two or three blackfellows
whom he knew; and he thought there was something
up, as there was a prisoner in the camp. Thereupon
we held a conference as to whether we should leave
the place altogether, go over to the camp, and see
what the darkies were doing; or return, gather up
our horses, and ride over. The last seemed the most
feasible plan, and it was ultimately agreed upon. We
therefore all returned as hastily as we might, and
found our Irish guardsman fast asleep. We were not
long saddling up our horses, and as soon as this was
accomplished, we set forth. We took a long circuit
through the bush in order to avoid being seen. We
crossed the creek half-a-mile below the spot where the
blacks were now making an infernal clatter. A quar-
ter of an hour had not elapsed from the moment of our
setting forth on horseback till the moment we hove in
sight of the blacks ’ camp.
Our arrival did not interrupt some six or seven who
were busy putting a number of small pegs into the
ground in a cleared space, about forty yards square,
and who, we were informed, were previously in the
native police of Queensland. After inquiries, we dis-
covered that the natives were about to execute a man
—a blackfellow named Georgie Sands. The crime he
had been guilty of we could not discover, although we
inquired. A number of pegs had been driven into the
ground, each about ten yards apart, in the form of a
semi-circle at least forty yards round. Inside, and
midway between the two horns, as it were, of the half-
circle, there were two or three other pegs, and close
alongside of these were all the tools and implements
of the black warrior—waddies, boomerangs, heela-


mans, spears, etc., in great variety and number. About
twenty-five yards from, and in front of this, there was
a single peg and a large heap of warlike implements
about it also.
All the blacks of the camp now assembled, and
stood round the pegs forming the half-circle. We rode
inside this circle without any objection being offered
on the part of the natives.
Georgie Sands, the prisoner, was now led out from a
gunyah close by, and placed at the single peg by him-
self. His hands had been bound, but were now un-
loosed, and as he stretched them over his head he ex-
hibited to us one of the most muscularly'developed
blackfellows I had ever seen. He was slight,, but tall
and lithe, and as active looking as a greyhound. He
seemed to be perfectly aware what was about to hap-
pen, but one of the first things he did when he was
freed was to take up a heelaman in his left hand, leav-
ing all the other tools on his right. It w r as perfectly
impossible for him to escape, for the two horns of the
circle were composed of active young men, all well
armed, and if he made a bolt at all, it would have to
be out on the open plain, where his pursuers could
easily run him down. The lubras, who, as well as the
rest, had become reconciled to our presence, now com-
menced a tum-tumming kind of music on their ’pos-
sum cloaks, while others beat two yam sticks together.
This seemed to be the signal for five stalwart men,
painted in various colors with the clay from the creek
banks, to issue from a gunyah hitherto unopened.
They all went systematically to work, and so much
system in their various movements may not accord
with the ideas entertained by some people of black-
fellows’vagabondising habits; but they must be
pleased to recollect that these were “uncivilised bar-
barians,” and therefore not such complete vagabonds
as they invariably become when civilised. They were
all well armed, and placed themselves at the pegs
mentioned, above and immediately in front of the


prisoner. He did not move, but kept bis eyes fixed on
his enemies, and balanced the heelaman in his hands.
The heelaman, or valaman, is a piece of solid wood,
varying in length, but generally about two feet long,
and is used as a sort of shield for turning aside the
spears or boomerangs. There is a hole in the back of
it, through which the fingers, up to the last joint, are
supposed to be while holding.
At a signal from an old greybeard, the five blacks
who had the execution to go through with, hurled
their spears at Georgie. The game had now com-
menced, Generally speaking, the culprits have not
the pluck to resist, but, kneeling, aAvait the first volley
of the spears, which invariably kills them. Not so,
however, with Georgie; our presence cheered him, for
he fought bravely. Sometimes when a spear was com-
ing straight for his head, he would spring right on it,
and at other moments he would beat down the spears,
or bend aside, to avoid them, but never stoop to let
them pass over. Spear followed spear, and they
whistled through the air in rapid succession, and
sometimes two or three of them together.
I never witnessed in all my life anything to equal
the agility of that blackfellow. Still the spears
whistled through the air, and still he bounded and
bent to avoid them. At last, as he stooped and turned
aside the point of a spear, he picked up a boomerang,
and hurled it at his adversaries. It flew from his
hand, close to the ground, for at least twenty yards,
and then gradually rose, and struck one of the five
blacks in the side. The unfortunate wretch sprang
up fully six feet from the earth, and fell back a corpse.
His heart had been literally cut in two halves by the
destructive weapon. Georgie, seeing his advantage,
continued to throw with such surprising rapidity that
his enemies had now so much to do looking after them-
selves that they never again had the chance of becom-
ing the aggressors.
A boomerang flung by Georgie, and turned aside by


one of the four, entered another darkie’s heel, cutting
right through between the sinews and the bone, and
thus laming him for life. “When his companions saw
what had occurred, they turned and fled, with fright-
ful yells, back to the circle, and at the same time
Oeorgie bolted like a racehorse for a scrub, distant
about 500 yards. The blacks did not attempt to fol-
low him, but, with great lamentations, went to look
at their fallen brethren. The whole scene did not last
above a quarter of an hour, and when we rode away
the blacks were carving figures on the trees near by,
after burying the unfortunate fellow who had been
killed.
The above is strictly true, and was observed by sev-
eral white persons besides the writer. That the
blacks, no doubt, would have closed on Georgie and
killed him, only they feared the intervention of the
whites, was never for a moment doubted, as he was
undoubtedly put there to be slain.
CONTRIBUTED BY MR. EX-SCHOOL INSPECTOR
LOBBAN.
In 1851 the writer first gazed on the broad, placid
Manning, as it appeared in view a little above where
the town of Tinonee now stands. Tinonee was then
a very primitive settlement, known as the “Old
Wharf,’’ and the chief and almost only residence
there was the humble manse of the Rev. j. T. Carter,
who was the first Presbyterian Minister settled in the
district, the whole of which was included in his ex-
tensive parish. Two families, comprising eight indi-
viduals in one, and six in the other, were nearing the
homes they had provided, but which were j r et only
patches in the wilderness. The beautiful stretch of
land above Tinonee was owned and occupied by Mr.


T. Wynter, Tilney, D. Wynter, and 11. Wynter, and
above their land was the homestead of one of the
newly-arrived families, Mr. Donald McLeod. At that
time the Mondrook estate was rented by Messrs. Wm,
McLeod and Mr. W. W. Board, Mr, McLeod had a
fine herd of Shorthorn cattle of an excellent breed,
and his principal cattle station was on Mitchell’s Is-
land, which, at the time, was not an island, as the
Farquhar inlet did not break open until the great
flood of 1866—which old residents of the lower river
always associate with the foundering of the ship
Eclipse, loaded with cattle for New Zealand, off the
Manning Bar, when all hands were lost and also all
the cattle were drowned; eleven of the bodies were
washed ashore and buried coffiuless on the beach. Mr,
McLean had invited the womenfolk and children of
the party to come to Mondrook and stay till some pro-
vision for residence was made at the new homes. At
that time a thick brush, more than a mile wide, ex-
tended across the neck of the remarkable bend of the
river known as the Bight, and cattle never seemed to
make a track through this dense scrub. It was, there-
fore, necessary to cut a dray road through this brush
to enable Mr. Alex. Lobban’s family to get to their
newly-acquired property opposite Wingham, which
the owner had already named Parkhaugh, The road,
when completed, would hardly have satisfied the re-
quirements of the Shire Engineer of the Manning to-
day. Suffice it to say that after a trip which lasted
more than a fortnight, between the Paterson district
and the Manning, everything was safely landed at the
journey’s end. Not so the tons of flour, sugar, and
other household requisites that had been purchased in
Sydney and sent by a sailing ship, which, alas! was
wrecked upon the treacherous bar. The pioneer faced
these difficulties and privations with heroic courage.
Two men had been engaged to proceed ahead to erect
a residence, but the proprietors found on arrival that
the builders had gone to the diggings instead, for the


golden treasures of the Turon were just being opened
up. At that time the river banks were lined with
dense brushes of cedar, beach, rosewood, immense tig
trees (in some cases covering with their roots nearly
a quarter of an acre), and giant nettle trees. These
brushes were infested with paddymelons and other
animals that feasted on the green crops as they ap-
peared above ground. Already bands of cedar cut-
ters had exploited many of the brushes of the finest
cedar trees in the easily accessible parts. The popula-
tion of the district was inconsiderable, Mr. Joseph An-
drews was the most prominent citizen on the Upper
Manning. Bungay was at the time the chief centre
of the district, and the seat of justice and of the only
post office. Mr. George Henry Rowley, J.P., was the
owner of Bungay, and Mrs. Rowley was the “lady
bountiful’’ of the district. Here divine service was
held in the old slabbed Courthouse at fairly regular
intervals by the Rev. Mr, Carter, and also by the Rev.
T. O’Reilly, Church of England clergyman of Port
Macquarie, who included the Manning in his spiritual
oversight until the advent of the Rev. W. A. Hawkins,
at an early period. Mrs. Rowley always led the sing-
ing, at the services of both ministers. It may be added
in passing that the solitary constable, Charles Bur-
rowes, stationed at Bungay, had a district extending
from Gloucester to Port Macquarie. There was no
house in Wingham then, but the remains of a frame
that had evidently been intended to go on wheels, was
rotting on the hill in front of where the old Court-
house used to stand, and a rose bush laden with clus-
ters of beautiful roses marked the spot where a little
child had been buried.
There were very few people on the Dingo Creek.
Mr. Johnston, of the Upper Dingo, who had a large
family of sons, had established a station there, and
bred horses and cattle. The Johnston “bob-tail”
horses were celebrated for their fleetness and sure-
footedness. On the main Dingo were Messrs. Samuel


Johnson and John Pollock, the latter subsequently
became the second settler in the Bight. The magnifi-
cent brush lands of the Woolla Woolla were purchas-
ed about this time, and the Kennedys, McDonnells,
Abbotts and Finlays soon began to clear the virgin
soil, and were rewarded by most bountiful crops of
maize, which was worth 12s to 15s per bushel. But
there were only two small vessels trading to the river
—the Emma and the Thistle—the former going up to
.Wingham, and the bar was a constant source of
anxiety. Among the early settlers on the Dingo were
the Messrs. Broomfield, Campbell, Wallace, Irvine r
Summerville, Gibson and others. Mr. Wallace, a few
years later, erected the first flour mill on the river. It
was worked by water power; but after a period of use-
ful existence, was swept away by a flood. Belbowrie
was purchased by Mr. Charles Croaker, J.P., who with
his family and his father-in-law, Mr. Hawthorne, re-
sided there several years. After the death of Mrs.
Croaker, who was buried in the Wingham cemetery,
Mr. Croaker left the district. At Kimbriki the Allan
family resided, and Dr. Allan attended the sick every-
where.
Further along the south bank of the Manning the
Murray family was settled. One of the saddest acci-
dents, which east a gloom over the whole district, re-
sulted about this time, in the drowning of Mr. William
Murray when crossing the flooded Burrill Creek. The
two Easton brothers, George and Robert, were located
on the Burrill Creek, and Mr, Robert Searle owned the
well cultivated farm of Treagolden.
Taree estate was owned by the Wynter family, the-
head of which was always spoken of as Major
Wynter. Mr. Wynter was a naval officer. The
dense brush smiled in undisturbed tranquility
until it fell into the hands of the late Mr.
Henry Flett, by whom it was let out in clearing leases ;
and roads through it were formed. A number of
settlers arrived about this time, or a little earlier at


Purfleet and Glenthorne, the latter being wholly
owned by the Trotters, Belfords, and Robinsons, while
Messrs. Stitt, Perry, McLennans, McKay, Brown and
others, purchased excellent farms at Purfieet and set-
tled on them. At Redbank there was soon a fairly
large settlement, the principal land owners being
Messrs, C. Turner, Cameron, McDonald, Gibson, and
Hugh Poison, whose farm at Pigeon-grove was one of
the best cultivated in the district. There was only one
residence on Jones’ Island—that of Mr. Roger Goften,
of Croki, who was succeeded by the Bligh family. The
McDonald family was one of the first to settle on
Mitchell’s Island, and Mr. Powell w r as the first pilot at
the heads.
In the Upper Lansdowne district Mr. W. Cross re-
sided, and Mr. Benjamin Saville lived there also;
while a little cattle station on the Dawson named
Brimbin was owned by Miss Isabella Mary Kelly. Up
till the passing of Sir John Robinson’s Free Selection
Act of 1861, the land was put up for auction
at an upset price of £1 per acre. For a time the land
on the south bank of the river, in the county of
Gloucester, was sold at Dungog. The last sale at this
town was held when Mr. John Pollock purchased his
farm in The Bight. In these days there was only a
fortnightly mail from Sydney to Bungay, and as there
were no punts or bridges on any of the crossings, the
mails were very irregular. The first land sale, which
changed the aspect of The Bight led to the advent of
several new families. It was held at Port Macquarie.
Major Wynter, who was land agent, had died sud-
denly just before the sale. Practically the whole of
the brush land was disposed of at one sale, the pur-
chasers being Messrs. Stirling, Brown, McGilvray, T.
Lobban, D. T. Lobban, Pollock, McDonald, A. Cam-
eron, H. Cameron, W. W. Board, MeDairmid, Sum-
merville, T. Cameron, Parsons, Stewart, and, later,
Mr, Bird. The first denominational school teacher on
the Dingo Creek was Mr. William Thompson. The


first National school teacher on the Manning was Mr.
William Small, at Redbank.
The member for Gloucester and Macquarie in 1851
was Mr. Thomas Baker. The first local Member was
Mr. Henry Flett. The first school in The Bight was
a private school, promoted by the Rev, Allan Mc-
Intyre, who was the first Minister of the Synod of
Eastern Australia settled in this district. The first
teacher was Mr. Andrew Thompson, and Mr. H. B.
Mclntosh succeeded him. Miss Isabella Lobban was
in charge after Mr. Mclntosh’s removal, but owing to
bereavement she had to resign. The school was sub-
sequently taken over by the National Board, and Mr.
W. W. Board, John Cameron, George Boulton, and
Allan Lobban were the teachers until it was closed.
The first teacher at Wingham was Mr. W. 11. Miller;
at Tinonee, Mr. D. Alderton; at Taree, Mr. A. W.
McKinnon; at Cundleton, Mr. W. Goudy; at Oxley
Island, Mr. Thomas Lobban; at Ghinni, Mr. John
Davies; at Croki, Mr. A. Lobban; at Dumaresque
Island, Mr. Alex Blyth; and at Mitchell’s Island, Mr.
D. Ritchie.
Early in the fifties an effort at co-operative ship-
building was attempted. The principal shareholder
was Mr. William McLean, who proposed to go to
Sydney as a commission agent to act for the district
shippers. The vessel was built by Mr. Snowdon, of
Purfleet, and named the Manning Packet. She made
only a few trips when Nemesis overtook her, and she
was left high and dry on the sand spit at the heads.
Mr. McLean and his family were passengers, and on
board also was Mr. David Irvine, of the Dingo Creek,
a Scottish sailor, who had been appointed captain.
But “the best laid schemes of mice and men gang aft
agley,” and the hopes of the Manning Packet Com-
pany were wrecked on the Manning Bar, and Captain
Irvine returned to his farm on the Dingo. The vessel
was supposed to have been wrecked, but an uncom-
monly high tide a year or so later, lifted the stranded


Killawarra Bridge, which spans Manning River, Main North Coast Road.


<j(*£W* tNT 4
rtiHOHnn.


ship and she floated up the river. She was subse-
quently repaired and traded to and from Sydney for
many years as the Concord.
The first store in Wingham was opened by Mr.
Alexander McGilvray. Mr. Wm. McLean followed,
and Mr., Walter Renwick was the third to cater for
the Upper Manning custom. The first public house
in Wingham was opened by Mr. James Staee. The
first private boarding school in the district was open-
ed in Woolla Woolla by Mr. Waugh. There was con-
siderable antagonism in the beginning between Wing-
ham and Tinonee. Mr. Joseph Andrews espoused the
cause of Tinonee, and Mr. A, Lobban took up the
cudgels for Wingham. The latter town has justified
the fight that was made. Even in ’sl “Pelican” was
a famous place, for there Captain Alexander Newton
had established his ship-building yards, and had sent
out many staunch vessels from his stocks. The fleet
of schooners, brigs, and barques, launched by Mr.
Newton, at Pelican, if in a harbor together, Avould
make a fine display. Captain Newton was a builder
of the type so graphically described by Longfellow
in his “Building of the Ship.” It was many years
before a steamer entered the Manning River. The
New Moon was the first to come to Wingham, but she
did not make a second trip. Even in those far off
days literature was not neglected, and a book club
was formed, the subscribers to read the books in the
order on which their names appeared on a list on the
cover: O. Wynter, 11. Wynter, Tilney, McLeod. Board,
Lobban, Chapman, Hawthorne. Mr. W. Chapman
was a young man of literary tastes, and a great reader
and took a practical interest in this book club. At
this time blacks were very numerous, and on great
occasions they foregathered from North, South, and
West, quite in undress uniform —the men with their
hair wound round bunches of grass standing out
about six or nine inches at the back of the head.
Wingham used to be the great meeting ground, and


I can still imagine I hear their wild songs as sung
in those far off days. Two blackfellows, Bando and
Pretty Boy, murdered one George, just outside the
mountain brush from the Bight, and left his body
lying behind the trunk of a tree, and a great gather-
ing was held in Wingham to deal with the murderers.
Each was supplied with a heelaman for protection,
and a certain number of spears were cast at each one,
and if he protected himself from them all he was ac-
quitted. On this occasion both got off. George’s wife,
“Betty,” was promptly appropriated by his friend
“Toney,” who was a quasi-leader of the tribe. I
often thought that Toney was not altogether guiltless
of George’s blood. I remember seeing Toney come to
the river bank opposite Wingham one day when there
was a flood in the river. He looked at the swollen
stream and then around for a tree from which he
could strip a sheet of bark. With his tomahawk he
soon succeeded in getting the required bark, and from
a Kurrajong tree close by he obtained the necessary
string. He daubed the ends with red clay from the
river bank, and when he had finished his canoe he
launched, it, and I watched him breathlessly till he
piloted it safely to the opposite shore.
In the middle of last century, Chatham was one of
the most important centres of the district. There was,
a general store there, kept by a well-informed and
progressive resident, Mr. Newby, and there resided
the only shoemaker, James Marshall, and the first of
our medical men, Dr. Stephenson, and there was the
district inn, kept by Mr. Windsor; but when Mr. Flett
laid out and sold allotments in the private township
of Taree, Chatham’s glory began to fade. A general
store was opened by Mr. Cornelius Crofton, and other
business places rapidly followed. The first black-
smith, Mr. Samuel Whitbread, was an accomplished
’cello player, and a lover of music. The first bank
in the district was established in Taree, a branch of
the Australian Joint Stock Bank. The first manager


was Mr. Harry MacDermott, and his clerk was Mr.
A. P. Stewart, the general manager now of the recon-
structed A.B.C. Bank, and brother of the Rev. S. P.
Stewart. The first newspaper, ‘‘The Manning River
News,” was established by Dr. Horace Dean, in
Tinonee, in the early 60’s, and one of the principal
historic events of the district is associated with his
being unseated as an alien at the instigation of Mr. R.
B. Smith. During the short time Mr. Dean was mem-
ber he obtained several road grants, including £7OO
for a road through Jones’ Island. His ejection from
Parliament was strongly opposed by his constituency,
and he was returned a second time by an overwhelm-
ing majority. On the first occasion he was unseated
for holding an office of profit under the Crown, as
Postmaster, and in the second he was adjudged an
alien, although he had taken out letters of naturalisa-
tion.
WINGHAM MUNICIPALITY.
Here is the advertisement relating to the first
Municipal election in Wingham;—“Municipal district
of Wingham. Election of Aldermen and Auditors.
In accordance with the proclamation of His Excel-
lency the Governor, published in the supplement of
the ‘Government Gazette’ of the 28th June, 1889: I
do hereby notify that the election of six Aldermen
and two Auditors for the Municipal district of Wing-
ham shall take place at the School of Arts, Wingham,
at 12 o’clock noon, on Wednesday, the eighteenth day
of September, 1889. And that the nomination of can-
didates must be delivered to me in writing, at my resi-
dence, signed by two electors entitled to vote, seven
days at least before the day of election. In the event
of more than six candidates being nominated for the
office of Aldermen, or more than two for the office of


Auditors, a poll will be taken on a subsequent date.
James J. Herkes, Returning Officer, Wingham, loth
August, 1889.”
The following extract explains the result of the
first elections:—“The Municipal electors of Wingham
met on Wednesday last, in the School of Arts, to hear
the official declaration of the poll. The Returning
Officer, having read the result as below, declared the
first six as duly elected Aldermen, and Messrs. Beale
and McCartney as Auditors. The Aldermen elect re-
turned thanksin the usual heartfelt manner for their
promotion in the social scale; and the defeated candi-
dates thanked their supporters, when a vote of thanks
to the Chairman, and cheers for the Queen, brought
the proceedings to a close.”
Following are the returns, as officially declared: —
J. Cochrane .. .. . • .. 57
W. McLaughlin ... .. .. 55
J. Pollock .. . . .. . . 54
W. Potheringham .. .. .. 53
P. Dennes .. .. .. . . .. 51
S. B. Hawke .. .. .. .. 45
H. Lambert .. . • .. .. 43
H. J, Hammond .. .. .. .. 41
F. Rye 36
J, Brown .. .. .. .. .. 31
A. Herkes .. .. .. .. .. 27
Mr, Joshua Cochrane was the first Mayor, and
amongst others to fill this important position—with
credit to the Municipality and themselves alike—
were: Messrs. J. Lambert, J. Pollock, W. Fothering-
ham, F. J. Dennes, J. B. Richardson, and J. Skinner.
Mr. Skinner is at present Mayor (1914), and the Ald-
ermen with him are: Messrs. E. MeC. S. Hill, J. B.
Richardson, S. Brewer, G. C. Hands, and F. A. Fitz-
patrick. Mr. D. Stewart, jun., is Town Clerk.


THE UPPER MANNING PRESBYTERIAN
CHURCH.
In the early days there eame to the Manning River
a goodly number of immigrants from the Scottish
Highlands with their leal devotion, and also others
from the Scottish Lowlands and the “Black” North
of Ireland, with the dour and determined character
that Calvinism infuses into all those who really under-
stand and love it. These men were a blessing to the
Manning, and they wrote Presbyterianism large over
it. They transformed the standing brush, and bush,
and forest lands into smiling farmsteads, and left be-
hind them a posterity, who, in the main, reproduced
the honored and trustworthy character of their pro-
genitors.
It is well known that among true Presbyterians
there is a passionate desire for spiritual independence,
and this has not infrequently led to divisions among
them —divisions so numerous that an Englishman in
Scotland on one occasion, who was seeking to under-
stand the niceties of the various Churches there, at
last said that he could only think of them as “the
split P’s.” Well, this desire after spiritual freedom
and independence led to there being two branches of
Presbyterians on the Manning. At the present time
these branches are represented by the Rev. Samuel
Pentleton Stewart, of the Eastern Synod, on the one
hand, and by the Revs. William Tassie and James 11.
Terras, of the Presbyterian Church of Australia, on
the other. This article principally concerns what is
at present the Presbyterian Church of Australia on
the Upper Manning.
The Upper Manning is only a portion of what was
originally the Manning “Charge,” as parishes are
technically called in the Presbyterian Church. In the
early “Sixties” of last century there were four Pres-
byterian Churches in New South Wales independent


of each other. In the year 1860, when the Union
took place, these were reduced to two—the I resby-
terian Church of Eastern Australia (the Eastern
Synod) and the Presbyterian Church of New South
Wales (now the Presbyterian Church of Australia in
the State of New South Wales). At that time the
Rev. William Dron, an ordained missionary, was
laboring on the river in connection with the branch,
which is now represented by the Church of Australia.
But he left for Dublin after the Union.
At the first General Assembly of the Church of New
South Wales, in 1865, the Rev. William Grant, after-
wards the famous and well-beloved Dr. Grant, of
Shoalhaven, reported that he had visited the n\er in
the interests of the Church. And I have frequently
heard him spoken of in terms of high admiration by
the late Mr. Hugh Cameron, of Black Flat.
In the following year, the Rev. James S. Lang (who
was afterwards raised to the doctorate degree, and
for many years was the esteemed Clerk of the General
Assembly) was translated from Aberdeen to the Man-
ning. During his pastorate, among other buildings,
the brick Church and the comfortable Manse at Taree,
and the Mount George (Woodside) Churchy were
built. He is still remembered with love and affection
by the older people. But in 1874 he was again trans-
lated to Muswellbrook. His successor in the Manning
Charge was the Rev. John Bannatyne, who had re-
cently come from New Zealand. He was inducted in
the year 1875, and continued working the whole dis-
trict until it became evident that the Charge must be
divided, which eventually took place in the year 1883,
Mr. Bannatyne choosing to retain the Lower Manning
as his charge.
Concerning this division, the Rev. John Miller Ross,
the General Agent of the Church, in 1892 wrote from
what proved to be his deathbedl have always had
a peculiar interest in and sympathy with your Coast
district, associated with my first and only visit to it.


Never shall I forget my intercourse with the late Mr.
Gibson, who visited me in Wingham, who had for
many a day longed and prayed that a minister should
be got for Wingham. The tears stood in his eyes
I said, “You shall certainly have a Minister
for Wingham.” This was on Saturday. He added,
when?” I replied, “The services to be begun
to-morrow as a separate centre shall be continued,
God willing. I can wire for a capital man to be for-
ward for to-morrow week.” He said, “Oh, I thank
God for that,” and the tears flowed down his vener-
able cheeks. It was indeed an omen for good re
Church extension. He had longed and prayed for a
Minister for the Upper Manning itself as distinct from
the Lower Manning. The district was too wide for
the strength of one man, including what are now two
Charges. He seemed to an unwonted degree bent on
the attainment of this. The Rev. Mr. Allan was avail-
able, and I wired for him to be sent forward “cum
periculo.” Mr. Gibson was spared to hear him, and
seemed as with another to have said: “Now, let Thy
servant depart in peace!” for, as you know, on his
way home after the service, “he was not, for God
took him.” (Mr. and Mrs, Thomas Gibson, sen., were
killed through a buggy accident as they were return-
ing from Mr. Allan’s first service at Ashlea, on the
26th of August, 1883.)
The Rev. David Allan was ordained and inducted
in 1883. At that time, of course, there was not a
Manse on the Upper Manning. There was a Church
building, of wood, in Wingham, situated between
what are now Mr. J. B. Richardson’s and Mr. Can-
non’s shops. The Church being old was sold, and its
timbers were used in building a portion of the present
North Coast Co’s office at the Wingham wharf. The
land also was sold, the idea being that a Manse was
an immediate necessity, while the Church services
could be conducted in the Oddfellows’ Hall. The late
Mr. Robert Andrews, Maryville, very kindly donated


the land where the Manse was built during Mr..
Allan’s time for the purpose of having both the
Church and Manse there. In 1885 Mr. Allan demitted
the Charge. , Al XT „
The Rev. W. Anson Smith, formerly of the A alley
Church, Brisbane, succeeded him, being inducted in
1886 During his time the Kimbriki Church was
built on land kindly given by Mr. Alexander Beattie
for the purpose. Both Mr. Anson Smith and Mr.
Allan were able preachers and talented men. Mr.
Anson Smith, however, demitted the Charge in the
early part of 1891. .
The present Minister on the Upper Manning (Rev.
James H. Terras) was translated from Greta, where
he had been the first Minister, and was inducted on
the 20th of December, 1891. During his ministry
Churches have been erected at Wingham, Bobin, and
Krambach, while the timber for another, at the junc-
tion of the Little Manning and Barnard Rivers, has
been cut and paid for, so that it also will soon be
built. The Manse has been enlarged also. At the pre-
sent time there is not a penny of debt on the parish.
The Charge is a self-sustaining one, not being a bur-
den on any of the funds of the Church at large. It
occupies the premier place in the Church with res-
pect to subscribers to the Sustentation Fund. There
are 217 Charges in the Church, and the Upper Man-
ning tops them all with 215 subscribers. But there
are many richer parishes, where the remittances are
much greater, though the number of contributors may
be much fewer. In 1912 the Charge had 268 adher-
ents over 16 years of age, and 125 communicants. The
Minister is ably seconded by the zealous Committee
of Management, and by the Session, of which he is
justly proud. The Session consists of three old men
and three younger men, viz., Messrs. William Gibson,
Eastbank (Ashlea); Archibald Gibson, Eastbank
(Ashlea); Robert Broomfield (Bow Hill); John Davy
(Killawarra); George A. Andrews, Coolangoola


(Woodside); and David Bell (Wyoming); all having
been ordained during the present Ministry, save the
first-named. At Ashlea there is a Young Men’s Fel-
lowship Association, which meets on the Sabbath days
before the service for public worship. There is also
the Ashlea Literary and Debating Society, which
meets on alternate Thursdays. The young men and
women are a great help to the Minister. There are
branches of the Women’s Missionary Association,
which meet as a rule monthly at Wingham, Woodside,,
Bobin, Kimbriki, and Krambach. Tlie Young Eeople’s
Mission Band meets in the Manse monthly. Sabbath
school work is also carried on in various centres. The
Minister preaches regularly at eight different centres,
and occasionally at eleven other places. The office-
bearers in the congregation, who have all been re-
elected annually for many years now, are: Secretary,
Mr. David G. Gibson; Sustentation Fund Treasurer,
Mr. John Davy; and General Treasurer, Mr. J. B.
Richardson.
THE FIRST NEWSPAPER ON THE
MANNING RIVER.
(By
A Friend.)
Recently a number of copies of the Manning River
“News,” of Tinonee, which was the first paper print-
ed on the Manning, came into my possession, from
which I now make a few extracts. lam sure they
will interest many, both on the Manning and on the
Hastings. The copies I have are not consecutive
issues, so in many instances there can be no continuity
of narrative. The issues date from 1866 to 1871, and
from these I purpose drawing pen pictures, which will
give the younger generation some idea of the Manning
as it was, as well as refreshing the memories of many


old people who took such an active part in the
pioneering work of the period under review The
Manning River “News” was owned and edited by
the renowned and clever “Yankee,” Horace Dean
and was a well-printed and readable paper, which
would bear favorable comparison with the journals of
the coast at the present time. Mr. Dean was a grace-
ful writer, and a forcible one.
Glancing at an issue of March 17th, 1866, we fin
the commercial quotations of intones . ere are
few * —Bacon, lOd to Is; butter, Is 6d lb. (verj dull),
flmir CAdelaide) £22, Chilian £lB ton; hides, 12s to
14s; F maize, 3s 6d; pigs, 4d lb.; wheat, Bs, ducks. 4s;
fo SevmTfor the week are the Sampson West
Hartley Fanny Gorilla, Elizabeth, Lillias, Esther,
Oberon,’and Jane. The Mary is reported a total wreck
on Bellinger Bar. From Port Macquarie we learn of
two murders at Rowland’s Plains, viz., James Daly
and H L Wilson. No arrests in connection -with tne
“agedies so far reported. ‘‘TOe Plaitm” was evident-
ly a good place to live out of m those days. The com-
ments on one of those eases, and the printed suspicions
and probabilities in which names are freely mention-
ed would call forth a goodly crop of defamation *c-
tio’ns now. Times indeed have changed. In 1 imm-
inent David Buchanan, with characteristic impetuos-
ity, creates a scene. A glance at the advertising col-
umns gives an idea of the business people in 1866.
Among the commission agents are 0 Doud and Co.,
Blake and McDonald, Samuel Priestly, J. Steele, W.
McKinnon, David Brown, Henry Priestly. Dean and
Co. seem to be universal grocers and local agents.
Thomas Brown notifies that he owns and runs the
Gloucester Hotel, and Henry McCabe is an auctioneer.
Frederick Lasseter has an ironware advt.; Mr. S.
Plummer is agent for the Australian S.N. Co.; Fran-
cis Longworth announces that he has opened a store
at Ghinni, and Henry Young informs the public he has


done likewise at Port Macquarie. John Sawyer is
Secretary of the Tinonee football club, Geo. Buckle-
ton President, and John Murray Treasurer. John
Jobson offers a reward of £5 for the conviction of
those who are in the habit of shooting his cattle. Mr.
A. Else controls the Freemason’s Hotel, Tinonee.
In 1869 we read an account of Agricultural Society
meeting at Taree, July 6th, Henry Flett, Esq., in the
chair. The following were the office bearers: Presi-
dent, Mr. Flett; Vice-Presidents, Messrs. Bates and
Richardson; Secretary, Mr. Else; Treasurer, Mr. Mor-
gan Rooll; Committee, Messrs. Flett, Bates, Richard-
son, Neil Campbell, S. and A. Gibson, A. Gill, R. Wil-
liams, John Galloway, A. C. Begbee, W. Gill, R.
Belford, D. S. Targett, James Vernon, Alex. Moore,
Geo. Ochs, Joseph Andrews, Wm. Allan, John Butts-
worth, Wm. Algie, Robt. Clinch, Ezra Perrett, C.
Wyatt, John Murray, G. Murdoch, John Herkes,
Robert Murray, Wm. Lee, Henry Lean, and Robert
Searle. Disastrous floods took place in 1867—especi-
ally on the Hunter, where the river was nine inches
higher than during the flood of 1857,
In 1868 there was great turmoil as to whether the
Post Office should be at Ghinni Ghinni, or Croki, It
was a warm affair, judging by a report of a meeting
held at Ghinni in January, 1868. Mr. Andrew Thom-
son presided, and the main speakers were the Chair-
man, Messrs. Bates, F. W. Dugdale, W. Boulton, F.
Longworth, Delves, A. Lobban, Dykes, and G. Allan.
The report goes on, “Mr, Reuben Richards also ad-
dressed the meeting at some length, and entered into
the matter very warmly, but as the Chairman notified
to your reporter that it was quite irregular no note
was taken of it.” In other issues are vigorous letters
from various correspondents—no sugar-coating or
frills then—the writers said what they thought. Ten-
ders are called for constructing a road through Jones’
Island. The issue under notice reports the wreck of
the ketch Lightning, bound to Sydney from the Man-


n ino>, loaded with local produce. I wonder how many
farmers living on the Manning to-day had cargo on
that little boat? A letter from the owners of the
ketch says; “ All went well after leaving the Manning
Bar on Friday, till 3 a.m. on Saturday. It was a clear
moonlight night, and the steamer Lady Bowen came
full speed into the stern of the vessel, cutting her to
the hatches; she sank at once; no lives were
The letter adds that it is thought that the Q
land Steam Company will pay all los f s ' 1 ? on '
der did they? In the issue of February 1,1868, a ioi B
account is given of the landing at Sydney of the Duke
of Edinburgh. The same issue reports the death by
drowning of the 7-year-okl son of Mr. and Mrs. An.
drew Thomson, at Ghmm and also the death of M *
Alo-ie, of Cundle Plains. More fiery letters on the
Croki Post Office question from Mr. Bates and •
e" Richards. 400 bags of maize are awaiHng
shimnent at Tinonee. The Editor of the Aews
blames the arrival of the Prince for it and becomes
exceedingly wrath over it-but it must be remember
ed that Mr. Dean was a Repubhcan Mrs. Calov
died at Cundletown in January, 1868 The vintage
on the Manning was a total failure in that } eai.
In an issue of January, 1869, there is a leading
article hi Mr. Dean’s best style on “Clerical influence
in Politics ” A fine explosive newspaper warfare
concerning the “Free Church at Tinonee” is raging
between Mr. Archibald Cameron, of Redbank, and Mr.
Samuel Martin. So far, Mr. Cameron has shown the
be™ display of adjectives! The Fire King, Luna, and
Gorilla,Appear to be the most regular ships trading
to the river. Mails were received from on
Mondays and Wednesdays—when the pack horsey
could travel the track, and by steamer “twice a week
on uncertain days and at irregular hours! How
philosophical the pioneers were! Mr. Dean announces
that he has received a supply of negro-head tobacco,


and advises smokers to call early, as no one man will
be served with more than 61b.
The news is also recorded that Aubrey John, 19th
Baron Somerville, who has succeeded to his estates,
left Port Macquarie last Saturday, on his way to Eng-
land. About this time there seems to have been con-
siderable ‘‘coolness” between the “News,” of
Tinonee, and the “Times,” of Taree. I read one side
in the papers under notice. I suppose the early files of
the “Times” supply the other.
Gales raged during February, and the Laura and
the Messenger were wrecked. The Redbank School
is now under the charge of Mr. J. H. Morley, a very
intelligent young man, who seems well fitted for the
position; enrolment 31. The issue of February 27th
gives particulars of the sad death of a young lady,
Mrs. Joseph Bates, of Jones’ Island. It appears that
the husband was rowing with deceased in a boat, when
she stood up to arrange her dress, and fell into the
water and was drowned. The sad event caused a
wave of sympathy throughout the coastal district, and
about 500 persons attended the funeral service. The
sugar industry promised to be a big affair about this
time, and we read that Mr. Pool (Tinonee) is turning
out very good sugar, the quantity now on hand being
three-quarters of a ton. There appears to be no
marked variation of yield, which continues to be
about 4cwt. of sugar to 5 tons of cane. Mr. Andrews
is also erecting a sugar mill on the Upper Manning. A
start is made in agitating for a road from Oxley
Island to Bohnock-Taree road, which eventually, after
long wrangling and much local unpleasantness, passed
through Pigeon Grove. A large meeting is fully re-
ported, the speakers being Messrs. McCartney, Lyn-
don, Gibson, R. McLean, C. Gordon, Bacon, John
McLean, and A. Gordon. Mr. Gibson thought it was
a shame to put the road through a poor man’s land,
when they could get it through Mr. Poison’s land at
Pigeon Grove, Evidently Mr. Poison was rich, and


that fact hurt! Tenders are called for a bridge over
Cedar Party Creek at Wingham. The “Lamb Inn,”
Wingham, is advertised for sale. The “News” re-
grets to hear that Mr. Richardson’s cane at Black
Flat has been injured by the frost. Mr. Andrews
says his plantation has sustained no injury at all, and
thinks he will have to instal more machinery to cope
with the supply of cane. Mr. Allan’s sale of horses
at Tinonee realised prices satisfactory to the owner;
bidding ranged from £4 12s 6d to 20s, the average
price being 355. They were light saddle horses. The
“News” heads its telegraphic column with a horse-
racing block. Is it to indicate the speed of the electric
“sports” in 1869. But perhaps it was more reliable
then than in 1914. The Presbyterian Church at Taree
was opened on Sabbath, July 14th, 1869, the speakers
being Revs. J. Cameron, J. S. Lang, W. C. Hawkins,
and J. Bowes, and Messrs. Belford, Richardson, Laurie
and Gibson. A report of the Agricultural Society
shows there are 40 paid-up members, and 119 in
arrears. At this time a highly interesting and schol-
arly discussion is being carried on between two very
able writers, Rev. John F. Horsley, and Mr. Thomas
Lobban, on the subject “The Scotch selling their
King,” There are some fine literary effects to be
found in those old copies of the “News.” Sugar is-
the main topic now (September), and in a leading
article the “News” advocates the forming of a com-
pany of £4OOO to build floating mills that will traverse
the river and do away with expensive hauling. How
strange that seems to us, and how the seasons have
changed—the most southern fringe of sugar zone is
now the Clarence district, and it is not flourishing
there. A young lady at Port Macquarie has been
causing a sensation by “seeing a man in old-fashioned
apparel, without a hat” when no one else can see any-
thing. The Kempsey mailman—more foolish than the
girl—declares he can’t sleep since seeing her in her
tantrums. Best and finest tea 2s 3d lb. Here is the


programme for Taree Christmas races, December,
1869: Stewards, Messrs. A. Cunningham, W. Arm-
strong, W. Lee, sen., G. Ochs; Judge, Morgan Poole;
Starter, Angus Kennedy; Treasurer, Charles McDon-
nell; Secretary, D. S. Target. Maiden, 8 so vs.;
M.R.J.C. Plate, 10 sovs.; Hacks, first prize saddle,
second bridle, third whip and spurs; Consolation
Stakes, 3 sovs. All publicans’ booths to pay £2.
The following information regarding schools should
be of interest: Prom the report to the Council of Edu-
cation for 1868 we gather there were 318 -public
schools, 103 provisional half-time, and 289 denomi-
national. The increase of scholars for the year was
from 28,434 in 1867 to 34,284 in 1868. The amount
of fees paid was £34,000, and exempted scholars 8289.
The scale of salaries paid to teachers should be of
interest, especially to those teachers who write such
piteous tales to the daily press about the small pay.
The highest salary paid to any teacher other than
teacher of a model school, £150; the lowest paid is for
provisional school, £24. The average emoluments for
all teachers, except pupil teachers, is from salary £7O
5s Od; from school fees £4l Is lid. The teachers held
the fees in those days, but they can recall with regret
that many of those fees are still owing. How the
teachers managed to live on such wages the report
does not say. The following is a list of the Manning
schools, with enrolment and reports of Mr. Inspector
Allpass;—Bo 80, 26, progress fair; Croki, 62, instruc-
tion intelligent; Cundletown, 45, teaching very satis-
factory; Dingo Creek, 32, instruction more mechani-
cal than instructive; Dumaresque Island, 36, instruc-
tion fair; Ghinni, 47, teaching tolerable; Karaak Flat,
22, moderate; Oxley Island, 57, moderate; Pelican
Point, 19, below standard; Purfleet, 36, fair; Red-
bank, 28; Taree, 101, tolerably effective; Tinonee, 45,
satisfactory; Winghara, 45, just moderate; Yappo
(Bight), 38, intelligent; Woolla. 44, tolerable to good.


ABORIGINALITIES.
(By
“The Sparrow.”)
Mr. John Allan’s “Early Reminiscences of the
Blacks” have been read out here with much interest
and pleasure. In one part, I think Mr. Allan states:
“The blacks had no meaning re their corroboree.” I
remember years ago attending a corroboree at Port
Macquarie. I think there was a gathering of four or
five hundred blacks —Manning, Macleay and Hastings
being represented. There was a good attendance of
whites also. How well do I remember, although a
boy, how great was the excitement; also tfie stench.
I’ll swear you could cut it with a knife.
However, next morning I met a darkie, “Merri-
man ’ ’ by name, and asked, ‘ ‘ What was the meaning of
darkies stooping low, running along, then jumping up
in the air, and yelling like ‘debil-debil?’ ” He replied,
“Oh, that all the same belong Sea Gull, dipping down
and flying up; then fly up high, dive down in water,
get him boodgerie fish, fly up and yell like flurry
fool.” He also informed me that in another part of
the programme, when they were hissing and wriggling
a lot: “That all belong black snake.”
Whether this is correct, I am unable to say, as my
stomach was not strong enough to go to the camp to
investigate, although much interested in these mat-
ters. Just imagine at time of which I write 400
blacks, with about three hundred mangy dogs, all of
which slept and ate together. Just think of the pan-
demonium. Paddy’s market was only a fool to it.
How often, too, was to be seen big buxom Lubras,
strutting out of town with a dirty nosed black child
strapped on her back in such a position that the dingy
eupid could obtain the lacteal fluid from its mother.
The aborigines are very superstitious, but the sub-
stance of their creed, I am informed, is not distinctly


c
* f 'KtrtCflUM v«//


Chemist, „d Mis. Hill. "‘ M —» b » «'• * *«!■ S. Hill.


understood. In some tribes they have wise men among
them, who profess to control the wind and the rain at
pleasure, and likewise to foretell events. Dreams are
considered ominous. They suppose that death gener-
ally proceeds either from magic, or the loss of kidney
fat, and should they dream that the latter event has
happened to them, they are apt to give themselves up
to fatal despondency. Singular actions of resurrec-
tions are entertained by them. They say: ‘ ‘Lay down
blackfellow, jump up whitefellow”—thereby imply-
ing the platonic doctrine of transmigration.
In my last letter I mentioned about the black’s
crude idea of futurity. “Lay down, blackfellow,
jump up whitefellow.” As an illustration. An old
friend of mine told me that years ago he was on a
■cedar expedition. In the away beyond, somewhere in
the Hastings electorate, he missed his way, and was
bushed for the night. During his peregrination, the
next morning, he struck a black’s camp. Having run
short of matches the day before, he entered it to light
his pipe. Seated in a corner he saw a wizened up,
toothless old gin, of unparalleled ugliness. On seeing
him, her dim eyes sparkled like diamonds, and spring-
ing up from her recumbent position, like a monkey,
before he could anticipate her intention, she flung her
boney arms round his neck, and her legs round his
waist, slobbering on his face—’possum-smelling, ten-
der epithets and caresses. Naturally disgusted, and
after trying a few of Donald Dinnies’ holts, he finally
succeeded in freeing himself from her embraces. Be-
ing familiar with her language, he gathered from her,
that she took him to be her dead son, who had gone
down into the dark valley “Blackfellow.” and had
jumped up on the other side “Whitefellow/’
He swore by the ashes of his fathers and the
Temples of their Gods, that no such relationship exist-
ed. The old woman was firm, and proposed that he
should take off his boots, and exhibit his right foot.
Her deceased son had a peculiar mark across his big


toe. To this mode of identification he willingly agreed,,
when to his astonishment the same mark was ap-
parent. Her eyes sparkled, and she sprang towards
him; but, being some distance from her, with boot in
hand, he made for the gully. Looking back in his mad
flight, he saw a woolly headed hairless-bodied crea-
ture, on all fours, more like a baboon than a human
being, close on his heels, at a good gallop.
With our sable brethren the mode of courtship and
popping the question is entirely different from ours.
Above all tilings they hate long engagements. At cer-
tain seasons of the year, after they have been through
the Man Making Ceremonies, the young males be-
smear their eyelids and lashes with red ochre and
stripe their bodies with white pipeclay. Thus adorn-
ed these worthies, with clenched waddies, pry inquisi-
tively elsewhere.
He gives no intimation of his approach. His very
walk suggests the idea of a prowling beast. At last
he pounces upon his dusky beauty. One tap on her
head, another across her stomach, silences remon-
strances, and she is carried off like the Sabine women
of yore to the camp of their tribe. With a wreath of
Dingo’s bushy tail round her brow, and a sapling stick
betwixt her nostrils, the nuptial knot is tied. No
Church fees. Marriage simplified.
The blacks in their diet were by no means fas-
tidious. Bears, ’possums, snakes, grubs, ants, roots,,
etc., are all alike palatable to them. Should cattle
die, the natives would hasten from all parts to devour
them. A dead bullock was a gastronomic delicacy.
Taking off the hide and amputating the limbs, they
voraciously swallowed putrid lumps. But a dead
whale is the ne plus ultra of edibles. I remember
years ago a large whale was washed ashore between
Camden Haven and Port Macquarie. I happened to
be travelling along the beach at the time. The blacks
got wind of the whale. So did I—six miles before I
saw it. It was “high.” So much so that the pilot at


Port Macquarie, twelve miles distant, swore that he
could smell it through his telescope, and that it also
blurred the sight of his instrument. In a very short
time the whale was covered with flies, and blacks too
numerous to mention, cutting off lumps as large as
they could carry. A bon fire was made. When cook-
ed, no alderman ever devoured green turtle soup with
greater relish than these comorants did.
This banquet was sustained till nature was com-
pletely exhausted, and they slept by the fireside, get-
ting up occasionally during the night to resume eat-
ing.
Indigestion was a very natural consequence, 'and
for days afterwards they were to be seen rolling
themselves on the ground, others lying flat on their
backs, while their more fortunate friends were
dancing a highland fling on their stomachs, their mode
of doctoring the sick, especially when they were
afflicted with what they termed “Carbon" bugge,
along bingee,” which when literally translated, means
“very sick in the stomach.’ ’
The denizens of the wilderness, in cooking, display
considerable ingenuity at times. ’Possums and roots
undergo a curious culinary process. An ant-hill is
scooped out, in which a fire is lit, and left burning
until the place is almost red-hot. The fire is then
pulled out, and a few stones are laid on the bottom of
the “fireplace,” The ’possum, or bear, unskinned
(just, in fact, as it was killed) is wrapped in some
large leaves, or ti-tree bark, and placed in the hollow.
The hole is then closed up. In a very short time the
“tasty morsel” is thoroughly cooked, without the loss
of gravy—the secret of cooking being a condensation
of steam.
A dusky native of the soil was once asked why he >
did not clean the animal by removing the “secrets of
its innards.” “No fear,” he replied, “white pheller
do dat, and fill ’em up with onion, sage, and ebery-
ting—and spoil ’em. Bear go up a tree, and stuff


himself with leaves before we kill and cook him. Den,
by golly, he lubly.”
Is not this art of cooking practically the same
(barring the dressing) as our 20th century paper bag
system ?
The Australian aboriginal is the most wonderful
climber in the world. Well may he be termed “the
human fly.”
With the sharp-pointed end of his nullah, which he
drives into the bark of a tree (making an incision for
his toe and another for his fingers), in this fashion he
wall mount, with the agility of a monkey, the most
lofty and perpendicular trees—trees devoid of knots
or branches. I once watched an aboriginal climb a
tree after a ’possum to a perilous height, trusting to
the most fragile branches, and stepping from tree to
tree with a hardihood sufficient to make one’s blood
run cold. Finally, he got near his quarry. One
whack with his club brought the animal down with
a crash upon my innocent head. From the number
of stars I saw on that occasion, I was at first inclined
to think that the moon had struck me instead of an
innocent ’possum.
Great efforts have been made in Australia—both in
zeal and money—to civilise our dusky brethren; but
they have been met by signal failures all along the
line. No matter how young they were taken, or how
long they were kept, or how kindly they were treated,
they would eventually return to their tribe.
In the earlier days, quite a number have been taken
clean away from their old environments to England,
where they received a thorough education and train-
ing, and were then sent back to Australia. The ex-
pectation was that the education and travel would
have a beneficial effect upon their future. But. alas!
How soon were the hopes of their benefactors cast to
the four winds of heaven. No sooner were these
aboriginals shipped back—educated and “refined”—


than they relapsed into their former state of primitive
man.
Governor Phillip it was who once said. “I do not
think anything very extravagant in the assumption
that the creature who has sufficient skill and energy
to construct the spear and the boomerang, to transfix
a kangaroo at sixty paces; to strike a bird down on
the wing; to ensnare the river fish with his net; who
can manufacture his canoe and its implements—is
capable also of learning more useful (though, in fact,
less ingenious) arts and sciences.”
With these thoughts in his (Governor Phillip’s)
mind, and actuated with the most philanthropic inten-
tions, he determined to capture a young aboriginal
for the purpose of training and educating him. Ac-
cordingly, a few weeks afterwards, in one of his pere-
grinations, the Governor came across his dusky
quarry—or, rather, one he thought would suit his pur-
pose With the aid of a few soldiers and officers he
secured the object of his search, and ultimately con-
veyed him home to Government House, where he was
treated with the utmost kindness. The Governor won
Arramboo’s confidence.
Having succeeded so far, the Governor personally
instructed him in domestic and public etiquette, dress-
ed him in the pink of fashion—and, in fact, treated
him just as he would treat any of his officers. In a
few months Arramboo was quite a gentleman in all
his actions, which naturally greatly pleased the Gov-
ernor. He could handle his knife and fork, and his
cup and saucer, as if he had long been accustomed to
using them.
However, a year after his capture, when a ship
arrived from London, with quite a number of ladies
and gentlemen of title on board, it being New Year’s
Day, the Governor, rising to the occasion, invited the
ladies and officers and other distinguished persons
(including Arramboo) to dine with him at Govern-
ment House. The band was playing in one apartment


of the House. As the guests sat down to the table,
Arramboo was brought in, and duly introduced to the
great assemblage, and then was requested to be seated
next to the Governor—which he did in good style.
He glanced quickly over the good things displayed.
Then, with a bound and a yell (upsetting his chair,
patting his stomach, and yelling ‘‘ Budgree! Budgree!
Maroony Budgree!” he danced about the room like a
tiend let loose. In a very short time the dining room
was in a state of pandemonium. Ladies were scream-
ing and fainting, and the distinguished gentry
tumbled over one another to get out of the room.
As a natural consequence, the Governor was horri-
fied at Arramboo’s conduct, after having taken so
much pains with him. His Excellency walked over
to his pupil, and taking him by the arm, escorted him
out of the room, and gently rebuked him for his un-
pardonable conduct. He then requested him to re-
main where he was until he (the Governor) restored
order.
Subsequently His Lordship returned as he prom-
ised. But alas! All that was left of Arramboo were
his clothes and boots! Arramboo was gone!
WORTHY PIONEERS.
C.C, writes in the “Maitland Mercury”:
Now that Mr. Macartney Abbott has been selected
as the Liberal candidate for the Upper Hunter, a
short sketch of the history in Australia of the family
to which he belongs will probably interest many of
the readers of the oldest provincial paper in the Com-
monwealth, and it will certainly interest the younger
members of the family who are now to be found in
every part of the continent. Some of the Abbotts
have been subscribers to the “Mercury” since its first
publication. In the thirties of last century, things


were very bad in Ireland, and the great trek or migra-
tion which was destined to reduce the population by
more than half in three-quarters of a century was just
beginning. At that time, Thos. Abbott, who was just
past middle age, in fact an old man as age is counted
now, resolved to leave the old country, bringing with
him his wife and whole family, consisting of six sons
and two daughters, and make a fresh start in Austra->
lia. Other members of the Abbott family, which was
a large one, went to Canada and the United States,
where their names have become prominent in many
lines.
Thomas Abbott landed in Sydney in the thirties of
last century, without capital, but with a healthy fam-
ily, all of whom had some brains and plenty of cour-
age, which was most wanted in those days. Soon
after reaching Sydney, Thomas Abbott entered the
service of the Government, as did his two eldest sons,
John Kingsmill Abbott and Joseph Palmer Abbott,
who were grown up, the eldest son having married
just before leaving Ireland. The younger sons were
sent to Cape’s College, a school at which most of our
leading men of last century were educated, and which
later on developed into the Sydney Grammar School.
Thomas Abbott retired from the Government ser-
vice after some years, and died in Sydney in his 85th
year, his wife, Eleanour Kingsmill Abbott, following
him some years later, in her 87th year. John
mill Abbott, the eldest son, left the Government ser-
vice to go into the pastoral industry in the early
forties of last century, and began by buying 330 acres
of land adjoining what is now the village of Wingen,
and leasing from the Government about 30,000 acres
of Crown lands adjoining. This holding has never yet
changed hands, and is still in the possession of his
descendants. He died in 1847, leaving one daughter,
of Murrulla, Wingen, mother of Mr. J.
A, K. Shaw, solicitor, Scone, who is still living, and
four sons, all born on the Hunter. The eldest son,


Joseph Palmer Abbott, who was a solicitor, went into
politics, served as Minister of Mines and Lands, was
a member of the Conventions by which the Common-
wealth Constitution was drafted, became Speaker of
the Legislative Assembly of N.S.W., and was knight-
ed by Her Majesty Queen Victoria.
The second son, William Edward Abbott, who now
holds the family estate, was for many years President
of the Pastoralists’ Union of N.S.W., and of the Pas-
toral Federal Council of Australia, once held the
position of member for the Upper Hunter, and has
been a voluminous writer on science and politics. The
third son was Thomas Kingsmill Abbott, who went
into the Government service, and died about 20 years
ago. At the time of his death he was Chairman of the
Stipendiary Magistrates’ Bench of Sydney. The
youngest son, John Henry Abbott, was killed by a fall
from a horse when only 19 years old. Sir Joseph
Abbott was married first to Miss Macartney, eldest
daughter of the late Dr. Macartney, of West Mait-
land, having by her two sons and one daughter, all
living still. The eldest son, J. H. M. Abbott, a suc-
cessful writer, author of “Tommy Cornstalk” and
other leading works, and the second son, Mr. Macart-
ney Abbott, the selected candidate for the Upper
Hunter in the forthcoming State elections, and Mrs.
Norman Simpson, of Leura, widow of the late Mr,
Norman Simpson, pastoralist, of Barraba. He mar-
ried for the second time Miss Blanch Solomons, also
of West Maitland, by whom he had three daughters
and one son, all still living, two daughters unmarried
and one married to Mr. C. Kater, of Mumblebone
Station, Warren, New South Wales. The youngest
son, Joseph Palmer Abbott, has just taken his B.A.
degree at the Sydney University, and has his reputa-
tion yet to make by upholding the motto of the
Abbotts: “There is room at the top.” The second
son of Thomas Abbott, Joseph Palmer Abbott, who
was grown up at the date of the great trek, and went


This building serves to show the great progress made by Wingham in recent years. It stands upon the site
once occupied by the old hotel shown in another plate.




into the Government service, died in harness at the
early age of 30 years, leaving only one daughter, who
is still living in Sydney, the widow of the late T.
Warre Harriott, chairman of the Metropolitan Land
Board of New South Wales. The third son, Thomas
Kingsraill Abbott, after finishing his education at
Cape’s College, went into the post office at the bottom
and retired after about thirty years’ service, having
reached the position of Under-Secretary, the highest
in his department. He left no children surviving him,
though he was married twice. The fourth son, H. T.
Abbott, after leaving school, went into the A.J.S-
Bank, retiring as general manager in Queensland, and
dying at 80 years of age in Sydney, leaving three
daughters and two sons. The eldest son, H. P. Abbott,
is a solicitor practicing in Sydney, who a few years
back as an athlete and footballer was about the first
in the State of New South Wales; and the second son,
T. H. Abbott, is manager of the A.B.C. Bank at
Quirindi. The fifth son, Benjamin Abbott, went in
for pastoral pursuits, and died at Tamworth a few
months back, 83 years old, leaving one son, Mr. R. P.
Abbott, of Barsham, Blandford, a very successful pas-
toralist, and two daughters—Mrs. Richard Allen and
Miss L. Abbott, of the Priory, Tamworth. The Rev.
T. K. Abbott, headmaster of the Armidale Grammar
School, who died recently, was Mr. B. Abbott’s second
son, The youngest son of Thomas and Eleanour
Kiugsmill Abbott, who came out with his father in
the thirties, was Robert Palmer Abbott, who became a
leading solicitor in Sydney, and going into politics,
became a Minister of the Crown in some of the Parkes
and Faruell Ministries, and was afterwards appointed
a member of the Legislative Council of New South
Wales. He died eight or ten years back, never hav-
ing been married. This is the record of the direct
descendants of Thomas and Eleanour Kingsmill
Abbott, of whom the Liberal candidate for the tipper
Hunter is one who has yet to make his mark.


"When Thomas Abbott, with his large family, in the
thirties of last century left the old land to make his
home in Australia, which was then “the uttermost
ends of the earth,” some of his nephews came also,
and settled in the Maitland district on the Lower
Hunter, and northwards along the rivers, where their
descendants are now to be found in many districts.
One, the last survivor of those who left the Old Coun-
try, Mr. John Abbott, of Taree, Manning River, is
now living on his own estate in his 94th year. Other
Abbotts at present in the Dungog, Gloucester, Man-
ning districts are: Mr. Joseph Abbott, of
Dungog; Mr. George Abbott, of Ram Station;
Mr. Thomas Abbott, of Treagolden; while their
children and their grandchildren, and their great-
grandchildren are doing their part in building up the
Empire in a way that is worthy of the traditions of
the race, each one in his own place doing a man’s
work, and not forgetting the motto—“ There is room
at the top.”
Mr. JOHN ABBOTT, SENR.
A Robust Pioneer.
Raise your bats and lustily cheer him; pretty hard to beat his
score;
Some there are with totals near him —he’s ‘‘not out” at
ninety-four.
Going fairly strong, despite it —weight of years, John wears
them well;
Pioneer who’s quite delighted talesi of gone-by days to tell.
Fought life’s fight in days of vigour—labored hard and labor-
ed long,
Men and muscles then grew bigger—proof we have at Kolo-
dong;
Though the shadows may be creeping—as they’ll creep on mil-
lions more—
Here’s “the health of Mr. Abbott,” at the age of ninety-four.


Mr. John Abbott, Senr.
Photo taken on his 90th Birthday, Ist April, 1910. On
April Ist, 1914, Mr, Abbott celebrated his 94th Birthday.




Saw the district undeveloped—watched it grow, and helped it
on,
Country then with scrub enveloped?—crops have grown, and
brush has gone;
Dusky natives roam no longer—boomerang has gone, and
spear.
Railway engine’s puffing stronger —railway train now steams
in here.
Thus it is there’s food for thinking—changes Time has
brought about;
Pioneering Sun is sinking —dazzling rays are thinning out;
Ninety-four, and still proceeding—give a cheer, and touch the
gong,
In the Race of Life he’s leading—Abbott, John, of Kolodong.
Had a chat in April, 1914, with Mr. John Abbott,
Sen., of Kolodong. On the Ist April he celebrated his
94th birthday, and he still retains a memory and an
activity which serve to prove that he was robust and
strong in the heyday of youth, and in the winter of a
long and useful life the hand of Time is treating him
kindly. Ninety-four years is a long time to, meta-
phorically speaking, glance back upon—more parti-
cularly as far as Australia is concerned. Changes
have taken place within the sunshiny shores of Aus-
tralia during those intervening years, and from the
hub of the blacks it has developed into one of the rich-
est and most important outposts of the British Empire
—and it’s men of the stamp and the stamina of John
Abbott who have materially assisted to make it so.
He belongs to the band of industrious pioneers who
migrated to N.S.W. in the days of early colonisation
—the days when workers and not shirkers were need-
ed. They have left behind, have these fast-disappear-
ing band of pioneers, a monument to their industry
and worth that Time, relentless though it is, cannot
possibly efface if the growing generations of to-day
and the days that are to come possess but a particle
of gratitude in their compositions. There are those
in our midst—the Manning district is doubtless no


exception to a rule that is far too general—who ven-
ture view that ’twere better to “let the dead past
bury its dead”—but not so. The rising generation
should be taught to regard with more than passing,
reverence these forefathers of theirs who, at personal
risk and self-denial, made it possible for them to live
under happy and favorable conditions to-day. It will
do them good—whilst as far as the aged are concern-
ed their hearts will surely be cheered by being afford-
ed an opportunity of fighting their battles over again
in memory—for do they not all in their honest hearts
feel that:
It lightens the days that are
To think of the days long ago.
Born in King’s County, Ireland, Mr. Abbott, at the
a"e of 20 years and nine months, bade adieu to the
green isle beyond the sea, and sailed for Australia.
His mother had died when he was but nine yearssot
age, and his father went hence on his son s 20th
birthdav—so that John Abbott found himself bereft
of parental guidance and help ere he had reached the
realms of manhood. He landed first in Melbourne,
and remained some months in Victoria. Eventually
Mr. Abbott boarded a ship bound for Sydney, and m
due course wended his way to Dungog and the
country thereabouts was then very sparsely popu-
lated indeed—it was in the dawn of better and more
prosperous days, tlie cradle of future greatness. For
sixteen vears John Abbott resided in the Dungog dis-
trict and he then came to the Manning, settling at
Woollah Woollah—;now known by the new-fangled
title of “Kolodong.” There he has fought life s
bustling battle for the past 56 years—and the house
that sheltered him and his when he first cast his lot
at “Laurel Hill” still forms part of the structure
that does similar duty to-day.
In 1853 Mr. Abbott was married at w est Maitland
to Miss Summerville, sister to Mr. John Summerville,
of “The Cedars” (a gentleman, by the way, who has


also weathered life’s gale remarkably well). The
marriage ceremony was performed by the Rev. Ste-
phen Rabone, then Wesleyan minister at West Mait-
land. Mr. and Mrs. Abbott (and Mrs. Abbott is well
and active to-day) have reared a family of 12—seven
daughters and five sons—all of whom are in the land
of the living, and settled in various parts of N.S.W.
Mr. John Abbott, junr., of Karaak Flat, is the senior
member of the male portion of the family.
“Maize and wheat were the staple crops on the
Manning during my early days here,” said Mr.
Abbott during the course of Monday’s chat, “and
I’ve known five and twenty sailing vessels to be tak-
ing wheat and maize to Sydney. It took them a long
time to land the produce in Sydney as a rule, and the
farmer was lucky who got any returns back in less
than six or seven weeks.
“Prices fluctuated then, just as they do now, I’ve
known corn to be bought in Taree at Is per bushel,
and sold in Sydney at 4s—and I also remember it only
realising Is 6d a bushel in Sydney.
“Wheat was extensively grown for years, until the
prevalence of rust made its cultivation unprofitable.
I gave it more than a fair trial—grew it till it nearly
ruined me. What were claimed to be rust-proof varie-
ties were introduced, but they all eventually failed to
with stand the rust scourge.
“There were no macadamised roads or bridges on
the Coast in my early days. We used to cross the
river at Bungay, and I remember on one occasion my
teams and drivers had just forded the crossing when
dawn came a flood. The river was uncrossable for
.some time afterwards. We had no taxes to meet those
days—there were hardships enough without them.
The lack of taxation then is being more than made up
for to-day, however, and I, in common with others,
have now to meet a pretty tidy Shire tax, in addition
to that imposed by Federal and State Governments.
“No, some of the young men and women of to-day


don’t really know what work and hardship are. I’ve
seen girls reaping in the wheat-field —strong and
healthy they were, too. Yon couldn’t get some of the
girls of to-day—or the men either, for that matter—
to even soil their hands or wet their feet. There was
no eight hours a day for men or women when the early
settlers were confronted with the task of ‘blazing
the track, ’ and making homes for themselves.
“The Woolla was all originally taken up on the
clearing lease system. You had, in those days, to
travel right over to Port Macquarie to transact land
business —even from Dungog. On one occasion I was
nearly drowned while on my way to Port. I really
mistook my way, and rode into the Lansdowne River
at a dangerous spot. There was a strong current run-
ning, the horse was swept down the stream, and
though the animal reached the opposite bank, it was
too steep for him to clamber up. I jumped out of the
saddle, and regained the bank. The horse swam fur-
ther down the stream, and I eventually recovered
him.
“Yes, lam a Justice of the Peace. My appointment
dates back to the year 1878, and my Commission was
signed by a Mr. Michael Fitzpatrick.
“Miss Kelly, whose name is associated with the
early days of the Manning, I knew well. She was
rather an intelligent woman to talk to, but seemed
rather fond of law.
“I remember when the Agricultural Association
was formed on the Upper Manning. Mr. G. S. Hill
was the first President, and I was the first Vice-Presi-
dent. When Mr. Hill retired as President, I was
elected in his place. The idea originally was to co-
operate with Tarce, and have shows alternately at
Taree and Wingham. Taree, however, did not favor
the idea —thus Wingham and the Upper Manning
struck out on their own. The Association has grown,
is still growing, and its annual Show ranks amongst


the best on the Coast to-day. The cattle and pig ex-
hibits, in particular, have always been good.”
This concluded an interesting chat, and Mr. Abbott
boarded his buggy, and drove off—as he had come—
alone. Ninety-four years trouble him but little, and
the infirmities of age creep on but slowly. lie is one
in a thousand, surely, and serves to remind one that,
after all—
The heroes of Australia are the men on farm and station —
Pioneers who, spite of failure, fought such foes as crossed
their tracks;
True first to adopted country, nobly for their generation
Have they toiled with hand and muscle and the plough and
clearing axe.
ABORIGINAL CEREMONIES AND NAMES.
“Kyoorie” writes from the Barrington:—
In common with many others, I have followed with
keen interest the articles appearing over the names of
Messrs. Allan, Bird, G. S. Hill, and Mrs. Murray, sen.,
incidental to early settlement on the Manning. I re-
gret, however, that much will yet be left unwritten.
Like unto more favored races in the far back ages,
so has it been with out native blacks. They gave to
every creek, flat or hill a name distinctive of some
dead, or illustrative of some natural feature—names
and significations, in most cases, unfortunately, gone
for ever—though, possibly Mr. Allan can supply such.
In the Gloucester district, of which I write, the
aboriginal has left few remains. An almost obliter-
ated bora circle here and there, and stone magos
which Nature cannot obliterate, are fairly plentiful.
Unlike the magos Mr. Allan speaks of, in this district
they have all been composed of black scheelite, seldom
granite. Oblong in shape, and round in face, they
were chipped to the requisite size and shape, and
ground to an even edge, apparently being used with-


out a handle. A red sandstone rock at Kirripit (now
known as Rawdon Vale), has been pointed out as one
spot where they came to grind their magos. Mr. Allan
refers to the strict exclusiveness of the “Bora" cere-
mony, and thereby hangs a tale.
Away back in the early forties, when Simon Lord
yet held Kirripit, and Robert Mackenzie had wan-
dered north to the Darling Downs, Mr. and Mrs. Frost
(parents of the late Mr. S. Frost, of Tigrah) were in
charge of Cobark Station for Messrs. Mackay and
Hooke. On the top of the range, about three miles
distant from the station, along the Curricabark track,
a big “Bora” was in progress, and one of the station
hands, a black boy, named Jimmy Doody, was a can-
didate for initiation into the mysteries. Mrs. Frost,
fresh from the Old Land, and somewhat curious, after
the manner of the daughters of Eve, wished to witness
the ceremony, and would not be gainsaid. She caught
her horse, and reached the scene before she was dis-
covered. She was seized by the blacks, who hid her
under a freshly stripped piece of bark, under guard,
until the ceremony was completed.
Aim
In the last article I alluded to_ aboriginal places
named and their meaning. I notice since that Mr.
Allen has taken the matter up in good earnest, but I
must join issue with him over the meaning of the
terminal Bakh, as I have always understood it to mean
locality or place. For instance, take the name of
Tigrah, on the Upper Manning (ironbark); now' com-
pare Tuggerabakh, near Gloucester, Tuggera (iron-
bark), bakh (place). Again take Curricabark, the
derivation of which is from Kurriea (mouth), bakh
(place), or otherwise the place with the mouth; an
allusion to the physical conformity of the locality, an
upland valley with a very narrow outlet, kaowm as
“The Rocks.” Below this outlet the word Kurriea is
again in evidence; this locality being in old times
known as Currieabundi. So much for the word bakh.


Now for place, names, and their meanings, Dungog
is a corruption of the aboriginal name Toonkang, (a
clean hill) immediately north of the town. Gloucester
Buckets, aboriginal (Booken) a big rock. The story
of Thunderbolt’s cave amongst those rocks is a mere
fable. The better story is that he watched the local
races from behind some thornbushes not far from the
course, and was supplied with spirits, etc, during the
day by two half-castes, who knew of his whereabouts
—one being a brother of the half-caste woman Mary
Ann, who lived with the bushranger. That night
Thunderbolt profited on his inspection, and stole one
of the chief winners, the Monkerai horse. “Martin’s
Wild Hawk.” Wang Wank signifies Flying Fox,
from the beat of their wings when flying. Coeumbark,
aboriginal “Kookumbakh, on the Wallamba, Fig
Tree: place. Giro, aboriginal Girro, the call of the
black satin bird, and Korrobora means the water in
the tree. This tree is on the top of Hungry Hill, not
-at the so-called Corrobora, down on the* Barnard,
Mookinbakh, now Carnies, near Gloucester, from
Mookin (a bandicoot); Bakh (a place); Pignoberny,
aboriginal Pingootnaberny, from Pingoota (water-
hole).; Koorabakh, now Bowman Farm, the place of
the white cedar, and Merimuka, or more correctly,
Eurimukha, near the clouds. Belbora (Easton’s is
much more modern), alludes to the Gangat tragedy
in the early thirties, and is more applicable to Upper
Ghaughat, where the hostile Wallamba natives died
thick from the effects of arsenical poisoning. Grue-
some and dark, is that partly forgotten tale, justifi-
able only in the fact that the unfortunate whites con-
cerned were beleaguered and wounded, and the pois-
oned dampers were their last defensive resort.
To -the blacks the name became an anathema; knew
them no more. Hence the name Baal Bora. But men
were callous, and life was cheap in those far off days,
and tradition tells a yet weirder tale of a blood
bounty at half a crown per head. But enough of this;


it is best forgotten. A few miles above Gloucester lies
a small flat called Bourwillah—a rather suggestive
name ; one of the prevailing rocks there is conglomer-
ate composed largely of small, water-worn stones.
Hence the name from Booey (dead), and Willah (a
small stone), or, in other words, “buried stone.' r
Monkerai is not an aboriginal name. And both
Nowendoc and Berrico are from two watcrholes—one
in the former river just above the station, and the
latter in the creek of the same name. In olden times
Nowendoc was better known as The Mountain. Co-
bark derives its name from a variety of Acacia, on
the river Caruh—not the Forest Lignum Yitia. Raw-
don Vale, from Christopher Rawdon (a surveyor)
during the early twenties. Mount Mackenzie, from
Robert Mackenzie, the proprietor of Kerri put, at the
period of the massacre in '35.
KRAMBACH PIONEERS.
(By
“The Wanderer.
”)
On Saturday last writer had the privilege of having,
a chat with Mr. G. J. Martin, of Krambach, regarding
the “good old days.” Mr, Martin is one of the many
who have read Mr. John Allan’s reminiscences of the
blacks with particular interest. He knows a good
deal about their customs and language himself, and
purposes in the near future to have one of their songs
sung, and placed on one of “Edison’s Records,” by
Mr. Dave Lynch, of Nabiac.
Mr. Martin settled at Krambach in the year 1872,
taking up a selection and building a residence. When
he came Krambachwards the only other neighbours
then were Mr. William Paterson and Mr. Robert
Easton; Mr. Hannah lived on Fire Fly Creek, as also
did Mr. Thomas Kerr. There were very few blacks
then in the vicinity of Krambach. “Larry’s Flat


Tommy” was a familiar figure those clays, and the
remains of this black and his wife were buried down
the Koribar Creek. Then there was another abor-
iginal rejoicing in the name of “Tommy,” but who
was distinguished by placing the prefix “Herkes”
before his name. Ho shuffled off this mortal coil at
Krambach, and Mr. Martin well remembers his
funeral cortege. His remains were carried on a sheet
of bark by two dusky denizens of the soil known as
“Monkey Bobby” and “Bony.” The former was a
short man, while the latter was tall. Thus it is not by
any means difficult to imagine the possibilities of
trouble when the mournful procession came to a steep
pinch. It generally came, did trouble, so Mr. Martin
informed us—and the corpse on several occasions
rolled off the bark on to the ground—through the tall
man being in front and the short one behind. Even-
tually the funeral procession was temporarily
stopped, and a “pad” was made to go on the short
man’s shoulder, and thus “level up” the corpse some-
what. On arrival at the grave it was found that it
was too narrow, and this defect had to be rectified.
The knees of the corpse were tied to the chest, and
into the grave were also placed a new blanket and
various weapons common to the race. It was on such
occasions of mourning that the gins used to hack
their heads about in a most cruel manner, in order,
apparently, to give proof of the grief that was within
them.
The only papers that Mr. Martin remembers circu-
lating in his locality were the “Maitland Mercury”
and the “Manning News.” The latter is “no more,”
but the former is recognised as one of the best pro-
vincial journals in New South Wales to-day.


Expedition Along the North Coast.
Undertaken by order of the British Government in
the years 1817-18.
From John Oxley’s “Expeditions in New South
Wales,” kindly lent by Mr. G. S. Hill, of Bungay, the
following extracts are taken. Governor Macquarie
was the ruling spirit in N.S.W. then, and the colony
was cutting its teeth: —
.... I named this inlet Port Macquarie, in
honor of His Excellency the Governor, the original
promoter of these expeditious.
October 12.—We quitted Port Macquarie at an
early hour on our course homewards, with all those
feelings which the word even in the wilds of Austra-
lia can inspire. We kept at a distance from the sea-
shore for nearly six miles; the country was exceed-
ingly rich, the timber large, with frequent brushes.
Just before we came on the beach xve observed an
extensive fresh water lagoon, running for several
miles behind the beach, bounded on the west by
forest land of good appearance; a strip of sandy land
about three-quarters of a mile wide dividing it from
the sea. At the back of Tacking Point rises a small
stream of fresh water, which hows into the lagoon.
The country is of moderate height. After travelling
near fifteen miles, we stopped at the extremity of a
sandy beach, on a point of good land, with an excel-
lent spring of water rising on it, about four miles
north of the northernmost of the Three Brothers.
Tacking Point bearing N. 25*4 E. Two of our three
remaining dogs had been for the last three flays de-
prived of the use of their limbs; one died this morn-
ing; the other we brought on horseback with us, will-
ing, if possible, to save the life of a valuable and faith-


ful servant. We conjecture that something they had
eaten in the woods must have caused so universal a
paralysis.
October 13.—Crossing the point of land on which
we had been encamped, we came to a sandy beach, on
which we travelled three miles and a half. At the
end of it was an opening safe for boats (and prob-
ably small craft at high water) into an extensive lake.
As we had no canoe by which to cross over, we were
abliged to keep along its north shore, with an inten-
tion of going round it. The lake formed a large basin
with a deep channel, which, as I approached the base
of the northern Brother, narrowed into a river-like
form, and in the course of a mile it again expanded
from the north-north-west to the south-west, to a very
great extent. The land on its eastern side was low
and marshy (fresh water). To the north and north-
west it was bounded by low forest hills, covered with
luxuriant grass; and to the southward and south-west
extended along apparently the same description of
country, nearly to the western base of the Second
Brother. The range of high woody hills laid down
by Captain Flinders dwindle when approached into
low, unconnected forest hills. The Northern Brother,
the highest of the three, is a long hill, of moderate
elevation, and is seen from such a distance in conse-
quence of the other parts of the country being com-
paratively low. The timber was chiefly black-butted
gum, stringy bark, turpentine and forest oak. The
stones are chiefly a hard sandstone. On the lake were
great numbers of black swans, ducks, etc. Various
small inlets from the lake much impeded us, and after
travelling near seven miles along its shores, we halted
for the evening near a small spring of fresh water, in
a good rising grass country. The easternmost highest
part of the North Brother was S. 4, W. From the
observed amplitude of the sun at rising this morning,
the variation was found to be 9, 33. E.
October 14.—We were considerably delayed in our


progress this day by salt water inlets, which occasion-
ed us much trouble to cross, and at length we were
altogether stopped by a very wide and deep one, near
the west end of the lake; it was too late in the day to
take any measures for crossing it this evening; we
therefore pitched our tents on the banks, near a
swamp of fresh water which borders on it and the
lake, from which w'e were distant about one mile and
a half. The inlet was brackish, and must have a con-
siderable body of fresh water near its head. In our
route we had disturbed a large party of natives, some
of whom were busily employed in preparing bark for
a new canoe. There were several canoes on the lake,
in which they all fled in great confusion, leaving their
arms and utensils of every description behind.
One of the canoes was sufficiently large to hold nine
men, and resembled a boat. Of course, we left their
property untouched, though we afterwards regretted
we did not seize one of their canoes, which we might
easily have done. We, however, determined to send
back in the morning for the unfinished canoe, and try
our skill at completing it for use. The ground passed
over for the last six miles was hilly and very stony,
but covered with excellent timber of all descriptions,
and also good grass. There were plenty of kangaroos,
but we had but one dog able to run—so that w r e suc-
ceeded in killing only a small one.
October 15.—A party was sent back early this
morning to secure the canoe, while we examined the
river. The party returned in the course of the fore-
noon, unsuccessful, as the natives had removed it,
with all their effects, in the course of the night, throw-
ing down or destroying their gunyahs or bark huts.
We also found that a mile higher up the river a
branch from it joined that which we last crossed
about two miles back, making an island of the ground
we were upon. The main branch continued to run on
to the north-north-west and north-west. We there-
fore lost no time in returning part of the way do the


entrance into the haven (which we named after Lord
Camden), where we proposed to construct a canoe.
The natives seem very numerous, but are shy. We
many large canoes on the lake, one of which
would be quite sufficient for our purposes.
October 18. —On Friday we returned to the en-
trance of the haven, and immediately commenced our
endeavours to construct a canoe. Our first essays
were unsuccessful, but by Saturday night We had a
bark one completed, which w r e hoped would answer
our purposes—though I think, if the natives saw it,
they would ridicule our rude attempts. This morn-
ing, the ebb tide answering, we commenced trans-
porting our luggage, and in three hours everything
was safe over. A very serious misfortune, however,
occurred in swimming the horses across. Two of
them were seized with the cramp near the middle of
the channel; one with difficulty gained the shore, the
other sank instantly, and was seen no more. He was
one of our best and strongest horses, and even now
their weak state can ill afford a diminution in their
number. This haven appears to have a perfectly safe
entrance for boats and small craft at all time of tide,
except at dead low water, with a strong surge from
the eastward, when it slightly breaks, but is still quite
safe for boats, if not for larger vessels.
When we were in this haven there appeared a safe
and deep channel through the sand shoals that spread
over it. The channel also appeared deep leading into
the inner haven. There is plenty of fresh water in
the swamps on almost every part of the shore on
which we were. All the higher land abounds with
good timber, the points nearest the sea being covered
with Banksia Integrifolia, of large dimensions, fit for
any kind of boat timber. It is high water full and
change at ten minutes after nine, and the tide appears
to rise between four and six feet. From a point near
the entrance several bearings were taken; and we
also saw another large lake, or perhaps fresh water


lagoon, under the southernmost of the Three Brothers.
A°sunken rock was also discovered off to sea, lying
upwards of two miles from the next point southerly to
us j a deep, clear channed lies between it and the shore.
At’one o’clock we departed, and by sunset had accom-
plished near 14 miles of our journey. We saw the
large lake under The Brothers from a high point on
the coast very clearly, and found that on the north
it was bounded by the North Brother, and separated
from the sea by a strip of low marshy land, about
three-quarters of a mile wide. This lake, I think, is a
fresh water one. It was named Watson Taylor’s
Lake. The country west and southerly of The Bro-
thers consisted of low forest hills, and a range of hills
of moderate height, the entrance of which bore west-
south-west, distant twenty or twenty-five miles, ended
near Cape Hawke, the country being, to that range,
very low, with marshes. A strip of sandy land, half
a mile wide, bounds the shore, on which is good grass
and water. On the beach, where we halted, we found
a small boat, nearly buried in the sand, but quite per-
fect. It had belonged to one Mills, which had been
lost some time ago, and the crew of which perished.
October 19.—Proceeded on our journey up the
coast. On attempting to cut off a point of land, which
would have saved us a distance of some miles, we
found that the low part of the country was an entire
freshwater swamp, interspersed with thick, barren-
brushes, in all respects resembling the country be-
tween Sydney and Botany Bay. We therefore re-
turned again on the beach, and crossing nearer to the
point in question, found the remains of a hut, which
had evidently been constructed by Europeans, the
saw and axe having been employed on it. About four
miles further on the beach, towards Cape Hawke, our
progress was stopped by a very extensive inlet, the
mouth of which was nearly a mile wide. It was near
high water, and the sea broke right across, with
tremendous violence, affording us little hope, circum-


staneed as we were, of being able to effect a passage.
As we had always experienced the difficulty, not to
say impracticability of attempting to go round such
inlets as these, we stopped about half a mile inside
the entrance, on a spot affording good grass and
water for the horses, the greater number of which
were entirely knocked up, insomuch that I began to
fear that we would take very few of them to New-
castle. It being early in the day, a party proceeded
to explore the shores of the inlet, to ascertain if it was
possible for us to proceed round it. After several
hours’ examination, and walking from six to eight
miles, we were obliged to give up all intention of pro-
ceeding circuitously, and found that our efforts must
be directed to effect a passage near the entrance,
since numerous fresh water rivers, having their
source in deep and impassable swamps or lagoons,
presented an insurmountable barrier to the horses.
The main inlet extended in two wide and extensive
branches to the south-west and west, the termination
of which could not be seen, the water being apparent-
ly deep—and the country to the westward rising into
forest hills. In this perplexing situation, with no
other prospect before us but that of effecting our pas-
sage in a bark canoe, andl being obliged to leave the
horses behind us (since the width of the channel,
which at low water we had the satisfaction to per-
ceive, did not exceed a quarter of a mile, and the
extreme rapidity of the tide, which ran at the rate
of at least three miles per hour) precluded all reason-
able hope that, in their present weak state they would
have strength to swim over. In this state, the boat
which had been washed on the beach suddenly oc-
curred to us. It was true that we were twelve or
fourteen miles distant from it, and that we should
have to carry her that distance on men’s shoulders;
but to persons in our situation such difficulties were
as nothing. It was therefore determined that twelve
men should depart before daybreak and use their


efforts to bring her to the tent, whilst those who re-
mained to take care of the horses and baggage should
be preparing material to give her such repair as must
necessarily be required. We had now fully experi-
enced how little dependence can be placed on the best
marine charts, to show all the inlets and openings
upon an extensive line of coast. Perhaps no charts
can be more accurate than those published by Cap-
tain Flinders, the situation of the principal headlands
and capes, with the direction of the coast, being laid
down with the most minute attention; but the dist-
ance at which he was obliged to keep, although it did
not prevent him from laying the coast line down with
an accuracy of outline sufficient for all nautical pur-
poses, did not allow him to perceive openings which,
though doubtless of little consequence to shipping,
present the most serious obstacles to travellers by
land, and of which, if they had been laid down in the
chart, I should have hesitated to have attempted the
passage without some assistance from the seaward, or
means wherewith to have constructed boats. From
our station on the north shore of the inlet the extreme
of Cape Hawke bore south 714. W., and the highest
part of the Southern Brother north 16V2- W. A break
in the land between high ranges of hills bore west,
and was distant from i 7 to 20 miles. Black swans
are very numerous on this inlet. Few marks of the
natives having remained here for any time were ob-
served, at least on this side; recent marks of two men
having traversed the shore being all that were seen.
October 20.—At four o’clock the people set out to
bring the boat and at two o’clock they had brought
her safely to the tent, having gone in that time up-
wards of twenty-six miles, thirteen of which they
carried a twelve-feet boat on their shoulders, a proof
how much may be effected by a steady perseverance.
In fact, I had no occasion to be anxious for the result
of any measure which at all depended on their per-
sonal exertions. We had the satisfaction to find that


the boat would be easily repaired, wanting little be-
sides caulking and oars, and we did not lose a moment
in commencing the necessary operations. It has blown
a gale of wind from the south all day, the surge break-
ing across the inlet with extreme violence. Within
the bar the water is very deep, and in moderate wea-
ther at Hood tides there is doubtless a boat passage
over the bar; for, notwithstanding the break, there
appears a sufficient depth of water. Whatever chan-
nel there may be is on the north side of the entrance.
I think, from the height of the rise of tide (between
four and seven feet), and the rapidity with which it
runs, that this inlet must penetrate a very consider-
able distance into the country, and probably the lake
which we took to be fresh water under the two South-
ern Brothers, may be a principal branch of this lake.
It appears to be high water at the full and change at
about forty minutes after nine.
October 22. —Yesterday was employed in giving the
boat such repairs as our means permitted. Before six
o’clock this morning we had transported a good part
of the baggage, when, the tide answering, we began
towing the horses over, which we safely effected by
half-past eight. I consider the discovery of this boat
most providential, for without its assistance we
should never have been able to transport the horses;
being obliged to cross near the entrance, the force of
the tide and their own weakness would have swept
them among the breakers, and they would consequent-
ly have perished. We lost no time in pursuing our
journey on the coast, and had by four accomplished
six miles, when, to our great mortification, another
inlet barred our progress. The southerly gale, attend-
ed with incessant rain, had by this time increased to
such a degree that we could take no steps this even-
ing to cross it. By the time the tents were pitched
everything was drenched with rain, and I think we
felt the cold it occasioned more severely than on any
simflar occasion. I should be of opinion that this inlet


communicated with the one we last crossed, as bran-
ches from each take such courses as would, I think,
cause them to unite. The last inlet was named Har-
rington Lake, in honor of the noble earl of that title.
October 23.—The storm continued through the
night. Late in the morning we had intervals of fine
weather, wdien all our strength was immediately des-
patched to bring up our little boat, as we found that
we could not cross without its aid. When the people
returned with the boat, it blew with such violence
that we dared not venture to cross in her. We, how-
ever moved a little nearer the point of entrance, to be
more conveniently situated when the weather should
clear up. The men voluntarily undertook to carry
the boat on their shoulders until we should pass Port
Stephens—a service, reduced as their strength was by
constant exertion, I should have been unwilling to im-
pose on them, hoAvever it might facilitate our future
progress to some considerable extent.
October 24.—The weather was so extremely un-
favorable (blowing in violent squalls, with almost
constant rain) that it was near dark before we got
everything safely over. I had sent on in the morning
to examine the beach for a few miles, and another
inlet was discovered about four miles in advance. We
named this lake Farquhar’s Lake, after Sir Walter.
October 25. —From the southern point of entrance
into this lake the following bearings were taken. The
highest part of the South Brother, north, 6. E.; ditto
North Brother, north, 18. E.; Cape Hawke, south, 3. E.
We set forward at our usual hour. At a mile along
the beach we found the wreck of a small vessel, which
was recognised to be the Jane, of Sydney, belonging
to Mills, before mentioned as the owner of the boat
in our possession. It being low water when we arriv-
ed at the lagoon seen yesterday, we crossed it at the
mouth, without unloading the horses. We proceeded
along the beach for six or seven miles further, and en-
tered an excellent rising forest country, with rich


•thick brushes, bordering the coast line. We travelled
in the whole about nine miles and a half, and halted
.about three-quarters of a mile from the beach, from a
point of which (one mile south-south-east of us) we
.saw Cape Hawke bearing 73. S., distant six or eight
miles, and at the extremity of a long curving sandy
beach, about six miles west of the same point there
was an opening which from the appearance of the
-country, we thought might probably form a lake.
October 26. —Two miles and a half farther travel-
ling brought us again to the beach, along which we
went for near seven miles more, when the opening or
lake seen from the point yesterday obliged us to make
use of our boat. On the opposite side to us we sa'w the
wreck of the brig Governor Hunter, now nearly cover-
ed with sand, at high water the tide washing over her.
We had got the horses and great part of the luggage
safely over, and I was on the point of setting out to
look for a place to turn the horses on (the immediate
margin of the bay being a swampy brush), when an
alarm was given that the natives had speared one of
the people. Previous to crossing, we had seen them
in great numbers on the side opposite to us, probably
to the amount of seventy of all ages; but on seeing us
launch our boat they got into canoes and w T ent two or
-three miles farther up the lake, still keeping on the
south side. On the north side we did not see any
natives, and although on both sides of the lake we
were prepared for them, had they shown themselves
in numbers on the beach, yet all were not on their
.guard against individual treachery. One of the men,
William Blake, had entered the brushes about a hun-
dred yards from the rest of the people on the north
side, with the design of cutting a cabbage palm; he
had cut one about half through, when he received a
spear through his back, the point of it sticking against
his breastbone.
On turning his head round to see from whence he
was attacked, he received another, which passed sev-


eral inches through the lower part of his body. He
let fall the axe with which he was cutting, and which
was instantly seized by a native, the only one he saw;,
and it was probably the temptation of the axe that
was the principal incitement to the attack. Blake was
immediately put into the boat and sent over to the
south side, where the doctor was, who, fortunately,
succeeded in extracting both the spears, but from the
nature of the wound his chance of recovery was con-
sidered very doubtful. It was so late before every-
thing was got over that we were obliged to remain on
the spot close to the wreck of the Governor Hunter.
The natives before dark had assembled in great num-
bers, and we could count twelve or fourteen fires from
their camps. United as we were, we had little to fear
from their attacks, particularly in the night, and we
remained so short a time at any place that we did not
give them time to make any concerted attack. The
country west and south-west of this lagoon is rising
forest land of pleasant appearance; but the shores are
flat, with thick brushes and steep fresh water swamps.
The lagoon itself is at low water nothing but a sand
shoal, with narrow and shallow channels. The surf
beats quite across the entrance, and though at high
water a small vessel might beat over the bar, it would
be a mere chance if she escaped being lost upon the
sand-rollers inside, the surf breaking with a flood tide
and easterly winds full half a mile within the outer
bar. The tides run near four miles per hour, and the
rise is from five to eight feet. From the south side of
the entrance into the lake the highest part of the
North Brother bore north 15. E., ditto of the South
Brother, North 8.10. E. The point of land of the bay
northerly, distant seven or eight miles north 8.30 E. ;
and a high bluff point or projection southerlv. north
163.30. E.
October 27.—We did not make much progress this
day, being greatly embarrassed by the thick brushes
which border on the coast in the vicinity of Cape


Hawke, and fresh water swamps near the edge of the
lake. There was, however, a good deal of forest land,
and the brushes grew in good soil. We halted in the
afternoon, having gone only four miles (Cape Hawke
bearing east distant two miles and a half), on a piece
of forest land surrounded by brush, through which*
however, in the course of the evening we cut a road
to the beach, to the southward of Cape Hawke. From
a hill on that line we saw that the lake was much
more extensive than it was first supposed to be, reach-
ing in a southerly direction to the base of the forest
hills, which run a north-west line from the next point
of south of Cape Hawke, and within a quarter of a
mile of the beach. To the north-west we could trace
it upwards of twenty miles, winding among forest
hills and a generally fine looking country. The lake
was studded with numerous islands of forests lands,
the interior of the lake being apparently deep water
with sandy beaches to the main and islands. The
whole appearance of the lake was extremely pic-
turesque and beautiful.
October 28.—This day’s journey afforded tolerably
good travelling, with the exception of the last two
miles, when, quitting the beach, we ascended a high
hill over the lake, and again ascended to a small bay
under a point of land south of Cape Hawke, where we
halted for the evening, having accomplished ten miles.
Although we w r ere obliged to halt the greater part of
the day, the extreme heat of the weather, combined
with the motion of the horse, rendered it impossible
for our poor wounded man to proceed. From this
point Cape Hawke bore North Peak on ditto 357.,
highest part of the South Brother, N.1.E,; North
Brother, N.7.E.; line of coast westerly, N. 306., a point
N. 328% mile; ditto N. 136% E. ten or twelve chains
islet of Sugarloaf Point, N. 168. The rocks off ditto,
N. 173.; Sugarloaf Point 174%.
October 29.—The coast projecting into bold and
perpendicular headlands obliged us to keep a distance


from it, and travel over an elevated range, from
whence we saw that an extensive series of lakes, pro-
bably forming one large one, continued at the back
of the coast line nearly as far as Blackhead. At five
miles we descended from the range on a small beach
which terminated our day’s journey; the nature of
the coastline preventing us from travelling along it.
I therefore went with two men to mark out a road
for the horses to the beach on the south-west side of
Sugarloaf Point. The line we were obliged to pursue,
led us through a most miserable scrubby country,
formed into irregular steep hills of white sand, with-
out a blade of grass or herbage of any kind; but with
abundance of small black butted gums, red gums, etc.
We found the road across to be too far for us to at-
tempt this evening. Indeed it was near sunset when
1 returned to the tent. The natives are extremely
numerous along this part of the coast; these extensive
lakes, which abound with fish, being extremely favor-
able to their easy subsistence; large troops of them
appear on the beaches, whilst their canoes on the lakes
are equally numerous. In the morning their fires are
to be observed in every direction; they evidently
appear to shun us, and we have no wish for a further
acquaintance. When we stopped for the night, the
lake was only separated from the sea by a narrow
neck of sand, and at spring tides, with an easterly
wind, it must be forced over it. The neck of sand
appears likely to be occasionally washed away, and to
form a shallow opening into this portion of the lake.
Its principal entrance I expect to find southerly, we
however observed no tides in it, which makes us con-
clude it will have but a shoal entrance. From this
point, the Sugarloaf Point, and island of it in one,
bore N. li 1 /*, and the direction of the lake was N. 275.
October 30.—We passed for five miles and a half
through the country described yesterday, when we
arrived on the beach south-west of the Sugarloaf
Point. The rock off ditto bearing N. 88. E.; Shoal off


'ditto, 120., and Blackhead, N. 212.%.; we went nearly
•six miles further on the beach, and halted near a
rocky point for the evening. This beach was a pecu-
liarly productive one to us; a great number of fine fish
resembling salmon, had been pursued through the
■surf by larger fish, and were left dry by the retiring
fide; we picked up thirty six, and a welcome prize
they proved to us. We had just got the tents pitched,
when a number of unarmed natives appeared on the
bills near us, and among them a woman and a child.
As they came in peace, so in peace were they received.
They approached the tents without any hesitation,
and in the course of an hour, their numbers amounted
to upwards of thirty, men, women, and children. Most
of these people seemed to have been at Newcastle, and
appeared a friendly and peaceable set. We did all
in our power to continue these good dispositions by
shaving the men, cutting the hair of the children,
and bestowing on them such little articles as we could
spare, not without a hope that our kindness might be
of services to others, who might under different cir-
cumstances be thrown among them. They were so far
from showing the least jealousy of their women, that
every circumstance indicated that their favors might
be purchased. However that may be we did not
avail ourselves of this privilege. Kindling their fires
close to our tents, they seemed to have taken up their
quarters for the night. The weather had appeared to
threaten rain, and as they all departed about ten
o’clock, it was attributed to the circumstance of their
being without shelter, and we expected a friendly
visit from them in the morning. From this station
Blackhead bore N. 197., and the island off Sugarloaf
Point N. 70. L. The peak over the north entrance into
Port Stephens, N. 211.
October 31.—The rain of the night still continuing
in the morning, and the tide not being sufficiently low
to let us pass round the head, we did not set off so
early as usual. Dr. Harris and Mr. Evans had gone


to bathe near the point, and within one hundred and’
fifty yards of the tent. Mr. Evans had already bathed
and had begun to dress himself, when four natives,
whom we recognised as being among those whom wfr
had treated so kindly yesterday, made their appear-
ance with their spears in their hands, in the attitude
of throwing them from the cliffs above. There was.
scarcely time to parley with them, when a spear was
thrown at Mr. Evans, Dr. Harris having leaped down
the rock into the sea, and escaped to the tent under its
shelter. The spear fortunately missed Mr. Evans, and
he likewise escaped with the loss of his clothes, by fol-
lowing the doctor’s example. On the alarm being
given they were pursued, but they had disappeared
among the brush on the hill. This instance of their
treachery redoubled our circumspection, and our
situation here being favorable for their attacks, I de-
termined to pass over the brow ofi the hill with the
horses—a road which from its extreme steepness I had
been willing to avoid by waiting for the tide, and
orders were given to collect the horses and proceed
on our route. Whilst this was doing, and as I was
sitting in the tent with Dr, Harris and Mr. Evans
writing this journal, a shower of spears from the
height above was thrown at the tent, one of which
passed directly over my shoulder, and entered the
ground at my feet; the others lodged around the tent,
and among the people who were getting ready the
baggage, but providentially without doing any harm.
We had stationed men to watch the hill, but the ap-
pearance of the natives and the flight of their spears
was so instantaneous that they had no time to alarm
us. To enable us therefore to proceed in safety it was
necessary to clear the hill, which was soon done, for
on our ascending that hill they took their station oit
another more distant. We travelled unmolested along
the beach for upwards of twelve miles, when we halt-
ed for the. evening on a small point of clear land,
which at high water was an island. Here we found


ourselves secure; vve had, however, but just unladen
when three natives were seen coming along the beach
from the side of Port Stephens. We knew that the
party which had behaved so treacherously had gone
that way, and we suspected that these men were sent
to see whether we were disposed to resent their con-
duct ; they appeared unarmed, each holding up a fish
as a peace offering to us; but when they were within
three hundred yards of us, they stopped, and not re-
ceiving any encouragement from us to advance, after
halting a few minutes they returned with all speed
along the beach to their companions. I had deter-
mined if they had approached nearer to have made
an example of them, and for the future never to
suffer them to come near us at all. I was very much
surprised to find that Blackhead proved to be an
island, with a good passage, at least a mile and a half
wide, between it and the main. There appears excel-
lent anchorage and shelter under it, and indeed it
seems a far better and more convenient roadstead
than Port Stephens, being safe from all winds, with
a passage either from north or south. The relative
positions of the points and islands on this part of the
coast, by no means correspond with, nor does the
longitude of Port Stephens agree with that assigned
to Sugarloaf Point by Captain Flinders, who com-
menced at that point; Port Stephens, and this part
of the coast, being laid down from other authorities.
From this point, the north head of Port Stephens
bore N. 199.; Sugarloaf Point N. 45. E.; and several
other bearings were taken for a sketch of the channel
between Blackhead Island and the main.
November I.—We departed early in the morning
and at three o’clock arrived at Port Stephens. The-
natives had assembled in considerable numbers at the
back of the beach, and being armed, we suspected
their intention to be to throw at us from the bank and
brush as we passed. On the advance of four men
who were sent to clear the bank of them, they quickly


retired l , and did not show themselves again until we
had passed. They appeared to be as cowardly as
treacherous, and I am convinced that all the mischief
they do arises from a misplaced confidence in their
seeming friendly dispositions. A single person off his
guard is sure to fall a sacrifice to their thirst for
plunder. As we were unable to pass this port without
the assistance of a large boat, it was determined that
Mr. Evans and three men should cross the port in our
own boat and proceed to Newcastle, from which
settlement we were distant about sixty-six miles, and
procure such aid as the commandant could afford us,
together with a supply of provisions, our men being
nearly exhausted.
November 5. —Mr. Evans and party set forward at
•daylight on Monday morning, and arrived the same
■evening at Newcastle. The commandant, Captain
Wallis, of the 46th regiment, lost not a moment in
despatching a large boat with an abundance of every
•comfort that could be acceptable to travellers in our
situation. We had also the satisfaction to learn gen-
erally the welfare of our friends in Sydney.
OLD IDENTITIES.
An interesting old gentleman is Mr. James
Northam, of Killawarra (father of Mrs. W. W. Bird).
Mr. Northam came to the Manning in 1857, and has
resided here ever since. During a chat with Mr. T.
J. Irvine on Saturday, sth April, 1913, Mr. W. Fother-
ingham and writer also being present, the old chap
recalled the fact that he had done some clearing work
for the late David Irvine at “Wambatina,” Dingo
Creek, about 40 years ago. Air. Northam well remem-
bers the fiour mill on the lower Dingo, known as
Wallace’s Mill.” He says it was run by Mr. W. R.


Wallace’s grandfather. Though rheumatics are now
troubling Mr. Northam somewhat, he still looks as
lively as a “three-year old.” Mentally, he is as clear
as the noonday sun, and he naturally delights to meet
the friends of bygone days—those days when the
flower of youth bloomed brighter.
One of the old school of pioneers is Mr. R. Broom-
field, of Bow Hill. He arrived on the Manning in
April, ’52, coming here from the Paterson. All things
considered, Father Time has been kind to Mr. Broom-
field, and he is still healthy and active. He was two-
years on the Manning before any goods could be se-
cured from Sydney at all. Mr. Broomfield has watch-
ed the district grow during the intervening years, and
it is men of his stamp who have helped it to become
the reproductive centre it is to-day.
CHURCH PROGRESS.
Church of England, Manning River, 1857 to 1913,
3lr. H. J. Hammond writes: —
In the year 1857 the Manning was part of the Port
Macquarie Parish. At that time the late Canon
O’Reilly was in charge of an area extending from the
Macleay on the North, to Port Stephens on the South.
He made quarterly visits to the Manning, and began
the building of St. John’s, Taree, in 1858. The parish
was later divided, the Rev. W. C. Hawkins taking
charge of the district from Camden Haven on the
North, to Forster on the South. Between 1858 and
1871 the following churches were erected: Old St.
Matthew’s, Wingham; St. Luke’s, Tinonee; St.
Thomas’, Cundle; Trinity Church, Scott’s Creek, and
another at Mambo Island; also the Parsonage at
Taree, and another Church at Marlee. Not a bad
record for 25 years’ labor by the pioneer clergyman.


Old St. Matthew’s, Wingham, was opened in 1871,
and was rebuilt in 1902. In 1882 the Parish of Taree
was divided, and the Upper Manning Parish came into
existence.
About 1884 the Rev. W. C. Hawkins resigned his
position as Incumbent of Taree Church, and the Rev.
R. H. Phillips (now Canon Phillips) took up the work,
and, with the assistance of the Rev. Mr. Crotty, work-
ed up the Coopernook Parish, which has been carried
on since by the Revs. Crotty, C. S. Hornabrook,
Reader, Campbell, Hilder, and various lay readers.
Wallamba Parish has been separated some time
from the Wingham Parish, and now constitutes a
Parish of its own.
During the past 50 years the Wingham Parish has
seen many changes in its Clergy and Bishops. The
Chancel Chairs in St. Matthew’s to-day carry with
them a silent record of those who have sat there. The
Bishops are: Bishop Tyrell, Bishop Pearson, Bishop
Stanton, and Bishop Stretch. The Clergy are: Revs.
W. C. Hawkins, Swindlehurst, Brown, Hill, Walker,
Thomas, Wright, Musgrove, Conolly, Campbell, and
Kitley.
Rev. Father O’Reilly presides over the Catholic
section of the Manning community, and has the able
assistance of Rev. Father Kelly.


OUR AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
A DOOMED RACE.
s(By
Edmund Milne,
, Superintendent Western Division
N.S.W. Railways.)
When the white Caucasian, lured by the love of
adventure and the lust of power, claimed this island
continent for his own, he found the coastal lands, the
mountains, the great inland rivers and plains, each
held by families, clans and tribes of dark-tinted
people—some copper-colored with varying shades to
nubian black. A strange folk—primitive of the pri-
mitive —living the lives of nomadic hunters and
fishers, a replica of the life story of the white savages
of 10,000 years ago. A people of the wild—a folk
hard to understand, when gauged by the 18th century
standard.
The later years of the 19th and the dawn of the 20th
century find science asking loud and long: Where did
these strange relics of man’s past come from—when
did the tide of man’s migration to this great lonely
southern land commence—from which of the world’s
races did he spring? One hundred years ago the
white invaders’ attitude towards this primitive folk
was one of contemptuous indifference, such as is com-
mon to the lot of a community which can be exploited
without fear of consequences or retaliation. Confident
in the superiority of his force and his arms, utterly
careless of the claims of the original owners of the
soil—Might became Right. The black man was early
taught the bitter lesson that his age-old camps, his
hunting grounds, aye, even his freedom, was his no
longer, and his neck must bow to the yoke of the con-
quering pale face.
The savages of New Holland had no Maori Honi


Heke, or Te Paite, or Zulu Ceterrago to weld and link
up the scattered tribes and clans into a compact and
dangerous fighting force, and so their ancient power-
crumbled away like a sand ridge before the onward
rush of a rising tide.
That the Australian aboriginal was not lacking in
courage is an historical fact. Right through the re-
cords of white settlement, dating from the dawn of
discovery, when, at Kurnell, two Botany Bay tribes-
men, armed only with their reed spears and wooden
lances, with boomerang and nulla, having watched the-
great white winged monster approach, stood forth
and challenged Capt. Cook and his armed sailors and
marines when they essayed to disembark —two naked
savages against an armed ship’s crew. If any further
evidence is required remember Jacky Jacky fighting
a lone hand for his dying leader, the gallant explorer
Kennedy in the jungles of Northern Queensland, or
read the records of Oxley and Evans, Sturt and Hume,
Mitchell and Stuart, explorers, who met the dark man
for the first time, and before the native Australian
was tainted, poisoned and ruined by contact with the
superior conquering race.
Science in the 20th century regrets, and has cause
to regret, the shameful neglect of 100 years ago.
Never again in the history of this old world of ours
can such an opportunity occur for primeval man to be
studied—his life story learned and his connection
with the world’s races analysed. Had this been done
systematically and thoroughly, when Australia was a
virgin land, what a flashlight of knowledge would
have been thrown on the history screen of the dawn of
mankind!
The celebrated Figuier says: “A knowledge of the
manners and customs of the Australian Aborigines
has conduced much to the success of the endeavours
to reconstruct a similar system of manners and cus-
toms in respect to the men of the quarternary age.”


How was this opportunity handled? How were
these interesting units of past age approached? Lis-
ten to this extract from the Government “Gazette”
of the day:—
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 27th July, 1842.
PORT PHILIP.
His Excellency the Governor has been pleased to
order the re-publication of the following notice of the
IMh April, 1842, and to direct that the reward of one
hundred pounds, or a free pardon and passage to Png-
land, be extended to any of the parties engaged in the
murder of the aboriginal natives, who were not prin-
cipals in the first degree, or did not actually fire the
shots causing death, and who may turn Queen’s evi-
dence.
By His Excellency’s Command,
E. DBAS THOMSON.
(COPY.) ' t
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 18th April, 1842.
ONE HUNDRED POUNDS REWARD
OR
A FREE PARDON AND PASSAGE TO
ENGLAND.
Whereas it has been represented to the Government
that on the night of 23rd February last a party of six
or more Europeans surprised a number of Aboriginal
natives sleeping in a tea-scrub, in the immediate
vicinity of the station of Messrs. Smith and Osbrey,
in the Portland Bay district, and then and there bar-


barously murdered three Aboriginal females and one
male child, by gun or pistol shots, besides wounding
a fourth female; His Excellency the Governor directs
it to be notified that a reward of one hundred pounds
will be paid to any free person or persons (except the
actual perpetrators) who shall give such information
as shall lead to the conviction of the parties guilty of
the above crime; and if the party giving such inform-
ation be a prisoner of the Crown, application will be
made to Her Majesty for the allowance of a free par-
don and passage to England to such prisoner of the
Crown.
By His Excellency’s Command,
E. DBAS THOMSON.
This was no isolated outbreak of white man’s
savagery. Remember the Myall Creek (New Eng-
land) massacre —one of the very few cases where the
long arm of justice gripped the murderers. What of
the poisoned flour bags left for the bush wanderers
to find and to use —what of the hideous unwritten
records of the black police? Of a surety the history
of Anglo Saxon colonisation holds no more awful,
shameful memories than those of the passing of the
Australian neoliths and the Tasmanian paleoliths.
It has been fashionable up till quite recent years,
for the Australian savage to be described as repre-
sentative of the “lowest and most degraded of man-
kind.” In short, a prototype of the “missing link.”
This is born of ignorance and prejudice, and will not
bear analysis.
Professor Huxley claims for them a “relation with
the ancient Egyptians.”
Major Mitchell describes them: “In manners and
general intelligence, they appear superior to any class
of white rustics that I have ever met.”
Professor J. W. Gregory says: “Instead of finding
them degraded, lazy, selfish, and savage, I found them
courteous, intelligent, generous (to a point of ira-


pudence), and phenomenally honest. Of course, there
were exceptions.”
*Tis true the tribe did not cultivate the land. Why
should they? The sea, the rivers, the swamps, the
scrubs, the forest lands, the plains, each in turn yield-
ed food supplies. They were criticised because they
built no houses or dwelling places. Sturt describes a
village of 70 huts, each capable of holding 12 to 15
men, on the banks of the Darling River, in 1829. The
gunyahs, mia mias, and whurleys, flimsy and frail,
sufficed. The rock shelters of the coast and the moun-
tains were facsimiles of those used by pre-historic
white man.
They were condemned as degraded because the need
for clothing was not felt—beyond the use of skin
cloaks and waist girdles. Granted; but it is only a
replica of our primeval forefathers. It has been sug-
gested that the tendency of the present, as exem-
plified in the surf bathing exhibitions of highly civil-
ized and educated nations, is to return to the simple
attire—or lack or it—of primitive man.
That they had no language, other than oral, is cpiite
wrong. Their sign language, smoke signal code, mes-
sage sticks, aborglyphs (or carven trees), and tree-
tapping tell quite a different tale. If neighbouring
tribes could not understand each others language—
well, we need not look further than our homeland for
a present-day example of the same thing. That their
knowledge of medicine and surgery was childish.
Was it? The old-time “Karadja,” or Medicine Man,
or Wise Woman, knew the secrets of root and leaf, of
herb and plant—secrets which the white usurper
would like to know to-day. Granted that the Kar-
adja, with his magic stones, and his absurd jugglery,
may be an object of derision, it was really a form or
type of faith healing; and after all our 20th century
civilization and education can to-day be relied upon
to produce evidence of grosser credulity and more
simple gullibility.


Let us look at the credit side of the ledger. The in-
vention and evolution of the boomerang, comprising
the comeback, ceremonial, hunting and fighting types;
the invention and evolution of the womerah, or spear-
thrower, prove beyond doubt that the Australian sav-
age intelligence had grappled with and mastered an
art of propulsion foreign to other races. The avail-
able evidence of the use of boomerangs as we know
them amongst the ancient Egyptians and Central
Americans is not convincing. The bewildering
variety and forms of weapons for close in fighting,
such as seen in the nulla and boondie; the reed hunt-
ing javelin, the barbed and jagged fighting lance, and
the three and four pronged and barbed fishing spear;
the beauty of form as shown in the triangular, flat,
bevelled, wide or narrow heleman or shields with their
marvellously accurate carving and coloring, all relate
a tale of intelligence and industry of no low order.
The wooden food dishes and coolamen, the stone mills
and grinders, pounders and scrapers; the wonderfully
delicate sense of touch and knowledge of stone as
shown in the chipped and carven, wrought and polish-
ed stone hatchets, knives, adzes, rubbers, etc., speak
for themselves.
Of their hunting and fishing skill chapters might
be written. When Sturt discovered the Darling and
Bogan Rivers, he noted in one camp two nets “beauti-
fully made, each about 90 yards long—one evidently
for snaring emus, and the other for fishing purposes.”
The stone fishing traps or mazes of the inland rivers
and the staked yards on the coastal estuaries repeat
the tale of applied intelligence of a high order. And
what of their watercraft? When, in 1818, Oxley first
traversed the coast line south from Port Macquarie,
he discovered and named Camden Haven, and there he
noted many large canoes, one of which would hold
nine men, and resembled a boat. On Oct. 18, 1818, he
reported that: “We commenced our endeavours to
construct a canoe; our first essays were unsuccessful,


but by Saturday night we had a bark one complete,
though I think if the natives saw it they would ridi-
cule our rude attempts.” And this was the effort of
educated white men using steel tools.
When the mighty Murrumbidgee came down in
high flood, and the town of Gundagai disappeared in
the raging torrents, the bark canoe made and man-
aged by an Australian savage, came to the rescue in
that time of horror, and the courage and skill of one
of the despised “inferior race” shone out like the
Southern Cross over the edge of a sombre thunder
cloud.
Of their marvellous bush craft, their wizard-like
power of sight and intuition; of their petroglyphs or
rock carvings, or their pickgraphs or rock paintings,
each typical of the struggling birth of the artistic
instinct in war—the Genesis of the great masters of
color and form, whose art is a natural heirloom. But
why continue? Proof enough and to spare is avail-
able.
TO-DAY.
A few pitiful fragments of once powerful tribes of
happy, carefree nomads, are all that are left to tell the
tale. To our children and to future generations of
Australians the aboriginal will be only a vague
shadow of a memory. For the fair fame of the land
we love—our own Australia—do not let us repeat the
crime of ten decades ago. Surely we of to-day, should
strive to preserve from destruction and spoliation the
relics of these much misunderstood and shamefully
treated clans. We have realised too late his value as
a link with the great world’s mystic past; we have
belatedly admitted his merits and his virtues; let ns
now do what we can—each in his or her own sphere—
even in this eleventh hour—to perpetuate the life,
glory, and preserve from utter extinction and abso-
lute annihilation, the memories of the nealothic man of
Australia, and the paleolithic man of Tasmania.


DISTRICT IDENTITIES.
Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Woodward, Sen.
The Manning and Wallamba districts can hold
their own with any other centre of the State for old
identities. Mr. Joseph Woodward, sen., of Nabiac, is
in the front rank of present-day veterans. Though
absolutely deaf, Mr. Woodward is otherwise hale and
hearty, and his sight is really remarkable. He
asserts that he left the old land about 1830—in the
year of the Bristol riots—being then about 20 years
of age. Mr. Woodward claims now to be 100 years
and 5 months old; but, according to figures supplied
by him some seven years ago, he will have,attained
in December next the age of 105 years. His wife
died some 14 years ago. The old gentleman now re-
sides with his son, Mr. James Woodward, at “River-
view,” Nabiac; and it may be of interest to mention
that on Friday, May 22nd, 1914, this sturdy pioneer
walked, unaided, to a Nabiac store, fully one mile, to
make a purchase of clothing for himself. Mr. Wood-
ward was camped at South Head on the memorable
night of the wreck of the ill-fated “Dunbar”—in
1857—and was present at the hauling to safety of the
sole survivor, Johnstone. On Sunday last, May 24th,
1914, the old chap related to Mr. J. Ward, of Nabiac,
various incidents associated with this shipping calam-
ity as though it only occurred yesterday. Mrs. John
Thompson, of Wingham, is a daughter of Mr. Wood-
ward’s—the eldest member of the family, in fact.
The Late Mr. and Mrs. R. Hardy, Nabiac.
The late Mr. Richard Hardy, whose death occurred
at the latter end of 1913, was another identity of the
Wallamba, He first saw the light of day in England,


Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Woodward, Senr., Nabiac.
( From a photo taken about 22 years ago.)


The late Mr. and Mrs. R. Hardy, Nabiac.
(From a photo taken when Mr. Hardy was in his 100th year.)


, * vpflv 1812 and was credited
towards the close of tie 5 lamp o£ life
with being 103 yeaii i t H = rd knew Sydney when
went out. file latt • , , j mow —its streets
there was not much o d circular Quay
ivcro was intersected by
was a bay whose san o , o treani n 0 trace of
what was known as ne 0 f the first settlers
which exists to-day. He Dr i me val forest dis-
appear the soil wasgood, and smilmg
P, Hfjf-?"* grandfathers, while the
old identity s sons are grc e, attaine d the dig-
His descendants
numbered about 250 souls.
Mrs. Lawrence Gallagher.
Mrs. Lawrence Gallagher is one of the identities of
2fJw«w MwA Her mMw «« P*SS
S With her late husband, who died m 1898
Sroailagher settled first at Matted. wh«s they
larobba 'SiSC. alK' olLrned 23 years
“next moving on to Krambach, in the year 18/7.


Krambaeh was then known as “Larry’s Flat Cattle
Station.” They took up land, and here it was that
Mr. Gallagher died, his mortal remains resting to-day
in the village cemetery. The family originally
totally 14, but nine remain to-day—five sons and four
daughters. The sons are: Messrs. John J,, Thomas,
Laurence, Gerald, and Michael; the daughters are:
Mrs. John Gillogly, Mrs. Pearce Landers, Mrs. Car-
roll (Newcastle), and Mrs. P. Ward.
Mr. Jas. Bowers, Nabiac.
Perhaps there is just now no more familiar figure
on the Wallamba than that of Mr. James Bowers. He
is well on to 82 years of age. To-day he is hale and
hearty, and it takes a wet day to keep him indoors.
His association with the Wallamba extends over 50
years, and he has seen many changes accomplished by
the relentless hand of Time.
Wholly set up and printed by The Cumberland Argus Ltd., Parramatta,
New South Wales, Australia,


Mrs. Laurence Gallagher.


Mr. James Bowers, Nabiac.
From a photo taken at the age of 81.)




