

SECOND SERIES
PRICE ONE SHILLING
oS
OLD TIMES
Published under the auspices
TH^
IN AUSTRALIA
of the Australian Historical Society
CONTENTS
Captain Gavin Hamilton page 65
The Old Benevolent Asylum 68
The Newtown Ejectment Action 69
Mrs. Oakes, the First White Child Born in
Australia 72
Reminiscences of an Octogenarian 72
Nicholas Devine 73
Travelling in the Twenties 79
The First Custom-House 81
The Discovery of Port Phillip 81
Bushranging near Sydney 82
Some Old-Time Inns 83
The Centenary of Liverpool 84
Busby’s Bore page 86
In the Days of Macquarie 88
Sir James Everard Home 89
Hawkesbury River 91
The “Parson’s Orangery” 9‘2
Kissing Point 92
A First Fleeter’s Grave 93
To Encourage Matrimony... .'. 94
Old Colonial Pensions ... 94
Sydney in the Forties 94
In the Days of the Gold Fever 95
Barron Field, Jurist and Litterateur 96
The Discovery of Gold 96
TYRRELL’S LIMITED, 22 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY
10 15




EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY
Published under the auspices oj the Australian Historical Society.
APRIL 5, 1910.
REMARKABLE EVENTS IN APRIL
1 First Jewish Synagogue in Sydney opened, 1844
2 (4) Robt. Towns died CTanbrook, Rose B. 1873
3 Robbery from ship Nelson in Hobson’s Bay 1852
4 Foundation-stone of Syd. Town Hall laid, 1868
5 Cooktown (Q.) proclaimed a municipality, 1876
6 Prince Alfred left Sydney, 1868
7 First Queensland census (pop. 30,059), 1861
8 Bank of New South Wales established, 1817
9 (11) Bishop George A. Selwyn died, 1878
10 Old St. John’s Church, Parramatta, opened, 1803
11 John Macarthur died at Camden, 1834
12 Australasian Steam Navigation Co. formed, 1833
13 Australian Gaslight Co., Sydney, estab’d, 1836
14 Sir George Grey born in Lisbon, 1812
15 (18) Henry Kendall born, nr. Ulladulla, 1841
16 R. Campbell, first mer. trader in Aust., d., 1846
17 N'.S.W. Corps embarked for England, 1810
18 Sydney Herald first published, 1831
19 Hamilton Hume, explorer, died at Yass, 1873
20 Sunshine Railway disaster, 42 lives lost, 1908
21 James Macarthur died, "1867
22 First South Australian Parliament opened, 1857
23 Australian Jockey Club established. 1828
24 First gold licence issued in Australia, 1851
25 Women in Australia first voted, 1896
26 Sir C. Cowper, 4 times Prem. N.S.W.. b., 1807
27 Sir Henry Parkes died, 1896
28 Capt. Cook landed Botany Bay, 1770
29 (28) Mutiny of the Bounty, 1789
30 First death of a white man in N.S.W., 1770
NOTES AND QUERIES
John Bayley Darvall.— To ‘ ‘ Australian ’ ’
(Hay) : The late John Bayley Darvall was born at
Nunnington Hall, Yorkshire, and was the second
son of Captain Darvall, of the 9th Dragoons. He
came to New South Wales in 1839; practised at the
Bar till 1867; was made a Q.C. in 1853 and was
appointed a member of the Legislative Council
in 1844. He afterwards sat in the first Parlia-
ment under responsible government, and held office
as Solicitor-General in the first Ministry. In 1851
he was offered, but declined, a judgeship in Vic-
toria. He was appointed a member of the first
Senate of the University of Sydney in 1850. and
returned to England in 1867. In the following
year he was made C.M.G., and K.C.M.G. in 1877.
A Governor’s Recall.—To “M.” (Albury):
Sir Charles Henry Darling (nephew of Governor
Ralph Darling) assumed, the Governorship of Vic-
toria on September 11, 1863. In 1865 he permitted
the M'Culloch Government to tack the protection
tariff to the. Appropriation Bill, but the Legisla-
tive Council rejected it. During the historic dead-
lock that followed, the affairs of the colony were
thrown into great confusion, and civil servants and
others were paid by means of judgments given
against the Crown. The Legislative Council for-
warded a protest to the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, and Sir Charles, in replying, reflected on
the character and standing of certain members of
the Upper House. This led to his recall in April,
1866.
CAPTAIN GAVIN HAMILTON
AND THE WRECK OF THE “SYDNEY COVE.”
(BY H. W. HEMSWORTH HUNTINGTON.)
During the fifties I was a scholar at St. Andrew’s
Model School, and our playground (in common with
three other schools in the neighbourhood) was tie
old George-street burial ground, upon which the
Sydney Town Hall is erected. In the south-west
corner of the cemetery was a tomb on which 1 have
often sat, and read the following epitaph: —“Here
lieth the body of Captain Gavin Hamilton, com-
mander of the ship Sydney Cove, who departed this
life June 20, 1798, aged 38 years. ’ ’ In later years
I learned that the captain was one of those hardy
rovers who made voyages to the West Indies, and,
furthermore, that his relatives, as well as himself,
were bosom friends of Robert Burns, the famous
Scottish poet.
As the wreck of the Sydney Cove was produc-
tive of two of the most extraordinary benefits to
Australia, viz., the discovery of the southern coast


coalfields and the demonstration of a strait between
Australia and Tasmania (Bass’s Straits), a brief
reference to the wreck and the ship’s commander
cannot fail to prove interesting and instructive
from an historical point of view.
The Sydney Cove (commanded by Captain Gavin
Hamilton, and owned by Messrs. Campbell and
Clarke, of Calcutta), loaded with a cargo of goods
on speculation, sailed from Bengal on November
10, 1796, on a voyage to Port Jackson. The ves-
sel sprang a leak in January, 1797, just before she
commenced to round the South Cape of Tasmania.
When she got to the eastward of the southern point
of the coast she encountered terrific gales and high
seas. Although fothering experiments ( i.e ., placing
sails under the ship, were tried, and the pumps
were kept going for several days and nights,
it was found impossible to keep the water under.
Such was the fatigue that three men dropped dead
under the labour of the pumps. Even after a great
part of the cargo had been jettisoned the vessel be-
came water-logged. Finding that the ship must
soon founder, Captain Hamilton hauled in for the
land, which was reached just in time to ground the
vessel. The vessel had sunk down to the fore chan-
nels when she was beached on an island of Fur-
neaux’s Group, which was afterwards called Pre-
servation Island.
This misfortune occurred on February 9, 1797,
and from that date until the 27th Captain Hamil-
ton was employed equipping the longboat to de-
spatch her to Port Jackson for assistance. While
the captain remained by the wreck with about
thirty other persons, the longboat proceeded on her
journey to Port Jackson, a distance of 498 miles.
In the boat were Mr. Hugh Thompson (the mate),
Mr. W. Clarke (the supercargo), three European
seamen, and twelve Lascars —in all, seventeen per-
sons. All went well until they were overtaken, on
March 1, by a storm of wind and rain, which
wrecked the longboat on the coast near Point Hicks,
a distance of about 320 miles from Port Jackson.
Here they all landed, and commenced one of tne
most miserable journeys on land ever recorded.
They endeavoured to walk to Port Jackson, and for
two months they were continually fording rivers
and creeks, and meeting hostile and pacific tribes
of aboriginals.
On April 16 nine of the wretched travellers, worn
out by want and excessive fatigue, succumbed, and
dropped out of the expedition. Their fate was never
known, but it is said that they perished from
attacks by the aboriginals. Messrs. Hugh Thomp-
son, W. Clarke, and three seamen then pushed on,
ana almost lost one another daily. When within
fourteen miles of Botany Bay two more of the
wretched men became too weak to proceed further,
and they dropped out. These were Mr. Hugh
Thompson and the ship’s carpenter, and it was on
May 16 they were left to their fate, either to die
of starvation or be killed by the aboriginals.
The party had now been reduced to three (Mr.
W. Clarke, a sailor, and a Lascar), and on May
17 they were delighted to see a fishing boat out at
sea not far from the rocks on which they stood.
The fishermen, seeing signals of distress, rowed to
their assistance, and within forty-eight hours had
them safely landed in Port Jackson. As they were
thoroughly exhausted Governor Hunter paid all
possible attention to them, and they quickly
recovered their health and spirits.
On May 18 the Governor despatched the whale-
boat to the spot pointed out by Mr. Clarke where
they left Mr. Thompson and the carpenter, but
the boat returned with only some articles which
had belonged to the unfortunate men, covered with
blood, and this led to the surmise that the men
had been killed by the aboriginals. The carpen-
ter was known to be a morose man, and hated the
blacks, and it was concluded that some inconsid-
erate act of his bad brought about the death of
himself and his companion.
On July 1, 1797, the Governor sent the colonial
schooner Francis, together with a decked long-
boat, called the Eliza, of 10 tons, to take off the
people who had been wrecked on Preservation
Island, Bass’s Straits. On July 10 the two ves-
sels reached the island, and were soon loaded with
part of the cargo of the ill-fated Sydney Cove.
The cargo saved being more than the two vessels
could carry, five Lascars of the Sydney Cove volun-
teered to remain on the island to take care of the
cargo left, until Captain Hamilton returned from
Port Jackson with a vessel to take them off with
the remainder of the cargo on the island. On the
21st the two vessels sailed and after a stormy pas-
sage of fifteen days the Francis reached Port Jack-
son safely, but not so the Eliza, which apparently
foundered soon after she separated from the
Francis in a gale. The Eliza was in command of
Mr. Alexander Armstrong, master of H.M.S.
Supply, and neither was the vessel nor were her
commander and crew (Lascars) afterwards heard
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY. 66


One of the fortunate events of the wreck of the
Sydney Cove and of the miserable journey of Mr.
W. Clarke was the discovery of many patches of
coal upon the summit of the place called Goalclitf.
Owing to the wintry weather Mr. Clarke built large
fires with the coal, and these attracted the atten-
tion of the fishermen who rescued the emaciated
party.
When Governor Hunter heard Mr. Clarke’s story
of the discovery of immense quantities of coal, he
despatched Dr, Bass, of H.M.S. Reliance, in a
whaleboat to the spot indicated by Mr. Clarke. Dr.
Bass proceeded about twenty miles to the south-
ward of Botany Bay, and there found, in the face
of a steep cliff washed by the sea, a stratum of coal
about six or seven feet thick, and extending eight
or nine miles to the southward. This boat expedi-
tion took place in August, 1797, and resulted in the
development of the Bulli coal seams. Dr. Bass dis-
covered also in the same region the skeletons of
Mr. Hugh Thompson and the carpenter of the
Sydney Cove, which gave equivocal proof of the
aboriginals having slaughtered them in their help-
less condition. Strange to relate, Dr. Bass, be-
tween December 3, 1797, and February 25, 1798,
in the whaleboat, with six seamen and six weeks’
provisions, made his famous voyage down the south
coast to Western Port, and discovered the strait
that bears his name.
In December, Governor Hunter gave Captain
Hamilton the use of the colonial schooner Francis
to visit the wreck of his snip in Bass’s Strait, at
Furneaux’s Group. The vessel sailed at the end of
the month and returned an January 20, 1798. At
Preservation Island Captain Hamilton found the
wreck entirely washed away, and that one of the
Lascar sailors had died. The gales of wind and
bad weather had destroyed all the articles taken on
shore from the wreck, except some spirits and coarse
cloth. The five Lascars, who had lived on kan-
garoos and birds, were brought to Sydney.
Messrs. Campbell and Clarke, of Calcutta, were
not discouraged by the loss of their ship, for they
fitted out a scow, which they called the Hunter.
This vessel reached Port Jackson on June 10, 1798.
with India goods. Captain Hamilton survived the
arrival of the Hunter only ten days, for he died on
June 20, 1798, five months after his arrival at
Sydney, exceedingly regretted by all who knew him.
In 1869 his remains were removed to the Rookwood
Necropolis, and deposited close to the Church of
England Cemetery office, among other bodies taken
from the George-street burial ground, by the Syd-
ney Municipal Council. He did not leave any rela-
tions in the colony, nor had he any land grant, &c.
The idea that a place in Sydney was called ‘ ‘ Ham-
ilton-square ’ ’ in compliment to him is without the
slightest foundation.
APRIL 12, 1910.
NOTES AND QUERIES
Flinders and Bass.—To “Native 5 ’ (Como);
Matthew Flinders and George Bass, in a boat Bft.
long called Tom Thumb, in October, 1795, traced
George’s River 20 miles further than previously
known. In March of the following year they
reached Port Hacking and returned on April 2,
1796.
Explorer Eyre. —To “Mudgee” (Wyalong):
Edward John Eyre, the explorer, was the son of
a Yorkshire clergyman, and was born in 1815. A
youthful passion for the heroic led him to choose
the military profession, but, having failed to ob-
tain a commission, he turned his attention to the
colonies, and came to Sydney in 1833.
Ballooning. —To “Mack” (Petersham): On
January 7, 1871, Mr. Thomas Gale, accompanied
by Mr. John Allen, ascended in a balloon (72ft.
high, 112 ft. in circumference, with a capacity for
32,000 ft. of gas) from Victoria Park, Sydney, to a
height of 21 miles, and descended in two hours’
time in the Parramatta River, between Kissing
Point and Tarban Creek.
The Bentley Mystery. —To “N.R. ” (Kiama)
A pianist named Julia Bentley (formerly Miss
Monk, of Exeter, England), with her husband,
Thomas Charles Bentley, afterwards secretary of
the Union Club, Sydney, arrived dm New South
Wales in January, 1860. In May, 1861, and dur-
ing the seven months succeeding, a number of
anonymous letters affecting the character of Mrs.
Bentley were received by leading inhabitants of
Sydney. She alleged that she was insulted and
violently assaulted in the streets of the city. A
Parliamentary inquiry was held, commencing on
November 14, 1862. On December 19 a progress
report was furnished stating that nq satisfactory
conclusion as to the authorship of the letters had
been arrived at by the committee, and exonerating
all those whom the Bentleys had accused. Sub-
Inspector Harrison, of the Detective Police, in
6?
PBBPS AT THB PAST.


giving evidence, expressed the belief that Mrs.
Bentley herself wrote the anonymous letters, and
in support of his opinion referred to a similar
occurrence having happened to Mrs. Bentley, when
a girl, in Exeter.
John Macarthur. —To “H.T.T. ” (Wagga):
It was Judge Therry, in his Reminiscences of
Thirty Years’ Residence in New South Wales, who
referred to John Macarthur as “the first and best
benefactor of Australia. ’ ’ You are wrong with
regard to the date of Macarthur’s arrival in the
It is interesting to note that yesterday was the
76th anniversary of the death of Captain
Macarthur.
THE OLD BENEVOLENT ASYLUM
(by frank walker.)
The representation of the one-time familiar in-
scription which is illustrated, and the original of
which adorned the front of the old Benevolent Asy-
lum, recalls the ancient building, wherein so much
OLD BENEVOLENT ASYLUM TABLET
colony, as the following extract from Mr. C. T.
Burfitt’s Founding of the Wool Industry in Aus-
tralia will show: —“John Macarthur landed in Aus-
tralia in June, 1790. In the following year he gave
some attention to agriculture. At this time a num-
ber of otficers were each given 100 acres of land
near Parramatta, with the promise that the one
who should first bring his land into cultivation
would receive a further grant of 100 acres. Mac-
arthur was the one to gain the reward. The hold-
ing he named ‘Elizabeth Farm’ in honor of his
wife. He it was who first broke Australian soil
with a plough; previously cultivation had been car-
ried on in true primitive fashion, with the hoe. ”
good work on behalf of the poor and needy was per-
formed for upwards of 70 years. The great Cen-
tral Railway Station and its ornamental grounds
now occupy the site of the structure that was, so
prominent a landmark of early Sydney.
The directors of the Benevolent Society, in their
wisdom, rescued the inscribed slab when the work
of destruction began, and it is now carefully pre-
served in the yard of the new building in Valentine-
street, surmounted by a second inscription setting
forth its history. This ancient relic clearly brings
to mind the ugly, yet serviceable, building, which
stood in George-street South, and with which the
autocratic Macquarie had so much to do. Seven
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY. 68


years before the erection of the building, viz., in
1813, a Benevolent Society was founded, to which
Governor Macquarie at first refused his patronage,
but later on was induced to identify himself with
the disinterested and humanitarian work the
society was carrying on. In 1820 the building,
which answered its purpose so well, was completed,
and was in active use until it was demolished in
1901 to make way for Sydney’s new railway sta-
tion. It is pleasing to know that this excellent
society, the value and magnitude of whose work are
little dreamt of by the majority of our citizens, is
still pursuing its honorable career, having pre-
served an unbroken record for 97 years.
Our old landmarks are disappearing one by one
as the years come and go, and the preservation of
such mementoes as this inscribed slab is a step in
the right direction, for they are valuable links
in the chain of history which we as a community
must aid in preserving for the benefit of posterity.
APRIL 19, 1910.
NOTES AND QUERIES
First Hackney Coach. —To “R.D.” (Wagga):
The first hackney coach was introduced into the
colony by a Mr. Hart, and commenced to ply for
hire November 15, 1830.
Lawsuit op 1795. —To “M.T.” (Sydney): The
first civil action of any note an Australia was
tried in 1795. A hog. belonging to a Mr. Bolton,
having been shot by some soldiers, an altercation
occurred, and Bolton, it was alleged, was assaulted
at the instance of two officers of the corps. Dam-
ages were laid at £5OO. The hearing of the case
occupied several days, and resulted in a verdict for
two shillings. On appeal the Governor confirmed
the verdict.
Earliest Coal Exports. —To “B.S. ” (Mait-
land) : The first exportation of coal from New
South Wales took place in January, 1800. by ex-
change with the master of the ship Cornwallis, Cap-
tain Michael Hogan, who arrived in Sydney with
convicts from Ireland. On this occasion 45 tons of
coal from the Hunter River were exchanged for a
quantity of nails and iron. The first regular ex-
port of coal took place in the year 1801, when a
small brig called the Anna Josepha, built in the
colony, was despatched with timber and coal to the
Cape of Good Hope, where the latter found ready
sale at £6 per ton.
A MEMORABLE LAW SUIT
THE NEWTOWN EJECTMENT ACTION.
The recent death of a member of the family of
the late John Devine recalls the celebrated New-
town ejectment action, which created so great a
sensation in the fifties. In a leading article on this
cause celebre, the Herald declared that, taking into
consideration all its circumstances —the magnitude
of the interests involved, the great length of the
trial itself, and the nature of the question at issue
—this was probably the most extraordinary case
ever submitted to the charge of a British judge
and jury.
For the story of this memorable lawsuit one
has to go far into the * ‘ shadowy past. ’ ’ The main
facts, however, can be related in a few words.
Nicholas Devine was an officer who came to New
South Wales in 1790. For 25 years he was Superin-
tendent of Convicts here, and at the end of that
time he received, in recognition of his services, a
grant of 210 acres of land, out at Newtown, though
it wasn’t called Newtown in those days. Living
with Devine as an assigned servant was one Ber-
nard Rochford, a man of education, who had been
transported for administering illegal oaths, and to
whom, in 1827, Devine executed a conveyance of
the whole of his landed property.
After the death of Devine, Rochford sold the
whole of the property, the value of which increased
enormously within a few years by reason of New-
town having become one of the most populous and
highly improved suburbs of Sydney. It was not
long before Devine’s relatives in Ireland got to
hear what they had missed, and out came his grand
nephew and heir-at-law, John Devine, who claimed
the whole estate.
To say that there was excitement out at Burrin
Farm, as the property in question was known, but
mildly describes the consternation that actually pre-
vailed, for it meant that no fewer than thirty per-
sons would have to defend their homesteads
. Thus commenced the great suit of Doe on the
several demises of Edward Devine and John De-
vine, versus Felix Wilson, John Blackman, Ralph
Mayer Robey, John Donohoe, John Walker, Mary
Hindmarsh, Zezia Iredale, William Innes, Ralph
Mansfield, George White, William Macpherson,
John M'Garvie, James Holt, Jane Malcolm, Joseph
Sly, James London, Jeremiah Evans, Henry Knight,
Samuel Walters, Robert Henderson, Robert John-
69
PBBPS AT THB PAST.


son, William Thurlow, Campbell Leverton Mac-
donald, Charles Sutherland, William a’Beckett,
George Dent, Joshua Frey Josephson, Moses
Joseph, Edward Druitt, and William Bucknell.
It is worth while recalling the fact that this
case was the last of the kind in New South Wales
that was distinguished by the presence of the
imaginary parties—John Doe and Edchard Boe.
This supremely absurd form of pleading was abol-
ished in 1852, when the litigious Doe and the long-
abused Boe were, so to speak, killed and buried.
As the declaration in the Newtown case had been
filed in 1848, the old form had to be adhered to,
which accounted for the ghost of Doe being in
evidence when the trial commenced in 1852, and
again at the second trial five years later.
The ‘ ‘ demise ’ ’ of Edward Devine was aban-
doned almost at the outset, and that of John De-
vine alone was maintained. As already stated he
claimed to be the grand-nephew of Nicholas Devine.
Devine died in May, 1830, but whether at the
time of his death he was legally “seised” of the
property was, of course, the main question in dis-
pute. The land was held by Nicholas Devine under
two grants.
The defendants’ case was that Nicholas Devine
had, during his lifetime —on October 22, 1827 —con-
veyed the whole of the lands comprised within these
two grants to one Bernard Bochford by indenture
of lease and re-lease. The considerations stated in
these instruments were the faithful services by
Bochford to Devine, divers sums of money expended
by the former on account of the latter, and a sum
of £350 paid by Bochford on the execution of the
conveyance. These deeds bore what purported to
be the signature of Devine, as well as those of
Bochford, and three attesting witnesses.
The property had come into the possession of the
defendants in various ways, but the only question
was whether or not the title of Bochford, through
whom they claimed, was sustainable. In the
highly-improved state in which it was then the
property was worth a lot of money. Its value
was estimated, on the part of the plaintiff, at
£400,000, and on that of the defendants at £lOO,OOO.
At the date of the disputed conveyance to Eoch-
ford, when the land was unimproved, its value was
very small.
There was no dispute as to the sufficiency of
consideration in Bochford’s deed, provided that
the deed itself was genuine. But the plaintiff’s
case was that the deed was forged, and thus this
was the real point at issue in the suit.
Various documents, purporting to bear Devine’s
signature, were put in to prove, by comparison, the
genuineness of the lease and re-lease, but the
whole of the signatures were declared by the plain-
tiff to be forgeries. Most of them were signatures
to receipts for a pension that old Devine had,
and ranged over a long period of years. Conse-
quently Bochford was charged with a long series
of forgeries, committed for the purpose of secur-
ing to himself everything in the shape of property
and money which Devine possessed, or to which he
was entitled.
During the latter years of his life Devine con-
tinued to reside under the care of Bochford and his
wife, and one of the points in contest was as to
how they had used him. Devine lived to a great
old age, being ninety-one when he died in 1830.
About eight years prior to his death he had been
robbed and ill-used by bushrangers. According to
the plaintiff, he never recovered from the effects
of this maltreatment, and for many years before he
died was completely imbecile —prostrate in mind
and helpless in body—and, therefore, incapable,
both mentally and manually, of making a transfer
of his property by deed.
On the other hand, the defendant submitted that
he so far recovered from the bushrangers’ attacii
as to possess his full mental faculties, weakened
somewhat perhaps by extreme old age, but still
sufficiently vigorous to be perfectly capable of dis-
posing of his property as he thought fit.
The status and the means of Bochford were
strongly contested and discussed during the trial,
but there was evidence —(1) That he was really the
assigned servant of Devine and (2) that in those
days the statutory disabilities which would prevent
persons of that class from acquiring property were
not rigidly enforced. The probability, or the im-
probability, that Devine would, in these circum-
stances denude himself of all but a life tenure of
his property for the purpose of securing care and
attention in his old age, were matters for argument.
As to the genuineness of the will there was, of
course, a great deal of evidence and argument. One
of the attesting witnesses declared the document
to be a forgery, while another swore it was
genuine
The first trial of the cause was delayed by the
necessity for a commission for taking evidence in
Ireland, but it came on at length before the Chief
70
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.


Justice, Sir Alfred Stephen, on March 26, 1852,
and lasted eight days, terminating at midnight on
April 5. On that occasion the plaintiff was repre-
sented by the Attorney-General (Mr. Plunkett), Mr.
Purefoy, and Mr. Smith; and the defendants by
the Solicitor-General (Mr., afterwards Sir, William
Manning), Mr. Foster, Mr. Broadhurst, Mr. Fisher,
Mr. Darvall, Mr. Meymott, and Mr. Holroyd.
The jury found a verdict for the defendants,
and, after an unsuccessful motion to upset this
finding, there was an appeal to the Privy Council.
The latter tribunal granted a new tria. generally,
but although this judgment was given on Novem-
ber 27, 1855, no further steps were apparently taken
to procure the second trial until early in 1857. A
new trial having been duly ordered several appli-
cations wore made with reference to its conduct.
The plaintiff, for instance, moved for a change
of venue from Sydney to one of the circuit towns,
on the ground that there were so many persons in
Sydney interested, directly or indirectly, in the
issue of the suit as to render it exceedingly diffi-
cult to procure a jury whose impartiality could be
thoroughly relied upon. It was shown, however, that
the number of special jurors on the Sydney panel
was so great as to make it a libel on common hon-
esty to suppose that a thoroughly unbiassed jury
could not be easily obtained.
The Supreme Court therefore refused to change
the venue, but in order that every precaution might
be taken to secure a jury whose impartiality would
be quite beyond question a special order was made
as to the mode of striking the jury. On the part
of the defendant an application was made for the
reception of the Chief Justice's notes at the first
tidal as evidence of what had been said by wit-
nesses that had since died.
Their Honors however decided that evidence of
this character must be brought forward by the testi-
mony of persons who had heard the deceased wit-
nesses examined, and who could be cross-examined
as to the accuracy of their recollection, or of the
notes they had taken. A third application, also
by the defendants, for the trial of the case
‘‘ at bar. ’ ’ was likewise unsuccessful.
The second trial commenced on August 17, 1857,
before Mr. Justice Dickinson and a special jury of
12. It lasted 30 days, and ended as the first had
done, in a verdict for the defendants.
This great and costly suit had now lasted nearly
nine years, and it looked as if the plaintiff would
persist in his claim, but further litigation was pre-
vented by a compromise, Devine receiving a large
sum of money in consideration of foregoing his
claim.
There was a good deal of sympathy for John
Devine in his failure to establish his claim. We
are told that he had ‘ ‘ a strong case, one that few
British lawyers would have hesitated to pronounce
irresistible. ’ ’ Some of the papers were very out-
spoken about the verdict, and this is how one ex-
pressed itself: —
■ ‘ This extraordinary case was brought to a
close last Saturday, after a trial of 30 days,
by an equally extraordinary verdict for the
defendants. No case of such importance was
ever tried in this or any other British colony,
and public confidence in the value of trial by
jury in civil cases has received such a shock
from the verdict as will not be cured or removed
for many a long day.”
APRIL 26, 1910.
NOTES AND QUERIES
Newtown Ejectment Case. —Mr. Thomas De-
vine, writing wdth reference to the celebrated New-
town ejectment action, explains that the claimant,
John Devine, was not a grand nephew of Nicholas
Devine.
‘ ‘ Ibro Dale. ’ ’ —This was the name of an estate
near Wollombi, once owned by the Rev. Richard
Hill, and is mentioned in the Sydney Almanac
for 1834. Further particulars concerning this old
estate are required by the Australian Historical
Society.
“Wallis Plains.” —“T.S.T.” writes: It is
generally understood that this name was originally
bestowed on the locality now known as West Mait-
land, but the town of Morpeth, one of the earliest
settlements in this district, also claims that honor.
If any of our correspondents are in a position to
state definitely which of these two places has the
prior right to the name I should be glad to hear
from them.
Old Western-road. —There is an abandoned
road near Penrith running in a direct westerly
course from Emu Plains station to the foot of the
Mountains, which it ascends by a series of zig-
zags, finally joining the present road near Blax-
land station. The Australian Historical Society
has long wanted to know, as near as possible, the
71
PBBPS AT THE PAST.


exact date of construction of this old-time high-
way, which is known to have originally been the
main Bathurst road. If any readers are in pos-
session of any facts concerning this road they are
asked kindly to communicate with the hon. secre-
tary of the society.
Liberty Plains. —To “Colae’ ’ (Lawson); This
locality was so named on account of the free
settlers who arrived in the Bellona on January 16,
1793, selecting land there. They were Thomas
Rose, a farmer from Dorsetshire, who brought with
him his wife and four children, and who was
allowed a grant of 120 acres; Frederick Meredith
and Thomas Webb, both formerly belonging to
H.M.S. Sirius; Edward Powell, formerly of the
transport Lady Juliana; Joseph Webb, nephew of
Thomas Webb; and Edward Powell (who married
a free woman after his arrival). The major por-
tion of the land allotted to these persons is situated
in the neighbourhood of Homebush.
Reflections by “Bob” Lowe. —Mr. Edward
Stack forwards the following extracts from Life
and Letters of the Right Hon. Robert Lowe (Vis-
count Sherbrooke) :
Australians, it must be confessed, take only a
languid interest in the brief annals of their own
community. Promising young men rarely indulge
in retrospect, and heed for the most part only the
present or the immediate future.
With smoking axle, hot with speed, with steeds of Are and
steam,
Wide-waked To-day leaves Yesterday behind him like a dream
Still from the hurrying train of life fly backward, far and
fast,
The milestones of the father’s, the landmarks of the past.
THE FIRST WHITE CHILD BORN IN
AUSTRALIA
Mrs. Frances Oakes (>nee Small), who is
reputed to have been the first white child
born in Australia, married Mr. Francis Oakes,
who left the old country to take up missionary
work in Tahiti. The reception to which he was
treated by the natives, however, was such as to
induce him to come on to Australia, and he subse-
quently occupied an official position in Parramatta.
The descendants of Mr. and Mrs. Oakes were
numerous, and many of them nave filled, and others
are still filling, important positions in Australia.
The picture showing Mrs. Oakes at the age of 93
years is from a photograph kindly lent to the His-
torical Society by Mr. D. Watsford, of Parra-
matta.
MRS. FRANCES OAKES
Who is reputed to h ive been the first white child born
in Australia. She was born on Sept. 22, 1789,
and died on Jan. 30, 1888.
REMINISCENCES OF AN OCTO-
GENARIAN
(by william freame.)
Among the oldest Australian natives in New South
Wales is Mr. Daniel Watsford, of Parramatta,
who was born in that town in 1826. His father
was Mr. James Watsford, who ran the first stage
coaches from Parrahiatta, and his mother was a
native of New South Wales, having been bom in
Sydney in 1796. Her father, Mr. Johns, was a
soldier in the 102nd Regiment. Mr. D. Watsford
has lived all his long life in Parramatta, and his
reminiscences of the old town and district are very
interesting. He distinctly remembers all the Gov-
ernors of New South Wales since Governor Bourke,
and is the proud possessor of autograph photo*-
graphs of several of them. He has a slight recol-
lection of the Rev. Samuel Marsaen, and knew the
Revs. Thos. Hassall and John Vincent well. Both
of these clergymen were early Government chap-
lains of the colony. He was acquainted with the
first white woman born in Australia, Mrs. Francis
Oakes, and he also well remembers the days when
the 4th, the 50th, the 28th. and the 11th Regiments
were quartered in the town.
72
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.


The Rev. John Watsford, his brother, was born
in 1820, and was one of the first scholars to attend
the King’s School. One of Mr. D. Watsford’s ex-
periences is well worth recording. About 40 years
ago he was in business in Parramatta, and used
then generally to carry a considerable amount of
jewellery about with him. One day a young man
entered his shop, and on the strength of an alleged
acquaintanceship with Mr. Watsford’s clerical
brother, endeavoured to induce him to visit a
schooner lately arrived in Port Jackson from the
South Seas, mentioning Sunday as the best day to
go aboard. Mr. Watsford, however had a preju-
dice to Sunday travelling, but promised to consider
making the journey some other day. Meeting the
late Captain Fairclough a day or two after, that
gentleman strongly advised him not to accept the
invitation, and Mr. Watsford had every reason to
be thankful that he did not; for he found out that
the invitation was part of a plan by the notorious
criminals Nicholls and Lester to rob, if not to
murder, him for the jewellery he wore. Despite
his advanced years, Mr. Watsford has a wonderful
memory, which is greatly refreshed by the many
old letters, photos, ana records in his possession.
MAY 3, 1910.
REMARKABLE EVENTS IN MAY
1 Royal Society of N.S.W. established, 1866
2 Capt. Fremantle took formal pos. of W.A., 1829
3 New Zealand dec. independent of N.S.W., 1841
4 Moreton Bay proclaimed, 1842
5 Ben Hall shot, 1865
6 Cook, in Endeavour, passed Pt. Jackson, 1770
7 First N.Z. Ministry under respon. Govt., 1856
8 Dr. Lang arrived in N.S.W., 1823
9 First Commonwealth Parliament opened, 3901
10 (8) Sir John Robertson died, 1891
11 (12) Coal first discovered in Australia, 1797
12 Rev. S. Marsden, d. at Windsor, N.S.W., 18p8
13 First steamer from England arr. in Sydney, 1831
14 Sydney branch, Royal Mint, established, 1855
15 Capt. Geo. Grey sworn in as Gov. or S.A., 1841
16 (13) First Fleet sailed for Botany Bay, 1787
17 Cook entered and named Moreton Bay, 1770
18 Sydney Sailors’ Home established, 1839
19 Allan Cunningham disc’d the Gwydir Riv., 1827
20 (24) G. W. Evans disc’d Lachlan River, 1815
21 New Zealand proclaimed British colony, 1840
22 First N.S.W. Parlt. under resp’sible govt. 1856
23 (22)First Queensland Parlt. assembled, 1860
24 Sydney first lighted with gas, 1841
25 John Oxley, Surveyor-Gen. of N.S.W. d., 1828
26 (27) Sir Chas. Lilley b. N’castle-on-Tyne, 1830
27 Sir Henry Parkes born in Warwickshire, 1815
28 First steam engine used in Sydney, 1815
29 Batman arrived in Port Phillip, 1835
30 Ly-ee-moon wrecked at Green Gape, N.S.W. 1886
31 (28) Capt. Roe, Ist Surveyor-Gen. W.A. d. 1878
NOTES AND QUERIES
Sydney Observatory. —To “C.F. ” (Parra-
matta) : The Rev. W. Scott resigned the post of
Government Astronomer in 1862. The position was
offered to Mr. John Tebbutt, the well-known Wind-
sor astronomer, who, however, declined it.
Old-time Newspapers. —To “Colonial” (Syd-
ney) : (1) The first number of The Sydney Gazette
and New South Wales Advertiser appeared on Sat-
urday, March 5 1803. Shortly after that date the
paper was published on Sundays. (2) The first
issue of The Australian made its first appearance
on October 14, 1824. (3) The Alfred is the name
of a newspaper that was published in Syd-
ney in 1835. (4) The Omnibus and Sydney
Spectator was a weekly and not a daily publi-
cation, the first issue of which was published on
October 2, 1841. (5) The Gazette of Literature to
which you refer was probably The Portfolio of
Romance and Gazette of Literature Science, and
the Arts, which was first issued in Sydney in July,
1844.
NICHOLAS DEVINE
ROMANTIC CHAPTER OF EARLY AUSTRALIAN
HISTORY.
(BY H. W. H HUNTINGTON.)
For nearly a century authors of books and writers
in newspapers have persisted in stating that Nicho-
las Devine, the first Principal Superintendent of
Convicts, arrived in the First Fleet with Governor
Phillip, and that he took an active part as superin-
tendent of convicts at the inauguration of the
colony and its government.
From an historical point of view these errors
should be rectified, and my object in writing is
to point out that the public official documents in
the Secretary of State’s office incontestably prove
that Devine arrived in the colony on board the Lady
Juliana on June 3,1790, more than two years after
the arrival of the First Fleet. Furthermore, De-
73
PEEPS AT THE PAST.


vine’s office of Superintendent of Convicts began
to date from the day of his landing in Sydney
Gove (June 6,1790), and terminated in 1808, when
he was retired on a pension (a period of only 18
years’ service). He received three land grants out
Newtown way, one of 120 acres on January 8. 1794,
a second of eight acres in the same year from
the Acting-Governor, Major Grose, and the third,
ninety acres, in October, 1799, from Governor Hun-
ter.
The circumstances of his appointment, his arrival
in Sydney, and his official experiences form one of
the most remarkable chapters of early colonial his-
tory, and may be thus summarised: —According to
State papers he was born in 1739, at Burren Maine
(about 60 miles north-west of Dublin), in the
county of Cavan, Ireland, where his people from
time immemorial lived. Judging from his illiterate
letters his early education appears to have been
neglected. In his early manhood he was a fine,
robust man, oft. lOin. high, very upright in stature
and very powerful physically. He spent some
years in farming pursuits, and was considered the
best and strongest ploughman at the county plough-
ing matches. When about 40 years of age he left
Ireland for England, and in 1781 he entered the
employ of Duncan Campbell, who was the Govern-
ment Superintendent of the Hulks at Woolwich, and
had the custody or ail convicts destined for trans-
portation to America.
In 1783 the loss of the American colonies to
Great Britain by the War of Independence,
closed the ports of America against the importa-
tion of criminals, and in 1785 the House of Com-
mons recommended the establishment of oversea
penal settlements. In August, 1786, the King-in-
Councdl fixed on Botany Bay for a convict settle-
ment, and in January, 1787, Superintendent Camp-
bell was directed by Royal Warrant to hand over
upwards of 700 convicts in his charge on board
the hulks to the contractors of the several vessels
which comprised the First Fleet. Being one of
the chief overseers on the hulks controlled by
Superintendent Campbell, Nicholas Devine success-
fully carried out the work of transferring the con-
victs from the hulks to the vessels of the fleet,
but he did not accompany the expedition.
Governor Phillip, writing under date May, 1789,
from the seat of his Government at Port Jackson,
to Lord Sydney, declared that the neglect to send
out superintendents had compelled him to employ
convict overseers, whom he found useless in exer-
eising proper authority. He had enlisted the ser-
vices of the marine officers, but they bitterly com-
plained of being compelled to supervise the con-
victs, inasmuch as they conceived that they came
out to perform the duties of soldiers, and not
those of convict superintendents. Owing to there
being only one farmer in the colony (and he was
the Governor’s private servant) he appealed for
superintendents with a knowledge of farming; also
for some skilled artisans. In order to remedy the
glaring oversight, Lord Sydney gave orders that
twenty-five of those confined on the hulks with eight
overseers should oe sent to the colony. Among
many others, Nicholas Devine volunteered to be-
come one of the convict superintendents, and in
August, 1789, he was engaged for a term of three
years from his landing, at £4O per annum, with free
rations, as a superintendent.
We now come to the extraordinary difficulties and
hardships he met with on his voyage to the colony.
The dangers and sufferings through which he and
those with him passed during that memorable voy-
age, deserve more than a passing notice, as they
are associated with one of the most sensational
cases of shipwreck ever recorded in shipping
annals.
In August, 1789, Nicholas Devine embarked on
board h.M.S. Guardian , of 44-guns, under the com-
mand of Lieutenant Edward Eiou, a Royal naval
officer of about twenty-eight years of age, who, by
his suavity of manners and handsome appearance,
was a great favorite in naval circles. Devine was
accompanied by several overseers and 22 convicts,
who were represented as skilled workmen, all bound
for Port Jackson. The warship sailed from Eng-
land in September, 1789, and in November reached
the Cape of Good Hope, where a large quantity of
live stock and a number of fruit trees were shipped
for the use of the colony. On December 11 the
Guardia7i sailed out of the harbour at Capetown,
and everything went well for days, when she
struck against an immense island of ice l , which
shattered all her works to pieces and broke the
rudder away.
The reader can imagine the horror of the voy-
agers upon finding the ship embayed in the ice,
the height of which was more than twice that of
the mainmast. The overshadowing head of the
huge berg threatened to break away and over-
whelm the vessel. As a result of the collision,
masts and planks were rended and sails torn.
Death stared everyone in the face, and one and
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY. 74


all began to labor for life, executing every com-
mand of Lieutenant Riou with the utmost de-
spatch.
By great exertion the Guardian was hauled clear
of its dangerous obstruction, and everyone gave a
sigh of relief as the monster ice island floated past
the battered ship. Speedy exertions were then
made to clear away the wreckage, but the awful
catastrophe had left the vessel in a sinking condi-
tion. In all parts the ship was in a crazy condi-
tion, and many leaks were discovered. All hands
were set to labour at the pumps, as there were
6ft. of water in the hold. A fothering experi-
ment had reduced the water to 2ft., but the ship
being strained in all her works, and being tossed
about in high Seas, the water suddenly rose to 10ft.
Though the pumps were kept incessantly going
night and day for three days, the water still rose.
In order to lighten the disabled ship the colony's
live stock of twenty cows, six horses, and
a great many sheep, goats, &c., were humanely
killed and committed to the deep. The vessel’s
forty-four cannons, the garden of 150 trees, and
all kinds of heavy cargo were pitched overboard.
On Christmas Day the pumps began to lose their
efficiency and power, and the exhausted crew and
passengers besought Lieutenant Eicu to let them
hoist out the five boats, as the ship was expected
to founder every moment. At this terrifying and
critical juncture the lieutenant granted the re-
quest, and the cutter, then the launch, with the
jolly-boat and two small boats, were accordingly
lowered over the ship’s side. While these pre-
parations were being effected Lieutenant Eiou pro-
ceeded to his cabin and wrote a note to the Ad-
miralty!, referring to the admirable and wonderful
conduct of his officers and crew “ after the fatal
stroke against an island of ice, ’ ’ and recom-
mending to the consideration of the Admiralty a
sister and a widowed mother. Going on deck
again, he delivered this missive into the hands of
the ship’s master (Mr. Clements), who had charge
of the longboat, containing- fourteen persons.
This act, which was done with the utmost com-
posure, has been characterised as one of the most
uncommon proofs of fortitude and virtue that ever
adorned human nature.
Lieutenant Riou took leave of upwards of sixty
persons, who then entered five boats. Owing to the
mountainous seas running, one of the boats was
stove in, and the ship’s surgeon, two midshipmen,
and five others perished alongside the ship. The
other four boats were then fully 600 leagues from
any land, and what with boisterous seas, fearful
heat, and a want of drinking water, the fifty-eight
voyagers had no other prospect than that of the
most miserable of deaths.
Three of the boats were never heard of, and it
was conjectured that they foundered at sea. Of
the five boats that were launched on their perilous
passage, the longboat, under Clements, was the only
one which carried its fourteen passengers into
safety. After fourteen days’ struggling with the
pangs of thirst and hunger, amid heavy seas, the
boat was picked up by a French ship, and the pas-
sengers were taken to Capetown. This boat con-
tained the new chaplain of the colony, the Rev.
John Crowther, who, on arrival in England,
refused to renew the voyage to the colony. The
other survivors were Mr. Clements, the master
gunner, the ship’s purser, a midshipman, a master
mate, and nine seamen.
Amid the dreadful scene on Christmas Day prior
to the boats quitting the Guardian, Lieutenant
Riou heroically declared that he would sooner go
down in his vessel that quit her. In this resolu-
tion he was supported by only three of his officers
(a midshipman, the ship’s carpenter, and the
boatswain), and by about twenty of the seamen,
who determined to share the fate of their com-
mander. There were 27 other persons who decided
to stand by the ship, and they were Mr. Devine, his
four fellow-superintendents, and the twenty-two
convicts in their custody.
The horror and dismay created by the unhappy
shipwreck were fearful. Without a rudder, and
wholly unmanageable, the ship was in a hopeless
condition. Everything that was deemed expedient
was done with alacrity and obedience. As the seas
broke over her, the ship lay like a log in the water.
It was pump or sink, and the common run for nine
weeks was 16ft. of water in the hold. Every man
shared alike in the work of baling and pumping,
for the long period of two months after the acci-
dent happened. Everyone laboured for his life,
and took his turn at the pumps. Most of them were
stripped like galley slaves, the better to resist the
effects of the salt water by which they were con-
stantly drenched.
In times of imminent danger Lieutenant Riou
displayed the greatest magnanimity and coolness,
his attention being principally devoted to keeping
up their spirits and watching over their health. His
manly, commanding presence and affable manners
75
PEEPS AT THE PAST.


encouraged the men to work like Trojans. Even
when he got one of his hands crushed and one of
his legs badly hurt, he stuck to his post day and
night. He personally attended to those who were
driven from work by accident or prostration.
Among those who were injured was Nicholas
Devine, who, while at the pumps, had the misfor-
tune to be permanently maimed in his left hand,
which caused him to lose the use of two of his
fingers. It was solely by the skill of Lieutenant
Riou that the ship was kept afloat until she fell in
with a Dutch packet boat, which had providently
sailed into a high southerly latitude, on her voyage
from the Spice Islands and Batavia.
The Dutchman not only afforded aid with men
and materials, but also accompanied the Guardian
back to the Cape. Being water-logged, there was not
the slightest hope of saving the ship until the day
before the vessel reached its haven of safety. To
all the survivors it was a matter of the greatest
astonishment how the Guardian managed to reach
Table Bay. Being a complete wreck, she was
beached and eventually sunk after some of her
cargo was saved for the use of the colony.
During the two months’ struggle for life on the
ship, the men were destitute of any external com-
forts, and though despairing of deliverance, they
testified by their labor how willing they were to
persist in making the greatest exertions, despite
the fact that they were almost drowning. During
the whole of that dismal time the men could not
attend to their personal appearance, and they
reached Capetown like beings from another world,
their beards having grown very long, their bodies
dirty and basted, with sweltering heat, and their
clothes in rags.
In recounting the dangers and difficulties
experienced, Lieutenant Riou praised the noble
work of the remnant of officers and men who stuck
to him. Reviewing the conduct of the five superin-
tendents and the twenty-two convicts, he writes:
“Had it not been for their assistance and support,
the Guardian would never have reached the Cape.”
Subsequently he showed his gratitude to the
convicts by being instrumental in procuring for
them, in November, 1790, a conditional pardon,
which was followed by grants of land on their
becoming settlers in the colony.
On March 1, 1790, the transport Lady Juliana,
bound for Port Jackson, having on board 222
female convicts, instead of a cargo of provisions,
reached Table Bay, and there found the Guardian
(which had left England with two years’ provisions
for the colony), lying in the bay a total wreck.
Lieutenant Eiou thereupon sent on board the
transport, Mr. Devine, and his four fellow-superin-
tendents, to continue their passage to Port Jackson.
On March 30 the Lady Juliana sailed from the
Cape, and on June 3 she entered Sydney Heads.
Her arrival dispelled the gloom that had shrouded
the colony for four months owing to the people
receiving half rations, through the neglect of the
British Government to send out supplies every two
years. Other vessels brought out stores, and the
famine abated.
On June 6, 1790, Mr. Devine paid his respects
to Governor Phillip, who handed to him his appoint-
ment as superintendent of the town labor or public
works in Sydney. On January 8, 1794, he received
his first land grant from Acting-Governor Grose.
It comprised 120 acres in the district of Bullana-
ming, the boundaries of which district were Sydney
and Parramatta road, Liberty Plains, Cook’s River
and Botany Bay. A few months later the Acting-
Governor added eight acres to the grant, and in
October, 1799, Governor Hunter added another
ninety acres, making in all 218 acres. Mr. Devine,
in 1800, had sixty-eight acres of the land cleared,
and on it he grew wheat and maize. It was in the
custody of a convict shepherd, who minded some
sheep and goats brought from the Cape.
While serving under Governors Phillip, Grose,
Hunter, and King, Devine lived in Bridge-street,
Sydney, not far from the residence of George
Crossley, who had married Mrs. Devine’s sister.
Crossley was a convict lawyer, and had been trans-
ported for putting a live fly into a dead man’s
mouth, and swearing that a certain will was
executed while the deceased had life in him.
Devine and Crossley were once partners in some
trading business, and being adherents to Governors
King and Bligh, were detested by the officers of the
New South Wales Corps.
In 1806, Devine held a lease as tenant at will of
a farm about six acres on the site of the present
superintendent’s dwelling in the Botanical
Gardens, with a stream of water running through
the land, and the beautiful spot was converted into
a fine vegetable and flower garden. A little maize
was grown on the farm, which had on it a hut and
a stable for a fine charger, which Devine rode while
on duty inspecting the town improvements.
In 1806, Devine went out to his farm at the
southern end of Sydney, which he christened Burren
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY. 76


Burren, after his native place. His homestead
stood near the corner of what is now Erskineville-
road and George-street, Macdonaldtown. It stood
in the centre of a large garden and orchard, with
cultivation paddocks adjoining, where cattle and
sheep were reared. The produce of a dairy, and of
the fruit trees consideraly augmented Devine’s
income of £75 per annum fixed by Governor Hunter.
We now come to the keynote of the rebellion, in
1808, of the officers of the New South Wales Corps.
Early in January, 1808, Devine went to John
Macarthur’s land on Church Hill, where he was
about to erect a residence. Devine told Macarthur
that Governor Bligh had ordered him to remove any
posts fixed in the ground,, as the land was required
for church purposes. There were holes with posts
ready to be fixed, and Macarthur at once fixed a
post, whereupon Devine alighted from his horse,
pulled out the post, saying, ‘‘ By order of the
Governor,” adding “When the axe is laid to the
root the tree must fall. ’ ’
On January 26, 1808, Major Johnston deposed
Governor Bligh, with the aid of the New South
Wales Corps. A provisional government was
established, and among those dismissed for their
loyalty to the ex-Governor was Devine, Isaac
Nicholls being appointed his successor by
Lieutenant-Colonel Foveaux, who had assumed the
government of the colony.
In January, 1810, Governor Macquarie took over
the reins of government from the usurpers, and
proclaimed all appointments made by the latter as
invalid and illegal, and ordered that all those
persons displaced at the time of Governor Bligh’s
arrest should ‘be restored to the offices they
formerly held. This was done by royal mandate,
but Governor Macquarie deviated from the terms
of his royal instructions, and the proclamation in
the case of Devine. He refused to re-instate him
or to restore him to the public service, giving as his
excuse that the Chief Superintendent of convicts
was too old and infirm, and that he was also very
deaf and had been very remiss and negligent in his
office, which was one of an important nature, requir-
ing an active, zealous, and resolute officer. As he
had served many years in the colony, and was an
honest and well-behaved man in other respects, the
Governor gave him an allowance of 2s. 6d. per
day for his maintenance.
On May 12, 1810, H.M.S. Hinclostan left I’ort
Jackson, having on board Governor Bligh and his
witnesses, one of whom was Devine, who, as a
Crown witness, was in receipt of one guinea per
day. In August, 1811, Devine memorialised the
British Government for a pension of £75 per
annum. He set out his services as superintendent
from 1789 to August, 1808, and seven years’
service on the hulks prior to 1789. He applied
to be re-instated or superannuated, so that “I may
have some support during the remainder of my old
age, being now 72 years old.” Devine was curtly
told that if he returned to Sydney, Governor
Macquarie would no doubt re-instate him.
He accordingly returned to the colony after the
trial of Major Johnston for mutiny, and finally
he was granted *• a small pension. He went
to his farrrt, out Newtown way, where, in
1822, he, with his wife, was attacked by
bushrangers, severely beaten, and left for dead.
The injuries he received on this occasion
affected his health so much that he became a mere
shadow of his former self. Eventually he lapsed
into imbecility, incapable of carrying on any con-
versation or of using his hands, or ot even walking
a short distance. He always wore a red nightcap
over his ears, and a pair of blue trousers through
which his long legs went too far.
Towards the close of his days he was per-
fectly helpless and had to be fed with a spoon,
while his talk was unintelligible. He died on May
29, 1830, aged 91 years, and not 104 years of age,
as is generally supposed. He was buried in the old
Devonshire Cemetery within the tomb where reposed
the remains of his wife, who had predeceased him
several years. Strange to say, the epitaph on his
tomb described him as a first fleeter, and that he
died 104 years of age, but official documents in
Mr. Devine’s own handwriting controvert the
accuracy of those two statements. When he died
he was “a lean and slippered pantaloon, sans
teeth, sans taste, sans sense, sans everything.”
Throughout this article the surname is given as
‘ ‘ Devine. ’ ’ In all official lists, however, as well
as in his land grants and memorials, the name is
spelt ‘ ‘ Divine. ’ ’ In some of the records his
Christian name is given as Philip, but this is
obviously a blunder in copying. Ever since the
famous Newtown ejectment action the surname has
been spelt “Devine.”
77
PEEPS AT THE PAST.


MAY 10, 1910.
NOTES AND QUERIES
Government Printing Office. —To “E.R. ”
(Parramatta-road) : (1) The Government Printing
Office was started in 1802. (2) Mr. Richards was
Government Printer for 27 years. (3) Mr. Potter
succeeded Mr. Richards and occupied the position
for about ten years. Mr. Potter was succeeded by
Mr. Gullick in November, 1896. (4) No. (5) Mr.
Richards either wrote or edited a book entitled
Neio South Wales in 1881.
Sawney’s Incorporation.— Mr. Edward Stack
supplies the following:—Sydney was formed into a
municipality in 1842. The house used for the meet-
ing of the new Town Council was one built by Mr.
Commissary Broughton, about the year 1813, on the
site of a row of soldiers’ huts known by the expres-
sive name of the ‘ ‘ Rookery. ’ ’ The building was
afterwards the residence of the first Colonial Secre-
tary, Major Goulburn; then it was occupied by Mr.
Sydney Stephen. Becoming a hotel, it was named
the * ‘ Pulteney. ’ ’
The Three Tuns. —To “Old Hand” (New-
town) : The Three Tuns publichouse stood at the
north-western corner of King and Elizabeth streets,
the site now, and for many years past, occupied by
Temple Court. The building was erected in 1823
for G. F. Read, of Hobart Town, as a private
residence. Later it was converted into offices for
the old-time solicitor, Mr. James Norton. About
1833 the premises were occupied as a hotel under
the proprietorship of Richard Driver, and named
the Three Tuns. The house became, in later years,
one of the favourite resorts of Australian crick-
eters, the proprietor’s son being an expert wielder
of the willow.
MAY 17, 1910.
NOTES AND QUERIES
Transportation —To “Brampton” (Narrabri):
The number of convicts transported to New South
Wales in 1791 was 2,407 —2,121 males and 286
females.
Wreck of the Sirius. —To “8.5.” (Young):
The Sirius was wrecked at Norfolk, and not at
Lord Howe, Island. Your date also is wrong. It
was March 19, and not April 20, 1790.
Fowles’s SYDNEY. — To “R.F.” (Goulburn):
Fowles’s Sydney in 1848 originally appeared in
fortnightly parts, the whole comprising 40 issues.
First Oranges in Australia— To ‘ ‘ Orchardist ’'
(Ryde): Oranges were first grown in Australia
by the Rev. Richard Johnson from seeds he obtained
at Rio Janeiro in 1787. His orchard was at
Kissing Point, Parramatta River. It is said the
trees produced abundance of fruit, and that the
oranges frequently brought as much as a shilling
each.
THE ATLAS.— To “Esmond” (Wagga) : The
Atlas was a weekly journal. It was first pub-
lished in 1844, but lived only four years and a half.
You are altogether wrong in your estimate of the
paper. As a matter of fact its literary ability
was one of its distinguishing features, which is not
surprising, seeing that its contributors were among
the ablest and most celebrated men of the day.
An Old-time Document. —At the last meeting
of the Drummoyne Council, Alderman Shand, on
behalf of the executors of the estate of the late
Mr. Millett, presented the council with the original
certificate of a grant of 1,500 acres, upon which
Drummoyne is now built. The papers were issued
by Governor King in 1806, and were in favour of
John Harris. The papers, though over a century
old, are well preserved.
An Indignant Governor. —A correspondent for-
wards the following extract from the evidence
given before a committee of the House of
Lords in 1847 by Mrs. Chisholm (“The Emigrants’
Friend”): —“One of the most serious impedi-
ments to transacting business of hiring servants in
the country was the applications for wives.
Shepherds left their sheep and would come for
miles for this purpose, with their certificates of
good character, and of money deposited in the
savings banks, and a list of their stock and even
bank notes. I had more than forty applications
of this kind in two years. One man, according to
a note in my register book, who came to Sydney
for a wife, was very anxious to know ‘when we
should have a new Governor who would attend to
matters consequence like that.’ ” The Governor
took a different view of the subject, for when in
the early days of the “Home Protection.” it was
suggested to him that many of the forlorn girls,
if sent to the interior, would marry well, “his
Excellency drew himself up to his full height, and
exclaimed indignantly, ‘What, Mrs. Chisholm! Is
it my business to find wives for bush servants?’ ”
78
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.


TRAVELLING IN THE TWENTIES
FIRST WHITE SETTLERS TO CROSS THE
BLUE MOUNTAINS.
Mrs. W. A. B. Greaves, of Bondi, has kindly
allowed the Historical Society to make some
extracts from a letter written by her grandmother,
the late Mrs. Thomas Fitzherbert Hawkins, who,
with her husband, a retired naval officer, made the
journey over the Blue Mountains in 1822. Mrs.
Greaves claims that her grand-parents and their
party were the first white settlers to cross the
great mountain barrier. The journey commenced
on April 5. Besides waggons, drays, and carts,
drawn by bullocks and five horses, was a tilted
cart for Mrs. Hawkins and her seven children,
whilst her husband and son rode on horseback. At
Parramatta a female servant was obtained from
the Factory. Rooty Hill, 25 miles from Sydney,
was reached in the evening, and there the Govern-
ment house afforded entertainment for the party.
Next day being Sunday, and the Government
orders forbidding travelling on that day, a
move was not made until Monday, when a journey
of nine miles brought them to the Nepean. The
river was crossed, and the journey then continued
to Emu Plains, where they found a Government
house and depot. At Penrith a wait of many hours
was necessary in order to obtain conveyances on
the opposite side of the river, those brought from
Sydney having to return. Sir John Jamison sent
his head constable to guard the property during
the night. On Wednesday, Mr. and Mrs. Hawkins
dined with Sir John, by whom they were enter-
tained in the lavish manner that made ‘ ‘ Regent-
ville ’ ’ famous throughout the colony.
The letter goes on to describe the assistance
afforded by the Government officers at Emu Plains,
and the difficulties that attended the ascent of the
Mountains, and mentions that Lapstone Hill was
“so called owing to the stones thereon resembling
cobblers’ lapstones. ’’ That night the tent was
pitched for the first time, with the reflection of
the camp fires on the surrounding bush, the scene
generally being a strange experience for those so
lately from the old country. During the night the
cattle found their way back to Emu Plains, which
necessitated Mr. Hawkins returning to that place.
The 'remaining members of the family continued on
to Springwood. ‘ ‘ After a most fatiguing journey
of nine miles (continues the writer) we arrived
at Springwood. The house was inhabited by a
corporal and two soldiers, kept there, I believe, to
superintend the Government stock. Formerly a
number of men had lived there. There was a large
room or store (a barn in England would have
been a palace to it), the kitchen was large, and
the fireplace in it the same. .Behind were two
small rooms. The house was completely in a
wood.
“The corporal’s wife (an old woman, who had
been transported 20 years previously) came for-
ward with pleasing manners to show us in
The kitchen contained a long table and form, and
stumps of trees to answer the purpose of chairs.
Several persons were here, to rest for the night.
We were shown to the small back room, which had
nothing but a sofa, with slips of bark laid on it
for the seat. There I felt desolate and lonely.
It was nearly dark, and still Hawkins did not
arrive. At length the storekeeper from Emu
Plains came to tell us that he could not get in
until fresh horses were sent. . . On going out
I saw what appeared to be a scene of great con-
fusion —men, tired with their day’s work, swearing
while releasing horses and bullocks, with the glare
of the fires over all. At length I found Hawkins,
and felt easy. The old woman (a most depraved
character, and a well-known thief), with a candle
held nigh above her head, screamed out: ‘Welcome
to Springwood, sir! ’
“Hawkins said, when he looked round, he felt
sure that his welcome would be the loss of what-
ever she could steal from us. . . I spread my
mattresses in the store room, the earthen floor of
which was dirty, cold, and damp. We put the
children to bed without undressing them. I laid
down for a few minutes, but sleep was out of the
question, the place being infested with vermin and
other sleep-vanishers, also the noise kept up by the
quarrelling of the men and the noise made by a
flock of sheep camped next the wall of the room.
Hawkins remained on the green in the cart ail
night watching, but the old woman (before men-
tioned) contrived to steal some spoons from our
basket. It was not with any regret we next morning
departed from the ‘house at Springwood.’ . . .
As we could not get on well with two bullocks,
another was added, but no good resulted, for at
short intervals one or other would lie down, causing
much delay, and to add to our discomfort rain was
79
PEEPS AT THE PAST.


almost continuous . . Breakfast and supper were
the only meals we allowed ourselves. . . During
the eleven days we were in the woods Hawkins did
not lie down till 3 o ’clock in the morning, and
then his resting place was the cart; only twice did
he take off his clothes.
“From the bark huts to Mount York nothing of
special interest occurred. A whole day was
occupied in making the descent of the mount, and
one of the drays we nearly lost over the precipice.
Next morning we saw two gentlemen seated upon
a hill a short distance from us. On going to them
Hawkins found that one was the Rev. Samuel
Marsden, returning from his first visit to Bathurst.
‘Oh!’ he said ‘I congratulate you. You are all
going to the Land of Goshen. ’ Without further
mishap w r e reached Bathurst Plains, where the sight
of the open country, with ‘Home’ in view, put us
all in good spirits. It was dark when we reached
the Macquarie River, the crossing of which was
a serious work. I believe everyone in the settle-
ment came to witness the sight. We crossed in
safety, and got to our ‘Home,’ which consisted ot
three rooms, with brick floors; so some difficulty
was experienced in finding room for ourselves and
belongings. Mr. Lawson, the Commissariat Officer,
came to see us next morning, and promised to do
all he could for our comfort, and he commenced by
adding two rooms to the house, whicn work took
seven months to complete. ‘ The Settlement ’
(Bathurst) consisted of Government House, of four
rooms; our own, of three rooms, courthouse, bar-
racks for a few soldiers, Government stores, huts for
prisoners employed by Government, and a good
garden, from which we were well supplied. Here
Sir Thomas Brisbane (Governor), Major Goulburn,
Mr. Oxley, Dr. Douglas, and the principal people
in the colony came to see us. ’'
Later Mr. Hawkins secured 2,000 acres of land
over the river*, which he named ‘ ‘ Blackdown. ’ ’ The
descendants of Mr. and Mrs. Hawkins are numer-
ous, and, like their progenitors of 1822, have done
yeoman service in assisting to build up and advance
the best interests of Australia.
MAY 24, 1910.
NOTES AND QUERIES
First Mayor of Sydney. —To “E.P.”
(Molong): Mr. Charles Windeyer, Police Magis-
trate, was the first Mayor of Sydney. The other
aldermen were H. H. Browne, W. A. Miles, J. R.
Breuan, F. L. S. Merewether, and Joseph Long
Innes.
Dr. Lang. —To “Old Colonist” (Newcastle):
The Rev. John Dunraore Lang, at the age of 33,
was married on August 25, 1831, to his cousin,
Miss Wilhelmina Mackie, aged 18, on board the
ship by which they were passengers, and which was
then lying in Simon’s Bay, South Africa.
Macquarie-street Chapel. —‘‘ F.W. ’ ’ writes:
The Sydney Gazette of December 31, 1830, says:
‘ ‘ The Rev. Mr. Crook resumed his ministerial labors
in the colony on Sunday last in Macquarie-street
Chapel.” I should be grateful for any informa-
tion concerning the building named, as to its loca-
tion, style, date of erection, and demolition!, and
other particulars concerning it. The Rev. Mr.
Crook mentioned was an Independent minister, and
a deacon of Pitt-street Congregational Church in
the early days.
Introduction of the Vine. —“S.S.P. ” writes:
The first successful experiment of which we have
any record was made by John Macarthur at Cam-
den. Certain Greek prisoners, transported for
piracy from the lonian Islands, were assigned to
Mr. Macarthur, and employed by him in culti-
vating a vineyard after the Greek manner. At the
expiration of their sentences these men left, and
were replaced by a number of German families,
whom Mr. Macarthur tempted by high wages to
migrate from the banks of the Rhine. Other
wealthy settlers followed the example of this en-
terprising gentleman, and many hundred species
of wine-bearing grapes have been introduced into
Australia.
The King’s School. —The following is from
the work In Old Australia, by the Rev. James S.
Hassall: “In January, 1832, the King’s School
was opened by the Rev. Robert Forrest, of St. Bee’s
College, Durham, England. It was founded, I
believe, at the suggestion of Archdeacon Broughton,
King William IY., and the Duke of Wellington.
The school commenced in a brick house in
Lower George-street, Parramatta. I entered in
April, 1832. Only a few boys were before me.
The names of the first pupils were: —Andrew
M'Dougal, Edwin Sutter, George Rouse, Joseph
Thompson. James Waller, Charles Lockyer,
boarders; and six day boys—two Orrs, two Oakes,
Geeorge Macarthur, and John Watsfcrd. ”
80
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.


Pharmaceutical Society. —To “ H.J.T. ’ ’
(Leichhardt) : The Pharmaceutical Society of New
South Wales was founded at a meeting of chemists
and druggists held in the Temperance Hall, Sydney,
on June 6, 1876. The late Mr. W. T. Pinhey pre-
sided over the meeting, at which the others present
were Messrs. Frank Senior, A. J. Watt, F. E.
Sloper, John Watson, M. H. Long, B. F.
Bozon, W. J. Hobbs (Newcastle), W. Felmingham,
C. C. Finch, James Henry, C. B. Saunders, Henry
SadleA J. Hamilton, Henry Potter, J. S. Abraham,
Thomas Humphries, W. Pratt, W. D. Eames. and
William Hume. It was moved by Mr. Sloper, and
seconded by Mr. Bozon —‘ ‘ That this raeeeting
resolve itself into a body for the formation of a
Pharmaceutical Society, of which the gentlemen
now present shall be considered the first members
and founders thereof. ’ ’ The following office-
bearers were appointed: —Council, Messrs. W. T.
Pinhey (president), Frank Senior, A. J. Watt, F.
E. Sloper, John Watson, M. H. Long, and B. I'.
Bozon; hon. secretary, pro tern., Mr. Watt; and
hon. treasurer, Mr. Watson. Rules for the govern-
ment of the society were adopted on June 27, 1876.
Of the founders mentioned Mr. J. S. Abraham is
now the only surviving one, and to him the His-
torical Society is indebted for the above infor-
mation.
THE FIRST CUSTOM-HOUSE
“Don” writes; —“It may be interesting to some
of your readers to know that the first Custom-
house was situated in Lower George-street, on the
site now occupied by the Commercial Hotel in
Essex-street, and ran from thence to the buildings
occupied by a dentist and flowershop to the north
(recently erected by the Government), thence it
ran up to the rear into what is now Cambridge-
street, thence down to the Commercial Hotel.
Essex-street was once known as “Gallows Hill.”
The new goal at Darlinghurst having been com-
pleted about the end of 1840, this land was subse-
quently sold by the Government. The late Win.
Long was the purchaser of the whole, and he erected
shops (lately pulled down) on the George-street
frontage, resumed by the Government, and resi-
dences at the rear in Cambridge-street that are still
standing.
‘ ‘ The first Custom-house stood on what is now
Playfair-street, and forms part of the Argyle
Stores, in the Cut, and Playfair-street. The en-
trance was in that street up a flight of steps flanked
by iron railings on each side. When the new
Custom-house at Circular Quay was erected, the
old premises were sold, and were occupied with
additions as stores, by the late Henry Fisher.
They subsequently fell into the hands of T. S.
Mitchell, and then passed to I. E. Ives, who made
considerable extensions thereto. ’ ’
THE DISCOVERY OF PORT PHILLIP
(BY CAPTAIN J. H. WATSON.)
Lieutenant Flinders and Hr. Bass, both of H.M.S.
Reliance in a small Norfolk Island-built 25-ton
schooner, named Norfolk, were the first to solve
the doubt that had existed as to whether Van Die-
men’s Land Joined with New Holland. Captain
Hunter, in the Sirius, formed the opinion that the
strong current and the heavy seas met with south
of Cape Howe indicated an open sea. Bass’s
voyage in the whaleboat, when he rounded Wilson’s
Promontory and discovered Western Port, led him
to the same conclusion. It was Governor Hunter
who named the Straits after Bass, recognising the
dangers and fatigue which that intrepid navigator
had gone through in his whaleboat expedition.
The armed survey ship Lady Nelson, which was
built under the direction of Captain Schank, with
three sliding keels, was the first vessel from Eng-
land to sail from the west through Bass’s Straits.
This was in December, 1800. The same craft, in
command of Acting-Lieutenant Murray, entered “a
fine sheet of smooth water of great extent,” she
being “the first that ever burst into that silent
sea.” Murray sighted the Heads on January
5, 1802', but was driven off by a storm, and it was
not until February 15 that he sailed the Lady
Nelson in. He named his discovery Port King,
but Governor King changed it to Port Phillip, in
honour of the first Governor.
Flinders, who was returning to New South Wales,
in command of H.M.S. Investigator, mistaking it
for Western Port, anchored inside the Heads on
April 26, 1802. Finding out his error on the fol-
lowing day, he congratulated himself on his dis-
covery, and it was only upon his arrival at Sydney
that he learned that Murray had forestalled him.
81
PEEPS AT THE PAST.


MAY 31, 1910.
NOTES AND QUERIES
First Evening Paper. —To “E.B. ” (Mel-
bourne) : The Sydney Evening Mail, published in
1859, represented the first attempt to establish an
evening daily in New South Wales. It had a very
brief existence, however, lasting, as it did, only
three or four months.
Ludwig Leichhardt. —To “M.G.” (Brisbane):
Leichhardt was born at Beskow, near Berlin, and
studied in the German capital. Through an over-
sight he was omitted from the list of those liable
to the one year of military service, and the sweets
of exemption tempted him to evade the three-year
military course. The consequence was that he was
prosecuted as a deserter, and, as the lawyers say,
sentenced “in contumaciam.” Afterwards Alex-
ander von Humboldt succeeded, by describing his
services to science in Australia, in obtaining a par-
don from the King. By a Cabinet Order, Leich-
hardt received permission to return to Prussia
unpunished, but when the order arrived in Australia
he had already started on his last expedition.
Musters. —To “F.A.P.” (Kiama): In the
early days in New South Wales it was found neces-
sary to number the people at short intervals, on
account of their dependence on the public stores and
the frequent occasions that arose for the curtail-
ment of provisions from dread of famine. It was
these enumerations that were termed “musters.”
The First Fleet —To “Australian” (Molong):
The number of people that embarked in the ships
of the First Fleet is variously stated, but accord-
ing to a collation of the earliest returns of Phillip
and Collins, it must have been 1083, of which ten
were civil officers, 212 the military establishment,
forty-five (women and children), the wives and
families of the military, and 816 the convicts and
their children. According to some authorities the
number of convicts was 756 —564 males, 192
females. It is exceedingly difficult to establish,
with anything like certainty, the actual number
embarked and landed; there are so many authori-
ties whose opportunities of knowing the truth were
equal, and yet every statement made conflicts with
every other.
BUSHRANGING NEAR SYDNEY
AN OLD COLONIST’S REMINISCENCES.
(by c. t. burfitt.)
Some fifteen years ago it was my good fortune
to meet with Mr. William Jones, then a resident of
Parramatta, who very kindly related to me some of
his experiences, commencing with the late forties,
which I shall endeavour to give, as near as pos-
sible, in Mr. Jones’s own words. The road from
Sydney to the western districts, he said, was known
as the Sydney-road to the point where the Dogtrap-
road turned off, near what is now known as Gran-
ville. For many years my informant was employed
as a carrier, by team, between Sydney and Parra-
matta. One day when near Dobroyd, and about 100
yards from the Iron Cove Bridge, he saw a carriage
standing on the road, and beside it was Archbishop
Folding, speaking with two men, whom he (Jones)
recognised as bushrangers. The Archbishop was
remonstrating with them, but without avail, for
they quickly deprived him of his valuables. Though
not wounded, or left half-dead, as was the man who
went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell
among robbers, he was greatly alarmed. The men
having wished their victim ‘ ‘ Good day, ’ ’ made off
into the bush), along the Iron Cove Creek, and were
not heard of after. The Archbishop went on to
Parramatta, and Jones followed. The same day,
one, Dave Austin, also was robbed near the bridge
mentioned, but not by the same men.
During the years 1848 to 1850 there were four or
five gangs of bushrangers in the neighbourhood of
Sydney, but although carriers and people resident
between the city and Windsor, Parramatta, and
Campbelltown, knew much about their doings, fear
of the consequences that were likely to follow pre-
vented them from aiding the authorities to bring
about the capture of these ‘ ‘ knights of the road. ’ ’
The localities most favoured by the gangs were
the junction at Liverpool and Sydney roads (oppo-
site Dobroyd);, Dogtrap and Sydney roads (now
Granville), and Homebush. These places were not
without their advantages to the marauders by
whom they were infested. There was an easy get-
away to rough country, into which pursuit would
have been useless, and the roads turning off at
the first and sedond points named met near Lans-
downe Bridge, George’s Eiver, where those who had
been skirmishing could meet to compare notes and
divide the spoils.
82
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.


Some years later a murder was committed at a
spot about 400 yards from Lansdowne Bridge. Two
travellers were camped beside a log, and during the
night one, while asleep, was murdered by his mate.
Some days later a detective, with a black-tracker,
went to the spot), and succeeded in tracing the man
to Sydney, then to North Shore, where, some six
miles out, he was arrested. Trial and execution
followed in due course.
There not being any banks in Parramatta, Mr.
Jones was charged with the responsibility of con-
veying not only goods, but money and other
valuables, a fact not unknown to the Dick Turpins
of the period, and his experiences must, to say the
least, have been exciting. ‘‘ I made it a practice, ’ ’
he told me, “to leave both Parramatta and Sydney
at a different time each journey, so as to prevent
any other person from knowing the time at which
I would be at any particular point along the road,
and so reduce the chance of being stopped, for as
there was not a bank in Parramatta I frequently
had large sums of money entrusted to me by busi-
ness people to bank for them in Sydney. One night
when a short distance from old Tom Kane’s house,
near Homebush, a man darted out from some
scrub and gave me to understand that I would not
again see the light of day if I refused to hand over
whatever valuables I might have about I
handed over the few shillings I had in one of my
pockets, but he was not satisfied), and proceeded to
search my pockets himself. However, all he got
was a watch that was not in going order.
‘ ‘ I then said, ‘ Look here, old man, I have been
at this game myself, but was never so mean as to
rob a man poorer than myself. You have taken the
only money I had to buy food for my wife and
children; surely you will not let the little ones and
their mother go hungry ? ’ As' my pleading ended, a
man, who had remained concealed in the bush,
called out, ‘ls that Bill Jones?’ and on my saying
it was he ordered his mate to return whatever had
been taken from me. From that day I was not
interfered with. My deliverer I recognised as a
man named Thompson, who had recently left a
gang that used to work near Parramatta. ’ ’
Mr. Jones said that the inn at the junction of
Liverpool and Parramatta roads, variously known
as Speed the Plough, The Plough Inn, and Boye-
son’s, was kept in the fifties by one Jack Ireland.
The road between the old wayside hostelry and
Battle Bridge was like that over Cherrytree and
Taverner’s Hills, a source of much anxiety to car-
riers and others journeying along there. On one
occasion the Governor’s carriage became bogged at
a spot south of the bridge, and an orderly was sent
on to Ireland’s for assistance.
In those days the Governor was responsible for
the making and the up-keep of the roads, so Jack
Ireland thought it would be wise on his part not
to let his Excellency escape easily, but to take
advantage of the opportunity to impress upon him
the necessity for something being done to relieve
travellers from the troubles and difficulties brought
about by the bad state of the roads. So the orderly
returned with the intimation from Ireland that if
the road was not all that might be desired, his
Excellency alone was to blame!, and that he might
get out of the mire as best he could. Some horses
were taken from wood carts, and finally the Queen’s
representative was enabled to continue his journey.
Opposite the inn is the old-time milestone which
proclaims to the traveller that he is distant from
the Obelisk in Macquarie-place, Sydney, five miles;
from Parramatta, ten miles; and from Liverpool,
fifteen miles. The bridge referred to above, and
now known as Long Cove Bridge, was, on the day
of the opening of the Homebush racecourse, the
scene ot a serious accident. A coach, driven by
Dunn, overturned, with the result that four pas-
sengers were killed and several others injured.
The Cherry Gardens (kept by Tom Weden), and
Cheshire Cheese hotels were, according to Mr.
Jones, favourite resorts of the city dwellers on
Sundays and on holidays. Going from the city, the
former was on the left and the latter on the right.
Regarding these places, the New South Wales
Calendar for 1834 has the following: —“These
houses have tea gardens, &c. Some fetes a la
Vauxhall were once given there. ’ ’ The site of the
Cherry Gardens is now occupied by the Carrington
Stores, and that of the Cheshire Cheese by the
Elphin Stores. Opposite the latter establishment
the Canterbury-road turns off. and passes under the
Great Western Railway at what, in the early days,
was known as the ‘ ‘ Seven ArcheSi,' ’ now Lewisham,
near which may be seen some traces of the home
of the celebrated Dr. Wardell. At the top oi
Taverner’s Hill was Elswick, at one time the home
of Mr. James Foster, and later that of the Hon.
James Norton.
The Fox Under the Hill, a wayside inn at the
junction of the Western and Richmond roads, some


four miles west of Parramatta, was, said Mr. Jones,
a favourite camping place of teamsters. He re-
membered seeing as many as fifty to sixty there on
a Sunday. Here, horse racing was carried out on
an attractive scale, the meetings being largely
attended by people from Sydney and Parramatta.
The house was built about 1825 i, and became the
property of a Mr. Peisley.
The Governor Bourke Hotel, at the corner of the
Western-road and Church-street, Parramatta, was
built by a Mr. Mervin before 1835, but how long
before my informant was unable to say. It is
standing at the present time, and is still a licensed
house.
A memorable occurrence that Mr. Jones witnessed
was the carriage accident in Parramatta Park, by
which Lady Mary Fitzroy lost her life in 1847.
Owing to the knowledge he thus possessed he was
enabled to point out the exact place where the car-
riage was overturned, and so prevent the obelisk
that marks the spot from being erected on the
wrong site.
Finally, this interesting old colonist mentioned
that he was at the first bazaar held in Australia
in aid of the Catholic Church, about 1840. It was
in the saloon of the Royal Hotel, George-street
and the old gentleman was the proud possessor of
a prize won on the occasion, a small wooden doll
dressed to represent a chimney-sw r eep. Another
prize was a pony, wdiich secured 100 subscribers
at £1 each, Mr. Robert Coveny being the winner.
Even in the early days, it will be seen, bazaars
flourished and patrons then, as now, were attracted
more by the object than by the value of the prize.
By supplying particulars of some of their experi-
ences, old colonists would greatly assist, as Mr.
Jones has. in perfecting the work of the Historical
Society.
JUNE 7, 1910.
REMARKABLE EVENTS IN JUNE
1 First sale of Crown lands in Melbourne, 1837
2 S. Bennett, founder of Syd. Evg. News, d., 1878
3 (4) Parramatta named by Phillip, 1791
4 First theatrical performance in N.S.W., 1789
5 Allan Cunningham disc’d Darling D., Q., 1827
6 Batman’s treaty with Pt. Phillip natives, 1835
7 Darlinghurst Gaol, Sydney, first occupied, 1841
8 Pitcairn Islanders placed on Norfolk Is., 1856
9 Eruption of Mount Tarawera, N.Z., 1886
10 Endeavor struck a reef near Cooktown, 1770
11 “Welcome Nugget” found near Ballarat, 1858
12 Melbourne Mint opened, 1872
13 Great flood, Hunter River 1864
14 Railway Sydney to Melbourne completed, 1883
15 Eugowra gold escort robbery, 1862
16 (15) First general election in N.S.W., 1843
17 Massacre at the Wairau, N.Z., 1843
18 Hamilton Hume, explorer, born P’matta, 1797
19 Sir Joseph Banks died, 1820
20 Brisbane Courier first published, 1846
21 Australian Agricultural Co. incorporated, 1824
22 (21) Sir Samuel Griffith, P.C., born, 1845
23 (19) Soudan Contingent returned, 1885
24 Adam Lindsay Gordon shot himself 18V 0
25 Gundagai flood; more than 90 lives lost, 1852
26 Melbourne proclaimed a city, 1847
27 Allan Cunningham died in Sydney, 1839
28 (29) St. Mary’s Cathedral, Sydney, burned, 1865
29 Kelly gang captured at Glenrowan, "Vic., 1880
30 Lambing Flat riots, 1861
NOTES AND QUERIES
Campbelltown —To “Alick” (Camden): Camp-
belltown was named after Mrs. Macquarie’s father.
Cockle Bay. —To “C.T.” (Young); It was
Darling Harbour, not Farm Cove, that was origin-
ally known as Cockle Bay.
First Civil Jury. —To “Law Clerk” (Sydney):
The first civil jury empannelled in New South
Wales was on November 1, 1824.
THE SPECTATOR.—To “N.E. ” (Goulburn) :
The Spectator was published in Sydney in 1858, and
was something of a curiosity. It was “edited by an
Association of Ladies,” at the head of which was
a Mrs. Cora Anna Weekes, who had recently arrived
from California. Its first number appeared in
July, and its last followed soon afterwards.
AN HISTORIC TOWN
THE CENTENARY OF LIVERPOOL
(by william freame.j
Liverpool will this year celebrate its centenary.
It was founded in 1810 by Governor Macquarie,
who granted a number of farm lots to ex-soldiers
and other settlers, and the first indication of a town
was a small notice board upon which was written,
‘ 1 This is Liverpool. ’ ’ Following his custom,
Macquarie caused the erection of a church, a gaol,
and military barracks. St. Luke’s Church of Eng-
land has an inscription which bears its vice-regal
builder’s name, and is dated 1819. It remains in
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY. 84


fairly good preservation, and is one of the most in-
teresting of the Macquarie buildings. The church-
yard contains the graves of several of the officers
and the soldiers of the regiments stationed in the
colony in the early days, particularly the 50 th, or
Queen’s Own.
Moore College, founded by Thomas Moore, of
Moorebank, is another picturesque old building,
although it is quite modern, compared with the
old “Moore” cottage next door, and other build-
ings at the northern end of the town. In the
vicinity of Liverpool are Horningsea Park, formerly
the estate of J. J. Moore, and afterwards belonging
to Captain Lyons; Macquarie Fields, the Rev. Mr.
Macarthur’s old school; Denham Court, the old
historic home of the Brooks family and the Bloom-
fields.
Some of the epitaphs in St. Luke’s churchyard
provide interesting reading. One stone bears the
following inscription:—
Sacred to the Memory of
LIEUT.-COL. JAMES HENRY PHELPS,
late of the 4th Reg.; a Knight of Hanover,
and a J.P.,
who died 19th Nov., 1841, after 29 years gloriously spent in
the service of his country, in the course of which he shared
in her victories during all her European wars. He closed his
just, honored, and upright life in Liverpool in the 63rd year
of his age.
Major Montgomery, of the 50th; Captain" John
Horsley, R. H. Guards; Captain Wm. Campbell, of
Harrington Park; Thomas Moore, Judge Kinchela,
and Aeting-Commissary-General Broughton, with
many other notable colonists, are buried in this old
churchyard. The oldest inscription appears to be
one dated 1821, although in an old, neglected burial
ground in ftie vicinity, amid the general ruins, may
be seen the headstone of N’athl. Lewis, who died
in 1818.
It is not generally known that Liverpool was to
be the ‘ ‘ port ’ ’ from which produce from ‘ ‘ the
southern countries” might be shipped to Sydney,
and that in the thirties it possessed its wharf, and
also its Ship Inn. Yet such was the case.
A writer in the Sydney Herald, of November 24,
1836, describes Liverpool as being the key to the
southern country, and mentions that a vessel of 60
tons can approach its wharf, ‘ ‘ whereby the produce
of the interior may be conveyed to Sydney.” To-
day Liverpool is almost a suburban station, on a
line of railway that traverses the vast southern
counties for hundreds of miles, and carries
thousands of tons of produce.
JUNE 14, 1910.
NOTES AND QUERIES
Bank op N.S.W. —To “Fernleigh” (Yass) :
The Bank of New South Wales was not started in
George-street, but in Mrs. Mary Eeibey’s house in
Macquarie-place, ih which it was first opened for
the despatch of business on April 8, 1817.
HEBALD and MONITOB. —To “Z.” (Nowra) :
Your dates are slightly mixed. It was the old Sydney
Gazette, and not the Herald, that was first published
in 1803. The Sydney Herald, as it was originally
known, issued its first number on April 18, 1831,
coming out as a small weekly sheet of four pages.
It was not until 1842, when the paper was enlarged,
that its title was changed to the Sydney Morning
Herald.
Rev. W. P. Crook. —A correspondent supplies the
following information relating to the Rev. William
Pascoe Crook, in response to the request recently
THE REV. WILLIAM PASCOE CROOK
made by “F.W. ” for a few particulars concerning
that old-time clergyman:—The Rev. William Pascoe
Crook was born at Dartmouth. Devonshire, on April
29, 1775. He, with the first missionaries sent out
by the London Missionary Society, left England by
the ship Duff , in 1796, and landed at Santa Chris-
tina, in the Marquesan Islands. Here he suffered
innumerable hardships at the hands of the natives,
85
PEEPS AT THE PAST.


and had narrow escapes from death. He managed
to return to England, but in 18031, with his wife,
he again left the old country as one of the expe-
dition sent out in the ships Calcutta and Ocean to
form a colony at Port Phillip, but there he
remained only three weeks, having decided to come
on to Sydney. In 1816 he returned to Tahiti,
and later to Papeete. In 1831 he re-embarked for
Sydney, and for some years maintained his family
by means of a school. Indeed, his was the first
ladies’ boarding-school in Sydney. For many years
he resided in Jamison-street, Sydney. Having
raised contributions, he built the little old church
that is still to be seen near the lighthouse at Wat-
son’s Bay, just off the harbour side of the road.
It has always been known as Crook’s Church. So
devoted was he to the cause of religion that he
frequently rode or drove from Sydney to Watson’s
Bay to conduct divine service, and the. same day
went to Parramatta for a similar purpose. He died
in Melbourne on June 14, 1846, and a memorial to
him may be seen in the Pitt-street Congregational
Church, Sydney. It is a most interesting fact that
he was among the first to start an independent
church in Sydney, and that its site was at the
corner of Bligh and Hunter streets, so that it
occupied almost the same position as the wattle and
dab church built by the Rev. Richard Johnson.
BUSBY S BORE
SYDNEY’S EARLY WATER SUPPLY.
(by “m. ”)
When the Grand Jury presented its report, on
November 9. 1825, it delivered itself thus: —“The
Grand Jurors have to lament that their repeated
presentments of the inadequate supply of Sydney
with water have been hitherto disregarded. They
have, therefore, again strongly to urge the indispen-
sable necessity of some immediate measures on this
subject. The principal stream whence the inhabi-
tants are at present supplied with this necessary
article they find still unclosed, and polluted by
common sewers, and every description of filthy pools
emptying themselves into it, which must render it
of highly deleterious quality. ’ ’ At the f ollowing
Quarter Sessions a similar indictment was made.
In the Sydney Gazette, of March 1, 1826, one
reads:—“We actually beheld upwards of half a
dozen boys bathing in the very stream from which,
it is most probable, the next moment, many of the
inhabitants of Sydney were obliged to supply
themselves with water for culinary purposes.” Alas
for the old Tank Stream, whose meandering waters
pre-destined the site of Sydney, and for so many
years served to satiate the thirst of its settlers.
The sinking of numerous yard wells, as Sydney
began to grow, and the abundant supply from
other streams, notably the one flowing into Black-
wattle Swamp,' created some disregard for the
Government water supply. Less than a hundred
years ago—October 28, 1820—the Gazette thus
lamented what was becoming a rather common prac-
tice: —“With much pain we have lately observed
individuals washing themselves in this stream of
water, particularly in that part that runs central
from King-street, because that spot is almost
secluded from every eye, that of curiosity ex-
cepted.” Imagine the site of our General Post
Office being once ‘ ‘ almost secluded from every
eye. ’ ’
As may readily be imagined, the purity of this
historic stream was not likely to be improved by
the five extensive slaughter-houses that stood on its
banks. Finally it became absolutely necessary to
supplement the tanks, and seven public wells were
sunk, at a cost of £2OO 16s. Bd., for immediate
wants. Two were put down in King-street, two
on the land in Pitt-street where the old Victoria
Theatre subsequently stood, one on the site of the
old Labour Bazaar in Pitt-street, and two on the
block of land noiw occupied by the Royal Arcade,
Pitt-street. One of the last-mentioned required 200
loads of material to refill it.
In the General Orders of 14.10.1802, 16.10.1803,
18.12.1803, 15.9.1810, 2.3.1811, 28.10.1820,
6.11.1823, 18.3.1824, pointed references were
made to the noxious inflows threatening the purity
of Sydney’s original water supply. Then came
the aforesaid presentment from the Grand Jury.
John Busby, Mineral Surveyor to the Govern-
ment, arrived in 1824, and was requested by Gov-
ernor Brisbane to report,on this great water ques-
tion. After some patient investigation, he decided
in favour of the Lachlan Swamp, then part of
what we now know as Centennial Park, and re-
ported accordingly in 1826. Sydney had then a
population of 10,000, supposed to be dependent
upon a catchment area of 180 acres.
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY. 86


A start was made with the tunnel in Septem-
ber, 1827, but the unskilfulness of the convict lab-
ourers delayed its completion until June, 1837. A
stockade was erected on the site of Darlinghurst
gaol for the convicts thus employed. Sydney had
then a population of 20,000 souls. A soakage from
the rocks through which the cutting was made
supplied a fair quantity of drinkable water as
early as 1830. When, in 1829, Sub-lieutenant
Woore visited Sydney, in H.M. sloop Zebra, which
had been freighted with British coin, to replace
teeming into the bore, and running through to
Sydney. In 1867, he found that this once copious
supply had nearly ceased to flow; aquatic plants
had entirely disappeared, and one could ride with
safety over almost any part of this old-time mor-
ass. Fires, parching winds, the removal of its heavy
brushwood, the summer suns, cattle and horses
grazing freely over the area, all conspired to the
drying up and hardening of its surface.
The bore was 12 000 feet in length, averaging 4
feet in width and 5 feet in height. Twenty-eight
BUSBY’S BORE—WHERE IT TERMINATED IN HYDE PARK
the rings and dumps then in circulation, he rode
out to view the spot now sacred to the memory of
La Perouse. A stream which he could not cross ran
from the swamps into the bay. In company with
Baron Hugel, an enthusiastic naturalist, sailing in
H.M.S. Alligator as the guest of Sir George Lam-
bert, he frequently visited those swamps, but al-
ways carried a piece of rope, with which he and
his companion could drag themselves out if they
got stuck in the quagmire. These excursions, which
were made to search for aquatic plants, took place
in 1833 and 1834.
Early in 1835, Woore entered Busbv’s bore
which then extended from Hyde Park to nearly
midway under the first swamp. Water was then
vertical shafts, ranging from 20 feet to 80 feet in
depth, connected it with the surface. Excavations
totalling 255,930 cubic feet were made, mostly
through solid rock, at a cost of £24,000. Its ter-
minal at Hyde Park, was about 104 feet above high-
water mark. It was intended to excavate a reser-
voir at this place, capable of holding 15,000,000
gallons, but the project was not carried out. Shortly
after the tunnel was opened, Sydney, indeed the
whole colony, experienced an unprecedented
drought.
Stokes, in his Voyage of the Beagle, says:
—‘ ‘ For some time previous to our former depar-
ture from Sydney, during the whole of our ab-
sence, and for several months subsequent to our
87
PEEPS AT THE PAST.


return, not a drop of rain fell. ’ ’ This would be
in 1838-9. The Sydney Herald, of November 5,
1838, thus comments upon this remarkable
drought: —“Great distress exists in Sydney, es-
pecially at the northern end, in consequence of
the scarcity of water. The stream from the pipes
on the Racecourse [Hyde Park] is very small —
so small that the men cannot fill the Avater-carts
without waiting four or five hours for a turn.
Threepence per bucket is the price now asked.''
When the weather was favourable the output of
JUNE 21, 1910.
NOTES AND QUERIES
Gladesville. —To “Cabarita” (Ryde):
Gladesville was named after John Glade, a land-
holder in that locality, from whom Glade’s Bay
also took its name.
Rev. 'W. P. Crook. —Two correspondents write
asking whether anyone can tell them what house
it was the Rev. W. P. Crook occupied when he
lived in Jamison-street.
A MACQUARIE RELIC AT LA PEROUSE.
It was from the top of this ancient tower at La Perouse that a sharp look-out for
smugglers used to be kept in the days of Governor Macquarie.
the bore was from 300,000 to 400,000 gallons
daily.
The Lachlan Swamp consisted of a great sand
sponge, carrying water at depths varying from
43 feet to 109 feet, with a catchment area of
about two square miles. The Upper Swamps now
form the miniature lakes in Centennial Park.
There are eight separate sheets of water covering a
total area of about 100 acres, varying, of course,
with the rainfall. When at their best some 130
millions of gallons of water may be conserved.
IN THE DAYS OF MACQUARIE
INTERESTING RELIC AT LA PEROUSE
An interesting discovery was lately made by
two members of the Australian Historical So-
ciety, Dr. Houison and Mr. Frank Walker. The
former, whilst glancing over the road itinerary
contained in the Sydney Almanac for 1832, noticed,
in connection with the description of the South
Head-road and its offshoots, that Governor Mac-
88
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.


quarie had caused to be erected at La Perouse a
watch-tower for the prevention of smuggling on
that part of the coast. Without much hope ot
finding this old relic still in situ, Dr. Houison and
Mr. Walker made a special journey to La Perouse
the other day, and were fortunate enough to find
the old building almost exactly as it was in Mac-
quarie’s time.
It stands on the hill, a short distance due east
of the cable station, and, although a familiar ob-
ject to all regular visitors to that locality, it is
doubtful whether there were any to whom its his-
tory was known.
Octagonal in shape, and commanding a clear
view of the adjacent coast, the structure is two
storeys in height, and is built of cut and dressed
sandstone blocks. The roof was originally flat,
and served the purpose of a look-out. It was
used as a custom-house until 1904, when the last
occupant, Mr. Peter Clark, was pensioned off. He
still lives in the old building. The previous
customs officers were Messrs. M‘Dermott, Eames,
and Brett.
Through the courtesy of the occupants the visi-
tors were permitted to inspect the ancient edifice.
The walls are nearly 3ft. in thickness, and save
for the addition of a small verandah outside and
one or two structural alterations within, this fine
old relic, is practically unchanged. A keen look-
out was kept for the ‘ ‘ inevitable inscription, ’ ’
but nothing was discovered. Probably, in the case
of this building, Macquarie contented himself with
the usual foundation deposit, and refrained from
recording on the outside surface his name and
date. The building appears to be as solid and sub-
stantial as the day it was erected, and the hope
may be expressed that this relic of bygone times
may, escape the hands of the spoiler, and remain
an object lesson in Australian history for the
benefit of generations yet unborn.
SIR JAMES EVERARD HOME
AN OLD-TIME NAVAL OFFICER.
(BY CAPTAIN J. H. WATSON.)
Australia is indebted for much to the Royal
Navy and its officers, especially to those who
discovered and surveyed its coasts and harbours.
Among those who are prominent are Flin-
ders, Bass, P. P. King Wickham. Stokes, Black-
wood, Yule, Stanley, Denham, and many others,
not least among whom is the subject of this
article.
Sir James Everard Home was a son of Sir
Everard Home Bart., F.R.S., Sergeant-Surgeon to
the King, and succeeded to the title as second
baronet on August 31. 1832. He entered the
the navy as midshipman on the Euryalus. After
serving in the Malta, 80 guns, the Tonnant, of
the same class, and in the frigate Sybille, he was
promoted to a lieutenancy on the Larne, sloop,
his next appointment being to the Pique, 36
guns after further service on the home station
and in the West Indies. He reached post rank in
1837, and in 1841 was given the command of the
North Star, a 26-gun frigate, of the class known
in those days as donkey frigates. He took part
in the China war of 1841 and 1842, at the ter-
mination of which he was sent to New Zealand,
where the Maoris were disputing with the Bri-
tish as to their right of occupancy. Sir J. Ever-
ard Home, with the officers and men of the North
Star, saw some exciting service there, the prin-
cipal engagement being the storming and capture
of the Ruapekapeka Pah on January 11, 1846.
The Castor, 36-gun frigate, commanded by
Captain Charles Graham, having relieved the
North Star, this ship sailed for Sydney, where
she refitted, and left for England on February
25, 1846, arriving at Portsmouth on August 22.
Thus concluded Sir Everard Home’s first commis-
sion in Australian waters.
Early in 1851 the Admiralty commissioned
H.M.S. Calliope to replace the Savannah on
this station, and the command was given to
Captain Sir J. Everard Home. The Calliope,
which must not be confounded with that other
Calliope, of Samoan hurricane fame, was one of
the old class of frigates concerning which a
writer in the United Service Gazette, in 1859,
said: —“It seems a very extraordinary thing,
but whenever a ship is required by the hydro-
grapher for the surveying service, the Admiralty
are sure to pick out the oldest and most rotten
old tub and with horribly bad accommodation.’’
This was specially said of the Herald and the
Aoteon, but it applied to practically all fri-
gates of this class at that period.
It was July 20 before the Calliope reached
Sydney, the Pandora, six guns. Commander
Byron Drury, coming in the following day, and
8 9
PEEPS AT THE PAST.


the Fantome, a 12-gun brig, arriving on the
25th, under command of Commander John H.
Gennys. Lying in Farm Cove at the time were
the Havannah (Captain Erskine), and the Bram-
ble (Lieutenant Pollard). This latter vessel,
ten years later, became the lightship at the
Heads, and was the predecessor of the present
Bramble, which was specially built for the pur-
pose. Whilst on this station the Calliope did
much useful work.
During the first cruise she visited the New
Zealand ports, the Auckland Islands, and Van
Diemen’s Land. It was about this time that the
Auckland Islands were made the headquarters
of the Great Southern Whale Fishery Company,
and a settlement was established there, Mr.
Charles Enderfby bednig appointed Lieutenant-
Governor. It was not, however, successful, for
two commissioners came out from London in
1852 to wind up the company’s affairs, and the
officials and settlers were removed to Sydney.
The Calliope’s next cruise was to the Islands,
when she visited Norfolk Island, Friendly
Islands, Fiji, New Hebrides, and other groups.
She returned to Sydney on December 19, 1852.
Captain Home’s health had been indifferent
during this cruise, and not improving while in
port, he put to sea again on March 16, 1853,
this time going to Melbourne, King Georgei’s
Sound, Hobart, and New Zealand'. It was
while in New Zealand that he was seized with
an attack of paralysis. He came back to Sydney,
and died here on November 1,, 1853.
Sir Everard was a man of literary and scientific
tastes, and a zealous botanist, and his contributions
to learned societies were numerous. His remains
were given a public funeral, on the day of which
all Government offices were closed. The procession
moved from Circular Quay at 10.30 a.m. on Novem-
ber I, headed by the band and a firing party of
the 11th Regiment. The coffin was borne on a gun-
carriage, drawn by twenty-four seamen of the
Calliope, the pall-bearers being officers of his ship.
The cortege was made up of officers, seamen, and
marines from E.M. ships Calliope, Fantome, and
Tarch, military officers, civilians, and carriages.
After a brief service at Christ Church, conducted
by the Rev. Canon Walsh, the procession continued
its way to Camperdown Cemetery, where the Rev.
G. Carwithen, the chaplain of the Calliope, per-
formed the last rites.
JUNE 28, 1910.
NOTES AND QUERIES
First Foreign Ship to Visit Sydney.—To
“Alpha” (Bart hurst) : The Philadelphia, from
America, was the first vessel under a foreign flag
to arrive in Port Jackson. She was loaded with
provisions, and reached Sydney on November 1,
1792.
Population in 1836 —To “M.B. ” (Strathfield):
The census of 1836 in New South Wales was taken
on September 2 of that year, the total number of
inhabitants being given as 77,096. Dr. Lang, in
his History of New South Wales, remarks that in
1836 two-fifths of the population of the colony con-
sisted of the prisoner class, and that the dispro-
portion of the sexes continued to be very unfavour-
able to the social and moral welfare of the
country.
Phillip’s Prediction. —■ ‘ C.T. ” asks: —‘ ‘ What
was that remarkable prediction which Governor
Phillip made regarding the future of New South
Wales?” Phillip made a good many predictions
concerning the prospects of the settlement he
founded on the shores of Port Jackson, but the
particular one to which our correspondent refers
was probably that contained in a despatch to Lord
Sydney, in which he wrote: “Nor do 1 doubt but
that this country will prove the most valuable ac-
quisition Great Britain ever made. ’ ’
A Land Without Antiquities. —To “N.S.W. ”
(Lewisham) : The lines to which you refer —
A land without antiquities ; with one,
And only one, poor spot of classic ground—
That on which Cook first landed —
were, as you say, written by Barron Field, but
they were not “part of a poem called ‘Geographi-
cal Memoirs of New South Wales. ’ ’’ This was
the title of a book that Judge Field published on
his return to England. At the end of the volume,
as an appendix, was a small collection of poems,
from one of which the foregoing lines are taken.
Field had an exalted opinion of his poetic powers,
but be was probably the only one who had. It
was a brother judge, Roger Therry, who referred to
his “Botany Bay Flowers” as having “long since
lost their odor, and now lie ‘withered and gone,’ ”
while a rival bard was unkind enough to perpetrate
the following: —
Thy poems, Baron Field, I’ve read
And thus adjudge their meed—
So poor a crop proclaims thy head
A barren field indeed!
90
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.


New South Wales Corps. —To “Inquirer’'
(Double Bay) : The following extracts from the
official correspondence furnish the particulars for
which you ask regarding the formation of the New
South Wales Corps:—“Sir George 'Yonge to the
Treasury, 20th May, 1789. The King, intending
that the detachment now serving in New South
Wales should be relieved and brought to England,
has thought it advisable, instead of. replacing them
with another detachment from that corps, that a
corps of infantry should be forthwith raised for
that particular service to consist of four companies.
H.M. is also pleased to direct that the
major and captains shall each raise their own com-
panies, receiving for each approved recruit the sum
of three guineas. ’ ’ Then follows the estimate of
the cost of the corps for one year amounting to
£6,054. Major Grose was notified by letter, dated
June 8, that the corps would be under his command.
He was further informed that it was clearly to be
understood by the officers who obtained appoint-
ment that they would not be allowed to dispose of
the commissions then held, but that they would be
considered purchasers in the new corps. Instruc-
tions were issued for the corps to be ready for em-
barkation on October 1, 1789. A weil-known his-
torian thus expressed himself as to this famous
corps: —“There is no doubt that in so far as the
personnel of the corps is concerned there was much
to be desired. At that time no one who had any
reasonable prospect of even moderate affluence
would have dreamt of embarking (voluntarily) for
Australia. The corps was really the sweepings of
the military prisons. The officers were, to say the
least, adventurous amateurs.”
HAWKESBURY RIVER
THE STORY OF ITS DISCOVERY
One hundred and twenty-one years ago is it this
month since the Hawkesbury River was found and
explored by Governor Phillip The discovery of this
noble stream —“the Rhine of Australia,” as some
enthusiast has dubbed it—was a turning point in
the history of the infant settlement at Sydney
Gove, and must have done much to dispel the
doubts that had previously hung over its future.
Of the existence of this river Phillip had been
dreaming ever since he caught his first glimpse of
the Blue Mountains fourteen months previously.
One cause and another, however, had prevented him
from making his projected excursions to the north-
west until June, 1789, when a large party was
organised for the purpose. Two boats were sent
on from Sydney to Broken Bay with provisions,
and in a third were Phillip, Captain Hunter, and
two of his officers, Judge-Advocate Collins, Cap-
tain George Johnston of the marines—then aide-
de-camp to the Governor, and afterwards a con-
spicuous character in our histoiy —and Surgeon
White, ‘ ‘ all armed with musquets, &c. ’ ’ They
landed “on the north part of Port Jackson” —
probably at Manly Cove —and proceeded along the
coast towards Broken Bay.
When, as we are told in Barton’s History, they
had reached the shores of Broken Bay, where they
found the boats waiting for them, they proceeded
to explore the various branches of it that had been
partially examined during Phillip’s visit in March,
1788. Two days were devoted to the work, and on
the third, while sailing up the north-west branch,
they saw some high land that had the appearance
of an island. Determined to satisfy themselves on
that point), they proceeded to examine it, and while
doing so they were led into a branch which had not
been discovered. Following it up, they found a
good depth of water, and every indication of the
opening of an extensive river.
Phillip’s satisfaction at the discovery may easily
be imagined; his confident prediction of the year
before that a great river would be found flowing
from the distant mountains was now confirmed; and
if he had had a doubt remaining in his mind as to
the ultimate success of his settlement it left him
here. For a large river meant a large stretch of
fertile country on its banks, with easy carriage for
produce by water. As soon as the river banks could
be occupied and farmed, especially by. those free
settlers for whom Phillip was always longing, there
would be an end to all fears as to the food supply
for the people at Sydney Cove. But settlement on
the Hawkesbury was not destined to take place in
Phillip’s time, for it was not until nearly five
years later that the first farms upon its banks were
established by Lieut.-Governor Grose.
91
PEEPS AT THE PAST.


JULY 6, 1910.
REMARKABLE EVENTS IN JULY
1 Victoria separated from N.S.W., 1851
2 First direct cables received from England, 1872
3 Dean Cowper bom, 1810
4 Hyde Park Barracks, Sydney, first occupied, 1819
5 Agricultural Society N-S.W. established, 1822
6 Northern Territory separated from N.S.W., 1863
7 D’Arcy Wentworth died in Sydney, aged 65, 1827
8 James Bonwick born in London, 1817
9 Nemesis with all hands lost near Sydney, 1904
10 Hordern’s great fire, 1901
11 Foundation of Macquarie Lighthouse laid, 1816
12 Steamer Gnwarra wrecked, Newcastle, 1866
13 Allan Cunningham born at Wimbledon, Eng., 1791
14 YarraYarra wrecked with all hands, Newc’tle, 1874
15 C. J. Latrobe, Ist Lieut.-Gov. of Vic., sworn in, 1851
16 Royal Tar left Sydney for Paraguay, 1893
17 Savings Bank opened in Sydney, 1819
18 Dr. C. Badham born at Ludlow, Shropshire, 1813
19 Matthew Flinders died in England, 1814
20 Sydney incorporated, J. Hosking first Mayor, 1842
21 Dr. Bland died, 1868
22 Victoria Theatre, Sydney, burned, 1880
23 Chusan, Ist direct str. from Eng., arrd. Melb., 1852
24 First vessel launched in Australia, 1793
25 (24) Sydney tram men’s strike began, 1908
26 Mock election of Earl Grey to N.S.W. Leg. Cl., 1848
27 (26) Gas first used in Sydney, 1828
28 Rev. Samuel Marsden born, 1764
29 Sydney Evening News first published, 1867
30 (31) Mount Kembla explosion, 95 killed, 1902
31 First Queensland railway opened, 1865
NOTES AND QUERIES
Rev. W. P. Crook. —“C. W. ” wuites re Rev.
William Pascoe Crook: —Information is desired
on the following points: (1) The location of his
seminary or ladies’ school, in Jamison-street, which
he was in charge of during the early thirties. (2)
The exact location of the building described by
Crook as being on the corner of Hunter
and Bligh streets, where, in 1810, “a church
on the Congregational, Or Independent, plan”
was formed. On which corner of the two
streets named was the building situated? (3)
Can any reader supply information of a church
and congregation, or meeting house, of the Con-
gregational denomination existing in Sydney be-
tween the years 1810 and 1831? (4) If, as stated
recently in these columns, the church at Watson's
Bay was not opened for public worship till July.
1840, and Crook was known to have opened a sub-
scription-list for the same in the year 1832, what
was the cause of the long delay —viz., eight years?
THE “PARSON’S ORANGERY”
INTERESTING DISCOVERY AT RYDE
The Rev. Richard Johnson. Sydney’s first chap-
lain, who is credited, and rightly too, with the
introduction of orange cultivation into New South
Wales, acquired a grant of land in the Ryde dis-
trict soon after his arrival in the colony, and set
about the planting of the seeds he had brought with
him. We are told that his efforts were crowned
with success, inasmuch as when the trees came to
full bearing as many as fifty baskets of oranges
were taken from a single tree. On his orchard he
erected a small stone building, which was strong
and substantial enough to withstand and repel the
attacks of natives, and in which was a loophole for
defensive purposes.
Two members of the Australian Historical
Society recently investigated the neighbourhood of
where this orchard was supposed to exist, and were
rewarded by the discovery of the very spot (still
unoccupied by buildings), with several straight
rows of holes, or depressions that were evidently
the places where the original orange trees had been
growing. In the upper corner of the allotment is
a ruined building, without a roof, constructed of
roughly squared stones, and, strange to say, in one
of the side walls is a rectangular opening, which
exactly corresponds to the loophole described. The
old orchard is situated a little to the east of the
present railway bridge, and abuts on the road lead-
ing down to the punt. There hardly seems a shadow
of doubt that here, indeed, exists a most inter-
esting relic —a veritable ‘ 1 link with the past. ’ ’ The
worthy chaplain, no doubt, with his own hands,
helped to fashion the rude structure which to-day
is a silent witness to an important episode in Aus-
tralian history, and if it can be established on
indisputable evidence that the building is actually
the one spoken of by Johnson in his letters, it is
an easy first in the claim it possesses to be the
oldest existing structure in Australia.
KISSING POINT
ORIGIN OF THE NAME.
A correspondent writes: —A good deal of specu-
lation is rife as to the origin of the name “Kissing
Point,” which, as everyone knows, is a projecting
tongue of land running into the Parramatta River
92
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.


in the neighbourhood of Ryde. The story of how
this particular point received its name was told by
Dr. A. Houison at the last meeting of the Aus-
tralian Historical Society, after the reading of Mr.
F. Walker’s paper on “The Great Northern Road.”
It seems that Governor Hunter, who was very par-
tial to river picnics, often visited this spot in com-
pany with a number of ladies and gentlemen, the
party being conveyed by rowing boats from Sydney
—a no inconsiderable task in those days, taking into
account the distance and the unwieldy craft then
in use.
On one occasion, when nearing its destination,
the boat grounded upon one of the numerous sub-
merged reefs in the neighbourhood, and, the tide
being on the ebb, remained hard and fast. To the
ladies the task or reaching the shore was a for-
midable one, but the gentlemen gallantly came to
the rescue, and, divesting themselves of boots and
socks- —or was it shoes and stockings? —hoisted
their fair burdens out of harm’s w T ay, and waded
ashore with them.
Not to be outdone in politeness, Governor Hun-
ter himself —(perhaps the lightest nymph was left
to him out of respect to his high position)—pre-
pared himself for the ordeal, and safely conveyed
his charge to dry land, when, on setting her upon
terra firma, he saluted her with a hearty kiss. Then
and there the spot of land where this pretty little
episode took place was named “Kissing Point,”
and the name has been retained till the present
day.
JULY 12, 1910.
NOTES AND QUERIES
Old-time Printer. —To “T.F.” (Petersham):
The late Mr. John Degotardi had a printing estab-
lishment in Robin Hood-lane, off George-street, in
the early sixties.
Telegraphic Anniversaries. To “M.R. ”
(Penrith): The date as shown in this month’s
calendar is correct. July, by the way, is quite
an eventful month in the history of telegraphic en-
terprise. It was in this month of the year that
the first telegram was sent in England (1837), that
the telegraph line between Adelaide and Melbourne
was opened (1858), that the Atlantic cable was
completed (1866), that the first direct cable news
came to Australia from England (1872) , and that
the new Atlantic cable was laid (1873).
Judge-Advocate Collins. —To ‘'Minty” (Bow-
ral) : Judge-Advocate Collins’s Christian name was
David. He returned to England in 1797, and it
was soon afterwards that his Account of the Eng-
lish Colony in New South Wales was published.
Collins’s history is a work abounding with infor-
mation, highly interesting, and written with the
utmost simplicity. As one writer has declared, it
“will be read and referred to as a book of autho-
rity as long as the colony exists whose name it
bears. ’ ’
A FIRST FLEETER’S GRAVE
One of the few graves to be found in New South
Wales of those who came out in the First Fleet
may be seen in St. Peter’s Cemetery at Richmond.
It is that of Thomas Spencer, and is shown in the
foreground of the accompanying illustration.
A FIRST FLEETER’S GRAVEYARD.
Dilapidated as it was when this picture was taken
some time ago, it is even more so now. The in-
scription on the stone slab runs as follows: —
SACRED
To the Memory
THOS. SPENCER,
Who came to this Colony
In the First Fleet, a Marine,
And Departed This Life
Feby. 3, 1821,
Aged 61 Years.
The block was made from a photo by Mr. R.
Farlow, of North Richmond.
93
PBBPS AT THB PAST.


TO ENCOURAGE MATRIMONY
LAND GRANTS AS MARRIAGE PORTIONS
A correspondent writes:—ln the regulations
relating to land grants published October 1, 1830,
is the following:^—“For the encouragement of
matrimony, his Excellency the Governor has also
bestowed grants of land as marriage portions from
the Grown upon the occasion of the marriage of
free and respectable persons born in wedlock. In
general the husband addresses himself to the Colo-
nial Secretary, stating his own and his wife’s con-
nections and circumstances, and if approved by has
Excellency the land is granted under a peppercorn
quit-rent, and entailed upon the wife and her chil-
dren by the existing marriage, subject, as in all
other cases to the confirmation of his Majesty. ’ ’
OLD COLONIAL PENSIONS
“Old Colonist” writes: —It is perhaps worth
while mentioning that the pensions payable out of
the N.S.W. Treasury for the year 1834 were as fol-
low: —Mrs. Macquarie, widow of Governor Mac-
quarie, £400; Mrs. Cobb (late Mrs. Bent), widow
of Judge-Advocate Bent, £200; Mrs. Lewin, widow
of Coroner Lewin, £500; Mrs. Jamison, widow of
Surgeon Jamison, £4O; Mrs. Thompson, widow of
Surgeon Thompson, £3O; John Stephen, late judge
in the Supreme Court, £500; Mrs. King, widow of
Governor King. £200; Mrs. S. Mileham, widow of
Surgeon Mileham, £100; William Harper, late
assistant surveyor, £lO9 10s.; John Redman, late
gaoler of Sydney, £7O; John Tucker, late commis-
sariat storekeeper. £5O; John Gowen, late commis-
sariat storekeeper, £5O; Thomas Taber, master of
the public school, £5O; Thomas Pendergrass, late
town-crier, £l2; William Eckford, late pilot of
Newcastle, £l3 13s. 9d. Total, £1,155 3s. 9d.
SYDNEY IN THE FORTIES
“THAT PICTURESQUE ANIMAL THE GOAT.”
(by c. t. burfitt.)
The following extracts from the diary of Lieut.-
Colonel Mundy (Deputy-Adjutant-General in the
Australian colonies in 1846) make interesting read-
ing at this much later period of Australia’s his-
tory:—
“On the afternoon of the 3rd March, 1846, 1
arrived at Gravesend with a brother, who had vol-
unteered to see me on board, and took rooms for
the night at the Falcon Hotel. ’ ’ Then follow
entries descriptive of the voyage (in the ship
Agincourt, 600 tons; which it is not necessary to
record. The colonel then goes on to say.—“ Early
on the morning of the 25th June we glided past
the entrance to Botany Bay, and with the glass
could distinguish the monument erected to the mem-
ory of poor La Perouse by his compatriots. . . .
Shortly before midday the Agincourt passed close
under the lighthouse of Port Jackson, and precisely
at 12 o ’clock we entered the Heads, that grand and
appropriate portal of one of the noblest harbours in
in the world. At 3 p.m. the anchor was dropped
within a biscuit’s cast of the spot where the first
governor of New South Wales pitched the tents of
the first British plantation in New Holland . . .
The health officer and a post-office functionary
came off to us in a boat pulled by prisoners . . . .
On finding myself dodged from deck to cuddy, from
cabin to poop, by a keen-looking young man who
addressed me in a low, earnest voice, I expected to
have my pockets picked; turning sternly upon him
for explanation I discovered his intentions to be
strictly honourable. He was a newspaper reporter.
.... He had heard that I had brought on board
at Deal the latest English journal. I handed it to
him, with the request that it might be returned
when done with. He vanished over the ship’s side,
and I never saw him nor my newspaper again.
Landing solus at the bottom of George-
street, I strolled up to Petty’s Hotel, where I
remained about a fortnight ere my tent was per-
manently pitched in Sydney.”
The colonel then at considerable length records
his impressions of the city, its buildings, and the
people. On the 29th he dined with his chief, Sir
Maurice O’Connell, “at his beautiful villa of Tar-
mons. The dresses of the guests and the servants
were as entirely English as they could have been
in London. ’ ’ Then appear entries from which the
following are extracts: —“July 1. —House rent in
Sydney is very high, and vacant houses very scarce.
The first I took consisted of seven small rooms;
rent £IOO per annum. The street contained, I
think, upwards of 300 houses and I was compelled
to be particular in giving my address street
North, because its extremity tapered off into im-
propriety. I had fallen by accident into the legal
94
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.


quarter of the city. . . My street abutted upon the
Supreme Court, and I was perfectly astonished to
see the number of sleek and bewigged personages
who soon after breakfast came swooping down upon
the field of their daily labours. . . I have been
assured by an influential member of the profession
that the palmy days of the law have passed away
in Sydney. ’ ’
Then follow unfavourable comments regarding
the lighting and the paving of the streets, the
sewerage of the city, and a number of minor, ill-
performed services of the “highly paid" corpora-
tion. 1 shall conclude this series of extracts with
the following:—“That picturesque animal, the
goat, forms a conspicuous item of the Sydney street
menagerie, amounting to a pest little less dire than
the plague of dogs. Nearly every cottage has its
goat or family of goats. They ramble about the
highways, and woe betide the suburban garden
whose gate is left open even fur a moment. The
bearded tribe of half-starved vagrants rush in and
quickly appropriate every blade of vegetation; and
the once-neat flower beds are dotted over with
imprints of little cloven feet, as if infantile devils
had been dancing there a juvenile sabbat. ;
JULY 19, 1910.
NOTES AND QUERIES
First Brick Church. —To “E.L. ” (Young):
St. John’s, Parramatta, is said to have been the
first brick church built in Australia. The foun-
dation-stone was laid in October, 1799.
Forms of Government. To “Eandolph”
(Moss Yale) : The history of the Government of
New South Wales since the foundation of the col-
ony in 1788 may roughly be divided into four
periods:—(l) A period of military and despotic
government, adapted to only the circumstances of
a penal settlement; (2) a period of civil but non-
representative institutions, extending from 1823 to
1842, during which the colony was ruled by a
Governor and a Legislative Council appointed by
the Crown; (3) a period of partially representa-
tive institutions, extending from 1842 to 1855, dur-
ing which the Legislative Council consisted in part
of elective members, although the executive gov-
ernment was still conducted by officials who were
appointed by and responsible .to the Imperial Gov-
ernment; and (4) a period of responsible govern-
ment extending from 1855 to the present time.
LAST CBUISE OF THE WANDERER.—To
“B” (Maitland): The book you refer to was en-
titled, not Ben Boyd’s Last Cruise, but The Last
Cruise of the Wanderer. It was written by John
Webster, and was published in Sydney.
BAILLIERE’S GAZETTEER.— To “F.E.”
(Granville): Bailliere’s New South Wales Gazet-
teer and Road Guide is still to be purchased at
some of the second-hand book shops.
IN THE DAYS OF THE GOLD FEVER
HOW SHIPS WERE DESERTED
In his Diary Lieutenant-Colonel Mundy, Deputy-
Adjutant-General in the Australian colonies in
1841, gives an interesting glimpse of the conditions
prevailing in Sydney during the days of the great
gold fever in 1851. Describing the difficulties
attending the departure of the ship by which he
was to return to England, the colonel writes: —
“August 9th. —The vessel in which i had taken a
passage for my family and myself being advertised
to sail on the 15th instant, I repaired on board this
morning with some of the luggage. What was my
dismay to find there was not a single able-bodied
seaman on board! All had deserted, or were be-
lieved to have deserted, for the diggings. Our
great round-ribbed vessel was loaded up to her
hatches with a few bales of wool, and an ‘intoler-
able deal’ of tallow, hides, horns and hoofs, and
such-like abominations. The captain was at his
wits ’ end. Three mates and as many cabin-boys
to work a ship of eight or nine hundred tons!
‘ ‘ In vain he moved the police to recover his
runaways. A few of them came draggling in,
from sheer satiety of Sydney back-slums, yet there
was not even a nucleus to form a crew upon. By
a happy accident one resource was left to us. U.M.
steamer Acheron was being paid off at Sydney, and
the officers and crew were to be disposed of in such
manner as the senior naval officer might appoint—a
great piece of luck, for Sir Everard Home, in com-
passion for our distress, allotted fifteen or sixteen
good hands to the Mount Stuart Elphinstone. These
men, as well as the merchant seamen, stipulated
for the high rate of wages of £4 10s. a month, with
a double allowance of grog. Thus did the gold-
find affect certain interests. On Sunday, the 24th
95
PBBPS AT THB PAST.


August, the vessel got under weigh; on the follow-
ing day we lost sight of the coast of New Hol-
land; and on the 11th January, 1852, reached Eng-
land, via Cape Horn. ’ ’
BARRON FIELD
JURIST AND LITTERATEUR.
In response to the request of a correspondent for
‘ ‘ a short account of that celebrated judge, Barron
Field/’ the following particulars are reprinted
from Blair’s Cyclopaedia of Australasia: —“Barron
Field, jurist, was sent out by the Imperial Govern-
ment in 1817 to supersede Judge Bent, who was
first judge of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales. Field was an English barrister, a man of
literary ability, and the friend of Charles Lamb,
Hazlitt, Coleridge, and their circle, and one of
Lamb’s most charming letters was addressed to
his friend Barron Field in New South Wales. . . ,
He was sent out to heal the wounds in the body
politic, but got himself into disputes with the
emancipists almost as quickly as Judge Bent him-
self. One of his first acts after entering upon his
duties was the giving of a decision which allowed
a defendant to plead a plantiff's conviction for
felony many years previously in England as a bar
to civil action.
‘ ‘ The emancipists at this time formed a large
majority of the trading and mechanical, as well
as the agricultural and grazing sections of the
community; and it is not surprising that they
showed a well-grounded alarm at the helpless posi-
tion in which Judge Field’s decision placed them.
They at length initiated a movement for redress,
by signing a requisition to the Provost-Marshal,
asking him to call a public meeting in order to
decide what steps should be taken to enable them
to obtain relief from their legal disabilities. The
meeting, which was numerously attended, was con-
ducted in a very loyal and orderly manner. The
result of the movement was a resolution affirming
the civil equality of the emancipist class, and
praying for redress from the throne. By the in-
fluence of the Governor the prayer was granted.
Field returned to England in 1825, and subse-
quently published a book on the state of society in
New South Wales.’’
THE DISCOVERY OF GOLD
A MINISTER’S APPREHENSION
A correspondent writes: —“The fact that it was
during the month of July in 1851 that some big
nuggets were found, especially that ‘boomer’ which
an aboriginal boy unearthed at Meroo Creek, or
Louise Creek, on the Turon, and which yielded
16dlb. troy of gold, reminds me of some interest-
ing facts in connection with tne representations
made by the late Sir Roderick Murchison regarding
the discovery of gold in New South Wales. Be-
tween 1841 and 1843 Sir Roderick described to
geologists the gold-bearing rocks of the Ural Moun-
tains, which he had explored. In 1844 ne published
in the 14th volume of the journal of the Royal
Geographical Society a comparison between the
Eastern Cordillera of Australia and the Ural
Mountains. In 1846 he recommended the Cornish
miners who wanted employment to emigrate to New
South Wales, and there search for gold (small
portions of which had been found near Bathurst
and Adelaide), instead of for tin in the alluvia,
his views being recorded in the Penzance news-
papers and the transactions of the Royal Geolo-
gical Society of Cornwall.
“In 1848, having received specimens of gold
from two colonists (Mr. T. W. Smith and Mr.
Phillip), he wrote to Earl Grey, referring to the
former comparison with the Ural Mountains, and
stating the results already obtained, adding that
the operations might be mpch extended if some
modification of the mining laws were declared. But
the Minister declined interference, apprehending
that the agitation over the discovery of the precious
metals would prove injurious to an agricultural and
wool-growing community. The anticipations in
England and the first discoveries of the ore in Aus-
tralia were therefore prior to the accidental opening
of the golden gravel of California in 1847. After
that great event Sir R. Murchison treated publicly
on various occasions or the subject of the distribu-
tion of gold over the surface of the globe, his last
views being put forth in the article ‘ Siberia and
California’ in the Quarterly Review of September,
1850. Even this last publication, in which the sub-
ject of Australian gold was again introduced, had
been read in Sydney before some of the accounts of
the profitable discoveries of 1851 were written. ’'
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by Websdale, Shoosmith, Ltd., Sydney.
EARLY AUSTRALIAN HISTORY. 96


' f
V


/P/v 7SV
JUST PUBLISHED.—PRICE ONE SHILLING (Postage Id.)
THE EXPANSION OF SYDNEY
A MARCH OF PROGRESS, 1840-1914
PEEPS AT THE PAST. Id.). Contains
64 pages of interesting articles and illustrations of The Old Colonial Days.”
Subscribers’ names registered for future series. be published quarterly
at one shilling net. A complete index will be > w ed with every fourth part.
