





[*>!:*€ ©b* f^


©HE ©OA6H I^IDE.
of tl)e attpaction? of a vi?lt to laopne i? tlje eoac s p'3.2 a l° n g a
($) of tl)£ Otwa}7, wljicl) aip? 3.oWn 800 fee t in tf)e la?t two mile?
of tsc ?o t§at one get? an3. view? o| isc little
?ea town at tf?e foot of tjje 1)111?, an 3., tl)e tpee?, faint glimpse? of
t|)e ?ea, in wljlel) ultra- mapine Blue an 3. fope?t gpeen ape commingling tone?.
Hepe, a? el?ewl)epe in tl)£ Au?tpallan mountain?, tl)£ Poa3. follow? tlje
ok Bullock tpack. ana “ Ba% ” witfj tljelp jinkep waggon?,
ana tlje Bullock Bell clanking at t[)£ ajde, Being t§e tpue pioneep? of moun-
tain ?ettlement. ,How muclj ea?iep tlje apive 1? 1? maieatea pepe
ana tljepe ?tpetclje? of tlje oia tpack, a©wn wljiclj, a t time?, one fjaa too
peali?tie a ?en?e of ?kating witlj Bpake? Ijapa aoWn, patlj^ ls t^ a n apiving.
Con?iaeping cljapactep of poaa, acciaent?, it mu?t Be aamittea, Ijave
Been few, ana even to tfjo?e witlj poop nepve?, tlje faneiea pepil?
of tfje coaclj piae ape ?oon fopgotten in It? manifoia plea?upe?. Tlje ?econa
page ?ljow? a view of laopne fpom coaclj poaa, witlj cljiiapen ? gpave?
at tlje foot of tlje Ijill. ago, wljen tlje ?plittep? 5 pos-
?e??ion, tljere wepe quick ?ana? at tlje jj of t§e Ep?kine, ana Ijepe one
a ?plittep’? wife, namea ?aw scp two little one? ?wallowea up
Befope §e.p a? pl watep-?iae. Tlje Boaie? wepe
pecovepea ana Bupiea §epe, ana aftepwapa? tlje pe?iaent? Built a picket
fence aßout pe?ting place of two little Bu?fj Baßie?, ana tljck g paVe
Ija? Been well f op twenty At coaclj cpo??mg on t§e
Ep?kine tljepe i? a pu?tic Bpiage, wljere man]7 coaclje? ana of
vi?itop? lj aVe: Iken pljotogpapljea. J'lopman’? ?tuaio on tlj 2 pivep Bank i£
one of tlje in?titution? of Eorne, quite a? ?o inaeea a? tlj a t look of
unaltepaßle patience upon face of it? proprietor, an
acquipea auping a aecaae ? in appanging picnic gpoup?. Poop
aptl?t 1 wljo wouk ?uffep a? Ije Ija.s ?uffepea —even fop ppivllege of
Being perpetually pe?kent at Eorne ?




©HE I^APIDS
Kapi3.s s aVe; au utilitarian Interest to pesi3ents, But a interest
to visitors. Tlje fopmep I)a3. tljeip first watep supply from t|)is soupce,
an 3 ape now sanguine tl)at tlje mountain on either Si3.e is a mas# of won3,erful
freestone, wl)icl), in 3.ays to come, will Be cjuappie3. an 3. taken to Melßoupne
fop Building purposes. Tljat, l)owevep, not a prospect viewed By
tl>e toupist wit!) any pleasupe. Ke prefers tlpe Kapi3.s a# tl)ey ape—a
charming little Bit of stpeamlan3., wljepe English an 3, Otway life ape strangely
mixe3.. Tlje coy mountain t|)puslj, called Elmulata, fpom tlje little Black
crescents at tlje en 3. of eacl) featf>ep, flit# t§e scpuß in company
wit!) tl>e sweet-voiced emigpant of tl)e same name, wsiel) somehow Ijas
foun3. Its way In tlje sweet wateps tl>e lapge English Bpook tpout
almost extepminate3. tjje little mountain tpout, op yoel)uck) tfje opiginal
tenant of stream, tljougl) tl)e silver eels still §ol3. possession against all
comeps—including tlje tourists. Fop at least tl)pee miles up tlje Epskine
you may see tlje English tpout lying eit§ep at tlje fyeiadl. op foot of tlje pool,
an 3. neap tlje pathways, strangely in3.iffepent as to wljo may come ancl go.
13own tlje creek Banks tlje English Blackßeppy tpails in ljuge tangleSi tlje
Beppies Being at tljeip Best aßout tlje enct of Feßpuapy, wljile one sees little:
now of tlje seaplet of tlje w!l3. paspßeppy. How tfjese stup3.y English
peoples ancl things dominate new places, an 3. overthrow all tljat up to tljeip
coming lja3 ppovecl “fittest" tljpouglj many centuples. Tlje Kapi3.s form
a fair Illustpation oj’ tfje: quick change fpom sea to forest is a charac-
teristic of laorne. It is not alone ljere at tlje foot of Kapicls one
§cav perpetually ‘ ‘ tlje league long pollep thun3.eping on tlje peef,
But Before tfje Ijlll si3.es wepe eleape3. fop pastupes one was as muclj in tlje
fopest Ijere—tljouglj But two fj un 3.pe3, yap3,s fpom the sljope—as In tfje
deepest an 3. 3,arkest of Otway gullies.




©HE SANGfPUAI^Y.
. • __ , , i i
jWE Sanctuapy was so called, not in tljat it differs materially from tlje
t of natupe s sanctuaries strewn among tljose pomantie ranges,
But Because in tlje earlier days of laopne, Before a eljupelj wag Built, divine
service was frequently Ijeld K wall of peek, on tlje dapk ledges of
wljictj tlje maiden-Ijaip gpows, overljangs tlje rows of natupal stone Benches
Beneatlj, making a nook apppoppiate to tjje puppose. ‘Tljepe wag:
no regular pulpit supply, But amongst tlje visitors wag occasionally a clergy-
man, and advantage was taker of Ijis ppesence to Ijold a primitive service,
devoid of ceremony oj’ any kind, and in wljielj theological niceties were
oßscuped, eljupelj laws and standapds suppressed, and a sermon
to suit tlje Bpoad needs of an almost ideal eongpegation, since: it usually
included memßeps of almost every peeognised denomination and a gpeat
many of no denomination at all. It is on record t|jat on one: op two occa-
sions tlje service was distupßed By tlje intpusion of jjtlje seppent in Bodily
j’opm —eitljep Black op Bpown. In t|jose days tlje Sanctuary was Better
clad witjj timßep tijan it is now, and {je: would Be: a poop preacljep wljo could
not find in it Botlj a church and a sermon. waters of life, litepally,
ape tljese mountain stpeams, since all t§at is Besf and most Beautiful In tlje
forest Ijas Been Bopn oj! tfjem—tlje great tree fepns tljat Bend alike: over
Ijjeip cpadle and playground of tljeip tupßulent Boyhood; tlje mountain
lilac, tljat, in tlje eaply yeap, rnipies a wealth of wljite Blossom witlj tse:ir»
foam; tlje Bat s-wing, waving wljite and unhealthily in deepest s{jades of
darkest groves; tlje ligi^t-loving h ap lS-tongue, Blocking tije watep-way
wit!) its featljepy plumes. All tljese—t[je streams. the jepns, and tjje:
Bus{j gpeen of t|je gullies —ape tlje gift oj 1 " tljat mountain mothep wljo lives
away up In a plateau of the Otway, where tlje Beeches and Blackwoods
grow, sending Ijep piver children aßpoad on all sides to Brighten and
Beautify tlje land. Inong may tljey laugh and sing in liquid voice as tljey leap
amongst tlje mountain ledges, and roll “in cataract aftep eatapact to tlje sea. ”
kiong may tlje mountain keep its cpown'of respiring giant tpees, natupe’sflpsl
preparation for the Building of many sanctuaries By tlje laopne stpeams-


i
jtff


Some Buildings
4-<N § p oup °f Sopne: Buildings shown upon the opposite page, Epskine
T House, Bette? known as claim?:
notice. Hepe in a couple of wooden pooms, whepe the entep-
tained t|jeip fipst guests, ape the Beginning? of Eopne, fop the Big estaßlish-
ment of owned and worked a company, has gpown
pound aßout t|)e old homestead, with little pegapd to method op
effect. Could the futupe have Been fopeseen a mope commanding site on
5iH side would ppoBaBlj? h aVe Been cl>o?en, But the little flat h a £ pep-
mitted the lading out of lawn tennis gpounds, and the Building of hot sea
Baths, and a salt swimming Bath fop those who dislike supf Bathing. These,
with the large dancing and concept §all, with a small stage fop taßleaux and
amateup give ppett}? well all the advantages ttjat a toupist can
desipe. In tlje °f the season the evening dance at Epskine House
is one of attpactions of Eopne. The Chupch of England, of wl)iclj,
togetpep with the papsonage, views ape given, was Built faptfjep
up the h‘T and although Mahomet came enough to the mountain,
the mountain was evidently Bpought close? to Magomet.
was done too, the Chupch Being moved Bodily fop aßout a of a mile
without so much as the Bpeaking of a pane of glass. Tl>epe h a S Been But
one pegulap occupant of the pulpit and papsonage, the Rev. James Hove,
came south, as into Canaan, “to see the land, what It is,
and the people tljat dwelletlj therein, ” and finding Eopne, went not Back
like Je§osl)ua. R second ljas since Been Built the Ppesßvtepian
The and Mechanics Institute, whepe, fop a tpiflmg fee,
visitops duping them get what Books peguipe, is a valuaßle
testimonial as to the and enthusiasm of the ladies of kopne, who,
led Mps. Felix as ppesident, and Miss Minnie Beale, as
the ppesent authopities. The men of Eopne, led Mp. Elklngton,
Mp, Kooke, and Mp. Willie have done them shape too fop the
little town, a fact shown the existence of such a pußlie Building
as the Post and Telegpaph Office. It is pathep apppoppiatc that this
paptieulap pa?t of the should Be peppesented in Papllament a
Foppest.




©eddy’s Lcoorout.
f EDDY’S EOOKOUT is tlje recognised Sunday aftepnocn walk at
Eopne; fop toupists, like: othep men, ape cpeatupes of method. It is
papt of tl)£ Queen’?; Papk, though for the mattep of that the whole moun-
tain is )?et a Queen's Papk, and likely to pemain so fop another f)alf centup)?
at least. It is not ipue that the name was given Because an earl)? pioneer
tried to get a donkey down the face of it, and Being told that tije animal
•would certainly Be killed, answered, ‘ ‘ Tecta’s laookout.” Tlje
only’ donkey in t|je connexion is t§e man w§o accepts stop)?. Tgepe
ape man)? lookouts in Victopia. Mopgan’s laookout, at tlje end of the
Range, overlooking drlenpowan, is a point from which tljat notopious
Bushranger h a d a commanding view of tlje old coach poad to S)?dne)?.
‘dedd)? was a Bushrangep too, in one sense, since §e panged tlje Bush after
cattle, and constant!)? came as a commanding point fpom wßiclj to look
fop straps. Right opposite is Mount St. (Beopge, two hundred feet higs ep
tljan the laookout, and Between these two high poptals Blows tt?e St. (aeopge’s
Rivep, ovep the mouth of wljle§ a suspension Bpidge is now Being thrown.
Imppovements such as these have some disadvantages. J'levep again, alas,
we Be compelled to capp)? the ladles acposs the St. (Beorge at
tide. One of t{je views looks up t§e St. (Beopge; t|je other from tlje
pavilion on the summit of the laookout; tlje other, to the eastwapd, extends
acposs tlje Ba)? in a gull’s flight °f aßout eight miles to tlje Eagle Rock, an
outstanding cpag on which a palp of white- Bpeasted sea eagles long Built
t|)elp nest. The shore cupves pound in a twelve-mile cpeseent to tlje pock,
fopms a fitting fpame to tlje sea-scape on that side. T{je walk to
Eagle Rock was long tlje Boasted achievement of laopne pedestpians,
But latterly a dpag fpom Sngaljook meets picnic papties, B)? appangement,
at the Big Kill, and tlje tpip is made eas)?, and B)? no means expensive.
K new land-mapk h a # latel)? Been added in tlje lighthouse at Split Point,
and not Befope it was needed, fop all the tpaek of navigation <s close in,
and all the fpom the Otwa)? to Port Phillip Heads ships h a - no guiding
lights. Teddy’s laookout is populap with toupists. It gives the excuse
fop a picnic while easing the conscience of those who h a ve not the hardihood
to camp at the Sanctuap)?, within sound of the luncheon Bell at Epskine
House.




the E?ier
fKE notaßle Bullrings at the wesiepn op piep enct o| Hopne—which,
in shape, lies like: a Boomepang at i§e: j’oot o| the hill# —ape the
drpan3. Pacific an 3. Hopne Hotels, t§e: lattep much Bettep known j’pom its
ppoppietop as “ Rooky's. ” The Pacific has a site on the pl3.ge at
the wesiep n en 3 o| the town, evep j’anneS. By the cool tpa3e win3.s j’pom the
Indian Ocean, while its wi3e Balconies look out ovep the sea to the snnpise.
The cost o| the Building Was excessive, the Bpieks Being all Brought acposs
the ranges By Bullock teams. Just Beyoncl is the pier, where only a small
occasionally calls, an 3. a little o jj tRe: pecj’, which at one
time it was proposed to extend into a Bpeakwatep, so that vessels might
have sßeltep J’pom westerly wincls. Hn Initiatory outlay o| £40,000 w0u13.,
it was estimated, have ma3e the port accessißle in all weathers. S goo 3.
many oj’ the residents consider it pepj’ectly saj’e even now, an 3. s>nt that
the Intepests of PoptlanS, an 3. Wappnamßool ape a consideration in
keeping steameps out. Rooke’s Hotel is Indeed a pleasant pookepy —a
many-pointed Building picturesque aspect, nestling on the hillside, and
j’opming another oj’ tt>e pleasant h om es of Isorne. It is aj’j’ected, as a pule,
By the mope guiet and philosophical of toupists, the men who angle By pivep,
sea, and lt was Built opigmally By a tempepance lectupep, one oj’
the pioneeps oj’ laopne, and genepally known as “ Bish°p " Hall. Many
Bishops have come there since, J’op cupiously enough, it takes all ovep-seeing
oj'j’iceps, whethep Superintendent Toofjey op the 13ish°p Melßoupne, a
long time to get through thelp Business in well-ordered Horne. They must
come often and stay long. The Builder oj’ the older papt oj’ Rooke’s Hotel
hit upon the ingenious idea oj’ imitating sandstone By painting ovep the
Boards with some adhesive compound and then dusting It jWely with clean
sea sand. This apchiteetupal puse h a S stood the test oj> a charter a
centupy admipaßly, j’op the imitation sandstone looks as clean and sound as
on the day it was made. The Bay in j’pont teems with j’ish* the j’loundep,
whiting, and garjash Being especially |ine, while thepe is a schnappep Bank
a couple oji miles out, But papely j’ished. With a system trawling, and
a readier means getting j’ish to mapket, Horne would, without doußt,
Become an impoptant fishing station.


grlEAtt,
V }


©he Phantom Falls
WE Ig ifyc lancl oj\ Watepj’allg. Mogt mountain places §ax>c
at leagt one:, But Eopae 15 Bleggecl witl) a sv\j-diOycn —t[je Epgkine,
tf)£ Phantom, Kopgegljoe, t§e: Sljeoak, tl)c: Splittepg’, op Ky?le’g anci
Stpaw'g Fallg, t|)£ two latte:p namecl tl)e exploping toupigtg
wljo cligeovepect l| Eopne s a # too m watepj’allg.
dominate: t[)C social appangementg oj> tsc place: —incleecl Ijave pulecl it jk>p
wil§ a gway? oj’ icon. A laopne picnic Ig incomplete: unlegg iS)C camp
fipe Be lit within pange tlje gppay? oj’ a watepj’all. Bettep peagon j’op
tl)ig can Be given tjjan it wag go in t|}e Beginning, anci tf)£ toupigtg
Become glaveg T§e ig tljat in isc geeking a|tep watep|all
many? lovely camping placeg in it)C gullieg ape oveplooke3. anH. neglected.
On tlje tpack to Ky?le’g Fallg one o| I§e mogt pictupegcjue Bltg
gtpeamlanS. in all Augtpalia ig pagge3. wltlj geapcely? a geconci look, tljougl)
lattep papt o| tfje joupney? to j'all itgelj’ ig By? no meang Intepegting.
Tlje Phantom, tl)ouglj a j-aiply? gußgtantlal j’all, ig well name 3., Aj’tep itg
3-igcovepy? on tlje St. dieopge’g Rlvep wag jupgt pepopteS., it geemecl to §ave
3.igappeape3. at any? pate in tl)b iengely? tlmßepe3. countpy? no one
wag aßle fop a long time to conjupm iS)C 3.lgcovepy?, go It Became known ag
tfje Phantom, anci tlje name pemainecl wlyen itg existence wag
Bey?on& all 3.0u8t, anci a tpack j’ollowing isc 6c3. oj? t §c St. (Beopge wag
opened up. Halj? to isc fall ig tl>e §ouge unclep i§c IJill, Bettep known
to tl)£ pegulap vigitopg ag “Tom’g. ” Aj?tep {§c sca te3. climßing oj?
it ig pleagant in3.ee3. to 3,ip 3,own Into tljig cool pivep j?lat, an 3. exchange
opinlong anci expepienceg ovep gtpawßeppieg In cpeam, to Be j?ollowe3, in tupn
tl)e Eopne geagon By? pagpßeppieg, Blackßeppieg, an 3. milk, op tljat
invaluaßle ppo3.uet oj’ tl>£ laopne mountain Ijougeg—{j°P Beep. Ag an eagy?
walk oj? two an 3. a Ijalj? mileg, t|?e: Phantom ig genepally? tl)£ toupigt’g j?lpgt
expedience. It ig Between gixty? an 3.
leap, j’ipgt to a le3.ge, an 3. to cool Black pool Beneatl), ig
tjome o| eelg an 3. mountain tpout, fop Engliglj tpout 3.0 not appeap to
t>ave j’ouncl t^erii 3 way; up St. (Beopge.


Is&L CLf?e IlPkaratbrc,


Falls
fKE Splitters’ Fall?, one of tlje last 3iscovere3, is now one of tlje most
populap of faopne excursions. Formerly, it was aecessißle
following 3own tlje pivep fporn tlje Epskine Falls, wljiclj ape less tljan Ralf
a mile Ijigljep up, Tljls travelling, tljougjj as picturesque as tourist
coul3 3esipe, of tlje journey Being ovep moss clotlje3 pocks,
rustic tpee Bri3ges, an 3 tljpouglj jungles of fern, was far from eomfoptaßle,
an 3 few vlsite3 tlje falls, tljouglj repente3 an unsuccessful effort
to 3.0 so. Wljen tlje Splitters’ Falls wepe chosen, Ijowevep, as tlje source
of watep supply fop tlje town of Eorne, toupists lja3 onl}? to elimß tlje fipst
1)111, tljen follow tlje pipe tpaek an 3 fluming along tlje mountain si3e —a
perfectly level patlj. So tlje Splitteps’ Falls jumpe3 Into su33en popularity,
an 3 now none ape so often visite3, Fop altfjouglj a goo 3 foup miles’ walk,
tljepe ape pleasant Blp3’s eye. views en poute of tlje Be 3 of tlje Epskine, an&
fine stpetcljes of tlje opposite mountain si3e. Tlje Splitters Fall is a
3oußle one, By fap an 3 awaj? tlje Ijigljest of all tlje Eorne watepfalls. It is
on tlje: Splitters' GTeek, sligljtly aßove its junction wltlj t§e: Epskine, an 3
tljouglj tlje volume of watep is small as eompape3 wltlj tljat in tlje main
stpeam, tlje setting is unusually 6013 an 3 picturesque, an 3 tlje camping
place, wltlj pouglj taßles an 3 Benches, at tlje junction of tlje two stpeams, a
characteristic Bit of Eopne lan3, Tlje scheme of watep supply, wljiclj
commences Jjepe, cost five tßousan3 poun3s, an 3 en3s in a two Run3pe3
tljousan3 gallon pesepvoip on tlje hillsi3e aßove, two Run3re3 an 3 eigljty feet
fpom tlje sea level. Tlje gullies en poute ape spanne3 By aque3ucts, views
of wljiclj ape s|jown, .an 3 at one point toupists Rave to elimß 3own a pouglj
Buss la33ep. Sn out-jutting pock Built on nature’s generous plan is tlje:
cause of muclj trepi3ation in tlje Ijearts of toupists. a fjan3 pailmg
on tlje aque3ucts tlje journey woul3 Be ma3e muclj easier, But most of tlje
la3ies ppefep elimßing 3own an 3 up tlje gullies to tlje pisk of epossing with-
out support a small open aque3uct. Tlje water is cappie3 for tRe greater
papt of tlje 3istanee in a covepe3 Box channel, an 3 latterly it Ija* Been foun3
tljat t[je small intrusive poots Rave foun3 tjjeir way in at tlje joints, an 3
punning along tlje pipe jjave flile3 it, so as to almost cljoke tRe passage.


{flit te *? js -TT’k 11 §


IiYNN.
/@)OR.KA laVj'lJ'l is patger a succession of cascades tgan a waterfall.
Fop aßout a §un3.pe:3. ya?as tge water tumßles from step lo step of a
guge stone staipcase, an 3. wgen after pains tge volume of tge stpeam is
swollen, tge view fpom tge foot of tge staipcase, always cgapming, is excep-
tionally June. teooking upwap3., one gas a full view of tge casca3.es; an 3.
3.ownwap3.s, tge gully opens out on a pictupe of fern cpowns in tge fope-
gpoun3., an 3. a gum-ela3. pange Beyon3. stpetcging away to tge coast.
J'lowgepe else inland is tge ppospeet so wi3,e an 3. open, fop distance is not
as usual a feature of tge teopne gullies. Tgepe a little space is genepally
tupnecl to tge Best account in tge lavisg grouping °f pietupesgae elements-
If one wants atmospgepe, a w!3.ep pictupe, an 3. Boteep detail, ge may gave
it anywgepe along tge pugged coast line. St tge foot of Coppa laynn tgepe
is a unique Bit of |e pn—ratger a |e;pn gall tgan a fern gpove, fop tge tpee
fepns stancl so tgickly along a little gully coming in fpom tge left, tgat tge
fpon3.s intermixing, form a green roof, wglcg guite sguts out tge sunliggt.
So tgepe is little un3.epgpowtg, ani tge foot falls noiselessly on a Springy
f loop of 3.ea3, fepn fronts. Tge stems look like: rustic pea columns support-
ing tge wide poof, very mucg tge same effect may Be noteS. at tge
aistant Kopse Sgoe Fall, a spot now papely visited. Copra teynn is tge
nearest Bit ot teopne to Paradise, for following up tge epeek one fJn3.s a
egapming Bit of scenepy so ani not ippevepently. ge fact is tgat
wltg twenty-five yeaps of toupists’ tpamps ani picnics Inland, laorne is only
yet in small part explored. Wgen tge passion fop a watepfall gas Been
otgep neglected Beauty spots —many of tgem mueg neaper gome
v?ill Be souggt out anS Become in tupn celeßpatea. Tgus tge laopne of
one aecaae will nevep Be guite tge teorne of tge next, But evep present to
tge toupist sometging new ana Beautiful.


or * r 1212


Falls
pplde and pioneep oj l all tlje Eopne ls tlje Epskine, wfjielj,
• • like tlje pivep, took it# name |pom one oj l t f)C oj^fieeps'oj l a supvey slj'p
taking soundings on tlje coast. visit to Eopne Is complete without a
visit to tlje Epskine, tljouglj visitops may Be counselled to make: it one oj
tljeip latest pilgpimages, and to undertake tlje trip only ajdep tfjey lj aVe:
Ijardencd somewhat By tlje easier journeys to tlje Phantom and tlje Splitters’.
As a mattep of |aet tlje Epskine and Splitters’ tracks ape at no point jW
apapt, But tlje one is easy tlje otljep is perpetually up Ijill, and tlje
tourist, ajdep s ax? i n § in imagination and pepspipatlon lej’t sevepal long miles
Beljind Ijim, is amazed to jnnd Ijimselj l on a point just oveplooking tlje town,
and it almost seems tljat a ijop, step, and jump would land Ijim in tlje
sea supj\ But tlje long climß only makes tlje pest at tlje cottages on tlje
summit, togetjjep witlj tlje jWslj scones, tea, and paspßeppies and cpeam, tlje
mope welcome, and tlje ultimate goal, tlje pomantie valley o| Epskine,
Bettep woptjj toil o| peaching it. Tlje chapter mile op so jk>om tlje jk>ot
oj l tlje ppeeipitous Ijill down wljiclj tlje patlj to tlje Epskine up to
tlje Falls is a pugged and pictupesgue of stpeamland, |pinged witlj
vepy |ine specimens 0J 1 two tpee |epns, Dleksonia Antapetiea, and tlje
mountain |epn Alsopljila Austpalis, |pom wljiclj tlje |ponds spping witlj a
graceful outward cupve like tlje lapgep Caledonian |epn, specimens oj s
aPe: * n £°l{j Sydney and Melßoupne Botanical (Hardens.
ordinary tpee jWn is Blaekep in tlje stem and mope woolly in Its coip iextupe.
Some oj l ' tlje tpee |epns on tlje Epskine patlj ape curiously disfigured, one
Being known as “ Tlje Beap. ” Tlje Epskine Fall is aßout one Ijundped
and tljirty feet in Ijeigjjt, and tlje pivep, Being fed apparently By a Bettep
system of mountain sppings t§an tlje pest of tlje Borne stpeams, is mope
pegulap in its flow, However one maj) Be disappointed witlj otjjep water-
falls, mope especially towapds tlje close oj 1 ’ summep, tlje Epskine is always
felt to Be a sigljt well Woptlj tlje ipoußle of seeing.




(gl^EEl^
Cumßepland Cpeek and Cave ig one o| tlje populap coagtal tpipg
Eopne, But two oj’ tlje j’qup mileg wegtwapd includeg gome vepy pugged
pock climßing. Eadieg, egpecially, ajvtep an expepience iljege gljapp and
glippepy pockg, ape gometimeg Induced to geek a petupn pattj ovep tlje moun-
iaing, and to all go Inclined one wopd o| advice Be given—“ Don’t.”
‘Tlje Cave, like: otljepg on tlje Otway eoagt j’uptljep wegtwapd, wag onee jWely
ljung witlj gtalaetiieg, But tljege Ijave Been Bpoken away By degecpating
toupigtg, a ppopoption oj’ wljom ape to Be looked fov In all e/eupgiong. Tlje
cli||g of tlje Cumßepland ape gljeep and Bold wljepe tlje telegpapjj wipeg take
a long leap acpogg tlje eljagm to tlje oppoglte mountain gide. Beyond tlje
cave gome digtance Ig tlje gtpange SpljynX op Amazon Kock, a vignette: oj’
wljiclj I? gljown in tlje mapgln. Tlje action oj’ wind and waveg Ijag capved
out tlje pock until tljepe ig an exact and wild looking peppegehtatlon oj’ a
woman’g in ppo|lle, tlje outline vapying gomewljat ag geen j’pom eitljep
gide. But tlje gea Ijag done
tunnelling, eapving, and gljaping o| tlje gojd pock. It ig a ag to
wljetljep tlje attpactiong o| tlje laopne eoagt ape not, By eompapigon witlj tljoge
oj’ tjje Eopne mountalng, undepvalued. Tlje jugljepman j’indg in tlje
lovlng pock j’iglj, tlje Bpeam and leatljep jacket, gu|jaeient to occupy
Ijig attention almogt cpngtantly, wljile cpayjnglj gnaping ig a gpopt wljiclj once
gucceggj’ully ppactlced will alwayg Be j’ollowed witlj a Tlje peceding
tide leaveg Beautiful gea poolg amonggt tlje pock, eaclj o| wljiclj ig oji itgelj?
an aguapium, witlj genepally one oj’ tlje gmallep* vapletleg oj’ octopi Jj°l3-i n §
all otljep oecupantg in teppop. Tljege clapet-eoloped watep demong lead tse
cpaßg, cpayjuglj, and pock cod a lively lij’e gometimeg, dpiving tlje epaßg clean
out o| tlje watep. Tljouglj Botlj can tpavel vepy well on land, tlje cpaß ig
tlje niope active tljepe. Oj’j’ tlje moutlj oj’ tlje St. (aeopge and Sljeoak a
cupioug gigljt ig ojden geen in gpeai gljoalg oj s gea galmon and mullett pounded
up and continually Ijappagged By gmall gljapkg and jaglj tljat kind.
make no attempt to dive into tlje gljoal, But gkipting pound aßout it, cut out
tljeip vietimg gingly and gtpive to captupe in a gepieg oj’ exciting
Continual wapj’ape appeapg to Be pule oj’ gea poolg, But ape:
not on tljat account legg intepegting to tlje toupigt, leapng o j l'
lij’e o| gea in Iji# j’ew dayg’ among tlje pockg !




(9ON6LUSION.
SWE gradual conversion o| Borne j’Pom an Otway cattle pun into tl)e
most popular tourist S resort in Victopia is an interesting story, But
one: the recital oj’ which Space will not here permit. Originally known
as Boutit Bay, and named ajder Captain Boutit, took the jurst wool sh'p
|rom dieelong to Bondon, and put in §epz for? shelter, it changed
o|jMcially to Borne. It was! the custom of the sguatteps on the landward
glde oj’ the range to drive here ovep the spups in the early days j’op picnics
and sea and river They jocund the Mountjoy’s lj ome:^te: a3, on the
present site oj’ Epskine House, and, as the fame. oj? tlje place: grew, others
followed in the tracks of these Otway pioneers, until, somewhat against their
will, tge Mountjoys were compelled to cater j’or if)C comj’ort of a steadily
increasing stpeam oj? snmme:p visitors. So the place gpew, and tl)e name
oj? Mountjoy with it, until j?ew natneg arc mope universally known in Victoria,
and none has So many pleasant memories associated Witi) it. Ppiop to tlje
Mountjoys coming here, the Boutit Bay pun was in turn By Herd,
Pisplin, and Short, and Mp. Ssplin is still living neap Oeelong. The old
opdep But the Borne oj? to-day pemains tlje pleasant Boutit Bay
of a guarter oj? a century ago, ovep-pun By hundreds °f tourists every
summep, But regenerating with each succeeding Winter, and Bearing won-
depj?-ully well the wear and tear oj? modern improvement. c Ti)e enduring
charm oj? the place is the association oj? sea and mountain scenery. Borne
has Been the medium J’op more “j?ine’’ writing t[jan any other part oj?
Sustralla, not excepting either “The Buj?j?a!o" or t§e Blue Mountains.
The intention is not to aggravate an old oj?j?ence, But to add a j?ew
rough notes In explanation oj? tf)e sketches. The pußlicaiion is Intended to
Be less a guide-Book than a souvenir oj? Borne, j?or those, who having gone
it may Be, many times, will yet go, j?or the Borne longing is some-
thing lasts; and though many come away with Ih e determination next
year to spend their holiday in some other picture place, the year’s end j?inds the
desipe to renew once more the old associations much too strong to Be resisted,
D. M.






When Kipling Went
To Lome
Buy my English posies!
You that will not turn — s' . f
Buy my hot-wood clematis, W " / " '
Buy a frond o' fern
Gathered where the Erskine leaps
Down the road to Lorne—
Buy my Christmas creeper '
And I'll say where you were born!
West away from Melbourne dtist holidays begin—
They that mock at Barydi&e woo at Cora Lynn-
Through the great South Otway gums sings the
great South Main-
Take the flower and turn the hour* and kiss
your love again, l " ‘ -
~Rudyard Kipling
liffiffft T> r:; ' : FiiT a small park overlooks
£ke blue waters of San Fraii-
mmm efeeb Harbor, a rustic wooden
bench, backed by a broken
half-column of stone bears
inscription, “Upon this seat
i Robert Louis Stevenson often
1 y; ? sat an viewed tile Bayl" In his
tune, tlie sparkling waves lapped tlie
; WSSS®MSi marsliy foreshore three hundred yards
f \‘‘ T' away Nowadays, the reclaimed
/ waterfront, a mile distant, is crowded
I with residential flats and skyscrapers,
....' Wk ; built upon piles driven one on top of
(be other thr~ugh the quaking mud
to a solid foundation,
j- was reminded of that little seat
in the park during a recent holiday at
Lome, where I made many inquiries
relating to the visit of Rudyard Kip-.‘
ling—moxe of a tradition than a reality umiimiiiiimiiiiimimiimiini
to mo—to the Queen of Watering
Places.” "Where the
More than 20 years ago, travelling „
down to Larne with the late Donald krskine leaps.
Macdonald. I made comment upon tlie
fidelity of detail-characteristic of all.
Kipling’s writings—in the beautiful
verse heading this article.
1 stressed particularly the refereuce . _ , . , t ..
to the “hot-wood clematis,” which never saw tlie Erskine r ails." men was mtroduced to Kipling rn tlie tram
indicated that the poet had tasted he told me the following story. by Alfred Deakin, the silver-tongued
and remembered the peculiar, pungent o O ° orator, then in the heydey of bis
flavor of. tlie leaves ot the plant. w . .. .
The doyen of Australian pressmen. COME years before, in tlie early Pou cr ana tame.
“The uncrowned King of Lome,” as J ’nineties, when journeying to Bal- They talked ot Lome. and. then, or
he was named, said to me. “Kipling larat to reporta political meeting, he at a later date, “Mac.” as he was
affectionately known to his intimates,
gave Kipling a copy of some of his
Nature essays. I imagined at the time
he referred to his book, ‘‘Gum Boughs
and Wattle Blossom."
But to return to the story.
When the express pulled into the
station, the three Empire Builders
strolled along the platform. “Mac.”
would have laughingly disclaimed the
soft impeachment. Nevertheless, he
blazed a Nature study trail through-
out Australia. '
As they came to-tire bookstall, he
said to the boy in charge, “Have
you any of Kipling's works?" “Yes,
sir," he answered, a- be handed down
a book from the shelf.
With a twinkle u his grey- eyes,
“Mac." asked, “What sort of a writer
is this fellow Kipling?”
“You had better - ask him your-
self," came the quick reply. “He is
standing right behind you."
The famous author was surprised
and delighted, and, turning to his com-
panions, remarked. “That lad will
make his mark soma clay.”
o O °
Y EARS afterwards. “Mac." used tills
story, and stated he had often
wondered how tlie lad had fared in
later life. Within a week came a let-
ter .telling how tlie boy became a suc-
cessful business man, had married,
and, enlisting in the South African
Contingent, was killed in the Boer
War. The letter was written by his
widow.
I have doubted at times whether the
poet actually saw the shining waters
of Loutit Bay Tlie oldest residents,
sons and daughters of the original
pioneers, told me, rather emphatically
in some instances, that Kipling had
stayed in the village, but with that
tire information ended. As to “the
year of his visit,” “His place of ac-
commodation,” “Had anyone seen
him?” the replies, with one excep-
tion, were vague and unconvincing.
Miss B. Veal remembered seeing the
Poet and his luggage on the verandah
of the old Lome Hotel a wooden-
By Dr. Brooke Nicholls
framed, weatherboard structure—wait-
ing for the coach. An uncommon-
shaped leather travelling bag at-
tracted her attention, and she saw his
name on the label. “That would be
somewhat about the year 1892." she
remarked.
o Q o
JJURING my recent visit 1 was given
a copy of a small paper-covered
book, exltitled “Pen and Ink Sketches
at Lome,” ,by G. Brougham Austin,
published in aid of the Church of Eng-
land Building Fund. A copy of -thU
lies before me as I write. In. a flash
I realised that here was tire booklet
referred to in that remarkable meeting
of the Poet, tire Statesman and lire
Writer 43 years ago.
The drawings arc unusually wet)
done, and tire letterpress describing the
waterfalls and scenic spots is modestly-
signed “D.M.” After reading it
through. I saw that some of the ma-
terial for the quoted verse could have
been gleaned from the descriptive mat-.
ter. . ■
D.M writes: “Cora Lynn is the near-
est bit of Lome to Paradise.” Kipling,
also, no doubt, had learned that the
seaside resort was the happy hunting-
ground for lovers and honeymoon
couples.
The “hot-wood" clematis grows on
tlie slopes of the deep fern gullies and
the dark green leaves have a biting,
pungent taste, a peculiarity not men-
tioned in the booklet. Kipling must
have had a personal touch with the
plant, and chewed up a leaf. Half »
leaf would have been sufficient
Recently, I have learned that the
Poet's trip to Lome took place some
lime between November 2d and 30,
1891. He spent a day and a night in
the town.
Surely the local residents or tlie
troop of Boy Scouts, “Rudyard Kip-
ling’s Own," will commemorate his
visit to this wonderful watering-place
by erecting some mark, or memorial on
the slopes of the hillside overlooking
tlie bay from the western eiid of • the
town, where the tali, grey-boled blue
gums still sing in the Great South
Main.
