

THE POSITION MI) OPERATIONS
OF THE COMPANY.
|rom its Incorporation to tlje present time.
1866.




PENINSULAR & ORIENTAL
STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY
A STATEMENT
THE. POSITION AND OPERATIONS
OF THE COMPANY.
from its |iuorpvation to tire present time.
VIII. The Employment of Agents,
I. The Charters,
11. The Postal Service,
Commanders, Engineers,
Officers, and others,
111. The Passenger Service,
IX. The Expenditure and Revenue,
X. The Shareholders,
IY. The Transport Service,
V. The Establishments at home
XL The Direction & Management
and abroad,
of the Company,
VI. The Consumption of Coal,
VII. The Consumption of Provi-
XII. The Parliamentary Committee
of 1866.
sions,
LONDON.
1866.
• * * m
••■. • ■ 1
. I ■ Mk. - -* r ~ * * A. ■- »-■- * ■m




d‘ Oriental Steam IWiption Companir.
Ax the close of the year 1866 a quarter of a century will have elapsed
since the shareholders of the Peninsular and Oriental Company held
their First Annual Meeting.
This fact alone might have suggested to the Directors that a review
of the operations of the Company for that period would be acceptable
to the Proprietary, but many other circumstances have combined to
render the year an eventful one, and to point to the expediency of a
Special Statement :
A select Committee of the House of Commons has inquired into,
and reported on, “ the practical working of the present system
of postal communication between this country and the East
Indies, China and Australia.”
That Committee have made a Report and recommendations which
will probably lead to the issue of notices for the termination
of the Company’s existing Mail contracts, and to invitations
for tenders for new ones.
The Directors have called up all the Capital authorised under the
original and supplemental Charters granted to the Company, and
they have applied to Her Majesty’s Government for a further
supplemental Charter, to empower them to increase that Capital
by the additional sum of £1,000,000.
The Board would consequently have found it their duty to extend
their Annual Report far beyond its ordinary limits, but they have
decided rather to issue this Special Statement, in which they propose
to furnish not only a retrospect of leading events in the history of
the Company, but a variety of general information connected with its
present position and the nature of its business, which will, they trust,
prove both interesting and useful to the shareholders.
They have also another purpose in view ; they are constantly made
aware of the great amount of misconception which prevails in many


quarters regarding the Company and its affairs—misconceptions which
find expression not only in portions of the home and Indian and colonial
press, but even in official reports —they will, therefore, supply material
for arriving at more accurate opinions respecting its transactions.
As recipients of public money for the performance of public services,
the Company are properly amenable to criticism of the manner in
which those duties are carried out, and the Directors have never shrunk
from examination of the mode in which, as a commercial body, they
fulfil their obligations to passengers and shippers by their steamers ;
they frequently have to regret, however, that many who deal with
these matters before the public, neglect to avail themselves of existing
opportunities for an examination of both sides of the questions on which
they may be treating.
The Directors propose to deal with the subject under the following
heads, and to report on the past and present position of the Company,
as regards—
I. The Charters,
11. The Postal Service,
111. The Passenger Service,
IV. The Transport Service,
V. The Establishments at
home and abroad,
VI. The Consumption of Coal,
VII. The Consumption of Pro-
visions,
VIII. The Employment of
Agents, Commanders,
Engineers, Officers, and
others,
IX. The Expenditure and
Revenue,
X. The Shareholders,
XI. The Direction and Man-
agementof the Company ?
XII, The Parliamentary Com-
mittee of 1866.
The Charters—Original and Supplementary.
Capital— How Represented—Average Dividend.
The Royal Charter of Incorporation was dated 31st December, 1840,
and it authorised the raising of £1,000,000 capital, with power to
increase the same by £500,000, under the authority of the Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury. This authority was sought and ob-
tained in 1847, the capital being thus increased to £1,500,000, and in


1852 the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, also under the authority
of the Charter, extended the borrowing powers of the Company to
£500,000.
In 1854 a Supplementary Charter was obtained, conferring power to
raise a further sum of £1,000,000, making the share capital £2,500,000,
represented by 50,000 Shares of £5O each, and in 1865 the Lords Cora-v
missioners of the Treasury sanctioned an addition to the borrowing
powers of the Company to the extent of £300,000. The borrowing
power was thus increased to a limit of £BOO,OOO in all, or somewhat
less than one-third of the total of the share capital.
All the shares will become fully paid up on the Ist January, 1867,
and it is probable the whole of the debentures will then be issued.
The Share and Debenture Capital together make up, therefore, the
sum of £3,300,000.
This is an amount calculated to arrest attention, and the share or
debenture holders will ask what has the Company to show for all this
money.
The reply is :—a fleet of Steam Ships 53 in number, measuring by
Customs’ register, 86,411 tons, and fitted with machinery of 19,690
horse power ; 9 steam tugs, measuring 864 tons, and 275 horse power
in all ; and sailing transports, store and coal ships, measuring 13,663
tons; also property on shore consisting of freehold and leasehold
houses, otfices, docks, wharves, coaling depots, factories, and repairing
establishments in this country and at Bombay, Hong-Kong, Shanghai,
Singapore, Calcutta, Point de Galle, Aden, Suez, Alexandria, Malta,
and other places ; and stocks of coals, and marine, victualling, and
other stores in depot and in transit to these stations, the whole showing
a value of £3,836,084 17s 3d, as stated in the Annual Report.
The Company, as an investment, has hitherto proved fairly remu-
nerative to the shareholders, but most so, of course, to those who were
original subscribers, and did not purchase their shares at a premium in
the market. It may be useful to state in this early part of the Report,
that the average dividend for the past 25 years, including that from the
Proprietors’ Underwriting Account, has been 9| per cent, on the paid-
up capital.
The perusal of the description of the property of the Company, given
above, will convey some idea of the magnitude of its present operations.
A thoughtful reader will be struck by the fact, that the list of places
at which it exists comprises almost every important sea-port in


the Eastern hemisphere ; yet, if all the places with which the
Company’s steamers communicate were named, the list would be more
than doubled.
The immense distance of these places from each other, and from
London, the centre of management', will also impress him with some
notion of the difficulty and expense which must attend the administration
of a service such as that now carried on by this Company; and he will at
once perceive the distinction which must exist between its operations
and performances and those of Companies who possess the great
advantage of despatching all their ships in turn from an English port.
The Postal Service.
The Directors will noAV proceed to submit, as a matter of the first
importance, a statement of the facts connected with the establishment,
progress, and present position of the Postal Services carried on by this
Company under contracts with H. M. Government.
This chronicle will be condensed as much as possible, and as (he
events to be recorded may be familiar to many to whom this Report is
addressed, those readers may be disposed to pass over a few pages of
dry history, and use them only as may be required for reference when
the subject is dealt with generally, and as it exists at this date, com-
mencing at page 30.
In August, 1837, the Peninsular Company obtained, after severe
competition, a Contract for the conveyance of the mails between Falmouth
and Gibraltar, calling at the principal ports of Spain and Portugal ;
and this Contract may be regarded as the foundation of the Peninsular
and Oriental Company, and the origin of the great systems of Ocean
Postal Services since brought into operation.
Previous to the Ist of September, 1840, the arrangements for trans-
mitting Mails to and from India, via Egypt, were as follows :
The East India Company had steamers plying monthly between
Bombay and Suez, and to meet these, Mails were forwarded, every fourth
Saturday, by the Contract Mail steamers of the Peninsular Company


to Gibraltar, and there transferred to an Admiralty steam packet, which
carried them to Malta. They were then put on board another Admiralty
packet, which conveyed them to Alexandria. The homeward Mails
were brought in a similar manner.
The transmission of the Indian Mails by this route generally occupied
three weeks or a month between England and Alexandria only.
In the year 1839 the British Government effected a convention
with the French Goveimment for the transmission of letters and de-
spatches for and from India, through France, to Marseilles, whence a
British Admiralty packet conveyed them to Malta. From Malta this
portion of the Mail, together with the larger and heavier portion for-
warded by the Peninsular and Admiralty packets, via Gibraltar, was
carried to Alexandria by another Admiralty packet.
This plan was found to work with much irregularity, and the
Managers of the Peninsular steamers were applied to, to submit a
plan for establishing a more rapid and regular means of transmission.
Their plan was examined and adopted by the Government; but as in
the case of the Peninsular Contract, the execution of it was put up to
public tender by advertisement. The tender of Messrs. Willcox and
Anderson, who, as Managers of the Peninsular Company, had furnished
the plan, was accepted, because it was the lowest.
This service) was the first'undertaken by the Peninsular and Oriental
Company, then just formed and incorporated.
It was a condition of the Charter granted to the Company that it
should open an improved steam communication with India throughout
from England, within two years from the date of the Charter, or that
it should be null.
The Directors proceeded to fulfil this condition with all practicable
speed, and on the 24th September, 1842, their new steam-ship
“ Hindostan,” was despatched from Southampton to Calcutta, to open
the Line by plying between Calcutta, Madras, Ceylon and Suez.
The Directors of the East India Company seeing that steam com-
munication with India was at last in the hands of parties likely
to place it on an efficient basis, and desirous to encourage it on
public grounds, voluntarily proposed to the Peninsular and Oriental
Company to give them a premium of £20,000 per annum, on certain
conditions, the most important being that not less than six voyages
should be performed between Calcutta and Suez annually, and that in
case a contract should be entered into with the P. and 0. Company for


the conveyance of mails, the grant should cease, and merge into such
sum as might be paid for that service.
In 1844, the Company having constructed another vessel of 520
horse-power and 1,800 tons, the “ Bentinck,” and purchased a third
new vessel of similar power and tonnage, the “ Precursor,” con-
sidered that the time had arrived when they might improve the postal
communication with India.
Finding, from a return which had a short time previously been made
by the East India Company to the House of Commons, that the cost of
conveying the India mails between Bombay and Suez, as then per-
formed by that Company, with steam-packets of an average power of
about 250 horses each, was not less than £105,000 per annum, the
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Company made a proposal to the East
India Company, to relieve the latter of that service, and to undertake
it with their vessels of 520 horse-power each, for £BO,OOO per annum.
The Court of Directors of the East India Company being opposed
to the transfer of the postal service between Bombay and Suez to the
hands of a private Company, this proposal was not entertained ; but
the matter having engaged the attention of Her Majesty’s Government,
it was ultimately arranged that the East India Company should retain
the Packet Service between Bombay and Suez, and that the Peninsular
and Oriental Company should submit proposals for the establishment
(under contract with the Admiralty) of a Monthly Mail Service
between Suez and Madras and Calcutta, via Ceylon, with vessels of
500-horse power ; and, in connection therewith, a monthly communica-
tion between Ceylon, Penang, Singapore, and Hong Kong, with vessels
of 400-horse power.
After a lengthened negotiation a Contract was executed, in virtue of
which the P. and O. Company were to receive £115,000 per annum,
equal to about 20s per mile, for the Suez, Ceylon, Madras, and Cal-
cutta Service ; and £45,000 per annum, equal to about 12s per mile,
for the Ceylon, Penang, Singapore, and China Service.
This Contract was not put up to public competition, and there are
obvious reasons why it would have been useless and unjust to have
done so. It wmuld have been useless, because it was well known that
there were then no vessels in existence capable of performing such
an extensive service other than the vessels which had, in fulfilment
of the conditions of their Charter of Incorporation, been provided by
this Company expressly for the East India Steam Communication ;


and it would have been unjust to the Peninsular and Oriental Company,
after they had been induced to embark so large an amount of capital
in providing ships of a description adapted to such important national
objects, not to have given them the Service on reasonable terms. It
had been estimated that the cost of the Mail Services previously
performed by the vessels of the Admiralty was 40s per mile, and
looking to the fact that the Bombay and Suez Service, with vessels
of less than 250-horse power, was actually costing 30s per mile,
namely, £105,000 for 70,000 miles, under the management of the East
India Company, after deducting the receipts for passage-money, the
terms of the Contract granted to the P. and O. Company—being
at the rate of about 20s per mile for the Suez and Calcutta Service,
and 12s per mile for the Ceylon and China Service, or if averaged, by
adding the two Services together, about 17s Id per mile, were very
advantageous to the public.
On the 6th January, 1848, the Government gave notice to the
Peninsular and Oriental Company to terminate the Contract for the
Mail Line between Southampton and Alexandria on the 18th January,
1849, and soon afterwards advertised for tenders for the execution of that
Service, The Directors sent in a tender for continuing to perform it
at a reduced cost, and at the same time, as they were aware that
exaggerated reports had been circulated as to the profits which the
Company was supposed to be making by the Contract Packet Service,
they offered to submit the Company’s books and accounts to the inspec-
tion of any competent parties the Government might appoint, and also
to enter into an arrangement, that in regard to the then advertised and
all future Contracts, that the Government should have the option of
inspecting the Company’s accounts and transactions from time to time,
and whenever it should be found that the Company were in a position
to divide 10 per cent, clear profit on its Capital, any surplus should
be appropriated for the benefit of the public, in the shape of a reduc-
tion from the sum payable for the Postal Service. The Admiralty
accordingly appointed Inspectors, who were instructed to ascertain —
“ Whether the profits of the voyages between Southampton, Malta and
“ Alexandria have been such as would provide a dividend of 10 per
“cent, per annum on the Capital, after the ordinary deductions of wear
“ and tear and sea risk of vessels ? ”
Also, “ To endeavour to institute a comparison between the expenses


“of carrying on the Mail Services by the Company and those which
“ are incurred by Her Majesty’s Naval Service, in similar duties.”
The Inspectors reported as follows :—“ That the readiest access was
“ afforded to the ledger, and other books of the Company.
“ That the amount paid to the Peninsular and Oriental Company for
“ the duties it has performed has not hitherto been more than it was
“justly entitled to receive, on the principle that the Shareholders are
“ entitled to a fair commercial profit on the capital invested in the
“ undertaking, and admitting that the affairs of the Company have
“ been managed, as they appear to have been, with economy and
“ efficiency.
“The dividend hitherto made has never reached the amount of 10 per
“ cent, per annum, and the additions made to their shipping and other
“ capital are from reserves to meet contingencies. The principles on
“ which these reserves have been laid aside, instead of being divided as
“ profits, will be hereafter explained in this Report.”
In another part of the Report the nature of the reserves was explained,
and the explanation was prefaced by the statement, that “ The principles
“on which the reserved funds have been laid aside appear fair and
“reasonable,” and was followed by the' paragraph : “So far, there-
“ fore, as the affairs of the Company have hitherto proceeded, the
“ amount paid to them under the Contract would not appear to have
“ exceeded a reasonable remuneration for the services performed, on the
“ principles stated.”
The endeavours of the Government to obtain competitors for executing
the Service -were, however, continued. It was twice advertised; and the
promoters of a concern called the Indian and Australian Company
having, after the second advertisement, tendered somewhat under the
Peninsular and Oriental Company, their tender was accepted ; but,
notwithstanding this advantage, they failed, after a delay of many
months, to satisfy the Admiralty that they had any means, or could
give any security, for performing the proposed Contract. The time
for closing the P. & O. Company’s Contract being within a few days of
its expiration, and the Admiralty being without a vessel to take the
outgoing India Mail, that Company was applied to to renew their offer
for continuing to perform the Service, which they did, and a Contract
for three years was entered into for £24,000 per annum.
The following memorandum shows the reduction effected by the
New Contract: —


Contract of 1840 —distance 70,824 miles; average annual payment
£30,700=8s 8d per mile.
Contract of 1848—distance 70,824 miles ; annual payment £24,000
=6s 9d per mile.
The final adjudication of this Contract to the Peninsular and Oriental
Company was, however, made the subject of much misrepresentation ;
and in April, 1849, a Select Committee of the House of Commons was
appointed “ to inquire into the Contract Packet Service.”
It was well known at the time that the real object of the movers of
the Committee was to inquire into the particular transaction just
referred to. The report of the Committee will be found in the
Appendix, p. i.
Appointment and Proceedings of a Parliamentary Committee on
Steam Communication with India, &r.
As the period for the termination of the India and China Contract of
1845 approached, it became evident that agitation was on foot, and that
an effort would be made to prevent a renewal of it with the P. and 0.
Company.
To quote a Report issued by the Directors some years ago, relating
to the proceedings of this period, “misrepresentation of all kind was at
“ work.” It was stated “ that the Contractors were making enormous
“ profits; that they performed the Service irregularly, and had little
“ regard to the comfort of passengers, See. If a steamer arrived a day
“ or two late, the event was chronicled and the delay magnified, Avithout
“ reference to the facts of the case or inquiry whether the detention
“ had been caused by circumstances within or beyond the Contractors’
“ control, while parties, who did not possess means, either in capital or
“ ships, were busy in representing that the public interests would be
“ better served by splitting the Line into sections, and entrusting the
“ execution of the Service to separate Contractors.”*
These representations led to the appointment of a second Parlia-
mentary Committee in 1851, “to inquire into the existing Steam
“ Communications with India and China, and into the practicability
* This quotation will show the remarkable identity between the arguments put forward
in 1851 and those urged upon the Committee of 1866.


“ of effecting any improvement therein ; and also into the best mode of
establishing Steam Communications between England, India, China,
“ Australia, New Zealand, or any of them.”
An immense mass of evidence, both verbal and documentary, was
submitted to the Committee, who made two lengthy Reports, which
may be summarised as follows
That “ the Peninsular and Oriental Company had displayed an enter-
“ prising spirit in conducting the communication —that “ the vessels
“ provided, although originally of the first class, were below the standard
“ reached on other lines, but that of late some of them had undergone
“ improvement, which had rendered them competent to maintain a speed
“ much in excess of the Contract ” (a result attributed by the Committee-
“ to the agitation of the question of its renewal); —that “statements of
“ some irregularity in the arrival of the Mails at Calcutta had been
“ made —that “ a rapid increase in the commercial and passenger inter-
“ course of England, India, and China had taken place since the estab-
“ lishment of Steam communication, and that there was reason to believe,
“ on the opening of the proposed Railway through Egypt, the important
“ traffic in the more valuable articles of merchandise would be largely
“ developed;”—that “the evidence showed strongly that a full commu-
“ nication every fortnight was required between England and the different
“ Presidencies of India;” —and that “ they believed such a service might
“ be established without any material increase of charge on the public
“ revenue.”
The Committee also expressed an opinion that “ a higher rate of
“ speed should be insisted upon in a new Contract;” —that “penalties
“ for a failure in speed should be fixed and rigidly enforced ;” —that
“ they did not consider that Government interference could be exercised
“ with any advantage as regarded rates of freight and passage money,
“as had been suggested to them;” but that “the only mode by which
“ the public could be benefitted in this respect was by the establish-
“ ment of a wholesome competition,” to secure which they “ recom-
“ mended that the proposed fortnightly communication should be
“ separated into two distinct Services, and put out to separate tenders ;”
concluding with a suggestion that “ ample notice of the terms and con-
“ ditions of any new Service should be given, so as to enable all parties
“ to enter the field and tender for them.”
The Report of the Committee was dated July, 1851, and notice
having been given to the Company that their India and China Contract


of 1844, and also that of 1849 for the conveyance of the Mails between
Southampton and Alexandria in connection with it, would terminate
at the end of 1852, the Admiralty issued advertisements, in November,
1851, inviting tenders, to be delivered on the 26th February, 1852,
for a full fortnightly communication between England and India and
China, with aline between Singapore and Sydney ; and, in accordance
with the views expressed by the Parliamentary Committee, those
Services were separated into five divisions, as follows :
Ist Line.—A Line from England to Alexandria and back monthly,
leaving England in the beginning of every month, and calling at
Gibraltar and Malta, with a branch from Marseilles to Malta
and back, conveying between those two ports the Mails which
are carried across France.
2nd Line.—A similar Line from England to Alexandria and back
monthly, leaving England in the middle of every month, with a
similar branch between Marseilles and Malta.
3rd Line. —A Lino* from Suez to Calcutta and Hong-Kong and
back monthly. This Line will take the Mails which have left
England in the beginning of each month, and will touch at
Aden and Point de Galle, whence one steamer will proceed by
Madras to Calcutta, and another by Penang to Singapore and
Hong-Kong,
4th Line.—A similar Line from Suez to Calcutta and Hong-Kong
and back monthly, conveying the Mails which have left England
in the middle of the month, and proceeding in like manner to
Point de Galle, and thence by Madras to Calcutta, and by Penang
to Singapore and Hong-Kong.
sth Line. —A Lino from Singapore to Sydney and back. Every
alternate month a steamer to leave Singapore on the arrival of
the outward packet at that port, with the Mails which have left
England in the middle of every alternate month, and to leave
Sydney so as to meet at Singapore the homeward packet, which
will arrive there from China after the lapse of two mouths.
These steamers are to touch both ways at Batavia, Swan River
(or King George’s Sound, as may hereafter be determined),
Adelaide, and Port Phillip.
The tenders were to be made for any one or more of these five Lines,
but not for any less portion of the Service than one of them, and in


further conformity with the recommendations of the Committee, it was
stipulated that the Mails were to be conveyed at a rate of not less than
10 knots an hour, to ensure which, the vessels offered in execution of
the Contract were to be tried by officers appointed by the Admiralty,
and shown to their satisfaction to attain a speed of 12 knots an
hour on a measured mile, with Coals on board and immersed to the
load line.
On the 26th of February, 1852, two tenders were put in, one by the
Peninsular and Oriental Company for the whole of the Services (with
the addition of a branch Line between Bombay and Point de Galle not
named in the conditions), for the annual sum of £199,600, to be reduced
to £179,600 six months after the completion of the Railway across
Egypt; and one by the Eastern Steam Navigation Company for a
Line once a month between England and Calcutta and Hong-Kong, for
the annual sum of £llO,OOO, to be reduced to £lOO,OOO in the event of
Trieste being substituted for Marseilles as the continental port of
departure, and one from the same Company for the branch between
Singapore and Sydney, in addition to Line previously mentioned, for
the annual sum of £166,000.
On reducing the tenders to a mileage rate, it appeared that the Penin-
sular and Oriental Company asked about 6s 6d per mile for the whole
five Lines (without taking into account the additional branch between
Bombay and Galle), and that the Eastern Company asked for Lines
1 and 3 about 8s a mile, and for Lines 1, 3 and 5 combined about
10s per mile.
On the 6th of March following the deposit of the tenders, a Treasury
Minute authorised the Admiralty to accept and carry into effect that
made by the Peninsular and Oriental Company.
This decision was not satisfactory to the unsuccessful competitors,
and they petitioned Parliament for a third Select Committee to inquire
into the subject; this brought on a discussion in the House of Commons,
when the Chancellor of the Exchequer (Mr. Disraeli) gave his reasons
for accepting the tender of the Peninsular and Oriental Company in
the following terms; —
IH,dr ad from “ Hannan I’a Parliamentary Debates,” May 2 Bth, 1852.
“ The Peninsular and Oriental Company’s tender was at the rate of
“ 6s 6d a mile, with the additional offer volunteered of performing the


“ Line between Bombay and Point de G-alle. The Eastern Steam
“ Navigation Company’s tender was at the rate of 8s a mile for the
“ first tender, and 10s on the average per mile of the second tender.
“ I had, therefore, to make my election between the offer of 6s 6d on
“ the one hand, and 8s and 10s on the other. These facts having been
put before me, I found that there was a difference between the two
tenders of £86,400 per annum. This difference in the rate of mileage
“ was very considerable. I had only one other point to convince myself of,
“ viz., whether the one tender, which was the cheapest, was likely to
“ prove equally as efficient as the other ; and I availed myself of all the
“ information I could command on the subject. It appeared to me,
“ however unwilling I might be to throw any discredit upon a rival
and a young establishment, that the securities for the efficiency of the
“ Service offered by the Peninsular and Oriental Company were
“ considerably preferable to those ottered for the Service of the dearest
“ Company. That is my simple story. I felt that I was called upon
to obtain the best Service, and I did so at the cheapest rate.”
The P. & 0. Company accordingly obtained the Contract, which was
dated Ist January, 1853 ; it superseded the Suez and Calcutta and
the Ceylon and China Contract of December, 1844, and the South-
ampton and Alexandria Contract of 1849, the average mileage on which
was 11s. Under the whole Contract of 1853, including the Line
between Bombay and Galle, the average mileage was 6s 2d, and a
fortnightly communication with India and China was thus established
at little more than the cost of the previous monthly one.
The Directors have entered into some detail respecting this important
Contract, inasmuch as it has remained in operation to the present time.
Modifications have been introduced at various periods, all tending to
cheapen the service, and the average mileage rate of 6s 2d has been
lowered, Ist, in 1859 by the abatement' of £20,000 agreed to on the
opening of the Egyptian Railway; 2nd, in 1861 by a proportion of
the sum of £15,000 per annum, which the Company paid the
Government in consideration of being released from the obligation
of carrying a certain number of military, naval, and civil officers at two-
thirds of the ordinary rates of passage money; and 3rd, in 1865 by a
proportion of £5,000 per annum paid by the Company on the substitu-
tion by the Government of a system of premiums and penalties on each
voyage, in lieu of the trial for speed of 12 knots at the measured mile,
as originally agreed.


Other alterations and extensions of the Service also took place by
mutual consent; the China Line was extended from Hong-Kong to
Shanghai in exchange for one of the fortnightly Lines between Bombay
and Hong-Kong; and the Company were compelled to abandon the
Line between Singapore and Australia. The Australian service will
be dealt with separately in a later portion of the Keport.
In March, 1857, the Company resumed the second line between
Bombay and Hong-Kong, at the same time making the Shanghai
Service fortnightly instead of monthly. A moderate rate of payment
was subsequently agreed upon for these additional services.
In September, 1859, the Company despatched their first steamer
from Shanghai to Japan, and since 1863 their vessels have run
regularly every fortnight between these places in connection with the
Mail steamers on the China Line without payment from the Govern-
ment. The means of communication thus established has, however,
been availed of by the Post Office for the transmission of Mails to the
same extent as on the postal lines performed and paid for under
contract, and the Imperial expenditure has been diminished thereby ;
the necessity of sending ships of war between Japan and China with
important despatches having been obviated.
Reverting for a moment to the period the Contract was granted,
the agitation prevailing at the time led to the
ippointment of a Committee of Inquiry into the Contract Packet
Service by the Government.
In March, 1853, the Chancellor of the Exchequer stated to the
Treasury Boai'd “ that the attention of Her Majesty’s Government had
“ been drawn to the great and annually increasing amount of the esti-
“ mates for Packet Services over sea, and to the large proportion which
“ that item bore to the general civil expenditure of the country.”
A Committee of Inquiry was thereupon appointed by the Treasury
consisting of—
Lord Canning, Postmaster- General;
Sir Stafford W. Northcote, of the Treasury;
The Hon. W. Cowper, of the Admiralty; and
Mr. VV. M. Bromley, Secretary to the Board of Audit.


The Cunard Company received .
£188,040, earning
£126,398
The Peninsular and Oriental Company
received
£199,600, earning
£152,564
The Committee made their report in July of the same year, and
it furnishes a complete history of all the seventeen Postal Contracts then
existing ; it also had the very desirable and important effect of eliciting
the net amounts of postage earned on the several Lines, with the follow-
ing result as regards the three great Companies. At that time :
per ann. per aun.
The West India Company received . £270,000, earning £89,540
After stating that three-fourths of the whole annual subsidy granted
by the Government for the Packet Service were paid to three great
Companies, and specifying the Lines worked by each, the Committee
reported that “ the value of the services thus rendered to the State
“ cannot, we think, be measured by a mere reference to the amount of
“ the Postal Revenue, or even by the commercial advantages accruing
“ from it. It is undoubtedly startling, at first sight, to perceive that
“ the immediate pecuniary result of the Packet System is a loss to the
“ Revenue of about £325,000 a year; but, although this circumstance
“ shows the necessity for a careful revision of the service, and although
“ we believe that much may be done to make that service self-support-
ing, we do not consider that the money thus expended is to be
“ regarded, even from a fiscal point of view, as a national loss.”
The following passage of the report is also remarkable in connection
with the events that took place very shortly afterwards, and which more
than verified the predictions of the Committee :
“ An erroneous impression appears to have prevailed among the
“ public as to the efficiency of our Postal Steamers for direct purposes
“of warfare. We do not believe that those who are charged with the
“direction of the military affairs of the country have ever regarded
“ them as likely to be of any great service in an engagement; but their
“ advantages as an auxiliary force will be very considerable. They
“will be available in the event of the breaking out of hostilities, for
“ the rapid conveyance of despatches, of specie, and, to a certain extent,
“of troops and stores. Their speed will be such as probably to secure
“ them from the risk of capture, and will render them highly valuable
“ for procuring intelligence of hostile movements. They may also be
“ expected to furnish the Queen’s ships with men trained to steam


“ navigation, and possessing an amount of local knowledge which
“cannot fail to be valuable in several ways.”
This passage from the Report will be referred to under the head of
“ Transport Services,”
The Bombay Service.
It will have been observed that hitherto no mention has been made
of the Postal Service with Bombay, the reason being that the first
Contract entered, into in connection with that Presidency was dated one
year later than that with Calcutta and China. It was taken under the
following circumstances.
The Parliamentary Committee of 1851 had reported that this service
—in point of economy, the comfort of the passengers, and the require-
ments of trade—would be performed to greater advantage by a private
company than by the vessels of the India navy. The East India
Company had, however, from the earliest period at which attention
was drawn to the costly and inefficient character of the service, shown
the greatest unwillingness to give it up, and it was not until the
Bombay Mail was lost in a native sailing craft in which it had been
shipped at Aden, there being no steamer to convey it from that place to
Bombay, that they gave up the point.
The Peninsular and Oriental Company were then applied to, and
they agreed to undertake the service between Bombay and Aden at
the same rate per mile they received for the general Contract, viz.,
6s 2d, making £24,700 per annum, and effecting a saving of not less
than £BO,OOO per annum as compared with the expense incurred by
the performance of it by the vessels of the East India Company.
This is proved by a return made to the order of the House of
Commons (Xo. 746), showing that the cost of transmitting the India
Mails between Bombay and Suez, through the agency of the East
India Company, by steam-vessels averaging somewhat under 250-horse
power each, amounted to £105,000 annually (equal to 30s per mile),
of which £50,000 was paid by an annual vote of Parliament out of the
revenue of the United Kingdom, and the remainder out of the revenue
of India.
The Bombay Contract with the Peninsular and Criental Company
was made in July, 1854, and the Line Avas worked at first in conjunction
with that to Calcutta, the mails, Btc-, being transferred at Aden.


The occurrence of the mutiny in India naturally created an anxiety
in all quarters that every means should be availed of tending to increase
the Postal Communication with that country. The Peninsular and
Oriental Company had previously pointed out a plan which, by an
extension and modification of existing services, would secure the
most important advantage of a weekly instead of a fortnightly com-
munication with India at a trifling expense.
In November, 1857, the plan was carried into effect ; the Line
between Bombay and Aden (under the Contract of 1854) was extended
to Suez, and in connection with it a fortnightly Line was opened
between Marseilles and Alexandria; the arrivals and departures of
the Bombay Mails were at the same time made to alternate with those
of the Calcutta Line, instead of being coincident with them, as was
previously the case, and thus a weekly communication with India was
established.
The total extra service undertaken by the Company under this
arrangement amounted to 133,728 miles per annum, and they agreed to
accept for it £16,000 a year, being at the rate of 2s 5d per mile.
It was at the same time considered desirable by Her Majesty’s
Government to extend the voyages of the Marseilles Packets, running
with the Calcutta and China Mails from Malta to Alexandria, and the
Company undertook this additional service for £5,000 per annum, or
2s 6d per mile.
The abandonment of the Peninsular Line in 1862 also brought about
certain modifications and improvements of the Mediterranean part
of the Bombay service, and from that time to the present a com-
plete and independent fortnightly service to and from Bombay has
been kept up in alternation with that to Calcutta and China. This
complete Bombay service sprang from the Contract of 1854 for the
Line between Bombay and Aden which, it has been seen, was taken at
a mileage of 6s 2d. It has, however, been frequently assumed, and was
even stated before the Parliamentary Committee of 1866, that the
through Line to England was paid for at the same rate; this is com-
pletely erroneous; for the extensions were taken at such low rates,
and the modifications referred to so much reduced the average, that
the amount paid for the Line between this country and Bombay is at
the rate of 2s 7d per mile only.
As a matter of convenience it has sometimes been the practice in
public documents to treat the whole India services embraced in the


Contracts of 1853 and 1854 as one, and to represent them as paid for
at the rate of 4s 2d per mile. This is correct as Tar as the calculation
goes, but the fortnightly service with Calcutta and China, and the
fortnightly service with Bombay, are not the less separate services
under distinct contracts, the former now costing 5s 5d per mile, and the
latter only 2s 7d per mile, as stated above.
In April, 1862, with the object of establishing a weekly service with
Bombay, advertisements were published by the Secretary to the Post
Office, inviting tenders to be sent in on the 15th October, for a fort-
nightly Line of steamers between Bombay and Aden, in connection
with the Company’s Line between Calcutta and Suez; and the
Directors, having in view the novel and onerous character of some of
the clauses which formed part of the conditions, and the fact that a
fortnightly communication direct with Bombay was amply sufficient
for the then existing passenger and goods traffic with that port by way
of Suez, submitted a tender based on those considerations.
On the 23rd December, 1862, they were informed, by letter from the
Postmaster-General, that the Government “ wei’e not prepared to take
any further steps at the present time in this matter.”
A correspondence between the Postmaster-General and the Company
took place more recently on the subject of despatching the Mails, not
only to Bombay, but to all parts of the East, on a fixed day of the week,
a measure which would involve the annual performance of thirteen
instead of twelve voyages each way, on all the Company’s Lines, and an
increase in the total distance run of 103,004 miles. The Directors,
although doubtful whether the revenue from passage money and freight
would increase in proportion to the extra work to be performed, stated
they would be willing to undertake it as an experiment at the existing
mileage rate, namely, for £35,024 per annum, reserving to themselves
the right of claiming the restoration of the existing system. Nothing,
however, was done at the time to carry out this plan.
The Postal Service with Australia .
The Directors do not propose to enter into a complete history of the
attempts, the failures, and the changes connected with Steam Naviga-
tion to Australia, but this Line now forms so important a branch of the
Company’s operations that it demands a separate description, and a brief


narrative of the events which preceded the establishment of the Service
on its present footing.
The Directors first took the matter up in 1847, when they addressed
a letter to the Treasury, stating that “whenever Her Majesty’s Govern-
“ meat might determine to establish a steam communication with
“ Australia, via Singapore, they would be prepared to tender for the
“ same.”
Shortly afterwards a Charter of Incorporation was granted to the
promoters of a new concern called the India and Australia Company,
and the'parties succeeded in persuading the Government of the day to
address a letter to the P. and O. Company, through the Board of
Trade, calling upon it for assistance in furthering the objects of the
new association. The Directors replied that they could not commit
themselves to arrangements with a Company not yet formed. The
promoters failed in procuring shareholders and capital, and at the
very time the official pressure referred to was put upon the
P. and 0. Company, the promoters were offering their Charter for sale
to the Directors, making £lO,OOO the price of the abandonment of their
intended operations.
They were informed by the Board that as their Charter conferred
no powers the P. and O. Company did not already possess, the offer
of its sale could not be entertained. The affairs of the India and
Australia Company were subsequently wound up in the Court of
Bankruptcy.
In October, 1848, the Admiralty issued advertisements inviting
tenders for a monthly steam communication between Singapore and
Sydney, via Torres Straits, and as, upon the best information then
procurable, the estimated expenses exceeded the estimated receipts by
£60,000 per annum, the Directors proposed to establish and maintain
the service for that sura, witli the proviso that the earnings of the
vessels should be subject to Government inspection, and that if they
exceeded the estimated amount, that excess should go for the benefit
of the public, and be deducted from the amount of payment for the
service.
This proposal, which must be regarded as a fair and liberal offer on
the part of the Company, was not accepted.
In 1849 the Government again invited tenders for a “monthly mail
communication with Australia,” in connection with the Peninsular and
Oriental Company’s existing line of packets calling at Singapore, and


in January, 1850, the Directors sent in proposals for the same, coupling
with them plans for the conveyance of the Bombay mails between that
place and England, and for the general improvement and extension of
the postal service with the East.
The East India Company could not, however, as before stated, be
prevailed upon to give up the costly Line between Bombay and Suez ;
the Company, consequently, struck out of their plan the suggested
alterations of the Bombay service, and intimated to Her Majesty’s
Government their willingness to establish the desired communication
with Australia, in connexion with a Line of Steam Vessels to ply
between Calcutta, Penang, Singapore, and llong-Kong, to be arranged
so as to afford a postal communication twice a month between Europe
and China, and a direct Steam communication between Bengal, the
Straits Settlements, China, and Australia.
The Company offered to undertake the specified services at a mileage
rate of 6s 3d, being exactly in proportion to the sum which they required
for executing the whole of the Lines embraced in their original plan.
This further movement on the part of the Company, with the view
of providing Australia with the long deferred and much desix*ed Steam
communication, was not responded to by Her Majesty’s Government.
The Directors then made an offer on the basis of receiving the
amount of the postage on the letters which might be conveyed on the
Line at the then existing rates of postage, but this was declined, and
the whole question of steam communication with India, China, and
Australia was referred to the Parliamentary Committee of 1851.
Pursuant to the report of that Committee, the tenders for the new
India and China Services comprised a Line once every two months
between Singapore and Australia, by the western route to Sydney,
calling at King George’s Sound, Adelaide and Melbourne.
This Line formed part of the contract executed with the Company
on the Ist January, 1853, and already described.
The sudden outbreak of the Russian War, and the urgent require-
ments of the Government for the means of conveying troops and
material to the Black Sea and the Baltic, caused it to avail itself of the
powers it possessed under the Mail Contracts, and to impress a large
number of the Company’s Steamers into the Transport Service. Among
these were the “ Simla,” “Alma,” “Nubia,” “ Colombo,” and “Ripon,”
the four first of which the Company had built and fitted expressly for
the performance of the Postal Contract of 1853, and at one time no less


than eleven of their steamers, measuring in the aggregate 18,000 tons,
were engaged in the war service.
These circumstances compelled the Company, towards the end of
1854, with the sanction of Her Majesty’s Government, to discontinue
the branch Line to Australia, and the proportion of the subsidy of
£199,600 per annum, applicable to the Line between Singapore and
Sydney, namely, £17,475 2s, was from that time deducted.
The year 1855 was spent in the discussion of plans for the re-
establishment and improvement of the communication with the Austra-
lian colonies, making Point de Galle the port of junction with the
India and China Lines, the Company having ascertained, by practical
experience, that the Singapore route was both inconvenient and un-
rernunerative.
The change of route was regarded with favour by the Government, and
the Directors submitted an offer to enter into a Contract for the monthly
conveyance of the Mails between Ceylon and Sydney by Steamers
of an average speed of 10 knots an hour, touching at King George’s
Sound and Melbourne, at an annual subsidy of £84,000 per annum,
and they stated that they were willing to submit for inspection the
estimates of cost and returns upon which this tender was based.
Her Majesty’s Government did not avail of this offer, but in February,
1855, issued another advertisement, inviting tenders for the monthly
conveyance of Mails between England and Australia, without specifying
any particular route.
A Treasury Minute on the subject, which was published at the time,
stated that the Government did not intend to commence this Service
until they had received from the different Colonies of Australia a “duly
“authorised legislative acquiescence in a certain arrangement for bearing
“a proportion of the cost of the Service.”
The Directors in consequence represented to the Government, when
the time came for. sending in the tenders, that it would be inconsistent
with their duty to the Proprietors of the Company, to bind themselves
by any tender for a Contract, the execution of which must necessarily
be postponed to a distant period.
Liberal grants of money having at length been voted by the Legis-
lative Assemblies of the several Australian Colonies towards the
maintenance of a Postal Communication with the mother country,
advertisements tvere issued by the Admiralty in May, 1856, inviting


tenders for “ a Monthly Direct and Independent Steam Service between
Suez and Australia.”
The Conditions of tender contained many clauses of a novel character,
and the duration of the Contract was fixed at a much shorter period
than usual, namely, five years.
The Ships to be employed were to be full power-screw steam vessels
of not less than 2,200 tons each ; the tenders were to specify the
maximum number of days to be consumed on the passage, both outward
and homeward ; but in substitution of the usual clause, stipulating that
the Steamers should undergo a test of speed previous to their acceptance
for the Service, the following was inserted, the words in italics indicating
the new condition :
“ A Penalty of £lOO to be incurred when the Contractors fail in
“ providing a vessel, in accordance with their agreement, ready to put
“to sea at the appointed hour ; and also the sum of £lOO for every
“ successive day which shall elapse until such steam vessel shall
“ actually proceed to sea ; and also (from 'whatever cause arising) £5O
“ for the first day, and a sum increasing by £5O per day for every
“succeeding day, that is to say, £5O for the first day, £lOO for the
“ second day, £l5O for the third day, and so on, increasing by £5O for
“ every day for any time consumed on the voyage beyond the maximum
“ number of days allowed; but so that the full amount of such Penalties
“ on any one voyage shall never exceed the proportion of the subsidy
“ applicable to such voyage , and which Penalties shall in no case what-
“ ever be relinquished
Four tenders were sent in, namely, by —
Mr. Laming,
Mr. Macqueen,
The Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company,
The European and Australian Steam Navigation Company,
But in a Treasury Minute, dated 24th June, 18/)6, my Lords stated
that, with the concurrence of the Secretary of State, they had no
hesitation in rejecting the two first ; the choice lay, therefore, between
that of the European and Australian (then called the European and
Columbian) Steam Navigation Company and the Peninsular and
Oriental Company.
The parties representing the former offered to undertake the Service
between Suez and Sydney for the sum of £135,000 per annum, stating
that should the tender he accepted, it was their intention to lay on an


independent Line of Steamers between England and Alexandria.
The maximum number of days between Suez and Melbourne to be 39
days outwards and 35 days inwards.
Six Steamers were named for the performance of the whole Service,
three of which were to be built, the other three being represented as
engaged in the English and French Transport Service ; and the Line
was to be opened from Australia in January, and from England in
March, 1857.
The Peninsular and Oriental Company tendered in like manner for
the Service between Suez and Sydney for the sum of £140,000,
but they “ declined to be held responsible in penalties for failure as
“ to the length of a voyage, or for other failures, arising jrom causes
“ beyond their control they also “declined to accept the premium of
“ £3O per day (named in the conditions) for effecting the voyage in less
“ time than the maxinlum number of days proposed to be fixed,
“ submitting that such penalties and premiums were unnecessary,
“ inasmuch as the vessels they offered had already been surveyed and
“ tested for an average speed of 10 knots an hour at sea.”
In the same Minute the Lords Commissioners stated their reasons for
declining the tender of the P. and O. Co., and accepting that of the
European and Australian Company.
The acceptance of the tender which was highest, by no less than
£45,000 per annum, naturally created great surprise. The fairness
and accuracy of the Treasury Minute was much canvassed, inasmuch
as the P. and O. Company had only objected to those penalties which
applied to failure from causes beyond their control, and because the
only ships named by the competing Company were, like those of the
P. and O. Company, engaged at the time in the Transport Service. The
ability of the successful competitors to carry out what they had under-
taken was also questioned by those who had a practical knowledge of the
difficulties and costly nature of the service. It would serve no good
purpose, however, to reproduce the statements and counter-statements
made at the time, but as a chronicle of facts, this record would be im-
perfect if allusion were omitted to the circumstance, that on receiving a
notification of the acceptance of their tender, the parties who had made it,
offered the Peninsular and Oriental Company to relinquish the execution
of it, provided the Company would purchase the two steamers, the
“European” and “Columbian,” of which they were then owners, and
which formed the basis of their tender.


Your Directors declined this offer, and the Contract was entered into
by the European and Australian Company, and was dated 14th October,
1856. The Line was opened in February, 1857, by the “Etna” from
Southampton, and in March by the “Simla” from Sydney, both
chartered vessels, the latter from the Peninsular and Oriental Company,
from whom the Contractors also received much assistance in supplies of
coal, the use of agencies, and in other ways, at the commencement of
their operations.
A return to an Address of the House of Commons, dated 20th August,
1857, for the names, tonnage and horse-power of all vessels employed
under this Contract showed, that in December of that year, out of the
seven vessels so employed, five were chartered, the exceptions being the
“European” and “Columbian,” the two ships originally offered for
sale to the Peninsular and Oriental Company, as stated above.
Previous to this, however, the Contractors had entered into a working
agreement with another Company—“ The Royal Mail Steam Packet
Company” —and the Service was for a time conducted by a joint
Committee of the Directors of the two Companies ; a “Basis” upon
which it was proposed that the two Companies should amalgamate,
under the title of the “Royal Mail Australian and Indian Steam Packet
Company,” was also put in circulation, and preliminary measures were
taken for obtaining an Act of Parliament for “Making better provision
“ for the due and punctual performance of Contracts with Her Majesty’s
“ Government by the * Royal Mail Steam Packet Company,’ and the
“ ‘European and Australian Royal Mail Company, Limited,’ respectively,
“for the conveyance of Mails from Great Britain to the West Indies
“ and the Brazils, and Australia and elsewhere, and in order thereto for
“ amalgamating those Companies, and for other purposes.”
The amalgamation of the two Companies was not, however, carried
out, and, notwithstanding the support of the Royal Mail and Cunard
Companies, the Directors of the European and Australian Company
(which was formed under the provisions of the Limited Liability Act)
placed themselves and the Shareholders, in the early part of 1858, under
the protection of that Act for the liquidation of their affairs.
In a speech on the operation of the Act, delivered in the House of
Lords, on the 24th March, 1859, Lord Overstone made a statement
with reference to the failure of that Company, which will be found in
the Appendix, p. iii.
From February, 1858, to February, 1859, the Australian Mail Service


was carried on by the Royal Mail Steam Packet Company singly, under
an arrangement with the Government, that in addition to the full sub-
sidy of £185,000 per annum, the Government should guarantee the
Company against loss, to an extent not exceeding £6,000 per month.
Differences arose, however, between the R. M. Co. and the Admiralty,
as to the amount which that Company were entitled to under the in-
demnity specified, and the case came before the Court of Queen?s Bench
on a “Petition of Right,” on the 24th April, 1863, when the Company
shewed that their losses had far exceeded the sum of £6,000 per month,
and fully proved their title to recover the full amount of their claim.
The cost of the Service to the public, therefore, fell little short of
£280,000 per annum for this period.
The arrangement was, however, only a temporary one, entered into
to avert the inconvenience that would have been caused by an interrup-
tion of the Line, and in September, 1858, the Admiralty again adver-
tised for tenders “ for the Monthly conveyance of the Mails between
“ Great Britain and the Australian Colonies, with a branch between
“ Marseilles and Malta.”
On the sth October following two tenders were put in, one by the
Royal Mail Company at £250,000 per annum, and one by the Penin-
sular and Oriental Company at £lBO,OOO per annum. The latter was
accepted, and the service was commenced in February, 1859.
It is necessary to explain that the Company had previously under-
taken a Monthly Service between Mauritius and Aden for a subsidy of
£24,000 per annum, and an arrangement having been made that the
route for the Australian Mails should be via Mauritius, the Company
were enabled to combine the Australian with the Mauritius Service,
and thus reduce their tender for the former to £lBO,OOO.
The arrangement of the details of the Contract somewhat postponed
its execution, and as eight months’ preliminary experience of the
working of the Line had proved that it could not be continued without
loss to the Company, the Directors signified to the Government that
they would feel compelled to relinquish it under the proposed arrange-
ment, and pointed out that the only means by which they could see a
prospect of maintaining the Service without loss would be by changing
the route of the Australian Steamers to its former course, via Point
de Galle.
The result was an agreement between the Government and the
Company for a monthly Line between Galle and Sydney, which, in


conjunction with the Calcutta, Suez, and China Lines, brought the
Australian Colonies in direct communication with England, India,
China, &c.
The payment for this Line was settled at £134,672 per annum,
and the Agreement, which was in substitution of the Contract of 1859,
via Mauritius, was made terminable on six months’ notice from either
party.
Notice was given to the Company in December, 1864, that it was
the intention of the Government to terminate the agreement on the
12th of February, 1866, being the date on which the Contract of 1859
would have expired ; and, in January, 1865, advertisements appeared
inviting tenders for this Service, to be sent in on the 10th of April.
The Directors accordingly submitted their terms for a new Contract,
embracing either a Monthly Service, a Semi-monthly Service, or a
Service under which —whether Monthly or Semi-monthly—the Mails
would be despatched on a fixed day of the week.
The terms for a Monthly Service, carried on as previously, were
£120,000 per annum ; for a Semi-monthly Service, £170,000 per
annum ; and, as the despatch of the Mails on a fixed day of the week
would involve the annual performance of thirteen instead of twelve
voyages each way, it was stipulated that the subsidy should be increased
by one twelfth in the event of that system being adopted.
The Company’s terms were accepted generally, but on the under-
standing that, for the present, the Service was to continue a Monthly
one, under the pre-existing regulations as regards the dates of despatch-
ing the Mails.
The Contract, which is that now in operation, was dated 17th No-
vember, 1865, and was made terminable on two years’ notice by either
party.
In deference to the wishes of the authorities of the Post Office,
the Directors recently consented to the introduction of clauses in the
India and China and Bombay contracts, under which penalties were to
be imposed and premiums allowed, both to be calculated on the duration
of the runs from port to port, the number of hours allowed for such runs
being computed at the rate of speed stipulated for in the original contracts
of 1853 and 1854. The penalties, as it is the practice of the Government
to make them, exceeded the amount of the premiums, the penalty for
overtime being £5O per diem, and the premium for time gained being
£25 per diem.


The agreement in this matter, which was dated 27th February, 1866,
was a simple substitution of a system of fines and premiums for the
stipulation that each vessel intended for the contract service should
attain a spee'd of 12 knots per hour on a measured mile as a guarantee
that she should make an average of 10 knots per hour at sea, and it
should be borne in mind that, at the time the new system was brought
into operation, not a single vessel was employed in the Mail Service
east of Suez that had not been subjected to the 12 knot test, and been
certified accordingly.
That the Company obtained no concession of time under this arrange-
ment (as was pertinaciously asserted before the Committee) is proved
by an official return called for and put by Mr. F. Hill on the part of
the Post Office on the last day of its meeting, as follows :
“3597. Mr. Childers : Do you put in also a comparison of the time
“ under the old contracts, and that under the agreement of last
“ February ?—Yes.” ( The same was handed in.)
TIME ALLOWED.
Under Old
Contract.
Under New
Contract.
Hours.
Hours.
Between Southampton and Alexandria
„ Marseilles and Alexandria ...
From Suez to Calcutta
„ Sandheads to Suez
Between Suez and Bombay
„ Bombay and Hong Kong
“3589. Is the time under the new agreement in any case greater
“ than under the old one ?—No ; but in one or two it is slightly less.”
It was, therefore, under some strange misapprehension of the nature
and effect of this agreement that a member of the Committee (Mr.
Ayrton) stated in Parliament, on the 16th July, when the vote for the
cost of Packet Service was under consideration, that “ it granted a
“premium to the contractors to delay the Mails to the prejudice of the
“ public.”— Hansard,
This statement was based apparently on the assumption that under
it the Company made slow voyages wilfully, and submitted themselves
to penalties as suiting them in a financial point of view, that they


were purposely, say four days, late, and got themselves fined £2OO to
save burning coal worth a larger sum.
Practical facts are, however, dead against this theory, for the slow
voyage is invariably the expensive voyage in the matter of the consump-
tion of coal. If each case were enquired into and examined separately,
it would be found that a failure of speed on a particular passage
was due to adverse gales—to a temporary defect of machinery—to the
ship’s bottom not having been recently cleaned in dock—to deterioration
in the quality in the coals, or to some other cause which had produced
an excess in expenditure of fuel ; and when to this is added the cost of
victualling passengers, and all the differences between the daily outlay of
a ship at sea and a ship in port, the gross absurdity of the assumption
will at once become apparent.
The three great Postal Services, namely, between England and
Calcutta and China ; England and Bombay ; and England and Aus-
tralia, comprised and linked together in the system at present worked
by the Company, have thus been separately described and traced
from their origin to their existing condition. It has been seen that the
small seed sown in 1837 took root, and gradually produced a great
trunk and far spreading branches, and this under ordeals to which no
similar undertaking has been subjected, for —
1. The Peninsular Contract, 1837, was twice competed for.
2. The Alexandria Contract, 1840, was competed for.
3. The India and China Contract, 1844, was arranged after nego-
ciation, there being at that time no other enterprise possessing vessels
capable of performing it.
4. The new Contract, on expiration of No. 2, was obtained after
severe competition, at a greatly reduced rate.
5. The new and increased Service with India and China, on expira-
tion of No. 3, was obtained after severe competition, at a greatly
reduced rate.
6. Bombay and Aden Contract was granted after negociation, but
effected a great saving to the Exchequer.
7. The Australian Contract was competed for in 1852, in 1856,
in 1859, and 1865.
As the amount of work has increased, so has the rate of payment
decreased. The Company performed 186,912 miles of Postal Service
per annum, east of Suez, under the first India and China Contract,
namely, from 1844 to 1853, and an average of 861,445 miles per annum


(exclusive of Ihe Australian and Mauritius Lines) from 1853 to 1866,
under the second Contract.
The mileage rate for these two periods stands as follows :
The first India and China Contract (1844 to
1853) was paid for at 17s Id per mile.
The second (1853 to 1866) was first taken at . 6s 2d
and has been since reduced to 5s 5d
The first portion of the Bombay Service, namely,
between Bombay and Aden, distance 79,872
miles per annum, was taken, in 1854, at . 6s 2d
The extension of this Service to Suez increased
the distance to 142,656 miles per annum, and
reduced the rate to 4s 2d
And the subsequent arrangements in the Mediter-
ranean brought the payment for the complete
fortnightly Line, now existing, down to the
average of . . . .* , . 2s 7d
The Australian Service between Galle and
Sydney was paid for, from 1861 to 1865, at 21s 5d
The same Service was taken in 1865 at . . . 19s Od
And the Directors have offered to double it for
a sum that would reduce the rate to . . 13s 6d
Not only have these constant abatements in cost been effected, but
whenever opportunity offered, measures were adopted by the Govern-
ment to open the Services to public competition, while (especially in
1852) the Lines were split up into sections, with a view to create that
rivalry and division of interest which is supposed by some to be essential
to the protection of the public.
The Directors hold, on the other hand, that it has been of the
greatest advantage to the public that the performance of these Services
has remained in the hands of the same Contractors, and that the com-
munity have greatly benefitted by the failure of the scheme for their
sub-division, because the Company, being possessed of the means in ships,
agencies, docks, coal depots, &c., &c., have been able to double a Line
for much less than a double payment, or to extend it in length for far
less than the mileage rate paid for the original distance, as seen above.
Let it be supposed for a moment that the five sections into which the


Mail Services with the East were divided in 1852 had been assigned
to five separate contractors, or even to three.
As a first and inevitable result, the number of Steamers required
for the efficient working the Lines so divided, would have been at least
in the proportion of four to three as compared with the total number
sufficient for performing the whole Service under one contract.
Each Contractor must have provided his running ships and his reserve
ships, his independent agencies, establishments, coal depots, docks,
wharves, and factories; expenses would thus have been doubled and
trebled, and these expenses must in the end have been borne by the
public, or have led to the ruin of the Contractors.
Numerous cases could be cited to prove that after the occurrence of
an accident a detention of Mails, passengers and cargo, and all the
contingent evils, both public and private, have been averted by the
judicious measures of the Company’s Agents in temporarily removing a
vessel from one station, or one Line, to another. On many such
occasions the service must have broken down, for a time, if unity of
control and interest had not existed.
In order to attain the result anticipated by the advocates of this
partition system, the several Contractors must maintain a constant
competition in rates of passage money and freight, and otherwise
bid against each other for the favour of the public. It is idle to
imagine that such a state of things would continue, the stronger Con-
ractors would overcome the weaker, and the public would soon cease to
derive the advantage supposed to have been created.
The Mail Service with the East, as carried on by the Peninsular
and Oriental Compary, differs entirely from that with any other part
of the world. Its three principal termini, Sydney, Shanghai, and
Calcutta, are distant respectively 10,398 miles, 8,999 miles, and 6,483
miles from Marseilles, the terminal port on the Continent, while,
if the distance be computed to Southampton, the terminal port in
England, 1,473 miles must be added. (See Map in the Appendix.)
A Mail Steamer leaves each of these distant termini at a date cal-
culated to bring them simultaneously to Point de Galle ; the distances
traversed by these vessels (taking the ports of departure in the same
order), are respectively 5,230 miles, 3,831 miles, and 1,315 miles. The
weather experienced by each is of a different character ; the wind and
currents that favour one obstruct the other, but the regularity of the
Service, nevertheless, depends on the attainment of the same rate of


Shanghai to Hong-Kong
by the “ Aden ’’
870
Foochow to Hong-Kong
by the “ Formosa ” —
510
Hong-Kong to Galle
by the “ Northam ” ...
... 3,031
Sydney to Galle
by the “Bombay” ...
... 5,230
Calcutta to Suez
by the “ Bengal ”
... 4,757
Alexandria to Marseilles
by the “ Delta ”
... 1,478
Alexandria to Southampton
by the “Massilia” ...
... 2,951
19,867
LAND JOURNEY. MILES
Suez to Alexandria
248
Marseilles to London
734
982
speed by each. From Point de Galle the three Mails are carried in
one Steamer to Suez, and at Alexandria they are again divided between
the Steamers for Marseilles and Southampton.
The Japan and local China Service is not taken into account in the
foregoing programme, but when that is done each delivery in London
of the Mails from Calcutta, Japan, China, Australia, and intermediate
places, involves the employment of no less than eight steamships,
and the performance of 19,867 miles by sea and 982 miles by land, as
shown by the following statement, the example taken being the com-
bined Mail delivered on the 13th ultimo (one day before the Con-
tract date).*
XT WAS CONVEYED FROM MILES.
Yokohama to Shanghai by the “ Singapore ” 1,040
20,849
For the outward Service all this machinery has to be reversed.
The Postmaster-General, in his annual Eeport for 1863, paid a just
tribute to the regularity of the Service under these difficulties, and
stated :—“ Several instances have occurred of remarkable punctuality
“ in the delivery of Mails conveyed over great distances, even when
“ such punctuality was dependent upon packets arriving at a point of
“junction by different routes. Among them was the following ; —first,
“ the arrival of the Mails, via Marseilles, despatched from Sydney, New
“ South Wales, distant nearly 13,000 miles, on the 22nd of September—
# Since the above was in type, another combined Mail has arrived in London,
namely, on the 11th instant (twa days before the Contract time).


“ from Calcutta, distant 8,000 miles, on the 10th of October—from
“ Shanghai, distant upwards of 11,000 miles, on the 19th—and from
“ Hong-Kong, distant upwards of 10,000 miles, on the 27th of September.
“ These Mails were all due in London on the 13th of November, at
“ midnight, and they arrived one hour and ten minutes before the time.”
This is no solitary case, for if the Postmaster-General’s calculations
had been based on days instead of hours, it would have been shown
that during the year 1862 the combined monthly India, China and
Australian Mails had been delivered outwards on eight occasions out
of twelve, and homewards on nine occasions out of twelve, either before
or on the days on which they were due, and the same would apply to
later years.
In the performance of one of these complete trips, mails, passengers,
and cargo are delivered and received at eighteen ports ; and are
transferred from ship to ship five times ; yet when any irregu-
larity takes place, the favourite form of criticism is a comparison
with Services which consist of a direct run of 3,000 miles across the
Atlantic. It has been asserted that the navigation on the Lines worked
by the Company is easy as compared with that of the Atlantic ; but
what are the facts ? Set aside the difficulties arising from the complex
character of the work and the number of junctions to be effected,
and look at the navigation only—a fine-weather season is unknown
to the P. and 0. Co., and consequently a fine weather voyage
throughout is very rarely, if ever, experienced,—if the India and
China seas are calm during the European winter, the vessels are
subjected to the most violent weather in the Bay of Biscay and in the
Mediterranean, If the Bay of Biscay and the Mediterranean are calm in
the European summer, monsoons prevail in the India and China seas,
and it is at the same time winter in Australia, the weather on the coast
of that country being then equal in violence to any known in the
Atlantic.
The two long stretches between King George’s Sound, in Australia,
and Galle, and between Galle and Aden combine all the difficulties of
the Atlantic voyages, while the navigation of the Red Sea, the China
seas, the coasts of Ceylon and Australia, presents dangers in the shape
of reefs, rocks, headlands, currents, cyclones, &c., which are infinitely
more adverse to the attainment of regularity than the gales encountered
on the open Atlantic.
Icebergs, it is true, are not met with by the P. and 0. steamers, but


this fact suggests another difficulty, which will be appreciated by
those who understand something of the working of a steam engine; they
know that much of its efficiency depends on the principle of condensation
—condensation depending of course on a constant supply of cold water.
Now the Company’s steamers in the East, during a great part of the year,
navigate an ocean of warm water, the temperature of the sea being
frequently over 90 ; the working power of the machinery is consequently
much impaired and decreased.
All these circumstances escape the attention of those who may be in-
terested in the punctual arrival of a Mail at either end of the Line,
while those who have an object to serve in disparaging the Company,
will institute a comparison between one of the least favourable of its
performances and one of the most favourable of the runs across the
Atlantic, and tauntingly tell the Directors “ to take a lesson from those
“of the Cunard or West India services.”
A volume could be filled with extracts from newspapers containing
denunciations of the Company in the matter of the speed of their
ships, and on no subject has more misrepresentation been put forward.
A case extracted from that able and popular journal, the Pall Mall
Gazette, may serve as an illustration :—On the 13th August last, an
“East India Merchant” wrote to the Editor to “call attention to the
“ manner in which our Indian Mail Service is carried on, and to the
“ inconvenience to which he and others are subject by the non-arrival
“of the Mails at or, at least near, the contract dates.” He went on
to state that the Mails were due in London on the 13th August—that
he had learnt by telegraph that the P. and O. steamer “ Mongolia ” left
Calcutta on the 9th July, and reached Suez on the 9th August—that,
“taking the distance from Calcutta to Suez, it gave a speed of a trifle
“ under seven miles an hour. How long,” he added, “ would such a
“ rate between this and America be tolerated. It is a notorious fact
“ that the new vessels of the P. and O. Company are beaten by the
“ vessels of the French Company,” and concluded by asking “if the
“ penalties contained in the contract are ever enforced.”
The Directors are well persuaded that the Editor would have given
equal publicity to a reply to the letter, but an attack of this nature
cannot always be completely refuted at the moment of its appearance :
the arrival of accurate information has to be awaited, and by the time
it becomes available the explanation would appear out of date. In the


case in question, the Directors could have pointed out at once, that the
“Merchant,” in giving the “Mongolia” a rate of seven miles an hour
between Calcutta and Suez, made her to be at sea all the time, and had
not allowed a single hour for stoppages at the intermediate ports. They
could have stated that the date for the delivery of the August Mail in
London under the contract was, not the 13th, but the 18th of the month ;
/
but it was only a week afterwards that they could have reported the
fact that the Mail was actually delivered on the 18th.
On the other two points, their answer would have been that the
vessels of the P, and O. are not beaten by the vessels of the French
Company (see averages further on), and that all the penalties incurred
by the P. and O. Company, in the performance of their contracts, are
rigorously enforced.
An average specimen of the style of criticism indulged in by the
Indian press is afforded more recently, and, strange to say, after many
of the facts elicited by the recent Parliamentary Committee were
accessible. The article referred to appeared in the Madras Athenaeum ,
of 14th Sept., and was headed “ The P. and O. Company.” It was not
written in an ill-natured spirit, on the contrary, the writer starts,by
giving the Company credit for “the business-like perseverance with
“ which they gradually overcame difficulties of no mean proportions, and
“ the regularity with which, through storms and coral reefs, they have
“ generally conveyed our bodies and our mails ” He then adopts a
bantering style, bestows on the Company the title of the “ Old Man of
“ the Seas,” who “ with low speed, high rates and mediocre vessels,
“ has got on our backs, and thinks we'cannot move him,” who purposely
keeps the speed of his fast steamers down at a “ comparatively creeping
“ pace,” who “ loiters in harbours,” and otherwise misconducts himself.
The “ Old Man ” is told he must mend his ways in this respect, and his
monitor goes on to say, “ Next in importance to that of speed, is the
“ question of cost. When first this grand enterprise was started, large
“ expenses could only be covered by heavy passage and freight rates ;
but now, that coal is to be had at Galle or Aden for much the same
“ price as in London, and that Suez is easily supplied by the railway,
“ there is no excuse whatever for keeping up the rates at such a
“ prohibitory figure.”
It is difficult to imagine the sources from which the publishers of
such extravagant statements derive their information, and what good


purpose they can hope to effect by giving currency to articles con-
taining inaccuracies which must be patent to nine-tenths of their
readers. Everybody who knows anything on the subject knows that
the Company’s Steamers do “ run at something better than eight or
nine miles the hour;” that they do not, and are not permitted “to loiter
in port,” but the mis-statement which caps all, and which in itself
answers the whole argument of the writer, is that regarding the price
of coals, for instead of coal being now procurable at Galle, Aden and
Suez, “ at much the same prices as in London,” the prices at those
stations were never higher than now, and those prices are, on the
average, three times as high as prices in London, and likely to con-
tinue so. This mis-statement involves a few hundred thousand pounds
per annum only !
The writer further observes, “ it is outrageous that we should be made
“ to pay three times the proper sum for passages and freights, simply
“ because we are the wrong side of Suez.”
Steam navigation on the “ wrong side of Suez ” is cai’ried on at
nearly three times the cost of similar operations on the right side, but
the Company, as stated elsewhere (page 49), do not charge treble or
even double rates, but a scale which will stand comparison with those
of any sound steam company in existence.
Passing from India to Australia.
A short time back, there was considerable irregularity in the delivery
of the outward Mails in the Colonies. A succession of unfortunate
accidents threw the line out of gear for some time, and the local com-
munities, naturally disappointed and inconvenienced, gave vent to their
feelings in no measured terms. When called upon by the Home Govern-
ment for explanation, the Directors were able to take the voyages
one by one, and to show, conclusively, that each case of delay arose
from unavoidable accident, or from circumstances over which they had
no control; and when, upon examination of cases separately, it can be
proved that the Company are entitled to acquittal upon each, the
Directors consider that injustice is committed when they are, without
enquiry into causes, condemned by those who combine exceptional cases
to establish a general charge against the Company.
It appears to be the belief of newspaper writers in India and Australia,
that the average rate of speed attained by the Cunard steamers is 13
and 14 knots per hour, and the general rate of the P. and 0. steamers


has, with equal inaccuracy, been set down at 8 knots. The Company
are also constantly twitted with the alleged superiority of the West
India and French steamers in point of speed.
The performances of the steamers of the Cunard, West India, and
Messagerie Companies are so good in reality that the Directors of those
undertakings can scarcely feel complimented when detractors of the
P. and 0. Company endow their ships with fictitious qualities, and
give them credit for a very high average rate of speed because that
high rate has been once or twice attained by a particular vessel under
exceptional circumstances.
In dealing with this as with the subject of passage rates, the Directors
are not unmindful of the saying that “ comparisons are odious,” but
they are specially odious when made on false premises, and as this has
been done to the prejudice of the P. and 0. Company, they feel assured
that the Directors of the other services referred to will not misunder-
stand their object when they make the following use of the materials at
their command for the purpose of arriving at more correct results :
In the cases of the Royal Mail and French Companies the averages
are reproduced from their own recent reports ; in the case of the Cunard
Company the average had been calculated upon a Parliamentary return
extending from January, 1862, to April, 1866, or four years and a
quarter, the distances from Liverpool to the American Ports being
those adopted by the Pbst Office, and the time of stay at the inter-
mediate port (Queenstown) being deducted. The distances are taken
from the same source, and the stoppages are dealt with in a similar
manner in computing the averages of speed of the P. and 0. Company’s
steamers given further on.
The following appears to be the average of the Cunard steamers :
Liverpool and Boston Line.
Knots Fath.
109 voyages outwards, average speed
112 « homewards «
9 2
10 2
Liverpool and New York Line.
Knots Fath.
11 1
109 voyages outwards, average speed
113 „ homewards
11 7


It will be remarked that on the Boston Line a difference of one knot,
and on the New York Line a difference of 6-Bths of a knot, exists
between the average of speed outwards and homewards, and this proves
that even the magnificent and full-powered steamers employed in those
services are affected by the circumstance that the prevailing winds of
the Atlantic are from west to east.
The official returns also exhibit another result —a considerable differ-
ence exists between the highest and lowest rate of speed recorded for
a voyage, this difference being brought about by adverse weather as
regards the slowest run, and by ffworing winds as regards the quickest.
If a difference of two days exists between the duration of a fine and
rough weather voyage in the run of 3,000 miles across the Atlantic,
the same rate of difference applied to this Company’s complete voyages
of 15,000 to 20,000 miles would account for any variation that can
be discovered between the most and least successful of their perform-
ances, accidents, of course, being excepted in both cases.
The average speed of the Royal Mail Company’s Steamers was stated
in their last report as follows:
Knots. Fath.
Between Southampton and the West Indies . 10 5
// // // Brazils ..95
The average speed of the steamers of the
French Company, and finer vessels do not
exist, is stated by their Directors in the
Report dated 10th June, 1865, to have
been, for the two previous years 9 4
“ which,” they add, “ is, for a general average, rather high.”
The average performances of the P. and 0. Company's steamers, from
the commencement of 1862 to the present time, are as follows :
Knots. Fath.
On the Australian Line ..... 9 7
>/ Calcutta and Suez Line ... 9 7
// Bombay and Suez Line ... 9 2
// Southampton and Alexandria, and
Marseilles and Alexandria Lines 10 0


It is constantly assumed that a postal contract is all profit, and that
it confers the character and advantages of monopolists on those who
hold it, whereas the execution of it frequently entails losses, risks, delays
and annoyances from which ordinary traders and trading companies are
exempt.
That the execution of a Postal Service may be attended with loss, is
exemplified by the fact that the Company have recently had to abandon
the Contract which they held for the Line between Mauritius and
Suez, notwithstanding the circumstances that it was paid for at the
liberal rate of 8s 2d per mile, and that it was worked by two very
inexpensive vessels. It was at no time a very profitable Line, but after
the Messageries Imperiales Company entered upon it, it became a losing
one, and although that Company are now in sole possession of the
traffic, and receive a subsidy of 22s 6d per mile, they state, in their
last report, that if the improvement on their ludo-China Lines is not so
decided as in the general proceeds of the enterprise, “ the fact must be
“ more especially attributed to the opening of the Mauritius Line,”
which therefore appears to be a losing concern with them, as it was
with the P. & 0. Company.
A more exacting and uncompromising document than a transmarine
Postal Service Contract does not exist. There is no rest for those who
undertake it, and carry it out faithfully. The season for passengers
may be slack : the transmission of specie may have ceased for a time ;
shipments of cargo may have fallen off in consequence of commercial
difficulties, but the Mail Steamer must be ready to the day and hour,
and the expenses attending her navigation are more likely to be aug-
mented than decreased by the failure of the usual sources of revenue.
The last two years have exemplified this ; the Company’s general
trade has been exceptionally dull, and the cost of coals, stores, labour,
&c. has been exceptionally high.
The Directors of the Messageries Imperiales Company had occasion
to refer to this part of the question in their last report to their share-
holders (a translation of which appeared in the Economist of the
23rd June, 1866). They had been denounced as monopolists (as the
P. and 0. and other English Companies have been), because they held
a postal contract with the Government, and received a “ subvention”
from the State ; they put the case as follows :
“ The object of the subvention is not to guarantee the success of the


“ commercial speculation, but the complete and permanent execution of
“ the postal service. The subvention is merely a payment for service
“ rendered to the State.
“ The carrying of the Mails requires speed and regularity. It can
“ only be accomplished by the aid of able officers and the most perfect
“ appliances. Now all this talent, speed, and regularity, cannot be
“ secured at a low rate of payment. The expenses of a service having
“ to satisfy all these requirements are far greater than those of ordinary
“ navigation, even when under the most favourable circumstances. No
“ instance has yet occurred of the regular trading profits being sufficient
“to cover the additional expenses inherent to the postal service.
“The absolute regularity is not only an obstacle to the realisation of
“profits ; it may cause serious losses by compelling departures in all
“ weathers, during political or commercial crises, or when an intense
“ epidemic is raging. This year the cholera has cost us l,500,000f.”
Notwithstanding that the rate of this Government subsidy is four
times as much per mile as that received by the P. and 0. Company, the
Directors further declare, in the same Report, that “ When they take
“ into consideration the numerous and onerous charges imposed by the
“ requirements of the service of the State, on navigation in those dis-
“ tant waters, they are justified in asserting that the subvention you
“ receive has been prudently and equitably calculated. It is far from
“ being excessive. It is only sufficient so long as th'e commercial
“ traffic produces the larger portion of your receipts.”
The Mail Contract imposes a very heavy penalty for not having a
Steamer ready to start to her day from the terminal and principal
ports.
During the last twenty-five years the Company have never once
incurred that penalty, although since the commencement of the existing
India and China Contracts, they have had to start on those Lines alone
upwards of 4,000 Steamers.
The enormous bulk of the Mails has now become a matter for serious
consideration. In the early, and even in some of the current contracts


of the Company, the Mails were described as “ Her Majesty’s Mails, (in
which “ designation all despatches and bags of letters are agreed to be
“ comprehended).” The Directors understood the mails to mean letters,
despatches and newspapers only, and tendered in conformity; but since
that time the “ book and pattern posts ” have been established, and in
more recent contracts the designation clause runs thus : —“ All Her
“ Majesty’s Mails (in which term ‘ Mails ’ all boxes, bags or packets of
“ letters, newspapers, books or printed papers, and all other articles trans-
“ missible by the Post, without regard either to the place to which they
“ may be addressed, or to that in which they may have originated, and
“ all empty bags, empty boxes, and other stores and articles used or
“ to be used in carrying on the Post Office Service, which shall be sent
“ by or to or from the Post Office, are agreed to be comprehended)
“which shall at any time and from time to time by the Postmaster-
“ General or any of his officers or agents, be required to be conveyed.”
Notwithstanding this enlargement of the designation the Directors
have never refused to carry the articles comprised in it, although
clearly not contemplated in those Contracts which contain the more
limited definition of the term Mails, and which are still current.
Her Majesty’s Postmaster-General has started as a cantor, both by land
and sea, of articles of all kinds, and the arrangement has operated in a
two-fold manner to the prejudice of the Company. The number and
bulk of the Mail boxes have been greatly increased, the Mail rooms
have been found too small, and the Company have lost the freight
previously paid by the public for the conveyance of the very books,
parcels and samples now shipped as Mails by the Post Office.
From the year 1858 to the present time careful records have been
kept of the number of boxes, with their weight and measurement,
comprising each Mail shipped by the Company’s Steamers. A tabular
statement extending over the years 1864-1865 excited much surprise
when submitted in evidence by the Company to the Parliamentary Com-
mittee of 1866 (see Appendix to Blue Book, pages 570 and 571). The
table has since been made up for six years. It is too long for production
here, but it will be sufficient to take the first month of each year to
support the foregoing statements.


COMPARATIVE STATEMENT OF MAILS SHIPPED AT SOUTHAMPTON.
Number
of
Pkges.
Date [ Ship
Where for
of Weight [Measurement
Tons cwts. qrs lbs.
Tons ft. in.
16 36 0
11 13 10
65 4 6
8 14 10
Jan. 4
Calcutta and China .
Bombay
7 12 2 24
5 1 3 16
30 5 1 8
3 13 3 24
Ellora
Ceylon
Delta.
C Calcutta, China, Aus-1
i tralia and Mauritius j
Bombay
Jan. 4
Calcutta and China .
Bombay. . . . .
7 15 2
17 10 10
11 14 8
81 14 8
8 21 10
Ellora .
Ceylon .
Mooltan
5 1 1 20
37 18 2 8
3 15 2 12
( Calcutta, China, Aus-1
(. tralia and Mauritius 3
Bombay
Jan. 4
Calcutta and China .
Bombay
5 19 3 24
53 0 8
37 12 0 20
3 18 2 24
13 10 10
11 21 8
80 28 10
8 33 8
Massilia
Eipon. .
Delta. .
C Calcutta, China, Aus-
\ tralia and Mauritius )
Bombay
Jan. 4
Calcutta and China .
Bombay
7 7 0 18
5 13 1 4
44 18 2 8
49 2 8
16 8 6
Syria .
Eipon.
Poonah
12 28 0
3" Calcutta, China, Aus-1
t tralia and Mauritius j
Bombay
1,090
96 14 0
10 1 4
Jan. 4
Delhi.
Syria .
Poonah
Eipon.
Calcutta and China .
Bombay. . , . .
8 2 0 24
4 13 0 0
45 11 2 8
3 13 0 0
18 26 0
13 7 0
( Calcutta, China, Aus-1
i tralia and Mauritius )
Bombay
1,098
99 0 0
10 13 8
-lan. 4
Massilia
Poonah.
Calcutta and China .
Bombay
8 17 020
4 6 3 14
19 18 10
10 36 0
( 'Calcutta, China, Aus- }
( tralia and Mauritius )
Bombay
Eipon.
1,271
52 7 3
5 12 1
24 112
16 2
Tanjore.
12 22 4
The number of packages of Mails shipped at Marseilles by the Steamers corresponding with those
leaving Southampton on the 30th of each month, for the six years included in the above return, has
been on the average 477.
It will be seen that the number of packages shipped by the Steamer which left
Southampton on the 20th January, 1861, was 733
The number shipped by the corresponding Steamer from Marseilles was 443
* 1,176
The number by the Steamer which left Southampton on the 20th January, 1866, was 1,271
The number shipped by the corresponding Steamer from Marseilles was 585
1,856
Increase in number of Packages 680
or 58 per cent, in six years.
The combined Marseilles and Southampton Mails shipped at, or
brought to, Suez, would thus form a cargo for a small ship.


The mode in which what is called the cost of the Mail Service is paid
for, gives rise to much misconception. The House of Commons, in
Committee of Supply, is asked every year to vote so much for the “Post
Office Packet Service.” Last Session the vote was for £821,164.
The consequence is, a large majority of the public believe that they
are taxed to that extent for the maintenance of the Service, and repre-
sentatives of the agricultural interest within the walls of Parliament
have been heard to complain that their constituents are compelled to
contribute to the support of enterprises useful only to the commercial
part of the community, while it rarely happens that the representative
of the Government on the Treasury Bench reminds those who oppose
the vote, that the greater part of the money comes back in the shape of
postage.
The whole sum is charged by the Postmaster-General against the
revenue of the department in his yearly account, and notwithstanding
this, the Post Office showed a profit for the year 1865 of £1,482,522.
(See 12th Report of the Postmaster-General, dated 1866.)
The real state of the case as between the Mail Companies and the
public would be more fairly represented if the House of Commons were
asked to vote the difference only between the sum paid to the Con-
tractors and the postage received ; and there does not, in fact, appear
to be any reason why Parliament should be applied to for a separate
vote for the money required to meet this particular item of the Post
Office expenditure (after the Contracts are once agreed to by it and the
Government), seeing that it is not asked to vote separately the cost of
conveyance of Mails by railway (£763,462); the salaries of officials
and letter-carriers; or any other sums which make up the expenditure
of the department, which are all included in one vote, amounting last
session to £2,436,016.
The Post Office has of late years exhibited a strong desii’e to
take rank among the revenue-producing departments of the Govern-
ment, and it struggles hard to show a good balance of profit at the 6nd
of the year. That balance for the year 1865 amounted, as stated above,
to £1,482,522. The late Postmaster-General, Lord Stanley of Alderley,
defends this policy in his Annual Report (for 1866) in the following
words :
“ go long as the net revenue of the Post Office continued to be either
“ a little less or a little more than half-a-million, the statement, su


“ frequently made, that the Post Office ought not to be a source of
“ revenue, did not demand immediate or careful examination, but under
“ the strong probability that this net revenue may, at no very distant
“ date, attain the proportions which I have anticipated for it, it is well
“ to point out that it would be difficult, if not impossible, to devise any
“ mode of raising a public income less burdensome or more equitable
“ in its operation than that which exacts no payment without giving
“ a service in return, and which is not open to the appellation of
“ a tax.”
This is no place to discuss the question whether the Post Office
ought or ought not to endeaVour, as a department of the Government,
to emulate the “ Excise,” and the “ Stamps,” or the “Income Tax
but it should be borne in mind that the Mail Companies, like the
Post Office, “ exact no payment without giving a service in return,”
and it has frequently been made apparent that the mode in which the
vote is taken keeps the public very much in the dark upon the im-
portant fact that the ocean Postal Service is nearly paid for in postage
stamps, and would perhaps be so paid entirely on many Lines —those
worked by the P. and 0. Company particularly—if the postage were
given to the Contractors as payment for their services.
As stated at page 17, the Commission of 1853 established the fact,
that while the Company received £199,600 per annum under the India,
China and Australian Contract, the annual gross postage reached
£188,466; from this sum £35,902 was deducted as “repayable to
Foreign countries,” and “for British and Foreign Inland rate,” leaving
“ the difference between the subsidy and estimated earnings of the
Packets ” £47,036 only.
The returns put before the Committee of 1866 exhibited an increase
of this “difference” or “loss,” it being therein computed at £82,000
per annum, but if was elicited during the examination of Mr. F. Hill,
that in the interval the postage of the half-ounce letter via {Southamp-
ton had been reduced from Is 3d to 6d, and that via Marseilles from
2s lid to lOd (see replies to questions 96 and 97), thus affording the
strongest ground for the assumption that, if the public had not received
the boon of a very large reduction of postage, the service would long
ago have been self-supporting.
One important item (and it is precisely that which concerns the
P. and O. Company) appears to have been overlooked in making this
statement, inasmuch as the tables show a large decrease in expenditure


When before the Committee of 1866 the able Assistant Secretaiy of
the Post Office, Mr. F. Hill, always referred to this diffei’ence between
the cost of a particular Line and its yield in postage as so much “ loss.”
No exception can of course be taken to this mode of dealing with the sub-
ject in a purely departmental point of view; but the Government and
the community at large would probably attach some value to a Service
such as that now existing with the East, apart from the consideration
that the Company undertake the functions of letter carriers as part
of their general business. (See also extract from the Report of the
Committee of 1853 at page 17J.
The opinions of the Committee of 1866 in this matter are expressed
in the following paragraph :
“21. Your Committee cannot assent to the doctrine, that interests so
“ important from every point of view, whether political, social, or com-
“ raercial, as those which connect the United Kingdom with the largest
“and most valuable possessions of the Crown, should be prejudiced by
“ an insufficient Postal Service, because the establishment of an efficient
“ service might leave an apparent loss of no great magnitude to be borne
“by the two countries. They submit that a question of profit or loss,
“ Avithin reasonable bounds, is a consideration entitled to little weight in
“ the case of so important a Postal Service as that between England and
“ India. They concur in the views expressed on this subject, in a letter
“ addressed by the India Office to the Assistant Secretary to the Post
“ Office, on the sth October, 1865, in Avhich it Avas said, 4 Sir Charles
“ ‘ Wood cannot, hoAvever, regard the question as one merely affecting
“ 4 the charge on the Imperial revenues. It has been the perception of
44 4 the bearing of increased postal communication on the wealth and
44 4 progress of a country that has induced statesmen of late years to
44 4 consent to fiscal sacrifices for the purpose of obtaining it. There can
44 4 be no doubt that increased postal communication Avith India implies
44 4 increased relations Avith that country, increased commerce, increased
44 4 inA r estment of English capital, increased settlement of energetic
44 4 middle-class Englishmen ; and from all these sources the wealth and
44 4 prosperity of England are more greatly increased than that of
“‘lndia.’ ”
Reverting to the Postmaster-General’s report for 1866, he states
(page 36): —“The foregoing tables show that, with a vieAv to meet the
44 just requirements of the public for increased accommodation all parts
44 of Post expenditure have been augmented.”


under the head of “ Conveyance of Mails by Packets under Contract
“ with the Admiralty and Post Office,” for
In 1864 this item stands at ... ... £900,610 0 0
In 1865 „ „ 796,399 0 0
Decrease £104,211 0 0
After stating that the net revenue of the department was rather less
than £600,000 in 1856, and that it bordered closely upon £1,500,000
in 1865, the Postmaster-General “declares, both for his predecessors
“ and himself, that this satisfactory result has not been brought about
“by any special effort to produce a revenue from the Post Office.” The
experience of the Directors as contractors for the conveyance of the
Mails by sea does not enable them to endoi'se this declaration, and they
have shown above that the Postmaster-General has entered into direct
competition with them as carriers of parcels for the public, and has so
diverted much freight from the holds to the mail rooms of the steamers.
In the returns placed before the Committee of 1866, by Mr. F. Hill,
the proceeds of the “ Book Post ” alone on the Company’s Lines (with-
out including Australia) are set down at £8,702 for the year ending
31 st March last.
The Passenger Service
If the mail service keeps the Company more constantly before the
public than any other branch of its operations,-its passenger service is
even more important to a large section of the community. It would be
difficult to find a family among the gentry of the United Kingdom
whose name is not represented in turn among the travellers to and from
the East by the Company’s steamers.
The number of passengers carried during the last 12 years has
averaged about —
Ist Class ... ... ... 16,000
2nd « ... ... ... ... 3,000 f
The army, the navy, the church and commerce have each furnished


their contingent, but it happens rather unfortunately for the Company
that very few of these passengers travel by their own choice and free
will, at least on the outward voyage. There is, consequently, a greater
tendency to find fault than is met with on Lines frequented by travellers
bent on pleasure and amusement.
The Company have not to deal with those who have made up a purse
for a holiday and a run abroad, but with those who are engaged in the
real battle of life, and who struggle to husband their resources ac-
cordingly.
It is scarcely probable that a ticket which costs from £BO to £l2O
would be regarded as cheap by the purchaser, but while the question
of passenger fares is one on which the Company are constantly assailed,
especially by the Indian and Australian press, there is no point on
which the Directors are better able to defend themselves.
They can shew that they have fully kept pace with the times in
reducing their rates at different periods ; that their rates will bear
comparison with those of other Companies ; and that they have con-
stantly added to the comforts of their passengers on the voyage.
On opening the Line to Calcutta in 1843, the cost of a passage from
Southampton was fixed at £l4O, and the charge of the Egyptian
Government for the transit was £l2 10s, making a total of £152 10s.
Since that period abatements have several times been made, and the
cost of the same passage is now £99 10s.
On starting the Australian Line the fare from Southampton to Sydney
or Melbourne was fixed at £l5O, transit through Egypt £7. The fare
from Southampton to Sydney is now £l2O, transit through Egypt
£4 10s.
It is the fashion to apply the words extortionate, exorbitant, and
other uncomplimentary figures of speech to the rates as they now stand ;
assertions are made that the Company charge two or three times as
much as other Companies, and some writers have attempted to prove
this by figures. The Atlantic Lines are usually selected for such com-
parisons. The Directors have, however, no objection to stand the test
of a fair examination of the respective rates.
It must be borne in mind that, although the Cunard and West India
Companies are paid a much higher mileage rate for the Postal Service
than the P. and O. Company, the cost of navigation in the Eastern Seas
is more than double that of the Atlantic:—notwithstanding this, a com-
parative table of passengers exhibits the following result:—


Cunard Co. —
Liverpool to New York
, 3,012....
.. £26 2d
i Exclusive
' of Wines,
Royal Mail Co. —
Southampton to St. Thomas
3,646....
.. 38 10s 2i
( Spirits,
/ Beer, &c.
« Kio de Janeiro
5,105....
.. 45 2d >
Bates of Passage Money goer Mile
Peninsular and Oriental Co. —
Passage Per
Distance. Money. Mile.
Southampton to Alexandria 2,951 £3O > .
) Inclusive
„ Bombay 5,923 85 3£ f 0 f Wines,
„ Calcutta 7,708 95 3 ( Spirits,
„ Sydney 11,623 120 2J ' eer > &c -
of Wines,
Spirits,
Beer, &c.
The plan most frequently adopted by the Company’s assailants, in order
to give a colouring of truth to their assertions, is to take the fare between
two intermediate stations in the Eastern Seas, and to compare it with the
through fare from Liverpool to New York or from Southampton to a
port in the West Indies. It is not surprising that by this process of
calculation, the result may appear to condemn the P. &O. Company,
but the Directors claim that a through fare should be compared with a
through fare, or an intermediate fare with an intermediate fare, inas-
much as rates for short distances, whether by land or water, by rail or
steamer, are always charged higher in proportion than those from
terminus to terminus.
Another plausible mode of attack is also commonly adopted. The
distance between two ports is ignored, but the number of days con-
sumed on the voyage from one to the other is taken, and the passenger
discovers, as he thinks, a great grievance, in the fact that a calculation
of the charge for his passage gives a quotient of £3 or £4 per diem
for the time he is onboard the steamer. Is it not monstrous, he writes
“ that I should be thus victimised when I can live in the best hotel in
the world for less than half the money,” entirely forgetting the circum-
stance that while he lives and is fed on board the steamer, he is con-
veyed from one place to another, at an enormous cost to the carriers.
It is a circumstance more curious perhaps than pertinent that the
rate of travelling per mile by an express or first-class railway train
exceeds that of travelling by an ocean steamer, notwithstanding the
fact that the owners of the steamers feed their passengers into the
bargain.
Following the comparison of modern travelling by land and sea one


step further, the introduction of railways and the steam locomotive has
annihilated the coaches ; but the steam ship has not in like manner
acquired a monopoly of the seas ; the sailing ships—the coaches and
waggons of the ocean—are more numerous than ever, and those who
clamour for low fares and cheap freights would do well to remember
that they have the option, at all times and to all places, of the less
expensive if slower means of conveyance.
The competition of the splendid sailing ships to the East Indies and
Australia has always exercised a control on the fares of the steam
companies, and tells especially on this Company’s Line to the latter colony.
The passenger traffic on the Company’s Lines is also prejudicially
affected by the climates of India and China ; the Company’s Steamers
do not, as on other Lines, at any time fill both ways; the tide of travel-
lers flows outwards in the autumn, and homeward in the spring. In
the former season the number of passengers for India, &c., is so great,
that the Company have difficulty in accommodating them, and are
sometimes charged with overcrowding the steamers, such charges not
unfrequently emanating from passengers taken at the last moment, on the
urgent representation of the imperative necessity for their jouniey, and
the assurance that they would put up with any inconvenience rather than
be left behind. At the same time of the year, the steamers in the
opposite direction are almost empty, yet a vessel of the largest class
must be sent with them, and the staff of stewards, &c., must be fully
kept up, seeing that the same ship has to receive at Suez three or four
times the number of passengers that she discharges.
The placing of extra vessels on the Line at such seasons would
appear to be an obvious remedy and a lucrative operation. The Com-
pany sometimes adopt this course, and have run two extra steamers
from Suez to Calcutta this autumn, each full of passengers ; but this
has been done to prevent disappointment to the public, and not in the
expectation of profit, for as these extra vessels had to be brought from
ports in India to Suez altogether empty, a full passage list one way will
not more than meet the expenses.
The total number of passengers of all classes (including troops)
carried by the Company’s steam ships during the period embraced in
this Report may be safely computed at over half-a-raillion ; and it is
with a feeling of deep thankfulness that the Directors are enabled to
record the fact that, of this immense number, not more than five or six
lives have been lost by wreck or casualty..


The Postal Contract takes no account of the precautions necessary
for the security of life and property. It is true that permission is given
to the Mail Agent on board the steamer to sanction stopping or a
deviation from her course, “to assist any vessel in distress, or to save
human life,” but it contains no word, either of recommendation or
warning, that care should be taken of the Mail ship herself. Although
half the work of the Contract is performed at night, the rate of speed
must be the same as in the day time, and this whether the vessel may
be navigating crowded waters or the open ocean.
It must not, however, be supposed for a moment that the Company’s
steamers are run with regard only to the obligations of the Mail
Contract. The Directors make the safe and efficient navigation of the
ships the first duty of their commanders, and to this may very frequently
be traced delays, for which the unthinking find no solution but lack of
speed in the vessels, or indifference on the part of the Company. It
frequently happens during the winter seasons that the steamers in the
Bay of Biscay and on the coasts of Australia have to lie to during a
gale ahead, and even to steer in a direction opposite to their destination
for a time, during a violent gale ; and the Directors prefer to pay the
penalty that may arise from a loss of time incurred in consequence of
such precautions, than to exert the power of the steamers at the risk of
life and property.
The Company have not escaped, and the Proprietors must not expect
to escape, the casualties incidental to the navigation of their large fleet,
and the performance of nearly 1,500,000 nautical miles in the year; but
the condition and results of the underwriting account are in themselves a
proof that these accidents have been considerably below an average.
It would have cost the Company £6 6s per cent, to have insured
their fleet at Lloyd’s, but since the Shareholders became their own
underwriters, in 1848, a percentage of 25s has covered all their losses.
The Transport Service.
The Company have at different periods rendered most important
public services in the transport of troops, under circumstances of


Officers
.
1,800
Men
,
. 60,000
Horses
15,000
emergency. The first occasion was on the outbreak of a rebellion in
Ceylon, in 1848, which is thus referred to in a letter from Major-General
Smoult—“ Immediately on the news of the outbreak arriving in Colombo,
“ his Excellency the Governor and myself at once felt the inadequacy
“of our force to furnish competent reinforcements to the disturbed
“ districts, and the urgent necessity of applying to the Pi’esidency of
“Madras for assistance. The steamer “Lady Mary Wood” being at
“ the time at Point de Galle, and ready to proceed to sea, was forthwith
“ despatched to Madras. His Excellency addressed the Governor of
“ Madras, and I wrote to Sir George Berkeley, to the effect that one
“ wing of a European regiment, together with one Native regiment
“ should be embarked with the least possible delay, and landed at
“ Trincomalee, fully equipped for the field. His Excellency’s requi-
“ sition was promptly responded to by the Madras Government, and
“on the morning of the sth inst. 200 rank and file of H.M.’s 25th
“ Regiment, under command of Brevet-Major Deacon, disembarked at
“ Trincomalee from that vessel.”
This opportune assistance was considered, at the time, to have been
the means of saving the island.
It has been already stated that, during the Crimean War, a large
number, of the Company’s ships were employed as transports, and this
without interruption of the Mail Service, except upon the Australian
Line, as explained at page 22. The total number of troops conveyed
the Company’s vessels was —
The next services of this nature, and the most important in their
results, were undertaken on the occurrence of the mutiny in India.
Between the months of September, 1857, and June, 1858, 235 officers
and 5,171 men were transported to India by the Company’s steamers,
via Egypt. At the same time the “Madras” and the “Pottinger”
were despatched from Bombay to the Cape of Good Hope and
Mauritius respectively, and brought the 13th and 33rd Regiments
back to Bombay.
It is impossible to overrate the value of the assistance afforded in the
suppression of the mutiny by the arrival of these troops. At one time
great uneasiness and apprehension of an outbreak prevailed at Bombay,
the island and neighbourhood having been almost denuded of European


soldiers, in consequence of the number sent into the interior, where
the danger was more imminent. Competent judges have been heard
to declare that the result of the Indian mutiny would have been very
different but for the succour so received.
The Persian War took place in the year 1857, and four of the’Com-
pany’s steamers and their sailing ship “ Haddington ” were employed.
Some of the vessels so employed were under fire.
The Company’s steamers have also on many occasions been employed
in the transport of troops from one of the Indian Presidencies to another,
and to Burmah, &c. It is right to add that the Company received
liberal payment for all these services, but it cannot be contested that
the steam ships of the great Mail Companies have at different times
performed a most important part in connection with the military
operations of the country, and that the opinions and prediction of the
Committee of Inquiry of 1853, quoted at page 17, have been more than
verified.
Establishments, at home and abroad, and their cost.
There is no subject connected with the operations of the Company
that has had more anxious consideration than the ever-increasing
magnitude and expense of the great shore establishments at the more
important stations. That they are indispensable will admit of no doubt;
day by day new wants arise, and with them demands for fresh outlay.
When the Company ventured upon the introduction of steam into the
eastern seas in 1842, they found little or nothing of what was necessary
on shore; they had to take lodgings as it were for their superintend-
ents and staff, and to hire all that was wanted for the maintenance of
the ships in proper order. It was soon found that the possession of a
fleet was but one item in the essentials for carrying on the business
of a mail-carrying and trading Company. Docks, wharves, factories,
coal sheds, &c., had to be built or leased; this was, of course, foreseen ;
but the extent of such requirements, and the cost of providing them,
could only be discovered as the operations of the Company progressed.
The disastrous failure of the European and Australian Company,


and the almost immediate abandonment of their contract after trial by
the Royal Mail Company, as described at page 27, may be traced
not only to the excessive cost of steam navigation in the eastern
seas, but to the unavoidable expenditure on shore.
If fhe Directors of the first-named Company were novices, the same
cannot be said of the Directors and Managers of the Royal Mail Com-
pany, who have so successfully carried on the business of that Company
and the mail contracts with the West Indies for many years.
The latter brought all their experience to bear in framing their
estimates, and they came to the conclusion that the mail contract
granted to the former at £185,000 per annum would prove a paying
one, and agreed to take it up accordingly.
When their Shareholders were applied to, at a Special Meeting (July,
1857), for the necessary consent to “ a proposal for an amalgamation
“ of the Royal West India Mail Company with the European and
“Australian Company,” it was given almost with unanimity, and the
warnings of the two or three dissentients were met by the Chairman,
Captain Mangles, in his speech advocating the proposed amalgamation,
as follows :
“ Now, as to the probable advantage to the West India Company,
“ the Directors had not been satisfied with setting down 12s 3d, the
“ mileage rate of the contract, and calling it a good thing, but they
“ had minutely ascertained the actual results and taken the earnings of
“ the European and Australian Company’s ships as a ground-work to
“go upon.” He then went into particulars of revenue to be expected
from freight of gold and from passengers, and after allusion to the
special operation of the penalties, which he “ did not think a hard
“ bargain,” he added: “He did not view it as an alarming contract; he
“ thought it was a fair contract, and if the Directors could not carry it
“ out they ought to be ashamed of themselves.”
A practical acquaintance with the expenses, as well as the earnings
of steam navigation east of Suez very shortly led, as we have seen, to
the retirement of the West India Company from those waters; and the
Directors of the P. & 0. Company are far from considering that their
friends, the Directors of the West .India Company, were open to the
blame which the Chairman, in his sanguine view of their proposed
operations, invited in the event of their non-success.
The Messageries Imperiales Company are learning something of the
cost at which a line of steamers in the east is maintained. In their


last report they state “ that, in the seas beyond Suez, coal costs twice
“as much as in the Mediterranean ; that the price of food is triple ;
“ that a workman kept at Suez, and owing to the effect of climate,
“ doing one-third less work than at La Ciotat, costs three times as
“ much ; lastly, that a European fitter is paid 30f a day at Hong-Kong,
“ and 42f at Shanghai.”
In the early part of this Report, particulars of the Company’s shore
property were promised, and these will be best and most concisely
presented in the following form, commencing at home and working to
the extremities of the Lines.
The Company possess in
London. —Capacious Offices in their court in Leadenhall Street, all
freehold, and other Offices fronting the street, partly built on
their freehold and partly on ground held on 80 years lease.
Southampton. —Offices and Warehouses, built on land held on 75
years lease from the Corporation. All the various moveable
property, such as boats, anchors, chains, &c., necessary at a ter-
minal station ; a large stock of duplicate parts of engines and
spare machinery ; an extensive Laundry, fitted with machinery
for washing the ships’ linen ; a large stock of naval and vic-
tualling stores, &c., &c.
Gibraltar. —The coal-hulk “ Santa Anna.”
Marseilles. — A convenient and suitable Building on the Quay, for
the reception of cargo and passengers’ baggage.
Malta. —Offices and Coal Stores, held on lease, a number of barges
and lighters, and all the appliances necessary at a coaling station.
Alexandria. —Leasehold Offices and a freehold Cargo and Coal
Store. The hulk “Ariadne,” with a large stock of lighters, &c.
Cairo. —Goshen Farm, granted by the Viceroy of Egypt to the
Company, and used for the supply of poultry, vegetables, and
fruit to the steamers at Suez and Alexandria.


Suez. —Offices and Hotel, rented from the Egyptian Government;
Stores and Workshops, fitted with machinery for the execution
of repairs ; also Washing Machine, Icemaking Machine, and
Water Condenser, v
Aden. —Agents’ House and Offices. Water Condenser, Ice-making
Machine, and Washing Machine, erected on ground reclaimed
from the sea. Small steamer and stock of lighters (upwards of
20) for coaling purposes.
Bombay. —The Mazagon Graving Dock, held on lease :
Length . . 400 feet.
Breadth . , 56 u
Depth on Sill | ' JJ-f ' a * hi f h s P ri "S tideB '
, r ( . 15.6 // at ordinary //
The new Mazagon Graving Dock, built by the Company princi-
pally on land reclaimed from the sea. On this property exten-
sive Stores have been erected, as well as Workshops, fitted with
the machinery necessary for the execution of the heavy repairs
which have to be effected at Bombay, as the principal Station of
the Company in the East. The dimensions of the new Mazagon
Dock are —
Length , . 378 feet.
Breadth . . , 65 »
Depth on Sill . 20 //
Point de Galle. —Agents’ House and Offices, small Store and Coal
Sheds, held on lease; also the stock of boats and lighters, neces-
sary for coaling the steamers and transhipping cargo, &c., which
is the principal work at this Station.
Madras. —Offices rented. Small Coal Sheds, built on land held from
the Government during pleasure.
Calcutta. —Offices and Dwelling Houses for Agents and principal
employes of the Company, held on leases. The Union Docks,
belonging to the Company and freehold, with Stores and Work-
shops, fitted with the requisite tools for the execution of heavy
repairs to the hulls and machinery of the steamers. The hulk


“Broughton Hall.” The dimensions of the Union Docks
are—
Dock No. 1
Length . . . 375 feet.
Breadth . . . 65 //
Depth on Sill . 18.6 '/
Dock No. 2,
Length . . . 310 feet.
Breadth . . 65 u
Depth on Sill . 18,6 u
Singapore. —Agents\ House and Offices, held on lease. Freehold
Wharf and Jetties at New-harbour, with Coal Sheds, Stores, &c.
Hong-Kong. —Houses for the Agent and principal employes,
Offices and Coal Sheds, all held on lease; freehold Stores and
Workshops, fitted with the machinery necessary at a terminal
station ; also lighters for coaling and cargo purposes, and the
hulk “ Fort William.”
Shanghai. —Agent’s house, Office and Store Godown, held on lease.
Freehold Coal Sheds:—and cargo and coal boats.
Yokohama. —Hulk “Tiptree.”
King George’s Sound, —An Office, rented at short notice. A plot
of ground, on which coals are stored, held from the Govern-
ment, free during pleasure. The hulk “Kingfisher,” and a stock
of lighters for coaling pui’poses.
Melbourne. —The Office here is also rented, and the Company have
no other property.
Sydney. —The Company have no property. Ihe docking and
repairs of the steamers are provided for by an agreement with
a local dock owner.
Apart from, but in a manner connected with, the cost of establish-
ments, is the amount ol capital constantly and unproductively locked


Southampton ....
2,000
Malta
5,000
Alexandria and Suez . .
. 6,000
Aden .......
. 20,900
Bombay
8,000
Point de Galle ....
. 12,000
Madras
500
Calcutta
. 4,000
Singapore
. 8,000
Hong-Kong
. 10,000
Shanghai
. 6,000
Yokohama
2,200
King George’s Sound . .
. 4,000
Sydney
1,200
up in coals, and naval, victualling, and other stores at and in
transit to these distant stations, for the Directors can at no time, with
prudence, permit the stocks to fall below what is required for six
months’ consumption. The sum so employed may be set down at not
less than £500,000, and the interest forms a heavy and constant
charge on the revenue.
The average stock of Coals kept at ports which are coaling Stations,
is as follows
Tons.
89,800
The Consumption of Coals.
All the figures which relate to the Company’s annual coal account
are so large, that it is difficult to submit them in a form which would
place the subject in a clear and distinct light before the general reader.
A return, extending over ten years, 1856 to 1865 both inclusive,
shows that the enormous sum of Jive millions-and-a-quarter has been
paid for fuel only during that period, or on the average, £525,000 per
annum.
During the last six years, 1860-65, there has been no considerable
variation in the number of tons consumed per annum, the increase of
the mileage performed having been compensated by the reduction of


the consumption effected in some of the new ships ; but the price of
one year as compared with another, has taken a considerable range,
and, unfortunately, the tendency of price during the later period has
been, and is still, to advance.
On more than one occasion Shareholders have written to the Direc-
tors that they have laid in their winter stock at only one shilling per
ton dearer than last year : why, then, this great outcry in your report
about the cost of coals.
Unfortunately these Shareholders are only representatives of a
numerous type of persons with whom the Company have to deal, and
who take no account of matters beyond their individual range of vision.
These persons forget that the cost of the coal at the pit’s mouth must
be multiplied by 3,4, 5, and even 6 to meet the expense of its carriage
to the depot from which it is issued to the steamers, and hence this
enormous bill.
An average number of 170 sailing ships is engaged annually in
conveying coal to the Company’s stations.
Unfortunately the coals suffer greatly in transmission, and notwith-
standing all the expense incurred for their protection from the effects of
climate, they undergo a deterioration of fully 20 per cent, from their
original quality before they are burnt. This fact was submitted to the
Committee of 1866 by a most competent witness, Mr. Samuda, M.P.,
in the following words, when comparing European with Indian
voyages :
“ (2949) It is a well known thing that coal deteriorates very much
“ indeed in hot climates ; it is very difficult to keep it so useful and so
“ good as in Europe, and I have made an allowance that we must
“ require one-fourth more coal to do the same quantity of work.”
The Consumption of Provisions, and its effect on
Passenger Fares.
The Commissariat is another department which presents its peculiar
difficulties, in consequence of the immense length of the Company s
Lines. A steamer leaving Southampton for Alexandria can take in
live and dead stock, poultry, fish, &c., of the best quality, and pas-


sengers will be struck with the style of table which a first-class purser,
supported by good cooks and experienced stewards, is able to keep,
and this at a moderate cost to the Company. But on the other
side of the Isthmus of Suez, three-fourths of the stores have to be
sent from England, and kept in depot before they are issued to the
steamers. Live stock, sheep excepted, and poultry are very inferior,
and the best of preserved meats, fish, and vegetables cannot be made
quite tempting to passengers'whose appetites have been destroyed by
the temperature of the tropics.
The quality of provisions of all kinds quickly deteriorates, while
their cost is greatly augmented east of Suez, and it must not be
forgotten that four-fifths of the victualling stores consumed on board
the Company’s ships are used under these circumstances.
It will scarcely appear credible that the Company feed more than
10,000 persons on board ship daily; but when that is borne in mind,
the list of the articles and quantities of food consumed in a year,
will not be astonishing. [See Appendix, No. 2.]
Ice is an article on the list which demands special mention. It will
be seen that the Company consume 1,360 tons per annum, costing in
manufacture, or by purchase, £7,000 Twenty years ago, this luxury
was not dreamt of on board ship, and the Indian passenger would gladly
have paid liberally for a supply. He now looks for his cooled beverages
as a matter of course, and the exhaustion of the ice house on a voyage
is made a matter of grievous complaint.
The difference in the cost of ice is an item which should not be over-
looked in comparing the Company’s rates of passage money with those
by the Atlantic Steamers.
In very long voyages, such as that to Australia, the cost of victualling
the passengers becomes a very serious consideration in relation to
the charge for the passage, and on the overland route, a point might
soon be reached at which the passage fare would not meet the actual
and indirect expense of conveying and feeding the passengers.
The Company’s fare to Australia is now lower in proportion than that
to India or China, yet writers in the Australian papers complain that
their passengers are sacrificed. Let them consider the effect of shutting
up the cabins of the steamers running between Australia and Galle, and
the reduction of expenses by paying off pursers, storekeepers, stewards,
cooks, and all the staff devoted solely to the passenger traffic; let them
calculate the saving of the food consumed by all this staff, as well as


by the passengers themselves; add to this the saving of the cost of linen,
glass, crockery, cutlery, and numerous other articles which are supplied
with a liberal hand by the Company; also the gain of the space in the
steamers occupied by the victualling stores and the baggage, which
would then be available for cargo, and they will perceive that
fares cannot be adjusted with regard only to the fact that passages
may be obtained by sailing ships at about half the rate charged
by Steam Companies.
It has frequently been stated in print that the Company do not care
about passengers on the Australian line, but nothing can be further
from the truth.
If the Editors of Australian papers who write that “when the
“P. and 0. Company offer a cheap transit to Europe, it will count its
“ passengers by tens and scores where it now carries but one,” would
be at the pains of looking into the matter, they would find that the
larger the number of passengers, at what they regard as “ cheap ” rates,
the greater would be the loss to the Company.
The reduction of the passage money to or from Australia, from £l5O
to dt‘l2o, has had the effect of increasing the number of passengers
exactly to the extent that has produced the same total of passage money
as was previously paid by the smaller number at the higher figures; so
that the Company have gained nothing, but have had, on the other
hand, to bear the expense of feeding the larger number.
VIII.
Employment of Superintendents, Agents, Commanders,
Engineers, Officers and Others.
Connected with the outlay of capital in plant, and the amount of
expenditure in maintenance and material, is the cost ot superintendence,
and the salaries of the staff necessary at so many distant stations.
Including London and Southampton, no less than fourteen prin-
cipal and subsidiary establishments have to be kept up. Many of
these are in parts of the world unfavourable to the health of Europeans,’
and the rates of remuneration to the superintendent, clerks, storekeepers,


engineers, boiler makers, coppersmiths, blacksmiths, joiners, carpenters,
and artizans of all trades are high in proportion. The same applies to
rates of pay afloat, the wages scale being about 50 per cent, higher than on
the home stations; but this is not the only drawback as compared with
the cost of operations conducted nearer home, the effect of climate
places a large per centage of these employes constantly on the sick
list, so that the Company have to engage a larger number of persons
than would otherwise be necessary.
The constant conveyance of the officers and servants of the Company
to and from the East entails an expenditure of no small amount.
At the present time the Company have in active service
On Shore—
Agents and Superintendents 16
European Clerks and Assist-
ants .... 260
Native Clerks . . 150
Carried forward . 426
Afloat —
Commanders ... 68
Officers .... 280
Surgeons .... 56
Pursers .... 25
Clerks in charge . . 20
Pursers’ Clerks . . 36
Engineers . . . .331
Boilermakers ... 35
European Firemen . . 436
Native ditto . . 1,914
Carried forward . 3,201
Afloat
On shore
Total
The above takes no account of
Brought forward . 426
European Mechanics and
Labourers . . . 475
Native ditto ditto . . 3,450
Total . 4,351
Broughtfortcard . 3,201
Carpenters ... 53
Boatswains . . . 55
Quartermasters and Gunners 293
Able Seamen . . . 581
Ordinary ditto . . .132
Native Seamen . . 2,541
European Stewards . . 1,001
Native ditto . . 393
Total . 8,250
8,250
4,351
12,601
the coal labourers and coolies
employed at various stations in coaling operations.


Expenditure and Revenue.
A formidable item in the expenses of the Company arises from the
necessity of constantly sending new steam ships round the Cape of
Good Hope to reinforce the fleet in the Eastern seas. Since the com-
mencement of the Company's operations 57 ships have been so sent out,
and 6 have been brought home for repairs, or other purposes. The
total cost of these voyages has been nearly £300,000, or at the rate
of £12,000 per annum. The Messageries Company were allowed
a large sum from the State to meet this expense, and in the balance
sheet of the late European and Australian Company the cost of
“ placing steamers on stations ” (five in number), was set down at
£37,617. Attempts were made at first to lessen this expense by
taking passengers, but the number was so small, and the rate they
paid so low, that their conveyance, instead of giving a profit,
actually increased the cost of a voyage. A vessel employed east
of Suez requires repair and renovation, both in hull and machinery,
much sooner than one employed on the home station. The Directors
are not able in all cases to undertake these repairs at Calcutta or
Bombay ; the lengthened exclusion of the working vessels from the
dock occupied by the ship under repairs, the additional cost of
material and skilled labour, the expense of the transport of boilers and
parts of machinery from England, frequently render it more advan-
tageous and economical to bring a vessel requiring heavy repairs to this
country.
The boiler account also assumes very serious proportions in the
maintenance of such a fleet as that belonging to the Company. During
the last thirteen years (and that period is taken because the Company’s
operations first assumed their present magnitude in 1853) the Company
have paid for 53 sets of new boilers at a total cost of £220,000, exclusive
of the expense of sending the majority of them to the East Indies and
China, which has cost upwards of £60,000.
The totals of the Revenue and Expenditure of the Company have
been placed before the Shareholdei’s, with other particulars in each
annual report ; it may be instructive and interesting, however, to


1857
1.877,420
3
0
1858
1,884,493
14
3
!859
. 2,176,590
9
3
i860
. 2,350,361
9
7
1861
. 2,288,289
12
0
1862
. 2,223,969
0
6
1863
2,296,305
4
3
1864
2,346.203
0
2
1865
2,136,076
8
9
reproduce these figures for the last ten years in
follows :
Revenue.
Expenditure,
1856 £1,691,589 0 0
It will be observed, that
£1,494,435 8 5
1,645,748 11 1
1,714,374 15 10
2,006,363 11 6
2,247,328 18 2
2,131,432 3 1
2.064,865 4 8
2,060,849 14 0
2,120,554 2 3
1,976,999 1 6
1859, when the
tabular form, as
Balance.
£197,153 11 7
232,889 15 6
170,118 18 5
170,226 17 9
103,032 11 5
156,857 8 11
159,103 15 10
235,455 10 3
225,648 17 11
159,077 7 3
and disburse-
since
receipts
ments each reached a sum above two millions, no annual increase of
either is established.
It is noteworthy that in the year 1860, when the receipts reached
their highest point, the expenditure, owing to the high price of coals,
also attained a figure out of proportion to the increased revenue, and
a greatly diminished balance and a lower dividend was the result.
There are those who point with surprise to any discrepancy they
may discover between the produce of any branch of the Company’s
business in two succeeding years, and who appear to think that
if each year does not exhibit an increase of receipt over its predecessor,
there must be something defective in the management ; passage and
freight rates have been kept too high or too low, the proceedings of
competitors have been too much or too little regarded, and so forth;
but reflecting persons will perceive that when a business of such mag-
nitude is carried on, causes apparently remote and entirely beyond the
control of the Directors, such as the American war, may bring about
an important variation in the financial operations of one year as com-
pared with another, and a variation of only 5 per cent, is enough to
constitute the difference between a good and a bad year, and to tell
sensibly upon the dividend.
A fallacious notion is also entertained that once the first outlay on
the business of a great Steam Company met and discharged, the ships
built, or bought and paid for, all drain upon capital has ceased ; and
if only the vessels are earning enough to show a fair per centage of


profit on their cost, fill will be well, —nothing can he more delusive.
The trial will come when the concern has been a few years at work—
when the fleet requires overhaul and repairs—when new boilers and a
refit of machinery are required—and when the want of shore estab-
lishments to effect all these renovations makes itself felt. The
P. & 0. Company has passed through some of these critical stages of
existence; and the Directors have learnt, in the process, that it is
not by the result of one year’s earnings as compared with another
that the prosperity and soundness of such a business is to be measured.
The operations of the French Company are affected by the same
circumstances which have influenced those of the P. and O. Company
for the last two years, and they were obliged to tell their Proprietors,
in their last report, that “the proceeds of the year only admit of a dis-
tribution of 50f per share (equal to 10 per cent.), instead of the divi-
“ dend of 55f (or 11 per cent.), which you received last year,”
The Shareholders —Their Number and Classification.
Some of the Proprietary may be interested in the following par-
ticulars relating to their own body :
The original subscribers and allottees of the Company numbered
about 600, and many of these are still on the Share Register.
The new Shares issued in 1850 and 1855 were all allotted in
due proportion to the then existing Shareholders, and were taken up
by them. Some of these Shares, of course, came upon the market, and
the result was an increase in the Proprietary which, at the end of the
year 1857 included 1,549 persons.
Since that date no issue of Shares has taken place, but deaths and
other causes have led to a gradual sub-division of accounts, and con-
sequent augmentation in the number of names on the Register, This
increase has progressed in the ratio of about sixty annually, and at the


present time the Share List comprises 2,122 names,' which may be
classified as follows :
Ladies ... ... ... ... 689
Clergy ... ... ... ... 153
Army and Navy ... ... ... 178
Civilians ... ... ... 1,102
The Directors have observed with regret a disposition on the part of
some Shareholders to take alarm at any temporary depression of the
market price of the Shares, and to look upon the Stock Exchange List
as a safe guide to their value.
At the present time the Shares are considerably lower than they
were two years ago, but if comparison be made with railway and other
similar stocks, it will be found that the fall is not out of proportion.
A very large number of the Proprietors of the Company never sell
Shares, they have invested their money and they arc content with a
fair and moderate dividend ; the consequence has been that, on the
occurrence of those fits of speculation on the part of the public that
come round periodically in this country, those who have a fancy to buy
have to tempt unwilling sellers by high offers, and it unfortunately
happens that those who give 60 and 70 per cent, premium for a Share
are the last to calculate what interest their purchase will yield at the
average rate of dividend previously paid by the concern, and the first
to take fright at a fall, and to fancy it must be going to ruin.
The Direction and Management of the Company.
Some of the Shareholders are probably aware of the nature of
the arrangements originally made for the government of the affairs
of the Company, and are familiar with the changes which have since
taken place ; a brief explanation and record may, nevertheless, be
useful to many of them.
The Board of Directors formed in 1840 was composed of gentlemen who
agreed to amalgamate the several interests they then represented, with
a view to lay the foundation for a sound and enduring undertaking.
Some of these gentlemen (as shown in the early part of this Report)


were already Contractors for the Mail Service with the Peninsula and
Alexandria ; others had been engaged in attempts to organize associa-
tions under different titles for opening up steam communication with
India ; and a third party were owners of the steam ships “ Oriental”
and “ Great Liverpool.”
The Royal Charter and the Deed of Settlement confirmed and ratified
the association of these gentlemen as the first Board of the new Corpor-
ation, and defined the number of shares to be allotted to those who brought
material in the shape of ships, and vested interests into the concern, and
and laid down rules for the future conduct of its affairs.
The original Board consisted of the undermentioned gentlemen :
Sir George Larpeut, Bart,, M.P., Chairman.
Sir John Campbell, K.C.IL, Deputy-Chairman.
* Arthur Anderson, Esq.
Capt. Richard Bourne, R.N.
John Pirie, Esq., Alderman
Capt. Samuel Thornton, R.N.
Robert Thurburn, Esq.
*Francis Carleton, Esq.
Joseph C. Ewart, Esq. *Brodie McGhie Willcox, Esq,
James Hartley, Esq. Chas. Wye Williams, Esq.
Capt. Alex. Nairne, H.C.S. Pedro do Zulueta, Esq.
* Mr. Anderson, Mr. Carleton and Mr. Willcox were constituted the
Managing Directors, and Mr. James Allan was the Secretary.
At the commencement of the enterprise, Avhcn its success could not
be estimated Avith much certainty, and would greatly depend on skilful
management, the original proprietors considered it desirable that the
services of the three gentlemen, avlio had by their practical knowledge
and energy been chiefly instrumental in founding it, should be seemed
for its future management, and that their remuneration should be ar-
ranged on a plan that would identify their personal interests with the
prosperity of the Company.
The three original Managing Directors Avere, therefore, made to some
extent the Agents of the Board and of the Proprietors, and, as is the
general practice Avith Agents, they were paid a commission in lieu of a
salary. This commission Avas, however, adjusted in the manner most
likely to produce the best result to all—there avhs no commission on
disbursements, there Avas a commission (2.j per cent.) on receipts, and a
larger commission (5 per cent.) on net profits.
In consideration of these commissions, the Managing Directors Avere
bound to provide at their oavu expense the London Ofiices of the Com-


pany, and to pay the salaries of the Assistant Managers, Clerks, and
others required for the performance of the numerous and important
duties assigned to them —they had consequently a direct interest in the
economical management and welfare of the Company.
The position and emoluments of these three gentlemen Avere secured to
them during the continuance of the Company, and they were not re-
movable so long as they faithfully and efficiently performed the
duties imposed on them, but in the event of the death or resignation of
any or all of them, the appointment and remuneration of successors
devolved upon the Board.
The system worked well from the commencement ; the Managing
Director's attended to the business daily, and the Board met once, and
subsequently twice in the week.
In 1848 Mr. Carleton died, and the Board filled up the vacancy by
the appointment of Mr. James Allan, who was paid by a salary, and not
a commission.
The commissions payable to the original Managing Directors gra-
dually produced larger amounts than could have been expected when
the undertaking was started, and although the Shareholders and all
connected with the concern participated in the advantages arising
from this success, these gentlemen began to contemplate the voluntary
surrender of a portion of their income for the further benefit of the
Proprietors and servants of the Company.
The result was that shortly after obtaining the Contract of 1853,
Mr. Willcox resigned the post and all the emoluments of Managing
Director, retaining only his position as a member of the Board, and
Mr. Anderson, although retaining his post, with all its duties and re-
sponsibilities, announced his intention of devoting a very large share
of his commissions to the formation of a fund for providing “ allow-
“ ances to persons who might become by long and faithful service
“ entitled to the same ; to reward extraordinary exertions in the
“ Company’s service, &c.”
These acts were recognised in a resolution passed at the Half-yearly
Meeting of the Shareholders on the 12th June, 185 4, as follows :
“ That the cordial thanks of the Meeting and the Shareholders
“ generally are due to Mr. Willcox and Mr. Anderson for their liberal
“ conduct with reference to their abandonment of emoluments, as com-
“ muuicated in their letters to the Board of Directors, which have been
“ read to the Meeting.”


At the succeeding Annual Meeting a Committee of the Shareholders
was appointed to “ consider and suggest some mode by which the
“ Proprietary might evince their sense of the important services of
“ Mr. Willcox and Mr. Anderson, and of their liberal and disinterested
“ conduct” ; and at a Special Meeting subsequently held, the presen-
tation of a testimonial, in the shape of a service of plate to each of these
gentlemen, was unanimously resolved upon and carried out.
The fund created by the commissions which Mr. Anderson devotes
to the objects referred to above, has been called the “ Provident and Good
“ Service Fund,” and from it are paid contributions to the premiums on
life and superannuation policies effected by the officers and employes of the
Company, both on shore and afloat, with the “ Marine Life and General
“Mutual Assurance Society;” these contributions being calculated
on a scale varying from one-half to one-third, according to the nature of
the risk. The number of the servants of the Company so assured was,
on the Ist January, 1866, 1,105, and the total amount of contribution
for the year ending 31st December, iB6O, was £5,900.
The total sum paid to widows and surviving relatives of officers and
servants of the Company so assured, from the date of the establishment
of the Institution to the 31st October, 1866, is £50,465 9s 7d, and the
amount payable on Superannuation Policies is now about £250 annually,
and is increasing yearly.
The expenses of the Company’s upper and lower schools at South-
ampton, now attended by 870 children of the officer’s and servants of
the Company, are likewise defrayed from this fund, and, under special
resolutions of the Board, it is the source from which cases of peculiar
necessity are relieved, and rewards for extraordinary exertions or
services are provided.
The importance and advantage of this arrangement, as relieving the
Shareholders of many claims which would otherwise press heavily on
the funds of the Company, and encouraging provident habits, and
attaching the most efficient employes of all classes to its service, is
therefore manifest.
Mr. Anderson has also, for some years past, devoted a considerable
sum out of the remainder of his commissions towards the payment of
salaries and other expenses of the executive management of the Com-
pany’s affairs.
On the retirement of Sir James Matheson in 1858, Mr. Willcox (who
had for some years represented Southampton in Parliament) was


appointed Chairman of the Company, and upon the decease of that
gentleman in 1862, Mr. Anderson was nominated his successor.
Mr. Patrick Douglas Hadow, originally elected a Director in 1849,
has filled the post of Deputy-Chairman since 1860.
The administration of the affairs of the Company demands, and
always will demand, the daily attendance of competent and experienced
officials, and since the changes referred to, this necessity has been met
by the appointment to the post of Managers of gentlemen whose length
of service ranges from fifteen to twenty years, and whose knowledge of
the business has been acquired in the exercise of responsible duties on
the home and foreign stations. These gentlemen hold their situations
under the Board, and not under the Managing Directors, as was
formerly the case, and the Shareholders may feel assured that the
executive of the Company was at no time in more efficient hands than
at present, and that there are many officials now holding subordinate
situations -who are, or will become, fully competent to fill any vacancies
that may occur in the more important and responsible offices.
xir.
The Report of the Select Committee of 1866 on
East India Communication.
The Blue Book containing the evidence taken by this Committee,
with an Appendix comprising a great variety of valuable returns, has
very recently been published. The Directors do not propose to enter
at any length upon matters referred to therein, but they may state
the fact, that the Report of the Committee adds one more to the pre-
viously recorded vindications of the Company from the charges preferred
against it before Parliamentary Committees.
The Committee of 1849 reported “That Mails were conveyed at a
“ less cost by hired packets than by Her Majesty’s vessels, and that
“ they saw no reason to think that better terms could have been ob-
“ tained for the public than those of the existing Contracts.”
The Committee of 1851 reported “That the Company had displayed
“ an enterprising spirit in conducting the communication, and that the
“ vessels, although below the standard of speed reached on some other
“ Lines, had undergone improvements which had rendered them com-


“ petent to maintain a speed much in excess of that required by the
“ Contract.”
The Government Commission of 1853 recorded their opinion that
4i the excess of subsidies over the postage received could not pro-
“ perly be regarded, even from a fiscal point of view, as a national
“ loss.”
The Committee of 1860 made three Reports, but as none of them con-
tained any special reference to the evidence or affairs of the P. and 0.
Company, it must be inferred that they had no fault to find.
The Committee of 1866 have reported “ That the services under the
“ several Contracts, to which reference has been made, have been well
“ performed.”
This Committee was appointed to enquire into the practical working
of the present system of telegraphic and postal communications between
this country, the East Indies, China, Japan, Australia, and the
Mauritius (the telegraphic part of the subject being probably regarded
as the most important), and the evidence submitted fully bears out that
part of the Report of the Committee, which states “ That the political
“ and commercial importance of possessing permanent means of com-
“ munication with the several countries before referred to, by a
“ telegraphic service at all times available and to be depended upon, is
<k even greater in degree than the necessity for an efficient postal ser-
“ vice ; indeed, with regard to the bulk of commercial transactions
“ between the merchants and manufacturers of this country and pro-
“ ducers and cousumers abroad, the Post Office has now become, in a
“ great measure, subsidiary to the telegraph.”
The concluding sentence of the foregoing paragraph is deserving of
much consideration in connection with that part of the Report which
recommends a “ Weekly Mail Service to Bombay, and that such service
“ should be on the footing of an Express Service.”
The labours and deliberations of a Parliamentary Committee were
scarcely required to establish the fact, that the Port of Bombay was
about to become the natural terminus of the principal Postal Line to
India, and the desirability of a weekly Line had already become apparent.
In fact, the P. and 0. Company had proposed, in the autumn of 1865,
to make some additional trips with extra ships between Bombay and
Suez, with a view to ascertain the lowest terms upon which they might
be able to undertake a permanent weekly service with that place, should
H.M.’s Government decide to adopt such a measure. The loss of the


“ Jeddo” and other circumstances led, however, to the postponement of
this experiment.
The great public convenience which would attend the dispatch of the
Mails from London and Bombay, on a fixed day in each week, will be
apparent to all.
The foregoing points being conceded, it would appear that the most
convenient arrangement would be that the Mails should be made to
arrive in London and Bombay on a day of the week as nearly as
possible intermediate between the days of despatch, say, if the Mails
are despatched on a Friday, they should be delivered on Monday, and
that the rate of speed should be governed by this arrangement. If a
rate of 9| to 10 knots per hour would ensure this, it would appear
scarcely necessary to tax the public with the very heavy expense which
would attend the conveyance of the Mails at 11 or 12 knots, especially
if such a rate of speed would have the effect of delivering the Mails
on, or vexy nearly on, the day fixed for their departure, a state of
things which would produce the utmost amount of inconvenience, not
only in London, but in Liverpool, Manchester, Glasgow, and the other
great provincial centres of commerce. This is, however, a question
which will more properly arise between the Government and the
future Contractors.
The Committee have further recommended that the Postal Service
between this country and Madras and Calcutta should be discontinued.
It is not known, at present, whether the Government will think it expe-
dient to adopt this recommendation ; previous experience has shown that
any proposal to lop off what may, in some quarters, be considered useless
branches of the Service, has been met with opposition, which has led to
the abandonment of such intention. The communities of Madras and
Calcutta, and the Eastern Presidencies, and those in this country,
interested in the direct communication with those places, may, when
the time comes, be able to prove conclusively that the Line is fully
worth the comparatively low rate of payment for which the Service
is carried on.
The indisposition of the public to submit to curtailment of a Service,
was unraistakeably exhibited on the occasion of the intended abandon-
ment of the second China Line in 1861.
Looking to the fact that the Bombay Service may be doubled in the
manner proposed, without involving much disturbance of other Lines


which have been brought into their present symmetrical and convenient
shape, after years of patient labour and practical experience, the
necessity for the proposed dislocation is not very apparent.
In commencing this Report the Directors felt that they had nothing
but a dry and somewhat monotonous story to tell, —dry, because a
record of bygone negotiations and competitions for contracts, and
statistics of mileage run and rates of speed, passage money and
freight, could scarcely be arranged in an attractive form, —and mono-
tonous, because of the sameness of the attacks against which they had
to defend the Company, and of the uniform character of the miscon-
ceptions they had to correct. In concluding it they can only express
a hope that those who may peruse it will henceforth view the proceed-
ings of the Company by the light they have thrown upon them, and
if this is done, their labour will not have been in vain.
order of the Board of Directors,
C. W. HOWELL,
Secretary.
London,
2 6th November, 1806.




APPENDIX No. 1.
REPORT.
The Select Committee appointed to enquire into the Contract Packet
Service, who were empowered to report their opinion, together with
the minutes of evidence taken before them, to the House, have con-
sidered the matter to them referred, and have agreed to the following
resolutions:
1, That so far as the Committee are able to judge from the evidence
they have taken, it appears that the Mails are conveyed at a
less cost by hired packets than by Her Majesty’s vessels.
2. That some of the existing Contracts have been put up to public
tender, and some arranged by private negociation, and that a
very large sum beyond what is received from postage is paid
on some of the Lines; but considering that at the time these
Contracts were arranged the success of these large undertakings
was uncertain, your Committee see no reason to think better
terms could have been obtained for the public.
3. Your Committee recommend great caution, either in renewing
the existing, or forming new arrangements. They suggest that
if it be decided to renew the existing Contracts, the most strict
and searching enquiry should be instituted by some responsible
department of the Government, into the cost of the execution,
into the manner in which the service has been performed, and
into the profits resulting from the several transactions to the
Companies by which they have been respectively carried on;
and if it should be decided to put up the several Contracts to
public tender, ample notice, and full particulars of the terms
and conditions of the service required, should be given to the
public, as being the means most likely to seeux-e a real com-
petition by responsible parties.
27th July, 1849.


SUMMARY OF STORES EXPENDED
From SEPTEMBER, 1864, to SEPTEMBER,
1865.
GENERAL STORES.
WINES
SPIRITS, <&c.
LIVE STOCK.
Bread, Flour, &c. - - -
Weight in
lbs.
- 1,262,481
Claret - - -
Bottles.
123,059
Oxen
No.
592
Salt Provisions - - - -
- 325,680
Madeira - -
1,969
Calves
69
Native Provisions - - -
- 2,689,216
Port - - -
29,366
Sheep
- 13,015
Groceries -----
- 621,796
Sherry - - -
102.711
Pigs
- 3,504
Oilman’s Stores - - -
- 454,023
Brandy - - -
62,222
Poultry ------
- 160,130
Cheesemongers’ Stores -
Preserved Provisions - -
Fresh Meat
- 236,674
- 48,700
- 852,193
Gin - - - -
Hum -
----- 15,547
Total
- 177,310
Whiskey - -
----- 7,424
Provender
- 2,472,350
Pale Ale - -
- - - - - 524,250
Vegetables
■ 2,593,397
Porter - - -
166,109
Ice
- 3,046,004
Soda Water -
Lemonade - -
132,428
----- 71,331
• Total -
14,602,514
Total - 1,301,608
APPENDIX No. 2,


APPENDIX No. 3.
Extract from Lord Overstone's Speech in the House of Lords, on
Thursday, 24 th March, 1859, as reported in the “ Times''
“ He would now ask their Lordships’ attention to the case of a large
“ concern of immense capital, and conducted by parties of the highest
“ respectability and greatest prudence in the management of their own
“ private concerns. He referred to the European and Australian
“ Royal Mail Company, the Directors of which had squandered nearly
“ £700,000. The facts of this case rested upon unimpeachable
“ evidence, which, with their Lordships’ permission, he would read :
‘ The European and Australian Royal Mail Company was formed
“ ‘ about September, 1856. It originated very much through the
“ ‘ success of some influential parties in Glasgow, who realized a large
“ ‘ sum by chartering two screw steamers to Government during the
“ ‘ Crimean War. These vessels were named the “European” and the
“ ‘ “ Columbian,” and the Company was named the “ European and
“ ‘ Columbian Company.” Soon after the close of the Russian War,
“ ‘ Government advertised for tenders for the Australian Mail Service.
“ ‘ One given in by the European and Columbian Company was pre-
“ * ferred to a cheaper one by the Peninsular and Oriental Company,
“ ‘ the annual subsidy for carrying being £185,000, with Monthly
“ ‘ Services, and the Contract to endure for five years. The penalty for
“ ; the non-fulfilment of the Contract was heavy, increasing prodigiously
“ ‘ with each day’s delay. In consequence of this great undertaking it
“ ‘ was necessary to enlarge the Company, and greatly to increase the
“ ‘ number of its vessels; and, accordingly, a new Company was formed on
“ ‘ the limited principle, under the name of the “European and Australian
“ ‘ Royal Mail Company (Limited),” whom Government accepted for the
“ ‘ Contract. The nominal capital was £500,000, but I believe not
“ ‘ more than £420,000 were subscribed, the balance being purposely
“ ‘ reserved, as the promoters expected it to command a large premium.
“ ‘ The list of Proprietors is one of the best I have seen of any Com-
“ * pany, all the Shareholders, eighty-four in number, being selected men,
“ ‘ residing chiefly in Glasgow and neighbourhood, London, Liverpool and


‘ Manchester. £400,000 were ultimately paid up. The first meeting
‘ of the new Company was held on the 3rd of September, 1856 ; but it
‘ was of course some months before their plans got developed, and time
* was lost in negociation with other Companies to sell their Contract
4 for a bonus, or to get some other advantage. As this was not arranged,
‘ the “ European ” and “ Columbian ” were taken over from the old
4 Company ; other vessels were chartered for immediate require-
‘ meuts ; a vessel called the “ Oneida,” by which £60,000 were
4 ultimately lost, was purchased ; and two other vessels contracted
‘ for at £lOO,OOO and £120,000. It was soon apparent that the
4 Company had started with too small a capital, and that there
4 was a total want of experience in the management. Establish-
ments had to be organised in Glasgow, London, and Southampton,
4 in the Colony, the Mediterranean, and the Red Sea, which required
• large outlays of money, and, to be efficiently done, much expe-
dience and,judgment. It was also found that the time within
4 which each monthly passage was contracted to be performed was too
4 short, and that the penalties were too heavy, and further, that the
4 class of vessels was 100 large to be filled up Avith passengers and light
‘goods. After borrowing considerable sums upon the security of their
4 vessels and otherwise, the Directors found that it was necessary to
4 make arrangements with another Company to work the Service,
4 which they ultimately did with the 44 Royal Mail (West India)
4 Company.” An arrangement for an amalgamation of the two concerns
4 was also very nearly completed, when the Shareholders of the latter
4 Company refused to confirm the bargain made by the Directors.
4 This and the events of last autumn (1857) brought matters to a crisis,
4 so that almost within a twelvemonth of the formation of the Company,
4 it was known that they were practically insolvent, and they have
4 since placed themselves under the Act, and gone into voluntary
4 liquidation. Besides the loss of £400,000 of capital, the debts,
4 including mortgages, appear to be about £270,000, against which they
4 have the steamers, subject to some disputed claims of the 4, Royal Mail
4 Company,” in whose hands some of them are. There is some hope
4 that the steamers may realise sufficiently to pay the debts, but in the
4 present state of shipping and aspect of the questions with the 44 Royal
4 Mail Company,” this seems to be doubtful. The following appear to
4 be the heavier items of expense and loss: Abandoning steamers
4 £26,000, placing steamers on stations £S7,CCO, loss on voyages


‘ £70,000, interest, management and depreciation £77,000, loss on
‘“Oneida,” and expense of bringing home £61,000, total £270,000;
■ but there will be a further heavy loss in realising the four steamers
• still belonging to the Company, and the plant they have at Sydney,
• King George’s Sound, Aden, and Point de Galle. These stand in
‘ the books at about £370,000, at least they did so on the 30th April
■ last. The result of this unfortunate concern is, like many others,
‘ not creditable to the management. All the Directors hold large
* interests in it, and became responsible for some of the debts along
‘ with various of the Shareholders. The undertaking of such a serious
‘ contract by inexperienced parties was most absurd, and the attempt
* to carry it out without the aid of parties having the knowledge and
‘ resources of the peculiar kind required was worse.’
“ In this case the money had been lost only by the parties concerned,
and their loss might be said to be a just penalty upon their rashness
and want of judgment; but he need not remind their Lordships that
the aggregate wealth of the community was only the wealth of the
separate members of the community.”
XLSSLX A PAlilvEK, Printers, ill, Mark Laue, Loudon.








■
■-#■: ’ ,
*
* . ■*': ■» '
■» « ,
fe ‘ *-'M ■ * *
• 4
• - *
0'




m
sht ■'
S' /
♦ . >
