

Preliminary Notice
The North Australian
White Settlement
Association
The North Australian White Settlement Association
is being formed to concentrate Australia’s
strength on the solution of a national problem.


The [Necessity for
The North Australian White Settlement
Association.
The peopling of its great northern area is the greatest and most urgent of Australia s
problems.
Most of our other problems concern a large body of people, and they, with their
special organisations, are dealing with them.
BUT THE MENACE OF THE EMPTY NORTH CONTINUES.
The people of the north are few, and they cannot, without assistance, effectively press the
claims of the north; it therefore behoves all patriotic Australians, who recognise the urgent
necessity for solving that problem, to combine forces and get to work.
There is necessity to stress the fact that it is a problem. 335,000,000 acres with a coast-
line of over 1,000 miles in the Northern Territory has only a population of 2,000 whites after 100
years of British occupation, whereas the population of the Commonwealth during the past 62
years has increased by approximately 4d millions, or fivefold.
The Northern Territory has hitherto been a heavy burden on the rest of Australia, and will
continue to be so until it is properly developed.
YOU ARE PERSONALLY REQUESTED TO TAKE AN ACTIVE INTEREST IN THIS
EFFORT BY BECOMING A MEMBER OF THE ASSOCIATION NOW.
As soon as 1 00 members have been enrolled a meeting will be called to appoint a com-
mittee to proceed with definite arrangements.
Those who have personal knowledge of the north consider that it is a problem the solution
of which can be demonstrated in a few years if the right way is adopted.
It has been suggested that the North Australian White Settlement Association should adopt
the following methods:—
(1) To work for close co-ordination between all interests concerned.
(2) To press for improved transport and communication.
(3) To ascertain what industries are suitable and to facilitate their establishment—
(a) by reference to previous experience in Northern Australia;
(b) by reference to experience in similar regions in other parts of the world;
(c) by means of cheap power and water;
(d) by encouraging bonuses for results obtained or possibilities demonstrated.
(4) To ascertain and remove causes of previous failures in (a) land settlement, (b) the
establishment of industries.
(5) To make it practicable for women and children to make their homes in Northern
Australia by providing (a) residential, (b) medical, (c) educational, (d) recrea-
tional, and (e) labour-saving facilities.


Mr. David Lindsay, the explorer, states:—
"My experience and study of North Australia (extending over 40 years, 1 5 years of
which were in the Northern Territory) leads me to the belief that the country can be
satisfactorily occupied by the white race. Children born on the North coast have lived
and married there, and have reared children whose physique and general health bear
comparison with those born in New South Wales.
“That white people can live and work satisfactorily has long been demonstrated.
"Dr. Breinl, the tropical expert, who has been studying North Queensland conditions,
sees no reason to anticipate race deterioration, given ordinary conditions of living.
"Although the pastoral and mining industries are the chief mainstays of the country
at present, it is an established fact that cotton, rice, tobacco, maize, peanuts, and fibre
plants can be grown on the coast lands.”
The proposed North Australian White Settlement Association is the outcome of the
patriotic enthusiasm of Major-General W. L’Estrange Eames, C. 8., C.8.E., V.D., who is now en
route to the United Kingdom, and he has expressed his eagerness, whilst there, to assist the
Association in any way its members may consider advantageous.
It is for Australians here to take the lead immediately by establishing this association for
active propaganda.
The membership subscriptions have been tentatively fixed at two guineas per annum for
full members, and ten shillings per annum for associate members.
In addition to an active working membership, the North Australian White Settlement
Association will require substantial contributions to a propaganda fund to further its aims.
G. HAROLD de P. CHANCE, (Commander, R. N. emer.)
Hon. Secretary & Treasurer pro. tern.
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR MEMBERSHIP.
The Honorary Secretary,
The North Australian White Settlement Association,
12-14, O’Connell Street, Sydney.
Dear Sir,
Please enrol me as | & . r member of the association, and I herewith forward
an associate )
two guineas 1 ag my subscription for one year,
ten shillings j
Yours faithfully.
Full name and address:—


Vale & Pearson, Limited, Printers. Sydney.
