

/ H;
- T -- - ' W? -- ? W&& - :?■ 'M 1 \ :-4
** >. v '" , * -/
* .r ' w.
X#-■***&&-- #<= *R- i w"v \ 9t ■'-■
-W iM * \ .
: ‘-jlf Af J
KP<‘-*WWM mSr JpfeK Jf ~ Jti 5. I
I W ( *zf\WT T M***
t-JjaiR .« ,.Jr iJ / vLr’ AW * I
WzWSmat |Hk|k
£31 I f # wKS: —J & M
'•


§ HI P
v V.


i n
jDitas
<3 llustrraTiorxs
and-
Story "byj
'TRaltB-q--
j
ft*-*


uc) >
i GTDiUcLS
CHAPTER 1
ONCE upon a time, in a snug and cosy little home, there
lived a happy family of mice. There was Pip, the father
mouse, and Pepita, the mother. Then there were four
daughters, Emily, Agnes, Violet and Angel, who was the
baby of the family, and one son, Jonathan. Angel had been
given that name because of her pure white fur and blue
eyes, but she was really a most mischievous little mouse, and
not one bit like an angel.
They were all very proud of their house, which was
hollowed out of an old loaf of bread. This had been left,
forgotten, in an unused cupboard, behind the vestry door of
a village church. They called their home “The Upper
Crust, and the Mouse children thought that living in the
church made them a little more important than other mice,
who lived in cottages and barns and other very ordinary
places. They were well behaved little mice, however, and
never gave themselves airs because of
their grand house, so that they were
all well liked by their neigh'
hours, and had very many
good friends.
Their house
had two em
trances; one, from


PAGE THREE
17 SEP
the outside world, led through cracks in the ancient stone
walls of the church; and the other ran behind the panelling
of the vestry; so that they could come out through a small
hole near the fireplace. This was a great advantage on cold
days, because the Verger often left a fire still burning so
that Pepita was able to do a little cooking and the children,
and their friends, coming in from the cold stormy outside
world, would sit around warming their cold little feet on
the nicely warmed hearthstones.
One very, very cold Sunday afternoon, the ay ore
Christmas, the family were expecting a visitor, Mrs. iilly
Hedgehog, to tea. Because of the stormy weather, however,
they were a little doubtful whether she could come, ror
three long days and nights it had snowed, with hardly a
pause, and now the world lay under a deep mantle o purest
Pip went out to look if Tilly was in sight, but, when he
got to the front entrance, it was completely blocked wit
snow. 4 ..
“Switch my tail!” said he, “I will have to dig my way
out.” So he set to work, and scratched and scraped and
dug his way along the wall till he got round a corner, and
there, where it was sheltered, he found his way out into
the daylight. . , , ~ ,
All around him were big heaps where the wind had piled
the drifting snow, and if he was to be able to see t e
countryside, it was clear that he would have to climb t e
drifts. “This will be like mountain climbing,” said Pip, as
he looked up the steep slopes, and he ran back inside to get
his muffler and heavy boots.
Some parts of the snow surface were hard and slippery;
in other places it was soft and smothery, like feather be s
when you jump on them. His first few steps were through
soft clinging snow, right up to his
knees. Then he came to
a hard crust. “Ah!” said
he. “This is better,”
and he jumped up and
down to get the snow


loudly.
PAGE FOUR
off his boots. This was a mistake, for the crust was very
thin. It cracked so that he fell right through, and was
buried up to the very tip of his little sharp nose. The cold
snow got down his back, where it melted, so that a frigid
little stream ran shivenngly down his back. “Br-r-r!” said
Pip, shuddering. “I didn’t know that snow could be so cold.”
He climbed out and shook himself, then set out again.
This time he went carefully, so that he reached the top
without any more mishaps. He looked round and gasped
in wonder. Everywhere was so different. Instead of the
houses and trees he knew, there was a bare white land.
Where before cottages and barns had shown were now large
white heaps, and only the smoke from chimneys, and the
cleared pathways to their doors, showed that they were
really houses.
All the little lumps and hollows of the landscape were
hidden under the thick white cover; ditches were filled in,
and hedges were just long smooth ridges. From the church
roof hung glittering icicles, and thick snow hung from the
eaves like a blanket over a bedside, looking as though, at
any moment, it might fall with a rush and a thump.
Pip looked in the direction of Tilly’s home, but could
see no sign of her. “111 bet my long curling tail that she’s
still asleep and dreaming. The sleepy head!” he said to him*
self, and he swung his arms and tail to warm himself.
Tilly was a drowsy sort of person at any time. During
t e winter she hardly ever came out of her warm burrow,
but just lay there, curled
up, fast asleep and usually snoring
You could always tell Tilly’s bur-
the snoring noises that came from
suppose I will have to go and fetch
grumbled Pip. “I had better go
and tell Pepita. He looked down
side of the drift thoughtfully,
n-m! he mused. “It ought to be
easy to slide down these hills. “He


fi|p}0f
"SbM
/ j / V
ifclltB* - *Y 1 ■ \ C
( 5 \
J / Hi \ # I #y wk
4J
i .
V A AUftS? I 1 w a.- , 1«|
A iWW&JW~ M S
riA n im ww jl. ' m v/s
v T — ‘ -iU^tv^^A
f i I I v ** ■- • - jj
3f \| V ■JCW A Ktl a
■fc €{-> . jfeg.
hi nt \Lj& iya, A i
IVI vv y il
m. I J kvv iira
and an old hat
Pip put on his overcoat


if//' i (/
PAGE SIX
chose a nice smooth looking slope, took a little run, and
balancing himself with outstretched arms and waving tail’
he sped quickly down the frozen slopes like a little toboggan’
Faster and faster he sped along, while, from each boot^ieei
frTn h l PC 7u° T W h \ e an OStrich P lume - having a faint
till behind him down the hillside.
That r g T d gaS P £d 38 he came to a
go for Tillv” H H K g / he ff Chlld . ren ° Ut IO P I
f to 11 K - Y ( ]^ e r da L he r down his snow tunnel
,he «■«€« wh,»
CHAPTER 2
W™Tan mn tT" te " m £ ab ° Ut the snow ’ there was
.y a iap'tap'tap on the wmdowpane. It was Red Robin
“I wonderHwhat h lnd ° WSII1 ,’, and , tappmg wlth his hard beak.’
to wit r he Wants ’ said Pepita ' “ Let us aII go out
by Pip ™d theT children 6Very ° ne ’ “* “ OUt ’ “
“Til/ a messa ge for you, Mrs. Mouse," said Red Robin
t0 l£t y ° U kn ° W that s be has a
and will not be able to come to tea this afternoon.”
troubTe “W?ll’ Mr Robln r replied Pepita, "for your
i 1 come in and have a glass of hnt o\c\or
berry wine with us?” Redbreast was nUA® T d
Jr ftp..', elderberry
* mk ”« ' h ' ™'. thanked .here, VSTto”
Merry Christmas, then
he flirted his wings with
a whirr, and was off
across the sky like a
red rocket.


PAGE SEVEN
Outside, the mouse children were laughing and romping.
Angel was covered in fine powdery snow. She explained
that she had been playing at “falling in snowdrifts like
Daddy.” Pip dusted her down and told them all to watch
while he showed them how to slide. Jonathan, too, wanted
to try sliding, so together they set off up the slope.
“Watch me,” called Pip, and, taking a fast run, he
launched himself down the slide. Gaily and swiftly he sped,
and to show how easy it was, he put his hands in his
pockets, and whistled a merry tune. At the bottom, how'
ever, he lost his footing and continued the slide on his back,
with whirling arms and legs, finishing by plunging headlong
into a deep drift.
The family shrieked with laughter, and, as he stuck his
head out of the hole, Pip had to join in. That was not
quite what I meant to do,” he said, but Pepita called out
that it was splendid, and threw a snowball at him. Pip
threw one back, and the girls joined in, pelting him from
all sides. No one thought of Jonathan, standing alone,
rather scared, at the top of the steep slope. Finally he
screwed up enough courage to get started, and followed Pip
down. To his great glee, he found himself going well, and
very fast, much too fast to stop at the foot of the hill. He
dashed through the snowballers, straight towards the hole
Pip had made, so that, as Pip stood up to throw, Jonathan
bumped right into him, and both fell over together and
rolled in soft snow.
As Pip got up his ears and whiskers were full of snow.
Angel said he looked like Santa Claus,
but Pip thought he felt more like a
snow man.
Laughing, Pepita said; “You are the
biggest baby of them all, and get into
most mischief. Come on in and dry
something
yourself. Ell find you


"''Si V >¥"HRirA ! f1
/ x \ at 4J1II A1 i/Jr^jf
K ■ h Vi \
: y ' fS- x y \
, w -f \W fcm #X«J /
-, ,J If » * Jif^^WLili_itmfc*
S, || \W^|\CT
—%: - Vy ...
y.* '■• _
X#| ■ /oB S ilf .
f//<4 ■■•/>• £*JLj&i
(i V x - n3lr
A/*" Ax.
IT/ * ' _
wW A'JvU
■*|^Br*^V * v /■ if v 7 M Sr %*■ .y
‘J ••-**'■ M JM «L V -V | ; *£., b|'J|r »<■•
\ y j * ff> jjBgff /
I flmJ
* A
l~ O^^V^W-y,
r ” " ,J^ ..., — -jMl 1 - / y\
'^tr r
4 I * ~TI
X... J X* t
■imi r • ■ ' -
She was able to reach up through the hole, and take the bowl in her
dusky little paws.


PAGE NINE
to do to keep you trom tumbling again."
As Pip danced on the warm hearthstone, the little snow-
flakes fell around him and made a little pool, but he was
getting nice and dry and did not care. Pep.ta made a big
bowl of hot bread and milk. "Take this to Tilly Hedgehog
she said, "she loves bread and milk, and it will do her cold
1 ”
Pip put on his overcoat and an old hat, and wrapped the
bowl in a woollen shawl to keep it hot. As he set out,
Pepita hung an empty sack over his arm. Go to the stoie
house and get some nuts and carrot slices, she said, and
be as quick as you can; it is freezing.
CHAPTER 3
PIP had often been to Tilly’s burrow, and thought he would
be able to go there blindfolded, but, to-day, with almost
every landmark buried, he had to confess himself beaten.
She lived in a burrow, dug in the side of a dry ditch, under
a hedge near the church; but now there was no ditch, and
all the length of the hedge looked the same, a long white
mound, with nothing he could see to tell him where she
lived. i
Dotted here and there in the snow were curious round
holes. Pip stopped to look at one of them, and, as he bent
down he could hear voices coming
up from deep down under the snow.
Very muffled and hollow sounding voices,
but he was able to recognise them. They
belong to Bertie and Barbara, his best
mouse friends, who lived almost next door
to Tilly.
Pip called down to them: “Hello, there,
Bertie and Barbara! How are you getting
on? Fine sort of Christmas, isn't it?”


PAGE TEN
Merry Christmas, Pip," they shouted back. "We’re doing
finely, thanks, it's very warm down here, and it was very
dark till the warmth melted our little peephole, but now we
can see well. We re having great fun making tunnels under
the snow, so that we can pop out at all sorts of places.”
Have you seen Tilly Hedgehog?” asked Pip. “Fve got
a bowl of bread and milk for her, but I cannot find her
home. It must be somewhere nearby.” “It is three holes
further on shouted Barbara. “I’ve been in to see her but
she was sleeping.' 1
Pip thanked her, and trotted along to the third hole,
over the countryside was a quiet stillness; not a sound
was to be heard, and the snow glowed golden pink under
the rays of the setting sun.
Two young rabbits, their noses wriggling eagerly as they
smelt the hot bread and milk, popped their head over a
arThJh f° k D f § rass : , Th ey hopped nearer, and sniffed
t the bowl as Pip put it down. “Oh, no!" said Pip; “that’s
shouldaawayy y ° U ' g °’ '*** bUCks! " he
veni nee^ g d °T by the ed g £ of the hole - he could hear a
gentle, Kaa-a-a-Whee-e-ew, Ka-a-a-Whee-e-ew,” slowly and
softly, over and over again. It was Tilly, to be sure, cosily
curled into a ball, her head tucked well
into her bristles, snoring as she slept.
At every breath, the wind whistled
through her bristles, and made a
whistling buzz like the tunes you play
on a papencovered comb.
It was such a funny sound that Pip
had to giggle to himself as he listened.
But now to wake her. First he called
just softly, then, as there was no reply,
louder and louder. Stili
she slept, so he looked
round for a long twig,
and, finding one, poked it


PAGE ELEVEN
down the hole till he could touch her with the end. Then
he pushed and prodded through her bristles till she awoke.
“Eee'e'e-ya-aw,” yawned Tilly, slowly waking and uncur -
mg herself. “Wake up!” called Pip. “Here s a bowl of hot
bread and milk for you. Pepita has sent it and hopes you are
feeling better.” Tilly slowly got up and waddled to the entrance,
where she was able to reach up through the hole and ta e
the bowl in her dusky little paws.
“This will do me a world of good, she said, 1 am
very grateful to Pepita, and to you for bringing it in this
cold weather. Thank you both very much.
Pip felt very happy that he had been able to help poor
sick Tilly, and he hummed a happy little tune as he ma e
his way to the store house, where he quickly filled his sac
with some of the good things he had stored. There were
round ripe hazel nuts, fat cherry bobs, brown acorns and
thick chunks of juicy carrot. Finally, as a special treat, a
nice piece of cheese, taken from Farmer Browns pantry,
and saved for part of their Christmas fare.
CHAPTER 4
LOCKING his store house and shouldering his loaded sack,
Pip tramped home through the darkening shadows. By
the time he reached the “Upper Crust,
it was quite dark, and Pepita had the
candles lit in the kitchen. Busily they
packed away on their shelves all the
things he had brought back. Pepita
seemed to be very excited about some"
thing. “Hurry up, Pip,” she said, but
what all the hurry was about she would
not tell him.
Suddenly, with a scurry of scamper"
ing feet, the children dashed into the
whiskers quivered,
kitchen. Then tiny
and their eyes were


PAGE TWELVE
bright with excitement. Their squeaky voices filled the room
as crowded round Pepita, asking, “Does Daddy know
yet. Have you told him?" “No, dears," replied Pepita
1 promised to let you tell Daddy all about it." They
jumped for joy, and, joining hands, danced round Pip. sing-
mg, Weve got a secret! We’ve got a secret!” They tied
a handkerchief over his eyes and turned him around three
rnnS f n p" 'tj ed -, hlm down Plages and round and
round till Pip had no idea where he was
“Guess where you are,” they shouted, but Pip could not
Open your eyes was the next order, and Pip did so.
What he saw made him blink with surprise and admiration.
He was standing in the doorway of the church school-
1C was connected to the vestry by a long passage,
Chrism!?? ° f h T S the argest ’ br 'B htest . most decorated
Christmas tree he had ever seen. Just one moment of quiet
children gave him to look and marvel, then, with squeaks
and squeals of delight the whole five of them swept past
him and danced around the tree.
The village people brought it here," said Pepita “I
people m^he 537 H that ther£ m ° re presents on 1C than
L P i® , ,*? e Vl [ la B e ’ 50 Perhaps it will be all right if we
et the children have some. The humans are going to have
SanrT ri° n Ch P^ aa and the Vlcar Is gong to play
, ta Wlth 'ong white whiskers." 8 S P Y
e , said Pip, I long white whiskers when
i, came out of the snowhole.
Cant I be Santa Claus, too?"
Pepita laughed and dug him in the
ribs with her fingers. “You are
fat enough, she squeaked, and ran
to join the children.


— »> \EW!rairm»W i
«-". v ■ w
inapt j/ ri* 1
■ v *
'iflhlvlr T \ «.
L . lBffi2i^BT^^^~ J^MHK!* ,, 'nErT!5r y IB^fcSK r ,- g 1 g _ _ ,..
Angel Had found a large coloured ball on the floor.


PAGE FOURTEEN
A light had been left on in the schoolroom, and the
big tree glistened and sparkled with brightly coloured orna"
ments, silver frosted sparklers and tiny coloured candles.
Every bough was thickly hung with gaily wrapped parcels,
and many more were heaped round the decorated tub in
which the tree stood.
Up and down the branches raced the little mice, shouting
with excitement and glee. Angel had found a large coloured
ball on the floor, and had scrambled on top of it. As she
did so the ball rolled, and she found that she was able to
paddle it round while balancing on top of it. Feeling very
pleased with herself, she was now rolling it round the tree,
looking for anything that might take her fancy.
High up, near the top of the tree, hung a red mesh
Christmas stocking, filled with small toys and sweets. Stick"
m g °ut of the top of it were large toys; a doll, a grey
doth elephant and a fan. Angel spied the stocking! “Whew!
What a beauty!” she squealed. Like a flash she skipped
down from the ball, and scuttled up the tree, so as to get
there before any of the others saw it.
For a long moment she stood admiring it, eyes and mouth
wioe open in wonderment, and too happy to say a word.
Suddenly, from below, there was a queer moaning noise, and
squeaks of alarm. Jonathan, who had been jumping wildly
from bough to bough, had missed his
footing and fallen against a large teddy
bear, knocking it over. It was one of
those that turn somersaults and make
noises, and, as it toppled over, it gave
out the queer moaning sound that had
startled everyone. Jonathan had
squeaked in alarm, and “P'S"t!” every
little mouse had streaked for home and
safety.


° 14 SkS¥ , "/
1U ** , V /
PAGE FIFTEEN
In a few seconds they were all at the “Upper Crust
and all dived under their beds in terror After a while, a
being still and peaceful, they slowly crawled out, one by
“I think that is enough for one night, said Pepita, and Pp
agreed “Off to bed, chicks, and up early to-morrow.
Quietly they undressed and crept into bed. where soon, one
by one, they fell asleep.
CHAPTER 5
ALL but one! Angel! She was always different and now
she could not forget the stocking she had seen and
wanted so much. She tossed and turned, but cou not
sleep. First she thought of the strange moaning bear then
of the stocking, till at last her longing overcame her lean
Slipping quietly out of bed, she crept cautious y on er
tiny pink feet out of her loaf of bread home, down the
long passages, past the fireplace, where a few embers stil
glowed faintly, and so to the schoolroom.
The light still burned nothing moved there was not
a sound. Angel stole into the room, feeling safer with every
step she took. Still nothing to fear. She raced up the tree,
and now she wasted no time, but climbed straight to the
stocking top, the only opening by which she could get to
the things inside. She pushed down between the doll and
the elephant, who had a squeaker fitted inside him, so that,
as she pushed and bumped, she bounced little squeaks out
of him. They were such tiny little squeaks for an elephant
that Angel was not at all afraid, in fact, she thought it was


Angei rroze” still. Her heart raced "Pit-a-pat.”


v*v Jr ■ is -
, Jrj>r»rii*** r* A \
N. '' 1 ' If M
ft*/ ; — w4**0S ., ■»^ M ~ r **^^^m^ : M
I W\ f Jj
Oh, what a beautiful pale green bath it was I


PAGE EIGHTEEN
great fun to make him cry, and stayed there tor a while,
pushing and punching, till she grew tired of making him
squeak. Then she made her way down past him to see what
was below.
Right under her feet was an orange coloured box,
decorated with a picture of a birthday cake with candles.
Oh! Cake! she thought, and nibbled away one corner of
the box. To her disappointment, it was not cake, but
candles! She tasted them, but they were not very nice, so
she turned away to find something better. Here there were
sweets wrapped in pretty papers. Angel nibbled one. “Oh'
Ah! Chocolate!” she squeaked in great delight, and nibbled
deeply to find what was in the middle. This one was soft
caramel, and she tried many others with different flavours.
To one side there stood a yellow duckling, which Angel
patted gently with her tiny paws till she came across the
key which wound him up. It was too stiff for her to turn,
which was just as well, for she would have had a great
fright if he had started to quack and waddle round inside
the stocking.
Hark! V/hat was that? Angel s sharp ears caught a
sound. It was the vestry door opening, and then the sound
of human voices. Angel turned like lightning to climb out
of the stocking, but her feet slipped through the mesh, and.
before she could untangle herself, in walked the Vicar and
his wife to see the tree.
Angel froze still. Her heart raced,
pit-a-pat, and she wished she had not been
y’ y--, so curious. How far away seemed her
little bed, and the quiet of her home!
The humans walked round the tree,
looking at the presents, and admiring the
decorations. “What a beautiful tree,” ex-
claimed the Vicar, “and presents
for everyone. In fact I think the
rs only family we have forgotten is
that mouse family that lives in the
vestry. He laughed and went on,
I would like to give a present to


PAGE NINETEEN
that little white one that ate peppermints and drank out of
my glass in the pulpit.
“Oh* That's the same one that dances on the organ
keys,” said his wife. "Yes, I would like to give her a
present, too. But suppose they will get their share of
the good things here."
Despite her fear, Angel wriggled with delight hearing
herself mentioned so nicely, but instantly froze again as
the Vicar turned towards the stocking.
“Talking of white mice," he said, “just look at that one
in the stocking. And a duckling, too. How kfehke they
make these toys nowadays.” "Marvellous, is it not? said
his wife, and they passed on round the tree, and then out
Trembling with relief, Angel set to work to free herself.
She twisted and turned, working first one little foot, t en
another, till she was clear of the mesh. Quickly
scrambled out, and ran down the tree, out of u°° ’
and never stopped till she was safely home and jumpe
straight into bed. In two flicks of a tail, 6 e a recover
from her fright and fell asleep, to dream of dolls, chocolates,
ducklings and Vicars, all mixed up together in an exciting
jumble.
CHAPTER 6
TWTEXT morning the children were all awake and running
JN round in the first faint grey dawn light. Pip and
Pepita, disturbed by the noise they made, got up, too, an
made an early breakfast of toasted cheese for the family.
As they sat round busy nibbling with their
tiny sharp teeth, they found time to talk
of the wonderful Christmas


„ m
gw y I i » MtBk
/Jk jftir* “v"^>>
■ V ify ) '.-^-yTO
, -* MgHl. L>, N * f
How she lathered and scrubbed herseK.


red wooUe^
PAGE TWENTY'ONE
Everyone was surprised to find how much Angel knew
about it but the naughty little mouse did not tell anyone of
her escapade. Excitement made her look more angelic than
usual which to Pepita, was a sure sign that her baby had
been up to some mischief. But it was Angels secret, and
she was not going to tell anyone, not at present, at any i ate.
After breakfast, each little mouse carefully cleaned its
face and combed its whiskers, then it rubbed its fur down
briskly with its little paws till it shone all over like brown
satin V Pepita made sure everyone was clean and tidy before
she would P allow them to go to the tree. Then there was a
scamper! It was much too early for any humans to be at
the church, so they had lots of time for a rea yg* *
round, and a chance for each one to choose g
the tree. Angel declared that she had heard Y
that they ought to have presents, though she did not say
when she had 6 heard him, so Pip and Pepita decided that it
was quite all right to take the things they wanted
as they were not labelled for someone else.
Angel could not pull the toys and sweets out of the st k
ine sci she nibbled at the stitches that closed the toe, an
before long the seam parted, and out shot all the contents
all over the floor, leaving the doll and the elephant hanging
in mid-air, with the empty stocking dangling below
The whole little mouse family set to work W sort out
the shower of presents. First they picked out all th §
to eat, and stacked them ready to cart away. Pepita took
charge of this heap, and made a neat little list of what th y
had.
There were: —
20 shortbread biscuits, filled with straw-
berry jam.
2 white sugar pigs, with
red woollen
tails.
4 chocolate marshmallow
2 packets of almonds and raisins
14 caramels, wrapped
pretty papers.


PAGE TWENTY-TWO
8 walnuts, in their shells (very hard to crack)
1 box of crystallised fruits.
1 bag of gingerbread biscuits (a bit hot to the tongue')
3 liquorice straps, and &
12 assorted chocolates (some slightly nibbled!).
one time **" “ g ° od thm g s t0 eat all at
time. Goodness me, exclaimed Pepita. “It will take
us weeks to eat all these. I think we will have to give most
really "IT h d K th ‘ S ° n ' y t0 tease them because
rea ly she had a better idea in mind. All the little mice
coked very sad, particularly Angel, till one of them, Aggie
I think it was, made a bright suggestion. ® ’
• V „ US giv /. a Christmas party, too,” she cried; “we can
nvite all our friends to share all these good things with us.”
Immediately all the other children echoed the cry “Let’s
f 6 a . Party, and they danced impatiently around’Pepita
this was just what she had intended to do, Pepita at
once agreed but said: “Very well then, but each of you
ud to u ake 11 a SUCcess ' Flrst of all . open
up all the boxes, so that we can carry all the things home ”
a cotr n :r to f r rk , wi , th a wm - and s °° n ***
ant stream of busy little mice running to the “Upper
Crust, each carrying a chocolate, or half a biscuit or some
other delicious burden The walnuts were not easy, but P%
Jonathan managed to roll them along to the
where they pushed them through the hole
and stored them behind the wainscot.
As soon as all the eatables were cleared
away, the children started to look at the
other gifts, Angel, struggling to lift the lid
a u a - l’. Caught a S lim Pse of a beautiful
dolly s bath. Hastily she called the others
the others,
and when Jonathan
had chewed


PAGE TWENTY 'THREE
through the strings that tied it, they lifted off the lid.
Oh, what a beautiful pale green bath it was! Adorned with
hand-painted pink flowers, and with it there v/as a sponge,
and a large egg of pink scented soap tied with a fancy
ribbon.
“We must have that,” gasped Angel, “then we can all
have baths before the party to-night. Me first, ’cos I found
it!” The others agreed, and all set to work to cart it
away. Pushing, pulling and heaving, they got it to the hole
near the fireplace. It was too wide at the top to go
through! Angel nearly wept then, “Turn it upside down,
she commanded. “It s nearly the same shape as the hole,
then.” Sure enough, when they tried it that way, to their
great joy, it just scraped through.
said Pepita, “we must make a list of guests, and
then Father and Jonathan can go out with the invitations.”
So she sat down and wrote out the names of all their
friends, on a piece of caramel paper, in the queerest cramped
little scrawl you ever did see.
First of all there was Mrs. Ticklewhiskers, who lived in
the large haystack, and who had, beside her own large family,
a number of refugee mice to care for. Then there were
Bertie and Barbara, with their tiny family, and, of course,
Tilly Hedgehog, if she were well enough. six black
mice, Jonathan s pals, who lived in Farmer Melling s corn-bin,
dashing lads, these! Robin Redbreast, with Jenny and family,
a great gossip, Mrs. Robin! The Moles?
We-e-e-11, you know, they live so deep down,
and their feet axe so muddy . . . No —no
moles! Who else? The rats? “No, from
everyone. “They are too greedy,
and they bully all the little ones.
Besides, they don’t wash very often!”
So —no rats!


PAGE TWENTY-FOUR
One by one, names were suggested, and put down or
rejected, until Pepita called, “That’s enough, and we've got
to get the orchestra yet. That makes another dozen. Thank
goodness, there's plenty of food!”
Pip and Jonathan, dividing the list between them, set off
to deliver all the invitations, while, at home, each little
mouse set to work with a will to prepare the house, and
the food, for the many guests that were expected to come.
CHAPTER 7
TT was late in the afternoon before Pip and Jonathan
A returned, and all the preparations were complete.
Everyone had worked so hard that they were tired so
the whole family went to bed for a rest. Their own p’arty
was not to begin till the humans had left the schoolroom
so there was plenty of time to rest, and so to be ready to
enjoy the fun later.
When It was approaching midnight, Pip woke them, and
o d them that it was time to get up and get ready for the
party. The bath had been left behind the fireplace, where
it was nice and warm in spite of the bitter weather Angel
of course was the first to use it, and how she did enpy
herself How she loved the scented soap! And how she
lathered and scrubbed herself, till her fur shone whiter than
the snow outside, and her tiny hands and feet were like pink
rose petals.
And then, after she had finished, each in turn bathed,
then dried, brushed and polished their fur till it shone sleek
as velvet.
Excitement grew as each one was dressed in best party
clothes. So many bows to
tie, so many hooks to fasten.
Whiskers to be curled and
polished, and tails to be
groomed.


J I * m ■'
I 1 1 f i / : ! —
? J * | I E.
One balloon was caught on Tilly's sharp bristles.


I
0
PAGE TWENTY-SIX
Pepita, wantea in half-a-dozen places at once, and vet
managing somehow to do it all. y
Jonathan was ready long before the girls. He wore a
hne gold-coloured suit, and carried yellow kid gloves. He
was oping to make a good impression on a young ladv
mouse, who would be one of Mrs. Tickiewhiskers’ p!rty
sever,*] H T dunng the afternoon and had booked
fnM Vi""" 5 - a He Crept awa y to the vestry, and Pin
£°Tedte h o r f very , am “ sed to see him climb to
courtly manner. mirr ° r ’ '*** praCtlSe b ° Wln g ln a
hd P' n g all L the &rk Pepita was ready quite
any ° f i* 16 " 1 ’ and Pl P’s heart thumped with
AhTl. “ S r £ a PP eared wearing her wedding dress Little
dd he know of the trouble she had had to get into it Pip
Hv d ng a Md y fille e d Pt h a Wdl ' stocked P antr y- and years of good
a bu«on d he fi r^ d considera hly. She had fastened
a button here and there, and covered the gaps very carefully
Suiter °' h " »k"S:
Pip was looking very handsome in his fine coat of neri-
wmkle blue, worn over a cherry coloured waistcoat of which
is increasing waistline showed rather too much. Aggie who
XkeTfor him I dlSt ” guished had cuTd hi!
appearance A“p g ‘ vm § , h ™ a most elegant finish to his
appearance. As Pepita joined him, she thought what a fine-
looking mouse he still was. She kissed him at which Pm
bowed with easy grace and asked for the fim dale P
q. ne P ne t^le S ir l s appeared, looking as sweet
a\ST g K lsl °Tt Em,ly ’ m a P lnk dress ’ with
a blue sash and slippers. She is the fat and iollv
slippers. She is the fat and jolly
let, her mother’s pet, a shy and
m yellow, with green sash and
slippers. Aggie, or, as she
ferred to be called, Agnes, took
a great deal longer to dress than
one. Then Violet
demure mouse, in


PAGE TWENTY-SEVEN
the others; she wanted to be the belle of the party, so had
gone to a lot of trouble to adorn herself, by stitching a big
purple bow on to her dress, and in arranging a particularly
large one on the top of her head. She carried a tiny toy
fan she had found in the stocking, and was sure that she
would be the prettiest mouse present.
CHAPTER 8
NOTHING had been forgotten to make the party a
success, and the orchestra that had been arranged for was
the best in the district. The leader was the big cricket
who lived under the hearthstone, and his band contained
crickets, cicadas and a few frogs, who supplied all the
bass notes. j r> v
It was time for the guests to arrive, so Pip and repita
went to the door to welcome them in, and the girls, and
Jonathan, stood ready to show them to the reception rooms
that had been arranged in the cupboard. Upstairs, where
the "Upper Crust” stood, was reserved for the ladies, and
below, where it was a trifle damp, was the gentlemens
smoking room. A few of the guests were a trifle too large
to get through the passage, and had to leave their hats and
coats in the vestry.
Tilly Hedgehog, who had recovered from her cold,
brought back the soup bowl. She was still very sleepy
though, and when she had stumbled inside and sat by the
fire warming her little toes, she immediately took a nap.
tnp ” said Penita. “I
"Oh dear me,” said Pepita.
do hope she will not snore.”
Everyone knew every'
one else, so there was no
shyness, and the fun be'
gan at once. First the


W "9SSS? - - |y~ . -
; V-.-i V HP' ' : “I
■ r^: * jr .- -•- , r \ . -~ : w tV
... * H^J
Lfr** *Sl 1 teir |mS; xflflr
SF-jISM K 'p. jf " /^j
_jf MJH '-Mf
\ <19 ft v^R
« j a *. ,.'% \ y pi
f * 5. HL-& jtT / U fit £L
Jr ’ m Al
flr * 1 %L ■HtABt-' ftdiWf" ■ ' \
/ / t 1 ■! aK aft - hmKB I J > \ ■
' ' «| Bk v » v \
-x JnR . 1 t \> Vi
PL3w l i r * > tr~-rr k Vi r,
; v v> - JI III I IMbmiWI JWPk y# JBk 3 *.
u jToV-/ ‘ V N J
f\ \ W *%_!
v*. v 1 v ,.,
\/ w 0
Hr.. * - -« IV 7W
Bh!MVfr"TriBi sJfeJ/ \ -^.«.e»f3
A*. VIS
Yv If
They went through the steps of the beautiful "Mouse Minuet."


PAGE TWENTY-NINE
fiddlers played a Barn Dance, with the frog base drums
puttmg in a deep “Urn-Pom-Pom” at the right moments
and the jolly tune and romping dance put everyone in the
highest spirits. Other dances followed and m the intervals
some of the family or guests sang or did parlour tncks_
During the dancing, Angel wandered away to the _ schoo -
room, in search of anything of value left there_ She
maged around, and found a box of balloons that ha ° b f e
dropped and overlooked. Huffing and puffing she at last
managed to blow up three of them and tied a string to
each Then, with her precious balloons floating out
grandly behind her, Angel scampered into the vestry, an
L round among the dancers. Turning sharply near the
Ictll IUUIIU ulAlvy o - r-p -11 *
fireplace, one balloon was caught on iillys
sharp bristles, and burst with a loud
“BANG!"
Poor little Angel burst into tears, but j Q
Tilly comforted her by taking her back to
the schoolroom, and soon they found more
balloons, which Tilly blew up for her, and
much bigger than Angel could blow them,
so that they floated about in the slightest
breeze.
Gaily Angel returned to the vestry, but,
as she entered, a strong draught blew
through the doorway, and swept the balloons
along and up. Angel was dragged off her
feet, and, still clinging tightly to the
strings, was lifted up to the ceiling
There she hung like an acrobat, slowly V <
bobbing up and down as the balloons
bounced against the ceiling.
The whole company was thrown into S,
panic and confusion. Pip, always quick in
thought and action, called for help, and, runnin
to the schoolroom, seized the empty mesh stock'
ing that had been thrown into a corner,
and his friends held it out like a fireman s net,
and kept it outstretched under Angel as she
floated along.


PAGE THIRTY
Pepita called to her to let go, but she was not going to
lose her balloons again, and held on grimly. Neither per'
suasion nor threats would make her lose hold. Finally
Jonathan had an idea to solve the problem. In the school'
room he had seen a peashooter and a lot of loose glass beads.
Hastily he fetched them and, filling his mouth with the
beads, he set to work to try to burst the balloons.
His aim was poor, so that he made many misses, and
hits on Angel, before he finally got in a good shot.
Bang went tne big pink balloon, and Angel wailed in
sorrow, bouncing like .a monkey on a string, but still holding
firmly on. 8
A lot more misses, several sharp cries from Angel as she
was hit again, and then he burst the second, a long, purple
badoon. This was enough, for the cluster, and Angel, started
to sink slowly down to the floor.
Pepita took Angel firmly in charge, and whisked her
away to rub liniment into the bruises caused by Jonathans
bead bullets.
After the excitement had died down, Pip announced that
the next dance was the supper dance. Everyone was asked
to help bring out the supper things, and then, after supper,
there would be some entertainment and a competition waits.’
av f, a^wa Y s a sp e dH supper dance; it is called the
Nut Romp.” In it, at the start, the ladies sit round the
room, while the gentlemen pretend to search for a nut
growing on a tree. Each one then gathers
a nut, and brings it to the lady he wishes to
take in to supper. If she wants him for a
partner, she pretends to nibble at the nut.
Then they join hands, and romp round and
round it. Finally, they waltz off together,
stopping at every corner to go “round the
nut” again.


PAGE THIRTY'ONE
If she doesn’t want him, she hides her face, and he has
to go from one to another until he finds a partner willing
to go "amutting” with him.
Jonathan, of course, made straight for the mouse of his
choice. Annette was her name, and she was a French
refugee mouse, who had formerly lived in a smart millinery
establishment in Paris. She was very attractive, and Jonathan
had many rivals, but she seemed to prefer him to any of
them.
After the "Nut Romp,” everyone set to work with a
will to prepare supper. While the gentlemen carried every'
thing down to the hearth, Pepita and the ladies set the tables
and made the tea. Soon everyone was settled, and so hungry
had the dancing made them that not a crumb was left.
Then one of the guests gave a recitation, based on the
true story of "Hickory'Dickory'Dock,” who was really a
gallant mouse of long ago. His lady love was impnsone
at the top of a tall grandfather clock, and was to be executed
at the stroke of one o’clock. But Sir Hickory stormed up
the clock, slew his enemies, and carried away his bride to
safety, leaving the clock to strike one, indeed but t e
mouse was gone! ,
Pip now announced the competition waltz,, and all the
couples, looking rather shy, lined up for the start. The
orchestra struck up the most popular waltz, tune, Tne ue
Cheddar,” and, the contest was on. Bravely the gentlemen
swung their partners, and sweetly the ladies twirled an
spun. For a while it was difficult to pick the winners, but
then Annette and Jonathan started to exhibit some fancy
steps. The cunning young things had been meeting in secret


op TT J > e^
PAGE THIRTY-TWO
to practise, and their steps were so exactly matched, and
they pirouetted so gracefully together, that everyone said
there could be no doubt that they deserved the first place.
Pepita awarded the prizes. For Annette, a pair of tiny
earrings (from a cracker), and so sweet did she look that
Pepita had to kiss her. Jonathan’s prize was a medal (also
from a cracker), which Pip said he should have as a sharp-
shooter, as well as for dancing. All the party laughed at
the joke, that is, everyone except Angel, who only looked
thoughtful, and rubbed herself in several places.
Someone suggested that Annette and Jonathan should give
an exhibition dance, and they were very pleased to show
how clever they were at dancing. After a word with Mr.
Cricket, they climbed on to the window sill, which made
a splendid stage. Here, where they could be seen by every-
one, they went through the steps of the beautiful “Mouse
Minuet,’’ to the tune of “Moonlight and Gorgonzola,’’ com-
posed many years ago by an Italian, Signor Whiskeretti.
By this time some of
yawning. Pepita and
agreed that it was time
guests crowded round
“For They Are Jolly
they put on there warm
Pepita] for the wonder-
joyed, they scampered
Within a few
feet quiet in the “Upper
been able to peep inside,
seven little mice , in
cosily warm and fast
say “Goodnight,” and
present.
the younger mice were
Mrs. Ticklewhiskers
to go home, so the
Pip and Pepita and sang,
Good Fellows.” Then
clothes and, thanking
ful party they had en-
away home.
minutes there was per-
crust,” and, had you
you would have seen
seven little beds, all
asleep, where we will
leave them for the
Printed in Australia by Queen City Printers Pty. Ltd.. Melbourne, for the
Publishers, Murfett Pty. Ltd.. 1 ] 8 Queen Street, Melbourne.


ft
'S Ss< y - +
3 1508 02233159 4




