

PETE PEARSON
Elephant Hunter
And
Game Ranger.
REPRINTED FROM
"ARARAT ADVERTISER.”
1934.




PETE PEARSON
Elephant Hunter
And
Game Ranger.
REPRINTED FROM
‘■ARARAT ADVERTISER.”
1934.


THE LATE “PETE” PEARSON.


Introduction.
According to Mr Budyard Kipling
“there is a legion that never was
listed,” and if the truth be told Aus-
tralians for some reason or other oc-
cupy a very worthy place in that
legion. Not the least of this noble
band of adventurers was the late
“Pete” Pearson, the most famous
elephant hunter in Tropical Africa.
If one looks to the map of Africa
he will find about its centre a maze
of lakes and mountains which have
appealed to human imagination since
the dawn of history. Who has not
heard of the “Mountains of the
Moon,” or the head waters of the
mighty Nile, or of slave raids, or
Livingstone, Emin Pasha, Stanley,
Fashoda, the Belgian Congo. Victoria
Nyanza ? Romances have been woven
about their peoples and places, some
of them tales of past peoples, at which
Rider Haggard was an adept. Here
are said to dwell the pigmies of an-
cient history. Here it is asserted
that the colored races took their origin
and spread over the whole of Africa
and Asia, more especially in the latter
case by war and conquest and the
traffic in slaves. It is the cradle of
the black race just as the Pamirs of
Central Asia are said to be the butu-
place of the white races. Certain It
is that until quite recently, Central
Africa was a terra incognita, a place
unknown except by big game
hunters, missionaries and explorers,
who for their various reasons, made
it a happy hunting ground, and gene-
rally left their bones in some unchart-
ed corner of the deep, untrodden
forests of the Interior, or died of the
deadly tropical diseases to which all
white people were specially liable.


Ail this territory has been ex-
plored. and. opened up to trade and
civilisation in the last thirty years,
and this has been achieved not by Go-
vernments, or companies, or other or-
ganisations, but by a band of adven-
turers, of whom Pearson was one of
the most. conspicuous.
He was born in Melbourne in 1876,
and educated at the Caulfield Gram-
mar School, but could not settle
down to the ordinary life of a pro-
fessional man, and at the age of 18 he
left school, and for a few years tra-
velled from one end of Australia to
another in search of adventure, which
ever seemed to beckon him on. He
was a surveyor’s assistant in Gipps-
land, a shearer in N.S.W. and Queens-
land, a miner in Broken Hill, and
finally, as the South African war was
then in progress, he joined a ship as
an ordinary seaman in order to get
to the front.
His arrival in South Africa was
opened by an adventure to be related
further on, which marked him out as
a man of supreme courage and initia-
tive. But nothing could be better for
our purpose than to copy the account
of his life given in the “East African
Standard” in essential particulars
at the time of his lamented death
at the early age of 52, following an
operation for appendicitis ;
Kampala, 14th September, 1929.
Mr P. C. Pearson, the famous white
hunter and game ranger, of Uganda,
who accompanied the Prince of Wales
on his Safari last year, died yesterday
after a severe operation.


“Pete" Pearson, as he was popularly
known In Uganda, was one of those
men who could speak with authority
of the “early days” in the Congo, of
those times when a small handful of
Intrepid hunters sought fortune in the
elephant fields of Central Africa. He
was, in fact, a member of that “com-
pany of adventurers” of whose activi-
ties John Boyes writes in his recently
published book. When the news
came through to Nairobi that gold
had been found across the Nile, near
the Belgian Congo frontier, and John
Boyes determined to “get on the move
again,” one of the first persons he met
in the back-blocks of Uganda was
“Pete” Pearson whom he had not seen
since leaving the Karamojo country
some years before.
“Pete” Pearson was one of the
twenty-five or so hunters who roamed
the Lado Enclave, as they had been
described by Theodore Roosevelt. In
his descriptions of some of the “Gen-
tlemen Adventurers” of the Lado En-
clave days, John Boyes makes refer-
ence to ‘Clarke and Pearson’ who
were two good and true men who
played their part well in those halcyon
times,’ and are to-day game rangers in
Kenya and Uganda respectively.
Doubtless they are no less efficient or
zealous because they were once pro-
minent hunters themselves in the
Lado and the Congo.”
“Pete” Pearson came out to East
Africa about 1904, and engaged in
white hunting in that part of the
country now known as Kenya until
1907, when news of the fortunes that
were to be made in elephant hunting
in the Congo drifted through to Nair-
obi, and attracted most of
the prominent hunters across


Lake Victoria. The company
of "unlicensed sportsmen” is a dimin-
ishing one. They worked in the
Congo, some of them as lone hunters
and others in parties from 1907 to
1911. There were close on thirty at
the time, but one of the “Company of
Adventurers,” in a recent conversation,
expressed the opinion that there were
only eight of them living. After the
elephant poaching days “Pete” Pear-
son returned to professional hunting
until the outbreak of the Great War,
when he enlisted and was posted to
the Intelligence Department. After
the war he joined the Uganda Game
Department as an elephant hunter,
and in this capacity he figured in one
of the outstanding events of his
career, namely, in the Safari under-
taken by His Royal Highness the
Prince of Wales in Uganda last year.
It has been said that “Pete” Pearson
discharged his duties in this Safari
with conspicuous distinction. He also
accompanied the Governor of Uganda
on several of his Safaris into the in-
terior, and as recently as a few months
ago he went into the field with mem-
bers of the film company producing
"Trader Horn.”
“Pete” Pearson as one of the best
known characters in Uganda. He
was extremely popular, and was re-
cognised as a wonderful horseman and
stockwhip man.—East African Stan-
dard.
After distinguishing himself in the
war he went to Uganda in 1905, and
then started that career of adventure
which made him one of the most
noted of that band of “Gentlemen
Adventurers,” who, in their search for
new hunting grounds, opened up new


country which the various Govern-
ments, who have divided Africa be-
tween them, had failed to do up to
that time.
Incidentally a few reputations,
founded on the alleged perils of past
explorers, were revealed to be more
putty than steel. We hope later on
to relate some of Pearson’s experi-
ences, which, though sober fact, equal
any romance which has ever been
written about the dark and fearsome
wilds of Africa.
PART 2.
A PERILOUS SWIM TO SHORE.
We have no authentic records of
the reasons which impelled Pearson
to select a sailing ship tramp for his
voyage to South Africa, the Mecca of
all adventurers spirits since the out-
break of the Boer War, but it is quite
possible that his disposition, apart
from an acute shortage of funds, made
him think there was more thrill to be
got from such a derelict than
the steerage of an ordinary steamship.
And if it had not been for the kind-
ness of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, the
film people who engaged him for the
“Trader Horn” expedition, we would
probably not have known anything
about the trip or his manner of get-
ting ashore. We can easily imagine,-
however, the youth, for that he in fact
was, with his shearing and rough rid-
ing experiences in the open spaces of
our Australia behind him, standing
on the wharf and eyeing the vessel
with a view of getting on board in
some capacity or other. Windjammers
are not very particular about their


crews, at least in the unskilled occu-
pations, and it would be easy for
Pearson to get a job as apprentice or
cabin-boy or off-sider; but it is just
as easy to understand that when such
a man had endured two months of
life at sea with its many disabilities,
and with always someone or other
over him in the capacity of “Boss,”
he would make up his mind to get
away from her as soon as he could.
And so it is no wonder that when the
vessel reached South Africa, and in-
stead of going to the wharf it an-
chored a mile from the shore, his
longing eyes looked to the distant
coastline as a call to adventure and a
relief from his utterly distasteful and
unhappy situation. What he did not
know was that the vessel had been
anchored in the stream to keep the
dissatisfied crew on board, for the
waters were infested with sharks, and
the distance from the shore
was quite far enough to de-
ter any but the strongest
swimmers. But he was to soon find
out. When he expressed his desire
to leave they simply laughed at him,
and when they said if he liked he
could swim ashore there is not the
slightest doubt that was the one thing
to make Pearson want to do it And
not even a remark that there would
be a few sharks knocking about would
deter him in the least. And to the
grinning crew he waved his hand and
jumped into the sea.
He had only swum about 200 yards
from the ship when he again raised his
hand to the crew lined on the side
in a mock farewell, for being a good
swimmer and used to surf bathing at
one period of his career he had no
doubt that he would easily make the
shore if he took his time. But he


could see the crew pointing to some
object In the water, and turning
round to his horror he was scared
almost out of hls senses by the sight
of a grim triangular fin sweeping to-
wards him.
Almost at the same time, nowever,
he noticed providentially floating to-
wards him a waterlogged native boat
only a few yards away. Then en-
sued a grim fight between the shark
and himself. The watchers saw him
put his head down and with his, legs
kicking like a thrashing machine he.
started a mad rush for the. boat.
Now, a shark is a timid creature
when up against something with
which he has had no . previous experi-
ence, and so the swimmer at last
reached the boat. But the wash of
the sea and the slipperiness of the
keel made it a hard matter to get on
top, and several times he slipped off
again into the sea with a splash, , al-
ways keeping a wary eye on the grey
fin that came almost. to his feet on
one occasion when he was just about
getting on top. But at last with his
fingers clinging to the gunwhale he
heaved himself across the craft as the
grey fin passed by. Yet he was not
safe by any means, for no sooner had
this happened than the boat gave a
sickening lurch and rolled over with
him.
The men watching from the vessel
saw him come to the surface gasping
and struggling hard to get on the
keel again, his struggles being evident-
ly quite enough to keep the man-eater
a sufficient distance away for safety.
But at last Pearson was seen to get
astride the boat, and with hls knees
under him was in a fairly secure posi-
tion as long as he did not slip or fall


off. Now the question was how was
he to get ashore with the monster
cruising about, and as he had for-
gotten the man-eater for a minute
or two he looked about to see
what had become of him. Then his
nerves suffered another jar, and what
he saw gave him, he used to say, the
greatest shock of his life. For there
cruising around was not one shark
but ten.
In this predicament he swiftly de-
bated as to whether he could call for
help from the ship from which he
was escaping, for even the captain
seeing him on the boat, con-
cluded he was safe, and Instead of
sending a boat to catch him the cap-
tain gave him a sporting chance to
reach land and never thought of
an emergency. But just when he
almost decided to give a cooee in the
hope of attracting attention, he saw
a piece of driftwood floating by, and
that decided him to make the attempt
to get ashore at any risk rather than
go back to the humdrum of wind-
jammer life. He risked upsetting his
frail craft, and found he could lean
over just enough to work the drift-
wood to the boat and dodge the sharks
who came inquisitively near.
It was this same calm and resolute
courage, under trying circumstances,
which got him and others under his
charge from dangers in the wilds of
Africa which would have daunted
many a brave man. And it explains
the type of man, who, in after years,
formed that half dozen men who
pioneered the Belgian Congo, and
were the nucleus of the “Gentlemen
Adventurers” who have become so
famous in modern Central African
history.


For about half a mile he fought
sharks at one moment, steadied the
derelict boat from the wave which
threatened to engulph it and himself,
and slowly and surely splashing with
his legs and paddling with the pieces
of driftwood he neared the shore. But
even then his troubles did not cease.
He was not far off from the big surf,
which is perennial on the East African
shore, and here his surfing at Bondi
and elsewhere helped him consider-
ably. . Diving into a breaker free from
sharks, which always cruise near the
surf, but never in it, he steadied him-
self on the keel of the wreck, and,
like Caesar, took his good or bad for-
tune with him to the sea. His luck
was in this time. Breathless, bruised
and panting, he was carried on the
crest of a breaker to be laid quietly on
the shore, and to thank his lucky stars
he was still in the land of the living
and not a choice morsel for the mon-
sters which cruised just outside the
breakers disappointed of their prey.
In after years he used to relate how
the sharks swam about him in slow,
menacing circles all the way, and
whenever he thought of the sea after-
wards he could never get out of his
mind the picture indelibly impressed
on his memory on that occasion.
PART 3.
SAVAGE LIFE IN NO MAN’S LAND.
It is not our purpose to record the
commonplace events of a hunter’s
life. They have been printed ad
nauseam in all sorts of books and
magazines, and generally resolve
themselves into a statement that “We
followed the spoor of a large bull, and,
after following them, I managed to


get the elephant with the first shot
with a Ross just behind the ear—a
very vulnerable spot, etc., etc. His
tusks were large and weighed so much,
and were worth so much.” Pearson
had his full allowance of hunting
trophies, and became at last one of
the surest and safest shots in the
whole territory—a reputation which
afterwards marked him out for selec-
tion as the hunter in charge of the
Safari when the Prince of Wales and
his brothers were out on an expedi-
tion to the Uganda in 1929.
We are more concerned just now
with the events which marked off the
various areas in Central Africa as the
property of Belgium, Germany, Eng-
land and France, and therefore in-
truded into the ambit of the Gentle-
men Adventurers the elements of
international controversy. Though
no names were mentioned, it is well
known that Pearson was concerned in
altering the boundaries of one Euro-
pean Power which added to the area
of the British territory. They were
a curious crowd these first adventur-
ers, and John Boyes relates that when:
Roosevelt, the ex-Presldent of the
United States, was on his famous ex-
pedition to Central Africa, he proposed
their toasts as follows ;—“To the Ele-
phant Poachers of the Lado Enclave.”
As some of them laughingly protested
at his bluntness, he gravely amended
his toast to “Gentlemen Adventurers
of Central Africa,” for, he added,
“That is the title by which you would
have been known in Elizabeth’s time.”
And he was quite right, for the ad-
venturers, Pearson amongst them,
never forgot their country and flag. It
is curious that amongst the select few
who first penetrated this unknown
land there were several Australians,


Bell, another famous hunter, being
amongst them.
On one occasion, while following
elephants Into unknown country,
Pearson was suddenly confronted with
a notice board, announcing the fact
that he was presumably in German
East Africa. And further search re-
vealed the fact that there were other
notices in German, apparently de-
limiting the border. All he did was
simply to shift the boards a few miles
further on, and finally the boundary
was found in later days to be 35
miles beyond the original border. This
was only possible because proper sur-
veys were impossible in those days,
and all that the hardy adventurers
on both sides did was to make their
own boundaries. And they remain
as he put them to this day.
The Lado Enclave, as it is called,
was really the meeting place between
the colonial possessions of the Euro-
pean Great Powers, as well as the
undefined kingdoms of Abyssinia and
Egypt, or rather the Soudan. And
although the rival explorers of the
different nations were friendly
enough when they happened to meet,
yet there was never absent from their
minds the interests of their respective
countries. Nominally the Enclave
was Belgian territory, but owing to
the difficulty of policing it in any way
it was in reality a no man’s country.
The natives were, according to Pear-
son and others, the lowest of the low.
In a letter dated 13/11/08, he says ;
“I have been cut off from civilisation
for six months in the Congo Free
State shooting elephants. If you
look on your map of Africa and find
Lake Albert and the Nile you will see
a stretch of 400 miles of country
abounding in elephants, hippopota


mus, rhinoceros, leopards, lions and
game too numerous to mention.
Then there is the wily savage, who
generally respects the white hunter
only because he has a gun and thus is
able to provide the native with meat.
He is a lover of meat, which he can-
not procure for himself, and as I only
want the tusks, he has the meat of
the elephants which I kill. The
native here, though not so bad as
those further west, indulge in the
pleasant habit of eating one another
up if their crops fall. Fortunately
the crops have been good this year,
for which I am very grateful, as I
would have cut up, in their ideas into
particularly good, juicy steaks,
though rather tough to my idea.
It is a strange sight to see the
beggars get to the meat after a kill,
and I would strongly advise anyone
with a delicate stomach not to bo
present. When going after the ele-
phant they follow in hundreds, run-
ning and jumping about, sometimes
in front and sometimes behind, until
one gets close to the elephant. Then
they evaporate up trees and among
rocks, or any place that is safe from
danger. He has a wonderful respect
for Jumbo, and will never get nearer
than half a mile from him if he knows
one Is about. But when you have
him down, who so brave as they ?
They sneak up quietly through the
grass and scrub and peer about to
make sure he is dead. As soon as
they are sure then a regular orgy
starts. They pounce upon the carcase
with home-made knives, fighting and
squabbling, even so far as to cut one
another, and often there are a few
deaths. But death is of little conse-
quence here. I have seen three
killed whilst fighting for the meat.


Men and women are just the same—
the favorite morsel being the entrails.
I have seen eight or more at once in-
side the carcase fighting and squeal-
ing for the tit-bits and eating it as
as they go on.
This fondness for meat is at the
bottom of their cannibalism probably,
and is a commonplace of native life.
Some tribes prefer it even to any
other meat. And further west from
here the Bucongo tribe have made it
a form of etiquette that If a native
dies in one village his corpse is sent
to a neighboring village as a present
for a feast. And this extreme kind-
ness is reciprocated by the feasters
when one of their tribe dies. If they
are very hungry they don’t call the
witch doctor for the invalid except to
hurry him off so that they can send
some meat to their neighbors, and the
the latter are equally careful to send
some back as soon as possible.
In another letter, at the end of
1910, he alludes to the savages again.
Writing from Koba, Nile Province, he
says :—“I returned to my main camp
six days ago, or, rather, to where it
should have been, for the natives had
come down and burnt it up after loot-
ing everything valuable in it. They
also indulged in their usual habit of
killing some of my men for the
breakfast table. So I am off to-
morrow, according to the custom of
their villages and blot out some of
them as well. This sort of thing helps
to keep cne off melancholy between
hunting trips, especially in the dry
weather, when there are no crops to
put in. This sort of thing is quite
inevitable, for they do not look on
life as we do, but, as I said, they kill


one another lor meat and do not mind
the compliment being returned. If
you do not return it they argue that
you are quite willing to be eaten, and
so come at you again until there is
nothing in the way of meat to eat
They do not imagine they will
escape scot free from me, because
they are used to reprisals, and each
argues that he is the one to escape
when the fight begins, In close
quarters I would have no show at all,
and so have to be wary and beat them
at their own game with the rifle as
against their arrows and the old-
fashioned rifles they can use at close
quarters. One slip and all is lost,
but on the whole I have thought it
better to die with an arrow in my In-
side rather than die inside one of
these Lado savages. So having ga-
thered my scattered boys together we
burnt out about half a dozen villages
where we could see the remains of
the cannibal feast about, and ‘blotted’
cut six of the murderers, and then
returned happy, having vindicated
ourselves In the eyes of the natives
as well as our own. Murder has to
be punished in the old tribal way, and
the natives recognise the justice of It,
and they will come in again in a few
days with a peace offering and pro-
mises to behave in future. So we
lived abundantly on fowls and eggs,
and all sort of vegetables, and soon
got over our troubles. They con-
sider I have won the fight, because
their casualty list is greater than was
mine, If the numbers were reversed
then I might expect another casualty
list of my men, and possibly myself,
and nc good done.”


(Part 4.)
ELEPHANT HUNTING,
Frequently in his letters Mr Pearson
stresses his contempt for the character
of the African native, but goes to more
than a little trouble to justify the
European hunters’ policy of reprisals
—a justification which he apparently
feels it necessary to make to relatives
whose Christian sentiments have been
somewhat shocked by his account of
the punishment he has given to native
offenders. “You do not go into hys-
terics,” he writes, “over a schoolmaster
flogging a boy or over a judge sen-
tencing a man to the whip. Then
why think it a crime for me to flog a
man who has stolen my property, or
for shooting a man who has attempted
my life ? You must always recollect
that I am speaking of occasions when
I’m on expeditions in districts where
there is no law, and where the weak-
est goes under. No white man ever
punishes a native if near a Govern-
ment station, where he can take him
to be tried and punished the same as
in this country.” That it was in the
early days of this century unwise to go
among the worst of the tribes was
brought home to Mr Pearson when in
1910 he ventured into a district hither-
to untraversed by white men. “They
w r ere too strong for me,” he naively
remarks. “I had to leave. They
dined off the best of my men and sent
one back to mo as a curio, I suppose;
they had cut off his Ups and his nose
and otherwise shockingly mutilated
him.”
To the intrepid hunter these experi-
ences were all part of the game, and
the life of danger and hardship had a
fascination which was not all due to


the prospect of substantial profit.
■'You will think me a flat for doing
it,” he writes to his Australian friends,
‘‘but the pay is good, and I think if I
were a rich man I would still indulge
in it. I make a good living, and I
would not be without the fun and ex-
citement for anything I know.” That
handsome rewards were to be gained
when conditions were favorable and
the hunter was of the calibre of “Pete”
Pearson is evident from his reports of
his efforts during 1908, when, with his
headquarters at Wadelai, an outpost
on the banks of the headwaters of
the Nile, he operated over a stretch
of country extending some 400
miles to the west. This year he
calls a “prosperous year," his day’s
bag on one occasion at least amount-
ing to ten elephants, the tusks of
which he valued at £3lO.
A good day’s sport in this
particular district is described by
the renowned hunter, W. Buckley,
in “Big Game Hunting in Central
Africa, as follows:—“While safaring
in the company of the late Pete Pear-
son between Wadelai and Nimule one
morning about 10 o’clock we surprised
an enormous troop of elephants water-
ing at the Nile, at a spot which is
known as Elephant Camp. During
the dry season in this part of Africa
the waterholes in the interior dry up,
and in consequence the small herds
come together, forming one continu-
ous herd. In the rainy season they
split up again into herds of two or
three hundred down to small
herds of from twenty to thirty, pre-
fering the waterholes to the Nile. On
this particular morning they were in
tremendous force. I sent back word
to Pearson, who, being down with
fever, was in the rear of the safari,


and having to be carried in a "ma-
chilla.” However, he came along at
once, when we commenced to sort out
the big bulls. On our opening fire
the elephants in the vicinity stamped-
ed amongst the enormous mass of
their fellows in the rear, creating ex-
traordinary confusion and jamming
each other in a tight wedge, in which
they commenced circling round and
round, eventually to get rounded up
again like a great herd of cattle.
Pearson and myself now went among
them, and by two or three o’clock
managed to bag nine, the smallest
pair scaling 50 lb. each tusk; the ele-
phants all this time being unable to
get away and rounding up again and
again. Wc then made for a small
hill, and this being a savannah coun-
try had an excellent view. About 4
p.m. the herd seemed to come to an
arrangement amongst themselves.
They all went off in six battalions like
an army on the march, each battalion
with its leader; one of the leaders on
each occasion happening to be an old
cow, and the intervals between the
battalions being from 50 to 100 yards,
very regularly kept. We now began
to make a count of the herd, our tally
being well over 2000 head—a magnifi-
cent sight, and the view, as I said,
could not have been better. This herd
had an itinerary of about 100 miles,
when they would arrive back at the
place they started from.” It is com-
monly believed that elephants accept
the leadership of their fellows in a
manner which has earned for these
huge creatures a reputation for intel-
ligence above that of most other ani-
mals.
John Boyes tells a remarkable story
of one of these animals, which he had
hit in, he thought, a vital spot, but


which with two others had managed
to get away. “Alter about , two hours’
tramp,” he says, “I found that they
had stopped near a river which ran
through a small ravine, where the one
that had been wounded had plucked
a bundle of reeds with its trunk, which
it was dipping in the river and slap-
ping against the wound on its head
as though to ease the pain. I have
always given the elephant credit for
a good deal of intelligence, but I con-
fess that this almost human display
of it rather surprised me.”
Even experienced hunters at times
failed to reach this vital spot, al-
though once a hunter really knows
where the brain is really situated and
has acquired enough Judgment and
practice to get the right angle to reach
it, he very seldom falls. A curious
incident happened to Mr Pearson,
when after shooting an elephant he
posed for a photograph by standing
on its back. While In this somewhat
elevated position he saw some more
elephants, after which he went. On
his return he found that the animal
on whom he had been standing had
walked away, and the hunter did not
see it again.
The securing of the ivory, though
undoubtedly the most dramatic part
of the hunter’s work, by no means
ended his troubles. To transport it
safely through difficult country, across
swamps and rivers, among hostile
tribes, needed careful organisation,
unlimited tact and resourcefulness.
W. Buckley relates one of the many
Incidents that occurred during the
transport of the tusks which were
secured by Mr Pearson during the
safari referred to above Two days


later, after dividing the proceeds,
Pearson left lor the east bank of the
Nile to obtain the provisions and am-
munition he was expecting at the
post of Koba. We arranged with the
chief, Issa by name, at the next vil-
lage to transport the porters to the
east bank of the Nile, which he pro-
mised to do, I arranging to take Pear-
son and his ivory In my private canoe,
which was much larger than the or-
dinary native variety. The flotilla
of three canoes started all right, and
was soon lost among the papyrus is-
lands, Pearson and myself starting
about half an hour later. We had
not gone far when a squall sprang
up, and I remarked to Pearson that
it was a good job he was in his large
canoe instead of being in one of the
smaller native craft, as the water was
being blown into moderate size waves,
and it is three miles across at this
place. After we had got half way
across we met the native canoes com-
ing back, their occupants shouting to
us that all the Waganda had been
drowned by the capsizing of their
canoes in the squall, and as none of
them could swim none had got ashore.
We now proceeded to search for the
porters, and found only one, who had
caught hold of a floating papyrus is-
land. We dragged him on board,
but found no trace of any others. I
landed Pearson, and as nothing fur-
ther could be done I proceeded to re-
turn to the west bank. During the
journey across something struck the
bottom of canoe, which sent it in the
air to an angle of 45 degrees but for-
tunately we came down plumb flat.
I grabbed my rifle and scanned round
to see what had done it. Then about
100 yards away an old hippo, shoved
his head and neck out of the water
to see, I Imagine, what effect his


bump had on the canoe. This being
my chance I got him, and he went
down, and did not worry us any more.
I wondered afterwards if perhaps he
had not in some way been responsible
for the capsizing of Chief Issa’a ves-
sels. Hippo, on the Nile were accus-
tomed to upset native craft crossing
the river with grain. After upsetting
a canoe load of grain they started to
demolish it. The natives, knowing
this, make for the shallows when
crossing the river, doing a zig-zag
course and speeding up when over the
deeper channels.
Part 5.
PERILS OF THE HUNTER.
It might seem from the foregoing
chapter that professional hunting,
particularly elephant hunting, was a
sure and quick road to fortune. In-
deed, when one sees a snapshot at
some camp in the jungle of 105 tusks,
weighing 5300 lbs., and valued at
£4OOO, lying together, and when one
reads of as many as ten elephants
being killed in one day, one is apt to
over-estimate the prizes of the game.
Though game was undoubtedly
plentiful at the time of Mr Pearson's
expeditions, the distances to be tra-
velled were enormous, and it must be
remembered that all equipment and
food had to be transported by native
porters on foot. Presents for the
natives of the country through which
the hunter passed had to be Included,
and although they were usually not
costly, they added somewhat to the
weight of the outfit Further, a
hunting licence had to be taken out
in the particular protectorate In


which the hunter might And his prey;
in the Belgian Congo, the hunter, In
addition to paying for his licence, had
to pay a super tax to the Government
as well as an export tax of 2J per
cent. A hunting licence allowed the
licencee only a certain number of ele-
phants, so that hunters preferred to
kill only old bulls, whose large tusks
would give the greatest value.
It was not unusual for Mr Pearson
to travel 20 to 30 miles in a day fol-
lowing the spoor of a bull. Even If
the quarry were finally hunted down,
it might easily happen that a careless
action on the part of his men, or even
the inadvertent breaking of a twig,
might give the warning, and a whole
herd stampede before a shot could be
fired. The feeding grounds of these
animals had, perforce, to be dense
undergrowth, the elephant "grass”
being two to three inches in diameter,
and eighteen feet high in places. In
such country it was only too easy for
the hunter to lost sight of his quarry,
and often he had to locate the beast
a few yards away and take aim while
standing on the shoulders of his gun
bearer—a precarious situation for both
bearer and borne—since the man
underneath could not sec what was
happening, and the man with tire gun
could not move readily, as his ankles
were clasped by his bearer.
Many thrilling stories could be told
by "Pete" Pearson of narrow escapes
he had under such circumstances.
The natives, too, were often unreli-
able; they would desert the safari at
the slightest provocation and at the
least opportune moment. Fresh
guides had to be engaged in each dis-
trict the hunter traversed, and,
strange as it may seem, most natives


have no bump of locality, and are
quite at sea when five miles from their
native villages. In dense forest
country hunters found that a guide
was useless when more than two
miles from his home.
The reliability of the gun bearer
was a most important factor in the
success of any hunting expedition,
and since most tribes, in their primi-
tive condition, depend on Ingeniously
constructed traps for the capture of
wild beasts, and all natives have a
wholesome fear of meeting them at
close quarters, it was no easy matter
to secure a man who would stand his
ground in the face of a charging
elephant. W. A. Buckley gives the
following thrilling account of the
dangerous situation created for him
by a defaulting gunbearer :—“On my
approaching the elephant, he watched
me intently while I manoeuvred for
an opening to get in a fatal shot, and
as I moved round to get the brain
shot by the ear, he also moved round,
and was always facing me, and, being,
too, in a depression was, therefore, at
the wrong angle to get the frontal
brain shot, I could see that he had
no intention of letting me get a
broadside of him, and also that he
was becoming seriously annoyed, and
would at any moment charge, so 1
whispered to my gunbearer, Slmba,
that I was going to put in a frontal
shot with both barrels to turn the
beast, when he was Immediately to
hand me my second gun, upon which,
no doubt, a vital spot would be ex-
posed, and I would then be able to get
him.
“He now raised his trunk to charge,
whereupon I let him have both barrels
between the eyes, turning him, as I


expected. I then held out my hand
for my second gun, as arranged with
Siraba, but was informed that he had
already fired the same time as I had.
I was very annoyed, but could not
wait to argue about it then, as the
elephant was off at full speed, so I
loaded again, mounted the mule, and
gave chase, the gunbearer and the
Syce bringing up the rear. I came
up with him as he was going down
the slope at a trot, when, discovering
that ho was being followed and I close
behind him, he stopped, and turned
round and faced me. I at once dis-
mounted and prepared for him, when
he raised his trunk, preparatory to
charging. I gave him, as before, both
barrels between the eyes, upon which,
with a roar, he charged, and I turned
for my second gun. but the gunbearer
had done precisely the same as he
had done in the first Instance —let go
when I did.
“I was now with an unloaded gun
and an elephant charging at the gal-
lop: the only thing to do being my
usual movement when charged, i.e.,
dash off at right angles, but what was
my consternation to discover that he
had also changed his course, and was
now close behind me. Running for
all I was worth, and being very fit. I
was making good time, and altered
my course to the direction being taken
by my mule, which, by this time, had
been abandoned by the Syce, and
was making very good running on his
own account. I had caught up with-
in a couple of yards of the mule when
simultaneously the elephant caught
us up, the mule lashing out his hind
legs while I dived with all my force
into a small bush in the long grass on
my left, where I remained motionless.
“The elephant, Instead of keeping


on and following the retreating na-
tives, jammed his forefeet in the
ground about seven paces in front of
the bush where I was lying. I was
fascinated watching his enormous
feet and wondering if he would make
that one step forward which would
have trodden on me. I felt that the
least movement of the grass would
have disclosed my presence, but pro-
bably the blood pouring from his
head upset his sense of smelL He
now slowly moved oft to the right.
'“You can imagine my relief ! Be-
fore you could say 'knife’ I had two
cartridges in the gun, cautiously
raised myself up, and made for a tree
about twenty yards away, and sat
down. . . The Syce and the gun-
bearer now turned up, and after we
had finished arguing why Simba had
fired off my second gun, we started
off again after the old ruffian, the
natives, by the way, having all cleared
off home, having had enough of it,
and in passing other villages spread
the report that I had been killed. . .
"We caught up with the elephant,
again going slowly, and, on his wind-
ing us, he made a half-hearted at-
tempt to charge, but I emptied the
contents of both rifles into him,
Simba not letting me down this time.”
Such incidents as these Pete Pear-
son curtly dismisses in his letters ;
"I had one or two close shaves this
time, but one expects to be scorched,
if not burnt, when playing with fire.”
To accede to his father’s request and
face the camera apparently caused
him more embarrassment than the
most jeopardous situations in the jun-
gle !
It was during a trading expedition
into the interior in 1906 that Pete
Pearson had one of the narrowest


shaves of his twenty-five years’ career
in Africa, for the sudden spring of a
lion found him unarmed and his gun-
bearer some distance behind. The
lion landed within a few feet of Pear-
son, and but for the prompt action of
his mate, who shot the lion through
the heart, his hunting days might
have been over at so early a date,
since, as he himself wrote, “a lion sel-
dom misses to do some damage if he
gets so close.”
One of the greatest handicaps of
both trader and hunter in Equatorial
Africa was the unhealthy climate of
the lower levels. Sleeping sickness,
blackwater fever and malaria took
heavy toll of European life. Pete
Pearson had his first taste of malaria
in 1905, when the doctor, to the Aus-
tralian’s disgust, gave him two days
to live. "I gave him,” he scornfully
remarks, ‘‘two minutes to get out of
my sight I knew I wouldn’t peg out,
as the first dose is always the worst.
After this 1 suppose I shall be taking
it like a duck taking to water; it is the
usual thing here." Nevertheless, the
fever left him so weak that he had to
return to Nairobi, but the following
year he again went to the further
shores of Victoria Nyanza, trading in
cattle. Returning with two hundred
natives to help drive the huge mob of
cattle he had secured, he was stricken
with blackwater fever at a time when
he was passing through hostile tribes.
They attacked his caravan and drove
off the largest half of his cattle—a loss
which postponed his hoped for trip to
Australia.
Frequently in his letter he says :
“I would have remained away longer,
but got into unhealthy districts, so


had to change my plans on account of
too much sickness,”
. During the latter months of 1913
Mr Gerald Buckley, of Narrapumelap,
Victoria, met Mr Pearson at Nairobi,
and conferred with him concerning the
possibilities of good shooting in the
interior. Together they bent over a
map the hunter produced, and which
had various districts ringed with red
ink. “There’s plenty of game here,”
explained Pete Pearson, “but if you go
in you’ll be carried out.”
The prospect of good sport was quite
enough for the Australian sportsman,
who went in, but, as he himself ad-
mits, was certainly carried out with
malaria.
It was while on this African trip
that Mr Gerald Buckley had a re-
markable experience. The European
war had extended to Africa, and Mr
Buckley and his party undertook to
guard a railway bridge near the bor-
der of German East Aricca. En-
camped one night at this point, Mr
Buckley was disturbed by sounds in
the jungle, which he thought might
indicate the approach of some foe.
He therefore rose to investigate, and
with Percival, the hunter in charge of
his safari, decided that a cordon of
their men should be formed to close
in on the camp and thus secure any
intruder. While this was in pro-
gress, and Mr Buckley and Mr Per-
cival were seated at the camp Are,
they were surprised to see an Eng-
lishman approach on foot. This
proved to be the celebrated John
Boyes, “King of the Wa-Klkuyu.”
who was engaged in a two hundred
mile trek on a Government mission,
his influence with the native tribes


being required to counteract disaffec-
tion which the Germans had been
stirring up, His horse had been
fatally injured, and he had sought
Mr Buckley’s camp in the hope of
getting a mount. Mr Buckley, who
had meanwhile recognised him as one
of the spectators at the Nairobi races
some time previously, at once offered
him the grey pony which had won
the Hack Race on that occasion.
Protesting at so much generosity,
Boyes was prevailed upon to accept
the gift, and continued his Journey.
Some months later Mr Buckley,
again in Nairobi, was surprised atre-
ceiving a visit from a band of native
warriors, who handed him a “chit,”
which proved to contain an invita-
tion from the former “King of the
Wa-Kikuyus” to accompany the bear-
ers of the message on a visit to their
own country. Mr Buckley, always
ready for adventure at once made
ready and followed the warriors to
Boyes’ kingdom. There he was
amazed to find the Englishman robed
with all the regalia of an African
chief, with hundreds of natives at
his beck and call. At their “King’s 1 ’
bidding these entertained the Aus-
tralian guest with dances and native
ceremonies, and thus afforded him a
unique opportunity of seeing native
life at first hand.
Part 6.
TRADING IN THE INTERIOR.
During the early years of this cen-
tury Pete Pearson earned his title to
fame largely through his exploits in
the Belgian Congo and as a profes-
sional hunter in Uganda and Kenya.
He made a “good living,” he says,
from elephant hunting, but, anxious
to supplement his profits from these


sources, he indulged in trading ven-
tures in Central Africa. Trading in
these regions was quite different from
that In civilised countries; money was
not used, the age-old custom of bar-
tering was still in fores; the cow
was a standard unit of exchange
among many tribes, and a means by
which their wealth might be esti-
mated. There was a ready sale for
donkeys in the various protectorates
of Africa, and a trader who could buy
reasonably in Abyssinia or Karamoja
and bring the animals safely through
inhospitable and wild territory was as-
sured of a handsome profit. Mbale
was a Government station in Uganda,
the centre of an agricultural district,
where the natives kept some cattle.
The small town was quite a consider-
able trading centre with a bazaar of
Indian stores where expeditions for
the north were often fitted out. The
climate was, however, extremely try-
ing; heavy rains and continual drain-
age from the mountain sides made
the neighborhood swampy, the haunt
of the mosquito and a veritable fever
bed,
This remote township Mr Pearson
made the centre of his trading opera-
tions for some months, but the un-
healthy conditions seriously impaired
his health. For cloth, beads, glass
and other gegaws of civilisation Pear-
son secured cattle, and with these
travelled further north into Kara-
moia. a territory inhabited by a fine,
well built people who wore practically
no c'othing and carried shields of
buffalo or rhinoceros hide and spears.
They owned large herds of cattle,
sheep, goats and donkeys. They
lived chiefly on meat and milk, and
like many other African tribes drank


blood. With this people Pete Pear-
sou did a brisk trade, finding them
very ready to barter their cattle for
the pleasing trifles he had brought.
It is not always an easy matter to
gauge the public taste m Africa, since
quite unaccountably a red bead will be
in demand in one district and a green
in the next. Usually there is a steady
demand for cloth, but occasionally
one meets a totally unclothed people,
who have no use at all for this luxury.
Provided with trade goods and cat-
tle Pearson and another white trader
made their way towards Mount De-
basien over dry, rocky country cov-
ered with a species of thorn bush.
The unpleasant conditions were made
worse, as the cattle which had been
purchased in Karamoja now began to
develop large tumours under their
ears, and the native remedy of brand-
ing the affected parts with a hot iron
proved quite ineffective. Pearson now
realised that his cattle had not been
secured at prices so favorable to the
white traders because the cunning na-
tives had known them to be suffering
from this disease. They continued to
Menimanl, a deserted village which
had in earlier times been built by
Arab and Swahili traders. To this
place came hundreds of natives anxi-
ous to barter their donkeys for the
cattle the white traders had brought,
one cow for six donkeys being the
usual rate of exchange.
Unfortunately Pearson’s cattle were
now showing so unmistakably the
symptoms of the disease that he had
to return to Kenya with the donkeys
he had been able to secure —a disap-
pointing result after so many months
of discomfort and hard work.
The return journey over five hun-
dred miles was no light task for the


trader, since donkeys Invariably gave
a good deal of trouble in bush coun-
try, and for many days were liable to
break away and make for their own
homes should an opportunity occur.
Moreover, attacks from hostile tribes
and the presence of wild beasts pro-
vided plenty of thrills. Rivers were
not bridged, and the trader and his
men had great difficulty in inducing
the animals to cross a stream, each
donkey having to be dragged across
separately. Many of the anima's,
too, died on the Journey, the sudden
changes from one climate to the other
so often proving fatal to animals in
Africa.
During these trips there were con-
stant delays and difficulties due to
native stupidity. On one occasion
Pearson found that the donkeys, which
had been laden with two sacks of
flour, sixty pounds on each side, were
carrying 60 pounds of flour in one
sack and sixty pounds of stones in the
other, the “boy” in charge having
substituted the stones, as the flour
had been used, in order to keep the
load balanced. It had never occurred
to him to halve the loads of flour !
Pearson frequently comments on this
absence of commonsense in the dusky
members of his staff “I am sending
you a number of snap-shots of hippo-
potomus at Lake Albert,” he writes.
"I would have had others to send
with these, but my native boy who
carries my camera slung over his
shoulder did not think it necessary
when crossing a river to hold it above
his head, but took it with him. The
river being up to his neck, naturally
the camera had a bath, and is tied un
for repairs {that not being the bath
prescribed by the Kodak Manual).
Little annoyances like these, such as


cooking the fowl without plucking It,
are everyday incidents, and one for-
gets to comment on them.”
The outbreak of the war in 1914-
brought Africa immediately, and . ac-.
tively into the conflict. The presence
of the enemy in German East Africa
rendered necessary the formation of
an army of defence in the British
protectorates and colonies. Peter
Pearson, then- in his thirty-eighth
year, at once enlisted, and was posted
to the Intelligence Department. The
suspicion that the Germans in East
Africa had armed whole tribes of na-
tives and were stirring up disaffection
towards the British Governments in
the territories of the Empire, made a
demand for the services of men of
Pearson's type. His wonderful
knowledge of African typography,
and hfs experience in handling
natives, proved Invaluable at a time
when British prestige In Africa
might easily have suffered grave loss.
(Part 7).
THE LIFE OF A GAME RANGER IN
UGANDA
The conclusion of the war left Mr
Pearson free to return to Uganda,
where he again took up his work of
hunting. His knowledge of this dis-
trict was very complete; his experience
of the game of Equatorial Africa was
phenomenal, and European and Am-
erican sportsmen on safari were al-
ways eager to secure his services. Ex-,
traordinarily kind and generous he
was always willing to help amateur
sportsmen and to advise newcomers to
his adopted country.


Since his arrival in Africa great
changes had taken place In Kenya
and Uganda, The railway, which
had had its terminus In Nairobi, the
capital of Kenya, had been extended
through eastern Uganda as far as
Jinja; hundreds of miles of roads
had made possible the penetration of
remote country by motor car and
truck; and farms owned and worked
by white men were now where form-
erly had been only native villages.
It would seem inevitable, that with the
advance of civilisation from the coast
to the interior, game should have been
driven further and further from the
beaten, tracks and that elephants
should have become as scarce in
Uganda as the kangaroo in the Shire
of Ararat. A considerable measure
of protection, however, had been af-
forded these huge creatures in that
the shooting of elephants was per-
mitted only to those white men who
had taken out sporting licences, and
each hunter’s bag was definitely
limited by the terms of his permit.
Moreover, hunters generally made it
a rule never to wantonly slay a cow
elephant or her young, so that the
rate of breeding. had been increased
rather than diminished since the in-
cursion of the white hunter. So much
so, indeed, that considerable damage
was done to the crops of both native
and white agriculturists, and the Go-
vernment had to take steps to deal
with the menace. Accordingly in
1924 a new Game Department was in-
augurated by the Uganda Government.
The protectorate was divided Into four
large districts, and a white hunter
with a native staff was appointed as
ranger to control the game of each
district. P, C. Pearson was one of
the four hunters chosen to undertake
this work, so that after twenty years


of adventure in the Congo, in Kara-
moja, and in German East Africa,
Pete Pearson became a civil servant.
There were still, however, thrills to
be got and dangers to be braved.
Pearson's district, which was the larg-
est of the four, comprised some forty
thousand square miles of territory
and included Lake Albert and that
part of Uganda which is drained by
the Nile and its tributaries. In that
district it was estimated that there
were about 12,000 elephants. With
natives trained to use the rifle Pear-
son accounted for some 200 elephants
each year. “In my district,” he ex-
plains, "there are about 500 miles of
road. I have a super six Hudson
car with what we call a box body,
and in this I get my camp equip-
ment, two gunbearers, cook and per-
sonal boy, I can live on what the
car carries for three weeks, and where
the elephants are reported doing dam-
age I take the car as far in that
direction as possible. Sometimes they
are near the broad roads, where there
are delightful camps every fifteen
miles —administrative camps. If so
we live at the camp and hunt the
neighboring bush. Shooting soon
drives off the herd. Then leaving
the car in camp we take to native
carriers and follow it up. When I
think I have taken sufficient toll I re-
turn to the car and back to head-
quarters, where I have a couple of
days’ spell before I am off again.
‘The work is hard; walking in the
bush for six or seven hours is a good
day’s tramp. It Is not like the Aus-
tralian bush, for the grass Is dense
and anything from four to twenty
feet high. • The risk in the long grass
is naturally great, as you have to get
up to within ten feet of the animal


before you can see to shoot. More-
over, the only way to get through the
long grass is to follow up the ele-
phant’s track, as he makes a lane in
the grass two feet wide. The ele-
phant goes through this country as
easily as you walk through your
sitting room, while a man has diffi-
culty In forcing his way through a
hundred yards of it In an hour. The
spice of the game comes in if you put
in a bad shot, and if instead of run-
ning away the brute turns nasty.
You either get a foot with a few tons
above it somewhere on your anatomy
or else a lot of thrills. Up to now I
have had the thrills, and prefer it
that way. There Is plenty of excite-
ment at the game, and although the
years are creeping on I still find my
nerve good. When that fails, or even
before, I will do something else,
though what I do not at the moment
know.”
A ROYAL VISITOR.
(Conclusion.)
The last five years of Pearson's life
were, as was indicated In our last
chapter, spent in the Uganda service
as a game ranger. Now on the
shady side of fifty, Pearson continued
his work of hunting under conditions
very different from those he had ex-
perienced in his youth.
, Significant of the changed times
was the intrusion into his old haunts
of an American company, consisting
of a movie director, a Mr Van Dyke,
of Hollywood; Harry Carey, Duncan
Ronaldson and Edwina Booth, stars


of filmdom; three camermen, two
electricians, two technical experts, a
carpenter and a laboratory man,
armed with the elaborate apparatus
necessary for the taking of a cinema
picture In Central Africa. They
were out to get a setting for the film,
‘‘Trader Horn," in the very country
which old Aloysius had roamed fifty
years before. Prom Mombasa, on
the coast, they travelled 336 miles by
train to Nairobi, where a laboratory
was set up and preparations made
for a safari into the interior. Prom
Kampala they continued by train to
Jinja, thence by motor lorry via
Kampala and Butiaba to Murchison
Palls, whore a camp was established
for the express purpose of filming the
crocodiles which infest the river at
this point. Their adventures with
these reptiles, and their further jour-
neyings into Uganda and the Congo,
were related by Mr Van Dyke, and
appeared at an earlier date in these
columns in the ‘‘Log of the Trader
Horn Expedition. 1 ’ Accompanying
the safari was our old friend, Pete
Pearson, who gave the Americans the
benefit of his knowledge and experi-
ence.
‘T think it was in the bar of the
New Stanley Hotel in Nairobi,” Mr
Van Dyke entered in his diary, ‘‘that
I first heard of Pete Pearson, an Aus-
tralian. He is a sort of mythical
character in these parts, whose name
is closely associated with elephants
and ivory. By some reports he is
credited with killing 1000 elephants;
others say that nobody knows' the ex-
act number. Universally he Is re-
garded as one of the greatest hunters
in Africa. One day before our de-
parture he arrived and strolled into


camp. He is a large square-shoulder-
ed man, laconic and undemonstra-
tive, probably about fifty-five years
old. His eyes are bloodshot from his
twenty-three years In Central Africa,
and a severe black moustache partly
covers the hard lines round , his
mouth.”
During Pearson’s years as a game
ranger a strong friendship developed
between himself and Sir William
Gowers, the Governor of Uganda, who
was himself a keen hunter, and whom
Pearson accompanied on numerous
safari. Owing to the high es-
timation in which he was held by
Sir William Gowers, he was asked to
accompany the safari arranged for
the entertainment of the Duke and
Duckess of York when they visited
Uganda. On - several • occasions he
took the Royal pair hunting, and con-
fesses that he quickly fell under the
spell of the little lady’s charm.
In 1923 the Prince of Wales, ac-
companied by his brother, Prince
George, visited Africa. The latter
went to Tanganyika (formerly Ger-
man East Africa), but the Prince
went to Uganda for elephant hunt-
ing. The Governor of Uganda ar-
ranged a safari, in charge of which
he put Pete Pearson. For eight days
the veteran hunter and England’s
future King roamed the country In
search of elephant. The entire
party consisted of the Prince, two
secretaries, two aides-de-camp, a
doctor, and two game rangers, one of
which was Pearson. The latter,
however, was given to understand
that he was solely responsible for
the Prince’s safety, a charge which
he felt was no light matter, though


he thoroughly enjoyed the Prince's
company.
The arrangements for the trip
were carried out in a delightfully in-
formal manner, all messing together
in the one tent, and the Royal visitor
and Pearson spending’ most of their
time hunting big game.
The last day of the safari, however,
might easily have had a ghastly end-
ing, for a bull elephant charged the
Prince and his hunter, and tragedy
was narrowly averted by Pearson’s
prompt action. The Prince was en-
thusiastic in his praise of the
hunter’s bravery, and Sir William
Gowers, who happened to bo an eye
witness of the incident, afterwards
wrote officially congratulating Pear-
son on his conduct. “It was an ex-
hibition,’’ he wrote, “of presence of
mind, quickness and courage which I
am glad to have been privileged to
witness, and which none of those who
saw it will ever forget.’’ The Prince,
before leaving Uganda, assured Pear-
son that he would return before long
to hunt with him once more, and on
his return to England send the hunter
a gold tie pin as a memento of their
safari.
But it was the last royal safari
Pearson was to accompany, for in
September of the following year,
1929. the life of adventure came to a
premature end. The hunter for
some time had suffered Indifferent
ocalth, and an operation for appendi-
citis in the Kampala hospital was
fatal, in spite of all that medical aid
could do, including two transfusions
of blood from personal friends. It
had been his intention to accompany,
before the end of the year, the Go


vernor of Uganda on safari to the
shores of Lake Albert, and after that
to visit Australia after an absence of
twenty-five years from his native
country. He was buried in Kampala,
but the Governor of Uganda thought
it fitting that his remains should be
permanently interred away from the
towns to the edge of the encampment
above Lake Albert, and that a monu-
ment to his memory be erected there,
“where there is a view over a vast
amount of lake and mountains and
plains over the country he knew and
loved so well, and in which he had
hunted for so many years.”


VILLAGE SCENE IN CENTRAL
AFRICA.


NATIVE CHIEF WITH HIS WIVES AND FOLLOWERS.


SAFARI TRAVELLING THROUGH AFRICA.




