

c
D
O^)/>
H l
ii ’j :
•lit]*


t
■.» «v v* . . J - , « U* 1
•
•
I *
»r
%
•4k'
M '
A*' kk-
J
■*
♦
•
-
• •
0
x ,
■ ■»
• <r . -*• s
* 1
**
»•
.
r
t
V
' *
• • r * V ~ -. \
0.
*» • • , -v
*: ..
- • ? , • v ’■ ••
»
♦
- •> ,, *•. « •
* * '■ ■ * :
' -r <* '
... v >.*
v , ‘V
• . •
r- ,r
-•',»-•■ r
««»
-*
■ -. . f v ~“
* ,
• *


Gtsb*.
,5l(Ql5
THE CAVES
fm 0F THF MITES
' GORDON^!
r =i □
WITH PICTURES TO COLOR
TVT 1 O AN AUSTRALIAN PRODUCTION. COPYRIGHT
1 INO. 1 6 BY GUNN & TAYLOR PTY. LTD.. MELBOURNE I -I
U 1 Distributors for N.S.W. and Queensland: HAMSON & LEONARD. 101 York Street. Sydney


It was washing morning, and Peter Bobtail had to help his mother by pegging
the clothes on the line.


C 14780
OF THE ' OAPRIM£
WASHING DAY
As the sun peeped slyly over the hills, and the darkness gradually
melted away, the giant forest began to come to life. Tiny insects started
scurrying across the ground, and the birds commenced to chirp sweetly in the
nests. The forest animals crept slowly from their cosy hiding places and
rubbed their sleepy eyes, then hurried off in search of food for breakfast.
And the old sun laughed as he lifted himself higher in the sky and covered
the earth with his brilliant light. He laughed because he knew that there
were some sleepy heads in the forest who never wanted to get out of bed.
And the worst of these sleepy-heads was Peter Bobtail. He just could
not get up. He was not really lazy, but he did like sleeping in in the
morning. Sometimes he would still be snoring when Ma and Pa Bobtail had
finished breakfast, but to-day his luck was out. It was washing day, which
meant that Peter had to get up and help.
“Up you get, lazybones,” Ma Bobtail called, and Peter knew that she
meant what she said. He slowly climbed out, grumbling to himself all the
time he was dressing. “I don’t know why I should always have to work.
Other children don’t have to,” he mumbled. “Never mind about the other
children,” said his Ma. “You just do as you’re told, and be quick about it.”
So Peter took the basket of clothes and tramped out of the burrow.
But when he came out into the sunshine, and heard the Kookaburras
laughing so happily, his sadness vanished and he soon felt quite cheerful. As
he pegged the clothes on to the line he began to sing, and the words of his
song made his Kookaburra neighbors laugh louder than ever.
O hmy name is Peter Bobtail,
And a dismal boy am I,
Though my burrow’s nice and cosy
And my bed is soft and dry.
For every Monday morning
When the clocks are striking nine,
You’ll find me busy working,
Hanging clothes upon the line.
O hmy Ma she is a Tartar,
And I think it is a sin,
For she washes every Monday,
So I never can sleep in.
Oh I’m not like other children,
Who can run about and play;
I’m poor old Peter Bobtail,
And I’m slaving all the day.


Peter stopped singing as he pegged the
last of the clothes on the line. His work over,
he went back into the burrow where Ma Bobtail
was busy cleaning the place up.
“Can I go and play now?” he asked.
“Yes,” replied his mother. As Peter Bobtail
stood in the little clearing outside the
burrow, wondering who he would go and
play with, he heard someone scampering
up the little track. And suddenly out
of some bushes came Plop the platypus.
Now Plop was Peter’s particular friend,
and they spent a lot of time playing together, but Pete knew that something
very important must have happened to bring Plop so far away from the
a-eek where he lived. When Plop came up he was that excited he could
hardly talk.
THE DISCOVERY
“What’s the matter?” asked Pete. “Can you come down to the creek?”
replied Plop. “There’s something I want to show you. It’s down under the
water. All right, said Pete, and away they both scampered. As they
hurried along the track Plop tried to explain what he had seen, but he had
to trot so hard to keep up with Peter that he could not speak properly, and
all that his mate heard was something about a glass boat.
However, they were soon skidding down the steep bank to the water’s
edge, where Plop pointed to an object on the bed of the stream. Pete could
hardly believe his eyes, for there was a boat resting on the sand, and it
seemed to be made of glass.
What do you know about that?” he exclaimed. I wonder where a
boat like that could have come from?” But Plop could not give any
explanation. “I’ll dive down and have a look at
it,” he said, and with that he slid into the water,
where he was as mack at home as
any fish. Down to the bottom he
went to try and move the
boat. Finding that it was
too heavy, he swam back to
the surface of the water, and
clambered on to the bank.
Peter would have liked to
have gone down into the
water with his mate, but of
course he could not swim like
a platypus. So they both sat
down to think things over.


Peter Bobtail's Kookaburra neighbors laughed loud and hearty
when they heard him start to sing.


\ \k I \ _ f
“Perhaps the fairies left
it,” said Plop. “No,” replied
Pete. “The fairies don’t have
boats like that. It must have
been washed down the creek.”
The pals sat and thought
of all the ways in which the
boat could have got into the
creek, but none of their ideas
seemed to be quite right,
last Pete said: “Perhaps
we could find out some-
thing if you swam along
the bottom. There might
be something else down there.”
So Plop once more dived Into the water and disappeared, while Pete
sat anxiously awaiting his pal’s return. When he had been sitting for quite
a long time, and there was no sign of Plop, he began to feel that something
was wrong. All sorts of ideas entered his mind. Perhaps there was some-
body down in the creek after all, and Plop had been caught.
But just as Pete stood up and began to pace up and down the bank,
there was a splash, and Plop’s head appeared. As he clambered out of the
water Pete could see that he was terribly excited.
“I’ve found it,” he cried, as Pete ran to meet him. “There’s an
underground river running into our creek. It comes out at the bottom of
that big pool.”
The news of the discovery made Peter as excited as his mate, and he
could hardly sit still to hear Plop’s story. When the platypus had recovered
his breath, he told Pete where he had been.
“When I dived into the stream, I swam along the bottom, looking to
see if there were any more boats. I did not find any, but I kept on
swimming until I came to the big,
deep pool. I had never been to
the bottom oT this before, but this
✓
time I went right down, and you
can imagine my surprise when I
felt a rush of water along the
bottom. I swam against the stream
until I reached a spot where the
edge of the pool should have been,
but I did not strike any edge.
Suddenly I realized that I was in
some sort of an underground river.
I kept on swimming for a while,
but the water was travelling so fast
I could not swim against it for
long, so I finally had to turn back.


l£x^^
Gosh, it felt funny to be in that river.” Pete had not spoken while his mate
had been telling the story, and when it was finished all he could say was
“Gee Whizz.”
After the pals had been sitting thinking for a few moments, Plop asked.
“What are we going to do now?” and Pete replied: “I’m going find
what’s up that river if it takes me a week. Are you game to help?” You
bet I am,” answered Plop. With that our friends set about working out a
plan.
“As you cannot swim up against the stream, and I cannot swim at all,
there is only one thing to do,” said Peter. “We’ll have to dig down through
the hill.” “That’s a pretty big job,” said Plop. “I know it is,” replied Pete,
“and I think we will have to get help.” “I am sure Waddle will give us a
hand,” he added, “and perhaps I can arrange a truce with Nosey, the
farmer’s dog. He would be a big help if we strike any trouble.”
“Excellent,” said Plop. “They are both good at digging. When
will we see them?” “Right now,” replied Peter. “You go and find
Waddle while I go and have a chat with Nosey. Then we will all meet here
again this afternoon.”
So the pals set off, Plop into the forest, and Pete in the direction of
the farm house. When Waddle and Nosey heard of the discovery, they were
only too glad to help, so that afternoon the four friends met on the side of
the creek to make their plans.
“If Plop tells us the direction the river came from, we will find the
best spot to dig down,” said Pete. “And if we have to dig very far we must
find some way of getting the dirt out of the burrow.
Nosey. “I can borrow
“That’s easily fixed,” replied
a little barrow from the farm house. Then we can
make some harness out of rope, and I can cart the
dirt away.” “Splendid,” said Pete.
“Then there is nothing else to
worry about, so we might as
well start on the job.”
DIGGING THE BURROW
So the four friends
marched along the
creek unti i pi op
showed them where
the underground
river came out. “It
runs right through
under that hill,” he
said, “so I think we
should dig on the
other side.” “You’re
right,” said Peter,


and over the hill they all went.
Arriving at a nice, grassy patch,
Peter called a halt. “This should
be a good spot,” he said. “I once
dug a burrow near here, and it
was pretty easy going.” “Well,
you get started,” Nosey cried,
“while I dash off and get the
barrow. I’ll come back as quickly as I
” can.” With that the farmer’s dog scampered
away, while Peter, Waddle and Plop set about
burrowing into the soft earth.
By the time Nosey returned, the burrow was well on its
way, and there was plenty of earth for the dog to cart out.
A harness was quickly prepared, and in a few moments they
were all working their hardest.
Further and further into the hill they burrowed, turning this
way and that way as they were forced to dig around
rocks. On and on, and down and down, went Waddle
and Plop, scratching and scraping the earth away quickly
and easily, for they were both experts at this work. And
load after load was heaped on to the barrow by Peter,
and carted out by the farmer’s dog. All the afternoon they worked, and
made great headway, but when the hour grew late, and it was nearly tea
time, they decided to stop for the day.
It was arranged that they should meet again early the next morning
and continue the digging. Before separating, Peter made the others promise
that they would keep the secret, and not say a word to anybody about their
discovery.
The next morning Ma and Pa Bobtail got an awful shock for Peter
hopped out of bed as the first rays of the sun came over the hill. “What
on earth is the matter with you?” asked Ma. “Aren’t you feeling well?”
“Oh, yes,” replied Peter. “but I think
everybody should get up early in the morning. It’s
lovely out in the fresh air.” “Good gracious,”
exclaimed Pa Bobtail. “Something must be wrong
with him.”
But Peter took no notice of their remarks.
He dashed through his breakfast, and not having
any work to do for his Ma, he scampered away
over the hill. Early as he was, he was not the
first to arrive, for Plop was already on the job,
digging away as hard as he could go. In a few
moments they were joined by Nosey and Waddle,


Waddle and Plop dig the burrow, while Peter shovels the dirt
into Nosey's barrow.


and the burrowing started again in
earnest. Everything was going along
nicely, and they had travelled ever so
far, when all of a sudden there was a
cry of dismay from Plop, and he
disappeared in a shower of earth.
Then they heard a splash which made
them hurry to the spot where Plop
had been.
THE UNDERGROUND RIVER
The end of the burrow opened
large cave, and when they looked
through the opening they could hardly believe
their eyes. For there below them was a large
river flowing slowly along, and there was Plop
swimming happily about. “Are you all right?”
called out Peter. “Yes,” replied Plop, “and I am going to swim along and
see if there is anyone about.” “Well, don’t go too far,” said Peter.
Plop disappeared from view, and the others sat down to await his
return. “Well, we got through all right,” said Peter, “but I don’t know
what we are going to do next. We can’t all swim along the river.” “We
won’t worry about it until Plop gets back,” said Nosey. “Then we can talk
things over.”
They had not been sitting long when they heard a call which drew
them to the opening again. Imagine their surprise when they saw Plop
sailing merrily along in a glass boat just like the one they had found in the
bottom of the creek.
“Gosh,” exclaimed Nosey. “Wherever did you get that?” “I found
it tied up to the bank in a cave further along the tunnel,” replied Plop;
“and there’s more of them.” “Then there must be somebody living down
here after all,” cried Peter. “Let’s go and see.” “All aboard,” grunted
Waddle, and the party quickly jumped into the boat. “Waddle can take one
paddle, and I’ll take the other,” said
Pete. “Nosey can sit in the front and
keep a lookout, while Plop can sit at
the back and steer with his tail.”
THE CAVES OF THE MITES
When they were all settled in their
positions they started off up the river.
The stream was wide and only travelling
slowly, so they had no trouble in
paddling against it. After travelling for
some distance along the tunnel they


Peter and his pals paddle along the rivei until they come to the Caves of the Mites.


Eiuddenly came out into
rge cave. And what
was. From the ceiling
ds and hundreds of
ctites, which looked
es, and on the bank
id rows of stalagmites
standing up iikc soiuiers in all shapes and sizes.
Some looked like long glass spikes, while others looked just like little glass
men. And, tied up to the bank, were more boats like the one they were in.
But when Peter examined them he found that they were not glass at all, but
a lovely substance like crystal.
As our friends looked at the wonderful sight they felt such a funny
feeling go through them. They felt that someone was watching them. Then,
just as their boat reached the bank, one of the little crystal Mites turned and
ran away. The pals just sat and gasped as they saw the little man disappear
along the bank.
Peter was the first to recover from his surprise, and he said: “I don’t
know what we are going to strike next, but I suppose we may as well push
on.” So he and Waddle started paddling again, and they continued their
journey along the stream.
CAPTURED
Suddenly Nosey barked in alarm, and they heard a loud swishing
noise. Then round a bend in the river came dozens of boats filled with the
little Mites. Each Mite was armed with a long crystal spear, and in a
twinkling the pals were surrounded.
It did not take Peter and his companions long to realize that it would
not be possible for them to get away, because those crystal spears looked


very sharp, and the funny little men looked very determined. And, although
they could not understand the chatter of the Mites, they knew that they were
being told to come along.
Then, as Peter settled down again, he received another shock. For he
glanced at the back of the boat, and Plop was missing. ‘‘Where had he
gone?” thought Peter. Then suddenly he realized what had happened.
Seeing the Mites approaching in their boats, Plop had decided to
escape. Slipping over the end of the boat, he had swum under water to
some hiding place. Knowing that Plop was safe, and would be able to help
them, made Pete quite happy, and he started to sing at the top of his
voice: “O hmy name is Peter Bobtail .. .” But that was as far as he
got, for the loud voice echoed through the caves and tunnels until it sounded
as though all the giants on earth were singing at once. It made the little
Mites tremble so that there was a sound like thousands of little pieces of glass
all clinking together. The tiny men looked at Peter as though he was
someone bewitched, and when they continued their journey along the tunnel
their chatter was stopped, and the only sounds to be heard were the little
splashes of the paddles in the water.
And then they came out on to a lake in another cave so big that
Peter could hardly see the other side. On the bank of the lake were rows
upon rows of crystal houses with a great castle in the centre of them. It
was this in particular which attracted Peter’s attention, for the castle had a
beautiful marble tower on the top of which was a great diamond so large
and so full of light that it lit up the whole cave like the brightest day.
Peter and Nosey and Waddle gazed about in wonder as the boat
drifted slowly to the bank. When they reached the edge of the lake and
stepped out of their boat, the boys were able to see the Mites clearly for the


Peter, Waddle and Nosey are taken to the Castle, where they see
the King of the Mites.


first time. And what wonderful little chaps they were for you could see
right through them.
Wherever do they come from,” thought Peter, and then he suddenly
remembered the beautiful stalagmites standing in rows in the other cave, and
how like these little men they were. He looked at the Mites closely as they
clambered out of their boats, and then all at once he saw everything clearly.
For hundreds and hundreds of years water had dripped, dripped, from
each long thin stalactite down on to the stalagmite below, gradually building it
up higher and higher, and, as the years passed and it grew and grew, it took
the shape of a little man. Then arms and legs and head formed, and at
last another little man was made, who would run away and join the others
in the crystal city. “How wonderful it all is,” thought Pete, until he
remembered that he and his companions were prisoners.
By this time the little Mites were all out of the boats and crowding
round. By signs they told Peter that he and his friends must go along to
the big castle. So off they went, with the Mites clinking along beside them.
“I wonder what they will do with us?” said Waddle. “I suppose
they will lock us up somewhere,” replied Pete. “Well, I only hope that
Plop can think of a way to get us out,” barked Nosey, “because I don’t like
the idea of staying here too long.”
When they reached the castle they found it was made of the most
beautiful marble, with the floors set out in little squares. On passing through
the doorway they came into a large hall. They were made to stand in the
centre of the floor while the Mites marched to the end of the hall where
there was a shining gold throne.
On being left alone, Peter, Nosey and Waddle glanced round to see
if they could escape, but there was no chance, for the door was closely
guarded by several Mites. Then Waddle whispered, “Look who’s coming,”
and through a doorway at the back of the hall
there came the King of the Mites. He was just
like the other Mites, but was made of lovely
rainbow-colored crystal, while upon
wore a crown of the finest gold.
his head he
The leader of the band of Mites
quickly chattered the story to the
King, who looked at our friends,
then waved his hand. At once
the Mites hurried Peter and his
pals out of the hall and along to
one of the crystal houses, and
locked them in. As this house was
without windows, they could not
see anything outside, so they sat
down feeling very miserable.


Plop's head suddenly appears through the floor.
Feeling that they would never get away, Peter said: “I’m sorry, boys,
for asking you to come along with me, but I did not know we were going
to strike trouble like this.” “Oh, that’s all right,” answered Waddle. “It
was good fun while it lasted. Anyway, it’s no good starting to cry now,
so what about a song?”
“A grand idea,” yapped Nosey. “What about singing your song,
Pete?” “Righto,” answered Peter, “and let’s make plenty of noise.” So
the three pals sat with their backs to the wall and sang for all they were
worth. The noise was deafening, and the crystal walls clinked and clanked
with the music.
THE ESCAPE
Then just as the singers were going well, and the noise was at its
loudest, several of the little glass squares in the floor bounced out of place,
and a head popped up. The singers stopped suddenly and gasped in a
chorus, “Plop!” And Plop it was, with a wide grin on his face.
“Come on, boys,” he said, “make it snappy and you’ll soon be out of
here,” and he beckoned to the others to follow him down through the hole


'7^41
ONtM
in the floor. “Well, this beats every-
thing*” exclaimed Peter. “Where does
the burrow go to?” “Down into the
lake,” replied Plop, “so you will have
to hold your breath while you are
under the water.” Quickly they
scrambled down the burrow until they
reached the level of the water. “Well,
here goes,” said
Plop, and into the water he went. The others followed
at once, and splashed their way along until they reached
the lake. When they reached the surface of the water
they found they were behind several of the boats, and hidden from the view
of the Mites.
Cautiously Peter peeped round one of the boats to see if anyone was
watching, but there was not a Mite to be seen. “That’s funny,” he
whispered. “The place is deserted. I wonder where they have all gone?”
Just then they heard soft and beautiful music being made by a lot of
bells. “It’s coming from that big castle,” exclaimed Plop. “Listen, they’re
starting to sing.” And the pals heard the little Mites singing so softly and
so sweet, that it seemed like a fairy choir.
“Gee, that’s great,” said Peter, “I wonder what they’re doing.”
“Goodness only knows,” replied Waddle. “But I’d like to have a look.” “So
would I,” said Pete. “What say we risk it.” “All right,” chorused the
others. “Lead the way.”
Followed by his mates, Peter pulled himself along the boats until he
reached the edge of the lake. Then, stepping on to the bank, they all crept
up to the castle. When they reached the main door through which they
had been taken as prisoners, they found it was shut.
“Perhaps there is another door further round,” said Pete. “Let’s have
a look.” Keeping close together they crept along the wall until at last they
came to an open doorway. Although the music had stopped, there was
still no sign of any Mites, so the pals stepped inside.
They found themselves to be in a small
room in which hung a number of long crystal
ropes. “This must be where they ring the
bells,” Pete whispered softly. “Be careful you
don’t touch those ropes.” With that he tiptoed
across the room to another door and gently
pushed it open. What he saw made him gasp
with amazement. For there were hundreds of
brilliant diamonds of all shapes and sizes in the
room, and the light they made was so strong
that he could hardly keep his eyes open. “Great
Scott,” he cried. “Come and have a look at


this.” The excitement in his voice made the pals all jump, which was the
worst thing they could have done, for it spoilt everything. For op in
surprise turned round quickly, and his long bill swept along the crysta ropes,
and at once the bells started clanging their loudest.
“Gosh, now we’ve done it,” cried Peter. “Run for your lives.” As
the pals dashed wildly out of the room and round the side ° * e
they could hear the chatter of the Mites getting louder and louder, as they
ran to see what had made the bells ring. Down to the boats raced Feter,
with Waddle, Plop and Nosey close at his heels,
“Clamber aboard quickly, and paddle for all you are worth, shouted
Plop, “and I’ll swim alongside.” Into the boat they jumpe ,an yt e
time the Mites saw them they were racing fast across the lake. Ahr^ u § h
the tunnel they went and out into the other cave, with boats u o es
racing after them.
“Keep it up,” yelled Plop from alongside “they’re gaining on us.” And
so Pete and Waddle paddled harder than ever. It seemed as though they
would never reach the opening from their burrow, but at last t ey came o
it, and made a wild scramble out of the boat. Into the burrow jumpe
Nosey, then Waddle, then Plop, and Pete was about to follow when the tirst
of the Mites reached them.
One Mite jumped after Peter, who turned and pushed him over
backwards. Down he fell with a crash and smashed into hundreds ot pieces.
Without even taking a look, Peter went for his life along t e urrow t
find his mates already scraping up the earth to fill the opening. o quic y
and hard did they work that in a few moments there was not the slightest
sign of a burrow, and the pals were safe.
“Gee, that was close,” gasped Peter, as he sat down to rest. It
certainly was,” said Plop. “I thought they were
going to get you at the last minute. Did you
hear that fellow crash when you pushed him
over?” “Yes,” grunted Waddle. I bet
they never patch him up again. W’ercn t they
a funny lot?” “Yes,” replied
Pete. “And one of these days I
think we’ll go back and have
another look at them, but we’ll go
prepared for trouble next time.
Anyhow, I’ve got this to remember
the trip by ” And he pulled from his pocket one of the beautiful diamonds.
“Crikey, how did you get that?” cried Plop. Pete laughed. “I picked it
up in the room just as the bells started to ring, and I had it in my hand
when we all bolted.”
“Well, doesn’t that beat everything. What are you going to do with
it Pete?” Plop asked. Peter thought for a moment, then answered: “I
think I will bury it in some safe spot for the time being otherwise someone
might take it from me.”


lust as Peter is about to scramble into the burrow after his pals
one of the Mites jumps towards him.


“Well,” chipped in Waddle, “if we are going to mark the spot where
we dug the burrow you might as well hide the diamond there, then you
will be able to find it easily.
“That’s the idea,” said Pete. So the pals gathered a number of sma
stones, and, after the diamond had been buried in the earth at the entrance
to the burrow, they placed the stones in a heap on top.
“Well, that’s that,” said Peter, “and I think the next best thing to do
is to go home and have a sleep. It looks pretty late.” So the pals sai
good-bye, and scampered happily away.
When Peter arrived home he found Ma and Pa Bobtail ready
bed, so before they could begin asking questions, he hopped into his ow
little nest. He felt so happy after his adventures that he began to g,
the Kookaburras in the trees bubbled over with laughter as the words of his
song drifted out of the burrow.
O hmy name is Peter Bobtail, Oh the Monday wash is °ver,
And a jolly boy am I; And the clothes are on the line;
For my burrow’s nice and cosy, So to-morrow 111 e snoring
And my bed is soft and dry. When the clocks are striking nine.
And as the last chuckle of the Kookaburra’s laughter died away, and
the forest settled down for the night, quiet and still, Peter Bobtail turned
over in his bed and snored.
But if he had seen what took place on the hillside after he and his
mates had parted, he would not have felt so pleased. For a tiny gnome
stepped quietly out from the bushes where he had been hiding and listening,
and ran quickly across the slope.
Swiftly he removed the stones from the heap and scraped away the
soft earth until he came to the diamond. As he lifted it out and saw how
brilliant It was, he chuckled with glee. Placing the jewel carefully on the
ground, he returned to work and replaced the stones in a heap, one by one,
just as he had found them.
His task completed, he took off his brightly colored coat, and wrapped
the diamond in it. Then, with a quick glance round to make sure that
nobody was watching, he hurried down the grassy slope and disappeared into
the bushes.
Who was he and where did he go? Well, that is another story
which some day may be told.


*
*
J
/
>
‘ ' ■ » - v


t
