

PETITION
OF THE
PLANTERS’ ASSOCIATION OF FIJI.
TO THE RIGHT HON.
THE SECRETARY OF STATE
FOR THE COLONIES.
Suva, Fiji,
January 30, 1908.
R. Crompton, Solicitor,
Suva, Fiji.
PRINTED BY G. L. GRIFFITHS, SUVA, FIJI.




PETITION.
®o tl)£ liigljt curable
®ije gtecretarir of Sctate for tljr fflolomro*
The humble Petition of the Planters’ Association of Fiji
sheweth :
1. Your humble Petitioners crave leave to refer to the following documents and
instruments published in the “ Fiji Royal Gazette” 1875.
(a)' The resolution of Oakobau and other native chiefs in Council assembled at Nasova on
the 80th September, 1874.
(B) The instrument of cession by Cakobau and other high chiefs dated the 10th October
1874.
(o) The Royal Charter dated the 2nd January, 1875.
2. The resolution (a) shows the intention of the natives at the time they were
desirous of ceding the islands the intention being clearly expressed by the words “We give our
country Fiji unreservedly to Her Britannic Majesty etc.”
3. Your humble Petitioners respectfully call attention to Article 4 of the said
instrument of cession which is as follows :
“ ! ho proprietorship of all lands not shown to be now alienated so as to have become
% the bona fide property of Europeans or other foreigners or not now in the actual
use or occupation of some chief or tribe or not actually required for the probable
future support and maintenance of some chief or tribe shall be and are hereby
declared to be vested in Her Majesty her heirs and successors.”
4. Your humble Petitioners would respectfully refer to Article 1 of the said
Instrument of Cession which gives sovereignty over the whole group of islands in the South
Pacific Ocean known as the Fijis ; therefore “ the proprietorship ” of lands, referred to in
Article 4, implies something more than sovereignty, viz., absolute ownership of the soil.
Your Petitioners have not lost sight of Article 7 of the Instrument of Cession by
which it was provided—
(a) That the rights and interests of Cakobau and other high chiefs the ceding parties
thereto should be recognise.! so far as consistent with British sovereignty and
colonial form of Government.
(b) That all questions of financial liabilities and engagements should be scrutinised and
dealt with upon principles of justice and sound public policy.
(c) That all claims to titles of ls,nd by whomsoever preferred and all claims to pensions
or allowances whether on the part of the said Cakobau and other high chiefs or of
persons then holding office.under them or any of them should in due course be fully
investigated and equitably adjusted.


Your Petitioners would suggest that Article 7 does not in any way extend or restrict
the provisions clearly set forth in the said recited Article 4.
5. The said Instrument of Cession is recited in and accepted by the said Royal
Charter.
6. Your humble Petitioners therefore submit that at the date of the Royal Charter
the native lands were vested in part in the British Crown and in part in the natives : And that
Article 4 of the Instrument ot Cession was framed with the intention that steps would be taken
to divide the native lands into Crown lands and what might be termed “ Native reserves.’’
7. Ordinance No. 4 of 1875 “To provide for the adjudication of certain claims
between divers Europeans and natives in the Colony of Fiji ” was duly enacted and under the
provisions therein contained a Board ot Commissioners was appointed to enquire into the land
claims and report to the Governor in Council.
8. The Lands Commission appointed by virtue of such Ordinance sat until the year
1883.
9. There was no Commission appointed at the time of cession to ascertain the extent
of native reserves nor to ascertain what lands then belonged to the Crown.
10. The Lands Clai ns Ordinance 25 of 1879 laid down the procedure to be followed
where claims to land, based on transactions that took place before cession, had been investigated
by the Lands Commission appointed to consider them, and (interalia) by Section 12 special
provisions were made in those instances where the refusal of the claim would establish the
absolute proprietary right of the Crown.
11. Your humble Petitioners respectfully submit that a considerable amount of
contusion has arisen as to the true construction to be placed upon the words “ actual use or
occupation of some chief or tribe ” in the said fourth Article of the Instrument of Cession.
12. On the 16th September, 1875, “ The Native Lands Transfer Prohibition Ordinance
1875 came into force by which land transactions with natives were prohibited.
13. It would appear that such Ordinance was a necessary measure, if the intention of
the said Article 4, was, that the native should have reserved to him such lands only as would be
necessary to his maintenance ; for obvious reasons it was proper to restrain him from disposing
of such lands.
14. In 1875 the Crown apparently took possession of certain native lands by virtue of
the Instrument of Cession and were prepared to sell same for in his message to the Legislative
Council on the 31st Becember, 1875 the Lord Stanmore—then Sir Arthur Gordon —Governor
of Fiji said :
“ The Governor has not ventured to anticipate any large sum from the sale of lands
as he considers that in the first instance land is more likely tp be purchased from
those now in possession than from the Government. A sum of at least £5OO
ought however to be realised from this source and a like amount from the fees on
Crown grants to settlers.”
15. On the 3rd of June, 1876, rules respecting applications for Crown Lands were
published in the “Fiji Royal Gazette” and on the Bth September, 1877, a notice of sale
of Crown Lands was published in the “ Gazette ” and from and after that date many sales
of Crown Lauds took place notices of which will be found in the “ Fiji Royal Gazette.’’
16. The Native Affairs Regulation Ordinance No. 35 of 1876 provided for the
establishment of a “ Native Regulation Board ” with power to make regulations as therein stated
which regulations when approved by the Legislative Council, should have the force of law (vide
Section 9) ‘An as far as the same are not repugnant to any law or ordinance in force in the
Colony.’’
17. By Regulation No. sof 1877 of the Native Regulation Board it was enacted that
every able-bodied man should have a plantation of not less than 100 bananas, 500 hills of either
y ims, dalo or kawais or kumalas and should keep it in good order. This regulation was
approved by the Legislative Council on the 17th May, 1877.
18. Native Regulation No. 5 of 1878 after pointing out the duty of men to support
their relations and dependents enacted that no man should absent himself from his home for a
period of three months without just or reasonable cause or without the permission of his Chief or
Buli. This regulation was approved by the Legislative Council on the 20th June, 1878.


19. Your humble Petitioners suggest that the regulations referred to are consistent with
the opinion that at the time they were passed it was the object of the Legislature that the native
should have sufficient land reserved to him for his maintenance cultivation.
20. In the year 1880 the Government evidently considered that there were large areas
of land the property of the Crown for on the 19th February of that year rules for regulating the
cutting and removal of timber from Crown Lands were published in the “ Gazette." Permission
to cut timber was given in the form of a license the fee for which was £1 for an area of 1000
acres.
21. On the 9th October 1880 Ordinance No. 21 of 1880 was passed in the Colony and
duly enacted. Your humble Petitioners crave leave to refer your Lordship to the Ordinance copy
of which is herewith marked Al.
22. It is urged that this Ordinance was not intended, and does not in fact, vest in the
native any lands which he surrendered to the Crown by the deed of cession.
23. Sections Y, VI and VI I, of the Ordinance read in conjunction with Sections XIV
and XVII, imply, that the natives were to have lands which they cultivated or made use of
according to native custom.
24. Section XIY provides that if any mataqali has become so reduced in numbers as to
be unable to cultivate the lands of the mataqali or make use thereof according to native custom
the Government on the report of the Bose Yaka Turaga may purchase such lands which shall
henceforth become Crown Lands. Section XVII permitted them to lease such portion of the
lands as may have been set apart for their use.
25. Regulation 3of 1880 of the Native Regulation Board was evidently based upon the
last mentioned Ordinance and is as follows :
No. 3 1880. As to the registration of lands.
1. It shall be the duty of the heads of every mataqali to prepare a register of the lands
owned or occupied by all the various family divisions of each mataqali and when
such record is complete let the register then become the rule of succession and of
rights of inheritance for all future time.
2. When the record of a mataqali with their lands is completed let such mataqali assemble
together and the record be read that all may hear and understand what is written
therein and what is the position of each of their people and when all the mataqalis
of each town have been recorded let the whole town assemble together and let the
record of the whole be read so that all may hear and know what is written ; and so
on town after town and when all shall have been recorded let the whole qali in like
manner assemble to hear and know the several boundaries of each of the township
lands, of the said qali.
3. When the whole of a district shall have been recorded let the record be taken to the
Bose \ aka I ikina to be read and when all the districts of a Province have been
recorded let then all the land records of the several qalis of the Province be taken
to the Bose Vaka Yasana following and read that they may be dealt with as the law
provides.
4. If any dispute arises during the registration of the land which the mataqali between
which it has arisen cannot settle let the town discuss and settle it or if any dispute
arises between several towns or qalis and they cannot themselves settle it
satisfactorily let the question be referred to the Bose Vaka Tikina and if the Bose
Vaka Tikina is unable to settle it satisfactorily let the question be referred to the
Bose Vaka Yasana to be dealt with as the law provides.
5. Let every change that is effected in the occupation of ownership of land within each
mataqali whether by succession alienation or transmission be registered as it takes
place and let the entry thereof be the evidence and proof of such change of ownership
or occupation.
6. Let the register be read over in every mataqali koro and qali once in every year in the
month of January and let it be brought to the Bose ni Tikina and all needful
corrections made as may be required and brought to the Bose Vaka Yasana to be
recorded in the Provincial Register.
7. Let moreover any transaction between different mataqalis be registered in a similar
manner.
Passed by the Native Regulation Board the thirteenth day of October, 1880.
Approved by the Legislative Council 4th November, 1880.
26. Your humble Petitioners read with interest the report of a speech delivered in the
House of Lords by the Lord Stanraore last year and your Lordship’s reply thereto.


The Lord Stanmore is reported to have said :
All who are acquainted with the Fijian race know perfectly well that if you separate
them from the land the race will die ont and that would be a violation of the
express conditions on which alone we took possesion of the Fijian Islands. We
told the natives that we had come to protect them against the lawlessness of the
white settlers ; we told them that their lands should be kept to them inviolate
&c and to that we are pledged by despatches without number from successive
Secretaries of State and in speeches equally without number of successive
Governors and what is more important than all by the solemn word of her late
Majesty the Queen.
On two separate occasions her late Majesty did me the honor to convey to me her
commands from her own lips that I was to tell the Fijian people that their lands
were theirs and should never be taken from them. I told them so on the
authority of our Sovereign and I do trust that that pledge then given will be
maintained.
27. Your humble Petitioners find it difficult to reconcile the said statements of the Lord
Stanmore with his last acts as Governor of Fiji concerning native lands which were (a) the
passing of the Native Lands Ordinance 1880 (b) the passing of the regulation as to the
registration of land.
28. Your humble Petitioners have perused the whole of the Lord Stanmore’s
published addresses to the Legislative Council of Fiji and on no connection did he intimate that
lands vested in the Crown were to be returned to the natives nor did he ever publish any such
intimation in the “ Fiji Royal Gazette. ”
29. Your humble Petitioners differ from the Lord Stanmore in many particulars of his
said speech but as they are outside the objects of this Petition they do not make special reference
to them but would remind your Lordship that the Lord Stanmore left Fiji at the end of 1880 and
has not visited the Colony since ; in the meantime the condition of things has entirely changed.
30. Your humble Petitioners are aware that at Nasova the Lord Stanmore
addressed certain natives and made some statements concerning the lands. He never informed
the Legislative Council of this speech nor did he refer to it in the u Gazette” nor did he
take any legal step to vary the intention of the said Act 4. The speech would appear to have been
delivered for some temporary diplomatic reason.
31. Sir G. W. Des Yceux was proclaimed Governor on the 20th December, 1880.
32. On the 10th February, 1881, a regulation respecting leases was passed by the
Native Regulation Board and approved by the Legislative Council on the 26th February, 1881.
The regulation is as follows :
No. 5 1881. Respecting leases.
1. If any person desires to make application to any mataqali or other native proprietor for
the lease of any land belonging to such mataqali or other proprietor such
application shall be sent to the Native Commissioner who shall communicate to the
mataqali or other native proprietors interested. Such request may be at once
refused if the mataqali or other proprietor think fit to do so but if the mataqali or
other proprietor desires to accept the proposal it shall be brought under the
consideration of the Bose ni Tikina of the district at its next meeting.
2. If the Bose ni Tikina think it inexpedient to the interest of the proprietor that the lease
shall be granted the matter shall go no further but if the Bose ni Tikina approve of
the proposal it shall be submitted to the Roko Tui of the Province who shall
forward the application together with a copy of his own opinion thereon to the
Governor by whom it will be communicated to the Executive Council in order to
obtain the direction of the Governor in Council thereon according to law.
3. All rents from lands leased from the native owners shall be paid by the lessee to the
Native Commissioner who shall give a receipt for the same on behalf of the native
owners and shall pay the same at once into the Provincial Department Deposit
Account at the Bank. The Native Commissioner shall thereupon remit the same
with the necessary vouchers in duplicate to the mataqali owning the land under
cover to the Roko Tui of the Province. One of the duplicate vouchers when duly
signed shall be retained by the Scribe of the Province and the other shall be returned
by the Roko Tui to the Native Commissioner.
4 The following shall be the primary divisions of all rents:—Of every twenty shillings
the mataqali shall receive ten, the Turaga Tankei shall receive eight, the Buli of the
District and the Roko Tui one each. The voucher shall be signed in duplicate by
the four recipients named or their representatives and shall be in form of Schedule
A. The subdivision thereof of the first two portions, viz : the mataqali and Turaga
Tankei shall in every case be in accordance with those vakavanua customs that
apply to yau ni vanua or produce of the land.
Passed by the Native Regulation Board the tenth day of February, 1881.
Approved by the Legislative Council the twenty-sixth day of February, 1881.
33. Your humble Petitioners respectfully venture the opinion that the regulation
respecting leases extended to such lands only as the natives were empowered to lease under
Section XVII of the Native Lands Ordinance XXI of 1880.


31. Governor Des Voeux does not appear to have regarded the lands which accrued to
the Crown under the Deed of Cession as of very great value for in a message to the Legislative
Council on the 80th May 1881 he said “ The Government buildings at Levuka were practically
the only valuable asset received by her Majesty at the cession to set against the cost of
establishing the colony.’’
35. Acting Governor Thurston in a message to the Legislative Council on the 18th
February 1884 said “11 may further be remarked that the investigation and ultimate decision upon
a claim of land is virtually a cause arising between an European on the one hand and a native
community upon the other and that the disallowance of the European’s claim is in effect a
declaration in favor of the native contention.’’
36. Governor Thurston’s remarks had reference to the Lands Commission appointed
to enquire into the bona tides of land transactions before the cession. Your Petitioners humbly
suggest that when Sir John Thurston spoke these words he did not intend to imply that all lands
disallowed to Europeans vested in the native. His said message is quite in accordance with the
opinion that in many disallowed claims the land by law vested in the Crown.
37. Your humble Petitioners would venture the opinion that in claims where it was
shewn to the Lands Commission that the European claimant had been in possession for several
years and such claim wa> disallowed the land did by law revert to the Crown for it could hardly
bo said that the native was in actual use and occupation ol lands which in fact were at and for
years before the time ol cession in the use and occupation of an European claimant.
38. Your humble Petitioners would call your Lordship’s attention to Regulation Yo. 3
of 1885 passed by the Native Regulation Hoard and approved by the Legislative Council. The
Regulation is as follows :
No. 3of 1885. Respecting planting.
1. Regulation No. sof 187/ “ Respecting Planting” is hereby repealed.
2. Every able-bodied man who according to the custom of the land is under obligation to
plant shall have a plantation of not less than one hundred bananas five hundred
hills of either yams nalo kawais or kumalas and shall keep it in good order. No
one who owns a dalo bed shall allow it to remain idle. Let everyone add what he
pleases to the above such as sugar cane corn or anything else especially adapted to
the soil.
3. The chief of each village assisted by the heads of Mataqalis and the Mata ni Vanuas shall
in the first place take care that each able-bodied man is provided with sufficient planting
land and in the second placf l the chief of the villas'e assisted by the heads of the
Mataqalis and the Mata ni Yanuas shall see that the land is cleared and planted.
4. Should any able-bodied man not have the quantity of food planted that is specified in this
law the chief of the village shall through the officers cause such man to be brought
before himself the heads of the Mataqalis and the Mata ni Vanuas to be admonished ;
and if the man after admonition dons not commence planting and plant the quantity
required by this law then the chief of the village shall cause the officers to take him
before the magistrate who shall order the person to commence to plant at once the
quantity specified above and in default may punish him by imprisonment for any
term not exceeding two months with hard labor.
5. No person shall sell or give away so much of the produce of his garden as would leave
himself or the household to which he belongs insufficiently provided for. The
. chief of the town shall cause any person breaking this section to be taken before the
magistrate and the magistrate on conviction shall punish him by a fine not exceeding
ten shillings or by imprisonment with hard labor not exceeding one month.
6. \\ hoever shall not fill up the hole made in removing a tivoli or other wild food and shall
not plant therein the top or some other part suited for reproduction shall on
on conviction be fined a sum of one shilling or be imprisoned for a term not
exceeding three days.
Passed by the Native Regulation Board the twentieth day of July, 1885.
39. Your Lordship will observe that Planting Regulation Yo. 5 of 1877 mentioned
in Clause 17 hereof was repealed but by Section 2 of the amending regulation the planting-
required of every able-bodied man was re-enacted.
40. Your humble Petitioners respectfully suggest that tlie regulation indicates an
intention to provide every able-bodied man with sufficient planting land: Section 1 of the
repealed Regulation i\o. 5 of 1877 enacted that every able-bodied man should have a plantation
and the individualism introduced by that Regulation was continued by the amending Regulation,
and the latter made it the duty ot the heads of mataqalis to see that every able-bodied native
was provided with sufficient planting land. It would therefore appear that though it was au
accepted theory that lands were held by native communes it was not intended that the work
should be communal but that it should be individual.
41. Your humble Petitioners would respectfully refer you to Ordinance IV. of 1888
intitule 1 an Ordinance “Respecting Crown Lands” (in the new volume of Ordinances this
appears as No. lof 1888). The Ordinance deals with the leasing &c. of lands by and to the
Crown rflid it is mentioned merely for purposes of reference.


r. A- 4 lV T °faT 1888 intituled “An Ordinance relating to native lands” amende,l
Ordinance XXI. of 1880 exhibit A 1 referred to m clause 21 of this Petition and has reference to
the leasing of native lands by the Crown.
43. Your humble Petitioners suggest that this Ordinance did not increase the area of
native reserves but in fact related to lands no longer required as native reserves owing to the
decrease in the native population. 6
follows a^ve e o u l a tion No. lof 1899 respecting boundaries of native lands is as
Whereas it has been ascertained that certain natives have from time to time wilfully designedly
and with intent to defraud interfered with and altered the boundaries of "native
ands with the intention of converting portions of such lands to their own use or to
A MW O ot^er Pp rso ps : and whereas such alterations give rise to serious trouble
and ill-teeling to the rightful owners thereof the following regulation is made : -
1. Prom and after the passing of this regulation any native who without due authority shall
alter or attempt to alter the boundary or boundaries of any piece or portion of
native land shall upon conviction be sentenced to imprisonment with hard labor for
any term not exceeding twelve months.
2. Any person or persons wh > shall aid or abet in the alteration of such boundaries as
mentioned in the preceding section of this regulation shall upon conviction be
sentenced to imprisonment with hard labor for any time not exceeding six months.
T• , 4 n on ., the , 2 1 d November 1892 Governor Sir John Thurston introduced to the
Legislative Council a draft Ordinance to amend the Native I.ands Ordinance XXI of 1880 and
delivered a message as follows on that occasion :
“As the draft Ordinance relating to native lands now before the Board contains important
amendments ot the principal Ordinance which it repeals and which may not at once
be correctly appreciated the Governor deems it advisable to offer the following
observations for the information and consideration of honorable members
“1. The original Ordinance was passed upon the 30th October 1880 and his Excellency believes
that provisions are generally understood. In some of its more important
objects the Ordinance has not however been brought into that full operation which
was intended at the date of its becoming law. Two reasons may be advanced for
this (1) Certain difficulties inherent to the Ordinance itself and (2) the straitened
circumstances of the colony which have prevented except in an almost inappreciable
Ordinance 8 appomfcmenfc of the Commissioners provided for in Section 5 of the
“2. The provisions of Section sof the existing Ordinance are in effect referable to Article 4of
the deed of cession by which it was settled that all native owned land “ not now in
the actual use or occupation of some chief or tribe or not actually required for the
probable future support and maintenance of some chief or tribe shall be and is
hereby declared to be vested in her Majesty her heirs and successors.”
“ 3 - ln ° rder that . *s® area ascription and locality of such native-owned land might be
ascertained and its rightful owners recognised it was necessary and still is so that
investigations and surveys should be made in each province of the colony and but
tor the reasons given above this investigation would have followed closely upon the
one which was made in respect of the property of Europeans or other foreigners
who had acquired or who claimed to have acquired the propretorship of lands before
the date or cession. r
“4. Under Section 6of the present Ordinance it is provided that the Bose Vaka Yasana of each
province shall in the first place take such measures as are necessary to have the
ands of its constituent communities defined and the boundaries set out in writing
o e laid before the Commissioners. Upon this being done several separate courses
ot action are provided for by this and the following Section 7.
“ 5 - The Com (1) might after investigation accept and register the claims as settled
without dispute by the Provincial Council, or (2) might adjust the claim under
investigation or refer it to the Governor in Council.
“6. The procedure provided for in Section 7 refers to disputed claims and requires that the
Koro or the Qali is first to attempt the settlement of the dispute or contention if
there is any. An opportunity is then to be afforded the Bose Yaka Tikiua (district
council) for determining the contention: and if that council should fail in
satisfying the parties the dispute is then to be referred to the Bose Vaka Tnraea
(counci o chiefs) and from the last named body there is an appeal to the Governor
in Council. rir
“ 7 ■ There ca " ”°, d ° nbt T tbat tbe Bose Vaka Tikiua referred to as above was intended to
It! er ?■ 16 °®f asaua (provincial council) which by Section 6is constituted
the ordinary tribunal for land titles and yet is not mentioned at all in Section 7
As most ot the disputes he between districts or Tikinasit follows that no satisfactory
conclusion could possibly he arrived at by submitting a contention to the ruling of
a meeting of the members of one only of the disputing parties.
8. It will be observed that in the case of disputed claims the Commissioners at present ha%e
no pai in t e procedure laid down and that there are four distinct references
sam lone »y i e Ordinance with none of which are the Commissioners concerned
U T e .Twu (l) r? he Koro or Q a]i ( 2 ) Bose Vaka Tikiua (3) the Bose Vaka Turaga
an ( ) ie Governor in Council. In addi ion to this practically cumbersome
proie are it as a ready been noticed that under the provisions of Section 6 it is
, e j*l 6 ] rt .* VlßCia . Council of each province to initiate measures for defining the
ai . ° U ? ( alles P I^s different communities and this in effect it can only do by
mo\ing t e l '^ rict ‘•"uiicil.s. Bat to move either of these councils to an active
t isc large o t eir duties under the Ordinance is found impossible an,l this
• ID U oss.bihty or disinclination is not hard to understand.


“9. The boundaries of all lands in Fiji dividing one mataqali from another and one province
from another were prior to the date of cession always more or less unsettled and
had ever been the subject of bitter dispute and frequent fighting.
“ 10. The Governor will go so far as to say that almost at any time prior to the date of cession
the mere positive assertion of a particular right in much of the l orderlands of
provinces would have formed ground for serious quarrels and any too overt act in
the assertion of such right would have been resented by some party and resisted if
the power of resistance had been present. This feeling still lingers in the minds of
the people and the consequence is that they will not or it may be fairer to them to
say cannot initiate among themselves the important question which it is the object
of the Ordinance to decide.
“ 11. As regards one of the modes of appeal provided by the Ordinance experience has shown
that the duty of deciding cannot with advantage be imposed upon the Bose Yaka
Turaga. The feelings that pervade the smaller councils also pervade the larger
councils and instead of differences of opinion and contentions between raataqalis or
between provinces being settled in a calm impartial and judicious spirit there is only
too much reason to fear they would be determined by personal interests and
predilections. Moreover as the annual council meets but once a year great delay in
the settlement of native land questions would inevitably ensue ; in addition to which
the time occupied in the consideration and settlement of contentions submitted to
in respect of land matters would prolong the session of the council for weeks and
perhaps months beyond reasonable and proper limits.
“ 12. Sections 7 and Bof the Bill now before the Board provide for a different and it is believed
a more practical procedure. Under the provisions of this Bill it is provided that
the Commissioners appointed under Section 6 and not any native council shall begin
or initiate enquiries into the title of all lands claimed by native communities and that
it shall be the duty of such Commissioners after due enquiry to describe in writing
the boundaries and situation of such lands. In fact the Commissioners in future
shall do everything necessary to ascertain what area of land is held by the original
and hereditary owners and for this purpose the usual powers such as those vested in
stipendiary magistrates for summoning and examining witnesses are vested in them.
‘‘ 13. Under section Bof the Bill the Commissioners shall after due enquiry as provided in the
preceding section draw up a report and lay it with the minutes of inquiry before
the provincial council or councils concerned in each case : and such council or
councils may at any time be specially convened by the Governor with that object
thus avoiding the loss of time which is inevitable under the provisions of the
present Ordinance. The provincial council or councils after consideration of the
report and minutes of inquiry before referred to shall then confirm or adjust the
boundaries submitted to them as may appear necessary.
“ 14. In all cases wherein the reports have been confirmed or possible adjustments have been
accepted by the parties concerned the boundaries and situation of the land so
settled by the council or councils shall be registered as provided for under Section 9
of the Bill and such record will form the legal evidence of the native title in such
lands. In the event of the council or councils being unable to confirm or adjust
the lands being the subject of report the finding of the provincial council or councils
together with a report of the Commissioners and a copy of all the evidence taken
should be transmitted to the Governor in Council whose decision upon the case
shall be final.
“ 15. It is believed that the amendments of the Ordinance relating to native lands now
submitted to the Board will greatly facilitate the settlement of a question which
every day becomes of increasing importance and that in due time it will render
possible a decision being arrived at on the points in the deed of cession adverted to
above.
“ 16. Another amendment of importance will be found contained in Section 19 of the draft
facilitating the lease of native land with the approval of the Governor in Council.
Under Section 17 of the Ordinance it was provided that any mataqali or other
division of a native community might lease such portions of the land as “ may be
set apart for their use” to persons of European descent or others but no such lease
should be valid without the consent of the Governor in Council on a report of the
Bose Yaka Yasana.
“ 17. It is quite clear here what the words “ set apart for their use” was intended to refer to
lands the right to which had been ascertained and consequently set apart for the use
of natives under Sections 5, 6 and 7of the Ordinance. But up to the present time
no land has been specifically defined or “set apart” as native owned land. A
strict adherence to the letter of this section would render the leasing of native
lands impossible. Provision has therefore been made in the Bill to meet this
difficulty.
“ 18. It is further provided by the Bill that the consent of the Governor in Council may be
given to a lease of native land on a report of the Bosa Yaka Tikina instead of the
Bose Yaka Yasana transmitted through the Roko of the province with his written
opinion thereupon.
“ 19. As the Bose Yaka Yasana or provincial council meets but once every six mouths
inconvenient delays in the settlement of applications for lease cannot but now occur.
And as each member of the provincial council has little knowledge and no interest
in the land of a pirticular district other than his own it seems desirable that the
district council should be at liberty to make its own decision in the matter of
leasing land subject to the report of the council the opinion of the Roko of the
province and the subsequent inquiry and approval of the Governor in Council.
“ 20. There is also in the Bill some amendment of the existing law in Sections 9 and 10 though
they are of comparative unimportance. An addition to Section 9 makes it an
offence punishable by fine or imprisonment on the part of any person who shall
tamper with destroy or remove boundary marks set up by the Commissioners; and
Section 10 provides for certain amendments in pre-existing registration of native
land boundaries, leases of which were made prior to the Commissioner’s
investigation and survey.


“ 21. It may be worthy of note here that the area of native land at present held under lease
amounts to 25,000 acres of which 8,000 were leased before and 17,000 after the
date of cession.
“ 22. The Governor anticipates the Board’s concurrence with the proposed amendments which,
in the evemt of their becoming law he believes will have beneficial results.”
By command,
JAMBS STEWART,
Assistant Colonial Secretary.
46. The Ordinance so introduced was duly enacted on the 29th November 1892 and
became Ordinance XXI. of 1902. A copy of the Ordinance accompanies this Petition and is
marked A 2.
47. For purposes of reference your humble Petitioners have numbered the paragraphs
of the said message of Sir John Thurston.
48. Your humble Petitioners respectfully refer to paragraph 2 of the message which
indicates the scope of enquiry by the Commissioners who were to be appointed under Section 5
of Ordinance XXI- of 1880.
49. Your humble Petitioners would remind your Lordship of paragraph 27 hereof
from which it will be seen that the passing of the Ordinance XXI. of 1880 was the last
Legislative Act relating to the native lands by the Lord Stanmore —then Sir Arthur Gordon.
50. Your humble Petitioners would respectfully contend that Sir John Thurston did
not share the view of the noble Lord that the lands had been returned to the native and he
attached no importance to the Nasova speech of the Lord Stanmore refened to in Clause 80
hereof. On the contrary he viewed the last Legislative Act of the noble Lord to be in accordance
with Article 4 of the instrument of cession.
51. Your humble Petitioners would point out that Section 6 of the Ordinance XXI.
of 1892 is a re-enactment of Section 5 in the repealed Ordinance XXI. of 1880 therefore the
scope of enquiry by the Commissioners appointed under Section 6 of Ordinance XXI. of 1892 is
identical with the scope of enquiry under the repealed Ordinance and in view of paragraph 2 of
the said message of Sir John Thurston the provisions of Section 6 of the Amending Ordinance
“ are in effect referable to Article 4 of the said deed of cession.”
52. That Ordinance XXI. of 1892 was subject to Article 4 of tire deed of cession is
clearly indicated in paragraph 15 of the said message of Governor Thurston.
53. Your humble Petitioners would emphasize paragraph 17 of the said message that
up to the year 1892 no land had been “ set apart” as native owned land.
54. Your humble Petitioners apprehend that the sections in the Ordinance XXI. of
1892 relating to the purchase of native lands by the Crown were intended to extend to those
lands which the natives actually used and occupied at the time of cession but which owing to
the reduced native population they no longer required.
The said Ordinance XXI. of 1892 was amended as follows :
(a) Ordinance VIII. of 1898.
(b) Ordinance VT. of 1895.
(c) Ordinance VII. of 1896.
(d) Ordinance VII. of 1897.
(e) Ordinance VIII. of 1898.
(f) Ordinance IX. of 1904.
These amending Ordinances are herewith marked respectively A 8 A 4 A 5 A 6 A 7 and AB.
55. Your humble Petitioners would refer to the fact that none of the amending
Ordinances either limit or extend the provisions of Section VI. of the Native Lands Ordinance
XXI. of 1892.
56. On the 26th November 1898 the following regulations were issued by the
Governor in Council relating to the Native Lands (leases) Amendment Ordinance 1898.


REGULATIONS.
1. When a person with the consent of the native owners desires to lease a piece of land he
shall fall up the usual printed form of application (obtainable from the Stipendiary
i agistrate) and indicate the land he applies for by fixing bamboos or long poles with
a flag at each corner of the block.
2. When this has been done it shall be the duty of the applicant to transmit the application
to the Stipendiary Magistrate of the province together with a rough tracing and a
description of boundaries in triplicate thus : Commencing at (some fixed or
easily ascertainable point) and running in a direction so many chains (so
many posts) thence in a so many posts, etc., etc.
3. The form of application having been prepared as above to the satisfaction of the magistrate
s all be sent by him to the Buli of the district for consideration by the District
Council and if approved by the Council it shall then be returned signed by the Buli
on behalf of the owners to the magistrate who shall thereupon collect a fee of 35s
rom the applicant (preparing lease 255. stamp duty ss. registration ss. and remit
e same together with the application and tracings to the Native Commissioner
who if not satisfied with them shall have the right to return them for amendment
before submitting the application for the approval of the Governor in Council.
4. On approval of the application by the Governor in Council a lease shall be preiared by the
TUlir C ° mmiSSloner m tTl P ,icale and registered in the office of the Registrar of
5. The lessee must within the space of two months of the approval of his lease by the Governor
in Council on penalty of forfeiting his lease enter iato occupation and put in
hardwood posts round the block in question at a distance not exceeding one chain
6. The rent agreed upon shall be payable to the Native Commissioner or the Stipendiary
Magistrate of the province from the date on which the lease may be approved by the
Governor,n Council and shall be paid on 30th June and 31st December in each year
and all payments on account of rent other than the first payment shall be made in
advance tor the term of six months.
p 8 f 7 ' U T iU .observed that these are not regulations by the Native Regulation
Board but are merely published for information. 6
58. On the 23rd March 1904 the above regulations were amended as follows :
Regulation No. 2 of the regulations dated 23rd November 1898 shall be read as if the words
a rough tracing and ” were omitted therefrom.
w • -K , 60 - Sir , G ®o r f O’Brien on the 23rd October 1900 in a speech to the natives at
Wambokasi Rewa (which speech however he never referred to in the Legislative Council or in
the liji Royal Gazette), is reported to have said (inter alia) :
For what after all are those so called native taxes that you have to pay ? I will tell you. Thev
a r U u nt ii. to than £ } per head a year for each adult male and the J are the rent
!f h t . l ? e Fyiaii peopie pay for the lands that they are not actually cultivating.
Under the Act of Cession by which the father of Roko Tni Tailevu and the other
great chiefs of Fiji on behalf of themselves and their several tribes made over the
country to Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria it was agreed that the
Fijians should ke.p the lands they were cultivating and that all the rest should
belong to Government. But when it was found that this did not please the chiefs
and the people the Government allowed them to have all the unoccupied lands and
in return got from them the small rent which is known by the name of native
taxes, bo you see if you were to cease to pay that rent you would also cease to own
those lands etc. What you have to think of is this : Would you rather go on
f a^H g £° Ur £ en f tO , f i lS Government un der the Queen or have your rent remitted
by the New Zea and Government and lose your lands. I know what your answer
is, you would rather pay your rent and keep your lands. Well I will do what I can
for you by writing to Her Majesty the Queen so that this country may not go to
New Zealand and that you may keep your lands but when I tell you this I tell you
also at the same time that you are all to keep very quiet etc.
61. Your humble Petitioners do not agree with the view that native taxes were
imposed as a rent upon the uncultivated lands but would refer your Lordship to a speech upon
the subject by Lord Stanmore—then Sir Arthur Gordon—delivered at the Royal Colonial
Institute on the 15th day of March 1879 in which he said :
“ Formill g as they (the natives) do 99 hundredths of the inhabitants of the colony ; causing as
they do a large part of its expenditure on Police, Administration of Justice, etc.
it is right that ihe native people should contribute and that in no inconsiderable
measure to defray expenses incurred for their profit and on their behalf. Later in
the same speech he said : After much consideration I came to the following
conclusions : “
“1. That the taxation of natives to be efiective must be of the nature of a land tax or corn rent
levied on the district or village rather than on individuals.
2. I hat while such tax could not at present be obtained in money without the exercise of
gross oppression a tax of produce could be easily received with the best possible
pecuniary results and with the yet greater advantage of stimulating native industrv
and largely increasing the native trade in the group.
“3. That it would be undesirable that the Government should take part in any complicated
trading operations or commercial dealings.
“ To Carr y ont * h , ese r Tie « ‘he Native Tax Ordinance of 1876 was passed by the unanimous vote
of the Legislative Council of Fiji.”


G 2. The controversy ot native taxes is outside the object of this humble Petition and
the speech of Sir George O’Brien has been quoted for the purpose of showing to your Lordship
that as late as the 23rd October 1900 the native clearly understood that lands which he was not
bona fide occupying were vested in the Crown.
68. Your humble Petitioners venture the opinion that Sir George O’Brien delivered
the speech to the natives at the time of an agitation to annex these islands to the Government of
Yew Zealand and he based his remarks upon Sir Arthur Gordon’s speech at the Royal Colonial
Institute ; that while he was anxious to maintain the right of the Crown to native lands he was
also anxious to satisfactorily explain in words the native would understand the necessity of the
native tax, and that he really intended the words to be understood—to quote Sir Arthur Gordon’s
speech on the subject—“ that the taxes were in the nature of a land tax.”
64. • Your humble Petitioners however would remind your Lordship that up to this
time 1900 there had been no legislative Act of any kind whatever to indicate that the Crown
surrendered the lands nor had any of the Governors of these islands referred to the matter in any
Message to the Legislative Council or by any notice in the “ Fiji Royal Gazette.’’
65. Your humble Petitioners are of opinion that if the lands had been returned to the
natives in consideration of the taxes which they were paying or for any other consideration it
must have come to the knowledge of Sir John Thurston who was connected with the Government
of the colony before the deed of cession and afterwards until his death, and his knowledge would
have bem disclosed in his Message to the Legislative Council quote in Clause 45 hereof.
66. Sir Henry Jackson in his message to the Legislative Council on 14th September
1903 said:—
“ The most important fac f or as regards the expansion of the colony and the growth of its
prosperity is the improvement of the facilities for offering to settlers the opportunity
of opening up the vast resources of the waste lauds which are now of no use or
benefit to the owners, I cannot venture to enter here into a review of that thorny
and often argued question of the land tenure in Fiji. By enactment and by
practice the ownership is assured to the people of Fiji but I believe them to be
sufficiently alive to their own interests to be able to consider intelligently proposals
tor enabling them to reap pecuniary benefit from their now valueless possessions so
long as those proposals shall not affect the security of their absolute right of
tenure. Such proposals are about to be submitted to the natives and until they
have been carefully explained to them it is obviously impossible for me to enter into
further details now.”
67. Your humble Petitioners understand that whatever proposals Sir Henry Jackson
spoke of its being about to be submitted to the natives never were so submitted and have never
been made public.
68. Your Lordship will observe that Sir Henry Jackson’s Message is the first
authontivo statement in the Legislative Council from which it might be concluded that the
Crown had surrendered its right to the native lands and this statement is made 29 years after
the cession.
69. Sir Henry Jackson said
R y enactment and by practice the ownership is assured to the people of Fiji.”
70. Your humble Petitioners most respectfully submit that Sir Henry Jackson’s
statement was not law for the reasons—
1. There is no enactment to the effect staled.
2. Xo practice —or adverse possession—can take from the Crown her rights.
71. Your humble Petitioners would respectfully refer your Lordship to paragraphs 51
an 1 52 heieof and would venture to observe that at the date of the above message the law
relating to native lands was comprised in the Ordinance XXL of 1892 which Ordinance was
t ten the basis of native land tenure and the amendments thereon referred to in paragraph 54
hereof. ® r
1 -• Lordship will observe that the powers of Commissioners under the
Ordinance XXL of 1880 and XXI. of 1892 were such that to prevent a confusion of native land
ten me a very great deal depended upon the gentlemen appointed as Commissioners.
78. Appointments would however appear to have been made of gentlemen whose
principal recommendation was a knowledge of the Fijian language and these gentlemen may
have been handicapped by reason of (a) a want of knowledge of law and (b) confused
instructions.
74. Your Lordship will find herewith Ordinance Yo. XI. of 1905 marked A 9. (In the
new volume of Ordinance this Ordinance is IV. of 1905).


Governor! CounT 16 “* 0 oWnershlp ° f native lands sub i ect to appeal to the
the Governor (£ ** 1905 his Exce]le^
‘‘^^^rmh-td^he^ 1 .? ,' aU< ? qae f° n bere ra » st urgently calls tor drastic
inseparable. ™ S ° ° 086 y and extncably interwoven as to be almost
“ Th<S as regards native laud-whioh is abont eleven-twelfth. of the land in Fiii-is
or Lb. «7f ° WU !;: 8 nSe but . an lnfini tesimal portion of it and thereby derive Httle
“l /r fit f fr ° m tlle Potential wealth which it represents but that owing to the
transfer from th/n»7“ b g b* haS hitherto been bardl y P°«iMe to obtain a
nnf .k.iT * h tV VeSl " , '° bave aud do not use, to the Europeans, who have
passed b fX[ h of iTot? “ S h : a - f the Si “ inS ° f this ooalloU “ Ordinance was
oansfer of Knd b! tLr P™porly used will go far towards facilitating the
„ u f J c^ e or ® ven by sale from the native to the European. There
To th Pni W T h ° gh ’ P erha P s stlll think > that the new law did not go far enough
thaf on. V? ? SWer u hat - lfc that is needful for thepresent and
that our next step is to use the given means P ’
lt J2T £ t£e r
£EH°^
“ There aeS T tions connected with native land which must be left to the Native
par men I mean disputes as to and determination of boundaries according to
ea 6 a“th e e^'’KS ‘I?* 1 'I 0 '’ 8 f Tbese ba Tft w^en
these rp»siM,i t^a:ddu e i; a e r s! ment - ' Pr ° P ° Se ‘° -parate and define
“ U Wi " b . een no «oo d that under the new Lands Ordinance the Native Lands
that offi 8 '°" 0,: , S b WOrk 13 T UOb « restr ‘oted. Hitherto tor a great many years past
ato„hold a S n mewbat f “" Staff has been “Mefly occupied in wlj 1 may call
intricate and bVJd shfnld
r-n a^rt^t^r&S
Commission has been to settle actual disputes as^o^ownLh^of“lands when^nd
U v . ssistance of Ratu Savonaoa should devote himself exclusively to that purpose.
nece'ssa^y' *“bu tTi wdll Sp ° radlC land dis P utes an occasional survey will be
necessary , but it will not be necessary to leave any survevors on fhn 4-u
U ds e ?hTSr‘^h 5 * Wi " S “ fflCe ‘° giTC tbe As^istan7o°omm 0 LL h n e er “t t
Department. “ y S ° r^B made *» Mm by the Lands
realised th^posHion—the'true arid— 6 *° that his ExCellenc y
“ W ° rst of all Perhaps no one either in the Native Department or the Land* rm *.
what land - ht M
1905 intituled “ The Xativ!" T^*!i!!/'' ' V . ),dd *? e re^er your Lordship to Ordinance XIV of
marked AlO “ Ao( l ulsltl( ’ n Ordmance 1905.’' Tins Ordinance is herewith
Lands” and by the defiuition of “ Native
implication or otherwise. Oidmance does not increase the area of native lands by


r • i following regulation of tbe Native Regulation Board approved by the
Legislative Council was issued on the 21st May 1906 :
RELATING TO MONEYS RECEIVED FOR RENT OF LANDS.
1. Clause 4of Native Regulation No. sof 1881 is hereby repealed.
2. (1) After this regulation comes into force the following shall be the division of every sum
of twenty shillings received for rent of lands leased :
To the Roko of the province wherein land is situate. One shilling.
To the Buli of the district wherein land is situate. One shilling.
To the Turaga i Taukei if any. One shilling.
To the Chief of the Qali. Two shillings.
To the Chief of the Mataqali. Three shillings.
To the Mataqali. The balance of the sura,
(2) When a Mataqali is subdivisible into persons or bodies of persons known by the Fijian
term Tokatoka and such Tokatoka is the owner of the lands leased the balance of
such sum instead of being paid to the Mataqali as above provided shall be sub-
divided equally between the members of such Tokatoka.
Passed by the Native Regulation Board this Bth day of May 1906.
Approved by the Legislative Council this 10th day of May 1906.
„ oul Lordship will find herewith the Acquisition of Lands Ordinance No. XVI
or 190 b marked All.
85. This Ordinance met with opposition in the colony which opposition was considered
by your Lordship.
, , _ B9 • Yoi , ir humble Petitioners do not discuss in this Petition the grounds of objection
to that Ordinance beyond the fact that the main objection to it was that it was not confined to
uncultivated lands.
87. In his message to the Legislative Council on the 10th October 1906 his Excellencv
the (Governor said : J
“ The iand system and Department is another matter in which I claim that considerable and
pregnant changes have been made in spite of difficulties due to the necessity as I
strongly hold it to be—of not suspending the alienation of native land during the
introduction of a new system. The first change was the Native Lands Ordinance
(No. IV. of 1905 formerly XI. of 1905) by which the sale of native lands was for the
first time permitted. This provision for sale at first seemed to me a great gain and
1 v\as glad to note a tendency to make use of it. But difficulties have cropped up
partly owing to the native idiosyncrasy of being willing to sell to a certain man
at a low price but unwilling to sell the same land to another man for an even much
higher price and partly owing to the fact serious enough in the cases of areas of
considerable size and value that the purchase money is too often at once frittered
away by the native recipients. A means of obviating the last-named difficulty is
under consideration.” J
88. A our humble Petitioners agree with his Excellency Sir Everard im Thurn.
89. The Native Lands Ordinance 1905 was amended by IX of 1907 which is
herewith marked Al 2.
90. Your humble Petitioners would call your Lordship’s attention to Section 2of the
Ordinance. It will be observed that this Ordinance does not affect Section 2 of the Native
Lands Ordinance 1905 and therefore does not extend the area of native lands nor does it
surrender to the native any lands acquired by the Crown under Article 4 of the instrument of
cession.
1 . Section 16 of the Native Lauds Ordinance 1905 was repealed and Section 4of
Lie Ordinance now under consideration was enacted in lieu thereof.
9 -- T Vonr bumble Petitioners would call your Lordship’s attention to the fact that
a 1 Plough the Native Lands Commissioner is said to hold an “ inquiry” he is empowered to give
a decision whicu may be final. The gentleman who at present holds this position has had no legal
training and is not accustomed to the consideration of evidence. He is however a most
competent Fijian linguist and would prove invaluable to a properly constituted Native Lands
Court.
. 9; L At the present time the Native Lands Commissioner is undoubtedly hampered by
a contusion of law and practice and litigants coming before him are refused the right of legal
assistance though the question under consideration may be as to ownership of extensive and
valuable properties.


94. Your Lordship’s attention is called to the scope of inquiry by the Native Lands
Commissioner which is confined to disputes between natives.
, i *i 95 V- Y r, hu “ ble . Petitioners apprehend that it may arise in many instances whether
lands, the subject of an inquiry, may not in fact be the property of the Crown. Your Petitioners
are informed on inquiry at the Native Office that the latter point is never considered.
rt 96 - Yoar humble Petitioners most respectfully submit that there are few instances
r an y) m which magistrates have jurisdiction over matters relative to the tenure of land and so
far as this extends Section 2 of the Ordinance IX. of 1907 is, like its predecessor, almost it not
quite inoperative. ’
97 • Whilst commenting on this Ordinance your humble Petitioners would remark that
eie are no rules of paocedure to assist the Native Lands Commissioner in holding his inquirv
or to ensure that the proper parties are before the Court or what are the questions to be decided.
-d ° B ' ui S t - the a PP eal to the Governor in Council by the native your humble
Petitioners would again remark upon the lack of procedure and would point out that the native
has no right of appearance or representation before the Governor in Council but his claim is
decided in his absence upon the notes taken by the Native Lands Commissioner.
u t "* ur I humbl ?. Petiti °ners most respectfully venture the opinion that though it is
well known natives always dispute over the ownership of lands they would be less likelv to do so
if such ownership were decided by a competent tribunal; and in this connection your humble
Petitioners would refer to the fact that the decisions of the Native Lands Commission from 1875
to 188 J have always been accepted as final by the natives.
r .7 Th TLf e n ? re S ulatious h y the Native Regulation Board based upon the Native
Lands Ordinances 1900 and 19U7 therefore the native regulations are incomplete and possiblv
very misleading to the native. F y
~ 19 i\. Your bui P ble Petitioners venture the opinion that it would be better to have no
native regulations regarding lands than to have them incomplete.
~ The present system of settling disputes does not command the confidence of the
native a fact which your humble Petitioners do not consider surprising under the existing
circumstances. ° "
ffi i 10 °‘7 T° U 1 burable P&thioners have endeavored to place before your Lordship a resume
of trie law relating to native lands.
, , 194 : ' rh ® Purchasing or leasing of native lands is still in an unsatisfactory state owing
m part to (a) the difficulty in ascertaining the real owners; (b) What lands are open for sale or
purchase ; (c) prompt procedure ; (d) terms and conditions of sale or lease ; (e) time payments.
. „ , I°s. The Native Commissioner is not in possession of any records by which he can
tell whether the natives selling or leasing lands are the true owners thereof vide message of his
Excellency the Governor in paragraph 80. 8
106. Your humble Petitioners would suggest that the native has no incentive to see the
13 mcmT'° gieSS and 16 W 1 wltllllold hls lands unless methods of bribery are adopted to get him
~ , ! 07 :, T'he incentive to deal with his lands either by way of sale or lease is somewhat
letaided by the di\ision of purchase money or rent.
i ~ 1 °; S - , our huaible Petitioners would refer your Lordship to Clause 83 hereof which
shows the distribution of native rents. Purchase money is divided in the same way though
here !s no regulation authorising such division-therefore a Mataqali owning land receive only
Izs. m the pound of the rent or purchase money.
i. - 109 ‘ J ll6 Ff sent method of applying for native land is to find out the owners or owner
obtain their or his wnhngness to sell or lease by means of yaqona money; then to send in the
pi escribed form to ihe Native Department or Stipendiary Magistrate of the district in which
Em lands a:e situate. Jhe application is forwarded by the Native Department to the Buli of
the District for production at the next District Council when the natives discuss whether they
VI; sell or not. Ihe question of sale or lease is not confined to the consideration of the
owners alone for persons not owners may interfere and object to the sale. And if persons
no ‘Owners object to the sale or lease of the land the application is refused. The Buli
notifies the We Department the result of the application. If the application is allowed
b} tiie natms it goes belore the Governor in Council for approval. If the Governor in


Council approves of the application the applicant receives a notification to that effect
from the Native Commissioner. It is by no means certain however that the applicant
will get the land. Difficulties may arise. If the area exceeds ten acres it must be
surveyed by a registered surveyor. The applicant appoints his surveyor who proceeds
to the land to do the necessary work. In the meantime the native may have changed his mind
01 some othei claimants appear on Ihe scene and the surveyor is prevented making the survey, or
it may he said by the native, u You applied for land known as ‘ Naikorokoro,” this land you wish
to survey is Yanu Yanu. Ihe matter is referred to the Native Department which in course
of time may send a Commissioner to enquire or they may refer it to the magistrate of the district.
The applicant may or may not eventually get the land after months of trouble and annoyance and
at no little expense. After a survey a considerable delay often extending from three to six
months occurs before Die title to the lands can be obtained the delay being occasioned by the
difficulty of obtaining the signature of the proper parties.
110. Your humble Petitioners would emphasise the difficulties which arise by reason of
the native having a different name for every few acres of land. One native will call a piece of land
by one name another native will call it by another name and when the application for the land is
made the confusion which arises affords an opportunity for the native to refuse to complete his
contiact after the applicant has spent months in getting his application approved by the Governor
in Council.
111. To illustrate the difficulty your humble Petitioners would refer to a block of land
at Nadi containing 261 acres—the native calls 200 acres of it “ Sikitura” the 61 acres he
calls “ Vunitivi’ the whole 261 acres he calls “ Magalevu.” An applicant looking at the land
may have either of the names “ Sikitura” or “Vunitivi” given to him by the natives with
whom he is treating and using one of these names he makes his application. When he goes to
survey he may have 200 acres offered him or only 61 acres though he distinctly applied for the
whole block. However he must take or leave the land as named in the application though he
may never have neard of the name “ Magalevu” until he attends with his surveyor to mark the
boundaries.
112. The Native Department cannot assist him when he sends in his application to
ascertain whether he has got the right name or not. Neither can the Native Department assist
the applicant in making sure that he is dealing with the right owners.
113. The manner of obtaining native lands is most difficult unsatisfactory and
expensive. To the old planter it is a mere possibility—to the stranger it is an absolute
impossibility. Even the Government have had applications for land refused by the natives.
114. Your humble Petitioners would call your Lordship’s attention to the great delay
which the present method involves and the uncertainty even after the application has been
granted by the Governor in Council.
115. Men have come to this colony prepared to take up lands and cultivate but have
gone away again after spending several months in the futile attempt to obtain land.
116. Your humble Petitioners would also call your Lordship’s attention to the fact that
there are large areas of land in Fiji—good and valuable lands—which can only be opened up by
laying out capital. Ihese lands are of no value to the natives ; they do not use or occupy them;
t ley are not required for the maintenance of the native ; the native has no idea of opening
taem up and so they are allowed to lie idle. The capital required places such lands beyond the
means of your humble Petitioners.
HE Your humble Petitioners would venture the opinion that the Crown should take
such lands and open up the same for cultivation by planters and when so opened up the capital
expended would bo found to be well invested.
118. Ihe system of having to deal with natives on land matters is unsatisfactory to
your humble Petitioners, is not advantageous to the natives and is the basis of much annoyance
unnecessary work and confusion to the Government, it renders prompt land transactions an
impossibility and it encourages undesirable private arrangements with certain chief.
119. A our humble Petitioners would emphasise the opinion expressed by Sir Henry
Jackson in his message referred to in Clause 66 hereof.
“ The most important factor as regards the expansion of the colony and the growth of its
prosperity is the improvement of the facilities for offeiing to settlers the opportunity
of opening up the vast resources of the waste lands which are now of no use or
benefit to the owners.”
120. Your humble Petitioners realise that much has been done by his Excellency Sir
Everard im f lhurn in this direction but much remains to be done before native land transactions
can be said to be upon a firm basis.


XI 121 ‘ II ? ) lddressin 8‘ tbe Legislative Council on the 11th October 1907 his Excellency
the Governor said (inter alia): — J
“ The fact remains that we are bound in every possible way to consider the interests of the
natives. Those interests to my mind are of a very vague and uncertain kind. Ever
since I have been in this colony I have been trying constantly to find out and’ define
and possibly set down eventually what those interests really are ; and only when
t tat has been done will it be possible to finally settle this important question of
native land and other native conditions which require almost as much revision as
native lands.”
122. Your humble Petitioners crave your Lordship’s indulgence in placing before you
such a lengthy petition upon the subject of vide Sir Henry Jackson “ that thorny and often
argued question of the land tenure in Fiji.”
123. Your humble Petitioners are at one with his Excellency the Governor that the
nit wests of the natives should be considered; they humbly express the opinion however that
those interests can only be ascertained and finally settled by means of legislation which shall rid
us ot the confusion which at present exists.
124. Youi humble I etitioners venture the opinion that from a strictly legal standpoint
a very large area of land is the property of the Crown but the Crown has not taken steps to allot
V “ e . natives the reserves according to Article 4 of the instrument of cession and by failing to
oo tins and by the conduct of the gentlemen appointed Native Land Commissioners who have
never considered the rights of the Crown, the native at this time views the lands as his own
property.
+1 x- V r( T n k‘ lS never surrendered Ls rights and has from time to time reminded
tne natives that the lands are not his absolute property but your bumble Petitioners submit that
le vagueness and uncertainty ot the actions of the Government may have tended to the native
bona tide believing that he is the absolute owner of the soil.
d - Your humble Petitioners aic of opinion that the time is ripe for a declaration of
tim true legal position of the Government and at the risk of repetition your humble Petitioners
suggest that the foundation of legal tenure by the Crown and by the native is
]>t. The said Deed of Cession.
-id. The Ordinance XXf. of 1880.
di d. The Ordinance XXI. of 1892.
Tib. Tl e Ordinance IV. of 1905 (new edition).
stb. The Ordinance IX. of 1907.
x i.- ’ Your humble Petitioners would urge the necessity for immediate legislation the object
of wfnen shall be to make clear the ownership and to facilitate the sale and leasing of lands.
. Your humble Petitioners send with tins Petition the Census of 1901 and the report of
tlie Native Comimssioher thereon marked A. The native population has reduced since 1901.
Your Petiti mers therefore humbly pray :
]. 1 bat yonr Lordship will declare the position of the Crown regarding native lands.
2. That your Lordship will direct legislation to ratify (if necessary) aH land transactions to
date and to facilitate the methods by which lauds may be purchased or leased.
o. That native land matters be removed from the Native Department to the Lands
Department of the Government.
4. That the Lands Department take immediate steps to ascertain what lands are available for
sale or lease and put an unset price upon such lands.
5. Chat if the sale of lands is by the native the execution of legal instruments shall be by the
Native Commissioner or other Government official on his behalf.
0. 1 hat lands he sold subject to conditions as to improvement.
7. I hat the purchase money for native or Crown lands may be paid as follows : —One-third on
execution of instrument of title ; one-third in two years, and one-third in four
years, the deferred payments bearing interest at the rate of five per cent, and to be
a first charge on the lands, or some other system of time payments introduced.
8. That all applications for lands be made to the Lands Department of the Government.
9. That purchase money of lands belonging to the natives be retained by the Government
tor their use.
10. 1 hat in the alternative the whole system of native legislation be submitted to a Commission
to be appointed by his Excellency the Governor.
And your Petitioners will ever pray, &c.






