





PETITION from VAN DIEMEN'S LAND. —Present Condition
of the 26,000 Free Inhabitants there, &c. &c.
On consulting mj friends here connected with Van Diemen’s
Land, in regard to the subjoined account of the present state of
that Island, we have come to the conclusion that if I were to
send it to one of the leading London Newspapers, for publication,
it would not probably be published, on account of its length, and
of the quantity of matter, more generally interesting, now in the
hands of the editors of these journals; and I have therefore deter-
mined to print and to circulate it among Members of Parliament,
and such other parties, here and in the South, as the Colonists, I
am in communication with, may think likely to take an interest
in the matter treated of.
I am aware that, as I have quoted from newpapers and private
letters, it may be said my statements do not deserve credence ;
my reply to this is: —Let a Parliamentary Committee be appoint-
ed, and all I have said will be fully proved.
Since I wrote the subjoined, I have seen the Times of the 4th
instant; and rejoice to find the Colonists are to have the power-
ful assistance of that influential journal. As, however, the
letter from Hobart-Town, referred to in the first paragraph of
the annexed, has not yet been published, I still think it right to
circulate my statement, as many of the topics treated of in it,
cannot be embraced in the short compass of one or even two
editorial articles.
G. Mackillop.
Edinburgh, 7th March, 1846.
To the Editor op
Mr Editor, —Copy of a Petition to both Houses of Parlia-
ment from the Colonists of V. D. L. was published in the Times
on 19th January last; but as I fear, a document of the kind, pub-
lished without, so far as I know, a single word of comment on it
by the Editor of that paper, will be little read ; and as a letter
from one of the most respectable of the V. D. L. Colonists, which
accompanied the petition, and illustrated many of the facts stated


in it, has not been, and perhaps never will be, published, I hope
the statement of the grievances of the Colonists, which I am now
going to bring to your notice, will not be unattended to. The
letter referred to, I understand, was delivered to the Editor of
the Times, in the expectation that he would publish it, or write
an editorial article on the subjects treated of in it.
Much of what 1 am about to state will be merely a repetition of
what is said in the Petition ; but I shall at the same time illus-
trate the working of the various convict systems in the Colony
since 1823* and thereby show how the present distressed state of
the Colonists has been produced. Official documents, which I
shall refer to, will show beyond all doubt, that the Colony was in
a very prosperous state up to the time when the grievances now
complained of commenced. The Petition itself, and what lam
going to adduce will show, too, equally clearly, that the Colony is
now in a lamentable condition ; and that this state of things has
been brought about mainly, if not entirely, by the convict system,
commenced by Her Majesty’s Government in London in 1839-
40, and which system is continued to the present moment.
It may be right to remark, that all that is said in this Letter
is stated on my own personal knowledge. When I first visited
the Colony in 1834, I found it in a secure and prosperous state ;
but when I was there again last year, I saw distress and misery
among the better classes of society, to an extent that I cannot ex-
pect will be credited even by those who may read the Petition,
and who may favour the Colonists by an attentive perusal of what
I am now going to state—Having made these few preliminary
observations, I proceed to my facts.
Ever since the beginning of 1824, the English Government
have encouraged and promoted the emigration of settlers to V.
D. L. by public notices issued from the Colonial Office, the
Horse Guards and the Admiralty,—offering, as inducements to sttch
emigrants, at first, free grants of land to settlers proceeding there
with property ; and latterly, by bonuses held out to naval and
military officers to induce them to settle in the Island.
Under these inducements, from 1824 to 1840, a great number
of British subjects, with property, proceeded to V. D. L. During
the same period, too, many farm servants and mechanics found
their way there, first at their own expense, or at the expense of
parties proceeding to, or already settled in the Colony, and who
had pre-engaged their services, and latterly, partly under t e
bounty system.


Dazing the period referred to, most of the convicts sent from
England went direct to New South Wales, and only a very small
proportion to V. D. L. Up to 1840 also, convicts were not on
their arrival in Hobart-Town kept together in gangs or parties of
200 or 300 as at present; but were immediately assigned to the
farmers and other settlers in the interior, who then undertook to
feed and clothe them, and report to the magistrate of the district,
when they might have any ground of complaint against either of
them.
When on a former occasion, i,e. in 1834,1 arrived in the Colony,
I found it under the charge of a very able officer, Sir George
Arthur. The system of assigning the convicts to the farmers was
then being matured by him ; and, as then administered, appealed
to embrace every advantage that could be expected from any sys-
tem of the kind.
Ist, The farmers generally found that, by strict yet indulgent
treatment, the convicts so assigned to them became in a short
time useful servants ; and that the work performed by them was
effected at less expense than it could have been done for by free
labour.
2nd, The convicts themselves were usually anxious to give
satisfaction to their employers, as the work they had to perform
was not often arduous; they knew too, that if they committed any
serious offence, they might be sent to a Toad gang, (usually con-
sisting of 200 or 300 convicts, all of whom had been convicted of
some offence in the Colony ; and had, in consequence, been sent
to one of these gangs by way of hard labour punishment,) and
where they would be deprived of much of the liberty and comfort
they were then enjoying. While, too, they were so assigned, they
were daily learning to plough, reap, shear, and attend to sheep ;
and were thus becoming qualified to earn a livelihood for them-
selves, when they might thereafter get their “ tickets of leave,”
i.e. permission to work on their own account in the Colony.
They were, in short, fitting themselves to become useful Colonists;
and this, of course, should be the grand object of all convict
training. While, too, the convicts were so assigned, they could
not often get spirituous liquors, nor meet with more than a few
meii in the same condition as themselves ; but were, on the con.
trary, constantly coming into contact with free and respectable
Colonists. They were not, either, in a situation where they could
rob or steal, without almost certain and immediate detection fol


lowing. The consequence is, that nine-tenths of the convicts in
V. D. L., who have been under the training above referred to,
have become useful and peaceable members of society.
3rd, The English Government, too, had no reason to object to
the above system in a pecuniary point of view ; for from the day
the convict was assigned, he ceased to be the cause of any expense
whatever to the Government.
To show that the system worked well, I give the following me-
moranda, all taken from statistical reports on the Colony, for
the years 1824 to 1838 inclusive, addressed to the successive
governors of V. D. L., by John Montague, Esq., Secretary to the
Colonial Government, and published by him in Hobart Town, m
1839.
Memoranda from Mr Montague s Statistics.
Population of V. D. L. exclusive of
the Military and Aborigines, — 1824, 1838.
Free, 6,029 Free, 26,055
Convicts, 5,938 Convicts, 18,133
Acres in crop in 1828, (there being no
record for the preceding years,) 34,033 108,000
Live Stock, —Horses, do. 1828. 2,034 9,636
“ Cattle, do. 84,476 75,057
“ Sheep, do. do. 553,698 1,214,485
Vessels. Tons. Vessels. Tons.
Vessels belonging to the Colony, 1824, 1 42 101 8,382
Do which arrived in do. do. 33 11,118 370 64,484
Do. whichsailedfrom do. do. 35 11,604 369 63,393
Value of Goods imported into the
Colony, chiefly from England,
and in English Ships, — do. £62,000 £702,956
Value of Goods exported from the
Colony, chiefly to England, and
in English Ships,— do. £14,500 £581,475
Churches, or places of public wor- 1838.
ship, in 1824, 4, sittings, 1464 32, sittings, 14,000
Public Schools,— 2, (No. of pupils 34, pupils, 1380
not known.)
Colonial revenue, fixed and inci-
dental, exclusive of land revenue, £32,116 £115,427
Amount paid by the Colonists for
Crown land, from 1828 to 1838, inclusive,— £147,370


The above statement, as aleady said, is entirely taken from
Mr Montague’s published reports. He left the Colony in 1839,
and no similar statistics,' I believe, have since been published ;
but I take the following memoranda from the Petition ; they are
equally derived from the official, though not published, document
of the Government of V. D. L.
Acres in cultivation in V. D. L. in 1840, 124,000
Vessels belonging to do. - 141 Tons, 12,491
Value of imports into do. - £988,356
Do. of exports from do. - £867,007
Colonial fixed revenue in do. - £118,541
N.B.—Fixed revenue of 1824, £16,866
Do. do. 1838, £98,681
Amount paid by the Colonists for Crown land
up to the end of 1840, .... £218,790
Number of places of public worship, up to do. - 44
Nothing could show more clearly than the above statistics, that
up to 1840, V. D. L. was progressing as rapidly as most colonies.
In one of Mr Montague’s printed Reports, dated 10th Oct. 1836,
and addressed to Sir G. Arthur, he remarks on this subject:—
“ The most remarkable occurrence during your Excellency’s ad-
ministration is probably to be found in the unprecedented rise in
the value of all colonial property, but particularly in land, sheep,
and cattle. From the best information I can obtain on this sub-
ject, I believe I may safely assure your Excellency, that it has
not been less, on an average, than 400 per cent, and, in many
cases, considerably higher. For instance, land which, in 1824,
would not realize more than ss. or 10s. per acre, has been sold at
prices ranging from £2 to £4; and sheep and cattle, which, in
1824 could be purchased at ss. and 40s. respectively, cannot now
be procured for less than £2, and £l2, respectively. To persons
unacquainted with the remarkable state of security for property in
every part of this Colony, such extraordinary and rapid advances
cannot fail to be unintelligible ; but those who have witnessed the
success of your Excellency’s measures for public and individual
protection, for the prevention and punishment of crime, for the
control and discipline of the convict population, and for the re-
moval and settlement of the aboriginal natives, can easily com-
prehend the steps which have led to such happy and prosperous
results, and are sensible that the value of property has increased


contemporaneously with the development and accomplishment of
your Excellency’s plans for the general welfare of the inhabitants
of this Colony, and the security of their persons and prope y.
There can be no doubt, but that the rise in the value of property
in Y. D. L. from 1824 to 1836, was mainly owing to the causes
referred to by Mr Montague ; but as I have no desire whatever
to blink the question, I give it as my candid opinion that the nse
in the value of property was also in some degree owing to a spirit
of speculation, which, from 1830 to 1840, was afloat in all the
Australian Colonies ; for sheep and other stock were then held at
somewhat extravagant prices ; and this state of things tended in
a great measure to produce the disasters which ensued m all ot
them in 1840, and the following years. These disasters, however,
were of a temporary nature, and would soon have been overcome
in V. D. L., as they have been at Port Phillip and in New South
Wales generally, if they had not been accompanied m .
by a measure of Her Majesty’s Government, the consequences of
which have thrown the whole of the respectable Colonists there,
into great and permanent distress.
In the year 1838, the free inhabitants of V. D. L„ considering
the advance the Colony had then made, as already described sent
home a Petition to Her Majesty, praying for a free Representative
Assembly i and though the prayer of that Petition was not then
granted, the reply was so worded as to induce the belief, that in
tins course of a few years their wishes would be acceded to. A
the time this reply to the petition was written, I take it for granted
it could not have been contemplated by her Majesty s advisers so
soon after to inundate V. D. L. with convicts ; but the Colonists
in New South Wales having in 1839 petitioned the Home Govern-
ment that no more convicts might be sent to them, the Govern-
ment then determined at once, without consulting the respectable
Colonists who had settled in V. D. L. at their recommendation,
to send the whole of the convicts of the Empire to that thinly in
habited island. . . ,
This determination began to be carried into effect m 1840, and
the result will be shown by what follows.—When I was mO. L.,
in April last, I found the Colony greatly overstocked with labour,
by the introduction of 4000 convicts annually since 1840, in p ace
of a third or a fourth part of that number, as in former years;
and that a great many of the free labourers.- the tntroduction of
w ho m had cost the Colony alout £200,000, had left it (chiefly for


Sydney and Port Phillip,) owing to the low price of labour in
V. D. L., and to the present insecurity for life and property in it.
Till 1840, the convicts were managed as already stated ; but
in that year, when the number imported was so much increased,
it was determined by the Home Government not to assign them
on their arrival in the Colony, but to employ them in gangs on
public works for a time, at the end of which they get ” probation
tickets,” i.e. permission to hire themselves as servants to the
Colonists. These probation gangs have proved a source of great
annoyance to the Settlers, who happen to be within a circuit of
eight or ten miles of them. They are lodged in sheds or tempo-
rary buildings, from which parties of them frequently make their
escape in the evening, and during the night plunder all who hap-
pen to be within their reach. The Colonial newspapers have lately
been filled with reports of the robberies and assaults committed
by parties from these probation gangs, and by convicts who are
now allowed to go about the country with probation tickets in
their pockets, ostensibly looking out for work, but in reality only
bent on plundering the industrious Colonists who still remain in
the island.
I have withdrawn nearly all my property from V. D. L., and
had no intention to write at present on the subject of the griev-
ances of the Colonists, till I got a letter from Hobart-Town last
night, requesting me to do so. As I come thus unprepared to
my task, I am not able to substantiate all I have said about the
present state of the Colony by ofiicial documents ; but any one,
who has access to the V. D. L. newspapers, will readily admit
that I have not overstated the case. In confirmation of it, how-
ever, I refer to the accompanying Colonial newspaper, by which
you will find that Sir John Pedder, Chief Justice of V. D. L., in
passing sentence on one of the convicts belonging to a probation
gang, at Launceston, in April last, in addressing the culprit,
made the following remarks : —“ He would pass a severer sen-
tence than he now intended to pass, if he thought every necessary
care was taken at probation parties to keep the men within the
precincts of their respective stations ; but he was of opinion, that,
either from the want of care, or the want of means far properly
securing the men at probation stations from roaming over the
country, the settlers were not sufficiently secured from their
depredations on the one hand, nor the men from temptation on
the other.” Things must have come to a pretty pitch, before a


discreet judge, like Sir John Pedder, would make remarks of the
kind from the bench.
In further illustration of what I have stated, I may remark,
that when in Y. D. L. in April last, on meeting married acquaint-
ances, I was often accosted as follows “ You know how I live
in this place. Unfortunately, I cannot leave it, as at present I
can neither realise nor let ray property ; but I live in constant
dread for my own safety, and that of all who are dependant upon
me; and them I must get out of the Colony, till the present system
be changed. What sum would be sufficient for my wife and
family to live upon, in London, Edinburgh ? ” &c.
1 In confirmation of what is said in the last paragraph, I enclose
for your perusal, a letter from Hobart-Town; —You will observe,
the writer says, “ I look forward, with some dismay, at being
driven out, (he means out of the Colony by the convicts); I sup-
pose, however, it will end in my sending my wife and children
home, remaining here a few years myself to scrape together what
cash I can, then join them, and see no more of this, the best, I
still maintain, of all the Australian Colonies, if the British
Government would only let us alone.” The writer of this letter,
is at the head of his profession in Hobart-Town ; and up to 1840,
I have good reason to believe, was making upwards of £2OOO per
annum by his business, (common report reckoned his income at
£4OOO per annum;:) he lives in the vicinity of Hobart-Town,
where, it might be supposed, he would be safer than elsewhere in
the Colony ; yet, it will be observed, the present convict system
is likely to drive him away from the place where he has been so
successful, where he is so much respected, and which has been
his home for the last four-and-twenty years.
In 1840, the Bothwell district in Y. D. L, was inhabited chief-
ly by a class of respectable and wealthy Scotch settlers ; now,
I believe, there is only one of them remaining there. Some of
them were long-sighted enough to sell their properties, when they
saw the storm was brewing ; others have succeeded in letting
theirs, (but only at a quarter of the rents they were worth up to
1840), and have come home ; and others again have waited till
things were at the worst, and then sold their properties for little
or nothing, and have gone to some other Colony with the wreck of
their means, where, at all events, they will be free from the terror
occasioned by the convicts of V. D. L. I can only refer your


readers, for proof of the accuracy of what I have just said, to any
gentleman who may have lately returned from the Colony.
As many of your readers may not have seen the Petition, and
many not now be able to procure a copy of it, it is right I show,
that in what I have already stated, I have not gone further in
my complaints against Her Majesty’s Government, than the
petitioners generally do, and therefore give the following short
extracts from the Petition.
In speaking of Taxation, the petitioners say, they are obliged
“to pay .taxes imposed by a Council, in which they have no re-
presentative, and levied, not for any colonial purpose, but to sup-
port the new convict system, which is fast destroying the
Colony.’ 1 Again, they say, “We are in a state of continual
dread and anxiety for ourselves, and our families, owing to the num-
ber of convicts by whom we are surrounded; —that we feel we
have no security for life or property, —that the moral condition of
the Colony is daily becoming worse and worse, —that no regulations,
however well intended, —no government, however able, —no im-
provement in detail, can counteract the evils of the enormous
mass of convicts that are poured upon our shores. That, if the
present system of transportation continues, we must, at whatever
sacrifice, abandon a Colony, which will become unfit for any man
to inhabit who regards the highest interests of himself or of his
children.”
Nearly all the free Colonists now in V. D. L. went there during
Sir George Arthur’s long government, or, at all events, went
previous to 1840—all under the impression that his convict
system would be continued, or that, no other would be es-
tablished in its stead, either detrimental to their own interests,
or those of the other free and respectable inhabitants. Though
such was the impression under which the free Colonists went to
the Colony, yet, by the convict system adopted by Her Majesty’s
Government in 1840, and continued ever since, the system of Sir
George Arthur has been entirely altered, or rather reversed ; and
the whole Colony, as has been fully shown, in place of being as
safe for life and property as any part of England, as described by
Mr Montague in 1836, is now little better than a den of thieves.
In this state of insecurity, no one of ordinary experience or re-
flection would suppose that property of any kind would retain the
value imparted to it during the secure and prosperous government
of Sir G. Arthur. In 1836, Mr Montague says—that sheep,


cattle, and land (the staple commodities of the Colony) had then
risen on the prices of 1824, from 300 to 400 per cent. The aver-
age price of meat in Hobart-Town, from 1830 to 1840, was about
6d. per lb., and of wheat, about 7s. 6d. per bl.; but when I was there
lately, meat was 2|d. per lb., and wheat about 3s. per bl.; the pnco
of sheep and cattle had fallen in a still greater degree. As to
the present value of land, I lately filed in the Court of Chancery
in London, an affidavit sworn to in April last, by two of the
Bankers in Hobart-Town, before the Chief Justice, and in which
it is stated that the value of land generally in the Colony, is not
more than a third or a fourth of what it was in 1840.
It is evident, Mr Montague and Sir George Arthur, too, (tor the
latter was not a Governor who would allow one of his officers to
publish a statistical account of the Colony without his concur-
rence), considered the increase that had taken place in the value
of property from 1824 to 1836, as owing to the greater security
for person and property, afforded by the latter s good government.
Now, person and property are more insecure than they were in
1824 ; and the consequence is, that though the free population
has been, since then, increased by 20,000 souls, the value of pro-
perty of every description is not more, nor has been more since
the present convict system came into full operation, than it was
in 1824. . . t
Many, or in fact, nearly all the 26,000 free Colonists in the
island, went there while the Colony was in a secure and prosper-
ous state, and when property had risen in value, and they, in con-
sequence, paid somewhat high prices for the land and live stock
they purchased on their arrival. Since 1841, however, such has
been the extent of the depreciation, that executions and bank-
ruptcies have been the order of the day; thousands have been
ruined, and all who had property in the Colony have been brought
into a state of the utmost embarrassment and distress.
The important question therefore, is, What can be done for the
Colony ? And here I would remark, that while the present trans-
portation system is continued, no effectual good can be done ; for
while Britain continues to throw into the Colony 4000 or 5000
convicts annually, and who, after a short period of probation, are
let loose on the Colonists, labour must continue below a moderate
rate ; and in such a state of things, it must be expected that all the
free labourers, who are still there, will leave it for Port-Phillip and
the other neighbouring colonies, where labour is more in demand.


The more intelligent among the time-expired men in V. D. L.,
too, will follow the example of the free labourers, and also quit •
the place. Thus, V. D. L., which my Hobart-Town correspond-
ent, not without reason, describes “ as the best of all the Austra-
lian Colonies,” will be left with none but the vilest of the convicts
as labourers. What I have said above is consistent with what
has actually taken place in the last two years, and must continue
to take place as long as the system complained of is continued.
Both Melbourne and Sidney, especially the former, have with-
drawn a great number of settlers from Y. D. L. in the course ot
the last two years.
The only effectual remedy, in short, which can be applied to
the case is,—to adopt the course proposed in the prayer of the
Petition of the Inhabitants of V. D. L., and which is as fol-
lows :
“ Your Petitioners humbly pray, that the number of convicts
in this Island may, as speedily as possible, be reduced to that
which existed in 1840 ; that transportation to the Colony may
cease until this object is effected ; that meanwhile, adequate pro-
tection may be afforded to the Colonists, and better means adopted
for the moral and social improvement of the convicts ; that the
Colony may be relieved from every expense occasioned by con-
victs not in the employ of settlers ; and that arrangements may
be made for the gradual and total abolition of transportation to
Van Diemen’s Land.”
It will be observed, the petitioners pray for adequate protection
to their persons and properties, and that they be relieved from
every expense occasioned by convicts not in the settlers’ employ.
The petition shows that these convicts have, for the last six years,
been sent to the Colony, and when there, have been managed
under a system contrary to the wishes and interests of the free
inhabitants ; and that by that system, the prospects of the Co-
lonists have been irretrievably injured. Under these circum.
stances, though the English Government may have the power to
compel the Colonists to receive and pay for convicts, I doubt much,
now that the petition shows the actual state of the case, that the
Government will consider itself justified in forcing the Colonists
to expend their means for the support of a system which, I think,
has been shown to be disastrous in an extreme degree to the Co-
lony. By Mr Montague’s statistical reports, before referred to,
I find that the total expenditure of the Colony in 1838 was


£135,000 ; and that the whole of that sum, except about £12,000
derived from land revenue, was levied in taxes upon the Colonists.
A great part of this amount was expended for large judicial and
police establishments; and these establishments, and other sources
of expense were chiefly rendered necessary by the presence of
convicts in the Colony. To these expenses the Colonists did not
object; because they considered the convict system, as then ad-
ministered, as beneficial to their interests: now, however, the
Colonists say—“ The present convict system is destroying the Co-
lony,” and that if it be continued, they must abandon it as a
place “ unfit for any man to inhabit, who regards the highest in-
terests of himself or of his children.”
In the letter which was delivered to the Editor of the Times,
but which has not been published, as before stated, it is explained
how the Colonial Government has got into debt, under the work-
ing of the present convict system during the last six years, to the
extent of £40,000, I think. Ido not enter into any detail on this
subject; because, considering the low price of gram and meat,
and the fall that has taken place in the value of land during that
period, as before explained, it must be evident that the few people
of property in V. D. L. could not have continued to pay the heavy
taxes that had been imposed on them, and which were cheerfully
paid up to 1841. The expenditure in 1838 amounted to about
£135,000, and must now certainly be more from the extra num-
ber of convicts that have since been added to the population.
How is this debt now to be got rid of ? And how is the Colony
in future to pay for its police, and other heavy expenses occa-
sioned by the presence of convicts ? The English Government
hare been the sole cause of the Colony’s present dilemma; and
being so, ought and will, no doubt, pay the debt, and contribute,
say from £20,000 to £30,000 per annum to the Colonial revenue,
to enable the Colony to pay its current expenses, till the number
of convicts be again reduced, and the state of V. D. L. be brought
back to something like what it was in 1840. I know that in op-
position to what I have just said, it may be stated, that in 1834,
the Colonial Government agreed with the British, that the Colony
should pay for its own police, receiving the proceeds of all its
own Crown lands in lieu of the assistance in money, for a police,
formerly granted by the Home Government. My reply to this
j s j n 1834, the Colony was in the flourishing state described in
Mr Montague’s address, already quoted ; and even in 1840, after


the price of land had been raised by the Home Government from
ss. to 12s. per acre, the proceeds of the Crown land amounted to
£52,000 ; whereas the expense of the regular police was then only
about £26,000, Now, however, the expense of a police is, or, at
all events, ought to be, much increased, by the introduction of so
many convicts ; and, owing to the convict system, the land reve-
nue is only taken in the Colonial Government’s estimate of “ ways
and means,” for 1845, at £2OOO ! If the Colony be restored to
the condition it was in in 1840, the Colonists will then have no
objection to stand by the bargain of 1834 ; but it is contrary to
reason, —first, to inundate V. D. L, with convicts, contrary to the
wishes of the free inhabitants, and then to tell the settlers they
must pay all expenses attending them, though sent there to
blight their own prospects and highest interests.
As I hear that the V. D. L, Petition is to be discussed in the
House of Lords in a few days, and as the present Colonial
Secretary’s intentions in respect to the Colony will then, probably,
be made public, I shall not at present state what I think should be
done for the Colony, but shall, in,postscript, to be written after I
have seen the debate in the House of Peers, state what my views
are, and at the same time, make such remarks as occur to me on
the Government new plans for the amelioration of the Colony.
Even if all that I have to propose be carried into effect, such is the
injury that has been done to V. D. L. in the course of the last five or
six years, that it cannot recover the prosperity it enjoyed from 1824
to 1840, for a series of years. The very name of the place is damned
for the present; and no free settlers will therefore think of going
near it: nor can Her Majesty’s Government, or any one else, bring
back the free Colonists who have left it since 1841. These men
were the bone and muscle of the Colony, as must be evident to
every one who knows any thing of Colonial matters. lam quite
aware, too, that the non-importation of convicts must be a great
loss to the Colony in a pecuniary point of view; but I take it
for granted, that that consideration must be thrown into the
shade, when it is considered, that so long as the present convict
system lasts, the free Colonists will continue to leave the island,
and their places to be supplied by convicts, thereby rendering the
island a hell upon earth to the free people of property, who are
obliged by that property to remain there; and that, therefore,
the system must be changed.


In the long run, I have no doubt the Colony will prosper. As
soon as the place may be safe to live in, many settlers will be in-
duced to resort to it, on account of the excellency of i s soil and
climate, and the very low rates at which laud and all other e-
scriptions of property are now obtainable. If, too, Her Majesty s
Government were to send out a second Sir George Arthur as Go-
vernor, the reformation in the place might be sooner brought
about than is at present contemplated. %
Though the Petition is not very numerously signed, I believe
it embodies the sentiments of every man in the island, w o rea y
regards its true interests. The free inhabitants are generally in
the interior, scattered over a country 200 miles long “ d
broad ; and as they seldom move from home, it would be difficult
to collect them, or to get them to sign a petition for any puipose,
Hobart-Town, the chief town in the island, has a ne >
and is romantically situated. I have been a good deal in Switzer-
land, Italy, and other parts of Europe, but have nowhere seen a
village to compare with it. Many of the towns in Switzerland
loot well at a distance, but will not bear close inspection; where-
as, in the straggling viUage of Hobart-Town, every cottoge
clean and neat, with its pretty little garden weU “ d **
geraniums, green nearly all the year round, neatly trained up
against the walls. There are 16,000 or 18,000 inhabitants now n
it; and many of them, as being engaged m trade, I dare say won
object to the course I have proposed, because the Government
expenditure is increased in proportion to the number o convie
imported ; but I hope and trust, that after what has been said,
it must be clear to all, the English Government cannot continue
to injure the 26,000 free inhabitants by the further introduction
of convicts, thereby making the place quite unfitted forr the »
deuce of any one who has the least regard for his own best tern-
ooral or eternal interests. . ,
P Since my return to this place from V. D. L„ it has often icen
remarked by my Scotch friends, when this subject has been on
the tapis, “ We believe you free settlers m V, D. U-hke the
army of King David at the cave Adullam-to consist of every
oneUiat was in distress, every one that was in debt, and every
one that was discontented ; and that such have gone °
Colony, and none else.” My reply to this has been :
the cato altogether. Lookatthe stateof the Colony, as desenbed


in the official Statistical Report of 1836, and you will find there
could then have been no serious objection to any British subject,
desiring to emigrate, to go there. There was no objection ; and
the consequence was, that many officers in the army and navy—
especially in the East India Company’s Service (after they had
first been there on account of their health), have permanently
settled in the island. Many others have gone also from Britain,
and India—not from being discontented, but in the reasonable
expectation, they would be able to live comfortably in the island,
and greatly improve their means. Many of them took large
means with them —say £IO,OOO, £20,000, and £30,000, and
some even much more, (I do not speak at random, but really
what is within my own knowledge) ; nor, till 1840, had they any
great reason to be discontented with the place, or their prospects.
Nothing could show more clearly, that, up to 1840, capital was
increasing rapidly in the Island, than the fact already stated, viz.
that the value of the goods imported in that year amounted to
near a million sterling ; for, unless the value of the property in
the Island had then been very great, i. e. considering the small-
ness of the number of free inhabitants,—there could not have
been a demand for any thing like this amount of imports ; —one
half of them nearly, too, in the shape of luxuries.
The Hobart-Town correspondent, from whose letter I have
given an extract, is the author of the letter to the Editor ot the
Times, referred to in my first paragraph. As he did not affix his
own signature to that letter, but merely subscribed it “ A Colo-
nist,” I suspect he does not wish bis name to be mixed up with a
discussion of this kind ; and I have not, therefore, named him.
I regret this, because he is well known to every one who has ever
been in Hobart-Town, to be a man of probity, sound sense, and
excellent talents; and, therefore, his name would have given
weight to my statements.
After all the complaints I have made against the present con-
vict-system, it is right that I add—l have lately heard that Her
Majesty’s Government have long seen, in part, the injustice that
has been done to the free settlers in V. D. L., and have been
endeavouring to make other arrangements for the disposal of the
convicts ; but as nothing, so far as I have heard, has yet been
done ; and as, in the mean time, the present system is doing irre-
parable injury to the Colony,—l think it right, that all who have


the power in any way to influence an alteration in the system,
should be made fully aware of the evils at present resulting
from it.
G. MACKILLOP.
40, Moray Place, Edinburgh,
4tA March, 1846.
P.S. 9ih March. —Since I wrote the foregoing, I have seen
the debate in the House of Lords, on the 3d instant, (as reported
in the Spectator,) when the Marquis of Lansdown presented the
Petition from V. D. L. ; and am glad to observe that high tri-
bunal has taken the case of the Colonists into its serious consi-
deration.
The main point to be considered, in reviewing the debate, is—
to ascertain how far the present plans of Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment differ from the expressed wishes of the Colonists in their
Petition. The Petitioners pray for greater protection against the
multitudes of thieves and robbers Her Majesty’s Government have
let loose upon them since 1840 ; and that no more convicts be
sent to them —at all events, till the Colony may be in the state
in which it was in the last mentioned year. What, on the con-
trary, Lord Stanley proposes, is—not that any new colony be
established for the reception of convicts direct from England ; but
that all of them be still sent to V. D. L. The new colony is only
to be for those who may wish to go there, “ having passed through
a certain portion of their sentence in V. D. L.” If Lord Stan-
ley’s plan, as above explained, be followed out by the present
Colonial Secretary, the Colony will be overstocked with labour,
and, what is worse, with thieves and rascals; and will continue to
be, —as it is at present, and has been since 1842, —quite unfit
for any right thinking man to live in. Though I have made
these remarks on Lord Stanley’s plans, I am satisfied from the
liberal views expressed in the course of the debate, that Her
Majesty's Government will find it right to send all the convicts
hereafter direct to the new colony to be established to the north
of the territory of New South Wales,
After what has already been stated, I do not consider it neoes


sary to refute what was said in the debate in palliation of the
present convict system. By it the convicts are put into gangs of
200 or 300 ; and in these gangs there will always be a number of
talented rascals :—these rascals rule the gangs, and, under such
rule, what good can be expected ? It is my firm conviction that
you run counter to all experience, when you expect religious in-
struction to do good to men so situated.
The late Colonial Secretary stated in the debate, that if it had
not been for a financial crisis in the Colony, the present system
would have worked well; and, further, that the other Colonies
would have been greatly distressed for labour in late years, if it
had not been for the time-expired men they were receiving from
V. D. L. I have not attempted to describe the state of V, D. L.
during the crisis referred to ; for I had no wish whatever to attri-
bute more evil to the convict system than is actually the result
of it. During that crisis, say from 1842 to 1844, land was often
sold outright at an eighth of its previous value, and sheep, cattle,
and horses were often disposed of even at a greater depreciation-
When, however, I was in the Colony in 1845, there was no crisis,
i. e. no pecuniary embarrassments ; but still, as at that time every
one was endeavouring to dispose of his property, on account of
the ruin being brought on the Colony by the convict system,—it
was then next to impossible to sell land.
I admit, freely, that the sheep farmers in Port Phillip have
in late years, drawn largely on V. D. L. for men, who had been
convicts, and that the P. P. farmers would have been in great
distress, if such labour had not been available ; but this only goes
in part to prove the accuracy of what I have already stated ;
viz., that while you send more convicts to V. D. L, than it can
employ, they are a pest while they are there, and that as soon as
they get their freedom, the best of them are withdrawn by the
neighbouring Colonies. The P. P. farmers appoint agents in
Launceston and Hobart-Town, to select men for them, and as they
offer better wages than can be got in Y. D. L,, there can be no
doubt, that, generally speaking, they get the best. By a late re-
gulation of the Home Government, convicts are now allowed to
leave V. D. L. for the other Australian Colonies, after having
undergone a short probation, instead of having to wait till the
expiry of their term, as heretofore ; and credit appears to bo
assumed by the late Colonial Secretary, that good is accruing to
these Colonies from this regulation. It is shown above, that it is


doing mischief to V. D. L.; and as to the other Colonies, the-
truth will be seen from what follows.—The South Australians
hare lately sent to the Home Government a representation or
protest against this very regulation ; and though the Philhppians
have not followed their example, their newspapers are full of
complaints against probationers, who have lately come across to
them, and many of whom have already been convicted at Me -
bourne of crimes committed by them in the district, and have
been sent back to V. D. L„ there to undergo a second probation
in one of the 200 or 300 gang hells. Port Phillip has never, pro-
perly speaking, been a penal Colony, and none of the Colonists,
(with the exception of a few men who came there direct from
Sidney, long after the Colony had been set on foot,) have ever
had convicts assigned to them ; and they therefore justly complain
of the annoyance and expense they are put to by the effects of
the regulation referred to.
Under present circumstances, my impression is. that the best
course for Her Majesty’s Government to follow, is,—
“ To increase the number of Pentonville men to be sent to Port
Phillip It is, I confess, a great pity to send men of that descrip-
tion to such a Colony,-a Colony with the finest climate, and, m
many parts, the best soil in the world ; but I do not see how else,
at present, extra labour' is to be got there by the farmers for their
rapidly increasing flocks yet labour they must have. The choice
appears to be between Pentonville men and the V. D. L. proba-
tioners ; and my conviction is, the former are much the least
to be dreaded. Before, however, any large number of Penton-
ville men be sent, the advice of the Colonists should be aske ,
whether or not they be willing to receive them.
“ Let all the convicts hereafter be sent to the new Colony.
“ In order, too, to repair in some small degree the injury that
has been done to V. D. L. in the last six years,—send from thence
2000 or 3000 of the worst of the convicts to the new Colony.
« Pay off now the debt of the V. D. L- Government, contract-
ed only to meet expenses occasioned by the presence of convicts ;
protect the Colony by a sufficient police, and pay the expense o
that police, so far as it may not be met by the Colonial revenue,
till the Colony be brought back to the state in which it was m
1640 • and do not impose any taxes on the Colonists, in the mean-
time. ’but such as may be usual in the neighbouring Colonies.


It may be supposed, from what is said in the body of this letter,
that I consider Sir George Arthur’s convict system free from
objection. I did not intend to say so. The objections to it are
many, and would be adverted to, if I did not dislike to lengthen
this paper. All 1 wish to be understood is, I consider that
system, on the whole, infinitely superior to the present, both in
regard to the good it effected in the convicts themselves, and
the benefits it conferred on the Colonists.
In conclusion, I beg to state, I have now very little property
remaining in V. D. L. ; and being not far from sixty years of
age, and my sons being destined to another part of the world, I
have no intention whatever, to return to the Colony, nor to be in
any way interested in it. In short, I only circulate this state-
ment, in the hope, that what I have said, may prove to be of
advantage to the respectable men I am acquainted with in the
Colony, (many of them formerly in the army and navy,) and all
of whom 1 found in the utmost perplexity and distress when I
was there in 1845.
It may be thought by some, I am doing injustice to the
Colonists by bringing the misfortunes, which have lately befallen
their Colony, so prominently before the English public, thereby
preventing emigration to it. My answer is,—No emigrants at pre-
sent think of proceeding to V. D. L., for they are convinced,
although the English Government may not be so, that the present
convict system there is bad ; besides which, the present state of
the Colony must be laid clearly before Parliament, before the
Colonists can expect redress. I am persuaded, that if the
Colonists had two years ago joined in a Petition like the one
lately received, their complaints would have been immediately
attended to ; now, at all events, that the Chief Justice has spoken
out against the convict system, and that the Bishop has, along
with all the other right-thinking men in the Island, subscribed
the Petition, in which it is affirmed, that if the convict system be
not changed, every honest man must leave the Island, —I am
satisfied it will be changed, and that too in the way recommend-
ed by the Colonists. It may be said by those who approve of
the present system, it is now working much better than it did
some years ago. The latest V. D. L. newspaper I have, is the
Hobart-Town Courier of 10th Ocf>d think this is the date, for I
have not the paper by me at present. Half of it is filled with
trials before the Supreme Court, of convicts, chiefly men from


probation gangs. It also states, that twenty probationers had
just made their escape from a gang at Delorain, and were in the
bush well armed. This party of robbers will probably keep the
Colony in a constant state'of alarm for the next six months, nor
will they be all brought back to their gang without much blood-
shed, While the present system is continued, no precautions can
prevent the frequent recurrence of such events.
G. M.






