

-p f fssoacis,c((2.
p
\TA VI>Kt ST/F V W\(%.
7*7 (O-n
IE^IE'T'ICT’IOISr.
To the Honourable the President, the Vice- Dominion Parliament, as the case may be)
and Members of the Feeler J and no person holding any office of profit or
Convention assembled. trust under them shall, without the consent
The petition of the undersigned, Andrew of both Houses of the Federal Parliament,
Ross, M.D., in the colony of New Soutn accept of any present, emolument, or title of
XvOSo, iu.xs., iu tue uuiuny ut xicw uuum
Wales, showeth :
Tnat your petitioner believes the
time has arrived in the framing of a Draft
Federal Commonwealth or Constitution Bill,
any kind whatever from any Queen, King,
Prince, or Foreign State.”
The foregoing clause is submitted in all
good faith in the hopes that some member
of the Convention may see fit to take the
in keeping with the well-being and advance- ot ‘he Convention may see ht to take the
ment of these democratic colonies, that | matter in hand withi the view to he ques-
some provision should be embodied in the | tl on being la.rly and fully discussed and as
Federal Commonwealth or Constitution Bill a guarantee to the people that the Draft
for dealing with the Important questions of w framed not m accordance with am-
ities’’and also the impeachment ot j cratie or conservative, but democratic
Members ” corrupt practices, as a r* os * ' '
herein most respectfully set forth in the 2. To make the Federal Bill as .mpleie
following clauses :
1. The element of democracy in the shape
of Labor Members (pure and simple) in
Parliament has been considerably on the
increase of late years in the respective colo-
nies, showing conclusively that public
opinion is gradually drifting towards (I wont
say mob) democratic rule and receding from
titled aristocracy and conservatism. What
the respective colonies have experienced of
late years has been in the direction of re-
forms having a democratic tendency. Titles
of all hues and grades have from time to
time been scattered broadcast over thes£
colonies, more especially of late years, as if
by way of offering a direct bribe to Labour
Members, or else a slap in the face of the
very principles and science of democracy,
and which of late years (especially in the
colony of N.S.W.) has been the actual factor
or active political lever that has ruled and
governed the colony. Under these circum-
stances it appears imperatively necessary
that some provisions as are herein submitted
and foreshadowed should be embodied in
the Draft Federal Bill, if the Bill is intended
to become poynlar and to receive the ap-
proval of the people of a United Australia.
I hope, therefore, some honorable member
of the Federal Convention (having a leaning
towards Democracy) may take this all-
important matter in hand by having a
resolution placed on the business paper with
the view to this aspect of the matter being
fully and fairly discussed and a clause or
clauses (as herein suggested) embodied in
the Draft Bill providing for the exclusion
for all time of the conferring of foreign
titles upon any colonist so that in future
our united colonies and free institution may
be preserved and kept as pure and unsullied
as ribbons, stars and garters afe
it exists in the States of America. Clause
No. 1 is as follows :
“ No titla.of nobility shall be granted by
the Federal Parliament (Commonwealth or
>cratic or conservative, but democratic
' OS. ' ; f , ' i
2. To make the Federal Bill as an pie be
j«.s possible, I would further mot respect-
fully submit that the following clause be
also added with the view of putting down
anything like fraud, corruption, collusion or
chicanery arising on the very threshold of
the new Federal Constitution Bill or during
its operation in subsequent years. Clause
No. 2 is as follows :
“ The Federal or Commonwealth Parlia-
ment shall have the sole power to try all f
impeachments against its members. When
sitting for that purpose there shall be an
oath or affirmation. When the Governor-
General, Acting-Governor-General, or Pre-
sident of the Federal Parliament is being
tried, the Chief Justice ot the Federal City
shall preside, and no person shall be con-
victed without the concurrence of two thirds
of the members present. Judgment in cases
of impeachment shall not extend further
than the removal from office of honor, trust
or profit under the Federal Parliament, but
the party convicted shall nevertheless be
liable and subject to indictment, trial and
judgment and punishment according to law.”
And your petitioner most respectfully
requests that the foregoing resolutions may
be taken into favorable consideration by the
Federal Convention now assembled, and
grant such relief or consideration to the
matter as in their wisdom may seem fit and
proper.
And your petitioner, as in duty bound,
will ever pray.
ANDREW ROSS, M.D.
20th January, 1898.
Printed at the
Argus Machine Printing Works.
i, Molong.
