

The Petition of the ARCHDEACON of Van Diemen’s Land.
To Mis Excellency 3m John Franklin, Knight Commander of
the Royal Hanoverian Guelphic Order, Knight of the Greek
Order of the Redeemer, and a Captain in Her Majesty's Royal
Navy, Lieutenant-Governor of the Island of Van Diemen’s Land
and its Dependencies, and to the Honourable the Legislative
Council, in Council assembled.
Your Excellency haying stated in your Minute relating to the New College, that
you leave the question of the Government Day Schools of this Colony entirely open for
the free discussion and consideration of the Legislative Council, your Petitioner respect-
fully prays, in common with the great majority of his brethren, and with those members and
friends of the Church of England who have addressed Your Excellency upon this subject,
that assistance may be afforded us towards establishing and maintaining Schools in which
the children of our Church may receive a sound Christian education, upon her principles,
and under the superintendence of her Clergy.
Since your Petitioner cannot expect this prayer to be acceded to unless it be urged
upon strong grounds, and enforced by arguments which may convince Your Excellency
and the Honourable Council, he respectfully beg's permission to state some of the reasons
•which induce him to present such a request, and which he hopes may be sufficient to
obtain for it your favourable consideration.
In the first place, he begs to inform Your Excellency and the Honourable Council,
that the Schools are not now, and never have been, conducted upon the plan proposed to
the Council last year; ,so that the Council may, without any danger of acting incon-
sistently, comply with the prayer of your Petitioner ; unless, indeed, it be prepared to
declare, that it will vole no money for the support of the Schools, save upon the under-
standing that there be a return to the plan then proposed, and henceforth at least some-
thing like an adherence to that plan.
The plan then proposed and approved was that of the British and Foreign School
Society. The distinguishing features of this Society are—the universal admission and
perusal of the Bible ; with the equally universal exclusion of Catechisms and catechetical
instruction on any of those points of difference which are found among the inhabitants of
Christendom, not excepting even those points which have ever been considered by the
orthodox as essential articles of the Christian Faith—nay, as the sum and substance of
Christianity itself.
This plan has been entirely discarded. The Bible has been sacrificed, where the
parent disapproves of it—a book, which is in fact a catechism, though not the Catechism
of the Church of England, (call it a Scriptural Catechism, if you please,) has been intro-
duced—and, by a private communication to the Masters, they have, if your Petitioner is
rightly informed, been instructed to admit the visits of any Ministers of Religion (so
called), and at any time, for the purpose of instructing, in their own peculiar principles
the children belonging to their respective denominations.
It was stated, indeed, in one of the Government Notices, that the Schools were to be
conducted upon the plan of the British and Foreign School Society, u so far as it mas
“ applicable to the circumstances of this Colony ” But this saving clause could hardly
mean that no attention whatever was to be paid either to the principles or practices of the
Society proposed and approved of as a model; which is, in fact, the case in the Govern
ment Schools: they have not a feature of the mother impressed upon them, and could
not possibly be recognised by her as her offspring.


The system, indeed, upon which the Schools are conducted Is a very Proteus. The
Board, I find, have informed Your Excellency that it has been explained in successive
Government Notices. Some very important changes have, however, been introduced
of which no public notice has been given. And it is reported that the system, Proteus-
like, is yet to pass through other important changes: that the Board has it in contempla-
tion even to construct and introduce a Catechism of its own, which is to supersede the
Catechism not only of the Church of England, but of all other Churches, embodying
merely the grand principles of what is now called “ fundamental religion.”
Your Petitioner hopes that he has now shown, to the satisfaction of Your Excellency
and the Honourable Council, that, by complying with his prayer, you will not act a bit
more inconsistently than in supporting the system now acted upon; which is in every
respect different from that which was approved by the Council when the question, upon
what plan the Schools were to be conducted, came last under discussion in the Council-
chamber.
In the next place your Petitioner begs to show, that, even under the pliant system
which has been introduced, no such advantages have resulted from the proceedings of the
Board of Education as to call for the continuance either of the Board itself or of its
management.
The Board indeed appears to have informed Your Excellency that, with few excep-
tions, general satisfaction has been expressed with their proceedings. Your Petitioner,
however, thinks that they must have here made some mistake, since he has himself heard
many expressions of dissatisfaction at the changes which have been made in the manage-
ment of the Schools. And as to the petitions which have been laid upon the Council
table, these plainly cannot be considered as expressive of satisfaction with the system
under which the Schools are at present conducted, since the two systems (viz. the one
proposed, and that now acted upon) are nearly at the antipodes of each other. Besides
that, even were it otherwise, those petitions could by no possibility be considered as
expressive of satisfaction with the working of the system, since they were got up
in the very infancy of the system, before it could ever have been brought into
operation; haying been drawn up, as is well known, under the direction of either
the Board itself or its Secretary, when it trembled for its very existence, and deemed
it absolutely necessary to apply for extraneous support, lest it should fall and perish
before its merits had been discovered.
The Board have also informed Your Excellency that the Schools are, in their opinion,
of “ real advantage to the Colony—that they are open to all, and conducted so as to avoid
(< interference with any religious tenets.”
Your Petitioner does not doubt that they are of real advantage to the Colony : but
he very much doubts whether the Colony will ultimately derive greater benefit from them
than it would have done had they continued under the regulations which formerly existed;
and he hopes to show that, even at the present moment, the claims of the Board upon the
community for the good which it has done are not such as to make it your bounden duty to
maintain it at all events. In the first place, however, your Petitioner begs to say that,
so far as he is acquainted with the past and present working of the Schools, religious
tenets were no further interfered with formerly than they are now, save and except that
the Board have removed the Bible out of the way of those whose tenets might be offended
by its introduction. This certainly was not done before; since to sacrifice it, or even to
put a slight upon it, in order that nobody’s religious tenets might be interfered with, seemed
something like sacrificing, or at least putting a slight upon, Christianity itself; which
rests solely upon, and must stand or fall with, the Scriptures of truth—the Revelation of
Jesus Christ. But in other respects there was no greater interference with religious tenets
than there is now, since, where objection was made by parents, children were not required
to learn the Catechism, or be instructed in the peculiar tenets of the Church of England.
The great points therefore which, as far as your Petitioner is aware, have been gained by
the change in the management of the Schools, are the following:—the children of Mem-
bers of the Church of England have been precluded from learning in the Schools the
Catechism of their Church—the Schools have generally lost the superintendence of the
Clergy—and Christianity has been something like sacrificed upon the altar of what your
Petitioner deems a false liberality, by the sacrifice of that Bible which is the foundation
of the Christian faith.
The Board also appear to have put forth, as they think, some claim to support in the
statement which they have afforded Your Excellency, “ that the number of Schools is in-
“ creasing.”


Here your Petitioner thinks he has some reason to complain that the information
given by the Board to Your Excellency has not been so full as it ought to have been.
The necessary inference from the above statement is, that the creation of the Board, and
its exertions, have led to an increase in the number of the Schools : whereas the fact is,
that there is not a single station now occupied by a School which had not been fixed upon
before the Board entered upon its duties, and only one (Cambridge) where steps had not
been taken towards the establishing of a School; whilst, even as regarded that one, the
necessary steps were delayed solely from the impossibility of knowing, in the then existing
uncertainty respecting the future School Regulations, what would be required from, and
what remuneration would be made to, any person appointed as Master. Even admitting,
however, that this was an addition of one made by the Board, one at Bridgewater has
been discontinued by them. Very properly, it is readily admitted; because, owing to the
fluctuation in the population, there was no longer a sufficient number of children to justify
the expense of maintaining one. But your Petitioner has yet to learn how, by the addi-
tion of a School in one place, and the subtraction of one in another, the whole number of
Schools has been increased.
Your Petitioner apprehends that the mistake on this head has arisen from the circum-
stance of the Masterships having been in some instances vacant at the time when the
Board assumed the management of the Schools. Thus, since the resignation of the last
Master in Liverpool-street, a new one had not been appointed—and why ? Because the Go-
vernment demurred about finding a house. The house formerly occupied as a School-
house in that street seems never to have been fit for the purpose; and, when the last
Master resigned, it was in so miserable a state as to make it impossible to carry on a School
any longer therein. Your Petitioner therefore recommended that the house now used
should be converted into a School-house, by making those very alterations which have
been made under the direction of the Board. He was promised that this should be done—
but could get nothing more than the promise; and, as no suitable person would undertake
a School of the description wanted unless he had a house found him, a new Master had
not been appointed. The School, however, was not at a stand through any defect of
management, but through the backwardness of the Government to find the necessary
accommodation. At New Norfolk also there was a vacancy; the former Master having
resigned, in order that he might give his whole attention to a private School. So, at the
Carlton and at the Springs there were vacancies, owing, in the first instance, to the death
of the Master; and in the second, to an intimation given the person who had been taken
upon trial that, in the opinion of your Petitioner, he might be more usefully occupied in
some other way.
Your Petitioner, however, wishes it to be distinctly understood, that the delay in
filling up these vacancies arose from the prospect of those unknown changes in the School
Establishment which were then in contemplation ; and which rendered it almost impossible
to settle a respectable man in a situation from which he might soon be driven by the intro-
duction of new principles of remuneration, as well as of management. For the same
reason no Master had been appointed at Cressy; though a house had been secured and was
ready for his reception.
Your Petitioner, moreover, ventures to think that, in the increasing number of
children spoken of as attending the Schools, there is nothing to prove that the con-
tinuance of the Board and its principles is at all necessary for the good of the community.
In order, however, to show this to Your Excellency and the Honourable Council, it will
be necessary for him to analyse that display of figures, which seems to have been presented
to Your Excellency as a proof that the Board and its proceedings have conciliated to the
Schools a much higher degree of public favour than they before enjoyed.
Your Petitioner learns, from the statements submitted to Your Excellency by the
Board, that when it took charge of the Schools there were 791 children in attendance
and that there are now 1148, giving an apparent increase of 357. But before any
inference can be drawn from these numbers, as to the comparative favour with which the
past and present systems are regarded by the community, allowance must be made for
those children attending Schools which, at the time the Board took the charge, were
vacant; and from which, therefore, there were no returns. These were, those in Liver-
pool Street, at New Norfolk, the Carlton, and the Springs. In Liverpool Street there are
now 263; at New Norfolk, if your Petitioner recollects rightly, (for he is obliged to
speak from recollection, having delivered over all the documents to the Secretary of the
Board,) the average attendance was nearly 40; and the Carlton and the Springs together
about 30. Let the average number at these three Schools be taken at 60; and then 323
out of the majority of 357 are accounted for without the slightest reason for supposing
that throughout the Colony in general the principles and exertions of the Board are re-
garded with any especial favour. If, now, the remaining 34 of this increase be divided


between the Schools at Cressy and Cambridge, both of which had been previously fixed
upon, and that at Cressy so far proceeded with as to be ready for the reception of a master,
there will be just the same number as before to be divided amongst the remaining Schools.
And it will require, in your Petitioner’s opinion, all the skill and ingenuity of the Board to
prove that there is an increase of so much as one scholar in the average number attending
at the Schools throughout the Colony. Your Petitioner indeed suspects that the Board is
aware of this, or there would have been put forth the same to them gratifying to those
who venture to differ from them in opinion, alarming—display of figures which graces the
account given to Your Excellency of their favourite establishment in Iflveipool-stxeet.
Even in this case, however, your Petitioner must beg leave to say that, in his opinion,
there is no proof of their having accomplished much, if any thing, more than would have
been effected without them. In the first place, it must be remembered that the Govern-
ment, and the Government alone, was in fault that there was no School in active opera-
tion on that station before ; it having declined, or delayed, to provide a house when urged
to it by your Petitioner. The Board, therefore, can have no title to the whole 263
scholars in that establishment as being the fruits of its exertions and popularity; the
most which they can lay claim to is the excess of this number over that which would
have been found there had a proper house been provided, and a Master and Mistress
appointed under the former system. What this excess might have been it is impossible
to say. Your Petitioner thinks it probable, however, that there would have been found
an excess. This might indeed, perhaps, have been the case, even without those children
who are said to have been admitted from the Infant Schools, and to be far better fitted
for those establishments than that to which they have gained access ; because a sort of pet
establishment of the Board, fostered by all the influence of Government, and holding
forth (as they think) to the poorer members of the Church of England the advantage of
having their children educated by a Clergyman of that Church, whilst it at the same
time enjoys the patronage of all those who are anxious to diminish her influence by pre-
venting her children from being educated in her principles : an establishment of this kind
could hardly fail of mustering, for a time at least, more scholars than one less favourably
circumstanced for swelling its numbers. Your Petitioner, however, does not think that
the Board has, on this or on any other account, much reason to be proud of this its
favourite child.
Your Petitioner has hitherto supposed the number stated (1148) to represent accurately
the number of children in actual and punctual attendance at the Schools. lie has, how-
ever great doubts upon this point. He knows that, during his own management of the
Schools, he found, in more than one instance, where the Schools were remote from fre-
quent inspection, the number requisite to secure a salary from the Government made up
by admitting children who were too young to learn any thing, and by permitting others
to continue on the list who attended, perhaps, once a week, or even once in a month.
Whether these things can be prevented by a half-yearly inspection of these establishments,
seems a question of no difiicult solution. But if they be effectually guarded against,
your Petitioner will not be much surprised should an effect follow similar to that which
was the consequence of an attempt on his part to put an end to such abuses. Having
found in some instances, that nearly twice as many were returned as either were or could
be in ’real profitable attendance in the Schools, he determined—let the consequences be
what they might—to prevent, if possible, such a deception being practised upon the
Government and the community; and found, in consequence, at the close of the year, a
falling off, he thinks, of nearly 100—although there was, in reality, no falling off whatever.
Your Petitioner ventures to think that he has now stated sufficient to show that the
prosperity of the Schools is not very closely connected with the Board and its proceed-
ings. He confesses he is not sorry that an opportunity has been afforded him of making
these statements to Your Excellency and the Honourable Council; because the accounts
which have been given by the Board to Your Excellency, and have been by Your Ex-
cellency laid upon the Council-table, cannot well be read by any one without leaving an
impression on his mind that the Schools were, prior to the 'appointment of the Board,
much neglected: whereas, in your Petitioner’s opinion at least, no advantage whatever
has been gained by that appointment beyond those already enumerated; unless, indeed,
the cost of inspection be considered an advantage; or the promised cost of School-houses
to be erected at, in your Petitioner’s opinion, an unnecessary expense, be looked upon in
the same light.
Your Petitioner having thus endeavoured to convince Your Excellency and the
Honourable Council that you may, without inconsistency, and without any danger of
doing- an injury to the community by lessening the influence of the Board, accede to his
prayer, begs permission to bring before you a few opinions which he hopes may conduce
to the success of that prayer.


Having already made known his own views upon this subject, he will not annoy you
by reiterating them upon the present occasion; but will endeavour to sustain his prayer
by bringing forward the opinions of others, even of some who seem little disposed to agree
with him in general.
In the first place, since His Lordship has been occasionally claimed as the friend of
general, to the exclusion of specific religious instruction, your Petitioner will sustain his
prayer by the sentiments of the Bishop of London, expressed at a public meeting held in
London, June 27, 1839, for the purpose of establishing a London Diocesan Board of
Education.
“If i s not,” says His Lordship, “an education founded upon those principles
u which we ourselves believe to be truth, we are devoid as much of candour and sincerity,
“ as we are °f truth itself. A religious instruction which is not a special religious instruc-
“ ti° n does not deserve the name of a religious instruction, inasmuch as it is not at all
calculated to command that effect which it is the object of a religious instruction to
“ bring forth.”
In the next place your Petitioner will endeavour to sustain his prayer by the senti-
ments of the Church of Scotland.
He finds that, whilst the General Assembly of that Church have passed a unanimous
vote against a somewhat similar scheme to that which has been introduced here, indivi-
dual members of eminence in that Church, as well as Educational Bodies, have deprecated
its introduction amongst them in the strongest terms.
Thus a Dr. Muir, a very influential and leading man in that Church, as your Peti-
tioner believes, speaking at Edinburgh, says—“ It is because the State proposes to with-
“ draw the charge of education _ from the Ministers of Christ’s Holy Gospel, who are
“ accountable to their ecclesiastical superiors, and proposes to vest the charge of education
“i n a Board unconnected with the Ministers of Christ’s Holy Gospel, and as irresponsible
“as it is powerful, that we object. And above all it is because the Government of the
“ Country appears to move in this matter of education under the guidance of a class of
“ theoretical educationists, who wish to apply the resources of the Country for enabling
“ them to experiment out their theories upon the precious souls of our people, that we
“ object.”
A Dr. Balfour also says, at the same place and time—“ It is a matter of the utmost
“ danger that the instruction of youth should be taken from the hands of the religious in-
“ structors of the people, and put into the hands of a small number of individuals, who are
“to have no principles, and who are likely to be influenced by many sources that will not
“ edify, but will most likely tend to pollute the source of education itself.”
The Glasgow Educational Society, in an address to Sir Robert Peel when he was
elected Lord Rector of the University of Glasgow, says : —“To detach the Parish Schools
“ from the Church, would be not only to make a direct attack upon the Church itself, but
“it would be ultimately to detach the education of the Country from the Word of God.”
Your Petitioner will also sustain his prayer by the sentiments of the Wesleyan
Methodists.
At a meeting held in London, June 21st, 1839, the Rev. Thomas Jackson, Presi-
dent of the Conference, being in the chair, the following resolution was passed :
“ After much and anxious attention to the subject, it is the opinion of this meeting,
“ that any attempt to instruct in the same School the children of the poorer classes
“ (whose parents, in the exercise of their undoubted rights as men and Britons, belong to
“ various Christian denominations) by teaching adapted to every prevailing variety of reli-
“ gious belief or opinion, will, under the present circumstances of this free Country, be
“ found impracticable; and even if practicable by any conceivable compromise of consci-
“ entious principles and preferences, could only lead to perpetual collision and inconve-
“ nience; and would in many instances produce among the children, so incongruously
“ mingled together, a dangerous spirit of scepticism and unbelief.”
Your Petitioner will venture still to trespass upon the attention of Your Excellency
and the Honourable Council, whilst he places before you the opinion of the able and pious
non-conformist Richard Baxter upon the question of a Schoolmaster’s duty; from which
may be easily gathered what he would have said to that general religious instruction


which is so much advocated in the present day; and which, if it meet with anything like
the encouragement which its supporters desire, will, m the opinion of your Petiuonei,
reduce Christianity to a sort of skeleton, without life or beauty, and worthy only of a place
in the collections of the curious.
This good man says, in the preface of his Catechising of Families, “ I am past doubt
“that it is g a heinous crime in the Schoolmasters of England, that they devote but one
« hour or two in the week to the learning of the Catechism, while all the rest of the week is
“ devoted to the learning of Lillie, Ovid, Virgil &c. Besides the loss ajid sinful onns-
“ sion it seduceth youth to think that common knowledge (which is only subsidiary and
“ ornamental) is more excellent or necessary than to know God, Christ, the Gospel, duty,
“ and salvation ; besides which, all knowledge (further than it helpeth or serveth this)
“ but fooling and doting, and as dangerous diversion and perversion of the mind as grosser
“ sensual delights. He is not worthy the name of a Christian Schoolmaster who maketh
“ it not his chief work to teach his scholars the knowledge of Christ and life everlasting.
Your Petitioner having thus stated his request, endeavoured to remove objections to
it which might arise in your minds from the past proceedings of the Council, and to sus-
L7n t by the opinions which he has advanced in accordance with it, now leaves his
Petition in your hands, confident that it will receive from you all the attention to which it
is entitled. And as in duty bound will ever pray.
W. HUTCHINS,
Archdeacon ofV.D. Land.
31s£ August, 1840.




PETITION
".//
TO
HIS EXCELLENCY IN COUNCIL
FROM
THE VENERABLE
THE ARCHDEACON
ON THE
GOVERNMENT DAY SCHOOLS.
Ordered by the Council to he printed, 2nd September }
1840.
JAMES BARMAKD, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, HOBART TOWN.
