

[copy.]
Unto the Venerable the General Assembly of the
Presbyterian Church of N. S. Wales.
The Petition of the undersigned, being the Directors of the
Presbyterian Newspaper Company, Limited, respectfully sheweth :
That, as will be seen from the accompanying correspondence
and resolutions, a serious difficulty has arisen between the Rev.
J. M. Ross, General Agent of the Church, and Rev. Joseph
Copeland, Editor of the Presbyterian. As both these gentlemen
are servants of the Church, and both doing important work, the
success of which depends largely on their mutually cordial relations;
when it became known to us that a difficulty had arisen between
them we used means to effect a reconciliation, in the interests of
these brethren and in the interests of the Church.
Having failed to bring matters to a favourable issue, and having
no other alternative, your Petitioners humbly pray the Venerable
the General Assembly to take such measures in the interests of the
Church as may bring this unhappy state of matters to an end.
And your Petitioners will ever pray.
ANDREW GARDINER, Chairman.
E. MACDONALD.
ALEX. DEAN.
JOHN H. GOODLET.
ROBERT COLLIE.
J. Mo DONALD.
I. In the General Assembly of 1880 Dr. Geekie moved the
following resolution on the editorship of the “ Presbyterian,” which
was seconded by Dr. Fullerton, and adopted : “ That a vote of thanks
be given to the present editor of the “Presbyterian,” Rev. J.
Copeland ; also, that a committee be appointed to confer with the
Newspaper Company and ascertain their arranged ents for the future


editing of the paper, and report to this Assembly.” The following
committee was nominated by the Moderator, viz. : Rev. J. Benvie,
Rev, R. S. Paterson, Dr. Geekie, Ministers ; Mr. Colley, Elder;
Rev. R. S. Paterson, Convener. (Minute 68, Assembly of 1880.)
11. In the Assembly of 1881 the Report of the Committee on
the “ Presbyterian ” was brought up and read by Rev. R. S. Paterson,
as follows : “ Report of the Committee re editorship of the ‘ Presby-
terian’ : —To the members and adherents of the Presbyterian Church
of New South Wales,—Dear Brethren—The undersigned members
of the Committee which was appointed by last General Assembly for
the purpose of enquiring of the Directors respecting the future editor-
ship of the ‘ Presbyterian’ newspaper are gratified to learn that the
Rev. Joseph Copeland has been appointed editor and managing
Director of it, which appointment the said members of committee
believe will give much satisfaction to the Church generally, inasmuch
as Mr. Copeland has edited it during the last ten or twelve months
with marked ability, and inasmuch as they confidently expect he will
be instrumental in rendering the paper increasingly worthy of the
confidence and esteem of our Church. They would, therefore, cordially
embrace this opportunity of urging all our people in the interests of
our beloved Zion, more particularly our Ministers, Elders, Managers
and Sunday School Teachers, to take an active and personal part in
curing to increase its circulation, and not to rest satisfied till
every family belonging to our denomination becomes a subscriber and
reader of it.—We are, Archibald Constable Geekie, D.D., Minister ;
James Colley, Elder ; R. S. Paterson, Minister , Convener."
The following deliverance was adopted on the motion of Rev. J.
M. Ross, seconded by Rev. J. Cameron ; Receive the Report, thank
the Committee for their diligence, especially the Convener; adopt
the recommendations of the Committee, recognise the importance of
the “ Presbyterian ” to the interests of the Church and the great
services rendered by it to the Assembly’s schemes, and its claims upon
the support of every Presbyterian in the colonies.
111. The Sustentation Fund Report of 1881 ( vide Blue Book),
signed by Joseph Paxton, J.P., and J. M. Ross, Joint Secretaries,
says : “ Much service of a most valuable kind has been rendered to
the movement by the ‘ Presbyterian,’ and the effect manifest
(wherever that excellent paper is read) in respect of intelligent interest
in the Church’s work is great. It is much to be desired that a copy
of each weekly issue should find its way into every family of the
Church. Every department of Church work suffers loss where that is


editing
commiti
Rev. E
Rev.
the “ I
as folk
terian’
of He 1
of the
the pu;
ship of
Rev. .
Direct
believi
as Mr.
with
be ii
conk
embr
our I
following
Benvie,
Elder ;
ittee on
’aterson,
‘ Presby-
ti Church
members
embly for
ire editor-
i that the
managing
ommittee
inasmuch
e months
jet he will
thy of the
3, cordially
nterests of
Managers
\al part in
dished till
endeai ourmg to mcrcii&c u»
subscriber and
every family belonging to our denomination becomes a subscriber and
reader of it. —We are, Archibald Constable Geekie, D.D., Minister ;
James Colley, Elder ; R. S. Paterson, Minister , Convener .”
The following deliverance was adopted on the motion of Rev. J.
M. Ross, seconded by Rev. J. Cameron : Receive the Report, thank
the Committee for their diligence, especially the Convener; adopt
the recommendations of the Committee, recognise the importance of
the “ Presbyterian ” to the interests of the Church and the great
services rendered by it to the Assembly’s schemes, and its claims upon
the support of every Presbyterian in the colonies.
111. The Sustentation Fund Report of 1881 (vide Blue Book),
signed by Joseph Paxton, J.P., and J. M. Ross, Joint Secretaries,
says : “ Much service of a most valuable kind has been rendered to
the movement by the ‘ Presbyterian,’ and the effect manifest
(wherever that excellent paper is read) in respect of intelligent interest
in the Church’s work is great. It is much to be desired that a copy
of each weekly issue should find its way into every family of the
Church. Every department of Church work suffers loss where that is


a t
~7 S 7
not the .case. It manifestly is the interest of the Church to endeavour
to bring about this much to be desired result.”
IY. The Directors petitioned the Assembly of 1885 to take
measures for increasing the circulation of the ‘ Presbyterian,’ and
thereby benefitting the Church. After discussion the following, moved
by Rev. J. Cameron, and seconded by Rev. J. Cosh, was carried by a
large majority :—“ Receive the Report ; assure the petitioners of the
high sense entertained by the Assembly of the important services
which have been rendered to the Church by the ‘ Presbyterian’; thank
the directors and shareholders for their generous and self-denying
efforts in supporting the same, and with the view of increasing
the usefulness and extending the influence of the paper, recommend
the Directors to appoint a small committee and consult with the editor
and ad\ise as to the ways in which the paper may be improved and its
circulation increased, and, without adopting it as the official organ of
the Church, resolve anew to commend the ‘ Presbyterian ’ to the
members of the Church.”
In accordance with this resolution, Revs. Dr. Fullerton and R.
Collie were appointed a Committee of Advice, and on the death of
Dr. Fullerton, in 1887, Rev. A. Gardiner, M.A., was appointed in his
stead.
Y. The Directors met January 11th, 1886. Inter aha: The
manager was instructed to send Mr. Dean’s account of £7 for shutters
for the back windows of the office to the Church’s Treasurer, with
the request that it be paid from the money (£200) got for early
removal from the previous office ; also to state that the Directors are
of opinion that the rent of the present office of the ‘ Presbyterian ’
should be £35 yearly. [As they have not the use of all the rootas in
the flat as was the case in the King-street office.]
YI. The following was the reply—“ Sydney, 12th February,
1886; Rev. Joseph Copeland, Managing Director of ‘Presbyterian’
Newspaper Company. My dear sir—l am to inform you that the
Treasurership Committee do not recognise the claim of the Directors
to payment of the enclosed account. lam also to say that the rent of
the rooms occupied by the Directors is forty pounds (£4O), the same
as that paid in King-street. Personally I may remind you that the
front room you occupy is the room which was reserved for a private
Church office, which is so much required for the conduct of Church
business, and as occasion may require, for Committee meetings when
the large room is occupied. The room you had at the old offices was
the one at the top of the stairs, which you professed a preference for,


and which was allocated to you. Your taking possession of the front
room you now occupy can only be regarded as a temporary arrange-
ment, until the ground flat shall be tit for sleeping apartments for the
caretaker. I am, yours ever truly, John M. Ross, General Agent.”
VII. At a meeting of the Directors, July 12th, 1886, Inter ana:
Correspondence was read from Rev. J. M. Ross, Agent for the Church,
stating that the Treasurership Committee declined to pay for the
shutters for the windows of the Company’s Office, and, further, that
they declined to reduce the rent of the Company’s Office from £4O to
£35. Mr. Dean’s account for the said shutters was therefore ordered
to be paid.
yiXT. In 1887, the Directors petitioned the General Assembly to
take measures (1) To extend very largely the circulation of the “ Presby-
terian,” and (2) To bring the paper into a closer relation with every
department of the Church’s work, and very specially with the Church
Offices. Dr. Cameron was heard in support of the petition, and moved :
“ The General Assembly recognizing the value of the ‘ Presbyterian ’
as a medium of communication and a means of household instruction,
heartily recommends it to the members and adherents of our Church,
pledge themselves to use their best endeavours to increase its circula-
tion and otherwise aid the Directors in carrying on this enterprise, which
has such an important bearing on the interests of the Church. The
resolution was carried. (Minute 100.)
IX. The Directors met May 22nd, 1888. Inter alia: The editor
tendered his resignation, assigning as his reasons that (1). Mr. A\ illiam
Wood had gone, unknown to him (editor), and got from the compositor
a proof of an article by Rev. James Benvie, which was about to appear
in the “ Presbyterian.” The compositor supplied the proof because lie
thought the office of the “Presbyterian ” and the Church office were one;
(2), Mr. Ross thereafter, on the stair of the office and in the hearing of
others, told him (editor) that the “ Presbyterian ” was “ destroying the
Church,” and was “a dead weight on the Church that he (Mr. Ross)
had to “ bear much” in connection with the paper, and that it was
out of a regard to his feelings that he (Mr. Ross) had not complained
to the Directors. (3), Mr. Ross then prevailed on Mr. Dean, one of
the directors, to come to him (editor) and stop the insertion of Mi.
Benvie’s reply to the Treasurership Committee’s circular.
X. The Directors met June 13th, 1888. Inter alia: The resigna-
tion of the editor was considered, when Rev. A. Gardiner moved and
Mr. E. MacDonald seconded, “ The Board of Directors express their
perfect confidence in the Rev. J. Copeland as editor, of the “ Presby-


teriau,” and trust lie will see it his duty to withdraw his resignation.”
The editor thanked the Board for their expression of confidence, but
said that if a better understanding could not be reached between him
and Rev. J. M. Ross, he must adhere to his resignation : whereupon
Mr. A. Dean moved and Mr. E. MacDonald seconded, “That a future
meeting of the Board be called to consider certain charges made by
Rev. J. M. Ross against the editor’s management of the “ Presby-
terian,” and that Mr. Ross be requested to formulate the same and be
invited to attend the meeting.
XI. The Directors met July 26th, lnter alia: Mr. Goodlet
reported that he had seen Rev. J. M Ross, but that he was not_ dis-
posed to meet the Directors re the charges against the ‘ Presbytei ian.
I t was then agreed that Mr. Goodlet write to Mr. Ross on the desir-
ability of there being a good understanding between himself and the
editor, both being servants of the same Church, and that if he have
charges against the management of the “Presbyterian,” he
should formulate these for the Directors at their next meeting.
Mr. Goodlet wrote thus ; “Canterbury House, Ashfield, July 30,
1888. My dear Mr. Ross,—At a meeting of the ‘Presbyterian’
Newspaper Company, held 26th inst., I was instructed to write to you
with the object of securing a better understanding between yourself
and Mr. Copeland. The relations between you and him have, especially
since the offices of the Church and of the paper were removed to
Elizabeth-street, not been as cordial as they should have been. Labour-
ing, as you both are, in the interest of the same Church, it is important
that you should work to one another’s hands. No one is infallible,
but it cannot be denied that the ‘ Presbyterian ’ has done much for
the Church, in all departments of her work. The Directors regret to
hear that you have brought against the ‘ Presbyterian’ such charges as
‘ destroying the Church,’ being ‘ a dead weight on the Church,’ that
you have had to ‘ bear much ’ in connection with the paper, that you
think the editor invites parties to write against you, and that it was
out of a regard to the feelings of the editor that you had not com-
plained f o the Directors. Now, if you have such charges to make, the
Directors would like you to substantiate them ; and when that is done,
they will take care that justice is done. In the interests of tlje Church
the Directors desire most earnestly that there should be a good under-
standing between yourself and Mr. Copeland. They hope that you
will both take a new departure, letting the past be forgotten. The
Directors will meet about the middle of August, and I trust to have


an answer to this in time for that meeting.—l remain, yours sincerely
J. H. Goodlet.
Mr. Ross replied thus
Sydney, 22nd August, 1888.
My Dear Mr. Goodlet,
I duly received your note; but, as I said to you personally, I feel in
no way called upon to enter into any altercation with the Directors of the
“ Presbyterian.” I hold myself quite entitled to hold an independent opinion
in regard to the wisdom or unwisdom with which the ‘ ‘ Presbyterian ” is edited
without being called upon to “ substantiate ” my views, which, however, I am
quite prepared to do when the time comes ; and if I deem it my duty to do so.
I need only refer to the debate over the merits of the paper in the General
Assembly. Although I had most cause to speak out, I was not among its
assailants. If you want proof of my allegations, which are not properly stated
by you, I need refer you only to this Benvie business, to the letters of
Macready, Sinclair, and Dr. Fraser, all calculated to injure the Church ; and
that afterthe General Assembly definitely decided the questions at issue. If I
feel it needful to open the question, I shall be at no loss for data. As for work-
ing amicably with the editor, I have only to remind you of my action to increase
the circulation of the paper and pay off its debit balance till stopped by the
attitude of the editor in relation to the work of the office. His address to me
when last present sufficiently indicates the spirit of his procedure. The paper
will, I have no doubt, prosper as soon as the confidence of the Church is restored
in the judiciousness of its conduct.
I am,
Yours truly,
J. M. ROSS.
XIII. The Directors met 22nd August. Inter alia : A copy
of Mr. Goodlet’s letter of 30th July to Rev. J. M. Ross, together
with Mr. Ross’s reply thereto of the 22nd August, having been read,
the Directors resolved to record their regret at the unsatisfactory
nature of the reply, both as to the statements and the spirit exhibited
therein ; further, they again express their perfect confidence in the
conduct of the “ Presbyterian';” by the Rev. J. Copeland, and they
feel that he deserves the warmest thanks of the Church for his
disinterested labours in editing and managing the paper for more
than eight years.
XIY. The above resolution was forwarded to Mr. Ross, who
made the following reply : —“ Sydney, 28th August, 1888. My Dear
Mr. Goodlet, —I duly received your note with the Directors’ extract
minute, and am sorry to be thus confirmed in my opinion of the
hopelessness of the prospects of the paper under present circumstances.
—I am, truly yours, Jonx M. Ross.”


XV. The Directors met August 29th, 1888. Inter alia: The
correspondence between the Directors and the Rev. J. M. Ross,
having reference to the relations between him and the editor having
been read, it was moved by Alderman Dean, and seconded by Mr. J.
McDonald, “ That a committee of three, viz., Revs. Dr. Cameron,
James Cosh, and A. Osborne, who would have the full confidence of
all parties concerned, as well as of the Church at large, be appointed
to confer with Mr. Ross and Mr. Copeland with the view of bringing
about a better state of feeling, and that a copy of this minute be
sent to Mr. Ross for his acquiescence.”
XVI. The foregoing minute having been forwarded to Mr.
Ross, he replied thus:—“Sydney, 6th September, 1888. My Dear
Mr. Goodlet, —In reply to your last note and extract, I desire to say
that the fulminations of recorded resolutions and extracts at me is
hardly consistent with the position of the men who adopt and send
them as the Directors of a Limited Liability Company, in which the
Church as such has no part. It is to me somewhat interesting that,
after over eight years of my General Agency in this Church, the
Directors of the ‘ Presbyterian ’ should all at once become concerned
about my views or feelings in relation to their undertaking and their
editor. Let me remind you, only once during this time have they, as
Directors, ever even acknowledged ray existence in the interests of
their paper, and that was when this Benvie annoyance occurred.
Then I was asked to put in an appearance to give some explana-
tion. When I arrived and got seated, instead of being informed of
the explanation required, the occupant of the chair proceeded to give
judgment ex cathedra as to the Directors’ determination as to what
was to go into their paper, as if I had been a criminal at their bar
rather than one who had simply expressed an opinion when asked.
After delivery of judgment the chairman, doubtless having received a
one-sided and misleading statement, and assuming its truth, further
proceeded, without warrant or even asking the culprit at the bar
whether he plead guilty or no, to administer in the presence of the
Directors, and therefore in public, a judgment, rebuke, or rather a
tirade of abuse of me on alleged grounds, which were without founda-
tion in fact. Further, when I proceeded to give an unvarnished
and truthful statement of the history of the editor’s connection
with the Treasurership Committee’s Statement correcting Benvie’s
misstatement, the editor being also a Director met my statement
with the insulting words, £ None of your perversions, Sir,’ which was
and can only be regarded as a direct charge that I was a perverter of


P 145 5-3^
F C <&M *
the truth ! X6w let me assure you that until these statements are
withdrawn and apologised for, you may save yourselves the trouble
of putting on record or of sending me any more Directors’ resolutions.
I shall accept in silence and with submissiveness such treatment from
no man, nor body of men, and no gentleman or body of gentlemen
should expect me to do so. When these statements are withdrawn and
apologised for, and the subject you desire to submit to arbitration,
stated in definite propositions, 1 shall consider whether I am free to
accede to your proposals, and I shall respectfully inform you of the
conclusions I arrive at. I beg to remain, ever faithfully yours.—
John M. Ross.”
XVII. The Directors met 12th September, 1888. Inter alia : A
letter from Rev. J. M. Ross was read, declining the proposal of the
Directors to have the matters in dispute between him and the editor
submitted to the Revs. Dr. Cameron, j. Cosh, and A. Osborne; it
was thereupon moved by Mr. Dean, seconded by Mr. J. McDonald,
and carried, “That Revs. A. Gardiner and R. Collie, the Committee
of Advice for the ‘Presbyterian,’ prepare an Overture on the matter
to the General Assembly; said Overture to be submitted to a future
meeting of the Directors.”
XYITI. At a meeting of the Directors, December 19th, 1888.
Inter alia: It was resolved re the Overture to the Assembly, referred
to in a previous minute, “ That it should take the form of a petition,
and that Mr. Copeland be associated with Messrs. Gardiner and
Collie in its preparation.”
XIX. The Directors met January 23rd, 1889. Inter alia : The
petition to the General Assembly re the difficulty between Rev. J. M.
Ross and the editor was read and considered, and thereafter signed
by each of the Directors. It was agreed that the cost of printing
the correspondence and the resolutions accompanying the petition be
borne by the Directors.
XX. The Directors met February 4th, 1889. Inter aha ; Rev.
A. Gardiner, M.A., and Mr. J. H. Goodlet were appointed to support
the Directors’ petition before the General Assembly.
