

PHASES OF
UNITARIANISM, ORTHODOXY,
FREETHOUGHT IN SYDNEY
FAREWELL DISCOURSE
By A. B. CAMM,
MINISTER OP THE UNITARIAN CHURCH, SYDNEY.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
SYDNEY:
Robert Bone, General Machine Printer, Bond Street.
1 8 8 5.
Brice Sixpence.




PHASES OP UNITARIANISM, ORTHODOXY
AND FEEETHOUGHT IN SYDNEY.
I wish this morning, as briefly as possible, to give the result of
my own observation, as I have tried honestly to understand the
phases of life and thought in this growing city of Sydney. What
I say I would like to be a small contribution to the higher
harmony of the new development of humanity in New South
Wales. My own position is well defined. I am, from conviction,
a Unitarian. Liberal Religious Thought suits my temperament.
Modern Unitarianism tends to Religious Rationalism.
As I have often told you, my basic principles are, —Faith in
a divine origin, divine discipline, and divine issue of life. With
the grand revelations of modern thought, a richer meaning is
given to the old words, God, Duty, Immortality. I add to
these the belief that the Christ-spirit is the highest element in a
growing divine humanity; also, that Jesus is the highest historic
expression of the Christ-spirit that we know. Faith, in the
spiritual evolution of the universe, briefly sums up the position.
Modern Unitarianism affords me a congenial sphere for
trying to do my little bit of work for the world, and, selfishly
speaking, for carrying on my own development.
But there are as many phases of Unitarianism as there are
individualities in its life and work. The modern doctrine of
temperament makes uniformity impossible. No two individuals
are alike in mind, or in their expression of thought; they must
differ in formulating their ideas. To each man there is a unique
universe. Each one is a sect in himself; but he does not claim
to be the exhaustive repository of thought. He does not expect
that from himself, as a centre, thought will widen to the circum-
ference of humanity. Each man is not a sect with the old idea
of becoming a dominant power. It is the recognition of individ*


uality, of a larger catholicity in the full freedom given to others
to expand according to their ideal. The glory of Unitarianism
is that it can respect the individuality of each one, and have a
bond of unity in the permanence of the religious element, in the
need of aspiration towards an Infinite Ideal. At this stage of
the world’s religious progress, Unitarianism would save reverence
from the wreck of the creeds.
Here we have a religious society in harmony with the best
tendencies of the past that have survived the sifting process of
time, in harmony with the broadest and deepest tendency of the
present age. It is a combination of ancient and modern thought.
We are in the line of historic continuity with Traditional
Unitarianism, yet we wish to be open to the revealing forces, the
truly progressive tendencies of to-day.
Our thought is eclectic, our method is elastic. We do not
want to break with the religious sentiment, because we believe
that, with all its vagaries, it is the richest and most permanent
element in man’s nature. But we also believe that with its
creedal wrappages, it is like newly-risen Lazarus ; it is facing
the light of day, but with the cerements of the tomb about it.
Liberal Religion says “Loose it and let it go!” Let it go,
shaking off the superstitions that have bound its fair limbs, and
in the strength of its immortal youth, glowing with the moral
warmth and inspiring thought of our day, become more beautiful
with the poetry and art, the flowering essence of the growing
life of man, and be accompanied in its undying progress with
the melodies and harmonies that shall be born !
So the ideal of a Unitarian Church is the Home of Liberal
Thought and Religious Culture. Our morality is not cold ;it
is touched with emotion ; our life is divine because, by aspiration,
it has the upward look.
Temperaments are classified. Hence we have definite
varities of Unitarianism. In England there are phases that go
from Arianism to Cosmic Theism. Probably in this congregation
we have Channing’s phase of thought, and Theodore Parker’s
Theism. Why ? Because we have friends whose temperament
and mood harmonize with the natures of these two fine men.


We are learning, however, that no one man’s nature, how-
ever good and great, however grand in historic influence, can be
an exhaustive final type. Hence we have the growth of a new
charity, a richer unity than the world has known before.
Channing said, “ I have no anxiety to wear the livery of any
party .... I desire to escape the narrow walls of a
particular church, hearing with my own ears, and following truth
meekly but resolutely, however arduous or solitary be the path
in which she leads. We must never forget that free rational
thought is the greatest gift of God. As I grow older I grieve
more and more at the impositions on the human mind ; at the
machinery by which the few keep down the many. 1 distrust
sectarian influences more and more. lam more detached from
a denomination, and strive to feel more my connection with the
Universal Church.”
Now there is an evident break-up of theology and a longing
for a purer faith, Unitarianism sees the need of the aspirational
mood. Reverence is still the “ Angel of the world.” If we can
harmonize reverence with full freedom of religious thought, we
may give tone and strength to the higher life of New South Wales.
We do not sing praises to God in the old sense. We do
not worship a Being outside His world, but we are awed by a
sense of the mystery and revealing beauty of life. We are not
afraid that modern science will be the death of religion. Evolu-
tion means revolution to theology, but it is revelation to Liberal
Religion. With the expansion of the Universe we have a
constant unfolding of the higher qualities of life. By many lines
of evidence we cannot mention here, we are forced to believe in
a Glorious Being whose life and purpose in these qualities are
revealed. Hence the object of our adoration. We know we can
do nothing for God, but by seeking to harmonize our natures
with this revealing life, we become co-workers with the One who,
by His increasing purpose, widens the thoughts of men with the
process of the suns.
Erom this point of view we can see the value of a corporate
religious life. Eirst, for ourselves individually, because as
Wordsworth says, —
3


“ ’Tis hard to keep
Heights which the soul is competent to gain.”
Hence, to turn our best instinct into a permanent mood, i.e., to
be as noble always as we feel in our best mood of aspiration, to
make every new moral height gained, a stepping-stone to higher
things, and to have from every table-land of our spiritual life a
new point of departure in the ascent of being, we do not forsake
the assembling of ourselves together, but meet here Sunday after
Sunday ; our experience testifies that, as a consequence, the life
of the week is sweeter, the burdens of life are lighter, the sorrows
of life are chastened; we grow day by day with broader sym-
pathies to higher ideals.
But secondly, a Liberal Eeligious Society, or a Unitarian
Church if you like, is an organized corporate expression of these
principles that are so grand and helpful to us individually.
Surely no one here feels that this is a kind of Unitarianism to be
sneered at, or to be ashamed of, but one that society needs.
We do not antagonise any of the higher forms of Lecture-
ship. A Lectureship, pure and simple, has a separate function.
I don’t mind having my phase of Unitarianism called Eeverent
Free Thought. Party words are nothing. Orthodoxy is made
to cover the extremes, from the rather noisy enthusiasts of the
Salvation Army, to a Liberalism in the pulpit which is Unitarian-
ism without the name. Unitarianism goes from the Arianism of
John Milton to the Evolutionary Theism of Mr. Savage of Boston,
to the Cosmic Theism of Mr. Suffield, —an ex-Eoman Catholic
priest who has a place of honour among our ministers at home.
The word Freethought in Sydney is used to express phases
of heterodoxy, from the Atheism and Materialism and enthu-
siastic Secularism now expounded at the Theatre Eoyal, to the
Spiritualism of Mr. Gerald Massey, and the Humanitarian
Liberalism of Dr. York. Party words have to be used with
much discrimination, taken with large grains of salt.
I am a Unitarian, but do not want to attach a narrow party
or sectarian meaning to the name. lam proud to be in the
historic line of those who, when dogma was dominant, stood out
for the Unity of God, and who, rejecting the doctrine of the
Atonement, said, “ Morality is enough.”
4


Now, Unitarianism is willing to have an expansion of its
principles in harmony with modern knowledge; I honor its
traditions, I glory in its tendencies, and I am thankful it affords
me a sphere of congenial work.
In the beginning of my work in Sydney, I was sparing in
the use of the word Unitarian, because in the minds of so many, it
was associated with misunderstandings of the past, social com-
plications that were a mere incident in the progress of Liberal
Religion, which can be forgotten now in the happy progress of
our Cause. Nor did I often use the word Freethought, because
men at its mention had only in their minds its lower vulgar
phase. “ Liberal Faith” seemed the best antithesis to Tradition-
alism, and free from all limitations. ,
If we grow “ In other heights and other worlds ” we shall
still be lovers of a Liberal Faith. While awe, and mystery, and
grandeur remain, while there are new depths of moral beauty to
unfold, while there are fairer forms of loveliness to be revealed,
while there is richer affection to receive and bestow, while there
are new heights to gain, and new deeps to explore, while, with
our advance, there are larger horizons girdling new realms, new
rosy dawns and enrapturing sunsets, while there is the mystery
of beauty in the heart of a rose, and the mystery of the minor
key in music and in life, I must have faith and can never cease
to be liberal. Mystery must always remain the condition of
awe and poetry, and unfolding life, and the hiding place of
Divine power. So, in our Liberal Faith we have the true germ
of a Religion we can never outgrow.
A Unitarian does not say to others “ I am all right and you
are all wrong he is so free that he can honestly be generous to
all types of mind. He sees that Atheism, on its best side, is
reverence for the soul’s conscientiousness to conviction, in the
absence of sufficient proof for the being of Giod. Agnosticism
is a wish not to go beyond the provable. Secularism draws
attention to this world, and would make of this planet a paradise.
Spiritualism, in its best strivings, is a wish to reassert man’s
immortality. Orthodoxy has germs of eternal truth in its
dogmas, which must, in the dissolution of the creeds, pass into
5


the conduct of life. A Liberal Faith tries to combine the best
elements of all, in a broad church of humanity.
I know there is a trust deed to this Church. I am not
conscious of having acted contrary to its spirit.* We need I
think a Religious Toeeens’ Title Act, say, every thirty or
fifty years. We could then start afresh in our mental life, with-
out the bondage of trust deeds and creeds, Nay, we need a
Torrens’ Title Act for some of our laws. In England you see
boys walking about in yellow stockings and with bare heads,
because of the whim of some generous man who imposed strange
conditions to his humanitarian bequest. Why should we not be
able to revise the conditions of bequests for philanthropy and
religion in harmony with the methods of thought of our time ?
Why should the “ Dead Hand ” come from the box of moulder-
ing trust deeds, to paralyse the actions of the living present ?
Every age can take care of itself. The conservation of
energy, and survival of the fittest, are laws of the universe.
Morality and religion are safe without false restrictions. It is
our faith in the reality, and permanence, and expansion of the
religious sentiment, that makes us believe that without vexatious
doctrinal trust deeds, the Faith of Freedom will slowly broaden
down from precedent to precedent.
People say “ That’s a splendid ideal for the Church of the
future, but rather vague and impracticable, isn’t it P ” I think
our life and work here, for the last three years, show that it may
not be altogether an unrealisable ideal.
I was told when I left Orthodoxy, “ The Unitarians are a
respectable people, cultured but cold, semi-ecclesiastical, semi-
creedal, and afraid to move with the times.” The first few weeks
of my life in Sydney, I read a letter in a local paper sent from
the United States, from a Sydney lecturer, who at that time had
been visiting Colonel Ingersoll, Ingersoll had said to him, “ The
God of the Unitarians is a respectable gentleman, who has grad-
uated at Oxford or Harvard, and considers an error in grammar
as an unpardonable sin.” This joke about a slip in grammar was
repeated on a Sydney platform. It all appeared to me very
* See Appendix.
6


smart, and perhaps true of the defects of certain qualities, but
very false of the qualities and excellencies themselves. Coming
fresh as I did from the freedom, and fine developments of Uni-
tarianism in England, it required some self-restraint for me to
observe cautious silence on the subject.
If anyone ever charges Unitarians with being cold and un-
enthusiastie, ask them to call on my wife and myself, and we will
show them gifts of which we shall ever be proud, as mementoes
of the warmth of our mutual affection, the depth of a love that
existed between minister and congregation, and the record of a
progress which nothing but genuine enthusiasm could have
secured.
You may judge of everything by its defective side, and to
the ignorant, by a sneer, ignore its excellencies. When I read
that saying of Colonel Ingersoll about the God of the Unitarians,
I asked myself “ Is the God of Dr. Martineau’s ripe, philosophic,
generous thought a respectable gentleman ? Is the God of Mr.
Savage, who sees the Higher Theism involved in Herbert Spencer’s
idea of the Eternal Energy ‘ welling up in our consciousness,’ a
respectable gentleman ? ”
I recognise the value of IngersolTs work, on its destructive
side, in relation to dogma, and its constructive side in relation to
social reform; but it pains one to hear the limits of great men
and good movements emphasized, and their positive elements
and progressive excellencies ignored. Naturally lam jealous for
the honour of a Faith that, when I had outgrown the creeds,
offered me a sphere of work, and has always generously accorded
me freedom.
What are the phases of Orthodoxy in Sydney P There are
hardly any transitional developments as in England. It is said
Cardinal Moran is bringing, or sending over, forty priests ;
Carmelite nuns have arrived. Granting the bases of Romanism,
the machinations and intrigues of an elaborate propaganda, are
conscientious and logical. The issue which will be forced on
the age is—“ Rome or Reason.”
I speak with genuine respect for Bishop Barry. He is
harmonising himself with the needs of colonial development,


His more human social utterances already, from our point of
view, begin to clash with his creedal enthusiasm. His humani-
tarianism is boiling over his evangelical creed. His two founda-
tion stones of the creedal superstructure are Butler’s Analogy
and Paley’s Evidences. At present Dr. Barry appears like a
general with the resources, and prestige, of a large army. He
sees opposing forces are gathering, he feels pressure on several
sides, and meets with occasional reverses, but he does not seem
to be aware that great as is his army, and vast the storage of his
ammunition, he is being cut off from the base of his supplies.
Butler and Paley do not meet and answer the doubts of the
day. Even the “ New Butler’s Analogy,” as Drummond’s
“ Natural Law in the Spiritual World ” is called, fails to prove
the continuity and identity of the laws in the two spheres. The
real diversity, underlying the seeming unity, of the Christian
Evidence platform in Sydney, is a significant prophecy of the
declining power of Orthodoxy. One champion speaks of Butler’s
works as an armoury from which all weapons needed for slaying
“ Modern Doubt ” can be drawn, and another defender of the
faith discounts Butler in praising Professor Drummond’s book.
The leading Congregational ministers in Australia have
given up the doctrine of Eternal Punishment. But one does
not hear of their pulpit disavowal of this horrible dogma. A
friend who heard Mr. Osborne’s farewell discourse, said he
avowed having given up three things—the devil, evangelical
conversion, and the doctrine of the atonement. Dr. Jefferis, in
his lecture on “ Buddhism,” spoke of “ the old Yedic faith of our
Aryan ancestors.”
Erom our point of view, silently to give up the idea of ever-
lasting punishment, to ignore the story of Eden, the beginning
of the race in Paradise, in talking about the Vedic faith being
the faith of our Aryan ancestors, is to give up the bases that
support the superstructure of dogma. The surprising thing is,—
with so much given up there are not the fine transitional
developments of Liberal Orthodoxy that in a large measure
save its consistency.
I would not wish to speak with disrespect, or suspicion, of


those who Unger in a denomination whose limits I feel I have
outgrown. To me Orthodoxy becomes less logical as it becomes
more liberal. But I know among its laity, who linger lovingly
in its intermediate stages, there are some of the mellowest
natures that live on our globe. They cling to the divine
elements in life, and fear to let slip the Divine in Christ, or in
God. They think that the moral beauty, the examples of heroic
sacrifice, and the traits of tenderness and sympathy that are
associated with the creeds, owe their existence to dogma.
We say “ It is the morality that preserves the dogma, not
the dogma that preserves the morality,” All the acknowledged
excellencies in the traditional faith belong to humanity, and are
needed for the freer, higher life of the world. Again we say
“ Loose them and let them go !”
Men cling to the dogmas and think them divine, hence the
Liberal Faith has a destructive side. Unitarians take their
share of the w r ork of breaking down superstition and ecclesias-
ticism. They do not shrink from the odium and social ostracism
that follow. They say to the traditionalists —“ Your creeds
cramp mental freedom, your assumptions stigmatize as heretics
those who have a larger faith in humanity, truth, and God; your
orthodoxy prevents the unity of the race being realised, and
hinders the full play of the Christ-spirit.”
There are definite phases of Freethought in Sydney, though
they are not distinctly marked one from the other. There is the
materialistic and atheistic phase. There is the spiritualistic
phase. Some exponents give prominence to sociological ques-
tions, and advocate humanitarian reform. But every new
lecturer brings a new phase, coming from his own individuality.
My first Sunday evening in Sydney I spent at the Theatre
Royal when an ex-clergyman occupied the platform. He an-
nounced his subject for the following Sunday as “ The Bible
weighed in the balances and found wanting.” The announcement
was followed by a “ guffaw ” from the audience. I confess it
sounded strange to my ears. In the lecture ridicule was un-
sparingly used, and reverence seemed wanting. The audience
were the evidence of a theological revolt, There was a studied


absence of anything that could savour of a survival of churchism.
In the laughter and cheers which greeted the well-prepared jokes
and hits at the current superstitious beliefs, there seemed a
chuckle of self-satisfaction that creeds, parsons, churches, religion
and God were outgrown. But if this represented Atheistic and,
as I thought, vulgar Freethought, I soon found a higher phase
in the lectures of Professor Denton. Eidicule with him was a
powerful means of laughing down hoary abuses, but his soul
and speech were full of reverence for what is pure and noble.
He viewed life in the light of its divine idea. The grand results
of modern science, the principles of hygienic reform, the methods
of humanitarian progress were all brought forward as helps
towards a spiritual ideal. I heard him say that if we were to
pull down the churches to-day, men would be busy building them
up again to-morrow. Why ? Because he saw how the aspiration
that shaped, and the sacrifice that raised temples in old times, were
the outcome of a spiritual yearning, the struggling latent divinity
in man.
I found from these two lecturers that there were very
diverse phases of what was called “ Freethought,” and I saw I
must be discriminating in my judgments.
I soon found socially there was a lower and a higher Free-
thought. At an evening party an old lady said to me, “ I hate
the Bible so much now that I can’t bear to hear a text quoted
from it.” Orthodoxy is in a large measure responsible for this
theological revolt. But why should we have “ the falsehood of
extremes?” One extreme claims the Bible as the “Word of
God,” and the other draws attention to the crudities, the in-
accuracies and the immoralities of the same book. I have often
wished that the Bible could be viewed generally by the Free-
thought platform, as part of the religious evolution of the race.
Then the crudities and immoral actions and low ideals would be
regarded as undeveloped humanity, but a humanity that was still
growing, and from our point of view, gradually revealing the
Divine.
I have heard a lecturer say in private he should not be
satisfied till he saw the first church pulled down; and from the


platform he expressed gratification at the idea of a church
being destroyed by larrikins on the one side, and members of
the Salvation Army on the other. This savours to me of
reaction and revolt, and, to speak plainly, of a want of reverence
for the core of the creeds and the essence of old forms of
religion.
I have been with some of my friends to hear Dr. York. I
say, because I believe, that strong as he is in his denunciations,
and unsparing as he is in his ridicule, he only denounces the
superstitions that he believes hinder the growth of mental
freedom. He ridicules many absurdities that ought to be
laughed out of existence ; but his aim is to harmonize the good
elements of Liberalism, to recognize the divine relations of life,
to open the mind to the inspirations of truth and beauty in our
own day. This is the higher constructive Freethought.
But we have had, and I fear we have now, another and a
lower phase. A few Sunday evenings ago I attended the
Theatre Eoyal, and the lecturer announced a class in physiology,
and said its chief object was to show that “ Man can do without
the Gods.” In the lecture there was an inuendo which I rather
hesitate to quote, and only do so that you may see I do not
speak without a reason. We were told “Jesus never was a
father —at least not that we know of,” and then a laugh from the
audience.
In the Freethought Paper sold at the lecture, there was the
storv which drew a comparison between a Homan Catholic who
adored a Virgin (Mary), and a Hallelujah Lad who loved a
virgin. Then more inuendo.
I believe the higher Freethought would join us in saying of
the lower Freethought from which these specimens are taken, —
“ All this is the negation of the higher elements in life.” We
say,—“ Teach physiology by all means, but include psychology,
the laws of man’s higher nature, and his relation to an expand-
ing universe. Man may do without the Gods, but do not
destroy reverence for what have been the ideals of the race.”
The higher Freethought should join us in saying “ If the
theological Christ is a caricature of the natural Jesus; nay! if
11


the historic Jesus were proved to be partly mythical, yet the
adoring love, the creative faith that could throw such an ideal on
the canvas of history, came out of the divinest part of our
nature. At least reverence that.”
We want to get men from between the deterrent pains of
hell and the sugar-plums of heaven ; but at the same time they
should be taught a higher morality. They should be shown the
action of spiritual law's. They should be told of moral deterior-
ation that yawns as a hell beneath them, and should also be told
of the glorious possibilities of a development which is an ever-
enlarging, and ever-alluring, heaven.
The Virgin Mary may be the Greek Venus Christianized ;
but when men in imagination saw Aphrodite rise like crystallized,
vitalized sea-foam, and become a goddess, they, perhaps uncon-
sciously, recognized the feminine divine in nature. And when a
Eomish peasant bows, in a priest-ridden country, before the
shrine of “ Mary the Mother of God,” he is reverencing the
ideal w r omanhood, which to him is divine. You may imagine,
with these thoughts in our mind, it gave one pain to hear an
audience laugh at some inuendo about a virgin.
In the early stages of a grand country like this, there is
enough, and too much, that leads to irreverence. We should try
to cultivate reverence for womanhood, for whatsoever is pure and
lovely in Ancient Faiths and hoary creeds, and even in the false
beliefs of the beloved dead.
I frankly recognize the efforts of the higher Freethought to
initiate constructive social reform. I know the higher and lower
Freethought are at one in denouncing superstition. But it is
only a unity for antagonism to the old creeds. I know numbers
of men and women in Sydney who mentally are perfectly free,
but who keep silence for fear of being identified with what to
them is vulgar, and destructive of the best interests of society.
We may call them cowards, as I think they are, but none the
less do we lament there is this lower Freethought which is
driving the half-emancipated back into the “ Coward’s Castle ” of
conventional belief.
X wish now, in a word or two, to show where Liberal Eeligion


has its own reason of existence. It is in the recognition of the
Supreme Power as an object of reverence ; the Infinite Ideal
towards whom we should aspire.
For this object religious culture is necessary.
I have heard Lecturers, during my stay in Sydney, recog-
nize the Higher Power under different names. One spoke of
“ the Mysterious Power governing the universeanother used
the words “ the Controlling Intelligencea third referred to the
Supreme as “ the diffusive Being—the Eternal Father.”
What does Liberal Eeligion do ? It turns prayer into
thanksgiving and aspiration. It does not define God ; it fears to
symbolize Him. As the universe unfolds however, it sees a
revelation of higher qualities through Law and Life, towards
Love. It feels the universe is good, and finds no better word for
the Supreme Life than the simple Saxon one — God.
Once a week we find an aid to moral, mental, and spiritual
growth, in seeking to harmonize our growing individual life with
the revealing Infinite One —God. If that seems a remnant of
superstition to any one, at any rate we should not be sneered at.
Such an attitude of mind and heart accords with our rational
thought.
Our religious culture chastens our sorrows, sweetens and
purifies our life, broadens our sympathies, and turns death into
a mere transition to a higher life beyond.
Our religious culture does more, —it puts us into a reverent
attitude to, and true sympathy with, the growths of the past.
Judged by our ideals they are crude and grotesque, but as stages
of struggling, aspiring, growing man, they are full of rich mean-
ing. So we gather up the beauties of all moralities, the essences
of Ancient Faiths. They help us in the growth of our modern,
rational, religious life.
So there is yet a need in Sydney for a Eational Eeligious
Society—for a Unitarian Church. My predecessors have done
good work in their own day and way. Dr. Stanley led a
protest, with a company of faithful men, against the dogmas
which die hard, but are passing away. He and they, in standing
for the unity of God and the sufficiency of morality, worked


with honour at the early stages of the liberal thought which is
having such a large development to-day. The Rev. James
Pillars, with his robust physique and strong intellect that
scorned shams and loved the right, carried the work on to broader
lines and richer unfoldings. One of my young men friends in
this audience, was greatly influenced in his mental development
by a sentence of Emerson’s he read in the little monthly, edited
by Mr. Pillars, whose motto was “More Light!” That sentence
was, —“ God builds his temple in the heart on the ruins of
churches and religions.”
Rev. James Smith, my immediate predecessor, is now doing
valuable work for the colony, and making a good and honorable
position for his family in public school education.
The seed sown by these men has grown into the harvest we
have reaped. Every harvest is the preparation for a new spring.
If you and I have had in our turn to dig and sow, our spring-
time shall be a preparation for the fields that may be “ white
unto the harvest ” of the coming time.
“We need not be missed if others succeed us,
To reap down those fields which in spring we have sown.
He who ploughed and who sowed is not missed by the reaper;
He is only remembered by what he has done.”
I congratulate you on my successor. I began my work in
love with an ideal, and spoke of the universal church, broad as
humanity, catholic as love, and eternal as the life of God. lam
glad to know that your new minister will work towards the
glorious ideal, so dear to all of us.
The last words of the last report of Mr, Grant’s utterance
in England were an appeal to his friends to emulate in word and
deed those grand believers (who were called heretics in their
day), Channing, Theodore Parker, and Priestley, who with their
large faith in God, and truth, and humanity, prepared the way
for us,
“ To build the Universal Church
Lofty as the love of God
A.nd ample as the wants of man.”
And now what more shall I say ? I rejoice that our union


has been one of affection, that our life and work has been charac-
terized by peace and progress. I cannot trust myself to say
many farewell words. Sometimes, at the parting of true friends,
a silent hand-clasp is more expressive than volubility. My wife
and myself will ever remember your great kindness, and we
value highly the handsome presents you have given us.
If I have been the means, by our Sunday services, of
brightening your faith, enriching your sympathies, intensifying
your inner life, raising and brightening your ideal, I thankfully
rejoice.
It is no formal “ Good-bye ” we say to each other, but a
hearty “ God be with you.” To you all, as- friends, I say
“ Farewell!”
15


APPENDIX.
We think the principle that is embodied respecting the laud in
Torrens’ Title Act should be applied to other departments and
spheres of life, —to laws that affect Eeligion, Literature and
Politics. If the world, so far as Law is concerned, could start
afresh every fifty years or so, we should not have the undignified
struggle, attended with such pietistic rancour, bad tone and
taste, that we see in Melbourne in connection with the prosecu-
tion of Mr. Symes.
It is an anachronism and an injustice to try to apply the
Act passed in the time of George 111. against Sunday trading, to
the taking money at the doors of a lecture-hall on Sunday
evening in the 19th Century. If the lectures and Paper of Mr.
Symes are dangerous to society, the present age, with the guide
of antecedents not more than fifty years old, is competent to
deal with its own crises.
Those who sympathize least with the tone Mr. Symes
adopts towards Eeligion and his opponents, must own that he is
being prosecuted on false issues. To say he keeps a “ disorderly
house,” is not only a false charge, but an unpardonable insult.
If the dead past, instead of burying its dead, is galvanized into
seeming resurrection in order to control the living present,
lovers of fairplay, though they dissent, as I do, from the opinions
and method of the editor of the “ Liberator,” will let their best
sympathies go towards the growth and expression of liberty. If
this liberty ever degenerates into a license inimical to the
interests of the community, let the excess be dealt with openly,
and by the laws and antecedents of a recent date. Freedom and
Truth are not endangered yet: it is a law of the Universe, and
so a law of God that the worst should disappear and the best
survive.
16




